10678 99837628 1964
HOROLOGIOGRAPHIA. The Art of Dialling: teaching an easie and perfect way to make all kinds of Dials vpon any plaine plat howsoeuer placed: VVith the drawing of the twelue Signes, and houres vnequall in them all. Whereunto is annexed the making and vse of other Dials and Instru∣ments, whereby the houre of the day and night is knowne: Of speciall vse and delight not onely for Students of the Arts Mathema∣ticall, but also for diuers Artificers, Architects, Surueyours of buildings, free-Masons and others. By T. Fale. AT LONDON Printed by Thomas Orwin dwelling in Pater noster-Row ou against the signe of the Checker. 1593.
SINGVLIS ARTIVM MATHE∣MATICARVM STVDIOSIS IN CELE∣BERRIMA CANTABRIGIENSI ACADEMIA, THOMAS FALVS EIVSDEM ALVMNVS, ET VERAE MATHESEOS STVDIOSVS, EXIGVVM HOC GRATI ANI∣MI MONVMENTVM DD. ANNO. 1593. Simonis Muri ad lectorem carmen. Scire cupis certa cur machina tangitur vmbra? Et breuis aethereum line a fignat iter? Haec, licet euoluas, facili praecepta libello Tradita, sed voto non leuiora tuo.
To the friendly Readers, and name∣ly to such as be welwillers to the Mathematiks. THe Arts Mathematicall (gentle Rea∣der) in regard of their antiquitie and ex∣cellencie may be compared with any other of the liberall Sciences whatsoe∣uer. For Seth who liued in the first age of the world is commēded of Iosephus,Lib. 1. c. 3. and Abraham of Berosus, to haue been skilfull masters in these mysteries. And the very name importeth, that in olde time these of all other were esteemed worthie to be taught, be∣ing called for their excellencie Mathemata, that is, SciencesAul. Gell. de oct▪ Att. l. 1 Ram. Scho. Math. lib. 4. meete to be learned. These be Arithmeticke, Geemetrie, and A∣stronomie, from which this Art of Dialling taketh his beginning: a knowledge also ancient and necessarie, and therefore practised by Princes and famous men of former ages. The first Diall that histories remember is Lib. 2. cap. 20. of the Kings in the holie2. King. 20. Vitruuius de Archit. lib. 9. Munst. Hor. in praef. Lib. 2. c. 76. scripture, where the Lord turned the Sunne backe 10. degrees for Hezechias sake, whereby it had gone downe in the Diall of Ahaz. This Ahaz was King of Ierusalem, and reigned in the 3200. yeare after the creation of the world, and in the first O∣lympiade of the Grecians. Afterward as Ple writeth, Anaxi∣menes Milesius the scholler of Anaximander, first found out the reason and proportion of shadowes amongst the Lacedemo∣nians, and there taught the Art of Dialling, who liued 200. yeare after the raigne of Ahaz, and was a famous Philosopher in Greece before Platoes time, as Diogenes Laertius reporteth. But some affirme that it was Anaximander himselfe that foundCal. Rdi∣gin. out this Art, and set forth the first Mappe of the earth.
Herodotus saith, that the Grecians learned this art, and the di∣uisionLib. 2. of the day into twelue houres, of the Chaldeans. Diodorus writeth that one Hyperion first obserued the houres. But if we may beleeue Macrobius, it seemeth that this Science came from the Egyptians: for they called the Sunne Horus, which by his motion limitteth to each houre his appoynted time. Vitruuius rehearseth sundrie inuentors of this Art of Dialling,Lib. 9. as Berosus the Chaldean, Aristarchus Samius, Eudoxus, Theodo∣sius with others, who were renowmed, and liued many yeares before the birth of Christ. I need not here remember Architas Tarentinus, who by art made a Doue of wood to flie in the ayre: neither Archimedes, who defended Syracusa against Marcellus,Plutar. in Marcel. and affirmed that if he had a place to stand on, he would moue the earth with his engins: both of them no doubt skilfull in this Science. It was long after the inuention that this Art was knowne in Rome: for in the twelue tables was onely mentioned the rising and setting of the Sunne, and after certaine yeares the midday was added. Then in the first Punike warre the Romanes obtay∣ning victorie, there was a Diall brought amongst other spoyles out of Sicilie. But in processe of time they began to bee more common in Rome: for 100. yeares before Cicero his time, the parasite in a Comedie, being hungrie, spake against the multi∣tude of Clockes and Dials which were then in the citie, Optans vt suus cuique venter sit horologium. Plinie also telleth of a Diall placed in the field of Flora atLib. 36. c. 10 Rome, which by the space of thirtie yeares had not agreed with the Sunne: and the reason was as he thought, because that either the Sunne had taken a new course, or els the earth was slipped from his Centre, wherein at the first it stood: or the stile was put awry by the shaking of the citie. Since which times learning spreading it selfe into diuers parts of the world, this Art hath been amongst the rest in great account. Concerning the profite of this Art, daily experience teacheth how needful it is in a well ordered Common-wealth, seeing no∣thing can be done in due and conuenient season, where this
Science is neglected: for the diuision of the day into certaine parts or houres, (which this Art teacheth) doth limit and allot to each action his due time. This Art being then so ancient, and the vse so necessarie, I trust none will thinke this labour super∣fluous, vnlesse they be rude without ciuilitie, or such as haue al∣waies at hand a Diall of natures framing, of whom this verse see∣meth to be made: *Si tuus ad solem statuatur nasus, hiantiMorus. Ore, bene ostendas dentibus hora quota est. Many haue promised (but none as yet performed) to write of this Science in our English tongue, which hath bin published in other languages, as D. Recorde long since, M. Digges, M. Bla∣graue with other, who if they would take the paines, I knowe could doe it with great commendation. Diuers haue written hereof in the Latin tongue, as Mun∣ster, Schonerus, Orontius, Witekindus, Clauius and others: yet e∣uery one differing from other in precept. Some teach the ma∣king of Dials by the helpe of the Globe, as Gemma Frisius: some by the Astrolabe, as the same Gemma Frisius and M. Blagr. which Instruments euery man haue not. Some vse the table of Sines and Arithmetike, as Witekindus, which way as most plaine and easie, is obserued in this booke; though in some kinds for want of triall Witekindus deceiued himselfe. Munster vseth a Rectificatorie with a circle, which is vnfit for small plats, and fai∣leth in greater, without great heed. Schoner wandreth in a wil∣dernes of lines, that a man know not where to begin, or when to end. Vlmer hath not the Delineation of all kinds. Othersome obserue the rules of Geometricall proportion: which order also we thought to haue obserued in all kinds, as we haue done in the South and North erect declining: but that sundrie precepts of the same thing would haue bred tedious∣nes and trouble to the learner, and the cutting of the Figures would haue been very chargeable. By meanes whereof we con∣tented our selues with this one way here set downe, not doub∣ting, but that euery one with small paines may attaine to the making of all kinds of Dials in this booke expressed. As for a great part of them, euery Artificer may easily vnderstand.
Onely thus much I aduertise the vnlearned, that they must acquaint themselues with some fewe Mathematicall principles, as to knowe what the Eleuation of the Pole meaneth, how a squire line is to be drawne, and such like, which (if they want a teacher) they may sufficiently learne by themselues out of Re∣cords Castle, his pathway and ground of Arts, published in the English tongue: for these tearmes could not be auoyded, nei∣ther plainly described without much tediousnes. We haue here added also examples and figures to euery kind, that so the precepts might appeare more plaine and easie: so that there is no plaine plat or wall howsoeuer it standeth, or be placed either Declining, Reclining, or Inclining, but by the helpe of this booke you may drawe a Diall vpon it. If any man complaine of obscuritie, he must knowe, that Dif∣ficilia quae pulchra, and yet small paines ouercommeth all. The making of the Horologicall Cylindre, and the Ring, with some other Instruments, we haue presently omitted, partly for their curiositie in cutting and delineation, and partly be∣cause (if occasion serue) we will entreate of these kindes of Ho∣rologicall Instruments by themselues, together with the making of all kindes of plaine Dials in this booke, prescribed by the way of Geometricall proportion. In the meane while (gentle Reader) committing this booke to thy fauourable acceptation, and thy selfe to the protection of the Almightie, I end. Tho. Fale.
To my louing kinsman Thomas Osborne. THis booke, which seuen yeares since, was in a manner perfected (as you knowe) doth now vpon iust occasion present it selfe to the view of the world: wherein you haue taken such paines for the triall of each example, that I thinke none can finde any great fault, but such as can see farre into other mens faults, and forget their owne. For after we found some precepts in Wite∣kindus to be false, we were enforced to trie and examine with great care each figure and example in the Sunne. And therefore if any receiue benefite by this our trauell, I would you should haue your due praise you deserue. I haue altered some fewe things, and added the making of the South and North Erect Declining Dials, by the way of Geometri∣call proportion: because those kinds be most in vse, and I would the learner should haue his choise of the easiest way. The grauer of the Figures was one M. Iod. Hondius, who hath shewed himselfe an excellent workman in the great Globes set forth by M. Mullineux, and the Mappes of England for M. Camdens booke: and whether he hath performed like diligence in these, I re∣ferre it to your selfe to iudge. If any be desirous to haue the Instru∣ment mentioned in the beginning of this booke for the triall of plats, I hope you will helpe them to it: for being of your owne inuention, I know none so fit as your selfe to make it: on which Instrument also, it were conuenient to draw the Quadrant Horologicall, that so it might serue for diuers vses. I trust you will not be offended in that I leaue vnder our names this small monument vnto the world, as a speaking witnesse of our thankefull hearts to this our Countrey, and a testimonie of our af∣fection towards the Arts Mathematicall. Thus beseeching the Lord (who hath endued you with extraordinarie knowledge in all Manuel Sciences) to finish that good worke of his heauenly grace alreadie begun in you, to his glorie and your owne comfort, I take my leaue. Commend me many times to your selfe & all our good friends. From London, Ianuary. 3. 1593. Yours, assuredly, T. F.
Aduertisements to the Reader. NOte alwaies, that in euery Diall the one end of the Stile must be placed directly towards the North Pole, and the other end towards the South Pole: for about these two starres the whole heauens are moued, they remayning im∣moueable. The North Pole is a starre in the North part of the heauen, being raised aboue the earth or our Horizon 52. degrees. And this changeth his height, if you goe Northward or South∣ward one degree in 60 miles: but Estward or westward it alte∣reth not. The Eleuation of the Pole is the height of this starre aboue the earth. Obserue also, that the Substile is the line or place ouer which the Stile or Gnomon in your Diall directly hangeth. The space betweene the Stile and Substile is the iust height thereof. One line cutteth another squire-wise, when they make right and equall angles. The Contingent or touch line, is that which is drawne by a∣ny poynt of another line or circle, so that it toucheth the same: and this line commonly in all Dials is drawne squire-wise to the Substile. A quadrant is the fourth part of a circle. The Meridian and twelue a clocke line are all one. I call these lines parallele which are euery where of like di∣stance one from another: example whereof you may see in the Est and West Diall, where all the houre lines be parallele. You may make all kinds of plaine Dials vpon one stone, if you prepare it first to be square like a Dye, and then take off the eight corners, and all the sharpe sides, so shall you haue 25. plaine plats besides the base, or foote whereon your Diall must stand. If any be desirous to haue this Instrument readie made, let him enquire at the Printers, and he shall heare of them.
The making of an Instrument to finde out the situation of any plat or Diall, and to place them already prepared. CAP. I. FOr asmuch as it is necessary before you can drawe my Dial, to know how your plat is already or ought afterward to be placed, it shalbe ex∣pedient to shew the making and vse of an Instrument, whereby you may examine and try all plain plats and place all dials being ready made and prepared. Prouide therefore an halfe circle of Peare-trée, Walnut∣trée, Bor, or any other close grained and solide wood, being well seasoned, so that the alteration of the weather at any time may not make it change from the first proportion ther of. Let it be perfectly tryed on both sides of an euen thicke∣nesse, halfe or thrée quarters of an inch thick or more if you will, and sir or eight inches broad as you thinke good. The edge or side A. B. must be very right. Thē draw the Line C. D. thrée quarters of an inch equally distant from the side A. B. place one foot of your compasses in the centre E. which is the midst of the line C. D. and with the other draw halfe a circle from C. to A. deuide it into two equall partes or qua∣drants, and laying your ruler vpon the centre E. and vpon this diuision drawe the line E. F. this done, deuide eche of
these quadrants into 90. equall degrées or partes, which you may thus doe: First, deuide eche of them into thrée e∣quall partes, and euery of these into thrée other partes, so shall you haue 9. diuisions in either quadrant, whereof eue∣ry one shal represent ten degrées. Againe, part euery one of these into two, and ech of those into fiue (if you can) and so is eche quadrant diuided into 90. degrées. Moreouer, it were necessary if your Instrument were large inough, to parte ech degrée into 60. minutes, or at the least into 3. whereof ech parte may conteine 20. minutes. This done, fasten a thread wel wared in the centre E. with a plommet of leade on the end, so that it may moue at frée libertie. You may also (if you will) vpon this side of the quadrant between E. D. draw the diall whose delineation is taught in the 28. Chapter.
dialing diagram It were neces∣sary to have here a little hole with a couer to put in your plet & thread. The omer  of  Instrument thus finished, let the other be altogether lie vnto it, except that in stead of the the thread with the plt, you must haue a plombrule
made in this maner. Prepare a péece of very good wood, try it perfectly on both sides to an equal thicknes, let it be about half an inch thick, and twise so broad as the space betwéene the line C. D. of your instrument and the edge A. B. in the midst therof draw the right line G. H. and placing one foote of your compasses in the point G. with the other make a halfe circle according to the breadth of the ruler, whereby you may cut the end round, make the other end with a sharp point right in the end of the line G. H. as you sée in this figure. Let the distance betwéen the point G. and the end H. be so much as is the semidiameter of the quadrant, make by G. an hole so great that a plōmet of lead hanging by a thread from the sharpe end, may moue therein at libertie: Make also an other round or square hole, wherein you may place a néedle touched with the Loadstone, as in the compasses or dyals you sée. Finally, make a little hole in the point or cen∣tre G. and with a broad headed nae of brasse fasten it vpon the centre E. of your Instrument, so as it may moue & turne which way you wil, and then your Instrument is finished. Note that you may make your Instrument in forme of a quadrangle rightangled, as Witekind{us} teacheth, cut∣ting a round furrow without the circle and degrées made, for the plōmet to hang at libertie in: so shall you néede but one side of your instrument to vse, with a compasse or needle touched with the Loadstone for declinations. But the form of the other, whose making we haue taught, seemeth more commnodious, beholde the Figure.
The vse of this instruement. CAP. 2. dialing diagram The vse of this instrument is in examining and placing the plat or dial. In immoueble plats, to know how they
stand, as if you would make a Diall vpon a wall, first you must vnderstand whether the wall be erect or els recline or incline: then whether it be direct East, West, North, or South, or els decline, which you cannot know without the helpe of this Instrument. Againe, in moueable plats for the placing of them, as if you haue made a South diall or any o∣ther kinde, by this Instrument you shall easily and perfect∣ly place them. The triall of a plat for a Horizontall Diall. IF your plat séeme to lye plaine, making no angle with the horizon, set the side or diameter A. B. of your Instrument vpon it, and erect the plombrule right vp betwéene the two quadrants precisely ouer the lyne E. F. then if the thread with the plommet hanging at liberty fall directly vpon his line G. H. which way soeuer you turne your Instrument, such a plat is saide to make no angle with the horizon: and therefore the diall which is made vpon it, is called a Hori∣zontall diall. In like maner may you place this kinde of di∣al being ready made parallele to the horizon, and by the help of the néedle direct the stile towards the North pole. The trying of plats for Erect, Direct, South, North, East and West Dials. WHen the plat standeth vpright, it maketh a right an∣gle with the Horizon, and is called Erect, whereof some beholde one priucipall part of the world directly as the South, North, East, or West: other decline as the South and North, toward the East or West, of which kindes hereafter. To examine an Erect plat, apply the side or diameter A. B. of your Instrument vnto it, the thread with the plom∣met on the foreside hanging at liberty. If the thread fal vp∣pon the line E. C. or E. D. the plat is Erect.
This done, apply the said line or diameter A. B. to y• plat, your Instrument being placed equally distant to the Ho∣rizon, and the plombrule vpon the line E. I. then if the néedle stand directly ouer his caracter, the end touched with the Loadstone being next to the plat, that plat is called a South Erect Direct. In the North all the foresaid things are to be considered, except onely that the end of the néedle touched with y• load∣stone is farthest from the plat. These things knowen, you may easily finde out the East and West Erect Direct, if either you haue a line drawen squire wise to the caracter of the néedle, or els if you place the plombrule ouer the line E. C. or E. D. And here note, that the East and West, are not saide to decline, because the declination is accounted from the south and North, to the direct East, and West pointes. The examining of plats for Declining Dials. ALl such plats as beholde not some principall part of the world directly, are called Declining. The quantity of their declination is found out thus. Apply the diameter A. B. of your Instrument to the plat, remembring to hold it equally distant from the Horizon. Then moue the plombrule vntill the néedle standeth right ouer the caracter, and the point of the ruler, which toucheth the degrées in the limb, shall shew how many degrées and minutes it doth decline: either toward the East if y• plumb∣rule lye in the quadrant C. E. F. or toward the west, if in the quadrant D. E. F. The trying of such plats as recline. IF the plat standeth not vpright, but maketh an obtuse or blunt angle with the Horizon, it is saide to recline. The
degrées of reclination are found out thus. Apply the diameter A. B. of your Instrument to the plat, the one end placed vpward, the other downward: thē moue the plomrule (the thread with the plōmet hauing frée course) vntill the thread hang precisely ouer the line G. H. then the point of the ruler shall shew the degrées of reclination. How Inclining plats are tried. BUt if the angle which the plat maketh with the Horizon be acute or sharpe, then it doth incline. The quantity of inclination is thus knowen. Apply the diameter A. B. of your instrument to the plat, the thread with the plōmet of the former side hanging at li∣berty, and mark what degrée and minute the thrad shal cut, for so much is the inclination. The manner of trying those plats which recline and decline, or incline and decline. IF your plat shall both recline and decline, or incline and decline: First séeke out the reclination as hath béen shew∣ed, and then the declination as in Erect declining. The making of a Horizontall, or plaine lying Sunne Dial. CAP. 3. YOur plat being prepared smoothe and plaine, drawe vpon it two lines, as in the figure fol∣lowing, the one A. B. the other C. D. cutting themselues squirewise, that is, making right angles in the point E. vpon which make the quadrant of any circle from the line E. C. to the line E. A. or E B and write at C. the North, at D. the South, at A. the East, at B. the West. And the line C. A. which here is the quadrant being deuided into 90. degrées or parts, the eleua∣tion
of the Pole shalbe accounted in it (which in our exam∣ple is 52. d. from C. to A. and at the ende of this number drawe a line from the centre E. which shalbe E F represen∣ting the stile and artrée of the world. Then draw an other line K. L. by C. or by some other point of the line D. C. squire wise, so long as you can which shalbe called the touch line, or line of Contingence. Then measuring with your compasses the least distance of the point O. and the line E. F. or the Stile, the one foot placed in O. which is the point of intersection, and the other extended toward E. where it shal chaunce to diuide or be placed in the line E. C. marke that point or centre with the letter G. and draw with your cō∣passes a halfe circle vpon this centre for the equinoctial cir∣cle, from H. by C. to I. whose diameter must be equally di∣stant to the line L. K. Then diuide this halfe circle into 12. equall parts: this done, lay a ruler vpon the centre G. and vpon euery marke or diuision made in the halfe Equator, and where the ruler shal touch y• line of contingence, there make marks or pricks, by which pricks draw lines from E. for the houres. E. C. is the 12. houre, E. B. the 6. in the mor∣ning, E. A. the 6. at euening, the rest you may sée in y• figure. And whereas in Sommer the 4. and 5. in the morning, and also the 7. and 8. at euening, shalbe necessary in this kinde of Diall: prolong or draw the lines of 4. and 5. at euening, beyond the centre E. which shall shew the houres of 4. and 5. in the morning. And likewise the 7. and 8. in the morning, for the 7. and 8. at euening. You may obserue an order both in these and in all other erect direct dials, by diuiding the one halfe of the Equator, drawing houre lines for the forenone, and obseruing the same distance from the meridian line, on the other side for the afternoone: for the line of the 11. houre in the forenoone is of like distance from the Meridian, that the 1. is in the afternoone, and the 10. as 2. and so of the rest. When you would draw or make the halfe houres, you must diuide euery parte of the Equator into 2. equall parts,  the ruler and the line of contingence as you find in the
drawing of the houre lines. And this remember for the drawing of the halfe houre∣lines, not onely in this kinde, but also in all other kindes of dials, which afterward shall follow. The Stile must be fixed in the centre E. hanging directly ouer the Meridian line E. C. with so great an angle, as the lines C. E. F. make, declining from that on neither sides. The Equinoctiall circle, the Quadrant, the line of the Stile and of Contingence, must be lightly drawen, because they ought to be put out againe, in that they serue to no vse but for the drawing of the Diall. And this likewise remē∣ber in all other kindes of Dials, that the preparatiue or pricked lines must after the making of the Dial be omitted and extinguished, as altogither vnprofitable. This and all other kindes of Dials may most fitly be drawen vpon a clean paper, and then with the help of your compasses placed on the plat. dialing diagram
The making of a South Erect, direct Diall. CAP. 4. THe making of this, is almost altogether like vnto other before. Draw here also a line A. B. parallel to the Horizon, out of the middest wherof, let the line C. D. perpendicu∣ler to that be extended: and let the Quadrant be drawen from A. to D. or B. to D. parted into 90. degrées, as before. Aboue C. let Zenith be written, beneath D. Na∣dir; nigh vnto B. the East, and by A. the West. In y• Qua∣drant number the Eleuation of the Pole (which in our ex∣ample is 52. degrées) from A. toward D. And at the end hereof draw from the centre C. the line C. E. representing the Stile: and by D. draw the line of Contingence, I. K. squirewise, as before. Then the least distance of the point or intersection D. and the Stile being taken with your Com∣passes, extend thn in the line D. C. the one foote placed in D. set the other in F. toward C. and draw by F. the Diame∣ter of the halfe circle of the Equator equally distant to the line K. L. which must be made vpon the centre F. from G. by D. to H. and diuide it into 12. equall partes, vpon euery one of which and the centre F. the ruler being placed, wher∣soeuer it shal happen to touch the line of contingence, there make markes. Then from the centre C. by these marks the houre lines must be drawen. The line C. A. shall shew the 6. in the morning, C. B. the 6. at euening, C. D. the 12. &c. The Stile must be placed or fixed in the centre C. han∣ging precisely ouer the line of the 12. houre, with so great a distance, as the angle D. C. E, is. This kinde of Dial doth receiue and shew onely but 12. houres at the most.
dialing diagram The making of a North Erect, Direct Diall. CAP. 5. HEre as in the South make a line Paral∣lele to y• Horizon, A. B. cut it squire wise with the Perpendicular C. D. let C. be the centre. At C. write Zenith, at D. Nadir, c. From C. draw the Quadrant of a circle to D. or B. deuide this into 90. Degrées, account the Eleuation of the pole (which in our example is 52. d) from A. toward C. Draw at the end of of this number the line E. F for y• Stile. Afterward draw the line of Contingence by C. squire-wise, and take the shortest distance, with your compasses be∣twéene the poynt C. and the Stile, placing the one foote in the point C. extend the other toward E. in the line C. D: ma∣king a poynt or pricke G: wherupon (as a centre) the same
widenesse of the compasses remaining, describe the halfe Equator by C. ended with the Diameter H. I. equidistant to the line of Contingence. When you haue deuided thus halfe circle of the Equator into twelue equall partes, lay the ruler vpon the centre G. and vpon each diuision of the Equator, and where it shall touch the Contin∣gent line, make markes. This done, draw the lines for the houres, by those markes from the centre E. but those very fewe, that is, two nigh vnto A. and two by B. but prolong and extend them beyond the centre E. so that their contraries may bée made: for in this kinde of Dials there bée but onely ten houres profitable, that is, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, before noone, and 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, after noone; which shew but only in Sommer, from the entring of the Sunne into ♈, vntill such tne as it entreth ♎. The Stile must bée fixed in the centre E. placed vp∣ward, directly ouer the lint E. C. with so great an angle as I. E. C. is. Let the line C. D. bée placed vpward per∣pendicularly, but so that it may not bée almost séene, as afterward seruing to no vse, because it is onely a line preparatiue. Beholde the Figure.
A North Diall erect, direct. dialing diagram The making of the East and West Erect Dials. CHAP. 6. IF you know the making of one of these, you may easily make them both, for they be very like, differing onely in the na∣ming of the houres, for the one contai∣neth houres for the forenoone, and the o∣ther for the afternoone. You must therefore on your plat make the quadrant of a circle A. B. C. which may afterward easilie bée put out, as all the other lines must bée, except the
houre lines: let the side A. B. be Perpendiculare: B. C. Paral∣lele to the horizon, and let the arke beholde the South, which being diuided into 90. degrées, nomber therin the ele∣nation of the Pole dounward from A. toward C. by the end of this number, and by the Centre B, draw a line so long as your plat will giue you leaue, whose South ende shall be∣hold precisely the Equinoctiall circle. At which end draw a circle whose diameter shall bee almost the third part of the line. Then draw another diameter or line in the centre, squire wise to the other, which shall shew the axtrée of the world, and be the line for the 6. hour. After ward at the cut∣ward sides of the circle, draw two contingent lines, one be∣neath, the other aboue, so that they may be Parallele to the middle line. Deuide each quarter of the circle into sixe equal partes. Then place the ruler vpon the centre, and eache of those markes or partes, and where it toucheth the lines of contingence there make markes in them. Afterward draw a line by those two markes which be next to the 6. houre, in the lines of contingence, which may be equallie distant from the line of the 6. houre. In like maner doe with the rest; so that you may haue in the East Diall, two aboue the 6. houre, the 4. and 5. in the morning, and vnder it 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. In the West Diall like wise 7. and 8. in the euening aboue the 6. houre, and vnder it 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1. Neither of them doe shew the 12. houre, because at that time the Sunne beames be Parallele to the plat. Fixe the Stile in the centre of the circle right vp from the Plat, so long as the Semidiameter of the circle is: only shewing the houre with the very top or end thereof. Yet it were more conuenient to haue it placed along ouer the line of the 6. houre, being a plate of yron or some other metall, being so broad as the Semidiamer of the circle is. Behold the figures folowing.
The East diall Erect. dialing diagram
The West Diall erect. dialing diagram Note that these fiue kinds of Dials before taught may be made vpon a stone cut square in forme of a die. The making of a South Erect declining Diall, which may be placed on any vpright wall what∣soeuer. CAP. 7. IN all Declining Dials because the Stile doth not hang directly ouer the meridianline, therefore you must first finde out and place the Substile (which is the line ouer which the Stile directly hangeth) and lik wise the line of the Stile: which may bée both eastly and spéedily performed in this maner. First, by your instrument séeke out the Declination of
the wall or plat, whereupon you would make a diall, which for example suppose I had found to be 50. degrées. Therefore drawe the Horizontall line A. B. let the Meri∣dian C. D. cut it squire wise in the point E. which may be in any place of the line A. B. and let the line F. G. cut the meridi∣an squire-wise in the point C. which you may like wise take in what parte of the Meridian you thinke most conuenient. Upon the center E. describe the quadrant of a circle from C. to A. if the declinatiō of your plat be West-ward, or from C. toward B. if East-ward (as in this example it is) diuide it into 90. degrées and number in it from C. toward B. the E∣leuation of the Equator 38. degrées, and laying your ru∣lerThis is al∣waies so much as the Eleua∣tion of the Pole, wan∣teth of 90. degrees. vpon the center E. and vpon the end of this number draw the line E. H. Againe account in the quadrant from C. toward B. the declination of the plat being 50. degrées, and draw the line of Declination E. I. from E. to the end of this number. Then take your compasses, set one foote in the point C. extend the other vnto H. (which is the intersection point of the line E. H. with the line C. G.) and that same widnesse re∣mayning, place one foote in the centre E. and with the other marke the point 1. in the line E I. and from the point I. draw the line I. K. squire-wise to the Meridian E. C. placing K. at the intersection it maketh with E. C. Moreouer take with your compasses the iust length of the line I. K. and placing one foote in C. turne the other to∣ward F. and make the point L. in the line C. F. drawe the Substile from E. by L. Let the line of Contingence bée drawne squire-wise to the Substile in the point L. This done, take the distance betwéene the centre E. and the point K. and place it in this line of Contingence from the point L. vnto M. and make the point M. that the line E. M. may be made from E. vnto M. for the stile. Measure with your compasses the least distance be∣twéene the point L. and the Stile, and with the same wide∣nes, one foote remaining in L. turne the other toward E. and make the centre O. in the Substile: vpon which de∣scribe
the Equinoctiall circle. Then placing your ruler vp∣on O. being the centre of the Equinoctiall circle, and N. (which is the point of intersection of the Meridian and Contingent) marking where it cutteth the circumference, for there you must begin to diuide it into 24. equall partes, not withstanding those 12. are onely in vse which are next the contingent. Finally, place your ruler vpon the centre O. and vp∣on the seuerall diuision points of the Equator, and where it toucheth the line of Contingence make markes, by which from the center E. draw the houre lines. Place the Meridian perpendicularly vpon the wall, the centre E. vpward, the Stile pointing downeward. Let the Stile hang directly ouer the Substile making an angle e∣quall to E. M. L.
The making of a North Erect Declining Diall. CAP. 8. THe North Erect declining Dial differeth from the South onely herein, that the centre is to be placed downeward, the Stile pointing vpward to the North Pole, and that the Meridian representeth the 12. houre at midnight and not at noone. Therefore if the de∣clination bée toward the East, you must account the houre lines from that which is as it were the Meridian forth∣ward 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 &c. But if it decline toward the West, number them backe∣ward, 11, 10, 9, 8, &c. omitting the first 3. which are before Sunne rising and after Sunne setting in our eleuation. Let the line E. D. bée placed perpendicularly vpon the plat, and the Stile point vpward to the North Pole. Com∣pare this figure with the former.
Another way to make the South Erect Declining Diall. CAP. 9. ALbeit we haue plainely and perfectly shewed the making of the South and North erect Declining Dials, in the two former Chapters; yet to satis∣fie them that delight in variety; here is also declared another way, whereby you may make them, namely, by the helpe of Arithmetick, and the Table of Sines which isRead the se of the Table of Sines. placed in the end of this booke for this intent. Therefore the Eleuation of the Pole being knowen, and the Declination of your plat, by your Instrument found out: Multiply the Sine of the complement of the Eleuati∣on, by the Sine of the complement of the Declination, di∣uide the product by the whole Sine (which is 100000) and you shall haue a quotient Sine, whose arke is the di∣stance of the Stile from the Substile, which distance kéep. Then take the complement of this distance, and the Ele∣nation of the Pole, and multiply the Sine of the lesser by the whole Sine, parting the product by the Sine of the greater: the quotient Sine which shall come of this diuisi∣on, shall giue you an Arke, whose complement is the di∣stance of the line of the Substile from the Meridian, which distance you shall likewise kéepe. For better instruction herein, consider the example. Example of a South Diall declining 45. d. Eleuation of the Pole. 52. d. FIrst I enter the Table of Sines, for the Sine of the complement of the Eleuation, which is 38. d. and I finde
it to be 61566. Then I looke for the Sine of the complement of the Declination, which is 45. d. and I finde that to be 70710. This done, I multiply the one by the other, and the product is 435333 1860. which I diuide by the whole Sine being 100000 wherof commeth a quotient 43533. With this quotient Sine I enter the Table, and because I finde not the iust number, I take that which is next either grea∣ter or lesse vnto it: (which you must alwaies remember to doe) for so small a difference maketh no alteration, and therfore I take in stead thereof 43523. whose Arke is 25 d. 48. m. which is the distance of the Stile from the substile. Then I take the complement of this distance, which is 64. d. 12. m. whose Sine is 90031. and the Eleuation of the Pole 52. d. whose Sine is 78801. and multiplying ye Sine of the lesser, (which is the Eleuation of the Pole) by the whole, 100000. the product is 7880100000. which I di∣uide by the Sine of the greater, to wit, the Sine of the com∣plement of the distance of the Stile from ye Substile, whose Sine is 90031, whereof commeth this quotient 87526 whose Arke is 61. d. 5. m. The complement of which arke is 28. d. 55. m. being the distance of the substile from the Me∣ridian. These distances being thus found out, the drawing of the diall foloweth. First draw a line Parallele to the Horizon A. B. out of whose middle point C. draw the Meridian line squire wise C. D. vpon the centre C. make the quadrant of a circle be∣twéene A. and D. Here vnderstand that generally in all kindes of declining Dials, if the declination be towards the East, you must draw the quadrant towards the West, (ex∣cept in the South reclining declining, and the North in∣clining Declining, where the contrary is prescribed) But if the declination be Westward, the quadrant must be draw∣en Eastward. Hereby you shall easily know on which side you ought alwaies to draw the quadrant, and which way the figures following doe decline. Your quadrant being made, diuide it into 90. degrées: number therein from D.
the distance of the Substile from the Meridian, (which is 28. d. 55. m. Draw at the end of this number the line C. E. for the Substile. Then from E. towards A. account the di∣stance of the Stile from the Substile, which is 25. d 48. m. and at the end hereof, draw the line C. F. for the Stile. Af∣terward by the point E. or in any place of the Substile draw the Contingent line G. H. so long as you can squirewise to the Substile. Then take with your compasses the least di∣stance betwéene E. and the Stile, the one foote remaining in E. and the other extended in the Substile toward C. place at the pricke there made with the compasses, I. vpon which pricke as a centre, the same widenes of your compasses re∣maining, draw a circle by E. which shall represent the equi∣noctiall or Equator. Then lay the ruler vpon the point I. and the intersection (whose marke is K.) of the line of Con∣tingence and the line C. D. which is alwaies drawen so that it may cut the other) and where the ruler so placed shall touch the circle, there make a marke, and there begin to di∣uide it into 24. equall partes: notwithstanding those 12. onely are to be vsed, which doe beholde the contingent line. Then lay the ruler vpon the centre I. and the Contingent line by euery diuision of the Equator, and where it shall touch the line of Contingence, there make markes, by the which from the centre C. draw lines for the houres, so ma∣ny as shalbe necessary. The line C. D. shall alwaies shew the 12. houre, which must hang perpendicularly. Number the residue of the lines in their place, as they follow in order. The line A. B. in such as doe decline is vnprofitable, ex∣cept it so chance that some houre line falleth in it. Let the Stile be fixed in C. hanging directly ouer the Substile, with so great an angle, as E. C. F. is, declining on neither side. Note diligently the making of this declining Diall, be∣cause in those which follow, we meane not to repeate those things which héere haue béen taught. And this one kinde
well knowen, all the other will séeme most easie. For better vnderstanding hereof beholde the figure. A South Erect declining Diall. dialing diagram The making of a North Erect declining Diall another way. CAP. 10. THe distance of the Stile from the Substile, and of the Substile from the Meridian, is foūd out altogether like to the South Erect decli∣ning. Therefore you may resort thither for the working hereof, I will onely drawe the Figure.
Let the line A. B. being parallele to the Horizon, cut C. D. squire wise, placing E. at the intersection Draw the qua∣drant from C. to B. diuide it into 90. d. accounting therein from C. toward B. the distance of the Substile from ye line, which is (as it were) the Meridian, which distance is 28. d. 55m. At the end of this number draw the line E. F. for the Substile. Then number from that line the distance of the Substile and the Stile, which is 25. degrées, 48 minutes toward B. Draw likewise at the end of this number the line for the Stile E. G. This done, let the line of Con∣tingence be drawen squire wise by the point F. and then ta∣king the least distance betwéene the point F. and the Stile, extend the compasses in the line F. E. the one foote being pla∣ced in F. where the other shall deuide the line, place the let∣ter H. With the same widenes of the compasses draw vpon the centre H. the Equator, and where the ruler shall touch the same, being laid vpon the centre H. and the intersection of the Contingent line, and yt which is (as it were) the Meri∣dian, begin to deuide it into 24. equall partes. Finish all things remaining, as in ye South erect declining, onely this excepted, the Stile being fixed in the centre E. must be pla∣ced vpward, beholding the substile with so great a distance or angle, as the letters F. E. G. do shew. The line C. D. being applyed to the plat perpendicularly, sheweth as it were the 12. houre at midnight: therefore account from that the houre lines, as they follow in order, 1, 2, 3. which houres haue no vse in this kinde of Diall for our Eleuation, but from 4. &c. Let the line A. B. be parallel to the Horizon, being light∣ly drawen, as the other preparatiue lines be, seruing after∣ward to no vse. Note, if the plat decline towards the East, as this figure doth, it is for the forenoone: and you must account the houre lines from that which is (as it were) the Meridian, forward 4, 5, 6. &c. If it decline toward the West, account them backward 11, 10, 9. as we shewed before.
A North erect declining Diall. dialing diagram The making of a Meridionall or South Reclining direct Diall. CAP. 11. IF the Reclination of the plat be lesse then the complement of the Eleuation of the Pole, adde this complement, and the Re∣clination of the plat together, and with this number as if it were the Eleuation of the Pole make a South erect direct di∣all, and it will be perfect and fit for your plat.
Example and delineation of a South Diall, reclining 25. d. MAke the first line A. B. drawe also an other C. D. cut∣ting the other with right angles. Then adde the Com∣plement of the eleuation of the Pole (which is 25. d,) to the reclination of the plat (which is 38. d.) and the totall summe shalbe 63. d. which number being in place of the Eleuation of the Pole, account it in the Quadrant from A. towards D. and at the end hereof, draw the line F. for the Stile. Then make the line of Contingence K L. squire wise to the line C. D. Afterward take the least distance with your compasses betwéen the point G. and y• Stile, with y• widenes, the one foote extended toward C. make a point or prick E. by which point draw the line H. I. equidistant from A. B. or K. L. vpon E. make a halfe circle from H. by G. to I. which being diui∣ded into 12. parts, finish the rest as the South Erect direct. A South Direct reclining 25. d. dialing diagram
BUt if the Reclination be equall to the complement of the Pole, make your Diall on this maner, like to the East and West. Draw a line Parallele to the Horizon A. B. so long as the plat will giue you leaue, diuide it into 7. equall parts, and with the same widenes of the compasses, in the midst of the line, make a circle representing the Equator. Then drawe two lines of Contingence by the circumference of the cir∣cle, equidistant from the first A. B. Diuide the Equator in∣to 24. equall parts. Finish the rest like the East or West di∣all: except in naming the houres, for that which is in them the 6. houre line, is here the 12. &c. A South Direct reclining 38. d. dialing diagram BUt if the reclination of the plat be greater then the com∣plement of the Eleuation of the Pole, substract the com∣plement of this Eleuation out of the reclination, and that which remaineth shall serue in stead of the Eleuation of the Pole: with which Eleuation make your diall altogether like a Horizontall, which you shall finde fit for your plat. Example of a South Diall, reclining 55. d. FIrst I take the complement of the Eleuation, which is 38. d. out of the Reclination of the plat, which is 55. d. and there remaineth 17. d. which number kéep for the Ele∣uation of the Pole.
In Delineation of this Diall, drawe a line Parallele to the horizon A. B. draw another C. D. making right angles with the line A. B. Then make the quadrant from A. to D. which being diuided into 90. degrées, number in it that, which is, as it were, the Eleuation of the Pole, namely 17. degrées from D. towards A. Then draw the line of Contin∣gence K. L. in any point of the line C. D. squire wise. Take with your compasses the least distance of the point G. and of the Stile: extend them forth in the line C. D. I meane, from G. toward C. make there a point marked with E. vp∣pon which point or centre with the same widenesse of the compasses, drawe the Equator from H. by G. to I. diuide it into 12. equall partes, &c. Finish that which remaineth in all respects, like to the Horizontall Diall, in naming the houres, drawing of the lines, fixing of the Stile, &c. for in this kinde of Diall, the Stile must bée fixed in the centre C. standing vpward, with so great an angle, as C. D. F. is. Beholde the Figure folowing.
A South Reclining Erect. dialing diagram The making of a North Diall Reclining Direct. CAP. 12. IN these kindes, if the Reclination bée lesse then the Eleuation of the Pole, sub∣tract that from this, & kéep the remain∣der for the Eleuation of the Pole: ac∣cording to which Eleuation, make a North Diall Erect Direct, and it will be fit for your plat. In which the houres about Noone are placed, being profitable onely in sommer:
and not then vnlesse the Reclination be greater then the di∣stance of y• Tropk of S, from y• Zenith. And the more your Diall Reclineth, the longer time it will shew in Sommer. Example of a North Diall Reclining 45. degrees. FIrst I take the Eleuation of the Pole (which wée ac∣count 52. d.)  the Reclination of the plat, which is 45. d. and there remaineth 7. d. which shall bée in place of the Eleuation of the Pole. Then for the drawing of it, resort to the North Erect Direct, because their Delineation is like: remembring al∣waies to call that which remaineth the Eleuation of the Pole: which in this example is but 7. degrées. In the fi∣gure following you sée that most part of the houre lines bée drawne opposit from the Contingent, beyond the centre E. as you must doe in any of this kinde, if you will haue the houres about noone. dialing diagram
Example of a North Diall Reclining 52. degrees. BUt if the Reclination be equal with the Eleuation of the Pole: then describe a circle vpō the centre E. and diuide it into 24. equall partes, beginning the diuision at the 12. houre. Draw by those points, lines for the houres from the centre E. so many as shall be necessarie: erecting the Stile (being some small wier) in the centre E. right vp. This kinde of Diall serueth only when the Sunne is in the north signes, which be ♈, ♉, ♊, ♋, ♌, ♍. A North Reclining Direct. dialing diagram You may with the help of a smale brasse quadrant and a néedle placed conueniently make this a portable and fit Di∣all for any Eleuation of the Pole. Againe, if the Reclination shall excéede the Eleuation of
the Pole: adde the complement of the reclination to the E∣leuation, and with that number as if it were the Eleuation of the Pole, make your Diall altogether like a Horizontall, and it shall be fit for your plat. In which notwithstanding in winter, very fewe houres will shew, and those about noone: and yet not these, vnlesse the Reclination shall bée greater, then the hest bending of the Tropke of ♑, from the Zenith. Example of a North Diall reclining 80. d. FIrst adde the complement of he reclination of the plat, which is 10. d. to the Eleuation of the Pole 52. d. and with the totall number 62. d.  f it were the Eleuation of the Pole, make a Horizontall Diall, as is shewed cap. 3. Alwaies remember to call the two numbers added toge∣ther, the Eleuation of the Pole. A North reclining Direct. dialing diagram
The making of an East and West Diall reclining. CAP. 13. FIrst multiplie the Sine of the Eleua∣tion of the Pole, by the Sine of the Reclination of the plat, and diuide the product by the whole Sine: whereof shall come a quotient, whose arke is the distance of the Stile, from the Substile. Compare the Complement of this distance with the Complement of the Eleuation of the Pole, and which you shall find least, multiply the Sine thereof by the whole Sine, parting the Product by the Sine of the greater. The quotient shall yéelde an arke, whose Complement shall be the distance of the Substile from the Meridian. Example of an East or West Diall, reclining 45. degrees. FIrst, I multiplie the Sine of the Eleuation of the Pole 52. degrées being 78801. by the Sine of the Reclina∣tiō of the plat, which is 70710. & the product 5572018710 I diuide by 100000 the whole Sine, and the quotient is 55720. the arke whereof is 33. d. 52. m. which is the di∣stance of the Substile from the Stile. Then I compare the Complement of this distance, which is 56. d. 8. m. with the Complement of the Eleua∣tion of the Pole, which is 38. d. and finding the Comple∣ment of the Eleuation to be least, I multiply 61566 the Sine thereof, by the whole Sine: and the Product arising thereof is 6156600000: which I diuide by the Sine of the
greater, which is the Complement of the distance, whose Sine is 83033. And the quotient 74141 yéeldeth an arke 47. d. 51. m. whose Complement is 42. d. 9. m. which is the distance of the Substile from the Meridian. First draw a line Parallele to the Horizon A. B. draweThe deline∣ation of the figure. another squier wise, C. D. Then make the quadrant from A. to D. Number therein the distance of the Substile from the Meridian (which wée found to bée in our example 42. d. 9. m.) from A. toward D. At the end of this number from the centre C. draw the line for the Substile, C. E. Account from this line the distance betwéene the Stile and the Sub∣stile, which is 33. d. 52. m. draw likewise at the end of this number from C. the line C. G. for the Stile. Let the line of Contingence bée squire wise to the Substile in any point where you will. Then take with your compasses the least distance betwéen the point E. and the line of the Stile: with that widnesse the one foote remaining in E. extend the other in the line of the Substile toward C. make there the point F. vpon which draw the Equator from H. by E. to I. Diuide it into 12. equall partes; beginning your diuision where the ruler being placed vpon the centre F. and the intersection of the Meridian with the Contingent shall touch the equator. Lay the ruler from F. by each of those markes, and where it shall touch the line of Contingence, there make markes: by which from the centre C. drawe the houre lines so many as shall be necessary. The line A. B. is the Meridian, and sheweth the 12. houre. Finish all other thinges, as in the rest before you were taught. Note that if it be an East diall, you must make the qua∣drant from A. to D. If a West, from B. to D. Finish the resi∣due as before, &c.
An East or West reclining. dialing diagram The making of a South reclining declining Diall. CAP. 14. FIrst, in this kinde, as in other which follow, you must finde out and place the Meridian, the Substile, and the Stile, which being done, that which remai∣neth is finished as in those before. Therefore the Declination and the Reclination of the plat being known by your instrument, multiplie the Sine of the Declination by
the Sine of the complement of the Reclination, diuiding the product by the whole Sine. The quotient Sine shall yéeld an Arke, whose complement shall be named the Com∣plement to be repeated. Afterward augment the Sine of the Complement of the Declination, by the whole Sine, diuide the Product by the Sine of the Complement to be repeated: where of shall come a Sine, whose arke shalbe the distance of the Meridi∣an from the Horizon. Againe, multiply the Sine of this distance, by the Sine of the Complement of the Reclination, parte the Product by the whole Sine, the arke of whose quotient shalbe cal∣led the Eleuation of the Meridian. Then compare this Eleuation of the Meridian, with the Eleuation of the Pole, and which you shall finde least, sub∣tract that from the greater, and that which remaineth kéep, (for it shall be called the difference kept) being mindefull which of them was the greatest. This done, multiply the Sine of the Complement to be repeated, by the Sine of the difference kept: diuiding the Product by the whole Sine, whereof shall come a Sine, whose arke shalbe the distance of the Stile from y• substile. To conclude, compare the Complement of this distance, with the complement of the difference kept, and which you shall finde least, multiply the Sine thereof by the whole Sine: part the Product by the Sine of y• greater, and there∣of shall come a Sine, the Complement of whose arke shalbe the distance of the Substile from the Meridian. Example of a South Dial Declining 18. d. Reclining 25. d. First looke out in the Table the Sine of the Declinati∣on, which is 30901. Then the Complement of the Recli∣nation being 65. d. the Sine hereof is 90630. Afterward multiply 90630: by 30901. and the product 2800557630
diuide by the whole Sine, which is 100900. the quotient shalbe 28005. whose arke is 16. d. 16. m. The complement whereof being 73. d. 44. m. is the complement to be re∣peated. This done, multiply 95105 the Sine of the Comple∣ment of the Declination 72. d. by the whole Sine 100000. the product shalbe 9510500000. which being diuided by 95996 the Sine of the complement to be repeated, the quo∣tient shalbe 99071, whose arke is 82. d. 11. m. which is the distance of the Meridian from the Horizon. Afterward augment the Sine of this distance 99071. by the Sine of the complement of the Reclination, which is 90630. and the product 8978804730 part by the whole Sine: and the quotient 89788 shall yéeld an arke 63. d. 53. m. which is the Eleuation of the Meridian. Then compare the Eleuation of the Meridian, with the Eleuation of the Pole, which in this example is 52. d. and finding the Eleuation of the Pole to be least, substract this namely 52. degrées) from 63. d. 53. m. the Eleuation of the Meridian, and there remaineth 11. d. 53. m. which is the difference kept. Now multiply 95996 being the Sine of the Comple∣ment to be repeated, which is 20591. the product is 1976653636. which diuided by the whole Sine, the quoti∣ent shalbe 19766, whose arke 11. d. 24. m. is the distance of the Stile from the Substile. Then to conclude. y• Complement of this distance, which is 78. d. 36. m. being compared with the Complement of the difference kept, which is 78. d. 7. m. you shall finde the Complement of this difference kept to be least, wherefore multiply 97856 the Sine thereof, by the whole Sine, and the product 9785600000. part by the Sine of the greater, to wit, of the Complement of the distance of the Stile from the Substile, which is 98027. the quotient shalbe 99825. whose arke is 86. d. 37. m. The Complement whereof is
3. d. 23 m. which is the distance of the Substile from the Meridian. There be thrée sundry kindes of these Dials, the one dif∣fering from the other. The first kinde. Marke therefore, if the Eleuation of the Meridian be greater then the Eleuation of the Pole, drawe a line paral∣lele to the Horizon A. B. out of the middest whereof extend an other C. D. squire wise to the line A. B. make the quadrant from A. to D. number therin from A. towards D. the distāce of the Meridian from the Horizon, which is 82. d. 11. m. at the end hereof from y• centre C. draw the line C. E. for the Meridian. From which account backward towards A. the distance of the Substile from the Meridian, which is 3. d. 23. m. draw at the end of this number the line C. F. for the Substile. Then from the Substile toward A. number the distance of the Substile from the Stile 11. d. 24 m. and at the end therof extend the line C. G. which shall represent the Stile. This done, in the line of the Substile in the point F. (which you may take where you wil in y• Substile) draw the line of Contingence squirewise to the Substile. Then take the least distance of the point F. from the Stile. Af∣terward extend your compasses, the one foote being placed in F. in the line of the Substile toward C. vnto H. Describe vpon the centre H. the Equinoctiall circle by F. Diuide it into 24. equall partes, beginning where the ruler shall touch the Equator, being placed vpon the centre H and vp∣on euery marke of the Equator, and where the ruler shall touch the line of Contingence, there make markes, by which, from the centre C. draw the houre lines somany as shall be necessary, C▪ E. alwaies she wing the 12. hower. Let the Stile hang directly ouer the Substile with so great an angle as F C. G. is: fixing it in the centre C. pointing▪
downward to the Pole Antartick. Place the line A. B. parallele to the Horizon, hauing af∣terward as other preparatiue lines no vse. A South Declining Reclining. dialing diagram The second kinde. But if the Eleuation of the Pole, and the Eleuation of the Meridian be found equall, the making of your Diall differeth from the former: yet y• finding out of the Meridian and the Substile, &c. is wrought as in the other before,
whither you may resorte. It shal be sufficient here to shew an example of this kinde. Example of a South Diall, whose Declination is, 32 d. Reclination is, 33. d. 30. m. Eleuation of the Pole is, 52. d. 2. m. First I multiply 52991 the Sine of the declination, by 83388 the Sine of the Complement of the Reclination, and the product 4418813508 arising thereof, I diuide by the whole Sine: the quotient Sine 44188 yéeldeth an ark 26. d. 14. m. whose complement being 63. d. 46. m. is ye com∣plement to be repeated. Then I increase the Sine of the Complement of the de∣clination, which is 84804, by the whole Sine, and the pro∣duct is, 8480400000: which I parte by 89700 being the Sine of the complement to be repeated. The arke of whose quotient Sine 94541 being 70. d. 59. m. is the distance of the Meridian from the Horizon. This done, I multiply this Sine 94541, by the Sine of the complement of the reclination, which is 83388, and the product arising hereof, being 7883584908 I diuide by the whole Sine: the quotient therof is 78835, whose ark 52. d 2. m. is the Eleuation of the Meridian, which I compare with the Eleuation of the Pole, and finding them equall, I end my worke héere. For this shalbe sufficient in this kinde of Diall, as you may more plainely perceiue by the delineation of the Figure. Wherefore if the Eleuation of the Pole, and of the Me∣ridian be found equall, (as in this example it is) make a line parallel to the Horizon A. B. Draw another C. D. making right angles with the line A. B. Draw the quadrant from A. to D. number therein the distance of the Meridian from the Horizon from A. toward D. which is 70. d. 59. m. being here in place of the Substile. Then draw the line of Con∣tingence squire wise to the Meridian C. E. (which is also the
Substile C E. in any point thereof, as before. Place one foot of your Compasses in the intersection E. then set the other foote in y• Meridian (or Substile) being of any widenes: make there the point or centre F. vpon which centre drawe the halfe Equator from G. by E. to H. Diuide the one half ther∣of from E. to H. into 90. d. Account therein from the Meri∣dian E. towards H. the declination of the plat 32. d. place the ruler vpon the centre F. and the end of this number, and where it shall touch the Contingent line, there make a marke, by this marke you must draw a line squire wise to the Contingent line, which shall be for the 12 hower. And where the ruler shall touch the Equator, there begin to di∣uide it into 12. equall partes, by which lay the ruler from the centre F. making in the line of Contingence markes for the other hower lines, all which shall cut the Contingent line squire-wise. Note that sometime in diuiding of the E∣quator, the two parts at both ends next to the Semidiame∣ter G. H shall both of them make but one whole parte vn∣lesse you will make a whole circle for the Equator, and di∣uide it into 24. partes. Let the Stile be a small wyer standing right vp in the point E. being so long as the semidiameter of the Equator. It may be also a plate of iron or brasse fastened in the Sub∣stile so broad as the Semidiameter is, as in the East and West erect dialls, &c. Let the line A. B. be parallele to the Horizon. Finish all other things as before.
A South reclining declining. dialing diagram The third kinde. If the Eleuation of the Meridian be lesse then the Ele∣uation of the Pole, the making of this Diall i vnlike to both the other mentioned before, yet the finding out of the distance of the Stile from the Substile is done like to the first kinde, as by the example following may appeare. Example of a South Diall Declining 45. d. Reclining 45. d. Eleuation of the Pole 52. d. First I multiply the Sine of the declination being 7071▪
by the Sine of the complement of the reclination which is likewise 70710, and the product 4999904100 I part by the whole Sine. The quotient is 49999 whose arke is 30. d. The Complement of this arke is 60. d. which is the Complement to be repeated. Then I increase the Sine of the Complement of the de∣clination, which is likewise 70710, by the whole Sine, and the product thereof 7071000000 I diuide by the Sine of the Complement to be repeated 86602: the quotient Sine 81649 yéeldeth an arke 54. d. 44. m. which is the di∣stance of the Meridian from the Horizon. Afterward I multiply this Sine 81649, by the Sine of the Complement of the Reclination, which is 70710: the product arising 5773400790 I part by the whole Sine, the quotient is 57734. The arke whereof is 35. d. 16. m. the Eleuation of the Meridian: which I compare with the Eleuation of the Pole (being in our example) 52. d. and fin∣ding the Meridian Eleuation to be least, I substract it out of the Eleuation of the Pole, & there remaineth 16. d. 44. m. which is the difference kept. This done, I augment 86602 the Sine of the Comple∣ment to be repeated, by 28791 the Sine of the difference kept, and the product 2493358182 comming hereof, I di∣uide by the whole Sine, the quotient Sine 24933 yéel∣deth an arke 14. d. 26. m. the distance of the Stile from the Substile. Now comparing the Complement of this distance being 75. d. 34. m. with the Complement of the difference kept, which is 73. d. 16. m. and séeing the Complement of the dif∣ference kept to be least: I multiply 95765 the Sine there∣of, by the whole Sine, and the product 9576500000 I di∣uide by 96843 the Sine of the complement of the distance, and 98886 shalbe the quotient therof, whose arke is 81. d. 27. m. The Complement of this arke is 8. d. 33. m. which is the distance of the Substile from the Meridian. In the Delineation of this diall, drawe first as before a
line Parallele to the Horizon A B. extend another C. D. ma∣king right angles with the line A. B. Draw the Quadrant from A. to D. diuide it into 90. degrées. In which account the distance of the Meridian from the Horizon, from A. to∣wards D. which is 54. d. 44. m. drawe at the ende of this number the Meridian line from the centre C. which shall shew the 12. hower. Account from this toward D. the di∣stance of the Substile from the Meridian, which is 8. d. 33. m. at the end hereof extend from C. the line E. for the Sub∣stile. From this, number the distance of the Stile being 14. d. 26. m. toward D. if there be so much space, if not, account it from the Substile toward A. make at the end of this num∣ber the line C. F. for the Stile. Let the line of Contingence cut the Substile squire-wise, in what poynt you will. Fi∣nish all other things, as in the first of these thrée kindes of South reclining declining Dials. In this kinde of reclining Dials, whose Stile must bée placed from the centre C. vpward toward the Pole Artick: if at any time you cannot draw to both ends of the Contin∣gent line so many howre lines as shall be necessarie: then prolong beyond the centre C. the lines opposite on the other side. As if you would make the 8. houre line for the mor∣ning, draw the 8. for the euening beyond the centre C. and you shall haue your desire. Note that moreouer, in this kinde contrarie to the other before, if the plat decline toward the West, (as in this ex∣ample it doth) thē draw the quadrant towards the West, &c. But if the Declination be towards the East, make the qua∣drant towards the East.
A South reclining, declining. dialing diagram The making of a North reclining decli∣ning Diall. CAP. 15. The first kinde. IN this kinde as in the South before: first multiply the Sine of the Declination, by the Sine of the Complement of the Reclination: parting the product by the whole Sine. The quotient Sine thereof shall yéelde an arke, whose Complement shall be called the Com∣plement repeated.
Then increase the Sine of the Complement of the De∣clination by the whole Sine, diuide the product by the Sine of the Complement repeated: the quotient Sine thereof will giue an arke, which shall be the distance of the Meridi∣an from the Horizon. The same quotient Sine multiply by the Sine of the Complement of the reclination: and the number arising part by the whole Sine: the arke of this quotient is the E∣leuation of the Meridian. Now adde the Eleuation of the Pole to the Eleuation of the Meridian, and the totall number or arke hereof, wée will call the compounded arke. And if the compounded arke be lesse then 90. degrées: then multiply the Sine therof, by the Sine of the Complement repeated, diuiding the product by the whole Sine: and hereof shall arise a quotient Sine, whose arke shalbe the distance of the Stile frō the Substile. Now compare the Complement of this distance, with the Complement of the compounded arke: and increase the Sine of the lesser by the whole Sine, part the product by the Sine of the greater: and thereof shall come a Sine, the Complement of whose arke shal be the distance of the Sub∣stile from the Meridian. But marke here the diuersitie which doth arise by reason of the compounded arke: for hereby you shall haue thrée sundry waies, both in finding out the distances betwéene the Meridian and the Horizon, the Stile and Substile, &c. And likewise in the delineation of the figure. Whereof a∣riseth thrée sundry kinds of Dialls: the first of them being already taught. The second kinde. If the compounded arke be iust 90. degrées: then the di∣stance of the Stile from the Substile shall be the Comple∣ment repeated: and the distance of the Substile from the Meridian shall be also 90. degrées.
Note that in the working hereof, there is no difference from the first kinde. For here as in the other before, you shall first inde out the complement repeated: then the di∣stance of the Meridian from the Horizon: Afterward the Eleuation of the Meridian, which being added to the Ele∣uation of the Pole, if the totall number bée iust 90. d. you shall not néede to procéede forward, for this (as before I made mention) shall bée the distance of the Meridian from the Substile. In this kinde you shall haue no intersection of the Me∣ridian and the Contingent line: therefore you shall begin the diuision of the Equator at the line of the Substile, which shall shew the 6. houre, either in the morning, or euening, according as the plat doth decline. The third kinde. But if the compounded arke be greater then 90 degrées, substract it from 180, and that which remayneth shalbe cal∣led the difference kept. Then multiplie the Sine of the Complement repeated, by the Sine of the difference kept, diuiding the product by the whole Sine, hereof shall come a Sine, whose arke shall be the distance of the Stile from the Substile. Then compare the Complement of this distance, with the Complemēt of the difference kept, increasing the Sine of the lesser by the whole Sine, and parting the product by the Sine of the greater: whereof shall come a Sine, the Complemēt of whose arke, being taken from 180 degrées, the remaynder shal shew how much the line of the Substile must be distant (vpward by the Horizon) from the Meridi∣an. For the better vnderstanding of these thrée kinds, mark these thrée examples following, with the delineatiō of their figures.
Example of a North Diall, whose Declination is, 45. d. Reclination 45. d. Eleuatiō of the Pole 52. d. First I worke this altogether like to the South recli∣ning 45. d. declining 45. d. vntill I haue found out the Ele∣uation of the Meridian. Then I adde the Eleuation of the Meridian which is, 35. d. 16. m. to the Eleuation of the Pole 52. d. the totall number is 87. d. 16. m. which is the compounded arke: and being lesse then 90. d. I procéede with this arke, &c. Now therefore I multiplie the Sine of this compounded arke, which is 99884, by the Sine of the complement to be repeated being 86602, and the product 8650154168 I part by the whole Sine. The quotient thereof is 86501, whose arke 59. d. 54. m. is the distance betwéene the Stile and the Substile. Then I compare 30. d. 6. m. being the Complement of this distance, with▪ the Complement of the compounded arke, which is 2. d. 44. m. and finding this least, I increase 4768 the Sine thereof, by the whole Sine, diuiding the product, which is 476800000, by 50151 the Sine of the greater: the quotient Sine yéeldeth an arke 5. d. 27. m. the Complement hereof 84. d. 33. m. is the distance of the Sub∣stile from the Meridian. In drawing of this Diall, first as before, make a line Pa∣rallele to the Horizon A B. Then extend the line C. D. cut∣ting the other squire-wise. Marke the intersection or centre with E. draw thereupon a circle A. B. C. D. whose two qua∣drants at the least, toward A. (if the plat decline West∣ward, or else toward B. if it decline Eastward) being diui∣ded into 90. d. each of them, number therein from A. to∣wards D. the distance of the Meridian from the Horizon, which is 54. d. 44. m. and at the end hereof from the centre . draw the line F. for the Meridian, or 12. houre. Account
from this vpward toward C. the distance of the Substile from the Meridian, bring 84. d. 33. m. make likewise at the end of this number from E. the line for the Substile. Againe number from hence vpward (if there be so much space, or else downward) 59. d. 54. m. which is the distance betwéen the Stile and the Substile, and at the ende hereof drawe the line H. for the Stile. Let the Contingent line cut the Substile squire-wise in the point G. which you may take in any place of the Substile. Then with your compasses the least distance of this point G. and the Stile being taken, with that widenesse extend them forth in the line of the Substile toward E. making there the point I. vpon which draw the Equator or Equinoctiall circle. This done place the ruler vpon the centre I. and the intersection of the Me∣ridian and the Contingent line, and where it shall touch the Equator there begin to diuide it into 24. equall partes. Finish all other things, as in those which went before.
A North reclining declining. dialing diagram The second kinde of North Diall, reclining 45. degrees 14. minuts, declining 38. degrees. IT shall not bée necessarie to shewe an example of this second kinde, because the Complement repeated, the distance of the Meridian from the Substile, and betwéene
the Stile and Substile, &c. is found out altogether like to the other before, and that which foloweth. Therefore it sufficeth to set downe the number of these distances. First the Complement repeated is, 64. d. 18. m. The distance of the Meridian from the Horizon is, 60. d. 59. m. The Eleuation of the Meridian is 38. d. which I adde to the Eleuation of the Pole being 52. d. and the totall 90. d. is the compounded arke. Draw therefore in this kinde as before, a line Parallel to the Horizon A B. make another squire-wise, C. D. Draw the two quadrants from C. by A. to D. diuiding each of them into 90. d. Then number herein the distance of the Meridi∣an from the Horizon, which is 60. d. 59. m. drawing from E. at the end here of, the line F. for the Meridian. From this account 90. d. being here the distance of the Substile from the Meridian: and like wise at the end of this number from E. drawe the line for the Substile. Againe from this line downward, (because there is no space vpward,) account the Complement repeated 64. d. 18. m. which here we take for the distance of the Stile from the Substile: make like∣wise by this number the line E. H. for the Stile. Let the Contingent line cut the Substile squire-wise in any place. Then taking the least distance with the compasses of the point G and of the Stile, with that widensse in the Sub∣stile, make the poynt I. vpon which draw the Equinoctiall circle by G And because here, (as in all other Dials, where the compounded arke is iust 90. d.) there is no intersection of the Meridian, and the Contingent line: therefore begin the diuision of the Equator into 24 equal parts at the Sub∣stile, which in this kinde shall shew the sixt houre, either in the euening or morning, according to the declination of the plat. Place the ruler vpon the centre I. and so many of these parts as you can, making markes in the line of Contingence as before, draw the houre lines by them, &c. finish the rest as in the other.
A North Declining Reclining. dialing diagram Example of the third kinde of North Diall before mentioned. Reclining 21. d. 30. m. Declining 30. d. Héere first, as before I multiply the Sine of the Decli∣nation being 50000, by 93041 which is y• Sine of the com∣plement
of the Reclination and the product 4652070000 I part by the whole Sine: the quotient 46520 yéeldeth an arke 27. d. 43. m. The complement whereof is 62. d. 17. m. being the Complement to be repeated. Then I encrease 86602 the Sine of the complement of the Declination by the whole Sine, diuiding the product, by 88525 the Sine of the Complement repeated: The arke of the quotient Sine 97827, is 78. d. 2. m, which is the distance of the Meridian from the Horizon. This done, I augment this quotient Sine 97827, by the Sine of the Complement of the reclination, which is 93041: the product 9101921907 I distribute by the whole Sine: and the quotient 91019 giueth an arke 65. d. 32. m. the Eleuation of the Meridian. Now I adde 65. d. 32. m. being the Eleuation of the Meridian, to 52. d. the Eleuation af the Pole, and the totall number 117. d. 32. m. being the compounded arke, be∣cause it is greater then 90. d. I substract it from 180, and there remaineth 62. d. 28. m. which is the Difference kept. Afterward I multiply 88525 the Sine of the Comple∣ment repeated, by 88674 the Sine of the difference kept, parting the product 7849865850 by the whole Sine. The quotient is 78498 whose arke is 51. d. 43. m. which is the distance betwéen the Stile and the Substile. Then comparing the Complement of this distance, be∣ing 38. d. 17. m. with the complement of y• difference kept, which is 27. d. 32. m. and finding this to be least, I amplifie 46226 the Sine thereof, by the whole Sine, diuiding the product 4622500000 by the Sine of the greater, which is 61955, and 74612 the quotient comming hereof yéeldeth an arke 48. d. 15. m. whose Complement being 41. d. 45. m. I take out of 180, and the remainder is 138. d. 15. m. the di∣stance of the Substile from the Meridian. The delineation of the Figure. First as before, draw a line A. B. parallele to the Hori∣zon.
Make another C. D. squire-wise to the former. Draw two quadrants at the least C. A. D. diuiding ech of them into 90. degrées, number therein from A. toward D. the distance of the Meridian from the Horizon, which in our example is found to be 78. d. 2. m. draw at the end hereof from E. the line F. for the Meridian. Then account from this vpward 138. d. 15. m. being the distance of the Substile from the Meridian, drawing likewise at the end of this number from E. the line for the Substile. Afterward account from this line (on which side you will) 51. d 43. m. the distance be∣twéen the Stile and the Substile, extending the line E H. by the end of this number for the Stile. Let the Contin∣gent line cut the Substile squire-wise in any point where you will. Afterward taking with your compasses the least distance betwéene the point G. and the Stile, with that widenesse in the Substile toward E. make the point I. vp∣on which draw the Equinoctiall circle by G. And because in this kinde, where the Compounded arke is greater then 90. d. there is none intersection of the Meridian and the con∣tingent line beneath the ceutre E. therefore draw forth the Meridian beyond the centre, then place your ruler on the intersection of the. Meridian and Contingent line aboue the centre, and the point . and where it cutteth the Equator, there begin to diuide it into 24. equall partes. Finish that which remaineth as before.
A North reclining declining. dialing diagram The making of a South Inclining direct Diall. CAP. 16. IF the inclination of the plat be lesse then the Eleuation of the pole, take that from this, accoūting the remainder for the Eleuation of the Pole. And with this number as if it
were the Eleuafion of the Pole make a Diall like to the South erect direct, and it shall be fit for your plat. But if the Inclination of the plat be equal with the Ele∣uation of the Pole, make your Diall altogether like to the North reclining direct, whose reclination likewise is equall to the Eleuation of the Pole. They differ onely herein, that this is placed downward to the earth, and that vpward. But if the Inclination of the plat be greater then the Eleuation of the Pole, substract this from that, and with the number remaining, as if it were the Eleuation of the Pole, make your Dial like to the North erect direct. Example of this kinde incling 65. d. Substract 52. d. the Eleuation of the Pole, out of 65. d. being the Inclination of the plat, and the remainder 13. d. account the Eleuation of the Pole. For y• delineation here∣of, resort to the North erect Diall, Cap. 5. A South inclining direct. dialing diagram
You sée in this Figure, that all the lines for the howers are drawen opposite from the Contingent line, beyond the centre E. In like maner must you doe in the delineation of all such, which incline more then the eleuation of the Pole. Let the Stile in this kinde be placed directly ouer the Meridian, with so great an angle as D. E. F. is, &c. The making of a North inclining direct Diall. CAP. 17. IF the Inclination of the plat be lesse then the complement of the Eleuation of the pole, adde the inclination to the Eleuation: and with that number, as if it were the Eleuation of the Pole, make a North crect direct diall, for your plat. But if the inclination be equall with the complement of the Eleuation of the Pole, then make a Diall as you were taught in the second kinde of South reclining direct: for as that plat so reclining in the South is placed vpward: so is this placed down ward. Note that this North diall shew∣eth but onely 4. howers, the two first in the morning, and the two last in the euening, and that only in the middest of Sommer. But if the inclination be greater then the Complement of the Eleuation of the Pole, substract this lesser out of the other being greater: and with the number remaining, as if it were the Eleuation of the Pole, make your diall like to an Horizontall. This kinde likewise sheweth very few howers. Example of this last kinde, inclining 45. d. First I take 38. d. being the complement of the Eleuati∣on of the Pale, out of 45. d. the inclination of the plat, and there remaineth 7. d. which I kéep for the Eleuation of the Pole. For the delineation of this diall, resort to the Hori∣zontall, Cap. 3.
A North inclining Direct. dialing diagram The making of the East and West inclining Dials. CAP. 18. MUltiply the Sine of the Eleuation of the Pole by the Sine of the Inclination of the plat, di∣uiding the product by the whole Sine: the quotient arke shall be the distance of the Stile from the Substile. Then compare the complement of this distance with the complement of the Eleuation of the Pole, increasing the Sine of the lesser by the whole Sine, part the product by the Sine of the greater, where of shall come a Sine, the Complement of whose arke shalbe the distance of the Sub∣stile from the Meridian.
It shall not be necessarie to shew any example hereof, be∣cause the East and West reclining bée altogether like to this. Wherefore resort thither, for the working of your example, for those distances in drawing this figure shall bée here obserued. The delineation of an East Diall, inclining 45. d. First drawe a line Parallele to the Horizon, A. B. make the perpendiculare line C. D. squire-wise to the other. De∣scribe the quadrant from A. to D. number from A. to∣ward D. 33. d. 52. m. the distance of the Substile from the Meridian, and at the end hereof from C. draw the line E. for the Substile, account from this 42. d. 9. m. drawing like∣wise at the end of this number the line G. for the Stile. Let the Contingent line cut the Substile squire-wise. Finish all things els, as in the East reclining. An East and West inclining. dialing diagram
The making of a South inclining declining Diall. CAP. 19. FIrst multiplie the Sine of the Decli∣nation, by the Sine of the complement of the inclination, parting the product by the whole Sine. The quotient Sine shall yéeld an arke, whose complement shall bée named the complement re∣peated. Then increase the Sine of the Complement of the De∣clination by the whole Sine, and the product diuide by the Sine of the Complement repeated: whereof shall come a Sine, whose arke is the distance of the Meridian from the Horizon. Afterward, this Sine being multiplied by the Sine of the Complement of the inclination, and the product parted by the whole Sine: the arke of the quotient Sine shall bée the Eleuation of the Meridian. Which arke you must adde to the Eleuation of the Pole. And if the totall number bée lesse then 90. d. it shall bée named the Doubtfull arke. But if it be greater then 90. d. take it from 180, and let the re∣mainder be called the Doutfull arke. This done, augment the Sine of the Complement re∣peated, by the Sine of the Doutfull arke: & the product ari∣sing thereof being diuided by the whole Sine, the quotient arke shall be the distance of the Stile from the Substile. Now compare the Complement of this distance, with the Complement of the Doutful arke, multiplying the Sine of the lesser, by the whole Sine, diuiding the product by the Sine of the greater: the arke of the quotient Sine com∣ming thereof shall bée the distance of the Substile from the Meridian.
But note, if the doubtfull arke be found without subtrac∣tion from 180, (which is if it bée lesse then 90 d.) then you must subtract the distance of the Substile from the Meridi∣an out of 180, and the number remaining shall be the true distance of the Meridian from the Substile. Marke this likewise, if the doubtfull arke be equall 90 degrées, let the Complement repeated be the distance of the Stile from the Substile: then shall there bée iust 90 d. for the space betwéene the Substile and the Meridian, as be∣fore is taught in the North declining reclining, whither you may resort for the working hereof. Here it shall bée sufficient to shew two examples, with the delineation of their figures: the one, where the doubtfull arke is subtrac∣ted from 180 d. and the other, where there is no subtraction hereof, because it is lesse then 90 degrées. Example of a South Diall Inclining 45 degrees. Declining 45 degrees. Forasmuch as this is altogether like to the North recli∣ning 45 d. declining 45 d. whither you may resort: I wil omit the working of the former part of this exāple, vntil I come to the finding out of the distance of the Substile from the Meridian. The former part of this example you may finde to bée thus wrought in the North reclining declining: 1 First the complement repeated 60 d. 2 Then the distance of the Meridian from the Horizon 54 d. 44 d. 3 Next the Eleuation of the Meridian 35 d. 16 m. 4 The compounded arke there, which we call the doubt∣full arke here 87 d. 16 m. 5 The distance of the Stile frō the Substile 59 d. 54 m. 6 Last, the distance of the Substile from the Meridian 84 d. 33 m. But here (as before is taught) you must subtract this
distance from 180 d. because the doubtfull arke was lesse then 90 d. and then the remainder 95 d. 27 m. shall bée the true distance of the Substile from the Meridian. In the delineation of this diall, first, as before, make a line paralele to the Horizon A. B. Draw another perpen∣dicular C. D. cutting the former squire-wise. Make two quadrants from A. by D▪ to B. If the plat decline westward, number the distance of the Meridian from the Horizon from A. toward D. &c. But if the declination be Eastward (as in this example it is) then account this distance of the Meridian from the Horizon, which is 54 d. 44 m. from B. to∣ward D. drawing at the ende hereof from the centre C. the Meridian line which shall shew the 12 houre. Account likewise from that toward A. 95 d. 27 m. the distance of the Substile from the Meridian: making in like maner the line E. C. for the Substile. From this line on which side you will, number the distance of the Stile from the Substile, be∣ing 59 d. 54 m. drawe by this the line G. representing the Stile. Let the line of Contingence cut the Substile squire∣wise in any point where you will. Make the Equator, be∣gin the diuision thereof, and draw the houre lines in all re∣spects as in the North reclining 21 degrées 30 minutes, de∣clining 30 degrées. Cap. 15.
A South declining inclining Diall. dialing diagram The secōd example of a South Diall Inclining 33. d. 40. m. Where the dout∣full arke is sub∣tracted frō 180. Declining 31. d. Where the dout∣full arke is sub∣tracted frō 180. First 51503 the Sine of the Declination being multipli∣ed, by 83227 the Sine of the Complement of the inclinati∣on: and the product 4286440181 diuided by the whole Sine: the arke of the quotient is 25 d. 23. m. The com∣plement whereof being 64 d. 37 m. is the complement re∣peated. Then I increase the Sine of the Complement of the declination which is 85716, by the whole Sine, and I part the product 8571600000, by 90346 the Sine of the Com∣plement repeated. The quotient 94875 yeeldeth an arke
71 d. 35 m. which is the distance of y• Meridian frō y• Horizō. Agayne, I multiply this Sine 94875, by the Sine of the Complement of the Inclination being 83227, and the product 7895961425 arising thereof, I diuide by the whole Sine. The arke of the quotient is 52 d. 9 m. which is the Eleuation of the Meridian. Now this being added to the Eleuation of the Pole 52 d. and the total number 104 d. 9 m. taken from 180, there re∣mayneth 75 d. 51 m. which is the doubtful arke. Therefore I augment 90346 the Sine of the Comple∣ment repeated, by 96930 the Sine of the doubtful arke, and the product 8760399890 I parte by the whole Sine. The arke of the quotient 61 d. 10 m. is the distance of the Sub∣stile from the Stile. This done, I compare 28. d. 50. m. the Complement of this distance, with 14. d. 9. m. the Complement of the dout∣full arke, multiplying y• Sine of the lesser, which is 24446, by the whole Sine, diuiding the product 2444600000, by 48226 the Sine of the greater. The quotient Sine 50741 yéeldeth an arke 30 d. 30. m. whose Complement 59 d. 30 m. is the distance of the Substile from the Meridian. First draw a line A. B. Parallele to the Horizon: drawe another C. D. squire-wise to the line A. B. make the two qua∣drantsThe deline∣ation of the figure. 71. from A. by D. to B. And because this Declination is on the left hand, number from A. towards D. 7 d. 35 m. the distance of the Meridian from the Horizon, drawing by this from C. the Meridian line. From that toward B. account 59 d. 30 m. the distance of the Substile from the Meridian, making in like manner at the ende of this number from C. the Substile line E. Againe from this forward (if you can, or else backward) number the distance of the Stile from the Substile, which is 61 d. 10 m. Draw likewise by this frō C. the line G. for the Stile. Let the Contingent cut the Substile squire-wise in any place, where you will, &c. The making of the reclining declining Dials before, shall teach you the finishing of this likewise.
A South declining inclining. dialing diagram The making of a North inclining declining Diall. CAP. 20. THe working of this kinde is altogether like the South reclining declining diall. First therefore multiplie the Sine of the Decli∣nation, by the Sine of the Complement of the inclination, diuiding the product by the whole Sine. The quotient shalt giue an arke: whose Complement shall be named the Com∣plement
repeated. Then augment the Sine of the Complement of the De∣clination by the whole Sine, & the product part by the Sine of the Complement repeated. Whereof will come a quoti∣ent Sine: whose arke shall be the distance of that which is as it were the Meridian from the Horizon. For the finding out of the Eleuation of the Meridian, be∣cause it may bée done two sundry waies, I will set them downe both, referring the choyse to your selfe. Compare the Complement of the arke last found out, with the Declination of the plat, multiply∣ing the Sine of the lesser, by the whole Sine: and diuiding the pro∣duct by the Sine of the greater. The quotient Sine shall yéeld an arke: whose Complement shall be the Eleuation of the Meridian. Or multiply y• Sine of the arke last found out, by the Sine of the Complemēt of the in∣clination, part the pro∣duct by y• whole Sine: and the arke of y• quo∣tient Sine shalbe y• E∣leuatiō of y• Meridian. Now comparing the Eluation of the Pole with the E∣leuation of the Meridian, subtract the lesser from the grea∣ter, retaining the number remaining, which shall be called the difference kept. Afterward increase the Sine of the difference kept, by the Sine of the Complement repeated, and diuide the pro∣duct by the whole Sine. The quotient arising of this diui∣sion shall giue an arke, which shall be the distance betwéene the Stile and the Substile. To conclude, the Complement of this distance being compared with the Complement of the difference kept, multiplie the Sine of the lesser by the whole Sine, and part the product by the Sine of the greater. The Complement of the arke of the quotient Sine, shall be the distance of the Substile from the Meridian. But note, if the Eleuation of the Meridian, & the Eleua∣tion of the Pole be found equal, make an Equinoctial dial as before you were taught in the Meridionall reclining decli∣ning:
for there is no difference, but only that this is placed downward, and the South vpward. There be of this north, as of the South reclining decli∣ning, thrée sundrie kinds of Dials, as by the examples and figures following you may perceiue. Example of a North DiallFirst exam∣ple. Inclining 20 d. Declining 30 d. First I multiplie 50000 the Sine of the declination, by 93969 the Sine of the Complement of the inclination, and the product thereof 4698450000, I diuide by the whole Sine 100000, & the quotient Sine 46984 yéeldeth an arke 28 d. 2 m. whose Complement 61 d. 58 m. is the Comple∣ment repeated. Then I augment the Sine of the Complement of the de∣clination, which is 86602 by the whole Sine, parting the product 8660200000, by 88267 the Sine of the Comple∣ment repeated: the quotient is 98113. The arke therof be∣ing 78 d. 51 m. is y• distance of the Meridian frō the horizon. Now in comparing the Com∣plementTwo waies in working the exam∣ple, for the two pre∣cepts, of the finding out the Eleua∣tion of the Meridian. of the arke last found out, with the declination of the plat: I find the Complement of the arke least. Wherfore I mul∣tiply y• Sine therof being 19337 by the whole Sine: and the pro∣duct 1933700000, I diuide by 50000 the Sine of the greater. The quotient 38673 giueth anBoth these waies tend to one end. arke 22 d. 46 m. whose Comple∣ment 67 d. 14 m. is the Eleuati∣on of the Meridian. Or multiplie 98112 the Sine of the arke last found out, by the Sine of the Complement of the inclination, which is 93969: and the pro∣duct 9219566568 part by the whole Sine. The quotient shall bée 92195, whose arke 67 degrées 14 minutes is the Eleuation of the Meridian. This done, I compare the Eleuation of the Meridian 67 d. 14 m. with the Eleuation of the Pole 52 d. subtracting the lesser from the greater, and there remaineth 15 d. 14 m. which is the difference kept.
Then I multiply 26275 the Sine of the difference kept, by 88267 the Sine of the Complement repeated: parting the product 2318455682, by the whole Sine. The arke 11. d. 47. m. of the quotient Sine 23184, is the distance of the Stile from the Substile. Now the Complement of this distance being 76. d. 36. m. compared with 74. d. 47. m. the Complement of the diffe∣rence kept, I encrease 96494 the Sine of the lesser, by the whole sine, and y• product therof 9649400000, I distribute by 97277 the Sine of the greater. And the quotient is 99191. whose arke is 82. d. 43. m. The complement wher∣of being 7. d. 17. m. is the distance of the Substile from the Meridian. The delineation of the Diall. If the Equator of the Meridian be greater then the Ele∣nation of the Pole, draw a line A. B. parallele to the Hori∣zen, make another C. D. squire-wise to the former, describe the quadrant on the left hand from A. to C. (because the De∣clination is on the right hand) numbring therin from A. vp∣ward 76. d. 32. m. the distance of the Meridian from the Ho∣rizon, draw at the end thereof from D. the line G. represen∣ting the Meridian. From this backward, toward A accoūt the distance of the Substile from the Meridian, which is 7. d. 41. m. making likewise at y• end of this number from D. the line E. for the Substile. From hence account 11. d. 47. m. being the distance of the Stile from the Substile, drawing in like maner from D. the line F. for the Stile. Let the line of contingence cut the Substile squirewise as before, make the Equator in this, as in the other before. Place the ruler vpon the centre H. and the intersection of the Contingent line, and the Meridian, beginning the diuision thereof into 24. equall parts, where the ruler shall touch the Equator. Finish all things remaining, as before. Remember that in this kinde of North inclining decli∣ning Diall, the Meridian line rather representeth the 12. houre at midnight, then in the day: wherefore in accoun∣ting
the houre lines, let the meridian be alwaies for the 12. hower in the night. And then if your plat decline West∣ward, account backward as it were 11. 10. 9. which howers with the 12. you may omit in the delineation of your diall, because they haue no vse in our Eleuation. But account forward 8, 7, 6, 5, 4. &c. so many as you think shall be necessary, for some declination will receiue more, then o∣ther will: the greater the more, the lesser the sewer how∣ers. But if the declination of your plat be Eastward then account from the Meridian line forward 1, 2, 3, 4. &c. so many as shall be néedfull, omitting likewise y• first thrée, &c. A North inclining declining. dialing diagram
The second kinde. But if the Eleuation of the Meridian, and the Eleuati∣on of the Pole be equall, the making of the Diall differeth from the other before. For an example hereof, and y• draw∣ing of the Figure, resorte to y• South reclining 33 d. 30. m. declining 32. d. for these are both alike, only remember here, that if this decline Eastward, make the quadrant like∣wise on the East side, &c. But if the plat decline toward the West, make the quadrant Westward (as in the figure fol∣lowing) finishing all things els as here you sée done. Ob∣serue the same order in naming the howre lines which I taught you before. A North inclining declining. dialing diagram
The third Example of a North Diall. Inclining 45. d. Declining 45. d. If the Eleuation of the Meridian be lesser then the Ele∣uation of the Pole, make your Diall thus, For the working of the example, and the delineation of the figure, resorte to the South reclining 45. d. declining 45. d. for that agréeeth with this, except only that in this, the Stile is placed downward, and sheweth but fewe howres, and those likewise are drawen downward: but in the other y• Stile standeth vpward, shewing many houres, and those likewise for the most part are drawen vpward. Marke also in this kinde, if your plat decline westward, draw the Quadraut on the West side, but if the declinati∣on be Eastward, make the Quadrant on the East side, &c. The making of these, are more pleasant to know, then profitable to vse: vnlesse the declination be the greater, for so it may shew the more howres. For the naming of the howres, doe as you were taught before in the first of these thrée kindes.
A North Declining Inclining. dialing diagram The delineation of those Dials, whose plat lyeth nigh to the Eleuation of the Pole. CAP. 21. WHen as the declination and reclination, or declination and inclination, shall cause the plat of your Diall to lye nigh to the Eleuation of the Pole, then the hower lines must be drawen very long, to make the distances somwhat large, so that they may be discerned one from another. And
commonly these folowing be such as here we meane. A South Reclining direct. Declining erect. Declining reclining. An Eastor West Reclining. Inclining. A North Inclining direct. Declining erect. Declining inclining. In all these kindes oftentimes the distance betwéen the Stile and the Substile is so small that it is not possible to draw your Diall, except the plat be very large: which at al times you shall not haue. Therefore the best way is this. First drawe your Diall very true (as before hath béen taught) vpon a large paper, making your quadrant so great as may be. Draw likewise the howre lines very long, which will cause the greater di∣stance betwéen the Stile and the Substile, and in like ma∣ner betwéen the howre lines. It will also procure y• greater Equator, which wil be a great help in the drawing of your Dial, as by the figure following you may perceiue. When you haue thus drawen your Diall, then at y• end of the paper wher the lines be of greatest distance, draw the line I. K. parallel to the Horizontall line, make likewise the other line L M. (according to the greatnes of your plat) of e∣quall distance from y• other. This done, finde out (or rather draw a line vpon your plat which may represent) the true Horizon of the plat: cutting the paper in sunder by the line I. K. and the line L. M. placing it vpon your plat very plain, so that one of the edges may be parallel to y• Horizon. Then make markes vpon the plat at both ends of all the howre lines drawing by those marks, y• lines for y• howers. Draw likewise light lines vpon the plat for the Stile & the Sub∣stile, easily to be extinguished, as you did vpon the paper. Let the Stile N. be fastened ouer y• Substile as you haue
béen taught in the East, & West, or Equinoctiall Dialls. But here note, that the Stile must not be of equal height at both ends. But let it be so high, as the distance betwéene the Stile & the Substile is in the place where it standeth: as in the examples folowing you may plainely perceiue. A North Diall. Declining Westward 65. d. Inclining 22. d. 20. m. Distance of the Meridian from the horizon 50. d. 50. m. Distance of the Substile and the Meridian 6. d. 35. m. Distance of the Stile and Substile 4. d. 15. m. Eleuation of the Pole 52. d. Hetherto we haue taught the delineation of all kindes of Dials, which are to be made vpon any plaine plat or superficies: now followeth the garnishing of them, with the 12. Signes, and the howres vnequall. dialing diagram
How to draw the 12. Signes in all kindes of Dials before mentioned. CAP. 22. FOr somuch as sometime the 12 signes of the Zodiake are placed in Sunne Dialls, know in what signe y• Sunne is at any time (which albeit any kinde will receiue, yet most commonly the verticall directly opposite to y• South are garnished therewith.) Therefore in drawing the 12. Signes, in these South, and all other kindes of Dialls before mentioned, doe thus. Prepare a little Table of Iron, Brasse, or close grained wood, in breadth 3. or 4. in length 5. or 6. inches. Chose for the Diameter one of the shortest sides, wherein draw vpon the centre A. halfe a circle to be deuided into two quadrants distinguished with a line drawen from the centre A. to the arke B. parte ech quadrant into 90. degrées. The line A. B. is héere in place of the Equator, shewing in the arke the be∣ginning of Aries and Libra. Moreouer how to finde the o∣ther Signes on both sides, séeke in the Table of the declina∣tion of the Sunne from the Equinoctial circle, which is af∣terward expressed. First finde out the degrées of the di∣stance (in this Table) of the beginning of Taurus from the Equator being 11. degrées 30. minutes. Account this di∣stance in the quadrant from the letter B. towards the left hand, and at the end of this number draw a line from the centre A. which shall shew the beginning of Taurus and Virgo. Account like wise the same distance on the other side from the line A. B. and make a line for the beginning of Pisces and Scorpius. Againe in the 20. d. 12. m. from the line A. B. you shal haue the beginning of Gemeni & Leo: and so
many degrées and minutes on the other side, the beginning of Aquarius and Sagittarius. To conclude on both sides in the 23 degrées 30 minutes there must bée on the one part Cancer, and on the other Capricorne. Afterward draw lines from the centre A by euery marke so long as your Table will receiue▪ and at the end of these lines let the caracters of the 12 signes of the Zodiake bée fixed: as in the figure following you may sée. dialing diagram
The vse of this Trigonall instrument in writing the 12 signes in Dialls. YOur Diall being made and the Stile placed therein: take your Trigonall instrument, and set it vpon the Stile, so that the whole Diameter thereof may stand plaine vpon the edge or vpper part, the centre A. of your instru∣ment alwaies remaining in one place of the Stile. Let the line of ♋ bend vpward to the centre of your diall, and the line of ♑ downe ward. Then fasten a thred at the vpper∣most end of your trigonal in euery line of the signes, so that you may direct it downward by the centre A. to the plat of your Diall: and where the ende of the thred shall touch the Diall, make a marke. Then mouing the Trigonal on the right hand, so that the thred may bée stretched on the left hand, make there likewise a prick vpon the plat. When you haue thus done 4 or 5 times vpon the one side of the di∣all: (that is on the left hand) doe so likewise on the other side on the right hand. These markes being thus made, draw (with your compasses or rather with a crooked ruler made according to those markes) a line by them. Doe thus with each one of the 7 lines of your Trigonal. When you haue drawne al these lines, (being crooked, except the middle line, which is right, and representeth the Equator) then at the ends of them write the caracters of the 12 signes on this wise. First on the right hand toward the East, at the ende of the vpper line, write or place ♑. At the second line down∣ward ♒. At the third ♓. At the fourth ♈. At the fift ♉ at the sixt ♊, at the seuenth ♋. Then on the other side on the left hand toward the West, at the ende of the nethermost line place ♋. At the second ♌, at the third ♍, at the fourth ♎, at the fift ♏, at the sixt ♐. And finally againe at the vp∣permost set ♑. This done, remember that in what place of the Stile the
centre A. of your Trigonall was placed, there fasten a small péece of yron or any such like thing, which may shewe with the shadowe thereof, the Signe which the Sunne shall be in at any time: vnlesse the houre lines bée so short, that where the small péece of yron should be placed, you may cut the Stile that the ende thereof shall shew it. But the first is the most conuenient way for the vse thereof. dialing diagram You may in like manner with this Instrument drawe or place the 12 signes in Horizontal, East, West, and all other kindes of Dials, which before are recited: because the difference is nothing but in placing the 12 signes at the
ends of the lines: the true doing where of, you may easily perceiue by the course of the Sunne. For in the South E∣rect, when the Sunne occupieth Cancer, then is the line of ♋ furthest distant from the centre of the Diall. But in the Horizontall Diall, the line of ♋ is next to the centre. Few words shall suffice for this matter: experience shall easilie teach you herein. How to place the vnequall houres in a Horizontall Diall. CAP. 23. FIrst you shall vnderstand, that by an vnequall hower is ment the 12 part of the day whether it be short or long. For when the Sunne is in the Equi∣noctiall circle, the day hath 12 equall, and like wise 12 vnequall houres. But in winter solstice, when the dayes be at the shortest, and containeth with vs (where the Pole is eleuated aboue the Horizon 52 de∣grées) onely 7 houres, 36 minutes: then the vnequall houres be lesse. For if you diuide these 7 houres 36 minutes by fractions into 12: you shall finde onely 38 minutes of an equall houre, to make one vnequall houre. But in the sommer solstice, when the dayes bée at the longest, and hath 16 houres, 24 minutes: then one houre with 24 minutes maketh one houre vnequall. These bée like wise called the houres of the Planets, and are placed in Dialls on this maner. Your Diall being made and prepared, draw vpon it the 12 signes of the Zodiake (as you were taught before) so large as your plat will giue leaue, &c. Note that alwaies the Meridian line, or 12 equall houre,
is the 6 vnequall houre. Marke likewise, that when the Sunne entreth into the beginning of ♈ and ♎, both the e∣quall and the vnequall houres be of like quantitie. For the 7 equall houre in the morning is the first vnequall, and the 8 equall the 2 planetare houre, &c. But in the Tropike of ♋ it is otherwise: for then the vn∣equall houres be greater then the equal. Therefore account how many houres and minutes is in the longest day for your Eleuation, changing all the minutes of those houres into one totall summe. Then diuide this number by 12: and the quotient shall shew how many minutes of an e∣quall maketh one vnequall houre. Example hereof: with vs the longest day is 16 houres 24 minutes. Where∣fore I multiplie 60 which is the minutes of an equal houre, by 16, which is the summe of houres of the longest day, and the product ariseth to 960, whereunto I adde 24 the mi∣nutes remayning, then the number shall be 984, which be∣ing diuided by 12, the quotient is 82. Wherefore I conclude that 82 minutes of an equall, maketh one vnequall or pla∣netare houre. Then to draw them in Dialls worke thus. First in the Tropike of ♋ diuide the space betwéene each houre into 60 equall partes, but because those distances bée so small, for the most part, that this cannot be done: there∣fore it shall suffice to diuide euery one of them into thrée e∣quall partes. Then shall euery parte conteine 20 m. and thrée of them 60 m. which is one equall houre. When as therefore you will place the 7 vnequall houre, account from the Meridian line, or 12 houre, 4 parts and 2 minutes (which is 82 minutes) and make there a marke. Then place your ruler by this point or marke, and the in∣tersection of the line of ♈ and ♎, and the first houre after noone: drawe a line from one Tropike to another, that is from ♋ to ♑. Then for the placing of the 8 vnequall houre, account from the 7 last made, 4 of the foresaid parts and two mi∣nutes make there a marke, by which and the intersection of
the line of ♈ and ♎ and the line of the second houre after noone, the ruler being placed, draw a line, as before. For the 9, account from the 8 last made, likewise 4 parts and two minutes, drawing a line as before. Doe in like maner for the drawing of all the other remaining: that is, for the 10, and 11. The 12 being the Sunne sitting shall néede no line. As you haue finished the vnequall houres on this side for the afternoone, doe in like maner for those in the fore∣noone: accounting from the Meridian 4 parts and 2 m. of an equall houre, to each vnequall, drawing, as before, lines from one Tropike to another. You may place the figures for the vnequall or planetare houres, at the ende of the lines vnder the Tropike of Capri∣corne, or aboue the line of Cancer as you will. Note that the same part of the Stile which sheweth the 12 signes, shall like wise shew the vnequall houres. For better vnderstanding hereof: Behold the Figure following.
An Horizontall Diall. dialing diagram
How to place the houres vnequall in a South erect direct Diall. CAP. 24. THere is almost the same maner of pla∣cing the vnequall houres in this kind, as in the Horizontall, differing onely herein, that whereas you diuided the spaces betwéene the houre lines, in the Tropike of ♋, (which is next to the centre of your Diall) and accoun∣ted 4 partes 2 minutes of an equall, to one vnequall houre: in this you must diuide the Tropike of ♑, (which is like∣wise next to the centre of the Diall) taking onely 2 partes wanting 2 minutes, (that is 38m.) of an equall houre to ech vnequall. Therefore your Diall being prepared, and the 12 signes of the Zodiake placed therein, &c. account how many houres and minutes be in the shortest day in your country, changing all the houres into minutes (giuing to each houre 60 minutes.) Diuide the product by 12, and the quotient shall shew how many minutes of an equall, will be answe∣rable to each vnequall houre. Example, the shortest day with vs is 7 houres, 36 minutes, which being multiplied into one grosse number of minutes, the product is 456, which I diuide by 12, and the quotient is 38. Therefore I affirme that 38 minutes of a vulgar or equall, maketh one planetare or vnequall houre. Then diuide the Tropike of ♑ here, as in the Horizon∣tall you did the Tropike of ♋. Afterward account from the Meridian line 38m. (or 2 parts wanting, 2m.) of an e∣quall houre to each vnequall, &c. Finish all thinges else in this Meridionall erect direct, as you were taught in the Horizontal. The figure ensueth.
A South Diall. dialing diagram
The placing of the howres vnequall in East and West Dials. CAP. 25. FIrst draw your Diall true, then place the 12 Signes of the Zodiake in it: which you may doe on this wise. The Stile of your Dial being fixed therin, as before hath béen taught, take your Trigonall (before prescribed) and place it vpon the edge of the Stile: then according to the direction of the thread (as in y• South Diall before) make marks vpon the plat, as in the Figure following you may sée. Afterward by these markes draw lines as before you did, placing at the ends of them the Caracters of the 12 Signes. Moreouer note that where the centre A. of your Trigo∣nall doth touch the edge of the Stile, there fasten a small péece of Iron or such like thing, which may shew she place of the Sunne in euery Signe, and likewise the planetare or vnequall howres.
dialing diagram When as therfore you would place the howres vnequal in those kindes of Dialls, account the mmber of howres and minutes, which the halfe of the longest day in your Country doth conteine.
Example. With vs the longest day conteineth 16 howres, 24. m. the halfe thereof is 8 howres 12. m. wherefore numbring in the circumference of the circle from A. to D. 6 howres, (for that quadrant conteineth 6 equall howres) and from D. toward C. the other 2. howres and 12 minutes, so that you may haue from A. by D. toward C. the iust halfe of the longest day, at the end thereof make a point X. Then diuide the arke A. X. into 6. equall partes. Afterward placing the ruler vpon the centre E. and eche one of these partes, where it shall touch the Contingent line D. F. make marks. Like∣wise in the other line of Contingence G. B. make these markes, being of equall distance in this line from the point B. as the other be from the point D. Then place the ruler vpon two of these marks (being equidistant from the points B. D.) in both the Contingent lines, and where it shal touch the Tropike of ♋ make markes. This done, lay the ruler vpon the first marke in the Tropick of ♋ next vnto X, and the intersection of the line of the 6 hower, with the line of the beginning of ♈ and ♎, drawing a manifest line from one Tropike to another, which (if you haue wrought all things true) will be parallele to the Horizon, and it shall be the 12. vnequall hower line in the West Diall, and the Horizon or Sunne rising in the East Diall. Againe, place your ruler vpon the second marke in the Tropike of Can∣cer, and the intersection of the line of the 5. hower with the Equator, or line of Aries and Libra, drawing like wise a line, which shall shew the first howre in the East, and the 11. howre in the West Diall, make on this wise all the o∣ther vnequall howres, namely the 10, 9, 8, and 7, in the West Diall. And the 2, 3, 4, 5, in the East Diall.
dialing diagram
The making of an Horizontall Sphericall or hollow Diall. CAP. 26. FIrst prepare your Sphere or plat perfectly hollow, of what quantity you wil. Then with your compasses diuide the vpper brimme thereof, into 4 equall partes, marking it with the letters A. B. C. D. Afterward open your Compasses to the widenes of one Quadrant, either A. C. or A. D. and with that widenesse, one foote being placed in the point D. draw an obscure or light line from A. to B. This done, set one foote of your Compasses in the point C and with the other you shall try whether the plat be perfectly Sphericall or not: for if it be, your Compasses will fall in the same line which you made before, but if it be not perfect you may a∣mend it. And then draw this line manifest, so that it may continue. For it shall be the Meridian line, shewing the 12 howre. Againe, place one foote in the point A. drawing with the other a light line from C. to D. then one foote being set in B. you may try with the other, as before, the truth of the line last made. Now where these two lines cut eche o∣ther in the bottome of the plat, place the letter E. Then di∣uiding the quadrant A. E. into 90. d. and accounting therein the Eleuation of the Pole from E. toward A. make y• point F. by which the arke line of ♈ and ♎, representing the equi∣noctiall circle, shall be drawen. Afterward séeke out the greatest declination of the Sun from the Equator, (which you shall finde in the table of the declination of the Sunne) which is 23. d. 30. m. Then account 23. d. 30. m. from F. to∣ward E. making there a mark for the arke of Cancer. Like∣wise from F. toward A. number the same distance, for the arke line of Capricorne. This done, account from F. toward E. 20. d. 12. m. make there also a marke for the line of ♊ and
♌. And the like space from F. towards A. for the arke of ♒ and ♐. To conclude, number from F. towards E. 11. d. 30. m. making there also a marke for the ine of ♉ and ♍: and so much from F. toward A. for ♓ and ♏. When you haue thus made marks for al y• arkes of the 12 Signes, open your compasses to the Quadrant of the Spheare, that is, from A. to C. which widenes of the com∣passes remaining, place one foote in the point F. in the arke of ♈ and ♎ in the Meridian: and where the other foot shall touch the same Meridian towards B make the point G. which shall represent the Pole antartic, by which as it were from a centre, draw a line from the point D. by F. to C. which shall be the line of Aries and Libra. Then one foote of your compasses remaining in the point G. with the other draw lines from one side of the plat to the other, by euery marke before made for the 12. Signes of the Zodiake. The 12. Signes being thus finished, procéede to the di∣uision of the equall howres on this manner. Diuide y• arke of the Equator into 12. equall partes, beginning at D. by F. ending in C. Then open your Compasses to the quadrāt of the plat, and the same widenesse of them remaining, place one foote on the first point of the diuision next C. in the Equator, and if you haue diuided the Equator equally, the other foote will touch the first part beyond F. towards D. by which from the centre G to the edge of the plat, draw a line, which shall shew the first howre afternoone. This done, remoue your compasses (that widenesse remaining) placing one foote in the second part from C. towards F. and the other foote touching the second part from F towards D. make a line as before, from the centre G. to the brimme of the plat, to shew the 2. howre afternoone. In like manner, finish all the other howre lines, namely the 3, 4, 5, 6 7, 8, for the afternoone. Then doe likewise on the other side for the howres in the forenoone, namely the 11, 10, 9, 8, 7, 6, 5, and 4 drawing lines from the centre G. by euery diuision, to the brimme of the plat, &c.
The placing of the vnequall howres in this Diall. When you will place the howres vnequal in this Sphe∣ricall Dial, diuide the Tropick of Cancer and of Capricorne ech of them into 12. equall parts, as before you did the E∣quator for the equall howres. Then with the compasses ioyne eche thrée points, of these thrée arkes, answerable in∣to one line or arke, vntill you haue made 12. lines to shewe the 12. vnequall howres, as in the figure following you may sée. Whereof the Meridian, or 12. vnequall howre shall alwaies be the 6. vnequall howre. In placing the figures to the equall & vnequall howres, and the Caracters to the 12. Signes of the Zodiake, the fi∣gure may sufficiently shewe, notwithstanding you may place them where you will, giuing to ech signe his proper Caracter, and euery howre equall and vnequall their pro∣per figures or names. Fire the Stile in the centre G. standing vp so high as the brimme of the plat, so that the vpper end may appeare as the centre of the circumference, which you may try, by pla∣cing a ruler vpon the points A. B. And againe vpon C. D. In like manner you may examine it with your Compasses, but the former, as practise wil teach you, is the more conue∣nient way. You may, if you wil, haue the Stile stand aboue the plat, so that it may shew the equall howres aboue the edge of the Sphere, and then fasten a knot of equall height with the plat, which shall shew the motion of the Sunne in the 12. Signes and y• vnequall houres, which otherwise the end of the Stile should doo: as in the figure following you may perceiue.
The Figure of an hollowe Horizontall Diall. dialing diagram
The making of a South Spherical erect direct Diall. CAP. 27. YOu shall vnderstand that the making of this kind differeth almost nothing from the Horizontall: except onely in the accounting the beginning of the Eleuation of the Pole, & drawing the houres vnequall. First your Sphear or plat being prepared, and parted in∣to foure Quadrants, as before in the Horizontall you were taught, diuide the quadrant E. A. into 90 degrees. Then number in it the Eleuation of the Pole from A. toward E. marking the ende of the number with F. Afterward open your compasses to the quadrant of the plat, and the one foote placed in F. extend the other in the Meridian line towards B. making the point G. where it shall touch the Meridian line: from which point as a centre you shall draw the lines for the 12 signes, as you were taught in the Horizontall. Diuide likewise, and draw the lines for the equall houres, as before in the Horizontall. The placing of the houres vnequall in this kinde is done, as in the South Erect Direct vpon a plaine superficies, ex∣cept onely that whereas there you did draw them with a ruler, here you shall doe it with compasses on this manner. Open your compasses to the Quadrant of the plat, that is, from A. to C. accounsing from the Meridian in the Tro∣pike of Capricorne, two parts wanting two minutes of an equall houre, making there a marke: And that widenesse of your compasses remaining, draw a line from that marke made in the Tropike ♑, by the intersection of the line of A∣ries and Libra, & the line of the first houre in the afternoone, vnto the Tropike of Cancer. Draw all the other lines for the vnequall houres in like maner, as in the figure you may plainely sée, Fixe the Stile in the centre G. as you did in the Horizon∣tall, placing the figures for the equall and vnequall houres,
and the caracters to the 12 signes, as in the example follow∣ing, or otherwise as you will. dialing diagram
The making of a Diall vpon a Quadrant, or the Table described in the beginning of the Booke. CAP. 28. IF you will make this Diall vppon a Quadrant alone, prepare and diuide it altogether like one of the Quadrants of the table, whose making is prescribed in the first Chapter: or if you will make it vpon that instrument alreadie prepared, worke thus. Diuide the diameter E. D. into foure equall partes; then leauing out the fourth part next E. describe vpon the middle point betwéene C. and S. an obscure halfe circle: which di∣uide into sixe equall parts. From each point of which diui∣sion draw light lines vnto the Semidiameter D. E. touching it squire wise. Then draw nigh to the line D. E. two other lines parallele thereto: which with the crosse lines drawne from the halfe circle may make 12 vnequall quadrangles, wherein the 12 signes of the Zodiake may be figured: the North towards D. the South toward S. And to the intent you may proportionally part these Quadrangles into fiue or ten degrées: diuide those sixe parts of the halfe circle e∣qually into so many degrées. Then drawe againe from those diuisions right liues to the Dimetient D. E. squire∣wise, as before. This done vpon the point E. from S. that is to say, from the end of ♐ and beginning of ♑, drawe an arke to the Se∣midiamer D. E. which shall be for the winter Tropike. A∣gaine vpon the same centre, draw another from the begin∣ning of ♈ and ♎ for the Equator. To conclude, make an∣other from the angle D. that is, from the end of ♊ and begin∣ning of ♋, which shall bée for the Summer Tropike. By the helpe of these arkes, you shall draw the houre lines, so
that you first know the height of the Sunne aboue the Ho∣rizon, at euery houre, when it occupieth the beginning of ♑, ♈ and ♋. Whose altitude is thus found out. Take the Eleuation of the Pole, and the Complement thereof: also the declination of the Sunne from the Equi∣noctiall, and the distance of the Sunne from the Meridian, accounting 15 degrées for euery houre, with the Comple∣ment of this distance. Then if you desire to knowe the al∣titude of the Sunne at sixe of the clock either in the mor∣ning or at euening (at which houre onely in Sommer it is aboue the Horizon) multiply the Sine of the Eleuation of the Pole, by the Sine of the declaration of the Sunne, diui∣ding the product by the whole Sine, and you shall haue your desire. But if the Sunne shall bée distant from the Meridian fewer howers then sixe, multiply the Sine of this distance (giuing to euery houre 15 degrées) by the Sine of the Com∣plement of the altitude of the Pole, and the product hereof diuide by the whole Sine. Then take the arke of the quo∣tient from 90 degrées, and the first number found out shall remaine, which must be kept. Then compare the Sine of this number found out, with the Sine of the Eleuation of the Pole, augment the lesser by the whole Sine, diuiding the product by the greater: Whereof shall come a quotient Sine, to the complement of whose arke adde the declination of the Sunne, if it shall be in the North signes, or subtract it from that, if it occupieth the South signes. And if the num∣ber which commeth hereof shall bée greater then 90, take it from 180, and you shall haue the second number found out. The Sine of this number found out being multiplied, by the Sine of the first number found out, shall yéelde a product, which part by the whole Sine, and the arke of the quotient Sine shall shew the desired altitude of the Sunne for the houre propounded. But if the distance of the Sunne from the Meridian shall excéede sixe houres (that is 90 degrées) take the de∣grées
of that distance from 180, multiplying the Sine of the remainder by the Sine of the Complemēt of the altitude of the Pole, diuiding the product by the whole Sine, and subtract the arke of the quotient from 90, the remainder shal be called the First number found out. The Sine of which number found out compared with the Sine of the Eleuati∣on of the Pole, increase the lesser by the whole Sine, and di∣stribute the product by the greater. Then take the Com∣plement of the Declination of the Sunne, from the arke of the quotient, and you shall haue the second number found out. Finally the Sine of the first number found out, and the Sine of the second being multiplied by themselues, and the product parted by the whole Sine; the quotient Sine shall yéeld an arke, which shall bée the altitude of the Sunne. But when the Sunne occupieth the beginning of ♈ or ♎ you shall finde the altitude thereof euery houre, onely by multiplying the Sine of the Complement of the distance of the Sunne from the Meridian, by the Sine of the Com∣plement of the Eleuation of the Pole, diuiding the product by the whole Sine, the quotient which commeth hereof shall yéeld the arke of your desire. At both the sixe houres, because the one sixe is the rising, and the other the sitting, there is then no altitude of the Sunne aboue the Ho∣rizon. Moreouer, to know how much the Meridian altitude is, of the Sunne entring into ♋, adde the greatest Declinati∣on thereof, to the Complement of the Eleuation of the Pole: and by subtracting the greatest Declination of the Sunne, from the complement of the Eleuation of the Pole, you shall likewise haue the Meridian altitude of the Sunne entring into ♑. You shall likewise séeke the height of the Sunne, being in the 10 degrée of ♉ aboue the Horizon, at 8 of the clock be∣fore noone, and at 4 after noone: at 7 in the morning, and 5
in the euening: at both 6. and the 5. houre in the morning, and 7. at night. Also at 5. in the morning and 7. in the eue∣ning, the Sunne being in the beginning of ♊. But because the working of this, to finde out these alti∣tudes, requireth much time and labour, we will set downe these distances ready found out, calculated for the Eleua∣tion of the Pole 50. d. and 52 d. which you may likewise vse without any notable difference, where the Pole is Eleua∣ted 49. d. 51 d. and 53 d. The first table calculated for 50 degrees. Hour. Hour. ♋ ♈♎ ♑ 10 deg. ♉ 10 deg. ♊     D. M. D. M. D M. D. M. D. M.   12 63 30 40 0 16 30         11 1 61 2 38 23 15 19         10 2 54 42 33 50 11 51         9 3 46 15 27 2 6 24         8 4 36 53 18 45     30 23     7 5 27 15 9 35     20 55     6 6 17 47 0 0     11 19     5 7 8 48         2 3 7 14 4 8 0 36             0 0
The second table calculated for 52 degrees of latitude. Hour Hour ♋ ♈♎ ♑ 10 deg. ♉ 10 deg ♊     D. M. D. M. D M. D. M. D. M.   12 61 30 38 0 14 30         11 1 59 13 36 28 13 21         10 2 53 15 32 7 10 0         9 3 45 12 25 33 4 45         8 4 36 12 17 32     29 36     7 5 26 53 8 46     19 22     6 6 17 42 0 0     11 4     5 7 8 58         2 4 7 46 4 8 1 1             0 0 If therefore you will make your Quadrant Horologi∣call for the Eleuation of the Pole 50. d. extend a thread, or lay a ruler, from the centre E. by the 63. d. 30. m. of the limbe of the quadrant, beginning at F and where the thread so placed shall touch the Tropike of ♋, there make a point or marke. Againe, let the thread be placed vpon the 40. d. of the limbe, and where it shall touch the Equator, there also make a marke. Thirdly let y• thread be drawen by the 16. d. 30. m. of the quadrant: and where it shall touch the Tropike of ♑, there make likewise a marke. This done, search out the centre (by the 5. Proposstion 4. Euclid) and ioyne these thrée markes into one arke, which shall be the line for the 12 hower. Afterward place the thread vpon the 61. d. 2. m. of the limbe, and where it shall cut the Tropike of ♋ note it. Draw likewise the thread vpon the 38. d. 23. m. of the
limbe, marke where it cutteth the Equator. Then by the 15▪ d. 19. m. of the limbe extend the thread, making a marke in the section therof and the Tropike of ♑. Drawe into one arke these thrée markes (as you did before) finding out the common centre: so shall you haue the line of the 11. hower before noone, and 1. after noone. In like maner are the rest of the hower lines drawen by 3. points accoun∣ted and found out by the altitude of the sunne. But because before 9. and after 3. in this Eleuation of the Pole it will not serue for this delineation, there must another be made by the table of the 12. Signes or Quadrangles. Therfore draw that from the 10. d. of ♉, so shall you haue a line or place wherein the third points may be marked. Then to prepare the points of the arke for the howers of 8. and 4. of 7. and 5. and both the 6. besides the two markes made in the Tropike of ♋ and the Equator, let the third be noted in the arke drawen from the 10. degrée of ♉.  draw the line of the 5. and 7. howers, vse besides the Tropike of Cancer and this drawen from the 10. degrée of ♉, the third which shall come from the beginning of ♊. The line of 4. in the mor∣ning, and 8. in the euening is very short, included in y• an∣gle next vnto I. Thus you haue finished 9 arkes or lines for the houres, of which each one of them doth shew two houres: except one which is onely for the 2 houre. And to the intent that there should be no space left voyd and vnprofitable betwéene the Tropike of ♑ and the cen∣tre E. you may drawe in that place the vnequall houres, which you shall very easily doe on this maner. Describe vpon the centre E. an arke very little distant from the Tro∣pike of ♑, to be diuided into 6 equall parts, and take the middle point betwéene the beginning of that arke at S. and betwéene E. Then vpon this point▪ as it were a centre, make a halfe circle from S. to E. which shall be the line of the 6. vnequall hower, that is of midday. Afterward one foote of the compasses being placed in the same Semidiame∣ter E. D. and remoued eche way as occasion shall require:
and the other extended in the meane time so far that it may touch the second point of the arke diuided into 6. partes, and the centre E. draw an arke or line from the centre to that point, which shal shew the 5. and 7. howers. Inlike maner are the other 4. drawen, one foote of the compasses being re∣moued, as necessity shal require, in the Semidiameter E. D (which may be prolonged if it shall be too short) & the com∣passes so opened, that the other foot may touch the point of the diuided arke and the centre E. and ioyne them all into one arke line: then fixe a thread in the centre E. well wax∣ed, hauing two small beades vpon it to moue with a plum∣met of iron or lead. Last of all prepare two sights of brasse or other metall with ioynts, which you must place in one right line vpon the side or edge A. B. so that you may direct them, and againe turne them downe vpon that side A. B. at your pleasure: that (if you make this Dial vpon the Table or instrument prescribed in the beginning of this book) they be no hinderance to you in trying or examining of your plats. Thus is your diall prepared: but for further instruc∣tion beholde the Figure.
dialing diagram The vse of this Diall or quadrant Horologicall. TO know the hower of the day when the Sun shineth, worke thus. First séeke out in some Calender in what Signe and degrée the Sun is at that day: then extend the thread with the beades vpon the Semidiameter E. D. and place the neathermost beade vpon that degrée, in the Table of the 12. Signes, which the Sunne then occupieth. After∣ward lifting vp your quadrant, the thread with the plum∣met hanging at liberty, let the Sun beams passe thorow
both the sights, and then the neathermost bead shall shew the hower of the day either before, or after noone: for eche line as you see, hath two howers, but you may easily discern what hower of the day it is. The vnequall hower of the day is thus found out. The neather bead being placed vpon his iust degrée in the Zodi∣ake, lay it vpon the arke of the 12. hower, the thread being extended: thus holding this immoueable, place the vpper∣most bead vpon y• line of the 6. hower vnequal. This done the Sun beames entring both y• sights, the highest bead shal shew the vnequall, and the neathermost the equall hower. The rising and sitting of the Sunne, whereby the length of the day and night is knowen, you shall finde out on this maner. Place the neather bead vpon the iust degrée of the Sunne in the Zodiake, then extend the thread vpon the se∣midiameter E. F. of the quadrant, and the bead shall shew at or betwéen what howers the Sunne riseth and falleth. The height of the Sunne. aboue the Horizon at any time of the day is thus taken. Receiue the Sunne beames by the holes in your sights, and the thread with the plunmet ha∣uing liberty to moue, shall cut in the limbe of the Quadrant the iust degrée of the altitude of the Sunne aboue the Hori∣zon. In like maner is the Eleuation of the Starres aboue the Horizon searched out. You shall finde out the eleuation of the Pole by the help of your Quadrant, thus. Take the height of the Sunne at 12 of the clock, when the dayes and nights bée of equall length, which being subtracted from 90 d. the eleuation re∣maineth. But if you assay that vpon any other day then the Equinoct. you must consider whether the Sunne oc∣cupieth the North, or the South signes, and then vse the table of the Declination of the Sunne on this wise. When the Sunne is in the North signes, substract his declination from the Meridian height thereof. But if it be in the South signes adde the declination to his Meridian altitude. The remainder or totall summe being taken from 90.d. the Ele∣uation of the Pole shall remaine.
How to make an instrument, whereby you may know the iust howre of the night by the Starres. CAP. 27. FIrst prepare a plat or Table of brasse or firme and solide wood, which will not change or bend, somwhat thinne, let the forme of it be round, thrée in∣ches broad, or more or lesse as you will. Draw a circle nigh vnto the edg, and diuide it into 12. equal parts: wherein shal be placed the 12. Signes of the Zodiake, then diuide ech of these parts into 30. equal partes, which shall shew the number of the daies that the Sunne moueth in euery Sign. Make a second circle, wher∣in you may number the daies, and a third circle wherein write the Caracters of the 12. Signes, as you sée in the Fi∣gure following. Draw likewise another circle, wherein you may write the daies of euery moneth in the yéere, which you may doe by any Calender, but for more easines beholde the Table following, whereby you may likewise doe it.
Month. Daies. Deg. M. Caracters of the 12. Signes. Signes. Ianuary 1 20 13 ♑ Capricorne.   15 5 33 ♒ Aquarius.   31 21 44 ♒   February 14 5 52 ♓ Pisces.   28 19 48 ♓   March 15 4 36 ♈ Aries.   31 20 18 ♈   Aprill 15 4 51 ♉ Taurus.   30 19 13 ♉   May 15 4 38 ♊ Gemini.   31 18 50 ♊   Iune 15 3 3 ♋ Cancer.   30 17 22 ♋   Iuly 15 1 40 ♌ Leo.   31 16 58 ♌   August. 15 1 24 ♍ Virgo.   31 16 58 ♍   September 15 1 40 ♎ Libra.   30 16 30 ♎   October 15 1 30 ♏ Scorpius.   31 17 43 ♏   Nouember 15 2 30 ♐ Sagittarius.   30 18 13 ♐   December. 15 3 38 ♑ Capricorne. Enter this Table, and you shal finde that the first day of January must be placed against the 20. d. 13. m of Capri∣corne, and the 15. day against the 5. d. 33. m. of Aquarius, &c. Therfore lay your ruler vpon the centre A. of your plat, and vpon the 20. d. 13. m. of ♑, and where it shall touch the circle which you made for the daies of euery moneth, there make a marke which shall shew the first day of January. Then lay it vpon the 5. d. 33. m. of ♒ and the centre A. and where it shall touch the circle, make a marke for the 15. day of January. Then lay your ruler vpon A. and the 21. d. 44. m. of ♒, and make likewise a marke for the 31. day of January. Again place the ruler vpon the centre A. and the
5. d. 52. m. of ♓, for the 14. day of Februarie: worke thus with all the rest, vntil you haue set down the beginning and middest of euery month, as the Table doth direct you, then hauing found out the beginning & middest of euery month, you may at ease diuide euery space into so many partes, as there be daies in the month, which it serueth for, according as you sée in this figure following. It shall be also necessary to make one circle to write the number of the daies of the moneth, and another for the names of the monthes: you must make also a hole in the centre of this plat, of such big∣nesse, as you may sée a Starre thorow it: as in the figure you may perceiue. dialing diagram Hauing prepared this plat with the circles vpon it, for the 12. Signes and months, you must prepare an other whéele full of téeth, which you shall make on this maner. Take a thime Table or platte of the same matter your
other was, draw a circle vpon it so great as the inward cir∣cle of the first plat, and diuide it into 24. equall parts. Then draw lines from the centre to euery one of those parts, vn∣till you haue so many as there be howers in the longest night in your Country. Then cut téeth by these lines for the howres, and write the number of them vpon the téeth as you sée in this figure. Let the tooth for the 12. howre be so long from the centre to the end, as is betwéen the centre A. of the other plat and the circle of the 12. Signes. You must likewise make a hole in the centre of this whéele, of the same bignes of that, in the other plat. The thothed wheele. dialing diagram This done, you must prepare a ruler, which shalbe pla∣ced vpon this whéele. Take therefore a thin péece of wood or brasse, and draw vpon it a light line: at y• one end therof in the middest of the line make a hole of the same bignesse which that is in the great plat and tothed whéele. Then draw a circle halfe an inch wide or more if you will, after∣ward cut the ruler round at the end, cutting off likewise the one halfe of the breadth of the ruler by the line.
Let the length of the ruler from th ntre to the end be of such quantitie, as is from the centre of the great plat to the outward edge, and an inch or more if y. dialing diagram The foreside of your instrument being finished: the back∣side must haue two small holes, and a handle, which may turne and moue about. Prepare them thus. Vpon your great plat on the backside, right against the fourth degrée of ♍, nigh the edge make a small hole, where∣in the little pinne of the handle may bée plaed, when néede requireth: and write by this the greater Beare. Againe, right against the 28 d. 1 m. of ♎ on the backside make ano∣ther hole likewise, so that the handle being: remoued to it, the pinne may enter, as in the other. And by this, write the lesser Beare. &c. dialing diagram
Prepare for your handle a thin plate of yron, brasse, or woode, about sixe inches in length or more if you wil. Draw in the middest of it a line: at the one ende thereof make a hole in the middest of the line, of such bignesse as the hole in the greater plat is. Vpon this handle you must fasten a litle short pinne right in the line, so that the handle being faste∣ned with the pinne toward the backside of the great plat, and being moued the pinne may fall directly into the hole. Beholde the Figure following. dialing diagram Prepare a hollow pinne of yron or brasse, according to this figure aboue, so great as it may easilie enter into the hole of the handle, so that it may turne vpon it: but let it goe close into the great plat, that it may remaine immoueable. Let the Tothed whéele and the ruler moue likewise vpon it. Then place the Tothed whéele and the ruler on the for∣mer side of the plat vpon the pinne, and on the backside the handle with the little pinne towards the back of the plat: fa∣sten them so together, that the handle, the Tothed whéele, and the ruler may turne vpon the plat seuerally, or each by themselues at your pleasure, and as néede shall require. Notwithstanding you must bée carefull, that the hole in your pinne may bée so great, as you may perfectly sée the North Starre in the night thorow it. Then your instru∣ment shall bée finished, whose vse followeth afterward. For better instruction beholde the figure.
dialing diagram
The vse of this instrument. FIrst it shall bée expedient to finde out the Starres ser∣uing to this purpose, which you may doe by the figure following. dialing diagram You sée in this figure the starres which serue to our vse. The Polare Starre is a bright Starre in the North, placed in the tayle of the lesser beare, and mooueth but a small course, as in the figure the letter A. sheweth. There is also another Starre of the lesser beare greater and brighter then the other, and is noted with the letter B. and serueth to this purpose also. There is likewise in the greater beare called also Charles waine, and of countrie men the plough, two great bright starres, and are placed almost in a right line with the Polare Starre; & are noted with the letters C. D. And these two Starres haue 5 other bright Starres
by them, but not so great as the other be. These Starres which you sée in the figure, as al other, mooue equally aboue the Pole, and finish their course in 24 houres. Therefore when you would know the houre of the night by this instrument, do thus. Place the right line of the long tooth of the 12 houre directly ouer the day of the moneth, and turne the handle on the backside to the hole of the greater beare, and your instrument shall be prepared. Then lift vp your instrument by the handle perpendicu∣larly, so that it declineth on neither sides: and beholding the Polare Starre thorow the hole in the centre, moue the ru∣ler aboue, vntill the right line there of be directly against, or séemeth to touch the two Starres of the greater beare, and vnder the line you shall haue the iust houre of the night: which you may finde out by the number of the téeth with your finger in the night. But if you cannot sée the two Starres of the greater beare because of clouds: and yet you may sée the Polare Starre, and the Starre of the lesser beare, noted with the letter B. remoue the handle on the backside to the hole of the lesser beare. Then lift vp your instrument as before, and beholde the Polare Starre at the hole, and turne the ruler to the foresaid Starre of the lesser beare, and you shall finde the true houre of the night, as be∣fore is taught. The making of a Diall, to knowe the houre by the Moone. CAP. 30. PRepare a square péece of wood or metall 3 or 4 inches ouer, draw thereon a cir∣cle so great as you can, draw also an∣other within that. Now because the Moone finisheth her course in 29 dayes, 12 houres, and 44 minutes, part the inward into 30 parts in this maner; let 29 be equally diuided, and the 30 which is the last must not be so great by a third part: wherefore diuide one of those 29
equall parts into thrée parts, and take two of them for the 30 and last part. dialing diagram Cut out that which is within the inward limb, and pre∣pare another of the same or like wood or metall somewhat thicker, and worke it so that it may goe into the former so much of the thicknes as it may be equal on the backside, and that which remaineth of the thicknes, let it hang ouer the foreside of the first plate to kéepe it from falling through: draw a circle vpon it, and diuide it into 24 equall parts: draw from these parts houre lines so many as shall suffice for the longest night: cut that which ouerhangeth with téeth at euery houre, but especially at the 12 houre make a long tooth, fixe a wier in the centre for the Stile equally di∣stant from the circle on each side. Let the Stile hang so
much beneath the plat, as it is aboue, because you shall haue as much vse on the backside as before. dialing diagram Cut out all that which is within the inward circle, except a little portion to support the Stile, so that this shall bée but as a hoope. Drawe the houre lines on the backside of this plat, as on the foreside, so that the one may be right against another: then drawe lines on the inside from euery one of these lines on the foreside to the lines on the backside. This plat or whéele must be moueable and turne within the former.
dialing diagram The vse of this Diall. PLace this Diall that each side may beholde one quarter of the world precisely: the South side the South, the North side the North, &c. Moreouer, it must recline according to the eleuation of the Equinoctiall, so that the Moone being in the Equinoctiall circle, shall giue light both aboue and be∣neath this Diall. You may place it perfectly with your in∣strument. Your Diall being thus placed, when you would knowe the houre of the night, first learne the age of the Moone by an almanack, and especially the houre of the change, then turne the great ouer-hanging tooth, to the day of the Moone on the first limb, and to the houre of the change, accounting from 12 of the clock.
The shadow of the Stile shall shew the howre of the night either beneath your Diall or els aboue. This Diall will serue also for the Sunne, if you turne the great tooth of the moueable whéele to the little strick A. which is right opposite to the beginning of the first, and end of the last day of the Moone, nere the 15. day, and then it is fit for the Sunne. For it differeth nothing from y• North reclining direct, where the Reclination is equal to the Ele∣uation of the Pole. The vse of the Table of the declination of the Sunne. TAke what degrée you wil of any signe, and by this table you may know his declination from the Equinoctiall cir∣cle. The Signes are written partely on the head of the Table, and partely on the foote of the same. The Degrées in the first columne doe serue for the Signes that be on the head of the Ta∣ble, and the Degrées in the last columne doe serue for the Signes in the foote of the Table. And the common Area or angle against the Signe and the Degrée which you séeke for, doth containe the Degrées and Minutes of the Decli∣nation due to the same. Example. I would know how much the tenth degrée of Leo doth decline from the Equinoctiall: I must looke in the columne ouer Leo, right against the number of 10. in the last co∣lumne, where I finde 17. d. 46. m. the declination therof, &c.
The table of the declination of the Sunne, from the Equinoctial circle.   Aries. Libra. Taurus. Scorpius. Gemin. Sagittarius.   Deg. Deg. M. Deg. M. Deg. M. Deg. 1 0 24 11 30 20 12 29 2 0 48 12 11 20 35 28 3 1 12 12 32 20 47 27 4 1 36 12 52 20 58 26 5 1 59 13 12 21 9 25 6 2 23 13 32 21 20 24 7 2 47 13 52 21 30 23 8 3 11 14 12 21 40 22 9 3 34 14 31 21 49 21 10 3 58 14 50 21 58 20 11 4 21 15 9 22 7 19 12 4 45 15 27 22 15 18 13 5 8 15 55 22 23 17 14 5 32 16 3 22 30 16 15 5 55 16 21 22 37 15 16 6 18 16 39 22 44 14 17 6 41 16 56 22 50 13 18 7 4 17 13 22 55 12 19 7 27 17 29 23 1 11 20 7 50 17 46 23 5 10 21 8 12 18 2 23 10 9 22 8 35 18 17 23 13 8 23 8 57 18 33 23 17 7 24 9 19 18 48 23 20 6 25 9 41 19 2 23 22 5 26 10 3 19 17 23 24 4 27 10 25 19 31 23 26 3 28 10 47 19 44 23 28 2 29 11 8 19 58 23 29 1 30 11 29 20 12 23 30 0 Deg. Deg. M. Deg. M. Deg. M. Deg.   Virgo. Pisces.   Leo. Aquarius.   Cancer Capricorne.    
The Table of Sines. The whole Sine conteineth 100000. partes. The vse of the Table of Sines. WHereas the making of some Dials, and this Table of Sines may séeme obscure and hard to them who are not acquain∣ted with Sinicall computation, it shal∣be expedient to declare the vse hereof, so much as perteineth to the vnderstan∣ding of this booke, omitting all other v∣ses as impertinent to our present purpose. Wherfore know that the Grades or Degrées are found in the vpper head of this Table, and the Minutes pertaining to the Degrées on the left side, & in the Area or common méeting of them both, a number which is called the Sine, answerable to ech De∣grée and Minute, offereth it selfe. Againe the Sine being found out, you may easily know the arke, that is, the De∣grée and Minutes thereof, these being on the left hand, the other on the head or vpper part. Vnderstand by the Com∣plement that which remaineth of any number being taken or substracted from 90. Degrées. If at any time you enter the Table with iust Degrées without any Minutes, re∣solue one Degrée into 60. Minutes, and then séeke out his Sine. And whereas you shall finde some numbers imper∣fect, you must remember to supply their want with those which be perfect immediatly going before. Example. The Eleuation of the Pole at Cambr. is 52. Degrées, whose Sine I desire to know, therefore resoluing one of the Degrées into Minutes, I enter the Table with 51. de∣grées,
60. Minutes, and in the common Area I finde the Sine to be 78801. If then you desire to know the comple∣ment of this Eleuation, substract 52. out of 90. and the re∣mainder shalbe 38. the complement thereof, and entring the Table with 37. d. 60. m. you shall finde in the Area 66. which number because it is imperfect, you must supply the want thereof by adding the 3. former figures in that which is next before perfect, to wit, 615. and thē the whole num∣ber shalbe 61566. the Sine of 38. d. which is the Comple∣ment of 52. d. the Eleuation of the Pole. These thinges well considered, there is nothing in the booke so obscure, but it shall séeme plaine and easie. . FINIS. Note that some of the letters in the Instrument page 2. are omit∣ted in the printing: place A. at the vppermost corner towards the left hand, B. at the neathermost, C. by 90. beneath, and D. at 90. aboue.
D 0 1 2 3 4 5 M Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes   1 29 1774 3519 5262 7004 8744   2 58 1803 48 91 33 73   3 87 32 77 5320 62 8803   4 116 61 3606 49 91 31   5 45 90 35 78 7120 60   6 74 1919 64 5407 49 89   7 203 48 93 36 78 8918   8 32 77 3722 65 7207 47   9 61 2007 51 95 36 76   10 90 36 80 5524 65 9005   11 319 65 3809 53 94 34   12 49 94 38 82 7323 63   13 78 2123 67 5611 52 92   14 407 52 96 40 81 9121   15 36 81 3925 69 7410 50   16 65 2210 55 98 39 79   17 94 39 84 5727 68 9208   18 523 68 4013 56 97 37   19 52 97 42 85 7526 66   20 81 2326 71 5814 55 94   21 610 55 4100 43 84 9323   22 39 85 29 72 7613 52   23 69 2414 58 5901 42 81   24 98 43 87 30 71 9410   25 727 72 4216 59 7700 39   26 56 2501 45 88 29 68   27 85 30 74 6017 58 97   28 814 59 4303 46 87 9526   29 43 88 32 75 7816 55   30 73 2617 61 6104 45 84
D 0 1 2 3 4 5 M Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes   31 901 2646 4391 6133 7874 9613   32 30 75 4420 62 7903 42   33 59 2704 49 91 32 71   34 89 34 78 6220 61 9700   35 1018 63 4507 50 90 29   36 47 92 36 79 8019 58   37 76 2821 65 6308 48 87   38 1105 50 94 37 77 9816   39 34 79 4622 66 8106 45   40 63 2908 52 95 35 74   41 92 37 81 6424 64 9903   42 1221 66 4710 53 93 31   43 50 95 39 82 8222 60   44 79 3034 68 6511 51 89   45 1208 53 97 40 80 10018   46 38 82 4826 69 8309 47   47 67 3112 55 98 38 76   48 96 41 84 6627 67 10105   49 1425 70 4914 56 96 34   50 54 99 43 85 8425 65   51 83 3228 72 6714 54 92   52 1512 57 5001 43 83 10221   53 41 86 30 72 8512 50   54 70 3315 59 6801 31 79   55 99 44 88 30 70 10308   56 1628 73 5117 59 99 37   57 57 3402 46 88 8628 66   58 87 31 75 6917 57 94   59 1716 60 5204 46 86 10423   60 45 89 33 75 8715 52
D 6 7 8 9 10 11 M Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes   1 10481 12215 13946 15672 17393 19109   2 10510 44 74 15700 17422 38   3 39 73 14003 29 50 66   4 68 12302 32 58 97 95   5 97 31 61 87 17508 19223   6 10626 60 90 15815 36 52   7 55 89 14118 44 65 80   8 84 12417 47 73 93 19309   9 10713 46 76 15901 17622 37   10 42 75 14205 30 51 66   11 71 12504 34 59 79 94   12 99 33 62 88 17708 19423   13 10828 62 91 16016 37 51   14 57 91 14320 45 65 80   15 86 12619 49 74 94 19500   16 10915 48 78 16102 17822 37   17 44 77 14406 31 51 66   18 73 12706 35 60 80 94   19 11002 35 64 89 17908 19623   20 31 64 93 16217 37 51   21 60 93 14521 46 66 80   22 89 12821 50 75 94 19708   23 11119 50 79 16303 18023 37   24 46 79 14608 32 51 65   25 75 12908 37 61 80 95   26 11204 37 65 89 18109 19822   27 33 66 94 16418 37 51   28 62 94 14723 47 66 79   29 91 13023 52 76 94 19908   30 11320 52 80 16504 18223 36
D 6 7 8 9 10 11 M Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes   31 11349 13081 14809 16533 18252 19965   32 78 13110 38 62 80 93   33 11407 39 67 90 18309 20022   34 35 67 96 16619 37 50   35 64 96 14924 48 66 79   36 93 13225 53 76 95 20107   37 11522 54 82 16705 18423 36   38 51 83 15011 34 52 64   39 80 13312 39 62 80 93   40 11609 40 68 91 18509 20221   41 38 69 97 16820 38 50   42 67 98 15126 48 66 78   43 95 13427 54 77 95 20307   44 11724 56 83 16906 18623 35   45 53 85 15212 34 52 64   46 82 13513 41 63 80 92   47 11811 42 69 92 18709 20421   48 40 71 98 17020 38 49   49 69 13600 15327 49 66 78   50 98 29 56 78 95 20506   51 11927 58 84 17106 18823 35   52 55 86 15413 35 52 63   53 84 13715 42 64 80 93   54 12013 44 71 92 18909 20620   55 42 73 99 17221 38 48   56 71 13802 15528 50 66 77   57 12100 30 57 78 95 20705   58 29 59 85 17307 19023 34   59 58 88 15614 36 52 62   60 86 13917 43 64 80 91
D 12 13 14 15 16 17 M Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes   1 20819 22523 24220 25910 27591 29264   2 48 51 48 38 27619 92   3 76 80 76 66 47 29320   4 20904 22608 24305 94 75 48   5 33 36 33 26022 27703 76   6 61 65 61 50 31 29404   7 90 93 89 78 59 31   8 21018 22721 24417 26106 87 59   9 47 50 46 34 2715 87   10 75 78 74 62 43 29515   11 21104 22806 24502 90 71 43   12 32 35 30 26218 99 70   13 60 63 58 46 27927 98   14 89 91 87 75 54 29626   15 21217 22920 24615 26303 82 54   16 46 48 43 31 28010 81   17 74 76 71 59 38 29709   18 21303 23004 99 87 66 37   19 31 33 24728 26415 94 65   20 59 61 56 43 28122 93   21 88 89 84 71 50 29820   22 21416 13118 24812 99 78 48   23 45 46 40 26527 28206 76   24 73 74 69 55 34 29904   25 21501 23203 97 83 62 31   26 30 31 24925 26611 89 59   27 58 59 53 39 38317 87   28 87 87 81 67 47 30015   29 21615 23316 25009 95 73 42   30 43 44 38 26723 28401 70
D 12 13 14 15 16 17 M Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes   31 21672 23372 25066 26751 28429 30098   32 21700 23401 94 79 57 30126   33 29 29 25122 26807 85 53   34 57 57 50 35 28513 81   35 85 85 78 63 40 30209   36 21814 23514 25206 91 68 36   37 42 42 35 26920 96 64   38 71 70 63 48 28624 92   39 99 99 94 76 52 30320   40 21927 23627 25319 27004 80 47   41 56 55 47 32 28708 75   42 84 83 75 60 36 30402   43 22013 23712 25403 88 63 31   44 41 40 32 27116 91 58   45 69 68 60 44 28819 86   46 98 96 88 72 47 30514   47 22126 23825 25516 27200 75 41   48 54 53 44 28 28903 69   49 83 81 72 56 31 97   50 22211 23909 25600 84 58 30624   51 39 38 28 27311 86 52   52 68 66 57 39 29014 80   53 96 94 85 67 42 30707   54 22325 24022 25713 95 70 35   55 53 51 41 27423 98 63   56 81 79 69 51 29125 91   57 22410 24107 97 79 53 30818   58 38 35 25825 27507 81 46   59 66 63 53 35 29209 74   60 95 92 81 63 37 30901
D 18 19 20 21 22 23 M Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes 1 30929 32584 34229 35863 37487 39909 2 57 32611 56 91 37514 39126 3 84 3 84 35918 41 53 4 31012 66 34311 45 8 80 5 39 94 38 72 95 39206 6 67 32721 65 99 37622 33 7 95 49 93 36026 49 60 8 31122 76 34420 53 76 87 9 50 32804 47 81 37703 39313 10 78 31 75 36108 30 40 11 31205 59 34502 35 57 67 12 33 86 29 62 84 94 13 61 32914 57 89 37811 39420 14 88 41 84 36216 37 47 15 1316 69 34611 43 64 74 16 44 96 39 70 91 39501 17 71 33023 66 98 37918 27 18 99 51 93 36325 45 54 19 31426 78 34720 52 72 81 20 54 33106 48 79 99 39607 21 82 33 75 36406 38026 34 22 31509 61 34802 33 53 61 23 37 88 29 60 80 88 24 64 33216 57 87 38107 39714 25 92 43 84 36514 33 41 26 31620 70 34911 41 60 68 27 47 98 38 68 87 94 28 75 33325 66 95 38214 39821 29 31702 53 93 36623 41 48 30 30 80 35020 50 68 74
D 18 19 20 21 22 23 M Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes 31 31758 33408 35047 36677 38295 39901 32 85 35 75 36704 38322 28 33 31813 62 35102 31 48 54 34 40 90 29 58 75 81 35 68 33517 56 85 38402 40008 36 95 45 84 36812 29 34 37 31923 72 35211 39 56 61 38 51 99 38 66 83 88 39 78 33627 65 93 38510 40114 40 32006 54 93 36920 36 41 41 33 82 35320 47 63 68 42 61 33709 47 74 90 94 43 88 36 74 37001 38617 40221 44 32116 63 35401 28 44 48 45 43 91 29 55 71 74 46 71 33819 56 82 97 40301 47 99 46 83 37109 38724 27 48 32226 73 35510 36 51 54 49 54 33901 37 63 78 81 50 81 28 65 90 38805 40407 51 32309 55 92 37217 31 34 52 36 83 35619 44 58 60 53 64 34010 46 71 85 87 54 91 37 73 98 38912 40514 55 32419 65 35700 37325 39 40 56 46 92 28 52 65 67 57 74 34119 55 79 92 93 58 32501 47 82 37406 39019 40620 59 29 74 35809 33 46 47 60 56 34202 36 60 73 73
D 24 25 26 27 28 29 M Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes 1 40700 42288 43863 45424 46972 48506 2 26 42314 89 50 98 31 3 53 40 43915 76 47024 57 4 79 67 41 45502 49 82 5 40806 93 67 28 75 48608 6 33 42419 93 54 47101 33 7 59 46 44020 80 26 58 8 86 72 46 45606 52 84 9 40912 98 72 32 78 48709 10 39 42525 98 58 47203 35 11 65 51 44124 83 29 60 12 92 77 50 45709 55 85 13 41018 42604 76 35 80 48811 14 45 30 44202 61 47306 36 15 71 56 28 87 31 62 16 98 83 54 45813 57 87 17 41124 42709 81 39 83 48912 18 51 35 44307 64 47408 38 19 77 62 33 90 34 63 20 41204 88 59 45916 60 88 21 30 42814 85 42 85 49014 22 57 40 44411 68 47511 39 23 83 67 37 94 36 65 24 41310 93 63 46019 62 90 25 36 42919 89 45 88 49115 26 63 46 44515 71 47613 41 27 89 72 41 97 39 66 28 41416 98 67 46123 64 91 29 42 43024 93 49 90 49217 30 69 51 44619 74 47715 42
D 24 25 26 27 28 29 M Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes 31 41495 43077 44645 46200 47741 49267 32 41522 43103 71 26 67 92 33 48 29 97 52 92 49318 34 75 56 44723 78 47818 43 35 41601 82 49 46303 43 68 36 28 4208 75 29 69 94 37 54 34 44801 55 49 49419 38 80 61 27 81 47920 44 39 41707 87 53 46406 45 70 40 33 43313 79 32 71 95 41 60 39 44905 58 96 49520 42 86 65 31 84 48022 45 43 4113 92 57 46509 47 71 44 39 43418 83 35 73 96 45 65 44 45009 61 98 49621 46 92 70 35 87 48124 46 47 41918 96 61 46612 49 72 48 45 43523 87 38 75 97 49 71 49 45113 64 48200 49822 50 98 75 39 90 26 47 51 42024 43601 65 46715 51 73 52 50 27 91 41 77 98 53 77 54 45317 67 48302 49823 54 42103 80 43 92 28 48 55 29 43706 69 46818 53 73 56 56 32 95 44 79 99 57 82 58 45321 70 48404 49924 58 42209 84 47 95 30 49 59 35 43810 73 46921 55 74 60 61 37 99 47 80 50000
D 30 31 32 33 34 35 M Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes 1 50025 51528 53016 54488 55943 57381 2 50 53 41 54512 66 57405 3 75 78 65 37 91 29 4 50100 51603 90 61 56015 52 5 25 28 53115 85 39 76 6 51 53 39 54610 63 57500 7 76 78 64 34 87 24 8 50201 51703 89 58 56112 48 9 26 28 53213 83 36 71 10 51 52 38 54707 60 95 11 76 77 63 31 84 57619 12 50302 51802 87 56 56208 43 13 27 27 53312 80 32 67 14 52 52 36 54804 56 90 15 77 77 61 29 80 57714 16 50402 51902 86 53 56304 38 17 27 27 53410 77 28 62 18 52 51 35 54902 52 85 19 77 76 59 26 76 57809 20 50502 52001 84 50 56400 33 21 28 26 53508 75 24 56 22 53 51 33 99 48 80 23 78 76 58 55023 72 57904 24 50603 52100 82 48 96 28 25 28 25 53607 72 56520 51 26 53 50 31 96 44 75 27 78 75 56 55120 68 99 28 50703 52200 80 45 92 58022 29 28 25 53705 69 56616 46 30 53 49 29 93 40 70
D 30 31 32 33 34 35 M Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes 31 50778 52274 53754 55217 56664 58093 32 50803 99 79 42 88 58117 33 29 52324 53803 66 56712 41 34 54 49 28 90 36 64 35 79 73 52 55314 60 88 36 50904 98 77 39 84 58212 37 29 52423 53901 63 56808 35 38 54 46 26 87 32 59 39 79 72 50 55411 56 83 40 51004 97 75 36 80 58306 41 29 52522 99 60 56904 30 42 54 47 54024 84 27 54 43 79 71 48 55508 51 77 44 51104 96 72 32 75 58401 45 26 52621 97 57 99 24 46 54 46 54121 81 57023 48 47 79 70 46 55605 47 72 48 51204 95 70 29 71 95 49 29 52720 95 53 95 58519 50 54 45 54219 77 57119 42 51 79 69 44 55702 42 66 52 51304 94 68 26 66 90 53 29 52819 93 50 90 58613 54 54 43 54317 74 57214 37 55 79 68 41 98 38 60 56 51404 93 66 55822 62 84 57 28 52917 90 46 86 58707 58 53 42 54415 71 57309 31 59 78 67 39 95 33 54 60 51503 91 63 55919 57 78
D 36 37 38 39 40 41 M Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes 1 58802 60204 61589 62954 64301 65627 2 25 27 61611 77 23 49 3 49 51 34 99 45 71 4 72 74 57 63022 67 93 5 96 97 80 45 90 65715 6 58919 60320 61703 67 64412 35 7 43 44 26 90 34 59 8 66 67 49 63112 56 81 9 90 90 72 35 79 65803 10 59013 60413 95 57 64501 25 11 37 36 61817 80 23 47 12 60 59 40 63202 45 68 13 84 38 63 25 67 90 14 59107 60506 86 48 90 5912 15 30 29 61909 70 64612 34 16 54 52 32 93 34 56 17 77 75 55 63315 56 78 18 59201 98 77 38 78 66000 19 42 60621 62000 60 64701 22 20 48 45 23 83 23 43 21 71 68 46 63405 45 65 22 95 91 69 28 67 87 23 59318 60714 91 50 89 66109 24 41 37 62114 73 64811 31 25 65 60 37 95 34 53 26 88 83 60 63518 56 74 27 59412 60806 83 40 78 96 28 35 29 62205 62 64900 66318 29 58 53 28 85 22 40 30 82 76 51 63607 44 60
D 36 37 38 39 40 41 M Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes 31 59505 60899 62274 63630 64966 66283 32 29 60922 96 52 89 66305 33 52 45 62319 75 65011 27 34 75 68 42 97 33 49 35 99 91 65 63719 55 70 36 59622 61014 87 42 77 92 37 45 37 62410 64 99 66414 38 69 60 33 87 65121 36 39 92 83 56 63809 43 57 40 59715 61106 78 32 65 79 41 39 29 62501 54 87 66510 42 62 52 24 76 65209 23 43 85 75 46 99 31 44 44 59809 98 69 63921 53 66 45 32 61221 92 43 75 88 46 55 44 62615 66 98 66609 47 79 67 37 88 65320 31 48 59902 90 60 64010 42 53 49 25 61313 83 33 64 74 50 48 36 62705 55 86 96 51 72 59 28 77 65408 66718 52 95 82 51 64100 30 39 53 60018 61405 73 22 52 61 54 42 28 96 44 74 83 55 65 51 62818 67 96 66804 56 88 74 41 89 65518 26 57 60111 97 64 64211 40 48 58 35 61520 86 34 61 69 59 58 43 62909 56 83 91 60 81 66 32 78 65605 66913
D 42 43 44 45 46 47 M Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes 1 66934 68221 69486 70731 71954 73155 2 56 42 69507 51 74 75 3 77 63 28 72 94 94 4 99 84 49 92 72014 73214 5 67021 68306 70 70813 34 34 6 42 27 91 33 55 54 7 64 48 69612 54 75 74 8 85 70 33 75 95 93 9 67107 91 53 95 72115 73313 10 28 68412 74 70916 35 33 11 50 33 95 36 55 53 12 72 45 69716 57 75 72 13 93 75 37 77 96 92 14 67215 97 58 98 72216 73412 15 36 68518 79 71018 36 32 16 58 39 99 39 56 51 17 79 60 69820 59 76 71 18 67301 81 41 79 96 91 19 22 68603 62 71100 72316 73501 20 44 24 83 20 36 30 21 65 45 69903 41 56 50 22 87 66 24 61 77 70 23 67408 87 45 81 97 90 24 30 68708 66 71202 72417 73609 25 51 29 87 23 37 29 26 73 51 70007 43 57 49 27 94 72 28 63 77 68 28 67516 93 49 84 97 88 29 37 68814 70 71304 72517 73708 30 59 35 90 25 37 27
D 42 43 44 45 46 47 M Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes 31 67580 68856 70111 71345 72557 73747 32 67601 77 32 65 77 67 33 23 98 53 86 97 86 34 44 68919 73 71406 72617 73806 35 66 40 94 26 37 25 36 87 61 70215 47 57 45 37 67709 83 36 67 77 65 38 30 69004 56 87 97 84 39 51 25 77 71508 72717 73904 40 73 46 98 28 37 23 41 94 67 70318 48 57 43 42 67815 88 39 69 77 63 43 37 69109 60 89 97 82 44 58 30 80 71609 72817 74002 45 80 51 70401 30 37 21 46 67901 72 22 50 57 41 47 22 93 42 70 76 60 48 44 69214 63 91 96 80 49 65 35 84 71711 72916 74100 50 86 56 70504 31 36 19 51 68008 77 25 51 56 39 52 29 98 45 72 76 58 53 50 69319 66 92 96 78 54 73 40 87 71812 73016 97 55 94 61 70607 32 36 74217 56 68114 82 28 53 55 36 57 35 69403 48 73 75 56 58 56 23 66 93 95 75 59 78 44 90 71913 73115 95 60 99 65 70710 33 35 74314
D 48 49 50 51 52 53 M Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes 1 74333 75490 76623 77732 78818 79881 2 53 75509 41 51 36 98 3 72 28 60 69 54 79916 4 92 47 79 87 72 33 5 74411 66 97 77806 90 51 6 31 85 76716 24 78908 68 7 50 75604 35 42 26 85 8 70 23 53 60 44 80003 9 89 42 72 79 61 20 10 74508 61 91 97 79 38 11 28 80 76809 77915 97 55 12 47 99 28 33 79015 73 13 66 75718 46 52 33 90 14 86 37 65 70 51 80107 15 74605 56 84 88 68 25 16 25 75 76902 78006 86 42 17 44 94 21 24 79104 60 18 63 75813 39 43 22 77 19 83 32 58 61 40 94 20 74702 51 77 79 57 80212 21 21 70 95 97 75 29 22 41 89 77014 78115 93 47 23 60 75908 32 33 79211 64 24 79 27 51 52 28 81 25 99 46 69 70 46 99 26 74818 64 88 88 64 80326 27 37 83 77106 78206 82 33 28 57 76002 25 24 99 51 29 76 21 43 42 79317 68 30 95 40 62 60 35 85
D 48 49 50 51 52 53 M Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes 31 74914 76059 77180 78278 79353 80402 32 34 78 99 97 70 20 33 53 97 77217 78315 88 37 34 72 76116 36 33 79406 54 35 91 34 54 51 23 72 36 75011 53 73 69 41 89 37 30 72 91 87 59 80506 38 49 91 77310 78405 76 23 39 68 76210 28 23 94 41 40 88 29 47 41 79512 58 41 75107 48 65 59 29 75 42 26 66 84 77 47 92 43 45 85 77402 95 64 80610 44 64 76304 20 78513 82 27 45 83 23 39 31 79600 44 46 75203 42 57 49 17 61 47 22 60 76 67 35 78 48 41 79 94 85 52 96 49 60 98 77512 78603 70 80713 50 79 76417 31 21 88 30 51 99 35 49 39 79705 47 52 75318 44 67 57 23 64 53 37 73 86 75 40 81 54 56 92 77604 93 85 98 55 75 76510 22 78711 75 80816 56 94 29 41 29 93 33 57 75413 48 59 47 79811 50 58 32 67 77 65 28 67 59 51 85 96 83 46 84 60 70 76604 77714 78801 63 80901
D 54 55 56 57 58 59 M Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes 1 80918 81931 82920 83882 84820 85731 2 35 48 36 93 35 46 3 52 65 52 83914 51 61 4 70 81 68 30 66 76 5 87 98 85 46 81 91 6 81004 82015 83001 61 97 85806 7 21 31 17 77 84912 21 8 38 48 33 93 27 36 9 55 65 49 84009 43 51 10 72 81 66 25 58 66 11 89 98 82 40 73 81 12 81106 82114 98 56 89 96 13 23 31 83115 72 85004 85910 14 40 48 30 88 19 25 15 57 64 46 84103 35 40 16 74 81 63 19 50 55 17 91 97 79 35 65 70 18 81208 82214 95 51 81 85 19 25 30 83211 66 96 86000 20 42 47 27 82 85111 14 21 59 64 43 98 26 29 22 76 80 59 84213 42 44 23 93 97 76 29 57 59 24 81310 82313 92 45 72 74 25 27 30 83308 60 87 89 26 43 46 24 76 85203 86103 27 60 63 40 92 18 18 28 77 79 56 84370 33 33 29 94 95 72 23 48 48 30 81411 82412 88 39 64 62
D 54 55 56 57 58 59 M Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes 31 81428 82429 83404 84354 85279 86177 32 45 45 20 70 94 92 33 62 62 36 86 85309 86207 34 79 78 52 84401 24 21 35 95 94 68 17 39 36 36 81512 82511 84 32 55 51 37 29 27 83500 48 70 66 38 46 44 16 63 85 80 39 63 60 32 79 85400 95 40 80 77 48 95 15 86310 41 96 93 64 84510 30 24 42 81613 82609 80 26 45 39 43 30 26 96 41 60 54 44 47 42 83612 57 76 68 45 64 58 28 72 91 83 46 80 75 44 88 85506 98 47 97 91 60 84603 21 86412 48 81714 82708 76 19 36 27 49 31 24 92 34 51 42 50 48 40 83708 50 66 56 51 64 57 24 65 81 71 52 81 73 40 81 96 85 53 98 89 55 96 85611 86500 54 81814 82806 71 84712 26 15 55 31 22 87 27 41 29 56 48 38 83803 43 56 44 57 65 54 19 58 71 58 58 81 71 35 73 86 73 59 98 87 51 89 85701 87 60 81915 82903 67 84804 16 86602
D 60 61 62 63 64 65 M Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes 1 86617 87476 88308 89113 89892 90643 2 31 90 22 27 89904 55 3 46 87504 35 40 17 67 4 60 18 88349 53 30 79 5 75 32 62 89166 43 92 6 89 87546 76 79 89955 90704 7 86404 60 90 92 68 16 8 18 74 88403 89206 81 28 9 33 88 17 19 93 41 10 47 87602 30 32 90006 90753 11 62 16 44 45 19 65 12 76 30 88458 89258 31 77 13 91 44 71 71 44 89 14 86805 87658 85 84 90057 90802 15 19 72 98 97 69 14 16 34 86 88512 89310 82 26 17 48 87700 25 24 95 38 18 63 14 39 37 90107 90850 19 77 28 52 50 20 62 20 91 42 88566 89363 32 75 21 86906 87756 79 76 45 87 22 20 70 93 89 90158 99 23 35 84 88606 89402 70 90911 24 49 98 20 15 83 23 25 63 87812 33 28 95 35 26 78 26 47 41 90208 47 27 92 40 88660 89454 20 90959 28 87006 53 74 67 33 71 29 21 67 87 80 46 84 30 35 87881 88701 89493 90258 96
D 60 61 62 63 64 65 M Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes 31 87049 87895 88714 89506 90271 91008 32 64 87909 27 19 83 20 33 78 23 41 32 96 32 34 92 37 54 45 90308 44 35 87107 51 88768 89558 21 91056 36 21 87964 81 71 33 68 37 35 78 94 84 46 80 38 49 92 88808 97 90358 92 39 64 88006 21 89609 70 91104 40 78 20 35 22 83 16 41 92 33 48 35 95 28 42 87206 47 88861 48 90408 40 43 21 88061 75 89661 20 91162 44 35 75 88 74 33 64 45 49 89 88901 87 45 76 46 63 88102 15 89700 90457 88 47 78 16 28 12 70 91200 48 92 30 41 25 82 12 49 87306 44 88954 38 95 23 50 20 88157 68 89751 90507 35 51 34 71 81 64 19 91247 52 48 85 94 77 32 59 53 63 98 89008 89 44 71 54 77 88212 21 89802 90556 83 55 91 26 34 15 69 95 56 87405 40 47 28 81 91307 57 19 53 89060 41 93 19 58 33 88267 74 89853 90606 30 59 47 81 87 66 18 42 60 61 94 89100 79 30 91354
D 66 67 68 69 70 71 M Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes 1 91366 92061 92729 93368 93979 94561 2 78 73 40 78 89 70 3 90 84 51 89 99 80 4 91401 95 61 99 94009 89 5 13 92107 92772 93410 18 99 6 25 18 83 20 28 94608 7 37 29 94 30 38 17 8 91448 41 92805 41 48 27 9 60 92152 16 93451 94058 36 10 72 63 26 61 68 47 11 84 75 37 72 78 94655 12 95 86 92848 82 88 64 13 91507 97 59 92 97 74 14 19 92208 70 93503 94107 83 15 31 20 80 13 17 93 16 42 31 91 23 27 94702 17 91554 42 92902 34 37 11 18 66 92253 13 93544 47 21 19 77 65 24 54 94156 30 20 89 76 34 64 66 39 21 91601 87 92945 75 76 94748 22 12 98 56 83 86 58 23 24 92309 66 95 95 67 24 37 21 77 93605 94205 76 25 91647 32 88 16 15 86 26 59 43 99 26 25 95 27 71 92354 93009 36 34 94804 28 82 65 20 46 44 13 29 94 76 31 57 94254 23 30 91706 92387 93041 67 64 32
D 66 67 68 69 70 71 M Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes 31 91717 92399 93052 93677 94273 94841 32 29 92410 62 87 83 50 33 40 21 73 97 93 60 34 52 32 84 93707 94302 69 35 91763 43 94 18 12 94878 36 75 92454 93105 28 22 87 37 87 65 16 38 31 96 38 98 76 26 93748 41 94905 39 91810 87 37 58 94351 15 40 21 98 93147 68 60 24 41 33 92509 58 78 70 33 42 44 20 69 88 80 42 43 91856 32 79 98 89 51 44 67 43 90 93809 99 94960 45 79 92554 93200 19 94408 69 46 90 65 11 29 18 79 47 91902 76 21 39 28 88 48 13 87 32 93849 37 97 49 24 98 93242 59 47 95006 50 36 92609 53 69 94456 15 51 91947 20 63 79 66 24 52 59 30 74 89 75 33 53 70 41 84 99 86 42 54 82 92652 95 93909 94 51 55 93 63 93305 19 94504 95060 56 92004 74 16 29 13 69 57 16 85 26 39 23 78 58 27 96 37 93949 32 87 59 39 92707 47 59 42 96 60 92050 18 93358 69 94551 95105
D 72 73 74 75 76 77 M Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes 1 95114 95638 96134 96600 97036 97443 2 23 47 42 07 43 50 3 32 55 50 15 50 96 4 41 64 58 22 75 63 5 50 95672 66 30 64 69 6 95159 81 74 37 97071 76 7 68 89 82 45 78 82 8 77 98 90 52 85 89 9 86 95706 98 60 92 95 10 95 15 96205 67 99 97502 11 95204 23 13 74 97106 08 12 12 31 21 82 13 14 13 21 40 29 89 20 21 14 30 95748 37 97 27 27 15 39 57 96145 96704 34 97534 16 95248 65 53 11 97141 40 17 57 73 61 19 48 47 18 66 95782 69 26 54 53 19 74 90 96277 34 61 59 20 83 98 84 96741 97168 97566 21 92 95807 92 48 75 72 22 95301 15 96300 56 82 78 23 10 23 08 63 89 85 24 19 32 16 70 96 91 25 27 40 24 96778 97202 98 26 36 95848 96331 85 09 97604 27 45 57 39 92 16 10 28 54 65 48 96800 23 16 29 62 73 55 07 30 23 30 95371 95881 96363 14 97236 97629
D 72 73 74 75 76 77 M Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes 31 95380 95890 96370 96822 97243 97635 32 89 98 78 29 50 42 33 97 95906 86 36 57 48 34 95406 14 94 43 64 54 35 15 23 96401 51 70 60 36 95424 31 09 96858 97277 67 37 32 39 17 65 84 97673 38 41 95947 24 72 91 79 39 50 56 32 79 97 85 40 95458 64 96440 87 97304 92 41 67 72 48 94 11 98 42 76 95980 55 96901 17 97704 43 84 88 63 08 24 10 44 93 96 96471 15 31 16 45 95501 96004 78 23 97337 23 46 10 13 86 30 44 29 47 19 21 94 96937 51 97735 48 27 29 96501 44 57 41 49 36 37 09 51 64 47 50 95545 96045 16 58 97371 53 51 53 53 24 65 77 60 52 62 61 96532 96973 84 97766 53 70 69 39 80 90 72 54 79 96077 47 87 97 78 55 95587 85 54 94 97404 84 56 96 94 62 97001 10 90 57 95604 96102 96599 08 17 96 58 13 10 77 15 23 97802 59 21 18 85 22 30 08 60 30 26 96592 97029 97437 14
D 78 79 80 81 82 83 M Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes 1 97820 98168 98485 98773 99030 99258 2 26 73 90 77 34 61 3 32 79 95 82 38 65 4 38 84 98500 86 42 68 5 44 90 05 91 46 72 6 98850 95 10 98795 99050 99275 7 56 98201 15 98800 54 79 8 62 06 20 04 58 82 9 68 12 98525 09 62 85 10 74 17 30 13 66 89 11 97880 22 35 18 99070 99293 12 86 98228 40 98822 74 96 13 92 34 45 27 78 99300 14 98 39 98550 31 82 03 15 97904 45 55 36 86 06 16 10 50 60 40 99090 10 17 16 98255 65 98844 94 13 18 22 61 70 49 98 99317 19 28 66 98575 53 99102 20 20 97934 72 80 58 06 22 21 39 77 85 62 09 27 22 45 98282 89 98866 13 30 23 51 88 94 71 17 99333 24 57 93 99 75 99121 37 25 97963 98 98604 79 25 40 26 69 98304 09 84 29 43 27 75 90 14 98888 33 47 28 80 14 18 92 36 99350 29 86 20 23 97 40 53 30 97992 98325 98628 98901 99144 57
D 78 79 80 81 82 83 M Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes 31 97998 98330 98633 98905 99148 99360 32 98004 36 38 10 52 63 33 09 41 42 14 55 67 34 15 46 47 18 59 70 35 21 51 52 22 63 73 36 27 98357 98657 98927 99167 99376 37 98032 62 61 31 70 80 38 38 67 66 35 74 83 39 44 72 71 39 78 8 40 50 78 76 44 82 89 41 55 98383 98680 98948 99185 99392 42 98061 88 85 52 89 96 43 67 93 90 56 93 99 44 72 98 94 60 96 99402 45 78 89404 99 65 99200 05 46 84 09 98704 98969 04 08 47 89 14 08 73 07 11 48 95 19 13 77 11 15 49 98101 24 18 81 15 99418 50 06 98429 22 85 99218 21 51 12 34 98727 98990 22 24 52 18 40 32 94 25 27 53 23 45 36 98 29 30 54 98129 50 41 99002 33 99433 55 34 98455 45 06 99236 36 56 40 60 98750 10 40 29 57 46 65 55 14 44 43 58 51 70 59 18 47 46 59 57 75 64 22 51 99449 60 98162 98480 98768 99025 99256 52
D 84 85 86 87 88 89 M Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes 1 99455 99622 99758 99864 99939 99985 2 58 24 60 65 40 85 3 61 27 62 67 41 86 4 64 29 64 68 42 86 5 67 32 66 70 43 87 6 99470 99934 99768 99871 99944 87 7 73 37 70 73 45 88 8 76 39 72 74 45 99988 9 79 41 74 76 46 88 10 82 44 76 77 47 89 11 99485 99646 99778 99878 99948 89 12 88 49 80 79 49 90 13 91 51 82 80 50 90 14 93 54 83 82 51 99991 15 96 56 85 83 52 91 16 99 99658 99787 99884 99953 91 17 99502 61 89 86 54 92 18 05 63 91 88 55 92 19 08 66 93 90 55 92 20 11 68 95 91 56 99992 21 14 99670 99797 99893 99957 93 22 99517 73 99 94 58 93 23 19 75 99800 95 59 94 24 22 77 02 97 60 94 25 25 80 04 98 61 94 26 28 99682 06 99 99961 99995 27 99531 84 08 99900 62 95 28 34 87 99809 02 63 95 29 36 89 11 03 64 65 30 39 91 13 99904 99964 96
D 84 85 86 87 88 89 M Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes Partes 31 99542 99694 99815 99906 99965 99996 32 45 96 17 07 66 96 33 47 98 18 08 67 96 34 50 99700 20 09 67 97 35 53 03 22 11 68 97 36 99556 05 99823 99912 99969 97 37 58 07 25 13 70 99997 38 61 09 27 14 70 97 39 64 99711 29 15 71 98 40 67 14 30 17 72 98 41 99569 16 99832 99918 99672 98 42 72 18 34 19 73 98 43 75 20 35 20 74 99998 44 77 99722 37 21 74 98 45 80 25 39 22 75 99 46 99583 27 99840 99924 99976 99 47 85 29 42 25 76 99 48 88 31 44 26 77 99 49 91 99733 45 27 78 99999 50 93 35 47 28 78 99 51 99596 37 99848 99929 79 99 52 98 39 50 30 80 99 53 99601 42 52 31 81 99 54 04 99744 53 32 81 99 55 06 46 55 33 82 99999 56 09 48 99856 99934 99982 99 57 11 50 58 35 83 99 58 99614 52 59 37 83 99 59 16 54 61 38 84 100000 60 19 56 62 99939 99684 100000
