11781 99849068 14199
GERARDS PRAYERS; OR, A DAYLIE PRACTICE OF PIETIE: Divided into foure parts. 1 Of Confession of Sinnes. 2 Of Thanksgiving, for benefits. 3 Of Petitions for our selues. 4 Of Supplicatiōs for our neigh∣bours. Written (originally) in the Latine Tongue, by Iohn Gerard, Doctor in Divinitie, and Superintendent of Heldeburg. Translated and revised By Ralph Winterton, Fellow of Kinges Colledge in Cambridge. Wherevnto is added a Morning and Eue∣ning Prayer, for a Familie. Printed in ABERDENE, by Edward Raban, 1638.
To the Reader. DIstressed soule! if thou conceav'st what 'tis To mount vnto the tower of endles blisse, Embrace this Work: It reacheth to the Skie; And higher, if beyond it ought doeth lie. Mans dull capacitie, weake humane sense; Wide worlds expansion, starres circumference, Can not it comprehend. Prayer passeth even To GODS Pavilion, to th' imperiall Heaven. That is the Golden Chayne, fixt to Gods eare▪ Knocke, & Hee'll open: Call, & He will heare. This, surelie; this is blessed lakobs Ladder, On which our soules climbe, by CHRIST, to CHRIST'S FATHER. Fayth is Prayers chiefe Attendant, CHRIST the Way: GOD'S Sprite both moues, and help? vs  to pray. True loue admittance gayn, humble confession Both helps Devotion, and procures Remission.
THE FIRST PART. Of Confession of Sinnes. THE ARGUMENT. The Meditation of our Sinnes, comprehen∣deth in it these two heads; Of originall and actuall sinnes. Actuall sinnes, are committed in thought, word, and deed; By the com∣mitting of evill, and by the omitting of good▪ Agaynst GOD, our neyghbour, and our selues. The offences of our youth are manie, and our daylie infirmities many. We are often tempted of the flesh, and we do often yeeld vnto it. Wee partake, many tymes, in other mens sinnes: and in many things wee are defectiue our selues. Wee are convicted of our sinnes, by all the creatures: and wee behold the sexeritie of GODS anger agaynst our sinnes, in the Passion and Death of CHRIST. PRAYER I. Hee weygheth, and considereth, the grievous∣nesse of originall sinne. HOlie GOD, and just Iudge! IPsal. 51. 5 know that I was conceaved and
borne in sinne: I know that I was for∣med 24, 4 of vncleane seede in the wombe of my mother: That poyson of sinne hath so corrupted and putrified my whole nature, that no facultie of my soule is free from the contagion thereof: That holie pledge of the divyne image, which was commit∣ted vnto mee in our first father, is perished in mee: There is no power at all in mee, to begin to come vnto the saving knowledge of thee, the feare of thee, confidence in thee, and loue of thee: There remaineth no sufficiencie in mee, to performe obedience vnto thy cōmandements: My will is averse from thy law: And the law of sinne in my members,Rom. 7, 23 beeing repugnant to the law of my mynde, maketh my whole nature be∣come corrupt and perverse. I wret∣ched and miserable man, doe feele the power of sinne cleaving fast to my members: I doe feele the yoke of wicked concupiscence grievouslie pressing me: For although I am rege∣nerate, and renewed by the spirit of▪Titus . 5 grace, in the laver of baptisme; yet am I not as yet whollie free from the
yoke and captivitie of sinne. For that roote of bitternesse, which lyeth hidden in mee, doeth alwayes desire to put forth new branches: The law of sinne reygning in my flesh doeth striue to captivate mee: I am full of doubts, distrust, and desire of myneMatt. 15, 19 owne honour: Out of my heart pro∣ceede wicked cogitations: Filthie thoughts defile mee throughout in thy sight: Out of that poysoned fountaine flow foorth rivers of poy∣son.Psal. 143. 2 Enter not, therefore, into judge∣ment with thy servant, O LORD; butPsal. 51. 1 bee propitiou vnto mee, according to thy great mercie: The deepe of my mise∣rie, calleth vpon the deepe of thy mer∣cie:Psal. 42.  For this vncleannesse and filthi∣nesse of my polluted nature, I offer vnto thee the most sacred conceptiō of thy Sonne: For mee hee was borne:Isai 9. 6 1 Cor. 1. 30 For mee therefore hee was concea∣ved. For me he was made sanctificatiō, & righteousnes: For me therefore he is become purification and cleannes. Throgh him, & for him, thy Sonne, haue mercie on mee, O thou most highest: and set not in the light of thyPsal. 90. 8 countenance that hidden corruption
that cleaveth to my nature; but looke vpon thy beloved Sonne, my Mediatour, and let his most holie and immaculate conception succour my miserie▪ Amen. PRAYER II. Hee recalleth to our memorie the sinnes of our youth. HOlie GOD, and just Iudge! Remember not the offences of myPsal. 25. 7 et. 31, 34 sinnes that are past▪ How manie ve∣nemous fruits hath the vicious roote of concupiscence, that is inherent in mee, brought foorth! In my chyldhood what an innumerable brood of actuall transgressions hath the evill of originall sinne hatched! The verie thoughts of my heart areGe. 6, 5 wicked and perverse, even from my chyldhood▪ yea, even from my tender infancie: For when I was an infant but of one day, I was in no wayes innocent before thee. As ma∣nie as the dayes of my lyfe are, so manie offences doe burden me; yea, manie more by farre in number,
seeing that the just man falleth seavenPro▪ 24, 1 tymes in one day: But if the just fall seaven tymes in one day, then I wretched and vnjust man, without doubt, haue fallen seaventie tymes seaven tymes. As my lyfe hath in∣creased, so hath the web of my sins increased: & as much as hath beene added to my lyfe by thy bountie; so much hath beene added to the course of my sinnes, by the wicked∣nesse of my corrupt nature. I exa∣mine my lyfe that is past: and what else doe I beholde, but a filthie stin∣king cloake of sinne? I attend vnto the light of thy precepts: and what doe I finde in the course of my yeares that are past, but darknesse and blindnesse? The tender flower of my youth ought to haue beene crowned with vertues, and offred to thee for a sweet savour: The best part of my age past did owe it selfe vnto thee, the best Creatour of nature: But the dirtie filth of my sinnes hath most foullie polluted the flower of my age, and the stinking mud of my offences hath in a wōderfull & mise∣rable māner defiled me. The first age
of man is amongst all the rest the fit∣test for the service of GOD: But I haue spent a good part thereof in the service of the devill. The memorie of many sinnes, which the vnbridled loosenesse of my youth hath commit∣ted, is set in my sight: and yet there are manie more which I cannot call to memorie. Who knoweth how oft heePsal. 29, 12 offendeth? cleanse thy servant from se∣cret faults. For these offences of my youth▪ I offer vnto thee (holie Fa∣ther) the most holie obedience, and perfect innocencie of thy Sonne,Phil. 2. 8 Luke , 42 who was obedient to thee vnto death, even the death of the crosse. When hee was but a chylde of twelue yeares olde, hee performed holie obedience vn∣to thee, and began to execute thy will with great alacritie. This obe∣dience I offer vnto thee (just Iudge) for a pryce and satisfaction for the manifolde disobedience of my youth. Amen. PRAYER III. Hee reckeneth vp our daylie falls, and slips.
HOlie God, and just Iudge! There is no man innocent in thy sight, no man free from the spote of sinne: And I am bereaved of that glorie, which I should bring with mee to judgement: I am stripped of that garment of innocencie, with which I ought to appeare arrayed beforeProv. 24, 16 Matt. 26.  thee: Seaven tymes, yea, and oftener everie houre I fall: seaventie tymes seaven tymes I sinne everie day. The spirit indeede is sometymes readie; but the flesh is alwayes weake: The in∣ward man flowrisheth, and is strong, but the outward man languisheth, and is weake: For I doe not the goodRom. 7. 1 that I would, but the evill that I would not. How often doe vaine, wicked, and impious cogitations aryse in my heart: How often doe vaine, vn∣profitable, and hurtfull wordes breake foorth! How often doe per∣verse, wicked, and vngodlie actions pollute mee! All my righ∣teousnesseIsai. 6▪ 6 is as the cloath of a men∣struous woman: Therefore, I dare not pleade for my righteousnesse be∣fore thee: But I humblie prostrate my selfe before thy most just tripu∣nall,
and out of the deeps doe I cry vnto thee: Lord, if thou shalt decreeP. 30. 3 to impute sinne, who shall abyde it? If thou wilt enter into judgement,Psal. 143. 3 who shall stand? If thou wilt call me to appeare according to the severity of thy justice, how shall I come be∣fore thee? If thou wilt exact a strictIob. . 3 account of my lyfe, I shall not bee able to answere thee one for a thousand: Therefore my mouth is stopt, and I▪ acknowledge before thee, that I haue deserved eternall torments; and withall I confesse with teares, that thou mayest justlie cast mee into prison for ever. Therefore, for these daylie sinnes of my lyfe, I offer vnto thee (holie Father) the most pre∣cious blood of thy Sonne, which was poured foorth on the altar of the crosse, which washeth me from all my sinnes. My sinnes which leade mee captiue, are manie in number, and most powerfull: But the ransome of thy Sonne is much more pre∣cious, and of more efficacie: Let that most perfect, plenarie, and ho∣lie pryce payed by Christ, obtayne for mee remission of sinnes. Amen.
PRAYER IV. Hee examineth our lyfe, according to the rule of the first table of the Commandements. HOlie God, and just Iudge! Thou.Exod. 20, 1 gavest vnto vs thy Law in mount Sinay, and thou wouldst haue it to be the rule of all our actions, words, and thoughts: That whatsoever is not squared by it, should in thy judgement bee accounted sinne. As often as I looke vpon that most cleare glasse, I perceaue mine owne filthinesse, and tremble everie part of mee. I ought to loue thee (O my God) aboue all thinges.: But how often doe I loue the world, and for∣get the loue of thee! I am bound to feare thee (O my God) aboue all things: But how often doe I con∣sent to sinne, and let thy feare slip out of my memorie! Thou requirest, that I should trust in thee (O my God) aboue all things: But how of∣ten in adversitie doeth my soule wa∣ver, and anxiouslie and carefullie doubt of thy fatherlie goodnesse! I am bound to obey thee (O my God)
with all my heart: But how often doeth my refractarie flesh resist the resolution of obedience, and leadeRom. 7.  mee captiue into the prison of sinne! My cogitations ought to bee holie. my desires pure and holie: But how often is the quyet state of my mynde troubled with vaine and impious cogitations! I ought to call vpon thee (O God) with all my heart: But how often doth my minde wan∣der in prayer, and doeth anxioustie doubt, whether her prayers be heard or no! How often am I remisse in prayer, aud demisse in conceaving confidence! How often doeth my tongue pray, and yet I doe not wor∣ship thee in spirit and in trueth! HowIohn 4. 23 profound oblivion of thy benefits doeth seize vpon mee! Thou doest dayly poure thy benefits vpon me in a loving manner; and yet I doe not daylie returne vnto thee thanksgi∣ving. How cold is my meditation of thy immense and infinite gifts be∣stowed vpon mee! What slender devotion is there for the most part in my heart! I vse thy gifts, and yet I doe not prayse thee who art the
giver. I sticke in the rivers, & come not to the fountaine. Thy word isIohn 6. 5 the word of spirit & lyfe: But I through sinne and corruption haue destroyed the worke of thy holie Spirit within mee. The sparks of a good resolution often inkindled, I as often extin∣guish: and yet I doe not sue to thee for increase of thy gifts. For these and all other my sinnes and defaults, I offer vnto thee (O my God) the most pure and perfect obedience of thy Sonne, who loved thee in the dayes of his incarnation, most per∣fectlie with his whole heart, & clea∣ved vnto thee most firmlie with all his soule: in whose deeds, words, and thoughts, there was found no blot of sinne, nor spot of the leastIsai 53. 9 offence. That which I want, by faith I draw from his fulnesse: Therefore for this thy wel-beloved Sonnes sake, haue mercie LORD vpon thy servant. Amen. PRAYER V. Hee considereth our lyfe, according to the rule of the second table of the commandements.
HOlie God▪ and just Iudge! It is thy eternall and immutable will, that I should honour with dueExod 20. 1 respect my Parents, and the Magi∣strates: But how often doe I thinke too meanlie of their authoritie! How often doe I in heart refuse to obey them! How often doe I traduce their infirmities! O how often doe I omit by serious prayers to further their safetie! I often cherish anger conceaved agaynst them, whereas I ought with patience to submit my selfe vnto them. Thy sacred will re∣quireth, that I should doe good to my neyghbour in all things, to my power: But how often doeth it irke mee to doe him good! How doeth it goe against my stomacke to for∣giue him? How often am I solicited by my flesh, to anger, hatred, envy, and brawling! how often doth the fire of my angrie heart burne within mee, although contentious wordes bee not heard without! Thy holie will, requireth that I should liue chastlie, modestlie, and temperately: But how often hath the loue of drun∣kennesse & lust, made my soule cap∣tiue
to sinne? How often doe fires of lust flame within mee, although my outward members be restrained! Hee that looketh vpon a woman, to lustMatt. 5▪ 28 after her, hath alreadie committed adulterie with her in his heart, sayeth the Text: How often therefore in the sight of GOD doe wee commit adulterie! The inordinate and im∣moderate vse of meat, drinke, and wedlocke, often stealeth vpon vs, and maketh vs appeare guiltie before thee▪ if thou wouldest enter into judgement with vs. Thy holie writ requireth, that in bargaining I de∣ceaue not my neighbour in anie sort; but that I rather further, and procure his good; that I traduce not his faults, but rather cover thē with the cloake of charitie; and that I doe not censure him rashlie & vnadvi∣sedlie: But how often doe I seeke mine own profite by injustice! How often doe I spend my judgemēt rash∣lie vpon my neighbour! Thy holie will requireth, that my spirit, minde, & soule be free from cōcupiscence: But how often doth my flesh solicite mee to sinne, and contaminateth my
spirit with wicked concupiscences! As a fountayne doeth abound with continuall bubbling of water: So doeth my heart alwayes swell with evill concupiscence. For these, and all other my sinnes and defects, I of∣fer vnto thee (most holie Father) the most perfect obedience of thy Sonne, who loved all men with per∣fectIsai 53, 9 1 Pet, 2, 22 loue, and in whose mouth was found no guyle, in whose words and deeds no aberrations, no corruption in na∣ture: To this propitiation I flee with true fayth, and by fayth I sucke outRom, 3. 28 of his wounds, as much as is suffi∣cient to justifie mee, and saue mee: Haue mercie on mee my GOD, and my Father. Amen. PRAYER VI. Hee showeth that wee often partake in other mens sinnes. HOlie God, and just Iudge! Thou hast committed vnto mee, not only the care of mine own soule, but also the care of my neighbours: But how often doeth my neyghbour through my negligence suffer great
losse of godlinesse! How often doe I neglect freelie and boldlie to chyde him, when hee sinneth! How often doe I, being hindred eyther by fa∣vour or feare, reproue him for his sinnes more slightlie than I ought!1 Tim, 2, 1 In pouring out prayers for his salva∣tion, I am too remisse; in reprehen∣ding his sinnes, I am too-too time∣rous; in furthering his salvation, I am too sloathfull: insomuch that thou mayest justly require at my handsEzek. 3, 21 the blood of my neyghbour that perisheth. If there were in mee a perfect and sincere loue of my neyghbour, sure∣lie from thence would proceed free∣dome in reproving of sinne. If the fire of sincere charitie did burne in my heart, surelie it would breake foorth more clearlie into the spiri∣tuall incense of prayers, to be made for the salvation of my neyghbours. For a man to pray for himselfe, it is a duetie of necessitie: But to pray for the salvation of his neyghbour, it is a deede of charitie: As often therefore, as I neglect to pray for the salvation of my neyghbour, so often I condemne my selfe for the
breach of the commandement of the loue of my neighbour. My neigh∣bour dieth the death of the bodie, and sorrow filleth all with lamenta∣tion and mourning; when as yet the death of the bodie bringeth no hurt to a godlie man, but rather giveth him a passage into a celestiall coun∣trey: My neighbour dieth the death of the soule, and behold, I am no∣thing troubled at it: I see him die, and grieue not at all; when as yet sinne is the true death of the soule, and bringeth with it the losse of the inestimable grace of God, & eternall lyfe. My neighbour delinquisheth against the king, who can onlie kill the bodie; and beholde, I seeke by all meanes his reconciliation: but hoe sinneth against the King of all kings, that can cast both bodie and souleMatt. 10. 28 into hell-fire: and yet I beholde it in securitie, and consider not that this offence is an infinite evill. My neighbour stumbleth at a stone; and I runne presentlie to saue him from a fall, or otherwise to raise him vp, if hee bee fallen: HeePsal. 118 22 stumbleth at the corner stone of our
salvation; and beholde, I securelie passe by it, and labour not with care and diligence to lift him vp againe. Mine owne sinnes are grievous anough: And yet I haue not beene afrayde to participate in other mens sinnes. Bee propitious (O God) vn∣to me, great sinner, and overburde∣ned. To thy mercie I flee in Christ, and through Christ promised vnto mee, I come vnto this lyfe, beeing dead in sinne: I come vnto this Way, having gone astray in the path of sinne: I come vnto this Salvation, being by reason of my sinne guiltie of damnation. Quicken mee, guide mee, and saue mee, thou which art my Life, my Way, and my Salva∣tion, for ever and ever, Amen. PRAYER VII. Hee showeth that wee are manie wayes convinced of sinne. HOlie God, and just Iudge! If I looke vp to heaven, I thinke with my selfe, that I haue manieLuke 15, 1 19▪ wayes offended thee, my GOD and Father: I haue sinned against
heaven and before thee, I am not worthie19 to bee called thy sonne. If I looke down vpon the earth, I thinke with my selfe, how I haue abused thy crea∣tures by my sinnes: I haue infinite∣lie abused not onlie the darknesse of the night, but also the light of the day, to worke workes of darknesse. If I looke vpon the examples of sin∣ners, vpon whom thou in thy just judgement hast inflicted punish∣ment, I finde that the weyght of my sinnes will counterpoise theirs. If I looke vpon the examples of the Sayncts, I finde that I come farre short of them in my holie service of thee. If I thinke vpon the Angell my keeper, I finde that often I put him to flight by my sinnes. If I thinke of the devills, I finde that I haue often given place to their sug∣gestions. If I weygh with my selfe the rigour of thy lawe, I finde that my lyfe is manie wayes irregu∣lar. If I looke vpon my selfe, I finde that the verie cogitatiōs of my heart doe accuse mee before thy judge∣ment. If I thinke vpon the houre of death to come, I finde that it is the
just reward of my sinnes, and (vnlesseRom. 6, 23 thou of thy meere mercie for Christ his sake shalt receaue mee) the gate and entrance into everlasting death. If I thinke vpon the judgement to come, I finde my deserts such, that thou mayest justlie call mee to the most exact account, and punish my sinnes according to the strict se∣veritie of thy law. If I thinke vpon hell, I finde that I haue deserved by my sinnes the most just punishment there, If I thinke vpon eternall lyfe, I finde that I haue by my sinnes just∣lie fallen away from all hope of at∣taynment. All thinges therefore con∣vince mee of my sinnes: Onlie thou thou, O my God, bee not thou ex∣treame against mee! To Christ thy beloved Sonne my onlie mediatour I betake my selfe: By him I most firmlie belieue I shall obtayne thy grace & remission of my sinnes. Thy creatures accuse me; the booke of my conscience accuseth mee; both the tables of thy divyne law accuse me; Satan accuseth mee day and night: But take thou vpon thee my patro∣nage. O sweet Iesus! To thee the
poore man is left bereft of all solace of the creatures. All my refuge is placed in thy satisfaction for my sinnes, and in thy intecession at the right hand of the Father for mee. My soule, take thou the wings of the morning, and, lyke a doue, hide thyCant. 2. 14 selfe in the clests of the rocke, that is, in the wounds of Christ thy Saviour. Hyde thy selfe in this rocke, till the anger of the LORD bee passed by: and thou shalt finde rest, and thou shalt finde protection, and thou shalt finde deliverance therein. AMEN. PRAYER VIII. Hee by the effects of contrition argueth vs to bee convicted of the haynousnesse of sinne. HOlie God, and just Iudge! My heart is contrite and humbled▪ my spirit is heavie, and in a great straite, by reason of the burden of my sinnes where with I am oppres∣sed. The cowrage of my heart hath failed, and the sharpnesse of my eyes is decayed. My heart is pressed, and
from thence gush out teares: My spi∣rit is oppressed, and I forget to take my bread: My heart is wounded, and from thence gusheth out blood, andPsal. 18▪  a fountayne of teares. Who knoweth how of thee offendeth? Who knoweth the sorrow of the heart, that is in a great straite by reason of offences? My soule is dry and broken in pieces, and thirsteth after the fountayne ofPsal. 4.  lyfe: O Christ feede mee with the dew of thy Spirit of grace. My heart that is in a great straite sigheth vnto thee: O thou true joye, giue vnto mee peace and quietnesse of heart,Rom. 5. 1 that beeing justified by sayth, I may haue peace with God. My heart condemnh mee: But doeIohn 3, 20 thou absolue me, who art greater thā my heart. My conscience accuseth mee: But doe thou absolue me, who hast fastned to the crosse the hand∣writingCol. 2, 14 of my cōscience. I offer vnto thee (ô my God) my contrite & hum∣bled heart, for a most acceptable sa∣crifice:Psal. 51. 17 I offer vnto thee my sighs as the messengers of true & serious cō∣trition: I offer vnto thee my teares as abundant witnesses of my vnfeigned
griefe. In my selfe I despare: In thee is my trust. In my selfe I faint: In thee I am refreshed. In my selfe I feele straitnesse: In thee againe I findeMatt, . 28 enlargment, I am troubled and bur∣dened overmuch: Thou shalt refreshPsal. 30.  mee, and giue rest vnto my soule. One deepe calleth vpon another: The deepe of my miserie calleth vponPsal. 230, 1 Mic. 7▪ 19 Psal. 38. 3 the deepe of thy mercie. Out of the deeps doe I cry vnto thee. Cast thou my sinnes into the deepe of the sea. There is no soundnesse in my flesh, by reason of thy anger: neyther is there anie rest to my bones by reason of my sinnes: For mine iniquities are gone ver my head, and become too heavie for mee. Cure my soule, thou heavenlie Physician, that I bee not swallowed vp of eter∣nall death. Take the burden of my sinnes from mee, thou that hast ta∣ken it vpon thy selfe on the crosse, that I despare not vnder the intolle∣rable burden thereof. Haue mercie on mee, thou fountaine of grace and mercie. Amen.
PRAYER IX. Hee declareth the number and great∣nesse of Gods benefits vnto vs, and the grievousnesse of our sinnes. HOlie God, and just Iudge! By how much the more benefites thou hast bestowed vpon mee, by so much the more I grieue, that I haue so often displeased thee, so loving a Father. As manie gifts as thou hast heaped vpon mee, so manie bonds of loue hast thou sent over vnto mee▪ Thou wouldest haue bound mee vnto thy selfe: But I haue for∣gotten thee and thy beneficiencie, and linked sinne vnto sinne. Father,Luke 15, 19 I haue sinned against heaven, and before thee: I am not worthie to bee called thy sinne: make mee as one of thy hired servants. I am altogether displeased with my selfe: Make thou mee al∣together to please thee. Thy large bountie, and wonderfull patience,Rom. 2, 4 haue often invited mee to repen∣tance: But hitherto I haue beene backward to come. Thou hast often called mee (O most Bountifull GOD) by the preaching of thy word, by the teaching of thy crea∣tures,
by the punishment of the crosse, and by inward inspiration: But I haue stopped the eares of my heart altogether at thy call. All the faculties of my soule, all the mem∣bers of my body are thy gifts: I ought therefore, with all the powers of my soule, and parts of my bodie, be rea∣die to doe thee all holie service, which is due vnto thee: But I haue made them (the more is my griefe) the weapons of iniquitie and vnrigh∣teousnesse. The breath which I fetch is thine; the aire which I sucke in is thine; the sūne, whose light I see day∣lie, is thyne: All these ought to haue beene vnto mee as furtherances and instruments to sanctitie of lyfe: But I haue abused them, the more is my griefe, to the slaverie of sinne. Thy creatures I should haue vsed to the glorie of thee the Creatour: But I haue wickedlie abused them to thy dishonour. In the light of the sunne I should haue put on the armour ofRom. 13.  light: But therein haue I committed the works of darknesse. How much soever is added vnto my lyfe, com∣meth all from thy bountie: Therefore
my whole life ought to be employed in thy service, on whom it doeth whollie depende: And yet I haue scarce bestowed the least part therof in thy service. As manie good inspi∣rations as I haue felt within mee, so manie hand-maydes of thy grace hast thou sent as ambassadours to invite mee most lovinglie to returne vnto thee by true repentance: But alace, how often haue I stubbornlie refused to giue them audience! But yet receaue him, who now at length returneth vnto thee with sighing & a contrite heart. Sprinkle mee with the blood of thy Sonne, that so being2 Cor 7.  purged from all the pollutions of the flesh and the spirit, I may becomePsal. 5. 7 whiter than snow, and with all thy elect prayse thee in the heavenlie Ierusalem world without ende. AMEN. PRAYER X. Hee considereth the severitie of GODS anger agaynst our sinnes, in the death and passion of CHRIST.
HOlie God, and just Iudge! I be∣holde thy Sonne hanging vpon the crosse, and pouring foorth plen∣tifull rivers of blood:  behold him; and behold, for verie terrour, I aint altogether. My innes are those yron nayls with which I haue boared his hands and his feete. My sinnes are those pricking thornes with which his most sacred head (which is to bee revered of the Angelicall powers) was crowned. My sinnes are those stinging thōgs, with which his most pure bodie (the proper temple of Divinitie) was scourged.Gen. . 33 A cruell wilde beast hath torne in pieces the heavenlie Ioseph, and embrued his coat with his blood: I miserable sinner am that wicked beast: for my sinnes did make an assault, and rush vpon thy most beloved Sonne. If thy most obedient Sonne is so vexed &Isai 53. 5 troubled for other mens sinnes: What cause hath the vndutifull and disobedient servant to feare in re∣gard of his owne sinnes! The wounds of my soule must needs bee great indeede and mortall, when as thy onelie begotten Sonne is so
miserablie smitten for to cure them. The disease of my soule must needs bee great indeed and mortall, when as the heavenlie Physician, and lyfe it selfe, doeth die vpon the crosse to cure it. I see the torment of his most holie soule: I heare the miserable exclamation of my most holie Sa∣viour vpon the crosse: For mee it is hee is so vexed: it is for my sinnes that hee complaineth, that hee is for∣sakenMatt. 27. 46 of GOD. If the weyght of other mens sinnes doeth so exceedinglie presse the Almightie Sonne of God, that it wringeth from him a bloodie sweat: How intollerable shall the anger of God bee, and how vnmea∣surable shall bee his wrath agaynst the vnprofitable servant! O thou drye and vnhappie wood, that hast alwayes served as a slaue the ever∣lasting fire of hell! What must thou feare, when thou seest these things come to passe in the greene wood! Christ is the greene tree: In the roote of his divinitie, in the loue of his humanitie, in the boughes of his vertues, in the leaue of his holie wordes, and in the fruit of
his good works. Hee is the cedar of chastitie, the vine of joyfulnesse, the palme of patience, and the oliue of mercie. But if the fire of the divyne anger inflameth this greene tree of lyfe: How much more shall it con∣sume the sinner lyke drye wood for his vnfruitfull workes! In what ca∣pitall and bloodie letters are my sins ingraven in the bodie of Christ! How conspicuous (O thou most just GOD) is thyne anger agaynst myne iniquities! How straite must that captivitie needes bee in which my soule was held, when so precious a ransome was payd for her delyve∣rie! How great must the staynes of my sinnes needs bee, when rivers of blood flow downe from the bodie of Christ to wash them away! O thou most just God, and yet most mercifull Father, consider what in∣dignities thy Sonne hath suffered for me▪ and forget the wicked works of me thy vnworthie servant! Behold the prounditie of his wounds; and overwhelme my sinnes in the pro∣found sea of thy mercie▪ Amen.
THE SECOND PART. Of thanksgiving for Benefits. THE ARGUMENT. The Meditation of Gods benefits, doeth ga∣ther out of the garden of nature, and of the Church, sundrie, & those most fragrant  of divine gifts: and recreating it selfe with the odour thereof, offereth againe to God the s∣crifices of the lips, for a savour of sweet smell. Now the immense and innumerable benefits of God, may be divided according to three articles of our Christian faith; God hath created, ré∣deemed, and sanctified vs. Hee heapeth his benefits on vs in this life, and hath promised greater vnto vs in the life that is everlasting. Hee conferreth vpon vs the gift of the minde, of the bodie, and of fortune, which wee ca externall goods. He preserveth vs from evil, and conserveth vs in good. That which is pt he covereth, that which is to come hee go∣verneth. His privatiue blessings are more than his positiue. In briee, woe can neyther in word expresse, nor in though conceaue, the number and dignitie of Gods benefits, which will afford vnto vs hereafter, in the world to come, most plentifull matter of eternall praise and thanksgiving.
PRAYER I. Hee giveth thanks for our for∣ming in the wombe, and for our nativitie. ALmightie, eternal GOD, Fa∣ther, Sonne, and holie Ghost: I giue thankes to thee, I prayse thee, I glorifie thee: because thyIob 10, 8 hands haue fashioned mee, and made mee whollie round about. Thou formedst mee lyke clay in my mothers wombe.9 Thou didst draw me lyke milke. Thou10 didst curdl mee lyke cheese: With11 flesh and skinne hast thou covered mee, and compacted mee together with bones and sinews. Thou hast gi∣ven12 mee lyfe and mercie, and thy visitation hath preserved my spirit. This thy great mercie bestowed vpon mee, I will celebrate with perpetuall prayses. Thy goodnesse I will sing of in continuall songs.Psal, 19 Thou didst protect mee in my mothers wombe. I will confesse vnto thee:13 For I am wonderfullie formed: Mar∣velous14 are thy workes, and that my soule knoweth right well. My bones15 are not had from thee, which thn didst make in secret, and deckedst me▪
with divers members in the lower parts of the earth. Thy eyes saw mee yet beeing imperfect, and in thy booke were all my members written, which day by day were fashioned when as yet there were none of them. How precious17 vnto me are thy thoughts O GOD! How great i the summe of them! If I18 goe about to reckon them, I finde them multiplied aboue the sands of the sea. Thou didst show thy mercie vnto mee before I vnderstood it: Thou didst prevent me with thy blessings before I did desire them: Thy bountie did embrace mee on everie side, before I could giue thankes for it. Thou art hee who not onlie didst forme mee wonderfullie in the wombe, but also didst take me out: Thou art my hope even from my mothers breast: Out of my mothers wombe I was cast vpon thee: Thou art my GOD from my mothers wombe. As often as I thinke vpon manie that haue beene extinct▪ and never came to the light of this lyfe: so often I admire and prayse thee for thy mercie, which brought mee out of that prison into the theatre
of this world safe and sound. How manie yeares are past in which I was not, and yet thou didst erect for mee this house of my bodie, and didst bring mee out of that bottomlesse pit, and the darknesse of my mothers wombe! Thou gavest vnto mee a reasonable soule: Thou madest mee a man, not a stone, or a serpent. To thee (O my God) for this thy mer∣cie bee honour and glorie for ever. AMEN. PRAYER II. Hee rendereth thankes for our sustentation. I Render thanks vnto thee, Almigh∣tie and mercifull God, for that thou hast sustained me from the very first dayes of my life. Naked I came into this world, and thou coveredst mee most graciouslie. Hungrie I en∣tred into this world, and thou hast hitherto fed me most bountifully. In thee I liue, moue, & haue my being: Without thee I fall agayne into no∣thing, and die. Through thee I owe, and moue my members:
Without thee I can neyther be par∣takerMatt. 5. 44 of life, or motion. Thyne is the sunne that giveth me light, which I see daylie with mine eyes. Thyne is the aire which I draw in with continuall breath. The night is thine, and the day is thine, whose entercourses serue for my labour and rest. Thyne is the earth, whose fruits do nowrish mee most plentifullie. Everie crea∣ture in heaven, ayre, earth, and sea is thine, and is appoynted for my vseHag. 2.  and service. Silver is thyne, and gold is thyne. Whatsoever is necessarie for the sustentation of this my present lyfe, all that I receaue from thy most liberall and bountifull hands. O GOD, how liberall art thou to man-kinde! All thinges thou crea∣tedst long agoe for the vse of man: All thinges thou doest as yet pre∣serue for the good of man. What∣soever thou, of thyne infinite good∣nesse, affordest to the other crea∣tures, thou affordest also vnto me; for as much as thou doest wonder∣fullie forme, furnish, and conserue them for my sake. Some of the creatures serue to obey mee; some
to nowrish me; some to cloathe me; some to cure mee; some to chastice mee: But all of them to teach and informe mee. Who can reckon vp those divers kindes of nutriments, which thou hast created, and doest as yet produce out of the earth vn∣to this day to nowrish vs? Who can enumerate those divers species of herbs, which thou doest everie yeare cause the earth to bring foorth to cure vs? Who can in wordes comprehende those sundrie kindes of living creatures, which were made for mans vse, and doe yet all serue him? To thee bee praise and honour for ever, who art the Crea∣tour and Conserver of all thinges! Without thee the true sunne, I should vanish away as doeth the shadow: Without thee the true life, I should presentlie depart out of this lyfe: Without thee the true beeing▪ I should suddenlie fall to nothing. To thee onlie is due, that I liue, moue, and haue my beeing. There∣fore to thee alone will I liue and adhere for ever. Amen.
PRAYER III. Hee rendereth thankes for our re∣demption wrought by Christ. I Owe vnto thee (O eternall and Almightie GOD) most heartie thankes, for that thou hast created mee when I was nothing: But much more for that thou hast redeemed mee when I was lost and condem∣ned. I did hang in the jawes of hell: And thou didst plucke mee out byColos 1, 14 the blood of thy Sonne. I was the slaue of Satan: but thy grace hath deli∣vered mee out of the power of the devill, and translated mee into the kingdome of Christ, I owe my selfe whollie vnto thee: because thou createdst mee whollie. My tongue ought alwayes to prayse thee▪ be∣cause thou gavest it vnto mee. My mouth ought alwayes to set foorth thy prayse: because the aire and breath which it draweth is thyne. My heart ought alwayes to cleaue vnto thee with perpetuall loue: because thou didst forme it. All my members ought to bee readie for thy service: because thou didst
wonderfully frame them, how many and how great soever they be. But if I owe my selfe whollie vnto thee, because thou createdst mee: What shal I repay vnto thee for redeeming mee out of slaverie and captivitie! The lost sheepe thou hast delivered out of the clawes of the infernall wolfe. The fugitiue slaue thou hast pluckt out of the prison of the devil. The lost grat thou hast sought outLuke 15. 8 with great carefulnesse. In Adam I fell, and thou hast erected mee: In Adam I was captivated in the bonds of sinne, but thou hast set mee at li∣bertie: In Adam I was lost, and againe thou hast saved mee: What am I worme, that thou shouldest be so solicitous for redeeming mee? What am I worme that thou shoul∣dest bee so prodigallie bountifull for saving mee? If thou hadst alto∣gether cast off our first parents after their fall, and hadst throwne them with all their posteritie out from the presence of thy glorie into the lowest pit of hell▪ there is none of vs could justlie complaine of anie wrong done vnto him: For they
had receaved, and wee had receaved for our deedes a just reward. What else could wee haue desired or expe∣cted from thee, who createdst vs af∣ter thine owne image, & furnishedst vs with power and sufficiencie to haue kept our innocencie. But in this thou didst manifest thy incompre∣hensible and vnspeakeable loue to∣wards vs, in that thou didst promise vnto our first parents after their fall, thy Sonne for their Redeemer, andGal. 4▪ 4 in the fulnesse of tyme didst sende him vnto vs, to call vs from death to lyfe, from sinne to righteousnesse, and from the infernall pit vnto ce∣lestiall glorie. O thou lover of man, whose delight is with the sonnes ofProv. 8▪ 3 men, who can worthilie set foorth the prayse of thy loue to man? Yea, who can in mynde conceaue the worthinesse thereof? These are the incomprehensible riches of thy goodnesse: This is the infinite trea∣sure of thy gifts, which the slender∣nesse of our capacitie and vnder∣standing cannot conceaue. Was a servant so deare vnto thee, that thy Sonne must bee delivered to death
for his redemption! Was an ene∣mie so much to bee beloved, that thou shouldest appoynt thy most beloved Sonne to be his redeemer! My soule is astonisht with the verie consideration of this thy goodnesse, and doth whollie turne and dissolue it selfe into the loue of thee. AMEN. PRAYER IV. Hee rendereth thankes for the in∣crntion of the Sonne. I Render thanks vnto thee. Ies Christ, thou alone Mediatour, and Redeemer of mankinde▪ for that thou hast in the fulnesse of tyme per∣sonallieGal. 4, 4 vnited vnto thee the true humane nature, and hast vouchsafed to bee borne of a Virgin. How greatIsai 7. 14 Heb. 2, 16 1 Tim 3. 16 is thy loue to man, in that thou d not assume the nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham! How great is the misterie of godlinesse, that thou beeing verie GOD▪ woul∣dest bee made manifest in the flesh▪ How great is the inclination of thy pitie, that descending from heave
for my sake, thou hast endured to bee borne of a Virgin! For mee, most vile creature, Creator Almigh∣tie, thou art become man. For mee, most abject servant, most glorious Lord, thou hast put on the shape of a servant, that by taking flesh vpon thee, thou mightest set myIsai . 6 flesh at libertie. To mee thou art borne: Whatsoever celestiall good there∣fore thou bringest with thee in thy Nativitie, shall▪ bee mine. To me thou art given: And therefore all thinges with thee. My nature in thee is more glorified, than it was in Adam dishonoured: For thou doest assume it into the Vnitie of thy Per∣son, whereas it was weakened with accidentall corruption onelie by Sa∣tan. Thou art flesh of my flesh, andEphes 5. 3 b of my bone. Thou art my bro∣ther: And what canst thou denye vnto mee, seeing thou art most nearlie joyned vnto mee in the same flesh & affection of brotherlie loue▪ Thou art the brydegroome, who ac∣cording to the good pleasure of thy heavenlie Father, hast coupled vnto thee by a personall league, the hu∣mane
nature, as a spouse: To the joy of those ntials I doe proclaime &Matt. 22. 2 thankfullie acknowledge that I my selfe am invited. I wonder now no more that the heaven, the earth, the sea, and all thinges that are in them were made for man by God, seeing that God himselfe would for man become man. Thou canst not vtter∣lie divorce mee, and cast mee away from thee, seeing that thou canst not deny that thou art a man, and there∣fore my brother. Thou canst not altogether forget mee, because thou hast grave mee in thye wIsai 49▪ 16 hands: For the verie communion of the flesh doeth daylie and conti∣nuallie put thee in mynde of mee. Thou canst not altogether forsake mee, seeing that it hath pleased thee to conoyne vnto thee tire humane nature, in a most neare bond of per∣sonall vnion. Although therefore my sinnes doe hinder mee, yet the communion of nature doeth not re∣pell mee. I will adhere whollie vnto thee, because thou hast whollie assu∣med mee whollie. Amen.
PRAYER V. Hee rendereth thankes for Christs passion. HOw great thankes doe I owe vnto thee. O most holie Iesu, for that thou hast taken vpon thee the punishment of my sinnes, and hast endured hunger, thirst, cold, wearinesse, reproaches, persecutiōs, sorrowes, povertie, bonds, whips, pricking of thorns; yea, and that most bitter death of the crosse for mee sinner! How great is the flame of thy loue which forced thee of thyne owne accord to throwe thy selfe into that sea of passions, and that for mee most vile and vnthank∣full servant! Thy innocencie and righteousnesse made thee free from all sufferings: But thy infinite and vnspeakable loue made thee debter and guiltie in my roome. It is I that trespassed, and thou makest satisfa∣ction. It is I that committed rapine, and thou makest restitution. It is I that sinned, and thou vndergoest the passion. O Iesu most benigne, I acknowledge the bowels of thy mercie and the fierie heat of loue.
Thou seemest to loue me more than thy selfe, seeing thou deliverest vp thy selfe for mee. O most innocent Iesu, what hast thou to doe with the sentence of death? O thou most beautifull amongst the sonnes of mē, what hast thou to doe with spittings vpon thee? O thou most righteous, what hast thou to doe with whips and bonds? These thinges belong not vnto thee: They are all due vnto mee: But thou of thine vnspeakable loue didst descend into the prison of this world, and take vpon thee the shape of a servant, and most willing∣lie vndergoe the punishment that was due vnto mee. I was for my sinnes to bee adjudged to the lake that burneth with everlasting fire: But thou by the fire of loue beeing burnt vpon the altar of the crosse, doest free mee from it. I was to bee cast away for my sinnes from the face of my heavenlie Father: And thou for my sake complainest that thou art forsaken of thy heavenly Fa∣ther.Matt. 7, 46 I was to bee tormented of the devil & his angels for ever: and thou of thine infinite loue dost deliver thy
selfe vnto the ministers of Satan to be afflicted and crucified for me, As many Instruments as I see of thy pas∣sion, so manie tokens doe I see of thy loue towards mee: For my sinnes are those bonds, those whips, and those thorns which afflicted thee, al which of thine vnspeakable loue thou en∣duredst for mee. Thy loue was not yet satisfied with taking my flesh vpon thee: but thou wouldest make it as yet more manifest, by that most bitter passion of thy soule and bodie. Who am I, most mightie Lord, that for mee disobedient ser∣vant, thou thy selfe wouldst become a servant so manie yeares? Who am I, most beautifull Brydegroome, that for mee the most filthie vassall of sinne, and whore of the devill, thou hast not refused to die? Who am I, most bountifull Creatour, that for mee most vile creature, thou hast not beene afrayde of the passion of the crosse? I am to thee, most lo∣ving Brydegroome, the true spouse of blood, for whom thou doest poure foorth such plentie of blood. I am to thee, most beautifull Lillie, a thorne
indeede that is full of prickles. It is I that layde vpon thee a heavie and sharpe burthen, with the weyght whereof thou wast so squeezed, that drops of blood did distill aboundant∣lie from thy sacred bodie. To thee, Lord Iesu, my alone redeemer and Mediator, for this thine vnspeakable loue will I sing prayses for ever. AMEN. PRAYER VI. Hee rendereth thankes for our calling by the word. VNto thee, O Lord my God, is most due, all praise, honour, and thanksgiving, for that thou wouldest by the preaching of thy word make manifest vnto vs that thy Fatherlie will and determinate counsell con∣cerning our salvation: By nature Ephes 5. 8 Luke 1. 79 are darknesse; wee sit in darknesse, and in the region of the shadow of death: But thou by the most cleare light of the Gospell doest dispell this dark∣nesse. In thy light doe we see light; thatPsal, 36▪ 11 is, in the light of thy word wee see
true light that lighteneth everie oneIohn 1, 9. that commeth into this world. What vse were there of a treasure that is hid, and a light that is put vnder aMatt, 5. 15 bushell? I doe therefore declare with thankfulnesse that great benefite, in that thou hast by the word of thy Gospell revealed vnto vs that trea∣sure of benefits in thy Sonne. HowIsai 52  Nah▪ 1. 15 beautifull are the feete of those that bring good tydings, and tell of salvation! This peace of conscience, and salva∣tion of the soule, by the preaching ofRom. 10. 15 the Gospell thou doest yet declare vn∣to vs, and call vs vnto the kingdome of thy Sonne. I was led into the by-paths of errours, as it were a weake and miserable sheepe: But thou hast called mee into the way again by the preaching of thy word. I was condemned and vtterlie lost: But thou in the word of thy Gospell doest offer vnto mee the benefits of Christ; and in the benefits of Christ, thy grace; and in thy grace, remis∣sion of sinnes; and in remission of sinnes, righteousnesse; and in righ∣teousnesse, salvation and life everla∣sting. Who can sufficientlie in words
expresse those bowels of thy mercie? yea, who can in mynde conceaue the greatnesse, and the riches of thy goodnesse? The mysterie of our sal∣vationRom. 11. 25 kept secret from eternitie, by the manifestation of thy Gospel thou doest lay open vnto vs. The counsels which thou hadst concerning our peace before the foundations of the world were layde, thou doest re∣veale vnto vs by the preaching of thyPsal, 119 105 word, which is a lanthorne vnto our feete, whiles wee goe through this darksome valley into light everla∣sting. What had it profited vs to haue beene borne, vnlesse by Christ thou hadst delivered vs when wee were captivated through sinne? What had it profited vs to haue beene redeemed, vnlesse thou hadst by thy word declared vnto vs the great benefit of our redemption?ai 5,  Revel 3▪ 20 Thou doest spread foorththy hands vnto vs all the day. Thou knockest at the ga of our heart everie day, & callest vs all vnto thee by thy word. O Lord most benigne, how manie thousand thousands of men doe liue in the blindnesse of Gentilisme, and in er∣rours,
and haue not seene that light of thy heavenlie word which thy bountie hath granted vs of all men most vnthankfull! Alace, how often through our contempt and vnthank∣fulnesse doe wee deserue that thouRevel , 5 Wisd▪ 11. 1 shouldest take from vs the candlesticke of thy word! But thou of thy long patience doest make as if thou sawest not our sinnes; & of thy vnspeakable mercie doest yet continue vnto vs that most holie pledge, and most pre∣cious treasure of thy word. For which thy great benefite wee ren∣der vnto thee eternall thankes, and wee humblie beseech thee to con∣tinue it still vnto vs. Amen. PRAYER VII. Hee rendereth thankes vnto God for the expectation of our con∣version. I Render vnto thee, most merci∣full Father, immortall thankes▪ for that thou wouldest with so great patience and long-suffering expect my conversion; and hast brought mee out of the path of sinne, vnto
the fellowship of thy kingdome. How great is thy long-suffering, thatRom. , 4 thou hast not cast mee away from thy face, and thrust mee downe in∣to everlasting torments, whereas I haue deserved it a thousand times! How manie thousands hath death prevented before they could attaine vnto true repentance! How manie sinners hath the devill made obsti∣nate, that they might not obtaine, forgivenesse of their sinnes! There was no distinction in nature be∣tweene mee and them; onelie thy goodnesse and long-suffering: My offence was no lesse than theirs; but thy grace did abound. Thy mercie stroue with my miserie: I went on in my sinne; and thou didst goe on in thy mercie: I differred my con∣version; and thou didst differre my punishment: I went astray and thou didst call mee: I refused to come; and still thou didst expect mee. This thy goodnesse, most indulgent Fa∣ther, I cannot extoll with sufficient prayses. This thy long patience, most mercifull GOD, I cannot re∣compense with anie merits. Thou
didst preserue mee from manie sins, whereinto the corruption of the flesh, the deceat of the world, and the perswasion of the devill, would haue throwne mee headlong as well as others. Neyther hast thou onelie kept mee from falling into sinne; but also hast most graciouslie expected my conversion from sinne, into which I had fallen. I finde thee more mercifull than I am sinfull: I sinned; and thou madest as if thou didst not see it▪ I contayned not my selfe from wickednesse; and yet thou didst abstaine from punishment. IBer∣nard. in his 2 Serm. of the seavē lous. did long tyme prolong my iniquitie, and thou didst prolong thy pitie. What were then my deserts? Sure∣lie evill, and the worst of evills, to wit, my sinnes, manie in number, most grievous for weyght, and de∣testable for varietie. Therefore to thy grace and bountie alone doe I attribute it, that thou hast so long expected my conversion, and deli∣vered my soule out of the sares of sinne. To thee, O Lord, bee praise, honour, and glorie, for ever and ever. Amen.
PRAYER VIII. Hee rendereth thankes for our conversion. I Render thankes vnto thee, my God, for that thou hast converted my heart that was hard, and knew not how to repent; and for that thou hast taken from me my stonie heart, and given mee an heart of flesh. I had of my selfe power to sinne: But I had not of my selfe power to ryse againe to repentance. I could goe astray of my selfe: But I could not returne againe into the way without thee. For even as hee that is borneGra∣at in the 2 book of the life of Chr. cap, 2 crooked from his mothers wombe, cannot bee made straight by naturall meanes, but onlie by divyne and su∣pernaturall power: So my soule being by nature crooked and prone to sinne, and the loue of earthlie things, could by no humane power, but thy grace onlie, bee rectified, and lifted vp to the loue of thee▪ & heavenly things. I could deforme my selfe by my sinnes most foullie: But thou onlie couldst reforme mee. As the Ethiopian cannot change hisIerm 13, 23. Skinne, nor the Leopard his Spots: So
neyther can I doe that which is good, beeing by nature addicted vnto the loue of that which is evill. Thou my God didst convert mee, and I was converted; and when I was con∣verted,Ierm. 31.  then I repented; and when I was instructed, then I smote myEphes 2,  thigh. I was dead in sinne: And thou didst quicken mee. As much power as a dead man hath to raise himselfe: So much had I to convert my selfe. Vnlesse thou hadst drawne mee, I had never come vnto thee; vnlesse thou hadst stirred mee vp, I had never watched vnto thee; vnlesse thou hadst illuminated mee, I had never seene thee. My sinnes were more sweete vnto mee than honey and the honey combe: But I am to thanke thee, that now they are sharpe and bitter vnto mee; for thou hast given mee a spirituall taste. The workes of vertue were more bitter vnto mee than gall and aloes: But I am to thanke thee that now they are become pleasant and sweet; for thou hast by thy Spi∣rit changed the corrupt judgementIsai 53. ▪ of my flesh. I went astray as a sheepe
that is lost, and declined to the wayGa∣nat▪ out of Au∣g∣ines Me∣dica∣tions▪ of iniquitie: But thou, which art the good sheepherd, hast found me out, and brought mee agayne vnto the flocke of thy Sayncts. It was late ere I knew thee; for there was a great & darksome clowde of vanitie before mine eyes, which would not suffer mee to see the light of the trueth: It was late ere I saw the true light; be∣cause I was blinde and loved blind∣nesse, and walked through the dark∣nesse of sinne, into the dark∣nesse of hell: But thou hast illumi∣nated mee; thou soughtest me, when I sought not thee: thou calledst me, when I called not vpon thee; thou convertedst mee, when I was not converted vnto thee; and thou saydst with a most powerfull voyce▪ Let there bee light in the inward parts of his heart, and there was a light; and I saw thy light, and I knew mine owne blindnesse. For this thy immense and infinite benefite, I will prayse thy Name for ever and ever. AMEN.
PRAYER IX. Hee rendereth thankes for the for∣givenesse of sinnes. I Owe and render vnto thee, eter∣nall and mercifull GOD, great thankes, for that thou hast not re∣jectedIohn 6. 37 mee when I came vnto thee, but diddest most readilie receaue mee, and most mercifullie forgiue mee all my sinnes. I was that prodigall sonne, most indulgent Father, I was that prodigall sonne, that by livingLuke 15. 13 ritusle wasted his fathers substance: For I haue defiled the gifts of na∣ture; I haue refused the gifts of grace; I haue deprived my selfe of the gifts of glorie, I was naked and destitute of all good thinges: and thou coveredst and enrichedst mee, with the robe of righteousnesse: I was lost and condemned: and thou of thy free grace hast bestowed vpon mee eternall salvation. Thou of thyne ardent mercie didst em∣brace mee and kisse mee, in sen∣dingIohn 1. 8 C▪ ▪  thy most beloved Sonne that is in thy bosome, and thy holie Spirit, which is the kisse of thy mouth▪ as
ample witnesses of thyne infinite loue: Thou cloathedst mee with my first robe, in restoring me my former innocencie. Thou gavest mee a ring for my hand, by sealing mee with thy Spirit of grace. Thou didst put shoes vpon my feete, by arming meeEphes 6, 25 Luke 5. 23 with the Gospell of peace. Thou killedst the fat calfe for mee, by delyvering thy most deare Sonne to death for mee. Thou didst cause mee to feast and make merrie by restoring the joye of heart, and the true peace of conscience vnto mee. I was dead; and through thee I was restored to lyfe: I went astray; and through thee I came agayne into the way: I was consumed with povertie; and through thee I entred agayne into my former possession. Thou migh∣test in thy just judgement haue rejected mee, seeing that I was pol∣luted with so manie sinnes, covered with so manie offences, and corrup∣ted with so manie iniquities: But thy mercie did abound aboue my sins;Rom. 5, 21 thy goodnesse was greater thā mine iniquitie. How often haue I shut the gate of my heart when thou diddest
knocke! Therefore when I knocked thou mightest most justlie haue shut the doore of mercie agaynst mee. How often haue I stopt mine eares, that I might not heare thy voyce! Therefore when I sighed vnto thee, thou mightest most justlie haue stop∣ped thyne eares, and not hearke∣ned vnto my voyce. But thy grace was more aboundant than all my sinne and transgression. Thou didstIsai 65▪  receaue mee with thy handes spread foorth, and put away my iniquities as it were a clowde, and cast all Isai 38▪ ▪ sinnes behind thy backe. Thou remem∣brest my sinnes no more, but recea∣vest me into the most ample bosome of thy mercie. For this thy inesti∣mable benefite, I will giue thankes vnto thee for ever. Amen. PRAYER X. Hee rendereth thankes vnto God for conserving vs in that which is good. TO thee, LORD, bee honour▪ andReve▪ 6.  glorie, and blessing, and thanks∣giving:
for that thou hast not onlie in mercie receaved mee vpon my repentance; but also hast ena∣bled mee to abstaine from sinne, and liue more reformedlie. What should it profit a man, to bee free from his sicknesse, and presentlie to fall in∣to a worse relapse? What should it profite to bee absolved from sins past, vnlesse grace bee conferred to leade a godlie lyfe? Thou, God most faithfull, hast showed all the parts and offices of a faythfull and skilfull Physician in the cure of my souls wounds. My wounds were deadlie, and thou didst cure them by the wounds of thy Sonne: But there was cause to feare, that the wounds that were healed might waxe rawe agayne: And thou by the grace of thy holie Spirit, as it were a fomentation, hast hindred it. How manie bee those, that af∣ter remission of sinnes obtayned, returne agayne to their former▪ course of lyfe, and reiterating their sinnes, more grievouslie offende GOD! Alace, how manie doe we see, that beeing freed from the
yoke of sinne, returne to their for∣mer captivitie, and beeing brought out of the spirituall Aegypt, looke backe agayne to the pots! They2 Pet. 2. 20 haue fled from the pollutions of the world, by the knowledge of CHRIST, and doe wallow agayne in the same, by22 repeating the former conversa∣tion of their most wicked lyfe. They were freed out of the bonds of Satan by their conversion, and agayne are held entangled in the same, by the delusion of wicked spirits: Surelie, their latter ende is worse than the beginning: And it2 Pet▪ 2. 21 had beene better for them never to haue knowne the way of righteousnesse, than having knowne it, to turne away from the path of the holie commandements, which were delivered vnto them. These22 are the dogs that returne againe to their vomite; and sowes that after their washing, wallow agayne in the myre. Whatsoever hath happened vnto them, might haue happened vnto me; but that it hath pleased thee by the grace of thy power, & the effica∣cie of thy holie Spirit, to enable me to continue in that which is good.
The same wicked spirit that van∣quished them, assaulted mee: The same world that seduced them, en∣ticed mee: The same flesh that over∣came them, allured mee: Onlie thy grace protected mee against their as∣saults, and furnished me with power sufficient for victorie. Thy strength2 Cor 12. 9 was powerfull in my weaknesse: From thee the strength of the Spirit des∣cended, with which I was enabled to bridle the assaults of the flesh. Whatsoever good there is in mee, it descendeth all from thee, who art the fountaine of all good: For in me by nature there is nothing but sin. Therefore, as manie good workes as I finde in mee, which notwith∣standing are impure and imperfect, by reason of my flesh; so manie gifts they are of thy grace, I must needs confesse. For this thine inestimable gift conferred vpon mee, I will giue thee thankes for ever. Amen. PRAYER XI. Hee rendereth thankes for all the gifts of the soule and bodie, and for externall goods.
I Render vnto thee, eternall and mercifull God, as it is most due, eternall thankes: for that thou hast not onelie made mee a bodie and a soule; but moreover hast furnished mee with sundrie gifts of the soule and bodie, and also with externall goods. Thou which art wisedome it selfe, teachest men all knowledge: IfPsal. 94. 10 therefore I know anie good, it is a demonstration of thyne aboundant grace, towards mee. Without thy light, my minde is darksome: With∣out thy grace, my will is captiue. If there bee in mee eyther anie wit or prudence, it is all to bee attributed to thy clemencie. Wisedome is the eye of the soule, and divyne grace is the eye of wisedome. Whatsoever wee know, we know eyther by the light of nature, or by the revelation of thy word: But from thee, O thou light of eternall wisedome, doeth the illumination of nature spring: From thee also doeth the re∣velatiō of the word come: Therfore whatsoever wee know, descendeth vnto vs as thy gift. Thou, O indefi∣cient fountayne of lyfe, art my lyfe,
and the length of my dayes. Thou, O eternall health it selfe, art the strength of my body, and the vigour of my vertue. Man liveth not byMatt. 4. 4 bread onelie, but by everie word that proceedeth out of thy mouth: So then man is not preserved in health and strength by bread onlie; neither is he preserved from diseases by Phy∣sicke onlie: but by everie word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God. Tranquillitie of the mynde preserveth the health of the bodie: And true godlinesse begetteth tran∣quillitie of the conscience. From thee (O thou chiefe good) all true godlinesse, all tranquillitie of the mynde without disturbance, and all wished-for health of bodie doeth come. Moreover, whatsoever ex∣ternall good I doe possesse, all that I owe vnto thy liberalitie and boun∣tie. A crust of bread is not due vnto my deserts: How much lesse then are all these externall goods which thou doest heap vpon mee? They are called indeede the gifts of for∣tune: But they are in deede and in trueth the gifts of thy grace. There
is nothing more blessed than to doe good, and to bee liberall to others: And thou hast made mee partaker of this blessednesse, by bestowing liberallie these outward goods vpon mee. Thou hast sowed in mee the seede of thy grace, that from thence there may aryse to others an har∣vest of liberalitie and beneficencie. Thou hast committed manie thinges vnto mee, as vnto a steward, that I might haue wherewithall to doe good to my fellow-servants. From thee the fountaine of all good, there descendeth vpon mee streames of goods: Whatsoever I am, whatsoe∣ver I possesse, whatsoever I bestow, dependeth all I confesse, vpon thy bountie. For this thine inestimable mercie, I will giue thee thankes for ever. Amen. PRAYER XII. Hee rendereth thankes for the sacra∣ment of Baptisme. TO thee, O eternall, and merci∣full God, Father, Sonne, and holie Ghost, I render humble
thanks for that thou hast washed me in the holie laver of baptisme from all my sinnes: and for that thou hast receaved mee into the covenant of grace, & made me an heire of ever∣lasting lyfe. I acknowledge it is thy gift that I was borne of Christian parents, and by them brought vnto this heavenlie fount. How manie thousands of infants are borne in Gentilisme, and without this sacra∣ment doe die in their sinnes! There is no difference in nature betweene mee and them: Onlie thy supera∣boundant grace hath made a diffe∣rence. I was joyned with them in communion of sinne: But I was se∣parated from them by participation of thy grace. How great is thy good∣nesse, that thou diddest finde mee,Matt, 7. 7 when I sought thee not, that thou didst heare mee, before I asked, that thou didst open vnto mee, before I knockt. This thy mercie exceedeth all prayse, yea, and all admiration. I was baptized in thy holie Name, thyMatt. 8. 19 Name for mee was called vpon. Therefore, I am receaved into the heavenlie familie, being made the
sonne of my heavenlie Father, the brother of Christ, and the temple of the holie Ghost. This is an holie and heavenlie laver: In it therefore, I am washed and purged from all my vncleannesse. It is the laver of rege∣neration & renovation: By it there∣fore I am regenerated and renewed by the grace of the holie Ghost. Whatsoever Christ my Saviour me∣rited by his most holie obedience, and by the effusion of his most pre∣cious blood: of all that hee hath left the saving fount of baptisme as a pledge. Therefore, the conferring of baptisme, is the besprinkling of the blood of Christ. That precious Iohn 1. 7 Psal, 51. 7 blood of Christ doeth make mee cleane from all my sinnes, and maketh mee whiter than snow in the sight of God. O eternall God, thou hast made an eternall covenant with mee in bap∣tisme; vnto which I haue alwayes recourse by true and serious repen∣tance. Thou hast betroathed mee vn∣toHos 2. 19 thee for ever in judgement and righteousnesse, in grace and mercie: Thou hast given mee an earnest andEphes 1. 14 pledge of thy Spirit in baptisme:
Therefore, thou wilt not cast mee away from thy face; but beeing mindfull of thy promise, thou wilt leade mee into the joyes of the ce∣lestiall marriage. As at the baptisme of Christ my Mediatour and head,Matt. 3, 16 the heavens were opened: So by the communion of the same baptisme, thou hast opened vnto mee the gate of paradise. As at the baptisme of Christ, the holie Ghost descended vpon him, and a voyce from hea∣ven did testifie that hee was the be∣loved Sonne of GOD: So by the same communion of the same bap∣tisme, I am made a partaker of the holie Ghost, and adopted to bee a sonne of GOD. For which inesti∣mable benefite, I will giue thankes vnto thee, my GOD, for ever. AMEN. PRAYER XIII. Hee rendereth thankes for the sacra∣ment of the Lords Supper. HOw great thanks doe Iowe vn∣to thee, most high God, for that in the most sacred mysterie of
the supper, thou doest feed me with the bodie and blood of thy Sonne! What is there in heaven or in earth of more pryce and excellencie, than that bodie which is vnited to thy Sonne personallie? What more cer∣taine testimonie and pledge of thy grace can there bee, than the pre∣cious blood of thy Sonne poured out for my sinnes, on the altar of the crosse? The verie pryce of my redemption thou bestowest vpon mee, that I may haue a most cer∣taine testimonie of thy grace to∣wards me. As often as I fall through my sinnes from the covenant of baptisme: So often by true repen∣tance, and the saving vse of this sup∣per, I am restored vnto it agayne. It is a sacrament of the new Testa∣ment, and it alwayes enricheth mee with new gifts of the Spirit. In this bodie lyfe it selfe dwelleth, and therefore it refresheth me, & quick∣neth mee vnto everlasting lyfe. By the effusion of this blood, satisfa∣ction is made for our finnes: And therefore by the drinking thereof, the remission of my sinnes is con∣firmed
vnto mee. Christ sayeth it, Trueth it selfe sayeth it; WhosoeverIohn 6. 54 shall eate my flesh, and drinke my blood, hath eternall lyfe▪ and I will raise him vp at the last day, that is, to the lyfe of50 glorie. For this is the bread of lyfe which descended from heaven, that whosoever shall eate thereof, may not die, but haue everlasting lyfe. It is the eating by fayth that Christ so commendeth. which must needs be added vnto the sacramentall eating▪ that so that which was appoynted to lyfe, may bee receaved by vs vn▪ to lyfe. I come therefore with true fayth vnto this heavenlie banquet, beeing firmlie perswaded, that the bodie which I eate, was delivered vnto death for mee, and the blood which I drinke, was poured foorth for my sinnes. I cannot in anie wise doubt of the remissiō of my sinnes, when as it is confirmed by the par∣ticipation of the pryce which was offered for my sinnes. I cannot in anie wise doubt of Christ his dwel∣ling in mee, when hee sealeth vnto mee the same by the communion of his bodie and blood. I cannot in
anie wise doubt of the assistance of the holie Spirit, when my Infirmitie is strengthened with such safegard. I am not afrayde of Satans assaults, when as this Angelicall foode doeth make mee strong to fight. I am notHilar. in his 8 book of the Tri∣nitie. pag. 141 afrayde of the allurements of the flesh, when as this quickning and spirituall foode doeth corroborate mee by the vertue of the Spirit. These taken and drunke doe make Christ to dwell in mee, and mee in Christ. The good sheepherd will not suffer the sheepe that is fed with his owne bodie and blood, to bee devoured by the infernall wolfe: Neyther will the power of the Spi∣rit suffer mee to bee overcome by the weaknesse of the flesh. To thee (O Saviour most benigne) bee prayse, honour, and thanksgiving, for ever and ever. Amen. PRAYER XIV. Hee rndreth thankes to God, for preserving vs from sun∣drie evills.
TO thee (O eternall and merci∣full GOD) I render eternall thankes, for that thou hast hitherto preserved mee from infinite evills and dangers, and hast kept me safe by the guard of thy holie Angells. Thy privatiue blessings, by which thou doest keepe mee from evill, are more in number than thy positiue, by which thou doest conferre good vpon mee. As manie evills of soule and bodie as I see in others; so ma∣nie tokens doe I see of thy mercie towards mee: For my deliverance from those evills is to be attributed as due onlie to thy goodnesse. How great is the power of the devil! How great is his subtiltie! As often there∣fore as that malignant and most sub∣tile spirit, and our most potent ad∣versarie doeth labour to doe vs anie mischiefe; so often by the buckler of thy benignitie and by the guard of the holie Angells being protected, I haue beene able to escape his nets. But who can reckon vp the treache∣rous assaults and invasions of the devill? Who can therefore reckon vp the riches of thy bountie? When
redst, that I may bee able to endure and overcome all the violent inva∣sions of the infernall powers. Let my last word in this lyfe be the same with which thou didst consummate all vpon the crosse: and receaue myLuke 23 46 soule, which thou hast redeemed with so deare a pryce, when I shall commend it into thy hands. Let a blessed resurrection follow a blessed death: In that great day of thy se∣vere judgement, delyver mee from that cruell sentence, thou which in my lyfe didst with thy readie helpe protect mee. Let my sinnes bee cove∣redPsal, 32.  Mic. 7. 19 1 Sam▪ 25, 2 with the shadow of thy grace, and overwhelmed in the bottome of the sea. Let my soule bee bound vp in the bundle of the living, that with all the elect I may come into the fellowship of everlasting joye. Amen.
THE FOURTH PART. Of Supplications for others. THE ARGUMENT. The meditation of our neyghbours wants and indigencies, concerneth the common good & welfare of the Church & common-wealth, and maketh vs looke vpon others miseries as our owne. This is the first of true and sincere charitie, which bindeth vs all together into one mysticall bodie, vnder one head, which is Christ; and commendeth vnto us a serious care of the whole Church, and of all the par∣ticular members thereof. That is not a true member of the bodie, which laboureth not, as much as in it lyeth, to preserue in safetie the whole structure of the bodie: That is not a true member of the bodie, which suffereth not with a fellow-member that suffereth. And the same reason is of force in the mysticall bodie of Christ. Whosoever therefore is a true and a living member of the Christian Church let him daylie pray: For the conserva∣tion
of the word: For pastors and people: For magistrates and subjects: and For the oeconomicall and houshold estate. For these are those three Hierarchies, and holie magistracies, appoynted by GOD for the safe∣tie and preservation of this lyfe, and for the propagation & increase of the heavenlie king∣dome. Let him pray also For his kinsfolke, and his benefactors, to whom hee must ac∣knowledge himselfe to bee bound in some spe∣ciall bond of detie. Let him pray For his enemies and persecutors, and seriouslie de∣sire their conversion and salvation. Let him pray lykewyse For all those that are affli∣cted and in miserie, and show himselfe to bee moved with a fellow-feeling of their calamities. PRAYER I. Hee prayeth for the conservation and continuance of the word, and for the propagation and increase of the Church. ALmightie, eternall, and mercifull GOD, Father of our Lord Iesus
Christ, that by thy holie Spirit doest gather thy Church out of mankinde, and in it doest keepe the heavenlie doctrine committed vnto it: In hu∣militie I adore and worship thee, and pray vnto thee, that thou woul∣dest bee pleased to continue vnto vs the saving doctrine of thy word in∣violable, and everie day propagate and inlarge the bounds of thy Church. Thou hast of thine infinite mercie lighted vnto vs that were in the darknesse of this world, the light of thy word: Suffer not there∣fore, the clowds of humane tradi∣tions to extinguish it, or to obscure it. Thou hast given vnto vs thy word for the wholesome meat of our soules: Suffer it not therefore, by the delusion of the devill and the corruption of men, to bee turned into poyson. Mortifie in vs the sin∣full lusts of the flesh, that thirsteth after earthlie thinges; that so wee may taste the spirituall delicates of thy word which is that heavenlie Manna: No man can feele the sweetnesse thereof, but hee that will taste: and no man can taste, whose
palate is corrupted with aboun∣dance of worldlie delights. Thy word is the word of spirit and lyfe, of light and grace. Take away there∣fore the carnall affections, and the corrupt senses of our hearts; that it may shyne to us within, and bee a light to leade vs vnto the light of everlasting lyfe. From the light of thy word let there aryse in our hearts the light of saving fayth, thatPsal, 36. 9 in thy light wee may see light, in the light of thy word, the light of thy Sonne. As in the olde tyme that heavenlie Manna descended in the wildernesse with a wholesome dew: So lykewyse by the hearing of thy word let our hearts bee silled with the fire of the Spirit, that our colde & lukewarme flesh may be excited, and may bee tempered agaynst the boylings of sinfull lusts. Let the seed of thy word take deepe roote in our hearts that by the dew of thy holie Spirit watering it, it may bring forth wholsome fruit, & plentiful increase lyke standing corne. Protect, OPsal. 80. 15 sai 5. 2 Lord, the vineyard of thy Church in which thy word is as seed scattered,
and fruit is gathered vnto everla∣sting lyfe. Set an hedge of Ange∣licall guard round about it, that the wilde boares and the foxes breake it not downe: the wild boares by violent persecutions, and the foxes by fraudulent delusions. Erect vp in it an high tower of thy fatherlie providence, that by thy custodie it may bee free from all devastation. But if thou shalt at anie tyme thinke good to presse the grapes of this vineyard in the presse of the crosse, and of calamities, let them beeripe∣ned first by the heat of thy grace; that they may yeeld the most deli∣cious fruits of fayth and patience. Whatsoever is put into the roote of the vyne, is converted in the grapes into the most sweet liquor of wine: Grant, I beseech thee, that what∣soever shall happen vnto vs in this lyfe, whether scoffings, persecu∣tions, prayses, or whatsoever else, our soules may turne it into the wine of faith, hope, and cha∣ritie, and into the fruit of patience and humilitie. Out of this mili∣tant Church translate vs at length
into the Church triumphant: And let this tabernacle of clay bee changed into that most beautifull and everlasting temple of the hea∣venlie Ierusalem. Amen. PRAYER II. Hee supplicateth for Pastors and their hearers. O Iesu Christ, Sonne of the li∣ving God, our alone mediatour and redeemer, who being exalted at the right hand of the Father,Ephes 4, 11 doest send pastors aud teachers of thy word, by whose ministerie thou doest gather together vnto thee thy Church amongst vs: I humblie in∣treate thee, the onlie true GOD, together with the Father and the holie Spirit, to governe these thy ministers in the way of trueth, and to turne the hearts of their hearers vnto the true obedience of the fayth. There is no state or condition of men, that is more subject to the hatred and treacheries of Satan, than the ministers of thy word: Defende them therefore, by the
buckler of thy grace, and furnish them with the strength of patience, that Satan by his sleights may not supplant them. Giue, I beseech thee, vnto thy ministers, that know∣ledge that is necessarie for them, and a pious vigilancie in all their actions; that they may first learne of thee, before they presume to teach others: Governe and illumi∣nate their hearts by thy Spirit; that beeing in the place of GOD, they1 Pet, 4. 11 Actes 20. 28 preach nothing else but the oracles of GOD. Let them feede the flocke that is committed vnto them, which thou hast bought and redeemed with thy precious blood. Let themIohn 1. 15 feede the flocke out of true and sin∣cere loue, and not for covetousnesse and ambition. Let them feede themBern. 2 Serm, of the resu∣recti∣on, Col, 34, with their mynde, with their mouth, and with their workes. Let them feede them with the ser∣mon of the mynde, with the exhor∣tation of the word, and with their owne example; that they may bee followers of his steps, to whom the cure of the LORDS flocke was three severall tymes commended.
Stirre them vp; that they may watchHeb. 13. 17 over their soules that are committed vnto them, as being to giue a strict deou for them in the day of judge∣ment.Gre∣gor.  book of pa∣storal Ce, cap. 6 Whatsoever they exhort by the word of their holie preaching, let them studiouslie labour to de∣monstrate the same in their actions: lst that beeing lazie themselues, and loath to worke, they labour in vaine to stirre vp others. Vnto what good workes soever they stirre vp others, let them shyne by the same first themselues, beeing set on fire by the holie Spirit. Before the words of exhortation bee heard, let them first proclayme by their workes, whatsoever they shal speake with their tongues. Thrust foorthMatt. 9. last faithfull labourers into thy harvest; that they may gather together manyActes 1, 14 handfulls of Saincts. Open lykewyse the hearts of the hearers; that they may receaue the seed with holy obe∣dience. Giue vnto them thy grace; that with a pure heart they may keepe thy holie word committed vnto them, & bring foorth plentifull fruit with patience. Let them hearkē
attentiuelie; let them heare careful∣lie; let them practice fruitfullie: that the word which is preached vnto them, for want of faith condemneIohn . 48 Heb. 4, 2 Isai 55.  them not in the last day. There is a notable promise of thy bountie, that thy word shall not returne vnto thee spoken in vaine: Bee mindfull of this thy promise, and blesse the labour of him that planteth, and him that1 Cor 3, 7 Matt. 3, 4 watereth. Suffer not the infernall crowes to picke out of the fielde of the hearers hearts, the seede of thy holie word. Suffer not the spinie thicket of the thorns of pleasures, &Luke 8, 14 riches, to choake it. Suffer not the hardnesse of the stonie ground to hin∣der13 the fructification of it: But poure downe the dew of thy heavenlie grace from aboue, and water thy heavenlie seede; that the fruit of good workes lyke standing corne may spring vp most plenteouslie. Knit together in a neare bond of loue and charitie the hearts of the pastors, and of the hearers: that they may labour together with mutuall prayers, and raise vp one another with mutuall comfort. Amen.
holie that Nurserie of the Church and Common-weale. Giue vnto virgins, widows, and married per∣sons true sanctitie of mynde, and pure chastitie of bodie: Let virgins cleaue vnto thee without anie di∣straction: Let widows persevere in Tim 5. 5 prayers and supplications night and day: Let those that are married loue one another with mutuall loue: Let them all serue thee, with their whole heart in holinesse: Let the marriageHeb. 13, 4 bed be vndeed, and let the mindes of them all bee vnspoted: Let them bee violets of humilitie, and lillies of chastitie: Let them bee roses of charitie, and balsame of sanctitie. Tye the hearts of them that are knit together in holie wedlocke, with the bond of chaste loue: that they may mutuallie embrace & obey one another, and persevere in thy holie service. Preserue thou them fromTobi 3. 8 the treacheries of Asde, that they burne not with mutuall hatred one towards the other. Let the wife bee an helpe vnto her husband▪ andGen. 2. 20 comfort him in adversitie: Let the indissoluble bond of matrimonie
bee a token and seale vnto vs of the loue that is betweene Christ and theEphes 5. 32 Church. By how much the nearer the societie is betweene the man and the wyfe: by so much the more fer∣vent let their zeale bee in prayer. By how much the more obnoxious and subject they are to dangers and ca∣lamities: by so much the more con∣joyned let their myndes bee in pie∣tie and prayer. Bee present by thy grace with religious parents, that they may bring vp their children inEphes 6. 4 holie admonitions▪ and instructions and good discipline: Let them acknow∣ledge those fruits of wedlocke to bee thy gift, and restore them againe vnto thee by godlie and faithfull in∣struction: Let them shyne before them by the example of their godlie lyfe, and not become guiltie of that grievous sinne of scandall. Bende lykewyse the hearts of the children, that they may performe due obe∣dience vnto their parents: that they may become sweete smelling plants of the heavenlie paradise, and not vnprofitable wood adjudged to the flames of hell-fire. Let them
cast foorth a most pleasant smell of pietie, obedience, reverence, and all kinde of vertue: that they fall not into that most filthie sinke of sinne, and so consequentlie into the pit of hell. Let them remember the commandement of honouring their parents: let them bee carefull to re∣compense their parents▪ after the manner of storks: let them remem∣ber to feede them as they haue beene fed by them, that they preci∣pitate not themselues into the gulfe of sundrie evills. Let parents and children with joynt desires studie in this lyfe to worship thee the true GOD: that they may beare parts in consort, and together prayse thee in the lyfe to come. Let servants ey their masters with alacritie, and with feare, and with singlenesse ofEphes 6. 5 heart: not with eye-service, or to please men, but as it becommeth the servants of Christ. In lyke manner, let masters embrace their servants with fatherlie kindnesse: that they turne not their just government in∣to tyrannicall crueltie. Let their so∣cietie in their private house bee an
oeconomicall private Churce, be∣loved of God, and of the Angells. AMEN. PRAYER V. Hee prayeth for parents, brethren, si∣sters, kinsfolke, and benefactours. MOst holie and mercifull God▪ from whom large heapes of sundrie benefites descende downe vpon vs▪ who hast given vnto mee kinsfolke and benefactours to bee helps vnto mee in this present lyfe: I beseech thee to bestow vpon them in the lyfe to come everlasting re∣wards. Those whom thou hast joy∣ned vnto mee in a speciall bond of nature and blood, I doe speciallie cōmend vnto thy protection. Those vnto whom I doe owe speciall loue and respect, with serious and fer∣vent prayers I commend vnto thy keeping. Grant that my kinsfolke may with joynt consent and vnani∣mitie serue thee in the true fayth, and with true pietie: that they may receaue all of them heereafter a crowne of eternall glorie. Vnto
my parents whom thou hast made, next after thee, the authours of my life, and my informers in true pietie, I cannot by anie meanes render de∣served rewards: I humblie beseech thee therefore, who art the authour of all good, and the rewarder of all benefits, to recompence their bene∣fits heere with temporall rewardes, and heereafter with eternall. Let the example of Christ thy Sonne, who about the agonie of his death commended vnto his disciple the care of his mother, let his example teach mee even to the last breath to take care for my parents. Let na∣ture it selfe, by the example of the storke, teach mee that I owe perpe∣tuall thanks and rewards vnto them for their merits. Vnto thee, merci∣full Father, I commend the care and tuition of my brethren, sisters, and kinsfolke: Let them become the brethren and sisters of Christ, and so heirs of the kingdome of heaven. Let vs all be joyned together in the kingdome of grace, whom thou hast joyned together In the lyfe of na∣ture: And let vs all, together
with those whom by death thou hast separated from vs, and taken vnto thy selfe, let vs all at length be joyned together in the kingdome of glori. Make vs all citizens of the heavenlie Ierusalem, as thou hast made vs in this lyfe members of the true Church. The same lykewyse I intreate of thee for all my benefa∣ctours, whose health & welfare both of soule & bodie I am bound to de∣sire and further even by the law of nature. Receaue them into the ever∣lasting tabernacles of the citie which is aboue, whō thou hast vsed as thy instruments to conferre vpon mee so manie and so liberall benefits. My heart propoundeth vnto thee the infallible promise of thy word, that thou wilt of thy meere free grace recompence even a cup of colde water: How muchMatt▪ 10, 42 more then wilt thou bee liberall and bountifull to those that with full hand bestow benefits of all kyndes vpon those that want! Let not thy graces cease to runne downe vpon them, that poure foorth so plentifullie vpon others. Let the
fountayne of thy goodnesse alwayes spring vnto them, from whom such plentifull rivers of liberalitie doe flow. Grant, I beseech thee, most mercifull GOD, that they which1 Cor 9. 11 ow temporall thinges so liberallie, may reape with much increase things spirituall. Fill their soules with joy, that feede the bodies of the poore with meat. Let not the fruit of their bountie perish, though they show it by bestowing of the goods that perish. Giue vnto them that giue vnto others, thou that art the giver of everie good gift, blessed for ever. Amen. PRAYER VI. He prayeth for enemies and persecutors, LORD Iesu Christ the onelie be∣goten Sonne of GOD, that hast prescribed vs in thy word this ruleMatt. 5. 44 of charitie, Loue your enemies, blesse them that curse you, doe good to them that hate you, pray for them that despitefullie vse you, and persecute you: I beseech thee, who art most gracious, and most readie to forgiue,
to forgiue myne enemies, and the persecutours of the Church. Giue vnto mee the grace of thy holie Spi∣rit, that I may not onelie forgiue myne enemies from myne heart, but also pray for their health and salvation even from my soule. Whet not against them the sword of severe revenge, but anoynt their heads with the oyle of thy mercie and compassion. Extinguish the sparks of hatred and anger that are in their hearts, that they breake not foorth into the infernall flames of hell. Let them know and acknowledge that Our lyfe is but a vapour and a smoakeIames 4, 14 that soone vanisheth away; that our bodie is but ashes & dust that flyeth away: that they beare not immor∣tall anger in their mortall bodies, nor entertayne into this brittle ta∣bernacle of clay their soules enemie. Let them know lykewyse, that in∣veterate hatred is their greatest ene∣mie: because it killeth the soule, and excludeth them from the parti∣cipation of heavenlie lyfe. Illumi∣minate their myndes, that they beholding the glasse of thy divyne
mercie, may see the deformitie of anger and hatred. Governe their wills, that beeing moved by the example of thy divyne forgiuenesse, they may leaue off and cease to bee angrie and to doe harme. Grant vn∣to mee, mercifull GOD, that,Rom. 12, 18 Ephes 4, 4 as much as in mee lyeth, I may haue peace with all men: and turne the hearts of myne enemies to brother∣lie reconcilement. Let vs walke with vnanimitie and concord in the way of this lyfe, seeing that wee hope all for a place in our celestiall countrey. Let vs not disagree vpon earth, seeing that wee all desire to liue together heereafter in heaven. Wee call vpon thee our Lord, and our God which art in heaven: And it is not meet for the servants of the same Lord to fall out one with ano∣ther. Wee are one mysticall bodie vnder Christ our head: And it is base and shamefull for the members of the same bodie to fight one with another. They which haue one fayth and one baptisme, oughtEphe 4, 5 to haue one spirit and one mynde. Neyther doe I pray alone for my
private enemies, but also for the publike enemies and persecutoures of the Church: O thou which art trueth it selfe, bring them into the way of trueth: O thou which art power it selfe, bring to nought their bloodie endeavours and at∣tempts. Let the brightnesse of thy heavenlie trueth open their blinde eyes, that the raging madnesse and desire to persecute, which they haue in their myndes, may heere∣after cease. Let them know, O LORD▪ and acknowledge that it is not onelie a vaine thing, but al∣so verie dangerous, to kicke againstActes , 5 the prickes. Why doe they imitate the furie of wolues▪ when as they know that the bl of Christ the immaculate Lambe as poured out for vs? Why doe they thirst to shed that innocent blood, for which they know that the blood of the verie Sonne of GOD was poured foorth vpon the altar of the crosse? Convert them, O LORD, that they may bee conver∣ted vnto thee from their heart, and so obtayne the fruit of their con∣version
in this life, and in that which is to come. Amen. PRAYER VII. Hee supplieateth for those that are afflicted and in miserie. ALmightie, eternall, and mer∣cifull GOD, which art the1 Tim 4. 10 1 Tim 2,  Saviour of all men, especiallie of the ythfull, and by the Apostle hast commanded vs to make prayers for all men: I intreate thee for all those that are afflicted and in mise∣rie, that thou wouldest support them by the consolatiō of thy grace, and succour them by the ayde of thy power. Indue with power and strength fro aboue those that labour and swe in the most grie∣vous agonie of Satans tentations: Make them partakers of thy victo∣rie. O Christ, thou which didst most powerfullie overcome Satan: Let the cooler of thy heavenlie comfort raise vp those, whose bones are be∣come dry with the fire of griefe and sorrow. Beare vp all those that arePal. 145 14 readie to fall▪ and raise vp those that
are alreadie fallen. Bee mercifull vn∣to those that are sicke and diseased, and grant that the disease of the bo∣die may bee vnto them the medi∣cine of the soule; and the adversi∣ties of the flesh, the remedies of the spirit. Let them know that dis∣eases are the handmaydes of sinne, and the forerunners of death. Giue vnto them the strength of fayth and patience, O thou which art the most true Physician both of soule and bodie. Restore them againe vn∣to their former health, if it bee for the everlasting salvation of their soules. Protect all those that are great with childe, and those that bee in labour: Thou art he that doest de∣liver children out of the straytes of their mothers wombe, & doest pro∣pagate mankinde by thy blessing: be present with those that bee in la∣bour, O thou lover and giver of lyfe: that they be not oppressed with an immoderate weyght of sorrows. Nowrish those that are orphanes and destitute of all helpe and suc∣cour. Defende the widows that are subject to the reproaches of all men,
thou which hast called thy selfe thePsal. 68. 5 Father of the fatherlesse, and the Iudge and defender of the widows. Let the teares of the widows, which flow downe from their cheekes, breake through the clowds, and rest not vntill they come before thy throne. Heare those that bee in dan∣ger by sea, which cry to thee, and sende vp their sighes vnto thee, seeing before their eyes their neigh∣bours suffer shipwracke. Restore libertie vnto those that are captiue: that with a thankfull heart they may sing of thy bountie. Confirme those that suffer persecution for righ∣teousnesseMatt. 5, 10 sake: that they may get the conquest over all their enemies, and purchase the everlasting crowne of martyrdome. Bee pre∣sent with all those that bee in dan∣ger and calamitie: and grant that they may possesse their soules in true patience, and denying theirMatt. 16. 2. owne wills, take vp their crosse. Let them follow him vnder the crosse, on whom they belieue that hee died for vs vpon the crosse. And especiallie I commend vnto
thee, most gracious Father, those which are about the gates of death, and are betweene time and eterni∣tie, & wrestle with all their strength with that last enemie. Confirme them, O thou most potent Conque∣rour of death: Deliver them, O most glorious Captaine and Author of lyfe: that they bee not overwhel∣med in the waues of tentations, but by thy conduct they may be brought vnto the haven of everlasting rest. Haue mercie vpon all men, thou which are the Creatour of all: Haue mercie vpon all men, thou which art the Redeemer of all. To thee bee prayse and glorie for ever and ever. Amen. FINIS.
The summe of GERARD'S prayers, reduced into a forme of morning prayer for the vse of an En∣glish familie. The foure capitall words signi∣fie the foure parts of Ge∣rards prayers, and the Arithmeticall figures poynt at every prayer of those parts. HOlie GOD and just Iudge! Thy eyes are more pure than the sunne, and can∣not beholde anie thing that is vn∣cleane: The Cherubims and Sera∣phims cover their faces before thy glorious majestie; The heavens of heavens are not cleane in thy sight. How then shall earth, sinfull earth, dust and ashes appeare before thee▪
Wee prefume not, O LORD, to come before thy tribunall, to plead for our righteousnesse; for all our righteousnesse is as filthie rags: But wee prostrate our selues with all humilitie of bodie and soule at thy mercie-seate, to make CONFES∣SION of our sinnes. Heare, Lord, and haue mercie. Wee confesse that 1 Wee sinned in the loynes of our first parente, wee were conceved in sinne; wee were shape in iniquitie. 2 In our chyldhood originall sinne brought foorth actuall: and actuall sinnes haue increased in vs ever since, as our dayes haue increased. Who can reckon vp the sinnes of his youth? Who can tell how oft hee offen∣deth? The just man sinneth seaven tymes a day: But 3 Wee haue sinned seaventie tymes seaven tymes everie day. 4, 5 All thy holie lawes and cōman∣dements wee haue broken in thought, word and deed. 6 We haue beene par∣takers of other mens sinnes. 7 Wee are manie ways convinced of our sinnes: We are convinced 8 By the contrition of heart, and the testimonie of
conscience: 9 By the greatnesse of thy mercie, and thy benefits bstowed vpon vs: 10 By the severitie of thy justice declared in the death and pas∣sion of thy Sonne our Saviour Iesus Christ. Thou art an holle God; and hearest not sinners: Thou art a just Iudge; and thy justice must bee satisfied. Wee are sinners; and the wages of sinne is death: Thy justice must bee satisfied; or else wee cannot escape death. Wee haue nothing of our owne to giue for the ransome of our soules: There∣fore wee offer vnto thee, holie Fa∣ther, that which is not ours, but thy Sonnes: 1 For our originall sinne, wee offer vnto thee, just Iudge, his origi∣nall righteousnesse, who is righteous∣nesse it selfe; for our conception in sinne, we offer vnto thee his most sacred con∣ception, who was conceaved by the holie Ghost; for our birth in sinne, we offer vnto thee his most pure nativitie, who was borne of a pure virgin. 2 For the offences of our youth, wee offer vnto thee his most perfect inno∣cencie, in whose mouth was found no guile. 3 For our daylie slips and falls,
wee offer vnto thee his most perfect obedience, who made it his meat and drinke to doe thy will in all things. 4.5 For our often breach of thy com∣mandements, wee offer vnto thee his most perfect righteousnesse, who ful∣filled all thy commandements. 6 For our communicating in other mens sinnes, wee offer vnto thee his most perfect righteousnesse communicated vnto vs. 7. 8, 9, 10 For our most wicked and vngodlie lyfe, wee offer vnto thee his most cruell and bitter death. For s was hee conceaved, for vs was hee borne, for vs was hee cruci∣fied: His blood still cryeth vnto thee in our behalfe, Father forgiue them. Accept, wee beseech then, the inestimable pryce of thy Sonnes blood for a full and plenarie satisfa∣ction for all our sinnes: yea▪ O Lord, wee know that thou hast ac∣cepted it alreadie. Therefore with confidence wee put vp our PETITIONS vnto thee. As thou hast redeemed vs by thy Sonne, so also wee beseech thee to sanctifie vs by thy holie Spirit. 1 Mortifie in vs everie day more and
more all sinfull lusts and affections, and quicken in vs all saving graces and vertues. 2 Increase our sayth.  Confirme our hope. 4 Inflame our cha∣ritie. Teach vs to imitate the lyfe of Christ, the true patterne of perfect obedience, and onlie true rule of a godlie lyfe: Teach vs 5 Humili∣tie. 6 Patence, 7 Meeknesse, Genle∣nesse, 8 Chastitie, Temperance▪ Teah vs 9 To contee all earthlie thinges, 10 To denye our selues, 11 To over∣come the world. 12 Grant vs consola∣tion in adversitie, and true tran∣quillitie of the mynde. Grant vs 13 Victorie in tentations, and delive∣rance from the devills treacheries. Grant vs in thyne appoynted tyme 14 A blessed departure out of this lyfe, and a blessed resurrection vnto lyfe everlasting. Wee pray not for our selues alone, but in obedience to thy commandement wee make our SUP∣PLICATIONS vnto thee for all men.  Saue and desende the vniver∣sall Church: enlarge thou her borders, and propagate thy Gos∣pell. 3 Blesse all Christian kings and
governours, especiallie thy servang CHARLES, our most gracious Kin and governour: Blesse togethe with him our gracious Queene MA∣RIE: Blesse vnto them, and vs, and our posteritie after vs, our hopefull Prince Charles: season him betymes with true religion, that hee may bee an instrument of thy glorie, the joye of his parents, and the blesing of thy people. Remem∣ber David, and all his troubles, the Ladie Elizabeth our Kings onelie si∣ster, and her princelie issue. Suffer them not still to mourne in a strange land: but restore them, if it bee thy will, to their former inheritance. Blesse all our kings loyall subjects from the highest vnto the lowest: Giue vnto the Senatours counsell and wisedome: 3 To the magistrates justice and fortitude; to those that are vnder them Christian subjection and obedience: 2 To the ministers of thy word holinesse of lyfe, and soundnesse of doctrine; to the hea∣rers of thy word diligent attention to the word preached▪ and a care▪ and conscience to liue here∣after.
Blesse 4 Everie familie in this kingdome, this especiallie and all that belong vnto it. Blesse our 5 pa∣rents, brethren, sisters, kinsfolke, benefactours and friends. 6 Forgiue our enemies. 7 Show pitie and com∣passion to all those that are afflicted and in miserie: Relieue them ac∣cording to their severall wants and necessities. Bee thou a Father to the fatherlesse, a Comforter to the comfortlesse, a Deliverer to the captiues, and a Physician to the sicke: Grant that the sicknesse of their bodies may make for the good of their soules: Especiallie wee be∣seech thee to bee present with those that are at the poynt to die: Fit them for their journey before their departure: Arme them with faith and patience: Seale vnto them by thy holie Spirit the pardon and forgiuenesse of all their sinnes: And so let thy servants depart in peace, and bee translated from death to lyfe, to liue with thee for evermore▪ Heare vs, wee beseech thee, praying for our brethren, heare our brethren for vs, and Iesus Christ our
elder brother for vs all: Wee know, O Lord, that thou hearest him al∣wayes. Heare vs lykewyse, wee be∣seech thee, for his sake, and accept our THANKSGIVING. Wee render most heartie thankes vnto thee for our Saviours 4 Incarnation, for his 5 Passion, for our 3 Redemption by his most precious blood: Wee thanke thee for  forming vs in our mothers wombe, for 1 washing vs in the laver of baptisme. for 6 calling vs by thy word, for 7 expecting our conversion, for 8 converting vs vnto the fayth, for 13 strengthening our fayth by the participation of Christs bodie and blood, for 9 sealing vnto vs the pardon of our sinnes, for 15 giving vs a promise of everlasting lyfe: Wee thanke thee for all other thy blessings 11 corporall and spiri∣tuall, internall and externall, for our 10 continuance in that which is good, for 14 deliverance from all evill: Wee thanke thee for thy often deliverances of this Church and kingdome from forreyne inva∣sions, and homebred conspiracies.  Wee thanke thee for 2 preserving
vs ever since wee were borne. for defending vs this night past from all perills and dangers▪ for the quiet rest wherewith thou hast re∣freshed our bodies, for thy mercie renewed vnto vs this morning. Let thy mercie bee continued vnto vs this day, let thy Spirit direct vs in all our wayes, that wee may walke before thee as children of the light, doing those thinges that are pleasing in thy sight. Let the dew of thy blesing descende vpon our labours▪ for without thy blessing all our la∣bour is but in vaine. Prosper thou the workes of our handes vpon vs, O prosper thou our handie worke: Grant that wee may conscionablie in our callings so seeke after thinges temporall, that finallie wee lose not the thinges which bee eternall. Wee are vnworthie, O Lord wee confesse, to obtaine anie thing at thy hands, eyther for our selues or anie others, even for the sinfulnesse of these our prayers: But thou hast promised to heare all those that call vpon thee in thy Sonnes name: Make good therefore, we beseech thee thy
promise vnto vs now calling vpon thee in thy Sonnes name, and pray∣ing as he hath taught vs in his holie Gospell. Our Father which art in heaven▪ &c. An Evening prayer for a fa∣milie, gathered here and there out of Gerards Meditations and Prayers. MOst glorious LORD GOD, whose▪ dwelling is in the highest heavens, and yet beholdest the lowlie and the humble vpon earth, wee blush and are ashamed to lift vp our eyes vnto heaven, because we haue sinned against thee which dwellest in the heavens: But looke downe, wee beseech thee, from▪ heaven thy dwelling place▪
and beholde the humilitie of thy servants heere on earth, which pro∣strate themselues at the foot-stooll of thy mercie, confessing their owne guiltinesse, and begging pardon for their sinnes. Wee confesse, Almightie Crea∣tour, that thou madest vs at the first after thyne owne image, thou cloa∣thedst vs with innocencie as with a garment, thou seatedst vs in paradise a place of all delight and pleasure: But wee haue defaced thine image, wee haue cast off our first covering, we haue thrust our selues out of that pleasant place. Wee ran away from thee, and were not obedient vnto thy voyce: Wee were lost and con∣demned before wee came into this world: Our first parents sinned a∣gaynst thee, and we sinned in them: They were corrupted, and wee are inheriters of their corruption: They were the parents of disobedience, and wee are by nature the children of wrath: Sinfull and vnhappie children, of sinfull and vnhappie parents? Thou mightest in thy displeasure after their fall haue
plunged them into the bottmlesse pit▪ and made them the fewell of hell, and sent their posteritie after them: And neyther they nor wee could justlie haue complained. Righ∣teous, O Lord, art thou in thy judge∣ments: And our miserie is ▪from our selues. But great was thy mercie vnto vs. Wee came into this world in a flood of vncleannesse, wallowing in our mothers blood; and thou didst set open a fountayne for vs to wash in: Wee were washed in the laver of baptisme▪ and wee haue returned with the swyne to our wallowing in the myre. Wee came from a place of darknesse into this world, we lived as children of dark∣nesse▪ wee sat in darknesse, and in the shadow of death: Thou gavest vs thy word to bee a lanthorne vnto our feete, and a light vnto our paths▪ that in thy light wee might see light; that so walking in the way of trueth, wee might attayne ever∣lasting lyfe: But wee haue loved darknesse more than light, & haue not beene obedient vnto thy word. Wee came into this world crooked
even from our mothers wombe; and thou gavest vs thy law to be a glasse wherein we might see our deformi∣tie, and a rule whereby to square all our actions, words, & thoughts: But wee haue shut our eyes that wee might not see, and wee haue refused to bee ruled by thy law: The law of sinne in our flesh doeth daylie cap∣tivate vs. The roote of originall sinne which lyeth hidden in vs, doth everie day put foorth new branches: All the parts and faculties of our bodies and soules are so manie in∣struments of vnrighteousnesse to fight agaynst thy divyne Majestie. Our hearts imagine wicked things, our mouthes vtter them, and our handes put them in practice. Thy mercies everie day are renewed vn∣to vs, and our sinnes are everie day multiplied agaynst thee: In the day of health and prosperitie we for∣get thee, and we never thinke vpon the day of sicknesse and adversitie. Thy benefits heaped vpon vs doe not allure vs to obey thee: Ney∣ther doe thy judgements infflicted
vpon others make vs afrayde to of∣fend thee. What couldest thou, O Lord, haue done more for vs, or what could wee haue done more agaynst thee? Thou didst send thy Sonne in the fulnesse of time to take our nature vpon him, to fulfill thy law for vs, and to bee crucified for our sinnes: Wee haue not followed the example of his holie lyfe, but haue everie day afresh crucified him by our sinnes. And now, O LORD, if wee shall become our own judges, we cannot but confesse that wee haue deserved everlasting torments in hell-fire. But there is mercie with thee O Lord: there∣fore will wee not despare. Our sins are manie in number: But thy mer∣cies are without number. The weyght of our sinnes is great: But the weyght of thy Sonnes crosse was greater. Our sinnes presse vs downe vnto hell: But thy mercie in Christ Iesus rayseth vs vp. By Satan wee are accused: But by Ie∣sus Christ wee are defended. By the law wee are convicted: But by Ie∣sus Christ wee are justified. By our
owne conscience wee are condem∣ned: But by Iesus Christ wee are absolued. In vs there is nothing but sinne, death, and damnation: In him there is treasured vp for vs righ∣teousnesse. lyfe, and salvation. Wee are poore: Hee is our riches. Wee are naked: Hee is our covering. Wee are exposed to thy furie per∣suing vs: Hee is the buckler of our defence, and our refuge: Hee is the rocke of our salvation, & in him doe we trust: His wounds are the clefts of the rocke: Giue vs, we beseech thee, the wings of a Doue, that by faith wee may hide our selues in the clefts of this rocke, that thyne an∣ger waxe not hote against vs to con∣sume vs: Let not thy justice triumph in our confusion, but let thy mer∣cie rejoyce in our salvation. Par∣don the sinfull course of our lyfe past, and guyde vs by thy holie Spi∣rit for the tyme to come: Amende what is amisse, increase all gifts and graces which thou hast alrea∣die given, and giue vnto vs what thou best knowest to bee wanting. Bee gracious and favourable to thy
whole Church; especially to that part thereof which thou hast committed vnto the protection of thy servant & our Soveraigne King CHARLES: Grant that he may see it flowrishing in peace and prosperitie, in the pro∣fession and practice of thy Gospell all the dayes of his lyfe; and after this lyfe ended, crowne him, wee beseech thee, with a crowne of im∣mortall glorie. Let not the sceptre of this kingdome depart from his house, neyther let there bee wan∣ting a man of his Race to sit vpon his throne so long as the sunne and moone endureth. Of this thou hast giuen vs a pledge alreadie, in bles∣sing the fruit of the Queens wombe. Let the Queene still bee lyke a fruitfull vyne: And let the Prince grow vp lyke a plant in thyne house. Let thy mercie bee extended to the Ladie Elizabeth our Kings onelie sister, and her princelie issue. How long, Lord just and true, how long shall their enemies pre∣vaile, and say, There, there, so would wee haue it? It is tyme for thee to lay to thyne hand: for
they haue laide waste their dwelling place. Aryse O Lord, and let their enemies bee scattered, and let them that hate them flee before them. Carrie them backe agayne into their owne countrey (if it may bee for thy glorie and their good) make them glad with the joy of thy coun∣tenance, and let them rejoyce vnder their owne vynes. Wee returne home agayne, and beseech thee to bee gracious and mercifull to the Kings Councell, the Nobilitie, the Magistracie, the Ministerie, the Gen∣trie, and the Commonalitie. Giue vn∣to those whom thou hast vse as in∣struments for our good, rewardes temporall and eternall. Forgiue those that be our enemies, and turne their hearts. Forget not those that groane vnder the crosse. Cloath the naked▪ feed the hungrie, visite the sicke, de∣liver the captiues, defend the father∣lesse and widows, relieue the oppres∣sed, confirme and strengthen those that suffer persecution for righteous∣nesse sake, cure those that are brokē in heart, speake peace vnto their consciences that are tormented
with the sense of their sinnes, suffer them not to bee swallowed vp in de∣spare. Stand by those that are rea∣die to depart out of this lyfe: When their eyes shall bee darkned in the agonie of doath, kindle in their hearts the light of saving fayth: when their eares shall bee stopt, let thy Spirit speake vnto them inward∣lie and comfort them: and when the house of their earthlie tabernacle shall bee dissolved, them Lord re∣ceaue their souls. As we haue made bold to make our prayers and sup∣plications vnto thee for our selues and others: So also wee render vn∣to thee all possible praise and thanks∣giving for all thy benefits bestowed vpon our selues and others. Wee thanke thee in speciall for our ele∣ction, creation, redemption, voca∣tion, justification, for all the blessed means of our sanctification, and for the assured hope of our future glori∣fication: Wee thanke thee for our health, mayntenance, and liber∣tie, for preserving vs ever since wee were borne, for blessing vs in all that wee haue put our handes
vnto this day. Let thy mercie still bee continued vnto vs, wee beseech thee. Let the eye of thy providence which never slumbreth nor sleepeth watch over vs, and let the hand of thy power protect and defende vs: Cover vs this night vnder the sha∣dow of thy wings, that no evill hap∣pen vnto vs. Grant that our bodies may bee refreshed this night with such moderate rest, that wee may bee the fitter for the workes of our vocation, and thy service, the next morning▪ Heare vs, we beseech thee, for Iesus Christ his sake our Lord and onlie Saviour; in whose name and words wee call vpon thee fur∣ther praying, Our Father, &c. FINIS.
