12918 99839664 4105
A DISCOVRSE OF THE SEVE∣rall kinds and causes of Lightnings. Written by occasion of a fearefull Light∣ning which on the 17. day of this instant Nouember, Anno Domini 1606. did in a very short time burne vp the spire steeple of Blechingley in Surrey, and in the same melt into infinite fragments a goodly Ring of Bells. BY SIMON HARWARD. Psal. 145. Vers. 17. The Lord is iust in all his waies, and holy in all his workes. THOV SHALT LABOR FOR PEACE PLEN¦TIE LONDON Printed by Iohn Windet, and are to be sold by Iefferey Chorlton at his shop neere the North dore of Pauls. 1607.
Honoratissimo Domino D. HO∣VVARDO, Baroni de Effingham, il∣lustrissimi Comitis Notingamiensis filio et heredi domino suo colendissimo omnia prospera & faelicia. {inverted ⁂} CVi potius munus (praeclare ac nobilis Heros) Hoc donare queam (sit licet exiguum) Quàm tibi cuius in auxilio Blechingleienses I am tristes totam spem posuere suam? Sperant permultos per te (domine inclite) amicos Tempore posse quidem se reperire breui, Per quos campanae amissae sibi restituantur, Debito vt ad templum tempore conueniant, Concipiant{que} preces humiles vt Rex Iacobus Ʋiuat, sit sanus, floreat, & vigeat, Sēper & Howardos solito amplectatur amore, Sic villa haec saluam se fore non dubitat, Sic Christoque (vir ample) placebis, qui tibi donet Nestoreos, sanos, omni in honore, dies. Amplitudini tuae deuotissimus, Simon Harward.
The preface to the Christian Reader. IT is not without great cause pronounced by the wise man,Eccles. 9.1. that no man knoweth either loue or hatred, which Saint Bernard doth expound to be ment of naturall man, that man by nature doth not know whether he be in the loue or in the hatred of god, but the spiritual mā doth dis¦cerne all things. But saint Hierom doth bet∣ter interpret it to bee spoken of things vn∣der the Sunne, which wordes, are vsed by Solomon fiue seuerall tymes in the selfe same chapter. By things then vnder the Sunne, that is by the outward accidents of this life, no man can discerne either loue or hatred, because sorrowes, sicknesses, losses and calamities, do befal to the godly as wel as to the wicked, but the triall of our selues
doth consist in inward graces, to wit, with what faith in God, and what loue toward God we indure the said afflictions, what good vses we make of them to our selues, and how in the middest of them all we do possesse our soules with patience. Sondry fearefull punishmentes by lightnings haue bin inflicted in many corners of this land, in this cleare light of the preaching of the gospell, partly vpon Paules in London, and partly on other places of this realme. And the like or farre greater haue bin shewed, heretofore in the time of Popery and blind¦nesse. The french Chronacles do testifie that in the year of our Lord 1534. (at which time France was ouerwhelmed with idolatry & superstition) the citie of Claraualla being stricken with lightning about noone dayes did so fiercelie burne, that in three howers space their town castles and churches were vtterly consumed. VVe must needs acknow¦ledge that our sinnes do deserue a farre dee∣per punishment then did the offences of our forefathers. They were as seruants sent
out in the night time, and therefore if they missed their way, their faults cannot be so heauy as ours who are as seruants sent out of the cleere day light: where God giueth one talent, he expecteth the increase of one, but where he giueth ten talents; he doth iust¦ly demand the increase of ten. VVhat vses we are to make of these iudgements of God vnder the Sunne, I haue briefely according to the shortnesse of time set downe in this smal treatise, which here now I do commit to thy view, & both thee and it to the good blessing of the Almighty. From Bansted this twentieth of Nouember An. Dom. 1606. Thine in the Lord, S.H.
A DISCOVRSE OF THE SEVERAL Kindes and Causes of Lightninges. WHen the Lord Almighty, doth any where shew extraordinary tokens of his iudgementes, it behoueth such as neere dwellers to resort to the place, and not only to take view of the pun∣ishment, but also to lay it deepely to their heartes. For there are some pu∣nishments, which in Greeke are called , punish∣mentes of vengeance, there are some which are termed , punishments of correction, and means to draw vs to amendment of life, and some , punishmēts of triall, to trie our faith and patience. The considera∣tion whereof moued me this present weeke to visite the towne of Blechingley, being a towne not onely neare vn∣to me, but also hauing such inhabitants, as vnto whome for many yeeres, for sundrie kindnesses I am much be∣holden, when I came, I found their case to be equall (if not worse) then the rumor or report, which was before published. I found that by the lightning (which came with the terrible thunder on Munday, being the 17. day of this instant Nouember, about ten of the clocke in the night) the Spire steeple of the said Bleachingley, hauing beene lately new couered to the great charges of the par∣rish
in three howers space, was vtterly consumed with fire. The steeple was but about twelue fadome high aboue the battlements of the square stone worke: but it was a steeple spreading downeward very large in circumference. The stone worke which bare it (being also about twelue fadom high) is a long square of one & twenty feet one side, and eighteene feete the other side. It is thought by good workemen, that two hundred loades of timber will not suffice for the erecting of such a steeple, as that stone-worke did lately beare. I found also the belles (being before a sweet ring, and so large, that the Tenor waighed twenty hundred waight) partly melted into such fragmentes, as may perhappes bee melted againe, and partly burnt into such cinders, or intermingled with such huge heapes of cin∣ders, as it will neuer hereafter serue to the former v∣ses thereof. These grieuous losses are by diuerse sortes of peo∣ple in sundrie wayes interpreted. Some do account of them as a particular iudgement of God against the sins of the inhabitantes of that towne of Blechingley. But I am not of their opinion, partly, because, as I cannot ex∣cuse the inhabitantes of the said towne of sundrie grosse abuses, so am I fully persvvaded, a number of tovvnes neare adioyning to them, are in the like iniquities, no∣thing inferiour to them, and partly, because in the ex∣tremitie of this fire vpon the church, the tovvne and tovvnesmen vvere miraculouslie preserued. The church standeth in the East ende of the tovvne, and the vvinde (though it somtimes changed) yet it still kept neare the vvest point, & droue the flame frōvvard frō the houses: A thatched barne, and certaine poore houses neere ad∣ioyning to the Church, were so wonderfully preserued, that we must needes confesse and acknowledge, that in the middest of iudgement there shined mercie. Some do descant vpon the day, because the Bells did thus perish in
that seuenteenth day of Nouember, wherein for so many former happie yeares they had ioyfully sounded for the raigne of good Queene Elizabeth. But let such know, that there needeth no other Bell, but onely a noble fame to sound out the vertues of such a learned and religious Queene: and that fame (maugre the despite of all aduer∣saries) must and will ring out her praises, euen vnto the endes of the world. If the Bells had beene cast in our late Queenes raigne, then might the Papists picke occasion to take some col∣lour of aduantage. They might say, that the Bels were neuer christened and hallowed, as by their lawes they should haue beene, and that therefore the lightning pre∣uailed against them. But the Bels were all auncient Bels, the eldest man in the parish cannot remember the casting of any of them, the third bell onely excepted. All the rest, as they were framed in time of Poperie, so (no doubt) they had the blessing and baptizing at that time vsed, and were hal∣lowed by that praier in the Masse booke. Omnipotens sempiterne Deus tu hoc tintinnabulum coelesti be∣nedictione perfunde,Benedictio Campana. vt ante sonitum eius longius effugentur igni∣ta iacula inimici, percussio fulminum, impetus lapidum, laesio tem∣pestatum. Almightie euerlasting God, besprinckle this bell with thy hea∣uenly blessing, that at the sound thereof, the fierie darts of the ene∣mie, the striking of lightnings, the stroke of thunderbolts, and hurts of tempests may farre be put to flight. The cause indeede why the lightning at this time did preuaile both against bels and steeple, was because it was the good pleasure of God, thus to shew his omnipotent power to stirre vp as wel the inhabitants of the said town, as vs all, to feare him, & to giue vs some taste of his iudg∣ments, to summon vs all to true repentance. The Philosophers Aristole, Plinie, Seneca, and others, do point out many naturall causes of lightenings, but when
they consider the wonderfull effects thereof, they are cō∣pelled to acknowledge a diuine power, farre aboue the reach of all humane reasō.Seneca lib. 2. Natur. quaest. As Seneca saith, Mira sunt fulmi∣nis si intueri velis opera, nec quicquam dubii relinquentia, quin di∣uina insit illis & occulta potentia. The operations of light∣nings (if you behold them) are wonderfull, and do leaue no doubt, but that there is in them a diuine and secret power. Pontanus in meteorolog.Pontanus maketh three especiall kinds of lightnings. Scinditque vritque & longo serat aera hiatu. One is a renting lightning, another a burning, and the third doth cut through the aire with a long dispersing. The lightning which is scattered more generally tho∣rough the aire, is of lesse and weaker force, but that which is gathered into a lesser compasse, is of greater strength, and according to the seuerall effects hath sun∣dry diuers names giuen vnto it. One is called fulmē scindēs a cutting or renting lightening, because by the aboundance of spirits and drines it is so swift in operation, that it renteth before it can inflame: of that the phophet Dauid spea∣keth when, he saith The voyce of the Lord breaketh the Cedar trees,Psal. 29.3. yea the Lord breaketh the Cedars of Libanus. An other lightening is called penetrans, a pearcing lighte∣ning, because by the puritie of the flame, it pearceth tho∣rough such outward parts as haue powers of passage, & worketh his forces inwardly▪ of that Pontanus speaketh Pontanus. lib. meteor. cap▪ 16hominemque bouemque, exanimat nulla vt maneant vestigia mortis. Of man and beast it kils hoth kind, And leaues no print of death behind. It pearceth thorough the outward pores of the body and slayeth the vitall parts within. So it killeth the child in the mothers wombe, leauing the mother safe: and it melteth the siluer in the purse, the purse sustaining no damage. This penetrant lightening is of such force, that it pearceth oftentimes bodies which can hardly be
accompted transpirable, as when it corrupteth wine and beare, be the vessels neuer so strongly made, or be the orifices thereof neuer so strongly stoppedPontan. ibid. There is also a lightening infuscans, which maketh blacke, but by reason of the subtillitie and thinnesse it fli∣eth away before it can burne, of that Pontanus speaketh. Non faciem non ora hominum non corpora noris. The body from the foote to face, With blacknesse it doth quite disgrace. An other lightning is termed vrens, a burning lightning, It hath much earthly matter, it breaking thorough the clouds doth fall downe, and doth burne, melt or spoile, those bodies vpon which it descendeth. Some lightnings are prodigious, so surpassing the rea∣son of man, that no natural cause can be rendered therof: as Eutropius sheweth a history of a maid of Rome, who tra∣uayling to Apulis, was killed with lightening (no haim outwardly appearing in her body) and at the same in∣stant her garments were also shaken off without any rent, and her horse also killed, and his bridle and girthes shaken off without any breach. Of such lightenings Pontanus writeth. Pontanus lib. meteorolog.Nunc ipsis etiam in stabulis (mirabile dictu, Quadripedem exoluit, pedibus quoque ferrea demit Vincula & intacto terram quatit vngula cornu, Illaesus sonipes alta ad praecepia mandit. Oft from the horse (O wonder great) it shaketh of the iron locke, The stead still at the cratch doth eate, and nothing harmed by the knocke. That lightening should shake iron fetters from the the feet of horses, and nothing hurt the hoofe, this doth Pontan. call a miraculous lightning.
The causes of the greiuous harmes which are often caused by lightnings, are of three sorts, the first iudicial, the second instructtiue: and the third fatidicall. The iudiciall cause is, when the Lord doth by it execute vengeance vpon some notable offenders, as vp∣on blasphemers, vpon sorcerers, vpon ambitious men, bloudsuckers,Sabellinus & Paulus Dia∣conus. drunkards, adulterers, and such like, Olym∣pius an Arriau Bishop when being at Carthage, he blasphe∣med the blessed Trinity, he had by the iudgment of God his body suddenly burnt with lightning. So Sabellinus sheweth a history of one Prester the sonne of Hippomanes, who blaspheming God was stricken with a thunderbolt and perished. The thunderbolt cōmeth of the viscous & sulphurous matter of the lightning: for as the Gunners wildfires doe flame in the water, so lightnings (being much of the same nature) haue beene often seene to burne Fishers nets e∣uen vnder the water. And as meale and water kneaded together and baked, doe grow into a hardnesse, so the drie and viscous exhalation is by force of the heate in thunder hardened into a stone. Zonarus tom. 2 Annalium.Another sinne, which God doth punish with light∣nings is Magycke and Sorcerie. As Zonaras writeth, that Anastasius the Emperour in the yere of Christ 499. beeing addicted to Magycke and the Manichean here∣sie, did persecute such Christians as reprooued his sinnes and wickednesse. But at the last, lightning came feare∣fully about his house called Tholotum, he crept from chāber to chamber to seeke where he might bee safest: but nothing would preuaile. The flashes in the ende ouer∣tooke him, and he perished miserably. 2. Reg. cap. 1. vers. 10.So in the second Booke of the Kings, fire came down from heauen vpon the two captaines of Ahazia king of Israel, and vpon both their bands of man, and destroyed them, because their Lord the King had highly displeased God, when in the time of his sicknesse he sent his ser¦uants
to consult with Beelzebub the god of Ackron. Another sinne plagued vsually by lightnings,Dionys. Halyc. lib. 1. Antiq. is Pride and Ambition. Dionysius Halicarnassaeus sheweth, that Al∣ladius an auncient king of the Latins (who raigned be∣fore Romulus) vvas so prowd and ambitious, that he coū∣terfeited thundrings and lightnings about his palace, because hee vvould bee esteemed as a god amongst his people. But at the last, his Palace vvas set on fire vvith lightning from heauen, and in the same he fearefully pe∣rished. So Diodorus Siculus vvriteth of a king of Clide,Diodor. Sic. li. 4▪ vvho caused himselfe to be dravvne vp and dovvne in a Cha∣riot, vvherein vvere deuises of Torches and squibbes counterfeiting thunders and lightnings, that so he might be deemed a god amongst his subiects: but in the height of his ambition he was stricken with a thunderbolt from heauen, and came to a most wretched end. This then is one cause why lightnings doe commonly strike the highest places, according to that of Horace, Feriuntque summos fulmina montes. Lightnings strike commonly the hills that are most hie. Not onely because the highest places are most sub∣iect to the iniuries of the clowdes, seeing euery agent doth worke most strongly vpon his neerest matter (as the Philosophers giue the reason) and because euill spi∣rits dwelling in the aire,Eph. 6.12. doe most seeke to annoy Tem∣ples and Churches, which commonly are the highest e∣difices,Garcaeus lib. de Meteorolog. (as some Diuines doe giue the cause) but also be∣cause by that example, God doth warne mankind, not to seeke to extoll it selfe by haughtines of minde. And this was seene by the Poet Ouid:
Viue tibi, quantumque potes praelustria vita, Saeuum praelustri fulmen ab arce venit. Liue to thy selfe, and too much height auoide, High towers are by lightninges most annoide. An other sin plagued with lightning is cruelty, and blood-shed, that so iudgement may be without mercy to them that shew no mercy. Hatto the Bishop of Mentz when in the yeare of Christ 918,Iam. 2. by the instigation of Conrad the Emperour: he endeuoured to murther Hen∣ry Duke of Saxony, was suddenly slain with a stroke of lightning. For this cause is the Lord in the Scripture, so often called the Lord of hoastes, that is the Lorde of Armies:Malac. 1. Ierem. 5. because all thinges in heauen and earth, are a part of his Armie to plague the wicked, and to fight for the godly. In the heauens he hath fire, to powre down vpon Sodom and Gomorrah: hee hath in the aire, thun∣deringes, lightninges and blazing starres to terrifie the heartes of the wicked: he hath the earth to swallow vp Core, Dathan and Abiram: the sea to drown Pharao and his Armie: Dogges to licke vp Iezabels bloud, beares to deuoure them that mocked Elizeus: the canker-worm and Caterpillar to destroy the fruites of the vngodly, yea there is no Creature so vile and base, but it is a part of the hoast of God to punish and destroy, euen the migh∣tiest in the world. Herod and Antiochus were two mon∣strous tyrantes, yet was one of them destroied with lice, and the other with worms. Lightning hath but a poore and base beginning of exhalations, drawne vppe from the earth, yet by the power of God, being inflamed & gathering force in the aire, it is enabled to confound whatsoeuer doth exalt it selfe against God his diuine Maiestie. An other sinne which God doth punish with fire from Heauen, is drunkennesse and whoredome, as Eze∣chiel
cap. 16. doth shew of the destruction of Sodom, that it was for their fulnesse of bread, that is excesse of meats and drinkes, according to the Hebrew Phrase, and for their committing abhomination, that is, for their filthy and damnable lustes. Concerning these thinges, I take not vpon me to iudge of the inhabitantes of the towne lately punished: But I pray God, that euery one may now so iudge himselfe, that hee be no hereafter further iudged of the Lord. The second cause of the harms done by lightnings, is for instructions sake, that others may learne to take heed and to feare God, and in this respect God dooth sometimes punish his dearest seruantes. In the yeare of our Sauiour, 1551. an honest Cittizen of Creutzburge,Garcaeus lib. de meteorolog. standing by his table, and a dogge laying by his feete, were both of them suddenly slaine by a lightning: yet a young child which stood hard by his Father, was pre∣serued safe. Iob his flocke of seuen thousand sheepe & his seruants,Iob. 1.16. were suddenly destroyed with fire from heauen, not so much for the sinnes of Iob and his fami∣lie, as to trie the faith of Iob, and to make him a schoole∣maister of Patience to all posteritie. So it falleth out in all other kindes of punishments:Luk. 13.1. Doe you thinke (saith our Sauiour Christ) that those Galileans whose bloud Pilate mingled with their sacrifices, were greater sinners then all other Galileans? I tell yon nay, but except yee amend your liues yee shall likewise perish: or thinke yee that those eighteene vpon whome the Tower of Siloam fell; were sinners aboue all them which dwell in Ierusalem? I tell you nay, but except ye repent, yee shall all likewise perish.Ioh. 9.3. The blind man in the ninth of Saint Iohn was borne blind? neither for his owne sinnes, nor for his parents sinnes, but that the power of God might be shewed foorth vpon him. There is none so desperate, but will he, nill he, shall by thunderinges and lightnigns receiue admonition, if not to instruct him to amendment of life, yet at the least
wise to condemn him in his owne guilty conscience: we reade of Caligula the Emperour, that in fearefull thun∣derings hee would creepe vnder beddes and into the-strongest corners of his howse, Whereof came this, but-that he vnderstood there, by that there was a God in hea∣uen, whose voice he did then heare, and who in the ende would assuredly be reuenged of his ambitious, cruel, and filthy life. The third chiefe cause of fearefull lightnings is called fa∣tidicall, or prognosticall,Garcaeus in Me¦teorol when God doth by them fore∣warn vs of greater calamities to fall afterward vpon vs, vnlesse wee amend our wicked and sinfull life. In the yeere of our Lorde God. 653. at Frisazium a towne of Saxony a great number both of houses and peo∣ple were destroyed with lightning, but there followed afterward a greeuous plague grassant ouer the whole Country. So in the yeere 653. in the time of Constance the Emperour a fearefull fier fell from heauen, but shortly af∣ter for the space of three moneths together their follow∣ed a most greeuous pestilence vpon all the places adioy∣ning. So in the yeare 1062. in the month of February there fell terrible lightnings vpon the Citty of Constance, but presently vpon it an infectious plague did wonderfully wast that Citty. God of his infinite mercy graunt vs such true repen∣tance for our sinnes and such vnfained conuersion from our vngodly behauiour, that these his iudgements thus threatned vpon vs may fauourably be turned aside. And the Lord graunt that in all his iudgements powred out vpon our neighbors wee may rather in godly wisedome make good vses of them to our selues, and in charity seek to relieue such as be in distressē, then either by pride to insult vpon their losses, or by shutting vp our bowells of compassion to augment their griefes and miseries. Sun∣dry are the remedies which are described by sundry wri∣ters
against the daungers of lightnings, some of them are philosophicall,Garc. in Mete. as when they appoint that in thunders and lightnings men should either shoot vp ordinance in∣to to the aire, or ring bels that by the stirring of the aire the cloudes may be the sooner dispersed nd driuen away, Fot as a stone cast into the water doth make first one cir∣cle and that circle maketh a greater vntill the greatest of all do touch the banke or side, euen so (say they) the tos∣sing of the aire by Gunnes or belles doth affect the aire next to it and that ayre againe the ayre next to it vntill at last it come to the cloudes by which the thū∣derings and lightnings are made. And this they make al∣so to be the cause why (although the lightning and thun∣der are in time both together) yet the lightning cōmeth sooner to our eies, then the thunder to our eares. For the line to our sight is a right line, but the line of sounds bea∣ting the aire is circular, or giricall, giricall as I haue shew∣ed by the aforesaid example of the stone cast into the wa∣ter. So when we see a man hewing wood a farre off, the sight of the stroke commeth to our sight before sound of the noice (which beateth the aire circularely) can come to our hearing. Others appoint meere Magicall, that is wick¦ed and vngodly remedies, to wit to hang about the necke or body inchanted herbs, stones or iewels. Such deuises sauoring of sorceries can in no wise be agreeable to true Christianity. Some haue taught that bay trees & the skins of seacalues are remedies against the dangers of lightnings. Where∣vpō Suetonius affirmeth, that Tiberius Cesar would crown himselfe with bay bows, & couer his tents with the skins of sea calues. Vt a fulmine tutus esset, that he might bee safe from lightnings. The onely true remedy is first by true faith,Psal. 92. v. 1, et 5. to put our full trust in God. For (as the prophet Dauid saith) If wee abide vnder shadow of the Almighty, we shall not be afraid of a∣ny feares of the night, nor of the arrow that flyeth by day: and se¦condly,
by hearty repentance to remoue the causes of Gods heauie iudgements,Isay. 59.1. Psal. 112. v. 1.4. & 6. & 7. and to forsake all such sinnes as doe make a diuision betwixt God and vs. The Pro¦phet Dauid pronounceth of him that delighteth in Gods commandements, and is mercifull and leudeth and will guide his words with discretion that he shall not be afraid of any euill tidings he shall surely neuer be remoued but the righteous shall bee had in euerlasting remembrance. These graces he grant to vs that died for vs euen Iesus Christ the righteous, to whom with the father and the holy ghost as well for iudgements as for mercy, bee all honour, glory, praise, maiesty, and thanksgiuing now and for euer, Amen.
An addition of the Author shew∣ing the opinions of Philosophers and Astronomers touching Thundrings and Lightnings. THe generall naturall cause which the Phlo-sophers doe giue of Thunders and Lightenings is this. First a viscous vapour ioyned with a hot exhalation is lifted vp to the highest part of the middle region of the aire, by vertue of the Planets: then the waterie vapour by the coldnesse both of place and of matter, is thickned into a clowd, and the exhalation (which was drawne vp with it) is shut within the clowd, and driuen into straights. This hotte exhalation flying the touching of the cold clowd, doth flie into the depth of the clowd that doeth compasse it about, and courseth vp and downe in the clowd, seeking some passage out, which when it cannot find, it maketh a way by force, and beeing kindled, by the violent motion it breaketh through the clowde. If the sides of the hollowe clowd be thicke, and the exhalation drie and copious, then there is made both thunder and lightning: but if the clowd be thin, and the exhalation also rare and thin, then there is lightening without thun∣der. The thunder then commeth, when the fierie spirits and exhalations beeing (as it were) shut vp in prison, doe by  wrastle with the congealed vapours which haue imprisoned thē. The like we see in al moist bodies which haue a hot spirit so included, that it cānot get out, the Chesnut in rosting amongst cinders giueth a cracke, a bladder filled with aire, being violently broken maketh a noise. When greene wood is burned, the spirits burst out with some little crack: but gun-powder issuing out of or∣dinance maketh afarre greater sound. The clowdes then which do farre exceed the greatnesse of mountaines must
needes giue out a more forcible roaring. Especially see∣ing that in them there is added a more principall opera∣tion of the handie worke of God, whereupon thunder in the Scriptures is called the thunder of God, Psal. 77.17. The voice of thy thunder was heard round about. And Psal. 104.7. at the voice of thy thunder they are afraid. So Psal. 18.13. The Lord thundred out of heauen, and the most highest gaue out his voice, hailestones and coales of fire. So Iob. 38.25. Who doth di∣uide the spowts for the raine, or the way for the lightenings of the thunder? as if he should say: none can doe it but God alone. The Poet saw somewhat by naturall reason, when hee said, Siquoties peccant homines sua fulmina mittat Iupiter exiguo tempore inermis erit. If God should with his lightning fight As oft as men offend, In little space of time he might His weapons wholy spend. The Astrologers as in other pointes they vary, so in their predictions, by thunderings and lightnings they do great¦ly disagree.Beda. Beda saith Tonitrua in Nouembri sterilitatem im minere ex alto quasi tuba praecinunt. Thunders in Nouē∣ber do as with a trumpet sound out from heauen to vs a dearth and scarcitie, and if they happen on monday, then turmas coniugum morituras & fruges passuras that compa∣nies of married folks shall dy, corne & fruite suffer harme Hermes.But Hermes is of a contrary mind: He saith tonnitrua Nouembris frumenti largvm prouentum & hominum hilarita∣tem promittunt. The thunders af Nouember doe promise great store of corne, and ioy and gladnesse amongst men. This lightning on mondy the 17. of Nouember did not onely this harme in Surry, but also it afflicted Sussex and diuers other places. It was very strange that at the same time when it fiered Bleachingley steeple it entered al∣so
so into the house of one Stephen Lugsford of Buckstead in Sussex almost twentie miles from Bleachingley and melting the lead of his glasse windowes did with great violence breake through and rent in sunder a strong bricke chim∣ney: the man is of honest report and zealous in religion, we must not therefore iudge of men by those outward ac¦cidents, but commit all iudgement to God to whom it doth belong. If lightnings haue any predictions, they haue as well good as bad. The mother of Hierom Fracasto∣rius (who afterward became a famous scholer) carrying the said Hierom (when he was a yong infant) in her arms was stricken with lighning and slaine, whereas notwith∣standing the yong child was vnhurt and vntouched, and preserued (as the sequele shewed) for the greater good of the common wealth. Psal. 77. vers. 13. Who is so great a God as our God? thou art the God that doest wonders, thou hast declared thy power among the people. FINIS. ERRATA. Fol. 3. Apulia. Sabellicus. Fol. 4 for lid. Ibid. Salmoneus.
