13544 99852148 17457
HOCUS POCUS JVNIOR. The Anatomy of LEGERDEMAIN. OR, The Art of Jugling set forth in his proper colours, ful∣ly, plainly, and exactly; so that an ignorant person may thereby learn the full perfection of the same, after a little practise. Unto each Trick is added the Figure, where it is need∣full for Instruction. The third Edition, with many Additions. Praestat nihili quàm nihil facere. Hiccius Doctius LONDON, Printed by I.D. for R. M. and are to be sold by Francis Grove at his Shop upon Snow-hill, neer the Sarazens-head. 1638.
To the Reader. COurteous Reader, do you not won∣der? if you doe not, well you may, to see so sleight a Pamphlet so quickly spent; but lightly come, and lightly go; it is a Juglers term and it well befits the subject. Would you know whence it first came? why, from Bartholomew Faire: would you know whither it's bent? for the Faire againe; its a straggler, a wanderer, & as I said, as it lightly comes, so it light∣ly goes; for it means to see not only Bartholomew Faire, but all the Fairs in the Kingdom also, and therfore in the front, Hiccius Doccius is the Post∣master, and what he wants there, ile give him here, a word or two of command, a term of art, not so much substantial, as circumstantial, Celeriter, vade, over hedges and ditches, thorow thick and thin, to come to your Fairs. Room for a Jugler: al in post, yet with a desire to give you ful satisfaction. If you like it, then buy it & read it, if otherwise, leave it for them that list. Farewell.
The Art of LEGERDEMAINE Discovered. The originall of Legerdemaine, and how it came first into this Kingdome. IT came first into the Kingdome by certaine Aegyptians, that were transported hither, who growing to numerous multitudes, dispersed themselves thorow most parts of the Kingdome: who being most expert in this Art, and in Palme∣stry, cousened the people in all parts wheresoever they came. Now divers vagrant English joyning with them in time learnt both their language, and cousening delusi∣ons, whereby at length they were discovered, and ther∣upon the next insuing Parliament, there was a sta∣tute enacted: that whosoever should transport an Aegyptian, should have a fine imposed upon him; Moreover, that whosoever should assume unto them∣selves
the names of Aegyptians, it should bee imputed unto them as fellony, in so high a degree that they might not have their Book granted unto them, which statute was put in execution, and since that time our Kingdome hath been well disburdened of those Aegyp∣tian Juglers. The Definition of the Art of Legerdemaine, with its principall parts. LEgerdemain is an operation, whereby one may seem to work wonderfull, impossible, and incredible things by agility, nimblenesse, and sleightnesse of hand. The parts of this Art are principally two, The first is in the conveyance of Balls, Cards, Dice, Money, &c. The second is in Confederacy. The end of the Art of Legerdemain. THe end of this Art is either good or bad, accord∣ingly as it is used: Good, and lawfull when it is used at Festivals, and merry meetings to procure mirth: especially if it bee done without desire of estimation above what we are. Bad, and altogether unlawfull when it is used on purpose, to cozen, deceive, or for vaine glory to bee esteemed above what is meet and honest. The Definition, or description of the Operator, FIrst, he must be one of an impudent and audatious spirit, so that hee may set a good face upon the matter. Secondly, he must have a nimble and cleanly con∣veyance.
Thirdly, hee must have strange termes, and em∣phaticall words, to grace and adorne his actions, and the more to astonish the beholders. Fourthly, and lastly, such gestures of body as may leade away the spectators eies from a strict and di∣ligent beholding his manner of conveyance. Of the play of the Balls. THe Operator thus qualified must have his Im∣plements of purpose to play withall: and first he must have three Cups, made of brasse, or Croo∣ked
lane plate: These Cups must be all of one size, and the bottome of each of them must be set a little within the Cup; marke the following figure, for thereby they are truly represented, both in form and bignesse: it is noted with the letter B. Also he must have four Balls made of Corke, about the bignesse of small Nutmegs. First hee must practise to hold these Corke Balls, two or three of them at once in one hand. The best place, and the readiest to hold one Ball, is between the ball of the thumbe, and the palme of the hand; but if you hold more then one at one time, between your fingers towards the bot∣tomes. The place to hold a great Ball is between your two middle fingers; Remember in your play alwayes to keep the palme of your hand downward: After you have once learned to hold these Balls handsomely, you may worke divers strange, and de∣lightfull feats. Some I have seen sit with thei Codpice open, others play standing with a Budget hanging before them▪ but all comes to one end.But whether you seem to cast your Bal in the aire, or into your mouth, or into your other hand, yet still retaine it in the same hand, still remembring to keep the palme of your hand downward, and out of sight. Now to begin. He that is to play must sit on the farther side of a Table, which must be covered with a Garpet: part∣ly to keep the Bals from rowling away,Some fts may with more grace be per∣formed stand∣ing then siting. The manner of holding the Cups wil con∣cease the ball that you retain in your hand. and part∣ly to keep them from ratling: likewise he must set his hat in his lap, or sit in such manner as that hee may receive any thing into his lap, and let him cause all his spectators to sit downe: Then let him draw his four balls, and lay three of them upon the table, (and retaine the fourth in his right hand) and say, Gentlemen, here are three Balls you see, 1. Meriden,
2. Benedic, and 3. Presto Iohn, then let him draw his Cups and hold them all three in his right hand also, saying, Here are also three Cups, saying, See ther's nothing in them, neither have they any false bot∣toms: Then say, See I will set them all on a row, and clap them all on a row, and in clapping them down, convey the Ball that you retained under the middlemost cup, saying as you set them downe, No∣thing there, there, nor there. Then shew your hand, and say, Gentlemen, you see here is nothing in my hands, and say, Now to be∣gin, and take up with your right hand one of the three Balls that you laid downe, and say this is the first, and with that seeme to put it into your left hand, and presently shut your left hand, and being shut, clap it unto your eare, saying, This is for the purging of the braine, Presto bee gone, then move both the outmost Cups noted with A, and B. with both your hands, saying, And there is nothing there,
nor there, and in the clapping them downe, con¦vey the Ball in your right hand under the Cup no∣ted B. Then with your right hand take up the second Ball, and seem to put into the left hand (but retain it) shutting your left hand in due time: then clap your left hand unto your mouth, seem to sup the bal out of your hand, and make a face as if you swallow∣ed it, then say, Presto, and that's gone you see, and with your right hand move the Cup noted A saying, And there is nothing, and in clapping it down con∣vey the ball you retained, under it, so have you con∣veyed into each Cup a ball. Then with your right hand take up the third Ball, and seem to put it into your left hand, shutting it in due time, and then reach it out from you, saying, vade couragious, and open your hand, and blow a blast, looking up as if you saw it flying away, and say passa couragious, and that's gone: then take up the Cups one after another, and say, neverthelesse Gen∣tlemen, there is one, there is two, and there is all three againe: Then cover them and say, see you Gentlemen, I will cover them all againe. Then say now for the first, then with your right hand take up the first Cup, and with your left hand take up the ball that is under it, saying, see, I take him out, and
in setting down the Cup againe, convey the ball in your right hand under it, then with your right hand take the ball out of your left hand, seeme to put it into your pocket (but retain it) saying, vade, that's gone into my Poket you see, then take up with your right hand the second Cup, and with your left hand take the Ball from under it, and say see, I take this out fairely also, and in setig downe the Cup, convey the Ball that you retained under it, and then with your right hand take the Ball out of your left, and seem to put it into your pocket, (but retain) saying, Iueo, and that's gon into my pocket: then with your right hand take up the third and last Cup, and with your left hand take the Ball from under it, and say, here I take my last out, and in set∣ting downe the Cup, convey the Ball that is in your right hand under it, and then with your right hand take the ball out of your left hand, and seem to put it into your pocket (but retain it) and say vade, tis gone into my pocket; then take up your Cups or∣derly, saying, Gentlemen here is one you see, here is two, and here is all three again, and in setting down the last Cup noted A. convey the Ball that you re∣tained in your hand under it.
Then take up one of the three balls with your right hand, and seeme to put it under the Cup B but retaine it, and then say by the powder of experience, Iubeo, come away when I bid you under this Cup A, then take up B, and say, see you sirs, hee scornes to tarry under this Cup, but is crept under here: then take the Cup A, and they will wonder how it came thither. Then say Gentlemen, and you see here is but one, and in setting it downe, convey that in your right hand under it, then with your right hand take up the second Ball, and seeme to put it into your left hand, shutting your left hand in due time: then hold your said left hand from off you, and pro∣nounce these words with a Revoca stivoca (open your hand tossing it up) that's gone, then take up the Cup A. and say, see here they are got both together: Then say here are but two, and setting it down, con∣vey
the ball you retained in your right hand under it, Then with your right hand take up the third ball, and seem to put it into your left hand, and shutting it in due time, saying, this is my last ball, vade, passa couragious, (open your hand then, tossing it up, and staring after it) and that's gone you see, then take up the Cup A, and say, here they are all three againe. Set your cups then on a row again, and under one of them, as D, convey your fourth Ball which you retained in your hand, and lay the other three balls by. Then with your right hand take up the first ball, and seeme to put it into your left hand, shutting your said left hand in due time, then as if you were at dice, cast your left hand at the cup D, and blow after it, saying, vade pas, and tis gone, then take up the cup noted A, and clap it upon the cup D, and in
clapping it on, convey the Ball you retained in your right hand upon the top of the cup D. Then take up the second Ball with your right hand, and seem to put it into your left, shutting it in due time, and as you did before: now in like manner seeme to make the same to vanish with a word of command, then take up the cup C, and clap it upon the cup A, and clapping it on, convey the Ball you retained in your right hand, upon the top of the cup noted A, So then you have conveyed under each cup a bal, then take up the third ball, seeming to vanish it as the two former, but retaine it, then shew them un∣der each cup one, which will be very strange.
Then take one cup in your right hand, and clap it upon another, saying, see Gentlemen I wil set you one cup upon another, and in clapping it on, con∣vey the ball you retained in your right hand upon the top of the lowermost cup: marke the figure following. Then take up one ball, and seem to cast it in the aire, and staring after it, say vade, that's gone, then with your right hand take up the uppermost cup, say, see here he is crept between my cups, and in clapping it down againe, convey the ball that you retained under it. Then with your right hand take up the second bal and seem to put it into your left hand, shuting it in due time: then open your left hand tossing it, say, vade, and that's gone, then with your right hand take up the uppermost cup, & say, do you see Gen∣tlemen,
they are snug'd like a young man and a Maid in bed together, and in seting it down, convey the ball that you retaine. Then with your right hand take up the third ball, and seem to put it in your right hand, but retain it, shutting your left hand in due time: then hold it from you; and then open your hand, tossing it up and gaping after it, say Mountifilede, mount, that's gone, and then take up the cup and say, here are all three againe. Then cover them again, and say single is nothing, then clap the third cup upon them, but double is somewhat. Then may you seem to pull all the three corks out of the top of the upper cup, causing them to vanish one after another, as I have sufficiently taught you before, which may be performed by that one ball
that you retain in your right hand. And lastly, take the uppermost cup, and set it down first by it selfe, then with both hands nimbly hoisting the two other cups, shuffle them one upon another, and the balls wil not fall out, and so it will be thought that you have pulled the three bals out of the bottoms of the two uppermost cups. I could teach you to vary these feats a hundred wayes, but I leave it to those that intend to follow the trade. How to make a great Ball seem to come through a Table into a Cup. SEt one of your cups upon a Table, and take a good big stoole-ball out of your pocket, and say clapping your hand with the ball in it under the Table, My masters would you not think it a pretty trick that I should make this bal come thorow the table into the cup: Then some one or other will take up the cup to see if it be so; then hold the ball betweene your two middle fingers of your right
hand, stare him in the face, and say, nay but you must not move my cup out of its place, while I have said my words of command: with that set your cup in its former place, and in setting it down nimbly, convey the ball under it, and say, He ortuna nun∣quam credo, vade couragious: Now see (say) if it bee there or not, which when they see they will ima∣gine was conjured into it by vertue of your words. Other very pretty tricks with Balls. REtaine one small ball in your hand, and lay three other small bals upon the Table: then with your right hand take up one of the three bals, and put into your left hand, saying, There is one, then take up the second, and put that into your left hand also, and therewith likewise put the ball you retained in your right hand, saying, And there is two (yet you know there is three already) and shut your hand in due time: then take up the third ball in your right hand, and clap your right hand unto the upper part of your left arme, retaining the ball firmly, pronounce these words: Iueo celerite, come all into my hand when I bid you. Then withdraw your right hand (holding the palm thereof down∣ward) saying, That's gone Gentlemen: then open your left hand, and say, Here are all three toge∣ther, and lay them down on the Table. Another. TAke up one of the Bals in your right hand, and put it into your left, holding it firmely be∣tween your forfinger and thumb of your said left hand. Then with your forefinger and thumb of your right hand, (but be nimble) seem to pull one
ball out of another, which you may doe by slipping the ball that you retained in your right hand be∣tween the forefinger and thumb of the said hand, saying, Thus by activity have I learn'd to do, out of one little ball for to make two: and all of a big∣nesse, then lay all foure balls upon the table. Another. WIth your right hand take up one of the bals and seem to put it into the left, but retain it, shutting your left hand in due time, and say, There is one: then hold your hand from you. Then with your right hand take up another, say∣ing, Here I take another. Then pronounce these words, Mercus mercurus by the powder of experi∣ence, Iueo; then open your left hand saying, That's gone, and then open your right hand and shew them both together. How to make a stone seem to vanish out of your hand YOu must have a stone of a reasonable bignes, such as you may well hide in your hand, sit∣ting in such manner as I have formerly said, that you may receive any thing into your lappe, take this stone out of your pocket, saying, You see, Gen∣tlemen, here is a stone, a miraculous stone: Will you have it vanish, vade, or go away invisible, which being said, withdraw your hand to the side of the table letting the stone slip downe into your lap, in which time stare about you, saying, chuse you whether. Then reach out your hand and say: For∣tuna vaiabilis, lapis in aetimabilis, Iueo, vale, vade, couragious. Open your hand, then tossing it up, and blow a blast, and look up, saying, Doe you see it is
gone. Your looking up will make them to look up, in which time you may take the stone again in the other hand, and slip it into your pocket. Another TAke your ston again out of your pocket, say∣ing, here it is once again, and I wil give it unto any of you to hold, and reach your hand out unto them, and opening your hand, say, Loe here it is. Then when any one is about to take it,By  and nimblenesse of hand you may mke a peece of a has skin to sti and run about yu as a lie creature, and at last to vanish away, which will bee imagined to be ome Fami∣lia that you deale withall. withdraw your hand to the side of the table, and make your conveyance as before, in which time say, But you must promise me to take it quickly: Then will he say, I will, then reach your hand being shut out un∣to him againe, and while he striveth, thinking to take it quickly, hold fast and say, Vade couragious, ce∣leite vade: in which time you take up the stone in the other hand, and hold it from you. Then open your hand and say, loe, If you can hold a pretty Lasse no faster, when you have her, I will not give a pin for your skill. How to make a Card vanish, and finde it againe in a Nut. TAke what Card you will, pill the printed pa∣per from off it, and roll it hard up, and make a hole in a nut, and take out the kirnell, and then thrust in the Card, afterwards stop the hole of the nut neatly with wae, this nut you must have in readinesse about you, and when you are in your play, call for such a Card as you inclosed in your Nut, or else have one in a readines, and say, You see Gentlemen, here is such a Card: then wet it, and pill off the printed side, roll it up, and in the usuall
manner convey it away: Then take your Nut out of your pocket, eand give it unto one, and say cracke that Nut, and tell me if you can find the card there, which being found will be thought very strange. Then have another such like Nt, but filled with Inke, and stopped after the same manner that your other Nut was, and give that unto another, and bid him cracke it, and see what he can find in that, and so soone as he hath cracked it, all the inke will run about his mouth, which will move more mirth and laughter than the former. How to seem to eate a Knife. DEsire any one of your spectators to accom∣modate you with a Knife, which when you have gotten, hold it in such manner as that you may cover the whole Knife with both your hands, the end of the haft excepted, and set the point of it un∣to your eye, and say, some body strike it in with his fist, but no body will, because it is so dangerous a thing: then set your hands upon the Table, and looking about you, say, why, what will no body strike it in, in which time let the knife slip downe into your lap. Then nimbly make as if you chopt it hastily into your mouth, or to hold it in one hand, and strike it in with the other (but nimbly) then make two or three sowre faces, saying, some drink, some drink: or else you may say, now some one put his finger in my mouth, and pull it out again; some will say haply you will bite me, say, no I will assure you. Then when he hath put his finger into your mouth, he will pull it out and say, here is nothing (this time is sufficient to convey the Knife out of your lap into your pocket) say againe, why, you
have your finger out againe, did you thinke to pull the knife out? if that should be in my mouth, it would kill me. The knife is here in my pocket, and with that take it out, and deliver it againe. How to rap a Wag on the knuckles TAke a ball and lay it on the Table, and hold∣ing a knife in one hand by the blade, desire some body to take the bal that is upon the table & lay it upon the haft of the knif, pretending that you will blow it thence invisibly, and when he is lay∣ing it on, take him a good rap on the knuckles. How to seem to swallow a long pudding made of Tinne. THis pudding must be made of Tin, it consisteth of twelve little hoops made Tape-wise, so that they may almost fall one thorow another, and have a peece of Canvas tyed over the biggest end thereof, to the end it may not hurt your teeth by hastily clapping it into your mouth. The figure whereof followeth, and is marked with a letter A. hold this pudding (for so it is called) privatly in your left hand with the Canvas end uppermost, and with your right hand take a Bal out of your pocket, and
say, If there bee any Maid that hath lost her maidenhead, or old woman that is halfe out of conceit with her selfe, be∣cause her neighbours deem her not so young as she would wil∣lingly seeme to be, let her come unto mee, for this ball is pre∣sent remedy: Then seeme to put the Ball into your left hand, but let it slip into your lap, and clap your pud∣ding into your mouth which will bee thought to bee the ball you shewed them: Then incline your head, and open your mouth, and the pudding will slip down at its full length, which with your right hand you may strike up into your mouth againe: do thus three or foure times one after another and the last time you may discharge your mouth of it into your hand, and clap it into your lap without any suspition, so that you make two or three sowre faces after it, as if it stuck in your throat, and if you practise to smite easi∣ly with your fist on each side of your throat, the pud∣ding will seeme to chinke as if it were lying in your throat. Then say, thus they swallow Puddings in high Dutch-land, they slip down their throats before their teeth can take possession of them. How to seeme to cut ones nose halfe off. FOr the effecting of this feate, you must have a knife for the nonce, made with a gap in the midst of the blade, as it is demonstrated in the following figure no∣ted with the letter A.
You must conceale the notch with your finger, and then wring it over the fleshy part of your nose,Note that in such feates as this, it were ne∣cessary to have a peece of spunge with some sheepes blood in it to be retained pri∣vately. and your nose will seeme as it were halfe cut off with the knife. How to seem to pull a rope thorow your nose. YOu must have likewise for the effecting of this de∣lusion, an Implement on purpose. The figure wher∣of followeth. It may be made of two elder stickes, thrusting out the pith, and afterward glued together, the ends whereof must have a peece of corke cut hol∣low, and glued over them: then must there be a little whipcord put thorow them, the ends whereof must come out at two holes made on the outward side of each elder sticke. Put this Trinket over the fleshy part of your nose, then pull one end of the rope, and afterwards the other and it will bee thought that the rope commeth quite thorow your nose.
How to make a pile of Counters seeme to vanish thorow a Table. YOu must have for the performing of this feate, di∣vers counters having holes cut out of the midst of them, then they must be glued together so many of them as they may make a case sufficient to contain a Die: then glue one whole counter upon the top of them, and have a boxe made of white Tinne to fit them, but let it be deeper than the glued pile of Coun∣ters, and make a cover for this boxe. First, put into the boxe three loose Counters, then put in the glued pile of Counters with the hole uppermost, then put into the hole a Die, and lastly three other loose whole Counters and cover it. Draw this boxe of Counters, and say, Gentlemen here is a boxe of Barbary gold, it was left me as a Legacy by a deceased friend, upon condition I should imploy it well and honestly. Now sirs it was my fortune as I was travelling, to be be∣nighted, and so forced to seeke for lodging, and as it happened, I tooke into an house of entertainment, where calling for my Ostesse, I drew my stocke, and said, what must I give you mine Ostesse for my meat, drinke, and lodging this night? My friend, quoth she, you must give me three French Crownes; with that I uncovered my boxe, and set it upon the Table (it must be done with the mouth of the boxe downward) tooke my boxe from off the Counters, and delivered her three from the top, saying, there they are; and cast∣ing my eye aside, I spyed a pretty lasse comming down the staires; Sweet-heart, said I to her, what shall I give thee to lye with thee this night? she replied, sir, for three French Crownes you shall: then I thrust my
boxe forward,If you lift the Boxe a little from the Table bearing it fom you, the three loose counters wil come forth and deliver her three from the bot∣tome, saying there they are. But now said I to my Ostesse, Ostesse, what will you say if with a tricke I have, I make these six Crowns to fetch al the rest tho∣row the Table? Sir, quoth my Ostesse, you shall have your meat, drink, and lodging for nothing, and said the Lasse, thou shalt lye with me for nothing. Then I un∣covered them, saying, but first let us see whether they be here or no, and shew them, covering them againe. Then (taking to those six Counters in my hand, other loose Counters I have ready in my lap) I knocke my hand under the Table, saying, Virtute lapidis, miracu∣losi lapidis, jubeo vade, celeritate vade. Then I mingle my Counters as if they came tumbling thorow the Table into my hand, afterward throw them on the Table, saying, there be the Counters, then I take the boxe up, pressing the sides of it with my fore-finger and thumbe (which will keep the glued pile of Coun∣ters from slipping out) and let slip the glued Counters into my lap, and say, there is none but a Die, casting the empty box unto them, who shall have all now, my Ostesse or I? A, the figure of the Box, BB the lid of the Box, C the pile of Counters glued together, E the hole for the Die, D the Die.
How to seeme to put a ring thorow ones cheek. YOu must have two rings made of brase, silver, or what you will, of one bignesse, colour, and likenesse saving that one must have a notch cut through it as it is represented by the figure following noted with X. The other must bee whole without a notch; shew the whole ring, and conceal that which hath the notch, and say, now I will put this ring thorow my cheeke, and privily slip the notch one over one side of your mouth, and nimbly convey the whole Ring into your sleeve, or conceale it in your right hand: then take a small sticke which you may have in readinesse, and slip the whole Ring over it, holding your hand over it a∣bout the middle thereof, and bid some body hold both the ends of the sticke fast, and say, see this Ring here in my cheeke, it turnes round, and indeed it will seem to turn round if you stroake it nimbly with your fingers: and while you perceive them to fasten their eies inten∣tively upon that Ring, upon a sudden whip it out, and smite upon the sticke therewith instantly, concealing it, and whirling the other Ring, you hold your hand over round about the sticke, and it will be thought that you have brought that Ring upon the stick which was before upon your cheeke.
How to seeme o thrust a Bodkin into your forehead. YOu must have two bodkins, the one made like un∣to the other to outward appearance, but let the blade of the one be made to slip up into the haft: let the other be a true Bodkin: Conceale the false one & shew the true, after that you have shewed it, convey it into your lap. Then take up the false one, and recli∣ning your head, make as if you thrust it very stifly, making an ill-favoured face all the while. If you hold a pece of spunge in your hand filled with some sheeps blood pressing it out, the bodkin being in your fore∣head, as it were up to the hilt, it will cause the more astonishment and admiration among the beholders. In∣stantly put up your Bodkin, and take your handker∣cher, and wipe off the blood, and say, Iubeo vade vul∣nus a fronte. How to put a Locke upon ones mouth. YOu must have a Locke made for the nonce, the fi∣gure wherof followeth, the one side of its bow must be immoveable as that marked with A: the other side is noted with B, and must be pinned to the body of the Lock, as may appear at E, I say it must be so pinned, that it may play to and again with ease. This side of the bow must have a legge as C, and then turn into the Locke; this binding must have two notches filed on the inner side, which must be so ordered that the one may locke or hold the two sides of the bow as close together at the top as may be, the other notch to hold the said parts of the bows a proportionable distance asunder, that being lockt upon the cheeke, it
may neither pinch too hard, nor yet hold it so slight∣ly that it may be drawne off; let there be then a key fitted unto it to unlock it, as may appeare at D. And lastly, let the bows have divers notches filed in them, so the place of the partition when the locke is shut home will be least of all suspected. By this figure and directions you may fit your selfe of such a Locke, if so be you are desirous of it. The use of it. YOu may cause some one to hold one tester edge∣long between his teeth: Take also another Tester and with your left hand proffer to set it edgelong be∣tweene a second mans teeth, pretending that your in∣tent is to turne both into whether of their mouthes they shall desire, and that by vertue of your words
and circumstances which hee shall no sooner essay to do, but you holding your lock privately in your right hand with your forefinger over the legge C, may presently slip it over the left side his cheeke, and single locke it, which you may doe by pressing your said fin∣ger a little down after some store o intreaties: the Locke having hung on a while, produce your key by some device (as by a confederate or some carelesse per∣son) and unlocke it, but immediately double locke it, for it will seem to be a true lock, nor after sight be sus∣pected for other. How to make it freeze by the fire side. THis feate cannot be performed at every time, but only in Winter, and at such times as snow may be had, and he that will shew it, must have in readinesse an handfull of salt. The time serving, and the par∣ty provided, let him call for a joynt-stoole, a quart pot, a handfull of snow, a little water; and a short staffe or sticke, first let him poure a little water upon the top of the stoole, and upon it let him set the quart pot, and put the snow into the pot, the salt also, but pri∣vately, then let him hold the pot fast with his left hand, and take the short sticke in his right, and there∣with churne the snow and salt in the pot, as if one should churne for butter, and in halfe a quarter of an houre the pot will freeze so hard to the stoole, that you can scarcely with both hands pull it off from the stoole: there's a naturall reason may be given for this, which he that is a Scholler need not be told, and for a common Jugler I would not have so wise as to know, therefore I omit it.
How to breath fire out of your mouth THe performance of this tricke consisteth in the rowling of the towe. After you have made a rowle in readiesse, call for a pie of Tobacco, light it, and take a whiste or two, you may stop it downe with the end of your rowle of tow, retaining it pri∣vately in your hand: then deliver the Pipe to some bo∣dy else, and convey the tow into your mouth: then blow gently, and smoake and fire will come forth of your mouth, which you may continue as long as you please, by putting in more tow as it consumeth. How to daw ilius of any colour out of your muh, and to deliver it by the ad. YOu must provide you divers sorts of Ribbin, some blacke, some blew, some green, some yellow mea∣sure it, and at the end of every yard make a slip knot, then owle each coloured ribben into a ball by it selfe, and disose them about you, that you may know readi∣ly which to take in an instant. When you are called upon for so many yards of such a colour, convey a ball of the same into your mouth, and draw it out, remem∣bring how many knots have slipped at your teeth, then cut it off and deliver it. How to make two bells come into one hand, aving put into each hand one. THis feate must be performed with three bel, you must put one bel into your left sleeve, then put one bel into one hand, and another bel into the other hand (they must be little morris bels) withdraw your hands, and privily convey the bell in your left hand
into your right hand: Then stretch both your hands abroad, and bid two folkes hold your hands fast, but first shake your hands and say, do you hear them. The bell that is in your sleeve will not bee knowne by the racling, but that it is in your hand: Then say, he now that is the arrantest Whoremaster or Cuckold of you both, shall have both the bells, and the other shall have none at all: open your hands then, and shew them, and it will be thought that you deae by art ma∣gicke. How to make a Iugling book, or a ook of Waggery. YOu must provide a paper-book in octavo, of what thicknesse you please; first turn over seven leaves of it, and then upon both the open sides, draw or paint the pictures of flowers, then turne over seaven leaves more, and paint the very same; do this untill you have turned the booke once quite over: Then unto the far∣ther painted leaves, paste a little stay of paper or parch∣ment one directly over an other: Then turn over the booke againe: and having turned every sixt leafe, draw the picue of flower-de-lues, and then paste stayes of parchment upon them as you did upon the first; but these stayes must all of them be a little lower than the former. Then turne over the booke again, and after the fift leafe, throughout the booke is turned, paint hornes, do thus untill you have painted the book full of pictures, onely let there be one part of the leaves faire paper: having thus finished the booke, when you use it, hold it in your left hand, and with your right hand, your thumb set upon the parchmnt stayes, shew them orderly and nimbly, but with a bold and audacious countenance, for that must bee the grace of all your
trickes: say, this booke is not painted thus as some of you may uppose, but it is o such a property, that whosoever bloweth on it, it will give the representati∣on of whatsoever hee is naturally addicted unto, and then turn the booke, and say, see its all aire paper. Bonus Genius, or Nuntius invisibilis, or Hiccius Doccius as my senior calls it. YOu must have the figure of a man made of wood, about the bignesse of your little finger, as may ap∣peare by the figure noted C D, the head whereof no∣ted with A, must bee made to take off and put on at pleasure, by meanes of a wyer that is in the necke, marked with B: also you must have a cloth cap with a little bagge within to convey the head into. The bag must be neatly made, that it may not easily be percei∣ved; shew your man unto the company, saying, see you here gentlemen, this I call my Bonus Genius, then shew his cap, saying, and this is his coat, say moreover, looke
now as stedfastly on him as you can, neverthelesse I will cousin you, for therefore am I come. Then hold your cap above your face, and take your man in your right hand, and put his head thorow the hole of the cap, as you may see at F, saying, now he is ready to goe of a∣ny message I hae to end him; to Spaine, Italy, or whi∣ther I will: but he must have some thing to beare his charges, with that pull out your right hand from under the cap, and therewith the body, (but privately) utting your right hand into your pocket, as if you felt for mo∣ney, where you must leave the body, and take out your hand, & say, there is three crownes: Now be gone, then turn the head about▪ and say, but he will looke about him before he goes. Then say (settng your forefinger upon his crowne) just as I thrust my finger downe, so he shall vanish, and therewith by the assistance of your left hand that is under the cap, convey his head into the little bag within the cap: then turne your cap about, and say, see here he is gone: then take up your cap, and hold it up againe, drawing the head out of the little bag, and say, hei genius meus velocissimu, ubi, and whistle. Then thrust the head up thorow the hole of the cap, and holding the head by the wyer, turn it about; then presently put head and cap into your pocket. Boxes to change Grain. MAke one boxe of Wood, Tinne, or Brasse: let the bottome fall a quarter of an inch into the boxe, and glue thereon a laying of Barly or such like graine: draw the boxe with the bottome downewards, and say Gentlemen, I met a Country-man going to buy Barly, and I told him I would sell him a pennyworth, also I would multiply one graine into so many bushels
as hee should need, then cast a Barly-corne into your boxe, and cover it with a hat, and in the coverng it, turne the bottome upside down: then cause some body to blow on the hat, then uncover it, and they will thinke strangely of it. You may make another o of wood like unto a bell to hold so much just as your for∣mer boxe wll, and make a bottome unto this boxe of shooe sole leather, to thrust into the bottome of the bell: then fill it with barly, and thrut up the lathr-bottome, for it will keepe te barley from faling out, take this box out of your pocket, an set it down gn∣ly upon the table, and say, I wll not caue al the r∣ly to goe out of my measure into my bell, then with a hat cover the boxe that hath the barly gewed unto it, and in covring it, turne it with the barly downwar: then say, first let us see whether thre be nothing un∣der the bell, and clap it hard downe upon the table, so the weight of the barley will thrust the bottome dow; then bid some one blow hard on the hat, then take it up, where they will see nothing but an empty masure, then take up the bell, and all the barly will poure out. Sweep it then presently into your hat or lap, lest their busie prying may chance to discover your leather bottome. How to vanish a glasse of Beere. TAke a low glasse, fil it reasonable full of Br, and take a six-pene and lay it downe upon the table and set the glasse of Beere upon it,Your finer op mut bee rud a lttle with some green soft wx and so you may do it cleanly and dipping your finger into the Beere, say, whether is the sixpence in, or under the glasse. Some will say perhaps it is under: then say, let' see, and take up at once both six-pence and glasse (hold the glasse so that both your hands
may quite hide it) and let the glasse slip plum-downe into your lap, then make as if you threw it away, look∣ing up after it. Then seeme to blow your nose, and let all the sixpence upon the table, saying, I am glad I have got my mony agane: but now (say) what is be∣come of the glasse? then seeme to take it out of your pocket, saying, I am a good fellow, and would not willingly lose my liquor, then drinke in up, This is an excellent tricke if it be swiftly and neatly performed. Though you spill a part of the Bere, it is no matter, neither is it any disgrace unto it; besides you may put it off very well. How to seem to cut off a mans head, it is called the de∣collaion o John Baptist. YOu must have a table with two good wide holes towards one end, also a cloath on pupoe to cover the table with, so that the said covering may hang to the ground round about the table; also this covering must have two holes made in it, even with the holes of the table; you must also have a platter of wood for the purose, having a hole in the bottome to fit also unto the holes of the table, and it must, as also the table, bee made to take in two peces: having these in readines, you must have two boyes; the one must lye along upon the table with his backe upward, and he must put his head thorow the one hole of the table, cloth and al; the other must sit under the table, and put his head tho∣row the other hole of the table, then put the platter a∣bout his neck, to make the sight more dreadfull to be∣hold, you may forme some loome about the neckes of them, making small holes in them as it were veins, and besmeare it over with sheepes blood, putting some
blood also and little bits of liver into the platter, and set a chafing-dish of coales before the head, strewing some brimston upon the coales; for this will make the head seeme so pale and wan, as if in very deed it were separated from the body. The head may fetch a gaspe or two, and it will be better. Let no body be present while you doe this, neither when you have given en∣trance, permit any to be medling, nor let them tarry long. How to make the face of a child to appeare in a pot of water. YOu must get a ball made of wood, and upon one halfe or side of it, there must the face of a child bee artificially carved: on the back-side of this face there must bee made a hole, but not very deepe; this hole must be filled with lead, to the end that it may (the ball
being cast into the water) sway te face uppermost: then paint it lively with oyle colours, and it is done. Note that it ought not to be full so big as a tennis bal. Call or a wine quart-ot filled with faire water up to the necke, having your face in a readinesse, concealed in your right hand, take the pot in your left hand, and set it on the table, and say, see you Gentlemen, here is nothing in the pot but water, with that clap down the po-lid wth your right hand, and in clapping it downe, slp the fae ito the pot, this you may doe without a∣ny the least suspition. Then cause them all to stand off, and if they please, to marke you as narrowly as they cap: with that put your hand into your pocket, and seeme to take out a handfull of powder, and to strew it over the pot, saying Sarge celeriter, by the powder of exeriene, sarge, then bid them look what is there. Ater he same manner may you make a Toad to ap∣peare, which will cause no small admiration. A device whereby you may drinke a Tunnell ull of dinke, and afterwards seme to poure the same all out of your sleeve againe. YOu must get a double Tunnell, that is, two Tunnels ored one within the other, so that you may at the little end pour a quantity of wine, water, or any liqur. This Tunell you must ave rady filled before hand wth whatsoever liquor you lease call for some of the ame kind: then drw your Tunnel, and setting yur middle finger unto the bottome of it, bid some ody▪ or else do you your elfe poure it full, and drinke it up efore them, and turn the road end of the Tun∣nell downeward, saying, Gentlemen, all is gne, and in a trice turne your selfe about, and in turning, pro∣nounce
some tearmes of art, withdraw your finger from the narrow end, and let all the liquor out that was between the Tunnels, and it will be thought to be that which you drunke out of the Tunnell, and so you may perswade them that it is the very same. How to seeme to make a tooth drop out with a touch. You must have some great tooth in a readinesse, as the tooth of a Hog, a Calfe, or of an Horse; this you must retain privately in your right hand, and with the same hand take out of your pocket a small corke bal, and having used some Rhetorick to perswade them that it is of some excellent property, incline your head and therewith touch some one of your farther teeth, and immediately let the tooth that you held in your hand drop downe, saying, and this is the fashion of Mountebanks, Touch and take. Another conceit to procure laughter. TAke your ball in one hand, and the tooth in the other, and stretch your hands as far as you can one from the other, and if any will, lay a quart of wine with him, that you will not withdraw your hands, and yet will make both of them come into either hand which they please: It is no more to do, than to lay one downe upon the Table, and turne your selfe round, and take it up with the other hand, and your wager is wone, and it will move no small laughter to see a foole so lose his mony.
How to make two or three egges dance upon a staffe. PRovide a good thicke staffe about two yards long, three parts whereof ought to be made scoope-wise, or halfe hollow, like a basting-Ladle, the fourth part must serve for the handle. At the end of the scoope must be made a hole, and therein put a broad pin about the length of an egge, and it is done. Rest the handle of this staffe against your right thigh, and hold it with your right hand neere to the beginning of the scoope; lay an egge then into the scoope of the staffe, and turne your selfe round, bearing the staffe now up, and anon downe, with the scoope side of it alwayes upward, so the egge will tumble from one end of the scoope unto the other, and not fall out. After the same manner may you make two or three egges by a little practise to wamble one after another. A merry conceit. DEliver one peece of mony with your left hand un∣to one, and to a second person another, and offer a third to another, for he seeing the other receive mony will not lightly refuse: when he offereth to take it, you may rap him on the fingers with a knife, or somewhat else held in your right hand, saying that you knew by vertue of your bonus genius, that hee meant to have kept it from you. How to knit an hard knot upon a handkercher, and to seeme to undoe the same with words. MAke one plaine loose knot, with the two corner ends of a handkercher, and seeming to draw the
same very hard, hold fast the body of the said hand∣kercher (neere to the knot) with your right hand, pul∣ling the contrary end with the left hand, which is the corner of that which you hold. Then close up hand∣somely the knot, which will bee yet somewhat loose, and pull the handkercher so with your right hand, as the left hand end may be neere to the knot: then will it seeme to be a true and firme knot. And to make it appeare more assuredly to bee so indeed, let a stranger pull at the end which you hold in your left hand, whilst you hold fast the other in your right hand; and then holding the knot with your fore-finger and thumbe and the nether part of your handkercher with your other fingers, as you hold a Bridle when you would with one hand slip up the knot and lengthen your reins. This done, tune your handkercher over the knot with the left hand, in doing whereof, you must sud∣denly slip out the end or corner, putting up the knot of your handkercher with your fore finger and thumbe, as you would put up the foresaid knot of your bridle. Then deliver the same (covered and wrapt within the midst of your handkercher) to one to hold fast, and af∣ter the pronunciation of some words of Art, and wag∣ers laid, take the handkercher and shake it, and it will be loose. A notable feat of Fast and Loose; namely, to pull three beadstones from off a Cord, while you hold fast the ends thereof, without removing of your hands. TAke two little whipcords of two foot long a peece double them equally, so as there may appeare, foure ends. Then take three great beadstones, the hole
of the one of them being bigger then the rest; and put one beadstone upon the eye or bowte of the one cord, and another on the other cord: then take the stone with the gratest hole, and let both the bowts be hid∣den therein: which may bee the better done, if you put the eye of the one into the eye of the other. Then pull the middle bead upon the same, being doubled, o∣ver his fellow, and so will the beads seeme to be put over the two cords without partition, for holding fast in each hand the two ends of the two cords, you may tosse them as you list, and make it seeme manifest to the beholders, which may not see how you have done it, that the beadstones are put upon the cord without fraud: Then must you seeme to adde more effectuall binding or those beadstones to the string, and make one halfe of a knot with one of the ends of each side, which is for no other purpose, but that when the Beadstones bee taken away, the cords may bee seene in the case which the beholders supposed them to be in before. For when you have made your halfe knot (which in any wise you may not double to make a per∣fect knot) you must deliver into the hands of some standr by, those two cords, namely, two ends even∣ly set in one hand, and two in the other, and then with a wager and tearmes of, Art beginne to pull off your Beadstones, which if you handle nimbly, and in the end cause him to pull his two ends, the two cords will shew to be placed plainly, and the Bead-stones to have come thorow the cords.
To burne a threed, and to make it whole againe with the ashes theeof. TAke two Trees or small Laces, o one oot in length a peece: row up one o them round, which will be then of the quantity of a eas▪ bew the same between your fore-finger and your thume. Then take the other threed and hold it forth at length betwixt the fore-finger and thumb of each hand, hold∣ing al your fingers daintily, as young Gentlewomn are taught to take up a morsell of meat. Then let one out asunder the same threed in the middle; when that is done, put the tops of your two thumbs together, and so shall you with lesse suspition receive the peice of threed which you hold in your right hand unto your left, without opening your left finger and thumb, then holding these two peeces as you did the same before it was cut, let these two be cut also asunder in the midst, and they conveyed as before, untill they be cut very short, and then rowle all those ends together, and keep that ball of short threeds before the other in your let hand, and with a knife thrust out the same into a can∣dle, where you may hold it untill the said ball of short threeds be burnt to ashes. Then pull bake the knife with your right hand, and leave the ashes with the other ball betwixt the fore-finger and thumb of your left hand, and with the two thumbs and two fore-fin∣gers together, seeming to take paines to rub the ashes, until your threed be renewed, and draw out that threed at length, which you kept all this while betwixt your fore-finger and thumb. If you have Legerdemain to bestow the same ball of threed, and to change it from place to place betwixt your two fingers (as may be ea∣sily done) then will it seeme very strange.
To cut a Lace asunder in the midst, and to make it whole againe. PRovide a peece of the Lace which you meane to cut, or at the least a patterne like the same, one inch and a halfe long, and keeping it double privily in your left hand, betwixt some of your fingers neere to the tops thereof, take the other Lace which you meane to cut, which you may hang about ones neck, and draw downe your said left hand to the bowte thereof: and putting your owne peece a little before the other (the end, or rather the middle whereof, you must hide be∣twixt your fore-finger and thumb) making the eye or bowte which shall be seen, of your patterne, let some stander by cut the same asunder, and it will bee surely thought that the other Lace is cut; which with words and rubbing and chafing it, you shall seeme to renew and make whole againe. This, if it be well handled, will seeme miraculous. How to seeme suddenly to melt a peece of Coyne with words. YOu must have a boxe made of brasse or Crooked-Lane plate, a double boxe, and not above five quarters of an inch deepe: in the midst must bee the bottome, and both ends must have covers to come over them. This boxe might be so neatly made, that each lid might have a small bolt artificially contrived (which though I could make my selfe, neither by words nor figures I can describe) whereby the lids of the boxe might bee lockt fast on, that none but master Jugler himselfe knowes readily to open. In one end of this boxe have alwayes in readinesse a resemblance of
moulten silver, which you may easily make by mix∣ing an equall quantity of linfoyl and quicksilver toge∣ther, which you shall thus doe: First, put your linfoyl in a crucible or Goldsmiths melting-pot, melt it, and then take it from the fire, and put in your quicksilver, and stirre both well together, and it is done. Now the one end of your box being ready furnished herewith, borrow a peece of coine of some one in the company, willing him to give it some private marke whereby he may know it againe to bee his owne, then put it into the other end of the box, in the bottome whereof you may have a little waxe to keep it from ratling. Thus you may seeme by vertue of words to melt his mony, and afterwards to give it againe to the party whole as you received it from him. A device whereby you may draw sundry liquors out of one seeming vessell, all which shall be put in at one hole, and all drawne out of another. YOu must cause a vessell of indifferent bignesse to bee made in forme of a Tunne, having two parti∣tions, so there will be three severall parts: A B signi∣fieth the first, C D he second, and E F the third, upon the top of this Tunne must bee fast nailed a peece of wood turned round as G H, in the center whereof must be erected a stile, whose top must be made into a screw, in this wood must also be made three holes to∣wards the circumpherence, each hole having a pipe inserted into it, which may extend themselves one of either into each vessell, as you may see by the figure. I K signifieth the first pipe, which reacheth into the first part A B, L.M, the second pipe that extendeth it selfe into the second part noted C D, N O the third
pipe that extendeth it selfe into the third part of E F, each part also must have his vent, else you can neither fill nor empty it, these are marked with the letter P Q R, upon the top of the foresaid wood must be fastened a peece of liquored leather having three holes in it an∣swerable unto the holes of the wood, then upon the wood must bee serued another snout whereby to fill each vessell with a severall liquor, V the snouts, S T a brasse plate whereunto the snout is sodered, W the sere that serueth this snout upon the stile in the turn∣ed wood G H. Lastly, each vessell must have its pipe whereout you may draw the conteined liquor, which you may see in the figure, and then must there be serued over them another plate with a taper vessell, so by turning it about from one hole to another, you may deliver
each liquor apart whither of them you please. A very strange tricke whereby you may seeme to cut a peece of Tape into foure parts, and make it whole a∣gaine with words. TAke a peece of narrow white Tape about two or three yards long; first present it to view to any that may desire it, then tie both the ends of it together, and take one side of it in one hand, and the other in the other hand, so that the knot may bee about the midst of one side, and using some circumstantiall words to beguile your spectators, turn one hand about towards your selfe, and the other from you, so shall you twist the Tape once, then clap the ends together, and then if you slippe your fore-finger and thumbe of every hand betweene the Tape, almost as one would hold a skeine of threed to bee wound, this will make one fold or twist as may appeare in the first figure, where A signi∣fieth the twist or fold. B the knot, then in like manner make a second fold about the line D C, as you may see by the second figure, where B signifieth the knot, C the first fold, A the second fold. Hold then your fore∣finger and thumbe of your left hand upon the second twist, and upon the knot also, and the fore-finger and thumbe of your right hand upon the first fold C, and desire some one of your spectators to cut all asunder with a sharpe knife at the crosse line E D. When it is cut, hold still your left hand, and let all your ends fall you hold in your right hand, for there will bee a shew of eight ends, foure above, and foure below, and so the string will bee thought to bee cut into foure parts, as may bee seene by the third figure, then gather up the ends that you let fall into your left hand, and deliver
two of the ends (seeming to take them at randome) unto two severall persons, bidding them to hold them fast, still keeping your left hand-fingers upon the twists
or folds: th  yor right and left hand seeme to tumble, and  al the ends together that you had in your left hand, twst out all the lips or peeces which are three, as you may see at A and B in the third fi∣gure; twist them all, I say, into a little ball, and conceale it betweene some of your fingers of your left hand, and crumble thereof on another confused heape: and after some words said, with your right hand deliver this confused heape unto one of the company, bidding him to hold it fast, saying, Hulla passa quicke couragious, fiat conjunctio: Then bid them looke on it, who while they are greedily looking after the event, you may with ease convey the ball or roll of ends into your po∣cket, so will it be thought that you have made it whole by vertue of your words. An excellent tricke if it bee gracefully handled, and a tricke that cost me more trouble to finde then all the rest; this I have gone pur∣posely to observe, but returned as wise as I went. A device how to multiply one face, and make it seem to bee an hundred or a thousand. THis feare must bee performed by a Looking-Glasse made for the nonce, the figure whereof I have fully described, with the manner of making it, which is thus: First, make an hoope or phillet of wood, horne, or such like, about the widenesse of an Halfe-Crowne peece, in the circumference, the thicknesse of this hoope or phillet let be about a quarter of an inch. In the mid∣dle of this hoope fasten a bottome of wood or brasse, and bore in a decent order divers small holes about the bignesse of small peafe, or phitches, then upon the one side of this bottome set in a peece of Crystall glasse,
and fasten it in the hoope close to the bottome; then take a quantity of quicke-silver, and prepare it after this manner: Take, I say, a quantity as an ounce or two of quick-silver, and put to it a little salt, and stirre them well together, then put to them some white wine vineger, and wash and stirre all together with a wood∣en slice, then poure away the vineger, and wash away the salt with faire water made warme, then poure a∣way the water, and put the quick-silver into a peece of white leather, and bind it up hard, and so twist or straine it out into an earthen panne, and it will be very bright and pure, then put so much of this prepared quicke-silver into the phillet or foresaid hoope as will cover the bottome; then let into the hoope another peece of christall glasse fitted thereto, and cement the sides, that the quick-silver may not runne out, and it is done. The figure whereof I have here under-set; A re∣presenteth the one side that giveth the forme of one face to the beholders. B the other side that multiplieth the beholders face, so oft as there are holes in the mid∣dle bottome, the use whereof I shall not insist upon, ince he that is verst in the former feats will better conceive
of himselfe to use it, then my words can either direct or assist him. Of divers pretty Iuggling knacks. THere are many feats able to beguile the simple, as to deliver meale, pepper, ginger, or any powder out of your mouth after the eating of bread, which is done by retaining any of these things stuffed in a little paper or bladder, conveyed into your mouth, and grind∣ing the same with your teeth. Item, a rush thorow a peece of trencher, having three holes, and at the other side in the third hole, by reason of an hollow place made betwixt them both, so as the sleight consisteth in the tur∣ning of the peece of trencher. Feats by conveyance of money. THe best place to dispose of a peece of money, is in the palme of the hand, and the best peece for convey∣ance is a Tester, but with practice all will be alike. A notable tricke to transforme a Counter into a Groat. TAke a Groat, or some lesse peece of money, and grinde it very thinne at the one side, and take two Counters and grind them, the one on the one side, the other on the other side; glew the smooth side of the Groat to the smooth side of one of the Counters, joy∣ning them to close together as may bee, especally at the edges, which may bee so filed, as they shall seem to bee but one peece; to wit, one side a Counter, the other side a Groat. Then take a little greene wax, and lay it upon the smooth side of the one Counter, as it doe not much discolour the Groat; and so will that Counter with the Groat cleave together, as though they were
glewed, and being filed even with the groat and the other counter, will seem so like a prfect entire coun∣ter, that though a stranger handle it, he shall not be∣wray it; then having a little touched your forefinger and the thumb of your right hand with oft waxe, take therewith this counterfeit counter, and lay it downe openly upon the palme of your left hand, in such sort as an Auditor layeth downe his counters, wringing the same hard, so as you may leave the glewed counter with the groat apparently in the palme of your left hand, and the smooth side or the waxed counter will stick fast upon your thumbe, by reason of the waxe wherewith it is smeared, and so you may hide it at your pleasure, provided alwaies that you lay the wax∣ed side downward, and the glewed side upward: then close your hand, and in or after the closing thereof turn the piece, and so instead of a counter (which they sup∣pose to be in your hand) you shall seeme to hav a groat, to the admiration of the beholders, if it be well handled. An excellent feat to make a two-peny piece lie plaine in your hand, and to be passed from thence when you list. PUt a little red waxe (but not too thinne) upon the naile of your longest finger, and let a stranger put a twopeny piece into the palme of your hand, and shut your fist suddenly, and convey the two peny piece up∣on the wax, which with use you may so accomplish as no man shall perceive it. Then say, Aili, cafil, zaze, hit, mel, and suddenly open your hand, holding the tips of your fingers rather lower then higher than the palme of your hand, and the beholders will wonder
where it is become. Then shut your hand suddenly againe, and lay a wager whether it be there or no; and you may either leave it there, or take it away with you at your pleasure. How to transforme any one small thing into another form by folding of paper. TAke a sheet of paper and fold, or double the same, so as one side be a little longer than the other: Then put a Counter between the two leaves of the paper up to the middle of the top of the fold, holding the same so as it bee not perceived, and lay a groat on the outside thereof, right against the Counter, and fold it downe to the end of the longer side: and when you un∣fold it againe, the Groat will bee where the Counter was, and the Counter where the Groat was, so as some will suppose that you have changed the money into a Counter, and with this many feats may be done. How to convey money out of one of your hands into the other by Legerdemaine. FIrst, you must hold open your right hand, and lay therein a Tester, or some big peece of money, then lay thereupon the top of your long left finger, and use some words of Art, and upon the sudden, slip your right hand from your finger, wherewith you held downe the Tester, and bending your hand a very little, you shall retaine the Tester still therein, and suddenly daw∣ing your right hand thorow your left, you shall seem to have left the Tester there, especially when you shut in due time your left hand. Which that it may more plainly appeare to be truly done, you may take a knife, and seeme to knocke against it, so as it shall make a
great sound: but instead of knocking the peece in the left hand (where none is) you shall hold the point of the knife fast with the left hand, and knock against the Tester held in the other hand, and it will be thought to hit against the money in your left hand. Then after some words of Art pronounced, open your hand, and when nothing is seen, it will bee wondered at, how the Tester came removed. How to make a six-pence seeme to fall thorow a Table. YOu must have an Handkercher about you, having a Counter neatly sewed in one of the corners of it: take it out of your pocket, and desire some body to lend you a Tester, and seeme to wrap it up in the midst of the Handkercher, but retain it in your hand, and in¦stead of so doing, wrap the corner in the middest that hath the Counter sewed in it, and then bid them feele if it be not there, which they will imagin to be no other than the Tester that they lent you, then bid them lay it under a hat upon the Table, and call for a Basin of water hold it under the Table, and knock, saying, Vade, come quicke, and then let the six-pence fall out of your hand into the water. Then take up the hat, and take the Hand∣kercher and shake it, saying, that is gone, then shew them the money in the Basin of water. How to seeme to blow a six-pence out of another mans hand. TAke a six-pence blow on it, and clap it presently into one of your spectators hands, bidding them to hold it fast: Then aske of him if hee be sure he have it, then to be certaine, hee will open his hand and looke.
Then say to him nay, but if you let my breath go off, I cannot doe it. Then take it out of his hand again, and blow on it, and staring him in the face, clap a piece of horn in his hand, and retain the sixpence, shutting his hand your selfe. Bid him hold his hand down, and flip the Tester between one of his cuffes. Then take the stone that you shew feares with, and hold it unto his hand, saying, By vertue hereof, I will and command the money to vanish you hold in your hand, vade, now see: when they have looked, then they will think that it is changed by the vertue of your stone. Then take the horne againe, and seem to cast it from you, retaining it, and say, vade, and anon say you have your money again: He then will begin to marvell, and say I have not, say then to him again, you have, and I am sure you have it: Is't not in your hande? if it be not there, turn down one of your sleeves, for it is in one I am sure, where when he findeth it, he will not a little wonder. How to deliver to one man six pence, and to another, another six pence, and to make both the testers come into one mans hand. DEliver into one mans hand two testers even set in∣stead of one, shutting his hand immediatly:Yur finger must be rub'd wih waxe, so you may deld him without a∣ny susption. then take another tester, and have in readinesse a peece of horn cut even with it. Clap the said tester into his right hand with the horn under it,The hard pes∣sing of the mo∣nie in the hand, wil seem that the money is in the hand when it is nt, fr a moment, ere∣fore be quck. staying the tops of your two middlemost fingers stiffe upon the tester; so bending his hand a little downward, draw your fingers toward you, and they will slip the tester out of his hand, and shut his hand presently, who feeling the peece of horne, wil imagine it is the testers: then say,
he that kissed a pretty wench last in a corner, shall have both Testers in his hand, and the other shall have none. This may also be performed without a piece of horne, wringing one tester in the palme of the hand, and ta∣king it away with your thumbe being waxd; for the hard wringing the money in the hand will make the partie beleeve he hath it, when he hah it not. Conveyance of Cards and Dice. THere are multitude of delightful feats which may be performed by an orderly placing, facing, shuf∣fling, and cutting of cards usually played withall. Also a number of other strange feats may be shewed by cards and dice, such as may be purposely made. The cards may be made halfe of one print, and halfe of ano∣ther; so by holding them divers waies, sundry things may be presented each contrary to other. For exam∣ple, with foure of the ame Cards purposely made, and holding them accordingly, you shall present eight severall things. Now for the Dice the cunning is in forging them, and a ready retaining or throwing two among three, or one with two: they must, I say, bee forged bigger towards one side than he other, so that the weight of one side may draw up the other. Othe some may be made flatter being furnished with such like. And having learned to retain them handsomely and readily, you may have the game at command, and know before hand what will be your cast, and so vi upon it too. Moreover, for the Cards there are divers other tricks, of which those that are cheaters make continuall practice, as nipping them, turning up one corner, marking them with little spots, placing glasses behinde those that are gamesters, and in rings for the
purpose dumbe shews of some standers by. But I will not stand on discovering these, for in this our couse∣ning age there are too many so expert herein, that they maintain themselves better than many an honest man with a lawfull trade and calling. Onely take this by the way, Those that have money in their purses, let them beware of Carding and Dicing, lest they wish they had, when it is too late. As for my own part, Ile never play for that I am sure of already: if any will play with me upon other termes I am sure I shall lose nothing by the bargain. Of Confederacie. SOme there are that have said I writ nt sufficiently of this part in the former Edition; I rather thinke the cause was they thought they had too little for their money. Neverthelesse I will to give every one their desired content, and deliver my mind more fully here∣in, and it may be, which I most desire, they may learne to avoid the company of roving gamesters, cheaters. I mean that frequent the high-waies, and principall Towns and places of resort thereabouts; for they are of the same manner, though for a worser end. First therefore by this word Confederacie is meant, a kind of Combination, or making an agreement or co∣venanting among sundry persons for the accom∣plishment of one and the selfe-same buinesse: under∣stand me aright; All these being very well knowne each to other (at least the design as may appeare by their agreement thereabout) do so estrange themselves as if they had never seen each other before. And to the end that they might performe their designe, not gi∣ving any the least suspition to any of the beholders, I
will give you an instance or two, whereby I shall give you sufficient information for the more ready con∣ceiving of every particular in this nature when and wheresoever you see them performed. How to cast a peece of mony away, and to find it in another mans mouth, pocket, or puse. THe Jugler calls for some one peece of coine, as a tester or a shilling of any one in the company, he willeth him to marke it with what marke he will, then he taketh it, and casteth it away, and commeth to his confederate (who is funished before-hand with the like peece of coine marked with the very same marke) and bids him deliver the money out of his pocket, purse, or if he say the word, his mouth; for this is conclud∣ed of before-hand. Now this confederate to make the matter seem more strange, will fume and fret, asking how hee should come by it, till having found the marke, hee will confesse it bee none of his, wondring at his skill how he should send it thither: and all the rest be taken with a reall administration of his extraor∣dinary cunning. How by the sound of a Counter philliped to tell what side is uppermost, whether crosse or pile. THe Jugler drawes a Counter out of his pocket, and saith to the company, See here is a Counter, take it who please, and let him phillip it up and I will by my cunning tell you whither crosse or pile be up∣permost by the very found, for you shall hood-winke me. Now there are three or four or more confederates in the place, who seeming strangers as well as the rest,
will be very importunate to have the philliping it, and before one of these shall have it, who by some signe of the fingers or countenance (foreknowne to the Jugler) do give him information after he is demanded. Of the same nature is that tricke formerly mentioned in the booke, and called, The decollation of Iohn Bap∣tist. To make one dance naked is a tricke of the same na∣ture, for the party before hand is agreed to doe it, and also the manner and circumstances: So that the Jugler to blind the people, pronounceth sundry words to such a person, he then begins to rave like a madde man, and put his clothes off with a kind of violent carelessenesse, though, God knowes, the party knowes as well what he doth, as your selfe that reades it. After the same manner shall you know what mo∣ney another hath in his purse, and casting money into a pond, and finding it under a stone or threshold in another place. Also to make a peece of money to leap out of a cup and run to another, by means of a small hair fastened to the money, which haire the Confederate guideth, with a multitude of such like strange feats, which may seem impossible to the judgment of the common people to be effected without the assistance of the devill, or some familiar, which to nominate is nei∣ther needfull, nor will my occasions permit so much lei∣sure as to do it. How to make a bellowing noyse like an Oxe, of a Dogge and Cat fighting together, or of two Mastiffes fighting together. THis I saw once or twice performed, and to my knowledge not above. It was a lusty young fellow
that did it with a cloth cast over his head which rea∣ched down to his feet, all was to beguile the people, for he pretended that this sound came out of his belly; he had a full and strong voice, and had practised a good while, and another man of the like making may easily doe as much. For his nostrils he stopt with his forefinger and thumbe, and closed the other part of his hand over his mouth as I saw him once uncased. Another man I saw at the same time, eat halfe a dozen quick charcoal, but this is not to be attempted by every one: For some cannot eat their meat very hot; others there are that cannot away with meat except it be boyling hot, and they are of that disposition, I should have said rather constitution, that they will not stick to take meat as it is boyling out of a pot with their bare hands, and yet feel no extraordinary heat. I ave here set downe kind Reader, not onely all uuall feates that either my self have seen or heard of, but divers others also which I am sure were never in print, nor as yet performed by any I could ever heare of except my selfe, and all to give thee thy full content: and take thus much from me, If thou rightly understand this, there is not a trick that any jugler in the world can shew thee, but thou shalt bee able to conceive after what manner it is performed, if he doe it by a slight of hand, and not by an unlawfull and de∣tested meanes. That there are such it is not to be doubt∣ed of, that doe work by unlawfull means, and have besides their own naturall endowments the assistance of some familiar, whereby they many times effect such miraculous things as may well be admired by whom∣soever shall either behold or hear tell of them. I could give an instance in one whose father while he lived
was the greatest jugler in England, and used the assist∣ance of a familiar; he lived a Tinker by trade, and u∣sed his fears as a trade by the by; he lived, as I was in∣formed, alwaies betattered, and died for ought I could heare in the same estate. I could here, as I have instanced in this man, so give you his name, and where he liveth, but because he hath left the bad way, and chose the better, because he hath amended his life, and betook himself to an honest calling, I will rather re∣joyce at his good, then do him any the least disgrace by naming him to be such a one. If here be any aske my name, let them know I am not bound to tell them. If they ask why I have writ this Pamphlet, it is to de∣light them: let them excuse me for the one, and thanke me for the other; and it may be if time will give so much leisure, I shall hereafter spend my wits upon some better Subject. FINIS.
