1365 S113165 99848404 13494
A VERIE GOD∣ly, learned, and fruit∣full Sermon against the bad spirits of Malig∣nitie, Malice, and vn∣mercifulnesse. Publikely preached by Thomas Bankes, Mai∣ster of Artes, and preacher of the word. Seene and allowed. LONDON Printed by Iohn Wolfe, dwelling in Distaffe Lane, neere the signe of the Castle. 1586.
To the most reuerend Father  God his singuler good Lord, Iohn  the prouidence of God Archbi∣shop of Canterburie, Primate of all England, & Metropolitane, Thomas Bankes wi∣sheth and prayeth for continuall encrease of Gods mani∣fold graces. MY verie good Lord, may it please your Grace to recognize, that as Cato the Cen∣sour, when he was as∣ked why he would not haue his picture solemnely erected (as others had) said, Hee would rather that men should maruel why he wanted that monu∣ment, then murmure because hee had it. So likewise haue I my selfe replied in this case, as most vnwilling to con∣descend
to the Presse. Notwithstan∣ding, the sad importunitie of some learned wellwillers which tooke a li∣king of this Sermon, & the causelesse impatience of other some captious per∣sons, which did both stomake it, & o∣ther such sermons of mine, as ouer∣fraught with too too much eloquence (forsooth) have finally won me to sur∣render vp the copie herof out of mine owne custodie. The one instant cause (well I wote) argueth no lesse but that my obsequious affection hath ouer∣weighed my discretion, in that I haue tendered my friends desire more then mine own credit, by publishing this so slender a treatise: & the other cause that moued me, importeth no more but that I do rather securely insult o∣uer, then seriously sticke at the waspish indignation of the aduersaries, espe∣cially hauing now a fresh recommen∣ded this thing to their eies with bold∣nesse,
which their eares afore could ardly brook with christian patience, and all because I rolled too much in any rhethorike, (say they) as though the nature of the sacred scriptures ould in no wise admit the seruiceable e of prophane sciences, no, not for eir better perspicuitie sake. This e thinkes) should be reputed as a radox amongst the best learned, & t is it canonized as a resolute truth  the generall decree of the inferiour t, which for the supply of some Arte d facultie they want, smothly pre∣nd a pettie zeale, and modestly with he Foxe say, they will eate no grapes. These be they, which whē they preach the word, (as oftentimes they do vn∣premeditate) haply catch mostraines by stouping too low, then others do by looking too high. As for me, whom they partly dislike & disfauor in this case, I appeale to them selues for their
further indifferent sentence, touching this my Sermon preached, and now vnworthely vnder your most graci∣ous protection published. Which al∣beit vntimely it seeme in respect of the authour thereof, and somewhat homely perchaunce in regard of the matter therein: yet being affianced vnder your good Lordships winges, and perused ouer without parcialitie, or preiudice, it may at times afforde the readers such seasonable and hole∣some lessons, as shalbe both easie for them to learne, & behouefull inough to liue thereafter. For neither is it in phrase so lofty, but that al through out may perceiue it, nor yet in matter so defectiue, but that some, I hope, a∣mongst all may select and single out some good thing which they haue ei∣ther not heard, forgotten or els neglected: The rifer knowledge, re∣membrance, and more liuely practise
whereof may happely make for the ancement of Gods kingdome, and ir eternall saluation, which em∣ce it accordingly with a good con∣nce. For herein (so farre forth my poore Talent would extend)  I assaied to supplant such foule rfections, as doe now a daies o∣hrow and deface the whole bodie  beautie of Christian innocencie: ch enormities namely are these, ster curiossitie in iudging, Ser∣ne poison in malice bearing, and rlish illiberalitie in Almes gi∣. And these three malignant, ful, and mercilesse spirits, though aue sought to coniure them by one d one: yet doe they commonlie epe companie, and concurre all in e subiect. For wheresoeuer the estilent spirits of malice & malig∣itie do enrage, euen there at hand ttendeth alwaies the vnsauorie spi∣rite
of vnmercifulnesse, insomuch as if we peaceably harbour one of these, the other two without nay say, will prease in after: and if on the other side wee put one to flight, the other two incontinent will bid vs farewell. Hauing therefore (I say) at the in∣stance of some for the behoofe of all, penned this Sermon as a meanes to suppresse and abolish these three noy∣some spirits: my humble sute and confident hope is, that it may and shalbe both fauourably protected vn∣der your Graces name, & fruitfullie perused of so manie as feare God, loue me, and fauour them selues aright. Which fortunate successe I commit o∣uer vnto the Almightie, who as hee hath largely enriched your Lord∣ship with manie singuler graces, & hath eke aduanced you on high in this his Church & common weale: so still doe I pray him graciousle to
multiplie the same in you, with a long d prosperous preseruation of your erson and calling, and all for the better preferment of his name, and propagation of his glo∣rious Gospell. Your Graces most humble in the Lord. Thomas Bankes.
THE TEXT. Luke. 6. 37 Iudge not, and yee shall not bee Iudged: Condemne not, and ye shall not bee condemned: For∣giue and ye shall be forgiuen. 38 Giue, and it shall bee giuen vnto you: a good measure, pressed down, shaken togither and run∣ning ouer, shall men giue into your bosome: for with what measure ye mete, with the same shall men mete to you againe.
ie godlie, learned, and ll Sermon against the bad spi∣ malignitie, malice, and vnmer∣es. Publikely preached by Tho∣as Bankes Maister of Arts and Preacher of the word. dge not, and ye shall not bee iudged: demne not, and ye shall not bee con∣mned. OUr Sauiour séeking throughout, by vertue of this his Sermon, to turne the peoples lea∣dē nature into the gol∣den metal of grace, and ecause nature did properlie hale on to deale as they were, and not ey would be dealt withall in way engeance: and grace forced them to s they would be & not as they were e to in way of beneuolence: Albeit  say) for the spéedier conuersion & ex∣ange sake of their corrupt nature into ure regenerate substance, the Lord in s own person had immediately before  this chapter, laid hard to their charge:
yet neuerthelesse dooth hee now afres (as it were) knocke vpon his Discip breasts, and roundlie now againe ru the memories of the residue of his au¦tors, charging thē straightly with th thrée speciall branches of Christianit The first concerneth the abandoning  curious and rash iudgement, The sec cutteth off all malice & priuate reueng and the third is altogither conuersant ¦bout the extending of almes: And the thrée seuerall precepts haue ech of the appendent to him, his kindly promise  recompence. So that (as we sée) this i¦stant treatise stādeth iointly througho of bare propositions and confirmations, yea, vpon méere precepts and promises Wel then, touching the first proposition, sounding in maner of a proclamation a∣gainst lauish iudgement, wee must well thinke, that Christes meaning thereby is not, to shorten the armes of ciuil Iud∣ges, according to the fantasticall cōstruc∣tion of the Anabaptistes: yea, the Lord is so farre off from dashing or putting to silence this same seruiceable sort of Ma∣gistrates, that by his owne ordinance and appointment they doo hold their stā∣ding
heir preheminence, and temporall mēt seat in iustice, as may appeare se sundrie places of Testament.  10. Iudges & officers shalt thou Deut. 16.  thee in al thy cities, throughout bes. Esai. 1. Iudge the fatherles, Esai. 1. Zach. 7. nd the widow. Zach. 7. Execute udgement, and shew mercie and assion euery one to his brother. . By the controlement of wrong∣ote righteous iudgement cōman∣ thus, How long wil ye iudge vn∣ psal. 82. & accept the persōs of the wic∣ So then hereby we learne, y• ciuill racie beautified wt vpright iudg∣ dooth goe for as singular good pai∣ with the Lord as may be Neither  this commandement any whit at isable or cut short ecclesiasticall per∣ frō iudgement & sentence giuing in  causes, as properly appertaine to  vocation & iurisdictiō. For as afore∣e in ye daies of Moses, ye Priests were thorized to iudge of ye lepry: so now in r age, the Church likewise is by office ioined to iudge, & for a season to put a∣art the retchlesse and notorious euill uers: and this in the Apostles time
was allowed off, as appeareth whe Paule commanded that such a one  kept his fathers wife, Should be deliue∣red vp vnto Satā for the destructiō  1. Cor. 5. his flesh, that his spirit might be saue in the day of the Lord Iesus. Yea, such iudgement of ours (I say) is not prohi∣bited here, as hath it warrant from ma∣nifest and infallible proofes, but that we may with Iohn the Baptist, terme the Phraises and Sadduces, A generation of vipers, and say vnto the Scribes as Christ did. How can yee speake anie thing that good is, whē ye your selues Math. 3. are euil? Yea, we may with the Apostle 1. Cor. 6. thunder out eternall condemnation a∣gainst such as defile themselues with fornication, theft, wantonnes, adulterie drunkennes, idolatrie, & such like. Tou∣ching these most prophane & grosse im∣pieties, which can in no wise possible proceed from a mean good mind, we may without all danger sears, & set Sathans marke vpō them, in token of their ouer∣throw, which pollute themselues there∣withall vnlesse that by repentance they take vp in time, and turne ouer a new leafe. For as the bad tree by the euil
t may be accordingly iudged of: so y they which through euill conuersa∣, without remorse of conscience op∣ themselues against the will of God.  reputed & iudged off what they are. sides, the Lord, who (as S. Ierome h) dooth not here forbid, but teacheth  iudge: dehorteth vs not from iud∣ our selues, but that we may after ostles aduise Iudge our selues, that 1. Cor. 11. e not iudged of the Lord. Thus ée, what sorts of iudgemēt are priui∣d, vntoucht, & exempted here: Now s behold a litle, what iudgemēt our iour Christ aimeth at, and seketh to off in this place, as a most pestilent  noious enemy against al true Chri∣nitie, and brotherly cōsent whatsoe∣. And this it is (my brethren) when en of sinister iudgement doo curiouslie t out the enormities, or openlie blaze discouer the nakednes of others, whose ults perhaps are fewer in number be∣g truely told, and lighter in weight be∣g rightly ballanced, then their owne e. Touching such péeuish and busibo∣ies, which for reproch and not for refor∣ation sake, roundly reprooue, and dis∣dainfully
carpe at other men: thapostle Paul dooth disappoint & wipe them of all excuse, where he saith, Therefore thou Rom. 2. art inexcusable (O man) whosoeuer thou art that iudgest. For this cause ye same Apostle els where warneth ye Co∣rinthians, yt they shuld in no wise iudge any thing, vntil the comming of ye Lord. Againd, Who art thou (quoth hee) that  Cor. 4. codemnest an other mās seruant? For such like rash and rouing condemnation, our sauior Christ rebuked the Scribes, as thus, Wherfore think ye euil things Mat. 9. in your harts? This he said, when falsly within themselues in a mutinie, they charged him as a blasphemer. S. Iames likewise giueth vs this watche woord, Speake not euil one of an other, bre∣thrē. am. 4. He that speaketh euil of his bro∣ther, or he that condemneth his bro∣ther, speaketh euill of the law, and cō∣demneth the law. And if thou con∣demnest the lawe, thou art no obser∣uer of the law, but a Iudge. That wee should not vpon superficiall and slender euidence iudge our neighbors: that place in the booke of Moses is of great force to perswade vs, where the Lorde saide,
me on, let vs go down & there cō∣nd Gen. 10. their language. Which words  our imitation sake, doo verie signifi∣tly import, what leisure & aduise the rd tooke, afore he would dash the buil∣s with cōfusion: For he said he wold  go down, & then doo it. In the Euan∣st Luke we reade, that the rich man Luk. 16. d néeds confer, and call his steward  him, afore he did dimisse him. In  Gospell of the Euangelist Iohn wée ow sparing our Sauior Christ was udging the Iewes, who because they a litle before sought to stone him, his ciples gaue him counsell yt he should  no more among them: and yet he ld not heare on yt side, so lightlie to  thē ouer, but madly made reply as , Are there not twelue houres in Ioh. 12.  day? As if he should haue said, Be it  that heretofore they intēded mischiefe ainst vs, yet now perhaps their ma∣e is worne out, and they will no more eale thus roughly with vs. These are xamples to teach vs, & the other afore re places of testimonie for to assure vs he rather, that the Lord can in no wise rooke such impudent & vnrulie persons,
as are too rashe and headlong in iudging other men, by meanes whereof they bewray themselues with shame inough to bee both excéeding presumptuous, and no lesse hipocriticall. Presump∣tuous, for that they take vpon them as Maisters, béeing vnwoorthie the name of Disciples, For that (I say) they goe about to reach that a farre off, which they are too short armd to appre∣hend and reach hard at hand: I meane, for that they assay to iudge others, be∣ing altogither vnable to iudge aright of themselues, (vnlesse happelie they doo surpasse both Peter and Paul, the one whereof was deceiued in himselfe, when without faile hee purposed, yea, and stoutlie protested, that though he . 26. should die with Christ, hee would in no wise denie him, and yet when it came to the push, hee both denied him, and forswore him bitterlie: and the other for his share confessed, that hee was al∣togither . 4. vnméete accordinglie to iudge himselfe, and that because hee knew nothing by himselfe.) That such men also as doo curiouslie iudge others, are them selues woonderfull hypocriticall,
case is moste plaine and euident:  the kindlie propertie of an hypo∣te, is, to sée the sliding of an other an, but not the downfall of himselfe:  point at other mens blemishes, bée y neuer so litle, but to ouerpasse  owne deformities, be they neuer so at. And therefore well saide the e man, An hypocrite with his prou. 11. gue hurteth his neighbor: whose sight and parcialitie in déed is such, t the leaste moate in his fellowes  séemeth a more sensible obiect, then  greatest beame in his owne. And  was the cause that moued Christ  to saye to one of that leaden pe, as also to all the rest of that risaicall complexion, Thou hy∣rite, Math. 7. first cast out the beame out  thine owne eye, and then shalt ou see clearelie to cast the mote t of thy brothers eye. But this e of the hipocrite (I feare me) and this eame are as harde to part a sunder, s the byrd Acalanthis and the thistles herein shée bréedes, or the Grashop∣per and the grasse whereof hée springs, which naturallie rather chuse to die,
then depart thence. Thus doubtlesse did Thales think, who being asked what thing of all other he tooke to be most hard and difficill in performance: returned this answere, For a man to know him selfe, (saith he.) And againe being asked what thing of all other hee thought to be easiest: For a man, (saith hée) to admo∣nish or curiously to carpe at others. For so vile in déed is the disposition natural∣lie of vs all, that we blush not one whit to measure other mens dooings by the crooked line of our owne imagination: yea, wée are not ashamed to packe vp our owne faults in the wallets end that hangeth behinde vs, where they may lie alwaies vnséene and out of remem∣braunce: but other mens wée trusse vp in the wallettes ende that is before vs, where they come alwaies in sight and handling. Wée glaunce at our owne imperfections, as through a net or lattice: but other mens we view and looke at with open Eagles eies. Wée account our owne suspicion a suffici∣ent proofe against others: but when they againe iustlie condemne vs, wée scarcelie take it for an accusation a∣gainst
our selues. Wee can sooner grant er mens good wine for to bee shire ter, then confesse our owne vnsaue∣water not to be wine: yea, so close∣re wee pinned to our owne sléeues,  so deuoutlie addicted to our owne o∣ons: that wee will péeuishlie con∣ne others which are to bee iustified, arciallie iustifie our selues, which ht are to be condemned. What ke yee) made Cicero to say, Fit io quo pacto) vt magis in aliis cerna∣ quid delinquitur, quàm in nobismet∣ It happeneth (saith hée,) (I know w) that wee can sooner espie out a  in others then in our selues. Or . (I pray you) moued Horace to  um tua peruideas &c. But onelie  that they both of them did sée this nation generallie inherent to flesh  blood, with the Henne to scrape  of the dunghill other mens rotten ges, with the Puttocke to sit sad∣ vpon other mens sores, and with  Pharisie to poste ouer their owne ltes, ripping and ransacking vp to e bottome other mens enormities? If ese two Heathen men were aliue in
this time, the one might spende all his Rhethorike hereabouts, and preuaile litle in persuading: and the other all his Poetrie, and yet (I feare me) leaue much vnsaide in the discourse, so large is the breach which this sinne hath made into mans heart, and so manifolde are the waies whereby shee dooth worke & wind her selfe in. For some men there are too too subtill and hollowminded, which hauing their tongues made of one flesh, and their heartes of an other: barke not, but pinch before warning. And these deale as the Butcher doeth, which claweth the Oxe with his hand that hee may the better come to lay his beetle on his head: Or as the Bee, which stingeth vs moste, when shee is fullest of honie. Some there are again of a currish kinde, whiche though they want teethe to bite vs, yet haue they tongues to babble, and open mouthes to barke at vs: and these (as God would haue it) beeing Dwarfes and Flies in force, though Gyants and Elephants in malice, are lyke to a kinde of Ser∣pentes, whiche albeeit full of poison
bee, yet because they bee toothlesse.  hurt none but them selues. Yea, e Viper which caught Paul by the Act. 18. e, could not harme him, but fell  the fire and there perished: And ee which smote Iason on the breast ding to kill him, broke his impo∣e, whereby hee cured him and made s sounde as a boxe: so likewise fa∣t somewhiles with these euil dogs  barke at their owne fellowes,  these vnkindlie birdes whiche be∣heir owne nestes, that where they  doo harme, they doo good in re∣ of the parties against whom they de it: but to doo that harme, that  good may come of it, is for them (in inion) a very indirect way to come ation. And therefore well saith st who is both the way, the trueth, Math. 7.  the life, Iudge not: that is, Call  his name into suspence and que∣n, who giueth thee verie litle or no se at all, For some actions in out∣ard appearance are of such indifferen∣, that whether way to take them, it  a verie harde matter to determine.
Touching these wée may not (I say) vnaduisedlie passe our verdicte, but ra∣ther must wee suspende our iudgement, breathing often vpon our pillow. And for this end serueth that admonition of a learned Father, Seest thou a man, saith he, that dooth fast often? Praise him not too much for it, because thou kndwest not whether for deuotion or ambition sake hee dooth it. Againe, seest thou a Ma∣gistrate that dooth seuerelie punishe? Déeme him not euill for it, because hée may as well doo it charitablie for pub∣like weale sake, as vpon stomack for priuate reuenge. Concerning these and suche like, wee ought either not to iudge at all, or if we doo, our part is to construe them the best way, and that because it is more sufferable and Christianlike, for vs to bee deluded on the right hand, by reputing the bad to bee good, then to bee deceiued on the left hand, by accounting the good to bee bad. And why? Wée ought one to take anothers part, because we are all men of Gods makyng: wee ought one to conceale anothers faults and frailties, because wee are all fel∣
seruants: and wee ought one to e with an others weakenesse the ra∣ because all of vs haue our infirmi∣ for ill may one théefe giue sentence nst an other: and ill may one sinfull  condemne an other of sinne. But  is our giddie rashnesse, that we wil utely giue sentence vpon euerie  similitude and resemblance, no, we  not sticke to iudge a mans conuer∣n by a blush of his countenance, h rule often proueth false: a Horse s furniture, which argument sel∣ proueth true: and the people by rish Church, wherein we can not lie but iudge amisse. So that if st and his Apostle Paul were now ngst vs, & the one should say to the e of the palsie, Sonne thy sinnes be Mat. 9. Act. 28. rgiuē thee, he would quicklie be con∣mned for a blasphemer: and the other, he were séene to haue a Viper on his and: he would now surelie bee appre∣ended, as he was then but iudged for a urderer. But they are gone, and haue left behind them many honest men & godlie successors in their place, which are daylie choked with the like soure
sauce, & will be still, (I feare me) till the table be drawn, & al turnd vpside down: after which riddance, dissolution, & brea∣king vp of all, these our saucie enimies shalbe turned ouer into sathans cōmons at a dish of soure sops, when we on ye o∣ther side, shall be dieted with the Angels in heauen, & haue all things at hearts de∣sire. This shall be our portion for good, & that shalbe their punishment for euil. What good then haue they? or what harme haue we by this? if when we are liberal, they iudge vs ambitious: if whē we are sparing, they estéem vs couetous: if when wee are silent, they take vs as fooles: or if when we are ioyfull and me∣rie in the Lord, they account vs as dis∣solute and licentious persons? Surelie, we are so greatly hurt, that wee neuer féele it, & therfore haue no cause to com∣plaine. For as a guiltie conscience doth somewhile with anguish accuse it selfe, though it be no way spoken against: so the man which knoweth himselfe to be frée from those enormities, wherwithall others do burdē & charge him, doth take such hart at grasse & comfort in his own vnguiltinesse, that he waigheth it not a
n, but shaketh it off with Paule,  being rashly iudged off, & wrong∣ discountenanced, said, As for me I 1. Cor. 4.  litle to be iudged of you, or of s iudgemēt. And yet surely a kind sse & punishment it is, for a man to uiled & hardly iudged off, for there man, vnlesse he be past grace and eles, but he tendereth his own good  about al things els. Which as Sa∣n saith, being a thing much more pto. 22. ous then riches, it must néedes fol∣ that they which rack the same vpō nters, & do all they can to teare it es, are much more faultie & iniuri∣hen they which rob & spoile men of ure & goods: for this cōmeth nothing gh the quicke as thother. Let vs not  (my brethrē) like vnruly & vntamed ses, leape thus brutishly vpō ye backs  others, but rather let vs contein, kéepe ithin compasse, & cease to iudge one an ther any more. And to the end we may  better performe this, we must first of al ut out ye thrée sinnowes, wherby this e∣uil eie is fed: bruise & breake ye shoulders by ye which this monstrous head is born vp: & remoue the rootes frō whence this
vnkindlie Impe hath her sappe: which namelie are these three: Selfeloue, en∣uie, Selfeloue. and our owne natiue wickednesse, which being bred in the bones, wil hard∣lie out of the flesh. The first of these made way for the Pharesie to condemn the poore Publicane, pointing at him with preiudice, as thus, God, I thanke Luke. 18. thee that I am not as this Publicane is. The second gaue matter inough to Enuie. the Iewes for to condemne our Sauior to death: Pilate knew that of enuy they Mat. 97. had deliuered him. This was the bro∣ker or solicitor that made Ioseph to bee sold, Iacob troubled, Abel slaine, and Dauid persecuted. The third thing, Our owne na∣iue wicked∣esse. which is a mans owne natiue corrup∣tion, wrought also this slander against Christ out of the Iewish people: Thou hast a diuel (say they) and that because Ioh. 8. in deed they them selues were through∣lie polluted and pestered with diuels. For to remedie the first infirmity, which is Pharisaical selfeloue, we must learne to eye and admire those goodlie parts, & gracious gifts of other men, wherin we our selues are no waie their coequals: and againe, we must often vpbraide our
with those our owne imperfecti∣ich we neither know nor suspect  others. Whom, though we nei∣re nor sée anie good by them, e we no warrant, rouingly to uil of them. For to feare vp the ad sinnow, which is Iewish en∣malice, we must at Paules bid∣ vpon vs as the elect of God, the  of loue and peace. And in so Colos. 3.  other mans eyesalue, shall no se our eye sore, an other mans p, shall no way become our mis∣, as it fareth with the enuious, e it was verie fitly said, Quid idè? tuumnè bonum, an alienum  O thou enuious man, what do∣ seeke for? thine owne good, or ghbors euil? For both these two  one with the enuious men: whose e is so peruerse, yea, so owlish (as I earme it) because as the Owle can bide the sunshine, so no more can  men away with other mens gliste∣ beames and goodlie partes, that if ng Samson were aliue, they would elie iudge him a weakling: rich Crae∣, a bankerupt or beggers brat: aged
Enoch and Elias, short liuers: faire A¦solon, a deformed fellow: mightie O¦uian, a man of no power: yea and w Salomon, if he were landed and aliue  this day, I think surely they would no sticke to begge him for a starke foole. This sinnow then must be seared vp (as I say) or els, I feare me, all wilbe ma¦red. Lastly, for the curing and recoue∣ring of the third sore, which is our ow inward corruption & wickednesse: we must seeke for to haue our selues cast in∣to a new mold after the Apostles aduise who willeth vs for to bee renewed in 1. Thes. 4. spirite. And so when we our selues are godlie and single hearted, we shall hard∣lie deeme others to bee worse then wee our selues are, euen as afore when wee were bad, we could not possibly repute others to be better: resembling Aesops moule, who because she was blind her selfe, she could in no wise be perswaded that anie other beast could see. And thus we note, how that by themselues men commonlie measure others. If they bee good them selues, they account others to be no worse: if they be bad, they rekon others to be no better. The former sort
e Bée conuert that iuice into ho ch the latter sorte with the Spi∣e into méere poyson. Let vs e cast away this naughtie eye hese three sinnowes, and so shall  aright: this drouping head with ree shoulders, and so shall wee ight: this vnkindely ympe, with ee rootes, and so shall we tast  Whereas on the other side if we em still, our eiesight will be so  that euerie moulehill will séeme taine: our hearing wil be so con∣at euerie light sound will seeme mne: and our tast so farre dis∣d, that one droppe of soure will entie: yea all our fraternitie so impoisoned, that we shall take rethren as bastards, and rekon ues onlie for right heires, ripping er folkes trifling sinnes, as most us and damnable, and fauouring wn as light and excusable in com∣on. By meanes wherof, we degene∣ from God aboue, whom in charitie ught to resemble: and become all  with Sathan beneath in malignity, ome wee ought to bee as vnlike
as vnlike may be. For in deede no eas a thing it is for to know the Sunne  the brightnesse thereof, the fire by  heate, or the honie by the swetenesse then it is to discerne Gods chosen chil∣dren by their friendlie relation and cha∣ritable sentence giuing, touching other mens doubtfull dealings or demeanou And againe, no easier is it to know the night by the darkenesse, the serpent by his poyson, or the wormewood by the bitternesse, then it is to know bad an euil disposed men by their bolting out  sharpe censures concerning other men indifferent actions: wherein, because they be doubtfull, wee ought to bee n lesse aduised afore sentence giuing, the we would be, for to aduenture a great wager about a paire of equall waights or ballances, whether side should fall down first: which in déede is a verie hard matter to foretell. Yea we ought to bee a great deale more aduised in the other, then in this, and that because the losses are much vnlike. For the one is but barelie the losse of our siluer, but the o∣ther is the shipwracke and losse of our soules. Let vs not then buye this pigge
e poke, as some men do, which are redulous, but rather let vs handle d looke on it first, and that because rice and valuation thereof is of all rs the greatest. And here finallie  we note this by the way, that as re enioyned not to iudge or con∣e the righteous, so are we forbid∣erein to boulster or iustifie anie d and vicious persons: for both  two iniquities as one, are to God an offensiue alike. And therefore aith Salomon, He that iustifieth prou. 17. cked, and he that condemneth st, euen they both are abhomi∣ to the Lord. Againe, He that prou. 24. to the wicked, Thou art righte∣im shall the people cursse, and ultitude shall abhorre him, saith  Woe vnto them, (saith Esai) that ke good of euil, and euil of good, Esa. 5. ch put darkenesse for light, and t for darkenesse. And this woe (I re me) may wel be denounced against umber of wicked and waieward peo∣ in this age, which taking their arkes amisse, preposterously misterme ce vertuous, & vertue vicious, worm∣wood
sweete, and hony sower: euil men good, and good men euil. For many there be doubtlesse now a daies, licenti∣ous and prodigall liuers, which will im∣pudently vndertake to cleare and iusti∣fie their fellowes, be they neuer so bad & notorious euil. So that if an honest zea∣lous man do at anie time iustly reproue anie of that crew for his bad conditions: O, will an other say, you do him wrong sir, for I will auouch, he is as honest a man as euer brake bread, yea, thus will he say, though he be as bad a man as e∣uer broacht drinke: and then is hee bad inough, for Tapsters we say are not al∣waies the bestliuers. Let them then which are guiltie this way, as well as the other, betimes repent and amend: for better were it for them to slide an hundred times with their feete, then once to slide thus with their tongue, by iustifying the vniust. It followeth in the text, And ye shall not be iudged. And this, in a word, is the confirmation or couenant, annexed to the proportion and commandement here. Wherein the Lord by way of promise sheweth, how good and gracious he is, in recompen∣a
single good turn with a double re∣de. For by abandoning of one sorte dgement, & the same against others, re assured here from Christes own th, for to escape a double iudgement nst our selues: that is to say, the se∣ iudgemēt of God at ye last dreadfull f dome: & beside this, the sharp cen∣ of men during this our mortalitie poral life time: for both sortes are y meant, though not seuerally mē∣d, here in this place. Thone of these elfe is most terrible & fearefull, and re with all might & maine now in f grace to be preuented: and the o∣e all take to be a thing most odi∣ shameful, & therefore warelie for ly honestie sake to bee auoided. t ye former is most horrible & dread∣ this dooleful & irreuocable saying of  Lord foretold vs in the Gospel, doth ciently declare. Depart from me ye Mat. 15. sed, into euerlasting fire. That the er also is a verie vnséemelie & shame∣l thing, it appeareth by the Apo∣es earnest exhortation directed to s fellow-labourers, where hee wil∣th them to contend, that through due
desert they might be honestly reported off among al men, & so stop the mouthes of malignant & euil speakers: who for the most part in séeking by this meanes wrongfullie to hurt others, do nothing els but raise vp a dust, whereby they put out their owne eies. For so it fareth with these men, as it doth with the Hen, which by long scraping in ye dunghil, dis∣couereth the knife that doth afterwards cut her owne throte: or as it doth with a hastie and hairebraind souldier, who desperatly rushing out vpon a mischie∣uous purpose for to smite & wound his fellow, returneth home againe himselfe with a broken pate. And herewithall a∣gréeth this saying, Qui quae vult loquitur, quae nō vult audiet. He that speaketh what he will, shall some whiles heare what he would not. Moses therefore vpon good consideratiō, among other precepts gaue the people this charge, that they should not in anie wise speake euil. And why? because the verie custome and practise hereof, is of it selfe so vncharitable and deuilish, that there can nothing be deui∣sed, which doth sooner then it cal for ven∣geance at Gods handes. Of this minde
King Dauid, saying, Him that ily slaundereth his neighbor, will psal. 101. stroy. And so was also King Salo∣, when he said, Put away from thee prou. 4. ward mouth, & put wicked lips e from thee. We read of one, which ng the space of three yeares kept a  within his mouth, for this end, Ʋt et tacere, that he might learne the  to inure and acquaint himselfe silence. We haue also by writers uered vnto vs, the nature of certain s, which when they draw nigh to ount Taurus, thrust their billes  their winges for feare of noise g, and so consequentlie for feare ouring by the Eagles, which fre∣ that place in great aboundance. n whence we are to draw and de∣ thus much for our owne securitie  safety sake, somewhiles to close and e vp our mouthes, for feare they ath & poure out anie hurtfull or vn∣istianlike speach against our neigh∣rs, the greatest harme whereof grow∣h in the end to be our own: for this one  giuen blow is alwaies sure to bring me with it two wore againe. Which
harme and inconuenience a great ma∣nie of pieuish and waiwarde people doe no whit at all foresee, and so by means of this their grosse ouersight, they com∣monlie catch their fall where they ho∣ped for to haue had their rising: yea, by poring at other mens, they do nothing els but put out their owne eies. And why? By reprouing and iudging amisse of others, they bring (as I told you a∣fore) both the heauie iudgement of God, and the like sharpe censures of men vp∣pon their owne backes. For whereas the Lord saith here, Iudge not, and ye shall not be iudged, it is as much in effect as if hee should haue saide, Take this for a warning at me, that if ye will needes be intermedling to iudge others, ye shall verelie in like case bee iudged your selues, and that not onelie by me when the last Trumpet shall sound, but also by other men, amongst whome yee liue here in this world. And al∣beit the case standeth thus, yet neuer∣thelesse sooner may the raging Sea be restrained within a hedge of willows, then wee within the compasse and pre¦cinct of this precept: so loose and vnru∣re
we all of vs in this behalfe. For rre hath Sathan bewitcht the most  of vs, that as heretofore among  Egyptians, there was no man ac∣ted happie, which had not a beast of spots: so now a daies among vs, e is no man almost reckoned proui∣ and worldlie wise inough, which not his heart al ouer bespotted with rmisings, his tongue beraied with es of reproch, and his handes de∣with sundrie actes of rash and ro∣ condemnation against others.  is our glorie for a while, which th vs to shame in the end: This ward apparance seemeth a kind doome we haue, which in it owne e proueth a point of slauerie: This l take to be a token of wisedome, h in déed is nothing els but a tricke eere foolishnesse: For thus saith omon, Euerie foole will be med∣. prou. 20. And here by ye way we are to note  milde & fauourable maner of aduer∣ment, which the Lord vseth where∣ to winne & draw vs on obediently to actise this same special cōmandement  his: for hereiu he doth not onely exe∣cute
his regall authoritie by forbidding vs that which he disliketh, but therwith∣all he sheweth also his father lie kindnes and clemencie by perswading vs there∣unto, foretelling vs flatly what great good by meanes of this his precept kée∣ping, shal afterwards ensue to vs ward. And yet for all this, not one of vs almost amongst a thousand, doth weigh or per∣forme this same aright, so blockish and carelesse are we, touching the saluation of our soules, which we ought to tender a thousand times more, then the safetie & good estate of our bodies. But marke I pray you, how farre wee are from this: for if an earthlie Prince should forbid vs a bad thing, commending vnto vs no reason therof, we would hardly gainsay him, fearing the danger of his displea∣sure, yea, if he should forbid vs ye practise of a good & godly thing, afording vs no reason but this, Sic volo, sic iubeo. Thus I wil haue it, thus I cōmand it to be: the most of vs would be afraid to withstand him, fearing the lesse of our life & goods. And yet when the Prince of all Prin∣ces, who is not onelie able to destroy the bodie, but the soule also, forfendeth a
hing, and that with a most forcible n whereby to persuade, we carelesly ect the same, and prophanely with∣all feare or trembling incurre the h therof, as if thereupon there could e no danger, no penaltie, or harme  against vs: wheras in déed we doo y prouoke Gods vengeance and full iudgement at the last generall nd in the meane time till that be∣, we shal be as sure as is ye skin be∣ our eies, for this our own péeuish ment, to be bitterly stung againe,  mothes of malicious and malig∣ople. And therefore good is it for es attentiuely to giue eare to cept, and faithfully to relie vpon omise of our Sauior Christ, who re, Iudge not, and ye shall not ged. Condemne not, & yee shall e condemned. For as touching ame latter proposition, because it is ng els but an  a meere expo¦, I meane, of the former, I thinke  to ouerpasse it without any seuerall ourse, hauing inclusiuely handled it ady with this other part aforegoing.
Forgiue, and ye shall be forgiuen. FOrgiue (saith our Sauiour Christ) and yee shall bee forgiuen. In this same other waightie charge giuing vs, the Lord dooth whollie bende his force a∣gainst the verie ground, and roote of the foresaid rash iudgement and rouing con∣demnation of ours, which I note to bée rancour, or malice procéeding of too too long remembraunce of iniuries done to vs: For when by this meanes and occa∣sion, we grow to be out of ioynt, and at variance with others, then wil our eares itch to heare, and our tongues roundlie bestir themselues to speake euill of our brethren, (be they neuer so blamelesse.) For the preuenting therfore of this mis∣chiefe, our Sauiour goeth about to doo away, and to wipe out the cause heere, where hée dooth enioyne vs to a cer∣taine voluntarie forgetfulnesse and for∣giuenesse of priuate harmes commit∣ted against vs, by whom, and how great soeuer. For, this iniunction or precept hath relation onelie to priuate
which through furie and rage of nd blood, most commonlie séeke re∣e. This Commandement (I say) rneth these men onelie, & not them h sit in place of Iudgement, for iust ofe sake and punishment of pub∣ffenders: yea, they in regarde of alefactors, (as saith the Apostle) not, neither ought to beare the Rom. 13.  in vaine. For by them, with∣ parcialitie, must the euill dooers like weale sake, be corrected and f, euen as by the Phisitions the  and putrified members are seared  the preseruation sake of ye whole  And yet must they doo all this t priuate grudge or indignation: ise, these, also as well as the o∣ come within compasse and daun∣ this Statute: for hereby in both s alike, is barred and condemned athful hatred and enimitie, (what∣er) may séeme either to boile in the , or breake out from the stomacke  man: whose inclination by nature  so furious and malicious, that (vnlesse ods spirit beare the greater sway) it
will sooner breake a sunder, then bend to vndertake this burdenous and heauie charge. For, what is it that naturall man can more hardlie away withall, thē patiently to put vp, and clearley to for∣giue all iniuries whatsoeuer are done or pretended against him, by his deadly e∣nemie? Surely, this is such a matter, as mans frailtie (not regenerate) can of it selfe in no wise possible affoord the per∣formance of: yea, an easier, and more vn∣suall thing it is throughout amongst vs all, for to let a hundred good turnes done to vs, slip out of our remembrance, then to blot out by forgetfulnesse one bare in∣iurious act or pretence against vs. For the impressiō of a benefit being wrought in to waxe, is quickly wipte out: but an iniurie, grauē in marble, is hardly done away. A benefite like butter melteth a∣pace out of our handes: but an iniu∣rie like birdlime cleaueth fast to our fingers. A benefit hath both legs to run, and wings to flie out of eiesight: but an iniurie hauing neither of both, sitteth sadly with vs, and tarieth still by it. A benefit, when wee are waking, wee can seldom remember: but a bad turn, when
sleeping, we can oftētimes dream  The one (I say) is sooner wipte of  feather, then the other conueyed pt aside with a beesome. Yea, so ard are we to requite a good turn,  appliable to auenge a bad, yt when d one calleth for the like againe,  where to be found: but when e knocketh, be it neuer so light∣are alwaies at hand to recompēce s hardly for want of grace are we  to doo good, & thus easily through ne iniquitie are wee set on fire to . And yet surely (my brethren) Deut. 32. ings ought not so to be: For ven∣ and recompence is mine (saith rd) in whom alone as it is a thing  most kindly and princelike: so in s a thing most vnnaturall, seruile, eastlike. For what can the sottish doo more, then when hee is hurt or n on, to spurn with his heele? Or a ish Dog, then when be is bitten, fu∣sly to bite again? This (no doubt) is  that a beast can do, whose sense ruleth stead of reason: and this is more then an ought to doo, whose reason should ake his sensuall desire an handmaiden
or vnderling. Well therfore doth Salo∣mon disswade vs from this euil as thus, Say not thou, I will recompence euil, rou. 20. but put thy trust in the Lord, & he wil deliuer thee. Here the wise man begin∣neth to find fault with the smoke in tokē that he can worse abide the flame or heat following. Here he séemeth so far to mis∣like ye preamble, that he condemneth the wrathfull wordes vsually going afore, which are these, I wil recōpence euill, I wil be quit with him: (for thus be spea∣keth in very familiar, & emphaticall ma∣ner, saying,) Say not thou, I will re∣compence euill, Say it not, once again I tell thée: doo it therefore much lesse. I forewarne thée, Thou shalt not auenge, Leuit. 19. nor be mindfull of wrong against the childrē of thy people, (saith the Lord.) Againe, (saith the wise man) Forgiue thy neighbour the hurt that hee hath Eccle. 28. done to thee, so shall thy sinnes bee forgiuen thee also when thou praiest: for if hee that is but flesh nourish ha∣tred: (saith he) who will intreat for his sinnes? Remember the ende therefore, and let all enimitie passe. The Apostle vnto the Collossians saith, If anie man Colloss. 3. among you haue a quarel to another,
Christ forgaue you, euen so do yee. d this worthy example of our Saui∣, though it be not the first yt wee read n Scripture, yet is it simply the best t we ought in word & déed to conform  selues after: whose innocent méeke∣ was so great, that he spake thē faire ch reuiled him, and whose patience  zeale was such, that hee instantlie d for them yt crucified him, as thus er, forgiue them, for they knowe Luke 23.  what they do. Other presidents be∣ this, there be manie in Gods booke, ch we ought to take our directiō by: auid, who when hee might easilie 1. Sam. 24.  slain his deadly enemy Saul, cut  off the lap of his garment onelie, in en that he could haue done more, and  was touched in heart, and did great∣forethink this daliance, as if it had bin matter of death. The other Prophets sides whō we read of, were all of them  far off frō recompensing euil, that they auelled mightily night and day, for the enefit and saluatiō sake of them, which n the other hande greedily sought their uerthrow & desiructiō. Thus dealt Mo∣ses in the behalf of his enemies ye Israe∣lites, whē he praied vnto ye lord his god,
and said, O Lord, why doth thy wrath Exod. 32. waxe hote against thy people, which thou hast brought out of the lande of Egypt? The godlie Martyr S. Steuen is also to bee enrolled heere, as one that hath no litle part and share in this cake, who praied thus for the Iewes, whose hearts brast for anger, whose teeth gna∣shed at him, & whose handes stoned him to death, Lord, lay not this sin to their Acts. 7. charge. Whereby it seemeth that hee was so mindfull to forgiue, and to in∣treat the Lord for them, that he left out and quit forgot himselfe: for wee read not here that hee praied for himselfe, but for them at his last gaspe, For when he had thus spoken, he slept. And yet may we rightly say, that in this his prai∣er for them, was couertly included also another praier for himselfe: for as our right hand by washing the left, cannot misse but also bee washed againe, so in praying for our enemies, wee are al∣wayes on the surer hande to pray for our selues, because wee are either co∣partners with them, or els full posses∣sours without them, of the finall vse and benefite of that Prayer. Wisely there∣ealt
Paul and his fellow Apostles  they tooke this innocent & harme∣course, We are reuiled, (say they) 1. Cor. 4.  yet we blesse: we are persecuted, suffer it. Wee are euil spoken of,  yet we pray. These coole complexio∣emperate, and heauenly wise men  well inough, that soft fire made ault, That a gentle answer did prou. 15. ay displeasure, & that for a time h they were dasht out of counte∣ & ouercrowed, yet in the end they d either by patiēce ouercome their ies, as the foresaid Dauid without edding: by forhearing onely, got per hande of Saule: or els if this  they happely failed of their hope, h would haue beene no more but a hearts ease for them, yet were they e assured, that on the other side they d not miscarry, but become coheirs,  haue share, and share like with the intes, in that great dole and rich re∣rd in heauen promised by Christ him fe to all them, Which should be re∣ed, Matth. 5. persecuted, and haue all ma∣er of euill saide against them for s names sake. This they made
reckoning of, as ye largest recompence, though perhaps it might séem vnto them somwhat long in comming: And thus after their ensample in hope of this heauenlie hire, though we misse (as misse we may) of that other world∣lie heartes case, wee must also for∣beare, and forgiue all men, whosoe∣uer haue doone or profered vs anie wrong: For if wee doo not thus, we shall deale hardlie in respect of them, and verie vnwiselie in regarde of our selues: for as wee hold him as a foole, and most fit for slauerie still, who will not abide an houres imprisonment for a thousande yeares libertie: And as wee doo account him an vnwise hus∣bandman, and woorthie himselfe to starue through hunger, who refuseth to sowe that one bushell of grayne, whiche within a while afterwardes woulde yeelde him a whole barnefull: so likewise maye wee repute him an improuident straitlaced striplin, and woorthie himselfe to smart for his ex∣tremitie, who will not remit that one poore penie debt to his brother, which woulde growe to bee a pounde in his
way at the handes of his father.  thus I speake the rather meta∣callie, because it is the verie fi∣ in this text vsed by Christ him∣, deriued and drawen from Cre∣s, which were wont fréely to strike f their debtbookes, the names of nable debtors, and so likewise  wee to wipe awaye out of our brances, all mens iniuries what∣: for otherwise, wee our selues e without all redemption to lye  till the vttermost farthing which we, bee also paide. The which nd extreme requitall wee are fore∣by Christ himselfe, as thus, If Math. 6. oo not forgiue men theirs, no  shall your heauenlie Father for∣ you your trespasses. We may not  (I say) for any cause (whatsoeuer,)  such broad way vnto malice and in∣anitie, as that we should account o∣ mens danger our owne securitie, er mens losse our own aduantage, o∣r mens dishonour our owne credit, er mens weaknes our own strength, d other mens ouerthrow our own vp∣ng. For in so doing, wee shall become
monsters whom nature hath no stroke in, streames of a corrupt fountain, bran∣ches of a rotten roote, beames of a wrong Sunshine, yea, the verie ofspring of Sa∣tan, and no true Christians. And why? The Lord no doubt, who saieth, The mountaines shal remoue, and the hils shal fall down, but my louing kindnes shall in no wise moue, euen the same Lord I say, looketh for some like louely agréement, vnitie, and mutuall kindnes againe at the handes of all of vs in some measure and proportion among our selues, and therefore hée saieth, A new Iohn. 13. Commandement giue I you, that as I haue loued you, so ye loue one ano∣ther. This must bée our conformation to Christ, herein must wée haue our re∣semblance with God, in this must wée bée at vtter discorde and defiance with the Deuill, yea thus must wée (I say) which bée true Gospellers, countrey∣men and fellowe Christians, insepa∣rablie cleaue together, as stones of one Temple, orderly growe vp together as impes of one stocke, louinglie a∣grée together as children of one mo∣ther, and (if néede bee) whollie burn
together as the leaues of one booke. For ng thus beset and besieged as wée  with manie both forren and do∣ticall enemies: our next way for ipe them of all aduantage, and et the vpper hande in this gene∣quarrell for Gods cause, is, peacea∣héere at home among our selues,  take vp all priuate matters of burning and variance. And that se our owne vnitie is alwayes nemies dissolution, our own con∣, their disagréement, and our own full coherence, their back cast and rance, in whatsoeuer mischieuous se they haue either heretofore, or  héereafter take in hande agaynst  Maiesties person and vs, whom  Lorde (as hée hath thus farre,) so  by his outstretched arme mightily e and protect (wée beséech him.) But s (my brethren) wee which are all  one nation, vnder one regiment, id all of one familie as it were, like relesse men for our owne safetie, and the enemies confusion, are verie far off from this same brotherlie affecti∣on: for now a dayes the Courtier a∣gainst
his coequall, the Preacher a∣gainst his fellow Preacher, the Citi∣zen against his fellowe freeman, the Commoner against his copartner, the husbande against the wife, the father against the sonne, and the Mother a∣gainst the daughter, all and euerie one of these (I say) one against ano∣ther, (yea for the least thing done a∣misse) doo on euerie hande breath out vengeaunce and recompence. Some doo it by bloodsheading in the streetes, as the Courtier: Some by defacing their fellowe labourers in the pulpits, as the Preacher: Some by annoying their neighbours about the sale of their wares, as the Merchaunt: Some by open and causelesse defamation where secrecies shoulde moste bee concealed, as the husbande and the wife: Some by disinheriting through a litle displea∣sure taking, as the Father against the sonne: And some one way, some an other. Seeing therefore all the members of this whole bodie of ours are altogether out of ioynte, and are so farre off from beeing armed in war∣like
sort, that they want in deed their e naturall habite in waye of de∣ against the aduersarie: what can  looke for else, but either to bee anted and ouerrunne by forreine er, whiche woulde bee a heauie : or els to bee swallowed vp and red one of another, which would thing much more lamentable and us? For a house deuided a∣ Matth. 9. it selfe can no way stand: but s must it some waye fall downe  For the appeasing therefore of  wrath, whiche (no doubt) is indled, and for the preuenting s our owne vniuersall calamitie ownfall, which wee see immi∣ and harde at hande: let vs all of  of what degree soeuer,) acquaint  selues to forgiue, to brooke, and to eare one another, yea though wee e neuer so great cause of priuate of∣ce profered vs. For greater cause can ee haue no waye giuen vs, then hrist him selfe had by traiterous Iu∣s, Matth. 2. Abell by his malicious brother Gen. 4. Gen. 37. ain, Ioseph by the whole crew of
his brethren, and yet tooke they all in good woorth, as ensamples to vs in waye of sufferaunce: shall wee the whiche say wee are Christians, relin∣quish Christes barne, because of the chaffe that is in it? Shall wée break asunder the Lordes Net, for the bad Fishes sake? Shall wee quite for∣sake the Lordes flocke because of the Kiddes, in the ende to bee put by? Or shall we giue ouer the Lords house for the Vesselles of dishonour, to bee reiected? I meane, shall wee so rash∣lie make hauocke and breache of the bonde of Charitie and peace heere a∣mong our selues, as to seeke vengeance against a whole corporation, for one members offence? Against a whole familie, for one mans fault? Against the Father for the sonnes, and against the Sonne for the Fathers trespasse? Surelie, me thinkes, this outreacheth the limittes of all modestie and rea∣son, and yet hath it beene heretofore, and is a thing at this instant most rife and vsuall among vs, so that (as I say) if wee take not vp quicklie and grow to one among our selues by way
onstliation, out of this same foule ie weather of ours here at home: nimies abroad for their turne will re me) picke a faire haruest time, hich desolate visitatiō to vs ward, ord for his mercie sake deliuer vs . Forgiue (saith our Sauiour) and ll be forgiuen. This the Lordes ant together with the commande∣ is all one in nature with that con∣ in his praier hard afore, wherein ght vs thus to say: Lord, forgiue r trespasses, as we forgiue them Mat. 6. trespasse against vs. This same  (sicut dimitttimus, as we forgiue) slike not greatly that it should still e it standing here in the praier: but  it should be liuelie, or carie anie y at al with vs, we allow not of that ie saucs. For when it should actu∣e do our errand to almightie God,  remission of our sinnes, we thrust it t by the shoulders, and put it by this fice, as though it were vnfit for this essage: and yet none so fit, as it, nay,  dare say more, none fit, but onelie it. or if this clause be left behind at home, ooke whosoeuer goeth vpon this our er∣rand
vnto almightie God for remission of sinnes, is like to returne as emptie a he went. If we will then spéede of th message, Dimitte nobis, we must alwaie aforehand send out this same, Sicut di∣mittimus. For this is one in deed which carieth his warrant about him, and  will not be said nay. Wherefore, truely saith Augustine. Ʋnusquisque talem in∣dulgentiam accipiet a Deo, qualem ostend proximo. That is, Euerie one shall haue the like fauour & beneuolence at Gods handes, that he sheweth to his neigh∣bour. And this falleth flat with that say∣ing in the Gospel, If ye do forgiue men Mat. 6. their trespasses, your heauenly Father will also forgiue you. For why? God Eccle. 2. is gracious and mercifull, and forgi∣ueth sins, & saueth in time of trouble. This the Lordes indulgencie & goodnes is couertly commended vnto vs by the storie of the prodigall sonne, who being Luke. 15. reclaimed, was receiued into fauour a∣gaine, as also by that parable of the ser∣uant who ought ten thousand talents, Mat. 18. and yet through humbling himselfe, had all the whole debt forgiuen him. And this same discharge & acquittance from
handes, is a thing worth gramer∣therwise Dauid would neuer haue , Blessed is the man whose vnrigh∣snesse is forgiuen, & whose sinne psal. 32. uered. Besides this, when we our s forgiue our trespassers ther grow lso thence a new forgiuenesse to vs e, that is, other men by this means  the rather wonne to pardon and e vs, when we come within their ger and fall into their hands. This  (as you sée) is no robberie but a ge, & such a change, as we haue two e: the former at our death, the o∣efore: the former celestiall, ye other oral: the one we haue immediately  Gods own hands, and thother we  also frō him, but yet mediately by s meanes. Two (I say) we haue for , and that is great vsurie, yea & good rie: but there is an other kind of vsu∣lesse profitable, and yet (I feare me) re in practise: but let that go, for so ll it, and that for good dealing. Séeing en (my brethren) the benefit of peace∣le forgiuenesse and reconsiliation a∣ong our selues, is thus behouefull d necessarie both these wayes:
let vs not become like vnto that stone, which being once hote can not possibly be colde againe. Neither let vs resemble Sydera errantia, the wandring Starres, which being once at discord could neuer afterwardes agrée with the heauens: but rather casting aside all debate and variance, let vs by how much the more able we are, be by so much the lesse wil∣ling to auenge our quarrels. Debet enim nostrum vnusquisque quò magis nocere po∣test, hoc minùs velle. Euerie one of vs the more able he is, the lesse willing he ought to be for to auenge his quarrel. For as in our lot and abilitie, there is nothing greater then that we may: so in our good nature and humanitie there is nothing better then that we wil fréely pardon and forgiue our malefactors. Yea, I say, it is both a great matter for vs to be able, and a good matter also for vs, to be willing thus to do. Finallie therefore, as Thrasybulus after the bat∣tell at Peloponnesus, and the Romane Senate also after the death of Cesar, made a law which they called legem , a law of forgetting and for∣giuing iniuries: so likewise must we all
vs duelie embrace and obserue the e law, as wee will answere to the trarie at the last dreadfull day of e, when the sonne of man shall send  Angels with the sound of a great mpet, and come himself in the clouds eauen with power and great glorie, ly to iudge them which wrongfullie e iudged others, and to recompence  in vengeance, which in way of re∣ge haue sought the spoile, the dis∣ce, and ouerthrow of their brethren. Giue, and it shalbe giuen vnto you. &c. THirdly and lastly, the Lord goeth on with his charge, & saith, Giue, and it shall be giuen vnto you. And e, as by the giuing out of the other o precepts immediatly afore, so now y prescribing of this last point of Chri∣stianitie, our Sauiour commendeth vn∣to vs more at large the fulnesse of his nestimable wisedome and goodnesse. The former qualitie appeareth plaine∣ly in him, by this his wise maner of schooling his auditours: and the other propertie of his, wee may also perfectlie
perceiue by the due consideration of the verie good matter it selfe, wherewithall he chargeth vs here. As for Christes me∣thode and maner in this place, whereby his wisedom is approued, it is in resem∣blance and effect all one with the skil∣full dealing of the cunning surgeon or phisition: Whereof the one vseth to re∣moue the putrified matter out of the wound, before he applyeth his salue to heale withall: and the other telleth his patient first what meate hee shall not eate, before he doth enioin him what dy∣et he must kéepe. Euen so likewise our Sauiour hauing alreadie forewarned & premonished his Disciples, for to kéepe backe from thinking, speaking or doing euil to any of their brethren, he maketh there no finall stay or full period, as though he had said inough so soone as he had barred rash iudgement, condemna∣tion & malice bearing: but he goeth on a large step further, & after his dehortatiō from doing euil, he chargeth them afresh with beneficence, and bountiful dealing, saying thus vnto them, Giue. And here as by the gradation & order of these his precepts giuing we are to note his wise∣
to be great, for that he wéedeth his d first, before he soweth it, for that seth vp ye euil eie, before he openeth ood, & cutteth off the left hand from g euil, before he draweth out ye right  to distribute & do good withal: so in rt by the matter it selfe included , we may gather the perfectiō and  of Christes own goodnesse, which h not only in doing no euil at all, so in doing what good may be doon uallie, & to euerie one whomsoe∣ For such as in this behalfe he wil∣s to be, such a one is he himselfe, & ond vs, if we should cōpare with  due proportiō of perfectnes. And uch in a word, touching the wise∣nd goodnes of Christ the Authour  apparantly séene by yt verie maner tter of this portiō of his preaching.  to come to the very point & charge fe giuen out for our vse & practise: ue (saith Christ) & it shal be giuē vn∣ you. Our Sauiour hauing premised rd before, forgiuing, as his forerunner  harbenger: now he sendeth next after m, liberallity as his chiefe steward, for  take vp his abod & mansion house in ye crie bosome & heart of man. And this
officer vnder Christ, as we are to wor∣ship him for his maisters sake, so must we bid him welcome for his own: & that because he doth not anie way tyranni∣callie ouercharge vs, but reasonablie ad∣uertise vs for our owne best behoofe. For he willeth vs not to cut off our own legges, to giue them to him who wan∣teth legges: to pull out our owne eies, for to giue them to him who hath no eyes: to teare off our owne skinne from our flesh, for to couer the sore and gréene wound of an other: or to laie downe our owne life, for the safegarde of our brethren: (although S. Iohn accounteth it but our duetie thus to do, and that be∣cause Christ himselfe laide downe his owne life for vs:) but the Lord, I say, 1. Ioh. 3. giueth vs here an easier & lighter charge by much then this, which is to giue (as we may spare) of our owne temporall goodes to the needie and succourelesse, the rewarde and recompence whereof groweth ten folde againe, from Gods owne handes to vs warde. And this same worke of beneuolence, though the Lord in his mercie make reckoning of it, as a precious thing and gracious acte,
eyesight: yet it is no more thrie instinct and law of nature  bound to do. For we finde it alto∣er a thing most naturall, that one ber should suffer with an other, ac∣ng to Paules saying, If one mem∣uffer, 1. Cor. 12. all suffer with it: but we be∣any, are one bodie in Christ Ie∣ Rom. 12. euerie one of vs one an others ers. Neither is this propertie of assion, & sympathie peculiar vnto alone, but inherent also in the na∣f bruite beastes: for they (saith the opher) which are of one and the e kinde, haue some feeling one thers griefe, and after a sorte suf∣gether, as appeareth by the Oxe.  foules of the ayre also, as the Crow sample, when she hath found out a y and place of repast, she calleth vnto  all her fellowes for to ioine with her opartners. In this behalfe then, let  aske the beastes, and they shall Iob. 12. ach vs, and the foules of the ayre, d they shall tell vs. And what shall ey tell vs? This forsooth, to be so pitt∣ll and so tenderlie affectioned to∣wardes our brethren, that we shall wil∣lingly
couer their nakednesse with clo∣thing, expell their hunger & thirst with reliefe and sustenance, direct their igno∣rance with good counsell, deliuer them from slauerie by redemption, yea, we shall suffer with them in all their woes, as we ought, and supply all their wants as we may. For looke whatsoeuer the Lord beyond our necessitie giueth to a∣nie What soeuer ye Lord beyond our necessitie eth vnto vs, e giueth vnto others by vs. of vs, he giueth it vnto others by vs. But to manie of vs (we see) he sendeth aboundance of meate, and yet but one bellie to put it in: great plentie of cloa∣thing and yet but one backe to weare it on: huge masses of money, and yet but one paire of eyes and one paire of hands to behold and handle the same: What then meaneth this large reckoning and this litle place of receipte? This plenti∣full haruest, & this narrow houseroome? This great store of wine, and this small vessell to conteine the same? But this, that whatsoeuer God sendeth vs ouer & besides, should freely goe to the poore mans boxe, should couertly be conney∣ed into his bosome, and bountifullie poured into his pitcher. Againe, what betokeneth it that wee may as easilie
tch our armes out, as draw them in∣d as soone spread our handes open nder, as shut them vp closely toge∣? But this to put vs in remēbrance t we ought to be as prompt and for∣rde to giue, as wee are applyable to iue a benefit, and as willing to prof∣ good turne to others, as wee are e to take one againe at their hands. des, what doth our stomacke teach  which conuerteth the meate that it iueth, to the vse and nourishment he whole bodie. The Bee which for ing the iuice out of our hearbs, yéel∣ vs honie againe? The young nbe which by nature at the first g but slenderly wolled, casteth vs rwardes great fleeces of woll he earth, which for one corne re∣iued, returneth vs twentie folde? What doe they (all these I say) teach s els but this, that wee ought as good Stewardes, to imparte the Talents of that wisedome and riches which GOD hath lent vs, to the com∣mon vse and benefit of others? Which in deede is such a comfortable and Christianlike kinde of liuing that
Licurgus in regarde hereof, and that for more humanitie sake, schooled his Citi∣zens, that they should not priuatelie liue euerie one to him selfe, but that they should as Bees ioyne handes all in one together, for the indifferent behoofe sake one of an other. So that as we see here, man onelie by naturall reason without grace, bruite beastes by sense a∣lone without reason, and the earth it selfe by vegetation onely without sense, do prescribe and signifie vnto vs, that man ought to be beneficiall, harberous and bountifull to man. Well then, if the Lampe without oyle, yeelde vs this light, the bodie without soule, proffer vs this life, and the earth without tillage, afford vs this croppe of increase: how much more ought the Lampe which is oyled, to burne more brightlie? The bo∣die that is quickened, to be more liuelie? and the earth which is tilled, to fructifie more plenteously? I meane, when souls of the aire, and beastes of the field with∣out reason, when the earth without sense or mouing, and man without re∣generation, appeare thus bountifull and beneficiall one to another: How much
more ought we, which are regenerate dren by adoption and grace, & haue  these wants supplied in vs, for to ex∣de in beneuolence and bountifulnes: he which vertue is so plausible and recious in the eysight of God, that  is taken in, as a Quéene at the gates eauen. And therefore good cause there , why, they which went afore ist, Christ himselfe in his time, and  Apostles that came after in theyrs, all of them mightelie beats at this tue, and charge vs sore therewithall. ou shalt not hearden thine heart, Deut. 15.  shut thine hand from thy poore ther, saith the Lord by Moses. Shew rcie and compassion euerie man Zach. 7.  his brother, saith Zacharie. Giue  him that asketh, & from him that Mat. 5. ould borrow of thee, turne not a∣ay, saith our Sauiour Christ. And hatsoeuer yee would that men should o vnto you, euen so do ye vnto them, according to the exhortation of the Apo∣stle, who saith, Remember them which Heb. 13. are in bondes, as though yee were bound with them: and them that are in affliction, as if yee your selues were
afflicted in the bodie. The same A∣postle also willeth the Ephesians, that they should bee curteous one to ano∣ther, Ephes. 4. and tenderhearted. S. Peter likewise saith, be ye harberous one to 1. pet. 4. another without grudging. Thus much then for equiualent sayinges by way of exhortation. Examples & presi∣dents we haue a great manie, for our better encouragement and imitation sake, touching hospitalitie and bounti∣fulnesse: as the example of Abraham, & Lot, Iob, and Tobias, Ioseph, Ezechias and Iosias, Dauid, and Salomon, Za∣che, and Tabitha, Cornelius and Martha, Nichodemus, with manie moe: yea, our Sauiour Christ we haue as a chiefe paterne in this behalfe, who mercifully in the zeale of his spirite said,  I haue Mat. 8. compassion on the mnltitude, and so did throughlie vittaile and relieue them, before he would dimisse and send them away frō him. He did not by out∣warde pretence and faire wordes onelie beare them in hand, that he pittied them and would do them good, as manie men now a daies vse to doe, resembling the
Taurus, which hath a great voice,  yet but a litle bodie, the thunder. ch hath a great clap and ye but  stone, which comfort (as saith Pla∣is colde and vnsauerie, because it meth not wrapped with some kinde medie: but the Lord, I say, perfor∣ it in deed, and all for our ensample the like, accordingly as S. Iohn h vs. Let vs not loue in worde, 1. Iohn. 3. er in tongue only, but in deed & e. For as it is not the cutting, but rtue which valueth the precious : so is it not the faire glose in word, e full performance in deed, where∣ neighbour is holpen, God the sa∣noured, and we our selues accep¦. For so saith S. Iames, The wise∣ Iam. 3. that is from aboue, is ful of mer∣ & good fruites. But so coole (I say) e deuotion, & so churlish is the dis∣tion of many rich men in this age.  they be found when time serueth, ee and forward to giue, as the flint ne is for to yeelde water: who in deed e more they haue, the lesse they giue, d the more they woulde haue, after e maner of the insatiable dropsie:
yea, by how much the more their coffers do encrease in store and substance, by so much the more do their mindes shrinke in and decrease in franknesse and bene∣ficence: wherein they become like the Cypers tree, which the more it is wate∣red, the more it withereth. And this sure∣ly is a straunge matter, that ye longer a mans arme is, the shorter should bee his reach: that the stronger a mans bow is, the weaker should be his shet: that the fuller a mans handes bee, the emptier should bee his heart: I meane, it is a wonderfull point of ingratitude, that the more substance a man hath giuen him, the lesse hee againe shoulde giue and parte from: and yet shall wee finde this thing most true, if wee looke into the course of the worlde and con∣dition of this time, wherein men for the most part are growne to bee so hard hearted, that rather then they will giue to others inough, or nigh inough, moderatelie to suffice them, they them selues will surfet by too much. Yea, rather then they will put out their Talent to aduantage, they will hap∣lie burie it so deepely, as no man
haue vse thereof: and yet better  it for them by much, if they had orldly wealth at all, then hauing ame, not to cut and carue it out in sort, as both they themselues and s may bée the better for it. Let vs , my brethren, be prouident and ll in this case, That our riches Iam. 5. ne not corrupt, our garments eaten, and our siluer and golde ed by too too long kéeping: for so ust of them shall bee a witness st vs, and shall eate our flesh as re fire. But rather let vs alwaies dfull, to disperse and giue to the  For so shall our righteousnes psal. 112. e for euer. And heere for our  direction fake in this point, let nsider a litle the parties to whom, anner whereafter, and the ende refore wee ought to giue. Touching st circumstance, we are thus taught he prophet Esai, saying: Is not this The parti whom we must giue. Esai. 58. fasting that I haue chosen, to deal  bread to the hungry, & that thou ing the poore that wandreth, vnto ine house, whē thou seest the naked, at thou couer him, & hide not thy
selfe from thine own flesh. When thou ke 14. makest a feast (saith our Sauior Christ) Call the poore, the maymed, the lame and the blind. And again, If thou wilt atth. . be perfect, saith he, Go and sell all that thou hast, & giue to the poore. Here∣withall agreeth that saying of S. Iames the Apostle, Pure religion, & vndefiled am. 1. before God the Father, is this, to visit the fatherlesse & widows in their ad∣uersitie. The remembrance of this de∣uation towards the néedie and succour∣lesse, was Iobes chiefest comfort and heartes ease, when in the middest of his owne miseries hee brake out thus & said, I was the eies to the blinde, the feete b. 29. to the lame, and a father vnto the poore. Vnto this same distressed condi∣tion of men, verie bountifully did Zache also put foorth his helping hande, when ke 19. deuiding his goods in two shares, hee imparted the one halfe to the poore. This then, as hereby wee learne, is the spe∣ciall state, whereunto by giuing wee ought to haue regarde: Now because as well our owne countrimen as stran∣gers borne, as well Christians as infi∣dels, as wel vertuous as godlesse people,
ewhiles put to the like triall in rnace of aduersitie: it shall not se for vs to obserue a litle, whe∣t plunging in like distresse and e, must of duetie bee supported, lpen first. As for forreiners or gers, albeit the Lorde straightlie th vs both to loue & relieue them, euiticus. The straunger that Leuit. 19. h with you, shall bee as one r selues, and thou shalt loue thy selfe. And againe in Deu∣y the Lord saith, The stranger Deut. 14. ome, and the fatherlesse which hin thy gates, and shall eate ee, and be satisfied: Although  the generall title of Christiani∣mon to vs, and them, should et vs at one in mutuall loue and ce, then the diuers and seuerall s of Countries separate our af∣s asunder, seeing as the Apo∣aieth, There is one Lord, one Ephe. 4. , one Baptisme, one God and er of all, which is aboue vs all,  through vs all, and in vs all:  notwithstāding, as nature cōman∣ vs, so the spirit of God forbiddeth vs
not, but that we relieue, and euery way befriend our owne countreimen and neighbours born afore strangers, if th on both sides there be like necessitie, an not vnlike zeale to Godwarde, els not. For although we be enioyned by the ho∣lie Ghost, to doo good vnto all men with∣out exceptiō, whether they be neighbor or strangers; friends, or enemies; grate∣full, or thanklesse, godlie, or graceles people: yet be wee charged speciallie t be helpfull towards them, which in faith and singlenes of hart séeke the Lord. For so saith Paul, While wee haue time, let Galat. 6. vs doo good vnto all men, but speci∣ally vnto them whiche are of the houshold of faith. This discretion d the same Apostle himselfe vse, when h caried the almes to Ierusalem and di∣minister it vnto saintes there. And vnto Rom. 15. this same sincere sort of professours ou Sauiour Christ had relation, when hee said, In as much as ye haue done alms Matth. 25. vnto the least of these my brethren, ye haue done it vnto mee. But now a daies among the richer sort, men of this simple outward condition, be they of ne∣uer so sound inward complexiō, eftsoones
orst of all: insomuch that Salo∣aying is verified, Riches gather prou. 19. riends, but the poore is separa∣m his neighbour. Again, Euery ith he) is friend to him that gi∣fts, according to that prouerbe, , prosperitie is alwaies iended. For looke as our sha∣ time of Sunshine, doo accom∣ bodies, and in time of cloudie  they vanish away from vs: and olphins of the Sea with ioyful∣n with vs, whiles we haue wa∣l, but when that faileth, they  and forsake vs: so likewise hile they haue full fruition of nour, and wealth, shall be sure s euerie where: but when these s weare out and are ouercast, l friendship wheresoeuer. This  is our frailty from the highest to est, frankly to giue where giftes lesse, be the parties neuer so bad ours: and vnkindly to withdraw nds where helpe is néedfull, be the s neuer so godlie and good deser∣ Touching this circumstance there∣o the end wee may offend the lesse,
wee must as nigh as wee can resemb the integritie and incorrupt nature  God Almightie, who specially by his po∣wer and prouidence, dooth relieue a aduance the sincerest, best, and worthie men. Concerning the commendable an The maner whereafter we must giue. Christianlike maner of almes giuing wee must not as men wayward and vn∣willing, foreslack the performance he of being once determined where néed r∣quireth: for so are wee tolde by the wi mā, Say not vnto thy neighbor, Come prou. 3. again, and to morrow wil I giue thee, if thou now hast it: Neither may we do it frowningly or with an euill will, f this also dooth ye Apostle forwarn vs off, saying, Let euerie man doo according . Cor. 9. as he is disposed in his hart, not grud∣gingly or of necessitie, & why? God lo∣ueth a chearfull giuer. In all thy giftes shew a chearful countenance, saith the Preacher. And looke what thy hand is able, giue with a chearfull eye. For a man not according to the mea∣sure of his gift and largition, but accor∣ding to his pitifull minde and chari∣table affection, is accepted of with the Lorde, as may appeare by the great
ing hee made of the poore wi∣ two mites, afore the rich mans l and large offering. Though I Mark. 12. 1. Cor. 13.  the poore (saieth the Apostle)  all my goods, and haue not  mee, it profiteth me no whit  So that as wee see, this same  loue and compassion, affoor∣ kinde both of inwarde and out∣ chearfulnes, must bee as a per∣r sweete powder whereof our must smell, as a garland where∣ it must bee beautified, and in  of a delightsome sauce whereof  taste. Otherwise, the Lorde  will abhorre and abandon it, ng vnpleasant to his nose, vn∣e to his eye, and vnsauourie to outh. For in trueth, without  two foresaide appurtenances, I e both inwarde and outwarde fulnes, all mens giftes how great er, are but as flowers without ur, masses without shape, bones hout marow, and as lamps with∣ oyle. If wee will then by dis∣rging our duetie accordinglie, right∣lease God in this behalf, we must be
as forward and prompt to giue, wh riches abounde, as the Sea men are to saile when winde and tide serueth, the birds to flacker when feathers come on, or the earth to fructifie when shée hath moisture at will. Yea, wee may not be so slack in our beneuolence as was Peri∣cles, who had his memorie rubde by his olde tutor Anaxagoras, afore hée gaue him ought, as thus, O Pericle, qui lu∣cerna indiget, oleum instillet. This he sai when Pericles, hearing that through want of maintenance hée was about to make a hand of himself, came to dissua him from doing that violence against his owne person, and the rather, because (as he said) hee and she whole Countrey be∣sides, could hardlie forgo him. Why th, saith Anaxagoras, hee that néedeth a lampe or light, let him poure in oyle for to kéepe it burning: as if he should haue said, Hée that for his vse néedeth a man, let him relieue and succour him. This reasonable rounde saying was Pericles ashamed of, who afterwards tooke more care ouer him, but lesse a great deale to his commendation and credit, then if hée had of his own accord doue it afore. For
hich is quickly giuen, is twise gi∣ Qui cito dat, his dat. And yet bée  I feare me) many well able and en, which take as much delight in  as ye Oxe in his yoke, or ye Horse eauy harnes. As for these world∣ which possesse not, but rather are  of their goods, some will com∣em to Hogges, which serue for ill they come to the Butchers  and some will liken them to de Dogges, which afore they ewed one peece of meate, gree∣e after another: and yet (mée ) they may bée resembled to a enly beast, though more subtill her of these, and that is in déed to , who had rather bruise & breake ile on the grounde, then giue or  anye part of it to the silly Ape  wanteth a taile. Let vs not then, rethren, when wee giue, bee closefi∣ and when wee take, openhanded: rather let vs frankly both doo & say  Zache, Halfe of my goods I giue Luke 19. o the poore. For why? Wisedome t is hid, and treasure that is hourded  what profite is there in them both?
And thus much for the maner how we The end wher∣fore we ought to giue. ought to giue. Lastlie, touching the right ende wherefore, we ought to giue it may in no wise be this, to be séene  men: I meane, for vaine glorie sake,  so wée forgoe the rewarde at our hea∣uenlie Fathers hande. And therefore saith Christ, When thou giuest thine Matth. 6. almes, thou shalt not make a trumpet to be blowen before thee, as the hipo∣crites do in the Synagogues & street to be praised of men: but when tho doost thine almes, let not thy left hi know what thy right hand doth, that thine almes may bee in secret, and the father that seeth in secret, hee will re∣ward thee openlie. Neither may we passe away our almes vpō hope of ma rewarde and retributron againe, for this dealing tasteth rather of vsur then of anie kindelie liberalitie: b when wee giue, wee must doo it fréelie through méere pitie and compassion to∣wardes the néedie, and that because the Lorde himselfe hath straightly enioyn vs so to doo. So that, to be short, t verie ende and drift of this our adon must alwaies bee this, to pleas
, who requireth it, whom we ought ake reckoning of aboue all, and to ue our neighbour, who néedeth it, m wée ought to loue as our selues.  this then suffice that I haue spo∣ concerning the parties to whom,  manner whereafter, and the ende efore wee ought to giue. It fol∣h in the text as thus. And it shall uē vnto you, &c. And this (I say) rises promise or couenant of re∣ & retribution, directed to so manie , as be faithful Christian almoners, ein for our better encouragement  the lord displaieth vnto vs, by way iliar description, the good & gainful ure of the saide rewarde, mutuallie ing to vs ward againe, as thus: A d measure, pressed downe, shaken ither, & rūning ouer, shal mē giue o your bosome. First then, let vs ndle the promise in generall, omitting itle these circumstances, whereby the me lieth here notably enriched, & beau∣fied. It shalbe giuen vnto you, saieth Christ. If so be yt in worldly affaires we account an honest mans word, as a rea∣sonable good pledge, & take an able mans
obligation, for sufficient securitie, whose conditions are in both kindes variable, and therfore vntrustie and deceiueable: how much more securely may we relye vpon Gods promise héere, who accor∣dyng to his immutable will and power ordereth mās goings, disposeth his hart, and hath vnder his wil all mans will at a eck? And this is he who hath here gi∣uen vs his hand, that if by gifts giuing, we be helpful vnto others, we our selues likewise shall bee curteously entreated, and frankly recompensed again, both at his and at their hands. Such reckoning then and reputation must wee make of this, that no vsurie in comparison, may séeme so beneficiall vnto vs, nor yet any treasure, so surely laide or lockt vp for our vse, as that which is deuoutly gi∣uen, and couertly conueyed into the nee∣die mans bosome. For why, as saith the Apostle, God is not vnrighteous, that ebr. 6. hee will forget our workes, and labor, that proceedeth of loue. Who as hee maketh the earth to acknowledge ye be∣nefit of the Sun, by yelding againe a re∣flexion of his bright beames: And as hée causeth the tilled lande, seasonably with
ntage for to repay that in haruest, h was sowen and lent out to inte∣in séede time: so dooth he by his good te enflame and stir vp mens hearts, ee thankfull for the benefites they e by others, and hée enforceth them eir ablenesse groweth on, for to re∣ and render the like againe to their ctors and first founders. And this rule holdeth not throughout, son of mans slacknes, and ingra∣: Yet dooth the Lord of his owne e make this his word good, and  this his promise, by way of re∣ him selfe: according to Salo∣is saying, Hee that hath pitie prou. 19. e poore, lendeth vnto the lord, e Lorde will recompence him  which hee layeth out. The libe∣an then (as we see here) hath two ges for his bowe, so that if the one , the other will bee alwaies readie and to make supply. For the Lord h not alwaies poste ouer this matter o mans discretion onelie, (albeit he keth him somewhiles as his Fac∣r or Deputie in this point) but hee formeth this thing actually himselfe
also, without means or mediation. And here, for our further assurance and better resolution sake in this behalfe, we will a litle ouersée & suruey these seuerall pla∣ces of scripture following. As first those of Salomon, Honor the Lord with thy ou. 3. riches, and with the first fruites of all thine encrease: So shal thy barnes be filled with abundance, and thy presses shal burst with new wine. The liberall rou. 11. persou (saith he) shal haue plentie, and he that watereth, shal haue raine. And again, he holdeth this as a rule infallible: Hee which followeth after righteous∣nes rou. 21. and mercie, shall finde life, righte∣ousnes and glory. This doubtlesse was Tobias perswaded of, when hee spake thus to his sonne, by way of aduertise∣ment, Giue almes according to thy Tob. 4. substance, for thereby thou layest vp a good store for thy selfe againste the day of necessitie. Likewise saith the wise man, Bestow thy treasure Eccle. 29. after the commaundement of the moste high, and it shall bring thee more profite then Golde. Againe hée saith, Giue thine almes secretlie, and it shal keepe thee from al afflictiō,
s also did king Dauid thinke in his ience, when he said, Blessed is hee psal. 41.  iudgeth wiselie of the poore: the de shall deliuer him in the time of ble. And this falleth flat with ye A∣es saying, Whatsoeuer a mansow∣ Galat. 6. that shal he reape. Let vs not then, ethren, bee wearie of well dooing,  that in due time We shal reape if Galat. 6. nt not. For no doubt, the Lorde ath heere made this francke coue∣and promise with vs, hath allready rmed the same to our forefathers,  whence there groweth also to vs  no small encouragement & hope: ragement (I meane) for to deale lli, as they our predecessours  and hope againe for to haue plen∣lie, euen as they themselues had.  some perchance will aske me, who re they? What did they? And at rewarde had they? Who they re, I tolde you afore, as namelie raham, Tobias, Dauid, Ezechias, seph, Iosias, Salomon, Corne∣us, Martha, Nichodemus, with ma∣ie moe besides these, all which for their mes deedes and compassion towardes
the poore, receiued againe in temporall blessings, some more, some lesse, some sin∣gle, some double folde, according as the Lord in his secret wisedome, did foresee it to bee best & most expedient for them: and in the end they also reaped eternall life, which benefit they found far surpas∣sing the other. Seeing thē the Lord who promiseth, hath so duely kept touch with these our elders before vs, wee for our parts may heereby assuredly perswade our selues, that we also as well as they, by scattering shall gather, by losing shal finde, by giuing shall take, by lessening shall augment, by emptying to the bot∣tom, shall fill vp to the brim, yea by ha∣uing nothing, wee shall surely possesse all things. For so manifold is the vse we haue alwaies by our giftes giuing, that though wee passe them from vs out of time, yet doo we receiue them againe in time: though they go from vs as things superfluous, yet returne they to vs a∣gaine, as thinges moste necessarie: and though wee giue them in earthen Cuppes, yet doo wee receiue them a∣gaine in golden Goblets: and what should I say else: whereby to rouse and
vs vp vnto beneficence and boun∣nesse, but this, that contrarie by hoording vp, we shall make ha∣t: by kéeping, we shall forgoe: by ng, we shall spend: by pinching, we  bring on pouertie: yea, when like ardes we thinke to make all, then gets shal we marre all? For why, sing to giue an inch, we defraude ues of an ell: by withholding one up of cold water from others, wee rred from a whole fountaine our : and for not emptying, the one  by giuing, we forgo both our hands  taking: according to that saying omon, There is that scattereth, prou. 11.  more increased: but hee that h more then is right, shall sure∣e to pouertie. Yea most true it o peny, no paternoster: nothing  nothing take: for so saith the wise , He that stoppeth his eare at the prou. 21. g of the poore, he shall also crye  not be heard. And againe, He that draweth the corne, the people  curse him, saith he. Herewithall a∣th that saying of the Apostle, There be iudgement mercilesse to him Iam. 2.
that sheweth no mercie. The veritie and proofe hereof appeareth at large, by the wrathfull subuersion of Sodome: For among other iniquities which wrought her desolation & ouerthrow, the Prophet Ezechiel nameth this for one, that she did not strengthen the Ezech. 16. hand of the poore and needie. The men of Succoth, for not relieuing Gi∣deon Iudg. 4. his people, when they craued suste∣nance, became in thend distressed them selues, and torne asunder with thorns and briers. The rich glutton, for with∣holding Luke. 16. his helping hand from Lazarus, fell himselfe finallie into a most mise∣rable, distressed, and helpeles case. Well then if it fareth thus with them which giue not of their owne substance, when and where neede is: what (I pray you) shall befal vnto them, which being come of the takers, as we terme them, doe not onely not giue to, but take from the poore: doe not onely not helpe them vp againe, when they are fallen downe, but assay to hurle them downe flat, when they are faire standing: doe not onely not salue them when they see them sore wounded, but bitterlie
them, when they see them per∣ whole and sound: do not onely not en them, when they see them lye g, but cruellie smoother and w them vp, while they are yet ? For such are the waies of euery at is greedie of gaine, that hee prou. 1.  take away the life of the ow∣ereof: what shall be their por∣ I meane, which are so farre off iuing to others, that they at∣ by open violence for to wring rest from them, that which of s theirs? Surelie these men if ten to and belieue the two Pro∣ Esais and Ames, shall finde hey haue a heauie matter, and e colde suite in hand, and that se their ende shall bee vtter death esolation. For thus saith Esai, e to thee that spoilest, and wast  spoiled, and doest wickedlie Esai. 33.  they did not wickedlie against e. When thou shalt cease from iling, thou shalt bee spoiled, d when thou shalt make an end  doing wickedlie, they shall doe ckedlie against thee. The same
Prophet also elswhere, threatneth vtter ouerthrow against them which ioyne house to house, and lay field to field, Esai. 5. and foretelleth them that manie houses euen faire and great ones, shall bee without inhabitant. The Prophet A∣mos also doth thus prophecie of these mercilesse and rauenous men: Foras∣much, saith he, as your treading is vp∣pon the poore, and ye take from hi Amos. 5. burdens of wheat: ye haue built hou∣ses of hewen stone, but yee shall no dwell in them, ye haue planted plea∣sant vineyardes, but ye shall not drin wine of them: For thus doubtlesse fal∣leth it out with al extorcioners, & oppres∣sors whosoeuer, that in the winding vp, they themselues reape no more vse by their spoile and rapine, then Achan did by taking the Babilonish garment, A∣doram Ios. 6. by extorting the Israelites tri∣bute, 1. King. 12. or Ahab by compassing of Nabothe 1. King. 22. vineyarde. Yea this bad end and misfor∣tune, as we learne, befel to al the Cana∣anites, the Assyrians, the Babilonians, the Persians, the Grecians, and the Ro∣manes, which were themselues mer∣cilesse, and altogether giuen to spoile.
efore all mightie men, and rich rdes, by the example of these e like afterclap, when they doe ely with drye eyes looke vpon ore tenants miseries, but by op∣ and violence grinde their faces, n vp & deuour them, euē as the es in the Sea deuour the lesse∣, I say, beware and looke to  doubtlesse, the Councell of the ching their shamefull fall and n, shall surely stand. And let t onely learne hereby for the pu∣t sake, to abandon such mon∣mpietie in oppressing and ra∣ir poore brethren: but let them  the rewarde sake, relieue and  them with their owne wealth bstance: for this in deede is that  smelling sacrifice, which the Lord eth here, as a riper branch and r degrée of true Christianitie, then ther. Yea, this is it finallie, where∣ the Lord affixeth his promise of re∣all and retribution, saying, Giue & all be giuen vnto you. Wherein dly with one breath (as it were) is ribed vnto vs, the perfect measure
and maner, how wee shall in due tim reape this rewarde againe, as thus a good measure, pressed downe, and ∣forth as followeth in the text. And th same familiar meanes of perswading (I say) the Lorde doth sollicite vs by for this ende, that being acquainted  forehand with the gainefull maner  the recompence ensuing, wee for ou partes, shoulde the more couragiously goe on, to put in vre such charitabl workes of beneuolence, as wee an here charged withall. For hauing not onelie a rewarde, but the same  most bountifull one promised vs ac∣cording to this our Sauiour Christs amplification here, wee our selues by meanes of this francke proffer must needes become willing, yea most wil∣ling to performe this his will, by way of Almes and liberallitie. And here∣in as wee are to admire Christes wise∣dome, for the familiar and effectual maner sake of this his promise, as also to magnifie his goodnesse, for the finall performance hereof, when time doth serue: so are wee to condemne our owne dulnesse in conceiuing, and
to proue our owne slacknesse in exe∣g this and other such like deedes lmes, and all because our sense∣and churlish nature is such, that ll not of it owne accorde, conceiue elde from it anie thing that good vnlesse it bee thus roused vp and  on in this maner, by faire and omises. This knew our Saui∣ell, who albeit of his owne an∣tie like a Lorde, hee might haue yned vs this charge without anie fer of rewarde at all: yet hath hee  Father, dealt more mildlie with  by waye of perswasion, including  a bountifull promise, thereby, awe vs on the rather, obedientlie  willinglie to embrace this his spe∣ciall desire. And this description of compence formallie framed by our Sauiour Christ, may séeme indifferent∣ly to afforde vs, a double sence and mea∣ning: that is to say, both a celestiall and a temporall signification. Notwith∣standing, whether way soeuer wee con∣strue it, wee finde that the rewarde doth not onely counteruaile ye desert, but doth also by manie degrees farre outgoe and
surpasse the same: for by giuing an euen, proportionable, and an equall measure vnto others, we are here warranted by Christ himselfe, that we shall reape the like againe, with a mendes, and large interest, either from them, whom before we our selues haue gratified, or els from some other more thankfull persons, whom the Lord in stead of their vn∣thankfulnesse will stirre vp againe for to recompence, and befriend vs. Here∣upon it commeth, that Christ elswhere in the Gospel promiseth an hundreth folde in temporall blessinges to them, warde againe, which for his names sake and the Gospels, renounce and Mar. 10. willingly part from their earthly possessions, and substance. Yea wee read that our Sauiour himselfe, who by promise standeth payable for this targe account and reckoning, hath heretofore miraculously discharged himselfe there∣of, as namely, when by his mightie po∣wer and prouidence, the Disciples after the satisfying of fiue thousand hungrie men, with fiue loaues and two sillie Mar. 6. fishes, tooke vp againe twelue baskets full of the fragments, that were left,
so when through his mighty hand, oore widow found her store fullie 2. King. 16. e vp, after she had frankly and frée∣otcht it out for the Prophets suste∣e and behoofe sake. Againe, besides  two miracles, many other ordina∣oofes, & ensamples we haue, which irectly teach vs, that Christes li∣ retribution hath beene alwaies  at hand, and answerable to mans ifulnesse: but of these I made men∣fore, as occasion serued. I wil now fore ouerpasse them. Onely thus  I say, and say againe, that the  himselfe is so farre off from broo∣or bearing with any worldly iug∣egerdemaine, and deceite, that he  no wise suffer his chosen children, g well dealt withall and done to by r brethren, so disloyallie to intreate  delude them againe, as to re∣e them chaffe for good corne, light res for downe weight, bad mea∣e for good, a stone for breade, or erpent in steade of a fish: but be∣ing Luk. 11. their superuisour and guide, hee will make them (will they, nill they) or to repay such good measure
againe, as is here liuely described by three seuerall properties of integritie and perfectnesse, which namely be these, pressed downe, shaken together, and running ouer. This measure then (as wee see here) shall not bee through any fraudulent or sleight deuise, heaued vp to the outwarde appearance, and so afterwarde faile on vs: but it shall be so roundly hudled vp, and so substanti∣ally coutcht together, that it shall not possibly shrinke in anie whit at all on a∣ny side. For first of all, it shall not be de∣ceitefull in the bottom beneath, because it shall be pressed downe: againe, it shall not be hollow or sleight about the sides betwixt, because it shall bee shaken together: neither yet shall it deceiue vs at the toppe aboue, because it shall outreach and ouerflow the brim. Yea, this same measure (I say) promised vs by Christ, shall from head to foote, and from toppe to toe, as wee terme it, bee sound without vnperfectnesse, substantiall without guilefullnesse, and full without scarcenesse, and what els can bee wished ouer and besides, sa∣uing onely the safe deliuerie and con∣ueyance
thereof, vnto our handes.  this also doth our Sauiour Christ  assure vs off, where he saith that o∣ men shall giue it into our bosomes:  if hee shoulde haue saide, This mea∣ shall not bee desperately cast to , (for so it might miscarie by the ) neither wrathfullie hurlde at  (for so it might offende you)  yet openly or ambitiously giuen  (for so perhaps it might disgrace discounteuance you:) but it shall onueyed into your bosome, modest∣r securitie sake, chearefully for bet∣king sake, and couertly for your t sake. Note here (I pray you) ther with the perfectnesse of the sure, the secure and singular good er also of the conueyance thereof, o our besomes. And here finallie ncerning this worde Bosome, I ob∣ue this as a speciall note among the t, that all mens good giftes what soe∣uer, ought to haue their chiefest reuolu∣tion, affiance, and setling place, about he heart, that is, from a beneuo∣nt heart must they come, and to a thankefull hearte must they goe.
For otherwise, if they halt betwixt both, they must néedes degenerate, goe out of kinde, and so consequently come to no proofe. So that, as you see, our heart must be our hand to giue from vs, and our heart must be our hand to take to vs, yea, our heart must be all in all. And thus much concerning the tempo∣ral meaning of this our sauiour Christs promised rewarde, amplified at large as ye haue heard alreadie, with a full description of the properties incident thereto. Now for the other more di∣uine interpretation, and celestiall ac∣ception of these wordes, if I should particularly by order as they lye, stand deskanting vpon them, I should there∣by rather satisfie the curious, then edi∣fie the simpler sort: I will not there∣fore meddle with the description of this incomprehensible heauenlie recom∣pence. Onely thus much and no more dare I boldlie say with the Apostle, that no eie hath seene, no eare hath heard, 1. Cor. 2. nor heart of man conceiued the ioyes that the Lorde hath in store for them that loue him, yea for them which loue him aboue all, and their brethren
m selues, which loue must needs re by their workes of charitie, lmes deedes. For, with what ure yee mete, with the same shall mete to you againe, saith Christ, e which generall sentence deriued common sense, and approued by w of nature, all the foresaid seue∣ts of recompence are now round∣prised, wound vp, and ratified. us our sauiour Christ reasoneth, what measure yee mete withall, good or bad) with the same shall ete to you againe: If yee then l iudging, by forgiuing, and by also, afforde good measure vn∣rs, ye your selues likewise shall  of the like beneuolence, mutual∣ine at their handes. And why,  well thought off, when we thinke  of others, is the still inward har∣ie: to be well spoken off when wee ke well, is the outward rebounding cho: and to be well done to, when we well to others, is the kindely proper∣ of mans nature vniuersallie. This ubtlesse did Homer feele by good ex∣rience both in himselfe & others when
saide, Talia dicentur tibi, qualia dixeris ipse. that is, Such wordes as thou broachest abroad by others, such like shall fall to thine owne share againe, bee they good or bad. And this same Homers saying may seeme of right to haue great affinitie with that saying of Salomon, Hee that seeketh good prou. 11. thinges, getteth fauour: but he that seeketh euil, euil shall come to him. For as by Gods fauourable appoint∣ment, it commeth to passe, that men of integritie and vprightnesse, such I meane, as delite both to speake well, and to doe well by others, reape againe the like good reputation and beneuo∣lence at their handes: euen so through Gods iust iudgement falleth it out, that men of sinister and maleuolent mindes, such I would say, as are vipe∣rous, hateful & illiberall persons, meete commonly in ye end with like mates vn∣to them selues, which will sting them outwardly, disdaine them inwardlie, and draw backe their helping handes e∣uen then, when assistance might stand them in most steade. Thus were the Sodomites, and the men of Succoth (as
e you) for their owne vnmerci∣sse iustly dasht and dealt withall,  when they might worst haue born Yea as there be none almost so vn∣full, qui non gratiam benè merenti: ere be none in maner so innocent, alum malè merenti non reponent. As  bee none (I say) so vngratefull,  will not repay a good turne to at deserueth a good one: so is there o harmelesse, which will not doe  bad turne, who deserueth no bet∣ Well then, if most men accor∣ as occasion shall bee giuen them  good or bad, vse cōmonly to render epay the like againe, & all through  owne permission and ordinance: r our partes, if so that wee wish to e backe the euil from vs, and to w on the good recompence into our soms, must alwaies thinke off, speake , and doe to our brethren all good and  euil. Yea, wee must (I say) con∣rme our heartes to thinke well, smooth d file our tongues to speake well, and oth bow and bend all our iointes to oe well to others, which no doubt oth may, and will be gratefull to vs in
like sorte, when time shall serue. And here perchaunce some will aske mee, How may these sayings hang together, and be reconciled aright? For whereas immediatly afore, the Lorde termed it measure running ouer that should bee giuen vs, now he seemeth to fall & light short of that proportion, promising no more but this, that ye same measure shal be returned vs again, that we mete vn∣to others withall. We answere, that by the same measure here, is meant no more but this in generall, that for our well doing to others, we againe shalbe well done vnto. So that whether this rewarde bee more or lesse, whether it light short or exceede in quantitie, tou∣ching the verifying of these wordes, all (I say) is as one for that. Seeing therefore, my brethren, the Lorde himselfe hath enioyned vs here, libe∣rallitie, and beneuolence, as asweete smelling sacrifice in his nostrels, and hath also promised a large retributi∣on thereto, whereby is signified, that the neglecte thereof is a thinge pu∣nishable and vnrewarded. Let vs for these foure causes, that is, first
e Commandement sake, second∣ for the dignitie of the action it  being elsewhere termed a sacrifice, ly for the promise sake, and lastlie, garde of the penaltie procéeding of ntrarie, let vs (I say) for these cau∣ as bountifull, as harberous, and as ciall one towards another, as pos∣e may be. And to the end this acti∣ be the more easie and delightsom s in the performance, let vs by f gradation obserue and put in vse paratiues, the other two precepts y going afore, touching the aban∣g of rashe iudgement and malice g. For these bee the chiefest ene∣nd obstacles that we haue, in the ianlike course of all our beneuo∣ whatsoeuer. For the supplanting fore of these enormities, tending di∣y by way of almes, to the glorie of , to the behoofe of our neighbors, and the safegard of our own soules, let vs say) with one accord, in all humilitie  feruentnes of spirit, craue the assi∣nce of God the Father, God the Son,  God the holie Ghost, in such deuout er and fourme as followeth.
The Prayer. ALmighty, most mercifull, and gracious Tri∣nity, frō whose incomprehen∣sible godhead, fatherly good∣nes, & ghostlie influence, wee receiue in hand, & haue deriued vnto vs our creation, our redemption, and sanctification, with all things els, we thy sorie creatures, ouerlaid with the accusation, and remorse of our own guiltie consciences, for the wilfull breach by past of these thy precepts: do now before thy throne of maiesty, prostrate our selues, with hūble cōfes∣sion of our heinous disobedience, a∣gainst these same fatherly prescriptiōs of thine, touching true sanctimony of life, & brotherly conuersatiō For be∣ing aforetime too too much in loue & liking with our selues, & so on the other side, out of all league and loue with our brethren, we haue parcialli
wote) iustified our own doings,  wee should haue condemned, aue peeuishly cōdemned theirs,  of right we should haue iustifi∣ Thus haue wee by flattering our , and by defacing our fellow ser∣, shamefully to thy dishonor, de∣ur owne soules. Yea, albeit wee s watchwoord giuen vs afore∣ That by our words we should be iusti∣ Matth. 12. by our words we should be condem∣ t this alas haue we done, to our  ouerthrow and confusion. A∣ouer and besides this, wee haue r at thy bidding rebuked our tres∣ Luke 17. nor yet forgiuen them vpon their re∣e: but hauing our harts by Sa∣r heauy lodesman, ouerfraught malice, we haue furiously sought  ease and vnburden the same, by  of vengeance against our euildo∣ Thus also being out of ioynt with ers, haue we impatiently lasht be∣ the cōpasse of thy will, & precinct hy sacred word, which seriously ad∣th vs, That wee should not auenge our es, but rather giue place vnto wrath and
indignation: yea, For hereunto verely were om 12. et. 3. we called. Lastlie, as for that due bene∣uolence & compassion of ours, which thou (O Lord) for the behoofe of the succourlesse, without all nay say requi∣rest at our hands, wee for our partes, which in substance haue most, and so might best haue been bountiful, euen we (I say) cannot denie but that wee haue churlishly, with that delicious Cormorant Diues, kept back our hel∣ping uke. 16. hād frō sillie pore Lazarus. Yea, thus croslie against thy will haue wee dealt in this behalfe, and haue not made vs friends of the riches of iniquitie, to uke. 16. the ende they might receiue vs into euerla∣sting habitations. For as much then, O heauenlie Father, as our demeanour hath ben so captious, so cankred, and so crosse at all assaies, wee thy sinfull caitifes relying whollie vpō thy mer∣cie and forgiuenes, haue now made our appearance before thy iudgemēt seat, with voluntary arraignment, and condemnation against our selues: and in this our own citation, and submis∣sion, before thee, we craue not onelie an acquittance, and full discharge, for
ur offences bypast, but we also ie beseech thee to affoord vs orth such copious measure of ace, as wee may neuer hereafter o the like lapse, and labrinth a∣ For so in deed might our end s in the Gospell, Become a great Luke. 1. se then our first beginning was. s hauing quashed against the e braines of these Babilonish spirits, I meane, euill ielousie,  and vnmercifulnes: grant vs,  Lord) we pray thee, such ghost∣r and assistance of thine, as we aies hereafter be prest, to giue nstructions in things indiffe∣o brooke and beare out with e, all mens iniuries and bad ces, yea and that which is more is, to feede our enemies if they r, & to giue them drink if they : For thus, O Father, of thy bles∣ast thou charged vs, That wee 1. pet. 3.  not be ouercome of euill, but ouercome ith goodnes. Ouer which euill wee eaklings can neuer anie way get pper hande and preheminence, le thou, who as our generall and
chiefe Captaine doost force vs on to fight this field, lēd vs also thy helping hand for to giue the foile to flesh and blood. For these in deed bee the two sore enemies, which daily come vpon vs in such iolly and giantly manner that if thou thy selfe doost not aid vs they will neuer surcease till they ha either by meere flatterie, or main force, subdued and conquered vs. B yet, O Lord, If thou be with vs, who (b Rom. 8. he neuer so iolly or giantlike) can p∣sibly be against vs? Defraude vs no therfore, we beseech thee, of thy me∣cifull assistance, whensoeuer we com in combat with Satan our Ghostlie ∣nemie: so shall wee according to th thy will, with all delectation & pea of conscience acquaint our hearts  think, accustom our tongues to spea and inure our hands to do well for  our brethren and companions sake yea, and all this shall wee rightlie do for the due aduancement of thy gl yea, for the temporall behoofe of o fellow Christians, and for the perp∣tuall saluation of our owne soul Which crowne of endlesse saluatio
this our corruptible, shall put  corruption, wee craue at thy s, O heauenly Father of blisse, e name bee worthely magnified  the first to the last generation. . LONDON inted by Iohn VVolfe.
