14476 23084415 26201
I tell you, Iohn Iarret, you'l breake: OR, Iohn Iarrets wiues counsell to her husband, to haue care to his estate in this hard time, lest he turne Bankerout. To the tune of the wiuing Age. PRay gentle Iohn Iarret, give eare to my words, It is my true kindnesse this counsell affords, And euery good husband to his wife accords: If your time you wast away at Alehouse boords, I tell you, Iohn Iarret, you'l breake, I tell you, Iohn Iarret, you'l breake. You sée how the world to vices inclines. Which if you doe follow, my soule thus diuines, That you'l want the mony which you wast in wines: Men being drunkards, are worse than base swines. I tell you Iohn Iarret, &c. They say, at the Talbot you runne on the sre, Beside, at S. Katherines you kéepe a braue whore. Where you on a night spent an Angell and more: If you vse such dealings, twill make you full poore. I tell you, &c. I heare y'haue a wench, they call her Blacke Kae, Whose dwelling, they say, is néere to Billingsgate, Besides, how you gaue her a new gowne of lase: If you vpon harlots doe thus waste your state. I tell you, &c. Besides, at S. Toolis, another mans wife, They say that (Iohn Iarre) you loue as your life, Twixt her and her husband you daily breed strife, Consuming your meanes, if you lead still this life, I tell you, &c I heare say at Wapping that you kéepe another, And when you goe there, you say tis to your brother But you maintaine her with the old bawd her mother Such scuruy dealings I by no meanes can smother: I tell you, &c. You rise in the morning before breake of day, And vnto the Alehouse you straight take your way, Where you in base manner at shuffle-boord play, Untill you haue wasted your money away. I tell you, &c. You haue a Bastard at Brainford at nurse, That wéekly doth cost you two shillings thats worse: These things, sweet Iohn Iarret, will empty your purse Besides, if you still perseuer this course, I tel you, &c. You into ill company daily d rome, Whilst I and your children sit sighing at home, With brown bread and small drink I sit like a mome And sometimes at midnight you drunke in do come I tell you, &c. This is a hard world, and euery thing's deare, Swéet gentle Iohn Iarret, my counsell pray heare Before all be wasted, I pray haue a care. For if you doe hold this course one other yéere. I tell you, Iohn Iarret, you'l breake, I tell you, Iohn Iarret, you'l breake.
The second part. To the same tune. YOu sée how the Farmers doe hoord vp their graine, No care will they lend to the poore mens complaine, Although we should starue, these Curmugins will gaine They neuer thinke on vs, nor pitty our paine, I feare me, Iohn Iarret, you'l breake, I feare me, Iohn Iarret, you'l breake. This is no world to borrow nor lend Nor (if you consider it) vainely to spend: Receiue this my counsell (good Iohn) as a friend, For if you pursue this vaine course to the end, I tell you, &c. When you in your shop should be plying your worke, In some scuruy blinde Alehouse you all day doe lurke, More like than a Christian to some Iew or Turke: If thus you neglect your liuing and worke, I tell you, &c. Be rul'd by my counsell, good husband, I pray, For t'will be your owne I'm sure another day: Yet, if you please liue full well you may, But if you persist in your drinking and play, I tell you, &c. You know, you haue wasted away a good Farme, And now we want firing for to keepe vs warme, Besides a good house for to shelter a storme: I giue not this counsell vnto you for harme: I tell you, &c. Giue ouer in time your scuruy base whores, For feare they should fill you with scars & with sores And laboure besides to pay your old scores: If whores still you follow, with company that roes, I tell you, &c. You sée that the ould yeare is almost quite spent The new one is comming▪ good Iohn then repent Your wicked old follies, and with one consent, Your downe-sinking state with care to preuent. I tell you, &c. Some that haue enough, at Gods blessings repine, But whilest I liue, that fault shall not be mine, When to thy power▪ swéet Iohn, with me ioyne, And pray that God daily will guard thée and thine, I tell you, &c. Be rul'd by your wife, that doth loue you full deare▪ And all ill society sée you forbeare, And of these children I pray haue a care, Begin a new course, I pray, with the yeare, Or else, sweet, &c. There commeth no goodnes by following of queane▪ But ryotous drinking, and wasting of meanes. Who trusts to such harlots, on wickednes leanes, And may with the Prodigall féed vpon beanes. I tell you, Iohn Iarret, you'l breake, I tell you, Iohn Iarret, you'l breake. Fin.
