17296 99845433 10331
A greene Forest, or a naturall Historie, Wherein may bee seene first the most sufferaigne Vertues in all the whole kinde of Stones & Mettals: next of Plants, as of Herbes, Trees, & Shrubs, Lastly of Brute Beastes, Foules, Fishes, creeping wormes & Serpents, and that Alpha∣betically: so that a Table shall not neede. Compiled by Iohn Maplet, M. of Arte, and student in Cambridge: entending hereby yt God might especially be glorified: and the people furdered. Anno. 1567. Imprinted at London, by Henry Denham.
To the Right Honourable, Lord, Lord Thomas, Earle of Sus∣sex, Viscont Fitzwalter Lorde of Egre∣mont, and of Burnell, Knight of the most Noble order of the Garter, Iustice of the Forrestes & Chases, from Trent Southward, and Captaine of the Gentle∣men Pensioners, of the house of the Queene our Soueraigne Ladie, BAthyllus, he of Samos (moste honorable Lord) was one whiche the Poet Ana∣creon sang alwayes of, minding him in euery song for a certaine conceipt of worthinesse which he thought was in him: Likewise Ligurinus was alwayes one at
the ende of Horace his pen and mouth. And as a report goeth (and many Romaine Histories shew the same) Numa & Ser∣uius are by Poets commended, vp to the Orbes of the Firma∣ment or Skie: where they saye they liue as they list: whose bread is Nectar, and drink Ambro∣sia, a sugred and confect kinde of Wine, which is serued oute in a faire Goblet or Cuppe by a faire waiting Boy named Ganime∣des. These Poets figured here∣by (most Honorable Lord) that any of the nine Muses, whatso∣euer
kinde of Harpe they vsed, it should be strung and tuned so that it mought reach to Diates∣seron, the onely note of Noble mens commendation. And so doe I gather, it is best vsed. I here∣vpon nowe wishe that although Anacreon be gone, I had yet his Harpe: for then would I now set and tune it many Notes higher than euer could he in the prayse of Bathyllus, or Horace in the testimonie of Ligurius: For I would vse it to recognize and re∣gester the memoriall of Yours such absolute Vertues. But sith
this Harpe is denied me: and the verie Instrument which I nowe sound of, is not as I would it were, my intent notwithstanding and not my possibilitie is to be consi∣dered. Yet rather then I should haue shewed nothing at al of bet∣ter testomonie of my good will to∣wards your Honor, this shall suf∣fise me (vntill hereafter I may do better) to vse so simple a sound. And if so be I could worthilye cō∣mende you (as those Poets did Numa and Seruius) to highe Olympus: you should surely by such our meanes come by some of
their Iuncketts that they haue: But this would I rather be done, by message had to and fro from these (which way Hercules v∣sed with Hyla Thiodamant his Sonne: Apollo with Hya∣cinth: Diana with Hyppoli∣tus:) then that you enioying the presence of those, our Countrie should lacke you, such hir orna∣ment and beautifying. Therfore for their better remembrance of you, I will do so much at the least as to signifie vnto them your cog∣nisance the faire bright Starre: which besides that, hath his hid
signification. But to leaue these: and although Typhis and Ia∣son be bolde: yet I hope (moste Honourable Lorde) I haue not theirs, but Vatienus his face. Whose simple Treatise of mine, when I was excited to bestow it of your Lordship, I straight wayes gathered with my selfe that you were not Licinius the Empe∣rour which was malicious toward the learned: neither yet Britan∣nion, an vtter enimie to the mo∣ther Science, and hir daughter Discipline: neyther yet Va∣lentinian: but rather contrari∣wise
Iulius Caesar, excelling both in Martiall prowesse, and also serious after the inquisi∣tion of good Discipline: or else Iulianus: or Marcus Aure∣lius. Which small gift of mine, if your Lordshippe take in good worth: I shall be encouraged af∣ter a while to enrich these: and to attempt muche greater and better hereafter, so soone as I shall attain to a little more ripe∣nesse. And thus ceasing to trou∣ble your Lordshippe any more I make an end: desiring GOD to blesse you in all his giftes, both
ghostly and bodilye: and to con∣tinue you in long life and true Honour, to his glory: the helpe and assistance of others: and your owne, and endlesse comfort. Amen. Your Honors humble Orator, Iohn Maplet.
The Preface to the Reader. WHatsoeuer things (sayth Cardane) are of Natures tempering and dighting, ei∣ther in the earth his closet or entrayles, or within the water (being all voide of f∣ling and mouing) may well bee deuided and sorted into these foure kinds: Earthes Liquors or Iuices, Sto∣nes, Mettalles. Earthes, saith Diascorides in his fift booke (as also the same Author abouesaide) haue their difference eyther in colour, in smell, in sauour, or else otherwise in other their vse & purposes. Proper or pertinent to earths are many & sundrie kindes and sorts, as those which either are in house with them, and fare as they fare, as Sande, which Isidore nameth the lightest carth, as others: or those which are neuer absent from the earth but are intermedled with the water, as Alume, which of some is called the arth his salt, as salt it selfe and such like. In earthes are diuers dispositions and farre diuers effects (which thing Diascorides pursueth aboundantly) there are also reckned diuers names of diuers kindes: as that of Eretria a famous Citie in the Ile of Eubea, hath his sett and disposition of colour and shew ashie like, and is in his kinde in operation a sore binder, besides this marueilously colde. And that that is plentifull in Chium in Eubea also (for there is of this name besides this, two more, one a Citie of Caria, and an∣other in Rhodes by Triopia) in effect and working
is farre otherwise, which being aplied or vsed in me∣dicine, drieth vp and burneth. The like dissent is in porcions of ground with diuers Inhabitants of op∣posite quarters & Climates, which by commō name they cal earthes, as in Samia is a most tough earth like to that natural Lime which is called Bitumen. But let vs come to Brimstone which is ye father of Mettals: as Mercurie or Quicksiluer their Mo∣ther. Brimstone saith Harmolaus in Greeke is cal∣led Theion. Isidore will haue it called Sulphur, for that it soone renneth on fire. It groweth (as they both agree) in the yes of Aeolia betweene Sicilie & Italie: that is best that groweth in Melus a towne of Thessalie which Nicius the Althenien captaine, wanne by famishing the inhabitaunts: Further, it groweth within the Hilles of Neopolitane, compa∣nions of those which be called Leucogei. Harmolous saith, that there be foure kindes heareof. The first which is called Apuron liue Alume, & this is solide and most massey: almost on clottes, which kind one∣ly Phisicions vse. The second which is called Bo∣lus a lumpe like mettall. The third is called Egula vsed commonly of Fullers to make their wull and yarne whight. The fourth which is called Cauton which they vse in the wicke of Lampes of Oyle & Candels. Thus much of this. Quicksiluer in Greeke is called ydrargyros, it is as Cardane saith, a certaine water made thick not by heate, bycause it is not hardened, neither by colde, for then should it be eyther in the stone his kinde or else in the mettals: but with most thinne and pure yearthy parte. Whereby it commeth to passe, that it is so heauie, so cold, so bright and cleare, so liquide or renning. It is rather mingled or tempered after a certaine sorte, & that his owne, then congeled or com∣pound, for as much as it is both liquide and fluxible. The reason he sheweth why this kinde, (as is also the water) are in figure round: for that they refuse
in their felowship drought or any mixture of yearth. It sercheth & seketh to the very bottom of ech thing. It is for his rawe mixture, of some called metal In∣concret. And as it is with yse which dissolueth, then when it vanisheth away, and doth not vanish till it be dissolued: in like sorte doth this (but more princi∣pally, all metalles) which doe endure well till that they be molten. Dioscorides saith, that this Quick∣siluer is most found in siluer quarries or mines: & is then ound whē Siluer is digged vp: some wil haue it founde in Mines by it selfe. It is best of all pre∣serued and kept in those vessels that be of Glasse, of Leae, or of Tin and Siluer. All other matter of whatsoeuer kinde it is of, it eateth through & low∣eth forth. It is a deadly drincke ouerlading & brea∣king in sunder the inwarde partes with his waight, in remedie wherof many haue taken forthwith Wine and Wormewood, and haue bene holpen. But nowe to the second part of our first & former deuision. Liquores or Iuices be Oyles, Wines, and whatsoeuer else is watrie or of ye water & aire. They be called Liquores, for eyther being actually moiste∣ned, or else by powre & possibilitie. ¶ But now let vs speake somewhat ingenerallye (as we haue of the o∣ther two) of stones, which supplied in our first deui∣sion, the third rometh. Of Stones some be more base and common: other some more Precious and rare: but the common Stone hath his name and vocable (if I may so say) hurtfoote, for that it is in mouing from place to place & iourneying the footes pain and griefe. The common stone hath almost infinit kinds which offer themselues euerie where, and therefore to speake of them particularly, or in seuerall sort, it were both tedious and without delight: We mought therefore so haue sorted Stones that wee mought haue made some of them both base, and com∣mon: other some base, but not yet common: lastly of all some neither base nor common but altogither rare
and precious. Of the first sort are all these that are so plentifull with vs and without estimation: of the seconde sort is the Pumelse concrete of froth as I∣sidore witnesseth, verie colde of nature and in wor∣king so colde as he sayeth, that it beeing cast into a Hoggeshead of Wine and continuing there a while taketh from the Wine his natural heate. Of the last and chiefest sorte are all such as are of greatest price, & for mens estimation spent on them, called Gems or Iewels: as is that which they call Dionysius stone in spots ruddie: and be speckled round about, as that of Phrygia, in colour wanne: in waight heauie: in vertue hid and secret: as that of Arabie, as white as Iuorie: without spot or specke: as likewise the Sanguinarie which in Greeke is called Amatites which being well chafed and rubbed, bleedeth. After this sort it hath pleased Dame Nature thus to dal∣ly in eche kinde, thereby to shewe hir cunning. But now let vs go to the last part of our deuision. Met∣talles and those of the mettalick sort, sayth Cardane lie close for the most pare in Mountaines, in maner like to the braunch or body of a tree: and are nothing else but the earths hid & occult Plants, hauing their roote, their stock or body, their bough & leaues, & be in all these partes proportionally dispersed: further he sayth, that both Stones and Mettals haue these foure partes as those that be necessarie to their ee∣ing and increase: a Roote, Barcke, substance, and vaines. The Stone his Roote sayeth he, is eyther some other Stone out of the which it groweth, or else the earth: ye Mettals Roote is eyther Mettal, or some thing Meallick. Their rinde or barck saith he, doth differ manifestly frō ye rest of their substance, both in outward place and hardnesse. Their vaines doe appeare manifestly. But thus much shall suffise vs to haue spoken of the whole as concerning diuisi∣on. Now let vs come nigh eche of them, and especi∣ally touch the best of them, leauing the rest, foras∣much
as it is our purpose not to seeke in all things what may be saide of all, but espeically and princi∣pallye to see what is in them especiall and princi∣pall. And therefore we were about to haue named this our Booke the Aegemonie, of Natures thre middle Daughters: For that in them all, that is sought forth, than the which there is nothing better, nothing more excellent in all the whole kinde: For such is y• Greeke word, Aegemonia, as if you would say Principatus: The best and chiefest of the whole. Those other two, that is yearthes and Liquores, we purposedly omit: onely couetouse to bestowe and employ in this first Booke (but as briefly as we can, and in order as chaunceth) our trauaile and diligence in inquisition after Stones and Mettals: not that which I would, but that which I may for my poore skill & knowledge: not to teach or shew the learned, howe in this point Nature hath wrought (for that were as the prouerb is, ye Sow to Minerua:) But to record & repeate in maner of Storie, with the resi∣due of men simple & plaine: And I cannot tell how it may somewhat helpe those that be learned also, If they shall espie and consider but the effect and proofe of these. I therefore desire a Reader not learned, but vnskilfull: yet rather learned then immoderate. For the one wilbe an impudent rayler: the other although hee findeth fault, yet shal a man haue him reasonable able herein to stay himselfe. Thus much of this Preface, nowe to the residue of our matter. Farewell.
Our Chiefest Authors herein. Aelianus. Agricola. Aristotle. Albertus Magnus. Auicen. Ausonius. Cardane. Cicero. Diascorides. Harmolaus Barbar{us}. Isidore. Iorach. Laurentius Lippius. Lonicer. Lucane. Mantuan. Oppian. Ouid. Pline. Ruellius. Remigius. Solinus. Theophrast. Volateranus with others. Psalme. 104. O Lord howe meruellous are thy woorkes: in wisedome hast thou made them all, the earth is full of thy riches.
A pleasaunt Discourse with the chiefe kindes particu∣larlye of Precious Stones, Plants, Beastes, & Foules, after the order of the Alpha∣bet, neuer heretofore in Print. The first Booke. Of the Adamant Stone. THe Adamant is a Stone of Inde, small and rare, in colour like to Iron▪ but in cleare relection and representa∣tion of image more Christall like: It is founde in bignesse of a Walnut, and neuer aboue: It yeeldeth or giueth place to nothing, neither is it heat by yron or fire. Wherfore the Greekes call it Fickleforce, for that it can not be brought vnder. But whiles it is inuincible or can not be woonne that way: yet notwithstan∣ding with the warme and freshe bloud of the Goate, it breaketh and riueth in sunder. It dif∣fereth, from the Lode Stone for that the Ada∣mant placed neare any yron, will not suffer it to be drawen away of the Lode Stone. Dias∣corides saith that it is called the Stone of re∣consiliation
and loue: for (saith he) that wo∣man that hath withdrawne hir loue from hir husband, by this, is brought to loue him anew: yea, it goeth furder: for it is said to giue proufe whether she be chast or no: for if she be say they, she shal whilest she is in sleepe imbrace hir hus∣band through the working of this stone, if not, she shall flie and go back from him. Of Alabaster. ALabaster, as saith Isidore, in his .xvj. booke and fift Chapter, is a white kinde of stone died, and bespotted among with diuers & sun∣drie colours. Hereof are made vessels to kéepe and containe all Ointments vncorrupt, wher∣in they be most purely and safely preserued. It groweth about Thebis and Damascum, and especiallye that which is whitest. But the best of this kinde is brought from Indie. It be∣ing borne about one, say some, kéepeth him in amitie and charitie with all men. Of the Amitist: THe Amitist also groweth in Indie: It is Princes among those Gēmes that be Pur∣ple coloured. Diascorides sayth, that there be fiue kindes thereof: but that which is Purple coloured, hée reckeneth the chiefest. His force
or vertue auaileth against drunkennesse, it ke∣peth a man waking, and driueth away ill cogi∣tations and thoughts, it sharpeth the vnder∣standing. And is also one of those sortes that is easie to engraue in. Of Achates. AChates is a kinde of Gemme, but black in colour, enterlined here & there with white vaines: and it is called Achates of a certaine floud of that name in Cicilie, about the which floud this Achates was first found. There is a certain kind hereof séene somtimes in Crete as Diascorides witnesseth, hauing strokes on eche side like to blew vaines. There is ano∣ther kinde in Indie bespotted on euerie parte with spottes like bloud. That of Crete is said to make a man gracious, and to bring him in fauour. That of Indie is good for the eiesight it remedieth venome, and being put into the fire is odoriferus. Of the Stone Albeston. ALbeston is a stone of Archadie, in yron colour, hauing gotten his name of the fire, for that it being once set on fire, can neuer af∣ter be quenched or put out: Whereof in olde time was built that kind of worke Mechani∣call,
whereas the Gentiles being once taken in sacriledge, dyed. Isidore sayth in his .xvj. booke, that in a certaine temple of Venus there was made and hoong vp such a Candlesticke, wherein was a light burning on that wise, that no tempest nor storme could put it out, & he beleueth that this Candlesticke had some∣what of Albeston beset within. Of the stone or Gem Alabandine. THe Gem Alabandine, as sayth Diascori∣des, had first his name of Alabanda, a coū∣trie in Asia, whose colour sayth he resembleth the Hearbe Calcedonie: but it is somewhat more rare and in colour cleare. Of the precious stone Absistos. ABsistos is black, maruellous waightie, be∣stroked and beset with red vaines: This being once heate, kéepeth hote seauen whole dayes after, as Isidore recordeth. Of Amatites. AMatites is that kinde of Gemme, that tou∣ching a mans Uesture or Garment, it ma∣keth it able to resist fire: so that it being after∣wards cast into ye fire hath no power to burne,
but through the fires brightnesse becommeth more bright it selfe. Thus saith Isidore in his xvj. booke. Of Argirites. ARgirites is a kinde of Gem, that in colour and shew is like to Siluer, giuing also ap∣parance of golden coloured Grauell, his figure or forme is foure square: his vertue such as the Adamants is. The Mages suppose that it had this name of his power or abilitie in brideling and kéeping in perturbations and troubles. Of Asterites. ASterites is a Gem: but white, keping close within it selfe light, and sheweth it forth but little, euen as the Starre doth: but to hym that beholdeth it throughly, it sheweth him the Sunnes manifolde reflexions. Of Astrion. AStrion is a Gem, founde first in Indie, of verie nigh consanguinitie with the Chris∣tall, in whose Centre or middle point: as saith Diascorides, a certaine light is seene shining, without reflexion much like to the Moone. The same Author also thinketh that this light that it hath▪ it taketh of the starres, against ye which
it is helden. Of the Berill. BErill is a Stone rare, but not so precious, for it alone groweth in Indie: it is founde greene like to the Smaradge. It is first found also raw and rude without eyther good looke or pleasant shewe, but afterwards it is better po∣lished of them of Indie, and they vse to polish it in maner and forme of Angle or Corner, to the intent that through ye dulnesse of his owne colour, this maner might shew some glittring the light hauing his stay in euerie eche corner: Some say, they fashion it a the first, seauen cornered: and otherwise they say it shimmereth not. There is also another kinde of Berill, which of the Gréeke worde is called Golden Be∣rill, as sayth Diascorides, whose interchaūged gréene colour resembleth almost the wan and yelow colour of Golde. They say that this being borne aboute a man, and being put now and than to his eies, kepeth a man out of perill of his enimies. Of Brasse. BRasse is a kind of mettal, one of those seauē that are compounde of Brimstone & Quic∣siluer▪ and is called Es of the Ayres resplende∣shing:
The Brimstone that is proportionally wrought in this (as in all other Metalles) is most earthie, nothing pure, hauing his colour red and as it were burned: Quicksiluer, it hath but meanely, grosse also and nothing subtile. Yet this kinde of Mettall being well purged & scoured, sodden also and washed from all his infections may be made regular, & brought to what point you will. Of all other Metalles, this is most soundable for his shrill and harde noise: With this therfore, as that which was most plentiful in ye former time, they eared and tilled their ground, but after that Iron and the residue of Metalles by succession were found, this kind ceassed in that and such like vses. So euen as the yeares chaūge: so also doth things themselues chaunge, as well and wisely sang the Poet. Of Calcedon. CAlcedon, is a kind of stone pale and wan, of dull colour, almost a meane betweene the Berill and the Iacinct. It hath three one∣ly kinds: whereof euery one of them is almost impossible to be grauen in. It being well cha∣fed and warmed will draw to it, a strawe or a rushe. It is as they say, the Lawyers and O∣rators friend, and others who pleade causes.
Of Ceraunium. CEraunium is a stone like to the Christall, bespotted with blew, and is found in Ger∣manie: There is another of this founde in Spaine firelike and like to a flame: his suffe∣raigntie is, that being safely and chastly borne aboute a man, kepeth him safe and preserueth him from Thunder and Lightnings, likewise the house wherin he is: and is otherwise effec∣tuous to bring a man in swéete sléepe. Of the Corall. THe Corall groweth in the red Sea, and so long as it is and hath his being in the wa∣ters, it is a kinde of Wood, but by and by after that it is taken forth of the water and cōmeth into the ayre (and his reach) it hardeneth, and becommeth a stone. His boughes vnder the water are espied white and tender: and being by chaunce through holdefast Nets in part or parcell brought to lande, chaunge also their co∣lour and become red, and for their feeling, are as hard stones. Isidore in his .xvj. booke. The Mages reporte that it resisteth Lightninges. Therefore euen as much worth and of estima∣tion as is the precious Margaret, that, that cō∣meth from Indie, so much worth and in esti∣matiō,
likewise is the Coral wt them of Indie. Hereof are said to be two onely kindes, the one red & the other white: this last is neuer found in bignesse & in length more than halfe a foote: that other often bigger and longer. They say that it is of power to rid vs from all diuelishe dreames and pieuish fantasies. Of the Cornellis. THe Cornellis is one of those sortes that be somewhat rare also, but not so precious, and is in colour red almost like to the Corall. It being hoong about the neck, or worne vpon the finger, is said, in all kinds of reasoning and disputation, to appease the partie that weareth it, and to kéepe him from childish brawlings. Of the Carbuncle. THe Carbuncle is a stone very precious, so called for that (like to a fierie cole) it giueth light, but especially in the night season: it so warreth with the pupill or the eiesight, that it sheweth manifolde reflexions. It hath as some say .xij. kindes: but those most precious that come nigh the Carbuncles nature: it is found in Libia. Of the Cristall.
THe Cristall is one of those stones that shy∣neth in euerie part, and is in colour warrie. Isidore saith, that it is nothing else then a cō∣geled Ise by continuance frosen whole yeares. It groweth in Asia and Cyprus, and especially vpon the Alpes and highe Mountaines of the North Pole. It engendreth not so much of the waters coldenesse, as of the earthinesse mixt withall. His propertie is to abide nothing in qualitie contrarie to it selfe: therefore it is de∣lighted onely with colde. Of the Chrusopasse. THe Chrusopasse is a Stone of Ethiope, which in the day light shimmereth not, but in his qualitie lieth hid: In ye night time when darcknesse ariseth, it then bewrayeth his owne and peculier qualitie. In the night time it is flamelike, in the day time yelow or wan. Of the Diamond. THe Diamond is one of those that be coun∣ted something precious, it is in colour al∣most Christallike but somewhat more resplen∣dishing, and is as good (if it be of any bignesse) as a looking glasse. Iorach calleth it an other eie: such certaintie & truth giueth it in things done in his presence.
Of the Dionise. THe Dionise is black or rather browne, all bestrowed with bloudie strokes or vaines. It being put faith Isidore in Wines, maketh them fragrant, or wel smelling, and is thought wt his smel or sauour to remedie dronkennesse. Of Dracontides. DRacontides as his name also mentioneth, is plucked forth of the heade or braine of a Dragon, which onely is in bright and fierie colour (as sayth Isidore,) as long as, it is come by, the Dragon being aliue: wherfore the Ma∣ges skilled in this point, cut it forth out of the Dragon his braine, he being by meanes cast in to sleepe. The moste bolde and aduenterous men, are said, to seeke out the lurking holes of the Dragon, and whilest that the Dragon is from home, these men bestrew his Lodge with certaine Graine, which being receiued of the Dragon, bringeth him into a deade sleepe. And whilest they haue thus brought their purpose to passe they rippe in sunder the noddle of his head to take forth the Gem, and after that sow it vp againe and so depart. Of Dradocos.
DRadocos is a kinde of stone verie pale, yet as shimmering withall, as the Berill. It is saide to bring to a man feare of Diuels and other straunge thoughts fantasticall: It being applyed and layde vpon a dead man, looseth his operatiue vertue. Wherefore they call it, the holy stone, for that wheras Death frequenteth or taketh, it vtterly abhorreth. Of Echites. EChites is a stone both of Indie and Persia, which in the shore and Sea banckes of the Ocean, in the verie bosome of the Indian and Persian Sea, it is found: it is in colour Uiolet like: And there is a paire of them, Male & Fe∣male, and be most commonly found both togi∣ther in the Eagles nest, without the which the Eagle can not bring forth hir yong: and ther∣fore kepeth them, as most necessarie in this be∣halfe alwaies in hir Nest. These stones bound to a womās bodie, being with childe, do hasten childe birth. And Iorach saith, that if any man haue these or one of these, and put it vnder that mans meate or trencher that he suspecteth to be in fault of any thing: If that he be guiltie, he shall not be able through this to swallowe downe his meate: If not saith he, he may.
Of Efestides. EFestides is in colour and Phisiognomie verie shamefast and childish, which béeing had and caried about the stomack, or heart, ke∣peth a man safe from all perill and endama∣ging. Diascorides sayth, that if it be helden a∣gainst the Sunne beames, that then it is verie firie, but being throwne into the water, it lea∣ueth boyling, & by little and little waxeth very colde. Of Elutropia. ELutropia is a Gemme, in colour gréene, or grassie, in part coloured and bespotted with Purple speckes & bloud coloured vaines. This is a maruellous Iugler, for it wil cause things obiect to be presented to our eies as it listeth. It being put into a Basan of water chaungeth to a mans eiesight the Sunne his beames, and giueth them a contrarie colour. Being also mooued and beaten in the ayre, maketh to ap∣peare a bloudie Sunne, and darkneth the ayre in maner of an Eclipse: and therefore it is cal∣led Eloutropia as you would say, the Sunne his enimie. There is of this name also a certaine Hearbe which Enchaunters & Witches haue oftentimes vsed, and doe vse, as also that aboue
said, whereby they haue mocked and deluded many, which by meanes and working of en∣chauntmēt, haue so dazeled the beholders eies, that they haue gone by them inuisibly. Of Ematites. EMatites is a stone somewhat ruddie, some∣what sanguine, found both in Affrick, in Indie and in Arabie: so named for that it re∣solueth & chaungeth oft into a bloudie colour: and is called of some stench bloud, for that it stoppeth his vent or course of flowing. Of Enidros. ENidros, is meane or small in bignesse, con∣tinually sweating or dropping, neither doth it for all this melt away or is lessened: of the which the Lapidare hath this note and tune as followeth. Perpetui fletus lacrimis distillat Enidros qui velut ex pleni Fontis scaturigine manat. Distilling drops and teares full oft That Enidros the Stone doth drop: Which as out of a Fountaine full, Doth alwayes runne and neuer stop. And here question might be moued why it doth not vanish or wax lesse, through such day∣ly flowing. The aunswere is for that his ver∣tue
or working doth bind and thicken the aire, that which is next to it, and so bringeth it to his owne nature, part by part in his order. OfGagates. GAgates is of the precious sort also, which was first found in Sicilie in a certain floud called Gagatus of the which it tooke his name: although that in Britannie, it is a good geast & somewhat common as Isidore saith: It hath two kindes, the one russet in colour, and the o∣ther black, this last easie to be fiered, and as smokie as Frankinsence. It being left in the place where Serpents bréede, driueth them cleane away. And Diascorides saith, that this being put into ye drink of a Maide or Uir∣gin will easilye giue you iudgement whether that she be a true and right Mayde yea or no. For saith he, after that she hath drunke of this and doth not anone after make water, but can continue, then take hir and estéeme hir a pure Uirgin, and contrariwise, if she doe not con∣tinue and stay herein some season, iudge of hir otherwise. OfGalactites. GAlactites is a stone in colour ashie, in taste verie swéete & pleasant, which being pres∣sed
or grouned, yeeldeth and giueth a certaine Milkie and watrish humor, as saith Isidore: This being kept in close, and shutte vp in the mouth, desturbeth and letteth the minde. Fur∣der, it being bound to a Womans thigh, cau∣seth easie deliuerance in childe bed. Ofthe Gem. I Must needes before I iourney any further or hasten to other, somewhat speake of the Gem: for that we haue beene occasioned and shall be hereafter to vse it as the generaltie or notion of the name and stock in these kindes. It is called a Gem saith Isid. for that it shy∣neth and is smooth as the Gum. This hath his best beautifying in the varietie and interpla∣cing of colours, & it is called precious, for that it is rare: all things that be rare are precious. Neither is it to be marueiled why eche Gem is precious, sith that al and singuler are not with∣out their diuine vertue. Of Gemmes, some are found in the earthes vaines, & are digged vp with Metalles: some are cast vp to lande and brought thither from the Sea his bottom, and their place of generation is vnknowen: other some are bred and found in the bodies & bellies of Foules, Fishes, Creatures & Beasts of the earth, Serpents and such as creepe my∣raculously
by God & prouident nature in their maner of working tasked. But in this kinde as in al others we must take heed of Sophisti∣cation: for to discerne & iudge truely the right Gem from the counterfayted, is the significa∣tiō of a most cunning man. It hath bene séene that in stead of a Smaragde some haue had so∣phistred and counterfayted Glasse: Wherfore let not colours deceiue thée: aswell gréene to eiesight is the Glasse as the Smaragde, thou must take héede as the Poet iddeth, much co∣louring is there and many deceies. Of Gelacia. GElacia is a Gem verie white, hauing the figure or shew, likewise the bignesse & quā∣titie of an Hailestone, and is of such excessiue coldenesse that by no meanes of fire had and applied thereto it becommeth whoe. Of Geratites. GEratites is a kinde of stone black, but his vertue excéedeth and is aboue his colour: If any man carrie this in his mouth close, he may tell what euerie man thinketh of him: as sayth the Lapidare. It also maketh amiable and bringeth him into others fauour that hath it about him.
Of Golde. GOlde is the heade of all other Mettalles, and is in the chiefest degrée that Nature in∣stituted Mettals by ripenesse and perfection at the last to come vnto: but euen as by stoppes and lets, partly by such imbecilitie as is with∣in vs, and about vs, partly by enuious & cleane contrarie disposition of the Ayre and Planets in their Orbes, fighting and striuing with vs somewhile, & anone against vs: we be many of vs cut off before we come to olde age, the last degrée of Nature, so that we can not attaine to this last, through such our hinderances and im∣pediments: so there is order and wayes to or∣der in al Mettals from the first to the last, from the most vile and base, to the most precious & richest: which kinde of order and degrée euerie Mettal although it were of the rawest and ba∣sest sort, should attain to in his due time, were it not for impediments and hinderances, either of colde and barraine ground, or for lack of the Sunne his purifying and ripening, or for in∣fection of rustie and copperous Mineralles be∣ing nigh neighbour to them: or for such other stoppes, whereby they stoppe and stay, and so become grosse for lacke of their naturall and first growth and tidinesse in ripening. Isido.
sayth that it is called Golde of the Ayre for that that the Ayre being stroked shimmereth the more. It is naturall to all Mettalles that they shine and looke bright, especially being moued and helden in the light. The Hebrewes call this Mettall Ophar, ye Gréekes Chrusos. Aristo∣tle sayth in his fourth booke of Meteores, that this kinde as all the rest procedeth and is com∣pound of Brimstone the verie subtillest and red, and Quicksiluer also as subtile, but white, and this last verie smallie and proportionally. Amongst al Mettals there is none more solide, more compact then this is: and therefore it be∣ing put into the fornace doth not euaporate (as other thinges doe) neyther doth it léese of hys waight. It is more dutile & easie to be brought to what poynt you will then any of the other. For vpon a Stith with a Mallet it is brought into most thin leafe or plate without rupture or breaking. There is nothing to looke to so beautifull as this, neyther is their any thing so pure. The Phisitions say that it comforteth and expelleth all superfluities in the bodie, and is effectuous against the Leprosie. Likewise his leafe buried in wine maketh it auaylable against diseases & consumption of the Splene, and other perturbations Melancholike. Like∣wise Incision or Adustion done with an In∣strument
of Golde is better than of any other Mettal or matter, for it kepeth the place of vsti∣on, frée and cleare from yll smelling and ran∣coring. There is also a certaine vaine of the earth, or whether a man might call it a kinde of stone, easily digged vp and broken, hauing the verie looke and face of Golde, and of some is the stone Arsenick, & is wrought as I thinke of Arsenicum, which also they call the golden earth. But this Arsenicum is double, one ashie colour, and the other as we aboue saide, in colour like Golde. The first is vsed to me∣dicine, for it hath power to dissolue & to purge: And besides that, they say it is vsed to Oynt∣ments depilatiue. Of the Iasper. THe Iaspar is a Gem verie gréene, like to the Smaragde, but of a litle more grosse co∣lour. Isid. saith that this hath. xvij. seuerall kinds and he calleth it the gréene stone. That of Cypria, (saith Harmolaus) is more duskie coloured and grosse: That of Persia is like to the Ayre, for the which it is called Aerizula: That of Phrygia is purple coloured: There hath bene in auncient time séene a Iaspar in waight .xj. Ounces. There is also in the heade of the Serpent Aspis found a little stone
much like to the Iasper of maruailous vertue, which some by cutting away the first letter, haue called Aspis. It is thought to haue so ma∣ny wayes in working as it hath kindes. Of the Iacinct. THe Iacinct is blew, and of nigh neighbor∣hoode with the Saphire. This is a maruel∣lous turncote, for that it doth conforme it self to all settes and dispositions of the Ayre, for being helde in the cloudie and darke Ayre, be∣commeth also cloudie and darke: and béeing in the bright and cleare Ayre, becommeth also both bright and cleare. It is taken to be medi∣cinable, to giue vigor and strength to the lims, to encrease the sinewes, and to prouoke quiet and sound sléepe. Of Iris. IRis is a kinde of Stone Mathematicallye wrought, as being digged vp in forme sixe cornered, which at the first was found nigh the red Sea: but is now found in many places, as in Germanie, in Irelande, and in the North parts and quarters, and is of colour as cleare as the Cristall. It is called Iris for likeloode to the Rainebow, which being touched & stricken of the Sunne his beames, vnder any couert,
doth represent and shewe both the figure and colours of the Rainebow vpon the wall next to it, and that oppositely as Diascorides saith. It hath the same force and working that the Berill hath, but is not in quantitie so great. Of Iron. IRon in Latin is called à feriēdo Ferrum, for that through his hardnesse it stryketh, molifieth, and bringeth vnder all kind of met∣tals. This kinde according to the manifolde difference of earthes and quarters of the earth. is diuersly called. It is engendred (as Aristotle sayth) of Quicksiluer verie grosse, nothing pure, vncleane and earthie: and of Brimstone also as grosse, as vnpure, as earthie. In com∣position whereof there is more of the Brim∣stone: so that through the temperature of cold which is in the Quicksiluer, of the drought and earth, which is in the other, it is so wrought & compact on that wise. Iron through bloud tou∣ching waxeth rustie, and getting within him, can scarcely, or not at al, be rid of it, corrupting within otherwise. Rust therefore is nothing else but a defaulte and an offence in the vn∣cleannesse and impurenesse of any substaunce, whether it commeth eyther by fellowship and placing next to the earth, or through any yll
qualitie of mans bloud, or of moyst and infec∣tuous vapour. As Isidore recordeth. Of Iron Mans bloud is soonest reuenged, for that by nothing so soone, Iron is brought to his corrup∣tion. It hath a naturall amitie with the Ada∣mant, which Adamant (as we before men∣tioned) draweth it to it, and this last followeth and obeyeth. Iron being polished is very like to Brasse. There is a certaine Iron which is for the most part white, which if it be buried a certaine space in a Uessell eyther of Wine or of Milke, remedieth diseases in the Splene, & is otherwise auaileable. If you go to vse and wade no further, this kinde of Mettall is prin∣cipall amongst the rest, which thing necessitie teacheth, and is the best proufe: which we also doe approue then, when as we are cōstrayned and driuen to Weapon and Armourie: for without thys coulde wée neyther be quiet at home amongst our selues, neyther could we kéepe off, from our Countrie borders and li∣mits, other our outward enimies. Further (to stay our selues in things at home and not to seeke other) there could be no mans Arte prac∣tised, no commoditie had by occupation & sci∣ence: further, not so much as the earth could be either sowē or reaped to any increase with∣out this. Therefore in this behalfe it mought
be called all graine and fruites Nurse. Of the stone Kaman. KAman the stone may well be called a turn∣cote, for that it is now blacke, now white, now shamefast & blushing. And is in colours very diuerse, and therefore it is called Kama, as you would say in Greeke Kauma soone kind∣led. It is found in hote places, and especially in those that haue good store of Brimstone and be Sulphureous: as Diascorides reporteth. It helpeth sayth he the drop sie: and is easie to be engrauen and carued in. Of Kabiates. KAbiates is cleare coloured, very lyke to the Cristall. It is thought being borne about one to make a man eloquent, to make him ho∣nourable, and to get and win him fauour. It preserueth one also from hurtfull and vene∣mous Serpents, and cureth paine and griefe in the Maw and Splene. Of Kalpophanus. KAlpophanus is a kinde of stone black, yet be painted with other colours, which being caried in the month is saide to clarifie ye voice, and to helpe them that be harse, as the Lapi∣dare
witnesseth. Of Lead. LEad saith Aristotle, commeth and ariseth of Brimstone, both grosse, vnpure, & full of dregges: and of Quicsiluer also, waterie, and in maner like to an humor. Isidore sayth, it was called Lead at the first for that at the be∣ginning with it was found forth and tried the Sea, his deapth and bottome. There are two sortes of Lead, the one white, & the other black: but the whitest is best, which kindes was first found in the Iles of the Sea Atlantike. But is now found in Lusitania and in Gallicia, & in many other places. It is found also in Mi∣neries in maner like to Grauell and Sande, which afterwardes is sodden and molten to greater quantitie in fire and fornace. That other black Lead is found most in Cātabrie, whose origine or being is after two sortes, for eyther it proceedeth of a vaine by it selfe, or else it groweth next by siluer, and ouercrosseth his vaines with it. Therfore his first lyquor run∣ning when as it is molten is almost Tin: the second, in a maner Siluer: that which is then left and remaineth (adding also to it his vaine and so entermedled) becommeth black Lead. In Indie saith Isidore, there is neyther Lead
nor Brasse of his owne, therefore it chaungeth for his owne Marchandise (as with Gemmes and Margarets) wherein it is most plentifull. In Spaine and Fraunce it is verie hardly he∣wen out: In Britannie with verie much ease. Hermes sayth, that Lead being boyled, loose∣neth al other sound bodies and weakneth their hardnesse, as also it enfeebleth the Adamant. Of the stone Ligurius. LIgurius, is a stone in colour lyke to Tin. It is engendred in the entrailes and priui∣ties of Lynx the wilde Beast, and is of that vertue that it draweth to it any offall of chaffe or straw. It also helpeth paine in the stomack, and bewrayeth Uenome or Poyson. Of Lipparia. LIpparia is a Gem brought from the Syr∣tes, sandie places and grauelled in the bor∣ders of Affrick, next towards Aegypt, whose propertie is to delight and inamour all kinde of beastes, with his looke or shew, vnto ye sight whereof they all hastily runne. Therefore the Huntesmen for those that they can not get by course of Greyhounde, or other kinde of Dog, they vse onely to come by them by meanes of looking in this stone, with the which sight they
bring them to them, as ye Lapidare reporteth. Of the Lodestone. THe Lodestone commeth from Indie, and is almost Iron colour like. It is founde most rife amongest the Trogloditas people, in the furthest part of Affrick, beyond Aethi∣opia, who are saide to dwell in Caues, and to eate Serpents flesh. It draweth Iron to it, e∣uen as one Louer coueteth and desireth an o∣ther. The common people therefore hauing sometime seene this so done by secret and vn∣knowne working, haue iudged and reputed ye Iron liuely. There is another kind of Lode∣stone in Thessalie, that is of contrarie set and disposition, which will haue none of Iron, nor will meddle with it. But for the other that is reckned principall and best, which in colour is blew. Saint Augustine saith, that if any man put vnder any vessel eyther golden or of brasse, or holde vnder these any péece of Iron, and lay aboue the vessels or vpō them this Lodestone, that euen through the verie motion or mouing of the stone vnderneath, the Iron shall moue vp and meete with it as nigh as the vessell wil suffer at the verie top. Of the Margaret.
THe Margaret of all Gemmes, those which be in their kindes white, is estéemed the chiefest: as Isidore consenteth, with others herein. Which kinde he will also haue thus named, for that it is founde growing in the meate of certaine shell fishes, and those of the Sea, as in the Sea Snaile, and in the greatest Oyster, and such like as haue their shell. It is engendred of a certaine heauenly dewe, which in a certaine time of the yeare, both the Sea Snaile and the Cockle doe take and drinck vp. Of the which kinde of stone certaine are cal∣led Vnions, for that by one and one, they be founde, and neuer aboue one: there be some of these also séene somtimes yellow, but the other are theverie best. Of the Mede. THe Mede is a precious kinde of stone only found amongst the Medes, whereof it is so named, which stone in some places there, is seene greene, in some other, black. It helpeth the Goute, mingled among with the Milke of a woman, nw bearing a Sonne, and re∣medieth the Phrensie. Of the Melanite.
THe Melanite is a Stone, which distilleth & droppeth that iuice which is verie swéete and honie like: wherfore it may well be called Melanite as you would say Honistone, and it is double coloured, on the one side it is gréene, on the other side yellow. Of the Mirrite. THe Mirrite is a Gem, both in taste and co∣lour like to Myrrhe, which being wroong & pressed hard, giueth as pleasant a smel as Nar∣dus or Spikenarde. Of the Marble. THe Marble by Greke worde and name is interpreted gréene. There are Marbles in great and huge bignesse, and length: which are of many esteemed and had in reputation for their spottes and colours. The sorts and kinds of Marble are infinite: for not euery of them are hewen forth out of Rockes: but many be dispersed vnder the earth, as the Marble with the Lacedemonians, which is both grene and precious: So likewise that kinde of Marble which is called Ophites, which hath spottes like a Serpent, is much estéemed. Of Ophites two sortes are mentioned: the first white and soft, the other black and hard. There is ano∣ther
kinde almost Corall like, found in Asia▪ hauing certaine blottes besprent vpon it and about it proporcionally. There is also a The∣bane Marble dipped here and there, and dyed like in maner to golden droppes, and is found in a part of Aegypt. There are other kindes also which bréede and haue the very rocks to be their shop houses, as ye Marble in Corinth, wherof whole Pillars and great Beames are made. And there is another Marble called Ca∣risteum verie gréene, hauing his name of his good looke, for that it is auayleable to their eie∣sight that engraue therein. The gréene colour hereof refresheth the eies. Marble therefore is more sounde, more faire, more profitable than any other stones are, with Lead and not with Iron (contrarie to all others wont) all stones of Marble are hewen and cut, which thing is marueilous. For neyther with Steele nor yet with Iron, neyther with Mallet nor cutting Sheares, neyther with Sawe by any force or striuing withall, it is subdued. Of the Melochite. THe Melochite is a gréene Gem, much like to the Smaradge, his gréene colour not∣withstanding is somwhat more thick & grosse: wherfore for his onely colour, of some it is cal∣led
gréene Malue. It groweth in Arabia, and is to feele to verie softe, and in effect verie me∣dicinable. Of Nesorpora or Todes stone. NEsorpora is a stone of Pontus, verie pre∣cious, marueilous white, and as they say, it is found in a Todes heade, out of the which it is plucked and taken forth, and is purified by lying a certaine space stéeping in strong wines and running water, as Diascorides beareth witnesse. In this stone is apparantly seene ve∣rie often the verie forme of a Tode, with be∣spotted and coloured féete, but those vglye and defusedly. It is auailable against invenoming. Of Nitrum. NItrum (as sayth Diascorides,) is a stone but nothing precious or Gem like: it is also verie white, easie to be riuen, and to looke to, it is cleare also. It is called Nitrum of Ni∣trea, a Region or Coūtrie in Aegypt. Of this stone many Medicines are made and are digh∣ted therewithall, as one principally to take, and rid out of the bodie all filth and annoyan∣ces. The dust hereof also wrought with hony doth clarifie and beautifie the face.
Of Onix or Onichus. ONix of some Onichus, is a stone of Indie and Arabie, hauing colours all aboute it intermedled verie like to a mans naile: wher∣vpō the Greekes call our naile Onikin. That of Indie hath a colour like to fire, & is dyed with white Uaines or Zones. That of Arabie is black, yet died with white Lines or Zones. It hath many kindes as Sardonix, so called for that by cōmixture of the Onix which is white and Sardus which is red, it becōmeth but one of them both. It being borne about one, rid∣deth him of feare: and in maner of a Glasse it sheweth a mans visage, as saith Diascorides. Of Oppalus. OPpalus (as saith Diascorides) is a stone in colour like to vecie many, and those cleane contrarie Gems. For it representeth in some part as good a greene colour as the Smaragde: in some other part it looketh like Purple, and in another part like to a whote Cole as the Carbuncle doth. Of Orites. ORites is a Gem black, and in figure round. It hath diuers kinds, wherof one is greene
hauing white spottes. This being worne and hung about the neck of any woman, prohibi∣teth and letteth conception, or, and if she haue before conceyued, it hasteneth hir deliuerie, and maketh the birth vntimely and vnperfect. Of Parius. THe stone Parius is a kinde of the finest and most excellent Marble. This is founde in Para the Iland, wherefore it is called Parius, it is verie profitable and good to kéepe and pre∣serue all kinde of Oyntments. Of Prassius. PRassius, is in maner of an Onyon or Leeke verie greene, and comforteth a weake and feble eiesight. It is found sometime wt bloudie drops, and sometime with drops that be white. It is nothing precious, neither in any laudable sort effectuous, but onely for a shew to the eies. Whereof the Lapidare hath this Uerse. Vtile nil affert nisi qui viret & decet Aurum. To no purpose or kinde of good Prassius the stone doth serue But onely that with fresh greene looke, it from offence th'eine doth preserue. Of Pirrites.
PIrrites is a kinde of stone, yealow, like to the fire his flame, and in qualitie almost all one with the fire: for the which I suppose it tooke his name, it is soone kindled and set on fire. It also sparckleth, and being hardly hol∣den & pressed in any mans hande burneth him sore or he perceiueth it. Whervpon the Lapi∣dare hath these two Uerses. Tangi vult leuiter blanda{que} manu{que} teneri nam pressus nimium digitos tangentes adurit. The Pirrite must with easie hand And maruellous soft enholden be: For being prest and helde to hard Doth burne thy flesh or ere thou se. Of the Pionite. THe Pionite is a stone thought to be onely a Female, for in very short time and full quickly it conceyueth & bringeth forth his like, and is an helpe also to such as be pregnant and big with childe. Of Panteron. PAnteron is a stone of all colours, or at the least of the most part of them, wherevpon it is so named: for it is in some part black, in o∣ther part gréene, in other part purple, and so forth. This is saide to bolden a man, and to
make him inuincible. Of the Quiren. THe Quiren is a stone which is found in I∣landes and Fennes, most commonly in Lapwings Nestes: this is a betrayer of drea∣mes, and of a mans secrets when as he is in sléepe. It being put vnder his head ye sleepeth, causeth him to speake out all that he hath in his minde in secret wise, and to himselfe onely purposed. Of Quandias. QVandias is a stone very vile in colour, but of much vertue as saith Diascorides▪ It is found in the Uulture his heade, and is mans friend, for it driueth from him al things that be hurtfull. Of the Rubie. THe Rubie is a stone which of some is sup∣posed to be found in the Crabs heade, most commonly red, yet notwithstanding somtimes found in yealow colour. It auaileth against the biting of the Scorpion and Weasell, if it be applied thereto plaister like. Of Rhombites.
RHombites is of two sortes, the one which consisteth of Scales, hauing the likenesse of Rhombus, a figure with ye Mathematicians foure square: hauing the sides equall, the cor∣ners crooked, whereof commeth Rhombites, This is very white as Cardane reporteth: there is another of this which hath ye figure of narrow Rowler, but coloured and dyed with∣in and without, so that it likewise represen∣teth the figure of Rhombus. Of the Sapphir. THe Sapphir is Skie coloured or blew, like to the Skie in the most faire weather. It is one of the Noblest and royall sorts amongst al Gemmes, and most méete to be worne onely vpon Kings and Princes fingers. This for his soueraigntie of the Lapidare, is called ye Gem of Gemmes. It is found most especially in In∣die, although that sometimes, otherwhere. Cardane sayth, that it is next and aboue the Adamant in reputation: fift or last in the de∣grée of those Gemmes that be noble and pre∣cious: he sayth also, it is good (if it be not o∣therwise ouerlaide) to the eiesight, and that no∣thing in the whole worlde, doth more recreate or delight the eies than the Smaradge & Sap∣phir do. Albartus Magnus saith, that he
hath proued it twise, that with the onely tou∣ching of this precious stone, the partie so disea∣sed, hath bene rid of the grieuous sore the Car∣buncle. It is meruelously effectuous against al venome. Wherefore, if thou put a Spider into a Box, and vpon the mouth of the Box, being shut thou layest the true Sapphir and kéepe the Spyder but a verie shorte time within the same, the Spider being vanquished and ouer∣come by such mean of close vertue dieth sodain∣ly. In olde time it was consecrated onelye to Apollo: for the which they thought their bu∣sinesse in Warres and affaires at home might be the sooner ended, if through such meanes they had enriched and honoured him, who by Oracle in all things those which were waigh∣tiest made onely the aunswere. Of the Sardye. THe Sardye is a kind of Gemme red colou∣red: so called for that it was first founde in Sardys, (whose kindes) those especially which are more thin and cleare (for this is something grosse) haue other names: as when it is most pure and cleane, it is called Carneolus, of some (certain letters being chaunged) the Cor∣nelles. Cardane sayth, that this of all other stones is most méete to engraue in, & to make
Seales thereof, and he giueth these thrée rea∣sons: First, for that it cleaueth not or doth not holde fast to the Waxe: secondarily, for that it is easily carued, for it is but of meane hardnes. Thirdly, for that through cleare humor or va∣por it is not so soone dulled or duskied as ma∣ny other be. Of Sardonix. SArdonix, as the Lapidare saith, is bred and borne of the Sardye, which is the father to him, & Onix, which we before mentioned, in maner his mother. Isidore sayth, it is thrée co∣loured, black about the bottom, white in the midst, & red at the top: It is as fit for Seales as the Sardye. There be fiue kindes hereof séene in Indie. This in working maketh a man lowly and shamefast in his doings. Of Silonite. SIlonite the stone is séene in Persia, in co∣lour like to the Iasper, or like to a fresh and flourishing greene Herbe. It encreaseth and decreaseth euen as the Moone, taking ye Moone herein to be his paterne or example, belike for that it consisteth of humor abundantly. Of Siluer.
SYluer in Gréeke is called Argurion, not far from the Latine name and appellation. It is compound of the best and purest Quicksil∣uer, and of the most white Brimstone, and that which in their mixture and composition, by no meanes is burnt to red or black, as Aristotle rehearseth. Quicksiluer therefore hath this proper and peculiar to it selfe, that it doth not gather togither in maner of curd, or waxeth thick vnlesse it be intermedled with his fellow like acquaintaunce, Brimstone. Therevpon Aristotle proueth that Quicksiluer & Brim∣stone are the Elements, that is to say, the Ma∣tere and cause of beginning in all thinges li∣quable or those which melt, which are cōmonly called Mettals. Quicksiluer doth much breath forth and euaporate, whose breath or fume doth greatly hurt those, whome it apprehendeth. For it bringeth to a man the Palsie, and vn∣doeth and looseneth within him his Sinewes and Ioyntes. Without this notwithstanding, there could be no mixture, neyther in Golde, in Siluer, nor yet in any other Mettall. Siluer therefore hath these qualities peculiarly. It is cleare, it is shrill of sound, easily ductile, a mar∣ueilous preseruer of swéete balmes, the Iaspers friend, and with whome the Iasper better a∣greeth than with Gold. It is also medicinable,
for his offall or dust remedieth wounds. Fur∣ther, it taking earth, rustieth: but being newe rubbed ouer with Sande and Salte, commeth to his olde colour againe. Isidore saith, that there is thrée kinds of Siluer, Golde & Brasse: and of other Mettals. That which is grauen or by any wyse seased vppon: that which is wrought, and that which is not wrought: that which is sealed or coyned, as is Money, or goth for Money: that which is wrought and made otherwise, as is Uessell or Plate: that which is vnwrought is called a lumpe or bar of raw Mettall, of some a wedge of Mettall. Of the Smaradge. THe Smaradge hath his name of his excel∣lent and fresh gréene colour. For euerye thing that is grassie gréene, is properly called in Gréeke Smaron. It passeth both the leafe and bough of any Trée or plant in this his colour, and in this poynt alone triumpheth, neyther is the Sunne by his Sunne beames, any let or hinderance to this his shew. There is no grea∣ter refection to the eies than the sight of this. It being polished and dressed, sheweth a man his liuely Image, wherevpon the valiant Cae∣sar had no greater delight, than in looking on this, to sée his Warriours fight, and to behold
in the Smaragde which of them went best to worke, and was moste actiue. Isidore sayth, that there be .xij. kindes hereof, but the moste noble is found in Scithia, the next in Bactria. This stone sayth Cardane, serueth to deuina∣tion, and to tell of a certaintie, things to come, or otherwise. For that that shall come to passe, it will neuer let it sincke or slip out of minde, and that that shall not, it easily suffereth the minde to forget. Of Sol. SOL the Precious stone, is in colour like to the Sunne, and is called Sol, for that it giueth reflexions of Sunne beames, euen as the Sunne doth. Of Tin. TIn after his Greeke name, is called a deui∣der and distinguisher of one thing from an∣other, for all adulterous and counterfayted Mettals it doth betray, and setteth them seue∣rally asunder. It also discerneth Brasse & Lead from Gold & Siluer. Tin being rarely powred vppon Brasen Uesselles, maketh their sauour more pleasant, and bridleth & kepeth vnder the poysonous rust. Aristotle sayth, in his fourth booke of Meteores, yt it is compound of Quick∣siluer
indifferent good, but of very base Brim∣stone, and therfore this kinde of Mettall is no∣thing proporcionably mixt, but al out of square compound, for the which it looketh so raw, and hath Siluer his verie colour, but not his good∣nesse. Cardane saith, that Tin descrieth and reueleth if any poyson be hid, for both it hisseth and cracketh if it be so, and also sheweth thin stripes in maner like to a bow. I haue séene it my selfe when as this kinde of Mettall being molten in the pit and but a sponefull of water being cast into, it hath floushed and leapt vp to the top of the house: but a whole Potfull of Béere or Ale being cast in, it hath not once moued, but laughed by and by. The cause I may giue that, that Cardane doth, applying it to all Mettals onely Golde excepted: for sayth he all other (onely Golde excepted) are fertile and fat. And being thus, laffe at their like, and refuse the residue. And thus much of Tin. Of Talchum. TAlchum the stone is like to Glasse, hauing as it were about it Hilles and Edges na∣turally set in it. This being dronken (sayth Cardane) in quantitie as big as a Walnut, doth marueylously ease and remedie paynes in the bowels.
OfTaraxippus. TAraxippus the stone as the name giueth, doth signifie the Horse his trouble and dis∣quietnesse. It is in colour verie fierie, and it so shimmereth especially by night, that the horse casting his eyes that way, espieth his like with a fearefull looke: whereat he stampeth and sta∣reth. Cardane him selfe recordeth, what as concerning this purpose, befell in his presence and companie, three yeares before he wrote his booke de Subtilitate. I was sayth he, in Ianua, whereas I supped with the worthie and renowmed man Francis Duarde ye Em∣perours Lieutenaunt: when as I had sup∣ped it rayned great showres, I was readie to put on my Cloke, my Hat and such Uestu∣res, so to defend me from these showres. This Duarde perceyuing I should be wet or I got home (as he is verie ciuile and curteous) lent me certaine of the best Horse he had, and of his men as many, to accompanie me. There was also present with me, and who should also go my way Lodwick Ferrare. Preparance was made: we tooke our Horse and so departed. As we should go by a certaine way hard by a cer∣taine fornace, we saw in ye verie walles therof a fierie colour, as it were of quick and burning
Coales, which thing the Horse hauing espied, would no furder, but drew backward, & wrast∣led with vs to haue gone back, so that we could not rule them. We at the length fearing dis∣pleasure such as might befall to vs, for feare of more daunger alighted, & hauing some there to stay them, went our selues nighe & appro∣ched to the Fornace, whither when we came, we might espie a fierie colour, but nothing burning or on fire, which also cōsidering what this should be, at the last perceiued wel inough that it was this Taraxippe, that had so fea∣red vs and our Horse, and so departing, being thus deceyued, we rid another way. Of the Topaze. THe Topaze as Plinie sayth, is a Gem of grassie colour: although that in Germanie it is found like to Golde. It was first found in Arabie, in a certaine Ilande there: whereas the people Troglodite such as liue by Snakes flesh and other Serpents, being compelled tho∣row verie extreeme hunger: and they also bee∣ing on the water or Sea, driuē thither by tem∣pest, and so both weared and hungrie, digging vp the Rootes of certaine Hearbes, by hap and chaūce pulled vp this. This Iland afterwards was sought of Mariners and Marchants, and
was ransaked where as they founde (hauing had of them knowledge hereof) their best Mar∣chandise. After that, for those peoples sake, by whome they had so wonne and done so well, they would neuer chaunge the name hereof, but after their proper and peculiar speach cal∣led it a Topaze. For Topazein in Greeke is as much, as to finde by seeking. Plinie sayth, that it hath bene found of that bignesse and quanti∣tie that Philadelphus is saide to haue framed, and made thereof a statue or Image in length of foure Cubits. Of the Turches. THe Turches or Turcois, is of the common sort called Eranus. It is in colour airelike or like to the Heauens, and looketh cleare also as sayth Cardane. It is called a Turches for that it is onely found in Turkland or amongst the Turkes. This hath such vertue and hid maner in working, that it supporteth and sus∣taineth, being worne in a ring, a mā from fal∣ling of his horse, and is saide of the aboue saide Author to receyue the daunger of the fal it self, and to breake and burst in sunder, rather than the man should fall and miscarie. The Conclusion.
OF Ydachides I néede not to write, for that I finde nothing of his prayse in other Au∣thors but this: that in manner Spherelike it hath one within an other. Neither néede I write of Zeblicū, which is found in Misaena, whereof I finde nothing else, but that it auai∣leth against venome. Neither néede I speake of Zinguites, the ashie coloured stone, which be∣ing worne about ye neck, stencheth bloud: last∣ly of all, I haue not much to entreate of Zeni∣eth, which of some is called and reckned the stone Lazulus, whose onelye commendation is for that it purgeth Melancholy passions, and stoppeth them. But these which I haue before entreated of, I therefore entreated of, and so far forth I spake of them, as it mought somewhat moue men not to be dull or slack in the searching out of these: for that much pro∣fite cōmeth to man by them. If I should haue spoken of all kinde of stones, as well Gems as other: I suppose it would haue required large and infinite volumes. For the kinde of stones as Isidore sayth, are infinite. But these haue I gathered with good wil, and briefely. Wher∣fore gentle Reader fauour vs, and beare with vs now; as thou wilt haue vs hereafter perad∣uenture to enrich these. FINIS.
The second Booke of the Aegemonie or chiefest vertues in all the whole kinde of Plants, and of his parts, as of Herbs, Trees, & Shrubs, after the order of the Alphabet. Psal. 135. Whatsoeuer the Lord pleased, that did he in Heauen and in Earth▪ &c.
The Preface to the seconde Booke. IN value more, and in degrée of Nature higher: In Nobilitie aboue Stones and Mettals, are Plants, if thei had their iust repu∣tatiō & were valued as they should be. But herein is corrupt and de∣praued iudgement (I might call it abuse, but that this worde is not so fit and agreable in all poynts as that other:) and therfore it is true that the Poet Gualter saith: Whi∣lest that we being fastned and set vpon pleasures, do stray from the right rule of Reason, to satisfie oure mindes & to nourish corrupt iudgement, we set most by that that is lesse worth: we most esteeme where lesse estimation should be, and haue a preposterous maner in iudging, and an awke wit in many things, their preferment. But this he spake (as it semeth) most of all moued with the Uulgar and cōmon sort. For the other kinde of men (whome Tullie calleth polished and wel addighted in all things) which go∣uerne and stay themselues by wise & prudent mea∣nes, he sawe (vnlesse they were I can not tell, howe by some euill meanes bewitched) to reckon and es∣teeme of all things as they were: And therefore he may seeme with al intent of mind fully bent to check and vpbraide the Multitude, and their basenesse in iudgement, whome the aforesaide Tullie trippeth eftsones, but especially in his Oratiō had for Cnei∣us Plancie, wheras he reckneth vp a heape of imbe∣cilities and wayes of halting in all office and duties, and first after this sort. In the cōmon sort (saith he) is no perfect knowledge or skill, to select or choose
forth amongst many things what is heade and prin∣cipall: there is no sound reason, there is no desart of hauing well, there is no industrie or diligence. And in his Oratiō for Quintus Roscius after this sort. Thus standeth it with the Cōmons. They esteeme many things by figure & fantacie, but few veritably and vprightly. Further, the selfe same Author in his Offices holdeth him not Heroicall or Prince∣like, which leaneth or hangeth vpon them. Wherfore let vs go on, and giue them their naturall, pristmate, and iust place and order in degree: forasmuch as in the other abouesaide, in Mettals & Stones, all is in their hid & secret vertue, there making abode & stay hereat: vnlesse peraduenture thou be moued wyth the goodly shew. Which with ye Sunnes reflexions and light, moreouer the shimmering aire & the Met∣tall his purifying more or lesse, meeting all togither, one helpeth, coloureth & setteth out another: & thou being in loue with so goodly a shew, and brought to it by euill accustoming, giuest consent and so wonne dost becken at it, and wilt say that it is onely proper to the Mettall it selfe: but from yt haue I brought thee, & set thee in another beliefe: whereas I spake particularly of Golde, Siluer, and such like, if thou wilt but onely waye of what stock or houshold they be of. But to returne to our purpose. In Plantes there is not onelye occult and hid vertue: further∣more, fresh & flourishing colours, wherewith I per∣ceiue thou wouldst be delighted: but there is in them that nature that cōmeth somwhat more neare (than those other doe) to the principall Creature man. For in them is the life vegetatiue or that life which nou∣risheth, augmenteth & bringeth forth his like, more apparant also, and in sight more than those other be, which lie shut vp in the earth as dead bodies with∣out life, and haue their maner of encrease or decrease therein, as all other things incensible haue, and are said to quicken or die but vnproperly: In the Plant
it is spoken on that wise properly & after such sort, as mankind first next after his conception is saide to quicken and continue withall in reaching by meane of naturall order to his last kinde, vnperfect at the first, by this meane of vnperfection, in the which he lyeth and stayeth in after, his conception. 70. dayes, and so long is he plantlike: then the rest of time hath he in part and parcell like, so disposed and ordred of Nature to lay holde on, and to apprehende the other life aboue this, called sensitiue, in the which time so bespent▪ he seemeth of no greater accoumpt or force than other bruite beastes be, whose propertie is (as brute beastes is also the like) to feele griefe and plea∣sure, to moue, to haue sense, and that newly, then be∣gunne by Orgaine or Instrument diuersly framed. And then euen then it becommeth to haue an appi∣tite to that which it holdeth good and pleasant, and a recesse or lothsomnesse to yt which maketh against it. All this at that time, (euen as bruite beasts haue) hath man in that not yet finished, & vnperfect shape or forme. But the other greater and that which is his owne, being once perfect, as to perceyue & iudge by sense both inward and outward, to stande in fan∣tasie, and to marke and obserue all ill deserts (wher∣at also brute beastes stay at:) but to leaue these, and to proceede further, to be mindfull of, & to haue in re∣membrance or recorde things past, to conferre and applie them with the present time, or adiudge there∣by what is in the time cōming: to vnderstand, to vt∣ter the thought in way easie to be vnderstoode: this diuine power (that I may so say) hath man onely, & that man principally & aboue others that is a man in deede, and not by appellatiō or name, withal those other powers that be in the other two kinds aboue∣saide: but so proportionably wrought; & in such ma∣ner sorted and placed, as the thirde number is ouer the first & second, holding and contayning them both in his number and accoumpt, but of neyther of them
reckeneth againe in making their accoumpt. The Plant therefore is of the Philosophers reckned in ye number of those naures, that hath life: for in them as Aristotle sayth, is a portion of life, euen as in sa∣uage and brute beastes, sauing that in these last their maner of life by way of mouing from place to place, by gredie desire to feede and repast themselues, it is more manifest: in those other by reason of their a∣bode and continuance all in one place (as setled hard to the earth, by oote and moysture) and by their more hid receit of necessaries such as maintain them being also close and occult, haue giuen great causes of doubting. Anaxagoras being moued (I know not wherewith) affirmed that there was not onely a de∣sire in them to tarie and continue in their state, but also that they had and felt both sorrow and pleasure: and his reason he gathered of the distillation of hu∣mor in the Plant his Leaues, and of the Leaues in∣crease. Plato saith that they be moued and led by appetite for the necessitie of their prouision in nouri∣shing. But both of these Aristotle in his first booke de Plantis, refelleth and reproueth by argument: wherevpon we entende not to stande. Yet may it be doubted for asmuch as with Theophrast and such o∣thers, rather yea, than nay is aunswered. And they bid vs looke in eche their appearance. Doth not the Cucumber hate the Oliue, and where the one is, the other through a certaine malice prospereth not? Cō∣trariewise, doth not the Uine loue and embrace the Elme, & prospereth the better, the nigher one is set by another? And as of these question is had, so may there also doubtes be made of the other. But let e∣uerie man iudge of these as they list. I had rather be still then haue a doe herein. Nowe to their partes and maner of diuision. Plants be sorted and deuided into three parts: the first is the Herbe: the seconde the Shrub: the third the Tres: there are which haue added hither
a fourth kind which they cal Suffutrex a mean be∣twene the Herbe and the shrub: but it may better ei∣ther of the one or of the other of these two be called as they are called being greater or lesse, thā to wan∣der so farre for so small aduantage in them by way of amplifying diuision. The Herbe is that sayth Theophrast in his first boke De Plantis and fift Chapter which springeth out of his roote well leaued without any body, and beareth seede vpon his stalke or stemme as al herbs do, which are vsed to the Pot. The Shrub is that saieth he, which out of the roote commeth vp in ma∣nifold stocke or bodie and shouteth out armes in his meane kinde of growth, as the Brome and Brier. The tree is that saieth he, that from out of the roote ariseth in one onely stock or bodie, and groweth vp in manie kinds to great height: beside this it is full of boughes, it is full of knots: besides this it is full of slips and shootes as the Oliue, the Figge tree, the Uine. That other which they call Suffutrex and make it the fourth parte hath a certaine thinne and small stock: but such a one as excedeth not the thinne and small stalk of the herbe: as the Rose and such like. Therevpon we may easily perceiue that all these kindes aboue saide in that, that they liue through the life Uegetatiue and haue their place of growth in the earth, and in that, that they all liue by heate and humor whereof the first (as that which is not much spoken of) seemeth of some to be forgot∣ten in them: further in their leafe and braunches: and other outward dispositions herein they all agree and are alike. But herein they are saide to differ (as all things of sundrie sortes do) in these foure points: Whereof the chiefe and principall is their strength or vertue. The second their smell, which to the lear∣ned teacheth their contemperature: for the odor and smell of ech thing doth much bewraie the thing. The thirde difference is fetched from their tast or sauor:
as the one sweete, the other sower, the one plea∣saunt, the other of sharpe tast & vnpleasaunt. More∣ouer as they haue those qualities which be proper and peculiar to the tast or want them. The fourth is (and that which is most infinite) of their figure and forme in leafe, of their owne figure, of their co∣lour, of their flower, of their fruite, of their stock, which is as it were the prop or staie of the Plant: of the bark, which is the defence (and as I mought so say) their house to lodge in: and to defend them∣selues from storme and tempest: further in the roote, difference is found, and to haue one worde for all, in all their whole composition and mixture. It is to be maruelled how Dame Nature hath vpon the face of ye earth (as it were in hir Garden or Orchard of de∣light) for varietie sake so manifoldly varied & mul∣tiplied ye kindes of colours either simply died, & stai∣ned: or else chaūgably almost in euery plant or thing growing. But the greatest meruaile that outward∣ly appeareth (and that which ye most cunning work∣man or Painter may follow, but not attaine to) is in the excellent shew and infinite their kinde of flo∣wers. Whereof some be Milke white, as the Lilie: some purple coloured as the Uiolet and Saffron flower: Some Scarlet red as the Aramanth: some Ocie or yellow as the Mariegold: some grassie grene as the Primrose: some be speckled as ye Car∣natiō, some cole black but those (as Authors affirme verie rare) in so much that the sadde blew coloured flower, as is Calcedome, hath bene taken of some for black, onely for their most like kinde of apparaiing. So that a man maye see howe Nature worketh in many, as in these and sixe hundred more like, after simple sort without any intermedling: In as many and rather mo as chaungablie. Wherein if I trauai∣led and did so largely run at roia or lauished in see∣king out their especialties, as Nature moste libe∣rally and abundantly hath bestowed hir labour and
wrought in them: I had neede of long time & grea∣ter studie herein to followe such exact discourse, but that I meane not, neither doe I purpose it. Plants may moreouer (to stay and continue yet a little in their deuision) so be deuided, that some shal be saide to be of the Garden: some of the Field: some that like well by the Sea and flouds: some by the Sea bancks: other some there be that onely growe in Fennes: some vpon rockes and stonie walles: some in the sands, and there are which are seene to grow in Wels as Liuerwort. Againe some be fruit∣ful, other some barren: some bearing braunches and leaues: some wtout al these: some of great growth: other of as small: some thicke and grosly set, as the Cyprusse: some as rarely and thinly disposed as the Beach: some full of knots as it were ioynted or de∣uided as the Reede: some without any such partici∣on, but all ouer plaine: as Hemp. Some which spring vp and increase by seede sowing: othersome which arise vp of their own accord not known how: some most holesome: othersome most hurtfull. And to twine vp this threde of deuision vpon some bot∣tome (for it were to long to vndoe the whole skaine) some seeme to haue both sexes and kindes: as the Oke, the Lawrell and such others: some without any such apperaunce but onely one in kinde, as the Palme and the like. The Plant therefore (for of that name we shall haue great vse) maye by Etimologie of worde so deriued, be so called, for that it is planted & graft in the earth, fostered vp by his roote and by that nou∣rishment that the roote taketh and feedeth on mini∣stred and put to it by his Nourse the earth, and of such daily foode getteth euerie day greater increase. Plants haue such nourishment through the earth and their roote naturally within, and be in euerie their chiefe part and all about a like Organick that being engraft whilst they be greene and not to farre
gone through drought in any stocke (onlesse it hath another maner of difference or almost a contrarieti in his qualitie then that others, and thereby not a∣uailable) are able by secret force of Nature to take and resume againe like life and power, and do as wel in the last stocke as it did being a member or parte of the first & naturall bodie. And here vpon it is that whereas through any imbecillitie or let espied and gathered either inwardly or outwardly in the tree, so that it is thereby hindred of his liking and doing well, men in time of yere vse to cut them off, such as are thought to prosper better in another place, and graffe them into a new stock: and being so cut off, are of a greater continuance (but by resemblaunce to shewe thee howe alike) than those small and siely Wormes be, who haue imperfection in their Nature as Waspes, Bees, Emites and such like, which by Latin worde are called Insecta that is, in part and member distinct and seuered, hauing for all this life proportionably and equally besprent throughout the whole bodie. In so much that these for a time after that they be cut or plucked into pieces in euerie their parte so seuered, shewe both life, sense and mouing: but in this point cōming behind them, for that being once so discerped can neuer after neither in applying their owne parts togither, neither yet in fastning or binding them to any body of any their like reuiue and quicken againe. But now let vs leaue this our straying abroad (which maner who so vseth in com∣mon conuersation & familiar talke is coumpted and reputed light and a talker: in stile and in endighting any thing a wanderer from the purpose) and come to our taske: yt to which we before setled our selues to: herein requiring the Reader not to accuse vs lightly, and on a sodaine to check and reprehend vs as those which haue entered into y• businesse which requireth long and exact discourse, and haue made a preface after that sort as though we would go a∣bout
to extricate and weede out what might be said at auenture of all things, not onely intending an Aegemonie which we onely promised and is but the chiefest part, but an vniuersalie which is ye whole. Unto whom I would that our sentence or meaning were well knowne: that therby they might vnder∣stand (perceiuing also what a preface is) that I had not greatly squared, if I had pursued many moe di∣uisions, for what is there so farre of (so that it belon∣geth to the thing wherof we intend to speake) that may not be added the thing it selfe being once had in hand. But nowe as hastily as we can and as briefe∣ly as we can, we minde to bring in other Authors thereby keeping our selues free from blame in this Aegemonie or Sufferaigntie of things growing vp∣on ye earth: not absolutly or throughly (which thing I woulde to God it were in our skill and wit (nei∣ther do I meane to giue the cause why: which was inough for Theophrast (as we reade written) who hath laboured all his life time, and that sore labou∣red, and hath not yet giuen and founde an absolute & perfect end of such his knowledge, who although for his time he hath done well & brought great light and vndid or made naked many things in that his kinde of studie and trauaile, yet hath he gone and passed by manie things without either eiesight set vpon them or meane of acquaintance had: partly for that the mother of all such greene things as grewe vpon the earth multiplieth euerie ech day with in∣crease, and diuersitie of many kinds and playeth the prodigall his parte: and partly that although man mought by art and inquiraunce after these attaine or come vnto knowledge herein, yet the race of this life was so sodaine and short so often perilled and euery eche momēt at death his nod and beck, which things all summined and accoumpted, & euery day the more he watched in these the more offer the had of them to be of his acquaintance, euen when as he was olde
and lay vpon his deathes bed, now readie to make a farewell of the bodie and soule, began to accuse Na∣ture of Iniurie doing and offence, and fault in per∣cialtie for that she had so dealt with the Harte and Hinde, the Crow & night Rauen, in prolonging and giuing them so long life (which good gift on neyther ther partes was little or nothing considered) but to Mankind she had dealt so straightly, and no poynt according to equitie or right reason, in that that shee had giuen him such short terme of yeares, and not so short as vncertaine, and sodaine: wherein if she had dealt more equally and had bene mans friend (as she mought haue bene) it had come to passe that our ma∣ner of life had ben more profitable: science, or ye Arts liberall, (whereas nowe they be rawe) should haue bene much more absolute: perseuerance of euery thing his cause (now small) should then haue bene more amplified. But now let vs heare in eche Plant his princi∣palitie, the mindes of other men, what is found in them wor∣thye marking: And the first in our Alphabet shall be the Al∣mond tree. Farewell.
The seconde Booke of the Aegemonie treating of Plants as of Herbes, Trees, and Shrubs, perticulerly and Alphabetically. Of the Almond tree. THe Almonde tree in Greeke is called Amygdalè, in Latine Nux lon∣ga, a long and straight forth kinde of Nutte. Of this Aristotle hath these wordes. The Almond tree sayth he, requireth much attendance and diligence to be kept from endamaging and hurt, whilest it is tender and yong. It prospereth not vnlesse it be set in good ground, in the which it yeldeth much fruite. It dyeth and fadeth away, whereas ouermuch old aboundeth. Wherefore his best liking is in those Countries whereas heate raigneth. It yéeldeth two seuerall kindes of fruite, the one vsed to meate, the other onely to medicine. Diascorides sayth, that if the Fox happeneth to eate and digest of this kinde of fruite, he by and by dyeth, except he licketh in water in the present place, and that immediatlye. It
may peraduenture so be, for that which is hol∣some and good for one kind, oftetimes is hurt∣full for another. The same Author sayth also, that that Almond tree which is most swéete of taste, if it be once bitten or gnawen of Cat∣tell, it by and by looseth his goodnesse, and be∣commeth most bitter and sower. Of the Alder tree. THe Alder tree (which by corrupt and ac∣customed kinde of speaking they common∣ly call the Elder) is of verie barraine and vn∣fruitefull nature, as Theophrast witnesseth: this is his onelie best and the chiefest thing he hath, in that he groweth straight vp in bodie, and is in his Wood and inwarde Marie very soft. His growth sayth he, is in moyst and wa∣trie places, and else no where. Of Aloes. ALoes, is a precious Wood which groweth in Indie, a Wood of most swéete smell, ve∣rie medicinable. Cardane saith, it hath a great leafe and grosse, verie fat, whereout distilleth that kinde of Gum that is most odoriferous. It is taken also with Phisitions for an Herbe which is most sharpe & bitter, which groweth in Indie and Persia.
Of Aegraton or good old Herb. AGeraton hath one and the selfe same name both with the Gréekes and Latines, and is a small shrub, verie full of yong shoutes and slips. It is like Origan or Marigolde, & hath his flower alike coloured as saith Diascorides It may be thought that it hath that name, for that it preserueth a great time without losse of his vertue, or not being otherwise hindered by sicknesse and age. Of Agarick. AGarick, as sayth Diascorides, hath both Male and Female: and is in efficacie or effect such, that it maye be applyed to all sick∣nesses, such as the sick person must paciently a∣bide, whether yt it be vsed with water or wine, in which sort it is most commonly ministred. Of Agrimonie. AGrimonie, of Mesues, is named Maud∣len, the Latine worde is Eupatorium. It is a short shrub, & of no great or iust height. It hath his leafe parted as it were fiue portioned. The decoction hereof, saith Diascorides, or his poulder dried is an excellent remedie against the oppilacion of the Liuer & Splene, by reason
of fleume, and is taken either the Herbe it selfe alone, or else sodden among with Wine. Of Annet or Dill. ANnet or Dill is an Herbe whose seede as Diascorides sayth, may be kept by ye space of thrée whole yeares next after it is gathered, without losse in any point of his operation. Of Anise. ANise hath the like vertue that Dill hath, but in sauour and tast, it is more pleasant and sweete. It commendeth vnto vs the good breath and swéete, and bewraieth the cōtrarie. Of the Apple tree. THe Apple tree is of good sounde bodie, of wrinckled barck, and in outward Cote ve∣ry full of knots. In flowers at the spring time verie beautifull, in swéetenesse of fruite in the Autumne almost not comparable, in fruit and encrease verie wonderfull, and vnder this one name it hath infinite kindes. Plinie sayth, that vnlesse it be often cropped, and rid of superflu∣ous and troublesome boughes, it will soone war barraine, and leaue off fruit bearing. The same Author sayth also, that the fruites hereof must be gathered in faire weather, vnlesse that
they being laid vp with outward plentie of ac∣cidentall and airie humor, doe by and by rot: he monisheth also that they be gathered before they be full ripe, for their better goodnesse than being preserued. Of Artichoke. ARtichoke the wilde, most commenly cal∣led the Thistle, is an Herbe wrought and fashioned on euerie side in maner of a sting, or Spearelike, and hath in the top of his stalke or stem, a certaine heade wherein his seede ly∣eth. It flourisheth and liketh best, in those places that be least frequented or nothing loo∣ked to. Of the Balme tree. THe Balme tree is rather a kinde of shrub, then a Trée, and may well be counted of that house for his lowe and humile kinde of growth: for it heightneth neuer aboue two cu∣bites. The Timber hereof is called in Gréeke Xulobalsamon, his fruite or séede Karpobalsamon, the iuice is called Vpobalsamon, bicause the bark of this Tree must first be stricken and hewen with Iron wedges, before it yeeldeth any fruit, whereby it being so wounded, by and by drop∣peth and distilleth a certaine humor, in a ma∣ner
tearlike, which humor thus issued through the coldenesse or other affection of the Aire a∣bout it, drieth to a kinde of Gum. Plinie pre∣ferreth this his smell before all smelles. But herein good heed must be taken, least we match and march with the greeke Sophister. And the same Plinie sayth (as also Theophrast doth) that it onely groweth in a certaine Dale and Ualie of Siria, which Ualie hath his whole compasse in a maner in two onely Groaues, and hath bene ye possession of long time of two sundrie and seuerall Princes. Whereof the greater was supposed to be in contents .xx. A∣kers: and the other lesse. Of Barley. BArley, in his excessiue Drought differreth from all other our kindes of graine, and is called in Latine Hordiū, as if you would say Aridum, hard and drie. It is neuer sowen but vpon such kind of earth, as is drie. Plinie saith, that amongst all other kindes of corne this is last sowne, & with the first reaped: that which also experience with vs here at home teacheth. Of the Beach tree. THe Beach, saith Theophrast, groweth on∣ly in rough places, and most commonly v∣pon
hilles. It hath many and sundrie kinds, of some accoumpted foure, of othersome fiue. In name all one, but in fruit bearing euerie one disagréeing. One of his kinds beareth a swéete Mast or Acorne (as the Oke or Chestnut doth) and of some is taken for the Oke. It is called of the Greekes Phage, bycause in ye former time men liued herewith, & had it in stead of breade. This kinde as Plinie sayth, is after a sort hai∣rie Lockt, almost growing out of fashion. It is nothing solide or massie, but much porouse: and therfore of the lesse endurance, as saith the same Author. Of this kinde of Wood being brent to Asshes is made Glasse, Arte, herein playing the workesman. Of Beete. BEete, is a Gardain Herbe, and in good plen∣tie with vs. Therof are said to be two kinds the one white, and the other black: both medi∣cinable. Aristotle saith yt vpō his roote (as vpō any stock) any yong set or slip maye be set and graft, and through the roote his good liking in growth, may be brought from his owne na∣ture into naturall parentage with the Trée. Of Bearefoote.
BEarefoote, is an Herbe whote and moyst, in the first degree, as the Phisitions say: and is vsed of them as a remedie to the Splene, and to giue the vitall and liuing sprites more easie and loose passage. Of the Beane. THe Beane sayth Theophrast hast his ma∣ner of growth thus. His roote is thick and grosse: somewhat more déepely set than the Réede his is. In the length it is indifferent, somtime foure Cubites high▪ It giueth fruite by maner of Celler: one onely in one part of his Huske. It is in his chiefest brauerie, and li∣keth best being sowne in moyst grounds, and especially in the Fennes and such like. It is al∣so said somtime through the rancour of groūds to come vp vnsowne. The Pithagorians con∣demned it, as y• which was not méete to meat. For sayd they, it dulleth and maketh grosse ech sense and spirite. It also causeth and exciteth vp in sléepe horrible dreames. Varro thought it was forbid for that as he sayd, the soules of the deade were therein placed. Of Betonie. BEtonie is a water Herbe which for his sin∣gular colde worcking and growth also, in
colde Countries and places is called in Greeke Psikotrophae. It remedieth sayth Diascorides the consumed Gall. Of Birdes tongue. BIrdes tongue, is an Herbe whose chiefest working is to prouoke Uenerie, and cau∣seth most ranck séede. It figureth the tongue of a Birde, whereof it hath his name. Of Borage. BOrage, the best that it hath, as Isid. sayth, is as I finde to engender good bloud, eyther sodden among other things, or else taken raw by it selfe. Of Bindweede BIndweede, of some Withweede, is an herb verie noysome or hurtfull to the other fruits of the Gardaine. It hindreth their growth, and troubleth them with the inwrapping and cir∣cumplication about ye other their stem or stalk. Of the Blackberie tree. THe Blackberie tree, is after his sort bushy▪ bearing that fruite that eftsoones refresheth the shepheirde, he being in the field, and often contenteth his lust. This his Leafe or coue∣ring
is said of Diascorides to destroy and kill Serpents. Of the Bremble. THe Bremble, of some is called Bucepha∣lus, of other some the water Bremble. It is of two sortes: one the field Bremble, which most commonly groweth in waters: and the other Gardaine Bremble, or swéete Bremble, which hath a verie good smell. They of Thrace and those which dwell about the floud Stri∣mon, féede their horse with ye greene growing Herbe or Leafe of the Bremble, and are said to be marueylous fat therewith. Of Britānick or English Herb. BRitannick or English Herbe, hath the very looke of the greatest Sorrell, but in colour a little more black, somewhat Mossie or Mealie. The best saith Diascorides, that is founde in this Herbe, is his iuice, verie wholesome and profitable to many things. Of Brome. BRome is a Shrub, which of some is called Mirica for the bitternesse of his tast. It groweth in stonie and barraine ground, and in such places wheras no culture or care of groūd
tilling is had. And his onely presence is a tho∣row signe or euident token of barraine and dry ground. It hath his boughes flourishing as well in the Winter tide as in the Sommer. His flower yealow, and Cod blacke, both of noysome smell, and of bitter taste. Yet in wor∣king, sayth Diascorides, it is verie wonder∣full. For his Leafe or flower being sodden and boyled among with running water, brideleth and kepeth away swelling of the Splene. It helpeth the tothache, and stencheth the flowing of the bloudie Flix. Of the Bulrush. THe Bulrush hath one kinde, which of some is called Sonnes brow: The Romaynes call it Sea Bulrish or Manuad: And it hath two kindes: one which hath a square top or crowne verie blunt withall: and the other is rather Spearelike and sharpe topped. This last saith Diascor. intermedled with drinke, bringeth on fast and sound sleepe. Of the Burre. THe Burre of the Gréekes is called Philan∣thros, mannes friend, for that it coueteth to catch holde and to cleaue vpon man his Gar∣ment holding fast by such kinde of roughnesse
as it hath. Of Cammock. CAmmock sayth Theophrast is an Herbe throughly beset with Prickle, and is one of those that continue but for one yeare, or for the Spring time, Sommer and Autumne: and so fade away. His leafe is like Rue. It groweth in such ground as is tilled, & especially where as Corne or such like graine is most rancke. It is plucked vp by his roote, then when as the earth through the Sunne beames is feruently hote, or else not. In some place for hindring & staying the Husbandman it is called Rest har∣row: in Cambredge shire Whine. Of Cammomill. CAmmomill, is an Herbe vsed of Phisiti∣ons to purge the head, and to emptie it of superfluous humor and other grosse matter. Auicen sayth, that there is three kindes hereof. One which hath a Saffron flower: another whose flower is as it were Purple coloured: the thirde is white. This hath that laudable preheminence for that the more it is trod and kept vnder, the more a great deale and the bet∣ter it commeth vp and prospereth.
Of Capers. CApers or the fruit which is called Cappa∣ris, is so deriued from the Gréeke name, for that it hath a round head in the top of his stem. His best liking is in dry & stonie groūds, and is called of the Phisitions the purging Herbe, of some it is called Doggues Bremble, of other some Doggues Apple, of other Hares heart. The Mages call it Pentheron. Of Casia. CAsia, is one of those sorts which haue their preheminence and are had in price for their odoriferous and pleasant smell. Which (sayth Plinie) hath thrée kindes, in no point one co∣loured like to another. For the first is white, the seconde red, the thirde almost blacke. The first is of least value, for that it soone rotteth, and is consumed and eaten of Wormes. The best is tried thus: by sauour or smell, tast and colour. It groweth in Arabia. His stalke or bodie sayth Theophrast, is somewhat grosse or superfluous, representing therein strikes, small and long, not much vnlike to Sinewes. It hath a barke and rinde but most difficult to be pared away. It is cut in the bignesse and length of two fingers, or a little more: and
that onely about the vppermost and most ten∣der twigges, and is after sowed vp being so cut whilest it is fresh and greene with some strong binding, the binding most commonly being of an Oxe his hide. The true Casia we haue not, neyther the true Cynamon. Of the Cedar tree. THe Cedar tree is in Leafe like to the Cy∣prouse: his Wood is counted precious, and is long endurable for that it neyther harboreth Moth nor Worme. Wherof (for this such his goodnesse) the Pillars and Beames of Prin∣ces Houses and Pallaces, likewise of Tem∣ples are made hereof. It groweth in Affrick, Crete, & Siria, and especially vpon the Mount Libanus. Rabanus sayth, that it is the verie Ladie and Queene of Trées. Theophrast sayth, that it is of marueilous highe growth, verie light, straight vp, about the bodie with∣out wem or knot. And aboue al places saith he, that beareth the freshest, and is of gréenest lea that is in Corica. From thence is brought that swéete Poulder which is called Cedria, which they vse to bestrewe vpon Garments, vpon bookes & such like to preserue them from worme eating.
Of Cerfolie. CErfolie, is an Herbe in operation and working in a maner fiery. His best is, saith Diascorides in that that it being wrought & tempered with Uirgins Waxe, remedieth all kinde of swelling. Of Cetewale. CEtewale, is an Herbe whose roote the Phi∣sitions vse to gather in Sommer, and bée∣ing then dried indureth in good case thre whole yeares next after. Of Centorie. CEntorie, is called the bitter Herbe, for that it is most bitter in tast: some call it the gal of the earth: his working was first knowne by Chiron the Centaure, who vsed it first in Medicine. Of Celedonie. CEledonie, is an Herbe which beareth a Saffron coloured flower, whose flower also gathered and helde in the hande dyeth, and stayneth the gatherers hande. Plinie sayth, it is then in his best lust, when as the Swallow abydeth and buildeth amongst vs,
and serueth the Swallow (as the same Plinie and Aristotle also doe witnesse) to great vse and purpose. For say they, if at any time by a∣ny mischaunce or fortune, hir yong be hurt or perilled in their eiesight, the dam goeth to this Herbe, & presseth forth his iuice, which being so done, she annoynteth it about their eyes, and so restoreth them to the better and their former state and case againe. Of the Cherie tree. THe Cherie tree sayth Theophrast, height∣neth and matcheth with any in that poynt what so euer. It somtime reacheth sayth he, to 24. Cubites, his leafe is like to the Medlar, sa∣uing that in handling of it, it is somewhat more rough. His flower is white, which ha∣uing gotten full ripenesse becōmeth bloud red. Of the Cinamon. THe Cinamon shouteth forth out of a yong set or spring in bignesse about two Cubits. It groweth in Indie and Arabia, as Theo∣phrast mentioneth, and is called Cinamon, for that it hath his top as it were folded or plai∣ted. It is of ashie and duskie colour: his Leafe is like to wilde Maioram. It neuer smelleth till it be throughly drie. It groweth amongst
Briers and verie hard Rocks, and is gathered with much paine and difficultie. In Fables we find that this fruit is found in the Phoenix Nest. Theophrast sayth, that is of the best goodnesse which is next to the twiggs and top, and that is lesse good, which is next to the roote. Of the Ciprous tree. THe Ciprous tree is so named of ye Gréekes as Isidore saith, for that in his growth and especially beneath about his roote, it figureth the Pine Apple tree, or that figure which the Geomitricians call Conus. It is singuler in swéete smell. And for this purpose they were wont in olde time to burie their dead with the Wood hereof, hereby thinking to kéepe vnder, and to suppresse all ill smelles and sauours of dead Carcasses. Of Cokkell. COkkell is an vnprofitable Herbe or rather (to giue him his right name) a hurtfull wéede which will alwayes be medling with the pure Wheate, and doeth often choke it vp, and hindreth his growth: So that the old Pro∣uerbe is herein verified: the ill wéede ouercrop∣peth the good corne.
Of Coltes foote. COltes foote of some is called Bethicon, of the Egyptians Suartha. His leaf is like to the I uie leafe. It ariseth from the roote di∣rect and straight vp. Of Coriander. COriander hath his name common with vs and the Gréekes. For it séemeth to be so called Apo tou koriou, of plentie of séede. Which séede being taken in sweete wine, pro∣uoketh a man to much venerie. But this being after this sort drunke without moderation or reason in so taking it, causeth Phrensie and madnesse. Of the Chestnut tree. THe Chestnut tree is a verie tough wood, and so massie or sound, that it maye be the principall Beame in all buildings. It is so fer∣tile and ranke in yong shoote and slippe, besides this in budding and giuing of flowre, that be∣ing once cut or hacked in pieces, will be the better for that, and bud so much the more. It is called Castanea in Latine quasi Castraria à Castrando bicause it is so often lopped or gelt, or bicause it is first opened before it is rosted in
the fier. Some saye that those kinde of Coles wherewith the Smith mollifieth and worketh his Iron are made with this. Of Chastlambe. CHastlambe or Agnus castus hath y• flowre and séede that being digested of vs, openeth forthwith the poores of the bodie: consumeth and drieth vp that naturall moysture within. Diascorides sayeth that with so working, it maketh men chaste. Of Crowtoe. CRowtoe of some is called Vacinium, in Greeke Iacynthos. It hath a leaf like to Por∣ret, a handfull in height, in bredth it is lesse or more small than a Maidens finger. His colour is greene as ye precius stone is of y• name: his top is full of Purple flowers. His roote circle∣like or round. It being drunken saith Diasco. with Wine purgeth the Gall of his superflu∣ousnesse. Of this Herbe .ij. sundrie fables haue sprong vp with ye Poets. One that it was first a Boy entierly beloued of Apollo, whome he at a time by a certaine mischaunce slew, which thing done in his furie (lesse that with his death his memorie should also die) he turned him into this kind of Herbe or Plant. Another
is, that it sprang vp of Aiax bloud the most va∣liant Captain that euer the Greekes had. And for the remembraunce of so worthie a Knight or rather Princelie and Heroicall person, the Gods are said to haue giuen to this Herbe two vaynes, figuring and euidently shewing these two Letters A. and I. with vs it is commonly named as we said before, Crowtoe. Of Crowfoote. CRowfoote of some is called Astrion. The Romanes in their phrase of speach call it bloudie leafe. It spreadeth sayth Diascorides, all abrode vpon the earth, rather than by anye meanes it should heighthen. His leafe is cut a∣bout or bepinked. It beareth yelowe flowers, called Goldknops, and wheresoeuer it grow∣eth (whosoeuer list to dig vnder and about it) shall neuer finde his roote without great store of humor and water, like as in Camomill. Of Cresses. CResses wyth the Egyptians are called Moth. The Romanes call thē Nasturcia This kinde being drunken sayeth Dias. much auaileth and is a certaine remedie against ser∣pēts. The Persians vsed it as the best Sallet that they had in al their feasting and banquet∣ting.
It auaileth much to memory, whereof a∣riseth this Prouerbe: Eate wel of the Cresses. Of the Cucumber. THe Cucumber after Plinie groweth both in the Gardaine and in the fielde. It is of those sort sayeth Isidore as also Theophrast, that chaunge their leafe and stalke often. Of Cinkfolie. CInkfolie or fiue leaued grasse of some is called Pentadactylon, or Asphalton. The Ma∣ges call it Ibis claw or naile: some cal it Mer∣curies fingar. His leafe is like to Mynt, and hewen or hacked toothlike, in maner of Saw. His flowre is yelow and somwhat pale with∣all. It groweth in moyst and watrie places. It is ministred often of the Phisitions with Lu∣sters and Purgations. Of Daffadill. DAffadill, some call Anthericon, the Ro∣manes Kings spare. It is in his stalke ve∣rie thinne and light, and beareth his flower in his top: it is of plentifull roote. It being mini∣stred medicine like, remedieth the Serpentes sting.
Of Dictamus. DIctamus is an Herbe which groweth in Crete and is very wonderfull in losening & vnbinding the straights of the bodie. Tullie gathereth this to be true by the maner of the Deare or Harte, who being stricken in the ri with anye Dart or Arrowe, so that it sticketh hard fast: they streight wayes hunt after and hasten to the water bankes of the Fn where this Herbe groweth, and finding this, eateth it as a present remedie to haue thereby helpe in such a distresse: which Herbe being once eaten, they shake out the Dart or Arrow out of their ribbes as they list. Of Dill. DIll some call Anis. The Egyptians Ara∣chis. The Mages after their tongue, Dogs head or Houndes locke. The Arabians Mer∣curies broode. The Romanes as before Anis. Diascorides saith, that it hindreth and hurteth the good eiesight being often taken, and is a hinderance to issue. Of Dragaunce. DRagaunce is an Herbe so called for that it is bespotted and is specked in his colour
much like to a Snake: representing the verie Uiper or Dragon, which Herbe the Uiper it selfe standeth in dreade of. Of some it is called Colubyne, for it hath hys flower Purple coloured: it is also clouen and sharpe as the Serpents tongue is. It is blacke in the midst of his flower. This sayth Diascorides, hauing his roote dried and beaten all to pou∣der & confect also with water of Roses beau∣tifieth and cleareth the foule face, as being with other things handled helpeth otherwise. Of Dragon. DRagon the greater and the lesse. The grea∣ter of some is called Aron, Isaron, Iaron. &c. The Romanes call it Serpentarie. Thys groweth only in shadowie places, and such as be hedged, so kept away frō the Sunnes heate, which thing it cannot abide. The lesser hath white spots, and those little, his stalke straight vp: and his length about .ij. Cubits. Of Dwale. DWale is called in Gréek Struchnon Ypnoticon in English séeple Dwale. It is a kinde of shrub sayth Diase. which groweth nigh to the Sea, verie abundant and plentifull in yong shootes. It is maruellously effectuous to bring
a man on sound and fast sléepe. There is ano∣ther kind of the self same name which is called mad Dwale. Which being drūkē sheweth wō∣ders by a certaine false shewe of imagination. Of the Elme. THe Elme is a trée whose wood or timber is yelow, verie sinowie & strong. It is called of some all heart. It is vsed and occupied prin∣cipally about magnificall or beautifull gates. It is then best of all riuen, clouen and cut in sunder when it is moyst and gréene, and wyth more difficultie being once drie. Theophrast sayth, that it is in his kinde verie barraine. It only beareth a certaine Grape, but nothing else. It is one of those kinds that putrifie and bréede wormes. Of Esele. ESele of some is taken for Eiebright: this hath his leafe verie thinne and plaine. It is not of so fresh a grene colour, or of like looke, as many other Plants be: but this it hath a∣boue them, for it being pressed, doth giue a very daintie and most medicinable iuice or humor, not much vnlike to milke. Diascor. sayth, it purgeth fleume and other such superfluities of like nature.
Of the Elder tree. THe Elder▪ saith Isid. is verie soft in hand∣ling, and of verie small heigth or growth. Hereof are made certain kinds of instruments and especially a kinde of Symphonie whiche the common sort call a Pipe: the learned and more ciuil kinde of men name it a Dulcimer. As the abouesaid Author, witnesseth, in that his tractate of Musicall instrumentes. It hath boughes thicke and grose, verie plaine and well compact with all in his outward appea∣rance. But within they are verie hollow, and haue nothing else but a soft Marie, which is commonly called their pith. Plinie sayth, that if the middle Barke or Rinde be pared or cut somewhat more toward the vpper part of his stocke or bodie, than towards the nether part, or contrariwise, so it will afterwards augmēt either vpward or downeward, with spreading forth of his armes or braunches after that sort. Of Fenkell. FEnkell is an Herbe of the Gardaine and fielde common to them both, but not so cō∣mon, as effectuous. The Latine worde signi∣fieth, that it should be sharper of the eiesight, & Diascorides also sayth, that the iuice of this
Herbes roote quickneth the eyes. It is called of the Gréekes Marathron. Plinie (as also Isidore in his .xvij. booke saith) that the verie Serpents (if nothing else did) were sufficient to Noble & to cause this kinde to be well reckened of, for that through the onely taste or eating hereof, they shake off many sicknesses, and thereby keepe away, or of from them weake & olde age. Of the Fig tree. THe Fig tree, is of no high growth, neither nice in bodie, but grossely set and thick, all his Wood not so plaine, as wrethed & wrinck∣led: the colour of his Leafe and Rinde some∣what more wan or pale: his flower Medler∣like. It is called Ficus in Latine à fecūditate as some say, for such fertilitie as it hath and in∣crease: for so soone as his fruites, those that be all of one time in growth begin once to ripen and are pulled or plucked therefro, it straight wayes with no lesse aboundance shooteth forth other. It hath that humor (as it is said) that is like womans milke. It hath also that vnctu∣ous and Oylie nature in tast and smell, so vn∣pleasant to the Bull, that there is no better bit or Bridle to stay and quiet him, then to bring him to the Fig tree, whereas he may haue but onely sent and smell hereof, and being neuer
so fierce, is forthwith tamed. It hath diuerse appellations and names of diuers Regions & Countreys. There is one kinde saith Theo∣phrast in Indie, which euen from his boughes or braunches giueth yearely roote. There is a∣nother Fig tree called Aegiptiaca, which in Wood and fruit bearing, is like the other: but in effect and manner of working is contrarie both to this kind and to all other: for it being throwen into the water, it straight waye dis∣cendeth and séeketh to the bottom (and that which is most to be maruelled at) after that it hath bene so a long time drowned, and hath e∣uerie parte or poore full of water (at which it should séeme to be more ponderous) it then a∣riseth vp againe to the waters top, and so kée∣peth uerlie and aboue the waters highest su∣perficie, and swimmeth as Saint Augustine sayth▪ as all other kinds of Timber do, aboue. Of the Fir tree. THe Fir tree sayth Theophrast, hath this one maner and custome peculiarly to him∣selfe, that being cut, eyther hindred or hurt, by any storme or tempest in ye left side of his stalk (which kinde of stalke it hath both light and smooth) it by and by taketh hart a grasse, and groweth round about and garland like, a little
beneath his top: which some call leaping a∣bout: other some the daunsing of the rounde. It is in colour somewhat black, to féele to hard aboue measure. Whereof the standing Cups of Arcadie were wont to be made. And this furder it hath peculiarly, that cutting ye bough∣es without shill, or hurting the toppe, it forth∣with dyeth. Of Firse. FIrse or Gorse, is a most sharpe and thornie kinde of Herbe, growing in Woodes, For∣rests, Desarts and in such grounds as be most weedie. It is saide to prick and wound the féete of him that passeth by, and catching holde of some part of a man, soone pierceth to the quick. The common sort call this daungerous· herbe. Of the Frankinsence tree. THe Frankinsence tree is verie plentifull in boughes giuing. In leafe it is like to our Peare. Sauing yt it is much more small. It is in colour as gréene as Rue, in rinde & barke as soft as Laurell. The trée it selfe hath ere nowe bene called Libanos, & in Gréeke Dendrilibanos his Gum or teare. Libanotos of Galen. Euri∣pedes again cōtrariwise vsed Libanon for the teare: and Libanotos for the tree. It is so fabled
with ye Gréekes that it had his name of a yong man, and the same an Assirian, whose name was Libanos, who afterward was turned in∣to this kinde of trée, whome certaine enuious persons slue perceiuing him so serious in wor∣shipping the Gods. (For the which their ma∣lice being not long after acquited and reuen∣ged) it was afterwards and hitherto is holden in opinion that there was no better nor more acceptable sacrifice to the Gods than Frankin∣sence offered vp. There is a certaine Manna of this Frankinsence, which Plinie will haue to be ye purest of this his humors drops wrung forth by great pressing. There is also a certain smoke in this, swéete and pleasant, after that it be burned, as there is also of Mirrhe. Of Fumitorie. FVmitorie of the Epyptians is called Lynx of the Gréekes Kapnos, with the Latines Fu∣mus terre, the earth his fume or smell. It is a bushie or shrublike Herbe like to Coreander his flower, white or more like Ashie colour. Diascorides sayth, it letteth the hayres of the eye liddes, being pluckt away to grow again, annointed and layde with Gum. It is in his best working, then, when as it is greene.
Of Garlick. GArlick, hath his name of his strong and vnpleasant smell: bicause it smelleth saith Isidore so strongly, and with that so lothsom∣ly, that it taketh away, & ereaueth for a time the good and swéete smell of all other things. The best that it hath, is that it is good of en∣crease. For euerie and eche coate of his (those I call coates which are as it were on both their sides behemmed and parted, and are as it were in seuerall corners of the house, but yet in house and so by that meanes all one) set in the Gar∣daine or otherwhere, will soone come vp and much prosper. Which thing the Onyon as Aristotle sayth, haltet in: for that is set onely by whole heades, & so commeth vp or else not. Of Ginger. GInger▪ in Gréeke is called Zingieris, it gro∣weth in Arabic, his growth is by manye and infinite small : in smell and auour not much vnlyke to Pepper. Choose fayth Di∣scorides of the  hereof . Take them for the best and principal, which haue not bene aton, neither gnwen with womes: for they haue their wormes also as al other rootes haue.
Of Gladiolus or Sworde herbe. GLadiolus, his form and proportion of leafe is like to Sedge, his flower yealow in a maner like to the flower Deluce: some call it Arion, some Sword point or edge toole: other some cuttle haft. The Romaynes as before. It groweth for the most part in the fielde. It hath a double roote one placed & setled within an another. This his roote sayth Diascorides, being taken in wine prouoketh and stirreth vp to Venerie. Of Grasse. GRasse of some is called Asyphylion. They of Affrick call it Eball, the Egyptians A∣nuphi, the Romaines Cattailes meate. His growth (as what it is also) is verie wel knowē of all men. Herein lurcketh the Serpent, and hydeth him selfe safely. With this all beastes and Cattell of the field do liue. It helpeth and remedieth, saith Diascorides all hinderances and stops to vrine. There is a kinde of grasse in Babilon, whiche is like Cane or Reede, which being tasted or eaten of, killeth the Cat∣taile, and it groweth by the highe way sides on euerie side as they iourney. In the Hill Parnasus, there groweth another kinde of
grasse more thicke and ranke than the other, & of better size: for it beareth a leafe like Iuie. In Cilicia there is a kinde of Grasse which is called Heracha, and of the Egiptians Apap, which groweth in hedges about walles and Uines: whose leafe is like Mercuries Herbe, and as full of Briestles. Of Grunswell. GRunswell in Gréeke Ereigeton, it groweth vpon walles and Tileshads, and is hoare∣like to an olde mans bearde. It hath a duskie flower. Diascorides sayth, that his stalke be∣ing boyled in water, and afterwards druncke wt wine, doth ease the sore grief of the stomack. Of the Gilofer. THe Gilofer is called Gariophilus, hys flower of al other flowers is most swéete in smell. There be many kinds of Gilofers, al∣though but one name for thē all. There is also a tree of y• name called Geū of othersome Be∣net, which hath fruit in tast like ye Peppercorn Of Hares foote. HAres foote, of some Hares commyn. It groweth in Gardaine Alyes. And is as Diascorides saith, a singular Medicine to kepe
and defend the inward bowels from swelling. Of Henbane. HEnbane, hath the name to be a cause of madnesse or furie: Isidore sayth, that it killeth and bindeth the spirites: The Herbe it selfe hath a top or small heade. In olde time, vpon the Crowne or Myter of the high Priest stoode a flower right vp on the top, not much vnlike this Hearbe, about a finger in heigth, supereminent, & vnderneath this, in the lower part of the garland or Myter, round about his Temple or Forehed, there was a golden circle in thrée sortes ordered, and set vpon, the which stoode with yealow flowers from one side to a∣nother. We must gather that something was figured hereby, and that the high Priest or Bi∣shops were not on this wise ordred for nought Of Horse taile. HOrsetaile but more commonlye with vs called Cates taile, of the Greekes Hippyris of the Mages Saturnes foode. It groweth in waterie places and those softlye dighted and banked about. It creepeth vp by stalke aloft, and reacheth ouer his neighbours head, coue∣ting and preasing as much as it may to be the higher. In his top it figureth a taile to looke to.
And thereof had it his name. His roote is tough and verie harde. Diasc. sayeth, that it is a sore hinder, and that it stencheth eruption of bloud. Of Houselike. HOuselike in Gréeke is called Acizoon, as you would say, always aliue. It is alwaies gréene and well liking, and for his endurance is resembled to Ambrosia: for his colour to the Marigolde, for his roundset or figure to the Bullocks ie: Insomuch that the Romaines call it Iupiters eie. It hath a fruitfull leafe in the bignes of a mans thumbe: in the end ther∣of it is sharpe or like a tongue. It is giuen to drinke sayth Diascorides against the biting of the greatest kinde of Spider, and that kinde principallye which hath the moste iontes, as some be thrise iointed. There is another of this name, but it is lesse, and is called Acizoon to Mikron, or with the Romanes Vitalis herba, or Semperuiua. Semgréene. It groweth vpon Walles and tiled housen and is many wayes medicinable. Diacorides. Of Humlocke. HVmlock in Gréeke is called Koneion. With the Egyptians Apemphi, in Latine Ci∣cua. It hath his stalk and stem like Fennell.
His flower is white. His séede like Anise seede, but more white. It is one of those kinds of Plantes which destroye and kill as soone al∣most as it is taken. Wherewith as we reade Socrates the good Philosopher died forthwith, after that he had bene once caused and compel∣led of malicious Iudges to take y• Cup wher∣in the iuice hereof was poured, and so to drink it off. Diascorides sayth it killeth through ex∣tréeme colde, vanquishing and extinguishing all naturall heate. Of the Herbe Iacinct. IAcinct is an Herbe hauing a purple flowre It tooke his name of a certaine noble childe, which among the Syrtes in a Pasture there was found dead. So the child his funeral gaue name to this Herbe. His colour is properlye Aerie, bespotted among with Purple and red. It hath a certaine flaxe lyke Snowe. Of these iij. colours were the Priestes robes of, as we read in the old law. Of Isope. ISope is an Herbe of meane growth, but of much vertue, and principallye in purging the Lungs. Wherefore in the olde law sayeth
Isidor, by a bunch of Isope, they would be be∣sprinkled with the bloude of Lambes, which would be counted and reckened cleane. Of the Iuniper tree. THe Iuniper tree is so called of similitude and likenesse to the fire. Pyr in Gréeke sig∣nifieth the fire: or as some thinke it is so called for that in his maner of growing it is like that figure which the Geometricians cal Pyramis, we may say sharpely topped. Or as other some say, it is so named for his good and long maner of retayning and keeping fier, insomuche that if Coales of fire be raked vp, and inwrapped with the Ashes hereof, they continue as they saye, vnextinguished by the space of a whole yeare. It groweth sayth Diascorides, in stony and desart places. Plini sayth, that the onely shadow of this sleath and killeth Serpents: and therefore his fruit is reckned to be a reme∣die against poyson. Of Iupiters beard. IVpiters Beard, called of the Gréekes Chry∣sokome, as you would say Goldilocks. It is hairie like Isope. Diascorides sayth, it is ta∣ken in Wine eftsoones to purge.
Of Iuie. IVie sayth Isidore, is so called, for that it créepeth all about, and cleaueth fast to the trée, some say (as it may be also) that it was so called, for that at the first it was giuen to the Kid and Déere as nourishment & meate. For Haedera is the Latine word, and we may fetch it as it were word out of word, Haedera quasi Haedis data. It is plentifull in giuing Milke, wherewith the Kids were more full of Milke. It is a token and signe with the Philosophers of colde and moyst earth. Of the Kastainy. THe Kastainy is a tree of good high growth, so called as Isidore witnesseth, for that it must be often lopped or gelt. For this so soone as it is cut downe, by and by (as it were a faire greene groue) spreadeth abrode and beareth in∣finite blossomes, and buddeth wonderfullye. His fruite hangeth betwéene leafe and leafe, and that double or by couples, in maner of a man his priuities. Of the Laurell tree. THe Laurell tree hath bene from the begin∣ning, the verie seignorie and badge of all
such as haue gotten amongst men the name of honor, dignitie and praise. Insomuch that in olde time (as also in many places now or not long since) the Garlands & Crownes of Em∣perours, hardie Captaines, valiant Souldiers and such like, were made hereof. With them of the olde time it was called Laudea, after∣wardes the letter d through an other custome had his chaunge into the letter r, and is nowe called Laurea, (as many other wordes of like sorte) of the which is Meridies for Medidies and the like. The Gréekes named it Daphnis, for that it is alwayes freshe and neuer leaseth his grene colour. Aristotle sayeth that this kinde of trée (whereas other and those infinite are) is neuer hurt by thunder and lightning. Of Laus tibi. LAus tibi or white Daffadill in Greeke is called Narkissos. It hath his leafe like an Onyon. His stalke yelow within his skinne, and hollow. Diascorides sayth, that it ioyneth togither those sinewes which are cut, being ad∣hibited and vsed plaister like. Of Lettice. LEttice sayeth Isidor, is so sayde for that it being eatē, hath that humor which  soone
conuerted into milke: and to the woman it encreaseth milke abundantlye. To the man he sayth, it is cause or prouokement to Uenerie. There is both field Lettise and Gardain Let∣tise. Diascorides sayth, that it putteth away all hinderances of sound sléepe. Of the Leeke. THe Leeke hath his time of lustinesse and youth, and his time also of age, euen as man hath. For the first yeare it bestoweth all care and trauell in growth and nourishment to his owne perfection and ripening: then the next yeare following, that that he can he reser∣ueth and bestoweth vpon séede, to the preser∣uation of his kinde. Of Laburnum. LAburnum is a tree growing vppon the Mountaines called the Alpes, whose wood is white & hard: and hath his flower one Cu∣bite in length, so noysome that no Bée will touch it. This groweth in hard and drie places and hateth moysture or water. Of Libardbaine. LIbardbaine of the Gréekes is called Ak∣niton, it hath leaues like the Cucumber, but
somewhat more lesse and rough. His roote is like ye Scorpions taile. In colour it is as white as the Alabaster. They say that if the roote her∣of be shewed or offered to the Scorpion, that it enféebleth him, and bereaueth him for a while of his liuely powers, & of both his inward and outward senses. But contrariwise if you shew him Barefoote or Terworte, he by and by lea∣peth, and is aloft. Diascorides sayth, that this roote being stamped to poulder, and being be∣spiced or bestrewed vpon their meate, as flesh, and such other things wherwith they liue, de∣stroyeth and killeth the Panther, the Libard, the Wolfe, and all other beastes, those especi∣ally which liue by rauening, and that whilst their meate so ordred is in their mouth. There is another of this name, englished Wolfbane: whose leae is like the Plane tree, which hath iij. kindes. The one which the Huntesman v∣seth: which groweth for the most part in Ita∣lie, with the which after their addighting they destroy Wolues, as Diascorides sayth: the o∣ther which serue the Phisition to good vse and purpose. Of Liricumfancie. LIricumfancie, or as other iudge May Li∣lie, for resemblāce alike: It hath his flowre
verie white. In Gréeke it is called Ephemeron, for his short continuance and daylie dying. As also there is a little kinde of beast in the Riuer Hipanis of that name, as Aristotle recordeth, which liueth but onely one daye, and dieth at night: so ordained of God and prouided of Na∣ture: herein to learne and teache vs that all things created & made, haue their ende: some with long looking for it, other some haue it as sodenly, and as short: And to enforme vs fur∣ther, that euerie thing hath not a like end. No, infinite things there are, that haue no propor∣tion, or séeme not to be (although they be) con∣ference & comparison being once had, the one with the other. Of Licorise. LYcorise, is so saide especially through the Greeke word for that it hath a sweete roote. Gluen in Greeke is interpreted swéete. It is not onelye swéete, but it is also moyst, insomuch that if slaketh the thirst. Of the Malew. THe Malew hath that preheminence, that it molifieth, and loseneth all hardnesse of the inward parts & bowels of the belly: as Isidor sheweth, whose lyquor or iuice sayth he, being
contempered with any clammy Oyle, and be∣ing annoynted vpon any mans body, he can∣not be stung with Bées. Of the Mandrake. THe Mandrake sayth Diascorides, of some is called Circea. For that the Poets faig∣ned, that Crce the Witch or Sorceresse vsed it in hir amorous and delicious drincks. It bea∣reth sayth Isidore, an Apple of swéete smell, which of some is called the Apple of the earth. The Poets call it Anthropomorpheos, for that it hath his roote in ye earth in figure like to a mā. Whose rooe being boyled with wine, and gi∣uen the pacient to drinke, the Surgion forth∣with casteth the Pacient into a dead sléepe. There is of this both Male and Female. The Male is of ike leaf to the Béete. The Female to the Lettse. Of Maioram. MAioram sweete, or Maiorā gentle, tooke his name of a certaine Kinges wayting Boy, which in fetching his Lord certain oynt∣ments at the Apothecaries, by chaunce (whilest he bare them) had a fall, & so by the spilling of euerie eche of them (meeting togither by their flowing, and by such confusion) a meruellous
swéete smell was made, which as they say, this Maioram representeth. Of the Mastick tree. THe Mastick tree, distilleth and droppeth a certaine teare or Gum: and that kinde of gum which is in working very dry, & emptieth the head of all moysture, and al other superflui∣ties, as Diascorides sayth. Of the Marigolde. THe Marigolde of Manardus is called Ly∣simachia. Ruellius calleth it Woodwaxen, it groweth in Medowes and Pastures like to Brome, so bitter that no beast liuing will eate thereof. Other will haue it called Lostriffe or Herbe Willow. It beareth a red flower: It being put saith Diascorides into the fire, sen∣deth forth that kinde of smoke that is noysome to Serpents, and driueth away Flies. Of Molin or Longwort. MOlin or Longwort, is one kinde of that Herbe, which in Greeke is called Phlamos, another of that is the Primrose. Of some it is taken for the Rosecampin. It hath a long roote, a white flower, & somewhat wanne. Aristotle sayth, that this is the fishes deadly destruction,
or they coueting to taste hereof, by the power of his working, are weakned and brought low insomuch that they thereby for the most part, léese their life. Of the Mulberie tree. THe Mulberie tree hath a soueraigne red colour in fruit bearing: whervpō in Gréeke it is called Moros, which signifieth red or ruddie coloured. There is saith Theophrast ye Egyp∣tian Mulberie tree that is not much vnlike ours in the Gardaine: but it hath a singula maner by it selfe in fruite bearing, for neyther vpon his bough, neyther yet vpon his leafe, it beareth fruit but onely beneath out at his bo∣die, in the bignesse of our Fig. But forasmuch as it lacketh his inward Karnell (which other fruites haue) it is somewhat slack in hastning toward ripenesse, and is neuer mature or mel∣low, vntill such time as it be pressed and chafed with Iron Instruments, such as they haue in Aegypt. Which kinde of fruit being on this wise vsed as it were the space of foure dayes, it wareth ripe by and by, and in the eating is ve∣rie pleasant. Of the Mushrom.
THe Mushrom or Toadstoole, in Gréeke is called Mokéton, in Latine Fungus. It hath two sundrie kinds, and they both differ in good∣nesse, for the one may be eaten: the other is not to be eaten, but is deadly to eate. The first also eftsoones by other meanes, not of himselfe, but taking it of another, becommeth poysonous or deadly. Diascorides saith, that this thing som∣time commeth to passe through neighborhoode and feloship either of rustie Iron, or Nayles: or else sometime by rotten and filthie Ragges cast among them, and consumed to dust: some∣time also by harbouring Serpents, such as are all venemous: somtime also through the next neighbourhoode of venemous and infectuous Plants, and so forth. Of Mint. MInt is an Herbe of sweete smell and is of two sorts the one of the Gardaine, ye other of the field. The Latines cal it Calaminthus. Isaac sayth, that it stoppeth and stencheth all kinde of swellings. Of Milfoile. MYlfoile of some Yarrow or Nosebleede, is a small and short set or shrub. It hath his leafe like to the Birdes feathers. They are de∣uided
by cuttes, and are sharpe also like the Cummin. Diascorides sayth, it is profitable to stay eruption of bloud. Of the Mirhe tree. THe Mirhe tree sayth Plinie, groweth in the pastures and woods of Arabia, whose leafe is much like to the Oliue, but more sharp and thornie. It hath boughes like to the Iuni∣per. It is in his growth aboute fiue Cubittes high. It distilleth drops out of his side, or body, both bitter & gréene, which some cal sweating. Isidore saith, that the best of it commeth by re∣solution and loose giuing within it selfe. And that he sayth is a great deale more precious, which commeth forth and issueth of his owne accorde, than that which cōmeth by stroke and Iron Instrument violentlye brought forth. Dead bodies annointed with this distillation, are sayde to be preserued from corruption or rottennesse. Of the Myrt tree. THe Myrt tree sayth Isid. was first called Myrtus, for yt it groweth most commonly nigh to the Sea shore. It is one of the odori∣ferous kind, or sort, those I meane which haue swéete sent or smell. Diascorides sayth that it
repaireth and refresheth anewe olde wearied members. Of the Nettle. THe Nettle is a burner, & is called Vrtica, of the actiue verbe Vro: as Isid. saith. It is of firie and extreme hote burning nature, bur∣ning with handling of it onely. And when as it hath once done with burning as much as it will: it straight wayes causeth ytching, to the intent that the place being scratched might swell ye more. Which ill wéede is not through this his dealing one waies hurtfull to a man, but many waies. Yet it hath in it saith Dias∣corides somewhat praise worthy: for it is sin∣guler (so as it may be vsed) to stench bloud. Of Nightshade. NIghtshade of ye Egyptians is called Alle∣to in Greke Struchnos, the Romaines cal it Batrachium some other Solanum. His leafe is somewhat like Percelie. Diascorides saith it helpeth the burning and inflation of the sto∣mack. With this the valiaunt Beggers and moste cunning in that their daylie craft, (craft it maye be well called and taken in the worst part) doe make their flesh séeme rawe and ran∣cored, as often as they will, to the intent men
may pittie them the more, and giue them the sooner their Almes: whereas peraduenture, they be as whole & as lustie as those that haue pittie of them in verie déede. But here we may perceiue there is a counterfayting almost in e∣uerie thing. They therefore to beguile men, thus vse it. With this they chafe their legges, their armes and other partes also where they will, till it blister and breake the sinne, & ha∣uing so done for a time it sheweth a meruelous ill looke. And so I warrent you to that looke they, for their partes, can counterfaite as good. In most places in England it is called Gold-knappe r yelowe Crace, for the golden colour of his frute, Of the Nut tree THe Nut tree may be called & that very apt∣lie, an iniurious & vnquiet neighbour. It hurteth the fruits next to him by all meanes, both with his shadow, with dropping ill teares or humors from out his leaues vpon them and also with his roote. Insomuch that by al waies it vexeth and hindreth the next to him. Isidore saith they may all generally and with one and the same name be called Nuts, whose fruite is hid and kept vp in huske or shale: As the wal∣nut, the Chestnut, the Almond and the like.
Of the Nimphes tree THe Nymphes tree of the Gréekes is called Lotos, it is of excéeding gret height, very soft & tender in barke. In fruit it is like the Che∣rie, as swéete and as smal also. Cardane saith, that Neptunes Daughter a Nymph, fléeing from Priapus, was turned into this trée, and therevpon it had first his name. There is an Herbe also of this name, which the Poets ima∣gin and faigne, that whosoeuer eateth thereof shall so be in attendance vpon Venus and vp∣pon hir Court Ladies, that he shall not be able to moue from the place where he so tarieth or resteth in. Of the Oliue tree. THe Oliue is a kinde of tree had in muche price amongest the Auncients for his pea∣sible and concordant nature. Insomuch that the olde Romaines (as in their Histories and Chronicles doth appeare) were neuer woont to send their Legates or Embassadours eyther to aske and require peace: or else to offer and pro∣claime peace with their outward enimies, wt∣out smal braūches hereof borne in their hands. Remigius saith, it is for a token of signe or at∣tonement and couenant made betweene God
and man. As then especially when as ye Doue fléeing forth of Noe his Arke, fetched first and formost to him a small twig hereof. Plinie sayth, in his .xv. booke, that the valiant and no∣blest vanquishers in the Citie of Athens in olde time were honoured and crowned with the Oliue. The same Authour also recordeth, that there be diuers kindes hereof. There is al∣so a certaine iuice of this Oliue, as Isidore saith, which the more new and fresh that it is, the better it is. There is also the wilde Oliue like to the other, but that it hath a more broade Leafe. Of the Oke. THe Oke is called ye sound bodied tree, and his principalitie is in long life & endurance. It is sayd that Mambra that trée, was a kinde of Oke, vnder which Abraham dwelt which continued and endured many hundred yeares, euen from his time to Constantines the king and Emperour. His fruite is commonly cal∣led the Acorne. Of the Oleander. OLeander, in Gréeke Naerion ye Latines call it Rhododendrum. It is thought to be a trée inleaf like to ye Almond trée, but at the end
somewhat more sharpe. In flower it is like the Rose, and beareth fruite with shale, as the Almonde: within his shale are fat and full seedes, as soft to féele to as purple silk. His leaf or lint of flower being eaten of cattaile is their cause of death. Of the Onyon. THe Onyon hath al his strenght and man∣ner of working in his roote or head, & there∣fore it is called Cepa in Latin, for that all his profit is placed in ye head. At one yeres growth it taketh no great proufe, neither doth it séeme to ryot vntill suche time as it is plentifull in yéelding séede. Of Orchanet or wilde Buglosse ORchanet, of the Romaines & Gréekes is called Anchusa. Some of our countriemen translate it wilde Buglosse. It hath his leafe sharp set and thornie. This roote saith Diasco. hath that kind of iuice, that being wroong out, dieth in a manner a sanguine colour. Of the Orenge tree. THe Orenge tree wherof Mantuā so much maketh mention of, in his Eglogs: is first reported to be brought from the Medes, wher∣of
is thought to arise this Latine worde Ma∣lus Medica. The Gréekes call it Kédromela, for that his fruite is in smell, not much vnlike to the Ceder. The Orenge sayth Diascorides, helpeth and remedieth all venome. And so the Poet meaneth, whereas he sayth: And hereof is the soules best nourishment. This trée is at all seasons of ye yeare fruit bearing or fruit∣full: insomuch that it is neuer found without fruit, but after a diuers sort in their ualitie & maner: for when the first of their fruit is mel∣low, and readie ripe: then the second you shall espie gréene and sower: and the thirde newe blosoming and in flower. So that as the first is plucked off: the residue one after another hasten to rypenesse, the first to the thirde hys poynt: the thirde to the seconde, and that, that is not (but in possibilitie and power is) then springing forth. Of Organnye. ORgannye of some wilde Maioram. His roote is like the Rape, ruddie within, and without verie blacke. Diascorides sayth, that if his roote be stamped and mixt with Uiniger, that itis a singuler Medicine, and remedieth the bighting and eating of Spiders.
Of the Palme tree. THe Palme tree, is bespred with boughes plentifullye, and the same in a maner re∣sembling the small lynes in our hande. It is of indifferent heigth, swift in shooting forth, and in his growth, kéeping and retayning still his Leafe without fall (which thing the most of all other kindes doe not) but haue yearely at one time of the yeare the fall of their leafe. The Greekes in their language call it Phoenix, fet∣ched & borrowed as I think, from Phoenix the Birde of Arabie, which is said to be of so long life or continuance. Plinie sayth, that there is hereof both Male and Female. Of Papirus or the Rushe of Aegypt. PApirus or the Rush of Aegypt, and Siria, in length is reported to be ten Cubits. It groweth in the Fen and Marshie groundes. Of this was Paper at the first made, as hys name yet seemeth to testifie. This kinde of Rush being well dryed, is the fire his best nou∣rishment: with this also in Aegypt and Siria, they make Candelles and Torches (euen as we) with out wike and cotton.
Of the Peare tree. THe Peare tree as Isidore witnesseth, is cal∣led Pyrus, for that it is in his fashion and kinde of growth, Piramidall or firelike, brode aboute the middle of the bodie, but at the top Arrow headed, or Pinnaclelike. It hath but one name, for many and sundrie his kindes. There is in a certaine Towne in Italie called Crustiminium that kinde of Peare, which is as red as bloud in one of his sides, and in the reasidue otherwise. Of Pearserthnut. PEarserthnut of many in english, in Gréeke in called Astragalos. The▪ Romaines call it Ficus terrae, the Fig of the earth. In maner of growth it séemeth to be but a small and verie short shrub. It is in leafe and braunch bearing like to Cicer his roote: of the Phisitions it is sayde to be by many wayes medicinable, as to stay and stench bloud, & the like. But it is very hard and scarcely able to be beaten to poulder. Of Penroyall. PEnroyall of some Chrusitis of others Iu∣piters beard: of others it is thought to be a kind of Calamint. It hath lockes verie like I∣sope:
The Gréekes amongest them by their maner of name and worde giuing (as we may interpret) séeme to call it golden Hearbe. His roote is a great binder, & causeth excessiue heate. Plinie cōmendeth it for this one thing aboue all other herbs: For that it being hung vp in ye larderhouse, either by braunch, or otherwise, in the midst and depth of Winter, yet for all that buddeth forth his yelow and golden Flower. Of the Pine tree. The Pine tree is called holdfast or pitchie tre. It is sayde to sweate, and to droppe forth Pitch. Theophrast saith, that this kind of tree furdereth and agreeeth with al other their na∣tures whatsoeuer, as also the Fig tree doth the contrarie. It beareth that fruite which we call the Pine Apple. At the first it is very raw and grene, but being ripened, it cōmeth most nigh to the Chesnut his colour. Of the Pionie. THe Pionie had his name first of a ertaine Phisicion whose name was Peon as Isid reporteth. Some call it Penterobina for his number of graynes. Other some call it fiuefin∣gred leafe, for ye fingers likenes. Auicen saith, that there is of this both Male & Female. The
Male saith he, druncken in Wine helpeth the Opilacion of the Splene. Of the Pepper tree. THe Pepper tree groweth in Indie, and vpon the side of the hill Caucasus right op∣posit to the Sunne. His leafe is much like the Iunipers leafe. It groweth amongst the Gro∣ues and Woods, such as the Serpents inhabit: But to be frée from any their kinde of enda∣maging, the inhabitants of that countrie saith Isidore, when the fruites hereof ripen, doe set the whole Groue on fire, and by that meanes the deadly Serpents flie, and are driuen away. So that the sire hath two effectes in so wor∣king: the one to their terrour and feare: the other to make black and becolour the Carnels as it were most browne: when as both they and ye residue of their fruit by naturall growth and proper colour are all white. It taketh also of this fiering, not onely blacke colours, but wrinckles also, as we may sée vpon his vpper skin. They that will be Craftes maysters in this marchandise, haue proufe of both olde and new thus. If it be light, they iudge it olde: if more weightie, then take they it to be newe. But herein sometime the Merchants play the verie Marchants. For they intermeddle now
and then amongst their olde Pepper the froth or sinders of Siluer or Leade, and such like, to make it waye heauie. Of Phleum. PHleum sayth Theophrast, is in his leafe verie fertile, and in a maner fleshly. It is of great stocke, and as small of heigth. It hath a certaine influence and more plentifull meane of encrease of the Stars which be called Plea∣des: And therefore it may be said that it is cal∣led Phleum It giueth orderly leafe after leafe as they fall away. Of the Plane tree. THe Plane tree in Gréeke is called Platos, for his bredth and plainenesse of leafe. Zerxes the King of moste mightie power had this in admiration aboue al other trees, insomuch that he fell in loue with it, and at such time as other hastned him, & made preparance through him to battaile, yet he would somwhile slack vnder this tree, and spende there the most parte of the day. He departing also from thence by motion and trauaise of bodie (yet still permanent there in his minde) would leaue behind him pledges and tokens of his loue: Armelets, Chaynes, embrodered aray, which he for testimonie one∣ly
of his loue, hoong vp vpon the Boughes. Of Piperitis. PIperitis the Herbe of Castor the Phisition, was saide to be effectuous in remedying and helping the falling sicknesse. Of the Pomegranet. THe Pomegranet, is of some called the good kernell Aple. It hath in his round set and proportiō of skin, a multitude of small kernels. Isaac saith, that this being immoderatly taken engendreth vexations & griefes, inwardly and outwardly. Of Persely. PErsely, is a Gardaine herbe and vsed much with Cookes in dighting & setting out their meates, as often also to farce and stuffe here wtall. It had his name as the Latin word gi∣ueth for growing on stony & rocky places. Di∣asco. saith that his séede may be kept ten yeres without losse of operation. There are diuers kinds hereof: but that of Macedony is coun∣ted the best. Of Plantaine. PLantaine of some is called Lāmes tongue: his leafe is verye plaine but sinowie, after
the likenesse of this Herb was once the attire of the high Priest made. It remedieth and hel∣peth the byting and swelling of mad Dogges. Of Popie. POpie or Chesboule is in one sorte, of the gardaine, in another of the fielde. This of many is takē in Bread, for better healths sake. It causeth slepe: and driueth away watchings, as sayth Diascorides. Therfore Diagoras the Philosopher, a man most vigilaunt and studi∣ous, when as other vsed it, he would not take it, no not then, when as he had taken to much vpon him by studie & watching: least he there∣by should accustome him selfe to fall frō his old woont: yet Mnesidem{us} another Philosopher, woulde eftsoones vse to smell hereof, and to re∣ceiue of the iuice purposedly to prouoke sléepe. Of the Plumb tree. THe Plumb tre, hath many & diuers kindes, although but one name for all▪ But his chiefest and principall kinde is the Damascen, brought forth first oute of a certaine place or towne called Damascum, where it first grew. Of Polipodecke or Okeferne.
POlipodecke or Okeferne, groweth on the toppes of Okes and walles. It being rost in the Carcasse of an Hen saith Auicen, reme∣dieth the griefe of the guttes. Of Purslane. PVrslane, is an Herbe in colour very fresh, and gréene. Plinie sayth, yt it being chawed and kept a while betwene the téeth, doth make the loose teeth hard, and setteth them fast again. Of the Quince tree. THe Quince tree is in Latin called Cydo∣nia Malus of Cydon a certaine towne in Crte. Cato was the first that called it Co∣tonea, for that his Apple or fruite is all o∣uer apparailed with a certaine kinde of wooll called Coton. With the Germaines it is cal∣led Quittenbaum. Amongst the Germaines it is most rife, and groweth in colde and moyst places. Manye thinke that this is that fruit which the Poets call golden Apple: in Gréeke Chrusomela. Lonicer sayth, that the iuyce of the raw Quince helpeth them that haue their winde or breath stopped: and which haue no good digestion in meate taking. Of Reede.
REede is halfe take with the Herbe and trée, but in force or growth, aboue the Herbe. And nothing in strength to the trée his compa∣rison: It is all without very smooth and plain, within like an emptie vessell. It is caried and bent on euery side with the wind. Isidor saith, that it tooke his name of soone & sodain chaunge in his aray. Arundo sayth he is deriued out of the Adiectiue Aridum, for that it so spedily dri∣eth and withereth. Of the Rose. THe Rose sayth Theophrast, (although it hath but one name for so sundrie kindes) yet it is knowen well inough in his kindes, ei∣ther by number and accoumpt of leafe, either else by sharpenesse, lightnesse, colour, or smell. They of this kinde for the most part haue fiue leaues: there are some found that haue .xij. o∣ther some .xx. other some haue farre many mo. There be also sayth he, which bene called hun∣dreth Leaues. Whereof many came from Phi∣lippos, which being first brought from Pan∣geus the verie armehole or elbow of Thrace, are now set and do grow in many other places Those be saith he of most swéete smell, which growe in Cyrena: and hereof is made with the Apothicaries a moste swéete confection or
Ointment. In Cyrena also there is the best Uiolet, and that which is of pure smell. Of Rosemarie. ROsemarie by his Latin name, should seme to haue bene called in ye former time, whol∣some Herbe. His leafe is somwhat like Fenel, but more sharpely ended, and grosse about. It can not be soone reckened, to howe many & sun∣drie vses and purposes it serueth to. Of Rue. RVe is called the Medicinable Herbe: and especially there where as excessiue heate is found. For it is sayd to be most whote. There is hereof both that of the Gardaine, and of the field. They say that in this Herbe it is taught vs, how the enuenoming of Serpents may be holpen: for that such things liuing as haue a doe with Serpents, doe first arme themselues with this Herbe, before they encounter wyth them. Plinie sayth, that the Weasell hauing well knowen the effect and sorce of this Herbe, at the meeting of the Cockatrice (hauing first eaten hereof) goeth forth quietly, and encoun∣teth with him, and so vanquisheth him. Of Saffron.
Saffron saith Isidore, was first named in Latin Crocus, of a certain town in Cicilie called Coritium, wheras it is especially most aboundant, although plentifull in many other places. Many things saith he tooke their name of the first place wheras thy grew. It hath this soueraigntie or best goodnesse, in that that by whole winters long, it kéepeth his gréene co∣lour, & leaseth it not, whatsoeuer cold nipping wether, or tempest can do to appall it. In sum∣mer it suffereth the leafe to wither, & in midde Autumne it taketh it freshly againe: and gi∣ueth then his fruit in a soft and tender heade. Of Sauin. SAuin, is one of those kindes which all the whole winter time weareth his greene cote, and beareth leafe all seasons of the yeare. It is often vsed of Phisicions to fomentacion, and especiallie to remedie and help all griefs in the inward partes and bowels. Of Saxifrage. SAxifrage is called the stone killing herb for that his operation is such, that it dissolueth and weareth away all sand and grauell which taketh roote in the bladder. Of Scammony.
SCammony of the Latins Colophonia, in Gréeke Skammonia: it hath a leafe like I∣uie, but softer and in figure and shewe most like to the Triangle: It beareth a white flow∣er. Diascorides saith, that it is giuen to purge and deliuer from colour, and saith he so it doth but it commonlye leaueth a worse matter be∣hind it. Of Saint Iohnes seale. SAaint Iohnes seale, of Ruellius Salomōs seale: of Manardus, Saint Maries seale: of Iohn Agricola fraxinella or scala Caeli, in looke & appearance is like ye Laurel: in tast like the Quince. Diascorides saith that there groweth betwene euerie leafe many flowers of white colour, and in great number. Of Spikenarde. SPikenarde sayth Plinie, giueth name to many kinds. Spica nardi or Spikenarde, is onely supposed to come out of Indie. It is so called saith Isidor, for that his leaf is gathered swimming aloft in the flouds, and streames of Indie, without eyther roote or stalke. Which leafe they finding, doe pierce and prick it, and do lay it vp to drie. They say that there is a leaf in Paradice much like to this Mardus. There
is one growing also in Indie, another in Si∣ria. This last being kept awhile in the mouth dryeth vp the tongue and saliuous humor. Of stonie Sage or Wall sage. STony Sage or Wall sage, which most com∣monly groweth vpon the Tyles of housen, or vpon the top of Walles, of some is called Heraclea. The Mages after their language call it Titans bloud, or the Scorpions taile. Some call it Oxes eie. It hath a Leafe like Sage: and groweth plentifully amongst the Sandes. The best vertue of this is sayth Di∣ascorides, to séeke and search to the bottom of all maymes and woundes. Of Sycomore. SYcomore or foolish Fig trée, in leafe is like the Mulberie tree: In other poynts, it is the selfe same with the Fig. It hath a milkie kinde of iuyce or humor, many a time séene at the Leafe his ende. It hath Graines within his fruite as the Fig trée hath: But this to be most merueiled at, for that it neuer ripeneth vntill it be stroken with an Iron instrument. Of the Thorne tree.
THe Thorn tree is armed about with Dart and sting. And therefore Isidore will haue it named Spina, quasi speculis septa: as you would say, befenced with sting. It is vsed with vs as for his best worthinesse to enclose, and to be a defence and a partour of our neighbour his ground and ours. Of Terebull. TErebull, is the Leafe of an Herb in Indie, which swimmeth about in Pooles & Dit∣ches, without any roote that is séene. Those of Mauritania and of Greece call it Malaba∣thrum. Whereof commeth a most precious, and swéete Oyle. Cardane sayth, that it so cō∣forteth a man, that the verie Leafe being taken then, when as a man is in griefe and vexation either of minde or of bodie, it staieth or quieteth him, yea although he be in a swoune or dying. Of Tragion. TRagion saith Diascorides, onely Crete & Cicilie bringeth forth. It hath his bough, séede and leafe like to the Mastix tree, but not altogither so great. It floweth and distilleth that humor that is like gumme. With this as with Dictamus (whereof we spake before) the Goates & Deere of Crete being once woū∣ded,
helpe and remedie themselues, and then especially, if it be by Arrowe or Dart, sticking fast in their Ribs, they so loosen it by this harts tongue or Cetract. And Diascorides sayth, that al haruest time his leaues smel rammish∣ly, in maner like the Goate, and this groweth vpon the hilles and loftie places. There is an herbe also of this name which some call Scor∣pion, the Romaines and Gréekes Tragos. Of the tree of Paradise. THe trée of Paradise saith Cardane, is of short life, for the second yeare his bodie dri∣eth vp and waxeth barraine: It beareth fruit like a cluster of Grapes, but in bignesse of an Apple. It is couered with a yelow coate, & his leafe is very long & broad, for the which it is of so short life, for that which is great and grosse hath néede of great humour, & that also which goeth to much at riot: or else it by and by di∣eth. Of Trifolie. TRifolie, or three leaued Herbe, as the word or name may be general to all such as haue onely but three Leaues: so is there a certaine fruit or Herbe so properly called. Of some it is called short vine, of ye Egyptians Epaphu.
It is of swéete smell. It groweth sayth Dias∣corides, in a shadowie and darke place: His flower is purpled & Circlelike, his séede dronc∣ken in Wine is much medicinable. Of Turbit. TVrbit whose Leafe is like the Laurell, groweth in Aegypt, and is not the same which men think, they receyue at the Apothe∣caries hands: It is giuen to purge fleume. It is said (being drunken in Uiniger) to remedie the byting and stinging of the Aspis: for the which there are but fewe remedies. Of Wake Robin. WAke Robin the Syrians call Lupha. It is leaued in figure like the Dragon: In his stalke it is purpled. It giueth a sharpe set stomacke inough to digest, and to satisfie Na∣tures desire, being once taken. Of Walwort. Walwort the Gréekes cal Symphyton whose heygth is commonly two cubites: his leafe is rifted like Buglosse, his roote and ne∣ther shewe black: but within very white and oylie: It helpeth and putteth away bloud spit∣ting.
Of wild borage. WIlde Borage or Alcibiadiō is that herb that Alcibiades vsed to paint his face with. The Latins cal it Alcibiacū, it hath his leafe, white, & is wrought like Orchanet: his best is sayth Diascorides, for that it helpeth ach and anguish of the Lungs. Of wilde Rue. WIlde Rue or woodsage in Latine Poli∣monion. It hath smal stalkes saith Di∣ascorides in a maner like a birdes Fether: his leafe is a little bigger than our Rue. It hath a tuft which is full of black séedes. They say, that if it be applied to any part of a man, No Scorpion can sting or wounde him: or if she doth, it can not hurt him. Of Veruen. VEruen, of some after their language is called Holy Herbe. The Mages call it Iu∣noes teare, or Mercuries moyste bloud. The Romaines Cockes combe. It groweth only in the waters, and is thought to be that Herbe which in Greeke is called Peristeon, bicause the Doues being in companie and in their flight, séeke after their foode at this Herbe.
Of the Violet. THe Violet is in two kindes: white & pur∣pled. His best goodnesse is in a sweete kind of smel, & especially that Violet which grow∣eth (as we saide before) in Cirena. Some say that there is a kinde of Violet lyke Honie. Looke howe much the more effectuous or good in working this his flowre is: so much ye more it is saide to holde downe his head, and to bow and bende his bodie downward, to the earth. Of Wintergreene. WIntergreene of the Mages is called Wolues heart, so to translate it. The Sirians call it Merida. The Frenchmen Iu∣niper. The Latines after theirlanguage, black Lingwort or the earths leafe, it is like to our Béete. His seede sayth Diasc. taken in wine, helpeth the grief of the inward bowels. Of Woodbinde. WOodbinde of the Mages is called Ve∣nus haire. Of the Egyptians Tucon. It is a humile and weake kinde of shrub, and hath his leafe sayeth Diascorides, one set a good way off from another. It twineth like a thréede or line, about other herbes and fruits,
and is a hinderaunce to their prosperitie and growth. They say that if it be drunken .xxxvj. dayes togither, it causeth a barraine and vn∣fruitfull nature: further it helpeth the Feuer intermedled with Oyle. Of Woodherbe. WOodherbe after the Latin translating, in Greeke Kaetaphysis, it hath a leafe lyke Crowfoote and groweth about in the groaues and fieldes as plentifully & as thick as grasse. It being stamped saith Diascorides, and mixt with ye brawne of anie thing liuing, remedieth & cureth Ulcers and Biles. It is also said, that if it be brought home whilest it is fresh, and bestrewed about the house, to prohibit and let the Flées of their engendring. Of the Willow tree. THe Willow tree in Latin is called Salix a Saliendo, for his swift skipping and com∣ming vp. The best prayse that it hath giuen him is, for that the more he is powled and cut downe, the better a greate deale he prospereth. His second praise is for ministring oftentimes meate to the Cattaile. Of the Yewe tree.
THe Yewe tree in Greke is called Smilax, the Romaines call it Taxus. It is in bignesse of leafe like the Firre trée. Diascorides saieth, that it first grue in Carbonia a part of Italie and Spaine. It hath that secret maner of wor∣king, that whosoeuer sitteth or lyeth on sleepe vnder it, keatcheth no good thereby: for often∣times hurt hath come thereby, and somtimes also death. It was tolde vs of it saith Diasco∣rides, that we should auoide it by a certaine friende of ours, for feare of greater daunger. And Virgil in his Bucolickes warneth and chargeth the shepeherds of his time, that they should not suffer their shéepe to féede neyther vnder this, neyther vnder the Iuniper tree, neyther vnder those trees whose shadowe is hurtfull. As in his Georgickes he warneth also, how the swarmes of Bees should be kept away in any case from the Yewes of the Isle of Cirse or Corsica in this verse and the like. Et tua Cyrneas fugiant examina Taxos. If that thou wilt thy Bees to be in weale and in good case Take heede of Cirsies Yewes I say and of that daungerous place. And Plinie also in his naturall Historie and xvj. booke recordeth of this, that in Arcadie the Yewes are of that force to weakē and enfeble
the vitall powers in any man sléeping vnder them, that sometime he forthwith and present∣ly dieth. And Plutarch in his Sympose ren∣dreth the reason, for that the Braine being dis∣tempered with so noisome and deadly a sent or smell, causeth the rest of the head not to be well, but vndoeth his good setling, and all at once bereueth him of all. Thus saith Plinie it doth, whensoeuer any long tariance is made vnder it. But then doeth it especially cum∣ber and hurt, yea, most often kill, when as it newlye shooteth out and buddeth forth flowers. FINIS.
The thirde Booke of the Aegemonie or chiefest vertues in all the whole kind of bruite Bea∣stes, Foules, Fishes, creping wormes and Serpentes, with the Al∣phabetical order. Psalm. 148. Praise the Lord of Heauen, ye beasts and all cattell: wormes and fethered Foules.
The Preface to the thirde Booke. THe deuision of Sauage and brute Beastes, rueth somewhat more at large: And may more plentifullye be sorted and seuered into their bran∣ches, then those other two more base Daughters and of leser prce, which we next before & immediatly in their order shewed off, what was their best and soueraigne goodnesse. For this is the close and wise working of Dame Nature, that the further and in degree the more high, she la∣boureth in hirs to haue them reach to the chiefest perfection in whome are all things absolute, full and without any point of lacke or imperfection, she giueth to eche of them in thei kinde a seuerall gift. And whereas all of them can not be a∣like, neyther is there in them equall condition, yet for the best she prouideth for them in that that may be: alwayes foreseing to auoyde impossibilitie. I mought here therefore set these two last Daughters, the plant and eke the brute Beast, the one from the other by this note and difference (for many men haue children alike, and yet they are knowne and haue their diffe∣rence by one marke or other) First and fomost in mouing from place to place, with an appetite to repast themselues: and this is the chiefest, vsed and sought forth of Philosophers: the next in feeling and sense, perceiuing griefe and paine, good and euill. And herein and in these, they chiefely dissent. In∣somuch yt the Plant is only portioned with the life vegetatiue, and therein in euery eche power fully & aboundantly. This other last steppeth vp a Stayer higher, layth holde and ap∣prehendeth another kinde of life in degree more Princely, and in force or large power most manifolde: for with this, it hath might to mue, to haue lust or appetite: to haue and hunt after what it will, and to wander and straye therefore whe∣ther it will, neyther ought that to be reckned ought which A∣naxagoras and Empedocles, men partiall in this poynt reasoned: Whereas they spake of that other the Plant his prayse. Insomuch, that they would peswade others of theyr time, that in that kinde there was both mouing abroade and appetite to that which it perceiueth to be best: but they are re∣futed
of Aristotle by sundrie and sufficient reasons whereof we entend not to speake: onely seling ur selues to gainesay them herein, with his one reason chosen forth of the rest, that Aristotle vseth. If they haue sense and appetite, they muste needes haue feeling: if they haue feeling, they must needes haue organe, & parts instrumentall for the maner of feeling. But in the Plant there is none such perceyued: Therefore with so little a trp they are cleane cast downe. Further some of them ad (but that which may be the more borne withal) that many of the kindes of Plants haue both Male and Female, As mpedocles and his like: of whome I demaund whether yt they haue coniunction yea or no? or whether they haue thse parts which e destined to prcreation yea or no? and lastly, whether they coniyne eche other with their like? for ye als sayth Aristotle is that which y coniuncion begetteth his like in another. The emale that which likewise doth euen so with another. But in this last they may be the more uffered, for that Aristotle himselfe in the conclusion and winding vp of his former booke De Plantis, doth as it were distinguish those of the same kindes, although they haue a nighe resem∣blance and are taken of some for all one. And thus sayth he, you shall know the Male from the Female. The Male is of more spisse or tough braunches: of leafe and boughe, more a∣boundaunt: of lesse humor or mysture than the Female: yet more forwarde in ripening. And hath his leafe and sippes also difering. The Female hath all these, but nothing like in nuber, affection and qualitie. But we minde not thus to giue back or to sip aside with any more conference or compa∣rison had. Let vs fall now to euery thing liuing and Crea∣ture of life hs accustomed deuision. All liuing Creatures therefore (I do here necessarily but vnwillingly comprehend man not mening to speake what his sueraigntie is nor what is in him best, but purposed to stay before I come at him, who standeth on the styer a step higher than we meane to climbe: bu speaking of liuing Creatures, my meaning is of brute Beastes, the worde restrayned and cut a little short.) First to go to their place where they accustome to liue, differ thus. For one part of them liueth vpon the earth, another in the Sea & atrs, the thirde part in both▪ doubtfully: so that one while they keepe in the brode ayre: anotherwhile in the water, and erth as the Crocodile. Those of the earth some of them haue  to go with: some creepe: some swim: some flie. The next diffnce is noted and perceyued in their maner and kinde of liuing, as Aristotle witnesseth; in his bookes De animali∣bus
very often. Some sayth he, be as it were milde, hurtfull to no bodie, as the Bullock, the Goae, the poore and ielye Sheepe: other of such fiercenesse, and so wilde that they can not be tamed, as the Tyger, the wilde Boare, and other of haughtie stomacke as the Lyon: othe some of increadible might or strength, as is he Elephant, the Cammell, and such like: other after a sort subtile and why, working man much e∣uill and displeasure, as the craftie Fox, the deuouring Wolfe and so forth. Plinie as concerning this matter hath this di∣uiion. All Beastes sayth he, or Creatures liuing, hath this difference: some be full of bloud, whereby they be long liued, as the Hart, the Hinde, the Roe, other are without bloud: but in stead thereof haue their naturall humor: as the Bee, the Waspe, the Betle, the lie. All which are of wrethed & pared bodie. Againe he sayth, some difference is in them for their foode: for that the most part to accoumpt of, of all maner Beastes, liue by flesh, and be called in Greeke Cinophagai: other are indifferent for that matter, and eate that, as other things, when they may come by it: as the Dgge, the fleeing Eagle, and the like. Some againe, which will none of i: as for the most part all Foules of the Ayre, and Fishes of the Sea. Further, some be of good memorie, or retaine for a time in their head a good turne done to them or an euill as ye Dog, the Lion, the Cammell: Other as forgetfull of such kinde of deseruing, and vnmindefull as the Ostrich, the Doue. And there is in some a certaine kinde of perceiueraunce and ad∣iudging or esteeming what is what (but the sme spoken of vs by resemblance and vnproperly) which we may perceiue they haue through their care in bringing vp & tendring their yong: as also in artificiall maner of building their Nest, in hunting and seeking after their pray, in remedying and curing woun∣des: in espying what shall hurt them: And further in sme through foreknowledge and skill to prognosticate what shall afterwards happen by storme & tempest: as is the Swallow by his departure, when colde and Winter begin to come in. As is the wilde Crane, which also sheweth vs through hir flight from place to place, wheras exceeding Frsts shall be: And there is not this onely in the Crane, laudable or prayse worthy, but that which requireth farre greater praise and long time to admiration. Aristotle sayth, hat he hath marked this that when the Cranes by companie, flie ouer the broad Sea (which is large, wide, and infinite) to continue in that their passage the better without rescue, and to endure to the ende, they vse this knack or practise. Their cōpanie then is brought
into fiues, and so they flie two a breast, and the fift or odde Crane in maner of a persiue sterne, to make the other way in the Ayre, flieth all alone before, till he be wearie so doing: when he is wearie, another goeth and taketh vpon him his of∣fice and painetaking, and that other commeth to their place which be of breast, and in like sort doe all the other by course, till their iourney be at an end: and so their flight is like a Triangle, sharpe at the ende, and broade about, and easied therewithall by one another his helping. Againe (to leaue their entrailes and inward parts so to come by deuision) they are sayde to differ in outwarde attire and kinde of aray: for some haue haire for their vppe Garment: some haue onely their bare skin: other haue feathers: other haue hide: other haue their skin full of prickles and briestles: and (to speake of their maner of defending themselues) som haue sting, some haue tuskes, some haue hornes: othersome helpe themselues by flyght and lightnesse of wings: and as for their voice, some haue soft voice: some as loud and shrill. The Cow saith Ari∣stotle, is in voyce more loud than the mightie Bull. I coulde gather also differences in shewing how euerie part is placed both within and without, not all alike: moreouer, of their vse and purpose, of their affection also, of their settes and dispo∣sition in life: but I had rather (as they say lose the Hare) then to take such infinite paines as to hunt so farre for hir. I will therefore now make hst home againe, peraduenture ye num∣ber of companie of yles going, in taking such paynes, would wearie vs: It is counted wisedome not to take to much vpon a man, neither more than he can well suffer. But now to euery liuing thing or Creature his soueraigntie, so farre forth as we can, ou Pen and Hande shall hasten. And first let vs begin Alphabetically (as in the residue of our work before) with the Adder.
The thirde Booke of the Aegemonie treating of brute Beastes, Foules, Fishes, creping Wormes & Serpents, perticularly and Alphabetically. Of the Adder. THe Adder is called by Etimo∣logie of Latin name shadowy Snake. Coluber sayth Isidore, is so fetched worde for worde, and deriued thus, as if you would say Vmbras colens, lurking or liuing in darke places and black shadowes. It is reported to enuie and hate the Hart, to kill the Lyon. And by all maner of meanes to flée from the Herbe Rue. It casteth off yearely his vppermost skin or coate. It loueth to liue a∣mong hollow trées, to séeke his food in Pasture and Groaue: to set muche store by Milke: to hurt both with tooth and mouth, and also with his hinder part or taile: to suck fleshe: to eate Flies, and now & then among to eate crum∣mie and dry arth. Plinie saith in his. 30. booke and .4. Chapter, that the fat or brawne of the Adder, especially the water Adder, remedieth
the stinging and byting of the Crocodile. And againe, if thou haue about thée but the Gall of an Adder, no other Adder will touch or hurt thée, but flie from thée: the scent or smell ther∣of doth so annoy him. Of the Ape. THe Ape in Gréeke is called Simeas, of hys flat nose and filthie face, on eche side therof plated or wrinckled. Some will haue him so called for counterfeyting of the like, or for imi∣tation, and deriue Simia the Nowne substan∣tiue out of the Adiectiue Simile, the like: For that he would be like in playing and toying. But I doe not greatly gainesay them herein. Isidore sayth in his .xij. booke, that when he is angrie he frowneth: In the newe Moone he is pleasant, and for that time very iocund: but when he waxeth olde, he sorroweth, and is of sad looke. When he hath two yong ones at one brode, that of them both which he most intierly loueth, he alwayes beareth in his armes, the other (as not much passing of it) he whurleth vpon his shoulders. Isidore reckneth vp fiue kindes of Apes: One which is not much vn∣like our Dog in figure or shew: another that hath a taile standing vp in good length & thick∣nesse like a Foxe: another kinde is saide to be
of soft & silkie haire: there are the fourth kinde called Satyri. The fift are said to haue a hairie beard & a square visage withall. Plinie saith, that the fierce Lion is very desirous of the Ape his flesh: and with hungrie ating thereof he riddeth himselfe of many infirmities. Of the Aspis. THe Aspis is a kinde of deadly Snake, of most perilous bite or sting: some say it is called Aspis ab aspergendo, of besprinckling and casting about venome. There are diuers kinds hereof. Plinie in his .viij. booke and .xxiij. Chapter sayth, that there is a principall and pure loue betweene the Male and the Female, after that they be once knit togither, and haue (as all Mates haue) house and home, and all things necessarie common to them both alike. Insomuch that they liue alwayes, and go togi∣ther to séeke their foode, and such like. So that if it be by any meanes, that any man kill either of these by any mishap, or by good will: the o∣ther left aliue pursueth after the slear with in∣credible care and couetise to reuenge. And kil∣leth him in whatsoeuer thorow fare or throng of people he can finde him, vnlesse he hastneth the soner away, & escapeth by straigts of nar∣row rowme, or by often turning and ouercros∣sing
the way, or by passage had ouer Flouds and Riuers. But Nature hath yet for all this bene mans friend, for wheras if with hir flight and swift glauncing vppon the earth, she had eiesight alike to it, she would soone be requited, and woulde soone come by him: she is herein somewhat behind, and hindred, and is saide to pursue him onely by hearing, whereas he is, and by sharpe smell. There is as Isidore re∣porteth fiue kindes of Aspis. The first named Dipsas in Gréeke, in Latine Situla Thristie Snake. It is of white colour, clouen in the taile, and beset with black spots or strikes. He that is stung with this Snake or Worme, shall féele such excessiue heate & vnquenchable thirst in himselfe, that by no meanes he can quench his thirst, neyther by Wine, by Milke, by Beare or Ale, or by cleare water. But the more he drinketh the more he may. Insomuch that through thirst at ye last he dieth, as Isidor witnesseth. The second Aspis is called Hyp∣nalis, which killeth a man as he is in sléepe. Which kinde of Snake Cleopatra vsed, and therewithall died in his bed with very much ease. The thirde is called Emorrois, which whome soeuer it byteth, he shall sweate forth bloud. It so loseneth the Uaynes and openeth verie wide the poores of the bodie. The fourth
is called Prester, which alwayes runneth to∣wards a man with open mouth, and hath a ve∣rie lothsome and ill smelling breath. The fift is called Septabificus, which by bit and sting∣ing, causeth a man to consume away, and gi∣ueth him so, a deadly deathes wound. Of the Asse. THe Asse is named after Etimologie of La∣tine worde Rescuy beast, for that men at the firste were saine to rescue them selues in iourneying, by setting thereon, or as some say, for that it is a beast of dull wit, & groe sense. Senos in Gréeke say some is Sensus, and Ase∣nos insensible or slow. It is of verie heauie and dul nature. His chiefest foode saith Auicen, are Briers and Brembles. And Aristotle semeth to becken to him, for that he sayth thus. The Asse by briestling amongest the Bushes and Briers hindreth the small Birdes in bringing vp their yong, and in their Nest building. And therefore the little Sparrowes doe him all the mischiefe that they can. And will often peck at him with their Bill. And especially then when as the Asse by rubbing himselfe against the Thornes or Briers, causeth their Nest to goe to wrack. Therefore when as the Asse braieth (which is a horrible & fearefull kinde of noise)
to them, they al then flie away for a good time. And comming againe afterwarde to the place where he is, and espying him prickled in any place by rubbing him amongst the Briers, in the place so raw and hurt, they neuer leaue off pecking, til they haue made it very sore, & haue eaten it in verie déepely: by this meanes hun∣ting him and compelling him to go awaye as fast as he can from their nestes. Here we sée that a smal sillie Bird knoweth how to match with so great a Beast. Auicen sayth, that the Crowe and the Asse are at naturall nmitie. For so soone as the Crow espieth the Asse, she flieth and flacketh about his eies & face, & pec∣keth and scratcheth out his eien. But it is very seldome that she pecketh them cleane out, he hath suche a deepe settling of his eien. Plinie saith, that he loueth his yong so tenderly that he runneth through fier and water to saue thē: Although it be most against his will to aduen∣ture in the waters. Of the Ant or Emote. THe Ant is called in Latine Formica, quasi micas ferens, carying hir meate by crummes into hir Lodge. Solinus sayth, that they be but of small bignesse, but of great dis∣cipline or skill in prouision for them & theirs.
Plinie in his .ix. Booke and .xxxj. chapter, saith, that they are all busied alike, and be about the like businesse dailie, and by companies hunt a∣bout to finde victualles. They haue amongst them a Publicke weale, euerie one for his po∣wer tendring & maintaining it. Their sorest labour is, when the Moone is at ye full, and rest then when as the Moone is at the chaunge. A∣ristotle in his 8. Booke de animalibus sayth, that they haue a very perfite sense of smelling, hating all strong and noysome smelles, as suffumigation of Brimstone, or Harts horne being beaten to pouder. Plinie saith in his. S. booke, that when the Beare sickneth or feeleth hir selfe not well at ease, that then she scrapeth in the earth with hir Pawes entending to find of these, which being found and presently eatē of hir, she recouereth hir selfe and is well. Of the Bee. THe Bee sayeth Plinie in his .xij. Booke, is one of those kindes that be cut and girdled about in their parts, which although it be but little, yet is verie fruitfull. Isidor sayth that it is called in Latin Apes for that it is first born without any feete. Aristotle sayth, that it is engendred of the deade bodie or carcasse of the Bullock. It is one of those that tēder common
profite. And hath within the Hiue (as it were within the Citie) his entes & Courts of very good workmanship. Of some they are reputed ciuill, for that they haue their King & Guides, and euerie one also distinct and seueral offices. So that some are onely set ouer the residue to sée that euery one laboureth in his calling. O∣ther some labour themselues, part by going a∣brode to bring home sweete Hony, part by stā∣ding at the Hiue doore (as it were at receipt of such as the other bring home) part playe the workmen within, and amende or make vp a newe all such things as are amisse: and euery one of them knoweth his dutie. At that time that their King is present with them, they liue euen as they will: but he being once absent, the whole swarme is disturbed, and fléeth wā∣dring by companies, it cannot tell whither. Such safegarde haue they by their King, that they cannot be well without him. So that if he happeneth eyther through casuall or natu∣rall death to die, they mourne for him a long time after, & carie him to sepulture, as solemly after their sorte as our mourners doe. Of the Beare. THe Beare with hir mouth & licking, brin∣geth hir yong which be at ye first without al
fashion, to that forme which they haue: and is called Vrsus as Isidor reporteth, quod ortos digerat lanbendo, for that by often licking, she bringeth euerie parte in them to an order. The best in all the whole kinde is as we find, for that she can play the Phisition for hir selfe: for she being crased and distempered within hir bodie, vseth hir claw for a spade, and dig∣geth vp Emmets or Ants out of the ground, which being taken, she immediatlye recoue∣reth. Of the Beuer. THe Beuer saith Plinie, liueth and is found in the Ile of Pontus, and is one of those sorts which are called doubtfull, for often ex∣chaunge had in place where they liue: for they liue one while altogither vpon the earth, and do accompanie other brute beasts, those which sray abrode & are foure footed: another while, they are conuersāt in the waters, and liue the fishes and serpents life. When they are hūted, they espying the Huntesman earnestly pursu∣ing them (least through such occasion they should be letted in their flight) the Male is re∣ported to bite off his owne stones and to gelde himselfe, and by that meanes becommeth very swift. He hath his taile not much vnlike the
fishe, and the residue of his bodie not much vn∣like to the Otter. Of the Boare. THe Boare saith Isidore, in Latine vocable or word, is called Aper a feritate of fierce∣nesse or wildenesse (chaunge of the Letter. P. had into the letter. F.) of ye Latines he is eftsoo∣nes called Verres for his great strēgth. He be∣ing gelt sayth Plinie, & Auicen, becommeth so much the more fierce and wilde, whereas all other Creatures liuing waxe thereby the more mile. His armourie is a sort of strong ushes or tuskes and sharpe. His vse is, to kéepe a good while in his mouth the stalke or sedge of Bar∣ley, such as is sharpe, to enter to the skin: kée∣ping it of purpose to file & sharpen his tushes, which if it will not, he hunteth after the Herbe Organnie, of some called wilde Maioram, which he vseth as a Whetstone to whet his téeth withall. Aristotle in his sixt booke de A∣nimalibus sayth, that the Boare at such time as he hath yong is most cruell and fierce, inso∣much that he can not abide any man to come nigh him, but is maruellously vexed with him. Of the Bull.
THe Bull is the hée Bullock, not gelt or ha∣uing lost his parts to generation. Plinie sayth in his .viij. booke, that his noble courage is in his looke, & in his frowning countnance or forehead. Aristo. sayth, yt he hath his Liuer round, in a maner like to a man his liuer. And is fed alone before such time as the Male & Fe∣male doe conioyne: but afterward at that time he féedeth and associateth in selfe him pasture with the Bullock. They are said to striue one with another for the Female which they best like: and after much strife and warring had, who so first tireth and is wearie, is counted vanquished, & the other the vanquisher forth∣with runneth to the Female, and leapeth vp vpon hir back, and so satisfieth his desired lust. Of the Bugle or wilde Oxe. THe Bugle or the wilde Oxe, is said to be so wilde, that his necke by no meanes can be brought vnder the yoke. And is called Buba∣lus for nigh resemblance to our Oxe. In Af∣frick they are verie plentifull: he is of great strength and force, almost not to be tamed: but only with an Iron ring put through his Nos∣trils or Snowte, wherewith they leade him whither they list. There is another kinde of wilde Oxe, which the Philosophers call Ap∣taleo,
but nothing so huge or great, but hath hornes much greater, very sharpe also where∣with he heweth downe trées, and thrusting vp his hornes sometimes vp to the boughes of the Trées, entending to reach foode thereby, doth now & then with force of his hornes had, sticke fast by them in the Tree, wherewith he being chafed and vexed, howleth out aloude, whose horrible crie the Huntesman hauing once hard runneth with fast foote thither, whereas he is snared, and so commeth by him, and else by no other meanes, and so sleaeth him. There is al∣so another kinde of wilde Oxe or Bull, called of Aristotle & Plinie Bonasus, a little shorter than our Bull, but more thickly set, and hath his Mane like to our Horse. His flesh is Uene∣sonlike: for the which he is so often hunted. And in the game time he vseth this knack or pro∣pertie: he runneth vntill he be wearie, and in his flight taking and course, he flingeth forth and befowleth behinde both of his vrine and dung, euen whole furlongs long after him, and with such annoiance wearieth the Cour∣ser or Huntesman. Of Barbell the fish. BArbill, is called the beard fish, for that on both sides of hir Mouth she hath finnes like
to a hairie beard. In Greeke she is called Tri∣gla: with the Germanes Ein Berb. Of this kinde Oppiane singeth thus. Accipiunt Triglae trino cognomina partu. The Barbill for hir oft increase Trigla by name is called: Thrise in the yeare she giueth yong herein all kindes excelled. Aristotle in his fift Booke de Historia ani∣malia affirmeth that this kinde bringeth forth yong thrise in the yeare. Of Calamarie the fish. CAlamarie the fish, of many Authors cal∣led Loligo hath his head betwene his hin∣der parts, and his bellie: and hath two bones the one like to a knife, the other like to a quill: she is like the Cuttle, but that she is a little longer: and in that they differ also, for that the Cuttle sheweth and poureth out a black kinde of bloud in all hir feare and disturbance: this Calamarie vomiteth a good red & pure bloud. Of the Cammell. THe Cammell by Gréeke word is called K∣mae, his signification for the moste part is lowlinesse and submission. And well had the Cammell this name, for that at euery burthen
laide vpon him (to ease the labourer) he lyeth downe, suffering him to lay it on, euen as he will. There are two kindes of Cammels, one which is onely in Arabie, which hath two ki∣bes in his back: the other in many other coun∣tries, al plain in his back. His vse is to iourney no further at one time than he hath bene before vsed & accustomed to at another, neither to cary heauier burthen at another time then he before hath carried. They liue some of them .50. yeres and some of them .100. They can be without water the space of foure whole dayes, and haue their best delight in drinking then when as by foote they trouble the water. Aristotle sayth, yt there is in the Cammels a certaine honest care to kéepe themselues within their boundes. For they thinke it vnnaturall and a most haynous offence to haue adoe with their Dam. There was in a certaine Citie saith he, the Mother or Dam of a yong and lustie Cammell, all co∣uered ouer with a cloth, with whome the yong one being incensed, vnwittingly attempted and assayed generation: who, or it were long, thrugh ruffling of the cloth, by certaine notes espying that it was his Dam, came down and ceased therein before he had his full lust, and biting hir most cruelly, through extreeme an∣ger slue hir. The like example of honestie ob∣seruing,
he rendreth there of a certaine mans Horse. Of the Cameloparde. THe Cameloparde hath the very head of a Cammell: the necke like our Horse, and feete like the Bugle or wilde Oxe. He breedeth in Ethiope: he is bespotted & stayned dyuerse∣ly wt diuers colours in a maner like ye Libard. Of the Cameleon. TThe Cameleon is a small kinde of beast, whose bodie is such that with easie conuer∣sion it chaungeth into all colours, a few onely excepted. Auicen sayth, that it is all one with Stellio or Cosin germane to the Lysarde, for that he hath on his backe light spots like stars. And for that feare that it is naturally in, and the paucitie or rarenesse of bloud, he hath so often and so diuers transfiguration in colour. It is verie commonly sayd with the olde versi∣fiers, and those also which would be estéemed Philosophers, that the Cameleon liueth onely by ayre, as the Moule doth by the earth alone: The Héering by the water: the Salamander by the fire. And these be their verses wherein they shew this purpose. Quatuor ex Puris vitam ducunt Elementis,
Cameleon, Talpa, Maris Halec, & Salamandra. Terra cibat Talpam, flamme Pascunt Salamandram, Vnda fit Halecibus cibus, aer Cameleonti. These fower Elements giue foode to fower things, eche other The Herring, Moule and Cameleon and eke the Salamander. With earth the Moule is said to feede▪ with flame the Salamander: And water is the Herrings meate the Cameleons the ayer. Of the bird Caladrius. THe Caladrius sayth Aristotle is of milkie colour, without any black spot, whose na∣turall propertie is this, that when as any man is grieuously payned with sicknesse or disease, if there be any hope of recouerie in the partie so diseased, she hath alwayes a cheerefull looke to∣wardes him, if there be no amendment that it can perceiue, it is of very sad looke and counte∣naunce, neuer giuing him cherefull looke, or once looking at all that way. Of the Carpe. THe Carpe is a kinde of fish well knowne of vs: she is arayed in all hir whole bodie with hir coate of fence that is stiffe seales of
meane & indifferent bignesse: insomuch that there hath bene found of this kinde some way∣ing ten pound: she is of very soft fesh & phleg∣matike: with ye Germanes it is called Karpff. Erasmus called it in Latine Carpa, when as other called it Carpio. Of the Cat. THe Cat in Latin is called Catus, as if you woulde say Cautus, warie or wise. In Gréeke she is named Galiootes, with the Ger∣maines Kaiz. She is to the Mouse a continu∣all enimie: verie like to the Lyon in tooth and clawe: and vseth to pastime or play with the Mouse ere she deuoureth hir. She is in hir trade and maner of liuing very shamefast: al∣wayes louing clenlinesse. There is also a kind hereof called the wild Cat, which of all things is annoyed with the smell of Rue, and the Al∣mond leafe, and is driuen away with that soo∣ner then with any other thing. Of the Crab. THe Crab in Gréeke is called Kakrinos, in the Germanes language Krebs: with the Frenchmen Crabe. Plinie vsed this Latine worde Cancer, for a generall or cōmon name for all such as haue, & weare shaled garments.
The Crabs saith Lonicer haue a porcion of venome and that occult or hid comming from their taile in the middle of their backes by line or thréede which kinde of matter pulled out be∣fore they are sodden, leaueth the whole altogi∣ther pure and without corrupting. Of the Serpent Cerastes. CErastes the Serpent hath on both sides of his heade, as it were the hornes of a Ram, bending vpward and wreathen all about. He lurketh sayth Isidore in the high grasse, wher∣in nothing can be espied of him sauing onelye his hornes, which thing the small Birdes of ye field espying, wéening to find (as in all other dead bodies their hornes, wormes meate alone for their appetite and desire) they being busie and pickling on them not knowing this Ser∣pent his deceipt hid, are caught of him with a sodaine twining of himselfe about them, and are so sodainely snared. The like wiles he v∣seth with horse and man, to lie as though he were deade, or secretlye as though there were none such, yet whilest they vnawares tread vpon him, he twineth about either them, and so stingeth them. Of the Coccatrise.
THe Coccatrise by his Gréeke name should séeme to haue bene sometime reckened the Prince in his kinde, for he is reported to be the king of all other Serpents. For al things ly∣uing whatsoeuer they be, comming into fight with him, flie back. He is so poysonous that he killeth with his breath. There is no birde that escapeth him that commeth in his dent, but she is his owne: yet Nature for this thing hath well prouided. For they vse to seeke for the Weasell which will haue this kind of ser∣pent tamed. The greatest stature that it is of, is not aboue .xij. inches or there about. Of the Crocodile. THe Crocodile is called yelow Snake for that he is in colour most Saffron like. Isi∣dore in his .xij. booke. He is one of those kinds which alwayes keepe not in one and the same place, or which are not pleased long with Ele∣ments alike. One while he is cōuersant vpon the earth, another while in the waters. He is of such hard skin, that being stroke in the back or bodie with violent stroke of stone or Iron sing, estéemeth it not a Rush. In the night time he harboureth in the waters, in the day time he liueth vpon the earth. Aristotle sayth, that the Crocodile alone amongst all other
Creatures liuing moueth the vpper lip, and keepeth the neather lip vnmoueable, contrarie to all other herein. It is a most glotonous ser∣pent, and a verie rauener, who when he is far∣ced full, lyeth all long by the Banckes side belching and panting as though he woulde burst. Wherevpon saith Tullie, when he is in this case, and so farre gone, a certaine little small birde called of vs the Wren or Kinges birde, of the Gréekes Trochylos, flieth towarde him, and often assayeth or he can come by his purpose, to go into his throte or intrailes: but is repelled so long as he is awake: but falling once on sléepe and opening his iawes as he v∣seth being on sleepe, the Wren goeth into his throte, and being within there a certaine time by flickring and mouing, causeth his throte to itche, wherewith he being delighted, at the last falleth on sound sléepe. The Bird percey∣uing this, goeth further to his heart, and pec∣keth at it with hir bill, and at the last gnaweth it out, and so féedeth hir selfe full and escapeth away. The like thing is read of Enidros the Serpent, which creepeth in the grasse of Nilus who being eaten downe quicke of the Croco∣dile, gnaweth his heart out in sunder within, and so killeth him.
Of Chelidros the Serpent. CHelidros the Serpent or of some in Gréek Chersidros, is in placebeing, one of those kindes which be doubtfull. For it is now abi∣ding vpon the earth now in the waters. This saith Isidore, maketh the earth smell well, or to haue good breathing there where as it crée∣peth as Virgill describeth in these verses. Seu terga expirant spumantia virus Seu terra fumat teter quá labitur anguis. In question is it whether that The fomie flesh and rancored Sell Of Chelidros that poysonous Snake, Should giue such odoriferous smell. Or that the earth by which this Snake Doth slide and glaunce along, Should giue to the nose obiect so swete Or minister scent so strong. Isidore sayth, that it goeth straight out in lim, and bodie, and findeth thereby a maruellous great ease: whereas if he should bowe hym∣selfe he should straine and hurt him selfe. Of Cencris. THe very like in this behalfe, that Cheli∣dros doth, the same doth Cencris, as Lu∣cane reporteth of him thus.
Et semper recto lapsurus limite Cencris. As Chelidros so Cencris doth in eake alike their sort▪ By stretching forth their bodie, both in gliding finde comfort. Of the Caddesse or Choffe. THe Caddesse was first called Monecula, and is now called Monedula, bicause it in finding money and golde hideth it. And vpon this Tullie in his Oration had for Valerius Flaccus hitteth him home with the like. Non tibi plus pecuniae est committendum quam Monedulae. I would commit mony to thy custodie no more than I would to a Dawes. Of the Crane. THe Crane by proper name should be cal∣led whisperer, or flackerer, as Lucane hath of hir thus. Et turbata petit dispersis litora pennis. In raging waues of the Seas streame the Crane by flacking wings, Hath pleasure passing all delight in this than in all things. Their flight is on highe, espying therby what land they were best to take: by his voyce they are all ruled which is their guide or leader,
whose voyce waxing hoarse, another straight wayes taketh his rowme. In the night time they haue their watch, euerie one of thē night∣ly by course, and whosoeuer playeth the watch man least he should sleepe, hath a prouiso: he holdeth fast in his clawes little stones, which in their falling from him straight wayes awa∣keth him. The other by his paine taking, sléepe quietly and take their rest. Aristotle by obser∣uauncy had, much commendeth their flight be∣yond the Sea: It is done with such cunning and ease. Of the Cokow. THe Cokow in Greke is called Kokkux, with the Germanes▪ Gauch, in the French tong Cocou, and is of ashie colour, and in bignesse as big as our Doue, building hir nest most of∣ten in the Sallowes. In the spring time she commeth abrode: and or ere Dog dayes arise she is gone and hidden. Aelianus calleth hir the wilie bird or aduouteresse, for that she most commonlye hatcheth hir yong in the Larkes Nest or Siskins, which Siskin is not much vnlike to the Goldfinch: whose yong or broode she knoweth to be bred and borne in colour & bignesse most like to hir owne, and therefore she is the bolder so to presume: whose Nestes
if she séeth good store or plentie of Egges, she destroyeth certaine of them, and in their place and number recompenseth and maketh them good with hir owne. Of the Cuttle. THe Cuttle is in colour verie white, but she hath hir finne black: she is called Sepia of a certaine rotten humor that she hath: of the Gréekes she is called Saepedoon, for that she a∣boundeth in black bloud as it were ynck, with the which when as she perceyueth any deceites wrought, she defendeth hir self with dispersing it abroade in all the whole waters. And the water being so fouled, she goeth and hydeth hir selfe. The Germanes call this Ein Black∣fisch: the Frenchmen Seche. Of the Deere. THe Deere the Latines call Dama▪ of some the fallow Deere is called Damula: Isi∣dore thinketh, yt it is so called (as by deriuing it also we may knowe) for that it fléeth from our hands not knowing how to defend it selfe, but onely through flight. In stead of his wea∣pon he sheweth vs his héeles as Marciall in a maner witnesseth, thus reporting of the Dere, the Bore and the Hart.
Dente tenet Aper defendunt cornua Ceruum Pofugit é medio Damula. &c. By tooth and tuske the Bore catch holde and hornes defend the Hart: The Deere being chaste all about with this hath his hearts smart. Of the Dragon. THe Dragon is the heade and chiefest of all other Serpents, and flieth from his Den or Caue in the earth his holownesse vp to the top of the brode ayre, and of Drágon in Gréeke, is englished flight. Plinie saith, that betweene the Dragon and the Elephant there is a na∣turall warre. Insomuch that the Dragon en∣rowleth & twineth about the Elephant with his taile, and the Elephant againe with his Snoute vsed as his hande, supplanteth & bea∣reth downe the Dragon: The Dragon with twining about him holdeth fast, and with his might somewhat bendeth backwarde the head and shoulders of the Elephant, which being so sore grieued with such waight, falleth downe to the ground, and in the fal the Dragon hath the worse, for that he falleth to ye ground first, and is therewithall slaine: but that other sca∣peth not scotfrée, for with one anothers holde and rushing to the ground the Elephant also
is broused, and often withall slaine. Againe they striue togither after this sort. The Ele∣phant espying him sitting on the loft of a trée, runneth as fast as he can with full but to that trée, hoping thereby to shake downe the Dra∣gon, and to giue him a deadly fall: but in that he doth not after the wyset sort for him selfe. For the Dragon so falling, oftentimes ligh∣teth on his necke or shoulders, and agrieueth him as with byting at his Nostrelles, and pec∣king at his eies, and somtime he dazeleth him, and goeth behinde at his back and sucketh out of his bloud, so that if he shaketh him not off betimes by suche wasting of bloud as he will make, thereby he is quickly enféebled: he fal∣leth downe heauily with the Dragon also hol∣ding aboute him, and are killed both with so heauie and burdenous a fall. Of the Dromedarie. THe Dromedarie or that other kind of Cā∣mell, that hath two Kybes or Bunches on his back, is of lesse stature then the other Cam∣mell is: but more swift in passage, of ye which propertie he borowed his name. Dromos in Gréeke is swift in course or running. He will go 100. Myles and mo in one day. They are gelt sayth Auicen, in their youth, least they
should be therby more slow or hindered in their iourneying: and also least they should (being at ripe age, prouoked to Uenerie as they iour∣ney) slack it oftentimes & draw backwarde, till that they haue had their lust. It is such a kinde saith Plinie, as is not couetouse of varietie or dainties. For after that it hath had neuer so long a iourney, it is well content with grasse and the Herbe Dactylus, or the Pionie. Of the Dolphin. THe Dolphin saith Isidore, hath a fit name or vocable, fetched from a man his speach or sound, or for that they cluster togither, and are all in one companie, hearing the swéete sound of any Instrument. There is no Fish in the whole Sea so swift as this is: for oftentimes through that light and nimble leaping yt they haue they mount ouer the tops of Ships. Tul∣lie saith, that they are so much delighted with Musicke, that they haue taken and caried the Musitian from out of the perill of the Sea to the Sea Bancks. As when Arion Methim∣naeus was throwen out of the Ship into the Sea, the Dolphins being their readie, tooke him on their backs and caried him to land. Of the Dog.
THe Dogge in the Latine hath almost the same name that he hath in Greeke. Kunos in Gréeke signifieth a shrill noyse or sound, after a maner like to song. There is saith Tullie, in the Dogge a merueylous perceiuerance and sharpe sense to know who doth him good or who doth him the contrarie: who maketh much of him, and who hurteth him. Therfore vpon his Mayster he commonly fawneth: to straungers he is eger and curst. In histories there is such recorde & testimonie of their loue had and borne to their Maisters, that the Mai∣ster by chaunce or casualtie, or else by crueltie miscarying, the Dog also euen with his Mai∣ster hath miscaried. Insomuch that we read of some, who hauing had but the sight of the dead Corps of their Maister, by lamentation, and by bewayling at his side neuer ioyed after, but perished and famished with long howling & mourning. Plinie remembreth of a Dogge which in Epiro a countrey in Grece, so assaul∣ted the murderer of his Mayster in a greate throng and assembly of people, that with fierce barcking and byting, at the last he compelled him to confesse his fault. In like sort did the Dog of one Iason in Cicilie who being slaine ye Dog for sorrow would neuer eate meate af∣ter. The like loue or gratitude (and somwhat
more to be merueyled at) is red of Titus Gabi∣nius and his companie, whereof one of them named Titius a Sabine, had a Dog (he being in Prison) that would neuer go further from him then to the ward or Prison Gate: whose Maister a little while after, being condemned, and put to death or execution, and the dead bo∣die anone taken downe from the Gallowes, and lying deade there, the Dog sorrowed and howled most lamentably, and being compas∣sed and hedged in with a great multitude of people, wherof one of them casting him meate thus howling to make him holde his peace, he caried it forthwith and put it to the mouth of his Maister their lying dead, whose dead corps anone after being throwne into Tyber the déepe floud or Riuer, the Dogge swam after it hastily with entent to vpholde and sustaine it, with merueylous astonying and wonder of the people had, that such a kinde of faith should be in a dumbe beast. And so with heauing vp his Mayster so long as he could, when as tho∣row wearinesse he could do so no more, they both drowned togither and sanke in the place alike. Plinie sayth in his .viij. booke and .41. Chapter, that of all beastes liuing with vs and amongst vs, of most assurance, trust and faith, is the Dog, and next after him the Horse. For
better proufe hereof we will adioyne one or two examples more. Celius a Senatour in Placence a Citie of Ligurie, being on a time besieged and assaulted sore of his enimies, and wist not how to be kept from their hands, was kept off from them all by a Dog, neuer woun∣ded or hurte till that the Dog in his Maisters quarrell was slaine. We reade also of Gara∣mante the King, who being banished some∣time from his Countrie, returned back home againe, and brought with him .200. Dogges, which he vsed in warring against those that resisted him, and so conquered them. Amongst all kinde of Dogges there are some so eger and stout stomaked that they haue Maystred and bene good inough for the Lyon and Elephant. There was a Dog as we reade sent as a pre∣sent to the noble and great king Alexander, from the King of Albanie, which at the first dash or onset giuen in the King his presence, daunted and toused the Lyon. Of the Eagle. THe Eagle of his eiesight most sharpe and prest tooke first his name. Isidore saith, that he is of such sharpe eiesight that he flying a∣bout in the top of the ayer in such heigth as he can not be seene ouer the Sea and waters,
yet for all that, through his cleare eyen, there is none so little a fishe that swimmeth so nighe the waters top, but he séeth and espyeth it, and thinking he may come by it, flyeth swiftlye downe to the water where as she is, and duc∣king a little, doth so sodainlye catch hir, as Gonshot that is shot off, or that that is more swift. The chiefest propertie also that he hath else, is that he is good in finding out false play or adulterie done: And this is his triall. Hée taketh his yong when as they be yong & ten∣der, and haue not ful stedfastnesse in their eies, and holdeth them with there eies right oppo∣site to the sunne beames. Those that haue con∣stant and stedfast looke not dazeled by such ex∣periment, he holdeth legitimate and truly be∣gotten, and hath euer good care after to them & their bringing vp. The other that haue their eyne twincle in their head, or which be dazeled at such proofe had, he counteth them Bastardes and misbegotten, and neuer after regardeth them, but repelleth them. Of Echeneis the fish. THe Fish Echeneis or Remora, staiship, a∣mazeth also (euen as the Lodestone doth) the beholder by his hid and occult naturall set or vertue. She coueteth the Shipbord euen as
the Lodestone doth Iron, he is said to be a good stay to the Ship, when as tempests arise: and with cleaing fast, do staye ye Ship be it neuer so great. Plinie saith, in his .9. Booke and .25. Chapter that it is a very small Fish alwaies accustoming and lyuing amongest the rockes. Aristotle thincketh that this kind hath fat, pla∣ced in a maner like a birdes winges. Of the Ele. THe Ele in Latin is called Anguilla. Isidor giueth the reason that it should be called so, for like figure saith he, to the Snake. Aristotle saith that it ingendreth of the Mud: the chiefest that is marked in the Ele is that it is slipperie, neuer ye nerer katching or in assuraunce of hir when thou hast hir most fast in thy hand, but the harder that thou holdest hir, the sooner she slippeth and escapeth out of thy handes. The floud Ganges hath Eles some .30. Foote long. They say, that the Ele being killed & addressed in wine whosoeuer chaunceth to drinke of that wine so vsed, shall euer after lothe wine. Of the Elephant. THe Elephant came first by his name of the Greeke verbe Eléphio which signifieth huge or like a hill. He is of excéeding great body, his
tushes are of Iuerie: his becke is holpen with that snowt that helpeth him euen as our hand doth. The Medes and Persians vse to carie in their warfare their Casteles and other prepa∣raunce on the Elephants backe: he is of good memorie and long mindfull of a good tourne. Plinie saith, that amongest all the beastes of of the wild forrest, he is most mans frind. In∣somuch that if a mans iourney lieth so, that he must nedes through the Forrest, (least he him∣self so mōstrous & huge) should first feare him, he goeth a little a side out of his way: furder if the Dragon should assault the man, he goeth forwith and warreth with the Dragon & kée∣peth him off from the man: so that whilst these two be at strife, the man passeth away. Aristo∣tle saith, that this kind is without his Gall; & therefore it may be that he is so quiet and pea∣sible. Solinus saith, that they séeme to haue some skill in the art of Astronomie, and play the Phisicion his part euerie moneth in pur∣gation taking & purging themselues: for af∣ter euery new Moone they hauke after ye cleare riuers, & so wash off all filthinesse, such as may cumber the body. After that they bathe them, & this being so done, they go again al frollike to their woonted pastures. And to the intent that their youth should kéepe good rule and not go
at royat, they haue them with them: such care haue they ouer them. They haue a meruelous and most honest shamefastnesse in the acte of generation. Therfore when the time commeth that this must nedes be done, the Female wit∣ting the Male his pleasure, goeth straying be∣fore towardes the deserts of the East, & seketh the most secret place where that their intent may be done and ended closely. The Male he a∣none hasteneth after & before their méeting or coniunction had togither, they are busied a∣while in seking out the herb Mandrage, which the Female taketh and receiueth to make hir of more fertill nature and pregnant: and the Male also eateth of it to procure a more earnest desire. Of al things that it standeth in feare of it is most afraide of the sily Mouse, which fret∣teth him then most when as hée is tied to the Maunger and cannot away. Of Ephemera the fish. EPhemera is a fish which ariseth in the Sea water euen as the Bubble doth, where as much raine is. Whome Iorach in his Booke de Animalibus reporteth after thrée houres of the day to die. Of the Falcon.
THe Falcon, is a bird of haughtie stomacke matching with birdes a great deale bigger and mightier then him selfe, stryking at them both with foote and breast. Of the Faune. THe Faune, or Hind Calf is called Hinnu∣lus, for that at his Dammes becke or nod, they are ready to come home from straying & riotting abrode in the Parckes or Groaues. Of the Fesaunt. THe Fesaunt hath yet no other name then it had first of the place whereas it was first founde: and that is reported to be an Iland in Grece, called Phasea from whence it was first fetched, as this Distichon sheweth. Argiua primo sum transportata carina ante mihi notum nil nisi phasis erat. By Argolike ship I first was brought and shewde to other landes Before that time I knewe no place but the Iland Phasis sandes. Of the Flecke. THe Fleck saith Isidore, goeth with row∣ling foote, and hath often anfractes or tur∣nings. He is naturally subtile, and hath ma∣ny
fetches to deceiue one. For when he lacketh meate and wote not how to come by it, he hath this craft or wile. He lyeth all along with eue∣rie lim of bodie stretched out, very quietly euen as though he were deade. The sielye Birdes espying this, and weening thereby to haue a great pray, flie to his Carcasse, and are verie busie about repasting. He, as they are vnawa∣res of him, sodainely snatcheth vp with his Pawes certaine of them, and so pleasureth himselfe, and stencheth his hunger. Of the Frog. THe Frog saith Aristotle liueth quietly all the time of cold weather, and neuer stirreth abrode, vntil time of coite or coniunction. And then by croking voice he allureth the Female & stirreth hir to Uenerie. There are Frogs cal∣led Seafrogs, of whome Tullie speaketh after this sort. They ouercouer themselues wyth sand, a knack vsed of them to beguile the little Fishes, and as they come by them, they step out, and catch them and so swallow them vp. Of the Flie. THe Flie in Latine is called Musca. It hath his name of the earth, euen as the Mouse hath. This kinde saith Isidore being
drowned in the water, after one houres space quickneth and reuiueth. Aristotle sayth, that they are engendred of the earthes dung pro∣porcionably digested and ordered. There meat and drinke is filth, and they of themselues are nothing else but filth. Of the Gnat. THe Gnat was firste called Culex of hir sting, wherewith she sucketh out bloud: she hath in hir mouth a Cundite or pype in a ma∣ner like a thorne or prick: wherewith she soone pierceth to the flesh, & commeth by our bloud. Of the Gylthead. THe Gylthead is a noble kinde of fish, and onely for a Gentlemans tooth. The La∣tines call it after their vocable or word golden fish, as also the Gréekes, Chrusophrus, say they is the golden fishe, so called for that his head re∣presenteth the right colour of Gold. The Ger∣manes call it Ein Gold forn: the Frenchmen Truitte. Aelianus sayth that it is at continu∣all strife with the Dolphin. Of the Goshauke. THe Goshauke is a Birde of farre better stomack than claw: and is called Accipi∣ter
of a certaine greedie desire, she hath to catch the other small Birdes. She is verie extreme and sore towards hir yong. For after that they be once feathered, and are able to flie abroade, she hath them forth with hir, and beateth them in the ayre with hir winges, and is somewhat rigorous to make them séeke their meat alone. And so by sharpe vsage they haue no ioy to ta∣rie with their Dam, but euerie one goeth his way, and prouideth best for himselfe. Of the Grashopper. THe Grashopper of some is called the Cric∣ket, it hath his name of his shrill & sharpe voice. He vseth to go backward, and loueth to dig and bore in the harde earth and mortered places. He is heard most in the night time. Isidore sayth, that the little Aunt or Emite hunteth him, he not séeing it for his long haire hanging downe: which followeth him into his Lodge and to espie him the more clearely, bloweth away the dust as he goeth, & so com∣ming neare him, claspeth him aboute in his armes, and at the last stingeth him to death, and so commeth by his pray. Of the Gotebuck.
THe Gotebucke is verie wanton or lasciui∣ous, verye much giuen to Uenerie, and al∣waies prone to it minding coniunction: whose eyes for insaciate lust thereof, turneth in his head and lie as it were but in one onely angle or corner of his browe. Hée is of such excessiue whoe nature that his onely bloud being kept warme suppleth the Adamantstone, and dissol∣ueth it whereas no fire is able to doe it. Of the Griphin. THe Griphin is a Foule of plentifull and thicke fether, & foure footed withall. This kinde of Foule is saide to liue in the Hilles or Mountaines, called Hiperborei, which be as some say, set in the fardest part of the North right vnder the Northpole. In their head they be like the Lion, in wing & flight like the Ea∣gle. It is saide to be enuious both to Horse and Man. Some say that they are set to kéepe the Precious stones as the Smarage, the Iasper and so forth of such as grow there. And to looke to them. Of the Hare. THe Hare is called lightfoote after the Gréek worde Pox is a swift runner. It hath no de∣fence for it selfe, but onely swift light. Where∣with
it eftsoones escapeth. They sléepe not as others doe their eielids being shut. Aristotle saith in his third booke de Historia amimaliū, that his feete is hairie beneath towardes his paw, (which thing in others is neuer espied.) Of the Hearon or Hernsew. THe Hearon or Hearnsew is called Ardea for moūting aloft. It cā not abide showers of raine, but to be out of their dent, she flieth farre aboue the clowdie Region of the Ayre, there where as raine is ingendred. With this hir high flight, she serueth some to prognasti∣cate ill weather. Of the Hercynie Birdes. HErcynie Birdes take their name of the place where they breede, the place is called Hercinia, a Wood in Germanie, béeing in breadth .xi. dayes iourney: in length .xl. whose feathers shine so by night, & when as the Ayre is shut in, that although the night be neuer so darcke and close, yet they giue then their best light: so that to a man iourneying they are to his great furderance, being cast before him in the way whereas he goeth. Of the Hedgehog.
THe Hedgehog hath a sharp and quickthor∣ned garment on his backe: He presageth by such skil as he hath, what blastes of winds, what tempestes will follow. Plinie sayth, that he hath good knowledge in the difference of the Northren and Southren windes, wherevpon he saith; that on a time a certaine man in the Citie Constantinople kept a Hedgehog in his Gardaine, by which he would alwayes know whether of these two winds blew, true∣ly and infallibly. He is as good a meates man and Catour for him selfe, as any thing liuing is. For when his vittayles be scant or nighe well spent, he getteth abrode to Orchards and Groaues, where he hunteth after Uines and other the best fruite. At the Uine (as likewise at the Apple tree) he playeth his part thus: He goeth vp to the boughes & shaketh them downe When he hath perceiued he hath shakē downe inough, he commeth apace downe, and gathe∣reth the Grapes or Apples dispersed abrode to∣gither: and when he hath done, he falleth hea∣uily vpon the heape, and so almost on euerie prickle or brestle he getteth an Apple or Grape and home he goeth. Of the Horse.
HOrses at ye first were called Equi, as they be yet, for that they were coupled by paire and Mates, and were so vsed to the Chariote or Wagon. Of some they are called Sonipe∣des, for noyse making with their feete. They be of that sort that are well stomaked: their pastime is by coursing and running in the fieldes. They know well and are acquainted with the sound of the Trumpet, and therewith haue the better will to warre. It is a griefe to them to be conquered, and they are as ioconde if they win. Some of them haue such memorie that they know their Aduersarie, & wil (when it shal happen) waite them a good turne. Some will not suffer no other man to come on their backe saue onely their Maister, as Bucepha∣lus King Alexander the great his Horse. Pli∣nie saith, that there is a certaine obseruancie in kinred and bloud with these. Aristotle in his 8. booke de animalibus, recordeth of a King in the North, which had a very faire Mare, who brought forth a very faire Fole or yong horse. and within fewe yeares after (estéeming so much this kinde) was verie desirous to haue more of the same broode. Insomuch that he shut them vp alwayes in Stable togither. This done of a long time, and espying them nothing forward in this point, thought he would work
a pollicie with them, as he did. For after that, he seperated them the one from ye other: Inso∣much that ye one mought forget the other. And after such time had, and the Dam so attired & vsed, that the Colt should espie no apparant signe that she should be his Dam, was brought to the Mare thus vsed, frollick and lustie, and he not knowing of this, and vnwitting, fell a∣none to coniunction, and ere he had ended (the Dams face by chaunce discouered) he was by and by at this daunted, departing as it were in a frensie, and running vp vppon a certaine Mountaine, threw downe himselfe headlong, and dyed. Of the Iay. THe Iay by that onely propertie that is ap∣plied to him, is called the chatting Birde. Whereof arose first this Prouerbe, bestowed vpon such men as be neuer wel, but when they be pratling: Graculus graculo assidet: One knaue or praler will alwayes accompanie a∣nother. And againe: Graculo cum fidibus nihil. And toucheth them that lacketh both eloquence and learning, scorne at them which haue both. Of Ibis the Bird.
IBis the Bird of the floud Nilus purgeth hir selfe with pouring in with hir bill, ater in∣to hir fundament as Isidore witnesseth: she li∣ueth by the egges of Serpentes, & carieth them to hir nest: & fedeth thereof, as of the best meate that she is delighted with. This bird profiteth Aegipt verie much, and is the best riddance or conueiaunce that they haue, of such discommo∣dities as be brought by Serpentes out frō Li∣bia to Aegypt by the Southrene winds. Plinie in his .viij. Booke. Of the Lapwing. THe Lapwings name is borowed Apo tou o∣loluzeìn, that is, of sorowing and heauy note or crie: for when he crieth, he mourneth & la∣menteth, wherfore in olde time the Soothsaiers & Augurers tooke heede to his crie, & did prog∣nosticate therby ill wether to come. And when as this kind lamented, they sayde it betokened heauie tidings to come, when she flew quietly, they professed prosperitie thereby and good luck for to come. Of the Larke. THe Larke of many is called Woodlarke. He foresheweth wt his pleasant note (as al∣so the Nightingale doth) the day his comming
& appéering, as Cicero sheweth in his Prog∣nostickes. Et matutinos exercet acredula voces. The wodlarke as the Nightingale that houre and tune doth keepe And sheweth by hir pleasant note when men should rise from sleepe. Of the Leach or Bloudsucker. THe Leach or Bloudsucker is a worme of the water, verie desirous of bloudsucking. She lyeth in waite for such kinde of cattaile as come to the water to drinke, and cleaueth fast & twineth about their hooues, & drincketh bloud hir fill: when she hath so done she vomiteth it forth againe, and falleth to fresh bloud anew. Of the fish Lucius. LVcius of many men is called the Macrell. The Germaines call it Ein Macrell. The Latins Luci{us}, by ye figure Antiphrasis, which is when a word hath a contrarie signification. They say that this fish kéepeth alwaies at the verie bottome of the waters, so auoyding as it were all cleare light, whither when as the fi∣shermen by night saile with firebrand & torch, so that they espie it, they amazed there at and astonyed in their flight are so caught.
Of the Lamprey. THe Lamprey in Gréeke is called Muraina, with the Germanes Ein Bricken: there is of this kinde two sorts, both differing in co∣lour. For the one is blacke in colour, died a∣mong with ashie spots: the other is white ha∣uing black spots. She swimmeth all whole in flexible sort, and all alike bending hir bodie: aboue the land she creepeth no other wise then our serpents doe. The best of this stock or kind are those that be called Flutae, in Greke Plootai, good saylers or fluites, for that they kéeping al∣wayes at the waters highest can not be drow∣ned. Antonia, Drusus wife had such delight in a Lamprey that she dressed and arayed hir all ouer with golde Ringes, and the same be∣set aboute with precious Stones. Likewise Crassus by surname the rich, so loued a Lam∣prey of his owne bringing vp, that when she dyed he lamented sore, and bestowed also great cost of hir burying. And whē as he was laugh∣ed to scorne of Lucius Domitius for so doing, he gaue him this aunswere. Thou marueylest sayth he, why I so bewaile this Fishes death. But I marueile more at him that hauing had the losse of thrée Wyues, neuer yet for ought that I could sée, bewayled it. This Domitius
is reported to haue poysoned thrée Wiues for hope that he had of rewarde or greater riches thereby. Of the Leoparde. THe Leoparde is a very tiraunte & aduoute∣rous also in his kinde: as saith Plinie. The Lionnesse and Leoparde hauing coniunction togither, or the Lion and Libardesse, bring forth a third kinde, euen as the Horse and Asse, or hée Horse and Mare doe. The Female saith Aristotle, is more cruell than the Male, his colour is bespotted about: his vpper parte of bodie, and his féete also, and taile are all alike to the Lion in outwarde shew. But in ye head they haue their difference: In bodye he is lesse than the Lion. And by that meanes he is euen with the Lion, and not behinde him in reuen∣ging as Homer witnesseth. He hath his cab∣bage in the yearth with two contrary wayes vndermined to enter into it, or to run out of it at his pleasure: verie wide at the comming in, but as narrow and straight about the mid cab∣bage: whether his enimie the Lion running sometimes after him, and a pace, at the first cō∣ming in thither is narrowly pent: Insomuch that he cannot neyther get forward, nor back∣warde. That seing the Leoparde, he running
a pace out at the furder hole, and commeth to that wheras the Lion first ran in, and hauing him hard pent, & his back towardes him, bigh∣teth & scratchet him with tooth and Nayle. And so by art the Leoparde getteth the victory, and not by strength. The same Leopard also saith Plinie, séeketh after the broode of the wild gote entending therewith to recouer his health. Of Lynx the beast. LYnx in face is like to the Lion, in bodie be∣spotted like the Panther, his vrine is of yt set or nature, yt it turneth by and by into a pre∣cious stone, which we before called Ligurius. He so enuieth man, and would that he should not be the better for this, that he hideth and co∣uereth his vrine with dust & yearth, to the in∣tent that no man should find it, but Plinie saith it is so much the better in his effect & working. Of the Lyon. THe Lyon in his greeke vocable and worde is interpreted King: he is reported to be the King ouer all other beastes. There are diuers of this kind▪ they only differing in their Mane eyther long or short. His strength is in his hed. His vertue in his heart, he sléepeth (as the Hare doth) with eielids vnshut. When he awaketh
forth out of sléepe, he rubbeth out the print of his bodie and steps, least the huntesman espy∣ing them, should easily finde him out. He is verie gentle to man & neuer hurteth him vn∣lesse he be greatly iniuried by him, or that he is throughly an hūgry. He knoweth sayth Pli∣nie, when the Lyonesse hath played him false play, and hath played the Aduoutresse with the Libard, by a certaine rammish smel or sweate which ariseth of them both. Yet if she washeth hir selfe throughly, she may deceyue him. Ari∣stotle sayth, that the Lionesse at the first birth or broode bringeth forth most of hir yong: then after that, she lesseneth euerie broode one. For at the first, she bringeth forth fiue: at the second time, foure: at the thirde time, thrée: at the fourth time, two: at the fift, one: and euer after that, she is sterill and barraine. Of their re∣membrance of a good turne I néede not speake, or howe they haue done man a good turne one for another. As that which had a thorne in hir Claw being holpen of one named Androdus, & eased thereof: euen when as he through en∣uie was deliuered vp to be punished, & throwē into hir Denne, that Lionesse that he eased so before, did then well remember him. As also I néede not to speak how God oftentimes bride∣leth in all beastes deuouring whatsoeuer, to
shew his pleasure and possibilitie what he can doe and worke by meanes of these. There was a fierce & hungrie Lyon let loose to Darius the Martyr, which not onely hurt him not, but also preserued him from the crueltie of other brute beastes. As likewise Daniell scaped scotchfrée by Gods prouidence, turning the fierce coun∣tenaunce of that Lion that his enimies had thought would haue soone deuoured him into a fawning and chearefull looke, not once ha∣uing power to hurt him. Hamo a Carthagien borne, is first reported to haue tamed the Lion. Memnonides or the Birdes of Aegypt. MEmnonides or the Birdes of Aegypt are named of the place where Memnon the Sonne of Thiton which came to the aide and rescewing of the Troians died, and is buried. They are saide to flie by companies out of Ae∣gypt to olde Troie, to Memnon his Sepul∣chre, and to be onely his memoriall: and are therefore called of some the Troian Memno∣nides, as Isidore recordeth in his .xij. Booke. Euerie fift yeare they flie to Troie, and flie a∣bout Priam his Pallace, and that two whole dayes space, the thirde day they make battaile betwene themselues, and doe torment and slea
one another with their sharpe nayles & beck. Of the Moth. THe Moth is our Garment worme, and by his latine worde is called Tinea holdefast, for it biding in one place in the Garment ne∣uer leaueth it, til it be gnawen and eaten forth thorow. Isidore saith, it mought be named Pertinax, peruerse, for that it vrgeth alwayes vpon one and the same place. Aristotle saith, that the Moth sucketh out of the Garment all humor, and leaueth it marueilously drie. Of the Mouse. THe Mouse after Isid. is counted the smal∣lest liuing beast, and is named Mus quasi humus, earth or earthie. It hath his growth at the full Moone, as other and sundrie kindes haue. It is for his bignes a verie rauenour or gréedigut, and for a little meate is often soone entrapped. It smelleth his vittailes a farre off, and commeth the sooner to them by smell. Of the Mule. THe Mule of the Latine word Mola, which signifieth grinding at the Mill, tooke his first name. For he being put into the Mill, is there, where he should be. He is engendred
of a Mare and an Asse (as of an Horse and an Asse also) is engendred the Mulet. Plinie sayth, that the Asse and the Mare doe neuer co∣uet copulation together, except they haue bene from their youth forth accustomed and brought vp togither: And be fed with the selfe same meate, as Milke and such others. Aristotle sayth, that the more the Mule drinketh water, the more his meate doth him good. Of the Nightrauen or Nightcrow. THe Nightrauen or Crowe is of the same maner of life that the Owle is, for that she onely commeth abrode in the darke night, fle∣ing the daylight and Sunne. There is a cer∣taine Shrickowle or Owlet which when she crieth, she shricketh and is thought to be one of this kinde. Whereof Lucane speaketh thus. Quod{que} strepens Bubo quod Strix nocturna querūtur. That that the Owle by noyse doth make and howling voice doth feare: That doth the shricking Strix and shrill with note vnpleasant to heare. Of the Nightingale. THe Nightingale was named first, of good melodi louing, or for hauing delight to
frame and sing a pleasaunt and swéete note. With hir pleasaunt tune she playeth euery day before the Sunne his arising a fit of mirth, and is verie melodious to welcome the sunne as it were a Bridegrome cōming. She is called in Gréeke Aaedoon of aei and adoo, which is to sing continually: she is one of those also which doe prognosticate as Aratus saith. In histories we read that many Caesars or Emperours, especi∣ally those which were of the yongest sort, haue had Nightingales & Starlings or Stares that haue béene well instructed and taught both in ye Gréeke & Latine tongue. As there was also a Crowe in Rome, which being framed and taught to that purpose, euerie morning would flie to the Court Hostilia ouer the riuer Ty∣beris to salute Garmanicus Caligula ye Em∣perour his Father, and Drusus, Emperour also, & then next after the whole body of Rome. This Crow is saide to be Apolloes bird: As the Eagle Iupiters: the Crane, Palamedes: the Kings fisher, Thetis the mother of Achil∣lis. Merthes also the King of Egypt hadde a Crow so taught and instructed, that whither soeuer he had bidden him go, eyther to carie or to fetch letters, he was not ignorant whither to flie, & by that meanes did his maisters mes∣sage spéedily. But to retourne to the Nightin∣gale
from whence we first came. Plinie saith, that in the spring time she most cōmonly brin∣geth forth sixt egges, and to the intent that hir griefe in traueiling should not be sore or great, she passeth awaie most of the night with plea∣sant songs. Whole fiftene dayes at the spring time or at the budding forth of leaues, she con∣tinually singeth. This kinde doth often striue betwene themselues, and being almost dead, yet to the verie ende he will rather want of his breath, then leaue off his song. This bird sang as Histories make mention in Stesichorus mouth, he being an Infant or child: euen as Bées flue aboute Platoes mouth he being on sléepe in the Cradell, and left there some part of there Hony: and as the selfe same kind also sat without hurting him, vpon Ambrose hys mouth, he being a child. And as vpon rich Mi∣das the Phrigian, he being yong, Pismiers fil∣led his mouth with wheat, whereof euery one of these, & such like haue their hid signification. Of the Onocentaure. THe Onocentaure is a Beast monstrous, halfe a Bull & halfe an Asse. Onos in Gréeke is translated into our speache, an Asse. But some Philosophers thinke that he is in bodie halfe a man and halfe an Asse. For from the
Nauell vpward say they, it hath the figure of a Man, and downewarde to the foote it resem∣bleth an Asse. Of this opinion is Plinie. These and such like monsters are nothing else but Natures dalying, and shewing howe she can varie and alter things in their kind, as we may plainely sée in the Hippocentaure, in the Faune & Satire, which Indie bréedeth. It is fabled with the Poets, that Ixion, Iunoes Se∣cretary, prouoked hir to Uenery, which thing Iupiter vnderstanding, made by and by a cer∣taine Cloud to appeare like Iuno to his eyes, with whom he being incensed, & in lecherous loue (nothing supposing but that it was Iu∣no) bespent his séede vpon the Cloude, and therevpon were ingendred those Monsters which are called Centauri; otherwise Geni∣tauri, quod ex aura sint geniti. Of Orix. ORix is a small beast and watrie, of that Nature that the Dormouse is, for he ly∣keth the better through good nourishment and long sléepe. All winter long he snorteth, and is as he were deade, but in Sommer awaketh and taketh life againe. Of the Owle.
THe Owle is called the dastardly Bird: she is of such slouth and sluggishnesse, she hath feathers inough to flie abrode day and night: But the sluggarde sleepeth all day long, most commonly, it liueth in olde Sepulchres, and in Housen or Barnes not often frequented, and in cauernes or holes of stone walles, of which thing Ouid hath these verses. Faeda{que} sic volucris venturi nuncia luctus, Ignauus Bubo dirum mortalibas omen. That filthie Birde and Messenger of sorrowes ill to come: The sluggish Owle hath bene to man most often daunger some. For if in the Citie in the daytime they had espied hir, they gathered hereof some sorrow to come. The Ile of Crete is voyde of this kinde. They are dedicated to Minerua. There is also a Shrickowle which is alwayes helden vn∣luckie. Of this kinde one sat vpon Pyrrhus his Speare he marching forward in battaile ray toward the Grecians armie, & portended and foreshewed sinister and yll fortune. This kind, as the abouesaide, is hated of all other birdes, against whome she vseth a verie craftie kinde of warring. For if the companie of small birds be manie, she lieth groueling & fighteth with hir feete: and couereth hir selfe all ouer with
hir Bill and Clawes. Plinie saith that the Bussard or Kite rescueth him oftentimes tho∣rowe a certaine naturall agréement or truice had betwéene them. Nigidius witnesseth with Plinie, that this kinde lurketh and sléepeth lx. dayes throughout Winter, and hath nine voices or soundes. These be verie plentifull in Athens: Insomuch that they haue brought forth their Prouerbe. Noctuas Athenas mit∣tere: In Grammaticall sense: to sende ouer Owles to Athens In Tropicall sense, ment of such as bestow largely vpon them that haue no néede: and much after that that we say, to cast water into the Tems. Of the Panther. THe Panther is euerie liuing Creatures friend, except onely the Dragon, whome he hateth dadly. He is in his colour bespotted and in euerie part of his skin or hide, he shew∣eth as it were eies. He loueth excéedingly all other kindes, such as be like him, as the Leo∣pard. &c. The Female neuer beareth yong but once in hir time for all. The reason is for that she neuer ioieth at the first birth or brood, wher∣of she being mindefull euer after with what paine she brought forth, neuer séeketh more af∣ter it. Plinie to this giueth another reason, all
beastes saith he of sharpe Clawes or Nayles, doe neuer bring forth often. The Panther his smell or breath, to all things liuing except the Dragon, is most delectable and pleasant. Inso∣much that all the other follow after hir, moued with that hir scent. So that by that meanes when as she is throughly hungrie she cōmeth by some of them to hir pray. The Dragon fli∣eth back and can not away with hir smell. Pli∣nie writeth that a Panther fawned vpon the father of one Philenus a Philosopher, that he should helpe hir out with hir yong that were fallen into a mirie Lake or Pit. In the former féete they haue fiue toes: but in their hinder féete foure onely. Of the Partrich. THe Partrich is called ye fleting birde, neuer setled or stayed vpon one thing: Therefore oftentimes in that which he goeth about he lo∣seth his labour. For he taking away other Birdes their Egges, and bringing them vp as his owne, doth not for all this greatly profite himselfe thereby, for so soone as those yong can heare but their owne and Natiue Dams note, they leaue their Stepmother or Nurses foode by and by. The Male destroyeth his owne Egges often: least that the Females care in
hatching them vp or sitting on them shoulde hinder him from Uenerie vsing: he is so lasci∣uious. The seauenth day also after their hat∣ching, he banisheth them and thrusteth them out of his Nest. He is consecrated to Iupiter & the Goddesse Latona, and Appollo his father. He purgeth himselfe with Lawrell. Beotia is without these. Of the Parret. THe Parret hath all hir whole bodie gréene, sauing that onely about hir necke she hath a Coller or Chaine naturally wrought like to Sinople or Uermelon. Indie hath of this kinde such as will counterfaite redily a mans speach: what wordes they heare, those com∣monly they pronounce. There haue bene found of these that haue saluted Emperours: giue them Wine and they will be wanton inough: they are as hard in their head as in their Beak or Bill: When they learne to speak they must be beaten with an Iron Rod, or else they feele it not: Plinie saith that in a certaine Wood called Gagandes this kinde was first founde: of all other Foules she and the Turtle Doue haue greatest friendship. Of the Peacock.
THe Pecock, had his name first with vs, of the selfsame note that he himselfe singeth dayly, whose flesh is so hard that it cannot ea∣sily be sod or rosted: His iolly brauerie in him selfe is through setting vp his fethers aloft, and at his espying in himself so many gaie colours: but hauing his fill at the length with so goodly a shew, in his vpper partes, & casting his looke towardes his base feete, seing himselfe therein deformed, forgetteth by and by all the former conceite of pride, and thereby is brought to ac∣knowledge himselfe. He is saide to be Iunoes birde. The Female cōceiueth not vntill she be thrée yeares olde: at what time she then begin∣neth to be so araied in colours: There is noted in this kind both selfloue▪ as in hir former pro∣pertie: & enuie also, for that she will rather hide away hir dung, than that man should haue profit thereby, being many waies medicinable. Hortentius the Orator killed first ye Pecocke that was tasted whither yt he was meate meete for a man, yea or no. And there is also a report yt Alexander the great, seing once a Pecock in Indie so meruailed at that sight that by a commaundement giuen, he charged yt no man in paine of death, shoulde slea or kill so faire a bird. The Doue and the Pecocke are verye great friendes.
Of the Perwincle. THe Perwincles in Gréeke are called Kokliai, wherof some be of the Sea: other of flouds, others of the yearth. They are alwaies clothed with one and the same shale. The Poets call this and the Snaile also, Domiporte, that is their house cariour. And this is the fable that they father vpon them. When Iupiter hadde bidden all creatures & thinges liuing to a feast or banquet: these kindes of all other made no apperaunce: Iupiter therfore demaundeth the cause or reason of their absence, who gaue him this aunswere. Quae domus cara, eadem do∣mus optima. Which is, that house or manti∣on place which is most estemed that we recken the best. At the which aunswere, Iupiter be∣ing stirred, he cōmaunded them to their owne house or lodge as to perpetuall prison, and that whither soeuer they went, they shoulde carye their House and Home with them vpon their backes. Of Phaenix the bird. Phaenix is a bird of Arabie, of marueilous long life, she liueth aboue six hundereth and sixtie yeares, and at the last being werie of hir life, goeth to the groaues there, and gathereth
small slippes and twigs of such kinde of trées as be both extreme whot & odoriferous withal as is Cinomon and such like: and so bestrew∣eth hir nest, cōmonly made in the highest firre trées, & next to the Sunne: and flying thither lieth voluntarily in hir nest, abiding both the burning of the spice & Sunne, and therewith is consumed to ashes. And of those ashes ani∣mated by the Sunne, and other Planets, ari∣seth another Phaenix, which maintaineth and continueth the kind from time to time. Some haue ye opinion that no man euer aw hir eate. She is consecrated to Sol: Plinie sayth that there was one of these brought into the Citye of Rome when Claudius was Censor. The yeare of the Citie .800. Of the Pellican. THe Pellican is a bird in Egypt, dwelling amongst the deserts of Nilus. She is saide of Ierome, to reuiue those of hir yong which in hir absence haue had their bloud sucked of Ser∣pentes, whervpon they died. And she reuiueth them by wounding hir selfe, and pouring into them certaine of hir owne bloud, and so within thrée dayes, they which were so dead, reuiue & quicken againe. Volateranus saith that that is the Pellicane which Pline calleth Platea,
cōmonly the Shoueler: but other do not here∣in agrée. This Platea is a birde which flieth to the shelfishes of the water, and eateth hir fill of them, which being made verie tēder through heate in hir belly: she vomiteth them vp againe that after the shell being once opened she may come by their meate with more ease. Of the Pearch. THe Pearch in Gréeke is called Perkae: with the Germanes Ein Bersig with ye French∣men Perche: some think that it is called Par∣ca by Antiphrasis, signifying another thing then the worde sheweth. For with whome so∣euer she is angrie, she woundeth him with hir innes, or if she can not come by him, they are sure to haue it that are next to hir. There is hereof both Male and Female. But they haue their difference: for the Male hath his innes red, the Female hath not so. Lonicer sayth that when as the fish Lucius is hurte or sore wounded of any other kinde, and can not helpe hir selfe, she seeketh out the Pearch, which so soone as she sées him, she toucheth and suppleth his woundes: and so is she healed. It is a fishe of verie tender meate or flesh. As Ausonius re∣cordeth of hir thus. Nec te delitias mensarum Parca silébo.
Amongst the kindes of delicate meates, the Perch I would haue spred: Whose flesh so soft and morsell sweete in all feastes is the hed. Of the Puttock. THe Puttock sayth Isidore, got his name of his soft flight. Miluus sayth he, is, quasi mollis, soft of flight. It is one of the rauenous sort, making hauock of the small birds. Tullie in his second booke De natura Deorum saith, that the Puttock and the Rauen or Crowe be at naturall enmitie togither. Insomuch that one of them (when they may come by them) breaketh anothers Egges. Aelianus thinketh that the Male in this kinde is seldome or neuer séene. Insomuch that the Female stretching hirselfe along and conuersant toward the East and south, conceiueth so & bringeth forth yong. They also beare a continuall hatred to ye Fox. Of the Pye. THe Pie is reckned Mars his bird. It had his Latin name first of Pycus Saturnes sonne which in his prophesying and soothsaying vsed this birde: as Ouid witnesseth. By Gréeke name he is called the Okes griefe, for yt with his Bill he pecketh & maketh hollow the Oke
with such daylie accustoming. In one and the selfe same day he chaungeth his tune. Of Rhinoceros. RHinoceros in Gréeke is interpreted hor∣ned beast or Monoceron, and is englished the Vnicorne. Plinie in his .viij. booke saith, that his Horne is set aboue his nostrils. His con∣tinuall strife is with the Elephant, & vseth to defend himself thus. Whē he seeith his enimie come, he whetteth his Horne against sharpe stones, & then setteth on: and in his fight war∣deth and foyneth at the Elephant his bellye, the most tender part that he hath, and so rid∣deth him. Of Rinatrix the Serpent. RInatrix is a Serpent which with enueno∣ming poysoneth ye water, so that into what cleare Fountaine or Riuer he swimmeth, he infecteth it, as Lucane witnesseth. Rinatrix violator Aquae. &c. The Rinatrix of Serpents kinde and the poysonous Snake: With intermedling doth infect eche Pond and euerie Lake. Of the Salamander.
THe Salamander as Plinie saith, is like the Lyzard in face and countenaunce. He in∣fecteth the fruites of Trees, and corrupteth the waters so that whosoeuer drinketh thereof dy∣eth by and by. He liueth onely in the fire and is nothing hurt through the fire his flame. Of the Salmon. THe Riuer Rhenus and Rhodanus in this kinde doe alone excell. The fishe it selfe is big and fat. His meate or flesh is red: in tast verie swéete: the Germanes call it Ein Sal∣men. The Frenchmen Saulmon. Plinie in his .ix. booke and .xviij. Chapter, preferreth hir before all those Sea fishes, which accustome to Aquitania the floud, which are many and great, and reckned daintie. Of the Scorpion. THe Scorpion is a Serpent of the earth, stinging deadly with his taile and of some is called flatering worme, for faire face shewed and friendly countenaunce. But if any man come neare hir behinde she payéth him home. Plinie sayth that it bringeth forth yong some∣time seauen at once, whereof, the Dam eateth vp fiue of them, but ye other the wisest of them, get about their Mothers backe and buttocks,
and so bite hir. This kind sleaeth his parents, and hath onelye care to reuenge their Bro∣thers quarrell: and in that point Nature well prouided that their should be no great multi∣plying in so perilous a stocke and kind. Orion when as he had made that boast that the earth shoulde bring forth no suche Monster but he would kill it: the earth it selfe cast vp such a Scorpiō as slue him in the presence of the peo∣ple with most sharpe sting. Of the Silkeworme. THe Silkeworme is the Trée or his braun∣ches worme, by whose web weauing silkes are made. She is called Bombix, for that she leaueth nothing in hir bellie but emptie ayer whilest she is about spinning of hir thréede. Of the Sole. THe Sole Varro calleth Lingulaca, for his great sound. The Frenchemen Sole: It is a kinde of fish all plaine: of verie soft meate or flesh, and easie to digest. Of the Sow. THe Sow is called Sus, of wrooting vp the clots of the yearth with hir beake or snoute. She beareth saith Plinie, somtime foure, som∣time
fiue at once, sometime moe, but cannot bring them all wel vp, and therefore eateth vp some of them: & it hath bene sene, that she hath eaten vp all hir broode, saue onely the oldest, whome she most entierly loueth, and him shée féedeth most often, & giueth him or hir the best teate. As Aristotle saith. Of the Shoueler. THe Shoueler is called Platalea sayth Tul∣lie, he getteth his meate with flight had to those birds that déeuing downe to the waters to ketch fish, drowne themselues, or if any come out with any pray, he méeteth them & presseth their heades, till they let go that which they haue caught. Of the Sparrow. THe Sparrow is called Passer a Paruitate, of small or little quantitie. Tullie in his Diuination saith, that they should be in those kindes that are noted to prognosticate: for saith he, that kinde of diuination which is marked by euent, or animaduersion, is not naturall but artificiall: & of these some be perceiued to be done by sodain coniecture, as Calcas with Ho∣mer, which through a certaine number of smal Sparrowes, prophesied and diuined before of
the Citie of Troie his siege. It is in his kinde very lasciuious and rioting. It flieth in his ex∣tremity alwaies to man for helpe. Seuerus the Abbat had a Sparrow, that for feare came fly∣ing to rescue him into his handes, & was glad to take meate at his hands, he reaching it him. Of Stellio. STellio the starred and speckled beast saith Plinie, liueth most by the dew of Heauen, and spirite of the earth. And all his best iolytie is in counerfayting colours, & yet for all that is venemous. Of the Swallow. THe Swallow, saith Aristo. in his sixe booke de Animalib{us}, maketh hir nest & bréedeth twise in the yeare, and that is done so artifici∣ally, as man cannot deuise to better it. Isidore saith, that he is so named for eating his meate as he flieth about in the ayre, or for often tur∣ning and retire had to one and the same place. Aristotle saith in the same booke that the eyen of his yong whilest they be tender, being hurt, he fecheth straight waies medicine at the herb Calcedonies hande. She is one of those kinds also that foretell things afterwardes to come. Cecinna a Volateran & Knight in Pompeis
campe when as he had come by certaine Swal∣lous he sent them as messengers before of vic∣torie woon to all his friends, & that was doone with letters tyed about their féete which they caried speedily and roundly. Of the Swanne. THe Swanne is called the swéete singing Birde, for that (as it were in footed verse) before hir death she ioyeth. In the Shipmens note or rule, the Swan prophecieth lucre & good lucke, as these verses seme to declare. Cygnus in auspicijs semper laetissimus ales Hunc optant nautae quia se non mergit in vndis. A token of good lucke it is the ioyfull Swan to see Which hideth not hir selfe in sea but will with Shipmen bee. She is fairely fethered & whight, but in flesh most blacke. She is one of those that knowing what vncleanesse commeth by venerie, before she goeth to foode, will to the waters to purge and make cleane hir selfe. This is Apolloes birde. There is a fable with ye Poets that this Swan was altogither Phaetons loue, & that after ye fall of his proud and presumptuous re∣quest, he was turned into this kinde of Birde. Pythagoras thought that the soule or spirite of
the Swan was immortall, and therfore said he it is, that she ioyeth so when as death calleth for hir. Of the Storke. THere is in the Storke a marueylous pietie or gratitude, which for such paynes taking as there parents had with their yong, when they could not shift for themselues, the yong promise (as in déede they doe) to acquite and re∣compence the same when their Parents wax féeble and can not helpe themselues. Those of Thessalie nourish and maintaine this kind to be rid of Serpents wherewith they be greatly annoyed. Aelianus saith that through the be∣nefite of the Goddes perceyuing them to be so kinde as we abouesaide, this kinde in certaine Ilands, were translated into Mankinde. The Image of the Storke in olde time was woont to be printed and grauen in the Kings Scep∣ter & Diademe, to the intent that men should haue eiesight of pietye or gratitude in their Prince so figured and painted. Their chiefest foode is the Herbe Origanum or Origan. Of Stockfish. STockfish in Gréeke is called Salpae, with the Germaines Stockfish. Aristotle saith that
it is a verie myrie fishe: and which can neuer be well sodden vnlesse it be beaten with a rod or wand. Amongst ye Germanes it hath raised a Prouerbe, which is, Salpa pelutantior aut lasciuior: More foolish or wāton thā a Stock∣fish: applied to such as haue their mindes set vpon wantonnesse: and which will doe no∣thing of their owne will vnlesse they be com∣pelled to it. With the Germanes it is after this sort. Er fantasiert ein Stockfish. In the person of this Laurentius Lippi{us} dalied with a Distich or double verse on this wie. Salpa, obscenus ego dicor, nec decoquor vnquàm Ni ferula caedens verbera multa dabis. As a muddie Stocfish I am which neuer will be sod, Vnlesse she hath good store of stripes and be beaten with Rod. Of Taxus or the Badger. TAxus, of some Melus, of Melos one of the Iles called Ciclades, which for full & plen∣tifull fléese of wooll, is called Melota. This saith Plinie, hath a certaine wilie heade to de∣ceiue, and daunt his enimies, the Spannell, & Fox, for béeing in daunger to be taken in hun∣ting, kéepeth in his breath with constraint had thereof, and in so doing, his flesh and skin puf∣feth
vp, and swelleth so, that he being thereby biten, féeleth no sore▪ He is a good prouider for himself also, and hath a forecast in time & wea∣ther. His house is some hollow Caue in the earth, in diuers sorts diuersly wrought: so that on whatsoeuer side thereof the winde is blus∣tring, he turneth his taile and kéepeth off cold, so from the rest of his bodie, and at the other contrarie hole, he taketh both ayre and breath. It is also carefull in laying vp store for Win∣ter, both the Hee and Shee: Insomuch that when the nipping cold Frosts come (at which time al liuing things are most hungrie) he fea∣ring the Female to lauish and to be no sparer of such vittaes as they haue, and fearing least (if they should so be spent) they should both fa∣mish, stenteth the Female, and giueth hir hir task, wherewith she being moued and as craf∣tie as he, espying hir time when and how she may come to the Lawder or Uittailehouse, he not espieng hir, finding such opportunitie as she looketh for, goeth another way to the Ui∣ander and vittailes, and there eateth hir fyll, and commeth againe stealing and sinketh in∣to his companie without any surmise or sus∣pect had of his part of any such kind of deceipt. The craftie Foxe also is his naturall enimie, who espying him to come forth of his Den or
Cabbadge, hasteneth thither and annoieth the place with filthie excrements. Of the Tench. THe Tench liueth whereas much Mud and Mire is. The Germaines call it Ein Sch∣lein, which kind of fish vnlesse it be well clen∣sed from such infections as it hath, is very hurt∣full. Ausonius calleth it the poore mans dishe, for that in the olde time it was onely the poore mans meate or dishe: of the welthiest men little set by. And in this sentence or verse he see∣meth to shew the same. Quis non & virides vulgi solatia, Tincas norit? Who doth not know the Tench to be the poore mans meate or fish Which to him once bequethed was to be his chiefest dish. Of the Tiger. THe Tiger is a beast of most swift foote, or flight, and of all beastes most fierce, named of the Persians arrowe, which they call Tiger, in their phrase of speche. Peraduenture for re∣semblaūce herein, their flight may be thought to be both a like. There is a certaine riuer also of that name, one of those foure riuers which
flowe forth out of Paradise called Gion, and passeth through Armenie & Mede. The best increase of the Tiger is in Hircanie & Indie. He is not onely of most swift pace, but also of smell. Wherefore saith Plinie, if that at anie time hir broode or litter (which is numerouse or many) be stolen away in hir absence (as then is the time when as the Huntesmen commeth by them) the hunter carying them neuer so fast away by horseback, & with neuer so much hast, yet at hir returning to hir Nest, when as shée espieth falshoode plaide, she flieth and strayeth abrode fiercely as she were mad, and with hir swifte pace and good Smell, she hitteth at the length into that waye that the Hunter betooke him, whome he hearing, not farre off, broyling fiercely, maketh awaye as hastilye as he can, he letteth one fall downe, and hastineth yet for all that away as fast as he can. The am in the way finding one of hir Litter, and broode, goeth with that one home backe againe, and conueyeth hir to the Nest: that being done, yet she leaueth not but pursueth after, & commeth by a nother after the same sorte, & like wise ta∣keth ines with that one home againe. And so likewise is ye huntesman faine to do so more often, except he be past hir reach or out of perill of hir, as by ship taking, & the like. The Male
saith Plinie, hath no regard of his yong. And the same saith also, that there is another waye that some huntesmen beguile hir with, as so bestrew & spréede in the way Glasse, by ye which she comming and espying there ir owne sha∣dowe represented, weeth through such sight, that there were of hir yong▪ and whilst she here thus tacieth long time, deceiuing hir selfe, the Huntesman hieth him away & so escapeth. Yet to speake a little of hir mildenesse sometime shewen, Diuus Augustus is reported to haue shewen in Rome a Tiger very well tamed and kept in a Caue or Cabbadge. Of the Tortesse. THe Tortesse is reckned one amongst the Snaile or Wormes. Aristotle saith that he hath such harde chaps and iawes that he brea∣keth stones in sunder, being put in his mouth. Of the Turtle Doue. THe Turtle doue of al foules is most honest and shamefast. She liueth in the toppes of mountaines and in the deserts. She is not fel∣lowlike with man, & conuersant with him as the other kind of doues are. Yet the other doues haue their praise of gratitude & remembraunce of a good turne shewed, & are called after their
Epithete simple or mild. The reason why they be so is, for that they acke their bitternesse of gall. Aristo as concerning this last kind saith, that they bring forth .xj. times in ye yere. There is another kind called the Kingdoue very chast and temperae. And as for the Turtle Doue, hir best praise is in keeping vndeiled wedlock (and lesing hir Mate) for hir constant widow∣hoode. The other Doues also haue bene mans messenger sōtimes to & fro, as at the besiegig of Mutina, where they caried Letters tyed to their feete to the Consuls tents through De∣cius Brutus. Of the Viper. THe Viper is a kind of most venimous ser∣pent, so named by the Latin word, for that she bringeth forth & deliuereth hir yong with much paine and griefe. For when as hir belly is big, and hir yong ripened, she desiring to be deliuered, (as they also couet to be out of so straight a pace) gnawe and ate a way out of their Mothers side, & so with both their great griefe, and most often their Dams destruction, they come out & are borne. I sid. saith that their maner of coniunction is not as others is. But ye Male being in time of yeare plentifull, & full of séede, to be rid thereof, after their owne and
natural maner, the Male putteth his head into hir mouth, and casteth vp of his seede into hir throte: With the which the Female by excee∣ding great pleasure taken therein, and almost wood or mad therwith, with holding fast, bigh∣eth of the Males heade, and so it commeth to passe that all the whole kind is in all their do∣ings most sharpely and painefullye agrieued. This kind saith Plinie, liueth in the earths or deepe Crannies, wheras the most part of Ser∣pents liue in rockes of stone, other in the hol∣lownesse of trees. Al winter time it lurcketh & is hyd, but as soone as the Sunbeames warme the yearth, she breaketh out, and being dazeled in the eyes through accustoming in the blacke yearth, she by and by seketh after the herbe Fe∣nell, and anoynteth them and so séeth clearly. This kinde is moste daungerous to aduen∣ture vpon. Politianus saith that Ampicides was killed with the byt of a Viper in Lybia: and with that his so deadly a byt, died oute of hande. Likewise is Orestes reported to haue had the same death, after that he came to him∣selfe againe. Of the Vulture. THe Vulture saith Aristotle, buildeth hir nest in most high Rockes, so that very seel∣dome
or neuer hir yong are sene. For the which thing a reporte went that Herodotus, Bri∣sons the Rhetoricians Father, thought yt this kind came from another world. And his rea∣son was, for that no man could sée the Vultur his nest: & yet when they were sene flying, they flewe alwaies by many and great companies. This coueteth and hawketh after dead carcas∣ses, & hath a maruilous good smel. Their chie∣fest dainties are fitches. Hermodorus ponti∣cus witnesseth, yt the Vultur of al other foules is the simplest, for that that he neuer raueneth or destroieth any such kinds of graine as man∣kinde soweth to nourish him and his. Their smell is so wonderfull, that they will smell (as is reported) any dead carcasse fiue hūdred miles off. Of the Weasell. THe Weasel in Gréeke is called Galae: with the Germanes ein Wesil. This is the sub∣tillest amongest the residue of beastes which are by naturall grouth small or little: And it hath a wonderfull care to kéepe and preserue his yong without harme taking and endama∣ging: Insomuch that he nourseth them whi∣lest they be sucklings, in the neathermost and most hid Crannies or Dens of the earth. Of
this sort thrée kindes are mentioned: one long like a Lamprey: the other called a Ferret, the thirde called Meles, of some englished the Powlcat. This is the greatest and the chiefest enimie yt Serpents haue: with whom when he encountreth or maketh battaile, he goeth and armeth himselfe with the Herbe Rue, the scent whereof, he knoweth to be most offensiue or annoious vnto them. They of the Cie Thebes haue worshipped and done ho∣nor to this kinde. This kinde and the Crow heare a naturall grudge the one to the other: as doth the Eagle and the Kings Fisher: the Owle and the lesser sorte of Birdes: as also the For and Putrocke: the Horse and the Gri∣phin: the Dolphin & Whirlepoole: the Lam∣prey, and Conger: the Elephant and little Mouse: the Elephant again and Rhinoceros with his snout so crooked: the Scorpion and Stellio which is so bespeckled: the Salaman∣der and the Snaile: the Frog and the Bée: the Bée and the Betell: the Bée also and the Swallow: as also againe the Weasell is the chiefest enimie that the Cockatrise hath: the Rat of Indie the greatest enimie that the As∣pis hath. And as there is such naturall strife betwéene these and such like: so is there againe (in as many kindes as we before made men∣tion
of a naturall agréement or loue made by confederacie of like kindes, or else those that are not greatly disagreeing or differing. The Turtle Doue and Parrt or Popiniay take parts and holde togither: as also the Choffe and Woodlarcke: the ring Doue & Partrich: the Peacocke and the other common Doues: the sielie Sheepe and the hee Gote: the Iay and Sterne or Seamew: and many other doe the same, which to rehearse woulde require large volumes. Of the Whirlepoole. THe Whirlepoole in French is called Ba∣lene. She is a fish of the Sea like a beast: for whome many striue to haue hir called the Whale: other are at variance to haue hir na∣med Pristix of ye infinitiue moode of the Gréek verbe Prizein, which is to cut or seuer, as this is reported to cut the waues of the Sea as she swimmeth: she is of wonderful length. Plinie sayth, as also Aristotle, that she breatheth in the water: which thing they two striue at to be done in the residue of fishes. She giueth hir yong milke by Teate: which thing verie fewe other fishes do. She is often dulled in ye water: for the which she often coueteth ye Sands to re∣fresh hir spirites, and wil there somtimes play:
sometimes also sléepe a while. Of the Whale. THe Whale with the Germanes is called the Wallfiche: many of the Latine wry∣ters are at strife to haue hir and Balena al one. Aristo. as likewise Plinie, will haue all those fishes called Caete which are of ye greatest sort: and which bring forth yong, and that a perfect and liuing thing so soone as they are deliuered: To speake of the hugenesse or vastnesse of this I néede not: for that euerie traueiler knoweth it. Of hir loue towards hir yong I must som∣what speake. This is the report that goeth of hir: at one time she bringeth forth many: and ouer those many as though they were but one, she is all alike vigilant. The greatest perils that most endamage them are the Sea stormes or tempestes: at these therefore she vseth this knack. She is saide to encompasse them all round about with hir bending bodie, and so as in a Parlour house safely to defende them: of other she is saide to swallow them vp into hir entrayles or belly for a time: and there to kepe them safely: after the broyling of the Sea be∣ing once ended she poureth them out againe, and so by this meanes they are without their perill.
Ofhe Woulfe. THe Woulfe is called Lupus saith Isidore, as if you would say Leopos, footed like the Lyon. It is a most rauinous kinde of Beast, terrible, and astonying a man at his first sight: whereof arose an olde Prouerbe, Lupus in fa∣bula. Signifieng, that there it was best to stay, and to haue no more such talke of him as was talked of before. Aristotle saith, that in time of coniunctiō they be most fierce, alwaies wood so long as they haue yong. And the same Au∣thor also saith, that when they are hunted and put to flight, they cary their yong with them, & in their iourneying they eate of Origan, to sharpe their teeth, which are in a maner like to our Saw. They being in extreme hunger (ra∣ther than they should famish) féede hartily vp∣on yearth and such like grosse matter. Ouid recordeth of a pleasure done or of well deser∣uing in this kind to two brethren, Romulus & Remus, whome Amulius their Graundfather sought to haue destroyed. And thus he shew∣eth the same. Venit ad expositos (mirum) Lupae faeta gemellos, quis credat pueris non nocuisse faeram. A Woulfe with belly big with yong to two twinnes abiect came
who in the world would not haue though that these should haue had harme Likewise a hée Woulfe of wonderfull crueltie is reported at the beheading of Edmond King of England to haue taken away from the cō∣pany his heade, and to haue preserued it long time without hurt or blemish. Of the Worme. THe Worme is called Vermis, quasi Ver∣tens, for complication or folding had in hir body as it crepeth, some wil haue it called Ver∣mis, for shewing hirself first in the springtime at what time, the whole kinde commeth forth. As they haue diuers kinds, (although but one common name) so haue they diuers meanes to engender. For some arise of rottennes of flesh, some of corrupt humors, some by drie rotten∣nesse: Againe some by méeting had of both kinds. Wormes are verie wonderfull in their kinde. One kind which is called the Panlmer that that maketh hauocke of our fruite in the Garden or field: another which breedeth in the toppes of Ashes and Oliues, and is in colour gréene: in humor or iuice verie poysonous, and is called Cantharis, another which is cal∣led the Cauler, which eateth out the sides of ye leaues of many herbes and especially of Basel.
Another which is named Cnips, which eateth through Timber and hauing eaten it through neuer resteth in al one place: wherfore he hath his Prouerb. Cnips in loco stare non potest. And is properlie applied to men, that be waue∣ring and inconstant. And there is a Worme called Cerastes, which when she hath had hir belly full and eaten inough, engendreth ano∣ther. And there is another which is called the fier Worme, & semeth as it were to be a kinde of Spider: which flyeth by night to the candle∣light or flame of the fier, and hath hir pastime so a while, till hir winges be singed or brent: & after that she hirselfe also lacking these, cannot escape, but is also brent: whose follie hath also raysed vp a Prouerb Pyraustae gaudere gau∣dium. The fire worme hath ioyed his ioy: foo∣lish men pleasure is little and short. The Be∣tle also is of the same linage and stock that the Worme is: likewise the Spider both y• of the yearth, and that also of the water. This laste is of such nimblenesse that running vpō the water neuer drowneth nor deaueth, like∣wise the Butterflie: out of whose dung Mothes are said to bréede, with many moe else, which do require longer discourse. FINIS.
The Conclusion. AS Vatinius Seruilius in his life time was hated & approchfully spoken of for that he like a Snaile spent all his life time in ease and ydlenesse, without any fruite that he gathered either to better himselfe or others: so contrariwise could Cleanthes the Philosopher well away with labour and paine∣taking in writing after his sort: & was glad to vtter abrode yt that was in him best to doe. And as Cle∣anthes is yet spoken of, not for any great workes of his, or for that he in stile and inditing excelled other: but for that he employed all his endeuour to the cō∣moditie of others: so haue I (gentle Reader) one as farre behinde Cleanthes, as he was the sect and Geneologie of the Peripaticians, somewhat vnlaced or vnripped, some of the Seames of the thirde quar∣ter of Philosophies attire or aray: (for hir whole coate as we reade, hath but three quarters: the one called Dialectike: the other Morall or Ciuill: the thirde naturall or wonderfull.) Although I haue not shewed thee hir altogither naked which thing Aristotle & others of his sect, as also Albert & Pli∣nie haue done: the sight or shew whereof if thou co∣uerest, I would wish thee to resort to these: For theirs is the Fountaine: and mine a small Arme thereof. Yet had I rather be an arme eyther of these or of some other as Cleanthes was, then to be no∣thing at all as was Uatinius. And yet for all this when I had enterprised this, I was not ignorant that Sicconius that ment so wel, had his Catllus: euerie Turnus had his Drances: euerie Cicero had his Salst: & for such his malice is now called Cice∣romastix Ciceros whip. Likewise euerie Plato hath his Xenophon. Uarro hath his Palemon, yea & this Liuer is so whte on fire that the witch and Sor∣ceresse Cyrce enuieth yt Scilla so amorous a Nimph
should haue a do with Glaucus or haue his loue: in∣somuch that she hath infected that Fountaine wher∣in Scylla was woont to wash hir selfe. But let the Queane take heede least she at the request of Scylla be not turned into a Sea monster. And let muttring Mutius take heede least he be serued with the same sawce. Uirgil requited Bauius and Meuius. Fur∣ther, let these vnderstande that euerie man is not at Corinth. Neither can euerie man carrie a Palme or Lawrel Cheeke by Cheeke with Orpheus or Dor∣ceus: neyther yet hath euerye man Harmognes Harpe. Tell me, canst thou play after Tellens tune, or haue this to be thy peculiar Prouerbe? Cane ea que sunt Tellenis. Sing after Tellens sort: that is to say, sing sweetly, or let vs heare a heauēly noise. No. Let not euery man looke to play and striue with Tellen or with Agathon. It shall suffice vs to haue Philomelus his cunning. And ye Hellyconians, al∣though that Babys come in in place amongst you: as he did when as Minerua played so sweetely, yet if he shall disquiet you (as Babys did Minerua) shame him not with ieasting or iarring (no more thē Minerua did) but thinke that his shame is great y∣nough (whatsoeuer he be) if that he playeth & har∣peth ylfauouredly. If God giue him life he may haue better perfection and ripenesse. And thus much I had to the learned sort. The other I doe not mis∣trust: for whom principally I was couetous to be∣stowe this such my trauaile, and will (if I shall see them thankefull hereafter) more aboundantlye to their delectation and profite. So that if they haue any consideration at all, they may be moued at this the working of God in these such his inferiour Creatures: who is to be praysed for euer and euer. Amen.
Imprinted at London by Henry Denham, dwelling in Pater∣noster Rovve at the Starre Anno Domini. 1567. Iune. 3. Cum Priuilegio.
