18069 99848604 13712
PRINCIPLES FOR YONG PRINCES. COLLECTED OVT OF SVNDRY AVTHOVRS, BY GRORGE MORE, Esquire. PROV. 19. Heare counsell, and receiue instruction, that thou mayst be wise in the latter end. printer's or publisher's device Printed at London, 1629.
To the Reader. HOnourable and courteous Reader, though I had no intention to publish this colle∣ction, yet now vpon some considera∣tion, and for that also I hold it as fit for yong Noblemen and Gentlemen to read, as for yong Princes to vnderstand, for that they may reap some profit thereby, I thought it not inconuenient to commit the same to the Presse, commending it to your good acceptance, and fauourable Censure, my meaning to you being of more value then my labour. And so I rest, denoted to doe you better seruice. GEORGE MORE.
The Table of the Chapters contained in this Booke. THe Regall and Politicke gouernment. 1 Who fittest to gouerne. 3 A Prince to be iust in his sen∣tence. 4 A Prince to be true of his word. 8 A Prince to be constant in his act. 12 A Prince to be secret. 16 A Prince to be liberall. 18 A Prince not to be couetous. 19 A Prince to be learned. 21 A Prince to be religious ibid A Prince not to shed innocent blood. 23 A Prince to be circumspect in giuing credit to reports. 25 A Prince to be mercifull. 28 A Prince not to be proud. 29 A Prince to be humble. 31 A Prince not to exceede in anger. 33 A Prince to be moderate in his dyet. 35 A Prince to be continent of life. 37 A Prince to beware of Para∣sites. 39 Who to be of a Princes coun∣sell. 43 Not to commit the Gouerne∣ment of the Cōmon-wealth to one Counsellour one∣ly. 47 Not to place a Stranger in authority. 50 Dangerous to take ayde of a Stranger. 51 A Prince to get and keepe the loue of his Subiects. 52 Who to haue charge in war 56 A Prince to bee well aduised before he begin Warre, and carefull in his fight. 61
PRINCIPLES for yong PRINCES. CHAP. 1. The Regall and Politicke Gouernment: AS in naturall things the Head being cut off, the rest cannot be called a Body: no more can in Politicke things a Mul∣titude or Communality without a head be Incorporate. Whereupon the Philosopher, 1
Politicorum saith, That whensoeuer of many is made one, one amongst them must gouerne, and the rest be gouerned. Therefore a people desiring to liue in society together, and willing to erect either a Kingdome, or other Politicke Body, must of necessity chuse one to gouerne that Body. Who in a Kingdome of Regendo, is called Rex. And so by the people is established a Kingdome, which gouern∣ment is absolutely the best. And as the Head of the Physicall Body cannot change the veines and sinewes thereof, nor deny the Members of their proper strength and necessary nurriture: no more can a King (who is head of the Polliticke Body) alter or change the lawes of that body, or take from the people their goods or substance against their wils. For a King is chosen to mainetaine the Lawes of his Subiects, and to defend their bodies and goods. So Brute arriuing in this Iland with his Troians, erected here a Regall and Politicke gouernment, which hath for the most part continued euer since, for though we haue had many changes, as first the Romans subduing the Brittaines, then the Bri∣taines entring againe: then the Saxons, then the Danes, then the Saxons againe, and lastly the Normans: yet in the time of all these Nations, and during their raignes, the Kingdome was for the most part gouerned in the same manner that it is now. Plutarke saith, that at first all that gouerned were called Tyrants, but afterward the good Gouernnours called Kings, and the euill Go∣uernours Tyrants: for in the beginning, some men co∣uetous of honour and glory, did by their strength force the people to obey them, and to subiect themselues to their lawes at their pleasure, and so established one∣ly a Regall gouernment, which done by force, and go∣uerned against all right and reason by rigour, was ac∣counted tyrannicall. For though a man by force doe subdue Cities and Countries, yet he ought to rule ac∣cording to reason: and if he know God according to the Law of God. But when he is chosen, or admit∣ted King by the people, and hath his power from them, he may not subiect the people to any other pow∣er, yet he hath a great and large prerogatiue, which he may vse at his pleasure. And here I thought not amisse to set downe some few Lawes and Customes of other Common-wealths, wherby their good gouernment and life may appeare, they not being Christians.
Ptolomeus, King of Egypt, feasting one day, seuen Ambassadours, at his request, euery one of them shew∣ed vnto him three of their principall Lawes and Cu∣stomes. And first the Ambassadour of Rome said, wee haue the Temples in great reuerence, we are very obe∣dient to our Gouernours: and we doe punish wicked men, and euill Liuers, seuerely. The Carthagenian Am∣bassadour said, in the Common-wealth of Carthage, the Nobility neuer cease fighting, nor the Common Peo∣ple and Artificers labouring, nor the Pphilosophers teaching. The Cicilian said, In our Common-wealth, Iustice is exactly kept: Merchandize exercised with truth, and all men account themselues equall. The Rho∣dians said: at Rhodes old men are honest: yong men shamefast: and women solitary, and of few words. The Athenians said, In our Common-wealth, rich men are not suffered to be deuided in Factions: nor poore men to be idle, nor the Gouernours to be ignorant. The Lacedaemonians said, In Sparta enuy reigneth not, for all men are equall, nor couetousnesse, for all goods are common: nor sloth, for all doe labour. In our Common-wealth, said the Ambassadour of the Sicyonians, voyages are not permitted, because they should not bring home new Factions: Physitians are not suffered lest they should kill the sound: nor Law∣yers, to take vpon them the defence of Causes and Sutes. And to these may be added, Anatharsis Letter to Cressus, King of Lydia, concerning the Gretians. Know (saith he) that in the studies of Greece, we learne not to Command, but to obey: not to speake much, much, but to keepe silence: not to be contentious, but to be humble, not to get much, but to content our selues with a little: not to reuenge our harmes, but to pardon iniuries: not to take from others, but to giue our owne: not to take care to be honoured, but to la∣bour to be vertuous: Lastly, we learne to despise that which others loue, and to loue that which others de∣spise, which is pouerty. CHAP. 2. Who, fittest to gouerne.
NOw to shew what manner of man is fittest to go∣uerne, I reade in Liuie, that men borne in Armes, great in deeeds, and rude in eloquence, ought to be cho∣sen Consuls: and that men of quicke spirits, sharpe wits, learned in the Law, and eloquent, should be for the City. For a Prince (so the Consull was for his time) ought to be a Martiall man, stout and couragi∣ous as well to defend his subiects, as to offend his ene∣mies; great and worthy in his actions, as well to be fea∣red of his foes, as to be beloued of his friends: and not to be curious, to speake eloquently, but to deliuer his mind plainely and wisely: it being more necessary for a Prince to doe well, then to speake well. For wise words are not commendable, if the deeds be not an∣swerable, whereupon the Philosopher Pacuinus saith, those are to be hated, who in their acts are fooles, and in their words Philosophers. They that will therefore (saith Plato) haue glory in this life, and attaine to glo∣ry after death, and be beloued of many, and feared of all, let them be vertuous in doing good works, and deceiue no man with vaine words. And he counselleth the A∣thenians to chuse a Gouernour that is iust in his sen∣tence, true of his word, constant in his act, secret and li∣berall. These be the principall morall vertues most cecessary in a Prince. CHAP. 3. A Prince to be iust in his sentence.
FOr a Prince ought to be iust in his sentence, accor∣ding to the words of Salomon, Sap. 1. saying, Loue Justice you that Iudge the Earth, For a iust King (saith he) Pro. 29. doth aduance his Countrey: and the King that iudgeth the poore rightly, his throne shall be establish∣ed for euer. Therefore he ought not to be led, either by fauour, passion, or gaine: but according to equity and iustice: and to haue care that all his Counsellors and Magistrates doe the like. And to attaine to this ver∣tue of Iustice; a Prince must call to God for wisedome, which he cannot obtaine, being of euill life. For wise∣dome will not enter into a soule possessed with malice, nor dwell in a body subiect to sinne, (saith Salomon) Sap. 1. But if thou (saith he) call for wisedome, and encline thine heart to Prudence: then shalt thou vnderstand Iustice, and iudgement, and equity, and euery right way. Prou. 2. Therefore he prayeth, saying: Giue mee (O Lord) that wisedome which assisteth thy seate, and cast me not off from the number of thy seruants, for that I am thy bond-slaue, and the sonne of thy bond-woman, a weake man, and of short life, vnable to vnderstand aright, what is Iustice and Law: and whosoeuer is the most perfect and excellent amongst the sonnes of men, he is to be accounted as no body, if thy wise∣dome doth not assist him. Sap. 9. All good and worthy Princes haue laboured to attaine to this wisedome, and to execute iustice most exactly, insomuch that some haue not spared their owne children: so sacred a thing they held Iustice to be. As for example, Brutus, who vnderstanding that his two sonnes were of the conspi∣racy for Tarquinus Superbus, caused them both to be put to death in his owne presence.
Cassius likewise seeking to get the loue of the people, and to make himselfe King, was beaten to death by his father. Pau∣sanias, Generall of the Lacedaemonians, receiued 500 ta∣lents of gold to betray Sparta, but Agesilaus his father vnderstanding thereof pursued him into the Temple of Minerua (whither he fled for Sanctuary) and caused the doores of the Temple to be nayled vp, and so there made him dye of famine, then his mother tooke his corpes, and threw it to the dogs, not suffering it to be interred. Darius likewise, King of Persia, vnderstan∣ding that his sonne Ariobrazanes ment to betray him to Alexander Magnus, cut off his head. Titus Manli∣us, being challenged by one of the Latins, to fight the Combate stepped forth of his ranke, and in Combate killed him, yet because it was done without license, his owne father, being then Consull and Generall present∣ly put him to death Posthumius likewise, did the same to his sonne. Fidericke, Earle of Harlebecque, and For∣rester of Flanders, hauing made very straite Lawes, for the reducing of his Countrey to lustice and good life, put his sonne to death for breaking the Law, in taking a basket of Apples from a poore woman, and not pay∣ing for them. Edward the first, put his sonne in prison, Prince Edward, for breaking the Parkes of the Bishop of Chester. Henry the fourth, also commended the Lord chiefe Iustice of England, for committing the Prince to prison, for transgressing the Law. And King Antiochus had that care to haue Iustice ministred, as he writ to all the Cities of his Kingdome, that they should not execute any thing he commanded if it were contrary to Law: but they should first aduertise him thereof: The Emperour Justinian likewise comman∣ded the Lawyers to be sworne that they should not plead in an euill and vniust cause. The like Law was made in the ninth Parliament of James the first, King of Scotland, that all Counsellours and Aduocates, be∣fore they plead any temporall cause, should take oath and sweare that they thinke the cause to be good they plead. Lewis the ninth, King of France, was a iust and vertuous Prince, louing the good, and punishing the wicked, and was a Capitall enemy to sutes, comman∣ding the Iudges to doe speedy Iustice, so that sutes then were laid away. Alexander Magnus was so farre from being transported from Iustice, as when any made complaint to him of another, he slopped alwayes one eare, saying, he must keepe that for the party accused. The Emperour Adrian was of that integrity in Iustice, as one Alexander accused another before him, called Aper, and bringing his proofes onely in writing, he said that his informations were but Paper and Inke, and perhaps forged, and that a man ought not to be con∣demned but by honest and substantiall witnesses, and therefore he sent Aper to Rufus Gouernour of Mace∣donia (from whence he was brought) commanding him, diligently to examine the witnesses against him, and to see that they were honest, and of good name. King Edgar of England had likewise that care to doe Iustice, as in Winter time he would ride vp and downe
the Countrey, and make enquiry of the misdemeanors of his Officers and Gouernours, and punish them se∣uerely that offended the Law. And as the followers of Iustice shall not onely be famous in this world, but shall perpetually liue, and receiue a kingdome of glory in the world to come, as saith Salomon, Sap. 5. So the Princes that minister iniustice, and do not iudge right∣ly, shall reape infamy, and incurre the high displeasure of Almighty God, as Salomon also witnesseth, saying: Hearken (O Kings) and vnderstand: learne you who are Judges of the bounds of the earth, in respect that power is giuen vnto you from aboue, and strength from the High∣est, who will examine your works, and search your thoughts, and because when you were Ministers in his Kingdome, you did not iudge rightly, nor iudge rightly, nor keepe the Law of Iustice, nor walke in the way of God, he will appeare vn∣to you quickely, and horribly: for most rigorous iudgement is done vnto those that gouerne. With the poore and meane man mercy is vsed: but mighty men shall suffer torments mightily, Sap. 6. And the royall Prophet saith, that God is terrible to the Kings of the earth, Psal. 75. Which doth very well appeare by the strange punish∣ments he oftentimes inflicted vpon them, as vpon Pharaoh, who was drowned in the red Sea, pursuing Moses, and the seruants of God: vpon Nabuchadnezzer, who was cast downe from his Throne, and made com∣panion to beasts: vpon Ozias, who was strucken by God with a filthy leprie: vpon Ioram by an incurable fluxe: vpon Antiochus the Tyrant, who rotted aliue: vpon Herod, who for killing Saint Iames, and persecu∣ring the rest of the Apostles was strucken by an An∣gell, and consumed with wormes whilest he liued: vpon Mmpricius King of Great Britaine, who was deuoured with Woldes: vpon Anastasius the Emperor, who was killed with thunder: vpon Seldred a Saxon, King of
England, who waskilled by the Dinel, as he was banquetting with his Nobility: vpon Drahomira Dut∣ches of Bohemia, who for procuring the death of Lu∣diuille her mother in law, a very vertuous woman, and of many Priests also, was, as she passed in her Coach, ouer the place where the Priests were murthered, swal∣lowed vp by the earth: vpon the wicked King of Na∣uarre, Anno 1387 who fell into such an infirmitie, that all his limbes were cold: for remedy whereof hee was sowed in a cloath wet in aqua vitae: and when the man had done, for lacke of a knife to cut the thred in his needle, he burned it with the Candle he vsed, and so by chance set the cloath on fire, which could not bee quenched, but that the King lying three dayes in ex∣tremetorment, dyed thereof. And many moe for their iniustice and wickednesse, haue beene punished very strangely, and oftentimes lost their Kingdomes: for a kingdome, as appeareth; Eccle. chap. 11. is transferred from Nations to Nations, for iniustice and iniuries. Therefore it behooueth a Prince to haue most speciall care hereunto. CHAP. 4. A Prince to be true of his word. IT is requisite that a Prince should be true of his word, and faithfull of his promise, both towards God and man, for it is said, Deut. 23. When thou hast made a promise or vow to thy Lord God, be not slacke to yeeld it, for he doth require it at thy hands. And
Salomon saith, Prou. 8. J detest a double tongue. And againe, Pro. 17. he saith, that a lying lippe doth not become a Prince. Cicero likewise De officijs, saith, that fides, which wee call fidelity, (consisting in the verity and constant per∣formance of words promises, and couenants) is the foundation of Iustice, which preserueth a Common∣wealth. One of the lawes of the Knights of the Band in Spaine was, that if any of them broke his promise, or falsified his word, he went alone by himselfe, & no body spoke to him, nor he to any. And the Romans had great care alwayes to performe their word; insomuch, that the first Temple builded in Rome, was dedicated to the goddesse Fidelity. And vpon a time, they wanting money to pay their Souldiers, and to maintaine their Armies, thought it better to spend the goods of the Common-wealth, then not to pay the Souldiers their wages: saying if the Common-wealth be not vpheld by faith and keeping of promise, it will not be vpheld by riches. And at another time, because they could not ayde the Saguntines, according to promise in due time (they being besieged and for want of ayde, spoy∣led by Hanibal) did not onely build vp their City a∣gaine, but after this made warre in Spaine for reuenge, by the space of 14 yeares. In which time they subdu∣ed the Turditanes, (who brought Hanibal into Spaine) and made them pay tribute to the Saguntines, and cha∣sed out of all Spaine, the Carthagenians, and restored all the Saguntines that were either imprisoned or fled. Scipio making warre in Affrica against the Carthage∣nians, granted them Truce for a time that they might send Ambassadours to Rome, to treate of Peace, but be∣fore the Ambassadors returned from Rome, Asdrubal spoyled 230 shippes of the Romans, whereupon Scipio sent to Carthage, to aduertise them of the breach of the Truce: but his Ambassadours could not be heard, but were threatned by the people. Soone after, the Am∣bassadours of Carthage, returning home from Rome, came through the Campe of Scipio, who sent for them, and told them, that though Carthage had broken the Truce and law of Armes, yet would not he breake the custome of the Romans, which was to obserue the pub∣like faith, and so let them passe. Iulius Caesar likewise kept faith and promise alwayes with his enemies, though they broke with him. The Emperour Nerua, (succeeding
Domitian in the Empire, who had put to death diuers of the Senators) did promise that hee would put to death any Senator: which greatly plea∣sed all the Senate. Soone after some of the Senators conspired against him: which discouered, he would not put them to death, because of his promise. The Emperour Augustus, hauing made Proclamati∣on to giue 25000 crownes to him that should take Crocotas, Captaine of the Theeues in Spaine, called Bandeleros: Crocotas offered himselfe to the Emperour, and demaunded the money promised by him. The Emperour, for performance of his word, did not onely giue him the money, but his pardon also. Sextus Pom∣peyus, hauing warres with Antonius the Triumuir, and meeting him vpon a treaty of Peace, and thereupon in∣uiting of him to supper (giuing him his faith for his as∣surance and safty) was moued by some to detaine him prisoner: but he answered, that to be the Emperour of the world, he would not falsifie his faith. Licurgus, brother to Poledectes, King of Lacedaemonia, hauing pro∣mised fidelity to the King, refused the offer of the Queene, who being left great with child, offered to destroy it, and to make him King, if he would marry her. But he, like a faithfull brother, proclaimed her sonne King so soone as he was borne, gouerning onely during his minority, chosen thereunto by the people. Ferdinando, brother to Henry the third, King of Castile, being left Tutor to the Kings sonne, was vrged by the three Estates of Castile, to take the Crowne himselfe, but he refused it, saying: He would neuer be false, ei∣ther to his brother dead, or his brother liuing, to whom hee had promised fidelity. And as these and many moe, are famous for their fidelity and perfor∣mance of their word: so a number are infamous by their perfidiousnesse and breach of their word. For Plutarch saith, that Alexander Magnus, causing cer∣taine Indian Souldiers to be killed, (after they had yeel∣ded themselues to him vpon his word) spotted and stained the renowne of all his glorious Conquests, and royall vertues. Hanniball neuer kept his word nor faith with any, but to serue his owne turne. Therefore Au∣tiochus, King of Syria, (to whom he fled, vanquished by
Scipio) made no account of him. And he going from thence to Prusias. King of Bithynea, one as perfidious as himselfe, for that he meant to haue deliuered him to Quintius, Generall of the Romans, whereof Hannibal vnderstanding, poysoned himselfe. Siphax, King of Numidia, by breaking his word with Scipio, lost his Kingdome and life in captiuity. Ptolomeus, King of Egypt, hauing promised safety to Pompey (who fled vn∣to him, ouerthrowne by Caesar) notwithstanding put him to death, and sent his head to Caesar, which he re∣fused to see, and wept for sorrow, and commanded them that brought it to be put to death. Shortly after, Caesar assisted Cleopatra, killed Ptolomeus her brother, and made her Queene of Egypt. Alfonsas, sonne to Ferdinando, King of Naples, vnder the promise and safe∣gard of his father, got to come to him, foure and twen∣ty Princes and Barons, who notwithstanding his pro∣mise, put them in prison, and vpon the death of his fa∣ther (being foure and twenty yeares after) put them all to death. Charles the seuenth, King of France, when he was Dolphin, made John Duke of Burgundy beleeue that he would make a peace with him: whereupon they met at a place appointed, where Charles caused the Duke to be presently killed. But Charles, after this, wearied with the warres, Phillip, sonne to the Duke, made against him: and of the subiection England brought France into, by this opportunity, did recon∣cile himselfe to Phillip, and asked him forgiunesse open∣ly by his Ambassadours. Charles the last, Duke of Bur∣gundy, hauing giuen safe conduct to the Earle of Saint Paul, Constable of France, tooke him prisoner, and de∣liuered him to the French King, who put him to death. But Sultan Soliman, the great Turke, did worthily pu∣nish his Bascha, for falsifying his word, who sent into Ʋalona, to passe into Jtaly, landed at the Hauen of
Ca∣stro, where the Inhabitants being astonished, yeelded vnto him vpon his word and fidelity, that they should depart with bag and baggage: neuerthelesse, he slew them all, except those that were fit to serue for slaues. But he returning to Constantinople, Sultan caused him to be strangled for his disloyalty and perfidiousnesse, and sent backe all the prisoners with their goods into Italy. Thus you may see how honourable it is for one to keep their word, and what they deserue that falsifie their faith: for a faithlesse Prince is beloued of none, but hated of all, suspected of his friends, not trusted of his enemies, and forsaken of all men in his greatest neces∣sity. CHAP. 5. A Prince to be constant in his Act. IT is likewise very fitting that a Prince should be con∣stant in his Act. First, to aduise well before hee re∣solue, but after, resolution to be constant, and not changeable: For Saint Ambrose, writing to Simplician, saith: that a foole is mooueable as the wind: but a wise man is not astonished by feare, nor changed by force, nor sunke by sorrow, nor proud by prosperity. The Romans besieged Casselin, Fabius would haue giuen ouer the siege, but Marcellus perswaded him to the cōtrary, say∣ing: that as there are many things a good Captaine ought not to attempt, so ought he not to desist or giue ouer an enterprise once begun and taken in hand. Ber∣trand de Guesclin, a Frenchman, seruing Henry, against Peter, King of Spaine, was by the Prince of Wales taken prisoner, and Peter by this victory, restored to his Kingdome. The Prince offered to giue Bertrand his liberty without ransome, so he would serue Henry no more, which he refused, because Peter had murthered the Queene his wife,
Blanche de Burbon, and married a Sarizen kings daughter, the better to strengthen him∣selfe and had renounced the Catholicke faith. Then the Prince asked him whither he would goe if he were at liberty: he said, where he would soone recouer his losse, and desired the Prince to aske him no further. Well, said the Prince, consider what ransome you will giue me, for I referre it to your selfe. With thankes he said, he would giue him 100000 doubles of gold. The Prince thought he mocked him offering him so much, and said he would take the fourth part. I thanke you said Bertrand, and you shall haue 60000 doubles wil∣lingly. Of which the Prince accepted. Then said Ber∣trand, very constantly and confidently, Henry may now say and brag, that he shall die King of Spaine, for I will Crowne him, whatsoeuer it cost me. The Prince was astonished at his so haughty speeches, yet vsed him very houourably, and gaue him his liberty, whereupon hee paid his ransome, by the helpe of the King of France, and of Henry of Spaine. And after siue battels, tooke Peter prisoner, put him to death, and made Henry King. The Priuernates warring against the Romans, and not able to resist their forces, sent their Ambassadours to Rome, to demand peace: but because they had not ob∣serued the Treaties of Peace before time, some thought it not fit to yeeld to their demand, and to conclude a Peace with those that would not keepe it. Whereup∣on the Ambassadours were asked, what punishment they had (in their iudgement) deserued for breaking the Peace before. To which one of the Ambassadours answered, that the Priuernates had deserued the pu∣nishment which those deserue, that thinke themselues worthy of freedome and liberty, and hate slauery and bondage.
Some thought this answer too proud and perempto∣ry for men ouercome: neuerthelesse they were asked againe, if that they being pardoned for their former breach of peace, would frō thenceforth keep the Peace granted them: to which the Ambassadours answered againe very constantly, that if they gaue them a good peace, they would faithfully and perpetually keepe it: but if they gaue them an euill peace, it should not long continue. Vpon this answer, diuers of the Senate were moued, but the greatest part did not condemne them for this constant and resolute answer, conside∣ring that the Ambassadour spake as a free man, and that euery one in bondage will seeke for liberty, therefore it was concluded that the Priuernates should haue such a peace, as they should be admitted and receiued for Citizens of Rome, and enioy the same liberty and pri∣uiledge as the City of Rome did. Agiges, King of the Cretians, about to giue battell to the Licaonians, his Captaines told him that his ene∣mies were too great in number, but he not feared ther∣with, nor any thing changed, said, that he that would raigne ouer many, must fight with many. Leouidas likewise, sonne to Anaxandridas, when his men told him fighting in battell, that the Arrowes of his enemies were so many as they couered the Sunne, was not dis∣maid thereby but constantly continuing his fight said, then shall we fight vnder their shadow. And the great Prince Bias, falling by chance in the danger of his ene∣mies, the Athenians, and being asked of his Captaines, what they should do, he seeing their feare and incon∣stancy, was not moued, but answered, that they should report to the liuing, that he dyed figthing, and hee would report to the dead, that they went away flying. Scipio, though hee got the victory against Antiochus: yet was he not changed, but gaue him the same condi∣tion of peace he had offered him before the victory. Spurius Seruilius, Consull, being accused before the people for the same matter, for which they had con∣dmned Menemius, his fellow Consull, (who through griefe thereupon dyed) was of that constancy and cou∣rage, as he freed himselfe, and condemned the people for their proceeding against Menemius. Perses, King of Macedonia, who ouerthrone by Paulus Emilius, the Roman Captaine, was brought before him prisoner. Emilius did rise out of his seat, to receiue and honour
him as a great Prince falne into that misery by the haz∣zard of Fortune. But Perses, not constant in magna∣nimity, cast himselfe at his feet vpon the ground, v∣sing such base and abiect requests, vnseeming for a King, as Emilius said to him. Alas poore man thou dis∣chargest fortune, and chargest thy selfe, vnworthy of that honour thou hast had before, being so base min∣ded, which hath made thee an vnworthy aduersary of the Romans. But Cressus, King of the Lydians, being to be put to death by Cyrus, shewed such constancy and resolution, (remembring Solon) as Cyrus forgaue him: restored him, and made him one of his chiefest Coun∣sellours. And Pelopidas, prisoner in the hands of Alex∣ander, King of the Phocians, sent him word that he marueiled why he put his Citizens to death, and not him. The Tyrant wondring at his great constancy, asked why he made such haste to dye. To the end (said he) that thou being yet more hated of God and man, then thou art, may the sooner be destroyed. Leaena, priuy to the conspiracy of Hermodius and Aristogiton, with o∣thers, against the Tyrant of Athens, would neuer con∣fesse, nor accuse any, but bit of her tongue, and spit in the Tyrants face. In memory of which constancy, and secrecy, they erected a Lyonesse of brasse without a tongue, at the entry of the Castle. Zeno likewise disco∣uered for conspiring the death of Diomedes the Ty∣rant, accused the Tyrants best friends, to make him more afraid, and faining to tel him some thing of them in his eare, he bit off his nose. Then being beaten in a morter, to make him confesse, he bit off his owne tongue (with a singular constancy) because hee should accuse no body. Anaxagoras the Philosoher did the like. A Prince therefore should be constant, and pre∣pared for all fortunes. For Seneca saith, that as a cun∣ning workman can fashion an Image of any kinde of matter: so a wise man should be constant, and take in
good part all kinde of fortune: For (saith hee) as fire tryeth gold, so doth aduersity and crosse fortune, a man of valour. CHAP. 6 A Prince to be secret. IT is necessary that a Prince should vse great secresie in all his actions: for Valerius saith, that secresie is the best and surest bond, for by it great matters may be wrought, and without it Princes designements easily crossed. Therefore the Frenchman hath a prouerbe, say∣ing, Que ta chemisene sache ta guyse. Let not thy shirt know thy secret. Peter, K. of Arragon, being asked what he would do with a great Nauy he had prepared, (with which afterward he recouered Sicily from the French) said, that if he thought his shirt did know it, he would burne it. Hanniball flying from Neron, Neron left his Army neere vnto him, and went himselfe secretly with a reasonable force to ioyne with Liuius against Asdru∣bal, whose Army they ouerthrew, killed him, & 56000 of his men, and tooke prisoners 5400. Which done, Neron was returned to his Campe againe, before hee was knowne to be absent. At another time the Ro∣mans vsed such secresie, as King Eumenes demaunding of them aide against King Perseus, it was neuer known what was demanded, nor what was answered, be∣fore the warre was ended which the Romans made at his request. The Kings of Persia punished to death those that discouered any thing determined vpon in counsell. And in Darian, a place in the Indies, they will neuer discouer any secret, especialy the spies, for what torment soeuer. Both Leaena and Zeno, before mentioned, were greatly commended for their secre∣sie, as well as for their constancy. Alexander Magnus, reading a letter of great secresie, one Ephestion being in principall fauour with him, presumed to looke on, and to reade it also.
Alexander would not debarre him, but the letter being read, tooke his Ring, and with it sealed Ephestions mouth, saying, that hee who would charge himselfe with another mans secret, ought to haue his mouth close, and sealed. King Lysimachus greatly fauouring Philipides, bid him aske what hee would, and it should be granted him. Philipides said, I will accept of any fauour you will bestow of mee, so you commit not your secret to me: thinking it fittest for a King to keepe his secret to himselfe, and the sa∣fest for another not to know it. So had it been happy for Fuluio, if he had neuer knowne the Emperours se∣crets, for the Emperor Octauian committing a secret to him, he discouered it to his wife, whereof the Empe∣rour getting notice, was offended with him. Fuluio vnderstanding thereof, and in despaire of the Empe∣rours fauour, told his wife that he would kill himselfe. You haue reason, said she, seeing in so many yeeres you haue not knowne my imperfection, or if you did know it, to trust it: but though the fault be yours, yet will I be first punished, and so killed her selfe: then Fuluio did the like. The Poets fained Tantalus to be in hell, hauing about him water, & the fruits he desired to eat, which as he offered to take, fled from him alwayes: and this was his punishment, for reuealing that which was by the gods determined in Counsell. They feigned like∣wise Sisiphus to be in like sort punished in Hell, for the same offence, carrying a stone vpon his shoulders vp a hill, and comming to the top, the stone alwayes falleth from him downe againe, which he returneth to fetch, and so neuer resteth. Therefore Seneca saith, that a Counsellour ought to speake much to himselfe, but lit∣tle to others, for feare of discouering any secret. So that secresie is most requisite, both in a Prince, and in his Counsellours.
CHAP. 7. A Prince to be Liberall. LIberality is also necessary and most commendable in a Prince, for it is the bond to oblige all men to him, both friends and foes: for which vertue the Emperour Titus was most commended, who laboured by liberality to deface the report against his father for his couetousnesse, and alwayes said, that a man ought not to goe away sad from the face of a Prince. And remembring one night that he had shewed no liberali∣ty that day towards any, sighed, saying: my friends I haue lost this day. Nabuchodonosor kept bookes wher∣in he commanded to be written, the seruice which euery one did him, to the end he might reward them. Alexander Magnus going to the Conquest of Asia, gaue most of his liuing and Kingdome to his Cap∣taines, reseruing hope to himselfe. And hee being in Aegypt, a poore man asked him something towards the marriage of his daughters. Alexander gaue him a City very populous and rich. Sir, said the poore man, you mistake me, or vnderstand me not. No, said A∣lexander, but know, though thou be poore Biantius in asking, that I am Alexander in giuing. Iulius Caesar, before the Ciuill warre, was so liberall to get fauour and loue of the people, as he grew thereby 750000 Crownes in debt. Cato, for all the Townes he wonne in Spaine, did neuer take any thing for himselfe, but gaue all amongst his Souldiers, saying: that a Captaine ought not to seeke any thing in his charge, but honour and glory. Scipio Affricanus was so liberall, as he con∣temned riches, for in fifty foure yeeres that he liued, he did neuer buy nor sell any thing, nor made any buil∣ding, neither was there found in his house after his death, aboue thirty three pound weight of plate. Marcus Curius, Consull, who had thrice triumphed, was of the like disposition, for all possessions he had
was but a little meane house in the Countrey where he liued for the most part, when publike affaires did per∣mit him, labouring and tylling that little ground hee had himselfe. And when certaine Embassadours were sent to visite him, they found him dressing a Raddish for his supper. And they presenting him a great summe of money from the Commonalty, he refused it saying: he held it farre more honourable to command them that had gold, then to haue it himselfe. Lutius Quin∣tius did the like for after he had been Dictator, and tri∣umphed with greater pompe then euer did any before him, yet returned he to his poore house againe, refu∣sing all liuing and riches the Senate offered him. For riches and treasure is but a clog, and a heauy burthen to a wise man: which made all the Philosophers to contemne wealth. For Plato saith, he that honoureth riches, despiseth wisedome. Policrates bestowed fiue Talents for a gift, vpon one Anacreon, who for two nights after, was so troubled with care how to keepe them, and how to bestow them, as he carried them backe againe to Policrates, saying: they were not worth the paines which he had already taken for them. There∣fore a Prince should not care how to lay vp, but how to lay out with honour and wisedome. For the liberall person shall haue plenty, saith Salomon, Prou. 11. CHAP. 8. A Prince not to be couetous. ANd as by liberality a Prince may attaine to great honour: so by couetousnesse he may bring him∣selfe to vtter destruction. For the Emperour Pertinax was a very good and vertuous Prince, sauing that he was extreme couetous and miserable: insomuch that wheras he should haue rewarded the men of War, who did aduance him to the Empire, he took pensions from diuers of them, which Traian his Predecessor, had gi∣uen them, for which, and for his miserablenesse, he was
killed by his Souldiers. So was likewise Alexander Seuerus and his mother also, for the same vice. As in like manner were the Emperour Galba, and the Empe∣rour Mauricius. And the Emperour Phocas by his mi∣sery was the ruine and dissipating of the Roman Em∣pire, for in his time there fell from the Empire, France, Germany, Spaine, the greatest part of Italy, Esclauonia, the greatest part of Affrica, Armenia, Arabia, Macedo∣nia, Thracia, Assyria, Mesopotamia, Egypt, and many o∣ther Countries. Lewis the 11, King of France, was so miserable, as he was contemned of all Strangers, and caused rebellion in his own Countrey, for he put away all the Gentlemen of his houshold, and vsed his Tay∣lor for his Herauld of Armes, his Barber for his Ambas∣sadour, and his Physitian for his Chancellour, and in derision of other Kings, he wore a greasie hat of the coursest Wooll, and in his Chamber of accounts, in a bill was set downe 20 Souz for a paire of sleeues to his old doublet, and 15 Denieers for grease to his Bootes. He increased the charge vpon his Subiects, three milli∣ons more then any of his Predecessors had done: For which he was mightily hated. Calipha, King of Persia, hauing filled a Tower with Siluer, Gold, Iewels, & pre∣cious stones, and being in Warre with Allanus, King of the Tartarians, was so euill succoured by his owne peo∣people, because he was so miserable, and would not giue them their pay, as he was taken in his owne City, and by Allanus committed to prison, in the foresaid Tower, who said vnto him: if thou hadst not kept this Treasure so couetously, but hadst distributed it a∣mongst thy Souldiers, thou mightest haue preserued thy selfe, and thy City: now therefore enioy it at thine ease, and eate, and drinke thy fill, seeing thou hast loued it so well. And so let him die in the middest of his riches.
CHAP. 9. A Prince to be learned. THough it be not good that a Prince should be too great a Scholler, yet it is necessary that he should haue some learning: for Plato saith, that neither can ignorant men, nor those that spend all their life in stu∣dy, gouerne a Common-wealth. For great learned men are perplexed to resolue vpon affaires, ma∣king many doubts, full of respects and imaginati∣ons The City therefore of Norenberg, did not admit any great learned man into their Counsell, but had some notable learned men, with whom they did con∣ferre, vpon any doubt that might arise in the Counsell. The Vrsins likewise in Italy, would neuer permit any learned man to gouerne their Common-wealth. Yet Socrates saith, That wit without learning, is like to a tree without fruit. It is requisite therefore, that both the Prince, and his gouernours should be learned, as well the better to vnderstand their duties towards God, the Lawes of the Realme, the gouernment of other Common-wealthes, and their Ambassadours, and the Art of Stratagems of Warre. And a Prince should nourish and cherish all learning, for the attaining of all Arts and knowledge. And to that end Ptolemeus, King of Egypt, made a most famous Library in Alexandria, of 200000 Volumnes. CHAP. 10. A Prince to be religious.
BVt aboue all things, Religion is most requisite in a Prince, that he be carefull to serue daily the King of Kings, who will prosper him on his Kingdome in earth, so he seekes the Kingdome of heauen, which hee must first seeke for, as appeareth, Matth. 6. And in Deut. 17. a King is commanded, after he be placed in his Kingdome, to reade the Deuteronomy, that he may learne to feare God, and to keepe his words and Cere∣monies which are written in the Law, so doing, a Prince shall prosper, for Salomon saith: God preserueth the state of the righteous. and is a shield to them that walke vprightly, Prou. chap. 2. Trust therefore (saith he againe, Prouerbes, chapter 3.) in God with all thine heart, and leane not to thine owne wisedome. So Iacob, Moses, Hezekiah, and Elizeus, did not trust in themselues, but onely by their prayers and trust in GOD pre∣uailed against their enemies. And King Dauid, though he laboured by humane diligence to defend himselfe a∣gainst Absolon, yet especially sought to moue God to mercy, by prayer, 2 Reg. 15. The Emperour Marcus Antonius, being in Almany with his Army, was inclo∣sed in a dry Countrey, by his enemies, who stopped all the passages, that he & his Army were like to perish for want of water. The Emperors Lieutenant seeing him so distressed, told him, that he had hard, that the Christiās could obtaine any thing of their God by their Prayers. Whereupon the Emperour hauing a Legion of Christi∣ans in his Army, desired them to pray to their God for his and the Armies deliuery out of that danger. Which they presently did, and incontinent, a great thunder fell amongst the enemies, and abundance of water vp∣on the Romans, wherby their thirst was quenched, and the enemy ouerthrowne without any fight. But pray∣er will not auaile euery Christian, vnlesse he walke vp∣rightly, for God wil not heare the prayers of those that lye and wallow in sinue, as appeareth Joh. 9. And Da∣uid saith, Psal. 65. Jf J finde iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not heare me. And God saith, when you shall extend and lift vp your hands, I will turne mine eyes from you, and when you shall multiply your prayers, I will not heare you, for your hands are full of bloud, I saias, chap. 1. Therefore if a man be in wicked or bloudy sinne, his prayer is in vaine.
CHAP. 11. A Prince not to shed innocent blood. IT behoueth therefore a Prince to be vertuous, and to haue speciall care that he put not his hand in inno∣cent blood, neither by tyranny, malice, ambition, polli∣cy, or vpon false reports and informations. For, to be a Tyrant, is odious to God and man, and to bring him∣selfe to an euill end. As the Emperour Nero, who af∣ter he had put to death his mother Agrippina, his wife Octauia, his brother Brittannicus, and his Master Seneca. Besides many others, being proclaimed an enemy to the Common-wealth, could get no body to kill him, but was glad to kill himselfe, saying, Turpiter vixi, & tur∣pius morior. The Emperour Caius Caligula, amongst other his tyrannies, caused at his dinner and supper or∣dinarily, one to cut off before him the heads of poore prisoners, wherein he tooke great pleasure: in the end he himselfe was killed by his men, who conspired a∣gainst him. Nabis the Tyrant, who vsurped the go∣uernment of the Lacedaemonians, sent for eighty of their yong Princes, and without any cause put them all to death. And shortly after, Alexamenes, vnder pretence to serue him, with some company, suddenly strucke him off from his horse, and killed him. And as these tyrants had their iust rewards, so all others had the like measure. And for their wicked instruments, the peo∣ple oftentimes did Iustice vpon them. For Plutarch writeth, that the wicked Counsellors, and Instruments of
Apollodus, of Phalaris, Dionysius, Nero, and other ty∣rants, were cruelly tormented to death by the people, and iustly, saith he, because they, who corrupt, or se∣duce a Prince, deserue as much to be abhorred of eue∣ry one, as those who should poyson a publicke Spring, or Fountaine, whereof all the people doe drinke. But sometimes those Princes that doe vse instruments for their murthers will not auow their Commission, but doe themselues many times put them to death whom they imployed therein, sometimes secretly, sometimes publikely, either to rid themselues of the suspition and infamy thereof, or for feare of discouery. As Alexander Magnus at his fathers Funerals, com∣manded publike Iustice to be done vpon those, who himselfe had secretly imployed to kill him: The Em∣perour Tiberius, did not onely dissauow his Commissi∣on, giuen to a Souldier to kill Agrippa, but put to death Seianus, his speciall fauourite, and instrument of his mischiefe. Caesar Borgia, did the like by a fauourite of his. And let no Prince thinke that he can so con∣triue his matters, but in the end truth will be discoue∣red and knowne to the world: and through ambiti∣on, many haue shewed themselues very barbarous and bloudy, as Tullia, daughter to Seruius, seeing her selfe married to Aruus, a man of milde disposition, and her sister of a gentle spirit, married to Lucius Tarquinius, who was ambitious, and she not enduring to be thus matched, killed her husband Aruus, and her sister, and then married Tarquinius, whom she perswaded to kill her father Seruius, to haue the Kingdome, and she be∣ing in the streets when he was killed, went with her Coach very inhumanely, ouer his body, that his bloud besprinkled her cloathes.
Soliman, King of the Turks, when he heard the great noyse and shout of ioy his Army made for the returne of his sonne Sultan Musta∣pha out of Persia, caused him presently to be strangled in his outward Chamber, and his dead body to be cast out before the whole Army and one to cry with a loud voyce, that there was but one God, and one Sultan vp∣on the earth. He put to death also Sultan Soba, because he wept for his brother, and Sultan Mahomet, his third sonne, because he fled for feare, leauing one onely aliue to auoyde the inconuenience of many Lords. The Em∣perour Seuerus, hauing vanquished Albinus and Niger, his Competitor in the Empire, embrued with blood, put a great number to death, and told his sonne Geta, that he would not leaue him an enemy. Geta asked him, if those he put to death, had neither parents, friends, nor kinsfolke, yes, said the Emperour, a great number. Then said Geta, you will leaue vs many moe enemies then you take from vs. His sonne Bassianus, hauing murthered his brother Geta, to haue the Em∣pire alone, and doubting that the Senate would greatly mislike thereof, made a shew that he was sorry for his brothers death, and that he did it by the perswasion of Letus, his fauourite, whom therefore he put to death, and all those that did assist him in that action, likewise all those that were friends to Geta, lest they should at∣tempt any thing against him, yet in the end he was kil∣led. Alphonsus, King of Naples, hauing vniustly mur∣thered twenty foure of his Barons, could neuer sleepe quietly for representation of their shapes, which al∣wayes vexed him in his dreames. And in the end hee fell into that feare of the French, as leauing his King∣dome to his sonne, he fled into Spaine, to liue a in a Mo∣nastery, making such haste as he would take nothing with him. And his men perswading him to stay two or three dayes, to make his prouision: no, no, said hee, let vs be gone, doe you not heare how all the world cryes France, France? Hee knew himselfe to be so ha∣ted. King Iohn of England, murthered his nephew, and in the end was murthered himselfe. Richard, likewise, Duke of Glocester, murthered his two nephews, sonnes to Edward the fourth, to make himselfe King, and after was slaine in battell by Henry the seuenth: for blood re∣quires blood, and let a bloody Prince neuer looke for better end. CHAP. 12. A Prince to be circumspect in giuing credit to reports.
BVt many Princes haue been mightily abused by false reports, and wrong informations, yea, some∣times by the nearest and dearest vnto them, and those that should be most faithfull. Dauid therefore prayed God to deliuer him from wicked lips, and a lying tongue, Psal. 119. And in Eccle. 31. we are warned to take heed of our children, and of our houshold ser∣uants. And in the sixt chapter, it is said, Seperate thy selfe from thine enemies, and beware euen of thy friends: for where a man doth trust the most, there he may soonest be deceiued. As was the Emperour Glaudius, a tymorous man, and gouerned most by his wife Messaline, and by one Narcissus, who, of a slaue he had made free, and had familiar credit with Messaline. This Empresse became enamoured of a yong Gentleman, a Roman of a Noble house, called Appius Sillanus, and seeing that by no meanes she could draw him to satisfie her wanton de∣fires, she practised with Narcissus, that they both early one morning should come to the Emperour, and tell him that they dreamed that Sillanus went about to kill him, wch they did one after the other; & Messaline had giuen commandement, that Sillanus at that instant should come to speake with the Emperour. Where∣upon Sillanus innocently came, and knocked at the Emperours chamber doore: which the Emperour vn∣derstanding, and perswaded by them that their dreams were true, and that he came then to kill him, comman∣ded Sillanus presently to be put to death, which was done.
Salome, sister to Herod, King of Jury, perswaded him that the Queene his wife sought to poyson him, and brought certaine false witnesses to confirme her report, to which, the King giuing credit put his Queen to death. But this wicked sister, not satisfied with this fearing that the Kings two sonnes would reuenge their mothers death, perswaded the King, that they were practising how to kill him, for putting their mo∣ther to death. The King fearing the Authority of the Emperour, if he should put them to death, brought them before Augustus Caesar, who knowing their innocency by their weeping, & great lamentation, ex∣horted thē to be dutifull to their father, & their father to make much of them, and so dismissed them; but the Kings sister inuented new matter against them, & per∣swaded her brother to send the Emperor word theref, which he did: then the Emperor gaue him authority to punish them as he thought good, whereupon the King put them both to death. But after vnderstanding the truth, and that Antipater, his sonne by another wife, practised all this with his sister, he put him to death, & within few dayes after dyed himselfe, his intrailes be∣ing inflamed, and thereby his bowels rotted, raging at these accidents. Philip King of Macedonia, put to death his owne sonne Demetrius, vpon the false report and accusation of Persius his base sonne, and after, vn∣derstanding how he was abused, dyed raging. Adel∣stan, first Monarch of England, after the entry of the Saxons, through the false report of his fauourite, put his owne brother to death. Francis, Duke of Britaine, put his brother Giles to death, vpon the false report of those that were messengers betwixt them, and after, he vnderstanding the truth, put them to death also. Therefore as in 1 Iohn 4. it is said: Beleeue not euery spirit, but proue the spirits whether they be of God, or not: So a Prince should duly and throughly examine report, whether it be true or not, before he giue credit there∣unto, and especially if it concernelife: for innocent bloud doth cry to God for reuenge, as appeareth in the Apoc. 6. saying: How long, Lord holy, and iust, iudgest thou not, and reuengest thou not our bloud on them that dwel vpon the earth. And Salomon saith, that the hands which shed innocent blood, are most odious in the sight of God, Prou. ch. 4. Likewise Dauid affirmeth, Ps. 65.
That God doth abhorre abloody man. Therefore Junenal saith, that euery stay which is made to giue life to man, is good. And he that doth vse to examine a report, made vnto him, that toucheth a mans reputation, shall free him∣selfe from lyars, for a lye cannot abide examina∣tion. CHAP. 13. A Prince to be mercifull. A Prince therefore should incline himselfe to mercy, and pardon iniuries, and auoyd the vices which may draw him to blood, which chiefly are ambition, pride, choller, and subiection to a woman. Seneca saith, that forgiunesse is a valiant kind of reuenge. And the more powerfull a man is, the more is his honour to for∣giue. And Pittacus the Philosopher doth affirme, that pardon is better then reuenge: the one (saith he) be∣ing proper to the spirit, the other to a cruell beast. Therefore Alexander Magnus said, that a man wrong∣ed, had need of a more noble heart to forgiue, then to reuenge. And Cicero did more commend Caesar for o∣uercomming his owne courage, in pardoning Marcel∣lus, then for the great victories against his enemies. The Emperor Adrian, attaining to the Empire, forgot and put away all the enemies hee had before. Inso∣much, that after he was Emperour, meeting one of his enemies, would not touch him, but said to him, thou art escaped. Augustus Caesar, hauing many enemies, by reason of the ciuill warre, did not onely pardon them, but aduanced them to dignities and offices: and there∣by wonne their loue, and made them faithfull. Hamil∣car, hauing ouerthrowne Splendius, Generall of the Mu∣tineers against Carthage, pardoned the prisoners, and offered them seruice, or liberty to returne to their countrey, which got him great honour, and loue of many of his enemies. Scipio Affircanus, set at liberty all the Hostages he found in new Carthage, after he had wonne it by assault saying, He had rather bind men to him by good deeds, then by feare. And amongst the Hostages, there was a maruellous beautifull young La∣dy, who was contract to Allucius, Prince of the Celti∣berians:
Scipio commanded them both to be brought before him, and her parents came with great treasure to redeeme her by ransome. But Scipio said to Alluci∣us: my friend, vnderstanding of the loue betwixt this Lady and you, I haue kept her for you, not touched in honor, & for recompence of this fauour, I pray you be a friend to the Romans. Her parents then presented Sci∣pio with great treasure, which through much impor∣tunity he was content to take, but bestowed it present∣ly vpon Allucius, who, not long after came to serue Scipio, with 1400 horse. Scipio likewise by pardoning Massima, his vncle Massinissa became and continued a friend to the Romans. So that mercy bringeth friend∣ship, and cruelty hatred. CHAP. 14. A Prince not to be proud. PRide was the fall of Lucifer, the ouerthrow of Ba∣bylon, and the ruine of many a Prince, for, nemo su∣perbus amat superos, nec amatur ab illis. A proud man lo∣ueth not the gods, nor is beloued of them. Pride pro∣duceth, sometimes cruelty, but alwayes shame; for Sa∣lomon saith, when pride commeth, then commeth shame, but with the humble is wisedome, Prou. 11. Therefore God resisteth the proude, and giueth grace to the humble, Iam. 3.
Allades, King of the Latines, contemning the gods, de∣uised how to make a noyse like thunder and lightning, to make the people feare him as a god: but thunder and lightning falling vpon his house from heauen, and a Lake ioyning vpon his house, ouerflowing extraordi∣narily, he and his family were were all swallowed vp. Iulius Caesar, after he was Emperour, grew so proud, as he was therefore killed by the Senators in the Senate. And the Emperour Domitian was so proud, as that hee commanded in all his Proclamations and publicke speeches, these words to be vsed. Be it knowne vnto you from your god and master; for which he was hated of all the world, and in the end killed The Emperour Caius set in his palace like Jupitur, with a Scepter in one hand, and a thunderbolt in the other, and an Eagle at his side, a Cobbler seeing him, fel on a great laughter. The Emperour commanded him to be brought before him, and asked him at what he laughed; I laugh, said he, to see thy pride and folly. The Emperour laughed also at his answer, and punished him not, but delighted in his owne pride. But Philip, father to Alexander Magnus, to auoyde that vice, caused a child to cry vnto him euery day at his chamber dore, before hee went forth. Phllip, thou art a man mortall. Hieronimus, King of Cicily, being very yong, was wholly counselled by his brother in law Andronodorus, who made him proud and arrogant and to contemne euery one, and to giue audience to none, nor to suffer almost any to haue accesse vnto him, but to giue himselfe to all kinde of voluptuousnesse, and to be cruell and bloody. An∣dronodorus, hauing brought him to this, conspired with others against him. The treason discouered, and one Theodorus called in question, therefore confessed, that he was of the conspiracy, and being vpon the torture, knowing he must dye, accused (to be reuenged of the King) the Kings most faithfull friends and seruants. To which the King giuing credit, put them all to death, and immediately after, was killed by the Conspirators. Andronodorus presently seized vpon Siracusa, thinking to make himselfe King. But he had such successe there∣in, as he, his wife, and all his family, and all the line of the King, were quite extirped, as well innocents, as offenders. Timothae, a Captaine of Athens, through his pride, did attribute all his victories, onely to his owne pollicy and wisedome. Whereupon (saith Plu∣tarch) the gods were angry at his foolish ambition, and did neuer prosper him after, but all things went a∣gainst him, and in the end hee was so odiously ha∣ted, that hee was banished
Athens, Cresus, being in the height of his pride, most sumptuously set in his Throne, asked Solon, if euer he had seene a more gorge∣ous and glorious sight, yea, said Solon, both Capons, Fesants, and Peacocks, for their colours are naturall. Menecrates, a Phisitian, because he was excellent in his rt, grew so proud, as he caused himselfe to be called Iupiter. But Philip, King of Macedonia, to make him know himselfe, inuited him to a banquet, and made a Table to be prouided for him by himselfe, which Me∣necrates seeing, was very ioyfull that it pleased the King to do him that honour, but when he see that in stead of meat, they brought him nothing but incense, he was ashamed, and departed with great anger. Yet this King grew a little proud after his conquest, inso∣much, that he writ a sharpe letter to Archidamus, sonne to Agesilaus, who answered him, saying: If thou mea∣sure thy shadow, thou shalt not finde it to be growne greater since thou didst ouercome Pride therefore cannot make a man great but odious. CHAP. 15. A Prince to be humble. CHrist did humble himselfe for vs: therefore wee ought to humble our selues for Christ, who saith, He that doth humble himselfe shall be exalted, but he that doth exalt himselfe shall be humbled, Mat. 23. Humility therfore (affirmeth Seneca) is the handmaiden of wise∣dom For a wiseman is humble, if not humble, he is not wise. Caralus Magnus, to haue euer before his eies, the i∣mage of pouerty and humility, did cause certaine very poore men to eate alwayes in his presence, their meat vpon the ground. The Romans had a custome, that the Emperor, after a victory, was drawn in a Chariot with foure horses, to the Capitall and a Clowne set besides him in the Chariot, who strucke him euery foot in the necke, saying: Know thy selfe. And when the Empe∣rour was crowned one al wayes came to him, and as∣ked
him, of what kind of mettall or stone hee would haue his Tombe made. And all this to the end the Em∣perour should be humble. The Emperour Constanti∣nus Magnus, was of that humility, as he excelled all o∣ther Emperours and Princes whatsoeuer: Yet of that valour as he, subdued Licinius his Competitor, and ma∣ny Pagan Nations. The Emperour Theodosius, being rebuked by S. Ambrose, for a great offence, did in such humility acknowledge his fault, as he did open pen∣nance therefore, willingly in the Church, where Saint Ambrose was ministring the Sacrament, and so was admitted to communicate. The Emperours, Ʋalenti∣nian and Justinian, were Princes of great humility, yet famous for their many victories. The Emperour A∣lexander Seuerus, was of that humility, as he would not suffer any to vse other salutations to him, then to say, God saue thee Alexander. Scipio, preuailing in Spaine against A sdruball, the Spaniards called him King, which Title he refused, saying: it was sufficient for him to be called their Generall. Agathocles, King of Cicily, be∣cause he was but a poore Potters sonue, caused him∣selfe to be serued with vessels of earth, amongst his vessels of gold and siluer, to shew his humility, and what he was. Julius Caesar, Augustus Caesar, Claudius, Domitian, Galba, Traian, Alexander, and many other Princes, were of that humility, as they gaue continuall audience themselues vnto the people, to the great con∣tent and comfort of the people. And Octauius Caesar, did fit daily in iudgement himselfe, and did abhorre the title of Lord, insomuch, that when said to him, O good and gracious Lord he reproued him sharply therefore. And the more humble that a man is, the more is he in the fauour of God, who, as Saint Iames saith, chapter 3. doth resist the proud, and giueth grace to the humble.
CHAP. 16. A Prince not to exceed in anger. ANd a Prince to be too passionate, and too cholle∣ricke, is dangerous, for choller sometimes burneth and dryeth vp the veines, and taketh life, sometimes it blindeth the vnderstanding, and taketh away sense and reason, wherby many a time sodaine mischiefe is done, that bringeth long and too late repentance, for the mind doth not easily see the truth (saith Salust) where passion and affection beareth sway. Therefore a Prince especially, should learne to know himselfe, and his imperfections: for Plato saith, that the perfect du∣ty of a man, is first to know himselfe. And the first Precept that was written in the Temple of Apollo at Delphos, was, Know thy selfe. And knowing himselfe, he must then labour to command himselfe, and make reason rule nature. Agesilaus, did more glory that hee could command himselfe, then in that he was a King. For he that is slow to anger (saith Salomon) is better then the mighty man: and he that ruleth his owne mind, is bet∣ter then he that winneth a City, Prou. 16. Yet moderate ire (saith Plutarch) doth second valour and fortitude. To auoid choller, Athenodorus the Philosopher, counsel∣led Augustus Caesar, neuer to do, or say, any thing when he was angry, before he had repeated the twenty foure letters of the A, B, C; thinking by that time his chol∣ler would be appeased.
Ʋirginius, being chosen Gene∣rall of the Roman Hoste, refused it, fearing to exceed in choller against Appius Claudius, his enemy. Crotis, King of Thracia, hauing a present brought vnto him, of ma∣ny faire vessels of glasse most curiously wrought, after he had well recompenced the gift, did breake them all himselfe of purpose; fearing lest through choller, (to which he was subiect) he should too seuerely punish a∣ny of his sernants, if they by chance should breake any of them. But the Emperour Ʋalentinian was so ouer∣charged with choller, that he fell into such a rage a∣gainst certaine Ambassadours, as he lost his voyce and speech, and so was carried to his bed and let ten blood, but bled not, choller hauing burned and dryed vp the veines, and so dyed. Patience therefore is a happy vertue, by which a man may preserue his body, and possesse his soule, saith Christ, Luke 21. In your patience you shall possesse your soules. And to attaine to this vertue, Diogenes asked almes of the Images in Athens, to make him take deni∣all patiently. Aristotle, being told that one railed on him, was not moued, but said, whe I am absent let him beate me also. And Socrates, being abused, spurned, and kicked by an insolent fellow, and seeing his friends offended therewith, said: How now my Masters, if an Asse had kicked and giuen mee a rap on the shinnes, would you haue me to yerke out, and to kicke him a∣gaine? Antigonus, hearing his Souldiers reuile him behind his pauillion, said to them, you knaues, could you not goe a little further off, when you meant to raile vpon me? One Nicanor rayled vpon Philip King of Macedonia, for which his Counsell wold haue had him seuerely punished, but the King very patiently answe∣red, first let vs see whether the fault be in him or in vs. And vnderstanding that Nicanor had deserued well, and that he had neuer giuen him any thing, sent him a rich gift. After which, Niconor spoke very much good of the King: Whereupon the King said to his Counsell, I see well that I am a better Physitian for backebiting then you are: and that it is in my power to cause either good or cuill to be spoken of me.
CHAP. 17. A Prince to be moderate in his dyet. NAture is content with a little, therefore if a man doe either eate or drinke, more then sufficeth na∣ture, it is superfluous, and ingendreth euill humours, corrupteth the body, and weakneth the spirits and vn∣derstanding: for Diogenes saith, that the wit is made dul with grosse and immoderate dealing. And Plato af∣firmeth, that those who vse to eat much, although they haue a good wit, yet cannot be wise. The reason is, saith Plutarch, because the body being ful of meat, corrupteth the iudgement in such sort, as maketh a man neither fit to giue counsell, nor to gouerne in a Common-wealth, nor to doe any good worke. The Emperour, Octauius Caesar, had therefore ordinarily at supper, but three dishes of meat, and when he fared best he had but sixe. And the Egyptians in their feasts and banquets, had a dead body dryed, brought in amongst them, that the sight thereof might containe them in modesty, and make them temperate in their feeding. Ada, Queene of Caria, sent Alexander Magnus certaine skilfull Cooks, whom he refused, and sent her word, that he had better then they were; namely, for his dinner, early rising, and walking a good while before day, and for his supper, a little dinner, for in those dayes they did commonly eate but one meale a day, as appeareth by Plato, who, being demaunded if he had seene any new or strange thing in Cicily, said, that he had found there a Monster of nature, which did eate twice a day, meaning Dioge∣nes the Tyrant. Agesilaus, King of the Lacedaemonians, passing his Army through the Countrey of
Thracia, they presented with meale fowle, baked meates, and all other sorts of delicate meates and conserues. The meale hee was willing to take, but not the rest, yet through great intreaty, he accepted of all, and gaue all and gaue all (sauing the meale) to his slaues, and being asked why he did so, he said, It is not conuenient for men who make profession of manhood and prowesse, to eate such delicates; for by pleasure, delicate meats and drinkes, the courage of man is abated. Therefore Xerxes, after hee had taken the great City of Babylon, would not put the people to death, but to be reuenged of them, commanded them not to exercise any Armes, but to vse and giue themselues to all pleasure, feasting, and drinking. So that by this meanes, they grew to be most vile and base people, whereas before they were most valiant. And by the great feasting and drunken∣nesse in Siracuse in Cicily, the Romans tooke the towne and spoyled it. The Emperour Ʋitellius, was very rio∣tous in his diet, insomuch, as at one supper, he had 2000 seuerall kinde of fishes, and 7000 dishes of foule, but what followed? Soone after hee was openly put to death by Vespasian. Caligula likewise, in riotous ban∣quets, in making sweet bathes, and in other vaine and friuolous expences, spent in one yeare, 67 millions of crownes, and in the end was killed. Nero also was prodigal in the like charges and banquets, & sumpuous attire, neuer wearing one garment twice. And Sabina, his wife had daily the milke of 500 Asses to bathe her in, but their ends were pittifull. The Emperour Adri∣anus, was riotous in his youth, and thereby diseased in his age, which forced him to vse many Phisitians and medicines, but could not be cured. Therefore good order and temperate dyet, prolongeth the life, and pre∣ferueth wisedome. Early rising also (saith Plato) and much watching, are profitable to keepe a man in health, and to augment his wisedome. It doth withall increase deuotion, for then a man shall find himselfe most apt to serue God.
CHAP. 18. A Prince to be continent of life. BVt if he serue his belly with immoderate, and too great delicates, and pamper his flesh too much, it will (besides dulling of the wit) make the flesh rebell against the spirit, and fall to incontinency, a vice wher∣of a Prince ought to haue a speciall care, that he giue not himselfe to the lust of the flesh; for it is a deuou∣ring fire till all be consumed, and rooting vp the seed of good workes, saith Iob 31. And Luxuria eneruat vires, effe∣minat artus. It will make him weake and effeminate, and destroyeth both body and soule, losing thereby also sometimes, both life and kingdome: for by adultery, Roderico, last King of the Gothes in Spaine, committed with the wife of Iulian, Earle of Cewta, when hee was Ambassadour in Africke, he, for reuenge, brought the Moores into Spaine, who therupon subdued the Coun∣trey. Osibright, King of Northumberland, rauished the wife of one Barne, who, to be reuenged, brought in the Danes, slew Osibright, and made great spoyle in the land. The Emperour Claudius, married his brothers daughter, and shee her selfe poysoned him. Siphax, King of Numidia, transported with the loue of Sopho∣nisba, falsified his faith, lost his Kingdome, and life in prison. Locrine, King of Great Britaine, put Guendoline his wife away, and married Estreld, daughter to King Humber, but Guendoline killed her husband in battell, and drowned Estreld and her daughter in Se∣uerne. The Emperour Commodas, kept three hundred Courtizans, and in the end by one of them, and one of his Parasites, was strangled. Childericke, the third King of France, for his libidonous life, which made him carelesse in gouerning the Common-wealth, was de∣posed. And Lewis the sixt, King of France, for his adultery, was poysoned by Blanche his wife: Helioga∣balus,
for his libidonous and vitious life, thought hee might make an euill end, and therefore if in case hee should be pressed by his enemies, he had poyson ready kept in precious stones: he had also halters of silke to hang himselfe: and sharpe kniues of precious mettall to kill himselfe: and he built a high Tower, richly gil∣ded, to breake his necke vpon, if he listed: yet all these deuises failed him, for he was strangled by his Souldi∣ers, and trailed vp and downe Rome. This is the end a libidonous Prince may looke for. But wise and ver∣tuous Princes will auoyd that vice. As did Ioseph, who hauing the wife of Putiphar in his power, would not touch her. No more would Abimelech faire Sara. Nor Dauid the Ebritian Sunamite. Nor Scipio the La∣dy; who was Hostage in Carthage; Nor Dionysius, the wife to Phocius: Nor Alexander, the daughter of King Darius: Nor Augustus, Cleopatra. And as it is hurtfull for a Prince to be allured by a woman to folly, so it is not good for him to be led by the counsell of a woman. For Aristotle saith, that part of a womans vnderstanding in which consisteth coun∣sell, is imperfect. Therefore neither the Romans, nor the Lacedaemonians, did euer admit a woman into Councell. Yet Theodora, after the death of her hus∣band, the Emperour of Constanstinople, was chosen Em∣presse, and had the onely gouernment of the Empire. Which without the helpe of any, she gouerned in great peace and prosperity two yeares, and then dyed, to the great griefe of all her subiects, who repented them not to be gouerned by a woman. The Empresse likewise, Zenobia in Asia, was a most singular rare woman. For Obdinato, her husband, chosen in Asia for their Emperour, and after killed by his kinsman she tooke vpon her the gouernment, and gouerned very well. She was constant in her enterpri∣ses, faithfull of her word, liberall in her gift, iust in gi∣uing sentence, seuere in punishment, discreet in her
speech, graue in her determination, and secret in that she did. She loued not to ride in a Litter, but on horse∣backe: she was of stature tall, slender bodyed, her eyes great, her forehead large, her face somewhat pale, her mouth little, and her teeth small. After she was con∣ceiued with child, shee would not company with her husband, saying: that a woman ought not to marry for pleasure, but onely for procreation. She did eate but once a day, and that at night: she drunke no wine, but water compounded more costly then wine: when she went to Campe, or to battell, or to skirmish, she was armed, and euer when there was any seruice, she would be amongst them. In the end, the Emperour Aurelianus besieged her, tooke her prisoner, and carried her in his triumph to Rome, yet pardoned her for her vertue and valour, and gaue her certaine possessions to liue vpon. She liued ten yeares after, as greatly honoured and beloued as Lucretia, of all the Roman Ladies. But this is (as the Spaniard saith) Ʋna golondrina que non haze verano. One Swallow which maketh no Summer. Yet I could not but set downe here her perfection, she being such a mirrour for all Ladyes. CHAP. 19. A Prince to beware of Parasites. BVt there is another creature about a Prince, more dangerous then a woman, and that is a flatterer, who neuer sings other song then
placebo, soothing a Prince in whatsoeuer. Apelles drew the picture of a King (which he sent to Ptolomeus) set in a chaire of Estate, with great hands great eares, and besides him Ignorance, Suspition, a Tale-teller, and Flattery: these will labour to be about a Prince, therefore a Prince must labour to auoyd them. For an enuious and backebi∣ting Tale-teller, and a Flatterer, are two most dange∣rous beasts: for Diogenes saith, that of wilde beasts, a backbiter biteth the sorest, and of tame beasts, a flat∣terer. And Hermes, the Philosopher saith, that as a Came∣lion can change himselfe into all colours sauing white: so hath a Parasite all points sauing honesty, for he win∣deth himselfe into fauour by any meanes, especially of pleasure, procuring any kind of mirth and delight, and by humouring the party. For Alexander Magnus, and Alphonsus, King of
Arragon, hauing each of them somewhat a wry necke; the one by nature, the other by custome, the flatte∣rers and Courtiers held their neckes on the one side. And like as wormes breed most of all, and soonest in firme, tender, and sweet wood: euen so for the most part, the generous and gentle natures, and those mindes that are more ingenuous, honest, amiable and milde then others, are readiest to receiue and nourish the flatterer that hangeth vpon him. And Plato saith, that he who loueth himselfe, and hath a good conceit of himselfe, can be content to admit another to flatter him. But when a Parasite seeth nothing to be gotten, then he is gone, being like to lice: For as these ver∣mine neuer haunt the dead, but doe leaue an forsake the corpes so soone as the bloud is extinct and depri∣ued of vitall spirit: so a man shall neuer see flatterers approach to those that are in decay, whose state is cracked, and credite lost. But where there is power and authority, and glory in the world: thither they flocke, and there they grow and shew themselues most malicious, sometimes by speaking euill of others. For Medeus, the chiefe Captaine of the flatterers, about Alexander Magnus, teached his Schollers to cast out slanders boldly, to bite others, for (said he) though the soare may heale vp, yet the skarre will remaine and be euer seene. By these skarres of false imputations, A∣lexander being corroded and eaten, put to death Calist∣henes, Parmenion, and Philocas, his true and faithfull friends. The Emperour Commodus, after the death of his father, was led by Parasites, and vpon their false re∣ports, put to death most of those that were graue Counsellors to his father, and also many of the Sena∣tors, and committed the gouernment of all his affaires, to Perennis, and himselfe followed his pleasure, which brought him to the end you heard before. The Empe∣rour Dioclesian, basely borne in Sclauonia, was in his youth very ambitious, and desirous of honour, and from a poore Souldier, came to be Emperour, and then made the people honour him as a god, and to kisse his foot, whereon he did weare guilt shooes, set with pearle and precious stones after the manner of the Per∣sian Kings. But seeing in the end, himselfe wonderful∣ly abused by the flatterers of his Court, and that hee could take no order for them, they had him so besieged in their hands, he gaue ouer the Empire, and retyred himselfe to his house in Slcauonia, where he liued euer after, a very priuate life, delighting himselfe with Gar∣dens and rurall workes. But the Emperour Caligula, tooke a better course with his Parasites, for one Afria∣nius Potitus, and Afranius Secundus, made a shew of great sorrow for him when he was sicke, and swore by the gods that they would very willingly dye for his re∣couery. The Emperour knowing they did but flatter, said then little, but being recouered, called them before him, and said, my good friends, I haue found that you are in fauour with the gods, for since your vow for me, I haue recouered, but fearing I should fall sicke againe, if you accomplish not your vow, I sent for you to dye, desiring you both to take your deaths patiently, and so presently put them to death. Plutarch writeth, that Dionysius, the Tyrant of
Cicily, delighting in his owne Poems, asked diuers Philosophers, how they liked them, they all flatteringly, highly commended them, sauing one, who said plainly, that it was a shame to heare them, they were so bad. Whereat the Tyrant of∣fended, commanded him to the Mines, there to worke amongst the condemned men: but being released by meanes of his friends, and againe in the Kings presence, when he demaunded the opinion of the Philosophers, in another of his Poems, and they all extolling it aboue the Skies, he cryed to the guard of the Tyrant, saying: Come my masters, come carry me away to the Mines againe, for I cannot endure this foolish flattery. The King by chance, being then in a good humour, was not offended, but turned it to a laughter. Curtius saith, that the states of Princes are oftner ouerthrowne by flatte∣rers, then by force. It is a happy thing therefore for Princes to haue those about them that will not flatter, but tell them the truth. For what (saith Seneca) wan∣teth he that hath all? marry one to tell the truth. Therefore the Emperour Gordian said, that that Prince is very vnfor tunate who hath not about him, those who may plainly tell him the truth. For a King know∣eth not what passeth, but by relation of those that con∣uerse with him. Theopompus, being asked how a Prince might preserue his Kingdome, said, by giuing his friends liberty to speake the truth, and in keeping his subiects from oppression. Phocian dealt plainly and like a faithfull seruant with King Antipater, telling him vpon occasion, that he would do him any seruice pos∣sible, but could not be to him both a friend and a flat∣terer. Themistocles in like manner, seeing Euribiades taking vp a staffe to strike him for his free speeches, said, strike me, so you will heare me after.
A Prince therefore must permit freedome of speech, if he meane to heare the truth, and giue no care to flattery. Pessenius Niger, a Roman Captaine, hea∣ring one praise and flatter him in his Oration, said to him, goe, goe, write the praises of Marius, and Hanni∣ball, & other old and valiant Captaines that are dead, that we may immitate thē, for it is a mockry to praise thē that are aliue: and as for me, I will do good whilst I liue, and be praysed when I am dead. Yet Agesilaus king of Sparta sayd, that he liked to be praysed of those friends, who would not also spare to blame him, when occasion should serue. CHAP. 20. What kind of persons to be of a Princes Counsell.
A Prince should be very carefull in making choyce of his Counsellors. For Plato faith, that many Princes are vndone, because thy want faithfull friends and seruants to counsell them. Therefore Alfred kig of England, sought out the wisst, and most learned men to be about him. Alexander Seuerus likewise made choise of honest and vertnous Counsellors, and dilplaced the vitious, and sought to know the truth of all things that passed in all places and Prouinces of the Empire. Frede∣ricus Furius opinion is, that Counsellours to a Prince ought not to be vnder thirty yeares of age, nor aboue six∣ty. For (sayth he) before he be thirty his vnderstanding is not setled, his experience llitle, his presumption great, his heate much, his thoughts light, and not of sufficient grauity. And that after sixty yeares his memory faileth, his vnderstanding weake, his experience turned to obsti∣nacy, his his heate little, lonsing oacasion, his thoughts wearied, and able to take no paines nor trauell. Howbe∣it some haue beene able and sufficient enough after they passd that age, as Camillus who though he were of very great yeares, yet was chosen Dictator: they finding his memory good, and his senses perfect: So many others haue bene fince his time. And Frederieus Furius sayth moreouer, that a Counsellour to a Prince ought to be ei∣ther of a chollericke, or of a fanguine complexion, for that those of that temper (saith he) are witty, haue good memory, can discourse well, are of good iudgement, most louing, affable, loyall, liberall, and of great cou∣rage: and that the melancholike are base minded, vaine, enemies to noble thoughts, malicious, superstitious, and phantasticall. And Socrates saith, a Prince ought not to trust him that is couetous, nor him that is a flatterer, nor to make a passionate, or a too cholericke man of his counsell, nor a drunkard, nor any that is subiect to a wo∣man. For it is not possible (saith he) that they should keepe close his secrets. And Pythagoras saith, it is impos∣sible for him to obtaine wisedome and knowledge, that is in bondage to a woman: therefore the Emperour A∣lexander Seuerus would neuer admit any Counsellor, or other officer, whether he were of Noble parentage, or had done him great seruice, or were commended to him, vnlesse he were of good reputation, learned, of good experience, and of good life. And better to informe him∣selfe hereof, he caused wrightings to be set vp in common places of the streetes, desiring thereby the people to shew some cause, if they could, why such a man should not be admitted to such a place and office, and would not suffer any office to be sold, because Iustice should not be sold. Yet the Emperor Vespasian at the beginning of his raigne gaue the chiefe offices & dignities to the greatest theeues he could find, and being asked why he did so, answered, that he vsed them as a spunge, for when they were full he would wring them, and confiscate all they had, and hang them. Some Princes doe place thecues in authority, not knowing them, but being discouered, it were happy for the common wealth, and good for the Prince, if they were vsed as Vespasian vsed his. And Iulian the Apostata placed a cruell and troublesome Iudge at Alexandria in
Aegypt, and being told he was vnworthy to gouerne: it is true, sayd he, and therefore I placed him there, that he may plague them as they deserue, they being a trouble∣some and wicked people, but good men are alwayes to be placed in gouernement, that the wicked by example may amend, or be punished, and the good preserued. For Pictatus reputed that common wealth to be well go∣uerned, in which wicked men might beare no authority. And a Prince is to haue some for Counsell, some for exe∣cution, for very seldome doth it concurre in one man to haue wit to disoourse well vpon any matter in Counsell, and to haue iudgement to execute that which by Coun∣sell is determined. The Captaine Picinio was in consul∣tation of a weake iudgement, but in executing any thing resolued vpon by Counsell, very ready. Francis the first, King of France did exceed all his Counsell in consultati∣on: but in his execution was not answerable to his ad∣uise. Pope Clement the 7. did exceed all other in Coun∣sell; but in executing was inferiour to euery one. And as it is necessary that a Prince should haue a graue and wise Counsell: so is it requisite hee should haue some about him for his pleasure. So Alexander Magnus, when he went into Asia against Darius, tooke with him two of his most speciall friends and seruants, Craterus and Hephe∣stion, very different in complexion, and in condition: for Craterus was graue, seuere and stoike, and only cared for matters of State and Counsell, being one of the Kings principall Counsellors. And Hiphestion was a yong Gen∣tleman of good complexion, gallant, actiue, and full of sport, and onely cared how to recreate the King. So that Craterus was called a friend to the King: and Hephestion a friend to Alexander. But a Prince had need to be very carefull in choosing of his friend, to be inward and fami∣liar with him. For
Augustus Caesar did not receiue a man to his amity and familiarity, but first did proue him, and sound his virtues, fidelity and loyalty, and those who hee knew to be vertuous, and that told him freely the truth in all things, and that did not flatter, and that imployed themselues willingly and sincerely in his affaires, and after hauing had good proofe hereof, he receiued them for his friends. Alcibiades, to try his friends, made them one af∣ter another beleeue, that he had killed a man, and they all refused to endanger themselues for him, sauing one Ca∣lias. The Emperour Constantius to make proofe of his friends, made shew to abandon Christian Religion, and to turne to Idolatry, he was instantly applauded by a great number, whom presently he banished the Court. For a Prince shall neuer want followers in any thing. The world counselling those that serue Princes to please them in whatsoeuer, though it redound to the losse of their soules, and ruine of the common-wealth, for so they shall obtaine honor, riches pleasure, and quietnesse: but what is their end? Ducunt in bonis dies suos, & in puncto ad n∣ferna descenaunt, saith Iob. 21. They lead their dyes in pleasure, and in an instant descend into hell. For when they shall say peace and security, then shall suddaine destruction come vpon them, saith Saint Paule, 1. Thes. 5. And Dauid saith, Psal. 36. Vidi impium superexaltatum, & eleuatum ficut Cedrum Libans, & transiut eum. & non est inuentus loeu eius. I did see the impious mightily exalted and raised on high as the Cedar tree, and I passed by, and presently he was gone, I sought him, and his place was not to bee found. Saint Augustine therefore affimeth, that it is better to suffer torments for speaking the truth, then to re∣ceiue great rewards for flattery. And Saint Chrysostome sayth, Feare not them that kill the body, least for feare of them, thou speake not the truth freely. And as Coun∣sellours ought to haue freedome of speech: So Prede∣ricus Furius doth wish a Prince, for tryall of his Coun∣cell, to aske counsell sometimes in things contray to the good of the Common wealth, and to his owne in∣tention. And Demetrius Phelarius counselled
Ptholomeus King of Egypt, to reade bookes which treated of Kings and Common wealths, for that in them be should finde many things which his Counsell and families durst not tell hid. But Aristeus saith, that the greatest and best guard a Prince can haue, is to be accompanied with a great number of iust and expert Counsellours, who through meere loue, setting their owne particular com∣modity apart, regard onely the profite and welfare of the Prince and common wealth, speaking freely what they thinke. For Counsellours, sayth Iulius Caesar in one of his orations to the Senate, should not be led by malice, friendship, anger, nor mercy. And if they concurre in one lawfull opinion, though the Prince be opposite, yet it is fitting he should yeeld to them. For so did the Emperour Marcus Antonius, saying: It must bee as You will: for it is great reason, that I being but one, should follow your opinion, then you being many, Wise and Learned, should yeeld to mine. CHAP. 21. Not good to commit the charge of the Common wealth to one Counsellor onely. BVt it is very dangerous for a Prince to be led by the aduice and counsell of one onely, or to commit the gouernement of the Common wealth to one Counsel∣lour onely. And so Commines dath witnesse, saying: that A Prince ought to haue many Counsellours, and not commit any cause of importance to one onely, and that all his Counsellours should be equall in fauour: other∣wise, if he be led onely by one, and make no accompt of the rest, not giuing them equall hearing, he may en∣danger himselfe, as did Hieronimus King of Cicily, who was onely counselled by his brother in law Androno∣dorus, who made him odious to all the Kingdome, and then killed him. Stillico likewise gouerned all vnder the Emperour
Ho∣norius. And to get entrance to make himselfe Emperour, took pay from the Goths, of purpose to make them rebel which thereupon they did, and by the aide they got, spoyled Thracia, Hungaria, Austria, Sclauonia, and Dalmatia: Stilico, though hee might, yet would not quite ouer throw them, whereof Honorius being informed, put to death both Stilico and his sonne. Vnder the Emperour Commodus first Perennis ruled all, and for displacing the Nobility, and preferring base persons, was killed by the souldiers. After him Cleander managed all, and a great famine and plague beeing in Rome, the people imputed the cause thereof to him, and thought to kill him: Hee to appease this sturre ranne vpon the people with the Em∣perours horse-men, and killed a great number of them. The Emperour fearing himselfe, sent for Cleander, pre∣sently cut off his head, and sent it to the people, where∣with they were appeased, yet in the end Commodus him∣self was killed. The Emperor Seuerus permitted Plautia∣nus to gouerne all vnder him at his pleasure, who in the end practised to kill him, and his two sonnes. But Bas∣sianus the Emperours sonne vnderstanding thereof, and that his Father meant to pardon him, killed him in the Emperours presence. The Emperour Galba was a good Prince and wise, yet suffered himselfe to be onely gouer∣ned by Titus Iunius, Cornelius Lacus, and Icellus Marti∣anus, who by their wicked gouernement made the Em∣perour to be hated of all estates, and therefore the peo∣ple murthered him. This Emperour was the more ha∣ted because he entertayned Halotus and
Tygenlinus, who were principall seruants to Nero, and instruments in all his wickednesse. So Otho likewise Emperor after Galba, though hee thought by good words and liberality to get the hearts of the people, yet did they hate him, for that he had some about him, who had beene instruments and Counsellors to Nero. The Kings of France for forty yeares, giuing wholly to their pleasures, permitted the Maior of the Palace of Paris to gouerne all at his plea∣sure, which gaue opportunity to Pipin to make himselfe King: Who being wise, vertuous, and well beloued, was thereby admitted their King. But the Emperour Tyberius giuing himselfe to pleasure, and committing the gouern∣ment to Seanus, who grew proud thereof, and tooke vpon him as he had bene Emperor, and had statues made him, before which they offered sacrifice, and happy were they that had his fauour: The Emperour hearing of his pride, and insolency, committed him to prison: then those that did most honour him, contemned him, and spoke euill of him. And the Emperour put both him, and all his children to death Zoticus had that credite with Halingabalus, as he was held Lord ouer all the rest, his counsell as a Law, and by his direction all Offices were sould: Hee made Consuls the sonnes of slaues and base men. And King Attolus gaue himselfe so to his pleasure, as one Phylopaemen gouerned him as hee listed. Insomuch that the Romanes, when they did see any ship of Asia come by, asked if the King was still in the good grace and fauour of Phylopaemen. But Charles the seauenth King of France, hauing diuers wise, and faithfull Counsellours of meane parentage, at the time he had ciuill Warre with the Duke of Burgundy (whom the Duke of Brittany secretly fauoured) mooued the Dukes to peace, who answered, if the King would re∣mooue his Counsellours from him, and take others, that they would accord. Whereuppon the Kings Councell perswaded him to accept thereof, and they most willing∣ly refused the Court, and retyred themselues to their owne houses, and so the Warre was ended. Therefore a Prince should take care for the good education of his Nobility, and honour the Noble and worthy families; whereby they may continue in the Vertue and Valour of their Ancestors, and the Prince thereby be the better serued. In Rome there was a Law made, called Prosopina, by which the off-spring of Siluius, of Torquatus, and of Fabricius, were more honoured and priuiledged then any other, because they were ancient Families, and more vali∣ant then others: They had a Law also, that those who were
descended of wicked persons, as of Tarquinius Superbus, of the Consull Escaurus, of Catelin, of the Censor Faba∣tus, and of the Traytor Bicinus, should beare no Office in the Common-wealth, nor dwell within the circute of Rome. But Nobility marrying basely, do oftentimes de∣generate. For when nature (sayth Plato) produced man, she gaue vnto him three properties of the mettals, as to those that were fit to gouerne the people, the property of Gold: To them of force and valour, to defend the Com∣mon-wealth, the property of Siluer; and the property of Iron and Brasse to handy-craftes men; and common people, to work and labour. And he sayth, that marrying the Noble with the Ignoble, is to mixe good mettal with base mettall, which is the ouer-throw of Nobility, and changing of gouernment of the Common-wealth. There∣fore he counselleth euery oe to marry with their equals, Nobles with Nobles, and ignobles among themselues. CHAP. 22. A Prince not to place a Stanger in Authority. A Prince is also to haue speciall regard that hee giues not a Stranger authority in the Common-wealth, nor trust him too much. For the ancient Romanes would neuer giue any charge or Office in the Common-wealth to a Stanger: Insomuch that after the Battell of
Cannas, for want of sufficient men to be Senators in Rome, Spu∣rius Curulius making a motion to haue had some of the Latis chosen for Senators, they would not agree there∣unto, but all hated Spurius for that motion. And Willi∣am King of Cicily, descended of the house of France, ma∣king a French-man his Chancellour, the Noble-men much grieued thereat, conspired, and in one night killed all the French-men in Cicily, in Apulia, and in Calabria. Charles the 8. King of France expulsed the Spaniards out of Naples by the helpe of the Neapolitanes, and placed French∣men in all authority and gouernment there. Whereupon the Neapolitans grieued, made a generall reuolte, and did driue out the French-men againe. The Duke of Bri∣taine hauing married an English woman was so affected to the English, as his subiects much disliked thereof, and hee mistrusting thm, sent for English-men to gouerne vnder him, but before they came, his owne subiects seized vpon all the Forts and Townes in Britany, and forced the Duke to flye into England. The Prince of Wales placing English-men in all Offices and authority in Aquitaine, made the Country-men grudge thereat, and in the end reuolte, by which meanes Aquitane was lost. Alexander King of the Epirots, giuing entertainement to a number of the Lucamans banished out of their Coun∣try, and after making Warre against their Country, thought he should be well serued by them, who promi∣sed to yeelde their Country into his hands, but they made a secret compact with their Country-men to the contrary, for drawing the King into a conuenient place for their purpose, they shewed themselues his enemies, and he swimming a riuer, to escape, in landing was kil∣led by one of them. The Emperour Gordian making an Arabian his Lieutenant called Phillipus, a man of base parentage, he procured the Emperours ouerthrow, and in the end killed him most barbarously. Charles Duke of Burgundy was betrayed by an Italian the Earle of Campobach, and killed before Nancy. CHAP. 23. Dangerous for a Prince to take ayde of a Stranger. ANd if a Prince take ayde or succours of a stranger stronger then himselfe, he may thereby endanger his estate. For the Esterques called but to aide the Citty of Ʋulture, subdued it. The Herules, Gothes, and Lombards, called into Italy for succours, became Lords thereof. So did they of
Franconia with their King Pha∣ramond; by the Gaules, now France. And the Sax∣ons did the like by England. The Turkes in like man∣ner got the East Empire; and Hungaria, called first in by the Emperour of Constantinople, and by the States of Hungaria. Cairaam a Pyrate called by the Inhabitants of Alger, to expell the Spaniards, after hee had van∣quished the Spaniards, slew Selin Prince of the Towne, and made himselfe King, leauing the estate to his bro∣ther, Aradin Barbarossa. Saladin a Tartarian Captaine called by the Calipha and Inhabitants of Cair, to driue the Christians out of Soria, after the Victory agaynst the Christians, slew the Calipha, and became absolute Lord thereof. The Romanes called into Cicily, by the Mamertins or Campanois, to aide them, did subiect both them, and all Cicily in the end. Francis King of France, had a de of Soliman the great Turke, against Charles the fifth, who fearing by continuing the War, that the Turke might get that footing, as to ouercome all Christendom, made peace with France. But then the Turkes Bascha being in Marcelles, the King of France could not get him out, before hee had succours from the Emperour: who was forced to ayde him. Therefore when Pope Iulius the second, Maximilian the Emperour, Ferdi∣nando King of Spaine, and Lewes King of France, had entred league against the Ʋenetians: Selin the great Turke, offered to send the Ʋenetians succours, which they refused, fearing that accepting thereof, they should be in danger of the Turke. CHAP. 24. A Prince to get and keepe the loue of his Subiects.
A Prince therefore, to the end he may be strong at home, and neede no Forraine force, should alwayes respect his owne subiects (especially men of worth and seruice) as well in peace as in VVarre, that hee may winne the loue and hearrs of his subiects, the meanest whereof may be able to doe him some kinde of seruice, at one time or other. For Seneca sayth, that the onely inexpugnable force of a Prince, is the loue of his subiects. Where∣fore the Emperour Marcus Aurelius, in his speeches to his Councell, commending his sonne vnto them, sayd: It is not the aboundance of money and Treasure, nor the multitude of suldiers that maintayneth a Prince, and causeth him to be byed, but the loue of his sub∣iects. For those (sayth hee) doe onely long and sarely Reigne, who doe ingraue in the hearts of their subiects, not a feare by force and cruelty, but a loue by bounty and liberality. And those that willingly yeelde to obe∣dience, and are not contrayned by seruitude, ought not to be suspected of the Prince. And subiects (sayth he) neuer refuse to obey but when they are vsed withvi∣olence and contumely. Mesissa King of Numidia ex∣horting his sonnes at his death to keepe amity and con∣cord amongst them, sayd: It is not the great forces, nor Armies, nor great Treasure by which a Prince should preserue and maintayne his estate, but friends, who are not gorten by force of Armes, nor with mo∣ney, but by good vsage and loyalty.
And Cornelius Tacitus sayth, that a Prince can haue no greater, better, nor fitter instruments to keepe and conserue his estate, then good friends: Wherefore a Prince should haue care alwayes of his subiects, and vse them well. For Antonius Pius would say, that hee had rather preserue one of his subiects, then kill a thousand of his enemies. And Pribagoras affirmeth, that subiects are to the Prince, as the Winde to the fire, for the stronger the Wind is, the greater is the fire: So the richer the Subiects be, the stronger the Prince. But where Matcheuils principle taketh effect, there the sub∣iects must be made poore by continuall Subsidies, ex∣actions, and impositions, that the people may be alwayes kept vnder as slaues, and feare the Prince, which course extinguisheth the loue of the people towards the Prince, and ingendreth hatred. Therefore Pythagoras counsell is better: And a Prince to enrich his subiects, the only way is to keepe them in peace, without quarrels, and dissentions, and too gricuous exactions. Therefore Phi∣lip Commines blameth greatly such Princes as doe not seeke to compound and end dissentions and quarrels a∣mongst their greatest subiects, but rather doe nourish the one part, wherein they doe but set their owne house on fire, as did the Wife to Henry the sixt, taking part with the Duke of Somerset, against the Earle of War∣wicke, which caused the Warre betwixt the House of Yorke and Lancaster. Likewise Charles the seauenth King of France, beeing Dolphin, taking part with the Duke of Orleans, against the Duke of Burgundy, was the cause that the Duke of Burgundy brought Henry the fifth into France. And for exactions, the Emperour Au∣gustus made a Law called Augusta, that no payment should be exacted of the people, but for the profite of the Common-wealth. And when Marcus Antonius layd a double taxe vppon the people, they answered, That if he would haue two taxes in one yeare, hee must giue them two Summers, two Haruests, and two Vintages. For the people cannot endure to bee ouer∣charged: if they bee, great inconuenience may grow thereby. For Phillip Le Bell King of France, being receiued in Flanders as Lord thereof, charged the peo∣ple with excessiue taxes, and suffered the French to commit all insolency and iniuries against the people, fa∣uouring the Nobility, and exempting them from all taxes, impositions, and charges, whereupon they of Bruges begunne to reuolte, and killed all the French in the Towne. After this the Flemengs ouer-threw the for∣ces of King Phillip, and freed themselues from the French.
Therefore if the Princes Councell, or Nobility, doe yeelde to haue any thing imposed vpon the people, it is fitting they should not be exempt, but beginne and lay it first vppon themselues as the Romanes did, for the people murmuring against the Consuls for imposing a great charge vppon them, Consull Leuinius sayd: As the chiefe Magistrate is in honour aboue the Senate, and the Senate aboue the people, so ought he to be a guide, and the first to submit himselfe to endure all kinde of paine and trouble: For if thou wilt impose a charge vp∣pon thy inferiour, first beginne and lay it vpon thy selfe, and the rest will more easily follow: therefore let vs be∣ginne with our selues, sayd hee, and so they did. The great impositions the Prince of Wales layd vppon the Councrey of Guienne, was a great cause of the losse thereof. The Duke of Orleans Gouenour of France for Charles the sixt, was extreamely hated of the Parisi∣ans for a great imposition he layd vpon them, for refor∣mation whereof, the Duke of Burgundy leuyed great forces, and in the end caused the Duke of Orleans to bee killed. The Duke of Aniou regent of France, laying a great imposition vpon the people, a Collector thereuppon de∣maunding a Denier of a poore VVoman for a basket of Herbes, which shee refusing to pay, hee forced to take her Herbes, but she crying, was rescued by the people, and an vproare did arise, which did great hurt before it could be appeased. The Earle of Flanders likewise, lay∣ing a great imposition vppon the people, made them re∣bell against him. And Lewes the twelfth King of France, making Warre against Lodowicke Sforce Duke of Milan, who knowing himselfe to be very edious to his subiects, for his great exactions and impositions, and fearing that they would abandon him, assembled the people at Mi∣lane, and to gaine their good wills, remitted diuers taxes which he had imposed vpon them, and gaue them
many reasons and excuses for his former proceedings. But such hatred they had conceiued against him, as all would not serue, for within few dayes after, they tooke armes, called in the French, killed his Treasurer, and made him flee. When the Battell of Cressy was fought, the people of France were in extreame pouerty, by rea∣son of the euill gouernment of the publicke Treasure, of the false-hood of the Treasurers and Magistrates (who enriched themselues by the puerty of the people) and of the increase of Taxes, Subsidies and Impositions, which orew the people into dispaire (oppressed also with Fa∣mine and Plagues) that when the King would haue leuy∣ed an other Army, hee could not get the French to it. A Prince therefore should loue and cherish his Subiects, but not oppresse them. For Tyberius Nero, when some perswaded him to take great Tributes of the Prouinces, sayd, that a good shepheard should sheare his sheepe, but not deuoure them. And Lewes the ninth King of France, his chiefe care in sparing was to ease the people by abating the Taxes and Subsidies layd vppon them by his Predecessors. And that State (sayth Thales) is best ordered which hath it, neither too wealthy, nor too poore Citizens. CHAP. 25. Who to haue the charge in Warre. FOrce and Valour most properly should belong to the Nobility, and they thereby defend the people, and bee their Leaders in Warre. Therefore for a Prince to take that charge from them, or to displace them, if they be sufficient, is not conuenient. For Perennis ha∣uing the whole gouernement vnder the Emperour Com∣modus, displaced all the Noble Captaines, and put o∣ther base persons in their roomes, whereat the Army be∣ing grieued, pulled Perennis in peeces, as an enemy to
the Common wealth. Anno enuying the glory of Mutines tooke his charge from him, and gaue it to his owne sonne. Whereupon Mutines practised with the Confull and be∣trayed to him the Towne of Agrigente in Cicily, where∣by all Cicily was brought in subiection to the Romanes. Lewes the eleuenth King of France, displacing the No∣blemen and his good seruants, and giuing the Offices to men or base quality; ciuill Warre did arise, but the King presently acknowledging his errour, restored them a∣gaine. Yet it behoueth a Prince to be respectiue, and not to giue a charge to a seuere man. For sometimes a good Prince shall be hated for his wicked Gouernour, as was Scipio, for the cruelty of his Lieutenant Pleninius. And Lucullus, though he was wise and Valiant, and did many exploits against Mythridates, and Tygranes, two of the greatest Kings of Asia, yet was hee so seuere and vncourteous, as his souldiers loued him not, neyther would obay him in the end. Whereupon the Romanes set Pompey in his place, who by his courtesie and cle∣mency wonne the hearts of his souldiers, and thereby brought all the East parts vnder the obedience of the Ro∣manes, and so reaped the fruites of Lucullus labours, and had the honour thereof with Tryumph. Appius Clau∣dius vsed in like manner great rigour and seuerity amongst his souldiers, insomuch as they would doe nothing for him, though he put some of the Captaines to death, but reioyced to be ouer-throwne, to dishonour him. And at another time the Romane souldiers, for despite they had against the Ten-men, suffered themselues to be vanqui∣shed. And Marcus Popilius Confull subduing the Lygu∣rians (now Geneuois) rebelling against the
Romanes, ray∣sed their Towne walls, tooke their armour from them; and sold them, and their goods: which the Senate thought to be a too seuere and cruell part of Popilius, and an euill example for others to stand vppon extreamity, ra∣ther then to yeeld, or to trust to the clemency of the Ro∣manes. Therefore commaunded all that were sold to bee redeemed, their goods to be restored, they suffered to haue armour, and Popilius to bee called home, and his gouernement giuen to another. Therefore a Prince for his Warres had neede to appoynt not onely a wise, but a temperate and Valiant Commander. For (Plato sayth) that a man temperate not endued with fortitude, falleth easily into cowardlinesse, and basenesse of minde; and that a strong and Valiant man without remperance, is easily carried away with temerity and boldnesse. So was Flaminius ouer-throwne and killed by Hanniball at Trasamene, for not staying to ioyne his forces with the other Consull. And Minutius in the absence of Fabius, hauing charge and commaund ouer the Army, vppon his rash attempt against Hanniball, had good successe. Whereupon he would needes haue the Army diuided be∣twixt them, and haue equall charge: to which Fabius condiscended: Hauniball perceiuing his rashnesse and in∣solence, gaue him battell and ouer-threw him; but Fa∣bius being at hand, gaue him succours, whereuppon Minutius conessed his errour. And then Hanniball said, that the Cloud which had wont to hang vpon the moun∣taynes, sturred with Wind and Tempst, was ruined to Raine; for Fabius kept the heights and would not fight but with good aduantage; therefore Hanniball feared his wisedome. And when Fabius had gotten the Towne of Tarent by Treason, Hanuiball sayd, I perceiue the Romanes haue also their Hanniball. But at Treue, Hanuiball defeated the
Romanes, who came to battell fasting, which was a great ouer-fight in the Confull. But Hanniball com∣maunded all his men to eate some meate before. Mar∣cellus, through the default of his owne souldiers, was o∣uerthrowne by Hanuiball; but his wisedome was such, as first rebuking his souldiers therefore, and then en∣couraging of them, he gaue battell the next day to Han∣niball, and deseated him. But the Confull Minutius was of a weaker spirit, temperate without fortitude, for hee being sent agaynst the Eques, durst not come neere them, but fortified himselfe in his Campe, which they seeing, besieged him in his Tents. Whereupon Lucius Quintiut was created Dictator, who relieued him, and subdued the Eques, but would giue no part of the spoyle, ney∣ther to Minutius, nor to his souldiers, but rebuked them. So that Wisedome, Temperance, and Valour, are neces∣sary in a Generall. Dissention likewise in an Army is to be auoyded, for by the diffention betwixt the Consuls, Hanniball ouer∣threw them at the battell of Cannas Therefore Clau∣dius Neron, and M. Lucins being enemies, and chosen Consuls, made themselues friends, for the good of the Common-wealth. So Aristides and Themistocles, sent Embassadours by Athens, did reconcile themselues du∣ring that imployment. Cretes and Hermias not friends, and being in their Citty of Magnetia besieged by My∣thridates, Cretes offered Hermias the charge of Cap∣tayne Generall, and to depart the Citty himselfe: or if Hermias had rather depart, then to leaue that Office to him, least by their both being in Towne, iealousie might grow betwixt them, and breed hurt to their Coun∣try. Hermias seeing the honest offer of his Companion, and knowing him to be the more sufficient, yeelded to him the charge, and left the Towne. And as dissention is hurtfull, so enuy is not fitting. For the French men ayding Iohn King of Castile, agaynst
Denis King of Portugall, had vpon their earnest request, the poynt of the battell, which did offend the Spani∣ards, who were desirous thereof, insomuch that the French-men giuing the charge, the Spaniard would not second them, but suffered them all to be slayne or taken, and then they set vpon the Portugals, who hauing van∣quished the French, and seeing the Castilians come, kil∣led all their prisoners, and then ouer-threw them also: Pope Boniface the ninth, and the French King, sent great forces agaynst the Turke Bajazet: Their Generall was the Earle of Neuers, who against the will of the King of Hungary, and of all the Campe gaue the first charge, and without order, and was ouer-throwne, whereupon the Army of the Christians fled. Anno 1396. by reason whereof the Turk tooke al Greece, and the greatest part of Bulgaria, and then besieged Constantinople. And it is also very requisite that the Generall should keep his souldiers from idlenesse, for Segnities robur fran∣git, longa otianeruos. Sloath weakneth the sinewes, and diminisheth a mans force, and is the nurse of all vice, ma∣king a man most base. Therefore Aeleas a King of Scy∣thia sayd, that hee thought himselfe no better then his Horse-keeper, when hee was idle. A vice to which Gen∣tlemen alwayes haue beene too much giuen. Insomuch that in Athens (where they did not suffer the people to be idle: a Citizen being iudicially condemned for idle∣nesse, one Herondas requested one to shew him the par∣ty that was condemned for a Gentle-mans life. In Carthage, to auoyde this vice, the Noble-men did al∣wayes exercise Armes; the common people laboured; and the Learned men were euer teaching and instructing others. And in the Common-wealth of the Lacedemo∣nians none were idle, for all men laboured; and they sending one Chilon to Corinthe, to treate of a League, hee found the Magistrates idlely exercised, playing at Dice: whereuppon hee returned home, and would not speake of his Commission, saying: That hee would not stayne the glory of Sparta with so great an ignominy, as to ioyne them in society with such kinde of people. Ma∣rius caused his souldiers to make Trenches when there was no cause, onely to keepe them from idlenesse. Clau∣dius hauing an assured peace, for the avoyding of idle∣nesse, kept thirty thousand men, twelue yeares in working the Channell Fucinus, that Rome might haue good water. And when the Lawes were well kept in Rome, at the time
they had Warres with the Celtiberians in Spaine, and with Alexander; the Senators went three dayes about Rome with the Censors, and could not find one idle man for a messenger to carry their letters. But in Marcus Au∣relius time there were plenty, for he confesseth that hee banished, punished, and put to death in his time 30000. idle Vagabonds, and 10000. idle women. And France being troubled with a great number of idle vagabond souldiers: Bertrand de Guesclin, (to free the Countrey of them) drew them all to goe with him into Spaine agaynst the Sarazins. Bruce King of Scotland exhorted his sub∣iects to exercise Armes alwayes, for that idlenesse would corrupt them, and for want of practise they would not be able to resist their enemies. A Prince therefore being the Lanterne to his subiects, should giue good example herein. Alfred King of England had that care to eschew idlenesse, and to spend his time well, as he diuided the day into three parts, by a Taper that burned continually in his Chappel 24. houres: The first part he spent in Prayer and in study: The second part hee employed in the affaires of the Common-wealth; and the third part he tooke for his recreation and rest. A good president for other Princes. CHAP. 26. A Prince to be well aduised before hee begin Warre, and carefull in his fight.
IT is not for a Prince vpon euery quarrell to make War, but to be sure that the cause bee good and iust, which then wil bring honor to his Person, safety to his soule, and great encouragement to all his souldiers. Yet (according to the saying of Octauius Caesar) neyther battell, nor War is to be vndertaken, vnlesse there may be euidently seene more hope of gayne, then feare of damage: for such as sought after the smallest commodities not with a little danger, he likened vnto those that Angle with a golden hooke, for the losse whereof, if it hapned to be suapped or broken off, no draught of Fish whatsoeuer was able to make amends. And it is necessary that a Prince, or his Generall, should consult and take counsell before hee fight, for the aduice of his Captaynes heerein may doe great good. Therefore the Carthagintans commaunded those Captaynes to be hanged, that got Victory without any consultation before. And those that did first con∣sult, and then were ouer-throwne, they did neuer punish. And hauing taken counsell and resolution, execution is to follow without delay, least occasion be lost. For A∣ristotle sayth, that a wise man ought to counsell slowly, and execue speedily; and if Victory be gotten, to fol∣low it hotly is the best, before the enemy (being dis∣couraged) be able to make head agayne. For if Hanni∣ball had done so after the battell of Cannas, and not lin∣gred to refresh his men, he had taken Rome. Likewise Pompey in a skirmish, put Caesar to the worse, which if he had pursued, he had quite ouer-throwne Caesar. Yet a man must take heed he follow not the Victory too fierce∣ly, nor out of order. For so Phillip King of Macedonta, by following the Romanes too fiercely was defeated. So likewise Gaston de Foix, hauing wonne the battell at Ra∣uenna, pursuing too fiercely a squadron of Spaniards that fled, by them was ouer-throwne, lost his life, and made all that a prey to the enemy, which before hee had Con∣quered in Italy. And an enemy is not to be contemned, though his Forces be inferiour, for oftentimes it is not the multitude of men that getteth the Victory, but the cou∣ragious and resolute mindes of the fouldiers, assisted by God. For King Alexander with 33000. foote-men, and 25000. horse-men, ouer-threw the Persians: and Darius army of 400000. foot-men, and 100000. horse-men. Ro∣bert le Frison, with a few, and without experience, de∣feated Phillip King of Frances great Army and old Soul∣diers. The Earle of Namure with the Flemings being but a few, ouer-thre the Earle of Artois, sent by Phil∣lip the fayre King of France, with 40000. French-men into Flanders, whereof
300. efcaped not. At the battell of Peitiers the Prince of Wales with 8000. English, ouer∣throw 40000. French, tooke King Iohn and his Sonne prisoners, and also a number of Princes and Noble-men. Henry the fifth at the battell of Agincourt with 7000 o∣uer-threw 80000. French. Simon Earle of Monford be∣sieged in the Castle of Mirebeau in France by the King of Arragon and others and hauing with him but 2. Knights, 60. horse-men, and 700. foot-men, hauing commended themselues to God, sallied and charged the King so vali∣ently, that he ouerthrew his Army, killed him and 17000. of his men, and lost not aboue eight foot-men of all his. Therefore a Prince should not presume too much of his owne strength, nor be carelesse of his enemy, nor charge him but in good order. For, fighting without order, the Carpentines, Olcades, and Ʋaceos in Spaine, hauing an Army of 100000. were ouer-throwne by Hanniball, for they trusted in the number of their Souldiers, and kept no order. Both the Scipioes being slayne in Spaine, Lu∣cius Martius being a man of meane calling, yet a good Souldier and of great courage, gathered the dispersed souldiers together, and was chosen for their Generall. Asdrubals making no account of him, set vppon him dorderly, and was ouer-throwne, by which the Ro∣manes encouraged Martius in the night following to set vpon Asdrubals Campe vppon a suddayne, and killed of the Carthaginians 37000. and tooke prisoners 1830. And the Carthaginians seeing the Romanes wearied with the seruice vppon the Sea, were perswaded that they would fight no more by Sea, and therefore grew very carelesse, whereby they were ouer-throwne by the Consull Catulus. And the Romanes held it not so good to defend, as to inuade. For they hauing first Warre with the Carthagnians in Cicily, thought it better to fight agaynst them in their owne Country, then in Cicily. Therefore sent the Conful with forces into Affrick, which forced the Carthaginians after 14. yeares war to seeke for Peace, and to leaue to the Romans al Cicily, and the Ilands
betwixt it and Italy, and to giue them 2200. Talents of siluer, and all their prisoners without ransome. In the second War Punicke the Romanes hauing lost many bat∣tels, spent their men, and consumed their Treasure, Sci∣pio being chosen Consull, desired notwithstanding to go with an Army into Affricke, holding that the best course to end the Warre in Italy. But Fabius misliked thereof, as did also the most of the Senate, wishing him to go a∣gaynst Hanniball, and to driue him out of Italy, and so to quiet his owne Country, before hee inuaded an other, alleadging also that they were not able to maintayne two so great Armies, as one in Affricke; and another in Italy against Hanniball, who if he should besiege Rome, Sci∣pio could not so easily be called from Affricke, as Fabius was from Capua, to succour Rome. They alleadged al∣so the Death of his Father and Vocle in Spaine, after their many great Victories, and the ouer-throw of Athens, by sending a yong man to inuade Cicily: The vncertainty of the fauour of Syphax and Masinissa, and the certainty of all those Countries to be their enemies. To which Scipio answered, that he was Consull, not to continue Warre, but to make an end of Wa and that greater courage a man doth assault his enemy, then  fend his owne, and that Agathocles King of Syracus▪ seeing Cicily troubled with Warre, turned it into Affricke from whence it came; and that a Captaine ought to fol∣low his good fortune and occasion; and that strangers should well know wee haue courage as well to inuade Affricke, as to defend Italy; and that there is a
Romane Captayne dare vndertake as much as Hanniball, and will force him to returne to defend Carthage. In the end, after long arguing of the matter, it was granted that Scipio should passe into Affricke: which hee did, and for∣ced Hanniball (after hee had continued Warre in Italy sixteene yeares) to returne home, then ouer-threw him, and made Carthage glad to accept of any conditions of peace. Which was, that Carthage should liue in liberty, and vse their Lawes, and possesse the Townes and Countryes they had before the Warres; and that they should yeeld all Rebels, Fugitiues, and Prisoners, and all their Gallies sa∣uing ten, and all their Elephants tamed, and should tame no more; that they should not make Warre, neyther with Affricke nor without, but by permission of the Romans; and that they should deliuer 100. Ostages, the yongest not vnder 14. yeares of age, nor the eldest aboue sixty yeares, with diuers other conditions. The Oracle of Apollo an∣swered those of Cyrtha, that if they would haue peace at home, they should make continuall Watres abroad. But a good peace is alwayes to be embraced by a Prince, and al∣so to be offered to his enemy. For as the Frenchman saith, La roue de la fortune, n'est pas tousours vne. The wheele of Fortune is not alwayes one. In the first War Punike Ap∣pius Claudius offered the Carthaginians peace, in respect of the alliance betwixt the Romanes and them, which they refused; but after, they fearing the Romanes, sent to the Consull Attilius for peace, who denyed them there∣of, because they had refused it before of Claudius: which made them desperate, and caused so long and grieuous Warre. And after the Battell of Cannas, Hanniball sen∣ding to Carthage for more ayde: Hannon a graue Coun∣sellour, would haue had them to haue made peace with the Romanes, whose counsell they refused, which brought ruine vpon themselues. Yet Scipio (after hee had ouer∣throwne Syphax and Asdruball) being sent to by Car∣thage for a peace, denyed them not, but sayd, though he had the Victory almost in his hands, yet would hee not refuse to treate of peace; that all Nations may vnderstand that the Romanes do both begin, and finish their Warre most iustly, and the reupon set them downe conditions of peace, which they seemed to like in retaining the time only til Hannibals comming home, who was sent for: and vpon his arriuall, he himselfe moued
Scipio to peace, who told Hanibal, that Carthage had but dissembled with him, till his returne, and broken the truce. Therefore he demanded   amends, besides the conditions first offered, which if he thought too hard, then to prepare himselfe to Battell. The next day Scipio ouer-threw Hanniball, killed 20000. and tooke as many prisoners. Then Hanniball confessed himselfe to be vanquished, and told Carthage, they had no way but accept of any conditions of Peace. Antio∣chus seeking to the Romanes for peace, had conditions offered, which he refused; and was ouer-throwne, then glad to accept of any conditions. The Common-wealth of Tyrus sent to Alexander Magnus, offering him what obedience and subiection hee would require of them, so neyther hee nor his men would enter their Citty: Alexander refused it, disdayning that one City should shut their Gates agaynst him, to whom the whole world was open; but after foure months siege, bee would haue accepted of that offer, and they then would not, being growne bold and proud. Where∣upon Alexander with a furious assault tooke the Towne, spoyled it, and put all the Inhabitants to the sword, or to bee slaues. But King Clotaire of France refusing the submission of the Turingians, who had rebelled agaynst him, me them desperate, and by desperate fight they ouer-threw the King, who hardly escaped. The Earle of Flanders likewise refusing the submission of his Sub∣iects, was by them ouer-throwne, and in the end they submitted themselues to Edward the third, King of Eng∣land. By this it doth appeare what hurt may grow by not giuing peace demaunded, and not accepting of peace offered. Therefore Appius Claudius of Sabine, because the Sabines would not yeeld to Peace, did forsake his Countrey, and went to Rome, where he was made a Cittizen of Rome. FINIS.
