18507.233 25208454 27882
November 29. Numb. 1. THE CONTINVATION OF OVR WEEKELY Intelligence since the 22. of this present moneth, to the 29. The second Part. Containing many notable and very remarkeable passages, a∣mongst the rest, you shall finde these, The strange and vnexpected reduction of the City of Prage in Bohemia, to its ancient liberty and freedome, from the cruell tyranny of the Imperialists, vnder the Command of that suparlatiue bloudy tyrant the D. of Freedland, and others, together with the like free∣dome begun over the whole Kingdome, by a gene∣rall revolt and club Law in all parts, where they doe but meete with any Imperialists. The taking whereof (with Gods assistance) was perfor∣med by the old Count of Thorne, and other Bohemi∣an banished Lords, Commanders of some Swedish and Saxon forces and other, the poore oppressed Na∣tiues entertaining this occasion as sent them from God, &c. The great preparation of the B. of Collen, the Arch-duke Leopaldus, the Duke of Bavaria, and other Leagers, to to joyne with the Imperiall scattered troopes, (for now there is no distinction) to recover if it may be (that by multitude,) what small and weake meanes hath taken from them. LONDON Printed for Nath: Butter and Nicolas Bourne. 1631.
The Continuation of our Weekely NEWES. From Prage the 4. of November, 1631. THis Citie is every where exceedingly for∣tified, and amended. Great feare also is conceived in this place, wherefore, men transport their goods and flie to Vienna. For the Duke of Saxons Forces are en∣quartered in this Kingdome of Bohe∣mia, and doe encroach day by day vpon vs. As also the Swedish are fallen into Silesia at least fifteene thousand strong, where they haue taken Great Glogaw of late and divers other places of moment. Yea they haue shew∣ed themselues in a victorious manner, even before Breslau. Which hath caused the Emperours forces mainly to intend against them. Who with all expedition are marching to∣wards them. His Imperiall Majestie this day, as also divers times of late himselfe in person hath beene present in the Counsell of Warre, and with them consulted, how and by what meanes a mightie Armie may speedily be raised. To this effect the Lord Questenburg is speedily sent to the Duke of Freid∣land, and Commissions are graunted from his Imperiall Ma∣jestie, for the levying and raising of an hundred thousand men. The Chancelor of the Duke of Lunenburg, Lord of Eu∣dern, who had with him many confiscated goods in Ellen∣boger Countrey; was surprized in the night, carryed away; and the said goods are restored to the former possessors.
From Ysleben the 1. of November, 1631. Last weeke the Imperiall Commaunder Bunnickhousen, with his Cavalleries, fell vpon some of his Majestie of Swe∣dens forces, and defeated them in a certaine Village where they lay. On the other side the Lieutenant Generall Schass∣man, surprised three Companies of Imperiall horsemen, and vtterly defeated, yea, slew them all, some few excepted which fled into Magdenburg. From Rotenburg the 8. of November. In the Country of Franconia. From Erfort is confirmed that since his Majestie of Swe∣den hath taken the same Citie, it is exceedingly oppressed with Garrisons, more then the Citie is able to beare. Here∣upon those of the Citie by their Committies, haue made humble sute to his Majestie of Sweden, to the end they might be eased and disburdened of so intollerable a Charge. His Majestie intends to send his Queene thither to reside there, whom they daily expect. Others are of opinion, that the Queene shall keepe her residence in the Castle of Wirts∣burg, which indeed is a strong and Royall Castle. In all parts here abouts, are levied all Souldiers that vpon any termes will beare Armes, both horsemen and foote. Two dayes agoe we heard a great thundring of shooting. Whereupon we doe presume, that the King of Swedens Ar∣my, and the Generall Tillies Army, haue had some sore en∣counter neare vnto Mergenheym, which is very probable to be so. From Lausenitz the 2. of November. The Imperiall Garrisons in Bautsen, Garlitz, and Sitta, durst in no wise expect the comming of the Duke of Saxons Army; wherefore they haue abandoned Lausenitz wholly, and haue betooke themselues into Silesia. Which indeede happened with great confusion, in so much that they were
constrained (by reason of their perplexitie) vto leaue the chiefe of their Ordnance at Gorlitz. The Prince Elector of Saxony his Army pursued the Im∣perialists, even at the heeles, and the said Imperialists were o∣vertaken by the Saxons neare vnto Hirschbergh. But where∣as the Imperialists durst not stand to it, they were slaine by wholes troupes of them, and miserably destroyed, as doubt∣lesse you will ere long vnderstand by a more ample Relation. Out of Franconia the 9. of November. His Majestie as yet is resident at Wirtsburg, which he hath caused to be exceedingly fortified; in the night he takes vp his lodging in the Castle. Some of Tillyes Souldiers who are imprisoned by the Swedish, affirme, that there is exceeding great want in the Popish Army, both of Victualls and other provision. Whereupon the Souldiers doe faint, and let their courage sinke. They confesse that many impotent forces are aggregated confusedly together, but to no great purpose, neither in any good order. Neither are they able to furnish their Armie with Ordnance and Munition, &c. since that horrible overthrow neare vnto Leipsich. Especially they are weakened exceedingly, because his Majestie of Sweden hath taken (of late) Wirtsburg, and other strong places, furnished with all manner of necessaries. And doth daily proceede in his Victorious and successefull proceedings. Whereas the Catholike League, haue not time to consult of the maine mat∣ter, much lesse to prevent the common danger and misery, which now comes flowing vpon them in full streame, but e∣very one hath enough to doe, to shift for his owne particu∣lar safetie. From Hanaw the 11. of November. I doubt not but you haue heard how this Citie hath beene surprized and taken by the King of Swedens forces. Giue me leaue briefly to relate it vnto you, if happily you are not ac∣quainted with the manner of it. In the morning early, Novemb. 1. three thousand Swedish
Dragoners (Musquetiers on Horsebacke) and six hundred Curassiers, came before this Citie, and entred and passed through the Kinzing gate, where they patarded the Gate be∣hinde the Castle, and scaled the wals, so that by these meanes they soone mastered the Old Citie. In this furious assault and expedition, onely eight Citizens and three Souldiers were slaine, besides some other hurt. The Earle of Hanaw, (notwithstanding his Countesse was then in Labour, or at least-wise newly brought to bed of a young daughter) was presently taken in hold. And present∣ly after assaulted the New Citie furiously, and battered vpon the same with Canon shot. Those within resolved to defend themselues to the vttermost. But being threatned with sore threats, were at last willing to come to agreement, appealed to the Earle, and required his consent, who came to them vpon the walles of the Citie, and spake to them in the Citie, in this manner. My faithfull and loving Citizens and Souldiers, to affoord you much Counsell in this extremitie, or any assistance, I am not able, by reason I am a prisoner. Onely this I wish you to compound and make your agreement vpon the best termes you can. Which they willingly consented vnto, and did so. And those that would betake themselues into the service of his Majestie were entertained; the rest were imprisoned. His Majestie of Sweden himselfe in person was not in this ex∣pedition, but is daily expected at Hanaw, to establish order according to his Royall Direction. The forces of the Generall Tilly which were enquartered at Heuxt, Hofsteym, and other places hereabout, haue aban∣doned their Garrison, and are fled to Mentz. The Swedish haue also taken Fryburgh. As many Forces as possibly can be are raised for the Ca∣tholicke League, in this their extreame need, and to this end divers Officers are sent into the Land of Liege, to levie some Troupes. The Arch-Duke Leopold is now also about to levie an Army of 20000 men. And as we are credibly enformed, the
Bishop of Cullen himselfe in person will come into the field with his new Army. We haue ty dings that the City of Strasburgh is agreed with the King of Sweden, likewise Norinburgh, Ʋlme and other Cities are upon termes of composition. Colonell Re∣linger is sent to the forenamed Cities, as Commissary for his Maiestie of Sweden, to agree with them as he shall finde it consonant. The same Commissary met in his journey with a Wagon full of Spirituall Persons, neare vnto the City Vlms, all which he tooke hold of, and ransomed them afterwards for 40000 Rix-Dollars. From Swynfordt the 10 of November. Last Wednesday his Majestie of Sweden with 33 Cornets of Horse, accompanied with divers Earles, and other great Lords and Peeres, departed from Wurtsburgh, and is direct∣ly gone to the Army newly levied neere vnto the City Ca∣relstadt, by the River Mayne, there to adjoyne his Troupes with them. His Maiestie tooke along with him from this place, 4 Companies, and as many as he could well spare from some other places, by reason he had information that the Imperiall Forces were speedily marching toward Carelstadt, against the sayd new raised Army. They are already come neere vnto Niewstadt, and Rotten, where doubtlesse when they meete, something will be effected. This City, as likewise the Castle of Wurtsburgh is much fortified. His Maiestie causeth a new Army of 40000 men to be raised, to which end, both here, and in all the adjoyning Countries the Drummes beate, and the Trumpets doe sound continually. In the mean while tis a great misery that befals these Coun∣tries, and none without pitty or compassion can either be∣hold or heare of the ruines in these Parts. Men haue heavy taxations laid vpon them, and great contributions must be paid; but especially by the Clergy, which causeth both Lai∣ty and Clergy to abandon their residence, which is pilladged
and spoyled by the Souldiers in their absence. Newly we received tydings that the whole Ʋaunt-guard of the Cavallerie of Generall Altringer is vtterly defeated, and many of them slaine. Insomuch that no lesse then 6. Cornets were brought and presented to his Maiestie of Swe∣den, we shall acquaint you with the particulars the very next occasion. From Torgan the 9 of November. The Imperialists not daring to abide the Encounter with the Saxon Forces, haue quite left and forsaken the six Cities in Lusatia, and are fled into Bohemia and Silesia, there if they can to defend those Countries. Since that an Ambassador from his Imperiall Maiestie with a great traine of followers is arrived at Dresden, with very friendly and patheticall moving Letters to our Prince Ele∣ctor of Saxonie, which Letters sound to this effect, as name∣ly, That it never was his Imperiall Maiesties intention or will, to make the incursion into Saxonie, and that he for his part, hath no other cause (but after great experience) to be well assured of his Maiesties favour and loue: Knowing what a friend his Imperiall Maiestie hath beene to him, insomuch, that he could not expect any emnitie at his hands, onely if he would be pleased to lay downe, and abandon his Armes. But since our Elector of Saxonie sufficiently knowes his Im∣periall Maiesties disposition, by woefull proofe and experi∣ence, especially since matters are now come to this high passe, the Duke of Saxonie will not trust to his coloured protestati∣ons, but earnestly adde further proceedings to their good beginnings, and leaue the issue to the Almightie. From Leypzich the 12 of November. His Highnesse of Saxonie at this present is at Bautsen in person, but his chiefe Army is in Bohemia. The Swedish of Crossen in Silesia, haue taken great Glogaw, and slaine all the Souldiers there that made any opposition. It is most certaine, that 12000 Swedish more are now speedily marching to his Maiestie about Wurtsburgh, to aug∣ment his Maiesties Army.
From Brunswicke the 13. of November. A few dayes agoe the Garrison of Rostocke came before this City, and required 4. dayes provision. Which by the Magistracy of the City was refused: they professed that they would cleave close to the Conclusion made at the Dyet at Leypzich. To the same Guarrison are adjoyued eleven Cor∣net more, whether they will now tend will ere long appeare. The Earle of Gransfield is now leuying of an Army in Westphalia. He is come into the Byshopricke of Minden with the Regiment of Erwitz. The Commander Baninghousen Colonell of the a∣foresayd 11. troupes of horse, (besides the Garri∣sons of Magdenburgh and Wolfenbuttle) hath brought againe all places unto Halberstadt under Contribu∣tion, and those that will not contribute, he puts them to fire and sword. He hath also sorely threat∣ned Halberstadt, but whereas divers troupes of Swedish are newly come thither, he will availe but little with his enterprise. The same Commander hath pillaged 14. Wagons laden with good Com∣modities going from Hamburgh to Leypzig. From Breme the 17. of November. Our Byshop causeth all possible strength to be brought together, to extirpate Tillyes forces out of these quarters, he hath already incorporated two places. And as it is reported, the Garrison of Staden hath againe taken Boytsenburgh, and Lauwenburgh, From Collen the 16. of November. Sixe hundred of Swedish Horse-men, marched
neare unto Franckfort the 13. of this Moneth. These in passing by related, that whereas the Emperialists had utterly abandoned Lusatia, that the D. of Saxony hath taken the 6, Cities in those Countries, and so is marched forward toward Bohemia. Letters from Leypzig affirme the same, and moreover that he is now Master of, and hath subdued the whole Coun∣try Limaris, and is come within some 7. Miles from Prague, and hath taken the City Litmaris. Which hath a bridge over the River Elve, so that now there is no more resistance but onely a plaine open way to the City of Prague. The old Earle of Thurne and divers other Dutch Lords, have adjoyned their strength to them. The Protestant Peeres have willingly contributed in the Conclusion at the Dyet at Leipzich as here followeth. Strasburgh. 279000, Gilders. Nrimbergh. 478800. Gilders. Worms. 065560. Gilders. Wirtmburgh. 043720. Gilders. Lindow. 029760. Gilders. Nordlingen. 054600. Gilders. Swabish Hall. 098443. Gilders. Heylbrun. 644800. Gilders. Ʋlm. 179000. Gilders. Memmingen. 051163. Gilders. Kempten. 048360. Gilders. Rotenburgh on the Tauber. 011780. Gilders. Sweinfurt. 054880. Gilders. Wirtzenheym. 052080 Gilders. Weissenburg. 031000. Gilders. Summe, 2312146. Gilders. From Eger in Bohemia, the 5. of November. Here is great flight in this Kingdome from all
parts, and men tremble for very feare, because the Swedish fall furiously into all places, and have alree∣dy conquered many brave Lordships and strong pla∣ces. It is also most certaine, that Ioachims Valley is taken by the Swedish. The Lantgrave of Hessens forces have made short worke in Paterborne, where they found but small re∣sistance. Some Spanish troupes are passed by Duy∣ren, and are marched towards the Palatinate. Those of Mentz have taken into their Citty 4. Spanish Companies, and have enquartered some troupes in Ringnow. From Bergen-up-zoom the 18. of November. From Antwerpe is written, that 8. Turkish men of warre from Algiers, were fallen into Ireland, and from thence carried away captive 1500. men, which they thought to have brought into Algiers, & sold them: but 12. Dunkerk men of warre met them by the way, and after a long fight sunke two of the Turkish men of warre, and tooke 6. more, and threw all the Pyrates overboord, so that the Frish are all rescued from slavery, and landed againe in Freland. Which we must expect some confirmation of, be∣fore we assure it true. Antwerpe the 17. of November. 1631. For newes, by the Letters come this day from Ger∣many: some men have writte from Norimbergh, that the Duke of Saxonyes forces should have taken in Prague, it doth agree with that one writteth me from Hambrough, how that the D. of Saxony with his whole Army was entring into Bohemia, and was within 7. leagues of Prague, (it should seeme Count Thurne was the leader of them) the King of Swe∣den continues in his late conquered places, where he makes himselfe strong, and gathers in great con∣tributions
in the Townes and Countries therea∣bouts; Tilly hath a great number of men, but most of them unexperienced in warres: the King hath sent the Count of Solmes into Franck∣fort, to have their present resolution, whether they will take in his souldiers to Garrison; Tilly hath sent one to them to perswaded them to take in the Emperors Souldiers, they would be happy if they could refuse both and remaine neutrall and friend to both; but it seemes they must resolve the one or the other; judge you in what a predicament they live, for they would faine hold with the strongest, and that is doubtfull, so long as they have both strong Armies in the field: It should seeme, that the Bishop of Breame takes time while time is, and begins to put the Emperors Souldiers out of his Iu∣risdiction. Many doe write that the neather Circle of Saxony, will have 12000. men in the field, and the Hance Townes like to Arme them; so that by all appearance this next Summer all Germany will be up in Armes: for particular fightings, many write of many, but they are farre from hence, and therefore forbeare to write of any of them: It should seeme the French are already marching towards Italy, they say to put into Garrison; I doe believe so till the next Spring, and then will show their intents; for there is a generall opinion they will joyne with Savoy, and the next Spring goe into Italy: and make a pretended warre against Germany, and get Mil∣laine if they can; the next yeare is like to be bloo∣dy, God send a good peace to prevent so great a bloudshed as is like to be.
Extract of another Letter of the 18. of November. 1631. BY Gods assistance the old Count of Thurn, com∣manding some Swedish forces and seconded by some troupes of the Elector of Saxony, and accompa∣nied with many Bohemian Lords and Noble-men, that by the Emperour were banished, tooke with∣out any opposition the Metropolitan City of Prage, of whose comming as soone as the Governour of the Castle and the other of the Towne had notice, they both with many more chiefe Ministers and Of∣ficers had no mind to stay for that Earle his com∣ming, but saved themselves by flight. They were followed by many Iesuites, Fryars and Priests, who all went towards Passan and into Au∣stria. The Duke of Fridland (Walsteyn) did indeed shew great displeasure at their flight. But soone af∣ter he himselfe and Don Balthazor (who commands all the milice and garisons in Bohemia) faining as if they would goe foorth to meete and parly with the said Earle of Thurne, they were no sooner out of towne but went also away as fast as they could towards Budwize. Therefore some of the Swedish Army joyning with many Bohemians, who are glad of so good an opportunity to free them∣selves againe from the insupportable yoke, both their consciences and goods are under, doe follow them, to hinder them to make any considerable Ar∣my. Almost all Townes doe openly reioyce and de∣clare for them, and so all Bohemia doth make a ge∣nerall insurrection, in manner, that wheresoever the people meetes with an Imperiall souldier, or whom they doe but suspect to be an Imperialist, they pre∣sently knocke him downe. And how this new conquest doth please the Duke
of Bavaria and the Emperour himselfe, may well be supposed. The said Duke of Bavaria being rea∣dy with about 12. thousand men to draw and march towards the Papists Army (for the Imperiall and Leaguish are ioyned into one, and Tilly doth no more appeare alive) when the newes of Bohemia did cause him to make a stand and to take new Counsell. This we understand for certaine, &c. Out of another Letter the 14. of November. I Doe not doubt but you have heard that the Count of Thurne hath delivered againe both Prague and many other parts and places of Bohemia from the oppression they have sighed under these many yeres. I hope to send you by the next more particularities thereof. Meanewhile I will tell you, that a friend of mine writes to me, that Generall Tilly fell so sicke the ve∣ry day of his overthrow before Leypsich, that ever since all the skill of Surgeons and Physitions could not keepe him alive. And so I am sure that hee is dead, but I cannot (as yet) tell you when and where he dyed. The Roman Catholike Army, lying still for the most part betwixt the Rhine and the King of Sweden, doe by incursions now and then great hurt therea∣bout, not against their Enemies, but onely upon the poore people, burning spoiling and sacking all whe∣ther they can come. For there is no discipline, nor order, nor Religion amongst them. They have late∣ly taken some places (of no strength) in the Marqui∣sat of Onspach, and the very towne of Onspach; yea they are not content to burne and rob the houses and the poore Countrey-people, but they have of late beene so barbarous that they have opened the Monuments and Sepulchers of the Princes and Mar∣quises
of Brandenburgh, that governed at Onspach, and there robbed the dead and abused the corpes, which some Finlanders understanding swore to re∣venge, saying; they were but sorry to have to deale with such as durst shew no courage against them, but were onely fit to rob and boast against the dead Lyons, whom they never dare looke in the faces whilest they are alive; And that they being fitter for the gallowes then for an Army, they hoped to meet them once againe as they had lately done in their quarter neare Leypsich, where Tilly had cho∣sen his quarter due to his robbers, and where they receiued their reward. Landgrave William of Hessen being come backe a∣gaine out of Paderborn to Fulda, hath brought with him thither many principall and Noble-men of that Bishoprick, as hostages, untill all the contributions agreed upon shall be payd. Bannier (who is now Generall commanding a Swedish Army in the Countrey of Magdenburgh) hath blocked up the said Citty, so that it is hoped he will bring the same againe into the former liber∣ty and deliver it from the Cruell Vsurpators. From Antwerp the 27. of November. This Instant there is a good friend of ours come from Franckford post in 3. dayes, who confirmes the taking of Hanaw, and sayth that for certaine, Prague is taken, with all the Citties Townes and places thereabouts, by the Duke of Saxony. And the King of Swedlands forces are marched from Hanaw to Franckford, which undoubtedly must also yeeld vn∣to him, in fine the King of Swedland is very victo∣rious and in all possibility to conqver all Germany, and the Empire: when I have any more newes, I will not faile to perticipate it unto you. FINIS.
