18748 99854711 20148
A COMFORT AGAINST THE Spaniard. DEVT. 20. And when ye are come nigh vnto the battell, the Priest shal come forth to speake vnto the peole. And shall say vnto them, Heare, O Israell, you are come this day vnto battell against your enemies, let not your harts faint, neither feare, nor be amazed, nor in dread of them. For the Lord your God goeth with you, to fight for you against your enemies, and to saue you. LONDON Printed by Iohn Windet for I. O. 1596. ornamental border
TO THE REVE∣REND FATHER IN God, William Lord Bishoppe of Norwich, and to the rest of her Maiesties Officers for the execution of Iustice in that Dioces. T. N. wisheth grace and peace. IS it true that the Spanyardes will com this spring? And is it not as true that we are ready to receiue them? Hath this land at any time had, either better prouision, or more Souldiers: brauer Captaines to leade them, or sounder Diuines to encourage them?
Yea, but what for Armour on our backes if feare bee in our hearts? can feare there remaine where our late victories are remēbered? Is not our enemie the same, our case, nay our God the same? But Pharao, and Sisera, their o∣uerthrow is now forgotten. Mi∣riam may sing alone, and Barac and
Debora can get no hearers. O, ra∣ther let this booke call to mind our dutie, for why should we depriue, either our GOD of his glorie, or our selues of such a comfort? Is it not an houres Sermon of that inuincible Nauie, and a briefe Apologie of the Portugale voiage? and doth it not set before our eyes how great thinges the Lord hath done for vs? To this ende I haue published it, & to your Lordship, and worships, I doe Dedicate it. Beseeching God, so to blesse you in gouerning vs, that still the Gospell may haue free passage among vs. So shal we stil eate the fruite of our vines, in despite of Senacherib: and good Ezechias shal not want Esaies to comfort her, whē Rabsache shall be sent to rayle vpon her. Your Lordships, and worships in Christ Thomas Nun Minister of the word, at Weston.
A Comfort, against the Spaniarde. Iud. 5. ver. 19. 19 The Kings came, they fought: then fought the Kings of of Canaan at Taanach by the waters of Megiddo: they got not the money they desired. 20 From heauen they fought, the starres in their courses fought against Sisera. 21 The riuer Kishon swept them away, the riuer of their meetings the riuer Kishon. O my soule treade vnder foot what soeuer seemeth valiant. 22 Then the horsehoofes were battered by the swift fleeing of their valiants. 23 Curse ye Meroz: (saith the Angel of Iehoua) curse ye the inhabitants thereof, because they came not to helpe Iehouah, to helpe Iehouah among the mighties. 24 Let Iael the wife of Cheber the Kenite be blessed aboue women: aboue women dwelling in tents let her be blessed 25 He asked water, she gaue him milke: she brought foorth creame in a lordly dish. 26 She put her left hand to the nayle, and her right hand to the workmans hammer and shee smote Sisera: shee tooke away his head and battered & brused his temples. 27 Betweene her feete he bowed himselfe, he fell & lay still betweene her feete: he bowed himselfe he fell, and where he bowed himselfe there he fell depriued of his life.
28 The mother of Sisera looked out at a window, & chat∣ted through the lattesse: why doth his chariot defer to re∣turne? why tarie the wheeles of his chariots? 29 Her wise Ladies answered her, yea she her selfe answe∣red her owne wordes. 30 Haue they not gotten? doe they not deuide the spoyle? A maide, yea two maidens to euery one? Sisera hath a pray of diuers colours, a pray of diuers colours, of colours of nelde worke, of diuers colours of nedle worke on both sides, for the neckes of the spoylers. FAther Iacob in his lastGen 49.21. wil fore∣sheweth, that Neptalie shoulde be a hind let go, giuing goodly wordes. The singer of the song (beloued) is the performer of this Prophecie, euen Barack ofIud, 46. Cadesh the sonne of Abinoam: for as his feet were swift inIud. 4, 10. leauing his armie against
Sisera: so are his words sweete which for the victorie he here singeth with Deborah. The whole song is lon∣ger then may now be handled, this part as fittest for our purpose I haue red vnto you: for wee are heere assembled, not onely to sanctifie this Sabaoth as at o∣ther times: but also to blesse God for the late Spani∣ards ouerthrow. It containeth 12. verses, and con∣sisteth of two members. In the one the battell is de∣scribed: in the other a curse to Meroz and a blessing to Iael is pronounced. Three circumstances describe the battell: the place wher it was fought: the parties that fought it & the euēt of it. Two places are named Taanah and Megiddo neighbor townes in halfIosua. 17 11. Ma∣nasses. At Megiddo good king Iosias was2. King. 23.22. 2. Chron. 35.22.23. slaine in the battell, & to Megiddo the three spirits like Frogs in theReue. 16.13. Reuelation doe bring the kings of the earth to battel: the allusion is vnto this text, & the mening is, that pseudocatholikes should fight with no better suc∣cesse against Christiās, after the reuiuing of the gospel, then did Sisera against Barack at the waters of Megid∣do. And in this sence, well may our narrow Seas bee called the waters of Megiddo, for thither their pride brought them, and ther were they cutin peeces. And thus much for the place, the parties that fought are now to bee considered. Sisera and his adherents is the one, and Barack and his partakers the other. Sisera his adherents are thus recorded. The kings came, they fought: then fought the Kings of Canaan. Iosua in conquering the land, killedIosu. 12.24. one & thirtie of them, Israel had expresseExod, 23.33. and Deut. 7.2. commandement to roote out the rest:Iud. 1.21. But Beniamin,Iud. 1.28. Zabulon,Iud. 1.30. Asher andIud. 1.31. Neptalie, thought it better pol∣licie to put thē to tribute: they preferred gaine before godlines, but what gained they by that pollicie? They found them prickes in their eyes, and thornes in their sides, as God hadNumb.
33.55. threatned: they were brought to meere beggerie and extreame slauerie, as well they deserued: meere beggerie, for their highIud. 5.6. waies were vnoccupied, and traficke ceased: extreame slauerie, for the seruant of seruantes, euen cursed Canaan becameIud. 4.2. Lord ouer thē. But what is not Canaan his curse vpō the Popes backe? Is not he as rightly called the seruant of seruants asGen. 9.25. Canaā was? If so? Why is not his brood rooted out from among vs? Or seeing England wil stil be pittying of them, why are they not Lords ouer her as was Canaan ouer Israel? The difference betweene them is the reason of it: for Israel chose new Gods; En∣gland hath renounced I dolatrie, Israel didIud. 4.1. euill in the sight of the Lord: England giueth free passage vnto the Gospel. And this I dare assure you, that so long as Eng∣lish lawes do countenance true religion, England shall be ours in despight of Gods enemies. Truth it is, that in space of 339. yeares Israel wasIud. 3.8. Iud. 3.12. Iud. 4.2. Iud. 6, 1 Iud. 10 7. Iud. 13.1. six times oppressed: but this also is as true that no one oppression began before Israel went a whoring after other Gods. The tenne tribes were2. King. 17.2 carried captiue into Ashur: but the tenne tribes had first 257. yeares continued in the sin of Iero∣boam.2. King. 24.14. & 25.11. 2. Chron. 36.20. Daniel. 1.2, Iudah & Beniamin were caried to Babel: but not before Iosias, his children had2. King. 23.32, & 37. & 24, 9. & 19 ouerthrowne what Io∣sias had established concerning religion. And as for their posteritie which returned from Babel, to builde the temple,2. King. 2.2, 2. Chro. 34.2. they became Saduces and Pharisies: theyMat, 27.22. Mark, 15.13. Luk. 23.21. Iohn, 19.15. ioyned with the Romaines, to Crucifie Christ, be∣fore Titus, eitheir sacked their Cittie, or burned their temple. We reade of Dauid that he1, King. 15.5. held Religion all his daies, the like we reade of1. King. 22.43. Iehoshaphat, the like of2. King, 18, 3. Ezechias, and the like of2. King, 22.2. Iosias, and who of all their e∣nemies preuailed against their land in their daies? And yet to that purpose, how often and how dangerously were they assaulted? Twise Philistims army was1. Chro. 14.11. & 13. pit∣ched in Baalperasim: once Edom, Ismael, Moab, Am∣mon, Philistims, Amalakites, Hagarens, Gebalites yea and Ashur too had2. Chro. 20.1. &, 2. and Psal. conspired together, and were ap∣proched to Engeddi:2. King. 18.17. Rabsache had brought his host to the walles of Ierusalem: and to such a plunge Necho Pharao put Iudah that she lost her2. King.
23.29. King in the battell euen good King Iosias. And to come to those sowerReuel. 9.14. vnto. 20. Angels of Gods wrath, I meane the Turkes and Sara∣sins, what though for their multitude, they are c tenne thousand thousands: for their force horses: for their courage Lyons heades: for their great desolation they make burning where they come, they haue Habergi∣ons fierie blew, and brimstone, and for their dooing this vpon a word, fire, smoke and brimstone come out of their mouthes: yet Christian nations they ouerrun not, only they kill such men as will bee stillReue. 9.20. worship∣ing of Deuils, and Idols of gold, siluer, stone & wood, there onely making desolation where Gods wrath is prouoked by Idolatrie. Salomon was as a Lyons whelpe couched in his denne whilest hee helde Religion, but after that his thousand wiues had1. King. 12 3. turned his heart, who then had not a hart to rise vp against him? Hadad, Reson, Ie∣roboam how pittifully did they1. King. 12.14.23. & 26. verse afflict him? And at the last1. King. 1.20. rent in two peeces his kingdome. Israel hadExod. 34.24. pro∣mises of her God to be kept safe in her land, whilst she held his ceremonies. His ceremonies we hold whilest his sonne we professe, for he is the end of them, & the truth of them, and therfore as safe as were the Israeli∣tish women from the enemie at home, whilst their hus∣bands appeared before God at Ierusalem: so safe are we from the Papists, whilst wee hold fast our professi∣on. Salomons temple was seauen yeares in1. King, 6.38. building,
Nabuchadnezar,2. King. 25, 9. burnt it, he was seuen yeares to be aDan. 4, 22, beast for it: yet Daniel giueth him thisDan. 4.24. assurance, that if he would breake of his sinnes by righteousnesse, and his iniquities by pittying the poore people, there shold be a prolonging of his peace,Eliza. 1 Our Queene hath broken the necke of Poperie, hath receiued into her kingdome Christs righteousnes, & pittying the poore souls of her ignorant subiects hath caused it to be prea∣ched among them. And why should wee distrust God for the continuance of our peace, whilst she and her suc∣cessours continue this course? Yea but Moyses telleth Israel, that if they doe not all Gods commandements, the enemies shall eate the fruites of their land. Now England is so ful of sinne that in steade of al it seemeth to performe scarcely and one of them.Leui. 26.15, 16. The text is, if ye keepe not my commandements but breake my co∣uenant then &c. Now England, howsoeuer it faileth in ciuill duties, yet holding the couenant shee is not subiect to this punishment. Neither is shee therefore the rather to be secure: for wherefore is pestilence and famine so often among vs? Wherefore so often is the sword of the enemie vpon our souldiers abroad? The sword of the magistrate vpō our malefactors at home? But for her sinnes. Neither yet anye whit the more is shee the to spare the Papists, for doe they not de∣nie the nature & offices of Christ? Doe they not giue vnto thatReuel. 9.11.
Abaddon what is due vnto our Soueraigne? They are heretiques and in truth very Traytors, & yet you would thinke them the best subiects, if you consi∣der but their dealings with vnreformed ministers: they are so zealous in speeches against them, and so impor∣tunate with Iudges til sentence be giuen against them. But O ye fooles, can ye imagine no other let for bring∣ing in againe your superstitions, but only that the lear∣ned ministers their mouthes are still opened? Are the lawes so soone altered? Will England bee so soone at your becke, as when with the Dog she returned to the vomite, and with the swine to the mire? Hath she these 37. yeares hated the whore, left her naked and burnt her with fire, and should she now againe begin to loue her? I tel you God hath put these things into her heart to doe them, striue not longer against his gouerment. Come out of Babell as we haue done, kisse his Sonne & then liue in our land, yea liue for euer. But if stil you will haue a Sauls eye against Gods Embassadors: then O ye iudges doe ye Iustice, & let notConser. Ezra. 2.13. with Reuela. 13.18. Adonicams chil∣dren stand vp against them. Are they notReuel. 11.3. two for their fewnesse and in sackcloth for their poorenes? Yet out of their mouthes commeth theReuel, 11.5. fire that deuoureth your enemies, they are your2. King. 6.17. fathers, and the2. King. 2.12. chari∣ots and horsemen of Israel, they bring vnto you the glad tydings of the Gospell, which if you belieue, you shallIosu, 3.16. liue for euer, and if you still professe you shal stil be safe from your enemies. And this of Sisera his ad∣herents. Barack is the other partieIud. 4.10. 10000. marched vnder his banner, but who reuenged his quarrel? From heauen they fought, the starres in their courses fought against Sisera. These were dumbe creatures, yet such as Ieho∣uah vseth to destroy his enemies. At his commaund∣ment the watersGen. 7.23. destroied the olde world: fire from heauenGen. 19.24.25. Sodome and Gomorrath;Exod. 9.24.25. haile andExod, 10, 14, 15. gras∣hoppers the fruites and beasts of Egypt: the redExod, 14.28. Sea Pharao and all his host:Iosu. 10, 11. hay lestones more of Iosuas e∣nemies then did all
Iosuas armie, the Lord of hostes is his name. The hostes of heauen and earth are alwaies ready prest for his armies. Had the Spaniard learned this lesson he would haue trembled to haue giuen the name of God to his Nauie, for onely Iehouah is in∣uincible. The Centurion sheweth by his answere how well he beleeued it, I am not worthieMat, 8.8. saith hee to our Sauiour that thou shouldest come vnder my roofe, only speak the word and my seruant shall be healed: for I haue souldiours vnder me, I say to one come and he commeth, and to another goe and he goeth: As if he should say: health, and conse∣quently all other creatures are so ready to goe & come at thy word, as are my souldiers at my cōmandement. But to leaue this point, and to come to the euent of the battell which thus followeth. They got not the mo∣ny they desired. The riuer Kishon swept them away, the riuer of their meetings, the riuer Kishon. Ther were the horsehoofes battered with the swift fleeing of their valiants. And was it any maruaile, though Sisera his army was thus foyled? who euer resisted God & preuailed? Daniels prophane kingdomes could not, yet was Babel among people as aDan. 4, Lyon among beasts. The Medes & Persians ruled ouer 127. nations. Alexander in sixe yeares well nigh ouerran the whole world, and the kingdome erected by his Captaines was a fearefull and ouglyEster. 1.1. beast with ten hornes. These in Nebuchadnezars eyes were as a goodly image, whose head was of gold, breast & arms of siluer, belly of brasse, and feete of yron: yet for resist∣ing God & abusing his people, in short time the Lord so powned them toDan. 2.34, pouder, that at his comming in the flesh, scarcely a remnant remained of them. And as for Rome, howsoeuer by Gods close prouidence it may remaine for a time, for the holines of Pilats vicar to abide in: yet seeing she hathMat, 27.26. killed the Lord, bani∣shed Iohn, & cōtinuallyReuel. 17.6. & 18, 24, shed the bloud of Gods saints, her damnatiō is decreed, she is thatNumb. 24 24 Chittim that must in the ende perish. In Iohns daies shee was called theReuel. 17.18. great Cittie, and rule ouer the Kings of the earth had she: But that great Cittie shallReuel, 16.19. drinke of the wine of the cup of Gods furie,Reuel. 16.21. haile like talents shall fall vpon it, the whore shallReuel. 18.8. come to destruction, herReuel, 18.15. Mar∣chants
may bewaile her, but none shal be able to helpe her. But to returne to Sisera: he hadIud. 4.3. 900. yron Chari∣ots: his Ladies were assured that he could not loose the victorie, how therefore doe they comfort his mother concerning his long tarrying? Haue they not gotten? doe they not diuide the spoile? a maid yea two maides to euery one. Sisera hath a pray of diuers colours, a pray of diuers colours of nedle worke, of diuers colours of nedle worke, on both sides for the necks of the spoylers. But thePro. 10.28. fooles their hope quick∣ly perished, for Sisera is now dead, the armie fled and drowned:Iere. 6.1. they said peace peace, but sudaine destruc∣tion came vpon them. And this for the former part of my text. The other is Meroz, curse & Iaels blessing. The cause of her curse thus followeth. Curse ye Meroz saith the Angel of Iehouah, curse ye the inhabitants therof, because they came not to helpe Iehoua: to helpe Iehouah against the mightie. Meroz durst not venter a limme to get libertie, she was situated so nigh the battel and so faint hearted, that wel she might be some towne in Isaschar, the only tribe which DeborahIud. 5.16. vpraideth of asselike sluggish∣nes, and which father IacobGen. 49.14. foretolde should bee an Asse couched vnder two burdens. She onely regarded her commodities, so shee kept them Sisera, or Iehouah whome she serued she cared not: Luke warmeReuel. 3 14. Lao∣dicea was much like her in behauiour, and almost the like punishment had shee, for sheeReue. 3.16. was spewed out of the Lords mouth, and Meroz is here accursed from his mouth▪ And this of
Meroz curse: Mels blessing thus fol∣loweth. Let Iael the wife of Cheber the Leuite, be blessed a∣boue women, aboue women, dwelling in the tents let her bee blessed. He asked water, she gaue him Milke, she brought forth Creame in a lordly dish: she put her lift hand to the nayle, and her right hand to the workemans hammer, and she smote Si∣sera, she tooke away the head, and battered and brused his tem∣ples. Betweene her feete he bowed himselfe, he fell, and where he bowed himselfe, there he fell depriued of his life. Before wee come to Iaels blessing, a word must bee spoken of her Country and exploit: she was neither Israelite nor Canaanite, but a Kenite,Iud. 4.4.11. descended fromExod, 3.1. Iethro king of Median Moses father in law the Kenite. Lot and Ie∣thro shewed the like obedience, the oneGen. 14.4 left his fathers house to goe with Abraham, the otherMat, 11, 5 left a kingdome to goe with Moses, and almost the like reward founde they for Ruth the daughter of Lot was the Lords mo∣ther, c and Iael the daughter of IethroIud. 4.17. killed the Lords enemie. But why should Iael therefore be blessed, was hee not in league with her? Did not hee * flie to her house for succour? The league was but ciuill and pri∣uate: But now aIud. 4. publike cause is in hand & the Lords battel in fighting, she was to prefer the cause of religi∣on before her couenant with Sisera: Her blessing was the very same that GabrielLuk, 1, 28. bestowed vpon Mary, for bearing the Lord, this onely excepted that Mary is blessed among women, but Iael aboue women. I will not now dispute whose was the greast blessing, but this I am sure of, that they were both saued by belie∣uing, and not by these workes, howsoeuer they had a prerogatiue aboue women for them. For this is a sea∣led truth, that wee are saued byEphe. 2.8 9. faith, and not by the wokes of the law: Yea, MaryLuk. 1.47. reioyceth in God her Sauiour. The time is past: yet a word of the Spaniard; and that by way of comparison, with the enemie wee haue now in hand. SiseraIudg. 4 3. had 900. yron Chariots, the Spaniard a Nauie inuincible: Sisera with an high
hand, came downe to the riuer Kishon. The Spaniard brought their Nauy on our natrow Seas with the like affection. In Israel none doubted to follow Barack but such as misbelieued Deborah her prophecie: In Eng∣land none fainted to take armour against the Spaniard, but such as knew not the course of Gods gouernment.Iudg 4.9▪ Deborah went vp with Barack to comfort his Souldi∣ers. And at Tilberie O Elizabeth, how were thy Soul∣diers encouraged at thy presence? Maidēlike in attire, thou camest vnto them, but warrierlike in behauiour wast thou among them, voyde of feare was thy coun∣tenance, and gracious were thy speeches: Mightie was thine armie as was Baracks, but Iehouah would haue the glorie as then hee had, his windes reuenged thy quarel. O Iehouah, to thee must we sing, thou wast our man of warre in that day, the horse and his rider thou ouerthrewest in the Sea, thou hast triumphed valiant∣ly: The Spaniard saide we will pursue, we will ouer∣take, we will diuide the spoyle, our lust shall be satisfi∣ed vppon them: thou blewest with thy windes, the depth couered them, they sunke to the bottome as a stone. O Iehouah, so let thine enemies perish, but they that loue thee, let them bee as the Sunne arising to his strength.
The Apologie of the Portingall voyage. THe Portingall voyage had a double purpose: the one to spoyle the K. of Spaine his townes of victuall, the other to weaken his strength of men and shipping: and both these to this end, that hee being impouerished and weakned at home, the Church in England might without feare still serue the Lord Iesus in holines and righteousnes. This was no euil mea∣ning, seing God commandethReuel. 18, 6. to do vnto thē as they thought to haue done vnto vs: seeing also Rome is babel which if wee destroy we haue ablessing. One meanes to accomplish this, was the carrying of the K. of Porting all into his countrie: neither was this a cursed course though his Religion bee accursed: for shall we condemne Abraham forGen. 14.24. carrying with him Anar Eschol, and Mamre for recoverie of his Nephue
Lot? OrGen. 30.7 loseph for vsing the helpe of Pharaos seruantes when bee went to bury his Father? OrNehemi, 27. 8. Nehemiah for hauing ayd frō Darius when he returned to Ierusalem, orActs 23, 7. Paul for stirring the Pharasies against the Saduces, that he might escape with his life? God forbid, seeing the auncient Hebrues had alwaies this Christian libertie, to vse vncleane beastes in matters of Phisicke. It is truth that many of our souldiers died in the voyage: but to the godly death is no curse; and as for the rest it is a great blessing to the land that they neuer returned. It is truth that at Plymmouth God kept his winds frō fauoring vs a great while, euen vntill the greatest part of our victuall was spent, & many of our souldiers weake: but who knoweth whe∣ther this was that we shold humble our selues vnder his migh∣tie hand, at the beginning of the enterprise: & that we should giue him the whole glory, the victorie being gotten. This I am sure of, that he that thinketh he laid these crosse vpō vs as a curse, because he disliked the whole action, neuer knew what blessing he vouchsafed vs in any one part of the action: In 3. daies he brought vs from the lands end to the coast of Spayne: this was no small blessing. He gaue first into our handes that towne, wher the yere before that inuincible Nauie was gathe∣red together, wher a hourse was builded for the laying vp of the English treasure, where a mint was erected to pay the Souldi∣ers appointed for that voyage, where also we found victuall horded vp for the present victualing of a new Nauie. This we confessed to be a great blessing. The exceeding great plentie of wine & victuals we found ther, were notably abused to drun∣kennes & suffetting: & therfore did not God there once make vs misse our purpose? and euer after send leanes euen to the death among vs? Yet so in wrath he euer remembred mercy, as still he shewed himselfe a fauourer of the action. He gaue vs courage, so that we burned the shipping in the harbor, destroy∣ed the Countrie round about the towne, the armie gathered at the Bridge, hauing great aduantage of vs, both of place and number, could not withstand our forces, they fled before vs to the toppee of sleepe mountaines, where, if they stayed, our sword pearced them, if they fled, they brake their neckes down ward. If this were not a blessing, why was the Generall & his valiant Captaines so ioyfully receiued, when in the Euening they returned frō the slaughter? yea, why was the next day so solemly proclaimed A day of thankesgiuing. How rued it the enemie from the high town to behold this triumph? to see our Souldiers marching in their armour, our Mariners car∣rying abroad their munition and wealth, their owne towne flaming at the last with fire, and they not daring come foorth to quench it? And though we thus plagued thē fiftene daies to∣gether, yet no other wreak they wrought vpon vs (such a feare had our good God put into theyr hearts) but onely peeping out of some hole of the Wall, with a peece now and then they took a legge or an arme from vs. Penichea was the first towne we descried in Portingal, and could there, either the shot from the Castle, or the sleepnes of the mountaines, or the Rockes hidden in the water, or the troopes of the enemie keepe vs from landing? How shameful∣ly did they after one or two brauadoes giuen, take themselues to their heeles? How speedely was the towne giuen ouer and the Castle surrendered vnto vs? Were there any more of vs then 6000. that marched from thence to Lysborne? Yet as the Hare before the Hounds, so fled the pesants before vs. They gaue vs leaue three daies and three nights to enioye the Suburbes of the Cittie, euen so long as any prouision for vs was found in them. Once indeede they sallyed out with Viue Don Antony, as if they had bene Portingals, but their dis∣sembling was well recompenced, for we are perswaded that of 600. not 26. returned without their deadly wound: so long the chase was in which we had them, and so nigh they were when we began to pursue them. From Lysborne wee marched in one day to Castcales, the march was long, and our match spent, and health sore decayed, this they knew as well as our selues: yet all that day long, durst they once skirmish with vs? Nay, their horsemen thought it as a greate matter, a farre off from some high hill to beholde vs; so a wonderfull glorie to kill, a few straglers, which the armie being passed, they found in Orchards. At Castcales word was brought that 8000. of them were come within two miles of vs. Wee feared presently: not that they were come so nigh, for the reporter was well rewarded: but least they would not abide the tryall of the battell, such cowards we had alwaies found them, therefore with all speede a Trumpeter was sent with, round message to prouoke them:
we as fast as we could marching after, they heard no sooner of our comming, but straight way they tooke themselues to their flying march, a tricke of warre which they alwaies vsed. Homewards within the Iles of Bayon, wee Ancred in des∣pite of them, Vigo and the villages there about we set on fire, the inhabitants wee chased all, some we killed, and had not Bayon bene better walled then they harted, we had fully satis∣fied our selues vpon them: but some will say: what is the Kinge of Spaine the worse for this, or we the better? What? we haue laide open the weakenes of his Countrie, the dastardlynes of his people, set on fire his holds, & brought away his Munition, his golde, his spice: yea, what was there worth the carrying which we left behinde vs? Where wee carried foorth one wee brought home two shippes, the like we did of Armour, the like of bread, or at least of Wheate to make bread, and the like of other pillage whatsoeuer is become of it. Yea but our Mariners there all dyed, which are the strength of our land? So indeed doe Papists giue out, to disswade vnstable minds from the like enterprise, but aske her Maiesties Officers men of great wor∣ship and credite, who saw them as they paide them, and they will tell you cleane an other matter. And therefore howsoe∣uer this voyage is euill spoken off of some, whome nothing con∣tenteth, and bitter to others that lost their friends: Yet for the Generals and Captaines it was most Honourable, for the whole land blessed, and cursed for none but for the Papistes. FINIS.
