18855 S122301 99857453 23194
monumental frontispiece: top, a light-skinned, seated, female figure in European dress with crown, orb or rudder, and sceptre, between two globes; left, a light-skinned, standing female figure in oriental or Mediterranean dress holding a jar or urn issuing smoke; right, a dark-skinned, standing female figure with a sun behind her head, half-naked, holding a flower-branch; bottom, a light-skinned, prone female figure or amazon, naked, with bow, arrows, and a net, holding a man's head, beside the bust of a female figure THEA¦TRVM ORBIS TERRA¦RVM GEOGRAPHI REGII. THE THEATRE OF THE WHOLE WORLD: SET FORTH BY THAT Excellent Geographer Abraham Ortelius. LONDON, Printed by IOHN NORTON, Printer to the Kings most excellent Maiestie in Hebrew, Greeke, and Latine. 1606.
blazon or coat of arms of the British royal family, encircled by the order of the garter, with lion and unicorn; above three crowned helmets topped by a crowned lion holding a sword and sceptre, a crowned lion, and a fleur-de-lis HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE The sway, by Sea & Land, great IAMES doth beare, His Birth, His Bloud, These Kingdomes figure here: But, were his seuerall vertues to be crown'd A World, past thine, Ortelius, must be fownd.
TO THE MOST HIGH, MOST MIGHTY, AND MOST HAPPY PRINCE, IAMES BY THE GRACE OF GOD, KING OF GREAT BRITAINE, FRANCE AND IRE∣LAND, DEFEN∣DER OF THE FAITH, &c. IOHN NORTON HIS MA∣IESTIES MOST HVMBLE AND FAITHFVLL SER∣VANT CONSECRATETH THESE IMMORTALL LA∣BOVRS OF ABRAHAM OR TELIVS, TRANS∣LATED INTO ENGLISH.
funereal monument with a profile portrait of Abraham Ortelius, below three figures: a haloed male figure or John the Baptist, semi-naked, with a cross and banner; a male figure leaning on a spade; and a female figure examining a globe with compasses; below a map of the eastern hemisphere ABRAHAMI ORTELII QVEM VRBS VRBIVM ANTVERPIA EDIDIT, REX REGVM PHILIPPVS GEOGRAPHVM HABVIT, MONVMENTVM HIC VIDES. BREVIS TERRA EVM CAPIT QVI IPSE ORBEM TERRARVM CEPIT, STILO ET TABVLIS ILLVSTRAVIT: SED MENTE CONTEMPSIT, QVA CAELVM ET ALTA SVSPEXIT CONSTANS ADVERSVM SPES AVT METVS. AMICITIAE CVITOR, CANDORE FIDE, OFFICIIS, QVIETIS CVLTOR, SINE LITE, VXORE, PROLE. VITAM HABVIT, QVALE ALIVS VOTVM. VT NVNC QVOQVE AETERNA EI QVIES SIT VOTIS FAVE LECTOR. OBIIT IIII. KAL. IVLII. ANNO MD.XCIIX. VIXIT ANN. LXXI. MENSS. II. DIES IIXX. COLII EX SORORE NEPOTES B.M. POSS. CONTEMNO ET ORNOMENTE MANV. Α Χ Ρ Ω
THE LIFE OF ABRAHAM ORTELL, COSMOGRAPHER TO PHILIP THE SECOND, LATE KING OF SPAINE, written first in Latine by Francis Sweert of Antwerpe, his familiar and louing friend, and now translated into English by W. B, as great a louer of his learning and vertues. THe stocke of the ORTELS flourished not long since, and liued in good state and credit at Auspurg in Bayern, (Augustam vindelicorum, the Latines called it.) From that family came WILLIAM ORTELL, who about the yere of our Lord 1460 left his natiue country, and seated himselfe in Antwerpe, (at that time one of the famousest Mart-townes of the world) where he did many notable things worthily deseruing great commendation: among which that is most memorable, that of his owne proper cost and charges he caused a goodly crosse of free stone to be set vp without the Emperours gate, in that place where the malefactours are vsually woont to be executed and put to death. Beneath this crosse, at the base or foot of the same, stood Mary and Iohn, and beside them, a little farther off, hung the two theeues; the one vpon the right hand and the other vpon the left, vpon their seuerall gibbets. This William died vpon the seuenth day of Ia∣nuary in the yeere of our Lord God 1511, and was buried in the cloisters of the Franciscane Friers in Antwerpe, leauing his sonne LEONARD ORTELL sole Executor, and heire, not only of his goods and substance, but also of his vertues and good qualities: For they report that he was a man so deuout and religious, that it was an hard matter to finde him from his booke, serious meditation on heauenly matters. This Leonard maried ANNA HER∣VVAYERS, and by her had issue two daughters, and one some named ABRAHAM, (whose life we heere pur∣pose to describe) borne vpon the second day of Aprill, in the yeere of our Lord God 1527. Hee was euen in his child-hood of singular towardnesse, great capacity and passing quicke conceit, and, that which is very strange in youth, hee was neuer giuen to the reading of any trifles or idle vanities. Wherefore his father purposing to make him a scholar, began first himselfe to instruct him priuatly at home in his owne house in the Latine and Greeke tongues: (For the old man was very learned in both these languages.) But see how these good purposes were soon crossed by the vntimely death of his most louing and kinde father! who departing this life, in the yeere of Christ 1535, left this his sonne to be further informed and taught abroade by strange schoolemasters, whose care and diligence to profit him, whatsoeuer their learning were, was nothing so great and painfull: notwithstanding euen vnder these he made such profit in the Artes and liberall Sciences, that he was not much inferiour to the best of his degree and time: For, as I said before, no vaine pleasure, or trifles, pastimes (which commonly are the ouerthrow of many yongue men) could euer with-draw him from his setled purpose, or alienate his minde from his booke. Yet his greatest delight and commendation consisted in the knowledge of the Mathematicall sciences, which for the most part he studied and practised without an instructor, or teacher, atteining, only by his owne paines and industrie, to the great admiration of others, euen to the vnderstanding of the greatest and deepest mysteries of the same. In the thirtieth yeare of his age, hauing many great matters in his head, and loathing to liue idly at home in his owne natiue country, he began to entertaine a conceipt of trauelling into diuers and sundry forreine parts and countries of the world. To Frankford vpon the Main, by reason of the great Marts or Faires, there held at two seuerall times euery yere, he went very often. In the yeere of our Lord 1575, he went with Iohn Viuian of Valence, a Marchant, but a great louer of learning, and Hierome Scoliers of Antwerp, to Leige, Trier; Tungren and Mentz: of which iourney and peregrination of theirs, there is at this day a booke of his exstant in print, wherein he hath lear∣nedly described the particulars obserued by them. In the yeere of Christ 1577, with Immanuël Demetrius of Ant∣werpe, hee trauelled beyond the Seas, into England and Ireland. Italy, that nource of great wits, that worker of strange woonders, that mother of reuerend antiquities and ancient monuments, hee visited thrise. The third time that he went thither, which was in the yeere 1578, he went in company of George Houfnayle of Antwerp, who was so excellent a painter that he was greatly esteemed and beloued of the illustrious princes, Albert and VVilliam, Dukes of Bayern: of Ferdinand, Duke of Austrich; yea and of Rudolphus himselfe, at that time Emperour of the Germanes. But this his consort, to the great greefe of his friends and such as loued his singular qualities, left his life at Prage in Bohemia, vpon the thirteenth of Ianuary in the yeere of our Lord, 1600. This man was woorthy of longer life, if the Fates would respect men for their great parts and excellent vertues. But so it is, that Death, like as the sythe in Haruest, cutteth downe, without distinction, aswell the yongue as old. There was nothing either in Germanie or in France, that was woorth the seeing, that this our authour had not seene and viewed with a cen∣sorious and iudicious eie. At length, hauing ouercome so many tedious and toilsome trauels, he returned againe to Antwerpe his natiue soile. There and then he began to apply himselfe to benefit succedent ages, to write of
those countries by him viewed and seene, to set out in Charts and Mappes diuers places both of Sea and Land vn∣knowen to former ages, to describe the tracts and coasts of the East and West, South and North neuer spoken of nor touched by Ptolemey, Pliny, Strabo, Mela or any other historiographer whatsoeuer: and lastly to bend all his forces to the framing of that his THEATER, which now is beheld and read with such admiration and applause of all men: in which worke of his he was so generally well liked and approued of all, that Philip the Second, that renowmed King of Spaine, graced him with the honour and title of The Kings Cosmographer. He wrot also his GEOGRAPHICALL TREASVRE, a very learned and pleasant worke, in which the ancient names or appel∣lations, (yea and oft times the new, by which they are now called and knowen at this day,) of Mountaines, Hils, Promontories, Woods, Ilands, Hauens, People, Cities, Townes, Villages, Seas, Baies, Creekes, Straights, Riuers, &c. are at one view instantly to be seene. Moreouer, out of ancient coines, for the benefit and delight of such as are louers and studious of antiquities, he set out The HEADS OF THE GODS AND GODDESSES, which afterward were illustrated with an historicall narration or discourse done by Francis Sweert the yonger. In the yeere of Christ 1596, he set forth THE IMAGE OF THE GOLDEN WORLD, that is, A treatise descri∣bing the life, Maners, Customes, Rites and Religion of the ancient Germans, collected and gathered out of diuers and sundry old writers of both languages. By these his labours and trauels he hath gotten and purchased vnto himselfe an immortall name and credit amongst the learned of all sorts. In company he was of an excellent dis∣creete cariage, passing courteous, merry and pleasant. Such was his singular humanity, that it was strange to see how he did winne and retaine the loue and fauour of all men wheresoeuer he became. His enemies he chose rather to ouercome with kindnesse, or to contemne them then to reuenge himselfe of their malice. He did so much hate vice, euen in his owne kindred, that he rather reuerenced vertue in his enemies and strangers. Vaine questions, and subtill disputations of diuinity, or matters of religion, as dangerous and pernicious, hee did alwaies greatly detest and abhorre. A deepe in-sight and sound iudgment in any kinde of matter, he preferred before glosing elo∣quence and quaint termes. Present aduersity and daungers he alwaies endured with more patience then feare of such as were comming on and neere at hand: and those which were bitter, more easily then such as were doubtfull and vncertaine of euent. He was a man which in his life time did set as little by himselfe as any man could: For he neuer set his minde much vpon the wealth of this world, or ought of those things in the same, hauing alwaies in memory that his learned poesie CONTEMNO ET ORNO, MENTE, MANV, I scorne and trimme, with minde, with hand. For surely this man was led with some heauenly spirit, which did so with-draw his minde from those earthly cogitations, that he neuer tooke any thing in his life more vnkindly then when he was drawne from his bookes, which he alwaies preferred before all other things in the world beside. These great learned men follow∣ing were his familiar friends, and such as he did greatly loue and reuerence. In Spain Benedictus Arias Montanus, that great linguist and graue Diuine; and the reuerend father Andrew Schotte, borne in Antwerp, a learned Iesuite. In Italy, Fuluius Vrsinus, Franciscus Superantius, and Iohannes Sambucus. In Germany, Gerard Mercator, that famous Cos∣mographer, Iames Monaw, Marke Velser, Ioachim Chamberlin, Ionas Grutterus of Antwerp, and Arnold Milius. In France, Petrus Pithoeus, and others. In the Low-countries, Iustus Lipsius, Laeuinus Tormencius, Nicolaus Rockoxius, Cornelius Pru∣nius, Balthasar Robianus, Ludouicus Perezius, Iohannes Brantius a ciuillian, recorder to the state of Antwerp, Iohannes Bo∣chius, secretarie to the same city, Francis Raphalengius, Christopher Plantine, Iohn Moret, Philip Gally, Otho Venius that famous painter, and Francis Sweert the yonger. In England, Humfrey Lloyd, the only learned courtiour of his time, and VVil∣liam Camden, now Clarenceux, the painfull and iudicious antiquary of our land. With all these and many other he was familiarly acquainted. To these he wrot often, and from these he often receiued most kinde and louing let∣ters. He was a great student of antiquities, and searcher out of rare and ancient things. He had at home in his house, Images, Statues, Coines of Gold, Siluer and copper both of the Greeks, Romans and others: Shelfishes brought from India and our Antipodes: Marble of all kinde of colours: Torteises shelles of such wonderfull big∣nesse, that tenne men, sitting round in a circle, might eate meat out of them at once: Others againe so little and narrow, that they were skarce so bigge as a pinnes head. His Library was so maruellously well stored with all sort of Bookes, that his house might iustly haue beene termed, A shoppe of all manner of good learning, vnto which men flocked from diuers places, like as in former times they did to Plato's Academy, or Aristotle's Lyceum. This Ernest and Albert, returning conquerour from the battaill at Hulsten, with other great Princes, and men of all sorts, came in troops to see and behold. While he was thus busied, and hauing now liued aboue threeskore and eleuen yeeres, he fell sicke in Iune in the yeere of our Lord 1598, and growing euery day worse and worse, at length, he yeelded to nature and died vpon the 28 day of the same moneth. The Physicians affirmed that he died of an vlcer of the reines, which Hippocrates writeth will hardly euer be cured in old men. He was of stature tall and slender; the haire of his head and beard was of a yealow colour. His eies were gray, and his forehead broad. He was very courteous and affable. In serious businesses he was very graue and sober, but without any shew of arrogant dis∣daine: in mirth and iesting he was as pleasant, yet with that moderation, that all was guided by the rules of Chri∣stian piety and modesty. This deceased bachelour, Anna Ortell, a virgine his sister, who liued not long after this her brother Abraham, (for she died in the yeere of Grace 1600) caused to be buried and intombed in Saint Mi∣chaëls, the Abby of the Praemonstratenses in Antwerp. He might well want the honour of a gorgeous and costly tombe, who by the generall consent of all men, had for his rare and singular vertues deserued an euerlasting fame and reputation. Francis Sweert, the yonger, gathered together the mournefull verses of those poets and friends of his, which did bewaile his death, set them foorth, and dedicated them to the State and citizens of Antwerp. Iustus Lipsius, at the instant request of his heires, and for a perpetuall memoriall of their constant loue and friendship wrote that Epitaph which is in capitall letters ingrauen vpon his tombe.
ABRAHAM ORTE∣LIVS CITIZEN OF ANT∣werpe, and Geographer to Philip the second, King of Spaine, to the cour∣teous Reader. SEeing, that as I thinke, there is no man, gentle Reader, but knoweth what, and how great profit the knowledge of Histories doth bring to those which are serious students therein; I doe verily beleeue and perswade myselfe, that there is almost no man, be it that he haue made neuer so little an entrance into the same, and touched them neuer so lightly, that is ignorant how necessary, for the vnderstanding of them aright, the knowledge of GEOGRA∣PHY is, which, in that respect therefore is of some, and not without iust cause called The eye of History. For thou shalt meet with many things in the reading of Histories, (I will not say, almost all) which, except thou haue the knowledge of the countreys and places mentioned in them, cannot onely not bee well conceiued and vnderstood, but also oft-times they are cleane mistaken and otherwise vnderstood then they ought to bee: which thing commeth to passe in many discourses: but especially in the expeditions and voyages of great Kings, Captaines and Emperours: in the diuers and sundry shiftings of Nations from one place to another: and in the traueils and peregrinations of famous men, made into sundry countreys. But seeing that this is a matter which euen experience it selfe doeth teach vs to be true, there is no reason why I should stand long vp∣on the proofe of the same. This so necessary a knowledge of Geography, as many worthy and learned men haue testified, may very easily be learn'd out of Geographicall Chartes or Mappes. And when we haue acquainted our selues somewhat with the vse of these Tables or Mappes, or haue attained thereby to some reasonable knowledge of Geography, whatsoeuer we shall read, these Chartes being placed, as it were certaine glasses before our eyes, will the longer be kept in memory, and make the deeper impression in vs: by which meanes it commeth to passe, that now we do seeme to perceiue some fruit of that which we haue read. I omit here, that the reading of Histories doeth both seeme to be much more pleasant, and in deed so it is, when the Mappe being layed before our eyes, we may behold things done, or places where they were done, as if they were at this time present and in doing. For how much we are holpen, when as in the Holy Scripture, we read of the iourney of the Israëlites, which they made from Egypt, through the Red sea, and that same huge Wildernesse, into the Land of promise, when as looking vpon the Mappe of Palestina, we doe almost aswell see it as if we were there, I thinke any student in Diuini∣tie, or that History hath oft made triall. Which things being so, how much those which are students and louers of Histories are combred, hindred and stayd, yea, & many times, euen while they are in their race and continued course, drawne backe, it is an easie matter to conceiue, when either the description of all countreys cannot be gotten, or if they may be gotten, they are dea∣rer then that euery mans money will reach and attaine vnto especially those that are but poore, or none of the wealthiest. For there are many that are much delighted with Geography or Chorography, and especially with Mappes or Tables con∣tayning the plotts and descriptions of Countreys, such as there are many now adayes extant and euery where to be sold: But because that either they haue not that, that should buy them: or if they haue so much as they are worth, yet they will not lay it out, they neglect them, neither do they any way satisfie themselues. Others there are who when they haue that which will buy them, would very willingly lay out the money, were it not that by reason of the narrownesse of the roomes and places, broad and large Mappes cannot so be opened or spread, that euery thing in them may easily and well be seene and discern'd. For, that I may speake that which is the trueth, those great and large Geographicall Maps or Chartes, which are folded or rowl'd vp, are not so commodious: nor, when any thing is peraduenture read in them, so easie to be look'd vpon. And he that will in or∣der hang them all along vpon a wall, had need haue not only a very large & wide house, but euen a Princes gallery or spacious Theater. This I hauing oft made triall of, I began to bethinke my selfe, what meanes might be found to redresse these discom∣modities, which I haue spoken of, and either to make them somewhat lesse, or, if possibly it might bee, to take them all cleane away. And at length me thought it might be done by that meanes which we haue obserued and set downe in this our booke, to which I earnestly wish that euery student would affoord a place in his Library, amongst the rest of his bookes. But that thou mayest the better vnderstand, what it is that wee haue done in this our Theater, and what it is that thou must exspect and looke for in the same; I thinke it not amisse in few wordes briefly here to declare vnto thee. First
my purpose was to represent vnto thy view whatsoeuer heretofore thou had'st, or new hast, in any Geographical or Choro∣graphicall Chartes here and there lately or long since set out that euer came to my handes, or were possibly to bee gotten for loue or money. Of all countreys whose descriptions are set out in Geographicall Tables, we haue selected one (for of some there are diuers) which in our iudgement seemed to bee the best and most exact: Which, notwithstanding that it were, by the first draught of the Authour somewhat large and broad, we haue brought into that small forme, as might agree with this our worke, and that the whole Mappe might be contein'd in one leafe: or, which sometime thou shalt obserue we haue done, as thou may'st see, that in one leafe many might bee contein'd and expressed: yet so as nothing, no neuer so small a thing, is either omitted or altered that was to bee found in the greater: except it be this, which oftentimes thou shalt finde, that the names of places and other things, which in the first Copies could hardly be read, in these our Mappes we haue so expressed, that they may perfectly be read of any man. And sometime, where occasion did serue, or need require, and the place would permit, vnto the moderne and vsuall names of certaine places, wee haue added the ancient names mentioned by old writers, but now vulgarly vnknowne. Which, as we doubt not, we haue done with the good-leaue and liking of the Authours themselues: so I hope it will be a thing very well pleasing to all such as are readers and students of old Histories and Antiquities. In those Mappes, which haue their Authours names written vpon them, we haue, as I said, altered nothing at all, excepting two or three of the Marine tracts of the Low-countreys, which the Sea hath much changed since the time that their descriptions were first set foorth: As for examples sake, in Flaunders, ouer against Zeland, not farre from the towne Wateruliet, where by the goodnesse and great benefit of Almighty God, long after that the description of this Countrey was first set out, the Maine-land was much enlarged and had gotten an aduantage of the Sea: wee there haue altered the forme of that Mappe, according as the place is found to be at this day. The description of which plot of ground we obteined of Master Marke Lau∣rine, the Lord and owner thereof, a braue gentleman, greatly renowmed both for the noble stocke from whence hee is descen∣ded, as also for his wisdome and great experience. But in other Mappes, which had no name of the Authour subscribed vnto them, we were somewhat more bold: for in these, in some places, at our discretion, where we thought good, wee haue al∣tered some-things, some-things we haue put out, and otherwhere, if it seemed to be necessary, we haue put in. Of some Coun∣treys also, that we might, as much as in vs did lye, make vp our iust number and fill vp our ranke, we haue made some Mappes of our owne, that there might as few Mappes be wanting as possibly might be. In the abridgement and bringing of those Mappes, which had as I said the names of the Authours added vnto them into a lesser forme, we haue vsed that faithfulnesse and diligence, that we hope to deserue thankes not onely of the Reader, but also euen of the Authours themselues, or at least we haue dealt so in them, that no man need be asham'd of these of ours whatsoeuer they be; yea he may aswell acknowledge and take this little one of ours, for his owne, as that greater one first set out by himselfe. For wee haue endeuoured to the vttermost of our power in this our worke, if it were possible, to deserue thankes of the Authours, if not, yet by no meanes to displease them: Not to follow or imitate that bad custome of some men in these our dayes, who, that they may seeme to the world to set foorth some new thing, doe nothing els but alter the workes and labours of other men, and oftentimes, out of those which are good, to select that which is not good, and to sell it commonly for the best: Sometimes by adding something at their pleasure, and in some places againe taking out and detracting something and withall either by concealing the right Authors names, or setting to their owne, or feyning a name of some one or other, they thinke to please the vulgar sort with nouelties, that that their worke may sell the better; and they may rake money together they care not how: For we were not mooued to vndertake this labour by any couetous desire of getting much by it, but euen of a willing and forward minde that wee had to helpe and further those that had a loue and affection to these studies, not any whit respecting the gayning of any vaine glory and commendation by other mens labours. For what need we to make new Mappes, when as the old Mappes of other men, now extant, would serue our turne? Some there are peraduenture, which will looke to finde in this our Theater more de∣scriptions of particular Countreys, (for euery man naturally, for the loue that he beareth to his natiue soile, would, I doubt not, wish that it were here seuerally described amongst the rest:) but let them know, that those which are here missing, are not left out and omitted, either by our negligence, or for that we were lothe to be at that cost and charges: but because that ei∣ther we neuer saw any such, or at leastwayes for that there neuer came any such to our hands. If there be any man, which either hath any such, or knoweth where there may be had, him we would earnestly entreate, that he would be the meanes to helpe vs vnto them, assuredly promising him, that we will, at our owne cost and charges, not without great thankes to him, and a most honourable mention of his name, cause them to be cut and imprinted apart and by themselues, that hereafter they may be inserted into this our Booke, either in their owne place, elsewhere, as any man shall like best. Of the Order also by vs here obserued in the placing of these our Mappes, I thinke it not amisse, gentle Reader, to speake a word or two, and to acquaint thee with our purpose: that if peraduenture there be any man, which doeth thinke that they ought to haue bene placed otherwise, we may either satisfie him, if we may, or els excuse our selues, which is all, I thinke, that can be looked for at our hands. First of all, we present vnto thy view an Vniuersall Mappe of the whole world: Then, the foure quarters or principall parts of the same; to wit, Europe, Asia, Africa, and America: in this following dame Na∣ture, in which alwayes before the parts can be, the whole, whereof they be the parts, must of necessitie first be. Next after these we haue put the seuerall and particular Countreys of these parts, beginning at the West part of the world, in this fol∣lowing Ptolemey the Prince of Geographers, and almost all others that haue written of this argument: And so the Pro∣uinces and particular countreys of America do first put foorth and shew themselues: next to these do follow the Brittish Iles, after them Spaine, and then France. From hence we passe to Germany: whose Countreys being after our maner dili∣gently surueyed, from Heluetia or Switzerland we passed ouer the Mountaines into Italy, which is the next countrey vnto it Eastward, purposing also to view all the Prouinces thereof seuerally. From thence we crossed the Sea and sayl'd into Greece. Whereupon going into Slauonia, we surueyed all the Countreys seuerally which do vulgarly speake the Slauonian
tongue, (to wit, Hungary, Transsyluania, Polonia, Scandia, and Russia.) Thus hauing finished Europe, we come vn∣to the Isthmus or Straight land, which is betweene the head of the Riuer Tanais and the North sea, which is in deed the bound of Europe and Asia: from it we step into Asia. Which, after we haue a while beheld, we left, and so passed into Afri∣ca, by the Streights, or narrow piece of the Mainland, which runneth betweene the Bay of Arabia, and the gulfe of Damiata, (Sirbonis lacus) made by the ouerflowing of the Midland-sea. From thence passing through Egypt and Barbary wee came vnto the Streights of Gibraltar, which we crossed, and at length came home againe to our owne natiue countrey from whence we first set foote; like vnto a trauailer or a Pilgrime, which hath viewed and trauailed through many and sundry seuerall Nations and Countreys, passing out of one into another, orderly as they lay and were situate one by another, ouer∣skipping none, at last returneth safely and ioyfully from whence he first set foorth. Thus farre of the Mappes themselues: Now let vs speake a word or two of the backside of the same. Because we thought it would be a thing nothing pleasing to the Reader or Beholder, to see the backesides of the leaues altogether bare and empty we determined there to make a certaine briefe and short declaration and Historicall discourse of euery Mappe, in the same maner and order as we said we obserued in the Mappes themselues; omitting nor concealing any mans name, that we had oc∣casion to vse. Moreouer to these also we haue added a Table of the names of all the Authours, that euer wee knew or had; out of which, those that are so disposed, may fetch a more ample and larger discourse and description of the seuerall Countreys handled by them. Wherefore the students of Geography shall haue here, in the Authours thus named in order, and in the Catalogue of the Authours of the Geographicall Tables or Mappes, which we haue set before this our worke, and lastly in these Tables themselues, a certaine shoppe, as it were, furnished with all kinde of instruments necessarily required in such like businesse: out of which, if peraduenture there may seeme any thing wanting, in his iudgement, either to the finishing of any Booke of that argument, or more fuller descriptions of any Countreys whatsoeuer, very easily, or in deed without any la∣bour at all he may see, from whence it may by and by be fetched. These things they are which I thought good to admonish the Reader of. It remaineth now, that wee doe entreate euery man, to take this our labour and entertaine it, with no other minde then it was by vs both begunne and finished, and at length set out and Imprinted. Farewell, and wish well to Francis Hogenberg, Ferdinand, and Ambrose Arsen, by whose skil∣full hands and extraordinary great paines and diligence almost all these Mappes were engrauen and cut. From Antwerp. this present yeere 1570.
¶ THE FIRST TABLE. A. ASia. fol. 3 Africa. fol. 4 America. fol. 5 The Azores. fol. 15 Aniow. fol. 25 Artois. fol. 41 Austria. fol. 63 Austrich. fol. 63 Aprutium. fol. 84 Abruzzo. fol. 84 Apulia. fol. 86 Asia the lesser. fol. 112 Aegypt. fol. 112 Aethiopia. fol. 113 The Abassinnes countrey. fol. 113 B. BRitannicae insulae. fol. 10 The Brittish Iles. fol. 10 Bretaigne. fol. 22 Berry. fol. 24 Bituriges. fol. 24 Blasois. fol. 25. ¶ ¶ ¶ Blois. fol. 25. ¶ ¶ ¶ Boulogne. fol. 26 Burgundy the county. fol. 31 Burgūdy the dukedom. fol. 32 Brabant. fol. 38 Brandenburgh. fol. 56 Buchauia. fol. 57 Buchonia. fol. 57 Brunswick. fol. 58 Bohemia. fol. 60 Bauaria. fol. 65 Bayern. fol. 65 Basell. fol. 68 Brescia. fol. 76 Barbary. fol. 1 4 Belid'ulgerid. fol. 114. C. CAmbria. fol. 13 Cumry. fol. 13 Culiacan. fol. 8 Cuba. fol. 8 Cadiz. fol. 20 Caliz. fol. 20 Calis-malis. fol. 20 Carpetania. fol. 20 Cenomani. fol. 22 Calais. fol. 26 Cimbrica Chersonesus. fol. 51 Chaczeola. fol. 70 Carniola. fol. 70 Cremona. fol. 57 Crema. fol. 75 Como lake. fol. 79 Corsica. fol. 83 Calabria. fol. 86 Corcyra. fol. 87 Corfu. fol. 87 Candia. fol. 89 Creta. fol. 89 Cyprus. fol. 90 Carinthia. fol. 94 China. fol. 106 The Cham of Tartary. fol. 105 Carthage hauen. fol. 112 Congl. fol. 115 D. DEscription of the world. fol. 1 Dutchland. fol. 33 Dania. fol. 51 Denmarke. fol. 51 Dietmarsh. fol. 53 Duringen. fol. 55. ¶ ¶ ¶ E. EVrope. fol. 2 England. fol. 12 East Friesland. fol. 50 Elba. fol. 87 Egypt. fol. 112 Ethiopia. fol. 113. F. FAyal. fol. 15 France. fol. 21 Flanders. fol. 42 Friesland. fol. 48 Franklandt. fol. 59 Forum Iulij. fol. 72 Foruly. fol. 72 Friuly. fol. 72 Florence. fol. 81 Fesse. fol. 115. G. GAdes. fol. 20 Guipusco. fol. 20 Gallia. fol. 21 Germany. fol. 33 Germany on this side the Rhein. fol. 34 Guelderland. fol. 36 Goercz. fol. 70 Grecia. fol. 91 Greece. fol. 91 Gorcz. fol. 94 H. HIspaniola. fol. 8. Heinalt. fol. 40 Holland. fol. 47 Holsatia. fol. 52 Holstein. fol. 52 Hennenbergh. fol. 55. ¶ ¶ Hassia. fol. 55 ¶ ¶ Heluetia. fol. 69 Histria. fol. 70 Histria. fol. 94 Hungary. fol. 95. & 96. The Holy-land. fol. 111 The Hauen of Carthage. fol. 112 I. IReland. fol. 14 The Ile of France. fol. 25. ¶ Iuitland. fol. 51 Italy. fol. 71 Ilua. fol. 87 Ischia. fol. 88 Ilands in the Archipela∣go. fol. 89 Illyricum. fol. 92 Illyris. fol. 92 Istereick. fol. 94. & 95 Island. fol. 103 Iapan. fol. 107 Iaponia. fol. 107 India in the East. fol. 108 K. KArst. fol. 70 Karnten. fol. 94 L. LA Mans. fol. 22 Limaigne. fol. 24 Lemosni. fol. 25. ¶ ¶ ¶ Lorrain. fol. 30 The Low-countreys. fol. 34 Lutzenburgh. fol. 35 Liege the bishoprick. fol. 37 The Landtgrauy of Hes∣sen. fol. 55. ¶ ¶ Lunenburgh. fol. 58 Lacus Larius. fol. 79 Lotophagitis. fol. 87 Lemnos. fol. 90 Liuonia. fol. 100 M. MArdel Sur. fol. 6 La Mans. fol. 22 Mansfield. fol. 55. ¶ Misnia. fol. 55 ¶ ¶ ¶ The Marquesate of Bran∣denburgh. fol. 56 Munster Bishoprick. fol. 59 Morauia. fol. 62 Milaine. fol. 74 Marca Ancona. fol. 83 Malta. fol. 87 Melita. fol. 87 Moscouy. fol. 104 Marocco. fol. 115 N. THe New world. fol. 5 New Spaine. fol. 7 Normandy. fol. 22 Narbone. fol. 29 The Neatherlands. fol. 34 Namur. fol. 39 Nurembergh. fol. 58 Nortgoia. fol. 66 Naples. fol. 85 Natolia. fol. 112 O. OLdenburgh. fol. 53 Ozwieczin. fol. 100 P. THe Peaceable sea. fo. 6 Peru. fo. 9 Pico. fo. 15 Portugall. fo. 17 Poitou. fo. 23 Paris. fo. 25. ¶ Picardy. fo. 27 Prouence. fo. 28 Piemont. fo. 77 Padua fo. 78 Perugia. fo. 82 Puglia. fo. 86 Polonia. fo. 98 Poland. fo. 98 Prussia. fo. 99 Pomerania. fo. 100 Pomerland. fo. 100 Persia. fo. 109 Palestina. fo. 111 Presters Iohns empire. fo. 113 R. ROme. fol. 79 Romania. fol. 101 Russia. fol. 104.
S. THe South-sea. fol. 6 Scotland. fol. 11 Spaine. fol. 16 Siuill. fol. 18 Sauoie. fol. 29 Saxony. fol. 55 Silena. fol. 61 Salczburgh bishop. fol. 64 Strasburgh. fol. 66 Switzerland. fol. 68. & 69 Siena. fol. 83 Sicilia. fol. 87 Sardinia. fol. 87 Stalamine. fol. 90 Sebenico. fol. 94 Spruse. fol. 99 Scandia. fol. 102 The Sophies empire. fol. 109. T. TErçera. fol. 15 Tourain. fol. 25. ¶ ¶ Thietmarsia. fol. 53 Thuringia. fol. 55. ¶ ¶ ¶ Tirol. fol. 70 Treuiso. fol. 78 Tuscia. fol. 80 Tuscane. fol. 80 Terra di Otranto. fol. 86 Transsyluania. fol. 97 Thracia. fol. 101 Tartaria. fol. 105 The Turkes empire. fol. 110 V. VAlentia. fol. 19 Vermandois. fol. 26 Venacin. fol. 29 Verona. fol. 73. W. The West Indies. fol. 5 Wales. fol. 13 West Friesland. fol. 49 The Wandalls Iles. fol. 52 Westphalia. fol. 54 Westphalen. fol. 54 Waldeck. fol. 57 Wirtembergh. fol. 67 Windesmarck. fol. 70 Z. ZEland. fol. 46 Zerbi. fol. 87 Zara. fol. 94 Zator. fol. 100. ¶ THE SECOND TABLE. A. THe Ancient Geogra∣phy. fol. vj. Anglesey. fol. ix. Africa propria. fol. xxx. Africa properly so call'd. fol. xxx Aegypt. fol. xxxj. Argonautica. fol. xxxv. B. The British iles. fol. ix. C. COnwey. fol. ix. Circaeus mons. fol. xxij. Cyprus. fol. xxviij. Chios. fol. xxviij. Cia. fol. xxviij. Creta. fol. xxviiij. Candy. fol. xxix. Corsica. fol. xxix. D. DIomedes iles. fol. xxij. Dacia. fol. xxiiij. Delos. fol. xxviij. Daphne. fol. xxxvij. E. EVrope. fol. viij. The Empire of great Bri∣taine. fol. ix. Etruria. fol. xx. Euboea. fol. xxviij. Egypt. fol. xxxj. England. fol. xlij. F. FRance. fol. xj. The Foundation of the Empire. fol. xxxviij. xxxix. France. fol. xliijj. G. GEographia Sacra. fol. j. The Geography of Ho∣ly Writers. fol. j. The Geography of the An∣cients. fol. vj. Goodwins sands. fol. ix. Gallia described by Strabo. fol. xj. & xij. Gallia described by Caesar. fol. xiij. Germany. fol. xv. & xvj. Great Greece. fol. xxij. Graecia. fol. xxvij. Great Britaine. fol. xlij. Galizia. fol. xliij. H. THe Holy land. fol. ij. Hibernia. fol. ix. Hellas. fol. xxvij. I. IVdaea. fol. iij. Iewry. fol. iij. Israël. fol. iij. Ireland. fol. ix. Illyris. fol. xvij. Italy. fol. xviij. Italy of the Gaules. fol. xix. Isole de Trimite. fol. xxij. Icaria. fol. xxviij. Ilands of the Ioniā sea. fol. xxix. Iasons voyage. fol. xxxv. Ireland. fol. xlj. K. The Kings Monastery. f. xl. L. THe Low countreis. fol. xiiij. Latium. fol. xxj. Lesbos. fol. xxviij. Lemnos. fol. xxviij. Limbourgh. fol. xlv. M. MAn. fol. ix. Monte Circello. fol. xxij. Magna Graecia. fol. xxij. Moesia. fol. xxiiij. Mar Maiore. fol. xxv. Mona. fol. xlvj. N. THe Nauigation or voy∣age of Aeneas. fol. xxxiij. O. THe Orkeney iles. fol. ix. The Oracle of Iupiter Ammon. fol. xxxij. P. PAlestina. fol. ij. The Peregrination of S. Paul. fol. iiij. The Peregrination of Abra∣ham. fol. v. Pannonia. fol. xvij. Pontus Euxinus. fol. xxv. The Peregrination of V∣lysses. fol. xxxiiij. The Paradise of Thessaly. fol. xxxvj. The Paradise of Antiochia in Syria. fol. xxxvij. R. THe Roman world. f. vij. The Roman empire. f. vij. Rhodus. f. xxviij. Rhenia. f. xxviij. S. SHepey. fol. ix. Spaine. fol. x. Sicilia. fol. xxiij. Samos. fol. xxviij. Sardinia. fol. xxix. Sardegna. fol. xxix. T. TEnet. fol. ix. Tuscia, or Tuscane. fol. xx. Trinacria. fol. xxiij. Thrace. fol. xxvj. Tempe Thessalica. fol. xxxvj. V. THe Voyage of Alex∣ander the Great. fol. xxxij. The Voyage or nauigation of Aeneas. fol. xxxiij. W. The West Iles. fol. ix.
profile portrait of Abraham Ortelius Spectandum dedit Ortelius mortalib. orbem, Orbi spectandum Galleus Ortelium. Papius Α Χ Ρ Ω VITAE SCOPVS
A DESCRIPTION OF THE WHOLE WORLD. THIS Map next ensuing containeth and representeth the portraiture of the whole earth, and of the maine Ocean that enuirons & compasseth the same: all which earthly Globe the Ancients (who were not as then acquainted with the New world, not long since de∣scried) diuided into three parts; namely, Africa, Europe, and Asia. But since that discouery of America, the learned of our age haue made that a fourth part, and the huge Continent vnder the South pole, a fifth. Gerardus Mercator the Prince of moderne Geographers in his neuer-sufficiently-commended vniuersall Table or Map of the whole world, diuides this Circumference of the earth into three Continents: the first he calles that, which the Anci∣ents diuided into three parts, and from whence the holy Writ beares record, that mankinde had their first origi∣nall, & first was seated: the second, is that which at this present is named America or the VVest Indies: for the third, he appoints the South maine, which some call Magellanica, as yet on very few coasts thorowly discouered. That this orbe or masse of the earthly Globe containes in circuit, where it is largest, 5400 German or 21600 Italian miles, antiquity hath taught, & late Writers haue subscribed to their opinion. And these so manifold portions of earth (sayth Plinie in the 11. booke of his Naturall historie) yea rather, as some haue termed them, the pricke or center of the world (for so small is the earth in comparison of the whole frame of the world) this is the matter, this is the seat of our glorie. Here we enioy honours, here we exercise authoritie, here we hunt after riches, here men turmoile and tire themselues, here we moue and maintaine ciuill dissensions, and by mutuall slaughter make more roome vpon the earth. And to let passe the publike tumults of the world, this in which we force the borderers to giue place and remoue farther off, and where we incroch by stelth vpon our neighbors lands: as he that extends his lands & lordships farthest, and cannot abide that any should seat themselues too neere his nose, How great, or rather how small a por∣tion of earth doth he enioy? Or when he hath glutted his auarice to the full, How little shall his dead carcase possesse? Thus far Plinie. The situation of this earth and sea, the disposition of the seuerall regions, with their inlets and gulfs, the maners and inclinations of the people, and other memorable and note-worthy matters are described by men of ancienter times, such as follow: PTOLEMEY of ALEXANDRIA. CAIVS PLINIVS 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 books of his Natural history. ARISTOTELES DE MVNDO written and dedicated to Ale∣xander the Great. STRABO in 17. books. SOLINVS POLYHISTOR. POMPONIVS MELA. DIONYSIVS APHER and his Expositor. EVSTATHIVS. APVLEIVS in his booke of the World. DIODORVS SICVLVS in his fiue former books. MARTIANVS CAPELLA. PAVLVS OROSIVS in the beginning of his History. AETHICVS and another of that name surnamed SOPHISTA, not yet printed. IVLIVS the Oratour called by Cassiodore, PRIMVS. BEROSVS described the antiquitie of the World. ANTONIVS AVGVSTVS (if the title be true) set downe the Iournals of the Romane empire. SEXTVS AVIENVS, the sea-coasts. STEPHANVS, the cities. VIBIVS SEQVESTER, in an Alphabeticall order, the Riuers, Fountaines, Lakes, Woods, Hilles, and Nations thereof. By new Writers, as RAPHAEL VOLATERANVS. ABILFEDE A ISMAEL, in the Arabian tongue. IOANNES HONTERVS; and HIERONTMVS OLIVERIVS: both in verse. BARTHOLIMVS in the eighth booke of Austria. SEBASTIAN MVNSTER, that learned Diuine, diligent Histori∣an, painfull Hebrician and Linguist, well studied in all maner of learning, and vnto whom the learned Student is so much beholding. ANTONIVS the Archbishop of Florence, in his Historie, in the third chapter of the first Title. DOMINICVS NIGER. IOHN AVENTINE in his second booke of his Annals. IOHN CAMERS in his Commentaries vpon Solinus. GEORGE RYTHAIMER. IOACHIM VADIAN. PETRVS IOANNES OLIVARIVS vpon Mela. LAVRENTIVS CORVINVS NOVOF. ANTONIVS VERONENSIS. GVALTERVS LVDOVICVS in his Mirrour or Looking-glasse of the World. S. ISIDORE of SIVILL in Spaine. MICHAEL of VILLANOVA, in his Commentary vpon Ptolemey. ZACHARIAS LILIVS VICENT. HIERONYMVS GIRAVA in the Spanish tongue. ALEXANDER CITOLINVS, in his Typocosmia or Patern of the World written in the Italian tongue. VINCENTIVS BELVACENSIS in the Mirrour of Histories the second booke. GVILIELMVS POSTELLVS Barentonius. Sr. IOHN MANDEVILL and his companion in his trauels. ODERICVS of FRIVLY. MICHAEL NEANDER of Soraw. GAVDENTIVS MERVLA in his 5. booke of memorable things. FRANCISCVS MONACHI, in his Epistle to the Archbishop of Panormus. ANDREAS THEVETVS, FRANCISCVS BELLEFORESTIVS, and PETRVS HEYNSIVS, in French: but this latter also in Dutch rythmes or verse. LAVRENTIVS ANANIENSIS, in the Italian tongue. ANTONIVS PINETVS, in French: and he hath withall set forth many Tables and Mappes (as the title sheweth) of Coun∣tries, Cities and Townes, aswell of Europe, as of Afrike, Asia and America. IVLIVS BALLINVS, hath put forth the Plots and drafts of the most famous Cities of the whole world, with a briefe historical discourse, written in the Tuscane tongue. The same is done by GEORGIVS BRVNO, in Latine, but much more beautifully and curiously. BENEDICTVS BORDONIVS, hath described all the Ilands of the World. So also hath THOMAS PORCACCIVS: both in the Italian tongue. WOLFGANGVS LASIVS, and IOANNES GOROPIVS BECANVS, the originall and shifting of the nations of the same. PETRVS APPIANVS, and BARTHOLOMAEVS AMANTIVS, haue gathered the ancient In∣scriptions: and so hath MARTINVS SMETIVS, but with greater diligence and care than ordinary. IOANNES BOHEMVS, and ALEXANDER SARDVS haue writ∣ten of the maners, rites and customes of all nations and people of it. The same hath FRANCISCVS BELLEFORESTIVS done in the French tongue.
map of the world TYPVS ORBIS TERRARVM. QVID EI POTEST VIDERI MAGNVM IN REBVS HVMANIS, CVI AETER∣NITAS OMNIS, TOTIVSQVE MVNDI NOTA SIT MAGNITVDO. CICERO: HOMI∣NES HAC LEGE SVNT GENERATI, QVI TVERENTVR ILLVM GLOBVM, QVEM IN HOC TEM∣PLO MEDIVM VI∣DES QVAE TER∣RA DICITVR. Cicero. EQVVS VEHENDI CAVSA, ARANDI BOS, VENANDI ET CVSTODIENDI CANIS, HOMO AV∣TEM ORTVS AD MVNDVM CON∣TEMPLANDVM. Cicero. HOC EST PVNCTVM. QVOD INTER TOT GENTES FERRO ET IGNI DIVIDI∣TVR, O QVAM RIDI∣CVLI SVNT MOR∣TALIVM TER∣MINI? Seneca. VTINAM QVEMADMO∣DVM VNIVERSA MVNDI FACIES IN CONSPECTVM VENIT, ITA PHI∣LOSOPHIA TOTA NOBIS POSSET OCCVRRERE. Seneca.
EVROPA. WHy Europe should be so called, or who was the first Authour of this name, no man as yet hath found out; vnlesse (sayth Herodotus in his fourth booke) we should thinke that the whole region borrowed this name from Europa daughter to the King of Epyrus. This Plinie calleth the Nurse of the victorious and conquering people of all other nations of the world, most beautifull and farre surpassing the rest: and so it is some∣times compared to Asia and Africa, not for his greatnesse and compasse, but for his might and power. Certaine it is, that this part, being most plentifully inhabited, is for multitude of nations inferiour to neither of the other. The North and Westerne sides hereof are bathed by the Ocean; the South coast is disioyned from Africa by the Mediterranean sea. Then Eastward by the Aegaean sea (now called Archipelago) by the Euxin sea (named at this present Mar Maggiore) by the lake of Maeotis (now termed Mar delle Zabacche) by the riuer Tanais (commonly called Don) and by the Isthmus or straight of the maine land, which is from the head or fountaine of this riuer directly vnto the North Ocean; it is diuided from Asia, according to the opinion of Glarean. And thus it beares the shape of a Peninsula (which signifies a place of the earth almost disioyned and cut from the Conti∣nent, and so well neere on euery side enuironed with waters) as in the Table it selfe is ma∣nifest. The head hereof Rome, was whilome conqueresse of the earth. The regions thereof (as they are now called) are Spaine, France, Germanie, Italie, Sla∣uonia, Greece, Hungarie, Poland with Lithuania, Moscouia, or more significantly Russia; and that Peninsula which conteineth Norway, Sweden, and Gotland. Among the Isles thereof the first place is due to Britany conteining England and Scotland; then followes Ireland, Groenland, Frisland, and Island: all situate in the maine Ocean. In the Mediter∣ran sea it hath Sicilia, Sardinia, Corsica, Candia, Maiorica, Minorica, Corfu, Negro∣pont; and others of lesse note, the particular names and situations whereof are to be seene in the Table. This our Europe, besides the Roman Empire reuerenced of all the world, hath in all (if you adde those foureteene, which Damianus à Goes reckens vp only in Spaine) eight and twentie Christian Kingdomes: whereby you may estimate the worthinesse of this region. It is a place out of measure fruitfull: and the naturall disposition of his aire is ve∣ry temperate. For all kindes of Graine, for Wine, and abundance of Woods, it is infe∣rior to none, but comparable to the best of the others. It is so pleasant, and so beautified with stately Cities, Townes and Villages, that for the courage and valour of the people and seuerall nations, although it be lesse in quantitie and circuit, yet might it well be ac∣counted, and indeed of all ancient Writers hath it euer beene accounted superiour vnto the other parts of the World: most renowmed also hath it beene both in regard of the Macedonian Empire, and the great command and power of the Romans. The praises thereof you may reade in Strabo, who in his third booke, and seuen bookes fol∣lowing, hath most learnedly and excellently described it. Peruse also other ancient Ge∣ographers. Of late Writers, amongst other things by the way, Ʋolateranus, Sebastian Munster, Dominicus Niger, Georgius Rithaimerus, in their Geographies, haue en∣deuoured to paint it out in his colours. But Pius the second, Christopher Cella and An∣selmus his brother haue described it a part and by it selfe. Diuers Iournals ouer all Europe in a maner, together with the distances of places, haue beene committed to writing by Cherubin Stella, John Herbacius, and George Mayerus. The like hath beene done by William Gratarolus in the end of his booke, which is entitled, De regimine iter agentium, or A direction for trauellers.
map of Europe
AFRICA THis the Ancients haue diuersly distinguished; but at this present it is diuided by Iohn Leo of A∣frica, into foure chiefe parts; Barbarie, Numidia, Libya, and the Land of Negros. BARBARIE, which is accounted the best, they circumscribe with the Atlantick & Mediterranean seas; with mount Atlas, & with the region of Barcha bordering vpon Aegypt. NVMIDIA, called by the inhabitants Biledulgerid, and abounding with Dates (for which cause the Arabians call it by no other name, but the Date-bearing region) is bounded Westward by the Atlantick Ocean; Northward by mount Atlas; it stretcheth East as farre as the citie Eloacat, which is an hundred miles distant from Aegypt; and the sandie Deserts of Libya embrace it on the South. LIBYA the third part, is named in the Arabian tongue Sarra, which word signifies a Desert. It beginnes East from Nilus, and thence runneth West as farre as the Atlantick sea; Numidia lies to the North of it, and the Land of Negros to the South. Now followeth the fourth part, which they call NIGRITARVM terra, either from the inhabitants, which are of a blacke colour, or from the riuer Niger, that runneth thorow the countrey. It is confined North by Libya; South by the Aethiopick Ocean; West by Gualata; and East by the Kingdome of Gaoga. And here we are to note, that according to this their diuision all Africa is included within the Mediterran, Atlantick, and Aethiopick seas and the riuer Nilus; wherefore Aegypt and Aethiopia are accounted parts of Asia, which we notwithstanding thinke more properly to belong to Africa: For the true Aethiopia containes at this day Presbyter Iohns Empire, which by all late Writers is ascribed to Africa. We therefore with Ptolemey iudge that it ought to be bounded by the Mediterran and Ocean seas, rather than by any riuer whatsoeuer; and so it hath the forme of a Peninsula, being ioyned to Asia by an Isthmos or small neck-land, which lies betweene the Mediterran sea and the gulfe of Arabia. The South part here∣of was vnknowen to our ancestours, till the yeere 1497, whereas Vasco de Gama first doubling the Cape de buona spe∣ranza or of good hope, and sailing about Africa, came to Calicut in East India. This Southern part by the Persians and Arabians is called Zanzibar. At the foresayd Cape of good hope the inhabitants are exceeding blacke; which we thought in no wise to omit, because all men suppose the cause of blacknesse to be heat, and the nearenesse of the Sunne; wheras here the Sunne scorcheth no more, than about the Streight of Magellan (if we measure the heat of the place, according to the positi∣on of the heauens and distance from the Equinoctiall line) where notwithstanding the people are reported to be maruellous white. But if we will needs ascribe this blacknesse to the scorching heat of the Sun, let vs consider, what makes the Spaniards and Italians looke so white, whenas they are equally distant from the Equinoctiall with the in∣habitants of the foresayd Cape; namely the one towards the South, and the other towards the North. Presbyter Iohns people are of a browne colour; in Zeilan and Malabar the inhabitants are coale blacke, yet all in one & the same distance from the aequator, and vnder the very same parallele of the heauens. * And on the contrary, why did He∣rodotus and Pindarus describe such as inhabited the same climate with themselues, namely Colchis, to be of a blacke colour, and curled haire? Herodotus in his Thalia makes the Indians blacke like the Aethiopians: which the experi∣ence of our times confirmeth. I know Herodotus will haue the cause hereof to be the seed of the parents, which he sayth is not white, as that of other people, but blacke. To whom Postellus also subscribeth, and imputeth the origi∣nall of this blacknesse vnto Chams curse. Against which opinion I haue nothing to allege. Let the trueth of the mat∣ter rest vpon the authours credit. But this a man may thinke more strange; that in all America there were no blacke people found besides a few, only in one place called by them Quareca. What then is the efficient cause of this colour? Is it the drinesse of the heauen, or of the earth? Is it perhaps some hidden propertie of the soile? Or a kind of qua∣litie inherent to the nature of men? Or is it all these vnited in one? But these things we leaue to be considered by them, who do more curiously search into the secrets of nature. This portion of the world is called by the Greeks Libya, and by the Latines Africa, because it is not molested with extremity of colde: or (if we may credit Iosephus) from Afer one of Abrahams posteritie. Another deriuation of the name you haue set downe by Iohn Leo in the beginning of his first booke of the Description of Africa, who deriueth it from the Ara∣bick theme Faraka, signifying to disioine or separate; because it is disioyned from Europe by the Mediterran sea; from Asia, as he saith, by the riuer Nilus, or rather as the best authours haue taught, by the Arabian gulfe called of the Greeks , Mare rubrum the red sea: of the Hebrewes  iam-suff, mare algosum vel iuncosum the sedgie sea: of the Arabians the neere inhabitants Bahci 'lkulzom the sea alkulzom. Vpon the like reason doth Iul. Caesar Scaliger thinke that Sicilia was so called of Seco which sig∣nifieth, to cut, for that this Island was thought of the ancients to haue beene a portion cut from the maine Continent, and sometimes to haue beene ioined to Italie. Others, after their maner, nullo digno autore, nullo solido & certo argumento, do fetch the name of Africa from Africus a king of blessed Arabia, whom they affirme to haue brought colonies hither and to haue first inhabited the same. The principall islands of this part (for here to expresse all by name, we thinke it not necessarie, because they are to be seene in the Table) are Madagascar, the Canaries, the isles of Cape verde, and S. Thomas island situate vnder the ae∣quinoctiall, which aboundeth with sugar. Among the olde Writers none haue particularly described this region. But concerning the same reade Salust his Bellum Iugurthinum; Hanno his nauigation about Africa, in Arrianus; and Iambolus his voyage, in Diodorus Siculus; and likewise Herodotus his Melpomene. Barlaams narration of the inner Aethiopia or India is extant in the Augustan Librarie. Of late Writers reade Aloysius Cadamostus, Vasco de Gama, Francis Aluarez, who trauelled Aethiopia. But of all others Iohn Leo hath most exactly described it; and Ludouicus Marmolius; and Liuius Sanutus. Iohn Barros also pron iseth a volume of Africa. Concerning the riuer Nilus, the greatest in all the world, you haue the letters of Iohn Baptista Ramusius and Ierom Fracastorius. Of Africa likewise you may reade at large in the second volume of M. Richard Hakluyts English voyages.
map of Africa AFRI∣CAE TA∣BVLA NOVA. AFRICAM GRAECI LIBYAM APP: EDITA ANT∣VERPIAE 1570.
The New World, commonly called AMERICA. THat all this Hemisphere or halfe-rundle (which is called America, and in regard of the large extension, The New world) should lie concealed from our ancestours, till the yeere of Christ 1492, at what time Christopher Columbus a Genoway first discouered the same; is a matter surpassing the measure of human admiration. For considering both the diligence of ancient Geographers in describing the World, and the commodious opportunitie of most large Empires for the searching out of new Regions, then also the insatiable auarice of mankinde, leauing nothing vnattempted for the attaining of Golde and Siluer, wherewith these Countries incredibly abound; I haue often wondered, how it could so long haue beene hidden from our World. Some there are which suppose that this Continent was described by Plato vn∣der the name of Atlas: my selfe also am of opinion, that Plutarch speaking of the face in the bodie of the Moone, makes mention thereof vnder the name of a Maine continent. Some thinke that Seneca rauisht with a Poeticall furie, presaged the discouerie hereof in these Propheticall verses in the very end of the 2. Act. of Medea: —venient annis Secula seris, quibus Oceanus Vincula rerum laxet & ingens Pateat tellus, Typhis{que} nouos Detegat Orbes, Nec fit terris vltima Thyle. In English thus: Long hence those yeeres will come, When th'Ocean shall dissolue Natures fast bonds and barres. Then shall huge lands appeare, Typhis shall then detect New worlds; nor Thyle then Shall bound the paths of men. Like to those Sibyllin verses, which (as Iacobus Nauarchus writeth) were found at the foot of the promontorie of the Moone (commonly called Rochan de Sinna) vpon the Ocean sea-shore, ingrauen vpon a foure-square pillar, in the time of Don Emmanuel King of Portugall, to this or the like purpose: Voluentur saxa literis & ordine rectis, Cùm videas Occidens Orientis opes. Ganges, Indus, Tagus, erit mirabile visu, Merces commutabit suas vterque sibi. In English thus: The stone with mystick letters, row'ld shall bee, When West the treasures of the East shall see. The Portugals and Indians (a thing admir'd) Shall truck their wares, on either part desir'd. Howbeit, that these verses are not ancient, but grauen in our times; nor part of Sibylles Prophesies, but counterfait; I was ad∣uertised (being in hand with the second edition of this my Theatrum) from Rome, by Caesar Orlando a Ciuilian, in his letters, out of some printed works of Gaspar Varerius, in which since that I my selfe haue read the same. And afterward I found it confirmed by Amil. Resende in his Antiquities of Portugale: namely, that in the time of Don Emmanuel King of Portugale, one Hermes Caiado of the same countrey, caused them to be ingrauen and buried in the earth: and when he supposed that the marble began to corrupt with the moisture of the ground; pretending some cause of recreation, he inuites his friends to a countrey-house of his, neere vnto which this fained Prophesie lay hid. Wherefore being all set at meat, in comes his Bailiffe with newes, that his Labourers had by chance digged vp a stone engrauen with letters. They all immediatly runne forth, they reade it, they admire it, they highly esteeme it, and are ready to adore it, &c. See how apt Caiado was to delude his friends. Marinaeus Siculus in his Chronicle of Spaine writes, that there was found in Gold-mines an ancient piece of coine with Augustus Caesars image vpon it, and for the more confirmation of the matter, that it was sent by the Archbishop of Consance to the Pope. But I am of opinion, that it was there lost by the same fa∣milie which first found it. Iosephus Acosta in his booke De Natura noui orbis indeuours by many reasons to proue, that this part of America was originally inhabited by certaine Indians, forced thither by tempestuous weather ouer the South sea which now they call Mare del Zur. But to me it seemes more probable, out of the historie of the two Zeni, gentlemen of Venice (which I haue put downe before the Table of the South sea, and before that of Scandia) that this New world many ages past was entred vpon by some islanders of Europe, as namely of Groenland, Island, and Frisland; being much neerer thereunto than the Indians, nor disioy∣ned thence (as appeares out of the Map) by an Ocean so huge, and to the Indians so vnnauigable. Also, what else may we conie∣cture to be signified by this word Norumbega (the name of a North region of America) but that from Norway, signifying a North land, some Colonie in times past hath hither beene transplanted? But why in mine opinion the maine Ocean was neuer sailed by ancient Nauigatours, I haue declared in my Thesaurus Geographicus, speaking of OPHIR. All this part of the World, (except the North tract thereof, whose Coasts are not yet discouered) hath in these last times beene sailed round about. From North to South it stretcheth in forme of two Peninsulae or Demi-isles, which are seuered by a very nar∣row Isthmos or neck-land. The Northermost of the two conteineth New Spaine, the prouince of Mexico, the countrey of Florida and New-found-land. But the Southermost (which the Spaniards call Terra firma) containes Perú and Brasil. A description of all which regions the studious in Geography may reade in Leuinus Apolonius, in the Decads of Peter Martyr, and in Maximilianus Transsiluanus, who writ all in Latine. Also to this purpose you haue many things worthy the obseruation in the Iesuites Epistles, and in Maffeius his story of the Indies. Postellus also promiseth Discourses of West-Indie-matters: and so doth Fredericus Furius Caeriolanus. These that follow haue purposely written of America, but all in their mother-languages, and for the most part in Spanish; but the better halfe of them are translated into Italian. PEDRO CIEçA DE LEON. GONSALVO FERNANDO DE OVIEDO. FERNANDO CORTEZ. PETER ALVARADO. DIEGO GODOYA. ALVAREZ NVNNEZ. NVNNEZ DE GVSMAN. FRANCIS VLLOA. FRANCIS VASQVEZ DE CORONADO. ANTONIE MENDOçA. FRIER MARCO DE NIZZA. FERNANDO ALARCHON. FRANCIS XERES. IOHN VERARZANO. AMERICO VESPVTIO. FRANCIS LOPEZ DE GOMARA. IEROME BENZO, in Italian. IAQVES CARTHIER, and ANDREVV THEVET, wrote in French. IOHN STADEN, in Dutch. Diuerse of which Authours, and many that haue written since, are translated into English in the third volume of M. Hakluyts English Voyages.
map of North and South America or the new world AMERICAE SIVE NOVI ORBIS, NO∣VA DESCRIPTIO. Vlterius Septentrionem versus hae regiones incognitae adhuc sunt.
The peaceable or the south sea, called by the Spaniards MAR DEL SVR. THis sea albeit vnknowen, yet was it not vnnamed by ancient writers: for Plinie calles it Ecum, and Orosius Orientale, that is, The East sea. Ptolemey falsly termes it SINVM MAGNVM, A great bay; whereas he should haue nam'd it MARE MAG∣NVM, A great sea. For of all the seas in the world it is the greatest and the widest. In Paulus Venetus it is described vnder the name of Mare Cin, (that is, as I interpret it out of Nubiensis Arabs, Bahci'ltzni vel alkini, Mare Sinarum, The sea of China) and in Haithon Armenus (whom elswhere we more truly call Antonie Curchino) by the name of Mare Cathay. Well therefore might it be named by the ancient and middle-age writers; but neuer was it fully knowen and discouered, till Fernando Magel∣lan a Portugale sailed thereupon. Seene it was indeed, and as it were saluted in the yeere 1513, by Vasco Nunnez, from the coast of Perú. But Magellan in the yeere of our saluation 1520. hauing passed the streight by him found, and called after his owne name (which it hitherto retaineth, for euery common Mariner calles it The Streight of Magellan) with an heroick and Herculean courage entred this sea, which vncertaine it is, whether any shippe before his had euer stemmed. For meditating a voyage to the isles of the Moluccos, whereunto the Portugals vsually sailed from West to East; and intending to make thither a shorter cut from East to West, he came at length vnto them by this sea: in one of which isles called Machian, he was slaine in a skirmish. The course of his voyage was this: Departing from Siuil with fiue ships, whereof one being his owne, was called by a name of good presage Victoria, he came to the fortunate or Canary-isles; then to the Gorgones or Hesperides, now termed The isles of Cape verde; and thence to the Streight abouenamed: which when he had found and past thorow, he enters into this sea; where with a fresh and prosperous gale hauing sailed vpon the maine 40. dayes together, and beholding nothing but sea on all sides, and still the sea; when he had crossed the South tropick he descried two small barren and vnhabited isles: where notwithstanding, because they found good fishing, they staied two dayes & then departed, calling them the Vnfortunate isles. Now, they are knowen by the name of Tuberones, and the isles of S. Peter. Then he proceeds on his nauigation, & in the space of 3. moneths and 20. dayes, hauing sailed ouer this vast Ocean 2400. leagues, he attained at length to the Aequinoctiall, and thence to the desired Molucces. And because (as we haue said) he had for the most part a prosperous & no tempestuous wind, he named this Pacificum or The peaceable sea, now called by the common Mariner, The South sea, or Mar del Sur. Those that haue written of the New world, say, that this sea about those vnfortunate isles, is most exceeding deepe, and that neere vnto the coast of Perú it yeeldeth pearles, and that there are in it 7449. isles, so that some in our times not vnfitly haue called the Western part thereof Archipelagus or A sea thicke set with isles: seeing this, like the Aegean sea (which is planted all ouer with the Cyclades, the Sporades, and many other islands, and is called in the Italian tongue Archipelago) is also with isles most nota∣bly replenished. In the bottome of this sea Francis Vlloa and Antonie Digafetta do report, that there growes a weed of 14. or 15. fathoms high within the water; and that it riseth out of the water to the height of some 4. or 5. fathom: so that sometimes you shall seeme not to saile thorow a sea, but rather thorow a greene medow. The place of Aristotle in his booke De Admirandis &c. doth not much disagree from this; where he writes of the Phoenicians which inhabited Gady∣ra, that when they had sailed a while without the pillars of Hercules, they arriued at certeine regions abounding with weeds and slime, which were ouerflow∣ed with the tides of the sea. The very same affirmeth Iornandes in the beginning of his Getish history; where he writes, that none could saile thorow the O∣cean, being impassable in regard of weeds or turfs, and for that cause vnknowen. Yea Plinie and Antigonus out of Megasthenes haue left recorded, that all the East Ocean growes full of woods. And that the sea neere Portugale should beare Okes laden with mast, Polybius reporteth in Athenaeus. Also, that the Bay-tree growes in the Red sea, the same authour affirmes vpon the credit of Pythagoras. Hereunto you may adde that of Theophrastus in his 4. booke of the history of Plants, cap. 7.8.9. and the testimony of Aelianus, lib, 13. de Animal. cap. 3. and Strabo, lib. 16. and Plinie, lib. 2. cap. 103. lib. 6. cap. 22. and lib. 13. cap. 25. and Plu∣tarch in his naturall questions concerning the face in the orbe of the Moone. All these are in some sort confirmed by Platoes fables or histories in his Timaeus concerning the isle Atlantis; whose sea he affirmes to be vnnauigable by reason of the slime or oaze remaining of the same isles inundation. But concerning the ship called La Victoria learne thus much: it is not sayd amisse: Bare names oft times things named doe resemble: Manifest it is by this ship, which vnder this happy name, the first voyage that euer she made, was the only ship that caried away the victory of sailing quite ouer the maine Ocean, for so many ages before. For departing from Spaine, by the Streight of Magellan, to the Moluccos, thence hauing doubled the Cape of Buona Esperança, and returned, whence she first put forth, she was the first of all ships and inall ages, that euer circumpassed the whole earth. The same ship made out of Spaine a second voyage as farre as S. Domingo and home againe. Thither also she made a third voyage; but in her returne she was quite lost; neither was it euer knowen what became of her. Anti∣quity would haue thought she had beene taken vp into the skies, and placed among the Constellations, like another Argo. Nor had this propheticall verse of the peerelesse Poet beene vnfitly alleged in her commendation: Then comes another Tiphys, another gold-fleeced Argo. Let Plinie now cease to maruell, that out of a small hemp-seed should grow that, which was of force to cary vp and downe the globe of [his] earth. We in our age haue seene with the very same thing this world of [ours, much greater than his] nauigated round about. Ours, I say: which that you may more perfectly vnderstand, do but compare the first Table of our Theatre with the first of our Parergon or By-worke, and you shall see the difference. And here, I suppose, I shall not bestow my labour altogether in vaine, by adding certaine particulars not commonly knowen, concerning the first discouery hereof. Which by all our late Writers is not vnworthily ascribed to Christopher Columbus. For in the yere 1492, he was the first man that laid it open, & made it knowen, and communicated the vse and benefit thereof to the Christian world. Howbeit I finde, that the North part of America (which lieth neerest vnto Europe, and to some of our European isles, namely, Groenland, Island, and Frisland; and is called Estotiland) was long since discouered by certaine Frislandish fishers, driuen by tempest vpon that coast: and afterward about the yere 1390, that it was reuisited anew by Antonie Zeno, a gentleman of Venice: and that by the authority of Zichmi, then King of the said isle of Frisland, a Prince in those times very valiant, and ouer all that sea, for his warres and victories most re∣nowmed. Concerning this his expedition there are extant in Italian certaine Collections or briefe extracts drawen by Francis Marcolino out of the letters of Nicolas and Antonie Zeno gentlemen of Venice, who liued in these parts. Out of which Collections I adde this that followes touching the description of this region. Estotiland (he saith) abounds with all things necessary for mankind. In the mids therof stands an exceeding high mountaine,That you many bet∣ter vnder∣stand this relation, peruse our Table of America and Scan∣dia. from whence issue foure riuers that water the whole country. The inhabitants are witty, and most expert in all kind of handicrafts. A language and letters they haue peculiar to them∣selues. Howbeit in this Kings Library there are certeine Latine books, no whit vnderstood by them, which might perhaps before that time be there left by some of their European neighbors that had traffique with them. They haue all kinds of mettall, but specially gold, wherewith they mightily abound. They exercise trade of merchandize with the people of Greenland; from whence they fetch hides, pitch, & brimstone. The inhabitants say, that towards the South there are countries rich of gold, and replenisht with inhabitants. There are also many & great woods; out of which they haue matter for the building of their ships and cities; whereof and of fortresses there are great numbers. Of the loadstones vse in nauigation they are vtterly ignorant. They also make mention of Drogeo, a region toward the South, inhabited by Canibals, and such as are delighted to eat mans flesh; for want whereof, they liue with fishing, which they very much vse. Beyond this there are large countries and another New world; but the inhabitants are barbarous, and go naked: howbeit against the cold of Win∣ter they arme themselues with beasts skinnes. These haue no kind of mettall: they liue by hunting. For weapons they vse long and sharp-pointed staues and bowes. They make warres one vpon another. Gouernours they haue, and lawes wherto they yeeld obedience. Southward of this place they liue in a more temperate climate, hauing cities and idol-temples, wherin they sacrifice liuing men, whose flesh they afterward deuoure. These haue the vse of gold and siluer. Thus much concerning this tract of land, out of the foresaid collections or extracts; wherein this also is worthy the obseruation, that euen then our Europe∣an Pilots by meanes of the loadstone sailed those seas. For I am of opinion, that there is not to be found in any history a more ancient testimony touching the foresayd vse of this stone. And these things I was the willinger to adioyne to this Table, because I see none of them that haue written the histories of the world so much as once mention this matter. But concerning the loadstone or sea-compasse you are to vnderstand, that the first inuentour therof was Iohn Goia a citizen of Melfi, whom Alexander Sardus in his booke De inuentoribus rerum calleth Flauius Campanus. For so write the Italians, and so much is confirmed by Antonie Panormitanus in this one verse of his: First Melfi Sailors taught, the loadstone how to vse, and that in the yere of our Sauior 1300. This Melfi called Amalphis in Latine, is a towne situate vpon the sea-shore of Lucania. Goropius ascribes the finding out of this secret to our Danes or Dutchmen; being persuaded hereunto, because the names of the 32. winds written vpon the compasse, are by all Pilots and Mariners, be they French, Spaniards, or of what nation soeuer, expressed in the Dutch tongue: which I confesse to be true, if you except the Italians only: for they both write and speake of these winds in their owne mother-language. Howbeit seeing all our na∣uigatours of Europe, be they Spaniards, French, English, or Dutch, do expresse them in our language, I am verily of opinion, that as it was first found and vsed by the Amalfitans or Italians especially within their owne Mediterran sea: so was the knowledge therof from them deriued vnto our Netherlanders, and most of all to those of Bruges; whose city at that time (before all traffque was reduced to Antwerpe) was a famous mart-towne, and frequented by Italians, especi∣ally of Venice, as the foresaid Zeni report: and according to the testimony of Peter Quirini, Christopher Fiorouanti, and Nicolas Michele, who in this our Ocean suffered that horrible shipwracke which we reade of in the Italian volumes: witnesse also Lewis Cadamosta, who in his Epistles written about the yeere 1454, affirmes this city of Bruges to be a Mart inferiour to none else in all the North parts of the world. Wherefore, that the citizens of Bruges receiued the vs of the sea-compasse from the Italians, and out of Italian translated the names of the winds into their owne language, and that from them the other nations be∣fore mentioned borrowed this knowledge, I see not well, how it may be denied. Of the nature and admirable vertue of the loadstone you may reade many notable things in Liuius Sanutus his description of Africa, printed in Italian at Venice. The isles or Salomon, which in this table you see described about Noua Guinea, were not long since discouered by Oliuer Mendanio, after he had conducted his fleet out of the part of Lima in Perú, & had sailed ouer this huge Ocean: as I find recorded in Iosephus Acosta his 1. book & 17. chapter De natura nouiorbis.
map of the Pacific Ocean region MARIS PACIFICI, (quod vulgò Mar del Zur) cum regionibus circumiacentibus, insusisq́ue in eodem passim sparsis, novissima descriptio. SPE ET METV. GENIO ET INGENIO NO∣BILI DN. NICOLAO ROCCOXIO, PATRICIO ANTVERPIENSI, EIVSDEMQVE VRBIS SENATORI, Abrahamus Ortelius Regiae Mts. geographus lub. merito dedicabat. 1589.
NEVV SPAINE. THis Prouince was about the yeere 1518 forcibly subdued to the Spanish gouernment, vnder the command and conduct of Fer∣nando Corlez: who with the great slaughter of his owne people, but farre greater of the inhabitants fighting for their liberty, con∣quered the same. It is a region rich of siluer and golde: for it hath very many riuers yeelding sands or graines of perfect gold. Vpon the coast of this countrey are many commodious fishings for pearle. Salt lakes here are diuers, the water whereof through the heat of the Sunne is conuer∣ted into excellent salt. Here is great abundance of Cassia fistula, and a kind of fruit in the Mexican language called Cacao, somewhat resembling an Almond: which is with them very highly esteemed; for hereof they make a kinde of drinke, to their owne taste most delicate. The seas and riuers belonging to this countrey abound mightily with fish. Their riuers also breed Crocodiles, whose flesh is food to the inhabitants. In these places this creature is for the most part aboue twenty foot long. It is a countrey very mountainous and beset here and there with most lofty and cragged rocks. So great is the diuersity of languages in these regions, that one cannot vnderstand another without an Interpreter. The principall Colonies to be seene in this Table, which in New Spaine haue been planted by the Spaniards, are first Compostella, the seat of a Bishop, and of one of the Kings counsels. Colima, by another name called the city of the Purification. Guadalajara, a towne most fa∣mous, and head of the Kingdome of New Gallicia. Mechoacan, a Bishops sea also. Sacatula, the city of Angels, a mother-towne and a Bishoprick. Mexico, a Kingly city, or rather Queene of all the cities in the New world; situate vpon the banke of a lake, or rather of a fenne: yea the very ground-plot of this city is so fenny, that you cannot come thither, nor depart thence but ouer bridges and cawseys. The lake adioyning is salt, being six leagues long and fiue broad. Fishes it hath none, but very small ones; which more aptly may be called wormes than fishes: of whose putrefaction, which is there caused by the heat of Summer, the aire is some∣times so infected, that it is most vnholesome dwelling there: yet is it as much fre∣quented with inhabitants and merchants, as any mart-towne in Europe. It is a large city; for in compasse it containeth about three leagues. The other lake adioining to this, is fresh water, and very plentifull of fish; wherein also stand many townes. There are likewise a great number vpon the banks of either lake. In this city (as Ierome Giraua reporteth) there was by Pope Paul the third established the seat of an Archbishop, in the yeere 1547. This citie was taken by the Spaniards 140 yeeres after the first foundation thereof; Montezuma at the same time being King, the ninth in number. A won∣der, how in so few yeeres it should grow to such largenesse and magnificence. The nature, situation, and customes of this citie and of the territory adiacent, who desires more perfectly to know, may reade the relations of Fernando Cortez. Ex∣tant they are in the volume intituled Nouus orbis; and in the volume of Nauiga∣tions printed at Ʋenice in Italian: but especially John Gonsaluo, who in his little booke of China hath a most large description of this region. You haue also many notable discourses hereof in the third Volume of M. Hakluyts English voyages.
map of Mexico or Nova Hispania HISPANIAE NOVAE SIVAE MAGNAE, RE∣CENS ET VE∣RA DESCRIP∣TIO. 1579. Lectori, Partium longitudinis hu∣ius tabulae inituum non fumi∣tur Ptolemaico more ab infu∣lis Canarijs, versus Oriente; sed à Toletano Hispanien∣sis meridiano, Occiden∣tem versus. Notularum circa Mexico explanatio. a. Escalpucoleo. b. Tucuba. c. Istapalapa. d. Ximaloaca. e. Teutitlan. f. Gucytitlan. g. Mexicalcingo. h. Culiacan. i. Catlavaca. k. Nicsquique. l. Cinarantepec. m. Xiquicpico. n. Ocellotepec. o. Ʋcicilapa. p. Mimiapa. q. Tecaÿuca. r. Chalcontengo. s. Tapalcapan. t. Tisquiquiac. u. Xilocingo. x. Chiconantla. y. Techcistlan. z. Caltoca.
The Prouince of CVLIACAN. THis Prouince of CVLIACAN is part of the kingdome of New Gali∣cia. It was discouered vnder the gouernment of Charles the fifth, in the yeere 1530. In this region is one only colonie of Spaniards called, The towne of S. Michael. Villages here are very many, built by the inhabi∣tants; all which before the Spaniards arriuall were at their owne liber∣tie: yeelding obedience to no King or Gouernour. The region is in∣differently furnished with things necessary. Out of the mountaines is digged great abun∣dance of siluer. The inhabitants are addicted to war and robbery. They that dwell vp∣on the coast, employ most of their time in fishing; but the vplandish people liue by hun∣ting. They goe naked, couering only their priuities with a piece of Cotton. They haue many languages. They lodge for the most part in the open aire. They are a most beg∣gerly nation. CVBA and HISPANIOLA. THis Island of Cuba is so called by the naturall inhabitants; but by the Spaniards Fernandina, and Joanna; and (as Peter Martyr reports) Alpha and Omega. In length it extendeth East and West 300 Spanish leagues: containing in bredth fifteene, and in some places twenty of the said leagues. The land is very moun∣tainous, but rich of gold, and excellent copper. Madder, which the Apothecaries, because it is very apt to die wooll and leather, call Diers-madder, is heere found in great abun∣dance. It is in all places beautified with thicke woods, with riuers and pooles of fresh wa∣ter: albeit there are lakes naturally salt. The woods breed vp Hogges and Kine in great plentie: the riuers sometimes yeeld graines of gold. It containes six colonies or townes of Spaniards: the principall whereof called Sant Jago, is the seat of a Bishop. But Hauana is the chiefe mart and hauen towne of all the Isle. Two wonderfull things Gonsaluo de Ouie∣do describes in this Isle: one, a valley extended betweene two mountaines some three Spanish miles in length: (the Ancients would haue named it, as in Gallia Narbonensi, now called Prouence, The stony field) which bringeth forth round stones in so great abun∣dance, that a man may lade whole shippes with them, being by nature framed so exactly round, that no Turner can amend them. The other is a mountaine not farre from the sea, whereout issueth a kind of Bitumen or Pitch in so great a quantity, that it runnes into the sea, and there floats farre and wide, according as it is carried by the waues or windes. This Pitch, they say, is very commodious for the calcking and braying of ships. HISPANIOLA lies to the East of Cuba. This Isle by the first inhabitants was called Quisquaeia, afterwards Haiti, and Cipanga likewise. But the Spaniards name it Hi∣spaniola, and (of the principall city) San Domingo. The compasse hereof is 350 leagues. It is an Isle rich in Sugar, and it hath many Gold-mines. It is very strange that is reported concerning a little flie very common in this Island, called by the inhabitants Cucujo, and as big almost as one of the ioynts of a mans finger, hauing foure wings, two very thin, and the other two greater and harder, wherewith the thin ones are couered. This shineth in the night as glowe-wormes doe with vs. The force of this light is not only in his eyes, sparckling like fire, but also in his sides, so that by lifting vp his wings, he shines more fly∣ing, than when he lies still. By the naturall curtesie of this little creature, all their cham∣bers, they say, are so lightsome euen in the darkest nights, that a man may reade and write very plainly without the helpe of any other light. This light of theirs is augmented by their number; so that many will giue a greater light than a few. Whoso des res a larger de∣scription of these Islands, let him reade the history of the New world written by Jerome Benzo, Peter Martyr his Decads of Islands lately discouered, and other writers of America.
map of Culiacan or Nova Galicia CVLIACANAE, A∣MERICAE REGIO∣NIS, DESCRIPTIO. Sciat lector; Auctorem Anonÿmum, qui hanc Culiacanam regionem, et has insulas perlus∣trauit, et descripsit: regionum longitudines non ut Ptolemaeus, alij{que} solent; à Fortunatis insulis, versus Orientem sumsisse: sed a Tole to Hispanie vmbilico, Occidentem, ex eclÿpsibus ab ipsomet obseruaris deprae: hendisse. map of the West Indies HISPANIOLAE, CVBAE, ALIARVMQVE INSVLA∣RVM CIRCVMIACIENTIVM, DELINEATIO
PERV. THe Spaniards diuide the South part of America into fiue regions, namely, The golden Castilia, Popaian, Perú, Chili, and Brasil. Perú in times past before the Spaniards comming thither was much larger, vnder the gouernment of the Ingas, than at this present, as Giraua and o∣thers write. Now they confine it with Quito on the North, and with Puerto de Plata on the South. It was thus named from a riuer & hauen named Perú. At this present they diuide it, according to the situation thereof, into three parts; into Sierras, Andes, and Plaines. The plaine countrey they call that which lieth next the sea; Sierras are the mountaines; and Andes a region beyond the mountaines toward the East. The head-city of this countrey of Perú is Lima, otherwise called La ciadad de les Reges, where the Kings seat, and the Chancerie of the whole Kingdome remaines. Also it is the sea of an Archbishop, who vnder his iurisdiction hath these Bishopricks following; Quito, Cusco, Guamanga, Arequipa, Paz, Plata, Trugillo, Guanuco, Chacapoia, Puerto viejo, Guajaquil, Popajan, Charchi, S. Michael, and S. Francis. That this is the richest of golde of all the countreys in the world, besides many other, these few arguments do euidently demonstrate. Francis Xeres writeth, that in Cusco there were houses, whose pauement, walles & roofes were couered quite ouer with plates of golde. Giraua reports, that the inhabitants of the prouince Ancerna go to warres all armed in gold from head to foot: their habergions, their brest-plates, their leg & thigh harnesse, con∣sist wholly of gold. The same authour affirmes, that out of certeine gold-mines neere Quito is digged more gold than earth. Those that haue written the storie of King Atabalipa, do agree in this, that he offered so much golde to the Spaniards for his ransome, as the roome wherein he was prisoner would containe. It was two and twenty foot long, and seuenteene foot broad: this he offered to fill so high as he could reach vpon the wall with his longest finger; or if they thought better (marke also the infinite quantitie of siluer in this region) he offered to fill it twise with siluer euen to the very roofe. It is also recorded, that the Spaniards at their first entrance vpon this countrey, shod their horses with gold and siluer shoes. This region in times past was gouerned by Ingas (which word signifieth Kings, or supreme Gouernours) of whom I finde this catalogue or pedegree in Simon Fernandez. The first was MANGOCAPA; him the Peruuians denie to haue been borne of a man, supposing that he was made out of a certaine rocke, which is to be seene nere Cusco. This man of his wife Mama Guaco begat a sonne named SICHEROCA. He being more warlike than his father, subdued many bordering nations, and enlarged the limits of his Empire. Of his wife Mama Cura he had issue LOCVCOPANGVE, the third Inga. This King thought it better to keepe that which his father had got, than with new conquests to augment his dominions. Being very aged he tooke to wife Mama Anauerque; which brought him forth a sonne, and successor, called MAYTACAPA. This successor of his ioyned the prouince of Cusco to his fathers Empire. Of his wife Mama Yacchidela he begat a sonne named CAPAC YVPANGVE who atchieued nothing worthy of memory. He had also by his wife Mama Cagna, a sonne called INGA RVCA. But neither did he in all his life any memorable act; saue that he tooke to wife Mama Micay, of whon he begat many sonnes; concerning one of which named Yaguar Guacinga Iupangue, they report this story: Being a childe of three moneths old, he was conueyed away by a certain Cacique to be murdred; but while they were consulting whe∣ther they should kill him, or no; it came to passe that drops of bloud trickled from the infants weeping eyes: which they expounding as a matter prodigious, surceased their intent of murdering him. In the meane time be∣ing found by a stranger, and restored to his father, he proued a most valiant and warlike Prince; insomuch that he subdued many bordering nations. He maried Mama Chiquia, of whom he had issue male VIRA COCHA, who succeeded him in his Empire, and inlarged it not a little. After him reigned PACHACOTI his sonne borne of his wife Mama Yunto Cayan. This Prince in martiall exploits surpassing all his ancestours, conquered di∣uers and sundry nations. He laid the first foundations of the Castle of Cusco. After death he left behind him for his heire TOPA INGA YVPANGVE begotten of his wife Mama Anabarque; who not only finished the castle that was founded by his father, but treading also in his warlike steps, he wan from his neighbours the kingdoms of Chili and Quito, annexing the same to his crowne. These common high wayes most admirable to the world, from Cusco to Charchas, and so to Chili, he was the first author of; which being all the way built of Chasqui (or as we terme them, woodden piles) he made the iourney very short: for by the benefit hereof he marched with a com∣pany of speedy footmen (a thing incredible in our eares) the space of 120 leagues in three dayes: (for before the Spaniards comming, the inhabitants neuer knew what beasts of cariage meant.) This King left behinde him a∣boue 150 sonnes. But GVAINA CAPA whom he had by his wife Mama Oclo, he ordeined to be his heire: who, albeit he had a father so valourous, and so renowmed both in peace and warre; yet by his braue exploits he far surpassed him: for he extended the bounds of the Peruuian Empire a great way farther than before. The Com∣mon wealth he reduced into a better forme, he reformed many lawes, and some he ordained anew. He tooke to wise Coia Pilico Vaco; by whom when he could haue no issue, he maried diuers others: of which wiues he begat sonnes not only equall, but superiour in number to those of his father; the eldest whereof was GVASCAR, whose mothers name was Raua Oclo. He had also another sonne named ATABALIPA. Betweene these two brothers some dissention arising about the gouernment of the kingdome, Atabalipa remaining in Cassamalca, and Guascar in Cusco; Atabalipa marching with an army against his brother, became Victor, tooke him, and caried him captiue to Cusco, in which place he afterward put him to death, and was there himselfe also burned by the Spa∣niards. This was the end of these two brothers. Whereupon MANGO Inga a third brother tooke the gouern∣ment
map of Peru or the Pacific Coast of South America PERVVIAE AVRIFERAE REGIONIS TYPVS. Didaro Mendezio auctore.
map of Florida LA FLORIDA. Auctore Hieron. Chiaues Cum Priuilegio. map of Guastecan or La Huasteca GVAS¦TECAN Reg.
vpon him (for Guaina Capa, as is aforesaid, had many wiues and sonnes.) Mango deceasing, appointed for his heire Inga XAIREMTOPA, who maried himselfe to Coio Cuxi Varcay daughter to Guascar. This man before he was crowned with Imperiall diademe changed his name, and called himselfe MANGO CAPA PACHVTI YVPANGVE. But he submitted himselfe to King Philip, and became his vassall. This was done in the yeere 1557. the sixth of Ianuary vpon the very feast of the three Kings. Concerning these Ingas, and their memorable acts Pedro Cieça de Leon promised a peculiar volume: whether he hath performed it I know not. Sufficeth thus much to haue been spoken of the Kings. Now let vs out of three worthy eye-witnesses adde somwhat concer∣ning the nature and disposition of the people. Ierome Benzo of Millan, who liued many yeeres in those countries, in his booke of the New world dedicated to Pope Pius the fourth, writeth that the inhabitants of Perú are natu∣rally indued with a more sharpe and subtile wit, than any other Indians subdued by the Spaniards. The same author (speaking of them in another place;) Marke my words (saith he:) I can by no meanes be induced to be∣leeue that which some report of them; namely, that they are addicted to theft, and that by their lawes, the least robberies deserue hanging. But who can imagine them to be theeues, whenas they are neither couetous nor rich, esteeming nothing more base than siluer & gold? Of which, it they had a minde vnto the same, they might without controlment take as much as they would out of the Mines, like water out of the fountaine. Vnlesse per∣haps they haue learned of the Spaniards to play the thieues, who haue planted their colonies in that country, &c. Bartholmew de las casas a Spaniard of the order of Dominick, and Bishop of Chiapa, a great city of the New world, in that volume which he entitled The destruction of the Indies, and dedicated to King Philip; he calleth them a peace∣able, humble, gentle, and harmlesse nation: and in another place, a simple, plain-dealing people, void of all ma∣lice, most obedient and faithfull, not only to their owne naturall Princes, but also to Christians that haue any command ouer them. And if there be any in all the world, then these are of a most quiet disposition, not giuen to brauling or tumults, nor greedy of reuenge. Frier Iodocus de Reijcke, by order a Franciscan, born in Mechilin, who in Quito a city of this region, erected the first monastery of his order, writeth in his letters (which I my selfe haue read) to the Guardian of the Franciscans at Antwerpe: All these Indians (saith he) thirst after the Gospell, and al∣beit they are barbarous, and without learning, yet nature hath taught them an excellent kinde of gouernment, and behauior. Among them there was not a begger found, notwithstanding they are all poore in food and ap∣parell. And a little after; With these people was found so great iustice and integrity of life, that therein they ex∣cell euen those which abound with books and learning. The same in another letter to the Friers of his order in Flanders: It is (saith he) a witty, bold, and warlike nation, giuing vs hope of their easie conuersion to Christianity, if they be not discouraged therefrom by the Spaniards auarice. These letters, I thinke are not printed: The very originals of them, according to his singular humanity and fauor to these my studies were bestowed vpon me by the worthy citizen Adrian Marselar, Senatour of Antwerpe, being the said Iodocus his kinsman by the mothers side. Also of this F. Iodocus mention is made by Ierom Benzo, & Pedro Cieça a Spaniard, in their stories of the VVest Indies. FLORIDA. THis is part of North America. It is called by the name of Florida in regard of the feast of Easter, which the Spa∣niards call Pascha Florida, because vpon that very day in the yeere of our Lord 1512, it was (as I reade in Gira∣ua) vnder the conduct of Iohn Ponce of Leon, first of all coasted, and discouered. Theuet (like himselfe) writes, that it was so called, because it was all greene and flourishing. By the inhabitants it was named Iaquasa. The French haue more than once attempted to plant a colony here: but hitherto they were neuer able in regard of the Spa∣niards ill will, who oft expelled them from thence. It is inhabited by a sauage, forlorne, and beastly people. They liue vpon spiders, ants, lizards, serpents, and other venimous, and creeping things. The region is very fruitfull, and rich of gold. Concerning this country Iames Cole my nephew from the mouth of an eie-witnesse (as he saith) writes vnto me as followeth: The inhabitants are of a brownish colour; but the Kings wiues are blacke by a kind of arte. The King hath power to giue, or rather to sell wiues to such as are desirous to marrie. A married woman being taken in adultery, she is for her incontinency from morning till night bound with her backe to a tree, her armes and legs stretched abroad, and sometimes she is beaten with rods. Their women within three houres after they are deliuered of childe, carry forth their infants, and wash them in the riuer. They haue no hatchets, nor spades, but of stone. In stead of ploughes, they haue certaine woodden pickaxes, wherewith they open the ground, and sowe a kinde of graine commonly called Turkish or Ginny-wheat, whereof they haue yeerely two or three crops. They haue also Pheasants, &c. They sowe in the moneths of May, Iune, and Iuly; and reape within six weeks after. Concerning this region reade the booke of Iaques Morguez le moine. GVASTECAN. THis also is a region of North America, and part of New Spaine. The inhabitants are poore. Along the sea-coasts, and the bancks of riuers, they liue for the most part of fish, but in the inland with Guinie-wheat, which they call Maiz. Otherwise they are a people gentle enough. The Spaniards haue planted two colonies here: the one is called Panuco, of the riuer that runneth by it; and the other S. Iames, of the vallies. Not farre from Panuco, neere the towne called Tamatao, stands an hill with two fountaines vpon it; one whereof disgorgeth blacke pitch; and the other red, which is scalding hot.
The BRITTISH Iles. THE EMPIRE OF GREAT BRITAIN included within the parallels 49. and 63. and the Meridians or longitudes 9. and 26. bounded vpon the South by France, vpon the East by Germany, vpon the North & West by the Vast Ocean, disioined from the rest of the maine land as High Admirall of the seas comprehendeth that Iland which at this day conteineth the kingdomes of England & Scotland, together with Ireland ouer against it Westward, the circumiacent iles, the Orchades, Hebrides, Man, Anglesey, Wight, the Sorlings, & many others of lesse note, and were generally of the old writers with one consent called, BRITANNICAE INSVLAE, The Brittish Ilands taking their denomination, as seemeth, from the greatest of them, commander of the rest, which indeed is properly called BRITANNIA, Brittaine. So na∣med (not of that fained Brutus, the bloody parricide, as the fabulous historian Geffrey of Monmouth, against all reason, authority & truth of storie, hath hitherto made the world beleeue: nor of the Welch word Prydain or Prydcain, as the learned Britaine Humfrey Lhoyd hath thought:) but of Brit, a Celticke word, which signi∣fieth Painted: For these people, as Caesar and other old writers report, vsed to paint their bodies, and therefore were called of the Gaules, their next neighbours, BRITONES: as those people of the same nation, who to auoid the slauery and seruitude of the Romanes, and withdrew themselues into the North parts, (from whom they continually mole∣sted their colonies heere), were of them, for the same reason, in their language called, PICTI. The Greekes called it also ALBION, not of Albion Neptunes sonne, which sometime sweied the scepter heere, as some haue most fabulously taught; but of Alphiων, the white cliffes vpon the sea coast, which first offer themselues to the eie of those which to this our land saile hither from France: and indeed the Welch poets call it Inis win, that is, as Orphaeus the most ancient poet of the Greeks doth interpret it, Nesos leu caessa, and Leucaios Chersos, The white Ile, or The whiteland. The first Inhabitants, which seated themselues heere not long after the vniuersall Flood and Confusion of Babel, came hither from France, as by Neerenesse of place, Likenesse of language, Maners, Gouernment, Customes & Name is by the learned Clarencieux Camden, the onely light of our histories, in that his thrise renowned Britannia, euidently demonstrated. For to this day the ancient Britans, the Welchmen do call themselues CVMRI, (not Cambri) as come from Gomer, the sonne of Iapheth, (called of the Latines Cimber,) from whom are descended the Celtae or Gaules. The Romanes, a second nation, vnder the conduct of Iulius Caesar, about the yeare before the birth of CHRIST 54. entered Brittaine and planted their colonies in diuers and sundry places of this Iland. The Scottes, obseruing the Ro∣man legions to grow weake and their Empire to decline, thereupon tooke occasion first to seise vpon Ireland: then a∣bout the yeare of CHRIST 446. great trouble arising in France, the Emperours were constrained wholly to withdraw their forces from hence, and to leaue the Brittaines naked and open to the furie of the Pictes their enemies. From hence ensued a double mischiefe: for first the vnquiet and turbulent Pictes, thinking that now the onely opportunitie was offered them to accomplish their desires, thought to make sure worke, called in the Scottes out of Ireland; combi∣ned themselues together against the poore disarmed Britans: whereupon the Britans were constrained, for safegard of their liues and liberties, to call in, about the yeare of CHRIST 440. the Angles, Saxons and Iuites, a warlike people inhabiting along the sea coast of Germany, from the riuer of Rhein, vnto Denmarke, to aid them against their violent enemies. The Normanes, lead by William the Bastard, their Duke, tooke possession of Great Brittaine in the yeare 1066. The Vandalles, Norweis and Danes, who by their piracies and robberies a long time and oft greeuously vexed these Iles, neuer seated their Colonies heere, and therefore I passe them ouer with silence. The forme of Brittaine is triangular, like vnto that figure which the Geometers call Scalenum; or as Nubiensis the Arabian saith, to the head and necke of Alnaama, the ostrich, and therefore it may aswell as Sicilia be called TRINA∣CRIA, The three-cornered Ile. The ancient Geographers did hold it, and that deseruedly, to be the greatest Iland of the Maine Ocean; wherefore Solinus saith, it may well deserue the name of ANOTHER WORLD: and Matthew Pa∣ris for the same cause calleth it THE QVEEN or Empresse of the Isles of the Ocean. In respect of which large compasse it hath been in former ages diuided into many seuerall iurisdictions and kingdomes: in the time of the Saxons, England the South-east part into seuen, and Wales into three. Great Egbert, in the yeare 800. reduced the Saxon heptarchy in∣to a Monarchy. The Irish Princes, Nobles, and Commons, after the incarnation 1172. vnited their Pentarchy to the crowne of Egbert, and swore alleageance to Henry the second King of England. Edward the first, to these did knit, in the yeare after the birth of Christ 1282. the triple crowne of the Pety Kings of Wales. In these our daies, the eternall wisedome of the Great King of Heauen and Earth hath cast all these, together with the crowne of Scotland, into one massie Emperiall Diademe, and placed it vpon the head of our dread soueraigne IAMES, lineally descended from those mighty Monarches, and shall (we doubt not) in time, adde to these whatsoeuer from them vnto his Highnesse do belong. BRITANNI∣CAE INSVLAE, or the Empire of Great Brit∣taine contein∣eth Ilands Greater, and of∣ten mentioned in histories. BRITANNIA diuided by the Romans into Superior, the Higher, conteining ANGLIA, England. CVMERIA, Wales. Inferior, the Neather, now called SCOTIA, Scotland. HIBERNIA, Ireland: vpon the West of Britaine. Lesser, yet fa∣mous, belon∣ging to England, from it South, Close to the shore of Brittaine, VECTA, Wight. Vpon the coast of France CAESARIA, Gersey. SARNIA, Gernsey. And many other lesser. West, From the point of Cornwall; SILLINAE, Silly, anno 145. In the middest betweene England, Ireland, and Scotland, MO∣NOEDA, Man. Wales, MONA, called of the English Anglesey, of the Welch, Tirmôn. Scotland, ly∣ing from it West; HEBRIDES, The West isles, in number foure and fortie. North, ORCHADES, Orkney-iles: about thirtie. THVLE, Schetland. Of these Brittish isles, (beside the ancient writers, Tacitus and Caesar) reade Henry Huntington, Polydore Virgill, Iohn Mayor, Paulus Iouius, Gregory Cenall in the 2. summa of his 3. booke de re Gallica, Antony Sabellicus Enne. 10. lib. 5. Wil∣liam Paradine, Ieffrey of Monmouth, Ponticus Verumius, and Beda: but especially M. William Camden Clarenceux his Bri∣tannia, whom when thou hast discreetly read, I doubt not but thou wilt thinke thou hadst particularly surueyed the whole ile.
map of the British Isles including Ireland, Scotland, England, and Wales ANGLIAE, SCOTIAE, ET HIBERNIAE, SIVE BRITANNICAR: INSVLARVM DESCRIPTIO. Britannia oim insularum Occidentis & Septentrionis maxima & potentiss. est: cuius potiorem hodie par∣tem Angliam vocamus, ab Anglis videlicet Saxonum gente, quae sub Ʋalentiniano eam ingressa, tenuit. Haec veteribus Albion dicebatur, ad differentiam, quum re∣liquae oēs eò tractu Britannicae dicebantur. Ab Occa∣su vicinam habet Hiberniam, hodie Irlandiam ap∣pellatam; & regibus Angliae subditam.
Of SCOTLAND. SCOTLAND, the North part of Brittaine, anciently called Albanie, and is of the first inhabitants, (which they call the wilde Scots, and dwell more in within the land, retaining yet the old language,) at this day cal∣led Albaine, was formerly called of the Romanes, Britannia minor and secunda, as Lhoyd doth gather out of Sextus Rufus. This country is diuided into 2. parts, by the rough & craggy mount Grampius, (now Grantz∣been) whereof Tacitus maketh mention. For it begining at the German ocean, neere the mouth of the ri∣uer Dee, coasting along by Aberden, through the middest of the country toward the Irish-sea, staieth at the lake Loumond. This Mountaine was sometime the bound of the kingdome of the Pictes and Scottes. Scotland is fuller of mountaines and more barren then England: Yet euery where it hath many commo∣dious ports and hauens. For so is this country embraced of the armes of the sea, that there is no house in it, as Iohn Maior affirmeth, which is aboue twentie leagues distant from the salt water. In the vallies are Lakes, meeres, pooles, riuers and fountaines well stored with sundrie sorts of fish. In the mountaines are champion plaines, yeelding great store of pasture for cattell, and woods abounding with plenty of Deere. By the meanes of which commodities it hath been so maintai∣ned, that hitherto it might neuer be wholly conquered: For in any eminent danger they presentlie flie to the woods and bogges, for succour and refuge, where they haue of venison and fish sufficient store for prouision of victuall. Scotland hath many wonders, whereof some we haue heere set downe out of Hector Boëthus. In Galloway saith he, is a lake called Myrtoun, part of whose water in the winter freezeth as other waters do, the other part was neuer knowne to haue beene frozen in the greatest frosts that euer were. In the country of Carict there are very great and large Oxen, whose flesh is verie tender and of a pleasant and delicat tast: Besides that, the fatte neuer waxeth hard, but is alway thinne in the manner of liquid oile. The Sea that washeth the coast of this prouince, is very rich of oisters, herrings, congers, cockels, and other such like fishes. In the prouince of Coyl about ten miles from the towne Aër, is a Stone, hardly twelue foot high, of 33. cubites thicke, called of the inhabitants, The deafe stone: For al∣though you shall make neuer so great a noise, nay if one shall shoote off a peece of ordinance on the one side, it shall hardly be heard on the other side, except one bee a good way off from it, for then the sound may easily be perceiued. In Lennox, which Ptolemey calleth Lelgouia, (Lelannonia, as I conceiue out of Ptolemey, but I thinke our authour meant Selgouiae, which is farre from this place) there is a very great lake, which they call Loumond, aboue twenty foure miles long, and eight miles broad; It conteineth thirtie Ilands, where∣of diuers haue villages well inhabited, with Churches and Chappels dedicated to the seruice of Almighty God. In this three things are especially worth the obseruation. For the fishes there, most wholesome and good, haue no sinnes. The water oft times, when the winds are most calme and still, is so boisterous and rough, that it affraieth the best experienced watermen from putting forth to crosse the same: For the wind being alaied the boates are taken in their midde-course, and are tossed with such danger, that except some com∣modious hauen shall fortune to be neere hand, many times they are ouerturned and cast away. Lastly, there is an iland in it, very good pasture for the feeding of cattell, which swimmeth and moueth euery way as the winds driue. It is credibly reported, that there is a stone which groweth in Argadia (Argathelia or Argile) which if it be couered but a while with straw or flax, it will set it on fire. At Slanis, a castle in Buquhan, there is a caue of a strange nature. For the water that droppeth into it in continuance of time is turned into a very white stone; and if within a certaine number of yeares they should not be taken out, it would haue been long since filled vp with them. In this prouince there is no ratte euer seene; and if so be that any should be brought in thither, it will not by any meanes liue there. In the countrie of Fife great store of a kind of blacke stone is digged out of the earth, (we call it sea-coale) a most excellent kind of fuell. At the mouth of the riuer Forth, in the maine sea there is a very high rocke, out of whose toppe a spring of fresh water, (a great miracle of nature) doth runne abundantlie. About two miles distant from Edenburgh, is a spring, vpon the toppe of whose water, dropps of oile, do continually swimme, in such sort, that if you take none from off it, there will be neuer the more: and if you take ought from thence, there will be neuer the lesse. This oile is good against the roughnesse of the skinne. Thus farre of the strange thinges of this Realme. Scotland in the countrie of Drisdaile hath a mine of Gold, in the which also is found that which they commonly call Lazure. It hath al∣so mines both of Iron and Lead. The inhabitants which possesse the South part, on this side the mount Grampius, are more ciuill and humane: and do speake the En∣glish tongue. Those which dwell in the North parts, are a rough and more hard kind of people (they call them The wild-Scottes) and do weare mantles and skirts died with Saffron after the Irish fashion, and go barelegged. They speake the Irish tongue. And as the Language of Scotland is of two sorts, so are their maners as diuers. These Marianus Scotus calleth High-land-men, the other, I meane the wild-Scottes, they call Low-land-men. The chiefe city of Scotland is Edenburgh, there is the kings seat, and the castle of Maidens, often mentioned in histories. Saint An∣drew, and Aberdon are two Vniuersities. The city Glasow is the Archbishops sea. The towne of Perth, commonly called S. Iohns-toun, is the onely towne in Scotland that is walled about. Of the wood Caledon, (whereof Ptolemey and other ancient writers haue recorded.) There is scarcely any mention to be found, onely about the towne of Sterling, there remaineth some shew of the name. Thus farre of the kingdome of Scotland: now it will not be amisse to speake somewhat of the ilands, that lie round about the same, and do belong vnto that crowne. The HEBRIDES, (commonly called the West-iles,) both for bignesse and number do excell the rest. Hector Boëthus saith that they be in number 43. But heere he reckoneth vp the ile of Man as one of them, which is not subiect to the kingdome of Scotland, but is vn∣der the allegeance of the King of England; neither do I thinke that it was euer accounted of the ancients among the Hebrides. The first of the Hebrides is Aran, (otherwise called Boëth) then Hellaw and Rothes. Not farre from these is Alize, where are great plenty of Bar∣nacles, which they call Soland-geese The greatest of all and the most famous is Ile, a fertile soile for corne, and rich for veines of mettall. Then Cumber and Mule. Neere vnto these is Ione, memorable for the tombs of Kings long since buried there. Next vnto this is Lewis, last of all is Hirth situate in the 43. degree of latitude. Thus Boethus calleth them. But Iohn Maior the Scot nameth them thus, Argila, Aranea, Awyna, Butha, or Rothsaya, and Leuisora. In these ilands are those geese, which they call Clakes, (Gyraldus calleth them Berna∣cles) which Boëthus affirmeth to breed of the sea and of rotten wood; and not to grow vpon trees, as the common sort beleeue and haue published in their writings. For if you shall cast, saith he, a peece of wood into that sea, in continuance of time, first wormes do breed within the wood, which by little and little become to haue heads, feet & wings: at the last being fledge and growen to their full growth, to the bignes of a goose, they attempt to flie, and do somtimes swim and sometimes vse their wings as other Sea-foule do. Beyond the Hebrides, are the ORCHADES, (or the Orkeney iles,) of which the best is Pomona, famous for the Bishops-sea, a goodly Church, and two strong castles. One of these Iohn Maior calleth Zeland, which is 50. miles in length. In these grow no manner of trees, nor any wheat, and yet otherwise of all other sorts of graine they are very fertile. It breedeth no serpent or venimous beast. In Scotland they buy the barrell'd butter: the inhabitants hauing abundance of Barley whereof they make a most strong kind of drinke, and are very great drinkers; yet, as Boëthus saith, you shall neuer see a drunken-man, or madde man, one bestraught or a naturall foole amongst them. The same authour affirmeth the like of the inhabitants of the iles of Scetland: but this is no wonder, amongst them that drinke nought but water. All the wealth and commodities of these Scetland-men consist in Stockfish, and hides of beastes. In the Hebrides they vse the Irish tongue: in the iles of Orkeney they speake the Gottish language. M. Iordanus in his mappe of Denmarke saith that the Orchades are subiect to the kingdome of Denmarke: yet we know them to belong to Scotland vnder the title of a Dukedome. But se what we haue written of this in the discourse to the mappe of Denmarke. Of Scotland and of the ilands adioining thou maist read more at large in Hector Boëthus, Iohn Maior, and Iohn Lisley, Scottish-men which haue written the histories of this their country.
map of Scotland SCO∣TIAE TA∣BVLA. Miliaria Scotica. Cum Priuilegio.
Of ENGLAND. THe South part of the Iland of Britaine, is, as we haue said before, diuided into two parts. That part which is toward the East, abutting vpon the German Ocean, is of the Angles, a peo∣ple of the Saxons which seated themselues there, in their language called ANGLIA, or England, that is, the Angles land. The West part, which is seuered from that other by the riuers Seuern and Dee, and doth vse the ancient Brittish tongue, is of the same Angles or En∣glishmen called, WALLIA or Wales: yet the Brittan or Welshman calleth himselfe Cumro; and his country Cumria; the English Saissons; and their country, Lhoëgria: neither do they know, or at least they will not acknowledge, what England or an Englishman doth meane: So great difference there is betweene the languages of the seuerall nations of this Iland. All this South part, England, I meane, and Wales, hath their proper king, vnto whom many Dukes, Marquesses, Earles, Barons and great Noblemen are subiect and obedient. It is a countrie at all times of the yeare most kind and temperate. The Aire is thicke, and so it is much subiect to windes, clowdes and raine: and therefore in regard of thicknesse of the aire it is neither opprest with too much heat or too much cold. For it is found true by ex∣perience that although it be more Northerly than Brabant, Flanders, and other forrein countries, yet heere the winter is neuer so bitter nor the frost so eger as in those parts. It hath euerie where many hilles, (without wood and water,) which notwithstanding do bring forth very small and short grasse, an excellent feed for sheepe: and therefore infinite flockes of sheepe do bespread them, which either by reason of the kindnesse of the aire, or goodnesse of the soile, do yeeld most soft wooll farre finer than those of other countries. And for that this country breedeth neither woolues nor any rauenous beast, you shall see in diuers places flocks of sheepe vpon the hilles, and dales, greene pastures, commons, fallowes, and corne fields; into which after the crop is off, euery man, by a certaine ancient custome doth put in his cattell in common, to wander heere and there without a shepheard. This indeed is that Golden fleece, in which especially the riches of the in∣habitants doth consist: for an huge masse of gold and siluer, is by Merchants, which thither flocke from all quarters for such like wares, yearly brought into the Iland, and there doth continually rest, for that it is by proclamation forbidden that no man may carry any money out of the Realme. It aboundeth also with all sorts of cattell, except asses, mules, ca∣mels, and elephants. There is in no place of the world greater and larger dogges, nor better. The soile is very fatte and fertile, and naturally bringeth foorth, beside all sorts of corne and pulse, all maner of things, onely the firre-tree, and, as Caesar saith, the beech tree, although that now it hath in diuerse places plenty of beeches. The ay-green Bay tree doth in these Northren countries no where thriue better. Such abundance of Rosemary heere doth grow in all places and that so high, that they oft times do fence their gardens therewith. Wine they haue none, for the grapes seldome heere do ripen, and is amongst them planted rather for shade and pleasure, then for his fruit and profit. There is in no country in Christendome more Crowes than heere, a kind of fowle very harmefull: for it doth not onely spoile the ripe and standing corne, but assoone as it is shotte they will stocke and digge it vp with their billes, so that the husbandmen are faine at that time of the yeare to set Boies in the fields with bow and arrowes (for they are not afraid of mens voices) to skarre them away. The Ocean or maine sea, which beateth vpon the coast of this Iland, aboundeth with all maner of Fish: of which the Lucius, or Pike, as they commonly call it, they esteeme as a deinty dish, and therefore they oft take it out of fenny pooles and riuers, and put it into their fishponds and weares; where being purged and cleared from that muddy sauour, feed with eeles and other little fishes, he groweth exceeding fatte and of a holesome and pleasing tast. This fish (which is a very strange thing) being brought aliue into the fishmarket to be sold, they open his belly with a knife, to shew how fatte he is: if he be not sold, yet of that wound he dieth not, but the slitte being sewed vp, and presently put into the pond, a∣mongst the slimie tenches, it is by and by healed againe. There are no where in all the world either more daintie Oisters, or greater store. It yeeldeth also Gold, Siluer, Copper, and Iron, although no great quantitie of either sort: but of Lead, and Tinne, (the Latines call that Plumbum nigrum, this Plumbum album) in their kind the best, is heere found in great abundaunce, and from thence is transported to forrein nations. The people are tall of stature, well fauoured and faire countenanced, for the most part gray eied, and as in maner of pro∣nunciation they much resemble the Italian, so in proportion and feature of body and maners they little or nothing differ from them. They shape their apparell much-what after the French fashion. The women most faire and beautifull, do go very decently and comlily attired. They feed most-what on flesh. The drinke which they vse, and do make of malt, is indeed very good, holesome and pleasant; much sought after in the Low countries, and therefore conueied thither in great abundance. At their meales both dinners and suppers they fare well, daintilie, liberallie, and are very merrie and pleasant. In warre they are courageous and hardie, good archers, and cannot abide delaies and lingring; and therefore when they ioine battell and come to blowes, one part shall soone be vtterly ouerthrowne, for the conqueror seiseth all in∣to his hands. They build no Castles; yea those which their auncestours haue built in former ages, and now are decaied, ruinous and readie to fall, they care not for the reedifying and vpholding of them. Cities they haue, and many faire townes, goodly hamlets, streets, and villages. The chiefe City, mart-towne, and imperiall seat of their Kinges is LON∣DON, situate vpon the riuer of Thames: ioined with a faire stone bridge of twenty piles, very goodly arched. Vpon this bridge are houses so built on ech side, that it seemeth almost to be a continuall street, not a bridge. This of the nature of the soile, temperature of the aire, manners and behauiour of the people, we haue for the most part gathered out of Poly∣dore Virgill his historie of England: for he hath very curiously there described this Iland. In England these things are fa∣mous and worth the obseruation, as this verse sheweth, Mons, & fons, & pons, ecclesia, femina, lana: Of riuers, and moun∣taines, stone bridges and wooll: Faire women, and Churches, England is full. IRELAND, is subiect to the crowne of England, so are diuers other lesser iles, as Wight, Man, Anglesey, (the ancient seat of the Druydes, the Welshmen call it, Tirmôn mam Gumry, Man the mother of Wales, the Latines, this MONA, that other MENAVIA) and those which now we call the Sorlinges (the Greeks called them CASSITERIDES.) Gernsey and Gersey with other small ilands about them, although they be hard vpon the coast of France, yet they do belong vnto Eng∣land. Humfrey Lhoyd hath so curiously described England together with the Antiquities thereof, that others before him may iustlie seeme to be accused of great negligence. Him did Alexander Neuill follow in his historie of the Rebellion in Norffolke, which he intituleth Norwicus. Daniel Rogers my kinsman hath written a booke of the maners, lawes and cu∣stomes of the ancient Brittans. The same author is also about to write of the command and iurisdiction that the Romanes had in Brittaine.
map of Ireland, Southern Scotland, England, and Wales, including a table of English and Welsh counties and their features ANGLIAE ET HIBERNIAE ACCVRATA DESCRIPTIO, VETERIBVS ET RECENTIORIBVS NOMINIBVS ILLVS TRATA: ET AD D. GVLIEL. CAMDENI BRITANIAM ACCŌMODATA Nominibus Antiquis ★ vel praeponitur vel postponitur. Ioannes Baptista Vrints Geographicarum tabularum calcographus, excud. Antuerpiae pedigree or family tree of King James VI of Scotland and I of England, stemming from William the Conqueror PROGENIES REGVM ANGLIAE AB GVILIELMI CONQVEST. TEMPORIBVS VSQVE AD HVNC DIEM. Anno Dn̄i. 1605. SERMO. INVICTISSIMOQVE IACOBO MAGNAE BRI∣TANNIAE, FRANCIAE, ET HIBERNIAE REGI, IOANNES BAPTISTA VRINTS ANTVERPIANVS, D. DEDICAT.
WALES. THe discourse of this prouince, we haue composed out of a certaine fragment of our singular good friend Humfrey Lhoyd, which not long since wee caused Birkman to imprint, for the benefit of those that are students of Geography. CAMBRIA, saith he, the third part of Britaine, is diuided from Lhoëgria, (or England if you please so to call it) by the riuers Seuern and Dee, otherwise it is on all parts confined with the Irish sea (the Geographers commonly call it Oceanus Vergiuius) it was so named (as they dreame) of Camber, the third sonne of Brute. The Welshmen call it Cymri, the English Wales, and the Latin WALLIA. This part only of this whole Brittish iland doth stil enioy the most an∣cient inhabitants being indeed the true naturall Brittans: and do yet retaine the Brittish tongue, and cannot speake one word of English, which is a language made especially of the misture of the Dutch and French tongues. Wales they do at this time diuide into three prouinces, Venedoth, Powis-land, and Dehenbarth. Vnder Venedoth the ile Anglesey, (famous long since, and accounted for the ancient seat of the Druides,) is conteined. The inhabitants in course of life and fashion of apparell do follow the English: and are an idle people not willing to labour or take pains, bragging much of their gentilitie, and do giue themselues rather to the seruice of Noblemen and to follow the court, than to trades and occupations. Heere hence it is that you shall find few Noblemen through out all England, which hath not the greatest part of his followers & seruants (in which thing Englishmen do surpasse any other nation whatsoeuer) Welshmen borne: for being men that are fed with whitmeats or butter & cheese, they haue nimble & able bodies, fit for any maner of seruice. Moreouer being men of haughty minds, and in extreme penury and beggery challenging vnto themselues to be nobly descended, they delight rather to go brauein apparell (like vnto the Spaniard) then to get goods or pamper their bellies, and do soone learne courtlike behauiour, and therefore they are of the English Nobility for ser∣uice preferred before the English. Yet of late heere they haue vsed themselues to dwell in cities, to learn occupations, to trade as merchants, to go to plough, and to do any maner of businesse good for the common-wealth as well as the En∣glish: nay in this thing they excell them, that there is no man so poore amongst them, but for a while will set his sonnes to schole to learne to write and read, and those whom they find to be apt, they send to the Vniuersities, & cause them for the most part to giue their minds to the study of the ciuill law: Heere hence it is that the greater part of those, which in this kingdome doe professe the Ciuill or Canon law, are Welshmen borne. You shall find also very few of the common and meaner sort of people but can read and write his owne language, and after their fashion play vpon the Welsh harpe. Now also they haue the Bible, and common praier booke printed in their owne tongue, a language, as we said, vsed of their ancestors and wholly different from the English. And as in old time long since be∣ing a people (as Tacitus reporteth) impatient of the least wrongs that might be offered, they were alwaies together by the eares and cutting one anothers throates; so now for feare of law, (to which they are more obedient, then any other nation) they will wrangle and contend one with another, as long as they are worth a groate. These few obseruations we haue gleaned out of Lhoyd, to whom we send the Reader that desireth more of the particulars of this country. Sylue∣ster Gerrard, a Welshman hath described VVales in a seuerall treatise. Read also the Iournall of VVales. Moreouer VVilliam of Newbery in the 5. chap. of his 2. booke hath many things of the nature of this country, & maners of the people. To these you may adioine Polyd. Virg. & those things which Robert Caenalis hath written in the summe of his 2. booke, de re Gallica. This Cymri, or (as the English call it) VVales belongeth (that we may heere by the way say something of this) by an ancient decree, to the King of Englands eldest sonne, or daughter if he faile, to the Kings heire, I meane, who is to suc¦ceed next after him: and he is called assoone as he is born, The Prince of VVales: and that in the same sense, as in Spaine and Portugall they call the Kings heire, The Prince; and in France, The Dolphin. Ieffrey of Monmouth writeth, that in these parts of VVales neere the riuer of Seuern, there is a poole which the country peo∣ple call, Linligune. This, saith he, when the sea floweth into it, enterteineth the waters like a bottomlesse gulfe, and so drinketh vp the waues that it is neuer full, nor euer runneth ouer. But when the sea ebbeth, the waters which before it had swallowed do swell like a mountaine, which then do dash and run ouer the banks. At which time if all the people of that shire should stand any thing neere the poole, with their faces toward it, so that the water shall but dash into their clothes and apparell, they shall hard be able to auoid the danger, but that they shalbe drawne into the poole. But if ones backe shalbe toward it, there is no danger at all, although he should stand vpon the very edge of the same. This is the story, I haue nam'd the authour, let him approue the truth of the same. Of Mona the iland vpon the shore of this country thou hast the opinion of Humfrey Lhoyd in his epistle which we haue adioined to the end of this booke. Of this also Iohn Leland in his Genethliacon of Edward Prince of VVales, thus writeth: This Iland saith hee, being conquered by the English, changed the name, and was called Anglesey, that is; the iland of Englishmen. Polydore Virgill, a man of great reading, and good iudgement in many matters, is of another opinion. Hee laboureth with all his forces to proue Menauia to be Mona. If the name, which yet it retaineth: If the citie Caernaruon, which is ouer against it vpon the maine, do take his denomination from hence and is called Aruon for Ar-mon: If that same very short cut ouer, of which the Roman writers do speake: If the nesse or promontorie Pen-mon, that is, as the word signifieth, The head of Mon: If the huge bodies of trees, and rootes couered ouer with sand, which daily are digged out of the shore of Tir-mon: If the firre-trees of maruailous length, which in squally grounds are heere and there found within the earth in this Iland, do not sufficiently proue that that was anciently called Mona, which now we call Anglesey, I know not what to say more then that I haue read this in the 14. booke of Cornelius Tacitus his Annales, Excisi{que} luci saeuis superstitionibus sacri, &c. Felling the woods consecrated to superstitious seruices, &c. The same Leland in another place hath these verses of this Iland: Insula Romanis Mona non incognita bellis, Quondam terra ferax nemorum, nunc indiga siluae, Sed Venetis tantum cereali munere praestans, Mater vt à vulgo Cambrorum iure vocetur, &c. Tyr-môn in former times, (thus witnesse writers old,) was full of stately woods, but now li'th bleake and cold: The soile is passing good, of corne it yeeld'th such store That Welsh-mens nurse it's call'd, as we haue shew'd before, &c.
map of Wales CAMBRI∣AE TYPVS Auctore HVMFRE DO LHV∣YDO Denbigiense Cam∣brobritano. Aliquod Regionum huius tractus synonyma, prout Latinè, Britannicè & Anglicè etiemnum appellanture Cambria, L. Cambrÿ, B. Wales, A. Venedotia, L. Gwÿnedhia, B. Northwales, A. Demetia, L. Dÿfet, B. Westwales, A. Ceretica, L. Ceredigion, B. Cardigan, A. Pouisia, L. Powijs, B. Dehenbart, B. Sutwales, A.
IRELAND. IRELAND, which the Greekes and Latines call HIBERNIA, others IVERMA and IERNA, the Irish them∣selues call Eryn. From hence strangers, taking it from the mouth of the English, which pronounce e, the second vowell with the same sound that other nations do sound i, the third vowell, haue made, as it seemeth Irynlandt, compounded, as is apparent, of the Irish Erin, and the Saxon or Dutch Landt, which after∣ward was contracted, for more commodity of speach and roundnesse of pronunciation, into Irland, from whence the Latines framed IRLANDIA. The first inhabitants which seated themselues in this Iland came hither, as may be easily demonstrated from Brittaine or England, not from Spaine, as some most absurdly haue written. For the abridgement of Strabo doth flatly call these ilanders, Britaines: and Diodorus Siculus saith that Irin is a part of Britaine: wherefore it was iustly of all old writers called, INSVLA BRITANNIA, One of the Brittish iles. About the yeare of CHRIST, 400. in the daies of Honorius and Arcadius the Em∣perours, at what time the Roman Empire began to decline, the Scottes, a second nation entered Ireland, and planted themselues as O∣rosius writeth, in the North parts, whereupon it was of them called, SCOTLAND. Syluester Gyraldus Cambrensis about 400. yeares since described this Iland in a seuerall treatise. But because that this booke as yet is not set forth and therefore not common and euery where to be gotten, we will out of it gather so much as this narrow roome may conteine, not doubting but we shall worthily deserue great thankes at the readers hand for the same. Listen therefore to his words: Ireland, next after England the greatest Iland of the knowne world, hath the greater Britaine vpon his East side, vpon the West on∣ly lieth the vast and wide Ocean; on the North three daies saile from the coast of Ireland lieth Island, of all the Northren iles by far the greatest. Britaine is almost twice as great as Ireland: for seeing that the length of both runneth the same way from South to North; that is, about 800. miles long, and about 200. miles broad: this from Brendam hilles to the iles Columbine otherwise called Thorach, is about eight daies iourney, that is 400. miles long at the least. Ireland conteineth in all 176. Canweds. The word Canwed is a compound word, vsed aswell of the Welch as Irish, and signifieth a circuite of ground conteining within it 100. villages. The soile of Ireland is vneuen, full of hilles and dales, soft and squally, full of woods, bogges and fennes. Vpon the toppes of the highest and steepest hilles you shall oft find great ponds and bogges: yet it hath in some places most goodly plaines and champion, but in respect of the woods they are very little. The ground is very fatte, and fertile for Corne. The mountaines abound with sheepe, the woods are full of Deere: and the whole ile generally is better for pasture, then for eareable ground, much better I meane, for grasse then corne. For the kernelles of wheat are heere so dwined and small, that they may hardly be dressed with any manner of fanne. That which the Spring-time doth bring forth and flourisheth for a while in Summer, the dripping and watery Autumne will hardly suffer kindly to ripen or tidily to be inn'd. For this Iland is more subiect to blustering winds, outragious stormes of raine and floods, then any other country vnder the cope of heauen. It is very rich of honie and milke. Solinus and Isidore affirme that it hath no Bees: but by their leaue if they had more diligently examined the matter, they might haue on the contrarie written, that it wanteth vines, but is not altogether void of Bees. For this Iland neither now hath, nor euer had any vines: But of Bees it hath, (as any other country) great plenty: which notwithstanding would heere, as I thinke, swarme in farre greater number, if it were not for the venemous and sowre ewgh-trees which in all places of the Iland do grow in great abundance. The Iland is euery where crossed and watered with many goodly riuers; of which the principall are these: Auenliss, runneth by Dublin: Boand (or Boine) through Methe: Banna, through Vlster: Linne, by Connagh: Moad, by Kenelcunill, Slechey, and Samayr: Mo∣darn and Furne, by Keneleon: There are also very many other riuers, whereof some issuing forth of the bowels of the earth and from their cleare fountaines, other immediatly rushing forth of lakes and fennes wandring heere and there diuide and part the Iland into ma∣ny goodly prouinces and shires. For vnder the foot of Bladina hill (now called Bliew Blemy) three famous riuers do arise, commonly called, The three Sisters, (for they beare the names of three sisters:) Berne, (Birgus, now Barrow) which runneth by Lechlin: Eoyr, Ne∣orus, they call it Nore, by Ossire: and Swyre, by Archfine and Trebagh; neere Waterford they kindly salute one another, and so falling into one channell they quietlie toward the sea. Slane, runneth by Wexford: Boand, by Meath: Auenmore, by Lismore: and Simen, by Limiricke. And indeed amongst all the riuers of Ireland, Sinnen bear'th the bell, not only for his goodly greatnesse, long and diuers wandrings through the country, but also his great plenty of dainty fish. For it ariseth out of a very large and goodly lake, which diui∣deth Connagh from Munster, and spreadeth it selfe into two branches running two contrary waies: one of them tending toward the South, passeth by the city Kelleloe, and then enclosinge round the citie Limiricke, with a direct course and large streame for an hundred miles and vpward, running between the two mountaines, emptieth it selfe into the Brendan sea. The other not much lesse then the for∣mer, diuiding Meath and the farther parts of Vlster from Connagh, running with a crooked course turning this way and that way, at last hideth it selfe in the Northren ocean: So that this riuer doth separate the fourth and West part of the Iland from the other three, like a midland streame running from sea to sea. For this Iland in former ages was diuided almost into fiue equall parts, namely into North Mounster, South Mounster, Leinster, and Connagh. This country hath diuers goodly Lakes. The sea coast aboundeth plentifully with all maner of sea-fish on all sides: the Riuers and Lakes are stored with great variety of fresh-fishes: especially with these three sorts, Salmons, Trouts, and Eeles. The riuer Shynen swarmeth with Lampreyes. But there are wanting many other sorts of good fresh-fish of other countries, as Pikes, Perches, Gogeons, and almost such fish as come not from the sea or salt waters. On the contrary the Lakes of this Iland haue three kinds of fish, which are no where els to be found. For they are somewhat longer and rounder then Trouts, very white fleshed, passing sauery and pleasant, very like vnto the Hallibut, (Vmbra our authour calleth it) but that they are much bigger headed. There is another kind very like to herrings, aswell for proportion and bignesse, as also for colour and tast. There are a third sort, in all points like trouts, but that they are not spotted. Yet these sorts of fish are only seen in the Summer, in the Winter they neuer appeare. In Meath, neere Foner are three Lakes not farre distant one from another, ech of which hath certaine fish proper to it selfe, not found in any of the other two; neither do they I meane, euer come one at another, although there be most conuenient passages by reason of the riuer which runneth from one to another: nay if it shall chance that the fish of one lake be caried to another, either it dieth within a while after, or returneth vnto his own lake againe. This Iland breedeth greater store of Falcons, Hobbies, and sparrow-hawkes, then any other countrie whatsoeuer. Heere Eagles are as common, as kites are in other countries: and they flocke together in such companies, that oft times you shall find an hundred in one companie. Heere are also great store of those fowles which they call Bernacles, which nature bringeth forth in a strange and woonder∣full maner: they are like the wild goose, but somewhat lesse. For they are bredde of the firre blocks, which are tossed along by the shore in this maner: First vpon the blocks you shall see as it were a certaine gelly: then the reeds and other sea-weeds staying the logges, being inclosed in shels, (for the better fashioning and safe preseruing of them) they hang by the billes, vntill in processe and continuance of time they wax of a competent bignesse, and be couered with feathers, either they fall into the water, or by the benefit of their wings they lift vp themselues aloft into the open aire. I my selfe haue many times and often seene with these same eies many very small bodies, of these kind of birds hanging vpon on blocke on the sea coast, enclosed in shells and fully fashioned. These tread not as other fowles do, they ley no egges, they neuer sitte. And therefore in certaine places of Ireland in Lent and vpon other fasting daies, it is lawfull to eat these fowles, as if they were not flesh, nor come of flesh. There are also heere great store of a kind of fowle of a doubtfull shape, or dou∣ble nature, which they call an Aurifrise, lesse then an Eagle, but greater then a hawke, hauing vpon one foot sharp talants, clouen and griping: the other whole footed, not made to cletch or carry any thing, but only fit for swimming; a strange and admirable worke of sporting nature. Heere are certein birds which they call Martiners, lesse then a blacke bird, cut tail'd like quails, but differing from them in this that their bellies are white and their backs blacke. A strange thing it is to tell of these birds: that if they being dead shalbe kept
map of Ireland Eryn. HIBERNIAE, BRITANNICAE INSVLAE, NOVA DESCRIPTIO. Irlandt. Cum Priuilegio
in a drie place, they will neuer stinke: and being laid amongst apparell or other woollen things they will keepe them safe from the moth. And that which is much more admirable, being dead and hang'd vp in some drie place, euery yeare they shed their old feathers, and new come vp in their stood. In the North part of Ireland they haue great store of Swans. Storks through out all the Ile are very rare, and those which they haue are blacke. They haue no Partridges, Phesants, Magge-pies nor Nightingales. It hath almost all kind of wild beasts. The Stagges beere are so fatte, that they are scarcely able to runne: and those which are the least amongst them in bignesse of body, do excell others in statelinesse and goodly branching of their hornes. We neuer in any place saw greater plenty of Bores. They haue also many hares, badgers, and weasils. The bodies of their cattell, beasts, deere, and fowles, are in their kind lesse then in other places. Hallow deere, goates and hedgehogs they haue none at all; as also Moles, or if any, they are very rare: but of mice they haue such infinite plenty, as no where more. Of wolues and foxes they haue many; but no maner of venemous creatures. For the Spiders and Nents heere are neither venemous nor hurtfull. The country is neuer shaken with Earth-quakes, and scarce once in a yeare shall on heare it thunder. From these naturall things let vs passe vnto those strange wonders which nature worketh in these out-countries of the world. In North Mounster there is a lake wherein are two Ilands, a greater and a lesse: the greater hath a Church, the lesser a Chappell. Into the Greater neuer any woman, or liuing creature of the female kind might euer come, but it would die by and by. This was often proued by bitches, cattes, and other creatures of that sex. In the lesser no man did euer die, or could die of a naturall death. In Vlster there is another Lake in which there is an Iland of two diuers qualities; one part of it hauing a church consecrated to the seruice of Christianity is very beautifull, goodly and pleasant. The other very rough, ouer growne and vnpleasant, is said to be bequeathed to Diuels and euill spirits. This part hath in it nine caues or trenches, in any of which if a man do chance to sleepe all night, he is presently assaulted by the euill spirits, and all the night so greeuously tormented and vexed, that by the morning hee shall scarce be able to breath and will be almost halfe dead. This place is called of the country people, The purgatory of S. Patricke. There is also a spring or fountaine in Moun∣ster, with whose water if any man shall wash himselfe, he will presently become hoary or gray-headed. I my selfe saw a man who wa∣shed the one halfe of his beard with this water, and the haire became white, the other remaining blacke as it was before. On the con∣trary there is in Vlster a fountaine, in which if any man wash his haire, he shall neuer be horay or gray-headed. In Connagh there is a fountaine of fresh water vpon the toppe of a very high mountaine, which ebbeth twise in 24. houres, and floweth as oft, in this imita∣ting the vnconstant motion of the sea. There is a fountaine in the farder and North part of Vlster, which by reason of the great cold∣nesse of it, in seuen yeares space turneth sticks and wood cast into it, into stone. In Connagh there is a fountaine only kind and wholesome for men: but for cattell and other such kind of bruite beasts pestilent and dangerous. There is a fountaine in Mounster, which if any man shall touch, by and by the whole country wilbe ouerflowed by storms of raine. The people of this countrie do weare course blacke mantles or rugges (for the sheep of this Iland are blacke) and they put them on as rudely and vnhandsomely. They vse also little hoods which hang down to their shoulders. In riding they vse no saddles, boots, nor spurres: but with a rod sharpe and tapered at one end, they pricke forward their horses, and make them runne. Their bridles are such as do serue both for bitte and reigne, so made as their horses only vsed to grasse, are neuer hindred from eating. They go into the field to warre, naked and altogether vnarmed. They vse three kind of weapons, long speares, darts, and battell-axes. The people is wild and very vnciuill: they delight in nothing more then to liue idly, and libertie they preferre before great riches. I only obserued the people to delight much in musicall instruments and in that to deserue some commendation. These briefly we haue gleaned heere and there out of the historie of Gyraldus Cambrensis, diligently retaining the tenor of his owne phrase: which we haue thought good to translate word for word as they are deliuered by our Authour, that succedent ages might see, either the credulous simplicity of former times, or how time doth alter countries, people and maners of men. And because we haue spoken before of S. Patricks purgatory, it shall not be amisse to adde to those former this discourse of it, taken out of the twelfth booke of Caesarius, his historie of Things worth the remem∣bring. When as S. Patricke, saith he, conuerted this nation to Christianity, and they made a doubt and beleeued not that men should be punished for their sinnes in the world to come, hee by earnest praier obtained this place at the hand of God: the maner of the place is thus: There is a deepe pit or trench, enclosed round with a wall; there are also certaine Regular Canons: No man is so great a sinner, to whom they enioine any greater penance, then to abide all one whole night in that purgatorie. If any man be desirous to enter in, first, making his confession, they administer the sacrament vnto him, they anoint him, perfume him and instruct him, thus: Thou shalt see this night say they, the assaults of the Deuill, and the horrible paines of hell, but they shall not hurt thee, if thou haue but the name of Iesus alwaies in thy mouth: But if thou shalt yeeld to the flattering enticements, or terrible threatnings of the Deuill, and so shalt cease to call vpon the name of Iesus, thou art surely but a dead man. Then in the euening putting him into the pit, they shut vp the dore, and comming againe in the morning, if they presentlie find him not, they looke no farther for him. Many haue died there, and many haue gone home againe, whose visions haue been written of the foresaied friers, and are shewed to such as are desirous to see them. IReland, saith M. Camden, according to maners of the people, is diuided into The wild Irish, and The English pale: but according to the ancient iurisdicti∣ons and naturall situation of it, it is more fitly diuided into fiue parts, (and indeed it once conteined fiue kingdomes) Mounster in the South, Leinster in the East, Connagh in the West, Vlster in the North, and Methe almost in the middest and heart of the land. MOVNSTER, Memomia, the Irish call it Mown, (sometime diuided into West Mounster, which in Ptolemeys time the Gangani, Luceni, Velabri and Iterni did inhabit: and East Mounster, posses∣sed then of the Vodiae,) comprehendeth now these seuen Shires; Kerry, Limiricke, Corke, Tiparary, Holy crosse, Waterford, and Desmond. Of which Kerry and Tipararie were sometimes county Palatines. LEINSTER, Lagenia, (they call it Leighnigls) a fertile soile, and holesome seat, possessed sometime by the Brigantes, Coriondi, Menapij, Cauci and part of the Eblani. Now it is diuided into these counties, Wexford, Caterlogh, Kilkenny, Dublin, Kildare, The Kings county, The Queenes county, Longford, Fernes, & Wicklo. METHE, (Media, the Irish call it Mijh, in the mid'st almost of the country,) the other part of the an∣cient possessions of the Eblani, for his great fertility, either for corn or grasse, fish or flesh, pleasant situation & healthful aire, multitude of people, strength of castels and towns, commonly called, as Bartholomeys English reporteth, The chamber of Ireland, was lately diuided into East Methe and West Methe. CONNAGH, Connacia, (they call it Connaughty) where long since were seated the Auteri and Nagnatae: now it containeth these shires, Clare, Le∣trimme, Gallawey, Rosecomin, Maio, Sligo. The whole prouince although it be in many places fertile and pleasant, yet it is euery where full of dangerous Bogges, darke Woods, Creeks and Baies, conuenient Stations and Harborough for shippes. VLSTER, Vltonia, (the Irish call it Cui Gully, the Welsh Wltw,) a large country, euery where full of great Lakes, thicke and huge woods, in some place resonably fruitfull, in others leane and hungry, but in all places greene and pleasant to the eie, and therefore it maintaineth great plenty of cattell. Here in Ptolemeys time inhabited the Voluntij, Darni, Robogdij, Vennicny, and Erdini, at this day it conteineth these shires, Louth, Down, Anwimme, Monalion, Tiroen, Armagh, Colrane, Donergall, Formanagh and Cauen. On all sides round about Ireland in the sea, (as also in the baies, riuers, lakes and fresh water) are heere and there many small ilands, whereof some are fertile, others wast and barren, of which to speake seuerally would require a larger discourse then heere we are allowed. Coelestinus Pope of Rome, in the yeare of CHRIST, 431. sent into Britaine Paladius a Bishop, as Prosper Aquitanus writeth, to purge it of the Pelagian he esie, wherewith it was but lately distained: and by this meanes also at the same time, caused Christian religion to be planted in Ireland. Palladius died in Britaine before he had brought to passe that which he came for; whereupon Patricke, a Brittaine, and of kinne to Martinus Turonensis, was by Celestine put in his place, who with such wonderfull successe did preach the Gospell in Ireland, that he conuerted the greatest part of that ile vnto Christianity, that he well deserued the name of The Irish Apostle. From hence after that at sundrie times, diuers colonies, if I may so vse the word, of learned and religious men, were sent into sundrie parts of Europe, and were not only the great patrons and planters of the Gospell there, but founders of Monasteries, cities, and towns, as schooles of that profession. In those bloudy warres of the barbarous Saxons, all scholes of learning in Brittaine were shut vp, and all reli∣gion almost wholly banished, so that whosoeuer was desirous of instruction that way, was constrained to seeke for it in Ireland; and after these wars en∣ded, those which returned brought with them, not only the Irish letters, (which yet the same charecters common to both nations, do plainly shew) but also liberall arts and sciences, which together with Christianity they taught the Saxons. To these the Reader may adioine such things as Henry of Huntington, Polydore Virgill, William Newbery, Iohn Maior, and others haue written of this in their seuerall histories. Daniel Rogers hath set forth a description of this Iland in verse dedicated to Thomas Phediger. And M. William Camden in prose hath most exactly described the same in his Britannia. But Richard Stanihurst, a worthy gentleman this countrie man borne, hath this other day put forth a seueral treatise of the history and state of this iland. Baptista Boazio hath described it in a mappe apart by it selfe, dedicated to the late Queene Elizabeth: and my good friend M. Speed, with no lesse care and diligence hath done the same in his Imperium Brittannicum, or Empire of Great Brittaine, lately set forth and dedicated to his Highnesse.
The Isles of the AZORES. SOme are of opinion, that these Isles situate in the Atlantick or West Ocean, are so named by the Spaniards, from a kinde of Hauks which they call Azor. And in the plurall number Açores. One writes, but fondlie, that they are so called from the French word Essorer, which signifieth to drie or wither. In Latin a man may call them Accipitrarias, or the Isles of Hauks, and in Greeke . Our Netherlanders terme them De vlaemsche eilanden, that is, The flemish Islands, because they are thought first to haue beene discouered by certaine Flemish Marchants of Bruges. At that time (they said) they could find nothing vpon them but trees (especiallie great store of Cedars) and woods, and foules, of diuers sorts; and thither they sent inhabitants to possesse and manure the said Isles. Afterward they submitted them∣selues to the Portugales, vnder whose gouernement they yet remaine. Lewes Marmolius fol. 38. reports that they were discouered about the yeare 1455. Vndoubtedly auncient writers knew them not: yet might they name them perhaps. For whether they specified them vnder the name of Cassiterides, I cannot be assured. The Spanish fleets laden with Indian commodities, doe vsually in their returne touch at these Isles, before they ariue at Lisbone, or Cales. One strange thing haue I heard concerning the soile, or the heauenly influence, or (if I may so say) the Genius of these Isles: For sailing from these parts of the world towards America, so soone as you are past the said Isles, you are freed from gnats, fleas, lice, and all kinde of noisome vermin, which beyond the Açores doe immediately die, and come to nothing. They are in number nine, and thus called by the Portu∣gales. The Isle of S. Michael, Terçera, S. Georges Isle, Pico, Fayal, Flores, Cueruo, and the Isle of S. Marie: all which we will particularly entreat of. TERÇERA. THis Isle is called Terçera, because it is the third in order as you saile from Spaine. And from this one, the common mariners confusedly call the whole nine by the name of Terçeras. It abounds with corne and fruits, neither is it destitute of wine. The Inhabitants are greatly inriched by their Madder, wherewith clothes are died red. In this Isle growes plenty of this commodity, especially about the places commonly called Los Altares, and Falladores. Angra the head city is most strongly fortified with an impregnable rocke or bulwarke called Brazil. This Isle also from the name of our blessed Sauiour the Spaniards call Isola del buen Iesu. PICO. THis Isle was so named from a mountaine therein rising sharpe in forme of a round Pyramis or Sugar-loafe. For whatsouer is naturally of that shape is by the Portugals called Pico. This hill is three miles high: within it is hollow, and full of darcke caues. At the foote of this mountaine Eastward, there is a spring of fresh water, which sometimes dischargeth fierie streames, and stones burning hoat; and that with so great force and violence, that it sends them packing as it were with a current, by steepe and lower places, euen to the sea, whereas of the multitude of these stones is made a promontory or headland commonly called Misterij. It is distant from the said fountaine 12. miles. At this present it stretcheth a mile and halfe further into the sea, in regard of the continual increase of this heape of stones. They are much deceiued which write that this Isle was so named from the bird called Picus Martius, in English the woodpecker. FAYAL. THis Isle is so named of the Beech-tree. For the Portugals call the Beech Faya: and a place planted with Beeches Fayal. That heere are yet in this Isle certaine families of the Flemish race which first inhabited the same, namely such as are called Bruyn, Vtrecht, &c. I haue learned from a Portugale of good creditte. Linschott also an eye-witnesse, in his Iournall published in Dutch, writeth that in this very Isle there is a riuer called by the Portugales Ribera des Fiamengos, or the riuer of Flemings; and saith further that all the Inhabitants of this Isle came originally out of Flanders, and that they doe as yet much fauour the Flemish nation. Concerning the residue, namely Flores, so called of abundance of Flowers: Cueruo, of Crowes: Gracioça, of plea∣santnesse: or the Isles of S. George, S. Marie, and S. Michael, so denominated of those saints (for it is vsuall with the Spaniards to name places after the same Saints vpon whose daies they finde them) I haue nothing to adde: saue that Theuet is mistaken, in that he falsly, and carelesly ascribes the same mountaine vnto S. Michaels Isle, which we haue truly and fully described in Pico. Of these Isles somewhat you may read in the Historie of Ierome Conestagio, touching the Vnion of the Kingdome of Portugale to the crowne of Castile. And also in the 97. Chapter of Iohn Huighen van Linschoten his East-Indian iournall.
map of the Azores AÇORES INSVLAE. Priuilegio Imp. et Reg. Maiest. necnon Ordinum Belgicor. ad decennium. Longitudo huius descriptio∣nis sumta est à meridiano I Ptolemaei, Occidentem versus. Has insulas perlustrauit summàque diligentia accuratissimè descrip∣sit et delineauit Ludouicus Teise∣ra Lusitanus, Regiae Maiestatis cosmographus.
SPAINE. SPAINE is resembled by Strabo vnto an Ox-hide spred vpon the ground. It is around in∣uironed by the sea, saue only where it is diuided from France by the Pyreney-mountaines. On the East it hath the said Pyreney-mountaines, which from the Temple of Venus, or the Promontory stretched foorth neere Illiberis (now Colibre) runneth along to the British Ocean; and this is the very narrowest part of Spaine; insomuch (saith Vaseus) that when I trauelled thorow Biscay, I remember that from the hill of S. Adrian, if my sight deceiued me not, I saw both seas, namely the Ocean neere at hand: and as farre off as I could di∣scerne, the foame-white waues of the Mediterran sea. North it is bounded by the Biscain sea; West, by the Western sea; and South, by the Streight of Gibraltar, and part of the Mediterran sea. Spaine is diuided into three Prouinces; Baetica, Lusitania, and Tarraconensis. Baetica on the North is inclosed with the riuer Anas, now called Guadiana; West, with that part of the Atlantick Ocean, which is betweene the mouth of Guadiana, and the Streight of Gibraltar; South, with part of the Mediterran sea called of olde Mare Balearicum, extending from the Streight last mentioned, to the Promontory of Charidómus, now called Cabo de Gata; and East∣ward it is bounded by an imaginary line, drawen from the said Promontory by the towne of Castulo to the riuer Guadiana. It is called Baetica of the famous riuer Baetis which cuts the whole Prouince in twaine. This riuer sprin∣ging out of the wood or forest anciently called Saltus Tygensis, runneth into the Atlantick-ocean, and is at this day called by an Arabian name, Guadalquibir, that is to say, The great riuer. This prouince of later times, of the Van∣dal inhabitants, was called Vandalicia, & at this present by the same word corrupted Andaluzia.Lusitania conteines Algaruc and the greater part of Portu∣gale. Lusitania confineth North vpon the riuer Duero, from the very mouth thereof, to the bridge ouer against Simancas; West it bordereth vpon that part of the Atlantick-ocean which ebs and flowes betweene the outlets of Duero and Guadiana; South, vpon Andaluzia; and East it fronteth Hispania Tarraconensis, now called Castilia, &c. euen from the ancient Oretania to the foresaid bridge ouer against Simancas. Lusitania was thus named from Lusus the sonne of Bacchus, and Lysa, one of Bacchus his companions: whereupon it is somtimes called of Lusus, Lusitania; and somtimes againe of Lysa, Ly∣sitania. The residue of Spaine pertaineth to the prouince called Tarraconensis, of the city Tarracona which is the head of all that prouince; a city (saith Strabo) most notably fit for princes in their trauels to retire themselues: and here the Emperors kept their chiefe iurisdiction. This prouince containeth the kingdome of Murcia, & likewise Valencia, and Arragon, with Catalonia, also Castilia Vieja, the kingdome of Nauarre, part of Portugale between the riuers Duero, and Minho, the kingdome of Gallicia, Asturia, and all Biscay. Hitherto Vaseus in his chronicle of Spaine, who in∣treateth of this argument more at large. Read also Marinaeus Siculus, Marius Aretius, Damianus a Goës, Francis Taraffa, the bishop of Gerundo, Annius Viterbiensis; and in Spanish Florian del campo, and after him Ambrosio Morales: with all those other Writers of Spaine that Vaseus in the fourth chapter of his Chronicle doth recite. Stephan Garibayo in his Chronicle of Spain, diuided into twenty books, describes the kingdome of Nauarre. Iohn Mariana likewise not long since published a volume concerning Spanish matters. Among the ancient Writers you must peruse Caesar, Stra∣bo, and the rest, which Damianus a Goës in his booke called Hispania doth nominate: also the Panegyrick speech of Latinus Pacatus, and Claudianus de laude Serenae. Vnto these you may adde the first booke of Laonicus. There is ex∣tant also a little Trauellers Breuiate written in Spanish by Alonço de Meneses, containing almost all the ordinarie voyages in Spaine, wherein also are noted the distances of places. Three memorable things (as writeth Nauagierus) are prouerbially spoken of Spaine: the first, A bridge, ouer which the water runneth (whereas it runnes vnder all other bridges) namely the water-conduct at Segouia: the second, a city compassed with fire, that is to say, Madrid, because the town-walles are of flint: and the third, a bridge, whereon are daily fed ten thousand head of cattel; whereby is signified the riuer Guadiana, which hiding it selfe vnder ground for the space of seuen miles, doth then breake forth againe. Albeit this last is a thing sprung rather out of the peoples vulgar opinion, than out of truth; as Don George of Austria Gouernour of Harlebeck, an eye-witnesse most worthy of credit, hath informed me, being a man conuersant in all kinde of history, and a a wonderfull searcher and admirer of naturall Philosophie. The islands belonging vnto Spaine, wherof ancient writers haue made mention, at the Celtick promontory, or Cape Finister, are the Cassiterides, which at this present are not to be found in the ocean. Also Insulae Deorum, other∣wise called Cicae, and of late times Islas de Bayona: Londobris named also Erythia, and now the Burlings: Gades in olde time dedicated to Hercules, now commonly called Cales. All these are in the Ocean. In the Mediterran sea you haue Ophiusa now called Formentera. As likewise the two Gymnesiae, or Baleares, at this present called by distinct names, the one Maiorca, and the other Minorca. The coast of Minorca is beset round about with huge mountaines: but at the entrance of the hauen the roots of these mountaines are leuelled into a plaine, till they meet, at so nar∣row a distance, on the other side of the shore, that no ships can enter the harbor, but with a gentle gale of wind. The hauen is named Mahon, being a most beautifull, and commodious place; for it stretcheth almost foure miles in length, with many inlets, all which serue for the harboring of ships. From hence ariseth a perpetuall ridge of mountaines, on which the inhabitants cut downe great plenty of wood. At the vtmost part therof on the moun∣tain-tops is built a city. Contrariwise the greater Island hath a plaine shore, and most high and barren moun∣taines in the middest. A city there is of one and the selfe name with the Island, very large and fairly built. They vse the lawes of the Castilians, and do much resemble them both in language and maners. This description of the isles Maiorca & Minorca we haue borrowed out of N. Villagagnon his discourse of the expedition to Alger. Who desires to know more of these isles, and of the inhabitants disposition, may reade Bernardin Gomez his sixt and se∣uenth books of the life of Iames T. King of Arragon. That Philip King of Spaine possesseth the greatest Empire in the world, since the worlds beginning, we haue proued in our Theatre printed in high Dutch.
map of Spain REGNI HISPANIAE POST OMNIVM EDITIO∣NES LOCVPLESSI MA DESCRIPTIO.
The Kingdome of PORTVGALE. PORTVGALE is vnproperly called Lusitania; for neither is all Portugale com∣prehended in Lusitania, nor all Lusitania in Portugale: yet can it not be denied, that the better part of Lusitania is subiect to the King of Portugale. Portugale is diuided into three regions, Transtagana, or that which lies beyond or South of Tagus, the riuer of Lisbon, as far as Guadiana; Cistagana situate on this side or North of Tagus, as far as the riuer Douro; and Interamnis. Transtagana border vpon that part of Andaluzia, which from the riuer Guadiana extendeth to the limits of Ca∣stilia Nuoua. Interamnis I call that which lies between the riuers Douro and Minho, a region no lesse pleasant than fruitfull. This Interamnis or Riuer bounded prouince, is wholly out of the limits of Lusitania; vnlesse reiecting the former description, we will rather incline to Strabo, who saith that the greatest part of Lusitania is inhabited by the Callaici. The length of this region is twelue leagues, and the bredth, where it is largest, is twelue leagues also; being in other places but six or foure leagues ouer. And in this so small a portion of ground, besides the Metropolitan church of Braga, the Cathedrall of Porto, and other fiue Collegiate churches, there are aboue 130. monasteries, the greater part whereof are endowed with most ample reuenues: and also to the number of 1460. Parish churches, as one writeth. Certaine it is, that within the peculiar Diocesse of Braga there are accounted 800. Whereby you may easily coniecture both the fruitfulnesse of the soile, and the ancient deuotion of the inhabitants. But of the pleasantnesse what need we speake, whenas within this one prouince are found aboue fiue and twenty thousand springing fountaines; bridges most sumptuously built of square stone almost two hundred; and hauens for shipping to the number of six? These things therefore I thought not vnfit to be remembred, because the goodnesse and woorth of this Prouince is in a maner vnknowen. To the East hereof adioy∣neth the prouince called Transmontana, that is to say, on the other side of the mountaines; it aboun∣deth with excellent Wheat, and strong Wine, and containes within it the city Bragança, which is the head of a most large Dukedome. Thus much out of Vaseus. Peter de Medina reckoneth and nameth in this Kingdome of Portugale sixty seuen cities or walled townes. To the Kingdome of Portugale at this present belongeth the Kingdome of Algarue, which is no∣thing els, but the South part of the whole Kingdome towards the sea. For the King entitles himselfe King of Portugale, of Algarue, of Guinie, of Aethiopia, Persia and India. This Kingdom first began about the yeere 1100. For vntill then, as also in ancient times, it went altogether vnder the name of Spaine. Marinaeus thus writeth of it: One Henry Earle of Loraigne, a man of most vndoubted valour, comming out of France atchieued great exploits against the Moores. In regard wherof Alonso the sixt, King of Castile gaue him in marriage his base daughter called Tiresia; and assigned for her dowry part of Gallicia contained in the kingdome of Portugale. Of this marriage afterwards was born Alphonsus, the first King of Portugale, he that recouered Lisbon from the Moores. Who hauing vanquished fiue of their Kings in one battell, left vnto posterity, as a monument of this exploit, his armes consisting of fiue scutchions. Oliuer à Marca in his Chronicle published in French, more particularly blazeth the armes of this kingdome. At first he saith, it was a plaine siluer scutchion without any portra∣ture; afterwards in regard of the fiue vanquished kings there were fiue scutchions imposed; and in euery of the fiue scutchions fiue siluer circles, in remembrance of the fiue wounds of our Sauior CHRIST, which in time of the battell miraculously appeared vnto Alphonso in the skies; or (as others report) for that being wounded with fiue mortall wounds, by the prouidence of Almighty God he escaped death. Reade also Ierome Osorius, Marinaeus Siculus, and Sebastian Munster. Of the originall of this Kingdome reade the first chapter of Iohn Barros his Decades of Asia. Athenaeus in his eighth booke and first chapter writeth somewhat of the fruitfulnesse of this Region, and the excellent tempera∣ture of the aire. Lisbon the chiefe city of the Kingdome, Damianus a Goes describeth in a peculiar Treatise. Concerning the antiquities of Portugale there is a booke written by Andrew Resende. The Portugales Dominions at this present are very large; for they extend euen from the Streights of Gibraltar, along all the Sea Prouinces, and the Islands adiacent, as farre as China, and the Isles called Lequios.
map of Portugal PORTVGALLIAE quae olim Lusitania, nouissima & exactissima descriptio, Aucto¦re Ʋernando Aluaro Secco GVIDONI ASCA∣NIO SFORTIA S.R. E. CARD. CAMER. Achillas Statius. Sal. Ltanicus Ʋr  descripta tibi ob¦gentes ntr pi , Gido Sforti: Hinc ho∣mines  pti,  Orbis terrarā po oi  in Pr rerunt: in∣  qui∣d  As ? re∣ nationes Jhesu Christ , religionemque  Ʋ R XIII. Cale . A. M.CCCCC.LX.
The Diocesse of SIVILL, being part of ANDALVZIA. THE Diocesse of the Church of Siuill is situate in that prouince of Spaine, which in rich com∣modities, and a kinde of fruitfull and peculiar brauery excelleth all the rest. This beautifull prouince the ancients, of the riuer Baetis, called Baetica: but late Writers haue named it VVandalicia, or Andaluzia of the Vandals, who about a thousand yeres past ouerran the same. The said Diocesse or territory, of all the regions and territories in Spaine, is rightly estee∣med the most happy, both in regard of the multitude and ciuility of the inhabitants, and of their riches, and ouerflowing abundance of all things; this being confirmed euen by the verses of the Grecians, who attribute the Elizian pleasures and delights vnto this tract, which bordereth vpon the West Ocean. This territory containeth here & there almost 200. principall townes, besides a great number of villages; so that there are now more townes vnder the iurisdiction of this one diocesse or conuent, than there were of old in all foure together: for (as Plinie writeth) they prescribed lawes but only to 175. townes. And how small a number will these seeme to be, if those hundred thousand villages be accounted, which only in the territory of Siuill, called by the Arabians Axarafi, were by King Ferdinand receiued into loyall allegeance together with the city it selfe? which notwithstanding after the departure of the Moores, became the greatest part of them desolate: howbeit the limits of this as they differ much from the ancient precincts of Spa∣nish diocesses; so do they come neerer to the forme prescribed by King Vamba vnto all the Cathedrals of Spaine. For this diocesse hath on the East the territory of Corduba; West the frontiers of Algarue; North it lieth ouer a∣gainst that part of Portugale which is called The gouernment of Saint Iago: but the residue toward the South is in∣closed with the diocesse of Cadiz and the Ocean sea. Principall townes here are very many, especially the royall city of Siuill, most largely and pleasantly situate vpon the banke of Baetis, and enuironed with beautifull and stately walles. This famous riuer Baetis or Guadalquibir springing out of the forest called in times past Saltus Tugi∣ensis, and holding on his course by the chiefe cities of his adopted prouince, doth from this noble city, knowen of olde by the name of Colonia Romulea, continue his streames in a chanell nauigable and abounding with fish, to the Westerne Ocean, for the space of threescore miles, the banks on both sides flourishing with Oliuets, Vine∣yards, and most admirable sweet Gardens, perfumed with the delectable and fragrant odour of Citrons. Now Siuill both for churches and houses is the gallantest city in all Spaine, and for the neat attire of the Citi∣zens, and a kinde of seemelinesse to them only peculiar, is inferiour to no city in all the world. Here religion, the study of liberall arts and the practise of gentlemanlike exercises are in their prime. And so infinite are the riches and treasures included within the walles of this city, as neuer the like in olde time could be found in any King∣dome or Empire how great soeuer, the Roman only excepted. For this being the richest of all the cities of Europe, largely distributes ouer all Christendome that vnspeakable wealth, and before these last times neuer dream't of, which it fetcheth as it were from another world, that from hence was first discouered. Wherewith also it abun∣dantly furnisheth the very barbarous and sauage nations, inhabiting the inmost part of Africa and Asia. It is most apparent, that for certaine yeeres together in the account-books of the Indies-contractation-house, there was most faithfully registred an hundred & more millions of gold. So that hence a man may coniecture, that so much more was concealed by those that brought it, for feare lest the King for some certaine time should haue borrowed it. What may we then thinke of the infinit & incredible masse of riches which from their first discouery of America till this present, hath hither been transported; two fleets yeerely returning into Spaine, laden in a maner with no other kind of merchandise, but gold and siluer, and for the most part balasted with both? But these (you wil say) are forren and far-fetcht commodities. It is so rich therefore of it selfe, that it payes for yeerely tribute vnto the King, to whom it is most loyally deuoted, a million and an halfe of golde: so much as many Princes can scarse raise out of their whole kingdomes. Here reside for traffike innumerable multitudes of strangers, besides whom of late yeres there haue been found 24000 Citizens housholders, diuided into 28. wards. The first of these wards is famous both in regard of the name, and the church of S. Mary, than which all Christendome hath not a more excellent, if you consider the large and magnificent building with the beauteous and admirable ornaments, and the steeple likewise of exceeding higth, from whence signes are giuen at certaine houres, wherein stands a lofty pinacle of most curious workmanship, out of which you may behold a most glorious prospect ouer all the city, and the fields adiacent. What should I here describe the royall magnificence of the kings castle; than which the Kings of Spaine haue none more gorgeously built, or pleasantly situate? Or to what purpose should I recount the sumptuous palaces of Dukes, Earles and Nobles; or the neat houses of Citizens, with their crystall fountains, greene arbours, and odoriferous gardens? with silence I omit the ancient water-streames disfused by arches tho∣row all parts of the city; and those later ones, which by the infinit cost, and industry of the Senatours & Citizens of Siuill, haue for publicke delight beene conueyed to the place commonly called Hercules pillars; where by plan∣ting of trees they haue conuerted a large fenny quagmire into a most beautifull groue, leauing faire and broad spaces for men to walke, run, and disport themselues in. Now the gardens without the city, fraught with all vari∣ety of pleasures, and those stately houses in the fields, bordering vpon Baetis, who can sufficiently commend? Out of which they may dayly behold ships comming in both from the old and new world. For Siuill the queene of the Ocean, being placed as a mediatresse between both, conioines them together by prosperous nauigations, and rich trafficks. Tedious it were to set forth the maiestie of the Kings palace, or of his castle at Triana. This Triana is a faire suburbe on the farther side of Baetis, inhabited almost with three thousand Citizens, and ioyned to the city
map of Seville in Andalusia, Spain HISPALENSIS CONVENTVS DELINEATIO, Auctore Hieronÿmo Chiaues Priuilegio Imp. et Regiae Maiests.
by a bridge of timber. But whoso considers the richnesse and fertility of their fields, abounding with all kinde of graine, may iustly acknowledge it a most bountifull and prodigall worke of nature, which here aboue all other pla∣ces seemes to muster; and distribute her pleasures and treasures for the solace and benefit of mankinde. Next vnto Siuill in authority and greatnesse Caesariana, alias Xeres de la frontiera, and Iulia firmitas now called Astigi, which in old times were colonies of the Romans, do excell all other townes & cities. Carmona and Vtrera may well be termed the two granaries and storehouses of Siuill. Next followes Marchena, called out of ancient stonie monuments, I know not how truly, Martia Colonia; and Arçobriga, being the lord-ship townes of the most illustrious ducal familie of the Ponces. To these you may adde Vrsao, called of old Genua Vrbanorum, and at this present Osuna, the most hono∣rable and rich dukedome of the Girones, ennobled with an Vniuersitie. For oile, corne, and wine Constantina, Caçalla, and Maronio do principally excell: Nebrisa likewise situate at the mouth of Baetis, the most happie natiue soile of Aelius Antonius, the restorer and author of the Latin tongue in Spaine, is famous for antiquity, and inferiour to none in plenty of Corne. Also in the very bay whereinto Baetis dischargeth his streames, vpon the headland called of old Luciferi Promontorium, stands the towne which we now call Solucar or Sant lucar, the rich mart-towne of the Gothish Dukes, and very commodious for the west-Indan fleets. Other principall townes of this Diocesse for breuities sake I omit. The soile in all this tract is most miraculously plentifull of wheat, wine, and oile, and of all kinde of graine, where∣with it supplieth remote and forrein countreies: and how deseruedly might Plinie haue preferred this part before Italie, had not he, an Italian, caried a greater affection to his owne countrey? yet Spaine by him: wheresoeuer it borders vpon the sea, is commended: which praise of his we vnderstand especially of that part of Andaluzia, which pertaines to the Diocesse of Siuill, because it lies open to the maine Ocean, and to the gentle blasts of the west. The skie here is most fauourable, smiling alwaies with a temperate and most amiable aspect: the people borne to piety and good arts, excelling in sharpnesse of wit, and surpassing others in a bold kinde of courage and towardlinesse of minde (which is in a manner peculiar, and hereditary to this nation) will in no case suffer themselues either in offices of curtesie, or in exploit of warre, to be excelled by any nation. The Archbishop of Siuill, next that of Toledo, is the highest prelacy in all Spaine; whilome it had eleuen suffragan Bishops, as appeareth out of the subscriptions of councells: namely, the Bishop of Corduba, who now is vnder the Iurisdiction of Toledo: The B. of Iliberis, who after the expulsion of the Moores, remoued to the Metropolitan sea of Granada: The B. of Ilipa or Elepla, of late called Pennaflor, which towne is now destitute of a B. sea, and subscribes to the authority of the church of Siuill. The Bishopricke of Tuccitan, now called Martos, and in old time Augusta Gemella Colonia, at this present destitute of a B. and vnder the Iurisdiction of Gienna. The Bishopricke of Malaga, which now is suffragan to Siuill. The Bishopricke of Aegabria, now called Cabra: it hath no prelate, but belongeth to the church of Corduba. The bishopricke of Asindia or Asidonia, now called Medina Sidonia, subiect to the B. of Cadiz, the episcopall sea being remoued from Gadisea, others call it Asidonia; it is now said to stand not farre from that place, where Xeres is situate; vnlesse you will say, that in the same tract it retained one and the selfe-same name. It had also the Bishop∣ricke of Ossonoba nere Pharo a towne in Algarue, the Moores named it Eruba, afterwards it was incorporated into the church of Siluis, which before being a member of Siuill, was by Pope Paul the third made Suffragan to Euora, which himselfe had aduanced to a Metropolitan sea. The bishopricke of Abdera, which was translated to the sea of Almeria, and is now Suffragan to Granada. The bishopricke of Astigi, which now is ingraffed into the church of Siuill. The bi∣shopricke of Italica, seated in a most noble colonie of the Romans not only citizens, but also Emperors & Generals, which standing six miles from Siuill, on the other side Baetis, was in ancient times, when S. Gerontius the martyr was bi∣shop, a place highly reuerenced. Out of this towne sprang Traianus, Hadrian, and Theodosius, three great and renow∣med Emperors. It is commonly called Old Siuill, the vast ruines thereof being now scarse extant, a wofull spectacle of the mutability of humane things, by so much the more to be lamented, in that the forlorne fragments of that most beautifull and large Amphitheatrum, which now lie scattered and disiointed, renew a more sad memory of the ancient greatnesse and magnificence. At this time the Archbishop of Siuill hath for suffragans the bishops of Malaga, of Cadiz, and of the Canary-isles. The maiesty, dignity & wealth of this church we cannot in few words decypher. Sufficeth that we do gather out of their own audits & accounts, that the archbishops yerely reuenues amount to aboue 100000. duckets. The princi∣pall of the church vnder him haue cleerely more than 30000: the whole society of the church is allowed 120000. which are diuided among 40. Canons, 11. priuileged priests, 20. fellow-portionaries or pensioners, and so many halfe-pensioners; yet so, as the Canons and priuileged priests haue such daily allowance, as by the yeere comes to 2000. duckats a man, the pensioners haue lesse than so much by a fourth part, and the halfe-pensioners are allowed only a third part. Next vnto the Archbishop the greatest authority remaines in the Deane, whose dignity is estee∣med worth 5000. duckats a yeere. Besides, here are in this church 20. masse-priests, which from their number we call Vicenarios; who for their nightly and daily orizons, are allowed euery day amongst them all 200. duckats and a∣boue: also there are 200. other priests, who out of their priuate chapels do raise stipends sufficient for their mainte∣nance. Rich benefices in this diocesse there are to the number of 600, many whereof are valued at 1000. some at 2000. duckats by the yeere: and of lesser cures, which are called chapels or chanteries, almost 2000. Here are like∣wise many cloisters of monks and nunnes, wherein their religion and the study of their diuinity flourisheth, most of them in yeerely reuenues being able to dispend 6000. duckats. There stands a monastery of Carthusians most sumptuously built vpon the banke of Baetis within view of Siuill, which hath 25000. duckats by the yeere. Long it were to recken vp all their hospitals, whenas within Siuill only there are aboue 120. very richly indowed, many with 8000. and some with 15000. duckats of yerely income. Thus much of this region or diocesse, out of the relation of Don Francisco Pacheco. Concerning Siuill and the territory thereto adiacent you may reade at large in the Iournall of Nauagierus.
The Kingdome of VALENTIA. PTolemey calles the people inhabiting this part of Hispania Tarraconensis, Heditanos. Plinie names the region Edetania. It seemes that in Strabo they are called Sidetani, and in Liuy, Sedetani. (Plinie also mentions the people Sede∣tanos, and the region Sedetania, but diuers from these; as appeareth out of his third booke and third chapter.) In this tract stands the city of Valentia, albeit Ptole∣mey ascribes it to the Cotestani, a nation bordering not farre off. From this city, as from the principall, all the whole region is denominated, and it containes the ancient Hedetania, Cotestania, and part of Ilercaonia. This prouince put on the title of a kingdome, about the yeere of our Lord 788. as you may reade in Peter de Medina, and Peter Antonie Beuthero. It is situate vpon the Mediterran sea, and is refreshed with the streames of Turia, a riuer so called by Salust, Priscian, and Vibius: by Pomponius Mela, Durias, and by Plinie, Turium. Now they call it Guetalabiar, which is an Arabicke name imposed by the Moores, and in English is as much to say, as pure and cleare water. It is a riuer not very deepe; but in regard of the euerflourishing banks, be∣decked with roses and sundry kinds of flowers, most exceeding pleasant. It is on both sides from the very fountaine to the outlet, naturally clad with beautifull and shadie woods: euery where you may behold the Withy, the Plane, the Pine-tree, and other trees, neuer disrobed of their leaues: so that Claudian wrote most truly of it; Faire Duria, with flowers and rosie banks adorn'd. There is also the riuer Sucro, which by a new name they call Xucar. Two hilles here are among the rest, one called Mariola, and the other Pennagolosa, that is, The rocke of dainties; wherunto from other places resort great store of Herbalists & Physicians: for vpon these hilles grow great abundance of very rare plants and herbs. They haue also a siluer-mine at a place called Buriol, in the way from Valentia to Tortosa. In a place likewise named Aioder are found certaine stones interlaced with golden veines. At Cape Fini∣strat there are yron-mines, and so are there by Iabea. About Segorbia, there is yet mention of a quar∣rey, from whence Marble was wont to be conueyed to Rome. In Picacent they dig Alabaster, and all the countrey ouer Allume, Oker, Lime, and Plaister in great abundance. But the greatest riches of this countrey consisteth in earthen vessels, which they call Porcellan: which may perhaps be the same that ancient Writers call Vasa Murrhina. These are made in diuers places of this kingdome so curiously, and with such arte, as the best Porcellans in Italie, (whereof in all countreys such reckening is made) can hardly be preferred before them. Who desires to know more of the excellency of this region, and how fertile it is of all things, especially of Sugar, Wine and Oile; let him reade the 9. 12. and 13. books written by Bernardine Gomez, concerning the life of Iames the first, King of Aragon. Among the cities of this kingdome, Valentia is the principall, and the sea of a bishop; which bishop (as Marinaeus Siculus and Damianus a Goes do report) may dispend 13000. duckats by the yeere. Amongst all the Valentias of Europe, this (saith Bernardin Gomez) is called by the French, Valen∣tia the great: for it containeth 12000. houses, besides the suburbs & gardens, which haue as many hou∣ses almost as the city it selfe. Peter de Medina writeth, that in this city there are aboue 10000. welles of fountaine water. An exact description thereof you may reade in Iohn Mariana his 12. booke and 19. chap. It is so beautifull, as the Spaniards in a common prouerbe say, Rich Barçelona, Plentifull Sara∣goça, and Faire Valentia. Plinie cals it a colonie of the Romans. He saith, it is three miles distant from the sea. That this city of ancient time was called Roma of Romus the king of Spaine, Annius out of Manethon, and Beutherus out of the Annales do report: let themselues auow it. In an ancient inscription it is named COLONIA IVLIA VALENTIA. It retained the name of Rome (saith the same Beutherus) vntill the Romans subdued it. Who hauing inlarged & beautified the same, called it Va∣lentia, a name signifying the quality of the place. Here was a councell held in the yere of our Lord 466. It is a city of venerable antiquity, where euen till these our dayes remaine many ancient marbles with in∣scriptions of the Romans grauen vpon them, whereof some are in the custody of the said Beutherus and Ambr. Morales. The territory of this city is for the greatest part inhabited by a people descended of the Moores, re∣taining as yet the speech and conuersation of their fathers and grandfathers, which I learned of that most worthie and famous man Frederick Furius Caeriolanus naturall of Valentia.
map of Valencia, Spain VALENTIAE REGNI, olim CONTESTANORVM SI PTO∣LEMAEO, EDETANORVM SI PLINIO CREDIMVS TYPVS. Cum priuilegio ad decennium 1584.
GADES: otherwise called CADIZ, CALIZ, or CALIS-MALIS. VNder the name of Gades, Strabo, Plinie, and some other Writers giue notice of two islands. Mela, Solimus, Dio∣nysius and Ptolemey make mention but of one, which together with the city, they call Gadira. They that will haue two Gades, call the one, The greater, and the other, The lesser. This (as writeth Plinie out of Philistides, Ti∣maeus, and Silenus; and Strabo out of Pherecides) was named Erythia, and Aphrodisea, and they call it also Iunoes Island. By the inhabitants also it was properly called Erythia, and Cotinusa, by the Carthaginians Gadir, and the Romans named it Tartesson, as the same Plinie writeth. At this present there is but one only isle (and that verie much diminished by the oceans violent waues) which the Spaniards call Cadiz, and corruptly Caliz, and our countrymen (I know not vpon what ground) Calis-Malis. In the lesser of the two foresaid isles stood the towne of Gades; and in the greater, Iulia Gaditana Augusta; which before, as appeareth out of Strabo, was called Neapolis. Now they call both towne and island Cadiz. It is the seat of a Bishop, who also is intitled Bishop of Alger. This Isle was first discouered and inhabited by certaine Phoenicians of Tyrus, as is euident out of most ancient records. Vpon this isle some are of opinion, that the Geryones afterward planted themselues, whose droues the Aegyptian or Tyrian Hercules forcibly draue away. At one corner of the isle stood the temple of this Hercules, famous both for builders, superstition, riches and antiquity. Why it should be holy (saith Mela) his bones there buried are a sufficient cause. Vpon the other corner Strabo affirmes the temple of Saturne to haue been ere∣cted. In the said temple of Hercules, Caesar found the image of Alexander the great, as Suetonius in his life reporteth. A fountaine there was very holsome to drinke, which with a strange kind of contrariety diminished at the floud, and increased at the ebbe of the sea. In this temple (as the same author affirmeth) were certaine brazen pillars of eight cubits, wheron were ingrauen the costs bestowed in building of the same. Here also the same author out of Artemidorus acknowledgeth a temple dedicated to Iuno. Dionysius describes therein the temple of Age and of Death, and tels of certaine altars consecrated to the Yere, to the Moneth, to Arte, and to Pouerty. Hercules pillars are here extant (saith Isi∣dore) and here growes a kind of tree like a palme, with the gum whereof the glasse of Epyrus being mingled, is turned into a precious stone. The inhabitants of old were famous for their skill in nauigation, and from this their ancient trauersing of the seas, they do not as yet dege∣nerate. But their principall gaine consisteth in making of Salt, and in catching of Tunies: for which they haue euery yeere an ordinary fish∣ing. These fishes being cut in pieces, pouldred and barrelled, are dispersed all Europe ouer. This isle was esteemed by antiquitie the worlds extreame Westerne limit; whereupon saith Silius Italicus in his first booke, And Gades the vtmost bounds of men, &c. Also in his 17. booke: Gades lands farthest end; And Calpe, bounding Hercules; And Baetis crystall streames, That bathe Apolloes steeds. For here the Poets faine, that the Sun being weary of his dayes labour, drencheth himselfe in the Ocean, and takes his rest: wherefore Sta∣tius also calles it, Gades the Sunnes soft bed. Yea at this very time our Netherlandish Mariners call the Westermost Cape of this isle (which by the inhabitants is named El cabo de San Sebastian) Het einde der Werelt, that is to say, The Worlds end. This ancient inscription found vpon this isle, is by Appianus in his booke of Inscriptions alleged out of Cyriacus of Ancona, as followeth: HELIODORVS INSANVS CAR∣THAGINIENSIS AD EXTREMVM ORBIS SARCOPHAGO TESTAMENTO ME HOC IVSSI CONDIER, VT VIDEREM SI QVIS∣QVAM INSANIOR AD ME VISENDVM, VS QVE AD HAEC LOCA PENETRARET. In English thus: I Heliodorus, a mad Carthagini∣an commanded in my last will, that they should in this tombe bury me at the worlds end; to see if any more franticke than my selfe would come thus farre to visit me. But that all this inscription is counterfeit and new, I learne out of Anthony Augustinus his eleuenth chapter of ancient coines. Concerning this isle you may reade more at large in Strabo, and Philostratus. And of the city reade Brunus in his volume of cities. GVIPVSCO. GVIPVSCO is a part of that Northerne tract of Spaine called of olde, Cantabria; it borders vpon the kingdome of Nauarre, and the Pyreney mountaines, which diuide it from France, and it is bounded Westard by the prouince of Biscay. The inhabitants in Ptolemey are called Varduli. At this present some call it Lipuscoa, others Lepuscoa, but corruptly, as Stephan Garibaio, borne in the country, writeth. Some ancient records of this country do not vndeseruedly name it The wall and fortresse of Castile and Leon. It is a mountainous place, euery where so abounding with yron and steele, that for quantity and goodnesse of this mettall it is excelled by no other region in the world. Wherefore from hence to their great commodity, all the neighbour-countries are abundantly supplied with all kind of iron-tooles and instruments. Here likewise they make warlike armour and artillery, as namely Great ordonance, Harquebuzes, Ca∣liuers, Harnesse, Swords, &c. so good, and in such plenty, as people of all nations are desirous to haue them. They themselues also are a peo∣ple very warlike. So that this region a man may rightly call Mars his armory, and the inhabitants his workemen. Such as dwell vpon the coasts, spending the greatest part of their time at sea, reape vnto themselues great profit, by taking Newfoundland fish called Baccalaos, and Whales; of whose fat they make great quantitie of Traine-oile. Heere also they boile Salt, mixing it (I know not for what purpose) with Oats, and with Hempe-seed. The head citie is Tholosa, situate at the confluence of the riuers Araxis and Oria: others there are also of note, as Placencia, swarming with Smiths: Motrico, or rather Monte de Trico, so called of the rocke Trico, that hangs ouer it. The port of Sant Sebastian, which is the lar∣gest & most commodious vpon all the coast. Hither people of sundry nations do trafficke. At first it was called Hicuru, afterward Don Bastia, and corruptly Donastia, which in signification is all one with Sant Sebastian. For Don in the Biscain tongue signifieth Saint, as Santo in Spa∣nish. But by the inhabitants it is commonly called Vrumea. For this region differing altogether in language from the residue of Spaine, hath many townes called by diuers names, according to the difference of languages; some whereof I thought good here to note, for the benefit of those that reade histories. The sundry names therefore of diuers townes in Guipusco are these that follow: Salinas, alias Gaza, both signifying salt. Mondragon, alias Arrasale. Monreal, alias Dena. Aspeitia, alias Vrasueitia, & Saluatierra de Traurgui. Olite, alias Ariuierri. Renteria, alias Villanueua de Oiarcum. Penna Oradada, alias Puerto de Sant Adrian. Elicaur, alias Licaur. Marquina, alias Elgoiuar. Azcoytia, alias Vrazgoitia, & Miranda de Traurgui. Araxa, Arayça. Also the hill Aralar is called Arara, and the riuer Vidoso, Vidorso, and Alduida, and Beyouia. This riuer runnes betweene Spaine and France. In describing this region Stephan Garibayo is very copious, in the 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. and 14. chapters of his 15. booke. And Florian del Campo writes somewhat of it in his first and second chapter. And Nauagierus in his Iournall affirmeth, that there is so much yron and steele dig'd out of the mines of Guipusco, as yeeldeth 80000. duckats of yerely gaine. The words of Plinie in his 34. booke and 14. chapter, are not (I thinke) to this place impertinent. Vpon the coast of Cantabria (saith he) which the Ocean affronteth, there is a craggie high mountaine, a thing very admirable, wholly consisting of the same matter [he meaneth yron.] CARPETANIA. THis region lies in the very heart of Spaine, which Plinie & Liuie call Carpetania. The people called Carpetani were knowen vnto Strabo, and the Carpitani with .i. by Ptolemey. Polybius calles them Carpesios; and so doth Liuie in some places. Their chiefe citie is Toledo. The description whereof you may reade in Nauagierus, Pedro de Medina, and George Brunus. All Carpetania is not set downe in this Table, but that part only from Toledo Eastward. Concerning Toledo, because I haue not read it in any other authour, I will adde that which Roger Houeden in the second booke of his Chronicle of England reporteth: He calles it Tulette, and these be his words: In this city there is an hill, out of which are daily taken aboue a thousand camels loads of earth, and yet it neuer decreaseth: for though you dig neuer so deepe an hole, yet by the morow, if any raine fall, it will be filled vp againe. The earth taken out of this hill is transported to the neighbour prouinces, and sold, to wash mens heads, and their apparell, aswell Christians as Pagans. The said Roger liued about the yeere 1200.
map of Carpetania, or Toledo in Castile-La Mancha, Spain CAR∣PETANI∣AE PARTIS DESCR. 1584. Cum priuilegio Imp. et Belgico, ad decennium. map of Guipuzcoa, Spain GVI∣PVS COAE REGIONIS TYPVS. Vardulorum, siue map of Cadiz, Spain HANC INSVLAM PERLVSTRABAT, ET SVA MANV DE∣PINGEBAT GEOR∣GIVS HOEFNAGLI∣VS ANTVERPIAN. BELGA. Dum extendar.
FRANCE. ALl that tract of land from the riuer of Rhene included by the Ocean, the Pyreney mountaines, the sea Mediterran, and mount Appennine, as farre as Ancona, the an∣cient Writers by one generall name called Gallia. For Westward by the Pyreney hilles it is disioyned from Spaine: North it borders vpon the French and British Ocean: East the riuer Rhene and the Alpes from sea to sea include it, in like ma∣ner as the Pyreney mountaines doe West: South it is accoasted by part of the Mediterran sea ouer against Prouence. It was called Gallia, in regard of the peo∣ples whitenesse: for the high mountaines and the heauens rigour exclude the heat of the Sunne from this part: hereof it comes, that their white bodies change not colour. Where∣fore the Graecians name the Gaules or ancient inhabitants of France, Galatas, in regard of their milke∣white colour: for  in Greeke, signifieth Milke; from which name the Latines haue called them Gal∣los. This deriuation the greatest parts of Writers doe approue: yet some there are that deride it, sup∣posing them rather to be so called of raine, which in Hebrew is Galah, and in the olde British language Glau, as who should say, A most ancient nation, rain'd vpon, and drenched in the very floud of Noah. This region of theirs was of olde diuided into Gallia Cisalpina, which in regard of vs lieth beyond the Alpes, being that part of Italie, which at this present is called Lombardie: and Transalpina, which is in∣cluded within these fiue bounds, namely, the riuer Rhene, the Ocean, the Pyreney mountaines, the Me∣diterran sea, and the Alpes. This Gallia Transalpina by Caesar in his Commentaries is diuided into three parts: Belgica, Celtica, and Aquitanica. Belgica which is enuironed by the Ocean sea, and the riuers of Rhene, Marne, and Senie, vsing most part the Dutch tongue, and at this present called the Low-countries. Celtica or Lugdunensis, which is comprehended within the riuers Garomne, Marne, Senie, and Rhosne. It is now called France. For the Celtae were subdued by the Francks of Germany: so that at length they were named Westerne Francks, from whom the prouince it selfe is denominated. Aquitanica before named Aremorica, which extendeth from the riuer Garomne to the Ocean, and to the Pyreney mountaines. West and by North it is confined with that part of the Ocean which is called the Bay of Aquitane. Westward. it hath Spaine: North, Celtica or France properly so called: and South, the country of Prouence. It is now called Gascoine, and the inhabitants differ both in stature, and language from the residue of France. These are the ancient limits of the Gaules. Howbeit the countrey of the French, which at this day beares the title of a Kingdome, and is commonly called the Kingdome of France; hath not so large ex∣tension: but towards the North only is so much the narower, as it is cut off by an imaginary line from Strasbourg vpon Rhene to the port of Calais; and it comprehends all that tract of land, which is con∣teined within this line, the Ocean sea, the Pyreney mountaines, the sea Mediterran, and the Alpes. Postellus in his booke of the whole world, reckons vp the peculiar Shires, or Prouinces of this King∣dome in maner following: In the East it hath Prouence, Sauoie, Swisserland, Bressia, Borgogne, Lorraigne, Champanie, Henault, Cleue, and Flanders: on the North, Picardy, Normandy, and Bretaigne: on the West, Bre∣taigne, Aniou, Poictou, Xantoigne, and Gascoigne: and on the South, Gascoigne, Bearne, Roussillon, Dauphnie, Vellay, Forest, Auuergne, Limosni, Perigort, and Angolesme. East of Poictou lie the prouinces of Bourges, Bour∣bon, Beaioulois, Lionnois, the Countie of Burgundy, Auxerrois, Niuernois, Berry, Tours, Vendosme beyond An∣iou, le Beaulse, Gastinois, Valois beyond Sens, and not farre off le Perche, Druise, and le Mans neere Bretaigne. And thus at this present are these Prouinces named. But albeit Postellus accounteth Sauoy, Swizzerland, Loraigne, Henault, Cleue, and Flanders among the Prouinces of France, yet are they not now vnder the go∣uernment of this Kingdome: for all of them haue peculiar princes, not subiect to the crowne of France. Concerning the French King, Villa Nueua reports two memorable things: First, That in the Church of Rhemes there is a vessell full of neuer-decaying oile, sent from heauen, to anoint the Kings of France at their coronation. Secondly, That the same Kings doe heale the disease called in English, The Queenes euill, only with touching the place affected. All France is described in a large volume, by Robert Caenalis; reade also concerning the same argument Gilbert Cognatus Nazorenus; Iohannes Marius; Chassanaeus in his twelfth booke De gloria mundi; Postellus in his booke Of the whole world; Aimon in the beginning of his storie of the Franks; Sebastian Munster; Belle∣forest; Theuet; and other Describers of the world. Touching this region also, and the disposition of the inhabitants, you may learne somewhat out of the second booke of Laonicus Chalcocondylas of Athens. Of ancient Writers Caesar surpasseth all. Diodorus Siculus in his fifth booke, and Ann. Marcelinus in his fif∣teenth booke haue many notable things concerning this region. Likewise Claudius Champier of Lions wrote in French a Treatise of the first originals of the principall townes in all France: Symphorianus, fa∣ther to this man, discourseth of the riuers, and the miracles of waters and fountaines in France. The ci∣ty of Paris is described in verse by Eustathius à Knobelsdorf; and the city of Lions by Champier.
map of France GALLIAE REGNI POTENTISS: NOVA DESCRIPTIO, IOANNE IOLIVETO AVCTORE Candido lectori S.D. Gallia tota iam olim non ob opes solum, & virtutem belli∣cam, quibus semper pres titit, verum etiam ob continentia & disciplinam, que summum a∣pud illos locum habuit celebris fuit. Nam & artium illustri∣um, et Graecae etiam lingue pe∣ritia excelluit, matre vt arbi∣tror Massilia Graeca vrbe, in ma∣ritima ora Prouinciae sita, ad quā quondā disciplinaru gratia ud ex ipsa vrbe Roma missi sūt qui docerētur.
BRETAIGNE and NORMANDY. THis Table representeth that part of Gallia Lugdunensis which stretcheth toward the Westerne Ocean. The ancients named it Armorica. Heere standeth Neustria, corruptly so called of late yeeres for Vestria or rather Westria, (according to some, Westrasia) as much to say, as a Westerne region. The occasion of this errour both in pronunciation and writing, was for that the French wanting a double V, doe alwayes in stead thereof write a single V: and because u in this small forme differs not much from n, hereupon it is likely that Westria was prodigiously changed into Neustria. In which Neustria at this present are situate the regions of Bretaigne and Normandie, which in this Table we present vnto your view. NORMANDIA so called of the Northerne peo∣ple that ouer-ranne it (for Nord in Dutch signifieth North, and mannen men) which Northerne people were Danes and Noruegians: who hauing by force subdued this region, planted them∣selues here in the time of Lotharius the Emperour. Concerning the situation and nature of this place, these are the words of Gaguinus in his seuenth booke: Normandie is adorned and fortified with one Metropolitan, six cities, and ninetie foure strong townes and castles: most of their villages also being built citie-like: thorow which Prouince a speedie traueller shall hardlie passe in six dayes: it aboundeth with fish, cattell, and plentie of corne; being in all places so fraught with peares and apples, that the people make all their drinke of the same; and yet send great quantitie to other countreys. They exercise clothing, and are notable quaffers of cyder. They are naturally a wilie people; subiect to no forren lawes; liuing after their owne fa∣shions and customes, which they most obstinately maintaine: cunning they are in sleights and sutes of law; whereupon strangers are loth to haue any dealings with them; being otherwise well addicted to learning and religion. Moreouer, they are very apt and valiant in the warres, many of whose worthy acts against strangers are recorded. Thus farre Gaguinus. Of the qualitie of this region you may more largely informe your selfe out of Henry Altissiodorensis his fifth booke of the life of S. German. It aboundeth, as Caenalis makes report, with all things necessary for mans life, wine only excepted, which the soile doth not yeeld. The chiefe city is Rouen (in English commonly called Roan) which hath a most learned Senate, or Court of Parliament, that execute iustice, and decide the controuersies of the whole Prouince. Heere are also great Mer∣chants, by meanes of whose trafficke the citie is knowen farre and neere. In this citie there is a church dedicated to the Vir∣gin Mary, beautified with a most lofty steeple, wherin hangs the greatest bell in all France, weighing forty thousand pounds, as these French verses grauen thereupon do testifie. Ie suis nominée George d' Amboise, Qui plus que trente six mil poise: Et si qui bien me poysera Quarante mil y trouuera. In English: George de Amboise my name rightly sounds, I weigh more than thirtie six thousand pounds: Whoso poiseth me well Fortie thousand may tell. This George, after whose name the bell is called, was Archbishop of Roan, about the yeere 1500. who considering that in his Diocesse (such was the scarsitie of oile, as it would hardly be sufficient for the time of Lent) granted to his Diocessans in stead thereof the vse of butter, conditionally that they should pay six halfepence Tournois a piece: with which summe of money he caused the said steeple to be built; which thereupon is yet called Latour de beur; that is, The steeple of butter. The antiquities, and other memorable matters of this city, F. Noel Taillipied hath described in French in a peculiar Trea∣tise. Thus much of Normandie. BRETAIGNE bordering vpon the coast of Normandie, is the vtmost prouince of France toward the Ocean. Some thinke that this was of old called Aremorica. Sure I am that Caesar describeth cities which he calleth Aremericas vpon this coast. But Plinie and Sidonius do name the inhabitants Britannos, placing them vpon the riuer of Loire. The Middle-age writers call them Brittones, which name they yet retaine. Plinie most aptly calles this region, The godliest Peninsula of Gallia Lugdu∣nensis. In a fragment of the Frankes history I reade that it was once called The horne of France; from the shape thereof, as I suppose. Robert Caenalis is of opinion, that the Brittons being named Hermiones, tooke occasion by way of allusion vnto this name, to make choise of those armes which they now beare, commonly called Ermines, with weasels tailes, and the natiue colour of blacke in a field argent &c. This region he saith is somewhat drie, and not very fruitfull; more apt to beare millet than wheat. Their fields (saith he) they call lands. It seemeth more properly to be named Eremorica than Aremorica. For they make larger leagues betweene towne and towne, namely of three miles; which is no slight argument of a barren soile. Hereof the coniecture seemes not improbable, that it was called Brutannia, of nourishing or feeding brute beasts. So many of their townes (as antiquity reports) are denominated from flocks and droues: as for example, Pullinaicum, à pullis equinis, from horse-coltes; Filicieriae, now called Fulgeriae, alias Foulgeres, of braky grounds; also Rhedones, à Rhedis, that is to say, of carts which cary commodities long and tedious iourneys: which I rather beleeue, than that it first borrowed the name from Brutus. Thus farre Caenalis: let the trueth thereof stand or fall vpon his credit. More concerning these countries you may reade in the same authour, and in Belleforest; but especially in Bertrard Argentré, who hath published a large volume of the same in French. Reade also Elias Vinetus vpon Ausonius his poem of Cupid crucified. LA MANS; the inhabitants whereof were in old time called CENOMANI. PLinie in his third booke and ninth chapter putteth the Cenomani amongst the Volsci neere Massilia. Ptolemey and Strabo doe place them about Brixia in Italia Transalpina, which is on this side Padus. Other Cenomani be found in Gallia Lugdunensi, by Ptolemey and Plinie lib. 4. cap. 15. or by Caesar in his seuenth booke De bello Gall. Howbeit the latter two call them also by a surname Aulercos. And these are they, whose region we propound in this Table. The inhabitants now call it La Mans. The situation of this countrey, and of the seuerall townes, you may reade in Theuet, Belleforest, and Caenalis; out of whom I thought good to borow this one speciall note concerning a certeine riuer and a lake. His words be these [speaking of Sarte a riuer in this Prouince:] Sarte being come to the bridge commonly called Noien, as farre as the towne of Malicorne, how plentifully and miraculously it aboundeth with fish, may appeare by this one example; that not many yeeres past contrary to mens vsuall expectation, here was taken a carpe of an ell and handfull long: his tongue (if we may beleeue the common report) weighed six pounds: which is confirmed also by a monument written vpon the Bishops palace. They say, that not farre from this place in the tract of Sagona, there is an ex∣ceeding deepe lake, (it is named The causey-foord, for it ends at the place commonly called Gay Chaucey) out of which lake are taken carpes of so huge bignesse, that one of them will suffice a meane family for an whole weeke together: the experi∣ence whereof, following the Court, I learned in the towne of Blois. Hitherto Robert Caenalis in his story of France.
map of Le Mans, in Maine, France CENOMANO∣RVM Galliae regionis, typus. Auctore Matthaeo Ogerio. La Mans. map of Brittany and Normandy Neustria. BRI∣TANNIAE, et NORMANDI∣AE TYPVS. 1594. Cum privilegio decennali.
POICTOV. AMongst the people of Aquitaigne some there are called by Ptolemey and Plinie, Pictones; by Caesar and Strabo, Pictones with i in the first syllable; and by Ammianus Marcellinus, Pictauos: Ausonius names the countrey Pictonicam regionem: but later Writers call it in La∣tine Pictauia. The inhabitants in their owne language, terme them∣selues Poicteuins, the region Poictou, and the head city Poictiers, which perhaps is all one with Ptolemey his Augustoritum. The opinion of some who affirme it was thus named of the Pictes, I holde altogether fabulous: for out of Clas∣sicall writers it is apparent that Pictones is an ancienter name than Picti. Poictou is now diuided into the Lower and the Vpper: The Lower Poictou we call that which ends Westward vpon the sea of Aquitaigne: and the Vpper, which lieth Eastward towards Tourain and Berry: South it confines vpon Xantoigne, Angolesme, and Limo∣sin: and North vpon Brettaigne and Aniou. It is a countrey most fertile of corne and cattell; rich in wheat and wine; and abounding with fish. Wild-fowle and beasts heere are great plenty, and for that cause much hunting and hauking. In this region are conteined 1200. Parishes vnder three Bishopricks, namely Poi∣ctiers, Luçon and Maillezais. The principall places besides these, are Roch-sur-yon, Talmont, Meroil, Ʋouuant, Meruant, Bresuire, Lodun, Fontenay le Conte: All which be in the Vpper Poictou. In the Lower are situate Niort, Partenay, Touars, Moncontoul, Hernault, Mirebeau, Chalstelleraudt, &c. The head of all these is Poictiers, which next vnto Paris is the principall citie in all France, and is for the most part enuironed by the riuer Clain. The antiquity of this towne sufficiently appeareth out of the Theater (commonly called Arenas) as likewise out of Gallienus his Palace, and the Arches of Water-conducts as yet extant, which the inhabitants call Arceaux de Parignè: all which are Monuments of the Romans gouernment in this place. Howbeit before their comming, this citie was seated vpon another plot of ground, as may be gathered out of the writings of Ammonius and Ado. For they make mention of a place called Olde Poictiers, whereat (they say) was the diuision of the kingdome betweene Charle∣maine and Pipin Kings of the Frankes. Also in this table vpon the very same riuer of Clain towards Chastellerault, you may see a place called Vieu Poictiers, that is to say, Old Poictiers. The towne of Talmont or rather Talon du Monde; (in English, The heele of the World) is so called by the French, because it stands vpon the vtmost border of this countrey towards the Ocean: as if therefore it were to be esteemed the extreame part of the World. Ouer against the shore of Poictou lie these islands: Oleron, (by Plinie named Ʋlia∣rius) at the mouth of the riuer Charente, called by Ausonius Charantonus fluuius, and by Ptolemey, Canentelum. L'isle de Rez, opposite to Rochell, abounding with wine, wherof it is named. The isle Noir, or Marmonstier, which yeeldeth plenty of salt. The isle Aulonne which in this Table is rather a Peninsula, this aboundeth with wine and salt: as doth another little isle called Chauet. The Mappe also represents vnto you L'isle de Dieu, or Gods isle: and that likewise which is called Nostre-dame de Bouin. By Saint Hillary the Apostle of Aquitaigne, Ecclesiasticall Writers affirme, that this region was conuerted to Christianity. A more exact description hereof you may reade in Bel∣leforrest, who will referre you from himselfe to Iohn Bouchet his Chronicle of Aqui∣taigne. Something you may learne out of Antony Pinetius in his description of Cities. Theuet likewise is to be perused. Concerning this region also Iohn de la Haye wrote a peculiar Treatise in French.
map of Poitou, France POICTOV. PICTONVM VICINARVM∣QVE REGIO∣NVM FIDISS DESCRIPTIO. Auctore Nobili Dn̄o Petro Rogiero Pictone, Regiae Mtis Galliae consiliario, etc.
The region of BERRY, called of olde BITVRIGES. THe people Bituriges are mentioned in most of the ancient Geogra∣phers. Plinie calles them Liberos: and saith they were also named Cubos. The country is now diuided into the Vpper & the Lower. The principall citie (called at this present Bourges) was named by Caesar (as some thinke) Auaricum. Theobald Fagotius citizen of the same, writeth that the territory adiacent is exceeding fruitfull, and wanteth nothing that all France may affoord; that the city is ancient, as appeareth by diuers notable monuments; that it is a towne of great trafficke; that they haue an Vniuersitie flourishing with all kinde of learning, insomuch as it may well be called The Honour of the liberall Arts, and A Mart of learned men. But concerning the origi∣nall of this citie, and the deriuation of the name, let vs giue eare to Iohn Calmey, who writes thereof in maner following. In the yeere of the worlds creation 1791. one Gomer of the nation of the Gaules, bringing a Colonie into this region of the Bituriges, planted the same in the chiefe citie, the name of Ogygis being by Noah his grandfather imposed for honours sake vpon the inhabitants: which by them for the fauor and loue they bare to their foun∣der descended of Ogygis, was afterward changed: and they named themselues Bito∣gyges, which in the Armenian tongue signifies, The posteritie of Ogygis. But as words by custome are often times corrupted, (for, to make them familiar, or more proper, we will not sticke to adde, detract, or alter some letters or syllables) so the name of this countrey and of the chiefe citie, either by the force thereof, or by the appointment of a certaine Prince named Biturix, changed the name of Bitogyges into Bituriges. A∣mongst other opinions some hold that it was called Bituris quasi Biturris, of two anci∣ent Towers which sometimes stood in this citie: whereupon a certaine Grammarian hath written this verse; Turribus à binis, inde vocor Bituris; that is, Of Towers twaine Bituris I was nam'd. Thus much out of John Calamaeus his booke of the originall of the Bituriges, from whence also we haue borrowed this Table. LIMAIGNE. THe length of all this region which some ab alimonijs or victuals call Alimo∣nia; others of the fat & slimie soile Limaigne, being part of Auuergne, which for shortnesse of time, and in regard of the high hilles and low valleys, and the crooked windings and turnings, we could not exactly measure. The length hereof (I say) from the bridge of olde Briuata, as farre as Ganao (abounding with Corne, Wine, Honie, Cattell, Horses, Saffron, Nuts, Pot-hearbs, Pastures, Woods, Fountaines, Riuers, Bathes, Marle, Lakes, Siluer-mines, Honourable fa∣milies, Strong fortresses, and Rich merchandize) stretcheth about twenty leagues; and the bredth almost eight leagues. But we describing only the more fruitfull and inhabited part, do in the Table following comprehend about eight leagues in length, and almost seuen in bredth, placing the townes and villages, according to the scale vnder-annexed. Thus farre the Authour in a Treatise intituled, A godlie and specula∣tiue Dialogue, by him written in Italian, where you may see the very Table which I haue here put downe. In the lower part of this Table stands a mountaine with a small towne named Ger∣goie. This is Gergouia in Aruernis, neere the riuer Elauer, whereof Caesar in his seuenth booke of the French warres maketh mention.
map of Berry, France REGIONIS: BITVRIGVM EXACTISS: DESCRIPTIO PER D. IO∣ANNEM CALAMAEVM map of La Limagne, France LIMANIAE TOPOGRAPHIA GABRIELE SYMEONEO AVCT.
The Dukedome of ANIOV. THe people and countrey of the Andegauenses, are by Pto∣lemey placed in Gallia Lugdunensi. The countrey at this present is called Aniou, and the people Angeuins. In times past it went vnder the name of an Earledome, but since the yeare 1350. it hath beene adorn'd with the title of a Dukedome. East it confineth vpon Tourain and Ʋen∣dosme. West it bordereth vpon Bretaigne. Poictou bounds it Southward, and the Counties of Maine and La Ʋal on the North. It is a country not very large, but for fruitfulnesse inferior to none other in France: the wine of Anjou excelleth all other French wines. Neither is it destitute of other commodities requisite either for the necessity or the plea∣sure of mans life, being euery where beautified with Riuers, Mountaines, Woods, and Medowes. It aboundeth with cattell great and small, and with fish. All this their Riuers and Medowes affoord them. Out of their Mountaines they digge Marble, and a kinde of blew Slates, wherewith they couer Churches and houses. The common people call them Ar∣doises. This Region is watered with so many Riuers, Freshets, Fountaines, Fish-pooles, Lakes, and Pondes, that some are of opinion, it was heereto∣fore called Aeguada, or Aguada, of the abundance of waters: for in the Aqui∣taigne tongue they call Water, Aigues. The principall Riuers, besides o∣thers, are Ligeris, which the inhabitants do name Loire, calling it likewise The Father of French riuers. Into this Riuer, within the compasse of Anjou, do fall the riuers Ʋienne, Diue, Thouets, Layon, Leure, Guiuatte, Maine, Seure, Loir (a riuer diuers from Ligeris, for it falles thereinto, and is called by late Writers Ledus) Aution, Oudon, Maienne, Brionneau, Losse, and Erdret, &c. So that there runne about fortie Riuers thorow this Pro∣uince. It hath diuers faire cities, the principall whereof is called Angiers: per∣haps the same which in Ptolemey is named Juliomagus. This being the head citie of all the Region, is built on either side the riuer Meduan, and ioyned together by a stone bridge. The antiquitie hereof is euident out of certaine ancient ruines of a Theater which hang ouer the Citie, and are called by the common people Brohan. Heere sometimes are olde coines found. Lewis the second in the yeere 1389. established an Vniuersitie in this place. There be also other townes of note, as Saumur, Beufort, Bauga, &c. Most of the premisses for the illustration of this Table, we haue trans∣lated out of Belleforest his French Munster. To whom, he that will, may adde Theuet.
map of Anjou Anjou. ANDEGAVEN∣SIVM DITIO∣NIS VERA ET INTEGRA DE∣SCRIPTIO. Licino Guyeto Andegauense auctore. Cum Priuilegio. 1579.
The territorie of PARIS: commonly called, THE ISLE OF France. IN a certaine Iournall of France I reade this description of the territorie of Paris. The Isle of France stretcheth from the towne of Saint Denis as far as Rossy and Mont∣morency: and so it comprehends all the land within the winding nookes of Seine, towards Normandie one way, and towards Picardie another way. The occasions of this name were (as Andrew Theuet reporteth) in that the Frankes com∣ming out of Germanie planted themselues first in this place, and here their Captaines tooke vpon them the title of Kings: and also for that the Riuers Marne, Seine & Oyse do in a maner compasse it around. Yet all the Region being comprized within these three Riuers pertaineth not to the said isle, but only that part which is neere vnto Paris. My opinion is, that this di∣uision might be made, when the sonnes of Clouis sharing the whole King∣dome, limited and included within these bounds the dominions of him who bare rule at Paris, and was only called the King of France. Howbeit, now this diuision is not obserued, seeing that certaine Cities of Picardie, Briè, and other Prouinces are comprehended within the same. But let vs heare the opinion of Belleforest also: After the death of the great King Clo∣uis, France was diuided after a new maner; for out of one King sprang ma∣ny, and he only was called The King of France, who gouerned at Paris: wherefore the Isle of France is the true and ancient iurisdiction of our Kings; albeit Pipins posteritie beganne to neglect it, and afterwards the Parisian territorie fell to them by inheritance, who enioyed the Crowne of all France.
map of Paris, France L'Isle de France. PARISIENSIS AGRI DE∣SCRIP.
The Dukedome of TOVRAIN. THis region is not very large, being on euery side so restrained with bordering Prouinces. West thereof lieth Anjou and part of Poictou; from the first it is seuered by the confines of Saumure; and from the second by the riuer Creuse: whereupon stands the city of Chinon subiect to this Dukedome of Tourain. South also lies part of Poictou, along the riuer Creuse, to La port de Pilles, which diuides Guienne from Tourain: and Berry in like sort from whence it is separated by Chastillon situate vpon the riuer Indre. East, not far from Loire, the riuer of Cher diuides it from the prouince of Blois, and from part of Berry: and North it is seuered from the territories of Maine and Vendosmois by the riuer Loire: vp∣on which riuer is built the citie of Tours, and it imbraceth the same on the part of S. Lazarus suburbs. This riuer also bends his course to the towne of S. Anne, and to the suburbe called Rich: for East, West, and South it toucheth the riuer Indre; and North, all the region to∣wards Anjou and Maine. To the Dukedome and gouernment of Tourain are subiect these cities, Chinon, Lodun, Touars, Langestz, Amboise, Loches, Chastillon vpon Indre, Montrichard, besides other places and fortresses of Barons. But the cities which I haue na∣med are of best note, and as it were the principall members of the whole Dukedome. Concerning euery of which I will speake more largely, hauing said somwhat of the Metropolitan: whereunto belong the third part of Bishop-townes, which in times past were vnder the ancient iurisdiction of Lugdune. For vnder the third receiued diuision of Diocesses apperteining to the Primacie of Lugdune or Lions, are comprehended Tours, La Mans, Angiers, Rhenes, Nants, Cornevaile, Vannes, S. Poll de Leon, Tregoir, Dol, S. Malo, S. Brieu. The Turones therefore of such antiquitie, and their city the head of so many Nations, Iulius Caesar recko∣neth in the first rancke of the people of France: and so likewise do other ancient Writers. Pto∣lemey placeth them vpon the riuer Ligeris: and Ammianus Marcellinus in Secundâ Lugdunensi. But in Caesar they are oftener mentioned, and that very plainly, especially at the end of his eleuenth booke De bello Gallico. This done (saith he) and all France be∣ing at quiet, so great an opinion of this war surprized the Barbarians, that euen those nations which inhabited beyond Rhene, sent ambassadours vnto Caesar, promising to giue him pledges, and to obey his commandements. He therefore hauing ended his warres, and put his legions in garison among the Carnutes, Andes, and Turones, which were cities neere vnto these places, departed for Italie. Hence you may gather, that they were not enemies to the Romans, but rather Caesars followers. Gregory Turonen∣sis often calles them Senatores Romanos, for they enioyed the libertie of Free-denizens, which was granted to none but such as were the Romans deere friends, and linked vnto them in most firme league. The Touranois are held to be one of the richest people in all France, both for the fruitfulnesse of their fields (which they deseruedly call The Kings garden) and also for their excellent maner of gouernment, and the industry of their Citizens, who are especially addi∣cted to traffique, for which purpose their nauigable riuer stands them in great stead. They haue also attempted of late to make silke, than which Italie affoords no better. At the East part of Tourain, vpon the riuer Loire, stands Amboise, built in a most excellent and choise seat, and a delicate pure aire: so that this place especially, the French Kings haue chosen to retire and solace themselues in. The city of Montrichard situate on a plaine, is on the one side fortified with Rocks and Woods, and hem'd in on the other side with Medowes and delightsome Fields. Without the city are houses vnder ground with Gardens and Ʋineyards on the tops of them. Loches vpon the riuer of Indre, hath a castle both for pleasantnesse, largenesse, munition and situation, almost incomparable: for situation (I say) both by Arte and Nature impregnable. Pautruy, Chastillon, Cormery, Beaulieu, and other cities of this Dukedome, are de∣scribed by Belleforest, vnto whom I referre the Reader.
map of Touraine, France Touraine. TVRONENSIS DVCATVS et CONFINIVM GALLIAE CELTICAE DESCRIPTIO. Perlustrata & descripta haec regio est ab Ysaaco Franco Regio Aedili, nec non in ea provincia Viarum magistro. Anno Domini M.D.XCII. Complectitur hic ducatus latitudo ab aequinoctiali versus Arcticum ad 47. gra∣dum, 49 minutos porrigitur. Longitudo vero ab Occidente in Orientem ad 21. gradum & 27. minutos extenditur. Les Isles de Loire, 1. Chaumont 2. Des Chams 3. S. Iehan 4. Le Chasselier 5. Tribon et du Ianover 6. Mahondeau 7. Roche corbon 8. Torcay 9. Vaugon est 10. Maille 11. Buysson Bretenay 12. Drovineau 13. Bec decher 14. Voletz 15. S. Martin 16. Cappel blanche 17. Petit S. Marin 18. Sauget 19. Les Isles de chose 20. Monsoreau
BLAISOIS, or the territory of BLOIS. THis territorie of Blois confineth East vpon Orleans and part of Gastinois; West vp∣on Tourain; South vpon Salloigne and part of Berry; and North vpon Vendosmois and Le Beaulse. That portion of the citie of Blois which looketh towards Le Beaulse, stands partly vpon hilles and rocks, and partly vpon plaine ground; which vneuen situation maketh the wayes and passages somewhat vneasie. Howbeit this inconuenience is no disgrace to the Citie, nor discourageth Tra∣uellers to frequent it: for the fruitfulnesse and faire beautie of the whole Pro∣uince makes it amiable, and the excellent temper of the aire, populous: It be∣ing for plentie of Wheat, Wine, and other necessaries for mans life, to no Prouince inferiour: for it is all shadie, and full of Woods, Vineyards, Riuers, Brooks, Pooles and Fountaines: so that Nature hath infused a wonderfull fatnesse into this soile, with such a temper of heat vpon the hilles neere about the citie, as causeth their Vineyards exceedingly to prosper. Wherefore this Prouince participating with Le Beaulse and Salloigne, excelleth them both in their owne commodities. For abounding with Wheat no lesse than Le Beaulse, it farre surpasseth thesame in Wines, in other kinds of graine, and in plenty of water. For pleasantnesse it matcheth Salloigne, from whence, though it be seuered but the bredth of the riuer Loire, yet is not the fruitfulnesse thereof empair'd by the others sandie barrennesse. Wherefore that part of Le Beaulse wherein Blois is situate, hath more abundance of wood and water than the resi∣due; and the frontiers of Salloigne next adioyning may ascribe their fruitfulnesse to the good neigh∣bourhood of this territory. Neither can the olde said saw, That it is best dwelling in Salloigne, and best inheriting in Le Baulse, be seuerally, but iointly applied to Blois. That the aire is most holsome and tem∣perate, I appeale to multitudes of great and honourable personages, who being oppressed with most grieuous diseases, do repaire especially to this Prouince for the recouery of their health. Yea the Kings children are nursed & trained vp in the city of Blois: for which cause it is called The Kings city. Amongst the rarities of this prouince, one there is that can hardly be found in the whole Kingdome besides, namely a veine of that earth, which is commonly called Terra Lemnia or Sigillata, being of the same force and efficacie with the true earth of Lemnos. All this description we haue taken out of Belleforest. LEMOSIN. THe Prouince of Lemosin consisteth of two Regions, the Higher and the Lower; both be∣ing subiect to one gouernment. They are diuided insunder by the castles of Massere, the riuers Bresdasque and Bezerre, and those of the region called La Marche de Lemosin. The higher part extendeth from Puy, the first village in the way to Paris, as farre as the riuer Bredasque, for the space of nineteene leagues or fortie French leagues. The very same di∣stance it hath from Vareille (which stands a mile from Souterane) to the foresaid riuer. It is plentifully watered by the riuer Vienne, which the inhabitants call Vignana, and Bezerre abounding with riuers, crabs, and by other small Freshets: so that all the whole country is very moist and fertile, and excellent pasture ground for great and small cattell, which do here mightily increase. The principall citie of the higher prouince called Limoges is accounted one of the most famous and ancient cities of all France: situate partly in a valley towards the riuer of Vienne, and the towne and church of S. Stephen; and partly on an hill, towards the suburbe of S. Martiall. The length farre surpasseth the bredth, extending North and South. It is strongly fortified with walles and ditches, and abounds with water deriued from a notable Fountaine in the highest part of the citie, which serues likewise both to water their horses, and to clense their streets. But the ruines of the ancient walles, yet standing in the next Vineyards, do plain∣ly shew, that the Citie in times past, was much larger than at this present. For first the Romans surpri∣zed it, and afterwards the Gothes, as witnesseth Sidonius Apollinaris, when he hath reckoned vp all the ci∣ties of Aquitaigne sacked and destroyed by them. The Francks also miserably afflicted it. After them Charles Martell laid it waste. And lastly, the English made spoile thereof. Notwithstanding at this time, for the bignesse, it is accounted one of the richest cities in the whole Kingdome; being very well orde∣red and gouerned in regard of the Court of Parliament there, as likewise the authoritie of the Vicount, the Kings Eschequer, and the assembly of the Consuls in Merchants affaires, which they commonly call The Burse. Thus much and more, concerning this region, writeth Belleforest.
map of Blois, France Blaisois. BLESIENSIS TERRITORII hanc tabulam, describe∣bat Ioannes Temporius Blesis, anno Messiae nati 1592. epoche Christia∣nae 1590. Mundi 5610. Le Blaisois contient en longitu∣de d'Occident en Orient depuis S. Ouin iusques à Brinon 25 lieuez en latitude de l'Equateur vers le Nord, depuis Chasteauroux iusques à Rabestan 40. lieues. La cincture de la terre est divisee en 360. degrez, a chascun degre donnons 25. lieues. Toute la terre contient 9000. lieues.
map of Limousin, France LEMOVICVM TOTIVS ET CONFINIVM PROVINCIARVM QVANTVM AD DIOE∣CESIM LEMOVICENSEM SPECTANT NOVISSIMA ET FIDISSIMA DESCRIPTIO. Io. Fayanus M. L. describebat. Homere Demosthene et Archimede ensemble Lymoges á nourry óu la Vertu sassemble, Muret, Dorat, Fayen, trois excellens Esprits: Muret son Demosthene et Dorat son Homere. Fayen son Archimede ayant sa ville Mere Sa Prouince et son Plan heureusement compris. IOACHIN BLANCHON.
CALAIS and BOVLONGNE. THis Cart conteineth the description of that North-western part of France, which the English were masters of from the yere 1347. vntil the yere 1557. At what time the Duke of Guise Lieutenant for the French King tooke it by force of armes. The townes of Calais, Guisnes, and Ardres the English from time to time haue furnished with able garisons. And Calais hath heretofore beene the Staple for Woolles and other English commodities. Concerning the tract of Boulongne, thus saith Robert Caenalis, in his 2. book, and 3. Perioche De re Gallica. Of Gessoriacum, a port of the Morini, I may well say with Meierus, that it is now truely called Boulongne vpon the sea shore, from whence there is a very short cut to Douer on the English coast. But the Docke or place for building ships (called Nauale Gessoriacum, which Bilibaldus falsely affirmes to be Gaunt) I thinke rather to be Ca∣stellum, now named Cassell. Some by another name call it Petressa and Scalas, com∣monly Scales. Moreouer, by the situation of Boulongne one may easily coniecture, whether it were Portus Iccius or no. Wherein that no man may doubt, let vs learne this one thing out of Strabo, That the sea between Portus Iccius and England, was iust 320. stadia or furlongs ouer: which make in all 40. miles. But the later Maps containe betweene Boulongne and Douer 17. English, which are longer than Italian miles, and from Calais 18. Whereby it is manifest, that from Boulongne to Douer it is but a very short cut: wherefore Portus Gessoriacus the hauen, and Na∣uale Gessoriacum the docke, are not all one: which docke whoso thinketh stood where Calais now stands, I will not greatly contradict him. Thus farre Caenalis. This very place of Boulongne is described by Arnoldus Ferronius (who continu∣ed the French history of Paulus Aemilius till his owne time) in maner following. There is (saith he) Base Boulongne, and High Boulongne. The base towne was vn∣walled before the comming of the English. There stands the church of S. Nicho∣las, and a cloister of Franciscans: the English sea beateth vpon this towne. Neere vnto this Frierie, which is not farre from the sea, there is a very commodious place to passe for England. It is distant from the higher Boulongne about 100. pases or somewhat more. But Boulongne the higher is inuironed with most strong walles, and with high ditches compassing the walles. All this region is full of that sand, which those that dwell on the coast call hot sand. Whereupon they will haue the name of Boulongne to be deriued of the French word that signifies such kinde of sand, notwithstanding we know it out of Ammianus Marcellinus to be an ancient name. Thus much out of Ferronius. Concerning these matters reade Diuaeus also. VERMANDOIS. THis Region which of olde the Ʋeromandui inhabited, still retaining the ancient name, is at this present called Ʋermandois. From hence the ri∣uers of Some and Schelde fetch their originall. Here in times past (as Ro∣bert Caenalis witnesseth) stood the city called Augusta Veromanduorum, now raced all saue a Monasterie which remaineth. This citie was the sea of a Bi∣shop, but vnder Medardus the Bishop thereof it was translated to Noion, as Caro∣lus Bouillus reporteth. Howbeit the place yet holdeth the ancient name, and is cal∣led Ʋermand-abbey. Wherefore they seeme to be in an errour, that thinke the towne of S. Quintins to haue beene Augusta Veromanduorum. Concerning the peo∣ple of this region, reade Peter Diuaeus in his booke of the antiquities of Gallia Bel∣gica.
map of Caleis and Boulogne, France CALE∣TENSIVM ET BONONI∣ENSIVM DITI∣ONIS ACCVRA∣TA DELINE∣ATIO.
map of Vermandois, France VEROMANDV∣ORVM EORVM∣QVE CONFINI∣VM EXACTISSI∣MA DESCRIPT. Iohanne Surhonio Auctore.
PICARDIE. THe name of Picardie, as all that write of France do affirme not to be ancient; so the originall or deriuation thereof none of them can render. Caenalis dares not say, that it was so called of the Be∣gardes. Belleforest flatly denies it, supposing the Picardes to be somewhat ancienter than the Begardes. Some thinke that they were so named of the warlike weapon called the Pike; which, as they imagine, was here first inuented. Certaine it is, that the prouince of Picardy was larger in times past: for we reade that Artois, with a part of Flanders, as farre as the riuer Lis, and the countie of Boulogne, were all comprehended vnder the name of Picardy. The region which is now properly called Picardy, extends not so farre as the Map it selfe. This Region is part of Gallia Belgica, whilom inhabited by the Ambiani, Bel∣louaci, and Veromandui, or (as Ptolemey calles them) Romandui. The riuer Somme, which some thinke to be Ptolemey his Phrudis, refresheth the wole coun∣trey, and makes it most fertile of all kinde of graine, and the townes and cities to abound with all necessaries: for it yeeldeth such plentie of wheat, as it is called by an vsuall prouerbe, The Barne or Granarie of Paris. It hath no vineyards; which defect some thinke is rather to be imputed to the sloth of the inhabitants, than to the intemperature either of the soile, or of the climate. The cities here, of principall note, are Amiens, in Latine Ambianum, famous both for antiquitie and the Episcopall sea. It is enuironed around with the riuer Somme. Wherefore some fondly thinke it to be named Ambianum, ab ambitu aqua∣rum, because it is compassed with waters. It is one of the strongest townes in all France. The vulgar suppose it to haue beene built by the souldiers of Alexander the great. Vnder the diocesse of Amiens is Abbeuile, the name whereof is new, as appeareth by the deriuation, which in Latine is Abbatis villa, that is, The Abbats towne: for out of an Abbey it increased at length to the greatnesse and forme of a citie. It is now the head citie of the county Ponthieu; which region is so called, à multitudine pontium, of the multitude of bridges; because it is in diuers places peste∣red with Marshes and Fennes. Picquenie stands in this prouince also; built as the common sort imagine by one Pignon a principall souldier of Alexander the great. Likewise in Ʋermandois you haue the towne of S. Quintins, which many suppose to haue beene Augusta Ʋeromanduorum, being the ancient seat of the Earles of Ver∣mandois, and the head of that region. Peronne so often spoiled in warres, who can be ignorant of? Guise also seemes to be a Fort against Lutzenburgh. Hence the Guisian familie deriue their name. Other cities there be of lesse moment, as Corbie, Roye, Nelle, Hen, Cattelette, Mondidier, &c. In a little French pamphlet intitled Chemins de France, or the wayes of France, Picardy is diuided into three parts; The Lower, The Higher, and Picardy pro∣perly so called: wherein are contained the Regions of Ʋermandois, Retelois, Tarte∣nois, and Tirasse. Picardy properly so called is described in this our Table.
map of Picardy, France PI∣CARDIAE, Belgicae regio∣nis descriptio. Joanne Surhonio auctore. Cum Imp. et Reg. priualegio decenn. 1579
PROVENCE. THat portion of France which ancient Writers called Narbonensem and Bracchatam, Caesar and Plinie doe comprehend vnder the name of Prouincia: part whereof is conteined within the riuers Rosne and Durance, the Alpes, the riuer Varo, and the Mediterran sea, the inhabitants as yet call by the name of PROVENCE. Petrarch writes it was some∣times called Regnum Arelatense. The middle-age writers call it Prouinciam Viennensem tertiam. It bordereth West vpon Languedoc, North vpon Daulphine, East it is confined by Piemont, and South by the Mediterran sea, and the Isles Stoechades. This euer was and now is accounted the most fertile region of France: for Strabo saith it yeelds all sorts of fruits that Italie affoordeth. If we may credit Belleforest, it beareth sugar about the towne of Yeres. Manna is here gathered, as the same authour affirmeth. The principall cities of this prouince are Massilia, commonly Marseille, which was the ancient Ionica Colonia, of the Phocaean Greeks, being as Caesar 5. Ciuil. re∣ports, compassed by the sea on three sides; and on the fourth side, hauing a passage to the land. Strabo writes, that the hauen is in forme of a Theater, and that within compasse thereof they haue docks for the building, and a storehouse for the furnishing of ships. Here was a temple of the Ephesian Diana, and ano∣ther of Apollo Delphicus. The citizens were treble-tongued, speaking Greeke, Latine, and French, as S. Ierome reporteth out of Varro. Of this citie reade more largely in the 43. booke of Trogus Pompeius, and in a Pane∣gyricke speech vttered before Constantine the great by Anonymus or one vnnamed. The citie Arelatum com∣monly Arles, vpon the riuer of Rhosne; which by Ausonius is named Arelas or Gallula Roma; as likewise double Arelas, because (as learned Vinetus obserueth) it was heretofore by the said riuer diuided in twaine. Now it may well be called single Arelas, looking of a farre other shape, and all situate vpon that side of the riuer which is towards Italie. This, Ammianus makes the renowme of many cities. And Suetonius saith, that heere was a Romane colonie planted by Tiberius the Emperor his father. Procopius affirmes, that it was heretofore the head citie of the Burgundians. Next followes Aquae Sextiae, so called (saith Strabo) because that very Sex∣tius which subdued Salyes, built this citie after his owne name, and after the name of certaine hot bathes in the same place. Now it is corruptly called Aix. These bathes Strabo in his time supposeth to haue turned colde, and so Robert Caenalis at this present affirmeth, that they haue lost their ancient vertue. The Parlia∣ment of the whole prouince is here resident. Of this citie Gabriel Simeonius writeth, that he neuer saw either a more pleasant place, or a more courteous people. Then haue you the citie Cabellio, now called Cauaillon. Tarascon retaining still the ancient name. Carpentoracte commonly Carpentras. Vasio now Voiton: the same with Forum Vocontiorum, as some thinke. Taurentum and Telo Martius, which some now interpret to be Tou∣lon. Forum Iulij, now Frejus. Olbia which perhaps is Yeres. Antipolis, Antibe. Segusteron, Cisteron. Vintium, Venze. Glanatica, Glandeues. Dinia, Digne. Tecolata thought to be S. Maximines. Grinicensis, Grasse. All famous for an∣tiquitie. Moreouer, here is the towne of S. Baume, situate vpon a craggie hill, in which is a caue; where, the inhabitants hold opinion, that Mary Magdalen did penance, and ended her dayes. Likewise at the mouth of Rhosne the reader may see on the one side the field called La Craux; and on the other side La Camargo This last named (they say) is miraculously fertile of wheat. And Belleforest thinks it to be called Camargo, à castris Marij, of the campe of Marius here pitched. Whereas the other named La Craux, is out of measure bar∣ren, yeelding nought but stones: for which cause it is by ancient Writers most aptly called Campus Lapideus, or The stonie field. The isles adiacent to this prouince are the Stoechades, dispersed, as Pomponius writeth, from the shore of Liguria or Genoa as farre as Marseille. Plinie makes them three in number, naming ech. And Strabo saith there are three of importance, and two small ones, not worthy to be mentioned. About these isles growes most excellent Corrall, as Plinie witnesseth, which Belleforest reporteth still to continue. In commendation of this prouince, Petrus Quinqueranus Bishop of Sens, hath written a peculiar volume. On this side the riuer Durance, this Region bordereth vpon that part of the Popes iurisdiction, which is commonly called Conte de Venacin, in Latine Comitatus Venuxinus, and Veneticus, wherein stands the Citie and Vniuersitie of Auignon, which in times past was the Papall sea, namely from Pope Clement the fift in the yeere 1300. till Gregorie the second, for the space of 60. yeeres. Petrarch then called it The French and Westerne Babylon. Besides other notable things in this citie, seuen there are, seuen times told, right worthy the admi∣ration; namely, seuen Palaces, seuen Hospitals, seuen Parishes, seuen Nunries, seuen Colleges, seuen Frie∣ries, and seuen gates. Not farre from hence is the valley of Chisa at the head of the riuer Sorgues, a place so highly magnified by Petrarch, as he often calles it his Helicon and Pernassus. This he made choise of as an hermitage to weane himselfe from worldly cogitations. A man (in my conceit) not of the ordinary cast of Writers, and whom I may boldly and deseruedly call, The Christian Seneca.
map of Provence, France PROVINCIAE, Regionis Galliae, vera exactissima{que} descriptio. Petro Ioanne Bompario auctore. Cum Privilaegio decennali Imp. Reg. et Brab. 1594
The coast of NARBONNE. THE principall places along this coast William Paradine describes in these words: Arles was a colonie of the Sextaine, as some Writers doe affirme. Standing vpon Rhosne it is enui∣roned with Marshes; wherein at this present are a breed of fierce and vntamed Kine. Whi∣lome it was a famous Mart-towne, as Strabo writes in maner following: Narbo (saith he) the most frequented Mart of this Region, standeth at the outlet of the riuer Araxis, by the lake Narbonensis: but vpon Rhodanus the towne of Arles, a Mart of no small importance, is situate. Neere vnto Arles are those hot bathes, where Sextius (saith Strabo) built a towne after his owne name, calling it Aquae Sextiae. The cause why he built it was to place a Ro∣man garrison there. Here were the Cimbrislaine by Marius, as writeth S. Ierome. Aurasio, now called Orange, famous in times past for the gouernment of the Gabali, or Cabilonen∣ses; wherin I saw the ruines of an huge Theater, and a mightie wall excellently built of square stone, the like whereof I doubt whether all France can affoord. There stands also at the gate towards Lions a triumphall arche, with a tilt or turniment of horsmen ingrauen thereupon, which we long beheld with great delight. To this citie belongeth Nemau∣sum, now called Arenas, a place renowmed for the ancient Theater there extant. Heere is a most woonderfull pas∣sage vnder ground, passing thwart vnder the very chanell of Rhodanus, to the citie which standeth afarre off. Heere likewise you may see the Palace of Plotina, built by Adrian the Emperour, as Spartianus reporteth, &c. Thus much out of Paradine. But of all others, most exactly Iohn Poldo d' Albena hath described this citie, and set forth the antiqui∣ties in picture, with the situations and ancient names of the places adiacent. Of this argument reade Strabo in his fourth booke: and Gunterus a Poet of Genoa. The originall of this Table my friend Mr. Carolus Clusius of Arras gaue me drawen with his owne hand. SAVOIE. SAVOIE standeth on this side the Alpes, the Prince whereof called the Duke of Sauoie, is Lord of the Region of Piemont. The head citie is Chamberi (of olde, as saith Caenalis, called Ciuaro) wherein the Senate or Parliament resideth. This region some thinke was named Sabaudia from certaine people called Sebusiani, and as others suppose, of the Sabbatian fourds. But Bouillus ren∣ders another reason of this name. For this region (saith he) in regard of the narrow passages (as being situate among the Alpes) and of the scarsitie of inhabitants was all ouer-pestered with theeues, which either robbed or murdered such trauellers as passed that way. Hereupon a certaine Nobleman hauing obtained it of the Emperour vnder the title of a Dukedome, expelled by force of armes all the said theeues and robbers, and made the way most secure for trauellers. This done, he caused it after∣ward to be named Salua via, commonly Sauluoy, that is, The safe way, which before was called Mala via, alias Maul∣uoy, The euill or dangerous way: hence the Latines call it Sabaudia. Hitherto Carolus Bouillus. Whether it be a fable or an historie, I appeale to the authours credit. This one thing I am sure of, that the word SAPAVDIA is often vsed in the booke called Notitiae prouinciarum, for a name of one of the prouinces of Gallia Narbonensis. But here also I thinke it not amisse to annex the description of this prouince out of the history which Paradine wrote of it. His words be these: That region which in Latine is now called Sabaudia (commonly Sauoy) ancient Writers na∣med Allobroges. And it containeth all that tract, which in times past the Sabbatij, Ingauni, Intimelij, Hiconij, Tricorij, Vicontij, Lepontij, Latobrigi, Medualli, Centrones, Catoriges, Veragri, Nantuarij, Salassi, Tharantasij, and Seduni inha∣bited. The regions therein comprised at this present are thus named: Sauoy, the countie of Geneua, the Marquisat of Susa, the countie of Morienne, the Baronisse of Tharentaise, Brengeois, Foucigni, Chablais, Val de Oste, Pais de Vaul, Pais de Geis, and some others. The Duchie of Sauoy hath vnder it the region of Piemont, adorned with the title of a Princedome. Also the region of Bresse, wherein are the counties of Varaz, Mountrueil, Pont de Vaulx, Bagey, &c. Out of ancient monuments it is apparent, that this region in times past bare the name of a Kingdome; especially in the dayes of Hannibal: who being ordained vmpire betweene Bronchus and his brother about the gouernment of this countrey, compounded their quarrell, and restored the kingdome to the eldest, whom his yonger brother had expel∣led; as Liuie reports in his 21. booke. Florus also affirmeth, that Betultus (or as some reade it Betuitus) the King of this place, was taken captiue by Fabius Maximus. And sundrie authours doe make mention of King Cottius in the time of the Emperour Augustus, of whom the neighbour-alpes were called Cottiae. More concerning this region you may reade in Philibert Pingonicus. The Countie of VENACIN. THe Countie of Venacin, named in Latine Comitatus VENVXINVS, and by Caenalis VENETICVS, and the Popes territory also, because it is vnder his iurisdiction; is part of that region in France now called Prouence, and of olde Narbonensis secunda. The principall citie is Auignon situate vpon the Rhosne. It is the Popes towne, and held for a while the Papall sea. In this countie are three Bi∣shopricks, where law-matters also are decided, namely Carpentras, Cauaglion, or L'isle, and Vaurias. In this Table is comprehended also the Princedome of Orange, so called of Orange the chiefe citie, be∣ing famous in Sidonius and Ptolemey vnder the name of Arausio. Plinie and Pomponius call it Arausia Secundanorum. COL. ARAVSIO SECVNDANOR. COH. 33. VOLVNT. is found grauen vpon an ancient stone. More concerning this region you may reade in Belleforest and Theuet.
map of Narbonne, France GALLIA NARBONENS. map of Savoy, France SABAVDIAE DVCAT. Auctore Aegidio Bulionio Belga Scala milliarium. map of Avignon, France VENVXINI COMITA∣TVS NOVA DESCR. Auctore Stephano Ghebellino.
LORRAIN. THE bounds of Lorrain in times past extended much farther, for it comprehended in a maner all the whole region lying betweene the riuer Rhene, and Scheld, and the mountaine Vogasus. All which was diuided into the higher, and the lower. The lower Lorrain contained Brabant, Haspengow, Guelders, and Cleue. In the higher were the Bishopricke of Liege, with the coun∣ties of Lutzenburg, and Limburg: as likewise the duchy of Maesland, the countie Palantine vpon Sur, and the territorie of Hundsruge: together with this present Dukedome of Lorrain retaining as yet the ancient name Lotharingia, imposed by Lotharius sonne to Ludouicus Pius, vnto whose share it befell: lying in the midst between Westrasia (or as some vnskilfully call it Noastria) which fell to Charles, and Austrasia to Lewis Lotharius Brethren. This therefore I thinke not amisse more largely to describe, not in mine owne wordes, but in the wordes of Symphorianus Campeg∣gius, sometimes a famous Physition of Lorrain, LORRAIN (saith he) ioineth East vpon Alsatia, commonly Elsas, South vpon Burgundy, West vpon Champaigne, & North it is bounded vpon the Forest Arduenna. This region albeit compassed with loftie Alpes, is notwithstanding so fat and fertile, as it need no supply from the neighbour-prouinces: it abounds with cattell great and small, with meadowes, corne, wine, fishpooles, high woods, healthfull bathes, saltpits, yron, copper, lead, tinne, siluer, precious stones, looking glasses, Calcidons, and is watered by sundrie riuers: foure whereof are famous aboue the rest. Mosa the first of these foure springing out of mount Vogesus (of which mountaine a great and a good part of Lorraine is named Le bois, and Le forest de Voige) and running along by Neufchasteau, a towne very commodious both for pleasant situation, and wholesome ayer: diuideth the duchie of Barre from Lorraine, and casteth it selfe into one of the chanels of Rhene, before it falleth into the sea. Mosella the second beginneth Southeast, not far from the towne of Rimere∣mont; wherein is a monastery of Nunnes, all gentlewomen, endowed with large reuenues. About six miles from hence are certaine hot-bathes whereunto resort great multitudes of people to cure themselues of sundrie diseases. Then runnes it along with swift streames to the townes of Espinall, Charmes, Toul (which in olde time was called Leuca) and Mediomatrices, now called Metz: not farre from whence it falls into the Rhene, at a city of Germany called of olde Confluentia, and now Cobolentz. Betweene these two riuers neere the towne of Vitell, is a double fountaine seuered like a mans nosethrills, from whence the small riuer Vena issueth: which sometimes is sandy, and sometimes miry, and for the most part very vnseemely and forlorne: the waters whereof are commonly dried vp in Iune, except the pooles, which the swelling and violent streames haue made so deepe. Murtha the third riuer falling from certaine rockes of siluer-mines, holdeth on his course through the valley of S. Didier, wherein is S. Godeberts fountaine, which is generally reported to be medicinable for many diseases. The said riuer runnes along by the towne of S. Didier, and then by the townes of Raon and Luneuill: all which both for naturall situation, and for rampiers, and walles are places of singular defence. Then followes the towne of S. Nicholas ge∣nerally famous both for abundance of marchandise, and multitudes of miracles. Lower downe the riuer stands Nancey, the principall towne of Lorraine, a place for munition, and fortification of great importance. First it is compassed with two ditches of exceeding depth, and a double wall: also it hath foure most admirable bulwarks, with plenty of warlike engins and artillery. Murtha falles into Mosell. And Sartha the fourth riuer running along the confines of Westereich, a prouince subiect to Lorraine towards the East, holdeth on his course by the townes of Sarburg, Saralben, Sarprucke, with others, and then falles into Mosell. Now whereas Lorraine aboundeth all ouer with speciall commodities; many of them we will omit, and speake only of the most principall. First therefore the mountaines of this prouince doe in all kind of mineralls excell euen the Pyreney mountaines: wherein, not to speake of the rest, there are diuers siluer-mines, so abounding with that kinde of mettall, as it is incredible what commoditie it yeelds to the whole countrey. There are also salt-mines, out of which is digged most pure, sauorie, and snow-white salt: which yeeldeth yerely to the Duke, all charges deducted, 100000. francks. Heere is found likewise a kind of matter, whereof they make looking glasses and drinking glasses, the best, by all mens confession, in Europe: nor is there in any place the like to be had. Also Calcidons of so extraordinarie bignesse, that I my selfe saw at the Bishops of Toul, a great cuppe made of one whole piece. Item, the Lazul (or Azure stone) representing most excellent colours. A minerall out of which the miners raise exceeding gaine. In the valley of Voige are fountaines (a matter memorable, and not to be omitted) so abounding with a kinde of pearles, and precious stones, as the greater part of Germanie doth vse them: which all Lapidaries and Iewellers of other countries do not only approue, but also preferre before the stones and pearles of the Indies. There is a lake of foureteene miles in compasse, stored with carps of huge bignesse; for they are generally of three foot long, and a foot broad; which for pleasantnesse of taste, are (in mine opinion) to be preferred before all other standing-water-carps in Europe. The lake is fished with nets euery third yeere; the fishing whereof (as euery man knowes) yeeldeth the Duke of Lorrain 16000. francks. Moreouer, Lorrain aboundeth with wheat, wine, cattell of all sorts, woods, excellent horses, which surpasse the Tur∣kish horses in courage, the Spanish in swiftnesse, and the English in stature. In briefe, for tall men and beautifull women; and all things necessary for mans life, it is inferiour to no other countrie. Thus farre Symphorianus. Francis Roseus very lately wrote a large volume of the pedegree, and famous acts of the Dukes of Lorraine. And I my selfe in mine Itinerarium, or Iournall, haue published some things of this Region not vnwoorthie the remembrance.
map of Lorraine, France Lorraine. LOTHARIN∣GIAE NOVA DESCRIPTIO. Scala milliariorum Lotharingicorum. 1587. Cum Priuilegio decennali
The County of BVRGVNDIE. THere are two Burgundies; the lower called Regia, intitled with the name of a Dukedome; whilome the countrey of the Aedui: and the higher named Im∣peratoria, adorned with the title of a Countie or Earledome, commonly called LA FRANCHE COMTE, that is to say, The free Countie. This of old the Sequani inhabited. It is represented in this Table. The confines hereof to the North are Lorraine and vpper Germany: to the South, Sauoy, and Bresse: to the West, the lower Burgundie: and to the East, part of Switzerland. It is at this pre∣sent diuided into three partitions or gouernments; The Vpper, the Lower, and that of Dole. The cities of the vpper are GRAY, one of the principall of the whole gouern∣ment, situate vpon the riuer Araris, or Saone, rich in sundry kindes of merchandise, and brauely built. On the one side it is endowed with most large and fruitfull fields. VESOVL. It hath strong walles, beautifull houses, and faire vineyards. MOMBOSON, IVSSEY, and PALMA standing vpon the riuer Dubis, or Doux. PORT-SVR-SAONE, vpon the riuer Araris, or Saone, with CROMA∣RAY, MONTGVSTIN, and FAVLCOGNEY. The cities of the lower Burgundie are: SALINS, a large citie, so named in regard of certaine salt and high fountaines; for here is excellent white salt made, which is carried hence in carts to the neighbour countries, and yeelds great reuenue to this region: SCODINGA, situate in a long streight valley, extending in length betweene a double ridge of high mountaines, which beare vines in such places as are most open to the Sunne: it is ex∣ceeding strong, being fortified with two castles, and diuers loftie turrets. ARBOIS, seated in a most pleasant soile, and abounding with all necessaries, especially with excellent and durable wine. It hath large suburbs on all sides. It is enuironed with ditches, but such as they make gardens vpon. Round about it are mountaines of most beautifull prospect, watered with cleare springs, and clad with fruitfull vines, and sightly woods. It is called Arbois ab Arboribus, because it is so planted with trees: POLIGNY a faire towne, fortified with stately walles and towers; the castle called Grimonia lying within it: and on the one side it hath mountaines of woods; and on the other side hilles set with vines, the wine whereof is principall good. PONTARLIER, situate in a low valley betweene two mountaines, on the bancke of Dubis. Not farre hence stands the strong castle of Iura or Ioux, on the top of an exceeding high hill; so that for situation it is impregnable. NOZEROY, founded vpon an open hill, in the very nauell or midst of this region. All the houses in a maner are built of stone: the Prince of the countrey hath here a castle, called The Leaden castle, because it is couered with lead. Here is a Faire kept foure times in the yere. In times past this towne, before it was walled, was named Nucillum, of the abundance of hazel-nuts that grew round about it. CHASTEL CHA∣LON, built and named by the Emperour Charlemaine, both pleasantly and strongly situate. MONTMOROT, vpon a steepe mountaine planted with vines. ORGELET, abounding with merchandise. The inhabitants are industrious and painfull, and exercise themselues in clothing. Their fields are barren, for they are full of hilles and craggie rocks; whereupon is grounded a com∣mon prouerbe, which saith, That Orgelet hath fields without grasse, riuers without fish, and moun∣taines without woods and groues. The cities of Dole, are first, DOLE it selfe, the head citie of the prouince, a nurse of all learning, and especially of the ciuill law, most pleasantly situate vpon the ri∣uer Dubis, adorn'd with bridges, walles, and inuincible forts. The houses, churches and schooles, both for greatnesse and curious building are most delightfull to the beholders. QVINGEY, a most ancient towne, situate vpon the bancke of Louë. ORNANS, standing also among high mountaines by the riuer Louë. LA LOY, a most ample village. ROCHFORT a pretie litle towne. VERCELLES with ruinous and deformed walles. In this countie stands BESANÇON, a citie Imperiall, and Metropolitan of both Burgundies: the description whereof, because I cannot con∣dignly expresse in this page, being exactly performed by Gilbert Cognatus, Paradine, and George Bruno in his volume of cities; I cease here to speake any farther. For sith their books are so easie to be had, I referre all students to them. To these also you may adde Robert Caenalis. It were to be wished that Cognatus had not frustrated the hope of students: for he promised in a booke, to restore and bring to light ancient Burgundie, together with a particular Map, and the olde and new names of places. But we haue hitherto expected him in vaine. Howbeit, not long since Lewis Gollusius published concerning this Countie in French, a great and peculiar volume.
map of the County of Burgundy, France BVRGVN∣DIAE COMITATVS. Hugo Cusi∣nus, sive Cog∣natus pa∣triam su∣am sic describebat. 1589. Cum Privilegijs Imp. Regis, et Brabantiae. ad decennium.
The Dukedome of BVRGVNDIE. THat part of France which the Aedui whilome enioyed is now called The Dukedome of Burgundie. It is limited North by Champaigne and Gastinois: West, by Niuernois and Burbonnois: South, it borders vpon Lionnois: and East the riuer Rhosne diuides it from Sauoy and the county of Burgundy. The head citie in times past was Augustodunum: but now Diuio, or Diuionum, as Gregory Turonensis in his third booke calles it, or as the in∣habitants, Digion hath gotten the superiority; for here the supreme court of Parlia∣ment for the whole Dukedome is holden. It is seated on the bancke of Oscarus (com∣monly Ousch) a riuer abounding with fish, in a fertile and plentifull soile, the moun∣taines adiacent yeelding strong and excellent wines: as the said Turonensis reporteth, who most learnedly describes it. Some thinke it was built by the Emperour Aurelian; but others affirme it to be much ancienter. It is a citie both by arte and nature most strongly fortified against all hostile attempts, certaine new forts being lately added. Belna (commonly Beaulne) is the second citie of the Dukedome, famous for the wines of Beaulne, which all men commend. This Citie is fairely built, being impregnable in regard of a Castle which Lewis the twelfth erected here. It hath an hospitall comparable for building to any Kings Palace. Here also is the seat of the high court of Chancery. In the territorie adiacent was built by Duke Otho about the yeere of our Lord 1098. the abbey of Cistertium; in a woody and clammy soile, which some thinke was so called in regard of certaine Cisternes there digged. Vnder the iurisdiction of this Monasterie Belleforest reporteth, that there are 1800. other Monasteries of Friers, and as many of Nunnes. Next followes Augustodunum (which some, though vpon no sufficient grounds of antiquitie, suppose to haue beene called Bibracte) now Auttun. That this citie of ancient times was most large and populous, it is euident out of sundry authours, and especially out of Caesar. Here are yet extant mightie ruines of a Thea∣ter, of Statues, Pillars, Water-chanels, Pyramides, and many other monuments of antiquitie. Likewise here are dayly digged vp coines, little vessels, and other such ancient fragments. This citie hath endured two memorable ouerthrowes: one by Caesar in his French warres; and the other about the time of Galienus the Emperour. But it was afterward reedified by Constantine the sonne of Claudius, as the Panegyrick of Eu∣menius, calling it Flauiam Heduorum, doth testifie. And at this very day it is adorned with stately temples, and other buildings for publicke vses. Then haue you Matiscona Caesaris, or Matisconense castrum Antonini, where he placeth in garrison the tenth Roman legion. It is now called Mascon. Of olde it was graced with the title of an Earledome. It ioyneth the bancks of Araris by a bridge. Here, the Lords day of the Christians began first to be hallowed, as Pa∣radine reporteth out of the Edict of Guntram. The relation of the citie of Mascon, Philip Bugnonius hath ele∣gantly, and briefly set downe. Cabilonum, now Chalon, vpon the bancke of Araris also, anciently called Or∣bandale, as reporteth Peter Sanjulian. By Antoninus the foureteenth Roman legion was here put in garrison. It was of olde the royall seat of Guntram, which notwithstanding afterward Lotharius sonne to Ludouicus Pi∣us so destroyed and abolished with fire, as he left no mention at all of a citie: yet now it is very rich, and a place of great trafficke. Also toward the North you haue Semur, a faire towne built vpon an high ground. As like Castillon, Flauigni, Soloigne, Noiers, with others, the description whereof, because this page cannot well containe, I referre the Reader to Belleforest, a diligent Surueyer of these parts. Only one thing I will adde out of the foresaid Sanjulian. He against the opinion of all other Writers, deriueth this word Burgun∣die, not à burgis, that is, from the boroughs or incorporate townes built in this region, but from one parti∣cular place called Burg Ogne. In the territorie of Langren about the riuer Tille, betweene Luz and Tille-castle, he saith there is a plaine which the inhabitants call by no other name but Val d'Ogne: where in times past stood a famous borough or city. Hence without all question he affirmes, that the Burgundians, or as they are commonly called Burgognons, do borow their name; and holds those Writers much deceiued, that re∣port them, as vagabond people, to haue come out of Sarmatia, Scandia, or the fennes of Maeotis to inhabit this region; indeuouring to persuade all men that they were the first and most ancient inhabiters of this countrey. The limits of Burgundie were larger in times past, as appeareth out of sundrie authours. For some there are that bound it South by the Mediterran sea; East, by the Alpes and the riuer Rhene; North, by mount Vogesus; and West, by the riuer of Loire, and Seine. Then, classicke Writers record, that it was gouerned by Kings, whose royall seat was Arles. It was diuided into the Duchie and Countie of Burgundie, about the yeere 1034. as the Chronicle of Aemilius testifieth. Of the Burgundians Paradine and Nicolas Vignier haue professedly written in Latine, and Peter Sanjulian in French. Of the ancient Aedui reade Nazarius his Pane∣gyricke pronounced before Constantine the Emperour.
map of the Duchy of Burgundy, France BVRGVN∣DIAE IN∣FERIORIS, QVAE DVCA∣TVS NOMI∣NE CENSE∣TVR, DES. 1584. CƲM PRIVILEGIO IM∣PERIALI ET BELGICO AD DECENNIVM
GERMANIE. GERMANIE, the greatest and largest countrey of Europe, is distinguished by many names: the limits whereof by authours, according to euery ones seuerall time, are so diuersly described, as they seeme, applying themselues to the pecu∣liar ages wherein they liued, to giue notice of a threefold Germanie; namely, the ancient, that of middle ages, and Germanie as it is now taken. The ancient is that of Berosus, which he circumscribeth by the Rhene, the Ocean, the riuer Tanais, the Euxine sea, and the riuer Danubius. That of middle ages is the same which Taci∣tus, Ptolemey, and Plinie, all of one time acknowledged: whereof, because it is suf∣ficiently knowen out of the authours themselues, I hold it needlesse in this place to make any descrip∣tion. But Germanie as it is now taken, we do confine by the German or Dutch tongue; which learned Goropius Becanus in his volume of the antiquities of nations, most wittily and learnedly sheweth to be the ancientest language in the world. Wherfore all those countries which at this day vse the same lan∣guage, we comprehend vnder the name of Germany. And so the greatest length thereof stretcheth from Calais on the West to the riuer Vistula or VVixel Eastward: and the largest bredth from the German and Baltick seas to the Alpes. The names of the seuerall regions are these, Flanders (the most Westerly) Brabant, Zeland, Holland, Frisland, Denmarke, Meckleburgh, Pomerland, Prussia, which extendeth beyond the riuer Vistula towards the Baltick sea: as likewise the ancient and new Marquesates, Saxonie, VVestphalia, Gelders, Cleueland, Iuliers, the Bishopricke of Colen, Hessen, Turingen, Misnia, Lusatia, Silesia, Morauia, Bohe∣mia, Franconia, the Bishopricke of Mentz, Lutzenburg, the Bishopricke of Triers, the Countie Palatine, Elsas, VVertenberg, Sueuia, Bauaria, Austria, Stiria, Carinthia, Tirolis, and Switzerland next vnto France. There be also more names of pettie regions, but such as are either of no great moment, or comprehended vn∣der the former. And albeit Bohemia speaketh not the German but the Sclauonian tongue, yet because it is situate in the midst of Germanie, and the King thereof is one of the Prince-electours, it is also num∣bred amongst the German prouinces. This countrey of Germanie, which for the present is adorned with the title of the Roman Empire, is so replenished with beautifull and strong cities, castles, villages and inhabitants, as it is no whit inferi∣our to Italie, France, or Spaine: for corne, wine, and riuers abounding with fish, it may compare with the most fruitfull regions Here are fountaines of water, hot bathes, and salt-mines in abundance: and for plentie of mettals, namely, gold, siluer, lead, tinne, brasse, and iron, no countrey shall euer go beyond it. Moreouer, you shall no where finde more courteous and ciuill behauiour, more honest and com∣ly attire, more skill and furniture for the warres, nor greater store of nobilitie. This is the place that whilome (as Cornelius Tacitus affirmeth) was either darkened with woods, or drowned with fennes. Such changes can succeeding times affourd, as saith the Poet. Of late Writers it hath beene diligently described by Beatus Rhenanus, Munster in his Cosmography, Franciscus Irenicus, Iohannes Auentinus in his Chronicle of Lyonnois: Briefly by Bilibaldus Pirkeimerus, Iohan∣nes Bohemus Aubames: Gerardus Nouiomagus, Conradus Peutingerus, Conradus Celtes a Poet, Iacobus VVimfelingius of Sletstade, Aimon in the beginning of his French storie, and Henry Pantalion at the entrance of his first booke of Prosopographia. Sebastian Brand hath set downe many iourneys, distances of places, and cour∣ses of riuers in this countrey. The riuer Rhene is described by Bernard Mollerus in verse, and by Mag∣nus Gruberus in prose. Iohn Herold hath written two short Treatises of this region: one of the Romans most ancient stations in olde Germanie; and another of certeine colonies of theirs on the shore of Rhae∣tia. Gaspar Bruschius published a volume of the monasteries of Germanie. Of ancient writers Cornelius Ta∣citus most exactly described it in a peculiar Treatise: whereon Andraeas Althamerus, Iodocus VVillichius, and lately Iustus Lipsius haue written most learned Commentaries. Diuers other Writers of Germanie, which we haue not as yet seene, are reckened vp by Francis Irenicus, in the first booke and second chapter of his Exposition of Germanie. But here I thinke it not amisse to alledge the testimonie of Laonicus Chalco∣condylas a stranger, namely of Athens, concerning this countrey and the inhabitants. Thus therefore he writeth in his second booke: This nation is gouerned with better lawes than any other of those regi∣ons or peoples that inhabit towards the North or West. It hath many noble and flourishing cities, which vse their owne lawes, most agreeable to equitie. It is diuided into sundry principalities, and is subiect to Priests and Bishops adhering to the Bishop of Rome. The most famous and wel-gouerned cities in the vpper and lower Germanie, are Norinberg a rich city, Strasburg, Hamburg, &c. The nation is very populous and mighty; ruleth farre and wide all the world ouer; and in greatnesse is second to the Scythians or Tartars. Wherefore if they were at concord and vnder one Prince, then might they well be deemed inuincible, and the most puissant of nations. As touching their bodies, they are verie healthfull, and want nothing. Nor is there any nation that I know gouerned by better lawes. Thus much and more concerning this people and countrey, who list may reade in the same authour.
map of Germany Deutschlanndt GER∣MANI∣AE TY∣PVS. Per Franciscum Hogenbergium conciunatus Anno partae salutis M.D.LXXVI vbiorum Coloniae. Cum Gratia et Priuilegio. Magnifico, Nobili ac Praecellentj viro ac Do∣mino, D. Constantino a Lÿskirchen, florentis∣simae Agrippinensis Reipub. Confuli Seni∣ori, Franciscus Hogenbergius nuncupat.
GERMANIE on this side RHENE, commonly called THE NETHERLANDS or THE LOW COVNTRIES. THis Table representeth not all the Lower Germanie, but only that part which King Philip, sonne to Charles the fifth, challenged by right of inheritance. And it conteineth these 17. Prouinces; the Dukedomes of Brabant, Limburgh, Lutzenburg, and Guelders; the Earledomes of Flanders, Artois, Henault, Holland, Zeland, Namur, Zutfen; the Marquesat of the sacred Empire; the Signiories of Frisland, Mechlin, Vtreight, Ouerissell, and Groemingen. Regions as ciuill and as well manured as any in the world; wherein (according to Guicciardin) are to the number of 208. cities fortified with walles, rampiers, or ditches; and villages with churches aboue 6300, besides a great number of hamlets, castles and forts. And this tract (beginning from the East maretine part at the riuer Amisus, commonly Eems, the bound hereof towards the Ocean) hath these bordering Princes: the Earle of East Friez, the Bishop of Munster, the Duke of Cleue, the Archbishops of Colen and Triers, and the French King, along the Southwesterne shore as farre as the riuer Aa, the extreame Westerne bound of these Prouinces. The aire, though it may seeme ouer-moist, is notwithstanding most healthfull, and agreeable to the constitution and digestion of the inhabitants; who are heere very long liued especially in Kempenland, the Northermost part of Brabant. It is euery where watered with riuers; and sufficiently adorned with woods and groues, either for pastime of hunting, or beautifull prospect. Mountaines it hath none, saue only about Lutzenburg, Namur, and in Henault, where it riseth in some places into hilles. It aboundeth with corne and fruits of all sorts, and medicinable herbs. Here also groweth great plentie of that graine, which commonly is called Buckwey, but the people corruptly pronounce it Bockwey; as if you would say, The Beech-herbe: for the seed or graine (albeit lesse in forme) is three-square, altogether like the nut of the Beech. So as it may truely be called Beech-mast, or if you will . Whether this simple were knowen of ancient times, let Herbalists enquire. Howbeit, in some sandie places, which the inhabitants, in regard of abundance of heath or linge, call Heath-ground; as in Kempenland the North part of Brabant, it growes not in such plentie. But this kinde of heath yeeldes such excellent feed for cattell, as (by the confession of neighbour-countries) their flesh is as pleasant and delectable to a mans taste, as any other. This region I suppose, that Plinie in his 17. booke and 4. chapter most truely describeth, when he saith: What better feed than the pastures of Germanie? And yet vnder a thin flag you haue immediatly a mould of barren sand. It bree∣deth no creatures hurtfull to mankinde. All the foresaid regions, the greatest part of strangers (most ignorantly mistaking part for the whole) call by the name of Flanders, and the inhabitants Flemings, whereas Flanders is but a part only, and but one Prouince of the seuenteene; as in the Table you may plainly see. These therefore are in as great an error, as if a man, to signifie Spaine, should name Castilia, An∣daluzia, or any other particular Prouince: or speaking of Italie, should mention Tuscan or Calabria &c. or discoursing of the whole kingdome of France, should nominate only Normandy or Bretaigne, &c. and so should imagine himselfe to haue spo∣ken of all Spaine, all Italie, or all France. These regions Iohn Goropius Becanus in his Becceselanis hath most learnedly described, as likewise Peter Diuaeus of Louaine, and Hubert Thomas of Liege. Iohannes Caluetus Stella, a Spaniard, writ in his owne language a Iournall of King Philips pro∣gresse thorow all these Prouinces; wherein you shall finde many particulars worth the reading, that giue great light to the knowledge of these countries and cities. But whoso desires to haue more full and absolute instructions of these places, let him peruse Guicciardin; and he will then thinke, that he hath not read of these Prouinces, but seene them with his eyes. Late∣ly also Dauid Chitraeus in his Saxon historie hath written both largely and learnedly of the same argument. Whereas the inhabitants in most places speake both the Dutch and French languages, and the countrey for traffique and other occasions is frequented by Spaniards and strangers of sundry nations; hence it is that diuers cities, townes, and riuers, are called by more names than one: for euery man calles them according to his owne language, by a name much differing from the proper name vsed by the inhabitants. The ignorance of which multiplicitie of names hath made some authours (o∣therwise not to be discommended) to fall into intolerable errours: and amongst the residue, Dominicus Niger in his Geogra∣phie; who puts downe Anuersa in stead of Tarauanna; and Antorpia (which notwithstanding in the copie printed by Hen∣rick Peterson he corruptly calles Antropicia) he placeth vpon the banke of Tabuda, thirty leagues from Tarauanna; whereas all men know, that Antorpia and Anuersa signifie one and the same citie of Antwerpe. Likewise Machelen and Malines, Leodi∣um and Liege, Nouiomagum and Nieumeghen, Traiectum on the Maese and Trait (for which he falsly writes Trecia) he suppo∣seth to be two seuerall townes, ech couple; whereas in very deed they signifie but one. The citie Raremutium also he most grosly affirmeth to be called Liege: and in another place he will needs haue the same Raremutium to be named Rhamon: but by his description I coniecture, that he meanes by his Raremutium and Rhamon nothing els but the towne of Ruermond. So Rhenen a citie of Guelders standing on the banke of the riuer Rhene, in regard of the affinitie of name, he takes to be all one with the Bishopricke of Rhemes in the Prouince of Champaigne in France. But being vtterly vnacquainted with the state of our countries, his errors may seeme the more pardonable. Howbeit, lest others, studious in Geography, should fall into the like absurdities, I thought good to annex vnto this page the cōmon synonymas or sundry names of certaine particular places. Antwerpen in Low Dutch, in Latine Antuerpia and Andouerpia; in High Dutch Antorff, whereof in Latine they call it also Antorpia; the Italians terme it Anuersa; the Spaniards and French men Enberes and Anuers. Aken in Dutch, in French Aix, and in Latine Aquis∣granum. Hertoghenbosche, in Frch Boissedue, and in Latine Silua ducalu. Loeuen, in Latine called Luanium, and in French Louuain. Lisle, in High Dutch Kijsel, in Latine Insula. Liege, in High Dutch Luyck, in Latine Leodium. Coelen so called by the inhabitants, in French Co∣loigne, and in Latine Colonia Agrippina. Dordrecht, by contraction we call Dort, in Latine Dordracum. Macheien, in Latine Mechlinia, and in French Malines. Tournay, in High Dutch Dornicke, and in Latine Tornacum. Arras in French, Atrecht in Flemish, and in Latine Atrebates. Mabeuge, in Latine they call Malbodium. Tienen, in French Tilemont. Namur, the Brabanters call Namen, in Latine Namur∣cum. Maestricht, and by contraction Tricht, is by ancient Latine writers named Traiectum ad Mosam. Viset, in High Dutch Weset. S. Truyen, in French Centron. Thionuille in French, Ditenhosen in High Dutch, and in Latine Theodonis villa. Terrewanen and Terrenborch in Flemish, Terouenne in French: Tarnanna in ancient Latine writers. It was wont to be the seat of a Bishop, but now it hath the name only. Gulick, in French Iuliers, in Latine Iuliacum. Mons, the Flemings call Bergen. Geersberge, which I heare is also called S. Adrians, and in French Grammont. Ioudoigne, those Brabanters that speake High Dutch call Geldenaken. Gemblours, an abbey with a small citie, in Latine Gem∣blacum. Soigni in French, in Flemish Senneke. Halle, in French Nostre Dame de Hault. Cortrijck, Courtray in French, Cortracum in Latine. Coomene, in French Comines. The riuer Maese, in French is called Mense, and in Latine Mosa. The riuer Scheldt, in French Escault, is by Iulius Cae∣sar and Plinie called Scaldis. The riuer Liege in French, is in Flemi h named Leye.
map of the Netherlands and Belgium DESCRIP∣TIO GERMANIAE INFERIORIS.
The Dukedome of LVTZENBVRG. THis region as we see many others, is so named of Lutzenburg the princi∣pall citie: but why it should be thus called, we cannot easilie coniecture. At first it went vnder the title of an Earledome, and afterward was ad∣uanced to the dignitie of a Dukedome, and so till this present continueth. Some say it was thus aduanced by Wenceslaus King of the Romans; others, by Charles the fourth: howbeit Conradus Vercerius ascribes it to Henry the seuenth, the first Romane Emperour of that family. I finde in ancient manu∣scripts, that the first Earle of Lutzenburg was one Sigisfridus, and that he was the sonne of Tacuinus Duke of Maesland. In former times Lutzenburg was part of Triers. It stretcheth from the wood Arduen∣na to Mosella (a riuer by Ausonius much celebrated.) The countries bordering vpon this Prouince, are part of France, Loraigne, Metz, Triers, Mamure, and Liege. It is in most places mountainous and woodie; but here and there also well manured: and of late we see their woods euery where turned vp and conuerted into most fruitfull fields. The people are for the greatest part Dutch, and yet their countrie ioyneth hard vpon France, and they are accustomed to the language and fashions of the French. This Dukedome conteineth in com∣passe, as saith Guicciardin, seuentie of our Flemish miles. Within it are seuen Earledomes, many Baronies, and great store of gentlemen. Cities there are with stone walles to the number of twentie three, besides those that the furie of warre hath layd desolate: with 1168. villages, and sundrie castles of importance. The principall citie is called Lutzenburg or Lucemburg; for I find it both wayes writ∣ten, but without any choice: because both the true maner of writing and the deriuation is vn∣certaine. Some thinke of the riuer Elza running by this citie (which perhaps was Antoni∣nus his Alizontia) that it might be called Elzenburg, and corruptly Lelzenburg. Others referre it to the fabulous historie of the Inchantresse Melusina. But my purpose is neither to proue nor disproue such opinions. Here resideth the chiefe Counsell, and the highest Court of iustice. The citie is of sufficient force, but vnequally situate: for standing partly on a hill, and partly in a lowe and steepe valley, it appeares of a very vneuen shape. Then haue you Arlune standing on the top of a hill, a towne very beautifull, where at this present are found sundry monuments of antiquitie, which Count Peter Ernestus hath caused to be transported to his stately Palace in the citie of Lutzenburg. Some are of opinion that the Moone in time past was here after a Gentilish maner adored, and that it was called Arlune, quasi Ara lunae, that is, the altar of the moone. Others imagine, that these cities following borowed their names also from the residue of the planets; as Iuosium (commonly Iuoix) from Ioue or Iupiter; Sathenacum (now Soleure) from Saturne; Virtonium (alias Verton) from Venus; Maruilla (or Maruille) from Mars; Malmedium (Malmedi) from Mercurie. Some interpret Malmedi, Montem maledictum, The accursed mountaine; saying that it was so called, because here the Emperour Valentinian lost his armie. Next followes Radema∣cherne. Also Thion-uille, on the banke of Mosella: it is the fortresse of the whole region, and a towne most defensible against all hostile attempts. Grauenmachern and Conings∣machern, two small townes situate vpon the same riuer. Dechrij stands vpon the riuer Saur. Echternach, containing a famous Abbey. Vinden likewise. Also the towne of Bastoigne, the principall mart of the whole region, standing neere the wood Arduenna. Here you haue in like sort, Naufchastelle, Danuiller, la Roche, and Durbis, townes not altogether vn∣worthie to be mentioned: as likewise Sant Vit, Marche, Chiney, and Ferta. All which are more amply described by Guicciardin. Regino in his second booke makes mention of mount Adromare about Thion-uille, where Charlemaigne was wont to ride a hunting. More concerning this region you may reade in our Itinerarium or Iournall.
map of Luxemburg LVTZENBVRGEN SIS DVCATVS VE∣RISS. DESCRIPT. Iacobo Surhonio Montano auctore. Cum Priuilegio Imp. & Regiae Maiestatuum.
GVELDERLAND. GVELDERLAND the seat of the ancient Sicambri (as most Writers are of opini∣on) hath to the North thereof Frisland, together with an inlet of the German sea, commonly called Suiderzee; East it confineth vpon the Duchy of Cleue; South vpon Gulick; and West it affronteth Brabant and Holland. It is a champian coun∣trey, destitute of mountaines, but all ouer replenished with woods and groues. It aboundeth with all necessaries, especially with corne; and their greene ranke medowes yeeld such plentie of feed for cattell, as euen out of the farthest part of Denmarke they bring hither their starued droues for succour. It is watered with three famous riuers, namely Rhijne, Maese, and VVaele. It conteineth the countie of Zutphen and the re∣gion called De Veluvve. The Veluwe is almost an isle, which being situate betweene a branch of Rhijn that runnes by Arnhem, and the riuer Yssel, stretcheth to the Suyder sea; it is meanly fruitfull and not al∣together void of woods, mountaines, and hilles. Some thinke that the inhabitants of this place were woont to be called Caninfates. The Dukedome of Guelders hath two and twentie cities compassed with walles and ditches, and a∣boue three hundred villages. Nieumegen vpon the VVaele is the Metropolitan; a citie very populous, and gallantly built, & famous in regard of the mint that is there. The greatest part of the citizens vsing trade of merchandize are exceeding rich. The territory of this citie is adorned with the title of a King∣dome. Next followes Ruremonde, situate where the riuer Roer falles into the Maese. It hath in my re∣membrance beene a Bishopricke. Zutphen, at the mouth of the riuer Berkel, where it dischargeth it selfe into Yssel. It beares the title of an Earledome. It hath a rich College of Canons, and is vnder the iurisdiction of the Bishop of Munster. Arnhen stands vpon the banke of Rhijne. This is the seat of the high Court of iustice, and of the Chancery. The Clergie of this towne are subiect to the Bishop of Vtrecht. HATTEM a towne well fortified vpon the riuer Yssel. ELBVRG on the shore of the Zuyder sea. HARDERVVIIK, vpon the same shore. Heere likewise you haue WAGENING, TIEL, BOMMEL, BRONCHORST, DOESBVRG, DOTECHEM, SHEERENBERG, gouerned by a peculiar prince vnder the name of an Earledome; LOCHEN, GROLL, BREDEVORD, GELRE which perhaps gaue name to the whole region; STRAELEN, VENLO, a towne vpon the banke of Maese fortified both by arte and nature; WACHTENDVNCK, of ancient times the city of Her∣cules, in the Dukedome of Iuliers. Besides these there are other small townes of note; which though now either by furie of warre, or iniurie of time, they are vnwalled; yet they doe enioy the freedomes and priuileges of cities. Their names be Keppel, Burg, Genderen, Bateburg, Monteford, Echt, Culeburg, and Buren; both which haue a peculiar Lord as Bateburg also. Vnder Earle Ottho the third, this region was mightily inlarged; for he compassed with walles, and endowed with priuileges the townes of Rure∣mond, Arnhem, Harderwijk, Bemel, Goch, and VVagening, which till that time had remained villages. In the Chronicle of Iohn Reigersbeg written in Dutch, I finde this region in the time of Carolus Caluus to haue beene called by the name of Ponthis; and that it was by him in the yeere 878. erected to a Signiorie. Then in the yeere 1079. this Signiorie of Ponthis was by Henrie the third adorned with the title of an Earledome, and called the Earledome of Guelders: and the first Earle thereof was Otto à Nassau. It went vnder the name of an Earledome till Reinhold the second. But whenas this Reinhold not only for his va∣lour and mightinesse grew terrible to his neighbours, but renowmed in regard of his iustice, his piety and fidelity towards the Roman empire; he was at Frankford in a solemne and royal assembly by Lewes the Emperour consecrated Duke; in presence of the King of England, the French King, and the Princes Electours, in the yeere of our Lord 1339. Some say, that in the time of the Emperour Carolus Caluus, towards that place where the towne of Gelre now standeth, there was a strange and venimous beast, of huge bignesse and monstrous crueltie, feared all the countrey ouer, which lay for the most part vnder an Oake. This monster wasted the fields, deuoured cattell great and small, and abstained not from men. The inhabitants affrighted with the noueltie and vncouthnesse of the matter, abandoned their habitations, and hid themselues in de∣sert and solitarie places. A certaine Lord of Ponth had two sonnes; who partly tendring their owne e∣state, and partly also the distresse of their neighbours, assailed the beast with singular policie and cou∣rage, and after a long combat slew him. The said Lord therefore not farre from the Maese vpon the banke of Nierson, for the perpetuall memorie of his sonnes exploit, built a castle which he called Gelre; because when the beast was slaine, he often yelled with a dreadfull roaring noise, Gelre, Gelre: from whence they say, began the name of the Guelders. Thus much out of the Chronicle of Henry Aquilius a Guelder borne. More concerning this Prouince you may reade in Francis Irenicus; but a most large description hereof you shall finde in Guicciardin.
map of Gelderland, Netherlands GELRIAE, CLIVIAE, FINI∣TIMORVMQVE LOCORVM VERISSIMA DESCRIPTIO Christiano Schrot Auctore.
The Bishopricke of LIEGE. IT is a common and constant opinion, that those which we now call Leodien∣ses or Ligeois are a German people named of old Eburones. A relique or monument of which ancient name remaineth as yet in the village Ebure, a German mile distant from the city of Liege. And this very place (as I sup∣pose) is described by Dion lib. 40. vnder the name Eburonia. Howbeit certaine it is, that the iurisdiction of Liege stretcheth much farther than that of the Eburones did of olde. Of the Eburones mention is made by Strabo, Caesar, and Florus. Dion calles them Eburos: and late Writers barbarously terme them Eburonates. Themselues in their mother tongue (which is a kinde of broken French) they call Ligeois: but in high Dutch Lutticher, and Luyckenaren. The deriuation of Eburones & Leodienses, whoso desires to know, I re∣fer him to the antiquities of Goropius Becanus, and to a small pamphlet of Hubert Leodius. This region taketh vp a great part of ancient Lorraigne: for it containes vnder the name of the diocesse of Liege, the dukedome of Bouillon, the marquesat of Franckmont, the countie of Haspengow, and Loots, and many Baronies. In this region besides Maestright, halfe wherof is sub∣iect to the Duke of Brabant, there are foure and twentie walled cities, a thousand seuen hundred Villages, with Churches and many Abbeys and Signiories. The names of the cities are these fol∣lowing; Liege vpon Maese, the seat of a Bishop, after which all the whole countrey is named: Bouillon Franchemont, Loots, Borchworm, Tungeren, Huy, Hasselt, Dinant, Ma∣sac, Stoch, Bilsen, S. Truden, Viset, Tuin, Varem, Bering, Herck, Bree, Pera, Ha∣mont, Chiney, Fosse, and Couin, as Guicciardin doth both name and number them. More∣ouer Placentius writeth, that part of Maestright was added to this diocesse by the donation of Pori Earle of Louaine. The territorie of this citie is called the countie of Maesland in the an∣cient records of Seruatius abbey, built here by King Arnulphus in the yeere 889. Now this countie is vsually called Haspengow. It is a region exceeding pleasant and fertile of all things, especially on the North part, where it ioyneth to Brabant; for there it aboundeth with corne and all kinde of fruits, and in some pla∣ces it yeeldeth wine. But on the South frontiers towards Lutzenburg and France, it is some∣what more barren, mountainous, and ouerspred with woods; here yet being some remainder of Ar∣duenna the greatest forest in all France, as Caesar writeth. This is the outward hiew of the coun∣try; but in the entrals and bowels thereof it is enriched with mettals and sundry kinds of marbles; as also with sea-coales, which they burne in stead of fewell; and all these so surpassing good, as in a common prouerbe they vsually say, that they haue bread better than bread, fire hotter than fire, and iron harder than iron. By their iron (than which all the prouinces around vse nei∣ther better nor indeed any other) they raise a great reuenue. Nor with any other more forcible fire do the Smithes and Bearebrewers in all this part of the Low countries heat their furnaces than with these minerall coales of Liege; which are of so strange a nature, as water increaseth their flame, but oile puts it out. The smell of this fire or smoke, though it be somewhat loathsome to those that are not accustomed with it, yet salt being cast thereupon, it smelleth either but a little, or not at all. But concerning these coales, you may reade more at large in the Tables of Namur and Henault. This region they say was conuerted to the faith by S. Materne the first Bishop of Tungeren, about the yeere of our Lord 101. For the Bishopricke which is now at Liege, was then at Tun∣geren, and there continued till the yeere 498, what time it was by S. Seruatius translated to Maestright; where it remained till the time of S. Hubert the Bishop, who in the yeere 713. re∣moued it to Liege, where it continueth till this present. Touching this Prouince reade more largely in Guicciardin, Hubert of Liege, and Placentius. To whom you may adde Francis Roserius his description of Loraigne.
map of Liege, Belgium LEODIENSIS DIOECESIS TYPVS.
BRABANT. THe Dukedome of Brabant is in such sort circumscribed by the riuers Maese, Scheld, Sambre, and Dender, as it no where ouerpasseth them; nor doth it in all places stretch so farre: for on this side the Maese lies a great part of the Prouince of Liege. But (that we may describe the bounds hereof more perfectly) it hath to the North, Holland and Guelders; East, the Bishoprick of Liege; South, the counties of Namure and Henault; and West it is diuided From Flanders by the riuer Scheld. It is a goodly and pleasant country, exceeding fertill, and abounding with come and fruits of all sorts, especially to the South of the riuer of Demer. For the North part thereof, namely Kempenland, is somewhat more barren and sandy. Howbeit, this part is not altogether fruitlesse: for Iacobus Spie∣legius writing to Guntherus of Genoa, affirmeth that the husbandmen of Brabant are so industrious, as they make the driest sandes to beare wheat. Also to head-cattell and sheepe, the greatest part whereof (as we reade in Homer of those Libyan sheepe) are horned; it yeelds most pleasant and plentifull pasture. And now by the industry & vncessant labour of the husbandmen it is dayly so manured; that where in times past there was nothing but vnprofitable sand-heaps, you may at this present beholde, to the great benefit of the inhabitants, most fruitfull corne-fields. On the East part of this Prouince there is a kinde of bogge or quagmite called Peele, the ground whereof (as Plinie reporteth of the fields Gabiensis and Reatinus) trembleth vnder a mans foot; neither can it be passed by horses or wagons, but only in Winter, when the vpper crust thereof is hardened with frost. This region containes the Marquesat of the sacred Empire (the chiefe citie whereof is Antwerpe) as likewise the Marque∣sat of Bergis, the Dukedome of Arschot, the Earledomes of Hochstraten, Megen, and that of Cantecroy lately erected by Charles the fifth, &c. It hath also woods and forests, abounding with wilde beasts of sundry kindes: the principall whereof are Grootenhout, Grootenheyst, Meerdael, Zauenterloo and Soenien the greatest of all, conteining in it for the space of seuen miles compasse sundry villages & monasteries. Hunting and hawking (except in these fiue woods, which are reserued for the Princes owne game) are free for all men. The people are so iocund, as they seeme scarse to feele the inconueniences of olde age; which frolike disposition of theirs hath giuen occasion to their neighbours round about to vse this iest: The longer the Brabanter liues, the more foole he. The aire is exceeding holsome: for when the plague hath beene most vehement in all the regions adiacent, Brabant hath often most wonderfully remained free. This Dukedome of Brabant hath six and twentie cities enuironed with walles and ditches. And they are these following: ANTVVERPE situate vpon Scheld, the most famous mart not only of Germanie, but of all Europe; and one of the strongest cities in the world; being much beautified with the steeple of S. Maries built an incredible height of white marble. The pa∣lace lately built, is scarse to be matched in all Europe. BRVSSEL, abounding with sweet fountaines. Here for the most part resideth the Prince; and therefore is this towne so much frequented by Nobles and Courtiers. LOVAIN, a large city, con∣teining Gardens, Vineyards, and Pastures within the walles: well may you call it The habitation of the Muses; for which purpose in the yeere 1426. Iohn the fourth Duke of Brabant established here an Vniuersitie, which flourisheth with all kind of learning. The territorie of this citie makes Brabant to glory of her vintage. Then followes MACHELEN, famous for the court of Parliament there instituted by Duke Charles of Burgundie in the yeere 1473. HERTOGENBOSCH, a towne of no small importance, conteining an excellent Grammar schoole, and inhabited in times past with a most warlike people. TIE∣NEN vpon the riuer Ghette, from whence are brought great store of cheeses. Here stands the church of S. Germans, whereun∣to belongs a college of Canons. LEVWE, where the noble ale is brewed. NIVELLE. In this citie there is a chanterie of Nunnes, whereinto none but ladies of great nobilitie can be admitted. The Gouernesse of this chantry the Nunnes them∣selues chuse by voices, yet with the consent of the Prince, and the Bishops approbation; and she is called the ladie of Niuella. Also the temporall and ecclesiasticall iurisdiction of the towne and adioyning territory soly belongeth vnto her. ARSCHOT, situate on the riuer Demer, bearing at first the title of a Marquesat, but since by Charles the fift aduanced to a Dukedome. BERGEN ap Zoom, so named of a small riuer that runnes thorow it; a towne heeretofore of good traffique, but now by the neighbourhood of Antwerpe not so frequented of forren merchants. MEGHEN, situate vpon the Maese. BREDA, a towne most fairely built. Here stands the Palace of the Earles of Nassau, so gallantly begun by a most skilfull architect, that being once finished, it may (I thinke) be preferred before all the Princes houses in this region. MAESTRIGHT, a large, populous, and rich citie; which though it seemeth to lie without the bounds of Brabant, acknowledgeth the Duke of Brabant as her souereigne Lord. STEENBERGEN vpon the sea-shore. In times past it was a flourishing mart towne; but now it is almost brought to nothing. LIERE, so beautifull and pleasant a towne, as many noble men make choise thereof as a place of recreat and solace. VILVORDEN. Here is a strong fortresse, and the castle of the Duke. GEMBLOVRS. The Abbat of this towne beareth the greatest sway in causes both ecclesiasticall and temporall. IOVDOIGNE for the holesomnesse of the aire in times past the nurserie of the yong Princes of this region. HANVT, heretofore reported to haue beene an Earledome, situate in a most fertile place. LANDEN, esteemed of some the most ancient towne in all Brabant. HALEN, almost vtterly ruinated by warres. DIEST, built on either side the riuer Demer, a spacious citie, the inhabitants whereof gaine much by clothing. SI∣CHENEN, a towne vpon the same riuer. HERENTALS, that maintaines it selfe also by clothing. EINDHOVEN, in the middest of Kempenland, vpon the riuer Dommel. HHLMONT, whereunto adioyneth a castle. Some places here are also which in Dutch we call Vrijheden, or Free townes; which though they be not fortified with walles and ditches; yet because they enioy the priuileges and immunities of Princes, we thinke not altogether vnwoorthie the naming: Osterwijck, Orschot, Turnhout, Hoochstraten, Duffel, Walen, Merchten, Asche, Wernen, Duisbosch, Hulpen, Waure, Braine, Genappe, Gheel, Arendonce, and Dormal. Here are seuen hundred villages, with parish-churches that haue steeples and belles; a great many of which villages are adorned with titles of dignities. Also vnder the gouernment and iu∣risdiction of Brabant are certaine regions beyond the Maese, as namely the duchy of Limburg, the countie of Dalem, the state of Valkenburg, &c. Besides all which, it hath many other places of importance: but it is not our purpose here to make rela∣tion of all. Iohn Seruilius published a briefe treatise as touching a conspiracie of the people of Guelders against this countrey of Brabant, where you shall finde many furtherances to the better knowledge of this region. But in Guicciardin his descripti∣on of the Low countries you shall not only reade of these places, but euen behold them with your eyes: so curiously hath he described them. The antiquities and memorable acts of this countrey my learned friend M. Iohn Gerard is now in hand withall. All which we earnestly expect that he will ere long publish. The ancient inhabitants of this region were called Ambiuariti and Aduatici. Concerning whom reade Iohn Goropius Becanus his Becceselanis.
map of Brabant, with inset map of Mechelen, Belgium BRABANTIAE DESCRIPTIO. Valkenborch MACHLINIAE VRBIS DOMINIVM. Stemmate et eruditione claro Dn. Hadriano Marsselario, patricio Antwerpiensi; Ab. Ortelius dedicab. L. M. Cum Imp. Reg. & Brabantiae privilegio decennali, 1591.
NAMVRE. THe region of Namur is at this present endowed with the title of an Earledome. Whether it was thus named of the principall citie, or that the city assumed this name from the region, remai∣neth as yet vncertaine; as likewise the originall of the word it selfe. The inhabitants call it Namur, and the high Dutch Namen, but the true signification of the word they are vtterly ignorant of. For those that affirme that an Idol called Nanus, was of old worshipped, and deliuered answers and oracles vpon the same hill whereon now the castle of Na∣mure is situate, and that afterward, when Christian religion began to shine, this Idol waxing mute or silent, the whole region of Namure was so named of Na∣nus mutus; do (I thinke) report fables, without the authority of any approoued writers. Meierus affirmeth, that anciently it was called Neumur, as much to say in Latine as Nouus murus, a new wall. Vpon this region do border the prouinces of Liege, Brabant, Henault, and Lut∣zenburg. It is watered by Maese and Sambre, two nauigable riuers. The country is neither mountainous nor plaine; but raised here & there into little hilles, and depressed into valleys: the woods, whereof the greatest is called Marlaigne, yeeld plenty of game for Gentlemen. It abounds with things necessary for mans life. Here are many yron-mines. Here also they digge a kinde of stony or minerall coles, which in Dutch we call Steenkolen: the inhabitants, as likewise the Ligeois (for they are found with them also) terme them Hoille; the learned call them , as much to say as Stone-coles. The nature of these stones is most wonder∣full: for whereas oyle increaseth the flame of all other fewell, these burne more vehemently by casting on water, and are quenched with oyle. With these coles the inhabitants and bordering nations (for they are transported hence into other countries) do make lusty fires: and Black-smithes do soften their yron bet∣ter with this, than with any other fiering. Here are quarries also, out of which are cut marbles of exceeding hardnesse, both blacke, browne, and particoloured; wherewith the churches & houses of the regions adiacent are maruellously ador∣ned. By meanes of which marbles the people of Namure reape no small benefit. This county hath foure walled townes: Namure, Bouuignes, Charlemont, and Ʋallencure. NAMVRE, as hath beene said, is the principall city, and of late is be∣come the see of a Bishop: it is right commodiously situate, namely at the conflu∣ence or meeting of the riuers Maese and Sambre: it hath bridges to passe ouer both riuers. Here is the chiefe tribunall of iustice for the whole region. BOVVIG∣NES stands vpon the Westerne banke of Maese, a towne in times past glorious for building, and populous for inhabitants; but now so deformed and ruined with often warres, as it hath lost the greatest part of her beauty. CHARLEMONT is a most impregnable castle, so named and built by Charles the fift, neere the banke of Maese, on the top of an hill, by a village called Giuet. Neither is VALEN∣CVRE a towne of small moment. Also within this county, besides diuers Ab∣bies, there are 82. villages, of which Floreu, Ʋascie, Samson, and some others, are so large and beautifull, as they may well be compared with townes. This region of old bare the title of a Marquesate: but about the yere 1200. it was conuerted into an Earledome. The people are very warlike, and most loyall to their Prince. They speake French. This region (as the rest of the Lowe countries) is exactly described by Guicciardine.
map of Namur, Belgium NAMVRCVM, Comi∣tatus. Iōes Surhon describ. Cum Imp. et Regiae Mtis priuilegijs. 1579.
HENAVLT. LEssabaeus writeth (vpon what ground, I know not) that this Prouince was of old cal∣led Pannonia, because the rusticke god Pan was here worshipped; then Saltus carbona∣rius or The cole-forest; and afterward, The lower Picardie. But at length it was na∣med Hannonia of the riuer Haysne, that runnes thorow the midst of it. The inhabi∣tants call it Henault, and the Germans Henegow, which in the ancient language of the place signifies The field of Hainault. For Gow in Dutch signifies a field. Another deriuation also of the name of this countrey is produced by Carolus Bouillus in his discourse of the variety of vulgar languages. To the West of this Prouince by Flanders and Artois; on the North Brabant; and Brabant againe with part of Namure and Liege vpon the East; and South it is bounded by Champaigne a Prouince of France. A country as pleasant, and as well stored with woods, lakes, fountaines, medowes, and pastures, as any other in all these parts. The inhabitants are warlike, and towards their Prince most loyall and seruiceable. Their liber∣tie or freedome they vsually boast of in a common prouerbe, saying: Pays de Hainault tenu de Dieu & du soleil, that is, The Prouince of Henault holds of God and of the sunne. Which prouerbe Nicolaus Brontius in a discourse of his published in commendation of this region, interpreteth in two Latine verses to this effect: Star-guiding Ioue and Phoebus bright, Of this place only challenge right. In length it conteineth about twenty, and in bredth sixteene miles. In which space (as Guicciardin reporteth) it comprehends foure and twenty townes, and aboue nine hundred and fiftie villages or hamlets. Robert Caenalis reckons vp in this Prouince two thousand two hundred petie villages with Churches and steeples. At this present it beareth the title of an Earledome: and it containes within it one Princedome, eight inferi∣our Earledomes, twelue Peeres, two and twentie Baronies, six and twentie Abbeys, with other titles of dig∣nitie, which are to be seene in Guicciardine. The principall cities are Mons and Valenchienes: the last whereof situate vpon the riuer Scheld, where it be∣gins to be nauigable for boats and barks, is a towne very large and strongly walled. The townesmen for the most part imploy themselues in trade of merchandise; and reape exceeding gaines by a kinde of cloth which they call Fussets, great quantitie whereof is wouen in this citie, and carried from hence to the furthest parts of the world. Mons standeth vpon the little riuer Trouille, almost in the very midst of all the region. A towne very sufficiently fortified against all hostile attempts. The citizens enrich themselues by a kinde of stuffe commonly called Saye, whereof great abundance is here made. Here are besides the townes of Condet, Halle, Angie, Maubeuge, Auesne, Beaumont, Chimay, Quercey, the retiring place of Mary, sister to Emperour Charles the fift, who built there a most stately and sumptuous Palace, which was then highly esteemed; but afterward by the French King Henry the second quite burned and defaced. Here also is Bauacum commonly called Bauais, which some thinke to be Baganum or Bagacum mentioned by Ptolemey. Others are of opinion, that Caesar in his commentaries calles it Belgium. Howbeit Hubert of Liege thinks it not to haue been so migh∣tie in Caesars time, but rather most of all to haue flourished vnder Constantine the Emperour: which he ga∣thereth by the ancient coines here dayly digged vp in great quantitie, with the said Emperours image vp∣on them. In the market-place of this towne stands a pillar of stone, at the foot whereof the inhabitants say that all those wayes begin, which with an high and direct passage extend from hence to all parts of France. These wayes (they say) were made by Brunchild. And euen till this day they are called after his name. For the French commonly term them Chemins de Brune hault; albeit the high Dutch call them de Rasije. There are as yet extant in sundry places some broken remainders of these wayes. Bouillus noteth certaine wonders of them; namely, that they are higher than the fields on either side; that they lie most directly betweene the principall townes of France; and that they are paued with flint-stones, whereof all the fields adiacent are de∣stitute: so that with admiration a man may imagine, that these flints either sprang out of the earth, or rai∣ned downe from heauen, or by a greater force than mans hand were gathered all the world ouer for the grauelling of these wayes. Also vpon the frontiers of this region towards the riuer Maese, in the way to France, you haue Charlemont, Marieburg, and Philippeuille, most strong garrisons against the incursions of the French: being built and so named by Emperour Charles the fift, by Mary his sister, and by K. Philip his sonne. This region aboundeth with iron and lead-mines. Heere are found also sundry kindes of marbles; as blacke, white, and particoloured; right commodious for the adorning of the palaces and sepulchres of Kings and great Nobles. Likewise here is digged great plentie of lime. Also a kinde of stony and blacke coales, hardened in the nature of pitch, which the inhabitants vse for fewell in stead of wood. And heere also are made those thin transparent panes of glasse, by meanes whereof vnseasonable windes and weather are fenced out of houses and churches; and this glasse excelleth all other that is made in any place besides. More you may reade in Guicciardine, and in a peculiar discourse that Iacobus Lessabaeus hath written of this re∣gion. Also Hubert Thomas of Liege in his booke de Tungris & Eburonibus writeth thereof many memorable things.
map of Hainaut, Belgium NOBI∣LIS HAN∣NONIAE CO∣MITATVS DESCRIP. Auctore Iaco∣bo Surhonio Montano. Pays de Haynault tenu de Dieu et du Soleil. Cum priuilegijs Imp. et Regi Maitis ad deconn. 1579
ARTOIS. THat the Atrebates were not the meanest people of Gallia Belgica, Caesar himselfe is witnesse. They are and haue beene a warlike nation, retaining as yet their ancient name. The head citie called in Latine Atrebatum, was of olde the Metropolitan also of Flanders; now it is named in French Arras, whereof the region adiacent and all the whole Prouince is called Artois, as if you would say Arratois, casting away the middle syllable. Hereupon by a new Latine name they call it Artesia. The whole region was by S. Lewis the French King adorned with the title of an Earledome: and the first Earle thereof was Robert the same Kings brother, as writeth Vignier. It is very large, extending from the frontiers of Cambresis, Picardie, Henault, and Flanders, euen to the Ocean sea. It was in times past subiect to the Crowne of France; but now by meanes of the peace betweene Emperour Charles the fift, and Francis the first the French King, concluded 1529, it is an absolute state of it selfe. It hath two fa∣mous cities, namely, Arras and S. Omer: the principall townes be Ayre, Hesdin, Lens, Bethune, Bappames, S. Paul, Lillers, and Perne; all which places are subiect to the King Catholike. The cities of Boulogne, Calais, Guisnes, and Ardres (which are also within the bounds of this Countie) are the French Kings: for Pontieu is now abolished. It hath also diuers fortresses and strong holds, besides an incredible number of noblemens castles, which they vse for dwelling houses. It contained of olde two famous bishopricks, namely Arras and Ponthieu: but since, Ponthieu in the yere 1553. was vtterly destroyed, the iurisdiction thereof was distributed to three Episcopall seas; namely, S. Omer, and Ypre for the one halfe, and Boulogne for the residue. Bailiwicks or Hundreds, being the principall members or parts of the whole Countie, it hath nine; namely, that of Arras, of S. Omer, of Ponthieu, of Ayre, Hesdin, Lens, Bappames, Auen, Bredenard, and Aubignie. Vnder the Baili∣wicke of Arras are comprized Boulogne, S. Paul, Perne, Bethune, and Lilers; but Calais, Guisnes, and Ardres doe by ancient right belong to S. Omer. Likewise the Earle of Artois had other inferiour Earles to his vassals, as namely, the Earle of Boulogne, of S. Paul, of Arcques, of Blangie, of Faukenberge, and of Syneghen. Now also it is augmented with the Princedome of Espinee, and the Marquesate of Renty. But how Boulogne first exempted it selfe from the iurisdiction of Artois, it is manifest out of histories: for after a certaine Earle of Boulogne was attainted of treason against the French King, the King vpon that occasion seizing vpon his Earldom, it euer since denied homage vnto Artois. Wherefore the Earle of Artois losing the one halfe of his right, assumed directly to himselfe homage or fealty ouer the county of S. Paul (which before was feudatarie to the Earle of Boulogne) saying often times, that he would not be depriued both of his homage and vnder-homage: so that hitherto the Princes on both sides haue vsed this custom; namely, that Boulogne no more acknowledgeth Ar∣tois, nor S. Paul Boulogne. Howbeit about this point in the latter treaty of peace 1559. there was some variance; wherefore the matter being referred to Commissioners, remaines as yet vndecided, the King of Spaine hol∣ding still possession. It is commonly supposed, that Calais (the next port of the continent vnto England) was by Caesar called Portus Iccius, from whence he sailed out of France thither. But if we more thorowly consider the matter, we shall finde it to haue beene another Port, namely, the towne of Saint Omer, which that it was of old an hauen and a most large inlet of the Ocean sea, euen the high cliffes, which in a maner enuironing the citie, do plainly demonstrate, besides infinit other arguments and reliques of antiquitie, which (though no man should affirme it) do most euidently conuince, that the territorie adiacent was in times past coue∣red with sea; the trueth whereof is till this day also confirmed by common and constant report. Yea Sithieu the ancient name of the citie (for who knowes not that the name of S. Omer is but new) manifesteth the same. As if it were deriued of Sinus Itthius or Iccius. Also that the said haue was in the prouince of the Morini, which Virgil and Lucan doe call the farthest people. And that this is most true, an attentiue Reader may by many arguments easily gather both out of Caesar his entrance and returne from England. Neither can the space of thirtie miles or thereabout, which he sayth the island is there distant from the maine, hinder my beliefe in this point; whenas the violence of the sea (especially in so narrow a place) may easily either adde or diminish. Nor doth the distance of the sea there from the maine to the continent much differ. Sufficeth thus much to haue beene said concerning Portus Iccius. Whether we haue hit the trueth or no, let others iudge. Moreouer, this Prouince hath three Bishopricks, to wit, Arras, S. Omer, and Boulogne; one and twen∣tie Abbeys, and seuen Nunries; besides many Couents and Hospitals. It hath many riuers also; the prin∣cipall whereof are Lys, Scarpe, Aa, Canche, and Authy, besides others that are nauigable. Great is the number of villages and hamlets thorowout the whole prouince. The soile is most fertile and abundant of all corne, and especially of wheat. Wherefore in the ancient French tongue some write it was called Atrech, that is to say, The land of bread. Nor is it destitute of woods and groues, especially towards the South and West. The garments of the Atrebates or Artesians S. Ierome in his second booke against Io∣uinian noteth for precious. Also the Artesian mantles Vopiscus celebrateth in the life of the Emperour Cari∣nus. Likewise the same Ierome and other authours affirme, that in his time it rained wooll in this prouince. This region, as others also adioyning, Guicciardin hath most notably described.
map of Artois, France Artois. ATREBATVM REGIO∣NIS VERA DESCRIPTIO. Johanne Surhonio Monteusi auctore. Illustri ac amplis∣simo viro Domino Christophoro ab Assonleuille, equi∣ti aurato Domino ab Alteuilla R.Mts. consiliario pri∣mario. Ab. Ortelius in hanc formam compraehen∣debat, et dedicabat Cum priuilegio Imp. et Regiea Maitis.
FLANDERS. THe extreme part of Europe, opposite to England and Scotland, enuironed by France, Germanie, and the Ocean, is called by the inhabitants, The low coun∣tries, or lower Germanie: but the French and all strangers in a maner call it by the name of Flanders. But in very deed Flanders hath not so great extension. For albeit Flanders properly so called was larger in times past; yet at this pre∣sent it is bounded by Brabant, Henault, Artois, and the Ocean sea. This they diuide into three parts, namely, Flanders the Dutch, the French, and the Imperiall; which last part (because it neuer acknowledged any superior, besides the Prince of Flanders) they name also Flan∣ders proprietarie. The Dutch Flanders hath these cities; Gant, Bruges, Yperen, Cortrijck, Oudenard with Pammele, Newport, Furnas, Bergen, Sluise, Damme, Bierflet, Dixmud, Cassel, Dunkerke, Greueling, Burburch, and Hulst. The French Flanders, L'isle, Doway, and Orchies. And Flanders Imperiall or Proprietary, Aelst, Dendermond, Geertsberg, and Ninouen. The principall riuers are Scheld, Lys, and Dender. Most part of the region is pa∣sture-ground, especially towards the West: it breedeth faire oxen, and most excellent and warlike horses. It abounds with butter and cheese; and yeeldeth wheat in abundance. The inhabitants are most of them merchants: and of flax (wherof they haue in Flanders great plenty, & excellent good) and wooll (which is brought them out of Spaine and England) they make great quantity of linnen and woollen cloth, which they disperse farre and wide. This Prouince of Flanders hath 28. walled cities, 1154 villages, besides fortresses, castles, and noble mens houses. Among which Gaunt is the greatest citie. Whereof Erasmus of Roterdam in his Epistles writeth in maner following: I am of opinion (saith he) if you looke all Christendome ouer, you shall not finde a citie comparable to this, either for largenesse and strength, or for the ciuill gouernment and towardlinesse of the people. So far Erasmus. It containeth in compasse three Dutch miles. It is watered by three riuers, which diuide it into twenty inhabited isles. For multitude and beauty of houses Bruges excelleth almost all the cities of the Netherlands; so famous a mart in times past, as (saith Iacobus Marchantius) by that meanes the name of Flanders obscured all the regions round about. Yperen stands vpon the riuer of Yperlee, very commodious for Fullers. By clothing it grew in times past to an huge big∣nesse, till the English and men of Gaunt besieging it, cast downe the large suburbs, and greatly dimi∣nished the same. As it is sayd in a common prouerbe, that Millan for a Dukedome excelles all Christendome; so doth Flanders for an Earledome. It hath certaine prerogatiues: for the Prince thereof writes him∣selfe Earle of Flanders by the grace of God: which clause is proper to the stile of Kings. For it is giuen (saith Meierus) to no Duke, Marques, or Earle in Christendome, but only to him of Flan∣ders: whenas all others vsually adde, By the clemency, or By the assistance of God, &c. He had in times past sundry officers peculiar to a King; as namely his Chancellour, his Master of the horse, his Chamberlain, and his Cupbearer; also two Marshals and ten Peeres, as in France. The armes of this region in times past were a scutcheon Azure, diuided by fiue Crosse-barres of golde with another small red scutcheon in the midst. Now it is a blacke lion in a golden field; which some are of opinion, he tooke for his armes, together with the other Netherlandish Princes, when they set forth on their expedition towards Syria in the company of Philip of Elsas: for at that time the princes of Flanders, Louaine, Holland, Lutzenburg, Limburg, Brabant, Zeland, Fris∣land, Henault, &c. changing their ancient armes, assumed to themselues lions of diuers colours. The greater part of Flanders was from the beginning vnder protection of the French Kings; but now it is at libertie, and absolute of it selfe; being released by Emperour Charles the fift, Earle of Flanders: who in the treatie of Madrid quite shooke off the French yoke. This region Guic∣ciardine hath most diligently described, and Iacobus Marchantius most learnedly. You may reade also Iacobus Meierus his ten tomes of Flanders affaires.
map of Flanders, Belgium Ad autographum Gerardi Mercatoris, in hanc for∣mulam contrahebat, parerga{que} addebat; Ab Ortelius.
ZELAND. LEuinus Lemnius of Zirichzee, in his booke De occultis naturae miraculis, Of the bidden secrets of Nature, amongst other things writeth thus of Zeland, his natiue country: That this Marine tract, saith he, was notvnknowne vnto the ancients, it may out of Cornelius Tacitus easily be gathered; although not by the same name, that at this day it is knowne by: but of a custome and common kind of salutation and speaking one to another, which acquaintance and friends of this prouince do vse at their meetings: therefore he calleth them by the name of MATTIACI, when he thus writeth: In the same iurisdiction are the Mattiaci, a nation very like the Bataui, but that those, in re∣gard of the situation of their countrie, are more desperate and couragious. Whereby he giueth to vnderstand, that although they are next neighbours and do border vpon the Bataui or Hollan∣ders, (so called of the hollownesse and lownesse of the ground) so that they might iustly be ac∣counted one and the same people, yet are only distinguished by the name of their customary saluation; and being neerer the Sea, are more hardie and audacious; (as indeed they are,) and for manhood, witte, policy, craft, deceits, cunning in buying and selling, and diligence in getting, and waies to enrich themselues, they do farre excell them. And in that hee calleth them Mattiaci, I conceiue it, that they were not so named either of any place or captaine, but of that fellowlike salutation, as I said, and vsuall maner of speaking one to another vsuall amongst them, to witte, of Maet, which in common speach and friendly meetings, signifieth a fellow and companion in all our actions, bargaines, contracts, and dangers; of all our purposes, coun∣sailes, labours and trauailles: a copartner and consort in any thing whatsoeuer we take in hand or go about, &c. For the name of Zeland is not ancient, but is lately inuented, and made of Sea and Land, as who would say Sea-land, a country or land bordering vpon the sea: for it is enclosed round with the ocean, consisting of fifteene Ilands, although it be not long since the raging Sea did great hurt in this country, by whose violence and ouerflowing, a good part of Zeland, (his dammes, walles and banks being rent and broken downe,) was ouercome of the salt-water and laid leuell with the sea: notwithstan∣ding certaine of them do remaine, of which especially three do continually wrestle with the boisterous billowes of the sea, and do very hardly defend themselues with infinite costs and charges against this rude and vnruly element. Of these first Wal∣cheren (Walachria) doth offer it selfe to the eie of such as do saile to these coasts; so named either of him that first entered and inhabited in it, or (as I gesse) of the Gaulls (Galli) which much frequented this country; who of the Low-countrie-men are yet called Walen; or of that part of Brittaine which lieth vpon the West side of it, and is called Wales, the most gentleman∣like and brauest nation (you may beleeue him,) amongst the English, and descended also from the Gaulles, which their lan∣guage as yet doth manifest &c. From hence Northward or somewhat declining toward the East is Scouwen Scaldia, the Latines call it of the riuer Sceldt, which runneth by it and heere falleth into the sea &c. Suytheuelandt, so named of the situa∣tion of it toward the South (to distinguish it from another distant from it Northward and therefore called Noortheuelandt) a large and most goodly tract of ground, coasting along the shore of Flanders and Brabant, although of late yeares hauing suf∣fered great dammage and losse, it is now much lesse and narrower. Thus farre Lemnius. Tritthemius in the Annalles of the Franks nameth Middleborough the chiefe city of these Ilands Mesoburgus Meyer; calleth it Mattiacum, more like a Latinist, then a true Geographer. More of these thou maist read in the forenamed Lemnius, who hath most excellently well described all the Ilands of Zeland, and the cities of the same. To these if thou wilt, thou maist adioine Lewis Guicciardine, and I know not what els thou canst seeke for further satisfaction. There are also certaine Annalles of these Ilands, written in the mother tongue by Iohn Reygersberg. But for an incomme, thou maist also to these former adde the descriptions of the cities of the Low-countries, done by Adrian Barland. Of the people of this prouince these verses are commonly spoken: Crescit nequitia, simul crescente senectâ; In Zelandinis non fallit regula talis. The worse they wax, as they grow old; In Zelanders this rule doth hold. These Ilands are situate between the mouthes of the riuers Maese and Sceldt, bordering on the North vpon Holland, on the East vpon Brabant, on the South vpon Flanders; on the West vpon the Germane sea. Iames Meyer thinketh that Proco∣pius calleth these Arboricas. Yet Petrus Diuaeus is of opinion that this place of Procopius is corrupt, and for Arborichas it ought to be read and written, Abroditos. That these are those Ilands, I do verily beleeue, vnto which Caesar, in his sixth booke De bello Gallico, affirmeth that he for∣ced a part of the army of Ambiorix Prince of the Eburones: which, as his owne words do giue to vnderstand, did hide them∣selues in Ilands, which the continuall motion, or ebbing and flowing of the sea had made. It is also very probable that Lu∣cane in his first booke aimed at these Isles, in these his verses: Qua{que} iacet littus dubium, quod terra fretum{que} Vendicat alter∣nis vicibus, cùm funditus ingens Oceanus, vel cùm refugis se fluctibus aufert. Ventus ab extremo pelagus sic axe volutat, &c. — They come in troopes amaine, From where th'vncertaine shore doth lie, that is nor sea nor land, But both, by course, as raging Tethys flow'th and ebb'th againe: Or as the wind with rowling waues all calm'd doth stand, From North to South thus carrying to and fro: &c. And that which the same Authour in his ninth booke sometime did speake of the Syrtes or Quicksands, one may now not altogether vnfitly applie to these Ilands, where he thus speaketh, — Primam mun∣do Natura figuram Cum daret, in dubio terrae pelagi{que} reliquit: Nam ne{que} subsedit penitus quo stagna profundi Acciperet, necse defendit ab aequore tellus: Ambigua sed lege loci iacet inuia sedes. When as this massie world by Nature first was fram'd, A doubtfull case it seem'd how God would haue it nam'd: For neither could the earth receiue the ocean deep, Nor land well able was his owne from sea to keep: The place so dangerous is, that none to it dare go; And whether sea or land it be, men skarce do know. Yet now these our Ilands are habitable, and easie and safely to be come vnto, by the industrie and labour of man, and not by the benefit and nature of the place.
map of Zeeland, Netherlands ZELANDICARVM INSVLARVM EXAC∣TISSIMA ET NOVA DESCRIPTIO, AVC∣TORE D. IACOBO A DAVENTRIA. Cum priuilegio.
HOLLAND. THus Erasmus of Roterodam, an Hollander doth describe Holland, his natiue country: Most learned men, saith he, do agree in this, and that vpon great probabil ty, that that iland of the Rhein vpon the maine sea, which Tacitus maketh mention of in his 20. booke, is the same that now they call HOLLAND. A land that I must alwaies both highly commend & reue∣rence, as to whom indeed I owe my life and natiuitie: And I would to God that it lay in my power to do it againe as great credit, as it hath done me honour and good, for the which I am much bound to praise the Lord. For in that that Martiall doth accuse this nation rusticitatis, of clownish simplicity; and that in that Lucane calleth the same trucem, rough and vnciuill, either it is nothing to vs, or els I deeme both to be interpreted as a great commendation vnto the same. For what nation in former times hath not been somewhat rude and vnciuill? or when were the Romanes more to be com∣mended, then when they knew no other art or mysterie but husbandrie and discipline of warre? If so be that those things which then were said of the Hollanders, some man shall stand in they may be verified of them now; what greater praise can be attributed to Holland, my natiue country, then if it may truly be said to loath those iests of Martiall, which he himselfe calleth nequitias, knaueries? And I would to God that all Christians had such eares, as these Hollanders had, that they might either not enter∣taine those pestilent conceits of that Poet, or at the leastwise would not be delighted with them. If any man please to call this clownishnesse, we do wil∣lingly beare that slanderous reproch, as being a thing common to vs with the good Lacedemonians, with the old Sabines & the worthy Catoes, so much commended. And Lucane, as I thinke, called the Hollanders truces, rough, in no other sense then Virgill calleth the Romane acer, stout and hardie. Other∣wise if any man do respect their homely and plaine maners, there is no nation more prone to ciuility and curteous humanity, in which there is lesse cruel∣ty or surly sternnesse; they are of a good nature, plaine, void of all trechery and guile, inclined to no notorious vices: only they are a little too much giuen to their pleasure, especially in banquetting: the reason of which I iudge to be the wonderfull plenty of all maner of things prouoking them thereunto: and that partly by reason of the forrein commodities brought vnto them, for that not only it possesseth the two mouths of the goodly riuers Maese and Rhein, but also for that the greatest part of this West coast is continually washed with the maine sea: partly by reason of the naturall fertility of the countrie, which euery where is watered with many great and nauigable riuers well stored with fish, and so hath abundance of pastorage and most fatte meadowes. Moreouer the fennes and woods affoord infinite store of wild-foule: and therefore they constantly affirme that there is no country in the world, which in so little compasse and plot of ground conteineth more cities and townes, not very big in quantity and circuite, but for state of common∣wealth and gouernment excellent. For cleanlinesse and near keeping of their houses, the Hollanders do beare away the bell from all other nations whatsoeuer, by the iudgement of Merchants which haue trauelled ouer the greatest part of the world. Of meane learned men there is no where greater plenty. The reason why many of them come not to the height of that exquisite learning, especially of the ancients, is their wanton and riotous life, or for that they esteeme more of honesty and vertue, then great learning: For it cannot be denied but that they haue good wits, as is manifest by many argu∣ments: although indeed it doth not appeare by me, whose gift that way is not great, as in nothing els. Thus farre Erasmus in his Chiliades. This country of Holland almost wholly enclosed like a Peninsula, with the sea, and the mouths of the riuers Maes and Rhein, is not very large, as being in compasse not more then 60. Dutch miles: yet it comprehendeth 29. walled cities, which are these, DORDRECHT, about an hundred yeares since by a deluge and ouerflowing of the sea made an iland: by this 4. riuers do runne. It is a mightie city, inhabited of very wealthy citizens, and beautified with most gallant buildings both publike and priuate. Heere is a great concourse of Merchants: for in it is held the staple of Rhenish wine, corne, timber, and other wares and merchandice which are brought downe by the Maes and Rhein into these countries to be sold. HAERLEM; this is the most stately and greatest citie of all Holland, situate in a most pleasant place. Hard without the town walls is a very fine groue, whither the citizens vpon festiuall daies, do withdraw themselues, for their pleasure and recreation, after their labour and toilesome busines. This town is famous for clothing, where it is cer∣taine that there are tenne or twelue thousand clothes yearely made. Heere the citizens do perswade themselues the mysterie of printing was first inuented and practised. DELET, so named of Delft, which in their language signifieth a ditch. Heere also the townesmen vse clothing. Moreouer in this city, they brue good beere, which from hence in great plenty is transported into Zeland. This towne in the yeare 1536. suffered great losse by fire, the greatest part of it being vtterly defaced. LEIDEN, vpon the Rhein, not far from his mouth where it sometime did fall into the sea, which now you may perceiue to be stopped & choaked with sand. It is thought to be the most ancient city of this prouince: for some do thinke it to haue beene so named of a Roman legion which sometime wintered in this place. Certaine antiquities are heere yet to be seene to this day. GOVDE vpon the riuer Isel, in that place where it meeteth with the riuer Goude or Gouwe, whereof the city tooke his name. It is very populous. AMSTELREDAM, most stately built vpon the inlet or bay called Tie, the most populous and frequent Mart towne of all these parts. In euery street almost, like as in Venice, a man may passe from place to place, by boate aswell as by foot, to dispatch his businesse. Heere daily from Norway, kussia, and other Northren countries, as also from Spaine, France, England, &c. great store of shippes do arriue and ancher; so that sometimes you shall see at once two hundred or three hundred faile of Mer∣chants shippes (hulks they call them) to ride heereat anchor. Therefore this city for traffique, is commonly held to yeeld to none but Antwerp. EN∣CKHVISEN, vpon that sea, which they vulgarly call in their language Suyderzee. Famous euen in forren countries for the building of great shippes. HOORN, situate also vpon the same bay. Heere in May is kept a faire, where there is sold such infinite store of butter and cheese, as is wonderfull. ALKMAER; this place for plenty of butter and cheese doth excell all other cities of this prouince. PVRMERENDE, famous for the castle or palace of the Count Egmond. EDAM, for building of shippes and good cheese, deserueth also to be remembred amongst the rest. Moreouer MVNNEKENDAM, WEESP, NAERDEN, and WEERT may not be forgotten. OVDEVVATER, heere groweth great store of hemp, so that heere they make almost all the nets, ropes and cables which the Hollanders and Zelanders do vse in fishing. SCOONHOVEN; as who would say, At the faire Orchards. Here is continuall fishing for Salmons, where also is held a Staple of this commodity, as we said there was of wine at Dordrecht. Next after these do follow I∣SELSTEIN, VIANEN: Item LEERDAM, ASPEREN, and HVEKELEN, three little cities round in a circle vpon the riuer Lingen, not about 500. pases one from another. GORICVM and WORICHVM, situate, vpon the banke of the riuer Wael, one ouer against another. Gorichum hath a very goodly and beautifull castle. A man may iustly call this town a city of store of all maner prouision: such a market is heere daily kept of such things as are necessary for the sustenance of mans life, which are from thence transported by shippe vnto other countries, but especially to Antwerp: Lastly, there are HVESDEN, ROTERODAM, SCHIEDAM, and both the MOVNTS, the one known by the name of S. Gertrude, the other of the number of Se∣uen; Seuenbergen I meane, and Geertruydenberge, for so they call them. Other towns there are, which sometime were walled: which although at this day we do now see them to want, either by the rage of violent warre, or by reason of other misfortunes, yet they still enioy their old liberties and fredoms. Of this sort Medenblick Beuerwijck, Muiden, Neuport, Vlaerdingen, and Grauesande. Moreouer in this prouince there are aboue foure hundred villages, amongst the which the Haghe, (which they call Earls Haghe) doth farre excell the rest. This town Guicciardine thinketh for bignesse, wealth, beauty and pleasant situation to surpasse all other in Europe whatsoeuer: for it conteineth two thowsand houses: of which the Princes pallace, built like a castell for∣tified with a wall and dich, where the Priuy courts of Iustice are held, is one. Neere vnto is a darke or thicke grone, which by reason of the singing of birds, and sight of Deere, is both to the eares and eies most pleasant and delightfull. I might more iustly call it Comopolis, a citie like town; and may boldly compare it with Ctesiphon a borough in Assyria, situate vpon the riuer Tigris, much magnified of all ancient writers: of which Strabo writeth, that that town is equall to a city for command and bignesse, and was the place where the Parthian kings did vse to winter, when they were desirous to spare the city of Seleucia. Vnder the Iurisdiction also of Holland are certaine Ilands, as Voorn, (with the towns Geervliet, and Briele,) Goereden, or Goere, (with a town of the same name: Somersdijcke, Tenel, & diuers others. The diocesse of Vtrecht, gouerned not long since by a Bishop, in which were 5. cities, yeelded it selfe to be subiect to the iurisdiction of Holland, in the time of Charles the fifth Emperour of Rome. This country is so enclosed with the sea, seuered by riuers, lakes, creeks and ditches, whereby it is diuided as it were into certaine plots and quarters, that there is no city nor village heere, to which one may not go aswell by water as by waggon. Neither is there any place in the whole prouince, from whence one may not easily in three houres space, go to the sea. Chrysostomus Neapolitanus hath described this Olland, (for so he writeth it) in an eloquent letter of his directed to Counte Nugarolo. Of this read the hi∣story of Holland, compiled by Gerardus Geldenhaurius and Cornelius Aurelius, as also Peter Diuey, but especially Hadrianus Iunius his Batauia. Of the wonderfull store and abundance of this country, read Lud. Guicciardine. Of the ruines of the Roman armory or storehouse of munition, which the country people call, The Brittish castle, (which is vpon the shore of the Germane ocean, at a village called Catwijcke opzee, not far from the city Leijden) and of the inscriptions in marble there found, we haue not long since set forth a peculiar treatise dedicated only to that argument. Of the prouince of Vtrecht, which now is vnder the command of Holland, and is likewise described in this Mappe, see the history of Lambertus. Hor∣tensius Monfortius.
map of Holland, Netherlands HOLLANDIAE ANTI∣QVORVM CATTHORVM SEDIS NOVA DESCRIP∣TIO, AVCTORE IACO∣BO A DAVENTRIA
FRIESLAND. THat the Frisij, a most ancient nation, did long since inhabit along the sea coast, neere the mouth of the riuer of Rhein, where also at this day they dwell, it is very apparant out of the records of ancient writers. For Ptolemey placeth them aboue the Busactores (or Busacteri, the people of that prouince which now is called Westfalia, as some thinke) between the ri∣uers Vidrus, (they call it Regge) and Amasius, now called Eems. Tacitus, who reporteth that they were of good account amongst the Germanes, and along by the sea coast to dwell on ech side the Rhein: diuideth them according to their power and greatnes of command, into Maiores and Minores, the Greater and the Lesser: hee moreouer affirmeth that they dwell round about certaine huge Lakes, such as were capable of the Roman fleet. The same authour nameth certaine Frisios Transrhenanos, Frieslandmen, dwelling beyond the Rhein: which he saith did rather mislike the auarice of the Romanes then their command. Iulius Capitolinus in the life of Clo∣dius Albinus the Emperour, saith, that these Transrhenane Frieslanders were by the same Clodius Albinus discomfi∣ted and ouerthrowne. Pliny mentioneth certaine Ilands of the Frieslanders (insulas Frisiorum) in the riuer of Rhein: and the Erisciabones, a kind of people between Helium and Fleuum, two mouthes of the Rhein, where it emptieth it selfe into the maine sea. It is manifest therefore that the Frisij, anciently did not passe the riuer Eems: but at this day they are further spred Eastward, almost as farre as the riuer Weser, (the old Geographers called it Visurgis.) Who also otherwise of them sometime, were designed by the name of the Chauci; (or Cauchi, for diuers authours write it diuersly) it is out of all doubt. And beside these vp higher, euen in Denmarke, in the confines of the little prouince Dietmarsh, there dwell a people vulgarly knowne by the name of Strandt Vriesen, that is, Frieslandmen inhabiting vpon the sea coast. These it may be were those which Ptolemey calleth Sigulones. Saxo Grammaticus, and Albertus Crantzius, calleth this Frisiam Eydorensem, (of the riuer Eider vpon which it bordereth) and Frisiam Minorem, the Lesser Friesland, both of them ma∣king it a branch sprung from those ancient Frisij. Cornelius Kempius in his description of Friesland, diuideth the whole country into seuen Zelands, that is, marine shires, you may terme them. The first is vpon the West of the riuer Fleuus or Isel, and now is called Waterlandt: Then Westergoe, as who would say, The West-land: The third Oestergoe, that is, The East-land. These three he saith are commonly known and conteined vnder the name of WEST FRIESLAND. The fourth is about the riuer Isel, where the cities Dauenter, Swool, Hasselt, Steenwijck and Wollenhoue are seated. The fifth conteineth the liberties of Groeningen: The sixt that part which they call East-Friesland. The seuenth is from the riuer Weser, beyond Elbe, euen vnto the little riuer Eyder. Otherwise this country of the Frisij, is vulgarly diuided into three parts, East Friesland, West Friesland, and Middle Friesland, which of some is called Groningen. Ptolemey nameth three towns of the Frisij, Manarmanis, Phleum, and Siatutanda: Fleum Castellum in Tacitus is the same as I thinke that Phleum is in Ptolemey: the same Tacitus also maketh mention of Cruptoricis stipendarij villa the Mannor of Cruptorix the stipendary: Item, the groue of Baduhenna, where he greatly lamenteth that 900. Romans had their throats cut, and where another supplie of 400. men, after that they had a suspicion of treason, did one kill another. The same authour writeth that in his time Hercules pillars were heere still remaining. The braue couragious minde of this nation and high conceit of their owne valour, is manifest by the history of Verritus and Malorix, two of their princes. For these (as Tacitus reporteth) going to Rome, and finding Nero the Emperour busied about other matters, amongst o∣ther things which were vsually shewed to barbarous people, they came into Pompeys theatre, that they might behold the greatnesse of it. While they sate idly there vpon the scaffolds (for they were not caried away altogether with the sight of the pastimes, as if they neuer had seen such before) they question about the differences of estates, what or who was a knight, and where sate the Senatours, they obserued some to sit in the Senatours rooms in a strange habit: and demanding who they were, after they heard, that that honour was giuen to the Embassadours of those nations which for valour, and amity with the Ro∣mans did excell others, they cried out with a loud voice, THERE ARE NO PEOPLE OF THE WORLD, THAT FOR PROVVES AND FIDELITY DO GO BEFORE THE GERMANES: and thereupon they left their places & placed them∣selues in the Senatours roome: and it was well taken of the beholders, as a token of their ancient spirit and earnest emulation of vertue. Nero made them both freemen of the city of Rome. Pliny writeth in the third chapter of the fifth booke of his naturall historie, that amongst the Frieslanders there grow∣eth an hearb which they call Britannica, hauing long blacke leaues; and a blacke roote. The iuice of this herb is pressed also out of the roote. The flowres by a proper name they call Vibones: which being gathered before any thunder is heard, and eaten, do wholly preserue a man from that danger. This herb is not only good and medicinable for the sinews, and diseases of the mouth, but also against the Golne or Squinancy and biting of Serpents. Whether this herb be at this day certainly knowne, and by what name, I desire to be informed of our learned Herbatists. Whether that the inhabitants of this prouince be those same Frisij, or whether happily they tooke their beginning and name from the Phrygians of Asia, as some would haue it, or from others of other places, (for Strabo acknowled∣geth also certaine Phrygi in Illyria, about the Ceraunian hilles) I leaue to the learned to determine. The idle fables of those men I cannot chose but laugh at, which do thinke that these Frisij came into this country from Fresia, a prouince of India. If I were delighted with fables, I had rather with Hanibald fetch the name of this people from their king Fri∣sus, the sonne of Clodio. The writers of middle age, especially the French, do call them, as I haue obserued, Frisones, by a name framed of the French word Frisons, by which the Frenchmen at this day vulgarly do call the people of this prouince. They retaine euen to this day the ancient name. For they are commonly, amongst themselues in their own language, called Friesen, by which name also they are known throughout all Germanie. They were conuerted vnto Christianitie by S. Boniface Archbishop of Mentz, at that same time when Zacharie was Pope of Rome. There is a strange historie of Rabod Duke of Friesland, who when he should by Baptisme haue beene consecrated and adopted into the number of Christs flocke, he demanded to what place his Grandfathers and Great∣grandfathers were gone before him: and when he vnderstood that they were all gone to Hell, he returned backe again saying, that he had rather be with his ancestors. Whether of this Rabod our word Rahoudt, whereby in our Mother tongue we signifie a knaue and a wicked fellow, were deriued, I cannot tell. Suffridus Petrus Frisius hath written ge∣nerally of the Frisij, in a seuerall and peculiar treatise dedicated wholly to this argument: Cornelius Kempius and o∣thers haue done the like: But Vbbo Emmius Frisius Gretensis of all hath done the same most learnedly.
map of Friesland, Netherlands Oost ende West vrieslandte beschryuinghe. VTRIVSQVE FRISIORVM RE∣GIONIS NOVISS: DESCRIPTIO. 1568.
WEST FRIESLAND. FRiesland at this day is by the riuer Eems diuided into West-Friesland and East-Friesland. West Friesland, whose description we heere do offer vnto thy view, doth by a most ancient right chalenge vnto it selfe the name of Friesland, and was alwaies esteemed the better. For this country had his proper king, vn∣till the daies of Charles the Great: after whose death this prouince was di∣uersly vexed and suffered many greeuous storms of frowning fortunes ire, although indeed before that time also it had often been assaulted and batte∣red by the Danes and Norweies. Yea and the raging Ocean, a continuall and most noisome enemie of this countrie, by ouerflowing, beating vpon it, tearing and rending his walls and banks hath much molested the same, and yet it will not suffer it to be quiet. Lastly, how it hath of later daies been troubled by the Bishops of Vtrecht and Earles of Holland, I thinke there is no man but doth well remember. But at length, in the daies of Charles the fifth, a very peaceable prince, it enioied peace and rest from all former troubles. At this day they do diuide it into three parts; Westergoe, Oestergoe, and Seuenwolden: which againe are distinguished into 29. Gre∣tanies, (as they vulgarly call them in their mother tongue) Courts or principall places appointed for the executing of iustice. Moreouer in this mappe there is described the territory of the renow∣med city Groningen: as also that tract which they call Ommeland: to these are adioined Ouerysel, Drent, and Twent, countries of a fatte and fertile glebe, well inhabited, full of villages and hamlets, bree∣ding also great plenty of cattell. The cities of West Friesland are thirteen, GROENINGEN, the more famous for that it brought forth the learned Rodolphus Agricola: DAM, LIEVVERDT with a faire castle: heere is kept the Court or place of Parliament and Chancerie, as they commonly call it: DOCKVM, the place where the famous Mathematician Gemma Frisius was borne: FRANICHER, a common palace, and place of retreit whither the Noblemen and Gentry of this country do for their pleasure retire themselues: BOLSART, SNEECK, where Ioachim Hopper a very learned and worthy man, was borne: ILST, SLOTEN, HARLINGEN, vpon an arme of the German ocean; (which they call Suyderzee,) hath a commodious hauen; garded with a strong castle to defend it from the impechment and assault of the enemie: WORCKVM and HINDELOPEN, vpon the same bay: Lastly, STAVEREN, which in time past hath been a mighty city, but now hauing endured many bitter storms and in∣undations of the sea, it is nothing so renowmed nor great. There are beside these 490. villages or parishes, of which diuers are endowed with great priuiledges, and haue many rich farmours: It hath many Monasteries; so that for the beauty of their townes, husbandrie of the land, and stately Abbeies, Friesland giueth place to no other country whatsoeuer. That in this prouince are many gentlemen descended from honourable families, hauing their houses and farms in diuers places of the shire, and no Barons or free Lords, the cause is partly by reason of the foresaid casualities, and partly for that they being contented with their own estate and liberty, haue not followed the courts of forrein Princes. Petrus Oliuarus in his annotations vpon Pomponius Mela, where he speaketh of West Friesland, wri∣teth, that within so little a circuite of ground he neuer saw so many parish Churches. There were, saith he, which do alleadge this to haue been the cause of that multitude of Churches: they report that there arose a great contention amongst the nobility of this country about their places in those Churches, euery one contending for the highest seat: and when as this contention grew euery day worse and worse, they determined, as many as were able, to build them seuerall Curches, eue∣ry man vpon his owne demaines: and so euery man might take the highest roome in his own seat: and heere grew the cause of building so many Churches. Thus farre Oliuarius, where also thou maist see many things els worth the reading. Moreouer read Albertus Crantzius, his Saxonia. But he that desireth a more ample knowledge of this prouince, let him haue recourse vnto the description of the Low countries done by Lewis Guicciardine. Aelsius Edouardus Leon Frisius hath described this country in Heroike verse, dedicated to D. Viglius Zwichemus: Cornelius Kempius, and Suffridus Petrus haue done the same at large in peculiar treatises. The learned Hieronymus Verrutius did this other day promise to set out the antiquities of this Country.
map of West Friesland, Netherlands FRISIA OCCIDENTALIS. SIBRANDVS LEONIS LEOVARDIENSIS DESCRIB. Cum priuilegio Imp. et Reg. Mtm. ad decennium. 1579. Antiquae Frisiae situs sub. Augusto Imperatore, ut fertur.
EAST FRIESLAND. THat the Frisij, did not in former times inhabit this tract, but the Cauchi, there is none, I thinke, that doubt. Beside Strabo, Dion, Suetonius, Paterculus, and Ael. Spartianus, Ptolemey, (who di∣stinguisheth them into The Greater, and The Lesser,) doth make mention of this people. Ptolemey placeth the Greater Cauchi, between the riuers Weiser and Elbe: the Lesser, between Eems and Weiser, where now these Frieslanders, which we call East-Frieslanders, at this day do dwell. Of the Cauchi, Pliny in the first Chapter of his sixteenth booke, thus speaketh: In the North we haue seene, saith he, the countries of the Cauchi, the Greater and the Lesser, (as they are termed) altoge∣ther void of wood and trees. For by an huge in-let there, twise euery day and night by courses, the sea runneth in amaine, confusedly couering whatsoeuer generally the earth bringeth forth; leauing it doubtfull which is sea, and which is land. There the silly distressed people get them vp to the toppes of high hills, or mounts raised, by labour and industrie of men, (according to the height of the highest tide, as they find by experi∣ence,) and thereon they build their poore cottages: where they dwell like sailers floting on the waters, when the ocean flowing en∣closeth them round: or like those which haue suffered shipwrake, when the waters ebbing returne backe againe: and then they go out to fish about their cabbines, when they obserue the fish to follow the tide. They haue no cattell, they liue not vpon milke and whit-meats as their neighbours do, they hunt not any wild beast, as being farre from any shrubs or bushes where they may hide their heads. Of Reike, a kind of seaweed, and rushes growing vpon the washes and boggy places they twist cords, whereof they make their fishing nets: and taking vp a kind of muddy earth with their hands, drying it rather with the wind, then with the sunne, they vse it for fuell to dresse their meat, and heat their limmes, starke and stiffe with the cold blasts of the Northren winds. They haue no other drinke but raine water, which they catch and keep in ditches in the porches of their houses. Yet these nations, if they be at this day conquered by the Romanes, they count it no other but slauery and bondage. So it is indeed, fortune is fauourable to some to their owne hurt and hinderance. Thus Pliny writeth of this people; who wondereth that they preferred liberty, be∣fore the tyrannous command of the Romanes, or rather, as I thinke, he enuieth that they were freed from their yoke. For neither is it yet so wonderfull a thing as he would make it, for a free nation, before all things els whatsoeuer, to maintaine their liberty: which is excellent a thing in his iudgement, ô Pliny, whom thou thy selfe doest highly commend before all other, who perswadeth vs to maintaine the same with the vttermost hazard of our life: and affirmeth it worthily to be desired and preferred not only of man, but also of brute beasts, before all things in the world beside. This country in former times was diuided into many Signiories; which seuerally were gouerned by their seuerall and proper Princes, euen vnto the time of Fredericke the third, Emperour of Rome; who gaue this whole country vnto one Vl∣ricke, and created him Earle of the same, in the yeare after Christs natiuity 1465. The soile of this tract is so rich of all necessarie things, that it seemeth not greatly to stand in need of the help of neighbour countries. Yea it doth so plentifully abound with diuers things, as Horses, Oxen, Cattell, Hogges, Wool, Butter, Cheese, Barley, Oates, Wheat, Beanes, Pease, and Salt, that from hence euery yeare they conuey great store of these com∣modities vnto forrein countries. This County hath but two walled cities, namely, Eemden and Awricke. Of which EEM∣DEN, situate at the mouth of the riuer Eems, is the common Mart-towne of the whole prouince, for concourse of Merchants especially famous, which indeed is caused by the commodiousnesse and opportunity of the hauen, which doth thrust it selfe so farre vp into the heart of the city, at such a great height and depth, that it doth easily receiue and entertaine great shippes, full laden, with sailes stricken into the very middest of the same. This city is much beautified with the sumptuous palace of the Prince, a gorgeous Church, the Yeeld hall, and the goodly houses of the priuate citizens. AVRICK, by reason of the woods and groues which on all sides almost do inclose it, is inhabitd for the most part of Gentlemen and Noblemen, where they recreate and delight themselues with Hawking and Hunting. In the territorie of this city, there is, as Kempius reporteth, a place called Iyl, enclosed round with a wall, beset with bushes, a commodious dwelling for Hares and Deere: in which as in a Parke or warrein they maintaine a great number of these kind of beasts, which none dare take vnder a great penalty: but they are reserued for the Earles disport and pastime when he is disposed to recreate himselfe with hunting. In the confines also of this city Awricke, is a little hill rising somewhat high, (commonly they call it Obstalsboom or Vpstalsbom) where the seat of Iustice or Court leet for the whole shire is ordinarily held. Heere they were wont euery yeare, out of all the Zelands, to meet in the open and wild fields, and there by the most skilfull and approued lawiers, such as best knew their customs and lawes, to end and determine all controuersies arising between man and man. In this precinct also are diuen castles, villages and farms. Of hamlets and end-waies, such is the number, that oft times one doth touch another. The greatest part of which both for beauty of their houses and streets, as also for multitude of inhabitants and strangers, do so excell, that they may foe honour and greatnesse contend with diuers cities of Germany. The people do giue themselues either to traffique as Merchants, or to get their liuings by occupations and handy-crafts, or by playing the husbandmen and tilling the ground. With their neighbours and forreners they speake in the Dutch tongue, amongst themselues they vse a peculiar language, proper to that nation and not vnderstood of strangers. They are comely apparelled, yea euen the very country people, so that a man would take them to be citizens. The women weare a kind of attire and apparell much differing from that of other nations. They bind vp all the haire of their had into one locke, and that, set out with diuers siluer and gilt spangles and buttons, they let to hang behind their backe. Their head they bind vp in Summer with a caull of red coloured silke, behung with siluer spangles, but in the Winter they weare an hood of green cloth, wherewith they do so couer their whole head, that skarsely one may see their eies: this kind of attire they call an Hatte. Their vpper garment (huick of loose gowne) which they weare abroad, from the head to the foot is pleited with many small pleits, and is so stiffe with siluer and gilt wire or plate wouen into it, that when it is put off, it will stand vpright. This some∣time is made of red, sometime of green cloth. In this country of East-Friesland there are also two other counties, the one called Esens, the other Ieueren, bearing the names of their chiefe towns. Of the situation of this prouince, nature and maners of the people, read Vbbo Emmius.
map of East Friesland, Netherlands FRISIA ORIENTALIS RIDERIAE PORTIONIS facies, ante inundationem, qui post∣ea sinus maris factus est.
DENMARKE. SAxo Grammaticus hath thus described Denmarke: DENMARKE, saith he, parted in the middest by the boisterous sea, conteineth a few small parts of the maine continent, seuered and disioined one from another by the breaking in of the ocean winding and turning it selfe diuers waies. Of these IVTIA, Iuitland, is, in respect of the greatnesse and beginning, in the enterance of the kingdome of Denmarke. Which as it is in situation first, so running out further, it is placed in the vtmost borders of Germany. From whose company it being parted by the intercourse of the riuer Eydor, it runneth with a larger breadth toward the North, euen to the banke of the frith of Norwey (he calleth it Fre∣tum Noricum.) In this is the bay of Lemwicke, (Sinus Lymicus) abounding with such store of fish, that it alone yeeldeth as much prouision of victuall to the inhabitants, as all the whole country be∣side. To this is adioined FRESIA, (Strand Friesen) a prouince much lesser, which lying more low then Iuitland in plaine and champion fields, receiueth from the sea ouerflowing it, great strength and heart, and is very set∣tile for come. Whose inundation or violent tide, whether it do bring to the country people more profit or dammage, it is hard to say: For in tempestuous weather the Sea breaking in through the creeks wherein the water was wont to be contained, such a world of waters oft times doth follow and come into the country, that diuers times it runneth ouer not only the fallow fields, but drowneth also whole families with their goods and cattell. After Iuitland, the ile FIONIA, (Fuinex) doth follow vpon the East, which a narrow arme of the ocean sea doth seuer from the maine land. This iland as vpon the West it looketh toward Iuitland, so vpon the East it hath the ile SEELAND, (Sialandia, he calleth it) an iland much commended for the great abun∣dance of all maner of necessary things that it yeeldeth: which for pleasant situation is thought to excell all the prouinces of this kingdome, and is supposed to be in the middest of Denmarke, indifferently situate between the one end of the same, and the other. Vpon the East side of this, an arme of the ocean runneth between it and SCONE, (Scania, Scandinauia, Basilia and Baltia called by diuers authours) a part of Norwey or Swedland. This sea yearely affoordeth great gaine to the Fishermen. For this whole bay or gulfe of the sea, is so full of all sorts of fish, that the fishermen oft times do catch such store and therewith they so fraight their boats, that they haue no roome to stirre their oares: neither do they heere vse any nets or other meanes to take the fish, but many times they are taken only with the hand. Moreouer HALLAND and BLIEKER, (Blekingia he nameth it) two prouinces, issuing forth from the maine land of Scone, like two armes from one and the same body of a tree, are, by many spaces and by-corners, adioined and knitte to Gotland and Norwey. Thus farre Saxo Grammaticus. See also Albert Crantzius, Seba∣stian Munster, and the Ecclesiasticall history of M. Adams. The kingdome of NORVVAY, is subiect to the crowne of Denmarke, as also the ile GOTLAND: Item, (if you will giue cre∣dit to Marke Iordane in his mappe of Denmarke) the ilands Groenland, Island, Hetland, Feroa, and the Orkneys. Yet we haue said before that the Orkney iles do belong vnto the kingdome of Scotland, vnder the name and title of a Dukedome. Olaus also saith, but falsly as I perswade my selfe, that the ile Gotland doth belong vnto the kingdome of Swedland. GOTHIA, or the ile Gotland is a good ground for the feeding and bringing vp of cattell, horses and oxen. There is plentifull fishing, fowling and hunting. It is very rich of a kind of faire marble, as also of all maner of things necessary for the mainte∣nance of mans life. In it is the goodly towne Visbui, sometime the most famous and frequent Mart of all Europe. There are yet remaining certaine ruines of marble, sufficient testimony of his ancient greatnesse and beauty: at this day it is now renowmed for the faire Abbey of Benedictine Friers; and the Library there containing about 2000. bookes of sundry authours, rare and ancient manuscripts. Thus farre out of Olaus Magnus and Iacobus Zieglerus. CIMBRICA CHERSONES VS, now called IVITLAND. CImbrica Chersonesus, out of the which the Cimbri, about the yeare 105. before the incarnation of Christ, issued forth and spread themselues in other countries of Europe, to the great terrour and affrighting of all Italie, stret∣ching it selfe from the riuer Elbe into the North about 80. miles, containeth many large and goodly shires. It is a part of the kingdome of Denmarke, which M. Adams nameth Daniam Cismarinam, Denmarke on this side the sea. In the entrance of it, as one commeth out of Saxony there standeth HOLSTATIA, Holstein, which old writers, for that it is disioined and seuered four the rest of Germany, toward the North, by the riuer Elbe, (Albis they called it) named NORDALBINGIA: and for that it was alwaies accounted the vttermost Northren bound of the Roman Empire: and therefore Henry surnamed Auceps, the Fowler, Emperour of Rome, about 650. since, had heere in the city of Sleswicke somewhat beyond the limites of the Empire, a Lieutenant and Lord-warden of the Marches. Holstein conteineth three principall shires, WAGRIA, STORMAR, and DITMARSH: of the which Federicke the Emperour, about 106. yeares agone, made a Dukedome. The next prouince, from the riuer Eydore, which is the furthest bound of Holstein, euen vnto Kolding, conteineth the Dukedome of Sleswick, so named of Sleswick the chiefe city, and ancientest mart towne of this country. For in former times this country was intituled by the name of the Dukedome of Iuitland, which Waldemare the great-grand-child of Abel king of Denmarke first held by homaga from Erick their king, about the yeare of Christ 1280. The male line of the Kings and Dukes failing, and the Dukedome of Sleswick and the kingdome of Demnarke being vnited and knit into one body, Queen Margaret heire to the three crownes, granted the Dukedome of Sleswick to Gerard Duke of Holstein, on this condition; that he should acknowledge his te∣nure from the king of Denmarke. The rest of Cimbrica Chersonesus called North Iuitland, stretching it selfe toward Norway, by Scagen, (a towne by reason the quicksands and the shallow sea there, well known to sea men,) groweth sharp and narrow like a wedge. This prouince is broadest about Aleburgh, a mart towne vpon an arme of the sea, which they call Lymford: for there it falleth into Iuitland, and pearceth almost quite thorow the same Westward, diuiding Wensussel (only a very narrow space ex∣cept) from the rest, making it a Peninsula or Neckland: from thence spreading it selfe into a greater breadth, enclosing and compassing many goodly ilands, putting forth many elbowes and branches, it distinguisheth and boundeth diuers shires and countries. In this Bay is that Iland, which Otho the first, Emperour of Rome, about the yeare after Christs incarnation 960. when as he passed with his army from the one end of Iuitland to the other, called Ottonia: whereof the whole tract about this Ile is called Otthesunt, or vulgarly Odsunt. That iland is now called Tyrhalm: so named, as I guesse, of Tyre the mother of king Harald: who, after the departure of the Emperour Otho out of Iuitland, caused all the country from Sleswick Northward, to be fenced with a wall and deepe trench. In that Iland at this day there is a village called Odby: where they suppose that the Iuites ouerthrew the Emperour and his forces. Thus farre the authour of this chart, hath written of this whole prouince.
map of Denmark DANIAE REGNI TYPVS. CORNE∣LIVS AN∣TONIADES DESCRIP∣SIT. Cum Priuilegio.
map of Jutland, Denmark CIMBRICAE CHERSONESI nunc IVTIAE descriptio, auctore Marco Iordano. Cum priuileio decenn. 1595.
HOLSATIA, vulgarly called HOLSTEIN. OF Holstein thus Crantzius in the seuen and twentieth Chapter of his fifth booke of the history of Sa∣xony: Holstatia tooke the name of a vulgar word of thar language: for that the country is woody and full of forrests, to distinguish between these parts and the other neere adioining, which are moorish and green pasture grounds. The Saxons call the inhabitants Holsaten, that is, people dwelling a∣mongst the woods: on the contrary those which dwell in fenny countries they call Merstude. There∣of the Latines haue formed he names Holsati, Holsatia, (Holsaten and Holstein) like as the French and Italians are from their own languages wont to enrich the Latine tongue. Vpon the East, this country is bounded by the riuer Bilene, on the West by Store, on the South by Elbe or Elue; on the North by Eydore, which in time past was the furthest bound of Denmarke. From this riuer Eastward the Wandalles or Vandalles otherwise called Wagers did inhabit: of whom that prouince was named WAGRIA, of an ancient (and sometime a populous) city of that name, now a poore village little inhabited, without wall, trench, rampart or fence: the houses are couered with reeds gathered in the fennes, homely and country like: it runneth out Eastward as farre as the riuer Trauenna. Notwithstanding that part of the country, which from the riuer Bilene by Elbe decli∣neth toward the riuer Store, and of that riuer is called Stormare, leaueth but a little ground to the old Holsatia, from Store to Ey∣dore. For the Dietmarshers a people inhabiting in mournish and fenny places, do claime a freedome and priuiledge from the iu∣risdiction of any other Prince. This Crantzius in his time wrote of the state of Holstein then. Whereupon it is apparant that Holstein was diuided into Thietmarsh, Wagria, and Stormare. The same Crantzius and others, do also call these Holsaters, Tran∣sabianos and Nordalbianos, as situate beyond and vpon the North-side of the riuer Elbe, called of the Latines Albis. Ado na∣meth them also Northuidos, vnder whom are conteined, as the same authour and Helmoldus do write, the Stormaren, Holsa∣ters, and Thietmarshers. He that wrote of the warres between the Danes and Dietmarshers, (his name we know not) doth describe these countries somewhat otherwise then those forenamed writers haue done. For he affirmeth that Holstein, as now it is called, generally doth comprehend the Dukedome of Sleswicke, Wagria, Stormare, Dietmarsh, and Iuitland, with certaine other lesser countries and ilands; as namely, Angle-land, Swant-land, and Wensusset anciently called Cimbrica Chersonesus. But this limitation is somewhat too large: for the same authour doth presently after write, that Holstein properly is bounded with those foure riuers, within which Crantzius doth restrein it. Although that Annonius the Monke, as he citeth there, in steed of the riuer Eyder doth place vpon the North, the wall and trench which the country people call Denwerk. And this is that Holstein which this our Mappe presenteth vnto thy view. That the Cimbri a warlicke people did long since inhabit this tract, it is very apparant out of the writings of most approved authours. In Wagria or Wagreland, Crantzius reckoneth vp these cities; Oldenburgh, Luthenburgh, Niestade or Nigestad, Todesto, Ze∣gebergh, Plone &c. In Stormare, Hamburgh, Reinoldesborgh, Itzeho, Niemunster &c. Dietmarsh hath no cities, only there they dwell in streets and villages: and of it we haue before written at large in his proper place. Of the country of Sleswicke, read Dauid Chytraeus his Saxon history. Where also he speaketh much of Hamburgh, a city belonging to this Dukedome. The Ilands belonging to the WANDALLS. THey are three Ilands perteining to Pomerland, RVGIA, Rugen, VSEDAMIA, Vsedom, and WOLLINIA, Wool∣lin, the more famous for their three Market townes, Vineta, Arcona and Iulina. VINETA, a goodly towne of Vsedome, which Conrad the second Emperour of Rome, surnamed Salignus, by the helpe of Canutus king of Denmarke, destroied in the yeare of Christ, 1036. hauing stood in flourishing estate about 250. yeares toge∣ther: the quarrell grew, as they report, for that they had vsed certaine Christian Merchants trading thither, very despightfully and cruelly. It was not situate, as Crantzius affirmeth, neere the mouth of the riuer Diuenow, or vpon the East side of the creeke, where the new lake emptieth it selfe into the sea. For it is from thence seuen miles West∣ward, two miles Southward from the strong castell Wolgast. At this day the foundation of it is yet to be seene in the sea, about thirty furlongs from the shore, or from the fisher-mens cottages in Damerow. It seemeth to haue beene welnigh as bigge as Lubecke. Toward the latter end of winter, the ice of the marine quarters there about are gathered together and do stay vpon these breaches, and oft times it appeareth a farre off like a Castell or Bulwarke. Heere the Seales (Phocae) do cast their yong and bring them vp in the sommer time, (the East sea being calme,) vpon the cragges and rocks there. And been they sleepe vpon the toppes of the cliffes and rocks which am aboue the waters. These do much hurt to the poore fisher-men that dwell heere about; eating vp the laxes and other fishes, which they catch with hookes. ARCONA, now the sea-men vulgarly call it Ormunde. In the neckeland of Rugen, was Wittow or Witmund, as the Hollan∣ders call it, of the high white chalkie cliffes vpon the sea-coast. This iland is diuided into many small iles and neck-lands: It hath in all 28. parish Churches. Waldemare king of Denmarke, in the yeare of Christ, 1168. spoiled Arcona. Ottocare king of the Romanes and of all Italie, was borne in Rugen, as also diuers other famous captaines, renowmed in histories, and registred by Francis Ireney. In our time it hath brought forth many learned noble men, which haue beene of the Councell to Kings and great Princes. IVLINVM, now Wollin, stood longest. This ouercame the fleet royall and great armado of Swein the first, king of Denmarke, and tooke him thrise in three seuerall battels at sea; yet was three times rescued and released our of their hands againe. Iulinum stood in that place or there about where now the towne Wollin is seated, as the monuments in the places neere adioining do sufficiently testifie. Saint Otto Bishop of Bamberg, the Apostle of Pomerland, in the yeare 1124. in this towne baptized 22000. men. Heere the Prince of Pomerland erected a Bishops sea, and Albertus the first Bishop of Pomerland, was first installed Bishop of the same. Yet the citizens and people about Iulinum did soone fall backe to paganisme and do againe adore their idoll Trigilaff, and vtterly forsooke Christ: and therefore fire fell downe from heauen, and wasted the city. Waldemare also pre∣sently after the fire, two yeares, after the ouerthrow of Arcona, rased Iulinum to the ground. There is also the Ile Gristoe, ouer against and within kenning of Camin. These things as I haue heere set them down, were written vnto me from Colberg, by M. Peter Edling. See Saxo, Helmold and Crantzius.
map of Holstein, Germany HOLSATIAE DESCRIPTIO. Marco Iordano Holsato auctore. Cum gratia et Priuile∣gio.
map of Rügen, Usedom and Wolin, Germany RVGIAE, VSEDO∣MIAE, ET IVLINAE, Wandalica∣rum insula∣rum Vera descriptio. 1584.
THIETMARSIA, or DIETMARSH. OF the MARSI, descended from Marsus, Strabo the ancient Geographer speaketh: and saith that many yeares since they went from the coasts about the Rhein, into a low and moorish country. Of these are come the THEVTOMARSI, or, as they commonlie pronounce the word, the Thietmarsi, (the Dietmarshers) who about 400. yeares agone, were gouerned by the most ancient family of Staden, many of which they treacherously slew, and so at length they made themselues free, by killing & banishing all their Nobility. Henry, surnamed the Lion, Duke of Saxony subdued them: but he being out-lawed by the Emperour Fredericke, Walemare king of Denmarke seized vpon the country, and when as he vsed their helpe against Adolph Earle of Holstein and the Lubeckers, they reuolted vnto the enemies, by whom the king was ouercome at the village Bornhouet. Thus againe being restored vnto their liberty, least they might seeme to be Anarchi, subiect to no Iurisdiction, they shrowded themselues vnder the patronage of the Arch∣hishop of Breme, and him they acknowledged for their Prince: but yet they would neuer pay him tribute or sub∣sidie, nor euer would be obedient to his lawes or commands. Often the Dukes of Holstein haue attempted wars against them, and alwaies they suffered the repulse. Fredericke the third, Emperour of Rome, gaue the country to Christian the first, king of Denmarke, vnder the title of a Dukedome: whose sonne Iohn, making war vpon them in the yeare 1500. lost the day, all his forces being ouerthrowen, himselfe with a very few hardly escaped by flight, leauing behind him the greatest part of the nobility of Holstein. After that, they grew more insolent by this victory, and oft greatly troubled and molested the Duke of Holstein. Adolph sonne of Fredericke king of Den∣marke, heire to the kingdome of Norway, and Duke of Sleswicke and Holstein, not being able to endure their male-part insolencie, in the yeare of Christ 1559. mustereth his men, gathereth a great army, to whom Fredericke the second, king of Demnarke, and Iohn his brother, ioine their forces. These armies thus vnited, set forward, and presently take Meldorp, with all the South part of the prouince. Then after a few daies respite, they ledde their forces along by Tilenbrugge,: against whom the Dietmarshers out of Hemmingstade make head with all their pow∣er, and met the enemy before the towne Heyde; entending to force the souldiers to retire being wearied with a tedious march: but oft repelled, and yet charging againe afresh, at length they are beaten downe, killed, forced to flie, and the towne is taken and fired. There were slaine that day about 3000. Dietmarshers. Duke Adolph labouring like a valiant captaine, to keep his men in aray, and to bring them on againe which began to flie, re∣ceiued an hurt. This battell was fought vpon the thirteenth day of Iune. The Dietmarshers hauing receiued this ouerthrow, submitted themselues to the King and the Dukes, and obteining pardon, they were againe re∣ceiued to grace: and thus Dietmarsh, which for many ages together by force of armes had defended and main∣tained their liberty, became subiect to the Dukes of Holstein. This the authour of this Mappe, which heere we haue inserted into our Theater, hath written of this country. See also Albert Crantzius his Chronicle of Saxony. Christianus Silicius, a Dane, hath lately set forth a little Treatise, in which he hath described these warres between the Danes and the Dietmarshers, and other things which do much make for the better vnderstanding of this tract. OLDENBVRG. THis country tooke his name from Oldenburg, the chiefe city. Albertus Crantzius in his Metropolis in the fifteenth chapter of the third booke, writeth that this is one of the most ancient Earledomes of Germany: for in the thirty chapter of his second booke, he reckoneth Widekind, Duke of Saxony, who liued in the time of Charles the Great, amongst the Earles of this country. Iraenicus affirmeth that this city was repaired by Charles the Great, who also there dedicated a church to S. Iohn Baptist, consecrated by Edalgarge the Bishop. In this I thinke he is deceiued, that he reckoneth this city amongst the ci∣ties of the Wandalls, and describeth it vpon that coast. For this is another city different from that; and is in VVa∣gria, a prouince of Holstein, nothing neere Pomerland. This the VVandalls called Stargard, the Danes Brannesia; ech according to the propriety of his owne tongue, as the same Crantzius writeth. The authour of this Mappe think∣eth that the Ambrones, (a people which went into Italie with the Cimbers, and were slaine and ouerthrowen by Marius, as Plutarch recordeth) dwelt heere about, and their name yet to remaine amongst that people which they call Amerlanders. The same he thinketh of the Alani Saxones, which he verily beleeueth to haue sometime dwelt about the lake Alana in this prouince, vpon ech side of the riuer Alana (both in the Mappe are written Ana) euen as high as the castell Oria; and at this day to be called Lengener, as who would say Alani, and Auerlenger, that is, the Alanes on the further side. Andrew Hoppenrode in his booke of Pedigrees, hath something of the Earles of this County. But Dauid Chytraeus hath written the best of any man of it, in his history of Saxony.
map of North Holstein, Germany THIETMAR∣SIAE, HOL∣SATICAE RE∣GIONIS PAR∣TIS TYPVS. Auctore Petro Boeckel.
map of the County of Oldenburg, Germany OLDENBVRG COMIT. Laurentius Michaelis describ.
WESTPHALIA, or as vulgarly it is called WESTPHALEN. THis country seated between the riuers Weiser and Rhein, runneth out toward the South almost as farre as Hessen, his North border a∣butteth vpon Friesland. The famous riuers Eems and Lippe, (Ama∣sis and Lupias) besides some other of lesser note, do runne through this country. The soile is reasonably fertile; but of those things rather that do belong to the maintenance of sheep, cattell, and such like beasts, than men. It yeeldeth diuers kinds of fruits, as apples, nuts, and acorns, wherewith they feed and fatte their swine: for of these they haue great store, the gammons and legges of which, dried in the smoke, are from hence farre and neere transported and caried into forrein countries: for the gammons of Westphalen bacon are accounted for a dainty dish at great mens tables. These also that country people do sometime eat raw, and take it for a sauory meat. It is more fertile about Susate and Hammon, but most rich of all commodities, in the prouince of Pa∣derborne and Lippe. The diocesse of Munster is good meadow and pasture ground: as also that tract which is about Weisser in some places. It is woody all about Surland and the coun∣ty of Berg. About Collen and the county of Marche it is not without some veine of mettall. The people are goodly men, of a tall and comely stature, strong and able bodies, and courage∣ous stomacke. It hath many good souldiers, well trained, and ready at an houres warning. The Counties and Noble houses which do belong to this Countrie, are, in the iudgement of Roleuinge, the County of Benthem, Tekelenburgh, March, VValdecke, Spi∣gelberg, Dinstlaken, Oldenburg, Diephold, Rauesburg, Limburg, Arnsburg, Ritburg, Lippe, Buren, Rekelinchuisen, Ludinchuyssen, Steenuord, Horst∣mare, Borchlo, Brunckhorst, Gemme and Cappenberg: to these also Hammelman addeth, Delmenhorst, Lingen, and Sterneberg. The people about the tract of Collen and in March, are the Surlandi: the Bergenses, which dwell in the mountaines and such as are subiect to the Duke of Cleeueland: the Emeslandi, in the Bishopricke of Mun∣ster and the inhabitants about the riuer Eems, and toward Friesland: the Slachterlan∣di, in the same prouince neere Cloppenburg: and the Norlandi, (that is, the Nor∣thren people) in the tract of Osnaburg: lastly, the Delbruggij, in the diocesse of Pader∣borne. The chiefe cities of Westphalen properly so called, are Munster, Dusseldorp, We∣sall, Oldenburg, Osnaburg, Minde, Herworden: and of lesse note Widenbrug, and Coesueldt. Some do account the ancient and true Saxony, to be Westfalen: and do thinke it to haue been inhabited long since by the Cherusci, whose Prince or Generall, Tacitus and Velleius do write to haue been that same Arminius, who slew Quintilius Varus the Romane, and put his three legions to the sword. Herman Hamelman hath set out the description of this country in a seuerall treatise; out of whom we haue gathered this briefe discourse: he nameth and citeth for his authours Werner Roleuing, Gobeline, and others mo of lesse note, writers which yet I haue not knowen. The studious Reader to these may adioine Albert Crantz his Saxony. Item Dauid Chytraeus his history of Saxony, where he hath a large and learned description of this country. Of this prouince this rythme and prouerbe is commonly spoken by trauellers. Hospitium vile, Cranck broot, dun bier, langhe mile, Sunt in Westphalia, Qui non vult credere, loop da. Lodging base hard bed, Kentish miles, small drinke and brown bread, In Westphalen be, He that will not beleeue't, let him go see.
map of Westphalia, Germany WEST∣PHALIAE TOTIVS, FINI∣TIMARVMQVE REGIONVM ACCVRATA DESCRIP∣TIO. Qui olim Saxones, postea se Ostpha∣los et Westphalos dixere: Ʋisurgi flumine distinctos: Ostphalorum au∣tem Vocabulum in Saxonum denuo eu∣anuit. At Westpha∣li in hodiernum usque diem nomen retinēt. Ʋetusque tanquam spurium respuentes. Cum Imp. et Reg. Mtm. priuilegio ad decennal. 1579. Christianus Schrot Sonsb. descripsit. Cum Priuilegio.
SAXONY. ALthough this Mappe do beare the title of Saxony, notwithstanding it conteineth not all Saxony: for the true and ancient Saxony was comprehended in former times between the riuers Elue and Rhein, according to his vttermost length: the breadth of it was restrained by the Germane sea, and the riuer Eydore, and the borders of Hessen and Thuringen. Brunswicke was almost in the center and middest of it. But now it is not bounded with those or such like naturall bounds, such as riuers and mountaines are; but it is confined by other Princes signiories and countries. Therefore Saxony at this day is diuided into the Vpper and Neather. The Vpper or High Saxony is that which this Mappe doth represent, and is graced with the title of a Dukedome: whose Duke also is one of the Princes Electours, which haue their voices in the choosing of the Empe∣rour. The chiefe townes of this prouince are VVitteberg and Torga. Of Saxony and the antiquities of the same, Albert Crantz hath written a whole volume. M. Adams also in the first booke of his Ecclesiasticall history, hath some things of this country worth the reading. Hamelman hath set out the histories of Saxony and VVestfalen. They that do desire to know the situation, buttes and bounds, and famous acts, let them read VVitichinde and Sebastian Munster. Pet. Albinus Niuemontius very lately, and Dauid Chytraeus, haue written very learnedly of this prouince. Of the Marquesate of BRANDENBVRG, LVSATIA, (Laussnitz) and VOITLAND, countries which we haue also described in this Chart, take these few lines; The Marquesate of BRANDENBVRG, one of those prouinces which in old time were inhabited of the Wandalls, is diuided at this day into the Old and the New; by this runneth the riuer Oder, by that Elue, Albis the Latines call it. In the old Mar∣quesate the chiefe city is Brandenburg, whereof the whole country tooke his name. The New hath the city Franckford: vulgarly called Franckford vpon Oder, to make a difference between it and that which is situate vpon the riuer Meyn. Heere is an Vniuersitie, and a great Mart kept twise euery yeare. At Berline; is the Princes court ordinarily kept. Him, of the Marquesate they commonly call the Marquesse: he also is one of the Prince Electours. VOITLAND is a little shire subiect to the Marquesse. This Aeneas Syluius calleth Aduocatorum terram, and Praetorianam, the Sollicitours or Controwlers land, framing a word from the Etymologie or true meaning of the Germaine name; for Voyt, in the Dutch tongue signifieth a Sollicitour or Controwler. So called for that sometime the Prince of this country was one of the foure controwlers of the Roman Empire. The townes of better note are these, as Gasper Bruschius thus reckoneth them vp in Munsters Cosmographie: Curia Regnitiana, Renitz court, commonly called Hoff, (so named of the riuers which runne by it and there falling into Sala,) a great city and very populous, beautified with the goodly and stately Church of S. Michael, a large Monastery of Nunnes, and two rich Hospitalls. Plauhenium, or Plaun; a city with a castell. Olsnitz, which the castell Voytzberg, neere adioining. Adorff, and Weidonium, (Weyda as I thinke) a faire towne, with certaine Abbeies about them, Milford and VVhite-crowne, Geraw Scletz, and whatsoeuer is between the Hoff and Cygney, standing vpon the riuer Elster, (Hallestra, the Latines call it.) Neere vnto this is Feichtelberg, that famous mountaine bearing plentifully the stately Pine-trees, out of which foure riuers do arise & runne, (a very strange worke of Nature) vnto foure quarters of the world: namely, Egre, Meyn, Nabe, and Sala. VVolfangus Iobstius hath written a curious description of the Marque∣sate of Brandenburg. LVSATIA, Laussnitz, is diuided into Ober Laussnitz, and Nider Laussnitz, the Vpper, and the Neather: it is also is a part of Saxony, as Rithaymer testifieth. It lieth between the riuers Elue and Oder, and the Bohe∣mian mountaines. Sometime it was a part of Meisen, (Misnia,) and was adioined to it: but the Bohemi∣ans; who laboured by all meanes to enlarge the bounds of their kingdome and command, at length seized it into their hands. The people in maners, conditions and language do not much differ from the Silesians: only they are distinct from them by name, and iurisdiction, as gouerned by seuerall Princes. The name and appellation of Lusatia, is somewhat neere in sound to the name of Elysij, or Lygij, which it is certaine, as Ioachinus Cureus writeth, sometime dwelt heere about. Their chiefe cities are Gorlitz, and Sittaw, and some others. The riuer Neiss runneth through the middest of this country. Gasper Peucer, hath this other day in Elegiacke verse, described the same in a pecular treatise. MISNIA, (Meisen) and THVRINGIA, (Thuringen) are described and set out in their seuerall tables, which we haue heereafter inserted into this our Theater of the World in their proper places. A portraiture and draught of these countries, shaddowed and counterfeited out of the Geographicall Chart of Iohn Criginger, which was imprinted at Prage in Bohemia in the yeare of Christ 1568. we haue adioined to this our worke.
map of Saxony, Germany SAXONIAE, MISNIAE, THV∣RINGIAE, NOVA EXACTISSIMA{QUE} DESCRIPTIO. Cum priuilegio
The county of MANSFIELD. MANSFIELD, a part of Old Saxonie, is thought to haue beene so called of Man∣nus: the second king of the Germanes: For Mansueldt, in this country speech, see∣meth to signifie nothing else, but The field of Mannus. Which deriuation Ascanien, another place not far from hence, denominated, as some men do verily beleeue, of Ascenez, the first authour of the Germane name and nation, doth seeme strong∣ly to confirme. Heere also is Ascher leuben, which in their language is as much to say, as, The house of Aschenez. There is also a lake, which of Ascenez, is called A∣scherslebische see. This countrie hath vpon the East, the riuer Sala, the territories of the Archbishopricke of Magdeburg, and the Diocesse of Merseburg: on the South lieth, Turingen; on the West, the Counties of Swartzburg, and Stolberg, the Principalities of Sangerhouse, Anhalt, and Asseburg. So that these Earles of Mansfield (which are also called, The noble Lords of Heldrungen) haue these princes their neere neighbours: the Archbishop of Magdeburg, the bishop of Merseburg, the Prince Electour of Saxony, the Landgraue of Thuringia, the Duke of Saxony, the bishop of Halber∣stade, the Prince of Anhald, the Lord of Bernburg, the Earles of Swartzburg and Stolburg, the Lords of Werther and Asseburg. When, or by whom, this prouince was graced with the title of an EARLDOME, Andrew Hop∣penrode, in his booke, which he hath written & set forth of the Petigrees of the Saxon Princes, plainly confesseth that he is altogether ignorant. Notwithstanding this same authour, and with him Syriacus Spangeberg, do auerre it to haue beene very ancient, by this, that an Earle of this country, called Her∣ger, did liue in the daies of Great Arthur, that renowmed king of the Britans, and was one of those, which together with the rest of the worthies of this king, were first made Knights of the order of the Round Table. Now this king Arthur, we know liued about 542. yeres after the incarnation of our Sauior Christ. But if there be any man that shall thinke and obiect, that this storie of the Round Table is too fabulous to confirme this our assertion, yet this is certaine and cannot be doubted of, that in England, almost in the middest of the kingdome, there is a towne called Mansfield, situate betweeene the riuers of Trent and Rotheram, not farre from the city of Nottingham. This county containeth also foure other counties: namely, ARNSTEDT, WIPRA, WETHIN and QVERNFVRT, all which in former times had their proper and peculiar Earles, but now at this day beside the counte Mansfield they haue not any one. In this county also there is the county Palatine of Saxony. Moreouer there are beside these certaine other Lordships and Principalities, as thou maist see in the Mappe. The chiefe and principall cities are MANSFIELD, EYSLEBEN, WIPRA and LEIMBACH. This country is very full of Mettall-mines. Heere out of the earth are digged those sleitstones, which they call Scheyffersteyn, such as scarcely are to be found, as Sebastian Munster writeth, in any other place of the world beside. It hath also certaine stones laden with Copper, which being burnt in the fire and then steeped and washed in water do yeeld the mettall, and together with it some good store of Siluer. But this is a wonderfull strange pranke, that Nature heere in sporting maner vsually plaieth, which the same authour there speaketh of well worth the obseruation: namely of a great Lake in this country well stored with diuers and sundry sorts of fish: all which kinds of fish, together with the paddockes, frogs, newts, and such other things liuing in this lake, are found so curiously expressed & shaped out in stones, as we haue to our great admiration beheld, as it is a very hard matter at the first sight vpon the sudden to discern them from the naturall liuing creatures of that kind, and that so liuelily that thou shalt be able presently to distinguish one from another and to call them by their seuerall and proper names. Some of these I haue, giuen me by Peter Ernest, the most renowmed and illustrious Earle of this country, and worthy Gouernour of the prouince of Lutzenburg. There is a Lake in this country, which, by reason of the saltnesse of the water, they call Gesaltzen, in∣to which, if the fishermen shall cast in their nets ouer deepe, they will presently be sienged & schorched euen as if they had beene burnt or drawne through the fire, as Seuerinus Gobelinus, in his history of Amber, reporteth. The same authour writeth that neere vnto Eisleben, there was not long since a piece of Amber found as bigge as a mans head. Syriacus Spangeberg did promise to set out the history of this countrey, wherin all the cities, castles, villages, mountaines, woods, riuers, lakes, mines &c. should seuerally be described; together with the Antiquities, Records, Petigrees, and such other historicall matters of the same.
map of Mansfeld Land, Germany MANSFEL∣DIAE COMI∣TATVS DE∣SCRIPTIO. auctore Tilemanno Stella Sig.
The Principality of HENNENBERG. THe terrirory and precinct of the Princes of HENNENBERG, a part of East France, how large and wide it was, you may see by this our Chorographicall Mappe; the buts and bounds of it are thus: Vpon the West and North it hath Thuringen, and the great forest, which of this countrie is called Durynger Waldt; (whose head on these parts doth diuide Thuringen from Frankenland) on the South it is confined with the riuer of Meyn, and the bishoprickes of Bamberg and Wuitzburg. Moreouer the East part is enclosed with that great mountaine which the country people do call, Die Rhon, or Rosn: vpon the same side also it hath the Diocesse of Fulden, and the prouince of Hessen. This country is wonderfully stored with deere, wild fowle, fish and such other things necessary for the maintenance of mans life. It hath also some Mines of mettals, especially of iron, whereof great store is yearely from hence, to the great gaine and commodity of the inhabitants, transported into forren countries. It is watered heere and there with many and diuers fountaines, heads, or springs of the riuer Visurgis, which in these parts they call Die Werra, but moe properly, it is of some in other places called Die Wesser, which indeed the name of the Abbey Vesser doth seeme to approoue for truth: which Francis Irenicus and Wolfgangus Lazius do verily beleeue to haue beene so denominated of Wasser, which in the Ger∣mane is as much to say, as water, in the English. Of the first beginning and originall of this house or family of Hennenberg, by reason of the negligence of the writers and Historians of those times, we can determine nothing for certainty, beside this, that in the time of Attila and Charles the Great, some authours do make mention of the Princes of Hennenberg, which also were Earles of Frankland and Burggraues of Wurtzeburg. So againe in the time of Henry the first, Empe∣rour of Germany, Gottwald and Otto of this house of Hennenberg, serued valiantly in defence of the Empire against the assaults and inrodes of the Vgri. Item the Boppones, two learned men of this family, in the yeares of Christ 941. and 961. were bishops of Wurtzeburg, and gouerned that sea with the great applause and praise of all men. But the true pedigree of these Princes is deriued from BOPPO, who in the yeare of our Lord 1078. following Henry the fourth, the Emperours side, in the battell fought betweene him and Rudolph the Switzer, neere to the city Mel∣richstadt, valiantly fighting was honourablie slaine in the field. After him succeeded his sonne GOTTEBALD, first founder of the Abbey of Vesser, for the Monkes of the order of the brotherhood of the Praemonstratenses: After him followed his sonne BERTHOLD; then BOPPO the Second, next him BOPPO the Third, all which succeeded one after another in a right line. This Boppo the Third had by his second wife Iut∣ta, of Thuringen, HERMAN, whose sonne BOPPO the Fourth died, leauing no issue behind him: But by his first wife Elizabeth, of the familie of the Princes of Saxony, he had HENRY, who had issue HENRY the Second, HERMAN the Second, and BERTHOLD the Second: Hen∣ry had issue BOPPO the Fift; whose sonne BERTHOLD the Third died without issue. But after Herman these Princes, HENRY the Second, HERMAN the Third, FREDERICK the First, GEORGE the First, and lastly FREDERICK the Second lineally descended one from ano∣ther, successiuely gouerned this prouince. This Fredericke had issue HERMAN, who by his wife Margaret, of the family of Brandenburg had two sonnes, BERTHOLD the Fourth, and ALBERT, both which died in the yeare of our Lord God, 1549. and left no issue behind them. Then of the line of Berthold the Second, third sonne of Henry the First, succeeded BERTHOLD the Fift, who for his singular virtues, wisedome, expe∣rience, and excellent gifts other waies, was in the yeare after Christs incarnation, 1310. by Henry of Lutzelburg the Emperour, with the generall consent of the whole company of the Electours, installed one of the Princes of the Empire. And after that, for the same his virtues, and for that he was in managing all maner of businesses a most prudent, faithfull and fortunate man, by Lewis the Fourth, the next successour in the Empire, much set by and greatly esteemed. In his time, this whole prouince as it is heere set out, in this our Chorographicall Chart, was subiect to him and to o∣ther Princes and Earles of Hennenberg then liuing. But HENRY his sonne dying without issue male, the greatest part of this countrey, by the marriage of his three daughters, KATHARINE, SOPHIA, and ELIZABETH, fell vnto the Marquesses of Misnia, Burggraues of Noriberg, and Princes of Wurtenburg, which two last selling their portions, the bishop of Wurtenburg did much enlarge his diocesse. IOHN, the second sonne of Berthold the first, by his wife Adelheida of the house of Hessen, had by Elizabeth of the family of Luchtenburg, a sonne named HENRY the Fourth, who by Mechtilda, or Mawd, daughter to the Marquesse of Bath, WILLIAM the First, who by his wife Anna of Brunswicke, had WILLIAM the Second, which by Katharine, Countesse of Hanaw, had issue WILLIAM the Fourth, begotten of his wife Margaret daughter to the Duke of Brunswicke. This William had by his wife Anastasia, daughter of Albert, Prince Electour of Brandenburg, seuen sonnes, and six daughters, namely WILLIAM, and CASPAR, which died in their infancy: IOHN, Abbot of Fulden: WOLFGANG and CHRISTOPHER, which two died bachelours: GEORGE ERNEST and BOPPO the Sixt: This Boppo, after the death of his first wife Elizabeth daughter to the Marquesse of Brandenburg, maried Sophia, daughter to the Prince of Luneburg; he died vpon the fourth of March in the yeere of our Lord 1574. leauing no issue behind him. He was a very godly, prudent, magnanimous and curtuous Prince. That other, George Ernest, after the death of his wife Elizabeth daughter to the Duke of Brunswicke, maried Elizabeth daughter to the Prince of Wurtenburg, and at length vpon the seuen and twentieth day of December in the yeare of our Lord God 1583. yeelded to Nature and died in the seuentie and third yeare of his age, being the last Prince of that stocke or family. The description of this prouince of Hennenberg, as heere it is set downe, at this day is subiect vnto diuers Princes: the greatest part of it, belongeth to the Duke of Saxony, the rest to the bishop of Wurtenburg and the Landtgraues of Hessen. A more large and exact description of this Stocke and Family, if any man be desirous to haue, may be learned out of the Genealogy or Pedigree of M. Se∣bastian Glaser, sometime Chancellour of this Principality of Hennenberg. HASSIA, or, The LANDTGRAVY of HESSEN. THe countrie of HESSEN, which sometime was an EARLDOME, and now graced with the title of a LANDTGRAVY' was in old time possessed by the CATTI, as almost all writers generally of our time do verily beleeue; only Albertus Crant∣zius, to my knowledge, is of another mind; for he laboureth to make the world beleeue that these Catti, were those people which now are called Saxones. This prouince hath vpon the East, Turingen; vpon the South, Frankenland; vpon the West, Westphalen; vpon the North, the Duke of Brunswicke, the bishop of Minden, with other princes are neere neighbours. It is a countrey very fertile of all maner of things necessary for the maintenance of mans life. It beareth no vines, but vpon that side only that lieth vpon the Rhein. MARPVRG, and CASSELL are the chiefe and principall cities of this country. Whereof this latter is adorned with the Princes court, and concourse of Nobles, Gentlemen and other braue gallants fol∣lowing and attendant vpon the same: the other is graced with a goodly Vniuersity; well frequented with students from all places neere adioining round about. In this Landtgrauy there are also diuers other Counties or Earledomes, as CATZENELEBOG, ZEIGENHEIM, NIDA and WALDECK, of all which now this Landtgraue writeth himselfe Lord. But listen what Eobanus Hessus, that worthy poet, in a certaine congratu∣latory poeme of his, written and dedicated vnto Philip the Landgraue of this country, vpon occasion of the victory atchieued by him at Wirtem∣burg wherin he doth by the way thus speake of the nature and situation of this prouince, and withall something also of the maners of the people. Qualis Hyperboreum prospectans Thraca Booten Gradiui domus ad Rodopen, Hemum{que} niualem Circumfusa iacet, gelidis assueta pruinis, Gignit in arma viros duratos frigore, qui{que} Aut Hebrum, Nessum{que} bibunt, aut Strimonis vndas: Talis & ipsa situ, talis regione locorum Et fluuijs siluis{que} frequens, & mon∣tibus altis Hassia: naturae similes creat alma locorum Ceu natos in bella viros, quibus omnis in armis Vita placet: non vlla iuuat sine Marte, nec vllam Esse pu∣tant vitam, quae non assueuerit armis. Quod si tranquillae vertantur ad otia pacis, Otia nulla terunt sine magno vana labore: Aut duro patrios exercent vomere colles, Aequatos{que} solo campos rimantur aratris (Nam{que} & planicies segetum foecunda patentes Explicat innumeras, & plenamesse colonos Ditat, & ipsa sibi satis est,) aut ardua syluae Lustra petunt, canibus{que} feras sectantur odoris, Venatu genus assuetum, genus acre virorum; Aut leges & iura ferunt, aut oppida con∣dunt Fortia, non solum bello munimina, verùm Quae deceant in pace etiam, oblectent{que} quietos. Quid sacros memorem fontes? quid amoena vireta? Quid val∣les ipsis certantes frugiferacis Vallibus Aemoniae? dulces quid vbi{que} recessus Musarum loca, confessu loca digna Dearum? O patriae gelidi fontes, ô flumina nota, O valles, ô antra meis notissima Musis! &c. Thus much in English prose briefly. Hessen, in situation, nature of the soile and temperature of the aire, is a country of all the world most like vnto Thrace; Which by reason that it is much ouerhanged with many tall and stately woods; beset and enclosed betweene the snow-top'd mountaines Hemus, Rhodope, Pangaeus and Cercina; watered and serued with the chill and frozen-streamed riuers Hebrus, Nessus, and Strimon, doth breed an hard kind of people fit for all maner of seruice and toilesome trauell. So heere as if they were descended from mighty Mars, their chiefe delight is in the wars, no other kind of life doth please them halfe so well, nay they hold it otherwise no life at all, or at least that that man is not worthy to liue that doth not especially delight himselfe in martiall feats and deeds of armes. Yet if all be still and warlike Mars do sleep, they cannot abide to liue idlely and to spend their time at home: For then they either do giue themselues to husbandrie and to follow the plow (For heere the large and open champion ground do with great aduantage repay the husbandmans hire and paines:) or else in hawking and hunting, they do through thike and thin, darkest woods and most bushy forests, ouer hedge and ditch, highest hils and lowly vales follow their game most laboriously: others do take as great paines in ordering and ruling the commonwealth, ending of contro∣uersies and seeing that the lawes be duly kept and executed; others do busie themselues in building and fortifiing of towns and cties, making them not only defen∣sible against the assault and battery of the enemy in time of war, but also gorgeous and beautifull to the great delight and astonshment of the beholders in time of peace. What should I speake of the goodly wholesome springs, the pleasant greene meadowes, pastures and vallies which for fruitfulnesse may iustly contend with those of Aemonia, that fertile country of Greece, so much commended by Poets and Historians? Of the sundry and manifold pleasures and delighsome places, brookes, and cleare running waters of this country? &c.
map of Henneberg, Germany HENNEBERGEN∣SIS DITIONIS. vera delineatio. Cum Privilegio decennali, 1594.
map of Hesse, Germany HASSIAE DESCRIP∣TIO, IOAN∣NE DRYAN∣DRO AVC∣TORE. Cum Gratia, & Privilegio decen. 1579
THVRINGIA, OR, DVRINGEN. THis Prouince was sometime a Kingdome, at this day it is onley graced with the title of a LANDTGRAVY. It is seated betweene the two riuers Sala and Werra. Vpon the North it is bounded with that great wood, which the Historians call Sylua Hercinia, and of them is called Hartz. On the South it hath the vast forest of Thuringia, Duringer Waldt, they call it. The length of this country, which is equall to the breadth, is about twelue Germane miles. In this narrow compasse, (as I remember not long since Hugh Brinkhorst, an Englishman, a citizen of Erford, my good friend, did tell me) there are 12. COVNTIES or Earledomes, and as many ABBEIS, which they call Gefur∣stete Abtyen) 144. CITIES, with so many MARKET TOVVNS, (Mercktflecken) 2000. PARISHES, and 150. CASTLES. It is a passing fertile country, and of wheat and such like corne it yeeldeth greater plenty than any other country of Germany whatsoeuer. Whereupon George Agricola doubted not to call it Sumen Germaniae, The Sweet-bread of Germany. Heere yearely groweth great plenty of woad (Isatis, the Latines call it) which from hence is transported into other countries, to the great gaine and commodity of the inha∣bitants: It is an herbe or weed much vsed of Diers, to set the more perfect and durable colour in wooll or wollen cloth. Heere some are of opinion that sometime the SORABI did inhabite. Reinerus Reyneckius in his booke, which he wrote of the Originall of the Myssen (Mysni) doth thinke these Tyringetae, to be nothing else, but as one would say Tyringotae, that is, The Gothes of Thuringia, and thereupon their city Gothen, or Gotha, he maketh no question, tooke the name. Zacharias Riuander, in the Dutch tongue hath set out a peculiar treatise containing a description of this countrie. The Metropolitane or chiefe city of this prouince is Erford, which is held to be the greatest city of all Ger∣many. The crystall and nimble streamed Gera runneth almost through euery street of this city, as we there beheld to our great delight and exceeding commodity of the people inhabiting the same. In it there is a mount vpon the which doth stand a goodly Monastery of Frier Benedictines, dedicated vnto S. Peter. Here also is a stately church, built by Boniface bishop of Mentz, and dedicated to our Lady Mary, the blessed Vir∣gin. This church hath a bell, famous all Germany ouer for the huge bignesse of it and massie weight. MISNIA. THis country is by Iohn Garzo of Bononia, an Italian, thus described: This prouince, saith he, is seated vpon the riuer Elbe; on the Eastside the Vindali, the Bohemi on the South, the Saxons on the North, and Libonotria, or the Eudoses on the West, are neere neighbours to this country: it is contained within the riuers Sala and Muldaw: beyond the riuer Sala the Thuringers dwell. In it are many rich and wealthy cities, and diuers strong castles. Here sometime, as Ptolemey testifieth, the Calucones and the Danduti did inhabite. But Libonotria was possessed of the Herthanae, Eudosi, Varini, and Suar∣dones, all which afterward were generally called Serabi. The country is very fertile of all maner of graine; so that it is able, in regard of the great abundance thereof, to serue almost all the neighbour countries neere ad∣ioining: Neither doth it yeeld such great store of wheat only, but also of wine; hony, and cattell. Thus farre out of the same Garzo. The head city of this prouince is Meissen (Misna) of which the whole country tooke the name. The riuer Elbe (Albis) runneth hard by the wals of this city. Heere is a very goodly and strong castle. Dresden, where the Prince doth ordinarily keepe his court, is a city also situate vpon ech side of this riuer Elbe, crosse ouer the which a goodly bridge doth passe from one part of the city to the other. Torgaw, also standeth vpon the same riuer, where there is brewed an excellent kind of beere, and is thereupon called by the name of this towne Torgaw beere. Item Leipzig, situate vpon the riuer Pleisse, is the greatest and wealthiest market towne in all these parts: hither the Merchants do flocke, from all quarters farre and neere, to the Mart that here is held thrise euery yeere. Heere also is a pretty Vniuersity, translated hither, as Munster saith, from Prage in Bohemia, about the yeere of our Lord 1408. This towne is verie goodlily built and hath many faire houses, but especially the Guild-hall, where the Aldermen vsually meet, not long since repaired with great cost and expences, is of all others most gorgeous. The people are very neat, cleanly, courteous and humane. Beside these there are diuers other pretty townes, as Zeitz, Schreckenberg, Naumburg, and Freiberg, a rich towne by reason of the Gold-mine neere adioining. Heere in old time dwelt the Hermanduri, as Munster, with other good authours doth teach vs. The Originall, Famous acts, Remooues or colonies and great Commands of this nation are set out not long since by Georgius Chemnicensis in the Latin tongue, by Reynerus Rey∣neckius, and at large by Petrus Albinus Niuemontius, in the Germane tongue. Of LVSATIA, a prouince also contained in this mappe, we haue spoken before, at the Mappe of Saxony.
map of Thuringia, Germany TVRINGI∣AE NOVISS. DESCRIPT. per Iohannem Mellinger Halens. Cum Priuilegio
map of Meissen, Germany MISNIAE ET LVSATI∣AE TABVLA Descripta à M. Bartholemaeo Sculteto Gorlit.
THE MARQVESATE OF BRANDENBVRG. THe Marquesate of Brandenburg runneth out in length threescore German miles. Vpon the West it bordereth vpon Saxony, Misnia, and Meckelburg. Vpon the North it is bounded by Pomeran, Stetin, and the Cassubij. His East part resteth vpon Polonia, and Silesia. On the South it hath Bo∣hemia, Lusatia, and Morauia. It is diuided into Old-march, Middle-march, and New-march. This Marquesate also conteineth within his iurisdiction the Lordship of Cothuss or Cotwitz: of Peilzen, Bescaw, and Storkaw, all in Neather Lusatia: the Dukedome of Crossen in Silesia: the Earledomes of Rapin, Stolp, and Vierad. To it also doth belong the little Prouince Prignitz. It hath three Bi∣shopricks, Brandenburg, Hauelberg, and Lubusz situate in Middle-march. Moreouer beyond the riuer Oder it hath the citie and shire Sternberg. OLD-MARCH beginneth at the Desert of Lune∣burg, and so extendeth it selfe vnto the riuer Elbe. It is confined with the Diocesses of Magdeburg, Halberstadt, and Meckelburg. The inhabitants long since were the Senones Sueui, and in some places also the Angriuarij, with the Teutones. In this coast are seuen cities of no small account, Tangermundt vpon the riuer Elbe, in that place where the riuer Angra or Tonagra (now Tanger) vnlodeth it selfe into Elbe, sometime the imperiall seat of the Emperour Charles the fourth. Stendal the principall citie of this shire, where there is a church of S. Nicolas (they call it Thumstift) of regular Canons of the order of S. Barnard, commonly called Ordo Cistertiensium, first founded at Gistertium (now called Citeauz) a place in Gallia Narbonensi. Soltwedel, diuided into two cities, the Old, & the New. Gardeleben, with a castle called Eischnippe. As also Oster∣burg, Werben, and Senohuse now Sehausen, so named perhaps of the Senones a people that sometime dwelt here about. Arn∣burg, with his castle situate vpon the riuer Elbe, Bismarch, Beuster, Bueck standing not farre from the Elbe, Kalbe, and Neflin∣gen, which they otherwise also call Letzlingen. Besides these townes it hath seuen monasteries richly endowed with tempo∣ralties and secular iurisdiction, and diuers Nunries, as Arntsehe, Damke, Diestorff, Crewessen, and Niendorff. The breadth of this countrey being equall to the length, is not aboue eight Dutch miles; and yet in it are at the least 465. villages of good note. MIDDLE-MARCH beginneth on the other side of the Elbe, and stretcheth it selfe vnto the riuers Oder and Spre (some∣times called Sueuus.) It is watered with the riuer Hauel, and other small brooks of lesse account. In former ages it was inhabi∣ted by the Sueui, or Switzers. The soile is very fertile, especially for corne. It hath many Woods, Fish-ponds, Pastures, and Medowes: as also certeine Vineyards first planted heere by Albert the Marquesse, surnamed, The beare. Brandenburg his chiefe citie; is by the riuer Hauel diuided into two parts: this is called The New citie; that The Olde: and was so named of Brandon sometime a captaine of the Franks. Here is held the generall court of iustice for the whole countrey. Many priui∣leges and great liberties haue (by emperors, kings, and princes) been granted to this prouince; a token or monument where∣of is the statue or image erected in the new city, holding in his hand a drawen sword, whom the citizens call Rowland. Not farre from this citie is the territory of Hauelan, so called of the riuer Hauel that enuirons it. Also the monastery of Lenin of the order of S. Bernard. After Brandeburg followes Rathenaw vpon the Hauel: Spandaw with a castle vpon the riuer Spree: like∣wise Coln and Berlin seuered by the same riuer. In Berlin is the Princes court at this present. Berlin was so named either of Albert the Marques surnamed Bear, or, as others hold opinion, of wild beares that haunted this place when the foundations were first laid. Colne was so called of Colliers that in great numbers inhabited the same in times past; or rather of the Latine word Colonia. Frankford vpon Oder was anciently reckoned in the number of the Hanse-townes; in which regard at this present it payes no tribute to Lubeck, nor to any other cities of that association. It hath three marts euery yeere. Here is a College or Vniuersitie founded by Ioachim the first marques of that name in the yeere 1506. Not farre from the Abbey of Carthusians in this citie runnes a small freshet springing out of a vine-bearing hill, whereinto whatsoeuer is cast, hardeneth into the nature of a stone. Other townes there be also, as Brietzen surnamed The loyall: also Belitzen, and Bernaw, where ex∣cellent beere is brewed. Bellin seated by a foord of the little riuer Rhien: Mittenwald, Monnixberg, Bisental, Blumbergen, of the diocesse of Brandeburg, Botzaw with a castle; Falkenhaghe with a castle sometimes belonging to the Templers, Frien∣wald, and Oderberg. Here marques Albert the second of that name built a castle in the midst of the riuer, to constraine pas∣sengers to pay tolle. Then haue you Fridland, a cloister of Nunnes, with a little borough. Frisach of the diocesse of Brande∣burg, Gereswald, Grimnitz, Grunheid, Grunwalde, and Koppenick, foure parks of the Prince with castles annexed. Hochelberg a village, Landsberg, an obscure place with a castle of great antiquitie, Lichen a small towne; Liebenwald with a parke; Naw∣en; Putstam a little towne with a castle; Newstadt, Eberswald, and not farre from thence Chorin a monastery of Bernardines. Mulrosa a small borough and a village; Sarmunde, Sconbeck, with a parke; Strausberg, Trebin, Bernewijck a little borough; Zendenick a cloister of Nunnes; Zossa a small borough with a castle; Stendel, Swet; Wrusen, not farre from Odera; Lietzen, Selow a small borough with many villages and hamlets. This middle marquesat containes eight and twentie Dutch miles in bredth, and so many in length. NEVN-MARCH is diuided from the middle by the riuer Odera, about that place where the riuer Warta falles thereinto, nere the towne of Kustren. The said riuer of Warta beginnes in Poland, and watereth this region at the citie of Lansberg, and the townes of Zandock and Sonneberg. The head citie of this marquesat is Kustren, reedified by the marques Iohn, sonne to Ioa∣chim the first, who to his exceeding charge fortified the same, and there established his court. Other townes there be, as Landsberg vpon Warta, Koningsberg, Bernwald, and Bernsteine, a small borough with a castle, Bernwijchen, and Berlinichen, or the towne of New Berlin. Then haue you the citie of Arnswald, the borough of Thame, Soldin whilome the principall ci∣tie, Furnstenfield a small borough, Dramburg, Driesen, Falkenberg the towne and castle situate on the confines of Pomer∣landt: also Himelstedt a cloister of Nunnes, Kalis a village, Kartaw, and Lepen two little boroughs, Morgenwald an Abbey, Morni a small towne, Nieuberg a village, Nurnberg, Reitz with an abbey of the knights of the Rhodes, Quartzen contain∣ing the palaces of noblemen, Schiffelben a towne that beares the name for good beere and excellent Armorers. Moreouer, you haue Osmund, Sconflis, Woldenberg a small borough, Sciltberg a village, Zeden a little towne with a monasterie, and Zandock a petie borough vpon the riuer Warta. The circuit of this new marquezat is about foure and twenty Dutch miles. Now the whole marquezat of Brandeburg, with the regions aboue mentioned thereunto subiect, containeth fiue and fifty cities of importance, threescore and foure townes, sixteene boroughs commonly called Marcktflecken, eight and thirtie castles or noble mens houses, ten parks, seuenteene monasteries of men and women. This region also yeeldeth Corall, the Eagle-stone or the Aetites, and the saffron-coloured stone called Schistus, with other gemmes of no lesse account. Thus much out of the Dutch discourse of Wolfangus Iobstius. You may reade also Munster and Irenicus, and Dauid Chytraeus his storie of Saxonie.
map of Brandenburg, Germany BRANDEBVRGENSIS MARCHAE DESCRIPTIO. Marchionatus hic primum erectus fuit ab Henrico I. Imperatore, ao. 923. fuitq́ue eius primus marchio nomine Henricus. Olim enim sub ducibus Saxoniae erat.
BVCHAVIA or BVCHONIA. IN this prouince standeth the Abbey of Fuld; concerning the ori∣ginall and situation whereof thus writeth Munster: FVLDA is the head city of that part of Germanie, which in times past some called Buchonia; others the forest or desert of Buchauia, namely of Beech-trees, wherefore at this present we call it Fagoniam and Fagunetum. And that this name is deriued of Fagus (a beech,) the name of a towne therein called Fag or Fach, not farre from the high hill Taurus, doth plainly import. This region is situate betweene Turingen, Frankenlandt, Hesse, and Wederau∣gia, bordering on the confines of all the said regions, and lying as it were in the center of them. For townes, castles, villages, riuers, pooles, woods, fields, hortyards, sweet fountaines, and fruitfull soile (so farre forth as the asperitie of these regions may af∣fourd) it is none of the meanest parts of Germanie; notwithstanding it beareth no vines at all. The riuers are Fuld (whereof the city that it runnes by is called Fuld) Hun, Guerra, and Ʋlster. The whole countrey is full of woods abounding with oaks and beeches. The little villages neere the city they call Celles, in token of the or∣der of the Benedictins there dwelling in times past. But the chiefe grace and orna∣ment of this region is the ancient and magnificent Church of S. Sauiour, which the memory of S. Boniface makes most renowmed, by whose meanes the city of Fulda was first built and inlarged, being before but a waste wildernesse. For this being the Church of that most ancient monastery, was before the towne anno 655. erected in the time of the Emperour Pipin, father to Charlemaigne. More you may reade in Se∣bastian Munster. Sundry particulars also concerning the originall of this Abbey, and the deeds of the Abbats, you shall find in the Chronography of Valentine Muntzer published in Dutch: where he saith, that the ground-plot of this city of Fulda before the building thereof was called Eulenloch, that is, The den of Owles. And where the Ab∣bey of S. Peter now standeth, it was of old named Eulenbergh, or The hill of Owles. THE COVNTIE OF WALDECK. THis Countie containeth a part of Hesse; it is a fruitfull region, and wate∣red with many riuers: the principall whereof abounding with fish, is cal∣led Eder, and is sayd to yeeld graines of gold. Then haue you also the ri∣uers Dimel, Twist, Ahra, Ʋrba, and Ither. The soile affourds both corne and wine. Also it hath mines of siluer, quick-siluer, copper, lead, salt, and alume. The principall places are the city and castle of Waldeck, which giueth name to the whole region. Astinchusen, Dudinchusen, Landawe, a city and castle, with the towne and castle of Mengerhusen, where the Earle at this present holds his court: the towne and castle of Roden, in the territory whereof is much hunting: Wetterburg a castle most pleasantly situate betweene Twist and Ahra: the old and new towne of Wildung distinct both in name and place; neere vnto which are certaine mines that yeeld both golde, copper, and siluer. Here are likewise fountaines of sower water. And here they brew the best beere in all the countrey. The castle of Eisenburg, in the fields whereof, as at Wildung, is digged vp gold and yron mine. Here also they dig a kinde of stones, which they burne in stead of coales. The castle of Eilhusen most gal∣lantly seated, and diuided by a riuer from Ʋrba. Corbach a strong city: the castle and towne of Newburg; the castle Ither, and the monastery of Werben, &c.
map of Buchonia, Germany BVCHAVIAE, siue FVLDENSIS DITIONIS TYPVS. Wolfgango Regr∣will auctore. 1574.
map of Waldeck, Germany WALDECCENSIS COMITATVS DESCRIPTIO ACCVRATISSIMA. Cum Priuilegio. Caes. et Reg. Mts. decennali. Iustus Moers describ. Anno. 1575.
The Dukedomes of BRVNSWIICK and LVNENBVRG. THese two regions are at this present subiect to one Prince. They are both named of the principall cities, Brunswijck and Lunenburg. The city of Brunswijck was about the yeere 860. built by Bruno the sonne of Ludolphus, who (as Crantzius saith) first erected a street or borough, calling it Brunonis vicus, whereupon the whole citie hath euer since beene called Brunswijck. A place of great renowme, situate in the midst of Saxonie, vpon the riuer Onadri, which falles into the Weser. The beginnings of this towne were small. Howbeit in processe of time, and by degrees, it is now growen to such state, ri∣ches, and strength, as the Princes thereof are worthily called Dukes of Brunswijck. But it was very long first. For of an∣cient times they bare only the title of Lords: but vnder Frederick the Emperour, in the yeere 1235, renewing their stile, they were ordained Dukes. This is one of the seuentie Hanse-townes. From which societie, by a generall Councell of all the said townes held at Lubeck anno 1381, they were excluded, in regard of a most cruell and bloudy sedition, where∣in the greatest part of their Aldermen they slue, and the rest they banished. And so they were depriued of the benefit of the said societie for eight yeeres, vntill they had done publike penance and satisfaction. From which time they were ad∣mitted anew into the said incorporation of the Hanse: that is to say, to be partakers of all priuileges granted by Princes and gouernours of former times to all that were free of the said societie, in those foure famous marts; to wit, London in England, Bruges in Flanders, Bergen in Norway, and Nouogrod in Rus∣sia. Their tutelary saint or protectour they holde to be S. Anthor the Confessor, whilome Bishop of Triers. For the honour of whose body, because it could not be brought within their city walles, they erected a monastery vnder the title of S. Giles, then neere vnto the walles; but now (the city being in∣larged) within the same. Thus much out of Crantzius his story of Saxonie and Wandalia. The praise of this citie you may finde in Aeneas Siluius his 23. chap. of Europe. The citie of LVNEBVRG, built about the yeere of Christ 1190. vpon an hill named Calcarium, was so called, not (as the ignorant imagine) from Idolum lunae the idol of the moone, which Iulius Caesar, or I wot not who, did there consecrate; for this is but an old wiues tale;) but from a place not farre off by the riuer Elmenou called Luna, where there hath for many yeeres continued a cloister of Nunnes. It is a citie of great strength, en∣uironed with ditches and walles. The citizens greatest traffique is for salt: for here are most plentifull and rich salt-pits, out of which they raise exceed∣ing gaines. For salt is here boiled in great quantitie, and vented from hence both by sea and land to Hamborough, Lubeck, and other places. These salt-mines were first found in the yeere of Christ 1269. This city of Luneburg with the territory adiacent, is in a peculiar Treatise described by Lucas Lossius. Of Hildesheim fiue miles distant from Brunswijck, M. Antonie Mockerus, a citizen thereof, hath written also a peculiar discourse. In this Table vpon the riuer Weser or Visurgis stands the citie of Hamelen; concerning which, the learned and famous Physitian D. Arnold Fretaghius wrote to me in a letter the story ensuing; his words be these: I chanced of late to light vpon a Saxon, and a Chronicler of Saxonie. He reports, that 130. yeres ago the citie of Hamelen, vnder the iurisdiction of Duke Ericus, being exceedingly pestered with mice, there came a iugler that offered his seruice to the townes-men to driue them away: this offer was most acceptable vnto them, because they could keepe nothing in safetie from those mischieuous vermine. Being agreed with the townes-men, by the sound of a bell he drawes all the mice out of the citie. Then he demandeth his promised hire. They denie it him. Well, in a great rage he departs the citie, and within a yeere after returneth; and sounding the same bell which before he had vsed to con∣iure the mice, he drew after him vnto an hill not farre off, a great number of the citizens children; whither being come, both they and he immediatly va∣nished. A girle of the company, either for wearinesse, or by Gods appointment, stayeth a good distance behinde: who returning home, and being as∣ked what she saw, makes report, that her fellowes were gone vp the hill with the iugler. Then euery man runnes to seeke his childe; but in vaine: for from that time forward they could neuer know what was become of them. Hauing read this, I iudged it either to be a fable, or (as it is in very deed) a most wonderfull and strange narration. Discoursing therefore with certaine citizens of this place, I made mention heereof. They all affirmed it to be true, and sayd, that the yeere, the day, and the number of children that were lost, was registred in the records of the citie of Hamelen: and it is yet a cu∣stome among them, in their bonds and couenants which they write in an ancient hand, to vse this forme or clause of speech, Don onser kinder ausgangh, that is to say, From the departure of our children. And they say, that the way or street thorow which they were led, for the perpetuall memorie of their mis∣hap, was called by the inhabitants, Die Bungloese straess: and that it is not lawfull thereto ring a bell. If you haue perhaps read this storie heretofore, I doe now call it to your remembrance. If you know any thing that may stand me in stead, I pray you impart it as leasure and occasion shall serue. Fare you well, and loue your Fretaghius. From Groenninghen the ninth of Nouember 1580. A description of the territory of NVRENBERG. OVt of Pighius his Hercules Prodicius I haue thought good to set downe the originall and description of this place: his words be these: When the barbarous Hunnes ouerran a great part of Europe, and oppressed also the people Norici inhabiting Bauaria, certaine princi∣pall families of them for shelter and refuge fled vnto the forrest Hercynia, planting themselues in a commodious place by the riuers of Pegnitz and Regnitz; and so vpon an hill by nature strongly situate, and free from hostile incursions, they built them a rude and homely castle, as the Chronicles of Bauaria doe beare record. Within a while their number was increased by the neighbour-husbandmen and the shepheards of the forrest Hercynia: and so of a medley of diuers sorts and professions of people, they grew at last to the bignesse of a towne. But giuing themselues to a base and dissolute kinde of life, without gouernours, without lawes, and continually molesting the neighbour Pro∣uinces with riots and robberies, it seemed good to the German Emperours to send thither a colonie of olde souldiers, which might serue in stead of a ga∣rison for the place, to bridle their outrages, and to prescribe vnto them lawes of ciuilitie. Some report, that Henry of Bauaria first brought it into the forme of a citie, adorned it with the church of S. Giles, enacted lawes, and enuironed the castle with a larger wall. Also, that Conradus the second ioined it to the Empire: for at the beginning it was a popular estate. One onely ciuill discord in the time of Charles the fourth, changed it into an Aristocratia, or gouernment of a few principall persons: by which meanes the whole authoritie came into the hands of the Senatours; who euer since haue vsed such equitie and moderation in their gouernment, as there hath not at any time in so great a multitude of common people, and diuersitie of nations, growen any notable sedition or pernitious mutinie. In the citie there are three degrees of people, that is to say, Senatours, Merchants, and Artizans. Ancient and honourable families there are 28. out of which alwayes are supplied new Senatours: who all of them are six and twentie in number. Thirteene of these, called Burgomasters, doe consult of matters of Estate: and the other thirteene they call Scabins, who being alwayes assisted by three stipendarie lawyers, doe vpon Court and Leet dayes execute iustice and decide controuersies among the citizens. It is forbidden by their ancient lawes,S.W. Her∣berts opi∣nion con∣firmed. that any professed lawyer, or any that beares the title of a Doctour, should be admitted to their senate, or to the gouernment of their Common wealth. Out of either of the said halfes or thirteenes they chuse euery Lunar moneth or new moone a new Consull; so that euery yeere the chiefe magistracie falles by turnes for the space of a moneth to euery man of both the foresaid thirteenes. Fiue there are of the same company, that in criminall causes do make in∣quiry, giue sentence, and allot punishment to malefactours. They haue likewise a Iudge or President for their suburbs, who executes iustice among the pesants and villageois. Out of the same company also, they yerely elect two Treasurers, men of sufficient yeeres, credit, and honesty, who take charge of the customes and reuenues of the whole citie, and haue the receit and disbursing of the same. All the said magistrates, and others that haue any au∣thoritie, are chosen only out of the foresaid number of Senatours. Two hundred there are yeerely nominated out of the three Estates and the whole citie, who once a yeere, or vpon any vrgent occasion, being assembled by the magistrates, do sit in common counsell. The State or company of mer∣chants, albeit very great and honourable, are freed notwithstanding from all publike offices, and endowed with most ample priuileges: wherefore fol∣lowing their priuate traffike, they do in this citie, as in a common ware-house, hoord vp the riches not only of Europe, but of the most remote coun∣tries and islands in the world. The labourers and artizans, which are the last and meanest degree, are suffered to haue no conuenticles nor meetings priuate or publike in the citie; no solemne banquets nor festiuall assemblies of many together, vnlesse it be for a matter of religion or some great fune∣rall: for they hold it a thing pernicious to the publike tranquillitie, hauing found by often experience, that most dangerous factions and seditions haue growen of such popular meetings, where people in their drunkennesse dispute of the Common-wealth: and that the like tumults haue bereft many ci∣ties of their libertie, and brought great calamities vpon them. Now if any quarrell or dissention arise among the common sort, it is not referred to the Masters or Wardens of their crafts and mysteries, but to the Senatours themselues; who presently appoint two arbitratours, to search into the cause, and to do their best to compound it. If they can not bring it to agreement, then it comes before the Senate; who hauing awarded the matter, do vnder a grieuous penaltie impose silence to both parties. With great seueritie they punish fightings, brawles, iniuries, and priuate quarrels, for the mainte∣nance of publike peace: insomuch as a man would thinke, that Minos and Rhadamanthus gaue dayly sentence vpon their iudgement seats. Thus farre Pighius concerning the originall, the magistrates, and the common wealth of this citie. More you may reade in the same authour. The territories ad∣iacent being naturally barren and sandie are by the industrie of the people made fruitfull. In the same territorie stands Altorff, where not many yeeres since the States of Nurenburg instituted an Vniuersitie. Nurenburg is watered by the riuer Pegnitz, which it crosseth with many stone-bridges. In com∣passe it containeth eight miles. It is compassed with a double wall, whereon are 183. turrets, besides castles and fortresses. Concerning the originall, si∣tuation, maners and customes of this citie, you haue a notable discourse written by Conradus Celtis a Poet laureat.
map of Brunswick-Lüneburg, Germany BRAVNSVICENSIS, ET LVNEBVRGEN∣SIS DVCATVVM VERA DELINEAT.
map of Nuremburg, Germany NORIMBERG. AGRI, FIDISSIMA DESCRIP. Habet urbs Nurenberga plateas et vicos 52. puteos aquarum 16. fontes ex arborum truncis emanantes 12. pontes lapideos 11. publica balnea 13. Cum priuilegio decen∣nali, Imp. Reg. & Cancel. Brabantiae 1590.
FRANKENLANDT. FRANKENLANDT is partly plaine, and partly mountainous: the mountaines are not very steepe, nor the plaines very fruitfull; be∣ing for the most part sandy. In many places the hilles be set with vines, do yeeld pleasant and delicate wine; especially about Wirtz∣burg. There are great store of woods, and much hunting. The country is subiect to many gouernours: notwithstanding they call the Bishop of Wirtzburg Duke of Frankenlandt. The Bishops of Mentz and of Bam∣berg haue many places here. And the Count Palatine enioyeth a great part. Here the Marqueses Orantes are seated. And here are many imperiall cities also. As touching Norimberg, it is doubtfull whether it belongs to Frankenland or Ba∣uaria: by the name, Bauaria should seeme to chalenge it. For Norimberg is as much to say, as Mons Noricus, The Norick hill: whereby it appeareth, that it was the city of the Norici. And after the Norici succeeded the Boiari or Bauarians: and now that portion of countrey that lies betweene Danubius and Norimberg, is called No∣ricum. Howbeit the city is in the diocesse of Bamberg, which belongeth to Franken∣landt. The inhabitants of Norimberg will be accounted neither Bauarians nor Frankes; but a nation differing from both. It is a stately city, with churches, castles, and houses, most sumptuously built. It stands vpon the riuer Pegnitz, in a barren and sandy place, which increaseth the peoples industry: for they are all either arti∣zans or merchants: so that they are exceeding rich, and beare a great name in Ger∣many. It is a place most fit for the Emperours court, a free city, and seated almost in the midst of Germany. Betweene Bamberg and Norimberg lies Forchaim, a towne famous for snow-white bread. The inhabitants suppose that Pilate was here borne. Thus farre Aeneas Sil∣uius in his description of Europe. Reade also Iohannes Aubanus, Hermannus Comes Nuenarius, Tritthemius the Abbat, and Iohn Auentinus, who thinks that the princi∣pall city thereof Wirtzburg was of old called Poeonia. THE BISHOPRICK OF MVNSTER. OF this Bishopricke thus writeth Sebastian Munster in his Cosmogra∣phy. Charlemaine erected a third Bishopricke in the midst of Saxonie, now Westphalia, in Myningrode, a place which afterward in regard of a famous Monastery there founded, was called Munster; and there he ordained as Bishop one Ludgerus borne in Frisland. Whose successour Hermannus consecrated the Monastery and Church on the other side the water, to the honour of the blessed Virgin Mary. Which Monastery in short time so migh∣tily increased, and became so famous, that it gaue name both to the City and Bi∣shopricke; so that the old name of Myningrode being abolished by little and little, it began to be called the City and Bishoprick of Munster, which name remaines euen till this present day. Hitherto Munster out of Crantzius. Concerning this Bishoprick, and that of Ozenburg, reade the Saxonie of Albertus Crantzius, and Hamelman his com∣mentaries of Westphalia. This City anno 1533. receiued great dammage by the Anabaptists, who expelling the citizens, vsurped the same; and chusing a King out of their rabble, they held it almost a yeere against the Archbishop of Colen and the Duke of Cleue, who besie∣ged it with a strong army. But the Bishop at length growing Master, punished both them and their King, as they deserued.
map of Franconia, Germany FRANCIAE ORIENTALIS (VVLGO FRANCKENLANT) DESCRIPTIO, AVCTORE, SEBAST. A ROTENHAN.
map of Münster, Germany MONASTERI∣ENSIS ET OS∣NABVRGENSIS EPISCOPATVS DESCRIPTIO. Auctore Godefrido Mas∣cop Embricense. Cum priuilegio.
BOHEMIA. IOannes Dubrauius in his Bohemian story describeth this region in maner following. Bohemia is situ∣ate in Germanie. East it extendeth to Morauia and Silesia, and west to Bauaria. Austria bordereth to the South, as Saxonie and Misnia do Northward. It is in forme of a Theater enuironed around by the forest or woods of Hercynia. Wherefore there is no great difference between the length and the bredth, containing not much aboue 200. miles a piece. Charles king of Bohemia, who afterward was Empe∣rour, diuided it into 12. regions, of which one only he named after the riuer Vultaw that runneth through Prage: the other eleuen he called by the names of their principall townes; some of them being so harsh of pronunciation, that a man shall hardly speake them, vnlesse he be a Bohemian borne or very skilfull in the language. The chiefe Bohemian townes lying towards Morauia are Mutha, Chrudima, Konignigretz, Pardubitz, Litomitz. Towards Bauaria you haue Glatow, Domazlitz, Misa and Tachow. On the side towards Austria the principall towne is Buduitz, with Cromlawe, Trebon, Hradeck: as likewise on the Misnian side stand Pons, Cadana, Chomutawe, Austia: and on the Silesian quarter Iaromir, Glacitz, Curia, and some others. In the heart of the countrey the principall townes of note are Cuttenberg, Kolim, Pelsin, Veron, Zateckz, Launa, Slana, Lytomerick, and Tabor. But the head citie of all is Prage, being so great, as it containeth three faire cities within it, namely, the new, the old, and the little towne, which is disioyned from the two former by the riuer Vultaw. Their Buildings both Publique and priuat are stately and magnificall. This city hath two castles; one called Vissegard, whilom the Kings palace, but now waste and almost deso∣late, by meanes of ciuile warres. Again that other castle that ouer looketh the little towne, as it is named, so it well deserueth the title of the Royal or princely castle. For it resembleth rather a city then a Castle; filling vp so great a roome with the wals and buildings. Of publique edifices, the Church built by King Charles before mentioned; and the Castle erected by K. Vladislaus, late deceased, are the most memorable. And as Prage of all their Cities hath the preeminence; so hath Elbe (called by Tacitus re∣nowmed and famous) of all their riuers. Howbeit concerning the fountaine of this riuer Tacitus writeth skarce soundly, namely that it springeth in the region of the Hermonduri. For it ariseth not among the Hermonduri, but rather out of certaine Bohemian mountaines lying open to the North, vpon the frontiers of Morauia, which the ancient Bohemians call Cerconessi. From which mountaines this riuer refresheth and watereth the greater and better part of Bohemia; and then hauing augmented his streames by the influence of Vultawa, Egra, Satzawa, Gitzera, and Misa his neighbour-riuers, continueth his course and name through Misnia and Saxonie to the maine Ocean, being all that way enriched with abundance of Salmons. But the smaller riuers and freshets of Bohemia yeeld in some places graines of gold, and in others shell-fishes containing pearle. Heere also you haue certaine hot bathes both pleasant and medicinable. And all the whole countrie so aboundeth with graine, as it affoordeth plenty to the neigh∣bour-regions. Wines there are no great store: and those of the countrey so weake, as they last but a very small time. Howbeit they haue saffron of the best, excelling both in colour, smell, and moisture, three principall properties to chuse that commoditie by. There are siluer-mines so exceeding rich, that were it not for some small quantitie of flint that insinuates it selfe into the veine, you should haue nothing but perfect siluer: whereas in other countries those mines are esteemed of high price, that hold a quarter or a fift part, or at the vtmost one halfe of good siluer. They find also plenty of gold-ore in certaine mines which take their name of a place called Giloua. It is reported that the Kings of Bohemia haue had graines of pure gold brought from thence weighing tenne pound a piece. Neither are they destitute of baser metall: namely, tinne, lead, copper, and yron. And some∣times they finde in those mineral rockes, the carbuncle, the Saphyre, and the Amethist. Next vnto their mines there is nothing of greater account to the Bohemians then their waters replenished with carps: which I haue declared more at large in a peculiar booke treating of fish-pondes. Now let vs decypher the disposition of the inhabitants. In briefe therefore, both in maners, habit, and stature of body the Bohemians resemble the Lion king of beasts, vnder whose constillation they are subiect; that is to say, if you consider either the largenesse of their limbs, their broad and mightie breastes, their yellow shag-haire hanging ouer their shoulders, the harshnesse of their voice, their sparkling eies, or their exceeding strength and courage. The Lion carries a kind of contempt and disdainefull pride ouer other beastes, and hardly shall you vanquish him, if you assaile him by force. Neither doth the Bohemian in this respect degenerate but soone shewes his contempt towards other nations both in word and deed, and dis∣couers his arrogancie both in his gate, gesture, and pompe. Being set light by, he growes impatient; in any enterprize he is as bold as a Lion, and most firme and constant till he hath brought it to execution, but not without a touch of ambition and vaine glory. Moreouer like a lion he is greedie of his meat, and very curious in the dressing and seasoning thereof. And their neigh∣bours the Saxons haue taught them to carouse both day and night. And by reason of their neighbourhood the Bohemians differ not much from the Germans in other qualities. Hitherto Dubrauius, by whom also the originall and ancient dwelling place of this nation is described. They brew excellent ale in this countrey, calling it Whiteale. They speake the Sclauon tongue, calling themselues Czecks, and the Germans Niemecks. Vnder the stile of this kingdome are also comprized the regions of Morauia, Silesia, and Lusatia. Likewise in the yeare 1315. the city Egra became the warehouse or principall mart towne of the Bohemians. Con∣cerning the region it selfe you may read more largely in Aeneas Siluius; and of the people, in the first booke of Martinus Cro∣merus his Polonian story. Vnto these you may adde Munster, Rithaimer, Crantzius in his description of Wandalia, and Sabellicus En. 10. lib. 2. Panthaleon Candidus wrote of late seuen books entitled Bohemaidos. Prage the head citie of this Kindome, is peculi∣arly described by Georgius Handschius. The Map it selfe we borowed out of the Table of Ioannes Crigingerus, published at Prage 1568. The diuers appellations of certaine cities in this Kingdome we thought good here to put downe out of Munster. For the names of all their cities, are by the Bohemian pronounced after one maner, and by the German after another. Bohemian names. German names. These cities are imme∣diatly sub∣iect to the King. Praha, Prag. Plzen, Pilsen. Budiciowize, Budwis. Kolim, Coeln. Cheb, Eger. Strzibre, Misz. Hora, Kuttenberg. Tabor, Taber. Zatetz, Satz. Litemierzitze, Leitmiritz. Launij, Laun. Rockowinck, Rakowinck. Klattowy, Glataw. Beraim, Bern. Most, Bruck. Hradetz, Gretz. Auscij, Aust. Myto, Maut. Dwuor, Hoff. Laromiertz, Iaromir. Bohemian names. German names. These cities are subiect to the peers of the king∣dome. Dub, Ath. Piela, Wiswasser. Gilowy, Gilaw. Krupka, Graupen. Loket, Elbogen. Hanzburg, Hasenburg. The riuer Albis is called by the Germans Elbe, and by the Bohemians Labe. The Bohemians call the riuer Molta by the name of Vltawa.
map of Bohemia, Czech Republic REGNI BOHEMIAE DESCRIPTIO. Bohemiae longitudo latitudo{que} peuè par, nam retundam faciem ex circu∣miacientibus montibus accipit, cuius diametrū tri∣um dierum itinere expedito absoluitur: quorū mon∣tium quae ad Septentrionalem plagā vergunt Sudetae appellantur, ardui sane ac praecipites, vbi Gabrita silua ingens extenditur, qui montes cum alijs Danubio proximis vnde Albis fi se proripit in coronam cocunt, quos vndi{que} profundissima nemora latis∣simè occupant: Hercinia enim silua vniuersā Bohemian compraehēit.
SILESIA. JOhn Crato one of the Emperours counsellers, and his principall Physician, hath for the benefit of the studious in Geography, out of his relations of Silesia, imparted thus much vnto vs. That we may not be scrupulous about the name of the Silesians, nor (as some haue done) deriue it from the Elysian fields: we are out of ancient writers to vnderstand, that the same region which they now possesse, was formerly inhabited by the Quadi. For Quad in the Saxon or old German tongue, hath the same signification that Siletz hath in the Polonian or Sclauon. For they were a people that resorted hither out of sun∣dry places, more addicted to warre than peace, destroyers rather than builders, and im∣patient of all superioritie. The first King that bare rule ouer them was Boleslaus a Po∣lacke. He was borne in the yeere of our Lord 967. his mother a Bohemian, neece to Duke Wenceslaus by the brothers side. A sonne of his called Mieslaus, in the yeere 1001. was married to Rixa daughter of Erenfrid County Palantine, neece to the Emperour Otho the third, by his sister Melchitis: and this man was the first that receiued the kingly diademe from Otho the third. But after his decease the Polonians hauing by sedition expelled out of their kingdome the Emperours niece and his sonne Casimire, Conradus the Emperour reseruing to himselfe a certaine tribute, annexed Silesia to the crowne of Bohemia. This Emperour was an Vratislauian borne, and perhaps gaue the name of Vratislauia to his natiue citie, which is now commonly called Breslaw. But hereof I cannot certainly affirme ought. This one thing is not to be doubted, that the Silesians had no affection towards the Polonians, whenas by the practise and industry of Iohn the first king of Bohemia father to the Emperour Charles the fourth, they vnited themselues to the Bohemians. Some there are (by what authority or opinion I know not) which affirme that in the same place where Breslaw now stands, was built in times past by a Prince called Liguis, the city of Budurgis mentioned in Ptolemey. For it is apparent out of histories, that Mieslaus Duke of Poland, who was first created King by the Emperour Otho the third, and in the yeere 965. embraced Christianitie, did anno 1048. erect a woodden church or chapel to the honour of S. Iohn Baptist. Whereby you may gather, that in those dayes there was no great matter of building at Breslaw. Moreouer, Gotefridus the first Prelate of that church being an Italian, preferred the village of Smogra before the citie of Breslaw, hauing there his Schole and College. Likewise about this time it is thought that the foundations of other the principall cities of Silesia, namely of Lignitz, Glogaw, Lu∣ben, &c. were layd: for out of monuments and Annales no certainty can be gathered, whenas the ancientest wri∣tings in all Silesia are the letters of the Emperour Frederick the second, which were written in the yeere 1200. all the residue being consumed and lost, either by fires or inuasions which haue beene very terrible in these parts. But by the good indeuour of Frederick Barbarossa, Silesia was both pacified, and so distributed among the sonnes of Vladislaus king of Poland, that it seemed not altogether to be dismembred from that crowne. But when the Poloni∣ans perceiued that Silesia grew full of Germans, and that the Princes began to fauour them; reiecting the lawfull heires, they aduanced to the kingdome of Silesia one Vladislaus Locticus, a cruell enemy to the Germans. This was the occasion that they betooke themselues to the protection of Iohn king of Bohemia; who being sonne to the Em∣perour Henry the seuenth, married the daughter of Wenceslaus king of Bohemia, and was inuested into the king∣dome 1302. Wherefore after the decease of this Iohn of Lucelberg, Silesia was subiect to twelue Bohemian kings one after another, six whereof were Emperours, one a Bohemian, another an Hungarian, fiue of the house of Au∣stria, two Polacks, but descended from Austria by the mothers side. Of the Polonian race remained as yet in Si∣lesia the Princes of Lignitz and Teschnitz: for those of Munsterberg deriue their pedegree from George king of Bo∣hemia. Vratislauia the head-city of Silesia being burnt to ashes in the yere 1341, began then so stately to be built of stone, as at this present both for order and beauty of houses and largenesse of streets, it is little inferiour to any of the cities in Germanie. Concerning other more true ornaments of a Common-wealth, I shall not need to speake, seeing it is manifest to all Germanie, that scarse in any other region there are to be found so many Schooles, such numbers of learned Professours, and of excellent wits. It beseemes me not to speake too gloriously of my coun∣treymen; yet thus much I may boldly say, that there is almost no Princes court, nor any famous common-wealth, where the vertue and learning of the Silesians findes not entertainment. The gentlemen likewise albeit addicted to tillage and good husbandry, yet are they so warlike withall, that no indifferent Iudges can deny, but that by their valour the remainder of Hungarie is defended. It is a region very fruitfull of corne, especially in one place aboue the rest, which is most carefully manured by our people. It aboundeth with fish-pooles. The famous riuer Odera confineth it East and North, and South it is diuided from Bohemia by Sudetes. But the situation best appeareth in the Map. Of Silesia you haue somewhat written by Aeneas Syluius, and by others which are ignorant of the coun∣trey. But Laurentius Coruinus could haue brought more certainties to light, had not the age wherein he liued been fatally ouerwhelmed in ignorance. Thus much Iohn Crato concerning his natiue countrey Silesia. It containeth twelue Dukedomes; one Bishoprick, the Bishop whereof hath his residence at Neisse, and sometimes at Breslaw: for there is a Cathedrall church and a College of Canons. Heere are foure Baronies also. In this region about Striga and Lignitz is found a kinde of medicinable earth, commonly called Terra sigillata, like that of Lemnus, and of equall force; some quantitie whereof Iacobus Manouius Citizen and Senatour of Breslaw hath often bestowed vpon me. The Chronicles of Silesia were of late written by Ioachimus Curius, wherein he hath so curiously described the situation and the antiquity of their townes and cities, the gouernment of their state, and their memorable acts, that the studious may here finde an absolute history. I am informed by Iacobus Monauius, that Francis Faber hath described it in verse also.
map of Silesia, Poland SILESIAE TYPVS A Martino Helwigio Nissense descriptus et Nobili doctoque viro Domino Nicolao Rhedingero ded.
MORAVIA. MORAVIA is thus described by Ioannes Dubrauius in his Bohemian story: Morauia was called of olde Marcomania, because it confined vpon Germany at that place, where Dariubius en∣treth Hungary. For Mark in high Dutch signifies a limit or confine, and thereupon Marco∣manni are such as inhabit the borders of a countrey. Concerning these people Arrianus in his relation of Germany, the farthest of these nations (saith he) are the Quadi and Marcomanni, then the Iazyges a people of Sarmatia, after the Getes, and lastly a great part of the Sarma∣tians. Howbeit, at this present, because it is bounded by the riuer Mora, from the same riuer the inhabitants are called Moraui, and the countrey Morauia. On three sides, as it now stands, it is diuided by mountaines, woods, forests, or riuers; on the East from Hungary, West from Bohemia, and North from Silesia: for on the South part towards Austria it is plaine, being some where separated therefrom by the riuer Thaysa, and in other places by another obscure riuer. The principall riuer in Morauia is Mora, which en∣uironeth the chiefe city called Olmuntz, and from thence running into Hungary, dischargeth himselfe with his tributary streames into the chanell of Danubius. For Mora receiuing into his bosome the riuer Nigra; and that of Switta, whereon standeth the city Brin next in dignity to Olmuntz; also Thaysa, which glideth along by the city Znaim famous for the death of Sigismund the Emperour; and lastly Igla passing by the city Igla; rendreth vp his owne and his neighbours substance to the great and renowmed Danubius. But the riuer Odera springing not far from Olmuntz, retaineth his name to the Ocean sea. Some thinke it is called by Ptolemey Viadrus. Odera is so na∣med of a word borrowed from fowlers, which call their watch-towers for the spying and taking of birds, Odri; and such towers you haue now in Morauia at the fountaine of Odera. Neither must we heere omit the riuer Hana, which albeit sometimes scant of water, yet doth it so moisten the neighbour-fields, being thereby the fer∣tilest in all the region, as the husbandmen in regard of their plentifull increase, call them the fat of Morauia. Here also more than in other places are found the siluer and gold coines of M. Antoninus, of Commodus, and other Em∣perours. Which is a manifest argument of ancient warres betweene the forces of the Empire and the Marco∣mans in these parts. This one thing is most worthy the admiration, that in Morauia there is a kind of Frankincense & Myrrhe, not distilling out of trees as in other countries, but digged from vnder the ground, in one place only called Gradisco, where till this present is found not only Frankincense called Male frankincense in regard of the resemblance it hath with the priuie parts of man; but also in the shape of other members both of man and woman. And of late VVenceslaus of the noble family surnamed à Quercu, as he was making a foundation for the banke of a fish-poole in his field of Sterenberg, he found the intire body of a man, consisting all of Myrrhe, the which distributing vnto his friends, and remembring me among the rest, bestowed on me more than halfe an arme, which I vsed often for a perfume. The inner part of the region is arable, an exceeding fertile and fat soile, and most apt for corne: as the hilles for vines, being more fauourable to Bacchus than the hilles of Bohemia; wherefore it excelleth for abundance of good wine. And it is so generally manured, and hath such plentie of husbandmen, that vnlesse it be in forests and desert places, heere is no pasture at all for the feeding of cattell. For the rest, both in speech, fashions and customes, they are like the Bohemians. Hitherto Dubrauius. In the yeere 895. the people of this region were instructed in the Christian faith by S. Methodius, at the pro∣curement of Arnulphus the Emperour. Vnder the Emperour Henry the fourth, in the yeere 1086. this countrey, together with Lusatia and Silesia, was annexed to the kingdome of Bohemia. Their language is mixt, for the grea∣test part speake Bohemian, and the high Dutch is vsed only in cities among persons of best account. This Pro∣uince (as Dubrauius writeth) yeelds plentie of wine, but not of the strongest; such (saith Rithaimerus, and I my selfe haue so found it by experience) as exempteth not the drinker quite from care. Duglossus in his Polonian sto∣rie saith that the name of the riuer Odera signifies in the Henetian tongue, inundation or robbery. Olmuntz the head citie of this region, and the seat of a Bishop, is described by Stephanus Taurinus in his Stauromachia. Concer∣ning Morauia, besides Dubrauius, reade Aeneas Siluius in his Bohemian story. This Map of Morauia first drawen by Fabricius, but afterward corrected by diuers gentlemen of the countrey was sent me by Iohn Crato Counseller and principall Physician to the Emperour Maximilian the second a bounti∣full fauourer of these my studies. He gaue me also this catalogue of townes called both by German and Bohe∣mian names. The Dutch names. The Bohemian names. Behemsche Triebaw, Trzebowa Czeska. Landskron, Landskraun. Schirmberg, Semanin. Sciltperg, Ssilperck. Hanstadt, Zabrzch. Zwittaw, Swittawa. Merherische Tribaw, Trzebowa Morawska. Neustadt, Nowy Miesto. Deutstbrodt, Niemeckybrod. Iglau, Cziblawa. Budwers, Budegowice. Weissenkirch, Hranitza. Plos, Pzin. Drosendorff, Drosdowice. Freyen, Vranow. Schtignitz, Trztenice. Holsterlitz, Hosteradice. Mislicz, Moristaw. Ioslwitz, Iaroslaiwice. Dayex, Diakowice. Grustpach, Hrussowamy. Maydpurgk, Dewczihrady. Auspitz, Hustopecz. Nuslau, Nosyslaw. Tischain, Itza. Schwartz Wasser, Strumen. Selowitz, Zidlochowice. Brin, Brno. Olmutz, Holomane. Prostnitz, Proslegew. Wischa, Wyskow. Austerlitz, Slawkow. Kremfier, Kromerziz. Vngerischbrod, Vherskybrod. Goeding, Hodomin. Lumpenburg, Brzetislaw. Altmarck, Podiwin. Ostra, Ostracia.
map of Moravia, Czech Republic MORAVIAE, QVAE OLIM MAR∣COMANNORVM SEDES, COROGRAPHIA, A. D. PAV∣LO FABRITIO MEDICO ET MATHEMATICO DE∣SCRIPTA; ET A GENE∣ROSIS MORAVIAE BARONIBVS QVI∣BVSDAM COR∣RECTA.
AVSTRIA or AVSTRICH. GEORGE RITHAYMER, in his Abridgement of the situation of the world, de∣scribeth Austrich vnder the name of Pannony the higher, in these words: Pannony the higher (saith he) toward the East abbutteth vpon the riuer Leyth. Ptolemey maketh the riuer Rab his Eastern bound. Vpon the West it is bounded with the riuer O∣nasus, and Noricum which is a part of Bayern. Some do on that coast limit it with the mountaine Caetius: on the North with the riuer Tey and the countrey Mora∣uia: for so farre at this day it doth extend it selfe on that side. Vpon the South coast it resteth vpon the mountaines of Steyri. The soile is good and fertile of all maner of corne, and is such as is manured and tilled with small charge. In that part which is beyond Donaw and is called Marchfield, where long since the Chetuari and and Parmecampi were seated, the husbandman falloweth his land with one poore seely jade only. Marle, without which their land in Bayern is leane and barren, what it meaneth the husbandmen of Austrich know not. It beareth so good Saffron, as no other in the world may compare with it. It affoordeth Wine passing holesome and agreeable to the nature of man. Althamerus vpon Cornelius Tacitus his Ger∣mania writeth that it yeeldeth plentie of Ginger in a mountaine neere the towne Hamburg in the middest of Austrich or Pannony. It hath many ancient and famous cities: notwithstanding those of greatest note are Styre, Vadenhoff, Melck, Castell, anciently called Claudionum, Crembs, Cetro castle now called Zeisselmaur, Saint Hippolytus, the two Newberies, one surnamed of the Abbey, the other of Corne. Petronell a village now, but in old time a great citie, as his foundation, ruines, and heaps of stones and rubbish do testifie. The new city Pruck vpon the banke of the riuer Leyth and Hamburg: out of all the most famous is VVien sometime called Fla∣uiana and Iuliobona, renowmed for the Vniuersitie and Schoole, than which there is none that hath brought forth more excellent and greater Mathematicians. This citie is round beset with Vineyards. The houses of the citizens are stately and beautifull, so that they may seeme to giue entertainment to Princes, and are built with large and open windowes to let the aire in and out: and therefore they are neuer pestered and offended with close and bad aire; for that euery priuate house hath either his seue∣rall court-yard or back-side. Hither is great concourse of forren nations from all countreys of Europe. Here is great plentie of all maner of prouision necessary for the maintenance of mans life. The riuers of Austrich are Donaw, sometime the vtmost border of the region, but now it runneth thorow the midst of the same; Onasus, Drawn, Erlaph, which at Cella (or Zelltal, famous for the Church of the Virgine Marie) ariseth out of a most pleasant lake: Draisn, Ypsie, Melck, Marck. These doe seuer Morauia from Austrich: Camb a notable riuer for sundry sorts of fish: Leytte, and Swegad in which are Cre∣fishes or Crabs of a most pleasant taste. Thus farre Rithaymer. Of the originall and reason of the etymologie of the name of this countrey, this report Lazius in his Commentaries of VVien doth giue. The name of Austria, (saith he) was inuented of late, about foure hundred yeeres since, of the blast of the South winde called of the Latines Auster, which winde in this country bloweth oft: or of the similitude of the German name; (which I thinke to be more likely) for the Kings of the Franks called the East border of their Kingdomes Ostenrich, like as the West part they termed Westenrich. This region long since was first gouerned by Marquesses, then by Dukes; and lastly by Archdukes; to whom it is now subiect: as is more at large to be seene in the said Commentaries of Lazius. The an∣cient armes of this countrey were fiue Larkes Ore, in a field Azure: but Lupold the Marquesse, the fift of that name, of an accident or euent that befell him, was licenced by the Emperour to alter his coat, and to beare a field Gules with a fesse argent: for that in the siege and assault of Accon he was all ouer em∣brued with bloud, onely his girdle excepted. More thou maiest reade of this in Munster and Cuspinian. The description of Austrich is to be seene in Bonfinius in the end of his fourth booke fourth Decade of his historie of Hungarie. Pius the second in his description of Europe citeth an historie of his, written of this countrey: which notwithstanding as yet it was neuer our chance to see. The same authour hath in his Epistles passing well described Vienna or VVien, the chiefe citie of this Prouince.
map of Austria AVSTRIAE DESCRIP. per WOLFGANGVM LAZIVM.
The Bishopricke of SALCZBVRG. FRANCIS IRENICVS saith, that of the fiue Bishopricks of Bayern, this is the principall, and the Bishops sea (termed of Aeneas Syluius the Metropoli∣tan citie) whose description we haue here set downe, is by Munster thus de∣scribed: Iulius Caesar entending to make warre vpon the Germans, caused a very strong castle to be built in the streights of the mountaines, whither his souldiers in danger might retire themselues; and from whence they might haue succour when need required; and therefore it was called Castrum Iuua∣uiense, in the German tongue, Helfenberg. The riuer vpon which it standeth, called Iuuauius, is thought by some to haue giuen the name to this castle, of which also the citie af∣terwards built, was named Iuuauia. This citie hath Fennes, Plaines, Hilles and Mountaines round about belonging to it. The Fennes yeeld pastures; the Mountaines hawking and hunting. But this citie hauing long since flourished for a few yeres, in the time of Attila the King of the Hunnes, susteined many inrodes and incursions, and was miserably wasted with fire and sword. Afterward about the yeere of Christ 520, whenas S. Rupert, descended of the bloud royall of the Franks, was inuested Bishop of the sea of VVormes, and after the death of Childebert was driuen from that his Bi∣shopricke, Thedo Duke of Bayern entertained him at Ratispone with great ioy and solemnitie, and was baptized of him, with his Nobles and Commons. Rupert the Bishop going on visitation, and trauelling about by Noricum euen vnto Pannony, preaching the Gospell, conuerted many to the faith of CHRIST; and comming vnto the riuer Iuuaue, where sometime the citie Iuuawe had stood, but now ruined, decaied, ouergrowen with bushes, and without inhabitant; and obser∣uing the place fitting and conuenient for a Bishops sea, he obtained the possession thereof from the Duke, stocked vp the trees and bushes, and finding the foundation of the buildings, he erected there a Church, which he dedicated vnto the honour of S. Peter. Also by the bountifull magnifi∣cence of the same Duke, he erected a Monasterie of the order of S. Bennet, and gouerned the Bi∣shops sea foure and fortie yeeres &c. The same authour in that place reckoneth vp also the rest of the Bishops and Archbishops of this sea. See Auentinus, who thinketh this citie to haue beene of Ptolemey called, Poedicum. This citie is seated amongst the Alpes. Some doe thinke it to haue beene named Saltzburg, of Salt, which in the countrey neere adioyning, not farre from Reichenhall, is digged out of the earth in great plenty. Yet who doth not see it, not to be called of them Saltzburg or Salisburg, but Salez∣burg of Salcz or Salczach the riuer, vpon which it is built and situate, like as Insperg, Instadt, of the ri∣uer In; Iltzstadt, vpon Iltz; Regensperg, vpon Regen; not farre from this place, and a thousand such euery where to be obserued. The territorie and liberties of this citie is rich of all sorts of mettels, as of Golde, Siluer, Brasse, and yron. Here is also found Vitrioll, Brimstone, Alume, and Antimonie. It hath also some quar∣ries of Marble. VViguley Hund hath set forth a catalogue of the Bishops of this citie. The Iournall of Antoninus maketh mention of Iuuaue. But Gaspar Bruschius thinketh the more ancient name of Iuuaue to haue beene Helfenberg: and of that the name Iuuaue to haue beene formed, which in signi∣fication is the same. Pighius writeth, that he hath read these verses in the chiefe church of this city. Tunc Hadriana vetus, quae pòst Iuuauia dicta, Praesidialis erat Noricis, & Episcopo digna Rudiberti sedes, qui fidem contulit illis CHRISTI, quam retinet, Saltzburgum serò vocata. Thus verbatim in English. Where Hadriana old did stand, which since they Iuuaue call'd, (A garrison towne to Roman State) there Robert was enstall'd First Bishop of the sea, who them did bring to cheerefull light Of Gospell cleere, which yet they hold, it now is Salczburg hight.
map of Salzburg, Austria SALISBVRGENSIS IVRISDICTIONIS, locorum{que} vicinorum vera descriptio Auctore Marco Secznagel Salisburgense. Qui patriae adfert ingenio suae Illustre nomen, Laudibus excolens Dignus fauore est, praemióque Quem sequens veneretur aetas Cum Marcus ergo fecerit hoc opus Grato tuum, te quaeso, foue sinu Salczburga ciuem, ges tiensque Posteritatis honore cinge.
BAVARIA. BAyern or Bauiere, called of the Latines Boiaria, or as others like better, Ba∣uaria, was inhabited in former times by the Narisci, Vindelici and Norici. The Nariskes, which now are called Nardge, the riuer Donaw parteth from the other two. The Noricks did enter at the riuer In, and doe decline toward the East and West, euen vnto Hungarie and Italie. The Ʋindelicks were conteined betweene the riuers Lyke, Donaw, Isara, Inne and the Alps, which Ptolemey calleth Penninae. All this part now is vnder the dominion of the Dukes of Bayern, and doth wholly rest in the name of Bayern. Bayern is diuided into the Higher and the Lower. THE HIGHER is situate vnder the Alps, and toward the South. This is combred with many mari∣shes, huge lakes, swift streames, darke and fearefull woods. Besides beares, bores, and such like wild beasts, it hath many heards of stags of an hundred yeeres old, which no man may hunt without the Princes leaue, but vnder a great penaltie. It is a good soile for pastorage, and for the feeding of cat∣tell. It yeeldeth yeerely great plentie of Apples, Barley, Oats, and such like corne, although not of all sorts: it is inhabited but here and there. The cities of this countrey are Munchen vpon the banke of the riuer Isara, a most goodly and famous citie, and the Dukes seat. This citie continually main∣teineth Lions. Many men do thinke it to surpasse all the cities of Germany for beautie. Ingol∣stadt, adorned with a publike Ʋniuersitie. Beside these, there are Freising a Bishops sea, Was∣serburg, Neuburg, Rosenhaim, Auensburg, &c. THE LOVVER BAYERN is more fertile, and better inhabited: and by reason of the riuers Donaw, Isara, and Lauar, it bring∣eth forth Ʋines. His cities are Regensburg, which some call Ratisbone, formerly called Au∣gusta Tiberia, situate vpon Donaw: whose suburbs vpon the opposite banke of the riuer, are ioy∣ned to it by a faire stone bridge. Patauium commonly called Passaw, at the mouth of the riuer In, where it falleth into Donaw, famous for his Bishops sea: Strawbing, Landshut, Dinglesing, Osterhoff, and diuers others. This countrey generally is reasonably fertile: as of Salt, Corne, Cattell, Fish, Woods, Birds, Pastures, Deere, and of all such things necessarily required to the maintenance of mans life, either for apparell or victuall, it is sufficiently stored. It breedeth many swine, feeding and fatting them with mast and wildings, in such sort, that as Hungary affoordeth Oxen, so this Swine to the most countries of Europe. Salt, Cattell and Corne are transported from hence, and solde into forren coun∣tries. Wines are from other places, as out of Italie, Istria, Rhetia, Rheni, Nicker and Panno∣ny, conueyed hither. But no Prouince of Germanie is beautified with more and finer cities: for within his borders (as Philip Apian in his Map of Bayern writeth) it conteineth foure and thir∣tie cities, six and fortie townes, (Mercktflecken they call them) threescore and twelue monaste∣ries, beside an innumerable company of villages, castles, and noblemens houses. In it Salczburg is the Metropolitan citie and the Archbishopricke, which hath vnder it many Suffragans, as of Trent, Passaw, Wien, &c. The people do rather giue themselues to husbandrie and grasing than to warfare, neither do they delight in merchandise and traffique; they be much giuen to drin∣king and venery. They seldome trauell forth of their owne countrey. The first authour of this na∣tion was Alemanus Hercules, the eleuenth King of High Germanie. His name as yet is pre∣serued in this countrey in the village and castle Almonstain, and the riuer Aleman. In time past this countrey was ruled by his proper King vntill the dayes of Arnulph the Emperour: him, as the Parthians, Arsaces; the Egyptians, Ptolemey, they called Cacan. After that it had Dukes, which as yet it reteineth. Marke, a certaine disciple of S. Paul, conuerted this Prouince vnto Christian religion, and he was the first Bishop of Laureacke, which Bishopricke afterward was translated vnto Passaw. Thus much out of Auentine, Munster, and Iohn Auban of Bo∣hemia.
map of Bavaria, Germany BAVARIAE, OLIM VIN∣DELICIAE, DELINEATI∣ONIS COM PENDIVM Ex tabula Philippi Apiani Math. Cum Priuilegio
NORTGOIA, or the Countie Palatine of BAYERN. THe other part of Bayern which is on the other side Donaw, and runneth out be∣yond the Bohemian wood, is called in our time (and long since was) Nortgoia, ha∣uing Noremberg for the chiefe citie, from whence the country, as some men thinke, tooke his name. And although that Noremberg be no ancient citie, yet his castle, situate vpon the toppe of an hill, is very ancient. This region hath many townes, monasteries and villages, especially Amberg, which in the yeere of Christ 1300. was enclosed with a wall. Awerbach, Sultzpach, Castell Munster, (where in old time the Princes of Nortgoia haue held their Court) Eger, Beierut, Eister, Napurg, Newenstadt, Rewenkelm, Kemnat, Krusen, Greuenwerdt, Eschenbach, VVeiden, Pernaw, Pleistein, Herspruck, Rurbach, Neumarckt, Tursenrut, Elbogen, Cham, Schonsee, Kunsperg, Stauff, &c. Which for the most part do belong vnto the Pala∣tine Princes. For Lewis the Emperour and Duke of Bayern, in the yeere of CHRIST 1339. made such a diuision, that of the whole prouince of Bayern, the prouince of Nortgoia should be subiect vnto the Pala∣tine Princes, except only certaine townes which should belong to the Emperour: and many also that did appertaine to the crowne of the Empire, in time past haue beene pawned to the Princes of Bayern. In this Prouince, betweene Bamberg and Neremberg, in the East, toward the towne Eger, there is a great mountaine called Fichtelberg, out of which do issue foure riuers, Meane, Nabe, Sala and Eger. This moun∣taine conteineth in compasse about six miles, it bringeth forth diuers kinds of mettals: it yeeldeth the best blew colour, which commonly they call Azure. In the toppe of the mountaine there is also found Tinne, and many caues, out of the which in former times mettals haue beene digged: generally all that whole prouince euery where swelleth with mines, especially of iron, by which meanes the Nortgoians do yeerely reape great profit. Otherwise the soile is hard and rough, although in some places it doth bring forth good store of graine, and is excellent pasture ground. This Prouince of Nortgoia conteineth one of the foure Earledomes or Landtgrauies, which long since were erected by the Emperors, namely, Luchtenberg, which taketh his name of the castle Luchtenberg, notwithstanding that the Princes of that iu∣risdiction doe keepe their Court in the towne of Freimbd, and sometime in Grunsfelden, the situation of which towne thou mayest see in the Mappe. The Earle which now possesseth the place, is called George, it I be not deceiued, descended from his progenitours Albert and Fredericke. This Earledome hath not growen vnto such greatnesse as the other three, which in processe of time are much enlarged, both in possessions and command, and especially the Landtgrauie or Earledome of Hessen. Thus farre Seba∣stian Munster. See also Pius the second. Of the beginning of the Countie Palatine of this Prouince reade Francis Irenicus. Conradus Celtes the Poet hath most excellently described Noremberg the chiefe citie of this Prouince: and of late also Pighius in his Hercules Prodicius. Gasper Brusch of Egra hath described Fichtelberg (a mountaine plentifully bearing Pine trees) in a peculiar treatise. The territorie or iurisdiction of STRASBVRG. THe booke of Records (Notitiarum liber) maketh mention of Argentoratensis tractus, the pre∣cinct of Strasburg. It taketh his name of Argentoratum or Argentina, as others name it, now called Strasburg. This tract is a part of Holst, where in time past the Triboces or Tribocci did inhabit, as Rhenan, Munster, and others do thinke. It is apparent out of old records, that it hath beene sometime vnder the iurisdiction of the citie Trier. Afterward it was gouerned by Earles (although not in that sence in which commonly the word is vsed now-a-dayes) yet they not∣withstanding were subiect vnto the Duke of Mentz, as the foresaid booke of Records doth shew. At this day it is dignified with the title of a Landtgrauie. Besides many things in this citie worthy of com∣mendation, there is a most stately steeple vpon the chiefe church, whose height is such, that it doth not only exceed all the rest of all Germany, but as I thinke, of all Europe. It is, as Munster hath left recorded, fiue hundred seuentie foure foot high. Those of VVien in Austrich doe thinke their steeple vpon the Church of S. Steuen, in height to exceed all others, yet that is, as Cuspinian reporteth, but foure hundred and foure score foot high. The steeple of S. Paul of London in England, was in height fiue hundred thirty foure foot, as the learned M. Camden affirmeth. Ours of the Church of our Lady at Antwerp, is but foure hundred sixtie six foot high. But whether the Geometricall foot vsed by the Architects of these seuerall cities in measuring, be equall or not, let them seeke which are more curious in these matters. That ours of Antwerp, for workmanship and beautie, doth excell all those others, I, which heretofore haue seene all the forenamed, dare affirme. Of this territory of Strasburg reade Beatus Rhenanus his first booke of his German histories.
map of Bavaria, Germany PALATINATVS BAVARIAE DESCRIPTIO, ERHARDO REYCH TIROLENSE AVCTORE.
map of Strasburg, France ARGENTORATENSIS AGRI DESCRIPTIO. Ex tabula Danie∣lis Spe∣kel.
The Dukedome of WIRTEMBERG. IOhannes Pedius Tethingerus in his history of the famous acts of this countrey, describeth this Prouince thus: The countrey of VVirtemberg; saith he, in the very entrance almost of high Germany, most pleasantly abbutteth vpon the coast of Switzerland, situate especially vpon the bancke of the riuer Nicher, (some doe thinke it in former times to haue beene the an∣cient seat of the Charitini) whose iurisdiction is very large. On the East it bordereth vpon the Sueui, Vindelici and Norici: On the West vpon the Countie Palatine of Rhein, the Prince Electour, and Marquesse of Baden: lastly it comprehendeth the mountaines of Swartz∣wald, the Blacke-wood. On the South the mountaines of Arbon and the Alpes of Switzer∣land (so the inhabitants do call the higher mountaines of that countrey) do ioyntly ouerlooke it. On the North they haue the Franckes their neighbours, and not farre off also, is Othos wood. And therefore the iurisdiction of VVirtemberg can not more fitly take his begginning, than where Nicher ariseth, which springeth from a small fountaine out of the high hilles of Arbona in the Dukedome of VVirtemberg, neere vnto the villages Schwenningen, in the confines of the towne Villing, not much more than fiue hundred pases from the fountaine of Donaw. Not farre from his fountaine it passeth by Rotwell, and leauing vpon the left hand the head of Blacke-wood, vpon the right, Switzerland Alpes, runneth by the Duchie of VVirtemberg with a wandering and crooked course (so saluting here and there certaine noble mens castles, and townes of the Roman Emperours) from his first rise the space of fiue dayes iourney more or lesse, being with diuers little streames from sundry places encreased and laden, and so made nauigable, at Heydelberg falleth very swiftly into the Rhein. The whole countrey, by reason of the nature of the soile, whether for tillage or otherwise in respect of the fertility, is not euery where alike. For that part where Nicher ariseth, and which bordereth vpon the Blacke-wood, as also that which is abbuttant vpon the Alpes of Switzerland, (situate betweene Donaw and Nicher) is somewhat rough, vnapt for vines, but yeelding indifferent good pasture for cattell. The soile within the Alps is stony, yet very good for corne: in like maner by the sides of Blacke-wood, the land is sandy of a red colour, which notwith∣standing is reasonable good corne ground. Euery where the nation is much giuen to breed and bring vp cattell. Nere vnto the forest of Blacke-wood there are recorded to be these Lordships, subiect vnto the Duchy of VVirtem∣berg: Hornberg, Schultach, Dornstad, Nagold, VVildberg, Kalbe, VVilde bath, Newenstade. By the Alps, or neere vnto them, these Lordships, Baling, VVrach, Blawbeyren, Heidenheim, Tuthing vpon the banke of Donaw, by the which, as by a certaine trench, they are seuered and diuided. But euery where the confines of the iurisdiction of VVirtemberg do gather themselues into a ring, as it were, enclosed with a large band, to the places neere to Nicher. But where∣as Nicher doth spread it selfe into the champian fields, there it is not only more kinde for temperature of the aire, but also the soile is more fit for tillage. Euery where are riuers well stored with fish, holesome springs, pleasant lakes, goodly valleys. Euery where hilles beset with Vines, well-grasing pastures and medowes, fertile fields, forests of woods and groues, in the which are great store of Beeches, many Okes, innumerable companies of Deeres, large pastures, abundance of cattell: in all places plenty of Wine, Corne and Apples. Vpon the brinke of crooked Nicher, here and there, are many goodly cities; some of them of reasonable greatnesse, others not so bigge; but for building and beautie very glorious. In the higher countrey, vpon Ni∣cher doe stand Hernberg, Tubing, Nurting, Kurch: then Stutgard, which being built as it were in the center of the prouince, is the chiefe citie and the palace of the princes of VVirtemberg, and excelleth all the other cities in buil∣dings, multitude of people and greatnesse. About the lower coast of Nicher at this day doe flourish VVabling, Schrondorff, VVinida, Bachanauge, Brackenauge, Binnicke, Bessicke, Bieticke, VVinsberg, Megimill, Lauff, Greining, VVahing. Next vnto Statgard are Bebeling, Lenberg, Cannostade: all which cities haue their seuerall Lordships, many strong villages, men and munition. Moreouer, generally the people of this countrey is for their manhood, humanitie, constancie and religion very renowmed. The townes (as I said before) are not so great, but are sumptuously built; whereof some are sufficiently fortified by nature and benefit of the place; other some by the industrie and labour of man. The villages are so well inhabited, that they are not much inferiour to prety townes: their houses are of timber, but very artificially built. The castles are fortified by nature and situation, as also by the ingenious arte of fortification, and so are not easie to be surprised: so that a man would thinke that another La∣conia were yet extant amongst the Switzers; such is the excellencie of the men both at home and abroad. This Dukedome hath his name of VVirtemberg an ancient beacon, which now is situate in the midst of his ter∣ritory, not very farre from Stutgard, yet vpon somewhat a rising ground & hilly place, is neither for his strength nor building any terrour to the enemy. But according to the custome of their ancestours, who trusted rather to their swords of steele, than walles of stone, it was notable for the pleasantnesse of the place, only commendable now for his antiquitie, hauing a most goodly prospect round about; aboue are the woods of Beech, beneath are the fertile hilles of Vines &c. The late Dukes of Wirtemberg for many ages past, held their Court in this tower, taking from thence their name, their stocke, and their armes, as is to euery man very apparent. There are which thinke, that the Dukes of Wirtemberg haue had their ofspring from the Tuscans or Rhaetians: others from the French. Whether of these opinions are more probable, I much regard not, for in a thing altogether vncertaine I affirme nothing constantly. It is certaine that they were strangers: whether they came first forth of Italie or from France, that as yet is not certainly knowen, &c. Thus farre Iohn Pede.
map of Württemberg, Germany WIRTENBERG. DVCATVS Accurata descriptio; In qua om∣nia eius Opida. Monasteria, pa∣gi, nemora; flumina et riuuli ali∣cuius nominis, diligentissimè expri∣muntur. Auctore Georgio Gadnero Cum Priuilegio Imp. & Regiae M. 1579.
The Precinct of SWITZERLAND. THey which diuided the Empire of Germany into certeine Bands or Circles (Kreis they com∣monly call them) they made Switzerland the fourth in order, now in all they record tenne: it is certaine, as approued histories do mention, that at first Switzerland was a Kingdome, but afterward reduced vnto a Dukedome. Notwithstanding at this day there is none of the Princes of Germanie which is graced with the title of Duke of Switzerland: for it is now diuided amongst many Princes. One part hath accrued by lot of inheritance vnto the house of Austrich: the duke of Wirtemberg enioyeth the greatest part: in it there are many free cities, and such as do belong vnto the crowne of the Empire: many are subiect vnto the Duke of Bauiere. There is none of the old writers which doth not make report of this Nation, as of the most noble and ancientest of all Germany. It is cleere out of Ptolemey, Strabo, and other authours, that heretofore they were seated vpon the riuer Sweue and Albis. But now at this day it is the vtmost prouince of all Germany, for it ab∣butteth vpon the Alpes. It is bounded by Bayern, Frankenland and Alsatia or Elsas, on euery side round about. In olde time this countrey was called Alemanie, of the lake Lemanus (vulgarly now called Lac de Losanne or Lac de Ge∣neue, the Germans call it, Ienfferlee) as some thinke. The countrey, as Iohn Auban in that worthy worke of his, De moribus gentium, describeth it, is partly champian, partly hilly. The soile is fruitfull, of which there is no part which lieth vntilled, excepting that which Lakes, Mountaines or Woods do possesse. In it are many woods; and therefore the nation is giuen much to hunting and hawking: they haue abundance of corne, and great store of cattell. The whole prouince by reason of the holsomnesse of the aire is euery where replenished with goodly cities, villages, castles and bulwarks strongly fortified aswell by nature as arte. About the mountaines it yeeldeth iron, siluer, and other mettals. The nation is populous, stout, audacious, and warlike: and therefore Plutarch calleth it, The most excellent nation of all the Germans. Whose renowme is recorded to be such and so to be enlarged, that for valour and feats of armes it seemeth to haue deserued the Empire of the whole world: which indeed it hath most gloriously for the space of somewhat more than an hundred yeeres enioyed. Thus farre out of Iohn Auban, where thou mayest at large see the customes and maner of life of this nation. Augusta Vindelicorum, Augspurg vpon the riuer Lech, and Vlm vpon Donaw, are the most famous cities of this pro∣uince at this day. There are also Campodun, Memmingen, Werd, Nordling, and others, of which thou mayest reade in Munster. Donaw, the greatest riuer of all Europe, here taketh his beginning, and passeth thorow the middest of the countrey. This riuer, laden with threescore streames (which Cuspinian, according to the report of Collimitius, describeth by name and order) emptieth it selfe into Pontus Euxinus (the Greeks now call it, Maurothalassa; the Ita∣lians Marmaiore; the Turkes, as Busbequius affirmeth, Cara-denis, that is, The blacke-sea) by six huge mouthes. Euery one of which mouthes are so great, and the streame so violent, as Pliny saith, that you shall obserue the sea to be ouer-mastered and driuen backe the space of fortie miles, and so farre the water to be perceiued to be sweet. Of this countrey and his people and first inhabitants, see the ancient Geographers: and of the latter wri∣ters, Iohn Auban of Bohemia, Munster and Irenicus, who affirmeth that Naucler hath penned certaine books only of this argument, and that Berno a certaine Abbat hath written many volumes of this nation. In the vpper part of this Map you see a little prouince cōmonly called Kreichgey; Dauid Chytraeus hath described it in a seuerall treatise. The territorie of BASELL. THis Map conteineth that coast, in which long since the Rauraci and the Cis Iurani did inhabit, as also the Waste of Heluetia. The Rauraci in time past, according to the opinion of most men, were con∣tained betweene the riuers of Rhein, Byrsa and Ar, and those mountaines which from Iurassus doe reach hither. At this day it is for the most part vnder the iurisdiction of Basell. In it as yet is there a village vpon the Rein, distant a Dutch mile from Basell, called Augst, sometime the chiefe citie of this nation, and was called Augusta Rauracorum; but now it is become a base village: notwithstanding many ap∣parent signes of decayed buildings, which as yet do testifie his antiquitie, we haue seene to remaine and be yet extant there. The country is rough, full of many cragged rocks, and euery where shadowed with thicke woods: yet is very well inhabited and manured: so that euen in the mountaines, besides the goodly pastures for cattell, of which it is greatly stored, it beareth plentifully very good wine and corne. Sequani CisIurani did long since reach from the mountaine Iura, euen vnto the banke of the riuer Rhein. Now this part is called Sungow, and the Higher Elsas, and is subiect for the most part vnto the Dukes of Austrich. Brisgow and Blacke-wood, commonly called Swartz-wald, possesse the other banke of the Rein. Here the waste or wildernesse of Heluetia is placed by Ptolemey. Brisgow is very well replenished with cities and villages, and is ve∣ry rich in corne. The common people for the most part liue vpon Vintage. The iurisdiction and gouernment of this countrey is diuided betweene the Archdukes of Austrich and the Marquesses of Bath. Of this shire thou mayest see many things in Munster. Christian Vrstise in a peculiar treatise hath most exactly described the citie of Basell. In like maner Aeneas Syluius, afterward called Pope Pius II.
map of Basel, Switzerland BASILIEN∣SIS TERRITORII DES CRIPTIO NOVA. Auctore Sebastiano Munstero. Miliaria Germanica duarū horarū itineris
map of Schwyz, Switzerland Circulus siue Liga SVEVIAVE, Vulgo Schwa bische Kraiss.
HELVETIA or SWITZERLAND. THe Heluetij (which as Eutropius saith were in time past called Quadi) Caesar writeth to haue been diuided into foure Pagi. At this time they diuide it into thirteene parts, which they call Cantones or Angules. Heluetia they now call Switzerland and Eydg∣noschafft, of the league and confederacie which they haue made betweene them∣selues. Some men doe thinke this countrey to be the highest of all Europe, for that it is wholly almost situate within the Alpes, the highest mountaines of the same Europe, and because the greatest riuers of the same, Rhein, Rhodan or Rosne, and Po, springing from hence as from a very high place, do runne into diuers coasts of the world. This countrey is euerie where full of steepe hilles, deepe valleys, great lakes, cleere springs and brooks. These mountaines do ap∣peare white with continuall snow, so that to those which behold them afar off, they seeme to be nothing but hard stone: yet notwithstanding the Medowes after they haue beene burnt, are found to be very fat. In them are fed sheepe and kine, from whence great profit ariseth vnto the inhabitants. For from thence whey, (as Oswaldus Molitor writeth) cheese, butter, and other white meats are made in such abundance, that not only Switzerland is glutted with such things, but also the nations nere adioyning are from thence very plentifully serued. For they are transported from hence into Sweueland, beyond the mountaine Iura into Italie, and into diuers other places. And that which may hardly be beleeued, as the same man affir∣meth for certaine, that of twentie kine the yeerely profit is one hundred crownes, and all charges borne which is bestowed vpon house-keeping, men-seruants, and maid-seruants. Here-hence it is, that so great a people is possibly able to liue and be mainteined in so strait a place and little plot of ground. The thirteene Cantones of this countrey (as we said they are commonly called) are, as Glarean recko∣neth them vp, Zurich, Bern, Lucern, Wry, Schwitz, Siluan, Tugi, Glaron, Basell, Friburg, Solodurn Schafhusen, and Keiser-stul. The gouernment and charge generally of the whole countrey is in the hands of those Cantones: for the rule or gouernment of Heluetia is an Anarchia, and is not subiect to the command of any Prince. These, when there is any thing that falleth out which concerneth the whole countrey or gouern∣ment of the same, do meet all ioyntly together, and do determine vpon that which they thinke meet: o∣therwise seuerall magistrates do gouerne the seuerall cities. These cities therefore are linked together by a certaine bond of friendship and league, whereupon they are called Eydtgnossen, that is, ioyned in one couenant. Those of Rotweill, Sangall, Doggenburg, and Lepont, haue combined themselues also to those thir∣teene Cantons, with the like bond of amitie. Heluetia is situate (that we may describe it in the plainest maner) betweene the riuer Rhein, S. Claudius mountaine, the lake of Geneua, (which of the Latine writers is commonly called Lacus Lemanus) and Italie. Vpon the East it hath the countie of Tiroll: vpon the South, the Duchie of Millan, and the countrey of Pei∣mont: vpon the West it bordereth vpon Sauoy: the other part of it lieth vpon Burgundie, France, and High Germanie. We said, that Switzerland amongst the mountaines doth conteine many valleys: of which some there are, that do tend from the tops of the Alps toward Italie, inhabited of diuers kinds of men. For Giles Schude writeth, that those which do inhabit the vale of Augusta or Val de Osta, where in times past the Salassi dwelt, are for the most part all Merchants factors. In Cesie vale they are almost all Stone-cutters and Masons. From Oscell vale do come Cutlers or Smithes, which do make sword-blades, and kniues, and such as doe turne woodden dishes and trenchers. All the inhabitants of the vale Vegese are Chimney-sweepers, and so that slouenly kinde of men, which liue by sweeping of chimneys, and are wont to wander vp and downe thorow Germany, France, Italie, and euen as farre as Sicilia, are bred here. In the vale Galanch they are all ei∣ther dressers of Rosen, or Basket-makers. But these like beggers wander from countrey to countrey: yet all the rest do liue vpon their trades. Besides that which Caesar, Strabo and other ancient writers haue written of this countrey, thou mayst reade many other things in Giles Schude, Vadian, Francis Niger of Bassana, Munster, Henry Glarean, and Oswald Molitor in the commentaries vpon him; as also in Iohn Stumpe, who hath written an huge volume of this nation. To these you may adioyne Iohn Rhellicanes his commentaries vpon Caesar. Iosias Simler hath set forth a booke of the prouince of Vallesia and of the Alps. The same man hath in hand a worke of Switzerland in generall. Nicolan Stupan of Rhetia promiseth a description of Rhetia. For the estate and gouernment of the common wealth of this countrey see Iohn Bodine in his Methodus historica. Anthony Pinet in his description of cities, hath diligently described the politicall estate and peculiar regiment of the Commonwealth of Berne. Giles Schude, Henry Glarean and others do contend and differ about the ancient language of the Hel∣uetij. I do thinke that they neuer vsed other than now they do. But we do send such as are more curious students in the dialects of languages, vnto the worke of Iohn Becan which he calleth his Becceselana.
map of Switzerland HELVETIAE DESCRIPTIO, AEGIDIO TSCHVDO AVCT.
The Countie of TIROLL. THe Earledome of Tyroll was adioyned vnto the house of Austrich, in the yeere after Christs birth 1360. by Rodulph the sonne of Duke Albert. This Countie is so rich in Siluer mines, especially neere the towne of Schwatz, that it may not onely be preferred before a rich Dukedome, but also may iustly seeme to compare with a large Kingdome. For it payeth yeerely vnto the Prince (as Cuspinian in his historie of Austrich reporteth) three hundred thousand crownes of golde. Moreouer in it is found absolutely the best brasse, when as scarse other where not any is found that will abide the hammer. This prouince is situate almost within the Alpes, betweene Bauiere and Italie. The chiefe cities in it, are Oenipons, now commonly called Inspruck, where the Princes Court of this region is ordinarily kept, where also the Coun∣cell-table and Parliament for this prouince and for Austrich is held. There also did we behold with admiration the house of the Lord Maior, vpon the roofe all guilt ouer with infinite cost and charges. Next vnto it is Bolzan the Mart-towne; and the castle of Tyroll, of which the whole countrey tooke his name. Then Trent, famous for the generall Councell held there within our remembrance. This is subiect vnto the Dukes of Austrich, yet partly vnto the Bishops of that sea, and is placed in the confines of Germanie and Italie, whereupon almost all the inha∣bitants doe vnderstand and speake both the languages. Then Halla, in which salt is made and boiled, which from thence is transported into the countreys neere adioyning. The Bishopricke of Brixia, and the towne of Briomeck, with a castle which belongeth vnto the same Bishop. Then Schwatz, where euery yeere great store of siluer, as we sayd before, is digged out of the earth. Verona, &c. But that (which we haue not thought good to conceale) of Munster, is well worth the reading. There is, saith he, an hill called Nansberg, three miles from Trent, extending it selfe twelue miles in length, and three in bredth; in which there are three hundred and fiftie Parish-Churches, two and thirtie Castles, besides Salt and many pleasant and sweet smelling fruits. In it all things do abundantly grow, which are necessary for the maintenance of mans life. But of this Countie see more at large in the same authour. Ianus Pyrrhus Pincius of Mantua, hath learnedly and at large set forth the historie of Trent in twelue books. Of GOERCZ, KARST, CHACZEOLA, CARNIOLA, HISTRIA, and WINDISKMARKE. OF Windiskmarke, Istria, and Goerez, we must speake hereafter, and therefore in this place we will sursease to say ought of them. Of Carnioll, Karst, and Chaczeoll (to say the trueth) I know not what to write. Something notwithstanding, that otherwise than in the other, I do not deceiue the expectation of the Reader, that shall not be vnpleasant vnto those which doe admire the wonderfull works of the Almightie, I will speake in this place. There is a place in this Map, which the inhabitants call Czyrcknitzersee, of a little towne neere vnto it, called Czyrcknitz, Lazius saith that Strabo calleth it the Mere of Lugey, it is situate in the prouince of Carnioll. This place (so I call it; for whether I may more truly terme it a lake, a parke, or a field, I know not) as the same Lazius hath, euery yeere yeeldeth corne, fishing and hunting. But here I thinke it best first to set downe his de∣scription out of George Wernher a little more at large: It is enclosed, saith he, on euery side with mountaines, and is in length about a mile and a halfe, but in bredth somewhat lesse. In many places it is eighteene cubits deepe, and where his depth is least, it is equall vnto the full height of a tall man. Out of the hilles round about on euery side certeine small brooks do runne, ech from his seuerall channell; from the East coast three; from the South, foure. Euery one of these the farther they runne, the lesse water they containe; for the earth so continually soa∣keth it vp, that at last it is wholly consumed by certeine stonie ditches, so framed by nature, as they do seeme to haue beene made and cut out by the arte and industrie of man. Lazius thinketh them to be certeine signes and arguments of the sailing of the Argonautes vnder the earth. Heere the waters doe so mightily swell, that by no meanes they may be receiued: whereupon it commeth to passe, that the ditches doe in such maner swell backe againe, that neither they only doe not receiue the water, but also what they haue receiued, they powre backe againe so exceeding swiftly, that a nimble horseman by running shall hardly be able to auoid the violence of the streame. Therefore which way soeuer the waters shall finde any way out, they issue forth and spread them∣selues so broad, that they make a great lake. These waters do returne almost as swiftly as they came, yet not by those ditches only; but the ground euery where almost doth so receiue them, as if they were powred thorow a sieue. This when the inhabitants do perceiue will come to passe, they by and by stopping the greater passages to the vttermost they may, they runne thither to fish by great troops: which is not only a pleasant passe-time to them, but also is very gainfull and profitable. For these fishes being salted, are carried out in great plentie vnto the neighbour-regions round about. Then the lake being dried, succeedeth an haruest, on that part where the soile is sowen; and the same is sowen againe before the next floud It is so fertile of grasse, that euery twentie dayes it may be mowen. Who is it, that which here doth not admire the wonderfull works of sporting nature?
map of Tryol, Austria and Italy Rhetiae alpestris decriptio, in qua hodie TIROLIS COMITATVS. Ex ta∣bula Wolf∣gangi Lazij. quam Joan Maior Viennensis aedidit. Cum Gratia et Priuilegio. map of Slovenia and Northern Croatia GORITIAE, KARSTII, CHACZEOLAE, CARNIOLAE, HISTRIAE, ET WINDORVM MARCHAE DESCRIP. Haec tabula concinnata est ex corographijs. Wolfg. Lazij. cui∣insima Histriae pars ex alteri∣us descriptione addita est.
ITALIE. ITalie the chiefe prouince of the world, as it hath often changed the name according to the alteration of times and states: for it was called Enotria, Ausonia, Hesperia, Saturnia. &c. so also his bounds and borders are diuersly described by diuers authours: notwithstanding in la∣ter ages it is thus bounded. First, by the riuer Varus; then by a straight passing by Alpes Coctiae, now called Monte Genebrae; by Mount Adula, or S. Gothardes hill; the Alpes of Rhetia or Monte Braulis, and hilles adioyning; then by the riuer Arsia the vtmost border of Istria: thus it is bounded vpon one side, the other sides do abut vpon the sea. Ptolemey describeth it in the forme of an Isthmos or Peninsula, which the sea incloseth on three sides, the other is walled by the Alpes. The ancient writers doe liken it vnto an Oke-leafe: the latter doe set it out not without great resemblance in the proportion and shape of a mans legge from the hippe vnto the sole of the foot. Italie hath the mountaine Apennine as it were a ridge or backe passing along from one end of it to the other, like as we see in fishes the ridge bone to runne along from the head vnto the taile. This mountaine, which ariseth out of the Alpes, where they decline from the lower or Mediterranean sea, when as almost with a straight course, nere Ancona, it tendeth toward the Higher or Adriatique sea, and there seemeth to end; yet from thence againe de∣clining from that sea, it passeth thorow the middest of Italie toward the Brutij (now Calabria inferiore) and the Sici∣lian straights. Elian affirmeth that in times past there were in this countrey 1197. cities. Guido a Priest of Rauenna, out of Iginus, which six hunnred yeeres since wrote of the cities of Italie, writeth that in his time there were but seuen hundred only. Blondus diuideth Italie into 18. prouinces; Leander, into 19. and their names are these: The olde. The new. LIGVRIA Riuiera de Genua. ETRVRIA Toscana. VMBRIA Ducato di Spoleto. LATIVM Campagna di Roma. CAMPANIA FELIX Terra di Lauoro. LVCANIA Basilicata. BRVTII Calabria inferiore. MAGNA GRAECIA Calabria superiore. SALENTINI Terra d' Otranto. APVLIA PEVCETIA Terra di Barri. APVLIA DAVNIA Puglia Piana. SAMNITES Abruzzo. PICENVM Marca Anconitana. FLAMINIA Romagna. AEMILIA Lombardia di qua dal Po. GALLIA TRANSPADANA Lombardia di la dal Po. VENETI Marca Treuigiana. FORVM IVLII Friuli, & Patria. HISTRIA Istria. Plinie, according to the opinion of Varro, maketh the lake Cutilius, in the territorie of Reatino, to be the center of all Italie. Neere vnto this lake is the territorie of Rosella (called of Virgill, Rosaea rura velini; Velino's fields bedecked with roses sweet) of all Italie the most fertile: which fertilitie was such, as Varro witnesseth, that a rod being left in it ouer night, the next day it might not be seene for grasse; and therefore it is called Sumen Italiae, The sweet bread of Italie. In former ages they haue reported, that the plaine of Stellate was the goodliest and best soile of all Italie; but now, as Blondus saith, the places about Bonony and Mutina do far surpasse the rest. Sabellicus, according to the common report of the common people, attributeth these epithets vnto the chiefe cities of Italie: Venice the rich, Millane the great, Genua the proud, Florence the faire, Bonony the fertile, Rauenna the olde, Rome the holie, and Naples the noble. But the commendation of this country, set out by Plinie, with as great a maiesty of words, as that countrey doth excell the rest of the countreys of the world, I cannot but I must needs, before I passe from it, set downe in this place by way of digression; for so he speaketh of it in his third booke and fift chapter: ITALIE the nurse and mother of all nations, chosen by the prouidence of God, to adde a lustre to the very heauens themselues, to vnite dispersed kingdomes, to temper and mollifie their rude and vnciuill maners, to draw the dissonant, barbarous and sauage langua∣ges of so many diuers people, by the entercourse of one refined speech to a conference and parley, to teach ciuilitie to men, and briefly to make this one a common countrey for all the nations of the world. But what shall I say more? Such is the excellencie of all places, that any man shall come vnto, such is the maiestie of all things, and of all people which do possesse it. The citie of Rome, which in it see∣meth only to excell, and to be a worthy face for so glorious a necke, with what words or eloquence may I expresse it! How beautifull is the countenance of Campania by it selfe! how great and many are the glorious pleasures and delights of the same! That it is manifest that in this one place nature hath shewed all her skill in a worke wherein she meant especially to delight. And now indeed such is the vitall and continuall holsomnesse of the temperate aire, such fertile plaines and champian grounds, such sunny banks, such harmlesse forests, such coole and shady groues, such fruitfull and bountifull kinds of woods, such fertility of corne, vines annd oliues, such goodly flocks of sheepe, such fat beeues, so many lakes, such store of riuers and fountaines euery where watering and bedrenching it, so many seas, hauens or ports as it were bosomes of the land euery where open and ready to entertaine and receiue the traffique of all lands, and it selfe running into the sea as it were willingly offering it selfe and earnestly desiring to helpe and succour mortall men distressed in the same. I doe omit to speake of the fine wits, natures and maners of the people of the same, as also of the seuerall nations ouercome by it partly by valour, and partly by humanity. The Graecians themselues, a nation exceeding prodigall of their owne praise and glory, haue iudged so of it, calling a great part of it Magna Graecia, Great Greece. Of the ancient writers Caius Sempronius, Marcus Cato, Polybius in his second booke, but most exactly Strabo, as he doth all things els, haue described this countrey. Of the latter historiographers, Blondus, Iohannes Annius Viterbien∣sis in his commentaries vpon Berosus, and other authors imprinted together with him. Pontanus in his first booke of the famous acts of King Alphonsus, Volaterrane, Sabellicus, Bernardus Saccus, and Dominicus Niger, but most exactly Leander, Gaudentius Merula hath most excellently described Gallia Cisalpina, which indeed is not the least part of Italie.
map of Italy ITALIAE NOVISSIMA DESCRIPTIO AVCTORE IACOBO CASTALDO PEDEMONTANO.
FORVM IVLII, FORVLY, or FRIVLY. THe originall of the name of Forum Iulij, Leander saith, diuers writers haue diuersly sought and censured. Some doe thinke it so called of Iulius Caesar. Blondus seemeth to affirme it to haue tooke his name of the citie Forum Iulij. Antiquities do testifie that this region hath beene called Aquilegia, of Aquilegium his chiefe or metropoli∣tane city. Lastly, it is certaine that it is called Patria of the Venetians: which name as yet also it reteineth to this day. Blondus saith, that it was long since called Li∣burnia: but from whence, when, or for what cause it was so called, he sheweth not. The first that had here ought to doe, were the Euganei, Veneti, Troiani, Galli; and after those, the Romans: vnder whom it did continually persist, so long as the fortune and maiestie of the Roman Empire did stand sound and whole: which at last declining, it came into the hands and iu∣risdiction of the barbarous nations which oppressed Italie, especially the Lombards, and so remained vnto the time of Charles the great. After that, the gouernment thereof was in the power of the Patriarch of Aquileia, vntill at length the Venetians (desirous to enlarge their territories on this side) reduced it wholly vnder their iurisdiction, who at this day possesse it. The situation of the region is thus: It beginneth from a plaine abbuttant vpon the sea, and so by a little and little encreasing, first it riseth vp in little hilles, and then into very high mountaines, which almost on euery side so enclose his borders, that this plaine enuironed about with the toppes of moun∣taines as with a wall, sheweth like a Theater, it is open but at one narrow straight, by the which, as by a gate, ferrying ouer the riuer Sontio from Taruisio, it may only be entred. The other borders of it, the Alpes on euery side doe limit: and therefore not to be come vnto but by the sea-ports or valleys of the mountaines, or els ouer their tops. It hath vpon the sea-coasts very many hauens. In this most good∣ly countrey are large champians watered with many pleasant streames, and those fields exceeding fer∣tile: for it aboundeth with vines, yeelding a kinde of wine, which Plinie reckoneth and commendeth for the best, and calleth it Vinum Pucinum, of the place. The mountaines of this countrey are very rich almost of all sorts of mettals; to wit, of Iron, Lead, Tinne, Brasse, Quicke-siluer, Siluer and Golde. They haue also Marble, white, blacke, and party-coloured: Pretious stones; as Carneols, Berylls, &c. and crystall. Here are all sorts of fruits, and apples of a most excellent taste: Woods both for fuell, tim∣ber, and hunting, most stately: pleasant and beautifull meddowes, and pastures most excellent pastu∣rage for cattell. The aire is temperate. The fields of themselues doe abound with all things necessary for the vse of man, as also for pleasure and delight. The people of this countrey are most apt not only vnto all artes and liberall sciences, but also for all merchandise and such other trades of life. The most famous cities in it are Aquileya, adorned with the title of a Patriarchy. This citie Mela nameth, The rich: In times past it was the seat of the Emperours, and therefore it was called, Another Rome, and was in compasse twelue miles. In it there haue beene accounted long since an hundred and twentie thousand citizens. The great prosperitie and flourishing estate of this citie, especially grew by the great throng∣ing hither of Merchants; for that from all quarters almost of the world, by reason of the great com∣modiousnesse of the place, easie and safe entrance vnto it aswell by land as by sea, merchandise were conueyed to this citie as to a common ware-house. That great trade of merchandise ended together with the fortune of the citie, the Venetians growing mightie, and drawing vnto themselues all meanes of trade and traffique: so that now of a most flourishing and populous city, it is almost wast and desert. Vtina, which also is called Vtinum (the Italians vulgarly call it, Vdene; the Dutch Weyden) situate in a plaine, hath a strong castle built vpon the toppe of an hill, raised by the labour and industrie of man, contein∣ing at this day fortie furlongs in compasse. Tergeste Trieste vpon the sea shore, a colonie of the Romans. Goritia, sometime (if I be not deceiued) called Noreia. Here are many monuments of great antiquitie to this day remaining. The citie Austria (many thinke it in olde time to haue beene called Forum Iulij) situ∣ate in the straights of the mountaines, is a place strong and fortified by nature. Thorow the middest of it doth runne the riuer Natiso, vpon the which is a faire stone bridge. S. Daniels towne seated vpon a very high and steepe hill. Porto Gruaro, vpon the South banke of Limine. Then Spilimbergo, Marano, Mont∣falcone, and others, of which thou mayest reade in Leander, out of whom we haue drawen this briefe de∣scription. Iohannes Candidus hath written an historie of Aquileia, whose copartener in his labour and tra∣uell Leander writeth to haue beene Gregorius Amasaeus. Of the monuments and antiquities of Aquileia, Sa∣bellicus hath written six bookes which are euery where to be gotten.
map of Friuli-Venezia Giulia, Italy FORI IV∣LII ACCV∣RATA DE∣SCRIPTIO. Cum Priuilegio. Ex Biblio∣theca Nobi∣lis et docti∣ssimi Ioan∣nis Sambu∣ci, Impera∣toriae Mats. Historici. 1573. IVLIAE ALPES, IAPIDES, ET CARNI.
The liberties of the citie of VERONA. THe citie of the Cenomanes, situate in Gallia Cisalpina, or as now they call it, Lombardie, is within the iurisdiction of the Veneti∣ans; a citie most stately built vpon ech banke of the riuer Adese, but conioyned by foure faire bridges. The same riuer as it doth diuide it into two parts, so it doth almost on euery side enclose it round: so that it is not only a commodity vnto the citie, but al∣so a defence and ornament vnto the same. The soile of this tract is excellent good, yeelding many things necessary and profitable vnto it; Great store of oile and corne, yeelding yeerely great gaines vnto the country people by selling and trans∣porting it to forren nations; Woll for finenesse excelling the other sorts of Italie. The citie is most excellently and pleasantly seated, beautified with faire and goodly buildings, aswell priuate as publike. It hath many famous monuments of antiquitie worth the regarding: amongst the which is the Amphitheater, which the common sort call Arena, The sand; of all those which remaine in Italie or in o∣ther places of Europe, the whollest and least defaced either by iniurie of times, or rage of barbarous nations. Moreouer, a triumphall arche, in whose inscription this citie is termed COLONIA AVGVSTA VERONA NOVA GALLIE∣NIANA. There are also other monuments, which here for breuitie sake we must omit. The liberties or ground belonging to this citie is in length, from the little towne Baruchello, vnto Riua (which is on the farther side of Lago de Garda) sixtie fiue miles: in bredth, which beginneth at La torre delle confine, vnto Riuoltella, for∣tie miles: and conteineth in all 1443378. fields (so the common people of Italie call the measure whereby they measure their lands, Seardeonius interpreteth it Akers) whereof 1223112. are fertile, 220266 are barren: which notwithstanding dayly (by the industry and diligence of the husbandmen) are made more fruitfull. There is in this tract a very high mountaine (the Mappe placeth it betweene Lago de Gardo and the riuer Adese) which they call Baldo. This hill is very well knowen to Herborists and Apothecaries, which flocke hither from all quarters, and do gather many kindes of herbs and roots necessary in Physicke, and good and holesome for the vse of man. There is also here in a certaine vale called Policella, a place named Negarina: where there is a very hard stone to be seene, hauing vpon it teats carued to the iust fashion and proportion of a womans breasts; out of the which pappes water doth continually distill and droppe; wherewith if a nurse or a woman giuing sucke doe wash her breasts dried vp by sicknesse or any other mischance, it pre∣sently draweth downe the milke againe. There are also other waters of this coun∣trey, giuen by the benefit of nature, both pleasant and profitable. But the studi∣ous Reader desirous to know more of this territory, let him reade Blondus and Le∣ander, he shall be, I dare boldly affirme, satisfied at the full. Torellus Sarayna hath written a whole booke of the antiquities, originall, gouernment and policy and famous men of the citie of Ʋerona. Georgius Iodocus Bergamus hath described Lago de Garda or Benacke lake in verse in fiue books. Iulius Caesar Scaliger hath sounded forth the praise of the citie Ʋerona and the lake Benacke in his funerall oration.
map of Veneto, Italy VERONAE VRBIS TER∣RITORIVM, à Bernardo Brognolo descriptum. 1579. Cum Priuilegio. decannali
The Duchie of MILLANE. LEander in the description of Italie, (after a long discourse of the gouernment of this Duchie) maketh this relation of Millane his chiefe citie: The citie Millane, saith he, is so conueniently seated, that besides the great store of fruite which the ground of his territories do yeeld, out of Gallia Cisalpina or Lombardie, all things, aswell for plea∣sure and delight as for profit and necessarie vse in mans life, may be easily transpor∣ted thither. It is so great, that it may well compare with the greatest cities of all Europe. It hath very longe and large suburbes, by which it is greatly augmented some of them so huge, that they may contend for bignesse with other great cities of Italie. Notwithstanding of late yeares they suffered great wrecke, by reason of the mortall warres and continuall troubles betweene Charles the fift and the French and Venetians. By which they were by fire and sword almost vtterly ouerthrowne and destroied, although now by great diligence and industrie of the citizens they are reedified againe. Wide and deepe diches full of water do compasse both the citie and suburbes: by which on euery side by boate and barge such great store of prouision is brought vnto it, that there is not any thing heere which is not to be bought at a reasonable rate. It is very admi∣rable in my conceite, to record the great aboundance and plenty of all things necessary for the vse of man. So many there are and such diuerse sorts of Artificers here, and so great a concourse, as is wonder∣full and may scarcely be told: whereupon that common by-word of the vulgar sort did arise, He that would repaire all Italie, must first pull downe Millane: to wit, that by this meanes out of his holes and nests the swarmes of Artificers might be dispearsed into all quarters of Italie. The citie hath very stately and beau∣tifull buildings: especially the gorgeous and sumptuous edifice, which they call The house, reered with in∣finite charge, and such wonderfull workemanship, that there is but a very few Churches of the whole world that may be compared, vnto it, whether you respect the huge greatnesse, and ingenious Archite∣cture, or the price of the Marble and rare worke of the same: for that not onely euery way within and without it is beautifully trimmed and pargetted ouer with white marble, but also it is bedecked with a wonderfull imagery, wrought in Marble with exceeding cunning. Beside very many famous Chur∣ches and Chappels especially Grace church, and Praechers church, situate ouer against the most strong Castle of Porta Iouia: hauing an Hemisphere made by Lewis Sfortia the Duke of Millane: vnderneath the which hee together with his wife lie buried, enclosed in a tombe of the best marble. To this Church is adioy∣ned the stately Abbey of the Friers Predicant, with a goodly Librarie and a very faire Chamber or Hall trimmed about with the storie of the supper of Christ and his Apostles, an admirable peece of worke, done by the hand of Leonardo Vincio a Florentine sufficiently approuing the great skill and cunning of the ingenious workeman, by the iudgement of all men experienced in the Art of painting. There are very many gorgeous houses of priuate citizens euery where to be seene within the citie. The Castle of Porta Iouia, is the strongest and best contriued fortification in all Christendome, which hitherto could neuer be surprized and forcibly taken by any enemie. There are besides these very many excellent buildings in Millane, which heere I must passe ouer with silence. Thus farre Leander, who doth excellently describe the rest of the townes and places of his territories of this citie. See also Volateran in his Geography, Geor∣gius Merula, Bernard Arlun, and Bonauenture Castillion, who hath written a seuerall Treatise of the Insubres, of their auncients seats and antiquities. Moreouer Bernardine Corius hath written the Millane historie in the Italian tongue. Laonicus Chalcocondylas also speaketh something of the happy estate of this citie, and a∣mongst other things he doth excellently describe and set out the fable of the Dragon, which made this citie desolate in the time of the Mariangeli, from whence the armes and cognisance of this city were deui∣sed, as is very likely. But it will not be amisse to adioine to these the opinion of Procopius, who writeth that this city doth surpasse the city of Rome in greatnesse, multitude of citizens, and other great blessings of God. Liguria also, which in this Chart is wholly described, is bounded with the riuers Varo and Magra, the Apenine mountaines and the Ligusticke sea, (a branch of the Mediterranean sea) now called Leonino. This now they call Riuiera di Genoa, of Genua his chiefe citie. This citie long since had enlarged his domi∣nion vnto Tanais: for it had Theodosia (now called Caffa) vnder his subiection: as also the Isles of Cyprus, Lesbos, and Chios, with Pera the city of Thrace. At this day it hath the commaund of all Liguria and the Iland Corsica. It is a famous Mart towne, whose most valiant and stout citizens haue gotten to them∣selues, by merchandise and traffique almost into all parts of the world an honourable name and renown together with great riches and large possessions. Austen Iustinian Bishop of Nebia hath most curiously compiled in the mother tongue the historie of Genua: which also very lately Petro Pizaro, and Herberto Folietta haue done in the Latin tongue. Moreouer Francis Petrarch hath written something of this Citie in his holy Iournall and Laonicus in his 5. Booke.
map of the Duchy of Milan, Italy DVCATVS MEDIOLANEN∣SIS, FINITIMA∣RVM{QUE} REGIONV̄ DE SCRIPTIO, AVC∣TORE IOANNE GE∣ORGIO SEPTALLA MEDIOLA∣NENSE. Cum priuilegio.
The liberties of CREMONA. THat this citie is verie auncient, all men may see by that saying of Ʋirgil, Mantua vae miserae nimium vicina Cremonae. O Mantua great thou sitt'st too neere vnto Cremona poore. Yet Liuy and others do report it to haue beene reduced to a Colonie of the Romanes long before that time, to witte, about the yeare 536. after the building of Rome. This citie is placed in Gallia Cisalpina (now called Lombardie) amongst the Cenomans, as Ptolomey recordeth, or in the tenth prouince of Italie, as Plinie affirmeth, vpon the banke of the riuer Po. The soile of his liberties is Champion ground, very fertile of all maner of graine, as also of wine: other things which are necessarily required for the preseruation of mans life, are plentifully conueied thither by the benefit of the streame. It hath endured many bitter stormes of fortune hauing ben oft sacked and spoi∣led: First, in those furious warres of Marke Antonie, when as the territories of this citie, Augustus Caesar being victor, were giuen vnto the souldiers. Then againe in the time of Vitellius, after the battell at Bebriacke, 40000. souldiers assaulted and sacked it: the com∣pany of freebooters, swaggerers, and base slaues was such, as Tacitus affirmeth that they regarded nothing whether it were profane or holy all was fish that came to net. Onely Mephitis templum standing without the walls, was vntoucht, whether by Gods proui∣dence or strength of the place I know not. Againe it was spoiled by the tyranous and ro∣guish Gothes and Vandalls, then by the barbarous Lombards about the yeare after Christ 630. Moreouer it abode the violent assault of Fredericke surnamed Aenobarbe, or Barbarosso, who beat downe his walls, and laide them leuell with the ground. After this the Ciuill warres betweene the Guelfs and Gibellines especially raged heere; in the yere, 1312. Lastly, vnder the gouernmēt of the vicounts of Millane, & thā vnder his Duks, it began againe by little and little to sprout vp and recouer it selfe. Vnder these hitherto it hath prosperously and peaceably enioied the estate of a flourishing common-weale. This city hath a castle, aboue all other in Italie, most strong & fearful to the enimy. Heere is also a turret of a woonderfull height, farre exceeding all the rest of this Country: whereupon it is famous in this their common by-word and rime which they vse, Ʋno Petro in Roma, vno portu in Ancona, vna turre in Cremona. One Peter in Rome, one hauen in Ancone, and one turret in Cremone. Lewis Cauitellius an Aldermans sonne did lately set forth the histories of this city. The author of this same mappe hath put forth a booke of the antiquities and worthy acts of the same. The Iurisdiction or liberties of the City CREMA. CRema a towne in the confines of Millane, is a Castle & place of garrison of the Venetians. This, as Lean∣der affirmeth, vnder the gouernment of the same Venetians; hath so incresed in multitude of citizens, and goodly buildings, that it may well be accounted amongst the most famous places of all Italie. Wherefore they vse to say in a common prouerb, in their vulgar tongue, Barleta in Puglia, Pratum in Toscana, Crema in Lombardia: signifying the excellency, statelinesse, and richesse of these three places. The Veneti∣ans haue often assaied to adorne the towne with the title of a city: but the citizens, fearing that whereas now it is accounted amongst the best townes, it shall then be reckoned amongst the meanest cities, haue hitherto with∣stood that their purpose. It is seated in a pleasāt plaine, in compasse large & wide, fortified with a strong wall, fa∣mous for wealth, very populous, and abounding with all things necessary: for the soile of the territorie and li∣berties of this towne is very fertile, and yet by the great diligence and industrie of the husbandmen, it is dailie bettered and amended. Many brookes, well stored with diuers sorts of fish, do euery where water this prouince. Blondus writeth, that after that Fredericke Barbarossa had spoiled Cremona, hee built Crema in scorne, to hinder and disgrace it. There are others, as Leander witnesseth, which do thinke it to haue beene built by the citizens of the city Parasium, which was ouerthrowne & rased to the ground by the Bishop of Millane, for heresie which it main∣tained: and therefore they called it Crema, in memoriam Crematae patriae, in memoriall of their natiue city burned and spoiled. But this I leaue to the iudgement of the discreet Reader.
map of Cremona, Italy AGRI CREMO∣NENSIS TYPVS. Antonius Campus pictor Cre∣monensis descripsit, 1579. Cum Priuilegio. map of Crema, Italy CREMAE DITIO¦NIS DESCRIP∣TIO. Lectori Ne tabula hoc loco omnino vacua exta∣ret, hoc Cremae territorium à quodam patriae studioso descriptum hic studio∣sis exhibere placuit.
The liberties of BRESCIA. THe liberties of Brescia now possesseth part of that coast where in time passed the Cenomanes dwelt: and extendeth it selfe in length 800. furlongs, or 100. miles; in bredth 400. furlongs, or 50. miles, as Elias Capriolus affirmeth: it is situate betweene the lakes Garda and Iseo: the Alpes and the riuer Oglio. These fields, as Iohn Planer writeth, are worthily accounted amongst the most delightsome champions of Lombardie. For it hath, as Baptist Nazario saith, Gold, Siluer, Brasse, Lead, Iron, Alume, Marble, both Porphyrie and Serpentine, as they call it, barly coloured with blacke and greene, Plinie calleth it Ophites; and other stones of great price; as also the Marchasite, which aun∣ciently hath beene called Pyrites, or The fire stone. The citie Brixia, whereof this territorie tooke his name; as yet reteineth the same his auncient name: for the inhabitants do call it Brescia, the which for his riches and beautie they terme in that common prouerbe of theirs, The Bride of the city of Venice. There is not any of the old writers, either Historians or Geogra∣phers, which do not make mention of this city. Trogus Pompeius writeth that it was built by the Galli Senones. Liuy saith, that it is the chiefe city of the Cenomanes. Pliny in his Epistles of this writeth thus vnto Iunius Mauricus, Brixia is that city which con∣stantly retaineth as yet much of that graue modesty and old frugalitie of our auncient Italians. It hath beene graced with the title of a Duchie, for so I find written in Diaconus his 5. booke of Lombardie in the 36. Chapter. But because that none of the late writers, (that I may say nought of the more ancient) haue described this citie more learnedly and eloquently, than Pighius in his Hercules Prodicius, thou shalt heare him speake in his owne termes. Brescia which is seated at the foot of the mountaines, may contend with most of the cities of Italie, for antiquitie and statelinesse of buildings, Iulius Caesar Scaliger, a famous Poet of our age, hath thus described it in this Epigramme; Thou Brixia great which proudly ouerlook'st the boornes and lowlie plaine, by due desert now iustlie mayst the soueraigne Empire claime. Thy healthfull seat, thy pleasant fertile soile, thy people wise and nation stout, If ciuill discord had not crosst, long since had brought about, That where long time thou hast beene thrall, and stoop'st to others lore; Thou mightest haue lorded ouer those, to whom thou serud'st before. For this Citie by reason of ciuill discord and dissention, being subdued vnder the yoke of the French and their next neighbours the Insubres, or the Millaners, hath endured much miserie: yet now at length, vnder the peaceable gouernment of the Venetians, it is growen ve∣ry wealthy, a great market well furnished with all things necessary, very populous and inhabited of a wise and discreet nation. The shire is very fertile of oile, wine, corne, and most excellent fruites of all sorts. It hath also some rich veines of Mettalls, but especially of Iron and Copper; whereof ariseth to this citie great gaine and commodity. Liuie and other good authors report, That Brescia was built by the Galli Cenomanes, about the time of the Romane kings, which afterward the Romanes, hauing subdued all that part of the countrey of the Gaules which lieth beyond the riuer Po, reduced vnder their iurisdiction. It is ap∣parant out of Liuie, how firme it sometimes stood with the Romans, especially in those most dangerous warres between them and Hanniball. Some would haue it to haue beene made a Colonie present after the end of the League-warre, when as Cneius Pompeius Strabo, the father of Pompey the great, planted colonies in Verona and other cities beyond the riuer Po. Not long after, by the fauour of C. Caesar, it together with other cities there about, obtained the freedome of the city of Rome, and after that it is woonderfull how it flourished vnder the Roman Emperours, so long as the greatnesse of that Empire stood vnshaken: This, diuers monuments of Antiquitie, which as yet remaine in this city and in the liberties of the same: as namely many goodly inscriptions of marble, statues, pillars, and Epitaphes of famous men, do constantly auerre, by which the former great∣nesse of this city may easily be gathered. Thus farre Pighius. Baptista Nazario wrote a seuerall Treatise of this city, in the which he setteth downe all the inscriptions of the auncient monuments of this country. Helias Capriolus hath comprized the whole historie of this citie in 12. bookes. Gaudentius Me∣rula, in his tract of the originall and antiquitie of the Cisalpines, speaketh somewhat of it, as also Chrysostomus Zanchus, writing of the originall of the Orobij and Cenomanes, likewise Leander Albertus and lately Andrete Paccius in his sixth booke of the Wines of Italie. There is in this prouince a towne called Quintianum, 20. miles south-eastward from Brescia, neere to the riuer Ollio, of the which Iohn Planer a citizen of the same wrote a small Treatise, who in an Epistle of his to Paullus Manutius, doth highly commend it both for learning and chiualrie. Whether this be that Quintianum, of which Optatus after speaketh, I leaue to the learned to determine. The riuer Mela or Mella; of which Virgil maketh mention, doth runne through the middest of this shire; as also Catullus in this verse affirmeth, Brixia Cygnaea positus in specula, Flauus quam molli percurrit flumine Mella. Old Brixia plac'd amidde the brookes, as gardian of the Swans, The riuer Mella kindly greet'th, and watereth all his lands. This riuer retaineth the name of Mella vnto this day. Notwithstanding it runneth not by it now, as you may see, although not farre off from thence it passeth through his liberties. The little riuer which runneth along by the city, is now called Garza: but I thinke that in old time it was also called Mella. And I thinke I may truly affirme, that the riuer Mella, when it approacheth neere vnto the city, spreadeth it selfe into two channells, both of them retaining the same name, do make a riuer-iland, (like as Nilus maketh Heracleopolites,) and then againe falling into one streame still keepe the name of Mella, and hauing so, heauily laden, runne for many miles toge∣ther, at length it vnladeth it selfe into the riuer Ollio. But before I finish the discourse of this Mappe, I haue thought good to say somewhat of the Lakes of the same. The lake Benacus (called of the poet Catullus, Lydius) Capriolus thinketh to haue been so named of the city Benaco, sometime seated vpon his brinke, a mention of which to this day remaineth still in a village called Toscolano, which thou seest vpon his west side, stan∣ding vpon a brooke of the same name. A memoriall of this city is preserued in an auncient monument, whose inscription Ma∣nutius setteth downe in his Orthographie. This lake is now called Garda, of the castle Garda placed opposite vnto Benaco vpon his east banke. This lake, as Alexius Vgonius writeth in a letter of his to Cardinall Poole, aboundeth with store of fish, which for goodnesse do far surpasse all others. It is enclosed on euery side with most pleasant hilles: into it from all quarters the cleare fountaines flow. Goodly meddowes, vines, oliues, beeches, laurell, and cedars; besides townes, furnished with all maner of necessarie prouision, like a crowne beset it round on euery side: so that nothing at all of those things may further be desired, which may make a champion country either beautifull to the eie, or commendable for profit and commodities &c. While I was writing of this, there came into my mind what speech I once had of this lake, with that most learned good man Benedi∣ctus Arias Montanus, (for we both had seene the same, although not at the same time) in which we both did protest either to other, that we neuer in all our liues had seene a place either more pleasant for situation, or more delightsome to the eie, so that it was no maruell that Catullus did so highly commend in his Epigrammes, that his Sirmion, and the waters of this lake. The other lake in this Cart is Sebinus or Seuinnus (for Plinie vseth both) made by the riuer Ollio. This now they call Iseo, of a town of the same name situate vpon his banke. There is also another lake which they call Idro; by what name it was called of the auncients, or whether by any, I doe not certainly know. I know, that a certaine learned man doth hold it to be Brigantinus La∣cus, whereof Plinie speaketh; but why I am not of his opinion, I haue shewed reasons in my Geographicall treasure.
map of Brescia, Italy Bresciano BRIXIANI AGRI TYPVS. Brixia, Cygnaea supposita in specula. Cum priuilegio Imperiali, Regio, et Belgico. 1590. Milliaria Italica decem
The Dukedome of PIEMONT. THat prouince which was formerly called Taurinorum regio, is now termed Piemont or Pedemont, for that it is seated at the bottome of the Alpes, which do diuide France and Sauoy from Italie, and so is as one would say, The pro∣uince at the foot of the hilles. The bounds of this country are thus: on the East, the riuer Po: on the South, the Alpes of Liguria: vpon the West, the Alpes of France: on the North, Riuiera di Duria: It hath many good∣ly fields full of pleasant and fruitfull hilles, which yeeld corne and o∣ther sorts of graine, excellent wines and fruite great store. It is well reple∣nished with Cities, Townes, and Villages. Vnder the gouernment of the Lombardes it was called, The Dukedome of Taurine, (so named of the city Taurin.) By them it was first reduced into the forme of a prouince, vnder the iurisdiction of a Duke. The gouernment of the Lombardes being come vnto a period, it was made subiect to the Kings of Italie, who were alwaies chosen by the Emperours: after that it was gouerned by diuers Petie Kings: and long since, in later ages it was accounted as part of the iurisdiction of the Princes, Earles, and Dukes of Sauoy, vntill the yeare 1536. when as Francis the first King of France tooke a great part of it: and now it is againe restored to the Duke of Sauoy. The chiefe city of this Prouince is Turin, seated at the mouth of the riuer Dorra, where it falleth into Po. This citie Ptolemey, Plinie and Tacitus call Augusta Taurinorum. That this citie in old time was a very famous citie, it may easily appeare, in that it was a colonie of the Romanes. It lieth at the foot of the mountaines, it is foure square, and hath foure goodly gates. It is very famous for the rich Isle and state of the citizens, and is adorned with many goodly buildings, amongst the which the Cathe∣drall Church is most beautifull. It hath an Vniuersitie of all maner of goodly learning: and is very well serued with all sorts of prouision of victuall. The countrie is of a very good and fertile soile, especially toward the East and South, hauing Vallies most rich for veines of Iron. Paulus Diaconus affirmeth that Taurin was the seat of the Lombardes: vnto whom it was subiect vntill Desiderius their king was ouercome and taken by Charles the Great: and then it was brought vnder the sub∣iection of the Kings of Italie, Emperours, Countes, Montferrate and Marchions, and Dukes of Sauoy; to whom at this time it is obedient. Neere the head of the riuer Po toward Ripell (or C. de Reuell) and Paisana, are quarries of most excellent Marble. Vpon the North side of the fountaine of the riuer Po, beginneth a certaine pleasant valley cal∣led the Vale of Po, or (as the inhabitants terme it) the Vale of Luserna, of the towne Luserna which standeth in it. It runneth out in length thirtie miles, and is not aboue foure miles broad. In the entrance of his Eastend, is Mambrinum; in the end toward the West is a very high stone crosse. The people of this place are commonly called, The Christians, but in some maners and customes which they vse, they scarse follow the strickt rules of Christianity: nay they do obserue most vngodly and wicked rites and ceremonies: amongst which this is one; That once in a moneth they obserue one day, in the which all meeting in a Church, after a collation made by their filthie and wicked Superintendent, at night, the Candles being put out; without any choice or regard, they fall like bruite beastes vnto their beastly Venerie. This we haue taken out of Leander, where thou maist read, if thou pleasest, many other such like things. Dominicus Niger also hath written of this Country. Paradine in his description of Sauoy writeth, That the Dukedome of Piemont doth conteine in it, beside goodly Cities, great and populous (which are in number fiue) more then fiftie Townes well fortified and beautifull; and also two hundred Borrowes, walled and fenced with Fortresses and Castles. And that it hath Earles, Marquesses, Barones, and other sorts of Nobilitie, all subiect to the Duke of Sauoy. Thou seest also in this Chart the description of Montferrate, which at this day is vnder the domi∣nion of the Dukes of Mantua: of the which Blondus thus writeth: At the riuer Taner the famous Countie of Montferrate beginneth, whose boundes are the riuer Po, on this side: and the Mount Appennine, on that side: the riuer Taner from his fountaine vnto his mouth where it falleth into Po, and on his vpper side the hilles next to Moncalerio, where Piemont beginneth. The prouince of Montferrate is almost wholly subiect vnto the Marchions, the most noble house of Italie, descended from the Constantinopolitane Emperours, which haue held that tract these 150. yeares. Thus farre Blondus. Merula also in his sixt booke of his historie of Vicounts, hath written something of this Country.
map of Piedmont, Italy PEDE∣MONTA∣NAE VICI∣NORVMQVE REGIONVM AVCTORE IA∣COBO CAS∣TALDO DE∣SCRIP. Cum priuilegio.
The Liberties of PADVA. THe territories of Padua (which is a part of the Marquesate of Treuiso) in old time was more large, now it is conteined within these bounds: On his South side runneth the riuer Athe∣sis, (now called Ladessa:) on the North, coasteth the little riuer Muson: vpon the East, lieth the gulfe of Venice: vpon the West, are Montes Euganei, and the prouince of Vincenza. Whereupon this verse was engrauen in the ancient seale of the City, Muso, mons, Athesis, mare, certos dant mihi fines. The Mose, the Hilles, Ladessa and the sea enclose me round. It is in compasse 180. miles. In it are 347. villages and hamlets. Vnto the court-leet of Padua now do belong these seuen goodly townes, Montiniano, Castro Baldo, Atheste, Mon∣selesse, Pieue di Sacho, Campo S. Piero and Citadella. As also these six villages, Miran, Oriaco, Titulo and Liuiano, Arquado famous for great Petrarchaes tombe, Consyluio, and Anguil∣laria. There are also in this territorie the mountaines called Euganei, famoused by the poets; neere vnto which is A∣bano a village seated vpon the Spring Abano, oft mentioned by Claudian and Martiall: Also Cassiodorus in his Epistles writeth that Theodoricus K. of the Gothes gaue order for the repairing of them. The fertilitie of the soile of this pro∣uince of the liberties of Padua is such, that of those things which necessarily are required to the sustenance of mans life, it yearely transporteth vnto the neighbour cities and countries round about great abundance, without any dearth or want to the inhabitants. Their Wines are very rich, hunting, fowling and fishing heere are very common. It is so well watered with brookes and riuers, that (to the great gaine and profit of the inhabitants) there is no country village aboue fiue miles distant from a riuer. This great plenty and abundance of all things, they bragge of in this their com∣mon prouerbe, saying; Bononia lagrassa, Padua la passa: that is, Padua for fertilitie, doth surpasse rich Bononia. Thus farre of the shire: now something of the city, whereof that tooke his name. It is seated in a flatte euery way crossed with pleasant riuers. The city is very strong, enclosed with a broad deepe water ditch, with high and thicke walles, and is very populous. It hath a goodly large common without the citie, wherein the enemie that will besiege it, shall not find a place to shrowd himselfe: A Session-house (the Yeeld hall, we call it) most stately and sumptuous all couered ouer with lead: An vniuersitie most famous of all Europe, begunne, as they report, by Charles the Great, finished by Fredericke the eleuenth, in the yeare of our Lord 1222. and fortie yeares after that confirmed by Vrbane the fourth Bishop of Rome. There is in this citie an Orchard (which they call the Physicians Garden) in forme round and verie large, planted with all maner of strange herbs vsuall in Physicke, for the instruction of yong students in the knowledge of Herbs and Plants; a singular and worthy worke. Clothing is the chiefe trade of the Citizens, a matter of 600000. pounds returne yearely and more. This we haue taken out of Bernardino Scardeonio, who hath written a whole vo∣lume of the situation, liberties, antiquities, famous men, and things worthy of note of this city: he that is desirous to see more of this, let him read him; and if he please, to him he may adioine Leander his description of Italie. Of the fennie places described vpon the sea-coast, thou maist read Cassiodore his twelfth booke Variar. Dedicated vnto the Admirall and Masters of the Nauie. Of the Liberties of TREVISO. BLONDVS in his description of Italie, making The Marquesate of Treuiso, the tenth prouince of Italie, in it placeth these famous cities, Feltre, Belluno, Ceneda, Padua, Vicenza and Verona: the head of which he maketh Treuiso, whereof the whole prouince tooke his name. The goodly riuer Sile, which for clearenesse and swiftnesse of his waters is inferiour vnto none, passeth by this citie, running East∣ward, about ten miles from the same, is nauigable, and falleth into the Adriaticke sea. Many little brookes runne through the towne, which is compassed with a strong wall, and is very populous; it is beautified with many stately buildings, both Churches, and priuate houses. The country adioining to Treuiso is most pleasant and rich, yeelding all maner of things necessarie to the vse of man and beast: For in it is a very large plaine, yeelding not onely great store of all sorts of graine, and excellent wines, but also it hath many goodly pastures, feeding abundance of cattell. Neither are his mountaines altogether craggie and barren. But his lower hilles are set with vines, oliues, and other fruit-trees, and affoord plenty of Deere, pastime for the hunter. In this country are many faire Townes; For on the East and North sides of the same are, Opitergium (now Oderzo, as I thinke) Coreglanum, (or Co∣negliano) both vpon the riuer Mottegan: Serraualle, Motta, Porto Buffole, and Sacile; these three last are situate vpon the riuer Liuenza. To these are to be added the Countie of S. Saluador, Colalto, S. Paulo, Cordignan, Roca di val di Marino, Cesarea (Cesana, I take it,) and Mel. On the West and South are Bassianum, (Bassan) Asolo, Castrum fratrum (Castelfranco) Nouale, and Mestre. Moreouer in it are diuers End-waies, villages, and hamlets. But hee that desireth to vnderstand more of the situation, antiquities, famous men, and other matters worthy of record of this prouince, let him haue recourse to the most learned Iohn Boniface, who hath a while since set forth a most exact and absolute historie of it. There is also extant a description of the countrie of Treuiso, done in verse by Iohn Pinadello, but as yet it is not imprinted. Thus farre the Author hath discoursed vpon this his Mappe: to which I trust I may with his good liking adde this out of Zacharie Lillie his Breuiary of the world. TARVISIVM, now Treuiso, a goodly city belonging to the Signiorie of Venice, (of which, of all ancient writers, Plinie did first make mention,) brought forth Totilas, the fift and most famous king of the Gothes; from whom it first began his greatnesse, and to arise to that dignitie that now it hath obtained, that the whole prouince of Venice should be called The Marquesate of Treuiso. For Totilas gathering together a great armie conquered all Italie, and entering the city of Rome did sacke and fire it. Certaine haue affirmed that the citie Treuiso was built by the Troians, vpon the faire riuer Sile, which falleth into the Adriaticke-sea. The city it selfe for walles, castle and water is very strong; for bridges, priuate houses, and Churches, very beautifull; and for diuers merchandise very famous. It hath great store of corne, wine, oile, fish, and fruites. The country hath very many castles and villages: but worthy men commended for Religion and wisedome, vertuous life and ciuill conuersation, do especially commend this city. Thus farre out of Lillie.
map of Padua, Italy PATAVINI TERRITO∣RII COROGRAPHIA, IAC. CASTALDO AVCT. Milliaria.
map of Treviso, Italy TARVISINI AGRI TYPVS Auctore Io. Pinadello Phil. et I. C. Taruisino.
The Lake of COMO, sometime called LACVS LARIVS. LACVS LARIVS, (which now they call Lago di Como, of Como the ancient town adioining vnto it) tooke his name of the Fenducke, a bird which the Greekes call Larus, and the Latines Fulica, of which it hath great plenty. It runneth out from North to South in length fortie miles; it is beset round with Mountaines, whose toppes are couered with groues of Chesse-nut-trees: the sides, with vines, and oliues: the bottoms with woods, which affoord great store of Deere for game. Vpon the brinke of the Lake, are many Castles seated: amongst the which on the South side, is Como, a faire towne, built by the Galli Orobij, or as some thinke, by the Galli Cenomanes. Afterward Iulius Caesar placed a colonie there, amongst which were fiue hundred Grecian gentlemen, as Strabo testifieth: whereupon it was called Nouum Comum. It is seated in a most pleasant place, that one would iudge it a kind of Paradise or place onely sought out for pleasure and delight: for vpon the fore-side it hath the goodly Lake, on the backe-side the champion plaines well manured, and fertile of all sorts of fruite: Vnto which you may adde the wholesome and sweet aire. Of the brasen statue long since taken out of this citie, see Cassiod. 2. Variar. cap. 35. and 36. This towne brought forth the two Plinies, men worthy of eternall fame, in whose honour and memory, the citi∣zens caused these Inscriptions to be engrauen in marble vpon the front of S. Maries Church, which we wrote out in the yeare of CHRIST 1558. in our returne from Italie. Vpon the right hand of the dore. THE STATE AND CITIZENS OF COMO HAVE GRACED C. PLINIVS SECVNDVS, THE MOST VVORTHY FREEMAN OF THEIR CORPORA∣TION (A MAN OF A PREGNANT VVIT, HO∣NOVRABLE FOR DIGNITIES, FOR LEARN∣ING ADMIRABLE, WHO IN HIS LIFE TIME OBTAINED THE LOVE AND FRIENDSHIP OF VESPASIAN THE EMPEROVR, BORE MANY GREAT OFFICES, EXCELLED ALL VVRITERS OF HIS TIME IN ELOQVENCE AND VARIE∣TIE,) VVITH THIS TITLE AND STATVE. Such honour great and worthy fame me Pliny did adorne: But much it grac'th mee more what heere is set. Vpon the left hand. TO C. PLINIVS CAECILIVS SECVNDVS, THEIR VVEL-BELOVED CITIZEN, VVHO HAVING BEEN CONSVLL, AVGVR, AND BORNE ALL OFFICES IN THE VVARRES, A FAMOVS ORATOVR, POET AND HISTORIOGRA∣PHER: MOST ELOQVENTLY VVRITTEN OF THE VVOR∣THY COMMENDATION OF TRAIAN THE EMPEROVR: BESTOVVED MANY BOONES AND BOVNTEOVS FAVOVRS VPON HIS NATIVE COVNTRY; GRACING THE SAME VVITH ETERNALL CREDIT: THE STATE OF COMO FOR THESE BENEFITS DID HEERE PLACE THIS MONV∣MENT THE FIRST OF MAY, IN THE YEARE 1498. At home in peace, abroad in war, ech office haue I borne: I liued, I di'd, and still I liue as yet. But why may I not to these adioine the words of the same Plinie, in his second booke vnto Caninius, writing thus? Doest thou studie? or doest thou angle? or iointly doest thou both? For the Lake af∣foordeth store of Fish; the woods plenty of Deere: the priuatenesse of the place doth giue great occa∣sion of study. The same authour, in his 4. Epistle vnto Licinus Sura, hath a storie of a certaine strange spring not farre off from this Lake. Paulus Iouius hath most excellently described this Lake in a seuerall Treatise, out of the which we haue drawen this our Mappe befitting our purpose. Moreouer Cassio∣dorus, in his eleuenth booke of Varieties vnto Gaudiosus, hath most exactly painted out the same. Bene∣dictus Iouius and Thomas Porcacchius haue written the histories of Como. Read also Leander in his Italia, and Dominicus Niger in his Geographie. The territories and liberties of the Citie of ROME. OF the city of Rome, (sometime the Empresse of the world, and Liberties of the same, because this place cannot beare so large a description as his worth doth deserue, and for that it is better to say nothing at all of it, then to say little, I thinke it best onely to reckon vp those famous authours which haue written of it at large, and to referre thee to them for further satisfaction. Of which the more ancient are, Q. Fabius Pictor, Sex. Rufus and P. Victor. Of the later writers, Blondus in his Italia, Fabius Caluus of Ra∣uenna, Bartho. Marlianus, Andreas Fuluius, Georgius Fabricius, Lucius Faunus, Andreas Palladius, Pyrrhus Ligorius, and Lucius Maurus. And very lately Io. Iacobus Boissartus. Iacobus Mazochius hath gathered and set out all his old Epigrammes, Fuluius Vrsinus the Noble houses, and Vlysses Aldroandus the statues of the same. Hubertus Goltzius, with no lesse art then diligence, and great expences, hath expressed in forme of a booke the table of his Fasti, most cunningly cut in brasse.
map of Lake Como, Italy LAKII LACUS VULGO COMENSIS DESCRIPTIO, AVCT. PAVIO OVIO. map of Rome, Italy TERRI∣TORII ROMA∣NI DE∣SCRIP. map of Friuli, Italy FORI IV∣LII, VVL∣GO FRIV∣LI TYPVS
TVSCIA. THe bounds of Tuscia, (which in time past was called Hetruria) are on the East, the riuer Tyber: on the West, Macra: on the South, the Mediterran sea: on the North, the Apen∣nine mountaines. It is a most goodly, beautifull and pleasant country. The people are very ingenious and of a subtile witte, indifferently fitte either for peace or warre: for all maner of humane litterature, or for trades and merchandise. The nation hath alwaies been superstitious and much giuen to deuotion in religion, as is apparant out of ancient writers. The sea coast toward the Tyrrhen or Mediterran sea, is for the most part in this our age full of Forrests, as also it was in the time of Vopiscus, as he witnesseth in the life of Aurelian; especially a little beyond the riuer Arno, vntill one come beyond Plumbino. The inner part of the country is almost as much oppressed with Mountaines. In it are these cities, more famous than the rest, Florence, Siena, Luca, Perugia, Pisa, Viterbo, &c. FLORENCE, or as they call it Fiorenza, is situate vpon ech side of the riuer Arno, conioined by foure faire bridges: it is a most goodly and beautifull city, whereupon commonly they call it Fiorenza la bella, Florence the faire: as if indeed it might seeme to bee the flower of all Italie. For it is adorned with stately buildings, aswell Churches and religi∣ous houses, as of priuate citizens. Amongst all other the Church of S. Maria Florida, wholly ouerlaid with Mar∣ble, arched with a roofe of an admirable workemanship, neere to which is built a goodly steeple for the bels, all of fine marble: not farre from which standeth the ancient Temple of Mars, of forme round very ingeniously built, and of a cunning workemanship, now dedicated to S. Iohn Baptist. The dores of this Church are of cast brasse; a very rare and curious peece of worke: especially those which are next to the Church of S. Maria Florida, are such that all men of iudgement and experience must absolutely confesse that in all Europe beside, the like are no where to be seene. But to reckon vp all the worthy buildings of this citie, aswell sacred as profane it were too tedious and would require more paper than this our purposed discourse will beare; He therefore that desireth to know more of the particulers more at large, let him reade Leander. SIENA lieth vpon the top of an hill, round begirt with high rocks of Tophus-stone, gorgeously bedecked with many noble mens houses: amongst the which is the great and large Church of our Lady, equall to the stateliest and sumptuousest Churches of all Europe; whether you respect the worth and price of the Marble whereof it is built: or the excellencie of the worke and workemanship of him that made it. Besides that there is a most stately house of tree stone built by Pope Pius II. with many other goodly houses. Worthy of commen∣dation and record is the large and beautifull market place, with Branda the pleasant fountaine alwaies full of most cleare water. PERVGIA is seated vpon the mountaine Apennine, the greatest part of the countrie arising with goodly pleasant hilles, fertile of strong Wines, Oiles, Figges, Apples, and other sorts of most excellent fruits. Beneath the citie at Asisia, as also toward Tuder, neere Tiber, the pleasant champion fields do spread themselues, yeelding plenty of wheat and other kind of graine. The city by reason of the nature of the place is very strong, adorned with gorgeous buildings both of religious houses and churches as also priuate citizens: together with a famous and large fountaine in the middest of the citie. It is very populous and the citizens are very ingenious and of couragious stomackes, apt indifferently either for any maner litterature or for seruice in the field. PISA, long since hath beene a famous citie and many waies richly blessed, not onely before the flourishing estate of the Roman Empire, but euen when it was at the full height: as also many yeares after. Many famous Marine-conquests, which it hath made, by which it brought the Ile Sardinia subiect to their command, do a∣uouch this to be true. Panormo a faire citie of Sicilia they won from the Saracens: and of the bootie and spoiles taken in that warre, they began to build the great Church, which they call DOMNVM, as also the beautifull palace of the Bishop. It hath an Vniuersitie or Schoole of all maner of Liberall Arts and Sciences, whose foun∣dation was laid in the yeare of CHRIST 1309. VITERBO lieth in a pleasant and spacious champion hauing the Cyminian hilles (now of this citie called Mont Viterbo) vpon his backeside, stately for many faire buildings and works of rare Art, amongst which is a fa∣mous fountaine, from whence issueth water in such abundance as is wonderfull. LVCA is seated in a plaine, not farre from the hilles foot, a city of goodly buildings. The people are neat, wise and ingenious; which haue most discreetly retained and kept their libertie of a long time whole in their owne hands, although they haue been often assaulted by their neighbours. See more at large of this in Leander. Myrsilus the Lesbian, Marcus Cato in his Origines: and their Expositor Ioannes Annius Viterbiensis, (who also wrote a seuerall treatise of the antiquities of Hetruria) William Postell, Volaterranus, and Laonicus Chalcocondylas a Grecian, in his sixth booke, and others haue described this prouince: Ioannes Campanus hath written most elegantly of the Lake of Perugia.
map of Tuscany, Italy THVSCIAE DESCRIPTIO AVCTORE HIERONYMO BELLARMATO. Me Ianus tenuit primus, formataq́ue ab illo Imposui leges populis, & nomina Ponto, Inferno, & Supero: missos auxiq́ue colonos, Imperium{que} Italos trans fines; foedera natis Dum seruata meis, sed me discordia preaeceps, Romuleae genti domitam seruire coegit: Quae deous antiquae longo post tempore linguae Auxilij male grata mei, male grata laborum Abstulit, & mansit nomen quod Thura dedere: Archades aut Lŷdi quod vel mutare Pelasgi Non ausi sacras quibus has concessimus oras. Cum priuilegio.
The Signiory of FLORENCE. OF the city of Florence read Blondus, who in his view of Italie reporteth thus of it: They commonly af∣firme, saith he, that this citie was first begonne by Sylla's souldiers, vnto whom this part of the countrie was by Sylla assigned: and because they first began to seat themselues ad Arna fluenta, about the riuer Arno, they then intituled it by the name of FLVENTIA. And indeed Pliny, who of all the old writers first mentioneth this place, saith that the Fluentini were seated neere the riuer Arno. These souldiers came hither about the yeare after the building of the city of Rome, 667. whereupon it appeareth that Florence was founded about 83. yeares before the birth of Christ. This city suffered much wrecke in the time of the warres of the Gothes. Yet was it neuer, either by Totilas, or any other of those ragings Tyrants, vtter∣ly rased or spoiled: And therefore that which some do write of the repairing of Florence by Charles the Great, I can by no meanes allow when as the histories of Charles written by Alcuinus his schoolemaster, do only mention his keeping of Easter heere at two seuerall times, as he went by this way toward Rome. It was preserued from a great hazard of vtter ouerthrow, which it was like to haue fallen into, by the manhood of one Farinata Vber∣tino, when as they of Pisa, Siena, and others of Tuscane, meeting at a market in a consultation by them held, hauing generally deter∣mined to rase Florence to the ground, said stoutly: That while he liued, he would neuer suffer his deare Mother, which brought him vp, by them to be spoiled. Therefore Florence partly taking by force, and partly by other meanes drawing to their part the Fesulanes, about the yeare of Christ, 1024. was much enlarged in wealth and authoritie: at which time also Henry the first Emperour of Rome, built the goodly Church of S. Miniate neere the walles of Florence. This city was twise within a little while, in the yeare 1176. mise∣rably defaced, by casualty of fire. From which time it first began to be gouerned as now it is by the Priori, (the masters of the twelue companies) and a Standard-bearer, Gonfalonerio, they call him. One of the first Gonfalonerios was Stroza, a nobleman borne, of a great house. The goodly Minster which in our time, by the ingenious direction of Philippo Brunalitio, a Florentine, was most stately arched, and dedicated to our Lady, was begun in the yeare of our Lord 1294. Foure yeares after that was that gorgeous Palace, where now the Priori, or Aldermen do keepe, first founded. And fiue yeares after that was the Pomoerium, (the prospect, or wast ground, round about the city) leuelled and the walles of the city enlarged. Pistorio was the first city that the Florentines subdued vnder their command, as Leander, in his description of Italie, affirmeth vpon the testimony of Aretino: where also he hath these words, of the diuers forms and different maner of gouernment of the same; After that it was repaired, saith he, by Charles the Great, they yearely chose two Consuls or Sheriffes, who with the assistance of 100. Senatours or Aldermen, should gouerne the city. This forme of com∣monwealth being altered, they created the Decemuiri, the tenne, called of them Antiani, about the yeare of Grace, 1220. as Volaterran affirmeth, or as Blondus saith in the yeare 1254. After that in the yeare 1287. hauing redeemed their freedome of the Emperour Ru∣dolfe for 60000. crownes, as Platina writeth, the Decemuiri, (the tenne) were reduced to Octouiri, (eight) and were called the Priori, (the maisters of the companies) ouer whom was set the Standerd-bearer, called by them Gonfalonerio di Giustitia, the Lord chiefe Iu∣stice; which office they were to hold but two monethes, and then others were to be elected. This forme of policy, for as much as I can gather out of historiographers, was since that time thrise altered. First in the yeare 1343. when the Florentines bought Luca of Mastino Scaligero for 5000. crownes; their forces being ouerthrowne by the enemie, they were constrained to demand aid of Robert King of Naples, and obtained Gualterio Gallo a captaine of Athens for their generall, who by great subtilty and cunning getting the rule of the city, went to the Court and there deposed the Priori, and other Magistrates from their office. Yet he enioied not his vsurped authority long, for the people at the persuasion of Angelo Accieuolo Bishop of the sea a Frier predicant, rose vp in armes, and deposing the Tyrant, restored the Priori and Confalonerio to their places againe. The second alteration of this Common-wealth happened in the time of Alexander the sixth Bishop of Rome, when as his sonne Caesar Borgia, Duke of Valence, (neuer labouring to bring home a∣gaine Peter, Iohn and Iulian, the sonnes of Laurence Medices, who but lately had beene banished) at length brought the matter so a∣bout that the office of the Gonfalonerio should be giuen to Peter Soderine for a perpetuall and standing office: who together with the Priori chosen euery two moneths, after the ancient custome, most wisely behaued himselfe and orderly gouerned that Common∣wealth: vntill at length being expelled by Raimundo Cordona Embassadour of Ferdinand the King of Arragon and Naples, (who was to restore Iohn Cardinall Medices, and his brother Iulian,) in the yeare of Grace 1412. and erecting the ancient maner of gouernment, which continued vntill the yeare 1530. In the meane time, although the city were commanded, at the discretion and direction of the Popes Leo the tenth, (which was Iohn Medices,) and Clement the seuenth, (which was Iulius Medices) the bastard sonne of Iulian, the first Cardinall Cortonesse, hauing the wardship, and being Gardian to Hippolytus the sonne of Iulian the second) & of Alexander, the bastard sonne of Laurenznio, the nephew of Peter the second. Yet notwithstanding the ancient Magistrates were chosen after the cu∣stome formerly vsed. In that same yeare therefore, when as three yeares before, the Emperours souldiers besieging Clement the se∣uenth in Hadrians castle, the city shaking off the yoke of bondage, obteined freedome, and endeuoured by all meanes to retaine the same, Philip the Prince of Aurange leading the armie of the Emperour Charles the fifth. Clement entreating that Alexander his ne∣phew, whom before he had intituled Duke of Penna, to be brought againe into the city, forced it being much distressed for want of vi∣ctuall to yeeld to the obedience of the Emperour. Charles the Emperour at the request of Clement the Pope presently created Alex∣ander perpetuall Priour: and thus the offices of the Priori and Gonfalonerio were vtterly taken away. Then, when the Emperour Charles had created Alexander Duke of Florence, and giuen vnto him in mariage Margaret his bastard daughter, in the yeare of our Sauiour, 1535. and two yeares after that, before the seuenth day of Ianuarie, Laurence Medices, the sonne of Peter Francis, that he might set his natiue country at liberty, as he pretended, had miserably slaine him. Cosmus Medices the sonne of Iohn Medices was created Duke in his roome. Thus farre Leander, vnto which I may adioine these words of my kind friend M. Iohn Pinadello: When it was known saith he, to Pius the fifth Pope of Rome, that Cosmus Medices, Duke of Florence, had at that time taken great paines for the maintai∣nance of the Church and Religion, and spared no cost in the warres against the hereticks, in the yeare 1570. in the moneth of Febru∣arie comming to the city, crowned him in Aula Regia, the Kings hall (a place in Vaticana so named) and gaue him and his successours, the title of, The great Duke. In whose Crowne the Pope caused these words to be engrauen, PIVS QVINTVS Pont. Max. ob exi∣miam dilectionem, & Catholicae religionis zelum, praecipuum{que} iustitiae studium donauit. that is, Pius the fifth Bishop of Rome, in token of great loue, earnest zeale of Catholique religion, and constant maintainance of true Iustice gaue this. Thus farre in few words of the Offices, Policy and Iurisdiction of this city. I thinke it not amisse here to adioine another short discourse, because it is rare, and not altogether from the purpose: It is thus as Syffridus Presbyter reporteth in George Fabricius his historie of Misnia. Otho the third Emperour of Rome, lying at Mutina with his wife, the Empresse fell in loue with a certaine Earle: but when as he by no meanes would consent vnto her, she so diffamed him vnto her husband, the Emperour, that he commanded him to be beheaded before euer he had examined the matter. Who before he was beheaded, entreated his wife, that after his death by the triall of Hoate Iron, she would approue to the view of the world, how wrongfully he was put to death. The day came, when as the Emperour sate to heare the causes and complaints of widdowes and Or∣phanes. Together with these came the late Countesse, bringing in her hand the Earles head: and demandeth what death that Iudge is worthy of, that had put a man to death wrongfully? The Emperour answered, He is worthy to lose his head. She saith, Thou art the same man, who at the false suggestion of thy wife didst vniustly cause my husband to be beheaded. The which when as the widdow approued vnto him by the maner of triall by hoat iron, the Emperour yeelded himselfe into the hands of the widdow, willing to abide his deserued punishment. Notwithstanding by the mediation of the Bishop and the Nobility, he obtained of the Countesse respite for tenne daies, then for eight, then for seuen, lastly for six. After the end of which daies, the Emperour hauing examined the matter, and being assured of the truth, gaue sentence against his wife, that she should be burned at a stake, and giuing foure castles vnto the widdow, redeemed his life. These castles are in the Bishopricke of Luna in Hetruria or Tuscane, and they are called after the names of the daies of repreeue, The tenth, The eighth, The seuenth, and The sixth. Thus farre Syffridus, which I thought good to set down in this place, for to my knowledge no man els hath left any record of these castles: neither are they named in this Mappe by our Au∣thour, notwithstanding that he hath described the country most curiously.
map of Florence, Italy FLOREN∣TINI DOMI∣NII, FIDELISSIMA ET NOVA DESCRIPTIO. Auctore D. Stephano Monacho Montisoliueti.
The liberties of PERVGIA. IOhannes Campanus writing of this country, affirmeth that although he had trauai∣led and viewed many countries, yet he neuer saw in all his life a more pleasant country, and better manured then the country of Perugia. All things seeme wast and wild to those that are farre off, but if you shall come more neere, nothing may be found more glorious either in respect of the husbandry of the land, or wholesomnesse of the aire, or fertility of the soile. The riuer of Tiber runneth through the middest of this country, and kindly watereth the same. Not farre from which is the city Perugia, situate vpon the Mount Apennine, built long since (as Trogus Pompeius affirmeth) by the Achaians; and of the twelue cities of Hetruria it is the chiefe. It was called Augusta by the Emperour Augustus, as the Capitall letters halfe a yeard square, grauen vpon the gate, do declare. This city, in regard of the nature of the place, is inuincible, richly beautified both with religious and priuate buildings of great state, and is very populous. This city aboue all the cities of Italie hath been euermore most fortunate and happie, hauing retained the same state and gouernment little or nothing altered, which it enioied before the building of Rome; and that which afterward it had, (in the time when Rome was ruled by Kings, Consuls, Emperours and Tyrants) at this time it reteineth. Yet it hath endured many and diuers greeuous and bitter storms. For in the time when Fabius Maximus was Consull, as Liuie reporteth, 4500. of his citizens were slaine. In the daies of the Triumuiri, Augustus besiedged it, and forced it to great distresse for want of victualls, tooke it and rased it to the ground, and was wholly defaced with fire, except only the Temple of Vulcane, as Appian recordeth. Afterward it endured the seuen yeares siedge and batterie of the cruell Tyrant Totilas, and at length was sacked and spoiled &c. Now it is subiect to the Pope of Rome, and hath a famous Vniuersitie, which was erected about the yeare of CHRIST, 1290. as Middendorpius hath written. Heere in the time of our grand∣fathers, flourished the most renowmed Ciuilians, Bartholus and Baldus. In the precincts of this city is Lago di Perugia, the lake of Perugia, anciently called LACVS TRA∣SVMENVS, famous long since for a great ouerthrow heere giuen by Hanniball to the Romanes; Appianus calleth it Lacus Plestinus, but for what reason I know not. It is in compasse, as the foresaid Cam∣panus writeth, about thirtie miles. The water of it is very cleare and pure, there are no riuers which runne into it, neither hath it any issue forth, yet is his water so exceeding sweet, that any man would thinke it were fedde from some running fountaine. It hath in it three Isles, whereof two, which are to∣ward the North, are close together; the one called the Greater, the other the Lesser: (Maiores and Mi∣nores) This is wast and not in habited, only it hath a Church situate vpon the toppe of an hill. The other, which is neere to the liberties of Cortona, conteineth about 200. families. The third, which is toward the South, and is bigger then the other two, is very populous and well inhabited. The inhabitants almost giue themselues wholly to Fishing; they sow little Corne: yet they do not neglect to plant vines. For wood, fuell and fodder they go out into the fields and woods neere adioining. Amongst the records of Lewis first Emperour of Rome, there is mention of these three Ilands, where he nameth them MAIOR MINOR and PVLVENSIS, (now Polueso) where I perceiue that they yet retaine their ancient names. No boggs, fennes, or spuing meeres do impech the shore: this is full of Oliue gardens, which vpon the hills on euery side do adorne the Lake, and are for their wonderfull fertility very beautifull. In the plaine which is between the Lake and the Hilles, there is such abundance of Hempe and Flax, so that in all Hetruria or Tuscane, there is not more. No country yeldeth better Wines or sweeter Apples. The kinds of Fishes in the lake are not many, but the abundance is wonderfull; in which it farre excelleth all other Lakes of Italie: heere also the fishing continueth all the yeare long, yea euen in the dead of winter, which no other Lake in all Italie affoordeth. These fish in the winter are caried into Tuscane, Vmbria, and Picenta: to Rome also they driue much cattell daily to be sold. The same Campanus affirmeth, that heere they take a pickerell partly coloured, spotted with diuers green specks, of the which he reporteth strange wonders: namely, that it doth engender with serpents, and from thence it getteth those strange colours. (The common people, saith Iacobus Greumus, in the twentieth chapter of his first booke, verily be∣leeueth that lampreies do engender with serpents, which Plinie holdeth for a fable, notwithstanding that hee often seemeth to be much delighted in writing of fables. Athenaeus also writeth, out of the re∣port of one Andreas, that these Lampreies which are bred of the viper, if they bite, the wound is deadly, which opinion he afterward reclaimeth as false.) Againe he telleth of a Pike that lying vpon the drie land, which when a fox assaied to catch, one of his feetstooke fast in his teeth; and both were found dead. Plinie in his second booke, chap. 107. testifieth that once this whole Lake did burne.
map of Umbria, Italy PERVSINI agri; exactissima no∣uissimaq́ue descriptio: auctore Egnatio Dante. Cum priuilegio Imperatoris, Regis, & cancellariae Brabantiae, ad decennium 1584.
The territories of the city of SIENA. CAesar Orlandius a famous Ciuillian of Siena, sent from Rome this Mappe, together with a briefe history of the city, taken out of a larger worke of his, (as he confesseth in his priuate letters to me, written of the originall of the same, to be inser∣ted into this our Theater of the World. The city of Siena, saith he, is so ancient, that of his first beginning there is nothing to be found in any approued old wri∣ters. For that some do report it to haue beene built by the Galli Senones, which vnder the conduct of Breanus their ge∣nerall, about 363. yeares after the building of Rome, in the space of seuen moneths (as Polybius and Plutarch haue recor∣ded) wan the city, it cannot be proued out of any good authour. For Iohn of Salisbury, which first broached this opinion, (who for that he intituled his history by the name of Polycraticon, is therefore called Polycrates, or of others Polycarpus,) in the seuenteenth chapter of his sixth booke, bringeth no authority for this his assertion. And himselfe confesseth in the twenty and fourth chapter of his eighth booke, that he was not familiarly known to Pope Adrian the fourth. Now it is apparant to all the world that Adrian the fourth sate in the Papall seat, but from the yeare of Christ, 1154. vnto the yeare 1159. and therefore the testimony of Iohn of Salesbury, concerning the building of Siena, so many yeares before he was borne, is of no validity at all. Cornelius Tacitus in his twentieth booke of his Annales, calleth this city Colonia Senensis. Which words of his can by no meanes be vnderstood of the other Sena, (which at this day also is in the country Piceno, and is vulgarly called Senegallia,) as some haue fondly imagined. For in the time of Tacitus and Plinie that city of Piceno, was not euer called Sena, but Senogallia, or Senogallica, or Senogallia, as is most manifest out of the words of Plinie and Ptole∣mey. For Plinie reckoneth Coloniam Senensem, amongst the mid land Colonies of Hetruria; and not many lines after he placeth Senagallia in the sixth region of Italie. Ptolemey not only in the Latine copies printed, but also in most ancient manuscript Greeke copies, placeth Sena amongst the mid-land cities of Hetruria, but Sena Gallica, (for so he termeth it) amongst the cities of the Senones, neere Ancona and the Temple of Fortune. When this city first was made a Bishops sea, although as yet it be not certainly knowne, yet this is certaine, that amongst the 46. Bishops, or there a∣bout, all of them neighbours to the city of Rome, (which in the first Romane Synod in the time of S. Hilary Pope of Rome, and first of the name, assem∣bled together in the yeare of Christ 465.) Eusebius Episcopus Senensis, was one of them. Againe in the second Councill of Lateran, vnder Pope Martin the first, in the yeare of Grace 652. amongst the subscriptions of 125. Bishops, these are named, Maurus Caesenatis Ecclesiae episcopus. Maurus episcopus S. Senatis ecclesiae, in the same maner and forme that Clusinus Roxellanus and Fauentinus, Bishops, do call their Churches Clusinatem, Roxellanatem, and Fauentinatem. In like maner amongst the like number of about 125. Bishops, who subscribed vnto the Epistle of Agatho Bishop of Rome, which the Legate sent vnto the six generall Councill at Constantinople, held in the yeare 573. caried with them, this subscription is found, Vitalianus episcopus S. ecclesiae Senensis. Whereupon it is manifest that no man may cauill and say, that Episcopus Senensis, is the same that Episcopus Senogalliensis: or that for Epi∣scopetus Senatis, it should be written and read, Episcopus Caesenatis. As also for that out of Plinie and Ptolemey, before mentioned, it is plaine, that euen in their daies, that Sena of Picenum; was not called Sena, but Senogallia: Moreouer also because in the forenamed Councill of Lateran, not only Episco∣pus Senatis, but also Caesenatis and Senogalliensis, named by one and the same name, subscribed seuerally. Lastly, Venantius Episcopus Senogalliensis, subscri∣bed also to the second and fourth Synods of Rome, summoned by Pope Caelius Symmachus, about the yeare of Christ 498. Furthermore Pope Pius the 2. borne in Siena, in the yeare 1459. (which was the yeare of his creation) aduanced the Church of Siena from a Bishops sea vnto the dignity of an Archbishopricke, and assigned the Bishops of Suano, Clusino, Crassetano, and Massano Suffraganes to the Archbishops of Siena, and their Churches subiect to that sea. This hath Caesar Orlandius written, of the originall and antiquity of Siena, his natiue country, to be published, for no other cause, as he protesteth, then that the fond opinion of Blondus, and others which haue written otherwise of it then the plaine truth is, might wholly be rased out (if it were possible) of the minds of all men. Claudius Ptolemeus Senensis, in his sixth booke of epistles to Gabriel Caesano, hath most elegantly described Monte Argentario. MARCA ANCONA. IN former times this region was called Picenum, now they call it Marca Ancona, of the head city of the same. Sometime it was called Marca Firmiana, of a town in this prouince, as Blondus hath giuen out. It lieth between the riuers Isaurus, (now called Foglia,) and Trento, and betweene the Hadriaticke sea, and Mount Apennine. It is manifest by ancient records that the Piceni, Vmbri & Senones, were long since seated in this tract. The country is a fertile soile, yeelding in great plenty all maner commodities, but especially for fruit trees & corne it doth farre excell other places. Silius Italicus, doth highly commend it especially for oliues. The head city, as we haue said, is Ancona, so called of his situation, for that being seated vpon the promontory Comerano, it lieth out into the gulfe of Venice like an arme or elbow. Whereupon the ancient comes of this city, (which heere oft times are found within the earth) are obserued to be stamped, with an arme holding a penne in the hand. The Hauen of this most ancient city, was made by Traian the Emperour, as an inscription in Marble doth giue to vnderstand. Heere is also Aelia Ricina, otherwise since that called Rici∣netum, (and at this day now, Recanati), is a towne situate vpon the toppe of an hill, where we saw the Mart or Faire (which there is kept at certaine times of the yeare) vnto which they come almost from all quarters of the World. Not farre from hence is the Church of S. Maria Lauretana, with the hamlet Loreto, enclosed with a very strong wall. The gorgeousnesse of this church and holinesse of the place is such, that so soone as one shall set foot within the dores, it will strike him into a great admiration. This Church is well furnished with all maner of weapons and engins, both for offence and defence a∣gainst the assault of Pirates. The village is inhabited almost of none els but Cooks, Ostlers, Shoemakers and such like fellowes, which attend heere ready to do any businesse, for such as resort hither almost all the yeare long in great numbers for deuotion: and to prouide and serue them with such things as they want. Heere is also the town and castle called Fabriano, whose inhabitants do almost altogether liue by making of Paper, which thereof is called Charta Fabriana. There are also many other goodly towns in this prouince, which are excellently described in Leander. Franciscus Pamphilus hath also written in verse a description of this Shire. The Mount Apennine in this place hangeth ouer this country with craggy topps exceeding high, in which is that huge caue that they call Sibyllas caue, (in their language Grotta de la Sibylla) and which the poets faine to be the Elysian fields. For the common people do dreame of one Sibylla to be in this caue, which heere possesseth a large kingdome full of gorgeous buildings and Princely palaces, beset with pleasant gardens, abounding with many fine wanton wenches and all maner of pleasures and delights: all which she will bestow vpon them, which through this caue (which is alwaies open) will go vnto her: and after they haue been there the space of one whole yeare, they haue free liberty giuen them by Sibylla, (if they please) to depart, and from that time, being returned vnto vs, they affirme that they liue for the rest of their time, a most blessed and happy life. This caue is knowne also to our countrie-men by the name of Vrow Venus bergh, that is, The Lady Venus mount. Whereupon they vulgarly sing certaine Dutch rimes of one little Daniel (for so the ballad calleth him) who after that he had liued a whole yeare in this caue, at last it repented him of this kind of life, therefore heere he leauing his Loue departeth, goeth to Rome, commeth to the Pope, confesseth his sinne, and desireth to be absolued. The Pope not deeming the sinne to be veniall, the staffe which by chance he had in his hand, (withered and drie) sticking it into the ground, said, that his sinnes should then be pardoned when this staffe shall beare Roses. Daniel by this answeare despairing of his saluation, went away very heauy and discontent, and presently taking two of his nephewes, his sisters sonnes with him, returneth againe vnto his Paramour. Within three daies after the staffe was obserued to put forth blossomes: Daniel was sought for vp and down, but could no where be found: For they do beleeue that he spent the rest of his life in this caue. But the story of this ballade is a worthy matter for a poeticall head, and to be deemed as true as the rest of their fictions. CORSICA. CORSICA an Iland of the Mid-land sea, was anciently inhabited of diuers nations. At this day it is diuided into two parts. The East part, they call Banda di dentro, The inner side: the West part opposite to this, Banda di fuori, The outter side. That end which is next to Italie, Di qua da i Monti, On this side the mountaines: That next to Sardinia, Di la da i Monti; beyond the Mountaines. Yet the people of what part soeuer, in respect of the situation of the mountaines, do call one another Tramontanesse, but himselfe Cismontanum. The iland is very hard to be entered or come vnto; as being on all sides enclosed with steepe and high hilles. The inner part is almost wholly moun∣tainous, and therefore is no very good corne ground: yet is it highly commended for rich wine, being transported to Rome, of the place is called Vinum Corsicum. It breedeth Horses of great stomacke, and Hounds of extraordinary bignesse. Heere i, as Plinie affirmeth, the beast Musino, a kind of ramme which in the steed of wooll beareth an hairie shagge like the goate: now they call it Mofoli. Strabo speaketh of this beast in Sardinia, as if it were proper to that iland. The Italians do account the inhabitants of this Ile for valiant and stout souldiers. Ancient writers haue affirmed that heere is found a kind of bitter Hony. The Tyrrheni first possessed this Iland, and afterward the Carthaginians: from these the Romanes tooke it, who held it vntill such time as the Saracens draue them out: these the Genowaies at length expelled. Then being taken by the citizens of Pisa, it became subiect to the Bishops. Lastly, it was brought againe vnder the obedience of the Genowaies, to whom at this day it doth belong. Leander Alhertus hath so exactly described this Iland, out of the Commentaries of Augustine Iustinian, that a man may not easily find what moreouer may be added or desired.
map of Siena, France SENEN∣SIS DITIO∣NIS, ACCV∣RATA DE∣SCRIP. Cum Priuilegio.
map of Corsica, Italy CORSICA. map of Marche, Italy MARCHA ANCONAE, OLIM PICENVM. 1572.
APRVTIVM, now called ABRVZZO. IN the kingdome of Naples there is a prouince which they call Abruzzo, the Latines anciently named it, Aprutium: why it was so called, as it is vncertaine, so, that it tooke not his name of the Brutij, as some haue been of opinion, I make no question. Some there are which thinke it so named ab Apris of Bores, for that the country being foresty and full of woods, it swarmeth with wild hogges: other some do deriue it ab asperi∣tate montis Apenini, from the cragginesse of the mount Apeninus, which heere in this tract is very hideous, steep and high. The greater and bet∣ter sort of writers do beleeue that in it some part of the ancient name of Praetutiana doth as yet remaine. For Volaterranus, Blondus, Domi. Niger, Leander and Scipio Mazella do perswade them∣selues, that the Samnites, (and amongst them the Praetutiani) the Peligni, Marucini, Ferentini, Vestini; Marsi, Caraceni and Albenses, haue formerly inhabited these places. It is bounded at this day on the North side, by the Hadriaticke sea: on the West, by the riuer Tronto, anciently called Tru∣entum: on the East, by Fortoro, in old time named Frento: vpon the South it hath the mount A∣penine, although in some places it stretcheth it selfe beyond the same. This prouince Alphonsus the stout, king of Arragon, diuided into two parts, Abruzzo the neather, and Abruzzo the higher. Abruzzo the higher which we haue described apart by it selfe, is seuered from the Neather by the riuer Pescara, which old writers called Aternus. Scipio Mazella in his curious description of the kingdome of Naples, affirmeth that this country is by situation and nature of the place very strong, and inhabited by a stout and sturdy nation; and the soile is very fertile of wines and cattell. The chiefe cities of it are, Aquila, Interamna or Teramo, Amatrice, Atri, Pinne: and long since heere haue stoode Amiterno, and Furconio, both now defaced, yet of their ruines and ashes is rai∣sed Aquila some fiue miles off, built vpon the toppe of an hill, as Volateran and others haue writ∣ten. This city is seated in a place most fertile of all maner of things necessary: so that the Cab∣badges heere (cauli capucei, they call them) do often weigh, as Mazella reporteth, sometime thir∣ty, sometime fortie pound; and therefore Martiall said not amisse, Nos amiternus ager felicibus e∣ducathortis; In Amiternoes fertile fields we liue and spend our daies. The fields before this citie, do yeeld such great plenty of Saffron, that thereof yearely they make 40000. ducates. Heere is once a yeare kept a great Faire. It hath 110. Churches. Neere this city, as Blondus saith, is a stone, from vnder the which runneth a streame of oile, which they call Oile of peter, or Petro∣leum: and is desired and sought for of many, but of the Almaines and Hungarians it is more esteemed, then of the Italians. The same authour recordeth that the country people shewed him a Peare-tree growing vpon an hill not farre from the head of the riuer Pescara or Aterno, shooting vp in such a sort, that the water falling vpon it, diuideth it selfe into three parts, which become three great riuers, Velino, Tronto and Pescara, running three diuers waies. Ami∣terno, in former times a goodly city, famous in histories, and the natiue country of Salust the no∣ble historian, can hardly be discerned where it stood: yet Blondus saith, that they do yet shew some pieces of the Theater, Temples, and Turrets. Mazella affirmeth that there yet do re∣maine the Temple of Saturne, the tombe of Drusus daughter, and a triumph of the Samnites engrauen in marble, a memoriall of their happie victory obtained against the Roman army, ad furcas Caudinas. Teramo long since called Interamnia, for that it is situate between three riuers, Fiumicello, Trontino and Vitiole, is the head city of this prouince; whose Bishop is graced with many titles and dignities, and the lord of the soile is called by the name of the Duke of Teramo. Adria the ancient colonie of the Romanes, is now called Atri. Some do thinke that the Empe∣rour Hadrian was borne heere, and of it tooke his name, as also the Hadriaticke sea, now called Mare superum, the higher sea, the Gulfe or Bay of Venice. Furconium sometime hath been a famous Bishopricke, whose Bishops are often mentioned in the Councels and Synods held 800. yeares since, at Rome or other places of Italie. At this day only some small mention is to be seen of it: for it was destroied by the Lombardes, and the Bishops sea, was by Pope Alexander the fourth, from thence translated vnto Aquila. The arms of this country, as Scipio Mazella writeth, is an Eagle argent crowned, standing vpon three mounts ore, in a field Azure. He that desireth to vnderstand more of this country let him repaire to the forenamed Authours, who I doubt not will satisfie him to the full.
map of Abruzzo, Italy APRVTII VLTERIORIS DESCRIPTIO. 1590. NATALIS BO∣NIFACIVS SE∣BENIICENSIS DESCRIBEB.
The kingdome of NAPLES. THis kingdome generally comprehended between the Adriaticke and Mid-land seas, from the riuer Fronto and Fundi, a city situate vpon the lake Fundano, vnto the Frith Messina, (the Latines call it Fretum Mamertinum or Messanae, the Italians el faro di Messina) conteineth nine most rich and goodly countries of Italie: namely these; A part of Latium, Campania felix, Lucani, Calabria, Magna Graecia, Salentini, Apuli Peucetij, Apuli Dauni, and Aprutium. The gal∣lant city Naples, which gaue the name to the whole kingdome, seated between the sea shore and the foote of most pleasant mountaines; hath a temperate and wholesome aire, with most sweet fields about it: and therefore in this our age, Princes, and Noblemen do resort hither, asmuch as euer heeretofore: for almost all the Nobility of this whole kingdome do spend most of the yeare in this city, and all for the most part haue heere most beautifull and stately houses: so that the fre∣quent throng of Princes, Dukes, Marquesses, Earles, Knights, Doctors, Barons, and Noble-men, is heere so great, that there are very few cities of the world which in my iudgement, in that respect may compare with Naples. The city in compasse is very large and wide, gorgeously built and seated, as I said, between the sea, and the goodly pleasant hils, strongly walled and fortified, especially that part which was done of late daies at the commandement of Charles the fifth. The buildings either of Churches or priuate citizens houses are most beauti∣full and stately, with diuers Castles and Towers almost inuincible. But amongst the rest, the house of the Duke of Grauina, and the Prince of Salerno, do farre excell. The streets of the city are very faire and straight. There are foure Courts, which they call Seats, Capuana, Nida, Montana, and S. Georgio, where the Princes, Dukes, Marquesses, and other of the Nobility do meet to consult of waighty matters and publike businesses. The strong Castels are these; Castello nouo, which Alphonsus the first raised and entrenched with very great charges and expences, so that now it may be accounted one of the most defencible fortification of all Europe. Next to this is Castello Capuano; which now is emploied for place of meeting for the state in consultation, for matters of the kingdome and city: Then is, Castellum oui, a little distance without the city, standing vpon a rocke (the ancients called it Meagrum) compassed round with the sea. Beside these is Castellum Santemerense, vpon a cliffe, looking ouer the walls of the city, lately fortified very strongly by Charles the fifth. Without the wals, vpon the South side of the city, there is a Block-house in the sea, a worke of wonderfull art and cunning workemanship, built for the defence and safe∣gard of the Hauen, continually full with shippes almost from all quarters of the world. Heere also is an Vni∣uersitie where all maner of Arts and Liberall Sciences are taught and professed, vnto which there is great con∣course of students from all places of the kingdome. Thus farre Vbertus Folietta, in a Treatise of his, which he wrote and intituled Brumanum. Without the wals of this most stately city, there are most pleasant sweet fields, yeelding all maner of things necessarie, not onely for the maintainance of man and beast, but also such as serue for pleasure and delight: Especiallie with all maner of Corne and Graine, and of rich and strong Wine such plenty, that he that hath not seene the great store both of Corne and Wine that one Aker of ground doth yeeld, may hardlie be made to beleeue it. The Hilles and Mountaines in this place are very fertile, and full of most excellent fruits: and some of them, enclosing the lowly plaines in manner of a Theater, do affoord plentie of Deere and game for the Nobilitie. Moreouer about Naples are most pleasant and fine Orchards, planted with Medicinall plants, and such like goodlie fruite trees, euerie where resounding with a most sweet noise of brookes and streames running to and fro: euery where most fragrant and odoriferous smelles do offer themselues vnto your sen∣ses, such is the abundance of Myrtill, Laurell, Gelsemine, Rosemarie, Rose-trees, &c. in euerie corner. To be short, the beauty, delightsomnesse, and elegancie of all places round about is such, as it doth almost exceed the capacitie of mans witte: no man need to wonder why in former times, as well as now, the Noble∣men so much delighted to dwell heere. This we haue taken out of Leander, where manie other things may be read of, who hath described the whole kingdome, this Citie, and the Liberties thereof, very curiouslie, that indeed it is not necessarie to send the Reader vnto any other Authour but Scipio Mazzella, (which in a seuerall and peculiar Treatise, hath with extraordinarie paines, and diligence, set out, in the Italian Tongue, a description of this kingdome. There is also in Print a little booke, written by Alexander Andreas, of the warre betweene Philippe King of Spaine, and Paul the fourth Pope of Rome, out of which the Reader which is not satis∣fied with this discourse of ours, may heere and there picke out something, concerning this kingdome, worth the noting and not triuiall. The booke is set out in the Italian tongue by Hieronymo Ruscello. Iohn Baptista Caraffa, Pontanus, and Pandulfus Collenutius, haue written the histories and chronicles of the kingdome of Naples: in the which they in diuers places speake much of the situation of this country. Gabriel Barry, hath very curiously de∣scribed Calabria, his natiue country, as Sanfelicius hath done Campania.
map of Naples, or Southern Italy REGNI NEAPOLITANI VERISSI¦MA SECVNDVM ANTIQVORVM RECENTIORVM TRADITIONEM SCRIPTIO, PYRRHO LIGORIO AV Cum priuilegio.
APVLIA, now called PVGLIA, or TERRA DI OTRANTO. WE haue composed this discourse following of this countrey, out of the treatise of Antony Galatey, which he wrote of the situation of Iapigya now called Terra di Barri. This country, saith he, in respect of his situation, is seated in the most temperate place of the world. Of diuers authours it hath beene diuersly called by sundry names. Aristotle and Herodotus called it Iapygia, others, Peucetia, others, Mesapia: others, Magna Gracia, Great Greece: others, Apulia: others, Calabria: (for that which now is called Calabria, was anciently called Brutia.) The corne, hearbs, and fruits of this country are of the best. The oats of this soile, is as good as the barly of other countries: and the barly, as good as their wheat. Melones of a most pleasing taste, and Pome∣citrons do euery where grow in great plenty. Physick herbs of greater force then other where, are here in all places very common. The aire is very wholesome, the soile is neither drie, nor squally or moorish. But these so great gifts and blessings of God are intermedled with some mischiefe and danger: for heere nature doth breed a most venemous and pernicious kind of spider, (the Greeks do call it  or , the Latines Phalangium and Araneus) whose poisonous bite is onely cured by Musicke or Tabret and Pipe. Heere is also the venimous serpent which the Greeks call Chersydros, the Latines Natrix terre∣stris, the Land snake; we call it, if I be not deceiued, an Adder: and heere is a kinde of Locust, which hurt and mar all things they light vpon. The cities of this country, long since more famous, were, Tarentum, now Taranto, proudly seated between two seas exceedingly stored with fish, in forme somewhat like a long Iland. This city in all mens iudgement is inuincible. Callipolis (now Galipoli, Pliny cal∣led it Anxa) is a city situate in the end of a promontorie or forland, shooting farre out into the sea, but with such a narrow Isthmos or necke-land, that in some places there is scarce so much as a cartway. It is very strong and round beset with high cliffes; from the maine land there is only one entrance, in the which is a very strong Castell. Hydruntum, of them called Otranto, is the chiefe city, and (which is somewhat more,) Metropolitan of the whole Peninsula, or Demi-ile, and that not without cause: for whether you respect the anti∣quity of it, the vertue and humanity of the citizens, ioined with valour and great magnanimity, it hath euer been of them accounted for a very famous and worthy city. It hath a very good and capacious hauen, but against the raging blasts of the North wind not so safe. It was sometime very strong and defencible, but now it lieth almost leuell with the ground. The fields adioining are very fruitfull; full of springs and alwaies green. From hence Montes Cerauni, certaine hills of Epirus, (now called Cimera and Canina) may easily be descried. Heere is the end of the Hadriaticke and Ionian seas, as Pliny testifieth. Brundusium now called Brindisi, a famous city, hath as notable a hauen as any in the world els where; the inner hauen is enclosed with castles and an huge chaine: the outer hauen is heere and there beset with rocks and small Ilands; but his mouth is by Alphonsoes meanes, so stopped and dette vp, that there is no entrance, but for little shippes and barges. It hath beene in former time a very populous city, now it is little inhabited. These are the chiefe marine ci∣ties. He that would know more particularly of the ancient names, situation, antiquities, and priuate stories of the mid-land cities and townes, we refer him to the learned discourse of Galatey, written of this his natiue country: to which if he please to adioine the descrip∣tion of Leander, I perswade my selfe the thirstie Reader shall not know what els he may demand. CALABRIA. GAbriel Barrius Franciscanus hath very curiously described Calabria in fiue bookes: which are imprinted at Rome with as lit∣tle heedfull diligence. Out of him we haue culled these particulars following: CALABRIA, saith he, a country of Italie, in forme and fashion not much vnlike a tongue, lieth between the vpper and neather seas. It beginneth at the neather sea, (the Greeks call it the Tyrrhen sea, the Latines the Mediterran or Mid-land sea,) from the riuer Talao, which runneth into the Bay of Policastro: at the vpper sea (the Ionian sea, the Grecians terme it) from the riuer Siris (otherwise sometime cal∣led, Senno) and coasteth along vntill it come to the streights of Faro di Messano, and the city Regio: and so being diuided longwise by the mount Apennine (heere they call it Aspro monte) it endeth in two capes or promontories, the one called Leucopetra, (of them Capo de Leocopetra) the other Lacinium (vulgarly of them called Cabo delle colonne, or Cabo dell' Alice.) Not only the plaines and champions, but euen the hillie places, like vnto Latium or Campania, are well serued with water. Whatsoeuer is necessary for the maintainance of mans life, this country doth yeeld in great abundance, it needeth no forraine commodities, but is able to liue of it selfe. Calabria gene∣rally is a good and a fertile soile, it is not combred with Fennes, Lakes or Bogges, but is alwaies green, affoording good pastorage for cattell, and excellent ground for all sorts of graine. The fountaines and brooks are many, and those passing cleare and wholesome. The sunnie hills and mountaines, open to euery coole blast of wind, are wonderfull fertile for corne, vines, and trees of diuers kinds, whereof arise great profit to the inhabitants. The valleies are pleasant and fruitfull. The shady groues and woods do affoord many pleasures and delights. The goodly meddowes and pastures are richly decked with herbs, and sweet-smelling flowres, and euer-running streames. And amongst other, heere is great plenty of Medicke fodder, wherewith they feed and fatte their cattell. Heere also grow many excel∣lent physicke hearbs of soueraigne vertues against diuers and sundrie diseases. It bringeth forth diuers plants, as the Plane tree, Vitex or Agnus castus, the Turpentine tree, the Oliue tree, Siliqua Siluestris, Arbute or Strawberry tree, wild Saffron, Madder, Liquirise, Tube∣ra or Sowbread. It hath also some hoate baths, continually distilling from their fountaines, which do cure aches and many other like maladies. In diuers places there are springs of salt water, whereof they make a kind of brine or pickle. It is well watered with many fine riuers, and those stored with sundrie sorts of fresh fish. The sea also on ech side yeeldeth great plenty of fish, both tunies, sword-fishes, and lampreies. There in many places is found the best Corall, both white and redde. Heere is most pleasant hunting and hawking: for in these quarters diuers and sundrie sorts of wild beasts do lodge; and as many birds and fowles do breed and build: wild boares, harts, hindes, goates, hares, foxes, lynces, otters, squerrells, martens, badgers, ferrets, porkupines, tortuses, both of the waters and of the mountaines. Of fowles, phesants, partridges, quailes, wood-cocks, ring-doues, crowes, &c. as also of many kinds of hawks it is euery where full. It maintaineth some herds of cattell and flocks of sheep and goats. It breedeth excellent horses, very swift and of great stomacke. Mettals heere were found in old time, and now also it aboundeth at this day with diuers kinds of mineralls: hauing indeed euery where mines of gold, siluer, iron, salt, marble, alablaster, crystall, marchasite, red-lead, or vermillion, copperas, alume, brim∣stone &c. many kinds of corne, wheat, siligo, beerbarly, rie, trimino, (we call it, I thinke, Turky wheat) barly, rise, and of sesamum infinite store. It aboundeth also with all kind of pulse, (legumina the Latines call them,) oile, wine and hony, and those in their kinds the best. There are heere euery where orchards thicke set with oranges, limons, and pome cittron trees. Heere also is made great plenty of excellent silke, farre better then any kind of silke made in other places of Italie. The Cotton tree (Gossipium,) groweth heere plentifully. But what shall I speake of the kind temperature of the aire? For heere the fields both winter and summer are continuallie green. But aboue all things, there is nothing that doth argue the same more soundly then that airy dew or heauenly hony, which they call Manna, that euery where distilleth from aboue, and is heere gathered in great abundance. So that that which the Israelites in the wildernes did admire and hold for a strange wonder, heere kind nature doth affoord of her own accord. It is adorned also with many goodly market towns, where marts and faires are kept at certaine times of the yeare. Heere in some places still is obserued the ancient custome of the Romanes vsed at funerals and buriall of the dead, where a chiefe mourner (Praefica, they called her) is hired to go before the rest of the mourners and she to guide their mournefull ditties and to keepe time in their howling lamentations. The funerall being done and all ceremonies performed, the dead mans friends and kindred, bringing their meat and iunkets, do banquet altogether at the dead mans house. The women of this country naturally, for modesty, and for that the waters of these places are good and wholesome, drinke naught but water. It is a shame for any women to drinke wine, except she be very old, or be in child-bed, &c. See more in the same authour. Cassiodore also in his Variar. hath in diuers places many things of this country.
map of Puglia, Italy APVLIAE, QVAE OLIM LAPYGIA, NOVA CORO∣GRAPHIA.
map of Calabria, Italy CALA∣BRIAE DESCRIP. Per Prosperum Parisium Consent. Cum Priuilegio decennali.
SICILIA. THere is not one either of the ancient Historians or Cosmographers, that hath not made mention of this Iland, or curiously described the same: especially Strabo, Plinie, Solimus and others. Diodorus Siculus calleth it, The soueraigne of all other Ilands. Solinus in like maner writeth of it, That whatsoeuer this country breedeth either of the nature of the soile, or inuention of man, it is little inferiour to those things which are esteemed of greatest worth. Of the la∣ter writers, Vadianus hath thus set it out in his true colours: SICILIA, not only for richnesse of the soile, (for which cause it was of the ancients dedicated to Ceres and Bacchus, and was accounted the Garner of Rome) but also for the multitude and antiquity of his townes, famous actes, victories and quarrels betweene the Romans and Carthagians, both contending for the mastery, is more famous then any other Iland whatsoeuer. In Plinies time there were 72. cities: at this day they report it to containe twelue Bishopricks, of great iurisdiction and large diocesses. The Dukes of Swevland posses∣sed it a long time. It was assaulted and taken by the English & Lorreiners, especially at that time when they made their voiage into the Holy land, against the impious Saracens. Lastly, it fell vnto the Kings of Arragon, and so at this day it remaineth vnder the obedience of Spaine. Neither is there any other Iland, that I know, in the whole world, that both Greeks and Latines haue indifferently, partly in respect of the goodnesse of the soile and situation, partly for the great accidents that heere haue happened, by their writings made more famous. He that would be further satisfied of the particulars, let him read Benedictus Bordonius, who hath in one booke comprised a discourse of all the Ilands of the World: Leander Albertus, Dominicus Niger, Franciscus Maurolycius, Marius Aretius, all which haue most learnedly described the same: Lastly, Thomas Fazellus, that countrie-man borne, who hath most curiously and liuelily described the true countenance of this his natiue soile: where you shall find the particular story of the mount Aetna, (now called, by an Arabicke name Monte Gibello) of which also Petrus Bembus hath put forth a seuerall Treatise. Tully hath written something of this Iland, in his orations against Verres. Thu∣cydides in his sixth booke hath very well laid downe the history of the originall and first inhabitants of the same as Diodorus Siculus hath done in like maner, in his fifth booke. Hubertus Goltzius hath out of ancient coines, added great light vnto the histories of this country. SARDINIA. SEbastian Munster, in his Cosmography hath an excellent description of this Iland, done by Sigismundus Arquerus Calaritanus a Sicilian. The same is described by Leander Albertus, Benedictus Bordonius, Nicolas Leonicus, besides that which you may reade of it in old writers, amongst whom Pausanias hath written some things that are not com∣mon. This Iland, the state of the Roman Empire decaying, came into the hands of the Saracens, from whom it was againe wonne by those of Pisa: Now, together with the kingdome of Sicilia, it is gouerned by the Spaniard. MALTA, sometimes called MELITA. QVintinus Heduus, hath passing well described this Iland and hath set forth a peculiar Treatise of the same. The landing of S. Paul and his shipwrecke heere vpon this coast, hath made this Iland famous. But not ma∣ny yeares since, by the ouerthrow of the Turks huge nauy, the knights of Hierusalem to their eternall fame, man∣fully defending the assault, it is now againe made more famous. See also Fazellus of this ile. ELBA, anciently called ILVA. THis Iland in these our daies is in subiection to the Dukes of Florence, and by a strong castell newly built it see∣meth to be very defensible and safe against the inuasions of the Turks. Of the new order of knight-hood, by the name of the Knights of S. Steuen, (answereable to those of Hierusalem in Malta) instituted in the yeare 1561. by Cosmus Medices Duke of Tuscane, read Caelius Secundus, in his historie of the warres of Malta. That this Iland had many veines of mettall, it is cleare by the report of ancient Cosmographers. And now Leander saith it hath a rich mine of iron, where also the Loadstone is found, as he writeth. Matthiolus telleth that from hence Liquid alume, is brought and conueied vnto vs. Diodorus Siculus in his fifth booke hath a large description of this Iland, where he calleth it by the name of Aethalia. CORCYRA, now CORFV. IT is an Iland of the Hadriaticke sea, subiect to the state of Venice. In it is a very strong castell of the same name, where is continually maintained a garrison against the Turks. Beside the ancient Geographers, these later wri∣ters Volaterranus, Bened. Bordonius, and Nicolas Nicolay, in his Eastern obseruations, with others, haue described this Iland. ZERBI, of old writers called LOTOPHAGITIS. THe ouerthrow of the Christian nauie neere this Iland which happened in the yeare of Christ, 1560. hath made this iland more famous. Of the situation, bignesse, and gouernours of this Iland, read Iohannes Leo Africanus, in his fourth booke of his description of Africa.
maps of Sardinia and Sicily (Italy), Corfu (Greece), Djerba (Tunisia), Elba (France), and Malta INSVLARVM ALIQVOT MARIS MEDITERRANEI DESCRIPTIO. Cum Priuilegio.
The Ile ISCHIA. THat this Iland hath been in former times called AENARIA, ARIMA, INARIMA, and PITHECVSA, Homer, Aristotle, Strabo, Pliny, Virgill, Ouid, and other good writers are sufficient witnesses. Now it is called ISCHIA of the name of the city there, built vpon the top of an hill, in forme somewhat like the Hucklebone, as Her∣molaus Barbarons testifieth, which of the Greeks is named Ischia: or rather of the strength and defenciblenes of the place, as Volaterranus thinketh. Although it be sure that these be but synonymes of one and the same iland, yet Mela, Liuie, and Strabo, do seeme to make Aenaria and Pithecusa two distinct iles: as also Ouid may be thought to do in these verses: Inarimen Prochitam{que} legit, sterili{que} locatas Colle Pithecusas, habitan∣tum nomine dictus. By Inarime he saileth, by Prochyte ile, by barren Pithecuse, A town on toppe of loftie cragge, where wilie Apes do vse. Where by Pithecusas, as I thinke, he vnderstandeth the city ancientlie, (as also now it is,) of the same name with the whole iland. Which, although now it be obserued to be ioi∣ned to the Ile, yet in former ages it was called Gerunda, and was apart and disioined from the ile, as Pontanus, a man of good credit, doth testifie in his second booke which he wrote of the warres of Naples: where he affirmeth, that in his time it was ioined vnto the Iland by a causway made between them. Prochita not farre distant from hence, (which Plinie doth write to haue been seuered from Pithecusa) doth shew that this was sometime adioined to, and sometime disioined from this Iland. The same authour doth affirme, (which Strabo also doth approue,) that all these sometime were cut off from the maine continent, and to haue been part of the cape Miseno. This doth the forenamed Pontanus in his sixth booke confirme, in these words: That Aenaria, saith he, was cutte off, from the maine continent, many things do demonstrate: namely, The torne rocks, The hollow ground full of caues, The nature of the soile, like vnto that of the continent, leane, drie, and spuing out hotte springs and fountaines. It breedeth flaming fires in the middest of the earth, wherefore it is manifest that it conteineth much Alume. Andreas Baccius, in that his famous worke of the Bathes of the whole world, writeth, that this iland doth counterfait Campania, (of which it was sometime a part) not only in respect of the fertility of the soile, but also for like∣nesse, and similitude of the bathes. Erythraeus vpon the 9. booke of Virgills Aeneiads, doth thinke it to be called Arima, of a kind of people or beasts so named: and that Virgill was the first, that when he translated that of Homer, , of the Ionicke preposition , and  altering the declension and number, did make the new word Inarime. Yet Plinie in the 6. chapter of his 3. booke and Solinus surnamed Polyhistor, are of a contrary opinion, which do affirme it to be of Homer also called Inarime. And as the same Pliny reporteth, it was cal∣led Aenaria, for the ships of Aeneas put into harborough heere: & Pithecusa, not of the great store of Apes there found, but of Coopers shops or warehouses. But this opinion the same Erythraeus in the foresaid place laboureth to ouerthrow, as not altogether consonant to the truth, for that of tunnes made for this purpose, he protesteth that he hath not read of in any authour whatsoeuer. Yet Seruius in my iudgement seemeth vpon the forcited 6. of Virgils Aeneads, to stand for Pliny, where he saith, that by Cumae there was a certaine place named Doliola, that is, if we should interpret it, Tunnes. And it is more likely, that this Iland should take the name from that place, with which sometime it was vnited, according to the opinion of these good authours, rather then of apes, (for I regard not the fable of Ouid) of which beasts none are heere, or euer were. That this Iland from the beginning hath been subiect to earth-quakes, flames of fire, and hot waters from thence oft breaking out, we are certified by Strabo and Pliny. The mountaine which Strabo calleth Epomeus, and Pliny Epopos, now they call it S. Nicolas mount, which for the same cause they report to haue burned inwardly at the bottome: and being sha∣ken with an earthquake to haue somtimes cast out great flakes of fire. Heere hence arose that fable of Typhon the giant, (wherof you may read in Homer, Virgill, Silius Italicus, (who calleth him Iapetus) Lucane and others) as the same Strabo interpreteth, which they fable to lie vnderneath this hill, and to breath out fire and water. That it is on euery side wonderfully fertile, of the last writers, Io. Elysius, Fran. Lombardus, Io. Pontanus, Solenander, Andreas Baccius, and especially Iasolinus the authour of this map, hath shewed abundantly: who in it doth reckon vp, beside the 18. naturall bathes which others haue written of 35. other, first discouered by himselfe. The same author also beside these baths doth make mention of 19. stoues or hot houses, (fumarolas they call them) and 5. medicinall sands, soueraigne in Physick for the drying vp of raw humours. Of this fire heere in the bowels of the earth, Aristotle in his booke of the Miracles of Nature, affirmeth that heere are certaine stoues, which do burne with fierie kind of force and exceeding feruent heate, and yet neuer do burst out into flames: But Elysius, Pandulphus and Pontanus do report the contrary. There is a place in this Iland Ischia, about a mile from the city of the same name, which, of the raging fire that happened heere in the time of Charles II in the yeare 1301. is at this day called Cremate. For heere the bowels of the earth cleauing in sunder, by the flashing fire that flamed out, a great part of it was so consumed, that a small village being first burnt down, was at the last vtterly swallowed vp. And casting vp into the aire huge stones, intermedled with smoke, fire, and dust, which falling againe by their own force and violence, scattered heere and there vpon the ground, made a most fertile and pleasant iland, wast and desolate. This fire continued the space of two moneths, so that many, both men and beasts were by it destroied: and many shipping themselues & their goods forced to flie either to the ilands neere adioining, or to the maine continent. Yet this iland for many things is very fruitfull: for in it there are excellent good wines and those of diuerse kinds, as that which they call Greeks wine, Latine, Sorbinio and Cauda caballi. It beareth good corn about S. Nicolas mount. In it the Cedar, the pomecitron, and the Quince tree, do grow euery where most plentifully. Alume and Brimstone are found deep within the earth: it hath had long since some veines of gold, as Strabo and Elysius haue written, and now hath as Iasolinus affirmeth. About the hill, (commonly called Monte Ligoro) there is great store of phesants, hares, conies, and other wild beasts: neere the cape of S. Nicolas they take much fish, and withall find much Co∣rall. Not farre from thence is the hauen Ficus or Fichera, where the water boileth so hot, that in it flesh or fish are sodden in a short time, and yet notwithstanding it is of a pleasant tast and very sauory. There is a fountaine which they call Nitroli, in which this is admi∣rable, that besides his great vertues for the cure of certaine diseases, if you shall lay flax in it, within three daies at the most it will make it as white as snow. Whereupon the authour of this Table saith, that this ile for bignesse, good aire, fertility of soile, mines of mettall, strong wines, doth far surpasse the other 25. ilands which are in the bay of Naples. Betweene the foreland called Acus, the needle, and that other named Cephalino, there is a great caue, or safe harborough for ships, especially for pinnaces & those lesser sorts of ships. Heere it is like that Aeneas landed, of which Ouid speaketh: as also Pompey, when as he sailed from Sicilia to Puteoli, whereof Appian writeth in his 5. booke of Ciuill wars. In this same Iland ouer against Cumae, there is a lake in which there is continually great plenty of Sea∣mews or Fenducks (Larus or Fulica) these are very gainfull and profitable to the inhabitants. The words of Pliny speaking of this iland are worth the noting. In the same, saith he, a whole town did sinke: and at another time by an earthquake the firme land became a stan∣ding poole, stagnum he calleth it: (although that the ancient printed copies for stagnum haue statinas; in which place the learned Scaliger had rather read statiuas, meaning standing waters.) The same Pliny hath left in record, that if one heere shall cut down a Cedar tree, yet it will shoot forth and bud againe. Liuy saith that the Chalcidenses of Euboea did first inhabit this iland: yet Strabo saith they were the E∣retrienses. But these also came from the ile Euboea. I am of opinion that Athenaeus in his 9 booke, although he nameth it not, yet he mea∣neth this iland, which he affirmeth he saw, (as he sailed from Dicaearchia vnto Naples) inhabited by a few men, but full of copies. There is also neere vnto this, Prochyta, an iland so named, not of Aeneas his nurse, but because it was profusa ab Aenaria, seuered from Aenaria, or as Strabo in his 5. booke affirmeth from Pithecusae. Notwithstanding in his I. booke he writeth that it was sundered from Miseno: yet both may be true: for aswell this, as that by inundations and tempestuous storms were rent off from the maine land. The poets same that Minas the giant lieth vnder this Iland, as Typhon doth vnder Ischia. Of which Horace in his 3. booke of Poems writeth to Calliope. Andreas Baccius writeth thus of this ile; It is a little ile, saith he, but very pleasant, rich of mettals and hot bathes, notwithstanding for the continuall fires, which the continuall tides of the sea do kindle in it, as Strabo writeth, it neuer was much inhabited. It retaineth still the ancient name; for they now call it Procida. Of this iland you may read more in Scipio Mazella, in his additions vnto the tract of E∣lysius of the Bathes of Puteoli.
map of Ischia, Italy ISCHIA, quae olim AENARIA. Ab Aeneae classe hic appulsa sic nominata. Nè mireris lector, si Septentrionalem plagam non superiorem (ut moris est) sed contra, inferiorem regionem spectare videas: Id nam{que} data opera fecimus, Quo utilior, magis necessaria, atque amoenior Insulae pars, verusque eius Situs in conspectu Caietae, Cumarum, Prochytae, Baiarum, Puteolorum, et Neapolis obviam iret. Omnia autem haec constant ratione Circini semper indubi∣tata, exceptis Mediterraneis locis, circumvicinis Insulis, & Montium aliquot, atque cre∣matorum lapidum quantita∣tibus; Quae tum situs, tum ornatus, & perspectivae gratia ponuntur. IVLIVS IASOLI∣NVS DESCRIB.
CANDIA, sometime called CRETA. CReta, which now they call Candia, is bigger then Cyprus, but lesser then Sicilia, or Sardinia: vnto which ilands only in the Mediterran sea it is inferiour. Yet for worth and fertility it is equall to the best. Ancient Historiographers do affirme that once it was famous for one hundred cities, and therefore was called Hecatompolis. In the time of Pliny it had not aboue forty. At this day, as P. Bellonius testifieth it hath not aboue three of any account, that is, Candy, a colonie of the Venetians, (whereof the whole iland is now named,) Canea and Rhetimo. The compasse of the iland is about 520. miles. It is euery where full of mountaines and hils, and therefore the inhabitants are much giuen to hunting. There is in it neuer a riuer that is nauigable, nor any venemous or hurtfull beast. The ex∣cellent wine, which they heere call Maluasia, and is from hence transported almost into all countries, hath made this iland famous all the world ouer. This kind of wine old writers called Pramnium, as Bellonius recordeth. Vola∣terran is of opinion that it is called Maluisia, for Aruisia, by the addition of one letter. And he furthermore addeth, that that kind of vine was first brought into Creta from the cape Aruisium in the ile Chios, (now Scio) and therefore the wines were called vina aruisia. Heere is great store of Cypresse trees, (whereof they make their ships,) which are of such great height, as Dom. Niger reporteth, that it is a most goodly fight to behold. In this iland was the Maze or Labyrinth built by Daedalus after the patterne, as Plinie saith, of that in Aegypt. A mention of which, as George Alexander, the Lieutenant of this iland for the Venetians, affirmeth in Volaterran, do re∣maine vnto this day. There is a mountaine, saith he, cut through, hollow euery way with many windings and turnings, and hath one onely narrow and straite en∣trance. The guide, a man that well knoweth the place, goeth before with a burning torch, directing the way in and out, and shewing the strange cranks in the darke corners. But Peter Bellone, a curious searcher of ancient monuments and antiquities, and one that in our age diligently viewed this iland, saith that this in old time was a quarry of stone, not a Labyrinth. (Notwithstanding that the people of the country do so call it) which indeed is more probable, seeing that Pliny affirmeth that in his time there remained no signe of it. But of this place take this description of P. Bellone, There is a place between Gnosium and Cortina, which hauing been obserued to be verie conuenient for the cutting and digging out of stone, the country people made there a Stone-mine (lapidicinam) out of which when as many stones were digged there were many windings and turnings left, so that he which by himselfe will venture to go vp and downe in this stone-pit, he shall light vpon many crooks and by-waies, and may easily loose himselfe. Neere to the riuer Leth, is this falsly-supposed-labyrinth, the which if any be desirous to see, he must needs vse the help of some one or other of the country people of the next village, to go in before him with candle to guide and direct him. But in it such a number of Battes do lodge, that except a man do take great heed they will by their flying vp and downe, put out the candle with their wings. In the bot∣tome of the pitte are found great heaps of Battes dong, and their little yong ones yet hanging vpon the sides and wals. The dammes when they can no longer flie, do not cleaue and sticke to the wall, nor stand vpon their feet, but there they hang vpon the beams and rafters, as our Battes do in the clifts of timber and holes of walles. Thus farre Bellonius. (The like story vnto this, altogether as Bellonius reporteth it, in my mind I haue seen, when as for recreation I trauelled from Rome to Hostia, and in my iourney at the hauen of Traiane I went vnder the ground, first hiring mine host to go before me with a light, that I might view the ruines of the same.) It was anciently dedicated to Iupiter, because that heere, old folks did thinke, he was bred, and brought vp, and at length buried. Bordonius affirmeth that vpon the North side of this iland there is a great caue vnderneath the earth, made by the labour and industrie of man, forty cubites in length, and foure in breadth: which at this day they call Iupiters tombe, and that vpon the head of it yet to this day his Epitaph remaineth written in great Capitall letters. Strabo writeth that the people haue been long since accounted for the best Mariners, as being wholly inuironed with the sea: and from thence arose that by-word, Cretensis mare nescit, A Cretian hath no skill in sailing. They haue of old been very infamous for their leuity, deceit, lying, and other such like vices: Heere hence sprong these prouerbs, Cretiza cum Cretensi, Cretensis Cretensem, Cretensis cum Aeginate, E Creta raptus. &c. of which thou maist read in Erasmus his Chiliades. Wherefore they are also ill reported of by S. Paul for the same faults. But I feare me least that which hath commonly been spoken of the Cretian, may indeed be truly verified of many other Nations, nay I would to God that all Nations wheresoeuer all the world ouer were not in this of kinne to the Cretians. L. Caecilius Metellus Creticus first brought this iland vnder the command of the Romans, about the yeare 685. after the building of Rome: Af∣terward it was subiect to the Emperours of Constantinople; Then it was giuen to Bonifacius of Monteferrato: by whom it was sold to the Venetians, in the yeare of Christ 1194. to whom at this day it doth belong. Amongst the ancient Geographers Strabo hath curiously described this iland: Amongst the latter writers Domi. Niger, Volaterran, Vadian, Zieglerus, and Bened. Bordonius, haue done the like. But most excellently of all o∣thers and exactly Iodocus Ghistelius in his iourney to Hierusalem, and Bellonius in his obseruations. Iodocus à Meggen, also hath something of this Iland, in his Peregrination to Ierusalem, worth the obseruation and reading. We are beholding to that braue nobleman, The Honourable Sign. Francisco Superantia, a Gentleman of Venice, not only a louer of the Mathematicks and earnest student of Geographie, but a worthy esteemer of all maner of learning. Certaine Ilands in the sea ARCHIPELAGO. THe Aegaean sea (now called Archipelago) conteineth many ilands, as the Cyclades, Sporades and diuers others, of which, some of the chiefe we haue described in this plotte. NEGROPONTE, sometime called Eubooea: his chiefe city then was called Chalcis, now they call it Negroponte, whereof the whole iland tooke the name. It was not long since wholly subiect vnto the Venetians: from whom it was taken by the Turks about the yeare of Christ 1471. It yeeldeth great plenty of oile, corne and wine, and is of all things that the earth bringeth forth, very fertile, especially it affoordeth very good wood for the making of shippes and gallies, as Anonymus reporteth, who wrote of the sacking and taking of it. The inhabitants (which is almost generally true in all the iles of this sea) are partly Greeks, and partly Turks: but each vseth his owne language and religion. NICSIA, in old time Naxos, is accounted one of the most fertile ilands of this sea. It yeeldeth good store of Wine. Some do thinke that heere is a veine of Gold, but such is the slouth and negli∣gence of the people, that yet it is not knowne where about it is. Heere is a kind of Waspe whose sting they report to be deadly. Heere are very many Battes. It was sometime belonging to Iohanni Quirino, a nobleman of Venice: afterward it came into the possession of a certaine captaine named Iacobo Crispo, whom Solimus the Turke draue from hence. Therefore it is now inhabited by Turks and Iewes. SANTORINI, of the ancients called by the name of Therasia. This Iland riseth by little and little euen from the shore vnto the middest, vntill it become an high mountaine, vpon whose toppe is placed the castle Scaro. The people for the most part liue by fishing. This also, as the other, is vnder the command of the great Turke. SCIO, the old writers called it Chios, is all full of trees and mountaines: it is watered with many small brooks. Vinum aruisium, (they now call it Maluasia) was from hence first transported into Candia. This iland only breedeth the Mastiche-tree, whose gumme from hence is conueied all Christendome ouer. Andronicus Palaeologus the Emperour of Constantinople gaue it to the Genowaies, who possessed it vntill the yeare 1465. when as Soliman by a wile gatte it from them. The women of this ile are commended aboue all other for fauour and beauty. Of this you may read in Laonicus his tenth booke. RHODVS, still retaineth the ancient name. It hath a city of the same name, very strong and defensible, with a very large and capacious hauen. It is the more famous for the Colossus of the sunne, a statue or image seuentie cubites high, which being broken off at the knees by an earth-quake, was ouerthrown & fell to the ground. Certaine Egyptians, as Domi. Niger re∣porteth, in the time of Constance the Emperour, passing the sea from Alexandria to Rhodus, amongst other things, ouerthrew this Colossus, brake it in pieces, and with the brasse did lade away 900. camels. It was giuen by Emanuel Emp. of Constantinople vnto the knights of Ierusalem, which for a long time and often did valiantly defend it against the furious assaults of the Turks, vntill in the yeare 1522. when as Solyman besieging it round by sea and land; they were forced to yeeld it vp, and to flie into the ile Melita. Of these see more in Theodoricus Adamaeus. STALAMINE, this the Gretians in old time called Lemnos. Of it read that which we shall write in the description of Cyprus. MILO, former ages long since cal∣led it Melos. In it is a mine of Siluer, where also is found the Sardoine, a pretious stone. METELLINO, old writers called it Lesbot. It hath a city of the same name, shaken and ruined by an earth-quake. They are vnder the gouernment of the Turke, as the other, yet they retaine their old language and religion. CERIGO, in old time they called it Cythera. SCARPANTO, the ancients named it Carpathus, or as Homer writeth it Crapathus: whereupon the sea about this place was called Mare Carpathium. It is situate almost in the mid-way between Candia and Rhodus. It is in compasse forty, or as others affirme, fifty miles. Eustathius in his commentaries vpon Homer, saith that it is craggy and euery where mountai∣nous and full of hils, and was called Porphyris in old time of the great abundance of Purples, (a kind of fish, whereof commeth the purple colour) found in this sea: and Tetrapolis, of the foure cities in this iland. From this iland sprong that prouerbe, Carpathius leporem, as the same Eustathius deliuereth out of Iulius Pollux. It is spoken of those which do so do a thing, that afterward being done, they do repent them of it. Because these Ilanders first brought in hares into this country, and within a little while after, when they perceiued how they eat and spoiled their corne, they de∣stroied them againe. It hath many Hauens, but those very narrow, shallow and dangerous. The inhabitants do speake the Greeke tongue, and professe the Religion of the Greeke Church, but are subiect to the iurisdiction and gouernment of the Signiory of Venice. You may read more of these ilands in Bordonius and Porcacchius, which in the Italian tongue haue written peculiar treatises of Ilands.
map of Crete, Greece CANDIA INSULA map of the islands of Lesbos, Cythera, Karpathos, Naxos, Therasia, Milos, Lemnos, Euboea, Rhodes, and Chios, Greece ARCHIPELAGI INSVLA∣RVM ALIQVOT DESCRIP. METELLINO CERIGO SCARPANTO NICSIA SANTORINI MILO STALIMENE NEGROPONTE RODVS SCIO
CYPRVS. CYprus doth iustly challenge his place amongst the greater Ilands of the Mediterran sea. The forme of the Iland is much longer than it is broad. The Metropolitan or chiefe city is Nicosia. Famagosta also is a most goodly city, the Mart-towne of the whole Ile, and very rich in regard of the commodious hauen and great customes and toles there paid. It is inferiour to no Iland that I know: for it yeeldeth plenty of wine and oile: it hath also suf∣ficient corne to find it selfe. Moreouer it hath had some veines of Brasse or Copper, in which veines there was also found Vitrioll and Rubigo aeris, the rust of brasse, simples of so∣ueraigne vertue in the practise of Physicke. In it doth grow in great plenty, the sweet cane (canna mellis) out of which they do boile Sugar. It affoordeth an excellent kind of strong wine, as good as that of Candy, which they call Malmesey. There is a kind of stuffe made there of goates haire, which now we call Chamelett, the Italians Zambelloto. This Iland sendeth ouer diuers commodities into other countries, where∣of they yearely raise great profit and gaines; it doth not much stand in need of any forrein commodities or mer∣chandise. The aire is not very wholesome nor healthfull. The people generally do giue themselues to pleasures, sports and voluptuousnesse: the women are very wanton, and of light behauiour. The fruitfulnesse of it is so great, that in old time they called it Macaria, that is, The Blessed Iland; and the lasciuiousnesse of the nation such, that vulgarly it was supposed to haue beene dedicated to Venus the Goddesse of loue. It is 427. miles about, and 200. long, as Bordonius hath recorded. The Venetians do hold it by right of inheritance, and is vnder them gouerned by a Lieutenant or Praetor. Diodorus Siculus in his 16. booke saith, that in this iland were nine good∣ly cities, which had their seuerall petie Kings, by whom they were gouerned; all notwithstanding subiect to the King of Persia. Inferiour townes also were commanded by their proper Kings. But that the fertility of this ile may better appeare, I thinke it good to set downe that commendation of Am∣mianus Marcellinus, which he hath left behind him of it; Cyprus, saith he, is so fertile and aboundeth with such va∣riety of all things, that without the help of any forrein commodities, only of themselues it is able to build a ship from the keel to the toppe saile, and send it to the sea ridged and furnished with all things necessary whatsoeuer. Sextus Rufus also hath these words of it; Cyprus; famous for wealth and great riches, tempted the poore and needy Romanes to inuade it, so that we held the possession of that iland iniustly and rather for gaine, then for any right we had vnto it. But this, ô Rufus, is not, as they say, mercenary commendation of the Roman valour. Amongst the ancient writers, Strabo, Mela, and other Geographers haue described this Iland: Of the latter, Benedictus Bordonius in his treatise of Ilands: Vadianus, Pius the second Pope of Rome, Domin. Niger, Sabellicus, Vola∣terran, and Iacobus Zieglerus passing well: Stephanus Lusignanus, hath in the French tongue written a peculiar booke of this Iland. STALAMINE, sometime called LEMNOS. LEmnos, an Iland of the Aegean sea, lieth ouer against Thrace, (Romania) between the Peninsula or Neck-land of Thrace, and the mount Athon of Macedonie. Famous long since for Vulcanes shoppe, and now as much talked of for the medicinall earth (which of the Physitions is called Terra Lemnia) that heere is digged out. At this day this ile, is called of the Turks and Italians, Stalamine. It is 100. miles about, as Bordonius affirmeth: And is a plaine and champion country, in respect of the Ilands round about it. On the East side, as Bellonius reporteth, it is leane and no good corne ground: between the South and West parts, where it is more moist, it is much more fertile. Anciently it had two cities, Myrina and Ephestias: this latter is wholly desert and not inhabited, is now called Cochino. That at this day is a towne of small account, situate in a Demy-ile or Peninsula, ioined to the Iland by a narrow necke or Isthmos; at this day it is called Lemno. In this iland, as Pliny testifieth, there was a Labyrinth, the third in estimation from that of Aegypt. But Bellonius narrowly see∣king for his foundation, could not find any mention of it: nor any of the country that could shew him any more then certaine pieces of it. The same authour affirmeth that there are yet remaining in it 75. villages. The earth which anciently was called Sphragida and Terra Lemnia, commonly Terra sigillata, is now, (as in old time it was wont) digged out of the ground not without a certaine kind of superstitious ceremony, euery yeare vpon the sixth day of August; and at no time els. For vpon paine of death, it is decreed that no man either priuately or openly shall go thither to digge out ought. The place where it is digged out, they call Vulcanes mount. Of the kinds of hearbs, serpents, and fishes which are heere very common: and of the ceremonies and with what adoe the earth, that is called Terra Lemnia, is taken out of the ground, and of diuers other peculiar things of this iland, read the first booke of P. Bellonius his Obseruations. Andreas Matthiolus also, out of the letters of Albacarius, vnto Angerius Busbechius, hath a curious description and discourse of the ceremonies vsed in the digging out of Terra si∣gillata, in those his learned commentaries vpon Dioscorides. Of this also read Hodoeporicum Bizantium Hugoris Fa∣uolij. He that desireth the old ceremonies of digging out of the same, let him haue recourse to Galen his nienth booke and second chapter, De Medicam. simplic.
map of Cyprus CYPRI INSVLAE NOVA DE∣SCRIPT. 1573. Ioannes á Deutecum. f. Cum Priuilegio. map of Lemnos, Greece LEMNOS INSVLAE descríptíonem ex Petrí Bellonij libro de Auíbus, hoc ín loco tanguam parergon adíecímus.
GREECE. GReece, which sometime was as it were the mother and nurce of all good learning and disci∣plines, of a rich and wealthy country, and which by his valour and magnanimity was Em∣presse & Prince of the better halfe of the world, is at this day driuen to that state (such is the mutability and vnconstancy of fortune, which turneth all things vpside downe) that there is no part of it but either it is subiect to the Turke and enthralled to his slauish seruitude, or els it is vnder the command of the Venetians, or tributary to them. The Turke possesseth the greater part: the Venetians do only enioy certaine ilands in that sea. Those which are vnder the Venetian gouernment are in better state, in respect of Religion, than those which are subiect to the Turke. Those which are vnder the obedience of the Turke, do conforme themselues to their maners, as likewise those which are commanded of the Venetians; doe imitate the behauiour of the Venetians. Yet all of them do liue in such great darkenesse of ignorant blindnesse, that in all Greece now there is not one Vniuersity or schoole of liberall sciences: neither are they desirous to haue their chil∣dren taught so much as to write and read. And all of them generally do speake their ancient language, but much cor∣rupted, although some of them do speake more purely then others. Yet their moderne language doth come more neere to the old Greeke, then the Italian to the Roman or Latin tongue. Those which dwell in cities subiect to the Venetian iurisdiction, do speake Greeke and Italian: but the country people only Greeke: those which dwell in cities comman∣ded by the Turke, do speake Greeke and the Turkish tongues; those in the villages and vpland places, only Greeke. They haue also at this day, as (also they had in former ages) diuers and different dialects; for the people of one prouince do speake more pure; they of another shire more barbarously and rudely: whereupon that happeneth to this country, which is incident to other parts of Europe, that one doth mocke and scoffe anothers pronunciation, which to his eares seemeth rude and clownish: so that the Boies of Constantinople do mocke and laugh at the forreners; for their pronun∣ciation and diuers accenting of words different from them. Much like as the Italian, which speaketh the Tuscane: or the French which speaketh French: or the Spaniard, which speaketh the Castillian languages, do flout and hisse at those which are brought vp in other countries of the same kingdomes. But that we may set out in the best maner the whole course of life of this nation, I thinke it necessary to distinguish the Nobility and citizens from the common people and baser sort of men: for they which are of greater reuenews and of better credit, do vse the habit and fashion of apparell of those Princes to whom they are subiect, so that those which are gouerned by the Venetians, do imitate the Venetians: those that are subiect to the Turke, the Turkes. But the com∣mon people vnder whose iurisdiction so euer, aswell within the maine land, as the ilanders, do yet retaine something of the old customes of the Greeks: for, for the most part all of them do weare the haire of their head long behind, and short before: and do vse great double cappes. The Ilanders in the forme of diuine seruice, all of them both in rites and ceremonies, aswell as in Ecclesiasticall gouernment, do not any whit vary one from another. All the Greeks general∣ly, after the Turkes maner, haue not much houshold stuffe, neither do they lie vpon feather-beds, but in steed of them they vse certaine pillowes, stuffed with flocks or wooll. All of them do hate delaied wine, that is, wine mingled with water, and to this day they keepe their old custome of carousing and liberall kind of drinking, especially the Creets. Yet in this they differ from the Germanes; in that these prouoke one another to drinke whole cuppes, those do sippe and drinke, smaller draughts. Whereupon Graecari, was then (and now still is) vsed, for Inebriari, to be drunken. But because that in drinking they vse certaine lawes or ceremonies, I cannot passe them ouer with silence. First, their tables are very low, and they drinke by turnes, no man euer skipping his course: so that if any man shall call for wine out of order, that is, before his turne come about, it is held for a very vnmannerly part. He that can fill wine best, holdeth the wine potte, and he alone filleth out for the rest in order as it commeth to their course. In those their drinkings they vse a certaine little kind of glasse without a foote, so that it cannot be set downe but euery man must drinke all out, and may not leaue one drop in the glasse. Sometime they challenge one another to drinke after the Dutch fashion, and then they embrace one another, and hold hands, and one kisseth the hand of him to whom he drinketh, and first layeth it vpon his forehead, then he stroaketh and kisseth both his cheeks: but in this kind of drinking they obserue no order as afore. And because they drinke a very strong wine, and that in small draughts, and so do heate themselues very much, they haue alwaies by them a great tankerd full of water, whereof they drinke euery foote large draughts to coole them∣selues againe: for otherwise they should scarsely be able to alay their thirst. No women may be present at their drinke∣ings. The old custome vsed of the heathen of mourning for the dead, is still obserued at this day all ouer Greece, and countries neere adioining: which is a very foolish maner: for as soone as one is dead, the women meet together in a certaine place; and at the breake of day they begin a kind of lamentation or howling, striking their breasts, tearing their cheekes, twiching and pulling their haire, they keep a pitifull and ruefull adoe to see to. And that these ceremonies may be done more solemnely, they hire one woman aboue the rest with a most shrill loud voice, to lead the rest and guide their voices, that their rests, or pauses as they call them, and the accents may better be distinguished: and in this mourn∣full song they set out the praises and vertuous qualities of the party deceassed, from his cradle euen to the last houre of his death. &c. These we haue taken out of the first booke of P. Bellonius his obseruations, where thou maiest see many things more worth the noting. Amongst the old writers, Strabo and Mela described this country, but Pausanias more curiously and with greater di∣ligence. Of the latter, Nicolas Gerbelius and Wolfangus Lazius; who also citeth one Antony Vrantz Bishop of Agria, who had trauailled it all ouer, and hath lately set out a more late description of the same, with the moderne names and appellations of places. To these you may adde the Hodoeporicum Byzantium Hugonis Fauolij, and the Orientall obser∣uations of S. Nicolaij, Andrew Theuet, Peter Bellone &c. Peter Gill hath most exactly described Bosphorus, (the Latines call it Stretto di Constantinopoli; the Greekes now, Laimon; the Turkes, Bagazin) and the city Constantinople. Appian also in his fourth booke of Ciuill warres, hath many things which make much for the description of Thrace.
map of Greece GRAECIAE VNIVERSAE SECVNDVM HODIERNVM SITVM NEO∣TERICA DE∣SCRIPTIO. Iacobo Cas∣taldo Pede∣moniano Auctore. Cum priuilegio.
ILLYRICVM. ILlyricum, or, (which pleaseth others better) Illyris, is a country vpon the coast of the Hadri∣aticke sea, opposite to Italy. The bounds of this prouince according to diuers authours, are diuers. For Pliny doth assigne it but a narrow roome between the riuers Arsia and Titius. And Ptolemey he extendeth the confines of it as farre, namely from Histria, vp as high as Macedonia, all along by the sea coast: and his vpland or more inner parts, he maketh to reach euen vnto the skirts of Pannonia and Moesia the higher. Pomponius Mela and Dionysius Ale∣xandrinus do yet make it farre greater, ascribing to Illyricum all that tract of the Hadriaticke sea that is between Tergestum and Montes Ceraunij, and affirmeth withall that the Illyrij do dwell beyond the riuer Danaw. For Mela doth account the riuer Danaw amongst the riuers of Illyricum. Strabo also in his seuenth booke of his Geography, saith that the Illyrij, do border vpon Macedonia and Thracia. But Appianus Alexandrinus doth yet make it more large then any of those for∣mer writers: for thus he writeth of the Illyrij. The Greeks, saith he, do call all those Illyrij, which dwell between Chao∣nia, and Thesprotis, (beyond Macedonia and Thracia) vp as high as the riuer Ister: for this is the length of this prouince. The breadth of it is the space betwixt Macedonia and the mountaines of Thrace, euen vnto Paeonia and the Ionian sea, and so butteh vpon the Alpes, which is about fiue daies iournies length. His length is thrise as great as the breadth &c. And a little after, the same authour hath these words: The Romans do generally comprehend vnder that of the Illyrij, not only those before cited, but also the Paeones beyond them, together with the Rhoeti, Norici, and Mysij which inha∣bit Europe, and whatsoeuer Nations els do border vpon these, which they leaue vpon the right hand that saile vp the riuer Ister: and againe that they may distinguish the Hellines from the Greekes, they call them by their seuerall and proper names: otherwise generally they are by one name called Illyrij: For euen from the head of the riuer Ister vnto the Ponticke sea, they commonly terme them Illyrici. Thus farre Appianus. Suetonius, in the life of Tiberius Caesar te∣stifieth in like maner that the bounds of Illyricum are thus large at the left. Sextus Rufus, who liued in the time of Valentinian the Emperour, ascribeth seuenteen prouinces to Illyricum: Two of the Norici, the two Pannonies, Valeria, Sauia, Dalmatia, Moesia, the two Dacias, Macedonia, Thessalia, Achaia, two Epirus, Praeualis and Creta. Some do thinke that these countries were so named of Illyrius the sonne of Polyphemus: others of Illyrius the sonne of Cadmus. Strabo writeth that all the sea coast of Illyricum, with the ilands adioining, is furnished with many good ha∣uens: when as contrariwise the whole coast of Italie ouer against this, hath none at all. It is a hot country, as Italy is, and very fertile of many sorts of graine, famous for oliues and vines: except certaine places which are altogether rough and vntoiled. The high country which is aboue this is altogether mountainous, cold and snowie, especially that which is toward the North. The country people in old time were much giuen to robberies and theeuing, but now they be somewhat more ciuill. They dwell for the most part in houses of timber, thatcht with straw, excepting only a few marine cities, in which their buildings are a little better. Thus farre Strabo. Amongst the which the chiefe is Ragusi, anciently called Epidaurus, a city famous for the Mart, aswell as for the politicke gouernment of their common-wealth. Not long since it was a free city, now it is tributary to the Turkes, and for that (as Nicolaus Nicolaius witnesseth in his Obseruations) it paieth yearely to the great Turke 12000. ducates of Gold. A description of this you may read of in the tenth booke of Martin Barlet of the life of Scanderbeg. Thus farre generally of Illyricum: now I thinke it not amisse to speake something of this our Mappe which doth not comprehend all Illyricum according to the iudgement of the forenamed authours, Pliny only excepted who doth restraine the bounds of it, as we said, into a more narrow roome. There are in this Chart Histria, Slauonia, Dalmatia, Bosnia, Carinthia, part of Carniola, and part of Stiria: all almost tributary vnto the kingdome of Hungary, except a few prouinces abuttant vpon the sea, which belong to the Venetians. The Turke hath subdued the greatest part of them to his obedience. All which countries almost are described in their seuerall Tables in this our Theater, and therefore in this place we speake nothing at all of them. Only I thinke it not amisse to adde this one story of Stiria, That this country doth breed those Strumosi, that is, a kind of people subiect to wennes, and that there are often seene some with such huge great wennes, that they do hinder their speach: and a woman giuing sucke (as Aubanus writeth) doth cast it ouer her shoulder like a sacke or wallet, least it should let the child from taking the breast. And indeed we in the yeare 1558. iournied from Frisach by Vienna to Venice, where we saw to our great admiration, a man whose chin beginning at his eares was almost as broade as from shoulder to shoulder, and hung downe euen to his breast. I say, not without great admiration, against that of Inuenall, Quis tumidum guttur miretur in Alpibus? It is no wonder great, to see the wenne amongst the Alpes. They commonly attribute the cause of the wenne to the water and aire which heere the inhabitants do vse, and draw into their bodies. Rithmaimer this country-man borne, in his treatise of the situation of the World, hath a peculiar description of Stiria. Of Bosina read D. Chytraeus his Chronicle of Saxony. Of these Illyrians read more at large in Dominicus Niger, Volaterran, and Lewis Verger in the Cosmography of Sebasti∣an Munster, as also Laonicus Chalcondylas, who in his tenth booke Notiliar, hath written something of this countrie worth the reading. All this tract, except those shires which border vpon Germanie, doth speake the Slauonian tongue: which, (that I may say something of it by the way) of some is now called Windish, was thought to be that, which the Latines called Lingua Illyrica, the Illyrian tongue, and at this day is very farre spread, as being generally spo∣ken of all the nations inhabiting between the Gulfe of Venice, and the North sea. For the inhabitants of Istria, Dal∣matia, Bosna, Morauia, Bohemia, Lusatia, Polonia, Lithuania, Pruthenia, Scandinauia, Bulgaria, and Russia that wide and large kingdome, and many other neighbour counrries, vp as high almost as Constantinople do speake that tongue; so that it is also much vsed amongst the Turkes:
map of Illyria, encompassing Slovenia and Northern Croatia SCHLAVONIAE, CROATIAE. CARNIAE. ISTRIAE. BOSNIAE, FINITIMARVMQVE REGIONVM NOVA DESCRIPTIO, AVCTORE AVGVSTINO HIRSVOGELIO.
The other Mappe of ILLYRICA. I Had purposed, as I promised in the Preface to this booke, to haue set out of euery country but one Mappe or Table: and that as exact as might be: therefore when the famous man Iohannes Sambucus had sent vnto me a more absolute description of this country to be inserted into this our Theater, I had determined to haue left the other out. But as it is oft times both delightfull and pro∣fitable to know diuers opinions of one and the same thing, so also I perswade my selfe, it will not be altogether vnprofitable sometime to see the different descriptions of sundry authours of one and the same countrie. Againe lest the studious and diligent Reader should misse in this our last edition, that which was to be had in our first, we haue thought good to reteine also aswell the one as the other: and to place it heere in this place as an in-come or by-matter. I doubt not but it will be a thing well pleasing to all students of Cosmography.
map of Illyria, encompassing Slovenia and Northern Croatia ILLYRICVM. IOAN. SAMBVCVS ORTELIO SVO, S. Mitto hanc quòque tabellam qua necessaria confinia Pannonia de∣clarantur, fluuiorum & aliquot lo∣corum situs Hirschuogelij recte mutaui, Angelini autem studio plurima adieci, et interualla cor∣rexi, vt parum quis si cum Hirsch∣vogelij haec coniungat desiderarit, si qui errores sint, dies certiora do∣cebit. Viennae, Vale, 25. Octob. 1572. Cum Imperatoriae & Regniae Maiestatis Priuilegio.
The Dukedome of CARINTHIA, or KARNTEN, and the County Palatine of GORCZ. THis Dukedome of Carinthia, (which as Rithmayer affirmeth should rather be written Carnithia) hath vpon the East and North Steyrmarcke, vpon the West and South the Alpes and Friuli. Carniola is part of this prouince. In this country are many valleies and hilles very good wheat grounds: many Lakes and Riuers; amongst the which the chiefe is Drauus, or as they now call it Dra. The more fa∣mous cities of this tract are, S. Veit, Villach, and Clagenfurt. S. Veit the Metropolitane city, is a city of good note, hauing a very faire large market place, wherein standeth a goodly conduite of running wa∣ter, which we saw in building in the yeare 1558. The diameter or breadth of the cesterne we tooke to be about seuen foote ouer. This cesterne made of one whole stone of white marble, and there a∣mongst other monuments of antiquity digged out of the ground, was a thing worth the seeing. As they go out of the city toward Clagen-furt, there is a very wide champion that offereth it selfe, as yet bestrewed with many ruines of ancient buildings, they commonly call it Solfeldt: Paracelsus in that his Chronicle of this coun∣try (if so be it be his) nameth it, I cannot tell vpon what ground, Liburnia. I do rather iudge Soluense oppidum, the towne Solue, which Pliny maketh mention of in Carina, to haue long since stood heere. This is that place, where the princes are wont to be crowned abroad in the open aire, a strange and vnusuall kind of ceremony curiously described by Pius the second, in his Europa. Villach, a towne, whose houses in their forefront gorgeously painted and set out with histories and variety of colours yeeld a beau∣tifull and goodly shew to the beholders. It is seated vpon the riuer Dra, in a plaine, enclosed with very high steepe rocks, with a great stone bridge ouer the riuer. Clagen-furt, a strong city anciently called, as Lazius witnesseth, Claudia. Some there are that write, that the citizens of this city are so hardly bent against theeues, that vpon the least occasion of suspicion of theft a man shall there without examination be hanged, and then the third day after that he is hanged, they sitte vpon the triall; if so be that they find him to haue been vniustly executed, they bury him very honourably: if iustly, they let him hang still. But Rithmayer saith, that this is but a meere fable. Moreouer Frisach, a very ancient towne S. Lionhart, Wolfsperg, &c. are townes also of this coun∣try. In former times the Iapydes were thought to haue dwelt heere abouts. The soueraignty and secular iurisdiction of this coun∣try doth belong vnto the Dukes of Austrich: but as concerning Ecclesiasticall iurisdiction it partly belongeth to the Bishop of Salczburg, and partly to the Patriarch of Aquileia, as Paracelsus affirmeth in his forecited Chronicle. But in the same place he hath a most ridiculous etymologie of the name of this prouince, which he faineth to be fetched from the Latines, namely, that it should be named Carinthia, as who would say, Caritas intima, Intire loue and affection. As if the first inhabitants who seated themselues heere should haue been desirous to haue their country named by a name fetcht from a forrein nation and strange lan∣guage, not vnderstood of them. The Reader not satisfied with this heere set downe by vs, let him haue recourse vnto Sebastian Munster, Sabellicus, Pio II. &c. I vnderstand also that one Iohn Saluian, hath surueied this country, whose description as yet, I haue not seene. Goritiae palatinatus, The county palatine of Gorcz, belonging to the Duke of Austrich, is so named of Goercz, the chiefe city of this country, called of the Italians (for it standeth in Italie beyond the Alpes) Goricia, of Ptolemey Iulium Carnicum, as Leander thinketh. Amasaeus, as the same Leander saith, gathereth by diuers antiquities heere found and remaining, that Noteia sometime was seated heere about. It is a towne situate at the mouth of the riuer Wipach, (formerly called Fluuius frigidus,) I meane where Wipach falleth into the riuer Natiso. HISTRIA, or ISTEREICH. IT is almost a common thing generally (as Pliny saith in his naturall historie) that euery man describeth best and most curiously that country, in which he was borne and brought vp. And within a few lines after the same authour saith thus; I will follow no one man altogether, but as I shall find him in all points to speake most probably and consonant to the truth. And therefore heere in this place (the which I do almost euery where in these discourses vpon my Maps) I haue determined, amongst many others that haue described this prouince, to offer to the view of the Reader a great description according to the capacity of the place, of Lewis Verger, that country man borne. This man in the Cosmography of Munster, saith that this Neckland or De∣mi-ile, from the inner bay where Trieste now standeth hard vpon the shore, vnto the S. Veit, a towne situate in Fanatico vpon the riuer Fiume, conteineth in length better then 200. miles. The whole country is not very leuell and plaine, yet the mountaines are neither very high, steep nor barren, but plentifully replenished with vines, oliues, and other fruit-trees, corne, pastures and cattell: only in that part which bendeth toward the bay, Golfo di Quernero, sometime called Flanatico or Fanatico, it hath a very high mountaine, which they commonly call Monte maior. This first presenteth it selfe to the eie of the seamen which saile hither∣ward; in whose toppe there ariseth a very goodly spring of fresh-water. It yeeldeth many rare hearbs and plants of singular ver∣tues, which do make Physitions, farre dwellers from hence, to resort hither in time of the yeare, and with great toile and danger to clamber vp the same. The riuers of Histria are three, Fornio, Naupertus and Arsia: the first the country people call Risano: the second, Quieto: the last Arsa, which falleth into the bay Quernero or Fanatico, and is now the vtmost bound of Italie. The ci∣ties of Histria are Mugia, Iustinopolis, Isola, Pitano, (or Piran as I thinke it is named in the mappe) Pumago, Hemonia, Parenzo, O∣sara, Rubino, Pola, S. Veit, all of them marine cities. Pinguento, Montana, Portulae, Grisignana, Bullae, S. Lorenzo, Doi castelli, S. Vincenzo, Val Adignano, Pamerano, Albona, Fianonae, Petina, Galigagna, Coslaco, and Pisino, are vpland cities. The most fa∣mous city of this whole country is Iustinopolis, which they commonly call Capo d' Istria, the head of Histria, Pliny nameth it Ae∣gida: it standeth vpon a rocke in the sea, farre remote from the continent, vnto which it is ioined by a long bridge. This city with many other is subiect vnto the Venetians, the rest are vnder the gouernment of the Duke of Austrich &c. Beside the ancient Ge∣ographers read also Leander, Volaterran, and Dom. Niger, Cassiodore in his 12. booke Variar, hath much of this prouince. ZARA and SEBENICO. ZARA, we thinke sometime to haue been called Iadera, and others do affirme that his territories anciently was called Liburnia. SEBENICO, is that which old writers called Sicum. Both are marine cities situate vpon the Hadriaticke sea, vnder the iurisdiction of the Venetians. In that place where in this our mappe thou seest certaine ruines of old decaied buildings, Dominicus Niger saith, sometime did stand the city Essesia, which now lieth leuell with the ground, and the place at this day is called Beribir, where Epigrammes in Latine and Greeke, with many other mo∣numents of antiquity are yet to be seen. The authour of this mappe, whose name we know not, calleth the same Bergine. Of this part of Illyria read the same Dom. Niger his sixth booke of Geography. M. S. Cornelius Scepper sometime Embassadour of Fer∣dinand Emperour of Rome, vnto Soliman the great Turke, in his Iournall hath these wordes; At Zara we saw the church of S. Io. de Maluasia, so named, for that the sailours of a hoy laden with Malmesy, being in foule weather in danger of shipwracke vowed, that if they escaped safe to land they would build a church, whose mortar should be tempered with malmesy, which was accor∣dingly performed.
map of Carinthia, Slovenia and Austria CARINTHIAE DVCATVS, ET GORI∣TIAE PALATINATVS, WOLF. LAZIO auctore. map of Istria, encompassing Slovenia, Croatia, and Italy Histriae tabula Petro Coppo descr. map of Zadar and Šibenik, Croatia ZARAE, ET SE∣BENICI DES∣CRIPTIO
HVNGARY. HVngaria, (which it is certaine was so named of the Hunni or Hungari, a people come out of Scythia, which now inhabit it) conteineth almost both the Panno∣nies, the countries of the Iaziges, and the Daci, now comprehending Transsylua∣nia, VValachria and Moldauia. On the South it beginneth at the riuer Dra: on the North it is bounded by Sarmatia Europaea, now called Polonia; and Getia, at this day named VValagria: on the West it hath Austrich, sometime the head of the Higher Pannonia: vpon the East it is confined with Mysia, which at this day they call Rhetia. Donaw (Danubius) of all the riuers of Europe by farre the greatest, run∣neth through the middest of it, and so diuideth it into two parts, the Heather and the Farder. The HEATHER HVNGARIA, is that which formerly were the Pannonies, the Vpper and Neather: this is seuered from the further Hungaria by the riuer Dra: from Austrich and Bayern, by the foote of the mount Caecius; from Slauonia by Dra: from Bosna and Rascia, by Saw. The head and chiefe cities of this part is Buda, (often they call it) the imperiall seat of their kings. Other townes of great account are, Alba Regalis, (Stulweissenburg) famous for the coronation and tombes of their kings; Strigonium, (Gran) the Metropolitan or Archbishops sea, Quinqueecclesiae (Funskirchen, the Turkes call it Petscheu) a bishop∣ricke; Sopronium, Taurunum (the Germanes call it Griechweissenburg, the Hungarians, Nandor alba; the Ita∣lians Belgrado:) Sabaria, (Zombatel) or Szombath hely) the place where S. Martine was borne: and Stridon, (Sdrigna,) the natiue soile of S. Hierome. It hath many goodly riuers; and two very famous lakes, (Ba∣laton) and (Fertou). To this part of Hungary, as soone as thou art ouer the riuer Dra, is annexed Slauonia, sometime a part of the vpper Pannonie, lying between the riuers Saw and Dra; although indeed it doth extend it selfe farre beyond the Saw, as farre as the riuer Huna, (for so it is at this day called) where Cro∣atia beginneth. After it followeth Dalmatia, coasting along by the Hadriaticke sea, partly subiect to the Turke, partly to the Venetian. The least part of it now is vnder the king of Hungaria: the vpland country is possessed of the Bozners, and Rascians, which anciently were called Moesi superiores. The chiefe city of Slauonia is (Zagrabia) of Croatia, (Bigihon) is now, but in former ages Fumium was the chiefe. The FARTHER HVNGARY, or Hungary beyond Donaw, is seuered from Morauia, Silesia, Polonia, and Ruscia by the montes Carpathij, (called now by the Germanes (Schneberg) which do begin a little aboue Posonium, (Presburgh) and from thence by many long and tedious windings, passe between this coun∣try vntill they end at the Euxine sea or Marmaiore, at that place where there is the country which now they call Maromarusia. There now other mountaines and woods, from that place bending toward Se∣uerinum, a city situate vpon Donaw, do diuide it from Transsyluania and VValachria transalpina. The riuer Tibiscus, well stored with diuers sorts of fish, arising out of the mountaines of Maromarusia, runneth through the middest part of Hungary. It hath many goodly townes, as Posonium, (Presburg) Tirnauia, (Dijru) &c. on the West: Colacia, Bachia, Zegedinum, (Zeged,) &c. on the South: Varadinum, Dedrecinum, &c. beyond the riuer Tibiscus, where also are the mines of gold and siluer; At Seuerinum, is yet to be seen a mention of the bridge, long since built by Traiane the Emperour, and other townes and things worth the remembrance, which in this place, the shortnesse of our entended discourse doth force me to omit. The Inhabitants do speake the Scythian language, a tongue much different from any language spoken by any of their neighbours round about them. It giueth place to no country of the World, for valiant and stout men; store of cattell, fertility of soile, and rich veines of mettalls: but for tempera∣ture of the aire, wholesome and pleasant situation, it may iustly be preferred before any whatsoeuer that I know. The earth is plentifully endowed by nature with all maner of things necessary and com∣modious: Gold, Siluer, Salt, Precious-stones, Mineralls for colours are heere digged vp in great abun∣dance. It yeeldeth great store of corne, graine, fodder for cattell, apples and fruites of diuers sorts. They haue many riuers well stored with fresh fish. They haue great plenty of Coppar. In the most of their riuers there are often found certaine shiuers of the best and finest gold: yea euen in their vines, (such is the nature of this golden soile) they do extract great plenty of Gold. This we haue gathered out of the little treatise of Steeuen Broderith, and the Decades of Hungary writ∣ten by Antony Bonfinius: to whom the studious Reader for further satisfaction may haue recourse. Let him also read Herberstein his Commentaries of Moscouy; Matthias a Michou of Sarmatia, Munster, and Cuspi∣nian in oratione Protreptica, and in his Austria: and especially the abridgement of the histories of Hungary written by Peter Ranzane, who, amongst other strange wonders which he reckoneth vp of this coun∣try, affirmeth, if you will beleeue him, that himselfe hath seen very many golden branches and twigs of vines, some as long as ones finger, others halfe a foote long. George VVernher hath written a little tract of the strange waters of Hungary.
map of Hungary HVNGARIAE DESCRIPTIO, WOLFGANGO LAZIO AVCT. Cum Priuilegio. Hungariae uoces quomodo legendae sunt. C H. litterae in vocibus Hungaricis CZ. S, littera pro S C H. Z, littera pro S simplici in vocibus Hungaricis. W, litte∣ram in fine pro V Y.
An other Mappe of HVNGARY. THis second description of Hungary more exact and true, as the famous learned man Iohn Sambuke, this countrie∣man borne, maketh me beleeue, (for euery man, as Pli∣ny in his Naturall history most truely witnesseth, de∣scribeth the plot and situation of the country best where∣in he himselfe was bred and borne) we haue thought good in this place to adioine vnto the former, and that beside our purpose: when as our promise was of ech countrie, to set out but one Mappe. But because I thinke neither of them to be of it selfe absolute inough for the worth of this so goodly a country, I haue thought it behouefull to the Reader, to set out both in this our Theater. He that shall compare them one with the other, shall find oft times great variety in the situation of places, and turnings and windings of the streames and riuers: and yet there is no rea∣son why presently any man should condemne the authours of want of skill or diligence in describing it: but let him iudge of it, as Strabo most truely doth of History: for he doth not by and by thinke that history to be reiected, when they that haue set it forth, do not altogether agree in the descriptions of places: when as the truth of the whole history is many times by that disagreement more plainly demonstrated. Let therefore the diligent Reader and student of Geography, for whose good we do whatsoeuer we possibly can, vse one or both at his discretion, seeing that we are forced to do what we may, not what we would.
map of Hungary VNGARIAE LOCA PRAECIPVA RE∣CENS EMENDATA ATQVE EDITA, PER IOANNEM SAMBVCVM PANNO∣NIVM, IMP. MS. HISTORICVM. 1579.
TRANSSYLVANIA. STeuen Broderith, in his Treatise printed at Basill, together with the Hungarian hi∣story of Antony Bonfinius, describeth this country thus: Transsiluania, saith he, was sometime a part of Dacia. His chiefe city is Alba Iulia, (Weissenburg) so called ei∣ther of Iulius Caesar, or rather of Hiula a certaine prince of the Hunnes. It hath many other goodly townes, amongst the which are Cibinum, (Hermanstadt) called of the Hungarians (Seben) situate vpon the riuer Cibin, Brassouia, (Chronstadt) Co∣losium, (Clausenburg) Bistricia, (Bestereze) and many other built and inhabited by a people of high Germany, which we call Saxons. In this country are the Siculi, a fierce and warlike Nation: amongst which there is neither clowne, nor gentleman, all men are in de∣gree equall, like as amongst the Switzers Transsiluania is very fertile of all maner of things, especially of Gold, Siluer, and other mettalls; as also of Salt digged out of mountaines. It breedeth excellent Hor∣ses, and hath great plenty of Wine, although not so good as Hungary and Slauonia. The two Walachies VValachia Transalpina, Walachie beyond the mountaines, and Moldauia, do enclose Transsiluania: that rest∣eth vpon the riuer Donaw, this vpon the Euxine sea, or Mar maiore, as the Italians call it; both of them together with Transsiluania do now possesse that part of Europe, which anciently was called DACIA. Thus that whole tract beyond Donaw, which doth not only conteine the higher Hungary, but also Transsiluania together with both the Walachies, is enclosed round on euery side with Donaw, the Car∣pathian hills, (Crapacke, as some thinke) the Euxine sea, and againe with the same Donaw. Thus farre Broderith. But I thinke it not amisse to set downe heere the description of it out of Antony Bonfinius his I. decade of the first booke of his history of Hungary. Beyond the Carpathian mountaines, saith he, is the vtter∣most prouince of Dacia, extended euen vnto the riuer Axiaces. This now vulgarly is knowen by the name of TRANSSILVANIA, they call it Sibenburghen, the Hungarians Herdel. It is a most fertile coun∣try of cattell, wine, and corne: also of Gold and Siluer: where certaine riuers do driue downe shiuers of Gold, and pieces sometime of a pound and an halfe weight; being euery way round beset with steep hills in maner of a crownet. In the woods are kine or beeues with long manes like horses; buffs and wild horses, both very swift and light in running: but the horses haue long manes hanging down to the very ground: those which are tame and brought vp for seruice, naturally haue a very fine easie kind of amble. This country is inhabited partly by Scythians, partly by the Saxones and Dakes: these are more humane and ciuill, those more rude and churlish. In old time before the breaking in of the Gothes and Hunnes, all Dacia was possessed by the Roman and Sarmatian colonies, &c. George of Reichtersdorff hath described this country in a peculiar Treatise. See also George Rithaymer, Peter Rantzan, Pius the second in his description of Europe, Iohn Auentine, and Martine Cromer in his twelfth booke of the history of Poland. This country vulgarly is called Sibenburgh, and Zipserland, as Sebastian Munster hath giuen out. More of the knowledge and discouery of this prouince are to be sought for, in the first chapter and second section of the twelfth booke of Wolfangus Lazius his Romane common-wealth, and in Laonicus his fifth booke: Lastly, in the protrepticke oration of Iohn Cuspinian. Synonymes or diuers names of one and the same place in Transsiluania, according as they are named by the Hungarians, Germanes and Latines, done by Iohn Sambucus. Erdel, Sibenburgen Dacia ripensis, Pan∣nodacia, Trans. vel Vltratrasiluania. Nagbanya, Newsteetl Riunli domin. Rudbanya, Rodna. Bestercze, Nosn Bistritiae. Bonczyda, Bonisprukh. Kolosuar, Glausnburg Claudiopolis. Offenbanya, Offnburg. Aprukh, Ochlatn. Samos falu, Mikldorff. Buza, Busaten. Vorosmarth, Rosperg. Demeterfalua, Metersdorff. Teuuisch, Durnen. Balasfalua, Blasndorff. Gulafeyruar, Weyssnburg Alba Iulia, Sermisdacia. Zekluasarhel, Newmarkh. Kizekmezeu, Ibisdorff. Felseupold, Oberspald. Absopold, Niderspald. Zazzebes, Millcnbach Zabeus. Holduilagh, Schatn. Apafalu, Apfdorff. Moneta, Donnersmkrhta. Braniczka, Bernfapff. Baijon, Bonisdorff. Ekemezeu, Prosdorff. Zelindes, Stoltzeburg. Naghczur, Grooscheyrn. Rihonfalua, Reicherdorff Requiescit. Brasso, Cronstatt Corona, vel Ste∣phanopolis. Varhel, Zarmis. Segesuar, Schesburg. Zazhalom, Hunderthuhl Centum col∣les, an hundred hills. Zarkan, Schirkingen. Keuhalom, Keps. Kykelwar, Kiklpurg. Veczel, Venecia, Vlpia Traiana. Kerestien mezeu, Aw Insula Christi Christs iland. Muschna, Meschen. Kakasfalu, Hendorff. Recze, Ratzisd. Ioffij Val. Dobra. Vizakna, Saltzburg. Barczasagh, Wurtzland Burcia. Vaskapur, Eysuthor Pilae Geticae, the ancients called it. Veurostorn, Ratertuern. Zakadat, Zaka. Feketetho, Nigra palus, Blacke more. Tolmacz, Talmisch. Aran, Auratus fl. Zamos, Samisch Samosus fl. Keureuz, Die Kraysz Chrysius fl. Fier Keureus, schwartz weis Kreysz. Feketh Keureus, schwartz weis Kreysz. Sebeskeureus, dic schnel krapsz fl. Maros, Merisch, Marysus fl. Olt, Die Alth Aluata, Aluttus fl. Strell, Istrig Sargetia, vel Strigetia fl. Ompay, Die Omp fl. Haczagh, vel Hatsaag, or rather, the vale Sarmisia, where there was some time the city Sarmisgethusa. &c.
map of Transylvania, Romania TRANSILVANIA HANC VLTRA VEL TRAN∣SILVANIAM, QVAE ET PĀNO∣DACIA, ET DACIA RIPĒSIS, VVL∣GO SIBEMBVRGĒ DICITVR, didit Ʋiennae Ao. 1566. Nobiliss at{que} Doctiss. Ioēs Sābutus Pannonius. H. Litera in hac tabula nonnullis vocabulis adiuncta significat ea esse Hungarica. Cum Priuilegio.
The Kingdome of POLAND. POlonia or Poland, so named of the champion plaines of the soile, (which yet in their language they vulgarly call Pole) is a vast and wide country, on the West bordering vpon Schlesia, on the other sides it resteth vpon Hungaria, Lithuania and Prussia. It is diuided into the Greater and the Lesser. The Greater Poland, is that which lieth toward the West, and conteineth the goodly cities Guesna and Posnauia. The Lesser Poland lieth toward the South, and hath the famous city Cracow, seated vpon the head of the riuer Vistula, (the Germanes call it De Wixel, the Polanders Drwencza,) which runneth through the middest of the country: the o∣ther cities are not very great nor beautifull. Their houses for the most part are all built of stone, and some are dawbed with clay. The country is very moorish, full of fens and woodes. The common drinke the people vse is Beere: wine they seldome drinke, neither do they know how to dresse and manure the vine. They are counted excellent Horsemen for seruice in the warres. The soile is fertile, they haue many heards of cattell, many deere, game and pastime for the Noblemen. It hath great plenty of Hony. Salt heere is digged out of the earth in great abundance. In the mountaines which they in their language call Tatri, they haue mines of Brasse and Brimstone. Cromer writeth, that the Polanders are of the Hungars called Lengel, of Leech the captaine or father of the Nation. Vnder the kingdome of Polonia are comprehended Lithuania, Samogitia, Masouia, Volhinia, Podolia and Russia, which is called South-Russia, and of some Ruthenia: as also all Prussia, except that part which hath a peculiar Duke by whom it is gouerned. Lewenclay writeth that in the yeare 1570. the king of Poland tooke the Prince of Moldauia to his protection. The greatest part of LITHVANIA, is moorish and full of Bogges, for the most part woody, and therefore not easilie entered, trauelled or come vnto; it is better trading with the Lithuans in the winter then at other times: for that the moores and lakes being couered either with thicke ice or deep snow, the Marchants may passe from place to place more easily. In Lithuania there are few townes, and the villages are little inhabited. The chiefe wealth of the country people are cattell and rich skins of diuers sorts of wild beasts, wherewith the whole country is wonderfully stored. They haue great plenty of wax and hony. This prouince breedeth the Bugle, a kind of beast which they call Suber, the Germanes Vr-ochs, such as was to be seene at Antwerp, in the yeare 1570. From hence also commeth that kind of beast which the Latines call Alces, the Dutch Elandt. The people speake the Slauonian tongue, like as also the Polanders do. Their chiefe city is Vilna, a Bishop sea, and is as bigge as Cracow: but the houses in it do not stand close together or touch one another: but like as in the country, gardens and orchyeards are between house and house. All that Oke-timber which we call Wagenschott, of which almost all the buildings carpenters worke, and ioiners worke, as well publicke as priuate, is made in the Low-countries, as also the greatest part of their furniture and houshold-stuffe, is feld in these parts, and from thence is through the East sea, (the Latines call it Mare balticum, the Dutch Oostsee, the Russians Wareczkouie mo∣rie) and Germane ocean, transported into these countries. In SAMOGITIA, (which in their language signifieth Low-land) the people are tall and of a goodly stature, but rude and barbarous in their maners and behauiour, vsing a sparing and homely diet. The Russians call this prouince Samotz∣kasemla. Heere is no maner of faire buildings, but their houses are like houels or poore cottages; made of wood and couered with straw or reed. From the bottome vpward by a little and little their buildings are made lesse and lesse, like the keele of a ship, or great helmet. In the toppe it hath one window, letting in the light from aboue, vnderneath which is the hearth or chimney where they dresse their meat. In that house they hide themselues, their wiues, children, ser∣uants, maides, sheep, cattell, corne and houshold-stuffe altogether. Sichardus in his history of Germany writeth that the people of Samogitia are descended from the Saxons: and therefore although they be subiect to the kingdome of Polonia, yet the Saxons challenging it to be a part of their iurisdiction, they do affirme it to pertaine to the precinct of Saxony. MASOVIA, is a shire held of the king of Poland, in homage. The chiefe or Metropolitane city of this prouince is War∣souia, where they make the excellent mead, a kind of drinke made of hony &c. VOLHINIA, a country abounding with all maner of things, a very fertile soile, full of townes and castles. PODOLIA, is of such a fruitfull soile, that the grasse in three daies will couer a sticke being cast into it. It is so ranke and groweth so fast, that a plough, being left in it vpon the head-lands or grassie places of the field, in a very few daies, wilbe so couered ouer that you shall hardly find it againe. Heere also is great store of hony. The head city is Camyenetz. RVSSIA, yeeldeth great plenty of Horses, Oxen, and Sheep of very fine wooll. Their drinke is mead, which they make of hony. Wine also is brought hither from Pannonia, Moldauia and Walachria. The chiefe city of this prouince is Leunpurg, the Latines call it Leopolis, Lion-city, MOLDAVIA is a part of Walachia, whose metropolitane city is Sossouia, commonly called Sotschen. The inhabitants of this country are a fierce and cruell people, but very good souldiours, and therefore they are at continuall enmity with the Transsiluanians. As the custome of the Thracians was in old time to marke the Noblemens children with a hot iron: so they report that the Lords of Moldauia to this day do vse, to marke their children, assoone as they be borne, with some kind of marke: least a question might arise whether they were the right and lawfull heires or not: and that aliens and strangers might be excluded from inheritance amongst them; as Reinerus Reineckius in his discourse of noble families hath written. Many other things of thse countries thou maiest read of in Matthias of Michow in his discourse of the Sar∣maties, Albert Crantz in his description of Wandalia, Bonfinius in his history of Hungary, and Laonicus Chalcondylas in his first and third bookes. But of all Martine Cromer in his Chronicle of Poland hath most excellently described these countries, and Sigismund of Herberstain in his commentaries of Moschouia. See also Sebastian Munster, Pius Secundus Pope of Rome, and Dauid Chytraeus in his Chronicle of Saxony. Iohannes Duglossus, a most copious historian of the Po∣lonians, is cited by Ioach mus Cureus; but as yet not published, as he affirmeth. George of Reichersdorff hath most curi∣ously described Moldauia. Laonicus Chalcondylas also in his second booke hath diuers things worth the knowing of this country.
map of Poland, Lithuania, Belarus, Ukraine and Moldova POLONIAE, LITVANIAEQ. DESCRIPTIO. Auctore Wenceslao Godreccio; et cor∣rectore Andrea Pograbio Pilsnensi. Cum Priuilegio. Imp. Regiae etc. decennali.
SPRVSE. GRomer in his description of Poland, describeth this country on this maner: Amongst many other nations of Sarmatia in Europe, the Borussi by Ptolemey are placed very farre North in that coast, where now, as I thinke, the Liuonians and Moschouites do dwell, beyond the riuer Chernish, next neighbours to the Ryphaeans. Those, with Erasmus stella I iudge, to haue passed further South and West and possessed a great part of Sar∣matia, which is vpon the East adioined to the Russians and Moschouites, and is enclosed on the South with woods and the Hercynian forrest, and all that coast along by Pautzkerwicke or Frish-haff, as some thinke, (Ptolemey calleth it Sinus Venedicus, Pliny Clylipenus) the Balticke, and East seas, euen vnto the riuers Vistula, (Wixel or Weissel) and Ossa; and to be called Borussi or Prussi, by names not much different. In this compasse now do inhabit the Liuonians, Lithuans, Samagites, and the Pruissen yet retaining the ancient appellation, nations distinct in respect that they are subiect to diuers states and gouerned by different lawes and policies, but vsing altogether the same language vulgarly, wholly differing from the Slauonians, yet hauing diuers Latine words intermedled and mixt among, but for the most part corrupt, and formed rather after the Italian and Spanish termination, than after the Latine. Notwithstanding the Dutch and Germanes of late yeares, conquering that part which lieth vpon the sea, and is cal∣led Spruisse and Liuonia, haue planted their colonies there. Heere hence it is that the Dutch tongue is more familiar and vsuall to these people, than that ancient and vulgar language, especially in the cities and townes. Which also is vsuall amongst the Lithuans, who by reason of their neighbourhood and entercourse with the Russians, and colonies from thence enterteined, do much what speake the Russian language. For in that Duglossus deriueth the name and originall of this nation from Prusias the king of Bithynia, it is altogether fabulous, and not worth the confuting. Some do thinke that the Borussi, in the German tongue were so called, for that they were neere the Russi: but whether truly, or fasly I list not heere to dispute. When and how the Latine tongue did intermedle it selfe with the vulgar language of the Borussians, Lithuanians, and Liuonians we dare not constantly affirme. Erasmus Stella saith, that Borussia, (Prussia, or Spruse) was rather assaulted by the Romanes, then conquered; and alleadgeth Pliny for his authour: whereupon that followeth that together with the Em∣pire, the Latine tongue could not there be spread and planted. But Duglossus he telleth vs, that in those ciuill warres between Caesar and Pompey, a certaine band or company of Romanes, forsaking Italie, their natiue country in those troublesome times, seated themselues in these coasts, and to haue built a city there, and to haue called it ROMOVE, after the name of Rome their mother: which city for a long time was the Metropolitane of that country. If this opinion of Duglossus be true, who may iustly suspect, (alwaies reserued, if there be any cause of doubt of the truth of the history) that that band of Romanes, lead by some captaine named Libo, to haue come vnto the sea coast neere Frisch-haff, toward the East, and doth border vpon the Russians, driuen hither either by tempestuous weather to haue landed in this place, or being followed by the conquerours, to haue withdrawen themselues into these quarters for shelter against the raging tyranny of Caesars souldiers: and so the Libones, Liuones or Liuonians to haue receiued their name and appellation from the same Libo: Lastly entending their bounds further and spreading themselues euery way, some to haue been named Lithuanians, by a name deriued from the same, but much altered and corrupt, and others to haue retained still the ancient appellation of the Prussi. Notwithstanding also a great part of Pomerland, and Culmischland, and the skirts of Michelaw, after that they came to be subiect to the same iurisdiction with Spruse, and were vnder the command of the Knights of the Holy Crosse, (Teutones Crucigeri) began to be called by one name, Spruse: yet indeed, that is properlie and truly called Spruse, which is comprehended between the riuers Weissel, (Vistulo) Dribentz, Ossa, and Nemen, and the bay Frisch-haff, (which we spoke of before) and from Lithuania and Massouia is diuided by thicke woods full of Meeres and Bogges. Thus farre out of Cromer. I thinke it not amisse also to set down heere the ancient diuision of this country of Spruse into particular shires, as Casper Henne∣berger hath written, whose words are these. VIDIVVTO, or, as he is called of some, VIDINITVS, king of Borussia, in the yeare of Christ 573. when he was 116. yeares old, be∣fore he together with his brother BRVTENOCRIBE, did cast himselfe, for a sacrifice to his Gods, into the fire, thus diuided his possessi∣ons vnto his sonnes. Hee had, as they report 12. sonnes. The I. was LITPHO, or as others call him LITALAN, to whom he gaue Lituania the Lower, & made him king & soueraigne of the rest, but he, for the murder of CRIBE, a Bishop of theirs so called, was reiected of his brethren. Amongst the other eleuen he diuided the country of Spruse. Of these the first called ZAMO, obtained that tract, which of him to this day is named Zambia, (Samland) hauing vpon the West & North the salt sea; vpon the East the lake Curisch-haff, (Curonensis lacus) and the riuer Deme: vpon the South the riuer Pregel: it is a receiued opinion amongst them that he dwelt in the mount GALTAGARE. II. SVDO, got for his portion that part of the country where now are Oletzo, Stradaun, Lick. part of the precincts or liberties of Iohanisburg, Letzen, Angerburg and Insterburg: and hath vpon the East, Lituania: on the South, Masouia and Galindia: on the North-West, Barthonia, (Barthenerland) on the North, Schalauonia. This country they called, after his name, Sudauia. Which name afterward, when this whole tract was spoiled and laid wast by the Crucigeri (the knights of the Holy Crosse,) it vtterly lost: and therefore whether this country was called Sudauia, or not, the latter writers are wholly ignorant, and they do thinke it to haue beene in Sambia, where now is the canton called Der Sudawische winkel oder der Bruster ort, but they are deceiued: For for their treachery they were of the Crucigeri translated thither. III. NADROO, was seated between Sambia, Scalauonia, and Barthonia, where there are many riuers, forrests, and vast wildernesses, and is called Nadraw, (NADRAVIA.) In this prouince are Tapiaw, Taplaucken, Salaw, Georgenburg &c. strong and defensible castels. IIII. SCALAVONI, had those places giuen him which are on either side of the riuer Memel, (the old writers called it Cronon) and therefore his portion was na∣med, Scalauonia, after his own name. V. NATANGO, got that part which of him was called Natangen, and hath vpon his North side the riuer Pregel, vpon the East, Alla. VI. BARTHO, enioyed Barthonia, Barthenerland. It was diuided into the Greater, the Lesser, and Plick Barthen; but now those diuisions are forgotten and out of vse. VII. GALINDO, that tract from Masouia, vnto the riuer Alla, and the lake Spirding, of him was named Galindia, and conteineth many huge deserts: a great part of it doth belong to the Bishop of Var∣mia, and is now accounted as part of Ermeland. VIII. VARMONI, for his portion was assigned VARMIA, lying between the countries Galindia, Natangia, and Pogesamia. But he not liuing long after his father, this prouince soone againe lost that name, and of his mother was named by a Germane name Ermeland. IX. HOGGO, his Lordship was seuered from Ermeland, by the riuer Passerg: from Pomesa∣mia, by the riuer Weseck and the lake Drausen: but now of the Germanes it is called Hockerland, but by the Latines, of POGIA, his daugh∣ter, it is named Pogesania. X. POMESO, possessed Pomesania, (denominated of him) bounded by the riuers Weissel, Weeseck, Ossa or Moc∣kra. XI. CHELMO, obtained for his portion Culmigeria, or Hulmigeria (they call it Colmishland:) a prouince lying between the riuers Weissel, Mockra, or Osso and Dreuentza, well replenished with castels and cities. Heere is another shire worth the remembrance which they call Sossaw: Item another called LOBOVIA, (Lobaw) belonging to the Bishop of Culm. HVNTAVV, also a very little prouince, but well inhabited. There is also an iland about Margeburg (or Marienburg) enclosed round with a bancke or wall by the Crucigeri, the knight of the Holy Crosse, against the inundations and breaking-in of the riuers Weissel and Nogot, and it is called The Greater ile, Gros Werder. The Lesser ile, Das klein Werder, is in Pomerell, about Dantzk. Lastly, MARIANA by Marienwerder, an Iland so called, which is not in∣habited, but reserued for pasture and meddow yeelding yearely great profit. This authour promiseth a peculiar Treatise of Prussia, with a further discourse of this his mappe. But of this thou maiest read more in Guaginus Veronensis in his history of Sarmatia. Dauid Chytraeus also in his Saxon Chronicle hath excellently well described the same. Amber, (the Latines call it Succinum and Electrum, the Germanes Bernstein, Agstein, Ammeren) is found plentifully on the coast of this country, and no where els in the world beside, to the great gaine and inriching of this Nation. Diuers haue written of the nature and properties of this Simple. But none better, in my iudgement, than Andreas Aurifaber Vratislauiensis, in a seuerall tract, written both in La∣tine and Dutch.
map of Prussia, Germany and Poland PRVSSIAE VERA DESCRIPTIO. Per Gaspar. Henneberg. Erlichens.
LIVONIA. LIuonia, (as Lewenclay writeth) extendeth it selfe along the sea coast aboue 4000. furlongs, and where it is nar∣rowest it is 1300. furlongs broad. The Prussians, Lithuanians, and Russians dwell round about it, the rest the Liuonian Gulfe doth bound. Liuonia conteineth the CVRONES, ESTHENI, and LETTI, nations different both in maners and language. In the cities and townes they vse the Saxon or German tongue. The country is full of wood, plaine and champion without hils or mountaines, for the most part lying lay and vnhusbanded, notwithstanding that the soile is good and fertile. For if you shall except wine and oile, and some few other such things which nature yeeldeth to some countries that are situate in a more temperate cli∣mate, (for these only are brought in hither vnto them) other things more necessary for the maintenance of mans life, are heere found in such great plenty, that they do liberally communicate them to strangers and for∣reiners. They haue great plenty of Fish and Deere. Munster affirmeth, that the Hares in this country do in euery season of the yeare change their colour: for in the winter they are white, and in the summer they are gray. From hence, wax, hony, ashes, stone-pitch, (pix arida) liquid pitch, (the Dutch call it Ther, we, Tarre) and that kind of corne which the Latines call Secale, the Germanes Rogghe, and we Rie, is yearely brought vnto vs in great abundance. It hath certaine cities very large and finely built; of them the chiefest is RIGA, a colonie of the Germanes of the Bishopricke of Breme, commodiously seated vpon the riuer Duin. It is a goodly Mart towne, and the Metropolitane of the whole prouince. RIVALIA, (they vulgarly call it Reuel, the Russians Roliua,) built by Waldemare king of Denmarke, famous for his goodly hauen vpon a bay of the Balticke or East-sea. This for traffique is not lesse frequented or populous then Riga. DORPATVM, (Derpt) neere neighbour to the Russians, which call it Iuriongorod. The riuer Becke runneth by the walles of this city, very commodious for traffique with the Russians. This riuer is caried in one channell into the sea, which running violently with a great fall from steep rocks, worketh the same effect to the people neere adioining, as Lewenclay saith, that the cataracts or fals of the riuer Nilus did to the Aegyptians, which in continuance of time by little and little grow to be deaffish and thicke of hearing. Besides these cities there are certaine lesser townes, fortified with goodly strong castles; VENDA, Wenden, the more honourable for that heere the Grand-captaine or Master of the order, keepeth his court. It is situate in the middest of the country: Then VELINVM, Welum, Parnaw, vpon the sea, Wolmer, Veseburgum, (I thinke they call it Yseborg) Wittestein, Narua, and others. Willichius and Cureus do thinke that the Efflui and Limouij did sometime dwell in these quarters. Of the forme of go∣uernment and ordering of their common-wealth, which is at the prescript of the knights of the order of the Holy Crosse, read Iohn Aubane, Munster, Lewenclay, Gaguine in his Sarmatia, and Herberstein; out of whom we haue culled these particulars. But Crantzius also in his sixth booke of Wandalia, is to be read, with Oderbornes second booke of the life of Basilidis, and Dauid Chytraus his Chronicle of Saxony, who hath written of the same with greater diligence than the rest. POMERANIA, or POMERLAND. PEtrus Artopoeus Pomeranus in Munsters Cosmography thus describeth this country, his natiue soile: POMOERA∣NIA, saith he, situate vpon the Balticke sea, of the first inhabitants, in their natiue language, that is, in the Wandall tongue, is called PAMORZI. It is still possessed of the first in-borne inhabitants, gouerned by their proper Prin∣ces, and was neuer subdued or made subiect to any forrein iurisdiction. It is in all places very fertile, well watered with riuers, brookes, lakes, creekes, and in-lets from the sea; it hath many good hauens, rich pastures, and good corne grounds: it hath great plenty of apples, cattell, deere, fishes, foule, corne, butter, cheese, hony, wax and such like commodities; it hath many rich mountaines, populous cities, townes, castels, and villages; there is no void place or wast ground in it, but those which lakes or mountaines do possesse. Before Christianity was entertained here, they spake the Wandall language, and followed their fashions and maner of life, vntill such time as they were sub∣dued vnder the command of the Roman Emperours, for then together with Religion they began to vse the Saxon tongue, which to this day they retaine. Thus farre Artopoeus. Pomerye, in the Wandalian language, which is the same with the Slauonian tongue, signifieth no∣thing els, as Herberstein affirmeth, but neere the sea or a marine coast. The banke or sea-wall of this country is so strongly fortified by na∣ture with such a strong rampart, that heere is no feare of the sea breaking in to ouerflow them. The more famous cities vpon this coast, be∣sides, some other situate further within the land, are, Stetin, Newgard, Stargard, &c. STETIN sometime was but a small village inhabited by a few poore fishermen, but after that Christianity was planted heere about, Wineta vtterly destroied, and the mart was remoued hither, it begun presently so to flourish, that now it is become the Metropolitan of the whole country. It is most pleasantly seated vpon the banke of the riuer Oder, from the which it ariseth by little and little higher vpon the side of an hill. It is enclosed with a strong wall and deep trench. GRYPSVVALD, is a towne in the Dukedome of Wolgast, which others do call the Dukedome of Barth: this towne being long together much afflicted with ciuill warres, was much hindered and impaired: but in the yeare 1456. by erecting and placing of an Vniuersity there, it began againe by little and little to lift vp the head. IVLINVM, a towne sometime not inferiour vnto the goodly cities of Europe, whether you respect the wealth of the citizens or stately buildings of the same. This was sometime a famous mart towne of the Wandalls. Such a multitude of merchants did flocke hither, from Russia, Saxony, Laussnitz, Meisen, and all parts of Wandal-land, in such troopes, that in all Europe, except Constantinople, there was scarce such a mart to be found: but it was so shaken by the violent warres of the Danes, that at last it was almost wholly brought to nothing; such is the mutability of vnconstant fortune alwaies delighted in change. Now they call it Wollin. STRALSVND, vpon the sea shore. It hath had sometime his proper prince, viz. the Duke of Barth. It is a city very populous and greatly frequented by Merchants. WINETA, this sometime was also a city of good reckoning, peraduenture it is now called Archon or Iulinum, (Wollin.) For the cities of Wandal-land, according to the diuersity of languages of sundry nations, had their diuers names. That which the Wandalls called Stargard, the Saxons named Aldenburg, and the Danes Bannesia as Crantzius affirmeth. But I thinke it good to set down the description of this country, which the singular learned man, M. Peter Edling sent me from Colberg, in this maner: Pomerland at this day hath forty cities, enclosed with walls and ditches; besides certaine goodly castles and monasteries. Amongst the which these are the chiefe: Stralsund, Stettin, Grypswald, Stargard, Colberg and Anglame. Fiue hundred yeares since, before the enterteinment of Christian religion, which was in the yeare 1124. and when they left the Slauonian tongue, Pomerland was greater, and not much inferiour to a kingdome. For Bugslaus the first, brother of Wartislaus the first, sonne to Swantibore, who died a Pagane, when as his nephews leauing their country for the alteration of the language, adioined Pomerell to Spruise. POMERELL, which the Polanders do at this day call Casub corner, (Cassubia) is no very small prouince. It extended it selfe from the borders of Pomerland to the riuer Wixel or Weissel, and conteineth these cities, Dantzk, Putzka, Dirsow, Stargard, Nauburg, Smecha, Tauchel, Nakel, Hamerstein, Baldeburg, Frideland, Conitz, Schoneg, Slochow &c. which cities haue for the most part castles belonging to them: beside which there are these castles; Moseuantz, Talkenborch, Subitz, Lauterberg: and these Monasteries, Polpelin, Sukow, Tzernitz, Oliua, where the Princes of Pomerell were wont to be buried, euen to Mestewin the last of that line, who died at Dantzk and was buried at Oliua in the yeare 1295. Read more of Pomerland in the Saxon Chronicle of Dauid Chytraeus. This mappe we haue taken out of Munsters Cosmography. The Dukedome of OZWIECZIN and ZATOR. THis Dukedome is a part of the kingdome of Poland where it toucheth Silesia. Sometime it did not belong to this kingdome. The territorie of OZVVIECZIN, (the Germanes in their language call it Auschwitz) fell vnto the kings of Poland in the time of Cazimir, the third, in the yeare 1454. ZATOR, about 400. yeares after, in the raigne of Sigismund the first, was reduced vnto the crowne of Poland and was vnited to that body, in the yeare of Christ 1548. as Cromer in his Chronicle of Poland testifieth.
map of Northern Germany and Northern Poland POME∣RANIAE, WANDALI∣CAE REGIO∣NIS, TYP. map of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania LIVONI∣AE NOVA DESCRIP∣TIO, Joanne Portantio auctore. map of Southern Poland DVCATVS OSWIE CZENSIS, ET ZATORIENSIS, DESCRIPTIO.
ROMANIA, anciently called THRACIA. THat country which now they call ROMANIA, the ancients called THRACIA. It was a large and wide prouince, hauing on the East, Propontis, (Mar di Marmora) and Pontus Euxinus, (the Italians call it Mar Maiore, the Gretians Maurothalassa, the Turkes, as Busbequius saith, Caradenis, the blacke sea, as both nations vnderstand:) on the South, Mare Aegeum, (the Turkes call this Acdenis, the white sea, Archipelago) on the West, Ma∣cedony and Pannony: on the North, the mount Haemus (Monte Argentaro) and both the Moesiaes. The aire is neither very kind, nor the soile very fertile: and, except it be in those places which do butte vpon the sea, it is barrein and cold. Ptolemey diuideth it into thirteen shires, namely these; Danthletica, Bennica, Bessica, Caenica, Coeletica, Corpialica, Drosica, Maedica, Sa∣maica, Sapaica, Sardica, Sellitica, Vrbana and Vsdesica. The latter writers haue diuided it into these six prouinces, Europa, Hoemimontum, Moesia, Secunda, (which is the same with Moesia Inferior, Rhodope, Scythia, and Thracia, pro∣perly so called. Lastly, it was since called by one name Romania, which it still retaineth. Yet about Constanti∣nople, I vnderstand the Turkes do call it, Galatia, where also at this day there is the city Galata, which we call Pera, and the old Historiographers named Cornu Bizantium, the horne of Constantinople. The famous MOVN∣TAINES of this country are Hoemus, (Monte Argentaro, or Catena mundi, the chaine of the world, the Italians call it: the Turkes, Balkan: the Slauonians, Cumouiza:) Rhodope, (Valizu, or Czernaniwerti, they now call it) Or∣belus, (Karopnitze) Pangaeus, (Malaca or Castagna) and diuers others of lesser note. The RIVERS are Hebrus, (Marisa) Nessus, (Nesto or Mestro, the Turkes call it Charasou) Melas, (now Lameta, or Larissa) and Strymon, as some thinke, although others do rather iudge this to be a riuer of Macedony. The famous CITIES are, Ab∣dera, (now Asperosa, as Niger thinketh; or Polystylo, as Sophianus; or Astrizza, as Nardus affirmeth) Apollonia, Phi∣nopolis, Philippolis, Nicopolis vpon the riuer Haemus, Nicopolis vpon the riuer Nessus, Hadrianopolis, (the Turkes call it Endrem, as Busbechius writeth; or Edernay as Postellus teacheth) Selyhria, Debeltus, Heraclea, Lysimachia, (He∣xamili) and Bysantium, famous in all ages, so named of Bysa who first built it, afterward it was enlarged and fortified by the Emp. Constantine, and of him was called Constantinopolis, but at this time corruptly and more short Stamboli. This now as also long since it was, is the most famous and honourable city of all this coun∣try, next after Hadrianople (Andernopoli, it is commonly called) then Sophia, and others of lesse estimation. This country also hath adioined vnto it a necke-land or demi-ile, which they call the Foreland of Thrace. Heere is Callipolis (Gallippoli) and Sesto famous for the loue of Leander. Dauid Chytraeus in his Chronicle of Sa∣xony hath diuers things worth the noting of the prouinces of this chart. The ilands in the Archipelago (mare Aegaeum) neere to Romania are SAMOTHRACIA, commonly called Samandrachi: and THALASSIA of Ptolemey, which others call Thassus, and to this day it reteineth some si∣militude of that name; for the latter writers do name it Tasso. In Propontis or Mar di Marmora, is PROE∣CONNESVS, or Elaphonnesus, which some haue named Neuris. Now the Turkes and Greekes do call it Marmora, whereof that sea tooke the name. In Bosphorus (the Latines call it Stretto di Constantinopoli, the straites of Constantinople, the Greekes Laimon, the Turkes Bogazin,) are the Insulae CYANEAE, (which Strabo calleth Symplegades, now Pauonare or Iarcazes) oft mentioned in the writings of ancient Poets, who after their maner did feine them first to haue floted vpon the water and to be moueable, and then by the sailing of the Ar∣gonautes to haue been setled and fixed. Beside the old Geographers Ptolemey, Strabo, Pliny, and Pomponius Mela, which haue written of this country; the latter writers also are not to be neglected: especially the sin∣gular learned VVolfangus Lazius his commentaries of Greece; and Bellonius his Obseruations. Petrus Gyllius hath most curiously and diligently described the city Constantinople, which city a man may say was by the proui∣dence of God ordeined to be the head of many kingdomes, and to haue beene sometime called New Rome, and at this day Romania: so that the famous poet Tibullus may seeme to haue spoken not without iust cause and by a kind of diuine inspiration, when he said, ROMATVVM NOMEN TERRIS FATALE RE∣GENDIS, O Rome, thy name doth giue, thou shouldest the world command. And in the iudgement of Romulus, the Gods would haue it, VT ROMA SIT CAPVT ORBIS TERRARVM, That Rome should be the head of all the World, as Liuy hath left record in the first booke of his Decades.
map of Romania, Moldova, Bulgaria and Northwest Turkey ROMA∣NIAE, (quae olim Thracia dicta) VICINARVM{que} REGIO∣NVM, VTI BVLGARIAE, WALACHIAE, SYRFI∣AE, ETC. DESCRIPTIO. Auctore Iacobo Castaldo. Cum priuilegio decennasi. M.D.LXXXIIII.
SCANDIA, OR THE NORTHREN Kingdomes. THis Mappe conteineth almost all the Northen tract of the knowen world: but especially the Neck-land or Peninsula, knowen vnto the old writers by these names, Scandia, Scandinauia, Bal∣tia and Basilia, but to them neuer throughly discried: which in regard of his greatnesse they haue called Another World, and the Shoppe of men, and as it were the scabberd from whence so ma∣ny Nations haue been drawen. But of the diuers names of this country, read that which we haue written at the mappe of Island, as also in our Treasury of Geography, in the word BASILIA. This Neckeland in this our age conteineth three kingdomes, Norwey, Swedland and Gotland; with a part of the kingdome of Denmarke, and many other prouinces, as Bothny, Finmarke, Finland Lappland, &c. whose seuerall descriptions we will heere set downe out of Iames Ziegler. NORVEGIA, Norway, if you would interpret it, is as much to say, as the Northren tract, or Northren way. This was sometime a most flourishing kingdome, and comprehended Denmarke, and Friesland with the circumiacent Ilands, vntill such time as the kingdome was gouerned by an hereditary succession of kings. Afterward the line failing, in the time of vacancie, by the consent of the Nobility it was decreed, that the kings should be chosen by electi∣on. At this day it is vnder the iurisdiction of the kings of Denmarke, who do not only take the lawfull reuenews iustly due to the crowne, but imposing intolerable exactions, and by scraping and raking all commodities into their hands, they con∣uey all the wealth of this country into Denmarke. Neither is this aggreeuance alone, but with all the disaduantage and con∣dition of the place doth much hurt the subiects: for all the hauens, roads, & shipping are at the command of the king of Den∣marke: so that neither they may without his leaue vse the sea or transport their merchandise into forren countries. This kingdome either for the temperature of the aire, goodnesse of the soile, or benefit of the sea is not of meane estimation and account. This doth transport into other parts of Europe a fish which is a kind of codde, slitte and spread vpon a post and so dried and hardened with the frost and cold: and thereupon the Germanes call it Stockfish. The best time of the yeare to catch them is in Ianuary, when as the weather is coldest to drie them: those which are taken when the weather is more mild, they shrinke or rotte away, and are not fit to be transported any whither. All the sea coast of Norway is very calme and temperate: the sea freeseth not: the snow continueth not long. SVECIA, Sweden or Swedland, is a kingdome rich of siluer, copper, lead, iron, corne and cattell. Wonderfull plenty of fish is heere taken both in riuers, lakes, and creekes, aswell as in the maine ocean. Heere are many Deere and wild beasts. Stockholme is the kings seat and chiefe mart towne, a city fortified both by nature, by art, and industrie of the ingenious Ar∣chitect. It standeth in a fenne, like Venice: and thereof it took the name, for that being situate in the waters it is built vpon piles, which they call Stockes. GOTHIA, (Gotland) that is, the Good land, is subiect to the king of Sweden. In it is the port and mart towne Calmar, a great city. Heere is a goodly Castle which for ingenious Architecture or Fortification, as also for large compasse and con∣tent is not much inferiour to that of Millane in Italie. Neere Tinguallen are mines of excellent iron. Thus farre Ziegler. Of DENMARKE and the BRITISH ILES we will speake nothing in this place, seeing that we entreated of them at their proper and seuerall mappes. In this chart there is described also ISLAND, an Iland as famous as any other for strange mira∣cles and secret works of nature. Item GROENLAND, another Iland knowen to very few. Heere also is FRIESLAND, a third iland altogether vnknowen to ancient writers; neither is it once named of the latter Geographers or Hydrographers; only Nicolao Zeno, a Venetian, who, in the yeare of Christ 1380. tossed with many continuall bitter stormes in this sea, at last rent and weather-beaten, arriued in this Ile. This authour affirmeth that this iland is subiect to the king of Norway, and to be greater then Ireland, and that the chiefe towne is of the same name with the Ile it selfe; lastly, that the country people do for the most part liue by fishing. For in the hauen of this towne they catch such abundance of all sorts of fish, that from thence they lade whole shippes, and transport them into other ilands neere adioining. The sea next to this iland vpon the West, full of shelues and rocks, as he writeth, is of the inhabitants called Mare Icarium, Icarus sea: and an iland in it, he saith is named ICARIA. Of GROENLAND he writeth, that the winter heere is 9. moneths long, and all that time it neuer rain∣eth, nor the snow which falleth in the beginning of winter euer dissolueth vntill the latter end of the same. But that is most wonderfull which he telleth of the Monastery of the order of Frier Predicants, dedicated to the honour of S. Thomas, in this Iland: namely, that there is not farre from it a mountaine, which like vnto Aetna in Sicilia doth at certaine seasons burne and cast out huge flakes of fire, and that there is in the same place a fountaine of hot or skalding waters, wherewith not only all the chambers of this monastery are warmed in the maner of Stones, and hot-houses, but also all kind of meat and bread is sodden and dressed, and with no other fire. All the monastery is built of a kind of hollow light stone, which the flames of that burning mountaine do cast forth. For these burning stones, being by nature somewhat fat and oily, are solid and firme, but being quenched with this water, they become drie, full of holes and light; and the water wherewith they were quen∣ched is turned into a clammy kind of stuffe like bitumen, wherewith these stones are laied, in steed of mortar, when they are to vse them in building: and thus they make a sure worke against the iniury of all weathers, Their orchyeards also and gar∣dens watered with this water are alwaies green and do flourish almost all the yeare long, with all maner of flowres, kinds of corne and fruits. This Priory standeth vpon the sea shore, and hath a reasonable capacious and large hauen; into which the forenamed fountaine emptying his waters, doth make it so warme that it neuer freeseth, in the hardest and egerest froast that euer was knowen. Whereupon heere is such abundance of fish, which do flocke hither from more colde places, that not only these Monkes, but also the neighbours round about are furnished from hence with prouision of victuall. These thinges amongst many others Zenus hath written of these Ilands, who, being made by Zichimnus, king of certaine Ilands heere about, high Admirall of his nauy, discouered all these Northren coasts. The ile FRIESLAND, now againe in these our daies was descried by the Englishmen, and was by them called by a new name WEST ENGLAND. In old writers there are but few records left of these Ilands. Amongst the new writers Olaus Magnus Gothus, Episcopus Vpsaliensis, Albertus Crantzius, Saxo Grammaticus, Iacobus Zieglerus, Sigismundus ab Herberstein in his commentaries of Moscouia, haue described these countries: And Nicolas Wimman hath set forth the nauigation of the Northren sea. See also a little discourse of Antony and Nicolas Zenis, two brethren, of the ilands situate vnder the North pole, together with the shipwracke of Peter Quirinus, written by himselfe and Christophero Fiorauante, as also by Nicholas Mighel, in the Italian tongue. There is also a discourse of these Northren parts written by Sebastian Cabato, who in the yeare 1557. first sailed into these quarters. But aboue all the history of Saxony lately written and set out by Dauid Chytraeus is not to be forgotten.
map of the North Atlantic, including the Arctic, Western Russia, the Baltic, Scandinavia, the British Isles, Greenland, Iceland, the supposed location of Frisland, and Newfoundland SEP¦TEN¦TRI¦ONA¦LIVM RE¦GIONVM DESCRIP.
ISLAND. I Do find in the Ecclesiasticall history lately set forth and imprinted vnder the name of M. Adams: That the people of this Iland came vnto Adelbert Bishop of Breme, earnestly entreating him to appoint them some learned diuines that might be able to preach the Gospell and plant Christianity amongst them. Neither do I thinke that there is a∣ny mention of this Nation in any other more ancient writer than he. Although I must confesse, that Sigebertus Gemblacensis hath left record, that Great King Arthur, about the yeare of Christ 470. subdued this iland and redu∣ced the people to his obedience. This I take as a fable, not for any true history. For I do certainly know that this was neuer written by Sigebert, but shuffled in, as many things els, by some other. For a very faire Manuscript copy of mine owne, as also another in parchment of my friend, haue it not.) Now this Adelbert died about the yeare af∣ter Christs incarnation 1070. And that the name Thule, oft spoken of almost by all old writers aswell Poets and Historians as Geographers, doth not pertaine to this Iland (against the opinion well neere of all the learned men of our time) but rather to Scone (Scandia Peninsula) a neck-land of Norway, not only the authority of Procopius; a graue discreet writer; but also for that a note and remnant of that name yet remaineth to this day in Scone, in that part which is opposite to the Or∣keney iles; namely in a place of Norway where the famous Mart of the Belgae is seated. For amongst other shires of Norway there is one in this place which they call Tilemercke, that is, the March or shire of Tule. The ilands also ouer against this shore which vulgarly are called Hetland and Shetland, the seamen, as I vnderstand out of England by the relation of my good friend M. W. Camden, are commonly called Thylinsel, where∣by I conceiue that this Iland tooke the name from the next maine land opposite vnto it. For what els is Thilensel, but the iland of Thile? This opinion of mine not only Pomponius Mela doth confirme, who writeth that Thule was opposite to the sea coast of the Belgae; (he directly saith, I say Belgarum, not Britannorum littori, the sea coast of Britaine where indeed Island is situate, not Thule:) but also Ptolemey the prince of all Geo∣graphers and writers in that argument, who placeth Thule vnder the 29. degree of Longitude, and 63. of Latitude. Which position and calcula∣tion of degrees doth exactly and precisely fall vpon Tilemarke. And as for Island there is no man that hath looked with halfe an eie into Geogra∣phicall Mappes and Charts, but doth know it to lie vnder the first degree of Longitude, and the sixtieth degree of Latitude. And I perswade my selfe euen Arngrimus Ionas himselfe, an Islander borne, in that his Treatise of Island, where he saith that the latitude of this Iland is about 44. de∣grees and 45. minutes was much deceiued. It is therefore as cleare as the noone day, as he saith, that Island is not the same that Thule was: and the same Procopius saith, that it is inhabited by thirteen Nations, and gouerned by so many Kings, and to be tenne times as great as Brittaine: so that not without good cause Stephanus giueth it the title of Great; when as it is certaine that Island is much lesse than Brittaine. The same Procopius affirmeth that the Scritifinni, a kind of people so called, did inhabite Thule; these Diaconus nameth Strictofinni: and speaketh of them in Scandia; as doth also Iornandes in his history; notwithstanding he corruptly calleth them (that I may note this by the way) Crefennae. Thus, gentle Reader, thou seest that which they name Scandia or Scone, he calleth Thule: and the same nation to this day dwelleth in the same Scandia, called by the same name no whit corrupted. For they are called vulgarly Scrickefinner, and do dwell in Scandia, and not in Island. In Thule Procopius writeth, that there be huge great woods: in Island all the world knoweth there are none at all. And so Isacius vpon Lycophron saith truly, when he affirmeth that Thule, is vpon the East of Brittaine, not vpon the North, as is Island. Contrary to that which Strabo (a most worthy and diligent Geographer, by the sound iudgement of all the learned) saith of it, but from the relation, as there he addeth of Pytheas, a shamefull lying historiographer, whose custome was, as Diodorus Siculus in his second booke writeth, to counterfait and coine fables so cunningly that ordinarily they passed for true stories. This is that Thule, which Tacitus reporteth, when the Romane nauy sailed round about Brittaine was seen and viewed by them, but not regarded, and therefore not entered as is probable. This could not be Island, which is much farther off, and out of kenning. But this is enough in this place of Thule or Scandia. We will addresse our selues to speake of Island, an iland altogether vnknowen, and not once named in any ancient writer. ISLAND, or, the Frosen or Icie land, which is all one, was so named of the ice which lieth continually vpon his North side: for there now be∣ginneth the Frosen-sea, as Crantzius writeth. It was called SNELAND, of the Snow which all the yeare long doth heere in some places continue: Item GARDARSHOLM, that is, Garders ile, so called, as Arngrimus himselfe being an Islander borne writeth, of one Gardar a man so named who first found it or inhabited the same. This iland is an hundred Germane miles in length, as commonly most writers do hold; but the foresaid Arn∣grimus Ionas saith it is 144. miles long. For the most part it is not inhabited, but is wast and mountainous, especially toward the North part: by reason of the bitter blasts of the South winds, which will not suffer, as Olaus teacheth, so much as any low shrubbe or bush once to put forth his head. It is subiect to the king of Norway, and so hath continued euer since the yeare of Christ 1260. at what time first, the same Arngrime affir∣meth, they did their homage to that Crowne. Whereupon the king of Denmarke euery yeare sendeth thither a Lieutenant, by whom they are now gouerned, as in times past they were by certaine Bishops of their owne; by whom they were, as we said before, conuerted vnto Christianity, in the time of Adelbert Bishop of Breme. In the raigne of Harald with the faire lockes, (Pulchricomus, Harfagro they vulgarly called him as Ionas writeth) who was the first Monarch of Norway, it was first begun to be inhabited, as some would faine perswade: namely, when he had ouercome the pety kings and had banished them out of Norway, they being driuen to seeke their dwelling in some other place, they forsooke their owne natiue country, shipped themselues together with their wiues, children, and whole families, landed at the length in this iland, and heere seated themselues. This seemeth to me to haue happened about the yeare of Christs incarnation 1000. but the forenamed authour Arngrimus Ionas saith that it was in the yeare 874. who also there setteth downe a Catalogue and names of all their Bishops. The first Bishop, as Crantzius writeth, was Isleff. That it was subiect to the command of the same Norweies about 200. yeares, I find in the abridgement of Zenies Eclogs, where I find that Zichmi king of Friesland attempted warre against this iland, but in vaine, and was repelled by a garrison of souldiers placed there by the king of Norway, to defend the same from the assault of enemies. It is diuided into foure parts or prouinces according to the foure quarters of the World: namely, into Westfiordung, Austlendingafiordung, Nordlingafiordung and Sundlendingafiordung, as to say as the West quarter, East quarter, North quarter and South quarter. It hath but two Bishops seas, Schalholdt, and Hola; with certaine scholes adioined vnto them. In the diocesse of Hola are the Monasteries Pingora, Remested, Modur, and Munketuere. In the diocesse of Schalholdt are Videy, Pyrnebar, Kirkebar and Skirda. Yet by the letters of Velleius, the authour of this chart, which he wrote vnto me, I do vnderstand that there are heere nine monasteries: and besides them 329. churches. They haue no coine of their owne, nor cities: for the mountaines are to them in steed of cities, and fountaines for pleasure and delights, as Crantzius testifieth, who affirmeth that for the most part they dwell in caues, making their lodgings and roomes by cut∣ting and digging them out in the sides of hilles. The which also Olaus doth testifie, especially in the winter time. They build their houses of fish bones, for want of wood. Contrariwise Ionas he saith, that heere are many churches and houses built reasonably faire and sumptuously of wood, stone and turffe. Wares they exchange with Merchants for other wares. Forrein dainties and pleasures they are not acquainted withall. They speake the Cimbrian language, or the ancient Germane tongue, into which we saw this other day the holy Scriptures translated, and imprinted at Hola (a place in the North part of this iland) in a most goodly and faire letter, in the yeare of our Lord 1584. I say, in the old Germane tongue: for I do obserue it to be the same with that, in which a little booke that is imprinted vnder the name of Otfrides Gospels, is written in. Ionas himselfe confesseth that they haue no maner of cattell beside Horses, and Kine. Velleius witnesseth that they haue no trees but Berch and Iuniper. The soile is fatte for pastorage and the grasse so ranke, that all men that haue written of this iland do iontly and with one consent affirme, that except they do sometime fetch their cattell from the pasture and moderate their feeding, they wil be in danger of being stopped vp with their owne fatte. Yet all in vaine oft times, as the same Arngrime affirmeth. The soile is not good for corne or for eareable ground, and so it beareth not any ma∣ner of graine, therefore for the most part they liue altogether on fish. Which also being dried and beaten, and as it were ground to meale they make into loaues and cakes, and do vse it at their tables in stead of bread. Their drinke in former time was faire water, but now of corne, brought vnto them from forren places, they haue learned to brew a kind of beere: so that after they began to trade with strangers resorting to them, they began also to loue better liquours and haue left their drinking of water. For as Georgius Bruno maketh me beleeue, the Lubekers, Hamburgers and Bremers do yearely resort to this iland, which thither do cary Meale, Bread, Beere, Wine, Aqua vitae, course English clothes and other such of low prices, both Wollen and Linnen, Iron, Steele, Tinne, Copper, Siluer, Mony both Siluer and Gold, Kniues, Shoes, Coifes and Ker∣cheifes for women, and Wood whereof they build their houses and make their boats. For these they exchange the Island cloth, (they commonly call it Watman) huge lumps of Brimstone, and great store of dried fish, Stockefish we call it. All this out of the West and South parts of the same. Out of the East and North part of the iland, where there is great plenty of grasse, they transport into other countries, Mutton and Beefe, butter and
map of Iceland ISLANDIA. ILLVSTRISS. AC POTENTISS. REGI FREDERICO II DANIAE, NORVEGIAE, SLAVORVM, GO∣THORVMQVE REGI, ETC. PRIN∣CIPI SVO CLEMENTISSIMO, ANDREAS VELLEIVS DESCRIBEB. ET DEDICABAT. Priuilegio Imp. et Belgico decennali A. Ortel. exud. 1585.
sometime the fleeces of sheep, and skinnes and pelts of other beasts, foxes and white falcons, horses, for the most part such as amble by nature without the teaching and breaking of any horse courser. Their oxen and kine are all heere polled and without hornes: their sheepe are not so. Saxo Grammaticus and Olaus Magnus do tell of many wonders and strange works of God in this iland, whereof some it will not be amisse to receit in this place. But especially the mount Hekla, which continually burneth like vnto Aetna in Sicilia, although alwaies those flames do not appeare, but at certaine times, as Arngrimus Ionas writeth, and affirmeth to be recorded in their histories, as namely in the yeare 1104. 1157. 1222. 1300. 1340. 1362. 1389. and 1558. which was the last time that the fire brake out of this hill. Of the like nature is another hill, which they call Hel∣gasll, that is, the Holy mount. Of the which mountaine the forenamed Bruno, a laborious student, and for that his worthy worke which he hath set out of all the cities of the World, famous and knowen farre and neere all the World ouer, hath written in his priuate letters vnto me, that in the yeare 1580. (Ionas saith it fell out in the yeare 1581.) not in Hecla, but in another mount, namely, in Helgesel, fire and stones were cast out with such crackes, thundering and hideous noise, that fourescore miles off one would haue thought great ordenance and double canons had been dis∣charged heere. At this hill there is an huge gulfe, where spirits of men lately departed, do offer themselues so plainely to be seene and discerned of those that sometime knew them in their life time, that they are often taken for liuing men of such as are not aware that they are dead: neither do they perceiue that they were deceiued, vntill the Ghosts be gone. (Ionas accounteth this for a fable.) There are also certaine spirits or ghosts, which do shew themselues apparantly to be seen in the businesses of mortall men, or of such as came to their end by some violent mischance, as Olaus reporteth. They call these Drols, as Rithmayer testifieth. (Now Drol, is a giant of the mountaines, if we may beleeue Arngrime Ionas an Ilander by birth and bringing vp.) Heere is a spring which by reason of a filthy smoaking water which runneth from it, killeth any thing that na∣turally the earth bringeth forth: and whatsoeuer is besmered with this smokie fume, in continuance of time becommeth as hard as a stone, yet still retaining the shape that it had before. There is also a spring of pestilent waters, which whosoeuer shall tast or drinke of, will presently be as if he had drunke poison. Heere also are certaine waters that are in propertie and tast somewhat like drinke that is made of mault. There are fires heere, that will not burne or consume flax, yet they will quite drie vp and consume water. They haue beares, crowes, and white hares. As also Eagles with white tailes, as our authour Ionas the Islander whom we haue often cited, doth witnesse. These Pliny (as he there alleageth) calleth Pygargos, I thinke we call them Wringtailes. But those that are desirous to know all the strange wonders of this iland let them read Albert Crantz, Saxo Grammaticus, Iohannes Magnus, and Olaus Magnus, whom they may beleeue or not beleeue, according as they shall find cause. To those they may adioine that which Dauid Chytraeus in his Saxon history hath written of this iland. Except I be deceiued, the fable which Isacius vpon Lyco∣phron reciteth, of a certaine iland of Brittany, whither he saith the soules of dead men are transported, doth perteine to this iland. For such a like tale is commonly told of Island. A declaration of the Markes and Letters of this Mappe. A. Is a fish which they commonly call Nahual. If any man eat of this fish, he dieth presently. It hath a tooth in the forepart of his head, standing out seuen cubites. This diuers haue sold for the Vnicornes horne. It is thought to be a good antidote and soueraigne medicine against poison. This Monster is forty elles in length. B. The Roider, a fish of an hundred and thirty elles in length, which hath no teeth. The flesh of it is very good meat, wholesome and toothsome. The fatte of it is good against many diseases. C. The Burchualur, hath his head bigger than all the body beside. It hath many very strong teeth, whereof they make Chesmen or Tablemen. It is threescore cubites long. D. The Hyena, the sea hogge, a monstrous kind of fish, of which thou maiest read in the 21. booke of Olaus Magnus. E. Ziphius, (it may be he meaneth Xi∣phius, the sword fish) an horrible sea monster, swallowing the blacke seale at one bitte. F. The English whale, thirty elles long: it hath no teeth, but the tongue of it is seuen elles in length. G. Hroshualur, that is as much to say as the Sea-horse, with a mane hanging downe from his necke like an horse. It often doth the fishermen great hurt and skare. H. The greatest kind of Whales, which seldome sheweth it selfe; it is more like a little iland, than a fish. It cannot follow or chase the smaller fishes, by reason of the huge greatnesse and waight of his body, yet he praieth vpon many, which he catcheth by a naturall wile and subtilty which he vseth for to get his food. I. Skautuhvalur, this fish altogether full of gristles or bones; is somewhat like a ray or skaite but an infinite deale bigger: when it appeareth, it is like an iland, and with his sinnes ouerturneth ships and boates. K. Seenaut, sea cowes, of colour gray: they sometimes come out of the sea and do feed vpon the land many in a company toge∣ther. They haue a little bagge hanging at their nose, by the helpe of which they liue in the water: that being broken, they liue altogether vpon the land, and do accompany themselues with other kine. L. Steipereidur, a most gentle and tame kind of whale; which for the defence of the fishermen fighteth against other Whales. It is forbidden by Proclamation that no man may kill or hurt this sort of Whale. It is in length an hundred cubites at the least. M. Staukul, the Dutchmen call it Springual; he hath beene seene to stand a whole day together vpright vpon his taile. It is so called of leaping or skipping. It is a very dangerous enemy to seamen and fishers; and greedily seeketh after mans flesh. N. Rostunger, (which also is otherwise called a Rosmar,) is somewhat like a sea-calfe: it goeth in the bottome of the sea vpon foure feet, but very short ones. His skinne may scarcely be pearced with any weapon. Hee sleepeth twelue houres together hanging by his two long teeth vpon some rocke or cliffe. Ech of his teeth are at the least an elle long, but the length of his whole body is foureteen elles long. O. Sperma ceti, par∣macitty, or a base kind of amber, they commonly call it Hualambur. P. Blockes and Trunkes of tree by force of winde and violent tempest blowne vp by the rootes from off the cliffes of Norway, tossed to and fro and passing through many stormes at length are cast vp, or do rest against this shore. Q. Huge and maruailous great heaps of ice brought hither with the tide from the frozen sea, making a great and terrible noise; some pieces of which oft times are fourty cubites bigge; vpon these in some places white beares do sitte closely, watching the silly fish which heere about do play and sport themselues. But I thinke it not amisse, to set downe the Verses of Erasmus Michaelis, which he hath of Island in his third booke De re Nautica. Vltima Parrhasias Islandia spectat in Arctos, Sub Canrum porrecta gradus: non diuite tantùm Laeta solo, cùm vel caecis occlusa cauernis Sulphura flaua coquit mixtis{que} extrudit arenis: Pabula vel laetis pecori gratissima pratis Fundit, & oppletas inuestit gramine valles: At vicina etiam solidos cùm littora pisces Nec numeris, nec mensura certisve ferendos Nominibus stipat, ratibus{que} immittere certat. Prouentu siquidem vario cum cxcesserit, vno Hoc vincit tamen, & cumulato pisce redundat, Aucta opibus fortes{que} animis complexa colonos. Cuius & in Notios quae pars iacet obuia ventos Aestuat aeternis per aperta foramina flammis, Eructat{que} globos cinerum, trepido{que} boatu Hecla tonans inter sparsa pice sidera lambit. In English thus: Island a famous ile that's farre remote and distant from the Maine, North-west from hence doth lie in frozen sea: The countries chiefest gaine Is Brimstone pale, which heere in mountaines high in plenty great is found; Or heere and there like sand on shore li'th scattered on the ground. The goodly pastures passing fatte, the lowly meddowes alwaie green, Such store of Neat and Kine in vales do feed, as else where may be seen. The Sea on all sides round about, so many sundrie sorts of Fish Doth yeeld, that none their names do know, or greater store may wish: Whereof they daily lade great shippes from hence, and those away do send To forrein countries euery way: though many things this ile commend, For fish yet doth it farre excell all kingdomes of the world throughout, By this the Nation grow'th in wealth, the people lusty strong and stout. The Northren parts which lie full cold and bleake within the frozen zone, Do breath forth flashing flames of fire, with lumpes of ashes, earth and stone. Whot burning coals with filthy stinking smoke mount Hecla casteth out, With hideous cracks and thundring noise, heard farre and neere about. Certaine wordes expounded for the helpe of the Reader, and better vnderstanding of the Mappe. Wic, that is, a creeke, inlet or bay. Iokul, a mountaine or hill. Ey, an ile: Eyer, ilands. Nes, the Dutch call it Nas and Nues, that is, a nose, a promontory or foreland shooting out into the sea. Lend, the Dutch pronounce it Landt, the land or earth. Clauster, a Cloister, or Mo∣nastery. Aust, the East, West, the place of the sunne setting; Nord, the North. Suyd, the South. Fior, signifieth foure.
RVSSIA, Or rather THE EMPIRE OF THE GRAND DVKE OF MOSCOVIA. THis Mappe comprehendeth not all Russia; for heere are wanting Polonia and Lithuania, which generally are conteined vnder the name of Russia: But the whole Empire of the Grand Duke of Moscouia; which is bounded on the North by the frozen Sea; on the East, vpon the Tartars; on the South, vpon the Turkes and Polanders; on the West; it abutteth vpon Lithuania and Sweden: all whose countries and prouinces Sigismundus Baro of Herber∣stein hath seuerally and particularly described; vnto whom we send the thirstie Reader for further satisfaction. Of the Religion, habite, manners and kind of life of this Nation; we haue out of him very willingly for thine ease selected these few things. In their Religion they do for the most part follow the rites and ceremonies of the Greeke Church. Their Priests are maried. They haue Images in their Churches. When their children are baptized, three times dipped all ouer into the water; and the water in the font is seuerally con∣secrated for euery child. Although by their constitutions and canons they haue a kind of Auricu∣lar Confession, yet the common people thinketh it to belong only to Princes and Noblemen, and little to pertaine to them. Confession being ended, and penance enioined according to the qua∣lity of the offence and fault, they signe them in the forehead with the signe of the crosse, and with a loud mournefull voice they crie, Iesus Christ, thou sonne of God, haue mercy vpon vs. This is their common forme and maner of praier: for few can say the Pater noster. They do communi∣cate in the sacrament of the supper both kinds, mingling the bread with the wine, or the body with the blood. They administer the Lords supper to children of seuen yeares old: for then they say a man doth sinne. The better sort of men, after the communion ended, do spend the day in drunkennesse and riot; and do rather reuerence the same with braue apparell than inward deuo∣tion: the baser sort of people and seruants; for the most part, do labour and worke as at other times; saying, that to make holy day to be idle and to leaue their worke, is for gentlemen and masters; not for poore folkes and seruants. Purgatory they do not beleeue, yet they make pray∣ers and do other seruice and ceremonies for the dead. No man doth besprinkle himselfe or suffer any other to cast holy water vpon him; except the Priest himselfe will do it. In the Lent they fast seuen whole weekes together. They marry; and do tolerate bigamy or permit a man to haue two wiues, but they make a question whether it be a lawfull matrimony or not. They grant di∣uorces and separations. They take it not to be adultery, except one man take another mans wife. The state of women in this country is most miserable: for they thinke, except shee like a snaile do carry her house ouer her head, and be continually mewed vp in her closet, or so watched, that by no meanes she may start out of doores, none possibly can be honest. It is a wilie and deceit∣full people, and is rather delighted to liue in seruitude and slauery, than at large and in liberty. All of them do acknowledge themselues to be the Princes seruants. They are seldome quiet: for either they must make warres vpon the Lithuans, the Liuonians, or Tartars: or if they be not em∣ployed in any seruice in forren warres, they are placed in garrisons about the riuers Don (Tanais, the ancients called it) and Occan, to represse the robberies and inuasions of the Tartars. They weare long cleit gownes, without any pleits, with straite sleeues after the Hungarian fashion: bootes also, for the most part red and short, such as scarse come to their knees, and shoes or clogges clouted and hobbed with iron nailes. They tie their girdles not about their wasts, but beneath their bellies as low as their hippes. They do seuere iustice vpon freebooters and such as robbe by the high way side. Pilfering and manslaughter is seldome punished by death. Their siluer coines or money, are not round, but somewhat long, of an ouall forme or fashioned like an egge-like figure. The country aboundeth with those rich and pretious skinnes or pelts, which from hence are transported and caried all Europe ouer; it is almost euery where full of huge woods. All these particulars we haue drawen out of the aboue named Sigismund. Many things more of this country thou maist read of in Matthew of Micou, Alexander Gaguine, his tract of the Sarmatiaes, Albert Crantz his VVandalia, Paulus Iouius of the Embassage of the Moschouites to Clement the eight. Albertus Campensis vpon the same, and in the Persian iourneies of Ambrosio Contareno. But I would wish thee also for farther satisfaction heerein to read ouer the first and second bookes of Bonfinius his first Decade of the history of Hungary: as also the first booke of the life of Basilides written by O∣derborne, together with the Chronicle of Saxony done by Dauid Chytraeus.
map of Western Russia, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, and Turkmenistan RVSSIAE, MOSCO∣VIAE ET TARTA∣RIAE DESCRIP∣TIO. Auctore Antonio Ienkensono Anglo, edita Londini Anno. 1562 & dedicata illustriss: D. Henrico Sÿdneo Walliae praesidi. Zlata Baba, id est aurea vetula ab Obdorianis, & lou∣gorianis religiose colitur. Ido∣lum hoc sacerdos consulit, quid ipsis faciēdum, quoue sit migrandum, ipsum{que} (dictu mirum) certa consulentib{us} dat responsa, certique e∣uentus consequuntur. Horum regionúm incolae Solem, vel rubrum pan∣núm pertica suspensum adorant. In castris vi∣tam ducunt; ac oīm ani∣mātium, serpentiū, vermiū∣{que} carne vescuntur ac pro∣prio idiomate vtuntur. Haec saxa hoīm iumentorúm camelorúm pecorumque, caeterarum{que} rerū formas refe∣rentia, Horda populi gregis pascentis, ar∣mēta{que} fuit: Que stupenda quadam meta∣morphosi, repente in saxa riguit, priori for∣ma nulla in parte diminúta. Euenit hoc prodigium annis circiter 300. retro elapsis: Cum priuilegio
TARTARIA, OR THE EMPIRE OF THE MIGHTIE CHAM. HE that will take vpon him to describe TARTARIA; he must needes speake of a great number of nations, farre asunder and remote one from another. For all that huge tract and portion of the Maine land is now called Tartaria, that is between the East sea, (or as he calleth it Mare Mangicum, the sea of Mangi or of Sin, a country all the World ouer, and vulgarly knowen by the name of China) and the South countries, Sin or China, that part of India which is beyond Ganges, the country of the Saci, the riuer Iaxartes, (now they call it Chesel) the Caspian sea, Mar delle Zabacche (Maeotis palus, it was called of the ancient writers) and Westward vp as high almost as the Moscouites. For all these countries well neere the Tartars did possesse, and in these places they were seated. So that it comprehendeth that country which the old Historiographers called Sarmatia of Asia, both the Scythiaes and Seria, the country where the Seres dwelt, which now I take to be named Cataio. The name of this Nation was neuer heard of in Europe before the yeare after Christs incarnation 1212. They are diuided (in stead of shires) into Hordaes, that is, as the word amongst them doth signifie, into companies or couents. But as they do inhabite large and wide countries farre distant and remote one from another, so in manners and kind of life they are as farre different. They are well limmed men, broad and fatte faced, scowling countenanced and hollow eied, shauen all but their beards, which they neuer cut low: they are strong and of able bodies, and do eat horse flesh and other beasts howsoeuer they come to their deaths: only hogges excepted, from which they wholly abstaine; they can more easily endure hunger and thirst than other men, a little sleepe doth serue them: moreouer when they ride, if they be very hungry and thirsty, they vse to pricke the veines of their horses vpon which they ride, and by drinking of their bloud to slacke their hunger and thirst. And because they roue vp and downe and haue no certaine place of abode, they guide their course and iourney by the stars, especially by the obseruation of the North pole starre, which they in their language call, as Sigismund Herberstein testifieth, Seles nicol, that is, the iron clubbe naile, or sterne. They stay not long in one place, taking it to be a signe of ill fortune to dwell long vpon one plotte. They obserue no maner of iustice or law. The people, especially the poorer sort, are very rauenous and couetous; alwaies gaping after other mens goods. They haue no maner of vse either of gold or siluer. In this country thou seest TANGVT, a prouince from whence all the Rheubarbe, that is spent and vsed in all the world, is brought vnto vs and other places. Heere also is the country CATAIA, whose chiefe city is Cambalu, which, as Nicolaus de Comitibus writeth, is eighteen Italian miles about, or as M. Paulus Venetus, thirty two. It is of a square forme, in ech of whose corners there are castles built, foure miles in compasse, where continually the Emperours garrisons are kept. But Quinzai, a city of the prouince Mangi, which is from hence Eastward, vpon the Eastern sea, is thought to be farre big∣ger than this: For this as the same M. Paulus Venetus affirmeth, who dwelt there about the yeare af∣ter the birth of Christ 1260. is in compasse an hundred miles. The same is also auouched by Odericus of Friuli (de foro Iulio) who nameth it Cansay. It is situate in a lake of fresh water. There are in it 1260. bridges, whereof many are of such great height, that shippes full laden may go vnder them and ne∣uer strike saile Heere the Great Cham hath a standing garrison of 12000. trained souldiers continu∣ally resident. It is a wonderfull stately and pleasant city, whereupon it obtained that name, for Quinzai, they interpret, The city of Heauen. The Tartars call their Emperour Cham, which signifieth the same that Princeps, a Prince: hereupon Cambalu is interpreted, The seate or city of the Prince. Sigismundus of Herberstein writeth, that the Tartars do call themselues Besermanni. The Tartars, together with their manner and course of life, are most liuely described by Sigis∣mund of Herberstein and Martine Broniouius: as also in the Historicall Glasse, or Mirour of histories, writen by Vincentius Beluacensis, in the 30. 31. and 32. bookes of the same. See also the commentaries of Hungary, written by Antonio Bonfinio: M. Paulus Venetus, who it is certaine liued long there amongst them; and the Iournall or Trauells of Iosapha Barbarus a Venetian. Of their originall, read Matthias of Michou, Haiton the Armenian, Caelius secundus Curio his Saracen history, and the letters of Iacobo Nauarcho a Iesuite. Of the Tartars there be many things worth the reading in the trauells of two Fri∣ars, which about the yeare 1247. were sent into these quarters, by Pope Gregory the fourth, in the thirtieth chapter of Nicephorus his eigteenth booke. Laonicus also hath many things, in diuers places of his workes, of the Tartars vnder the name of the Scythians: the like hath Gregoras another Greeke writer. Lastly, Dauid Chytraeus in his Saxon chronicle hath written much of this nation. But no man hath more fully and amply set out the maners and life of the Tartars then William Rubricius, a Friar of the order of S. Francis, a copy of whose trauells into these parts, in the yeare of Christ 1253. I haue by me in written hand.
map of Eastern Russia TAR∣TARIAE SIVE MAG∣NI CHAMI REGNI tÿpus Continet haec ta∣bula oēm Tartariam, cum reliqua Asiae Orientalioris vs{que} Oce∣anū Eoum parte, Magno Chamo obedi∣ente: Cuius imperium Obij fl: Kataia la∣cu: Volga fl: Mari Caspio, Chesel flu: Ʋssonte monte, Thebet regione, Ca∣romoram fluuio. & Oceano terminatur. Cum Priuilegio.
CHINA. BErnardinus Scalantus hath in the Spanish tongue set out a peculiar description of this country in a seue∣rall tract, out of whom we haue gathered these few lines. This huge kingdome of China, the inhabi∣tants do call TAME, and themselues TANGIS: but of the bordering nations it is named CHINA, and is that Tein or Sin, which Auicenna so many hundred times mentioneth, and commendeth for rare sim∣ples and plants of soueraigne vse in Physicke: and is the same no doubt with SINAE or Sinarum regio, a country for rich commodities much talked of amongst all ancient Cosmographers. This country on the East bordereth vpon the East sea: (vulgarly called Mare Cin, the sea of China) on the South, vpon the prouince Cauchinchina: on the West, it is bounded by Bramas: on the North, it hath the Tartars, a warlike and stout people, from whom it is defended and seuered partly by an artificiall wall, made by the hand and labour of man, partly by a naturall mountaine which runneth for many hundred miles together between the countries. It is a country very fertile of all maner of things necessary for the maintenance of mans life, cau∣sed not only by the goodnesse of the soile, and temperature of the aire, but especially by the husbandry and industry of the people. For the men heere are not giuen to idlenesse, but are very laborious and painefull. To be idle heere it is counted a shamefull thing. It hath wonderfull store of Gold, Siluer, and Rheubarbe. The sea which beateth vpon this coast, and the riuers which runne through the middest of this country, do abound with all sorts of fish. Vpon the mountaines, vales and meddowes infinite flocks of cattell do feed and are maintained. The woods, forrests and groues are possessed with Bores, Foxes, Hares, Conies, Zebellines, Martens, and diuers other such kind of beasts, whose skins are much set by for facings for gownes. Of all kinds of birds it yeeldeth maruallous plenty, especially of water-foule, as is manifest by this, that in Canton, which is one of the least cities of this prouince, there are spent euery day vpon their Tables tenne or twelue thousand Ducks and Geese. They sow the drier ground with wheat and barly: the wet, plaine or moorish grounds, withe rise: which they cut or reap foure times in a yeare: this is their chiefest diet and liuing. The higher and steep places and sides of hilles are beset with Pine-trees: amongst the which they sow panicke, and pulse or horsecorne. There is no place therefore, no field, no plot of ground vnfruitfull. Euery where are Or∣chards, Gardens, Fruits, Roses, Floures, of all sorts yeelding a most fragrant and pleasant smell and goodly shew to the beholders. They plant flax in great abundance euery where, whereof they make diuers sorts of linnen, whereof they make their apparell: but especially Sugar canes, (which heere groweth in maruellous great abundance) and the Mulbery trees for the feeding of their silke wormes which are maintained with the leaues of this tree. Tor Silke is the chifest merchandise and commodity, whereof they raise yearely an infinite gaine and profit. There are in this kingdome 240. goodly cities, the names of which do all generally end in the syllable fu, which in their language signifieth a city; as Cantonfu, Panquinfu. The townes whereof there is infinite number, they likewise end in Cheu. Villages which are not to be numbred, by reason of the continuall husbandry and tillage, are very po∣pulous and wonderfully inhabited. All their cities for the most part, are situate vpon the banke of some great and nauigable streame, fortified with broad and deep ditches, and very high strong walles. These wals from the foundation vpward, are made of stone; toward the toppe and battlement, with bricke, laid in steed of lime and mortar, with lome or potters clay, the same stuffe, I meane, whereof the China dishes, so much esteemed of amongst vs, are made. The height of them and thicknesse is so great, that fiue or six men may walke a breast vpon the toppe of them. Vpon the wall are placed heere and there certaine high towers and bulwarkes, out of which they may see all the fields ouer farre and neere round about. On ech side of the wals so much vacant ground (pomoerium the Latines call it) is least, that horsemen may passe them six and six in a rancke in battell aray. These wals are so close and soundly wrought without any rifts or chinks, that one would thinke them to haue been but newly made, when as their histories do testifie them to haue been built two thousand yeares since. The entrance into the cities is by great gates most won∣derfully and stately built. Their streets are as smooth and precisely plaine, as if they were altogether made by line and leuell, and are so large and broad that tenne yea fifteene horsemen may ride a breast through them, which in many and sundry places are par∣ted and seuered with stately triumphall arches, gracing the cities beyond all measure. Certaine Portugals do report that they saw in the city Fucho a turrette, standing vpon forty marble pillars, whose height were forty hand breadth, and the thickenesse twelue after the measure which the Architects vse. This, (they affirme in their iudgement) for greatnesse, for exquisite workemanship, beauty and costlinesse, doth farre exceed all the stately buildings of all Europe. The greatnesse of their cities we do gather by this, that they say the city Canton, which we said was one of the least of their cities, is twelue English miles in compasse; beside 355. suburbes which do belong to it, very great and populous. The people are broad and round faced, thinne haired, flatte nosed, and small eied: although there be some amongst them reasonable well fauoured and handsome men. The colour of their faces is some∣what like that of those which inhabite Europe, yet those which dwell about Canton are of a browne complexion. They seldome or neuer trauell further than their owne country, neither will they easily suffer a stranger to dwell amongst them, especially in the vpland places, except they be publikely sworne to be true vnto the King and Country. The wealthy and better sort of men haue all their apparell made of silke of diuers and sundry colours. The base and meaner sort do weare a kind of stuffe made of white or blacke cotton, and sometime linnen coloured or stained with party colours; for as yet in these parts they know not how to make wollen cloth. The men there, as women do heere, do weare their haire long, which they winde vp in a knot to the crowne of their head, where they bind and fasten it with a siluer bodkin. The women comb their haire very trimly, and do behang and set it out with gold spangles and diuers kind of pearles and pretious stones. They paint and besmeare their faces with complexion, such as the Spanish women do commonly vse. They neuer once looke out of dores, except they be carried in their littars vpon mens shoulders, and attended by all the family. It is lawfull for the men to marry many wiues, of which they keep but one in the house, the other they maintaine at boord a∣broad in other places. Those which are conuict of adultery, are put to death. Within the city there may be no stewes, the courti∣zanes do liue altogether in the suburbes without the wals. Weddings are alwaies kept in the new moone or beginning of the moneth, and that for the most part on the first day of March, which is their New-yeares-day, or first day of the yeare. These feasts they set out, like as we also do, very sumptuously and with as great preparation and prouision as may be gotten and diuised. Their chambers are hanged and spread with hangings of silke and rich tapestry, flowres are strewed and cast in euery corner. This feast is held and continued for many daies together. At them they haue musicke and all sorts of instruments, with Interludes and stage plaies. At these bankets they eat and drinke so soundly, that in this euen the very Dutchmen and Flemings themselues do not much exceed them. Their meat they do not touch with their hands, but with a siluer forke or hooke they put it into their mouthes. They sit at their meat or tables in chaires or on stooles, as heere we do in Europe, not vpon the ground, as the rest of the Asians vse. It is a very witty and ingenious people, so that they haue deuised and framed certaine waggons, which they can skil∣fully guide in the fields and champion plaines, driuen and forced by sailes and windes, like as shippes are vpon the sea. These peo∣ple haue had the vse and art of Printing of bookes, long before it was knowen to vs heere in Europe, the West part of the world. And there being in this country, by reason of the largenesse of the same, many and sundry people speaking distinct and different languages, one vnderstanding another no more than the Castilliand th the Biscaines, or the Germane doth the Frenchmen; yet by their maner of writing and characters which they all in common do vse, they do one know anothers mind passing well. Therefore all the inhabitants of the prouinces of this kingdome, as also those of Cauchinchina, and in the Lequeio's (certaine ilands vpon this coast) do vse one and the same alphabet (as they call it) or rather a kind of draught of letters (not much vnlike the Hiero∣glyphickes, of the Egyptians) whereby they do most cunningly and readily expresse euery thing and phrase or maner of speech. For example; a city or towne (the one he calleth Leombi, the other Fu) all do expresse this word by this marke . In like
map of China CHINAE, olim Sinarum regionis, noua descriptio. auctore Ludouico Georgio. Cum priuilegio Imperatoris, Regis, & Brabantiae: ad de∣cennium. 1584.
maner Heauen, which this nation calleth Guant, by this character : a King, whom they name Bontai, thus  and so forth. For they haue in that their alphabet aboue fiue thousand characters of things and words. Gaspar Balbus, in his Iournall of India, writeth, except he iest, that they haue sixty thousand sundry characters. In writing or printing they do not begin at the left hand and so go on to the right, as we do: nor contrariwise, as the Iewes and Arabians vse; but they begin at the toppe and so write down in a straight line vntill they come to the bottome of the page. This kingdome hath an infinite number of all sorts of gallies, boats and barges, whereby they passe ouer riuers and armes of the sea: so that when they will brag of their Kings wealth and shew his power and command, they vse in a prouerbe to say, that he can make a bridge of shippes so long that it shall reach from China to Malacha: which are more than 500. leagues asunder. For the country abutring vpon the sea, and being euery way and in many places watered and crossed by diuers great and nauigable riuers, there are almost as many people that dwell in boats vpon the water, as there do in houses vpon the land. Some there are, which neuer go out of their boats or barges, but continually staying in them, do by fishing and fowling get their liuing all the yeare long: for, as we said before: the abundance of fish and fowles heere in this country is admirable. Although this prouince be beyond all measure fertile of all maner of liuing creatures, yet they do helpe this fertility by art and this strange inuention: In the Spring time they couer two or three thousand egges with horse dung, (like as they vse in Alcairo of Egypt) by the heat of which, in a certaine time, goslings and chickins are hatched and brought sorth. The like they do in the winter, but then they lay them not in dung, but putting them into a basket made of reeds, & so setting them ouer a soft and moderat fire, which they keep continually burning in the same temper, whereby, in a certaine number of daies, they bring the same to passe as afore. They haue also this kind of fishing: in those cities which stand vpon the bankes and sides of riuers (as almost all the cities of this kingdome do) they keep a great number of Cormorants or sea-guls (the Latines call them Mergi, the Spaniards Sea crowes) in cages or coupes: these, when they list to go a fishing, they put into their boats, and carying them to the deepest places of the riuer, and there binding their necks lightly with cords (least that the fishes which they catch should go into their bellies) they cast them by multitudes into the water, where they let them stay so long, vntill they see their croppes to be filled with fishes, and then they returning to their boats, they are let in and there they cast vp at their masters feet all the fish they haue caught. This they do as oft as the fishermen please: and then being brought vnto their coupes, their neckes are vntied, and their ordinary meat is giuen to eat while they will. All this whole country is subiect to one King, (as to a Mo∣narch) whom they call The Lord of the World, and The Sonne of Heauen. Paquin, a city in the North parts of this kingdome, toward the confines of Tartaria, is the seat of their King, where he ordinarily keepeth his Court. Out of this he neuer goeth, except in time of warre. His predecessours did sometime keep their court in the city Manquin, for a remembrance whereof a golden Table is there very religiously preserued. In this the name of the King, which now raigneth, is written: before it is hanged a very rich curtaine, which is neuer drawen but vpon festiuall and holy daies, when as they do reuerence it very superstitiously, as if it did indeed represent the very Maiesty of the King himselfe. They report that when he maketh warre at any time against the Tartars, that he leadeth out into the field at the least three hundred thousand footmen, and two hundred thousand horsemen: yet this also they adde, that it is no very warlike Na∣tion. The King hath vnder him a gouernour, as it were a lieutenant, whom they call Tutan. This lieutenant is the iudge and determi∣ner of all causes and controuersies arising between man and man through-out the whole kingdome. In the execution of iustice he vseth great seuerity. Theeues and murderers are kept in perpetuall imprisonment, vntill they end their liues either by whipping, hunger or cold. Although they be condemned to suffer the greatest punishment that their law doth inflict (which for the most part is whipping) yet the execution of the sentence is so slow, that the greatest part of these condemned men do die in prison and neuer come to execution. Hence it is that there euery where in all their cities such an infinite number of prisoners, so that in Canton, one of their least cities is there are oftentimes more than fifteen thousand men in prison at once. Robberies, (than which fault, in these countries, there is none coun∣ted more odious) are punished by a cruell kind of whipping. The maner of this whipping is thus: They set the party to be whipped, with his face downe-ward, and his hands bound behind him: then he is beaten with a whippe, made of a reed or cane, vpon the calues of his legges, with such mighty blowes, that the bloud for the most part followeth at the first stroke; the second blow doth so torment the party to be punished that he cannot possibly stand vpon his feete any longer. Seuerall hangmen do whip, one one legge, and another another; and that so hard that many do die of the fifteenth or sixteenth lash: for all their sinewes are by this time burst asunder. The Portugals do affirme that euery yeare in this country there die aboue two thousand of this kind of death. This whippe is fiue fingers broad, and an inch thicke, which euery foote they dippe in water, to make it the more pliant, and to strike the greater blow. Concerning the faith and religion of this nation, it is thus: They do beleeue all earthly creatures and all things in the World, and the gouernment and disposition of them, to depend of Heauen and Heauenly powers. For they do thinke that Heauen is the greatest of all Gods; and therefore the character of it possesseth the first place of their alphabet. They worship the Sunne, the Moone and the Stars, yea the very Diuell himselfe, (which they paint in the same forme, as wee do heere in Europe) that hee may do them no hurt, as they say. They haue stately and sumptuous Churches, aswell in the country, as in their cities. They haue also two sorts of Priests: the one sort go in white, with their heads shauen, and liue by begging, as our Friars do: the other goeth in blacke, wearing their haire long, and dwell by themselues, as our Priests vse to do heere in Europe. Neither of them may marrie, yet they liue very wantonly and licentiously. Thus farre out of Scalantus. It will not be amisse to these to adde some things out of others. Iohn Barry in his Asian Decades giueth out, that this king hath vnder him fifteen very great and large countries; which they call Gouernments. And moreouer he addeth, that this King alone doth farre surpasse all the rest of the Princes of Asia round about him: and that his yearely renenews do exceed all the riches and wealth of all Europe. For handy-craft trades and occupations they do excell all men liuing, their works are so finely and cun∣ningly made, that one would iudge them to haue been framed by nature, and not by art and industrie of man. At the city Nimpo, which others call Liampo, he saith it hath been obserued that some of the Portugals in the space of three moneths, haue bought and shipped a∣way 166000. pounds of silke. Odoardus Barbosa writeth, that the people are very kind and humane, and go apparelled much like the Dutchmen, whom also they do much resemble in pronunciation and maner of speech. Those cleare and transparent vessels, or dishes as white as the drift snow, which amongst vs are of such great estimation, are heere made in this maner: They mingle certaine cochle∣shels eg-shels & other things together, which they knead & make into a paste. This paste they hide in the earth, where they let it li for the space of fourescore, or an hundred yeares, before they stirre it or looke to it again, leauing it, as a great inheritance or pretious iewell, vnto their heires. That paste they vse which their grandfathers or great grandfathers haue laied vp for them. And they do obserue duely by an ancient custome, that he which taketh away the old paste, do put new presently in his place. Antony Pigafetta, calleth this King the most mighty Prince of the whole world. He saith that his palace, or house where he keepeth his Court, is enclosed with 7. wals; and that he hath alwaies 10000. souldiers for his gard continually there attendant vpon him: and that 70. crowned Kings do homage vnto him and are subiect to his gouernment and command. The same authour affirmeth that Muske is from hence transported into diuers parts of the world. Andrew Corsalis he likewise saith that the greatest store of Rheubarbe and Pearle that is brought hither to vs in Europe, doth come from hence. In the Iesuites Epistles lately set forth in print, many things well worth the obseruation are heere and there set downe of this country. That of Ptolemey these people were called SINAE, the situation doth plainly proue, neither doth the name yet retained much differ from that. For the Spaniards and Portugals do write it Ch na, yet they pronounce it Sina. Of the situation and nature of this country, the be∣hauiours and maners of the people, you may read in a worke of Iohn Gonsalis set forth of this argument. Of the same also read the letters of the Iesuites afore mentioned, and Ferdnando Lopez: but especially the sixth booke of Maffeius de rebus Indicis. Lastly, the nienth chapter of the ninth booke of the first part of the choice Library of Posseuinus.
The Ile IAPAN, OR IAPONIA. IOhn Peter Maffey, in the twelfth booke of his history of India doth thus write of this iland: They are especially three greater ilands, with many other smaller round about them, disioined one from another by very narrow straits or armes of the sea, that are called by the name of IAPAN or Iaponia. The first and the greatest is diuided into three and fifty signiories or kingdomes: the head and chiefe city of this is Meaco, whereof this whole iland taketh his name. The second is named Ximen, and conteineth nine kingdomes: the more famous cities of the kingdome of Bungo, are Vosuqui and Funay. The third iland is called Xicocum: it conteineth not aboue foure kingdomes or signio∣ries: it is beautified with the goodly city Tonsa (Tosa he calleth it) of the same name with the king∣dome: Thus the regiments or kingdomes of Iapan are in all generally sixty and six; beside diuers other iurisdictions which cannot iustly be called kingdomes. The length of the whole maine land is, as they say, almost two hundred leagues: the breadth is nothing so much: for in some places it is not aboue tenne leagues broad: at the most it is not aboue thirty leagues ouer. Of the compasse there is nothing certainly written that I know of. It runneth out from the South toward the North from the thirty degree of latitude almost to the thirty and eight. Vpon the East it is opposite to New-Spane, remote from it not aboue 150. leagues. Vpon the North it hath the Scythians or Tartari∣ans, and other such people exceeding rude and barbarous. On the West lieth China, (Sinarum regno) in some place neerer, in some place further off, according to the diuers windings and bendings of the shore: for from the city Liampo, which is the vt∣termost bound of China, toward the West, vnto Gotum, (Ogoto, I thinke) which is the first Iland of all Iapan that offereth it selfe to the view of those which saile from thence hitherward, is not aboue threescore leagues but from Amacan, a mart town in the West, where the Portugals for the most part do altogether vse to trade, vnto the same Gotum, the cutte is 297. leagues ouer. On the South, neere hand it hath naught but the vast and wide Ocean; further off, certaine lands and countries not yet descried or knowne, out of which, the report goeth, that certaine sailours came once by chance vnto Iapan, and neuer put off from thence any more to returne backe to their natiue soile. The country for the most part is full of snow all the yeare long, bleake and cold, and therefore not very fertile. In September they cut downe their rise, in some places they reap their wheat in May: (for this generally is the vsuall food throughout the whole country) yet they make no bread of it, as we vse heere in Europe, but a kind of pudding or pappe, which they eat in stead of bread. The temperature of the aire is very kind and whole∣some: their fresh waters are passing good: they haue also some bathes or springs of hot waters of soueraigne vertues in Phy∣sicke, as some do constantly report. High and steep mountaines they haue many heere and there, but two are especially fa∣mous, the one of which, whose name I know not, doth continually burne and cast out flames of fire, as Aetna in Sicilia was wont to do, and as Hecla in Island now vsually doth at certaine times. In the toppe of this mountaine, the Diuell, enclosed in a white clowd, sheweth himselfe to certaine men, after that for deuotions sake they haue long fasted and pined themselues. The other, called Figenoiama, ariseth vp certaine leagues aboue the cloudes. The people do digge sundry sorts of mettals out of the bowels of the earth, whereby they intice forren Nations to come from farre vnto their quarters. Trees they haue both for pleasure and for profit or fruit not much vnlike ours heere in Europe: yet there is one tree, which doth much resemble the Palme-tree, whose nature is very strange: for, as they affirme, it is afraid of any maner of moisture: and if so be by chance it happen to be wette, it shrinketh together, and as if it had been infected with the plague, smitten or blasted, it withereth and dieth immediately. The helpe and meanes to recouer it againe, is to plucke it vp by the roots and to drie it in the sunne: then to lay it in a dry ditch or empty pit, and to couer it all ouer, either with the rust of iron beaten to powder, or else with sand: there, after it is planted and set into the ground againe, it groweth and buddeth as afore, and so it flourisheth and becommeth as trimme and beautifull as euer it was: the boughes also that fall off, or are broken off, if they be fastened with a naile vnto the stocke or body of the tree, they will grow and ioine to the same aswell as if they had beene grafted into it. Heere are euery where great store of Cedar trees, of such height and thickenesse, that hereof the carpenters make summers for houses, pillars and columnes for stately buildings, and the shipwrights masts for the talest and greatest shippes of burden that in those quar∣ters they vsually make. Sheep, hogges, hennes, ducks, geese, and such other filthy kinds of liuing creatures they seldome or neuer keep at home about their houses: if they please to eat flesh meat, they only eat venison, and such as they catch abroad in the wild fields. The fields are bespread with many heards of cattell, as kine and horses for seruice in the warres: in the forrests, woods and bushie grounds, woolues, conies, bores, stagges and other deere do wander vp and downe: they haue plenty of phesants, wild ducks, stock-doues, quailes and wild hennes: fishes of diuers sorts, but especially of riuer trouts, (or silares as some call them) as also of sea troutes which is not vnlike that kind of fish which Ausonius nameth Alosa, and Pliny Clupea or Clypea, in the fifteenth chapter of his ninth booke: this they set great store by and do account it for a dainty dish. They know not what butter meaneth; oile of oliues they haue none; but they make a kind of artificiall oile of the Whales which they catch or are cast vp vpon this shore: the common sort of people do vse most what boughs or sticks of pine-trees, in some place straw and hawme, in steed of candles. If any one be tall or properly made, he is not a little proud of it. Many of them liue long, and are strong and lusty euen to the last, so that the most of them are fit for the warres till they be threescore yeares old. They weare their beards short: but in the rest of their haire they are very curious and haue diuers and sundry cuttes: they shaue them not, but plucke them off with pullesans or pinsers; the Boies do bare their heads from the forehead euen vp to the crowne: the baser sort of people and the clownes, the one halfe of the same: the gentlemen and noblemen, almost all ouer, onely leauing a few haires behind about the nape of the necke, which they hold for a great disgrace if any man shall lay hand vpon, or once offer to touch. Hunger, thirst, heat, cold, labour and such like inconueniences, that do much trouble other men, they can well away withall and most patiently endure. As soone as euer they be borne and come into the world, al∣though it be in the midde winter, they be straight caried to a riuer to be washed: being weaned and taken from the breast, they are exercised in hunting, and are kept apart in rough and craggy places farre from their mothers and nurces wings; for they thinke that there is nothing that doth more effeminate the minds of men, than too tender and delicate bringing vp. They bespread and couer the floores of their houses with fine and neat mattes, rising and swelling as matrices or flockebeds. Vpon these, laying a stone or blocket vnder their heads, in steed of a pillow, they sleep and take their rest: and vpon the same, kneeling vpon their knees and sitting vpon their legges, they dine and suppe. They are as neat and cleanly as those of China: at their meat they do so cunningly put their meat into their mouthes with two little pricks or forkes, that they neuer droppe or let ought fall beside, nor need once to wipe their fingers. They put off their shoes when they go to meat, least they should soile their carpets by treading vpon them The poorer sort, especially those that dwell vpon the sea, do liue by herbs, rise, and fish: the wealthier sort do set out their banquets richly and with great variety of dishes: at euery messe ech mans trencher
map of Japan and Korea IAPONIAE INSVLAE DESCRIPTIO. Ludoico Teisera auctore.
made of Cedar, or Pine-wood, of an handfull thicke, is changed without table-clothes or napkins. The meats, when they are to be set vpon the table, are built, or laid vpon another informe of a steeple or pyramis, bestrewed with gold, and stucke and set out for a shew with branches of the Cypresse tree, like as we vse to do with Rose-mary. Many times whole fowles are brought to Noblemens tables, with their bils and legs gilt all ouer. They intertaine their friends and guests very kindlie and bountifullie. They haue many orders and lawes of feasting and drinking, which are performed very curiouslie & with strange and exquisite ceremonies. They haue no manner of wine, nor vines amongst them. A kind of artificiall wine they make and presse out of rise: yet they are especially delighted, more than with any other kind of liquor, to drink water almost scalding hot, putting it into the powder of an hearb which they call Chia, (it is a very wholesome hearb of soueraigne vertues) this kind of drinke they vse often and are curious in the making of it; so that many times Princes and Noblemen, will dresse, prepare and mingle it with their owne hands, for an honour and grace vnto their friends: and they haue certaine places in their houses assigned to this purpose: in which there is a furnace or fire kindled at all times readie, with a kettle of cast iron continually hanging ouer the same: from hence they fetch drinke to entertaine their friends at their first comming to their house, and for their farewell at their departure: when their guests are to depart, they shew them all their treasure and houshold-stuffe which they do especially esteeme; which for the most part is nothing else but those vessels and instruments belonging to the making of the drinke which I spake of before, namely the furnace or hearth, the panne or kettle with the trefeet, the tunnell, the drink∣ing cuppes or earthen pots, the spoones, and the boxes wherein they keep the hearb and the powder made of the same. These things they set little lesse store by, than we do heere in Europe by rings beset with pretious stones or bracelets of the best and most orient pearles. Their houses for the most part are framed of timber, to auoid the danger of earth-quakes, which heere are very frequent and often, although that some haue their houses very artificially and stately built from the foundation vpward of a very faire kind of stone. They haue many goodly Churches, and Monasteries both of men and wo∣men, very rich and sumptuous. The language of all these ilands is one and the same, but so diuers and manifold, and of such different dialects, that it may not vniustly be said to be many. For they haue of one and the same thing diuers and sundrie names, of which some are vsed in scorne and bad sense, others in good sense and honourable vsage: other phrases and words are vsed by the Nobility, others by the common people: others are spoken by the men, others by the women. Moreouer, they speake otherwise than they write: and in their writing there is a great variety, for they write their priuate letters vnto their friends one way, and bookes and such like another way. They haue diuers bookes, very fairely written, both in verse and in prose. Againe, their letters are such, as in one and the same character they do expresse and signifie sometime one word, sometime two or more. Lastly, the Iaponian language is, of indifferent iudges, preferred before the Latine, either in respect of the elegancy and smoothnesse of pronunciation, or copy and variety of the same: therefore it requireth both great time and labour to learne it. They are a very warlike people and much giuen to follow that kind of life: the chiefe men of dignitie, which haue the command of the kingdome and gouernment of the same, they generally call Tonos; although amongst those there are also certaine degrees, as there are amongst our Nobility, Princes, Dukes, Marquesses, Earles, and Barons. Another sort of men there are amongst them, which haue the charge and managing of matters of their Church: these are shauen all ouer both head and beard: these may neuer marrie, but do vow perpetuall chastity. There are diuers and sundrie sects of these religious persons amongst them: some there are which after the maner of the Knights of the Rhodes, do iointly professe armes and religion together, but they are generally called by one name, Bonzij. They haue in many places diuers great schooles, such as we call Vniuersities. The third state or sort of people amongst them, are the citizens and other degrees of gentry: next vnto these are the retalers, hucksters, factours, and shop-keepers: with artificers and handiecraft-men, of diuers occupations, very ingenious and skilfull in their trades. They haue many kinds of armours and warlike weapons, made of sundrie makings, and excellent temper. They haue also the vse of Printing with letters and stamps, not much vnlike our ma∣ner inuented and practised heere in Europe. The last sort and state of people in these ilands, are the husbandmen and labou∣rers. Generally it is a very subtile, wittie and wise Nation, and of singular endowments and good parts of nature, both for acute iudgement, aptnesse of learning, and excellency of memorie. It is no shame or reproach to any to be accounted poore. Slaunderous and railing speeches, theeuing, robberies and that vngodlie kind of rash othes and swearing, with all kind of di∣cing and gaming, they do vtterly abhorre and detest. Any offendours against the Law, of what degree soeuer, are punished by no lesse punishment, than banishment, confiscation of goods or death. Those which are to be executed are for the most part beheaded suddenlie before they are aware. Notwithstanding it is the maner in some places to cary, such as are taken for robberies, in a certaine kind of carre round about the city, in the face of all the people, and to hang them vp without the wals of the towne. In the seruice of God, which is the chiefe point of iustice and vertue, they do miserably erre and swarue from the right tract. Their guides and great masters of religion to informe the rest, are those which I say they name Bonzij. A∣mongst their saints which they worship, the chiefe are those which they call Amida and Xaca: other idols they haue of lesse estimation and note amongst them, whom they pray vnto for health, recouery in sickenesse, children, money, & other things belonging to the body: these they call Camis. All Iaponia, or the people of that name, were subiect in time past vnto one Em∣perour, whom they called Vo or Dair, (this was his title of honour and dignity) vntill such time as he growen effeminate and giuen to pleasures and ease, became to be scorned and contemned by the Lieutenants and Nobility, especially of the Cubi (for so they called the two chiefest Princes vnto whom the gouernment of the country was committed, of which afterward the one did kill the other) therefore the Lieutenants of the seuerall shires, with the military men, hauing for a time endured such a carpet Knight, by and by began to loath his gouernment, and at last wholly shaking off the yoke of subiection, seised euery man into his owne hand the prouince ouer which he was set as gouernour vnder the Emperour: so at an instant that vnited body and maine Empire of so large command, was shattered as it were into many parts and pieces: yet so as notwithstanding a kind of soueraigne authority doth euen to this day remaine in the Dair, of distributing and giuing the titles of honour to the Nobility, which eftsoones are altered according to the diuersity of the degrees, and are designed by certaine notes and bad∣ges. The chiefe and most mightie of all the Princes of Iaponia is he that gat either by force or policy Meacum, and the best kingdomes neere to the same, which they generally by one name do vulgarly call Tensa. Those places were lately possessed by Nubunanga, that tyrant which I spake of before: this King being slaine by treason about two yeares before, and his chil∣dren murdered or banished, one Faxiba a chiefe captaine of the rebels, by force and violence stepped into his regall throne, and tooke vpon him to sway the scepter of that kingdome. The honour and credit of the first entrance of this Iland certaine Portugals do challenge and take vnto themselues, but I do rather giue credit to Antonio Gaualno, who reporteth, in that booke which he wrote of the descries of the New-found world, that Antono Mota, Francisco Zeimoro, and Antonio Pexoto, in their iourney as they sailed from the city Dodra in Sion, to passe for China, they were caried by a contrary wind to the Ilands of the Iaponians, about two and forty yeares before that time. All this we haue extracted out of the forenamed Maffeius, who handleth them more at large, with many other things of these Ilands of Iaponia. Of the same there are heere and there many things in the Iesuites Epistles.
INDIA. THat there is not a more goodly and famous country in the world, nor larger, comprehen∣ded vnder one and the same name than INDIA, almost all writers iointly with one con∣sent haue affirmed. It was so named of the riuer Indus. The whole compasse of India by the iudgement of Strabo and Pliny, is thus limited: vpon the West, it hath the riuer Indus; on the North, the great mountaine Taurus; on the East, the Eastern sea, wherein those fa∣mous Ilands, the Moluccaes, do lie; on the South, it hath the Indian sea. In the middest it is diuided into two large prouinces by the goodly riuer Ganges. Of which that which is on the West side of Ganges, is called India intra Gangem, India on this side Ganges: that on the East, India extra Gangem, India beyond Ganges. That in holy Scripture it is called EVILAT or Hauila: this latter some writers call SERIA, the country of the Seres, as Dominicus Niger testifieth. M. Paulus Venetus seemeth to diuide it into three prouinces, the Greater, the Lesser, and the Middlemost; which he saith they name Abasia. This whole country generally, not only for multitude of nations (of which, as Herodotus writeth, it is most populous and best stored of any country in the world) and for townes and villages almost infinite, but for the great abundance of all commodities (only brasse and lead excepted, if one may giue credit to Pliny) is most rich and fortunate. It hath very many riuers, and those very great and faire. These running to and fro and in many places crossing and watering the same, do cause it, as in a moist soile, where the sunne is of force, to bring forth all things most plentifully. It storeth all the world with Spices, Pearles and Pretious stones, as hauing greater plenty of these commodities than all the countries of the whole world besides. There are neere vnto this country many goodly ilands, which heere and there lie scattering in the maine Ocean, so that it may iustly be tearmed the World of Ilands. But especially IAPAN, which M. Paulus Venetus calleth Zipangri, situate in this sea, is worth the noting: which, because it is not many yeares since that it was knowen to few or none, I thinke it not amisse to say something of it in this place. It is a very large and wide iland, and hath almost the same eleuation of the Northren pole and position from the South with Italy. The Ilanders and people heere inhabiting, are much giuen to learning, wisedome and religion: and are most earnest and diligent sear∣chers out of the truth in naturall causes. They vse to pray and say seruice oft, which they do in their Churches in the same maner as the Christians do. They haue but one King, vnto whom they are subiect and do nothing but according to his behests and lawes. Yet he also hath one aboue him, whom they call Voo, to whom the or∣dering of Ecclesiasticall matters & gouernment of the state of the Church is soly committed. This peraduenture we may not vnfitly compare to the Pope, as their King to the Emperour. To their Bishop they commit the sal∣uation and care of their soules. They worship only one God, protraitured with three heads, yet they can shew no reason of this act. They baptize their infants: by fasting, in token of penance, they labour to bring downe their bodies. They crosse and blesse themselues with the signe of the crosse, against the assault of Satan: so that in religion, certaine ceremonies, and maner of liuing they seeme to imitate the Christians: yet notwithstanding the order of the Iesuites labour by all meanes possibly they can, not refusing any paines and trauell, to reduce them wholly to Christianity. Heere are also the MOLVCCAE, certaine ilands famous for the abundance of spices which they yearly yeeld and send into all quarters of the world. In these is bred the Manucodiatta, a little bird which we call the bird of Paradise, a strange fowle no where els euer seen. More neere the coast of India, is SVMATRA, or rather Samotra, for so the King himselfe of that country, writeth it, in his letters vnto his Maiesty: this Iland was knowen to the ancient Geographers and Historians by the name of TAPROBANA. There are also diuers other Ilands heere∣about of great estimation and fame, as Iaua Maior, Iaua Minor, Borneo, Timor &c. as thou maist see in the Mappe, but we cannot in this place speake of euery thing particularly and to the full. Thus farre the religion of Maho∣met is professed, and from Barbary ouer against Spaine, euen vnto this place is the Arabicke language spoken or vnderstood. The Moores from Marrocco, Ambassadours to our late Queene some fiue yeares since, we saw and heard them speake that tongue naturally, in which also their commission or letters patents were written: From Achem in Samotra, and Bantam in Iaua Maior our Merchants, this other day brought letters vnto his Highnesse, so fairely and curiously written in that character and language, as no man will scarcely beleeue but he that hath seen them, especially from so barbarous and rude a Nation. Of the ancient writers Diodorus Siculus, Herodotus, Pliny, Strabo, Quintus Curtius and Arrianus in the life of Alexan∣der, haue described the Indies. So hath Apuleius also in the first booke of his Floridorum. Dion Prusaeus in his 35. ora∣tion hath written much of this country, but very fabulously. There is also extant an Epistle of Alexander the Great, written to Aristotle, of the situation of India. Of the latter writers Ludouicus Vartomannus, Maximilianus Trans∣siluanus, Iohannes Barrius in his Decades of Asia, and Cosmas Indopleutes, whom Petrus Gyllius doth cite, haue done the same. But see the Iesuites Epistles, where thou shalt find many things making much for the discouery of the ile Iapan. But if thou desire a full and absolute description of the same, I would wish thee to haue recourse vnto the twelfth booke of Maffeius his Indian history. Iohn Macer, a Ciuillian hath also written bookes of the history of India, in which he hath much of the ile Iaua. Moreouer Castagnedo a Spaniard, hath written in the Spanish tongue a discourse of the Indies. Of the ilands which lie scattering heere and there in this ocean, read the twentieth booke of the second Tome of Gonsaluo Ouetani, written in like maner in the Spanish tongue.
map of the Asia-Pacific region, including China, Japan, Philippines, New Guinea, Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, Vietnam, Cambodia, Laos, Thailand, Burma, Bangladesh, India, Sri Lanka, Nepal, Tibet, and Bhutan INDIAE ORIENTALIS, INSVLARVMQVE ADIACIENTI∣VM TY∣PVS. Cum Priuilegio.
The kingdome of PERSIA, OR The Empire of the SOPHIES. THe Empire of the Persians as it hath alwaies in former ages been most famous, so at this day still it is very renowmed, knowen farre and neere, and conteineth ma∣ny large and goodly prouinces: For all that whole tract of Asia comprehended be∣tween the great riuer Tigris, the Persian gulfe, the Indian (which of old writers was called mare Rubrum, the Red sea) the riuers Indus and Iaxartes (they now call it Chesel) and the Caspian sea, is now in these our daies possessed by the Sophies, the Kings of Persia. All which tract of ground Pliny in the 27. chapter of his 6. booke of the history of Nature, by the iudgement of Agrippa, assigneth to the Medes, Parthians, and Persi∣ans. But Ammianus Marcellinus, who liued in the time of Iulian the Apostata Emperour of Rome, doth ascribe it wholly to Persia. For he in his foure and twentith booke reckoneth vp these eighteen countries in this order, as parts of Persia; Assyria, Susiana, Media, Persis, Parthia, Carmania the Greater, Hyrcania, Margiana, the Bactri∣ani, the Sacae, Scythia beyond the mount Emodus (a part of the mount Taurus, the Iewes call it Iethra, others, Moghali, others Beresith, as Theuet reporteth) Scrica, Aria, the Paropamisadae, Drangiana, Arachosia and Gedrosia. All these countries euen at this day are subiect to the iurisdiction of the Kings of Persia, (for ought that I can learne either by the bookes of late writers, or relation of sailours and trauellers into those parts) yet the names are much altered and changed, as you shall easily perceiue by comparing of the moderne mappes and chartes, with the descriptions of ancient Geographers. Of the originall of the SOPHIES, these particulars following, Caelius Secundus Curio, hath translated in his Saracen history, out of the Decades of Asia, written by Iohn Barrius: In the yeare of Christ 1369. there was a certaine pety king amongst the Persians, named Sophi, who held the city Ardenelim in his possession. This man bragged that he was descended lineally by his ancestours from Musa Cazino, nephew of Alij Muha∣med. He, the Chalife of Babylon being dead, & the contrary faction maintained by the Turkes, suppressed by the Tartars, began more boldly and freely to broach his opinions of religion: and because that Hocemus, the sonne Aly, from whom he draweth his pedigree, had twelue sonnes, minding to set some marke or badge vpon his sect and disciples, whereby they might be distinguished and knowen from others, he ordained that they that would follow him, and be of his religion, should weare a tire vnder the vaile, which all the Turkes do wind about their heads (they call it Tulibant) should be of a purple colour, and should hang out at the middest of the Tulibant twelue hand breadth. After his death Guines his sonne succeeded in his steed: who did purchase vnto himselfe such an opinion of learning, religion and holinesse throughout all the Eastern countries of the World, that Tamerlanes, that worthy and famous Emperour of the Parthians, (who ouercame Bayazet, the great Turke, and defeating all his forces, tooke him captiue) trauelling through Persia, determined to visite him as a most holy and religious Saint. To Guines, Tamerlanes freely gaue thirtie thousand captiues, which he brought thither with him: these Guines afterward trained vp in his religion; whose seruice Secaidar his sonne, especially vsed in his warres: For he, after that Guines his father was dead, made warre vpon the Georgians, his neighbours bordering vpon his kingdome and countries, a kind of people of Scythia, but Christians by profession, and by the help of these Mussulmanes, grieuously vexed them many kind of waies &c. Let this satisfie thee in this place to be spoken of the originall of the Sophies. These do make continuall warre with the Turkes about the Mahumetane religion: for because the Sophies do follow one interpretour of the Alkora'n and Mahometan religion, and the Turkes another, which in∣terpretours and expositours do much dissent and vary one from the other, so that the Sophians by the Turkes are counted but as Heretiques, and contrariwise the Turkes are esteemed for no lesse by the Sophi∣ans. It is by nature a Gentleman-like and honourable Nation, very ciuill and curteous, louing learning and liberall sciences, and withall do much esteeme of Nobility and Noble-men: in that are cleane contrary and opposite to the Turkes, which do not acknowledge or regard any difference of bloud or descent from fa∣mous ancestours and great houses. The situation of these countries, the maners, customes and behauiour of the people of the same, thou maist read of in Aloysius Iohannes Venetus, Iosaphat Barbarus, Ambrosius Contarenus, Iohannes Maria Angiolellus, and a certaine Merchants trauels, whose name I know not, together with them imprinted. Looke into also the Iesuites Epistles, and the Persian Commentaries of Caterino Zeni, a Senatours sonne of Venice. Polybius in his fifth booke doth most excellently well describe the middle Country. Moreouer Petrus Bizarrus, my singu∣lar good friend, hath this other day set out the history of Persia. Lastly, and somewhat latter than Bizar∣rus, Thomas Minadoius hath done the like, but in the Italian tongue.
map of the Persian Empire, incorporating Iran, Afghanistan and Pakistan PERSICI SIVE SOPHO∣RVM REGNI TYPVS. Cum priuilegio.
The Empire of the Great TVRKE. OF the originall and beginning of the Turkish Empire, the encreasing and grow'th of the same, vntill it came by little and little to that greatnesse that now it is of, whereby it is fearefull to all nations round about, we haue gathered these few lines out of the best Historiographers of our time. In the yeare of Christ 1300. one OTTOMAN∣NVS a Turke, the sonne of Zichi, a man of meane parentage, began for his pregnant witte and great experience in feats of armes and discipline of warre, to grow famous and renowmed amongst the Turkes. Of this man the stocke of the Turkish Empe∣rours first tooke their name and beginning, and he was the first that ordeined a king ouer the Turkes. He raigned seuen and twenty yeares, in which space he conquered all Bithynia and Cappa∣docia, and subdued many strong holds neere vnto Mar Maiore, or the great sea; so now the Italians call that sea which the old writers call Mare Ponticum and Sinus Euxinus, the Greekes now Maurothalassa, and the Turkes Caradenis, that is, the Blacke sea. After him succeeded his sonne ORCHANES, who wonne the great and strong city Prusia or Prusa, (now called, as Bellonius writeth Bource, and was sometime named Zellia and Theo∣politana) which he made the head of his kingdome and place of residence for his Court. He was slaine in an vnfortunate battell which he fought against the Tartars, in the 22. yeare of his raigne, and left AMVRATHES his sonne to rule the kingdome after him: who first, (the Grecian Princes falling at variance and calling him in) sailed with an huge army out of Asia into Europe: he in a short space subdued almost all Greece, and Pho∣cis a part of Bulgaria, but himselfe at last being ouercome and taken by Tamerlane, died and ended his daies most dishonourably. The father being taken, CALEPINVS his sonne stepped into the throne, and tooke possession of the kingdome. But hauing in battell vtterly ouerthrowen Sigismund and his forces, and begun to wast and spoile the borders and territories of the Emperour of Constantinople, died in the floure of his age, when he had raigned but six yeares. Heere note by the way that, Adolphus Venerius doth not reckon this Calepine amongst the Turkish Emperours. For immediately after Baiazeth, he placeth Mahomet. And that I may giue euery man his right, the singular learned man, my good friend, Georgius Bruno Agrippinensis hath taught me that the very Turkes themselues do not account him for an Emperour. After him MAHOMETES tooke vnto him the crown of the Em∣pire, who made fierce warres vpon the Walachians: subdued a great part of Slauonia: first passed with an armie ouer the Donaw: conquered Macedonia: and pearced through the country euen as low as the Ionian sea. He translated his Court from Prusias in Bithynia, vnto Adernopoli in Greece, where he died in the four∣teenth yeare of his raigne. After him AMVRATH the second succeeded in the kingdome. This man con∣quered Epirus, Aetolia, Achaia, Boeotia, Attica and Thessalonica, (now Salonichi) a city belonging to the state of Venice. After him MAHOMET the second tooke vpon him the Diademe, he ouerthrew Athens the most renowmed Vniuersity of the World. He wonne by battery the great city of Constantinople, vpon the nine and twentith day of May in the yeare after the birth of Christ 1452. He subdued the kingdome of Trapezon∣da vnder his command. He tooke Corinth. He forced the ilands Lemnos (Stalamine they now call it) Euboea (Nigroponte) and Mitylene to yeeld to his obedience. He got Capha, a city belonging to the Signiory of Genua; and at Geiuisen a city of Bithynia died in the 32. yeare of his raigne. BAIAZETH the second, after his death possessed the crowne. He made warre vpon the Venetians, and wanne from them Naupactus (Lepanto, or, as the Turkes call it, Einebachti) Methona, (Modon or Mutune, a city in Peloponesus) Dyrrachium (Durazzo) and spoiled all Dalmatia. He was poisoned by a Iew his Physition. After whom SELYMVS his sonne succeeded in the Emperiall throne. He wanne Alcairo, the strongest city of Aegypt, and killing the Souldan, subdued Alexan∣dria and all Aegypt vnder his obedience. He tooke also Damascus in Syria. SOLYMANNVS the only sonne of Zelimus, possessing his fathers roome, wanne Belgrad, tooke Buda the Princes seat, and spoiled Strigonium and almost all Hungary. He gatte the Rhodes by composition, and vtterly rased Quinqueecclesias in Hungary, (the Turkes call it Petscheu, the Dutch Funfkirchen). Hauing surprized the city, he besieged Zygeth, where he ended his life. ZELIMVS the second his sonne, continued the battery, wanne it and sacked it in the yeare of Christ 1566. And thus vnder 11. Emperours, in 260. yeares, a great part of Africa, a greater of Europe and the most of Asia was by Turkish tyranny, brought vnder their yoke. But he that desireth a more absolute knowledge of the histories of the Turks, let him read Paulus Iouius, Christofer Richer, Cuspinian, Baptista Egnatius, Gilbertus Nozorenus, Andreas Lacuna, Pius the second in the fourth chapter of his Europa, and others that haue written of the Turkish affaires; but no man hath set out these histories either with greater diligence or more amply than M. Richard Knolles, our learned countryman my singular good friend. Laonicus Chalcondylas hath curiously described the pedigree of the Ottomans together with the originall of the Turks. Iohn Leonclaw hath very lately imprinted the Annalles of the Souldan Otthomans, written by the Turks in their owne language, and interpreted by him into the Latine tongue. Of their ancient maner of life, behauiour and customes, thou maist read in the eighteen chapter of Leo the Emperour, of Warlike preparation: as also in Bartholo∣mew Georgieuiz, who hath written a seuerall treatise of that argument: but especially the Annalles of the Tur∣kish Souldans and the history of the Musulmans, both written by the singular learned Iohn Leonclaw, shall sa∣tisfie thee to the full.
map of the Ottoman Empire, incorporating Greece, Albania, Macedonia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia, Montenegro, Bulgaria, Turkey, Georgia, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Lebanon, Syria, Iraq, Isreal, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, Yemen, Oman, Kuwait, Bahrain, Qatar, and United Arab Emirates TVRCICI IMPE∣RII DESCRIPTIO. Concordia parue res crescunt, Discordia maximae dilabuntur. Cum priuilegio.
The HOLY LAND. THat which the ancients called Palestina and Phoenicia, all the Europeans generally now call The HOLY LAND, vnder which name they comprehend that whole country which God gaue vnto the Israelites by the name of the Land of Promise, to them and their seed to possesse and inhabite for euer, and which after the death of Solomon, we read, was diuided into two kingdomes, IVDAH, conteining two tribes Iudah and Beniamin, whose cheife or Metropolitan city was Ierusalem: and SAMARIA or ISRAEL, which comprehended the other tenne tribes, together with the city Sebaste or Samaria. A latter description of the modern situation of this country, very curious & exact, done by F. Brocard in a seuerall treatise (vnto whom we send the Reader for further satisfaction) we offer in this Mappe: for the former tables did present vnto thy eie the ancient face and more beautifull countenance of this land. To him they may adioine, that please, the treatise of William Tyrius en∣tituled, The Holy warres, and other authours that haue written their Peregrinations to Hierusalem, of which sort there is a great number written and imprinted in diuers languages. For many Christians not only out of sundrie parts of Europe, but from all quarters of the world, haue in former times and now do daily trauell vnto Hierusalem, for deuotion to visite the holy sepulchre of our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ, and are there sometimes by the Franciscane Friars, dubbed Knights, who thereof are named Knights of the Sepulchre: the order & ceremonies of making these Knights, we haue thought not altogether impertinent from our purpose, to describe in this place, as it is set out by Iod. a Meggē, an ei-witnes of that, in the 12 chap. of his treatise intituled, Peregrinatio Hierusolymetana. And thus he hath down the maner of it: First of all therefore the Knight that is to be made, prepareth himselfe vnto his deuotions, that he may receiue the fauour of the degree of the holy order, and making his confession (hauing heard Masse & receiued the Sacrament) he is admitted into the roome where the holy sepulchre is, and then they begin on this manner: First, all being gathered together within the holy sepulchre, they sing this Psalme, Come holy spirit &c. Then this, Send forth thy spirit &c. The Answear. And renew &c. Lord heare &c. Let vs pray, Thou Lord, which know'st the harts of the faithful &c. Then the Gardian demandeth of him, what wouldest thou haue? He answeareth vpon his knees, I do desire to be made a knight of the order of the Holy sepulchre of our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ. Question. Of what state and condition of life art thou of? Answear. A noble man, borne of honou∣rable parents. Question. Hast thou sufficient liuing whereby thou maist liue and maintaine the estate and dignity of knighthood, without the help of merchandise or vse of any mechanicall or handie-craft occupation? Answear. I haue, thankes be to God, sufficient liuing and maintenance by lands and reuenews. Question. Art thou prepared to sweare with hart and mouth, to keep and obserue, to the vttermost of thy power, those mi∣litarie sacraments and orders which shalbe heereafter inioined thee, namely these which follow? First, a knight of the holy order of the sepulchre must euery day, if opportunity be offered, heare a masse or diuine seruice. Secondly, when need requireth, viz. when there is any generall warre against the Pagans or Infidels, he must aduenture both body and goods in the quarrell of the Church; that is, he is bound either to go in his owne person, or to send thither of his charges, some one sufficient man or other. Thirdly, he is bound by that oath to defend and free, in as much as in him shall lie, the holy Church of God, and all the members of the same, from their persecutors, and from the enemies of Christianity. Fourthly, he must altogether shunne vniust warres, filthy lucre and hire, fencing, iusts, torneaments, combats and such like, but only for exercise and making of himselfe more fit for the sacred warre. Fifthly, he must procure peace and concord between faithfull Christian people, do his best to grace and enlarge the bounds of his country, defend orphanes and widdowes, he must carefully take heed of cursed oathes, periuries, blasphemies, rapes, v∣surie, sacriledge, murther, drunkennesse, suspected places, infamous persons, and to shunne and keep himselfe, (as from the deadly plague) from all those vices of the flesh that mortall man by nature is so much subiect vnto: and that he do so cary himselfe, that in the iudgement of men he shall not be blame worthy, but shall shew himselfe worthy of that honour that he is called vnto, by frequenting the Church & procuring the honour and glory of God in what he can. It is therefore demanded of him, whether he be ready with hart & voice to protest, sweare & performe all these things? Answear. IN. do protest and promise before our Lord Iesus Christ and the blessed Virgin Mary his mother, that I will, to the vttermost of my power, obserue all these things. These being done, the Sword is blessed or consecrated by the Gardian, according to the blessing beneath pre∣scribed, if it be not otherwise consecrated before: but if it be blessed, then after that blessing or consecration, calling one of those that are to be made Knights, and causing him to kneell downe before the holy sepulchre, the Gardian putteth his hand vpon his head and saith: Thou N. be thou a faithfull, true, stout, good and braue souldiour of our Lord Iesus Christ, and of his holy sepulchre, whom we pray to vouchsafe thee his heauenly glory with his chosen Saints, Amen. Then the father Gardian giueth him a paire of gilded spurres, which he must put vpon his heeles, standing vpon the ground. Afterward he giueth the naked sword to the Knight: saying, Take thou N. the holy Sword, In the name of the Father and of the Sonne and of the holy Ghost, Amen. (making withall 3 crosses vpon the same) Vse it for thine owne defence, & for the defence of the holy Church of God, to the offence and confusion of the enemies of the crosse of Christ and Christian faith, and to thy vttermost power thou shalt hurt no man wrongfully with it: which he vouchsafe to grant, who with the Father and the holy Ghost raigneth one God both now and for euer, Amen. Then the Sword is put vp into the scabberd, & the Gardian girdeth the Sword about the Knight saying, Be thou N. most valiant, girded with thy Sword vpon thy thigh, in the name of our Lord Iesus Christ: and obserue, that the Saints haue conquered kingdomes not by their swordes, but by faith. The Knight thus girded with the Sword ariseth, and resting vpon his knees and leaning his head vpon the holy Sepulchre, he is dub'd by the Gar∣dian, 3 times smiting the Sword vpon the shoulders of the Knight, and saying thrise these words, I ordain & make thee N. a Knight of the holy Se∣pulchre, of our Lord Iesus Christ, in the name of the Father and of the Sonne and of the holy Ghost, Amen. (making as afore 3. crosses.) Then he kisseth him, and putteth vpon his necke, according to the old maner, a chaine of Gold with a crosse hanging vpon it; Lastly, the Knight kissing the Sepulcher, restoreth all these ornaments, goeth aside, and another is called, which is to be dubbed with the like ceremonies: In the meane time the Knight first made must stay in the hall of the holy Sepulchre, vntill such time as all the rest that are to be preferred to this dignity, haue obtained the same. When they are all made, then Te Deum is song by the Friars, and from thence they go to the chappell of the Minorites, or else there they stay still, as the Gardian shall please or appoint. Then these words following are spoken in the singular number, if there be but one: if there be many, in the plurall. In the singular it is said, Thou more beautifull than the sonnes of men, thou N. gird &c. with thy sword vpon thy thigh, o thou most mighty. If there be many it is spoken in the plurall number. The Versicle. Lord heare &c. Answear. And let my crie come vnto thee. The Lord be with you. And with thy spirit. Let vs pray. Grant vnto thy Church, most mercifull God, that being gathered together in the Holy Ghost, it may no manner of way be disturbed by the assault of the enimy. Almighty and euerlasting God, powre the grace of thy bles∣sing vpon this thy seruant (or these thy seruants) which at this instant desireth to be girded with the glorious sword, cause him, being defended by the power of thy right hand, to be continually garded with a garrison of heauenly souldiers against all aduersaries, whereby he may not be mole∣sted in this world with any tempestuous stormes of bitter wars, by Christ our Lord, &c. Lastly, the Gardian and others, if they please, do embrace him. The blessing of the sword. Hee that blesseth it must hold the sword naked before him and say, Our help is in the name of the Lord &c. Let vs pray. Listen, we pray thee o Lord, vnto our praiers, and vouchsafe with the right hand of thy Maiesty to blesse this sword, wherewith this thy ser∣uant desireth to be armed, to the end that he may be a defendour of the Church, of widdowes, orphanes, and of all such as serue God, against the fury of the Paganes and Infidels; and a terrour and dread to such as shall assault or go about to hurt him, assuring him of the certain effect of iust & lawfull defence and offence, by Christ our Lord, Amen. Let vs pray. Blessed Lord, holy Father almighty, and eternall God, by the inuocation of thy blessed name, by the comming of thy sonne Iesus Christ our Lord, and by the gift of the holy Ghost, blesse this sword, that this thy ser∣uant, which this same day, by thy bounteous fauour, is to be girded vnto him, may ouerthrow and beat downe all thy enemies both visible and inuisible, and he getting the vpper hand may continually abide void of all danger, by Christ our Lord, Amen. The blessed Lord, my rocke, which teacheth my hands to fight, and my fingers to warre: my largesse and my castle, my high tower, and my deliuerer, my protectour in whom I haue put my trust, is he that subdueth my people that is vnder me. Glory be to the Father and to the Sonne &c. Saue thy seruant o Lord God, which putteth his trust in thee. Be thou, o Lord, vnto him a tower of strength: from the face of his enemie. Lord heare our praier. The Lord be with you &c. Let vs pray. O holy Lord, father almighty, who only dost gouerne and rightly disposest all things, who hast by thy gratious prouidence granted to man, in this world, the vse of the sword to represse the malice and audacious lewdnesse of the wicked, and to maintaine right and e∣quity; and wouldest that the order of knighthood should be instituted for the safegard and protection of thy people, who also causest it to be pro∣claimed by Saint Iohn Baptist, to the soulders which came vnto him into the wildernesse, that they should smite no man, but be content with their owne wages: we do humbly beseech thy gratious goodnesse, that as thou gauest to thy seruant Dauid power to ouercome Goliath, and madest Iu∣das Marcabeus to triumph ouer those fierce nations which called not vpon thy name: so also to this thy seruant N. who lately hath submitted his necke to the yoke of knighthood, grant for thy mercies sake power & strength to defend faith and iustice, giue vnto him the encrease of faith, hope, and charity, and in him order all things aright that pertaine to thy feare and loue of thy holy name, to true humility, perseuerance, obedience, and patience, that he may hurt no man wrongfully with this sword or any other, & that he may with it defend all things that are iust and right: and like as he now is promoted from a low and mean degree, vnto this new and honourable estate of knighthood, so he putting off the old man with all his affections, may put on the new man, that he may feare and reuerence thee aright, as he ought to do, may shunne the company of the wicked mi∣screant Infidels and may extend his charity vnto his neighbour, be truely obedient in all things to him to whom he is subiect, and do his duty vp∣rightly in all things that he shall be emploied in, by Christ our Lord, Amen. The forme of the oth which they must take before they may be admit∣ted to take this holy order of knighthood vpon them, thou maist see in the Orientall iournall written by Leonard Rauwolph, in the Dutch tongue.
map of Israel TERRA SANCTA, A Petro Laicstain perlus trata, et ab eius ore et schedis à Christiano Schrot in tabulam redacta.
NATOLIA, sometime called ASIA The Lesser. PEtrus Bellonius in those learned obseruations which he made and set forth of his trauels, saith that this part of Asia, (called of the ancients Asia minor, Little Asia) is at this day named of the Turkes NATO∣LIA, or Anatolia, of the Greeke word Anatale, which signifieth the East, vnder which name they com∣prehend all that part of Asia that is beyond Propontis (Mar di Marmora, it is now vulgarly called) and Hellespontus, or, Stretto di Gall poli, the streits of Gallipoli, as at this day they terme it: that is to witte, all Phrygia, Galatia, Bithynia, Pontus, Lydia, Caria, Paphlagonia, Lycia, Magnesia, Cappadocia and Coma∣gena. The miserable estate and condition of which countries, the maner of life and customes which the people there do now at this day vse, if any man be desirous to know, let him repaire to the said au∣thour, who was himselfe an eie-witnesse of the same, and he shalbe I doubt not, satisfied to the full. Let him also looke ouer the description of the East countries, (Orientalem Cosmographiam) done by Andrew Theuet, the Orientall obseruations of Nicolas Nicolai, and Peter Gill his Bosphorus, or description of Constantinople and the places neere about that city. Laonicus Chalcocondylas writeth that of all the prouinces of Asia Minor, Paphlagonia doth yeeld a mine of Copper or Brasse, and that the King of this country, (Ismaël he calleth him) doth yearely raise a custome or reuenue of 10000. rose-nobles. (Stater, the Greeks call this kind of gold coine.) Yet it seemeth that he meaneth not generally all Asia, when as he addeth this afterward, That this copper is thought to be the best in goodnesse next that of Iberia: for Iberia is a prouince of Asia, bordering vpon the Caspian sea. But peraduenture this may be true of that Asia, which is called Asia Minor, of which Paph∣lagonia is a portion. Theodoricus Adamaeus of Suallemberg, hath described the Rhodes, an iland which lieth not farre from the coast of Asia Minor. AEGYPT. VPon the West, this country is enclosed with the deserts of Barca, Lybia and Numidia: vpon the East, with the deserts which lie between Nilus and the Red-sea: on the North it hath the midland-sea: on the South it is con∣fined with the territories of the city Bugia: Thus it is bounded according to the iudgement of Iohannes Leo Africanus, who doth diuide it into three prouinces; Assahid or Alsahid, which lieth between Bugia and Al∣cairo: Errifia, from Alcairo to Rossetto: and Bechria, between Pelusium and Tenessa: In Haithon the Armeni∣an we read that it was sometime diuided into fiue shires; namely, Sayt, Demesor, Alexandrina, Resnit, and Damiata. That which Haithon calleth Sayt, and Leo Assahid, Tyrius nameth Serch; except the copy be cor∣rupt and faulty. The same authour maketh mention of another shire of Egypt, which the Egyptians do call in their language Phium. Haithon doth make the country of Egypt to be fifteen daies iourney in length (a manuscript copy, which beareth the title of Antonius Curchinus, not of Haithonus Armenus, hath, corruptly and falsly as I thinke, fiue and twenty daies iourney, for fifteen daies iourney) and three daies iourney ouer. To this computation Gulielmus Tyrius doth seeme to consent, who saith that betweene Phacusa and Alexandria cities of the lower Egypt, are somewhat more than an hundred Italian miles. The vpper Egypt is scarsely seuen or eight miles broad, in some places it is so straitely beset and enclosed with mountaines and hils that it is not aboue foure or fiue miles ouer. Leo saith; that from the Mediterran sea vnto Bugia, it is 450. miles long, the breadth of it, especially in the vpper part, is almost nothing to speake of. That Nilus, the riuer which runneth through the middest of it and watereth all the country, doth empty it selfe into the Midland sea only by foure mouthes, against the opinion of all ancient wri∣ters, Gulielmus Tyrius doth teach vs, who is a man worthy to be beleeued in this case: for he was both an eie-witnesse, and a most diligent searcher out of the truth of the same. I haue a Mappe, which I thinke was made by the pen in Egypt, which mentions so many, neither doth it point out more that are worth the speaking of. Haithon writeth that in this whole country there is beside Ale∣xandria and Cairo, neuer a strong city or any that is fortified with ditch, wall or rampart. Yet it is apparant out of the description of this prouince done by Iohn Leo Africanus, that there be diuers other cities beside these, although they be not very strong. For in his eighth booke of the description of Africke, he reckoneth vp thirty and two, beside certaine other villages, which he descri∣beth according to their name and situation. Of Egypt thou maist read in the description of the Holy Land, set forth by Brocard, to∣ward the latter end of the same; as also in Bellonius Obseruations, Guillandine and Niger. Of Nilus read Goropius and Nugarola, beside that which ancient writers haue written of it, which thou shalt see in our Mappe of old Egypt. The Hauen of CARTHAGE. IT is not our purpose to describe CARTHAGE that famous city (and next after Rome the only glory of the world) which so long bearded the Romanes and stood out against all forren subiection: but because we saw this his Bay to be set out in Italy in this forme, I thought it would be a thing, wel-pleasing the learned student of Geography, to ioine the same also to this our worke together with this discourse of Paulus Iouius written of the same. Such is the forme of the Bay of Carthage, that the entrance into it is not to be descried by such as saile thitherward from the maine sea: for that the cape Clupea, called of old writers Mercuries Foreland or Fairenesse stretcheth out it selfe farre into the West, and againe winding it selfe and bending inward maketh another cape, sometimes called Apolloes Foreland, now the sailours call it Zafranio. From thence vnto the straits of Goletto it is redou∣bled in maner of an halfe moone; and at the left hand of the city Rada (Raba the chart hath) famous for hot bathes of soueraigne vertue, it leaueth the country. Ouer against which are to be seene the ruines of old Carthage and the place where it stood. Thus farre Iouius. But the places neere adioining are described more particularly in Iohn Leo Africanus.
map of Turkey and Cyprus NATOLIAE, QVAE OLIM ASIA MIN∣OR, NOVA DE∣SCRIPTIO.
map of Egypt AEGYPTI RE CENTIOR DE SCRIPTIO map of Northern Tunisia CARTHAGINIS CELEBERRIMY SINVS TYPVS
ETHIOPIA or ALHABAS, The country of ABYSSINES, or The Empire of PRESTER IOHN. THe same whom we in Europe call Presbyter Iohn, or Priest Iohn, the Moores call ATICI ABASSI. themselus, that is, the Abyssines or Ethiopians, ACEGVE and NEGVZ, that is, Emperour and King, for his proper name is arbitrarily giuen him (as heere we vse in Europe) at the discretion of the parents. It seemeth also that at his coronation he chan∣geth his name, (like as the Popes of Rome vse at this day to do) and together with his crowne to take vnto him ano∣ther proper appellation: for he which in our remembrance possessed the throne and made a league of amity with the King of Portugall, was called before his coronation Atani Tingal, but after he had taken vpon him the Emperiall diademe he was named Dauid. This Prester Iohn, out of doubt, in this our age, is one of the greatest Monarches of the World, whose kingdome lying between the two Tropickes, reacheth from the Red-sea almost vnto the Ethi∣opian ocean: and that we may somewhat more precisely set downe the bounds of this Empire, (for as much as we can gather out of the surueihgs of the same, made and set forth by some learned men of our time) it hath vpon the North Egypt, (which now is vnder the command of the Turke) on the east it abutteth vpon the Red sea and Bar∣baricum sinum (Pliny calleth it Troglodyticum sinum; others Asperum mare, the rough sea; the seamen at this day vulgarly, Golfo de Melinde: on the South it is strongly by nature fensed and enclosed by Montes Lunae, the mountaines of the Moone: on the West it is confined by the kingdome of Nubia and the riuer Nilus. These bounds do seeme to containe that prouince which old writers called Ethiopia beneath Egypt, together with Troglodytis, & Cinnamomifera regio, (the country where in those daies Cinnamon grew most plentifull, with part of the inner Libya. These countries now are diuided into many smaller prouinces, and are called by diuers and sundrie names, as thou maist see in the Mappe. These countrie people are at this day generally of all our moderne Historiographers called ABYSSINI, or, as themselues with the Arabians round about them, pro∣nounce the word Hhabas, and with Al, the Arabicke article or pronoune, prefixed, Alhabas, as Beniamin reporteth; and Abexim, as Garcias ab Horto affirmeth: all which wordes indeed originally are the same, and do only differ either in sound or maner of writing: for the Eastern Hheth, (a letter I meane proper to those nations, and barbarous to vs borne in Europe, the West part of the World) is diuerslly expressed by diuers, (as they do well know which know ought in the Hebrew, Arabicke, Syrian, and Ethiopicke languages) sometimes by our single h, sometime by the double hh, otherwise by ch, others do wholly omit it, as not finding any letter, in that language in which they write, that is of that nature and pow∣er, whereby they may truly expresse the same. Again the last letter of the same word which the Hebrewes and Arabians call Schin, is sometime ex∣pressed by sh, sometime by ss, or by the Spanish x, (which they sound almost like our sh) and sometimes by s or z. For thus I find the word writ∣ten often in the holy Scriptures translated into Arabicke and Habashi and Alhabassi, Psalm. 68.32. and 74.14. Item in Gen. 2.13. where Ardzi' lhabas, the land of Ethiopia, is the same that Auicenna in the 283. chapter of the second tract of his second booke, calleth B'ledi'lhhabashah, the country of the Abyssines, or as our fathers named it, India Occidentalis, the West Indies; the interpetour Gerardus Cremonensis hath Terras al∣habes, Bellunensis hath Terras Indiae minoris, the countries of the Abyssines, or of the lesser India. Heere also it is worth the obseruing that this word, out of all doubt, had his originall from the Hebrew שוכ Cush, whereby they did long since call this nation and people, as it is apparant out of Gen. 10.5. and 2.13. by the iudgement of all Interpreters, Grammarians and Iewish Rabbines. For the Hebrew ו, or vaw, which indeed, and in his owne nature is the same with our w, is pronounced of some nations in some cases like the Germane v, or v consonant, as they call it, somewhat like the sound of b, altogether the same with that pronunciation of the Hebrew Beth, when it followeth a vowell, as the modern Grammarians and Iewish Rabbines do now teach. According to which custome it is not vnlikely but that this word שוכ, which the Iewes sounded Cush, some other nations might pronounce and vowell thus, שוח chauash, chabaas, habas, or Abyssi. And indeed, the Asians generally, and they themselues, as Ortelius citeth out of Iosephus, do call themselues Chusaeos, and, as he reporteth from the relation of the reuerend B. Arias Montanus Hispalensis, they are euen to this day of the Portugals still called Cussij of Cush, I make no question. The people are blacke, or of a deep tawny or blackish co∣lour: and blacke, we say in our common prouerbe, will take none other hue. Whereupon the Prophet Ieremy in the 23. verse of the 13. chapter of his prophecy saith thus: Can ישוכ Cushi, (the Abyssine or Blacka-moore) change his skinne? or the leopard his spots? For the same reason also the learned Diuines do iudge that Dauid in the title or superscription of the seuenth Psalme, by Cush did meane Saul, for that his deadly hate was such toward him, that by no good meanes that he might vse, he could make him change his mind, more than an Indian doth his skinne, as Kimchi the great Rabbine doth interpret this place. The people are by profession Christians, as appeareth by the letters of the said Dauid, written vnto Pope Clement the seuenth. Of whose manner of life, customes and religion, we haue gathered these few lines, out of the trauels of Francis Aluares, written and imprinted in the Italian tongue. In these countries there are very many Monasteries and Religious houses, both of men and women: Into the Monasteries of the men, there is neither woman, nor any liuing creature of the female sex, that may enter or once looke within the gates. Their Monkes, which heere do hold their Lent for fifty daies together, do fast for the most part only with bread and water. For in these countries there is small store of fish, especially in the vpland places: for although the riuers are well stored of fish, yet they giue not their mind to fishing, because they know not how to catch them; there is none skilled in that art. In time of Lent, certaine of these Monkes do not eat any bread at all, only they liue vpon rootes and herbs: some of them for all that time do neuer go to bed, nor sleepe but as they sit in the water vp to the chinne. In their Churches they haue bels as we haue, but for the most part made of stone. Their Ministers and Priests are married. They say Masse, and do go in procession with crosses and censers like as they vse in some Churches in Europe. The Friars do weare their haire long, but their Priests do not so: neither of them weare any shoes, nor any man, neither Churchman nor Layman, may once enter within the Church dores, with shoes on his feet. They keep Sundaies and Holy-daies, vpon which they do no manner of worke. They are all circumcised, both men and women: but they are also baptised in the name of the Father and of the Sonne, and of the Holy Ghost, yet not vntill the fortith day after their birth: they which liue not till this day, are buried vnchristened: to all those that are baptized the holy communion or Eucharist, as they call it, is at the same instant administred, powring a great deale of water into the childes mouth, that he may so much the more easily get it downe. The proper names which then are giuen them, are all of some signification. They affirme that they were conuerted vnto Christian religion by Candaces, (a Queen of this country, spoken of in the 27. verse of the 8. chapter of the Acts of the Apostles) whose proper name they thinke was Iudith. They haue a booke diuided into 8. parts, (this they call Manda and Abetilis) which they do verily beleeue was written by all the Apostles being iointly for that purpose gathered together at Hierusalem: all the contents of this booke they do most diligently and strictly obserue. The baser sort of people do without any controwlement or feare of pu∣nishment marry 2. or 3. wiues, according to their ability and as they can tell how to maintaine them: but these are excommunicated, and forbid∣den by the Cleargy to enter into the Church. Their lawes do tolerate diuorcements. The Noble-men do esteem raw beefe, serued in with fresh or hot bloud, in manner as we vse our boiled meats with pottage or stewed broth, for a great and dainty dish. In all the kingdome of Prester Iohn they haue no manner of brasen or copper money, but in steed of it they vse pure gold vncoined of a certaine weight. In like manner salt, (yet not only in these prouinces, but also generall throughout all Africa) is vsed in exchange and buying and selling in stead of money. In some places small pieces of iron bright and burnished do serue that turne. But pepper amongst these people is of such great price, that whatsoeuer a man will buy, he may easily obtaine it for that merchandice. These countries haue almost all sorts of beasts and fowles; as Elephants, Lions, Tygres, Losses, (Lynces the Latines call them) Badgers, Apes and Stagges, (contrary to the opinion of the old writers, which haue generally denied that Africa doth veeld this kind of beast) but in all that six yeare which Aluares this our authour, dwelt in these countries, he writeth that he neuer saw any Beares, Conies, Linnets, Magpies, or Cuccoes. Yet Iohn Leo an African borne, in his 9. booke saith, that in Barbary there is wonderfull store of Conies. The Locusts do more vex and hurt this country, than any place of the World beside, so that this plague is almost proper and peculiar to them. Such oftentimes is the number and abundance of them, that as they flie they do seeme to darken the aire and shadow the earth: they flie together in such great flockes and thicke troupes that they do vtterly spoile and consume the fruits sometime of one prouince sometime of another; wholly almost deuouring all their corn vpon the ground, eating vp the leaues and barkes of the trees, leauing their meddowes and pastures bare of grasse, so that the people do oftentimes leaue their natiue soile where they were bred and borne, and are forced, for want of victuals, to go seeke some other place to dwell in. There is in these quarters a city named Cassumo, sometime the seat (as their histories do record) and place of the Queen of Saba, Maquedam, (that is, as I thinke, Antistes, a Prouost or President) they say she was called. By whom they affirme that Salomon King of Isra l, had a sonne named Meilech, (that is, The King.) In this city they are perswaded that the Queen Cand ces did afterward dwell. But it is best that the Reader that is de∣sirous of further satisfaction, to haue recourse to the same Francis Aluares, who hath very curiously described those thing which he did most dili∣gently obserue in that his Ambassage into these countries. Item Iohn Bermundes, who set foorth his Ambassage vnto the Abyssines, in the Portugall language. Let him also read a little treatise of Damianus à Goes, which he wrot out of Ethiopia, and Sabellicus his 10. Enneas of his 8. booke. Of the originall of Prester Iohn, and by what meanes he came out of Asia (where he was knowen to writers about 200. yeares since) and seated himselfe in Africa, read Iohn Nauarchus in his Epistol. Asiatica, and Gerard Mercator in his Vniuersall Mappe.
map of East Africa, Sudan, Eritrea, South Sudan, Ethiopia, Somalia, Congo, Rwandi, Burundi, Uganda, Kenya, Tanzania, Zambia, Malawi, Mozambique PRESBITERI IOHANNIS, SI∣VE, ABISSINO∣RVM IMPERII DESCRIPTIO. Titulus & Insignia Presbiteri Iois. DAVID SVPREMVS MEORVM REGNORVM, A DEO VNICE DILECTVS, COLVMNA FIDEI, ORTVS EX STIRPE IVDA, FILIVS DAVID, FILIVS SALOMONIS, FILIVS COLVMNAE SIONIS, FILIVS EX SEMINE IACOB, FILIVS MANVS MARIAE, FILIVS NAHV SECVNDV̄ CARNEM, FILIVS SANCTORVM PETRI ET PAVLI SECVNDVM GRATIAM; IMPERATOR SVPERIORIS ET MAIORIS AETHIOPIAE, ET AMPLISSIMORVM REGNORVM IVRISDIC∣TIONVM ET TERRARVM; REX GOAE, CAFFA∣TES, FATIGAR, ANGOTAE, BARV, BALIGVANZAE, ADEAE, VANGVAE, GOIAMAE VBI NILI FONTES, AMARAE, BAGVAMEDRI, AMBEAE, VANGVCI, TIGREMAHON, SABAIM PATRIAE REGINAE SA∣BAE, BARNAGASSI; ET DOMINVS VSQVE IN NV∣BIAM QVAE IN AEGYPTVM EXTENDITVR.
BARBARY, and BILEDVLGERID. THe later writers, which haue diuided Africa into foure parts, do name this Barbary for the chiefe: and they do thus bound it; On the East toward the rising of the sun it hath the deserts of Marmarica (at this day they call it Barcha) euen as farre as that part of the mount Atlas, which now is vulgarly called Meies, which part peraduen∣ture was described by Strabo vnder the name Aspis. This mountaine (which runneth all along by the side of it from the East vnto the West, euen to the maine sea which of it is called Mare Atlanticum, the Atlanticke sea) doth bound it vpon the South. On the West it abutteth vpon the said Atlanticke sea. On the North coast the Me∣diterran sea doth beat: therefore all that whole tract of Africa which formerly conteined both the Maurita∣nies, Africa, properly so called, and Cyrene, is generally by one name called BARBARIA; all which tract, as Suidas witnesseth, was vnder the command of King Masmissa. This now is held for the best and most famous part of all Africa, and is diuided into foure kingdomes, or, if you like that terme better, foure prouinces: namely, Marroccho, Fesse, Telesine, and Tunete. The people generally of this whole country are of a brownish or tawny complexion. They which dwell in cities, are very ingenious in Architecture and such like Mathematicall inuentions: which a man may easily gather by their rare and artificiall workmanship shewed in their buildings. They are (if we may beleeue Iohn Leo Africanus) most singular honest men: without any deceit or couen: not only making a shew of simplicity and true dealing outwardly and in word, but also approouing the same by their actions to be so indeed and in hart. They are very stout and strong men; but especially those which dwell in the hils and moun∣taines. There is no Nation vnder Heauen that is more zealous, so that they had rather die, than to put vp any wrong or disgrace offered by their wiues. They are very couetous of wealth and as ambitiously giuen to seeke after honour and preferment, and therefore they trade and traffique almost into all quarters of the World. They which dwell in tents, that is, such as follow grasing and do liue by cattell, are very kind men, courageous, patient, curtuous, good housekeepers, and as great louers of vprightnesse, as any men in the whole world elsewhere. But seeing the state of the world is such, that there is no man altogether blessed, none but haue their faults, these also are not without their vices: for the citizens, which before we spake of, are exceeding haughty and proud, hasty and fumish, so that the least iniury or indignity that may be offered, they do, as the common saying is, engraue in marble, they will neuer forget it. The coun∣try or vplandish people are so clownish and of such rude behauiour, and that so deepely imprinted in their mindes, that they will hardly be wonne to acquaint themselues with any stranger, he shall hardly e∣uer winne their fauour. They are so plaine and simply minded, that they are easily drawne to beleeue things told them, although almost incredible. Of naturall Philosophy they are so ignorant, that they hold all things done by the naturall force and operations of Nature, to be wholy supernaturall. They are so hasty and cholericke that one shall hardly in the day time walke the streets but he shall see two or three either quarrelling or together by the eares. They neuer speake but hastily, aloud and as if they would eat one another. Thus farre of the quality and behauiour of the people, now it remaineth that we should speake somewhat of the nature of the soile and country. That part of the country which is toward the Mediterran sea, is full of hils and mountaines. From these mountaines euen vnto famous Atlas, it is plaine and champion, yet heere and there rising with knols and hils. Heere are very many goodly springes, and therefore it is well watered with diuers pleasant brookes and riuers. It yeeldeth great store of Dates and Pomegranates: it is not very fertile for corne and graine: but of figges, and oliues with such like fruites it affoordeth yearely great plenty. Mount ATLAS, verie cold and barren, on all sides full of woods, and couered ouer with snow, breedeth almost all the riuers of Africke. Yet the cold heere is neuer so great and sharp that one need to desire to come to the fire to warme him. The later end of Autumne, all the Winter and a great part of the Spring haue many boisterous and bitter stormes of wind and haile: and oftentimes they are in these places much vexed and affrighted with terrible thundrings and lightning: in some places they haue great and deep snowes, &c. But Iohannes Leo Africanus hath described these countries and people very curiously and at large, who will satisfie thee at the full; to whom it thou pleasest thou maiest adioine what Ludouicus Marmolius, and Fazellus in the first chapter of the sixth booke of the latter decade of his history of Sicily, haue written of this prouince. Caelius Augustinus Curio hath set out the description of the kingdome of Marocho in a seuerall treatise, to him, he that pleaseth, may adioine Diego de Turribus, who in the Spanish tongue hath written a booke of the Originall and Succession of the Xariffes.
map of North Africa, Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia, Libya BARBARIAE ET BILEDVLGERID, NOVA DESCRIPTIO. Cum Priuilegio.
The kingdomes of FESSE and MAROCCHO. THat part of Africa, which of old was called MAVRITANIA TINGITANA, at this day comprehendeth the kingdomes of Fesse and Maroccho, which heere we present vnto thy view in this Mappe. Of the which MA∣ROCCHO, taketh the name of Maroccho (they call it Marox, the Spaniards Marwechos) the chiefe and metro∣politane citie of the same. The territories round about this city, and generally the soile and fields of the whole kingdome, as Iohn Leo Africanus writeth, are most pleasant and fertile, euery where bespread with heards of cattell, flockes of sheep and diuers sorts of deere and wild beasts: in all places are green and goodly pastures, most plentifully yeelding whatsoeuer is necessary for the maintenance of mans life, whatsoeuer may recreate the senses by pleasant smels, or please the eies with delightsome shewes. The whole kingdome is almost no∣thing else but one large champion, not much vnlike Lombardy, the Paradise of Italy. The hils that are (which are but very few) are exceeding bleake, cold, and barren, so that they will beare nothing but barly. Maroccho which we said was the chiefe city of this kingdome, is accounted one of the greatest cities of the whole world: for it is of such a won∣derfull bignesse, that in the raigne of Haly the sonne of Ioseph their king, it had more than an hundred thousand families. It hath about it 24. gates. The wall of a maruelous thicknesse, is made of a kind of white stone and chalke vnburned. There are heere such abundance of Churches, Colledges, stoues or hothouses and innes, as iustly more may not be desired. Amongst the Churches, there is none more artificially and gorgeously built, than that which standeth in the middest of the city built by the foresaid Haly. There is another beside this first, raised by Abdu'-lmumen, his successour, and enlarged by Mansor, his nephew: and lastly more richly set out with many good∣ly columnes, which he caused to be brought out of Spaine. He made a fountaine or cestern vnderneath the Church, as large and wide as the whole Church it selfe. The roofe of the Church he couered all ouer with lead. At euery corner he made spoutes, by which the raine water falling vpon the roofe might runne into the cestern vnderneath. The steeple made of a very hard kind of stone, like that of the Amphitheater of Vespasian at Rome, is higher than that towre of Bononia in Italy. The greeses or staiers, by which they go vp to the toppe of it, are euery one nine handfull thicke, but in the outside of the wall are tenne. This tower hath seuen roomes or lofts one a∣boue another. Vpon the toppe of it is set another turret or spire like a pyramis, sharpe toward the top. This hath three lofts one aboue another, into which they go vp from one to another by staires or ladders made of wood. On the toppe of this spire vpon a shaft of iron, in steed of a weather-cocke, doth stand a most goodly Moone of pure gold, with three golden globes so put vpon the iron shaft, that the greatest is lowest, the least highest of all. If any man from the toppe of the steeple shall looke downe toward the ground, the tallest man that is seemeth no bigger, than a child of a yeare old. From the toppe also of this the cape or fore-land which they call Azaphy, being an hundred and thirty miles off, may easily be descried. And although one should skarcely find a greater Church if one should trauell all the world ouer, yet the place is almost wholly desert: for none do euer vse to come hither but vpon Fridaies. Vnder the cloisters of this Church they report that there were wont to be an hundred Stationers, and as many ouer against them on the other side of the Churchyard, which daily heere kept shoppe, where as now I do not thinke that all this whole city can affoord at this time one booke-seller. Hardly the one third part of the towne is inhabited. Heere hence it is that within the wals there are many vineyeards, large gardens of palme-trees and other fruites, with goodly corne fields most fertile and well manured: for without the wals they can∣not till the ground by reason of the frequent inrodes of the theeuish Arabians. This one thing is most certaine, that this city is suddenly growne old before the time: for it is not aboue fiue hundred and six yeares, since it was first built. There is also in this city a very strong castle, which in respect of the large bignesse, the great thickenesse and compasse of the wals, the high and many towers, or lastly, the goodly and stately gates built of the richest Tiburtine marble, may iustly be accounted for a faire towne. Within this castle is a most beautifull Church with a very high steeple, vpon whose toppe is a golden moone, with three golden globes of different bignesses, all of them weighing 130. crownes. There haue been some kings of this country, who, moued with the loue and valew of the gold, haue attempted to take these globes downe and to put them into their purses, but alwaies some strange euent or misfortune or other did hin∣der their purpose and crosse their desires. So that it is now commonly amongst the people held for a very ominous thing for any man but once to offer to touch these globes with his hand. Let this be sufficient to haue spoken of this city in this place: he that desireth a larger discourse both of the city and castle, let him haue recourse vnto Leo Africanus, who in his 2. booke will satisfie him to the full. In this kingdome also is the city TARADANT, (the Moores call it Taurent) a very great and goodly city built by the ancient Africanes. It conteineth about 3000. houses or families. The people are more ciuill and curtuous than in other places heere about. Heere are many artificers of diuers and sundry occupations. The townesmen do yearely raise a great profit by keeping of a gard to defend merchants, that from hence do trauell vp higher into the country, from the assault of theeues and robbers, and to conduct and lead them the neere∣est and best way: for it is a place of great resort of strangers aswell of Christians as others. There are also other cities, as the mappe doth shew: amongst the which is MESSA, hauing a Church not farre from the sea, which they do most religiously reuerence. For there are some heere that most fondly do beleeue and affirme that the Prophet Ionas, when he was sent of God to preach vnto the Niniuites, was at this place cast vp of the fish, which before had swallowed him. The sparres of this Church and the beames are made of whale bones: for it is a common thing, for the sea to cast vp heere dead whales of maruailous bignesse. Vpon the coast also of this country is found that kind of Amber, which we call Amber-greese. Not farre from this city is TEINT, a towne where all those rich skinnes are dressed, which are commonly called Maroccho pelts. More of this kingdome thou maist read of in Leo Africanus, Marmolius, and in the Saracen history of Caelius Augustinus Curio, where he hath a seuerall treatise of this prouince. Thus farre of Maroccho: it remaineth now that we should speake likewise of Fesse. FESSE, like as Maroccho, is a kingdome so called of the chiefe city and metropolitane of the same. This city is situate in the hart and middest of the kingdome. It was built as they affirme about the yeare of our Lord 786. Neither is it only the head city of this king∣dome, but it is esteemed, The Metropolitane of all Barbary, and is vulgarly called, as Marmolius testifieth, The Court of all the West part of the World. Some there are which do thinke it to haue been named Fesse of a masse of gold, that heere was found when first they began to lay the foundations of the same: for fes in Arabicke signifieth an heap or masse. The greatest part of the city standeth vpon hils, only the middest of it is plaine and leuell. The riuer vpon which it is seated entreth it at two sundry places, (for the one is diuided into two parts) and being entered within the wals it spreadeth it selfe almost into infinite branches, and is by and by, in channels, troughs, and pipes conueighed almost to euery priuate house, church, colledge, inne and hospitall. Lastly, running through their vault, fewers and sinkes, it carieth with it all the ordure and soile of the city out into the maine riuer, and by that meanes keepeth it continually near and cleane. The greatest part of their houses, built of bricke and coloured stones, are very beautifull and do make a goodly shew to the be∣holder. Moreouer the open places, galleries and porches are made of a kind of party-coloured bricke or pauement, much like vnto those earthen dishes which the Italians call Maiorica. The roofe or seelings of their houses they ouerlay with gold and other most orient coloures very finely and gorgeously. The toppes of their houses on the out side are couered ouer with boord a dare made plaine, so that in the summer time they may be ouerspread with couerlets and other clothes: for heere in hot weather they vse to lie and sleepe all night. Item, for the most part euery house hath a turret seuered into many roomes and lofts, whither the women, being toiled and wea∣ry, may with-draw themselues, to recreate and refresh their mindes: for from hence they may almost see al-ouer the city. Churches and Chappels they haue in this city to the number almost of 700. whereof 50. are very large and goodlie, most sumptuouslie built of free
map of Wast Africa, Senegal, Gambia, Guinea-Bissau, Guinea, Sierra Leone, Liberia, Côte d'Ivoire, Ghana, Togo, Benin, Nigeria, Cameroon, Gabon, Congo, Angola CONGI REGNI CHRISTIANI, IN AFRICA, NOVA DESCRIPTIO. Auctore Philippo Pigafetta. map of Morocco FES∣SAE, ET MAROCCHI REG∣NA AFRICAE CELEBERR. describebat Abrah. Ortelius. 1595.
stone or bricke, euery one hauing a fountaine or conduict adioining to it, made of a kind of marble or stone vnknowen of the Italians. Euery Church hath one Priest belonging to it, whose charge is to say seruice there and to read praiers. The greatest and chiefe church in this city called Carrauen, is of that greatnesse that it is said to be almost a mile and a halfe about. It hath one and thirty gates of mar∣uellous bignesse and height. The steeple of this Church, out of which the people with a very lowd and thundering voice are called to Church, (like as we do vse by the towling of a bell) is very high. Vnderneath this is a cellar or vault, where the oile, lights, lampes, mats and such other things necessarily and ordinarily vsed in the Church, are kept and laid vp. In this Church there are euery night in the yeare 900. lamps lighted at once. Moreouer, in this city there are more than an hundred Bathes: Item, two hundred innes, euery one hauing six skore chambers apeece at the least: for diuers of them haue many more. Euery inne hath a well or fountaine of water priuat to it selfe. In about foure hundred places you shall find mill-houses, euery place hauing in it fiue or six mils: so that in all you may ac∣count heere certaine thousands of mils. All occupations heere are allotted their seuerall and proper places to dwell in, euery one by it selfe, so that the best and more worshipfull trades are placed neerest the cathedrall Church. All things which are to be sold, haue their seuerall market places appointed out for them. There is also a place assigned as proper to the Merchants, which one may iustly call a lit∣tle city, enclosed round with a bricke wall. It hath about it twelue gates, ech of which hath a great iron chaine drawne before it, to keep horses and cartes out. And thus much of the West part of Fesse. For the other side which is vpon the East, although it haue many good∣ly churches, buildings, noblemens houses, and colledges, yet it hath not so many tradesmen of sundry occupations. Notwithstanding heere are about fiue hundred and twenty weauers shops, besides an hundred shops built for the whiting of thread. Heere is a goodly castle, equall in bignesse to a prettie towne, which in time past was the Kings house where he vsed to keep his court. These particulars we haue heere and there gathered out of the third book of Iohn Leo his description of Africa, where thou maist read of very many other things of this city, both pleasant and admirable. Item Iohn Marmolius hath written something of the same. Moreouer Diego Torresio, in that his booke which he sometime wrot of the Seriffs, (or Xariffs as the Spaniards vsually write it) hath done the like. Out of whom I thinke it not amisse in this place to adde this one thing worth the remembrance. There is a stone saith he, at one of the gates of this city, which hath vpon it this inscription in Arabicke letters,  FIZ VLEDEELENES, id est, populus gentium, or thus, Fes bleadi'lenes: Fesse is a world of men: like as they commonly speake of Norway calling it Officinam hominum, the shoppe or workehouse where men are made. Againe he alleadgeth this as a common prouerbe vulgarly spoken of this city: Quien sale dc Fez, donde ira? y qui∣en vende trigo, que comprera? as much to say in English, He that is weary of Fesse, whither will he go? and he that selleth wheat, what will he buy? answerable to that of the poet, spoken of Rome, Quid satis est, si Roma parum est? What will content thee, if all Rome be not inough? This S. Hierome, in his second Epistle vnto Geruchia a virgine, doth cite out of Ardens the Poet. The kingdome of CONGI. OF Congi this kingdome of Africa (which others corruptly call Manicongo; for this word properly signifieth the king of Congi, and cannot he spoken of the country alone) my good friend Philippus Pigafetta, the authour of this Mappe, wrote a booke in the Italian tongue, this other day imprinted at Rome. Which he penned from the mouth and relation of Odoardo Lopez, a Por∣tugall, who had himselfe been a long time a dweller there, and so a man very skilfull of the state and situation of this country, and an ey witnesse of that which heere is set downe, out of whom we haue drawen these few particulars: This kingdome is diuided into these six prouinces: Bamba, Sogno, Sundi, Pango, Batta and Pemba. The first of which is inhabited and possessed by a warlike and ve∣ry populous nation: so that this one by it selfe is able, if need be, to make 40000. fighting men. The chiefe city of this prouince, and seat of their Kings, is Bansa, which now they call Citta de S. Saluador. All this whole prouince is very rich of siluer and other mettals, especially about the iland Loanda, where also they catch abundance of those shell fish which breed the pearles: these they do vse in this kingdome for exchange in buying and selling in steed of money: for heere there is no manner of vse of coine: neither do they much esteeme of gold or siluer. Heere is also great trafficke for slaues, so that the Portugals do yearely buy and carry from hence aboue 5000. Negroes. This country doth breed great store of Elephants, which they in their language call Manzao. There is also found in these quarters a kind of wild beast, which they call Zebra, of the bignesse and fashion of a mule. But that it is not a mule, it is apparent, in that this beast is not barren, as the mule is: for this doth breed and bring forth yong, as other beasts do. The pelt or hide of it is different from those of other liuing creatures of like sort: for it is straked with strakes of three diuers colours, namely, blacke, white and yeallow or lion tawny as they call it. It is so wonderfull swift of foote and so wild that by no meanes it may be tamed or be made seruiceable for any vse of man: whereupon they commonly vse this for a prouerbe, As swift as the Zebra. There are also, as in other places, Lions, Tigers, Woolues, Hartes, Hares, Conies, Apes, Chamaeleons with diuers and sundry kindes of Serpents: beside hogges, sheep, goats, hennes and parrattes. Crocodiles, which they terme Cariman, are heere very plentifull. But horses, oxen and other beasts fit for such kind of seruices and vses for mankind, they haue none at all. Heere doth grow great store of Palme-trees. Of the leaues of this tree they make and weaue almost all kind of silke garments and apparell. For the vse of the silke-wormes, which in other places is well knowen, is heere altogether vnknowen. The maner of their posts, or maner of trauell from one place to another (for as we haue shewed before, they haue no horses) I thinke it well worth the while to set downe in this place, out of the 15. booke of Maphey his Indian histories, who affirmeth that they haue no other but wooden horses; which story he thus laith downe. Vpon a rafter or beame, saith he, about nine inches thicke, and eight foot long, they spread a piece of a buffe hide of the breadth and compasse of a saddle; vpon this the traueller sitteth stradling: two men beare the bayard vpon their shoulders, and if the iourney be long, then other two do shift and ease them of their burden. The forena∣med authour Pigafetta, describeth another kind of carying of passengers from place to place, yet it is not very much different from this. Vpon the North part of this kingdome do abutte the Anzicanes, a mankind nation, a people I meane that eateth mans flesh: so that heere mans flesh is openly sold in their shambles and flesh markets, as beefe and mutton and other meat is amongst vs. That also which they report of Loanda, an iland vpon the coast of this country, I thinke it worth the noting in this place; namely, that they say it lieth so exceeding flatte and low, that it is scarcely seene aboue the water, and that it is a made ground compounded of the mudde and sand, which the riuer against which it lieth, ca∣steth out into the sea. Lastly, that if any man shall digge but two or three handfuls deepe within the ground, he shall find fresh water, very wholesome and good to drinke: and that which is most wonderfull, this same water when the sea ebbeth will he salt, but at full sea only it is fresh. How this nation was by the meanes of King Iohn, King of Portugal, in the yeare of Grace 1491. conuerted vnto Christ anity, and with what successe they haue continued and gone forward, and yet still constantly do persist in the same, any man that list, may read of in the forenamed authours; Pigafetta in his second booke: Maphey, in his first booke of the history of India: and Iohn Barros in the third chapter of the third booke of his first decade of Asia. Before the entrance of the Portugals into this country, the people had no proper names; but were called by com∣mon names, such as also stones, trees, herbs, birdes, and other creatures amongst them were called by.
monumental frontispiece: top, a reclining male figure, semi-naked, with a trident, leaning on a jar from which water flows, and another reclining male figure, semi-naked, holding a rudder, resting on a cloud with two puffing child heads representing wind; between them a snake with an orb entwined in books; left, a standing male figure in classical dress holding a globe over his head showing the western hemisphere; right, a standing female figure, half-naked, holding a globe over her head showing the eastern hemisphere; bottom, two cherubs ΜΩΡΙΑ ΠΑΡΑ ΤΩ ΘΕΩ. PARERGON, SIVE VETERIS GEOGRAPIAE ALIQVOT TABVLAE. LECTOR S. Ad nostram Orbis terrarum descriptionem habe sequentes tabulas: quas in gratiam priscae tam sacrae quàm profanae historiae studiosorum à me delineatas, seorsum publicare decreueram: nihil enim ad nostrum in hoc Theatro (quo hodiernum tantùm locorum situm exhibere proposueram) institutum facere videbantur: victus tamen amicorum precibus, eas in huius nostri Operis calcem, tamquam Parergon, reieci, Vale, & nostros conatus boni consule. HISTORIAE OCVLVS GEOGRAPHIA.
THE GEOGRAPHY OF HOLY WRITERS. THat which we haue promised, behold now, ye students of Diuinity and Holy writte, at length we offer to your view, namely, a Map of Sacred Geography, or of such places as are named by holy writers in the bookes of the Old and New Testaments, whether so ex∣actly as the matter requireth and thou doest looke for, I know not: but that it is done with my best ability & skill (to which in any matter, and therefore in this especially, I dare not much rely.) I know and can truly protest. Yet notwithstanding, that I haue not bereaued the learned of their due commendation in doing the like; I do acknowledge and do wil∣linly confesse, we haue done what we could, seeing that we might not performe what we would. Therefore what heere we offer it is rather our will, than our wish. Two things, most kind Reader, we de∣sire thee to obserue and marke, before thou iudge and censure this our labour. First, that in the Geographicall names of places, we haue followed the translation of Septuagints: because that is but one and vniforme. The Latine translations as they are many, so also they are different, and in naming of places they vary much and dis∣sent one from another: so that that word which one doth interpret properly, another otherwise doth translate it according to the sense and meaning. Which is, that I may vse Varroes phrase, to make a noune appellatiue of a proper name: and contrariwise of proper names to make appellatiues. Examples of which thou maist see in the annotations of Emauel Sà, as also in our Geographicall Treasure. Therefore where we sticke as doubtfull, which of these different readings and writings of proper names we may take, we runne vnto the 72. interpretours as vn∣to a sure ground. It any man be desirous to know how otherwise the Latine interpretors do call these proper names, let him haue recourse to our Treasurie, and he shall without any great difficulty easily satisfie his desire. For in this he shall find all the Synonymes of places digested according to the order of the Alphabet. The other thing, gentle Reader, which I would haue thee to obserue, and necessarily ought to be done, least preiudice do go before sound iudgement; is this, the seats of all places of Palestina are not set downe in this our Mapp, but a few of those that are more famous, according to the capacity of the table: (for thou seest how straite and nar∣row it is:) what heere is wanting may be supplied out of the Tables following; two of Tileman Stella; the third in∣tituled the Peregrination of S. Paul, and the fourth intituled the Peregrination of the Patriarch Abraham. For if all these should haue been portraitured and ioined together in one and the same Mappe, it would grow too much too great: yea it would be so great and huge that it would exceed this, which heere we giue; an hundred times; and so by reason of the greatnesse, it would not only be troublesome in vse, but also vnpleasant to the eie. In the hart and middest of the plotte; where thou seest Syria, as it hath been sufficiently replenished and filled with places, so in places round about vpon the coasts on all sides, it is most empty and barren: so that it would appeare like a small iland in the vast ocean, and would soone haue growen into a great, burdensome and chargeable bignesse to no purpose or profit at all. We haue vpon the side in a void place set the Mappe of the whole World, whereby the diligent student of Diuinity by conferring might easily see, what and how great a portion of the same, the holy history doth men∣tion and comprehend: and at once; iointly with the same labour to find out the situation and position of two famous places mentioned in the holy Scriptures: namely of the situation of the country Ophyr and the earthly Paradise. Of the which although many men do write many and diuers things, and the opinions of the learned be different, yet we haue also set downe our iudgement, willingly giuing leaue to the learned Reader, in his di∣scretion, to take which him pleaseth: and he may read, if he thinke good, that which in our Geographicall Trea∣surie, we haue written more at large of Ophyr. Of Paradise also there is the like controuersie and question a∣mongst the Diuines. The most men do place it in the East, others in Syria; Postellus, vnder the pole Arcticke. Some there are which do gesse it to haue been vnder the Equinoctiall line. Goropius, our countrieman, is perswa∣ded by many arguments that it was in Indoscythia, a prouince of India in the East, abutting vpon the riuer Indus. Some of the old writers did imagine it to reach as high as the sphere of the moone: others do place it in other places. Caesarius the brother of Nazianzene in his Dialogues, in what place he supposeth it to be, I cannot deuise: for he maketh Donaw one of those foure riuers; namely, that which sacred antiquity called Phison: this Saint Hie∣rome and Eusebius do vnderstand to haue been Nilus in Aegypt, others Ganges in East India: S. Augustine against the Manicheies hath this opinion: Beatam vitam, Paradisi nomine significatam existimo: By Paradise I do thinke the blessed life to be vnderstood. Others more later, which purposedly haue written of the situation of Paradise, are Moses Bar Cepha, in the Syriacke tongue, and translated by the learned Masius; Pererius vpon Genesis; Iohn Hopkinson, an Englishman, in a peculiar treatise, where also thou maist see a Geographicall Mappe of the same. Others also haue done the like, as Beroaldus in his Chronicle; Vadianus in the description of the three quarters of the World; and Ludouicus Nugarola in his booke intituled Timotheus or Nilus &c. Phison one of the riuers of Paradise, which some do expound to be Ganges, which runneth too farre toward the East; this Mappe by reason of his narrow∣nesse, cannot by any meanes containe: the situation of which thou maist see in another Mappe of ours in this our by-worke, intituled Aeui veteris Geographiae tabula, A Geographicall chart of the old World.
map of the ancient world GEOGRAPHIA SACRA. Ex Canatibus geographicus Abrahami Ortelii. Cum privilagio Imp. Regis, et Cancellariae Brabantiae, ad decennium. MDXCVIII. Ophiram regionem quia haec tabula compraehen∣dere non poterat, hanc aream univer∣salem hic seorsim delineavimus, in qua illam ex dissentientium scriptorum iudicio notaevimus. Nostram verò de eadem sententiam si quis intelligere aveat, Thesaurum nostrum Georgraphicum adeat, censu∣ram{que} suam (per me enim licebit) addat. REVERENDO ET ILLVSTRI DNO GVILIELMO GRIM∣BERGIO, ANTVERPIENSI PRAESVLI DIGNISSIMO, Abrah. Ortelius obse∣quij deuotionis{que} ergò dedicab. consecrabat{que}. map of the world Haec notula locum Ophirae designat. DOMINI EST TERRA ET PLENITVDO ORBIS TERRARVM ET VNIVERSI QVI HABITANT IN EO. Psal. 24.
PALAESTINA, OR The HOLY LAND. CANAAN, The most ancient name of this country was Canaan, which it tooke of Chanaan the sonne of Cham, whose posterity diuided it amongst themselues and first inhabited it. Their names were these, Sidon, Heth, Iebusy, Emory, Gergesy, Heuy, Arky, Siny, Aruady, Semary, and Hamathy, Gen. 10.15.16.17.18. Euery one of these gaue his owne name to that part of the country of Canaan, which he enioied for his por∣tion and possessed, and of them mention afterward is made Gen. 13.14.15.23.24.25.27.34.36.38.49.50. Exod. 3.13.23.34. Num. 13.22.32. Deut. 1.2.3.4.7.20. Iosu. 2.3.5.7.9.10.11.12.13.15.16.17.19.24. Iudg. 1.3.10.11.18. 1. King. 7.1. Chron. 1. Iud. 5. Psalm. 105.106.134.135. Esa. 21. Ezech. 16.27. This country was called by the name of the Land of Canaan, vntill the Israëlites, hauing partly slaine and partly subdued all the posterity of Canaan, possessed the same: from which time it be∣gan to be called the Land of Israel, which name was by the Angell giuen to the Patriarke Iacob, for that he had wrestled with God; and from thence the country grew to be called by that name, Gen. 32.28. For the word Israël in the Hebrew tongue signifieth, to preuaile with God, or a mighty man preuailing against the mighty God. Heere hence were the sonnes and ofspring of Iacob named Israëlites, and the country wherein they dwelt the Land of Israël; as is apparant out of the booke of Iud. and the 1. booke of the Kings. Although the whole land of Chanaan were indeed generally called Israël, yet neuerthelesse the portion or iu∣risdiction of euery Tribe, which seuerally Iosua assigned to euery one of the twelue Patriarkes, receiued a proper appellation of the chiefe of that family, as is apparant by diuers places of Holy Scripture. The names of the Tribes were these, Ruben, Simeon, Iuda, Zebulon, Isaschar, Dan, Gad, Aser, Nephtali, Beniamin, Manasse, Ephraim: and so the name of euery one of the sonnes of Iacob, remained in his posterity and place of abode in the same, so that the whole land of Chanaan was diuided into twelue parts, as the holy Scripture doth testifie. Then vnder Roboam, when as Israel and that kingdome was rent into two parts, the Tribes of Iuda and Beniamin, being vnited, retained the name of Iuda: and that for these reasons: First, for that of the two it was the mightiest: Secondly, by reason that out of it the Messias was to come, it was the more famous, and the name of the whole was taken from the most honourable. But the other tenne Tribes, which were commanded by the Kings of Samaria, still retained the ancient name, and were called Israël. Againe, the later part, after the captiuity of Babylon, was diuided into two prouinces, Samaria and Galilee. Samaria the Metropolitane or chiefe city (of which the country tooke the name) was the seat of the Kings of Israel. But Galilee was possessed and inhabited by forreners and strangers, 3. King. 9. and 4. King. 17. and therefore grew to be much enuied and despised of the rest of the Iewes: so that they did vse to speake all villany and reproachfull speaches of the people of this prouince. The North part of this in scorne was called Galiley of the Gentiles, and in respect of the situation, the Higher Galiley: the other part of it, toward the South, was called the Lower Galiley. Therefore after∣ward euen vnto the time of Christ and his Apostles, and so foorth, the land of Chanaan or Israel was diuided into three parts, and called by three distinct names. The Higher country toward Sidon and Tyre, they called Galiley; the Middle, Samaria; the Lower, toward the South and Arabia Petraea, was properly called Iudaea, Iewrie, as is manifest out of the second chapter of Saint Matthew, and the fourth of Saint Iohn. This later did containe onely two Tribes, Iuda and Beniamin. Although also all the land of Canaan, euen as high as the mountaines of Thra∣con neere Antioch, and the country of Ammon, was called Iudaea, as is euident by the ninteenth chapter of Saint Matthew, and the tenth of Saint Marke: and therefore also Pliny mentioneth Iudaea citerior, Iewry on this side Iordan. Strabo in his sixteenth booke, and Lucane in his second booke do also call the same Iudaea: which name, as we said before, had the originall from the Tribe of Iuda. Ptolemey and others call it Palaestina, of the Palaestini, which according to the propriety of the Hebrew pronunciation in the Holy Scriptures are named Philistiim, (Phelistines) this Nation indeed both for their great command and warres made with their neighbours for certaine yeares together, were very famous. Herodotus in Polymnia and Dion in his seuen and twentieth booke, calleth that part of Syria which is next to Aegypt, Syriam Pa∣laestinam, Palaestina of Syria. Ptolemey calleth it Palaestinam Iudaeam, Palaestina of Iewrie, or Palaestinam Syriae, Palaestina of Syria: Because that Palaestina is a part of Syria, as Pomponius Mela thinketh, who calleth it Syriam Iudaeae, Syria of Iudaea. Many places of this Palaestina are expressed in that his Mappe: and therefore heere they are omitted. OF AEGYPT. The country situate between Syene, or the Catarractae Nili, the fall or mouthes of Nilus; through the middest of which this riuer runneth, and by his yearely inundation and ouerflowing, watereth all the grounds of the same, in old time was called CHAM, of Cham the sonne of Noe, to whose lot this country fell when the world was diuided presently after the confusion at Babel; Psalm. 78. v. 51. & 105. v. 23. and 106. v. 22. Afterward it was called Misraim, of Misraim the sonne of Cham, Gen. 5. and 10. Iosephus in the twelfth chapter of his first booke calleth it Mersin, which name doubtlesse is made of Misraim, either by contraction or short kind of speaking, depraued by custome, or fault of the writer. Herodotus in Euterpe affirmeth, that Aegypt was sometime named Thebes. Of some it was called Aëria, or Aëtia, as some copies write it. Marmolius Theuer, and Pinetus affirme that the Turkes, and country people in and about Aegypt, do now call this country Chibth, Elchibet or Elchebitz. And indeed the Arabs that turned Genesis, the first booke of Moses into Arabicke, in the 45. and 46. chapters, for Aegypt hath Elchibth, from whence no doubt, the Greekes and Latines fetched their Aegyptus: like as of Phrat, the Hebrew name is made Euphrates. Aegypt had three speciall prouinces or shires; the Higher, which was called Thebaica, the Middle and the Lower. Thebaica and the Middleshire of Aegypt which the mountaines of Aethiopia, and the vtter section or parting of the riuer Nilus at Sebemytus do define, are cal∣led the Higher Egypt; through the middest of which the riuer Nilus doth iointly runne in one maine channell: and is both vpon the East and West enclosed with high and steep mountaines. The other Prouince, from thence euen vnto the Aegyptian sea, is called the Lower Egypt. This alse they call Delta: for that this country or part of Egypt, which is conteined between the parting of the riuer at Sebemytus, Canopus and Pelusium, or the two mouthes of the same riuer where it falleth into the Mediterran sea, neere these townes, is in fashion three cornered, or triangular representing the forme of the Greeke Capitall letter Δ. These countries by the discreet aduise of Alexander the Great, were diuided into ΝΟΜΟΩΣ, that is, Shires: for by Nomòs, Nomė and Nomarchía, the Greekes do vnderstand a shire and ward, ouer the which is set Nomárches, a Lieutenant or Lord-warden. Thebes com∣prehended tenne shires, and the middle prouince sixteen shires: so that in all, the Higher Egypt conteined six and twenty shires. But in the Low∣er Egypt or Delta there were onely tenne. Egypt is very often mentioned in the holy Scripture: and the places where it is spoken of, are very famous and memorable: Gehon, that is, as some do expound, Nilus, Gen. 2.13. Bethshemeth, the Sunnes house, Heliopolis the Greekes call it, Gen. 41. and 46. Esa. 19. This also is called On, Ezech. 30. Gessen or Gosen a country or prouince of Egypt, Gen. 45.47.50. Exod. 9. Phitom, Exod. 1. a city of store situate vpon Nilus. This the Israelites were forced to build. Ramesse or Raemses, Gen. 47. Exod. 1.12. which also was built by the Israe∣lites in their bondage, when they were slaues and serued the Aegyptians. Sucoth, Exod. 12.13. Etham, Exod. 12. Piachiroth, Magdalum, Beelsephon, The red sea, Exod. 14. Migdal or Migdalum, Ierem. 44.46. Taphnis, Ierem. 2.43.44.46. Exod. 30. Phatures, Pa∣turos, Pathros, Ierem. 44. Ezech. 19.30. Tanis, Num. 13. Esa. 19. Ezech. 30. Psalm. 77. This Iosephus calleth Protanis. Alexan∣dria, Ierem. 46. Ezech. 20. Pelusium and Bubastus, Ezech. 30. Memphis, called of the Hebrews Noph and sometimes Moph, and Mig∣dol, Esa. 19. Ierem. 2.44.46. Ezech. 30. Ose. 9. This was the seat of the Kings of Egypt, where they ordinarily kept their court, and was the Metropolitane city of all that whole kingdome.
map of ancient Palestine PALAESTINAE SIVE TOTIVS TERRAE PRO∣MISSIONIS NOVA DESCRIPTIO AVC∣TORE TILEMANNO STELLA SIGENENSI. Dominus Deus tuus introducet te in terram bonam, terram ri∣vorum aquarum{que} et foncium, in cuius campis & montibus erumpunt fluviorum abyssi. Ter∣ram frumenti, ordei, ac vinearum, in qua ficus & malogranata & oliveta nascuntur terram olei ac mellis. Ʋbi absque ulla penuria comedes pa∣nem tuum, & rerum omnium abundantia perfrueris.
OF ARABIA. This country the Hebrews call Arab, that is, a misture, hotchpotch or dwelling of diuers and sundrie Nations together in one and the same country, as is probably to be gathered out of the six and twentith chapter of the second booke of Chronicles. But there being three Arabiaes, Deserta, Felix and Petraea: we are especially in respect of the neerenesse and neighbourhood of it to Iudaea, to speake of the later in this place. ARABIA PETRAEA, tooke the name of Petra, the Metropolitane city of this prouince and place of residence of their Kings. This also was called NABAIOTH, by the Hebrews of Nabaioth the sonne of Ismaël, Esa. 60. Ezech. 27. whereupon the name and appellation of Nabataea arose amongst the old Historiographers. It sometime did belong to the Edomites and Amalechites, and was a part of their lands and country. Whereupon the Israelites by the commandement of God were constrained to passe by this country. Saint Hierome saith that Petra the city, is of the Hebrews called Iacteel, and of the Syrians Recem. This country by reason of the passage of the children of Israel through it, and the great workes and wonders of God done in it, is very famous and oft mentioned in the holy Scriptures. The places of it oft spoken of in the booke of God, are these: The Red sea, Exod. 13.14.15.23. Num. 11.14.21.33. Deut. 1.2.11. Iosu. 2.24. Psalm. 77.105.113. Act. 7.1. Cor. 10. Sur and Mara, Exod. 15. Elim, Exod. 15.16. There were twelue wels and seuenty palme trees, of which Strabo doth speake, in the sixteenth booke of his Geography. The wildernesse of Sin, Exod. 16. Arabia Petraea in many places was a vast and hor∣rible desert, as is apparant out of the first and eight chapters of Deuteronomy, of which there are also diuers other testimonies euery where to be obserued. Sinay, Exod. 16. Raphidim, Exod. 17.19. Horeb, Exod. 3.17. Obserue in this place, that Horeb was part of those moun∣taines which the Greekes call Mélanas, that is, the Blacke hils; which are of such a wonderfull height, that vpon the toppe of them the sunne may be descried at the fourth watch of the night, that is, about three of foure of the clocke in the morning, an houre or two before her appearance to those which dwell in the plaine. But Sinay was the East part or ridge of mount Horeb. This is proued by these places of Scripture, Exod. 33. Deut. 4.5.9.10.29. Psalm. 105. Actor. 7. In Deut. 33. Sinay is called the hill Pharan: and in Exod. 18. the Holy mount. More∣ouer there is mention made of the hill and wildernesse of Sinay almost in euery chapter throughout the whole bookes of Exodus, and Leuiticus, and in the two and thirtith chapter of Deuteronomy it is againe spoken of. The country round about it, is called the Wildernesse of Sinay, Num. 9.10.26. Amalec, Exod. 17. Num. 14.24. Deut. 25. Madian, Exod. 18. Num. 10. Act. 7. The Graues of lust, and Hase∣roth, Num. 11.12. Deut. 1. Pharan, Num. 12.20. Deut. 1.33. The Desert of Zin, Num. 13.20.26. Deut. 32. The Desert of Ca∣des and Cadesbarne, Num. 13.20.26.32.34. Deut. 1 9. Iosu. 10.15. Horma, Num. 14.21. Hor, Num. 20. Deut. 32. The Wa∣ters of strife, Num. 20.26. Oboth, Ieabarim, Zared, the Brooke, Mathana, Nahaliel, Bamoth, Num. 21. Deut. 2. Also of Zared and Seir, mention is made in Num. 24. Deut. 1.2.33. Iosu. 24. Tophel and Laban, Deut. 1. Elath, Deut. 2. Asiongaber, Deut. 2.3. Kings 22.2. Paral. 8. Beroth, Mosera, Gadgad, Iatebatha, Deut. 10. In the three and thirtith chapter of Numbers the foure and twenty mansions or places of abode where the children of Israel, in that their tedious peregrination between Aegypt and the Holy Land, pitched their tents, are recited by name. Which mansions, and encamping places of theirs, were greatly famoused with many miracles and wonderfull workes of God, which he wrought there in the sight of that peruerse and froward generation. These places were not remote one from another by equall distances, as is very probable by these places of the Old Testament, Exod. 14.15.19. Num. 10.14.33. Neither did the people of Is∣rael, being led through this wildernesse vp and downe, euer crosse the first way which they had gone before: but by winding & turning this way and that way, they came thrise to the Red-sea: as may easily be demonstrated out of the three and thirtieth of Numbers, the second of Deuterono∣my, and the eleuenth of Iudges. These do necessarily appertaine to the vnderstanding of the tract of that their iourney and orderly placing of those forsaid mansions and resting places. Of SYRIA and PHOENICIA. Although in old time the name of SYRIA, and the bounds thereof were more large: yet that is pro∣perly called Syria which is enclosed within the mount Amanus, (Monte Negro, Postellus calleth it) a part of the riuer Euphrates, Iudaea, and the Phoenician sea. PHOENICIA a part of Syria, famous by many reasons and accidents, amongst his more notable cities had Tyre and Sidon: But the chiefe or Metropolitane city of COELESYRIA, (Hollow Syria or Holland in Syria we may call it) lying Eastward from Iudaea, was Damascus, oft mentioned both in holy and prophane writers. Of which places we haue spoken of in Palaestina. Thus farre Stella the authour of this Mappe hath discoursed vpon the same. Of the old Palaestina read Saint Hierome, and that which the learned B. Arias Montanus hath written of it in his Chaleb. Iacobus Zieglerus, Wolfangus Wissenburgius and Michaêl Aitzinger, haue described the same in seuerall and peculiar treatises. Iosephus in the six and seuen bookes of the warres of the Iewes, Adam Reisner in se∣uen bookes, and Christianus Adrichomius haue described Ierusalem, the chiefe city of Palaestina.
IEWRY and ISRAEL. An exposition, with an history or discourse vpon certaine places of this Mappe. ADER or Eder, a tower. The Iewes do call a flocke or herd, Eder; although others do thinke that the word rather signifieth a defect or want: and I know not whether it do in those places signifie a floore or plot of ground, I meane that which the Latines do call Aream. In this place some write that the natiuity or birth of our Sauiour Christ was by the Angels told vnto the Shepheards. Beersabe, the well of the oth, or, the well of confirmation made by an oth: so called for that Abimelech King of Gerar, made a couenant neere this place, first with Abraham, Gen. 21. then with Isaac, Gen. 26. Againe Iacob going into Aegypt, when he came vnto this well, he was encouraged and commanded by a voice from heauen that he should boldly go downe into Aegypt and not feare. God promising him that out of his seed should come the Captaine or Leader of the Gentiles, and the Redeemer of Israel, Gen. 46. It is also called the Fountaine of fulnesse or saturity: for Agar the handmaid of Abraham, when she was with her sonne Ismaël cast out by Sara her mi∣stresse, she wandred vp and downe in this place, ready to die presently with her sonne for want of drinke: but the Angell shewed her this well, whereby she with the child drunke their fill and were satisfied, Gen. 21. Neither is that Beersabee, Gen. 22.3. King. 13. diuerse from this. BETHANIA, the house of obedience, or the house of affliction, or the house of the grace of God: where our Sa∣uiour Christ manifested his infinite power by a sufficient testimony, raising Lazarus, who had lien three daies by the wals, from death to life againe. This place is spo∣ken of in Matth. 21. Marc. 11.14. Iohn. 11.12. BETHABARA, the house of Passing ouer, or the Ferry-house: For there the waters of Iordan were diuided into two channels, and therefore there they yeelded a safe passage to Iosua and all the children of Israel through the middest of this riuer, Iosu. 3.4. Heere Iohn baptized Christ and many others, Matth. 3. Moreo∣uer Saint Iohn speaketh of this place in the first and tenne chapters of his Gospell. BETHEL, Gen. 12. Thither Abraham remoued his houshold, after his departure from Sichem. For there is no doubt but that they are two diuers places. First, it was called Luza, that is, an Almond tree, or place where Almond trees did plentifully grow. There Iacob saw the Lord standing vpon a ladder, as it is re∣lated in the 28. chapter of Genesis. Therefore vpon that accident the place was called by a new name, Bethel, that is, the house of God. In the same Ieroboam ere∣cted the Golden calfe, that he might seeme in that to imitate the example of the Patriarkes and holy men before him, who worshipped God in that place. Heereupon the Prophets changed the goodname Bethel, and called it Bethauen, that is, the house of wickednesse or villany. BETHSAIDA, the house of fruites, or the house of corne, prouision or hunting. Heere Philip, Andrew and Peter, the Apostles of Christ were borne, Iohn 1. The Euangelists also Matthew and Marke haue made mention of this place, Matth. 2. Marc. 6. CANA the Greater, the country of Syrophoenissa, whose daughter Christ cured being possessed with a Diuell, Matth. 15. Marc. 8. of this see more beneath in Sarepta. CANA the Lesser, a towne of Galiley, in which Christ with his presence and miracle of turning water into wine, honourably graced matrimony. Cana signifieth a reed or cane. CANANAEA, it is the name of a country, so called of Chanaan the sonne of Cham. Chanaan sig∣nifieth a Merchant, and indeed the posterity of Chanaan dwelling vpon the sea coast did trade as Merchants. For Sidon the sonne of Canaan built the city Sidon. And in the tenth chapter of Genesis, the land of Canaan is so described, as it is certaine that it contained all that whole tract of ground which afterward the Israelites did possesse, from Iordan euen vnto the sea, and so along as farre as Aegypt. There as yet was no distinction between the Philistiim and Canaan. For Canaan also was ancienter than Philistiim, which was not borne of Canaan, but of Misraim. Yet afterward when the power and iurisdiction of the Nation of the Philistines grew to some heigth and greatnesse, they caused the country, especially all along the sea coast, beneath Tyre Southward, to be called after their name PALESTINA. And in the 13. chapter of the booke of Iosua there are reckoned vp 5. cities of the Philistines, Azotus, Accaron, Ascalon, Geth and Gaza. When therefore the Canaa∣nites for that they possessed the places neere Iordan, were almost vtterly destroied, their name by a little and little began to perish and to fade away. And although also the Philistines, which greatly enlarged their bounds and territories in that countrie, which afterward was giuen to the tribes of Iuda, Beniamin, Simeon, Manas∣ses, and Isaschar, were driuen from thence, and were for the most part consumed: yet they retained, as I said, certaine strong cities vpon the sea coast beneath Tyre, and so somewhile they greatly flourish and were lords ouer others: within a while after they grew weaker and were commanded of others. In the time of Abraham the seat and court of Abimelech was at Gerar, who in the 26. chapter of Gen. is named King of the Philistines. The city Gerara was situate in that country which af∣terward the tribe of Iuda did possesse, not farre from Hebron: and was indeed placed between Hebron and Gaza. It is therefore to be conceiued that the name of Cananaea, Canaan is somewhat more ancient, and comprehending more Nations, than the name of the Philistines, which neuer possessed all that tract and compasse of ground which afterward the Israelites enioyed. But notwithstanding because the Philistines had certaine great cities vpon the sea coast, the name of Palaestina was, by reason of their traffique, more famous and better knowen to the Greeke writers, than Canaan or Cananaea. Herodotus in Polymnia saith, that the Phoeni∣cians and Syrians possessing Palaestina sent 300. saile of ships to Xerxes, and afterward he addeth that the whole country, euen from the skirtes of Aegypt vnto Phoe∣nicia, was called Palestina. And therefore also afterward the Greekes, as Ptolemey, vnder the name of Palaestina haue comprehended Iudaea, Samaria and Gali∣ley, when as notwithstanding the Philistines did not possesse all that large space and compasse of ground. But often times names are giuen to countries of some principall prouince of the same, that doth in power and command surpasse the rest. The Grammaticall interpretation and reason of the Etymology of the word Philistim, is thought to be, for that this nation inhabiting along the sea coast, where earthquakes are very frequent, and so whole townes and cities are couered with sand, besprink∣led and soiled with dust and dirt. For the word in the Hebrew tongue signifieth Sprinklers, or besprinklings, as when any thing is besprinkled and foiled with dust: or it signifieth otherwise Batteries and shakings, as when a building is violently shaken and mooued by an externall force, whereby it is in danger and ready to fall. Like as Ascalon and Azotus hauing their names giuen them of Esh, fire. CAPERNAVM, that is, a pleasant and delightfull village. Heere Christ first began to publish his Gospel, Matth. 4. Luc. 4. and 7. For he was a citizen of that corporation, betaking himselfe to that place, when as he fled for feare of Herod, when he put Iohn Baptist to death. Therefore of Christ and his Disciples they demanded there a didrachma for poll mony, as of the rest of the citizens and dwellers in this city. Of this city mention is made Matth. 8.11.17. Marc. 1.2.5.9. Luc. 4.7. Io. 2.6. DALMANVTHA, that is, the poore mens habitation. Christ with his Disciples came also into this country. Matth. 16. Marc. 8. DAMASCVS. It is distant from Ierusalem 42. Germane miles. Breitenbach writeth that Damascus is 6. daies iourney from Ierusalem. The map sheweth the situation of it to be in the mount Antilibanas. It is a very ancient city, which also at this day is very populous and much frequented by merchants. Diuers etymo∣logies and reasons of the imposition of this name, diuers men do curiously seeke; I do hold this for the likeliest, The sacke of blood: because the old opinion is, that in this place Abel was slaine by his brother Cain. Surely it is very probable and generally agreed vpon, that our first parents Adam and Eue did first dwell not farre from this place. DECAPOLIS, the name of a prouince in the vttermost skirtes of Phoenicia and Galiley, which comprehended tenne cities: these, although those au∣thours, which write of them, do not wholly agree which they should be, it is certaine by the iudgement of all men, were neighbour cities. And it is that country which is conteined between Damascus and Sidon: and between the Lake Genesareth and Caesarea Philippi. EMMAVS, afterward it was called Nicopolis. And in my iudgement the Greek name is but an interpretation & sense of the Hebrew name, which signifieth the mo∣ther of strength & fortitude or victory. Others haue giuen out that the interpretation of it is, the Mother of counsell. EPHRATA, which also is otherwise called Bethá∣chem or Bethléhem, as our bookes vulgarly haue. Ephrata, signifieth abundance, fertility; a fertile soile plentifully bringing foorth all maner of fruites. For in the whole earth there was no place more fruitfull than Ephrata, that is, than Bethláchem, where Iesus Christ, the Lord of Heauen and Earth, and Redeemer of all mankind, was borne: whom the Proph t Micheas, in his fift chapter, did foretell should be borne in this place. And therefore was it called Bethlachem, that is, The house of Bread. In the same place was also seated Bethhacaris, (Beth-haccarem, I thinke he meaneth) that is, the house of vineyeards. Bethlachem was the na∣tiue soile of Dauid, where he was annointed king of Israel, 1. King. 16.17. GALGAL, this word signifieth a wheele, or a wheeling and turning about, the trundling of any thing that is round. It may be that this name was giuen to that place and rose vpon this occasion, for that Iosua the captaine and generall of the Israelites, out of the camp heere and standing garrisons, did vse to draw new supplies and armies, wherewith he conquered and ouercame the enemies, and by chacing vp and down and continually vexing the nations round about, at length vtterly consumed them. Heere the royall army and campe was continually resident, vntill such time as the whole land was diuided into 12. tribes, and so was quietly and freely possessed and inhabited of the Israelites. These were the first campes that the children of Israel had in Iudaea, the land of promise, and heere the Manna ceassed. For now they began to eat and liue vpon the fruites of the land. Heere also the Passeouer was celebrated, and all those almost were heere circumcised which had passed ouer Iordan. For they which had been circumcised in Aegypt, they were dead long since in the wildernes, Ios. 4.5. The same Galgala is mētioned in the 1. king 11.15 2. king. 19 4 king. 4. GALILEA, that is, a limit or bound; it was a country situat in the borders of Iudea. GAZA, AZOTVS, ASCAION, GETH, ACCARON. The exposition of which names it thus: Gaza or Aza signifieth strength or might. Azotus or As∣dod a robbing or spoiling, or else, the fire of the beloued: or rather in my iudgement, a fortification, bulwarke, blockhouse or muniment: for so the Arabicke, a neere dia∣lect of the Hebrew tongue, doth most properly signifie. For the theme or Arabicke roote Schadada, signifieth to strengthen, fortifie, bind together or enclose with a defence, Psalm. 147.12. Gen. 12.10. Auscen. lib. 2. tractatu 2. cap. 596. Luc. 12 35. from hence is deriued Teshdid, a note or marke vsed by the Grammarians, answe∣ring vnto Dagesh forte of the Hebrew: so named of his power and force; for it doth double the letter ouer which it is put: therefore the forme of it is like vnto the Greek omega, or our double 00. Againe Shadid signifieth strong, hard, stubborne: Matt. 25.24. Psalm. 60.5. as also in Mahomets Alkoran, in the 32. Azoara. Shad∣dah, strength, might, 2. Pet. 2.11. Firmamentum, the Firmament, any thing that is solid and firme. Psalm. 73.4. Ascalon, the keeper of fire or fire of ignominy. Geth, that is, a wine presse. Accaron, a barrennesse, weakenesse, feeblenesse, a plucking vp by the rootes, a body or stumpe of a tree. These were the chiefe cities of the Nation of the Plistines, which was so mighty a people, that all the whole country of Iudaea or Israël, euen from Aegypt vnto Phoenicia, was after their name called PA∣LAESTINA. This their power and greatnesse continued from the first entrance of the Israelites into the Holy land, euen vnto the daies of king Hezechia, 4. Reg. 18. For all the while between these times they maintained almost continuall and cruell warres with the Israelites. GEHENNA, the vale of Hinnon; compounded of Ge which signifieth a vally, and Hinnon, the proper name of a man to whom that piece of ground did belong. It was a dale in the tribe of Beniamin, where those deuilish sacrifices were made, in which they burnt and sacrificed children to their idols. For this cruell fact it came to passe that the name afterward figuratiuely was vsed for Hell and place of the damned: and indeed the etymologie also doth somewhat fauour this sense, for Hinnon, is a spoiler, destroier, conspiratour or traitour, Ios. 15.18 Mat. 18.
map of ancient Judea and Israel TYPVS CHOROGRA∣PHICVS, CELEBRIVM LOCORVM IN REGNO IVDAE ET ISRAHEL. arte factus à Tilemanno Stella Sigenensi. Priui∣legio Im∣periali, et Belgico, ad decenni¦um. Abraham∣mus Orceli∣us in hanc for∣mam minorem redigebat. Anno M.D.LXXXVI.
GENEZARETH, a lake in Galiley, of most pure water, well stored with diuers sorts of fish. It was so called of the pleasantnesse of the country round about it: For Genesar signifith, the Princes orchycard. Moreouer, both the cities neere adioining, and the lake are called Cinnereth of the forme and figure: For Cinné∣reth is the same in Hebrew that Cinnor, that is, an Harpe, a kind of musicall instrument which the Latines call Cithara, and which doubtlesse was made of the fore∣said Hebrew Cinnor. This place, diuersly written, you haue mentioned in diuers places of Holy Scripture, 1. Machab. 11. Matt. 14. Marc. 6. In the 6. chapter of the Gospell of S. Iohn at the first verse it is called the Sea of Galiley, for that it was situate in the Lower Galiley; or the Sea of Tiberias, of the city Tiberias, so named by flattering Herod the tetrarch, in honour of Tiberius Caesar Emperour of Rome, as Iosephus in the 18. chapter of his 4. booke of the warres of the Iews, and Egesippus in the 3. chapter of his 2. book do witnesse, when as formerly it was named, as before is signified, Cinnereth, which, together with the lake vpon which it standeth, is notably described by the same Egesippus in the 26. chapter of his 3. booke of the destruction of Ierusalem. GERAR, signifieth a Peregrination Because that Abraham, going from Hebron, soiourned in Gerar, where Sara his wife was violently taken from him by A∣bimelech, the king of that place: whose striuing lust God did so punsh that he was forced to restore Abraham his wife againe before euer he had come neere vnto her, as is shewed in the 20 chapter of Genesis. Heere Isaac was borne, Gen. 21. to whom in this place Christ was promised, after that Agar forced by hunger, had fled from the well, vnto Abimelech king of Gerar. Gen. 26. HAI, in Genes. 13. signifieth an heap. It stood ouer against Bethel. Saint Hierome labouring to expresse the Hebrew letter Ain, writeth it Hagai, and saith that in his time  parua  a small heap of rubbish. HEBRON. Whn Abraham returned out of Aegypt, after his long Peregrination, seeking a new resting place, leaueth Bethel, and trauelleth vnto Hebron. Hebron, oft mentioned in diuers places of Holy Scripture had many more ancient names. Of which one was Cariath-arbe, that is, Tetrapolis, Foure cities. For antiquity diuided the principall and Metropolitane cities into foure parts: (wardes we would call them) The first was the court of the Prince, where also the Counsell, the Nobility and Princes did keep: The second, was for the souldiers and military men: The third, was reserued for the husbandmen: In the Fourth, the artificers and tradesmen dwelt. There also was the vale of Mamre, so called of an Ammonite who possessed it, Gen. 14. and made a league with Abraham. Heere three guests who went to destroy Sodom and Gomorrhe, were interteined of Abraham. There Abraham buried Sara his wife, Gen. 23. And therefore some thinke it was cal∣led Ciriath-arbe, that is tetrapolis, the city of 4 great men; for that heere were buried 4. Patriarkes, Adam, Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, Gen. 25.35.49. IA∣BOC, the riuer Iaboc, that is, of emptinesse, or scattering or wrestling. The things done heere, and the histories recorded are agreeable to the etymologie and reason of the name: for heere Iacob wrestled with the Angell, and therefore he was after that named Israel, that is, a Prince of God, or preuailing with God. But the place where he wrestled, Iacob called Penuel, that is, seeing God, or the face of God. IERICHO. Some do expound it, his moone, others his mon'ths, or his smell. We do approue the later exposition of smelling, rather than either of the two former: and that for the pleasant and fragrant smell which partly issued from the gardens and orchyeards of the rare and soueraigne Balsam, a plant only growing in this place: and partly from the Palmetrees, which heere do grow in greater abundance, than any where else in the world beside. And therefore in the 34. of Deut. it is called the City of Palme trees. IERVSALEM, that is, The vision of peace. It enclosed two mountaines, vpon the which it stood: the name of the one was Sion, vpon the which stood the castle or palace of Dauid. Now Sion signifieth a watch tower, a beacon. The name of the other was Moria, vpon which the temple of Salomon was built. For the very name also doth shew, that the fathers in old time did sacrifice in that place. And Abraham lead his sonne Isaac, to sacrifice him to the Lord, to this moun∣taine. As concerning the etymologie of mor-iah, we are contented with that deriuation of Abraham, who nameth it, God shall see. Therefore let this be receiued that mor-iah signifieth, the beholding or the demonstration of God. Yet other etymologies and deriuations, are not altogether from the purpose and to be reiected, as these, the illumination of God, or the feare of God. IORDANIS. A famous riuer running through the middest of the country, arising out of the foot of the mount Libanus. It hath two fountaines or heads, like vnto our riuer of Thames; one called by the name of Ior, which name in the Hebrew tongue signifieth a brooke: the other by the name of Dan. These meeting and running together in one channell, they are called by one name Iordan, compound of the names of the seuerall heads. MACHANAIM, that is, two camps, Gen. 23. These are the campes of God, as Iacob himselfe nameth this place. For as he returned out of Mesopotamia by Gilead, the Angels of God met him. Whereupon he called this place Mahanaim, the tents or camp of God, that is, the presence and gard or garrison of the Lord. NAIM, a city so called of the pleasant situation of it, as seemeth by the etymologie of the word: for Nahim, signifieth pleasant, delightsome. Our Sauiour Christ going from Capernaum, entreth into Naim, and in the very gate and entrance of the city, he raiseth the only sonne of a widdow from death to life, and so turneth the heauinesse and mourning of the mother into ioy and gladnesse. SALEM, was the dwelling place of Melchisedecke. Iosephus saith, that it was that towne which afterward was named Ierusalem. Neither will I oppose my selfe against this opinion receiued by so many great and learned men. But there was another Salem, which afterward was called Sichem, as is left recorded in the 33. chapter of Gen. as we haue touched before. Thou seest therefore how Abraham, Loth, Melchisedecke (who was the same with Sem the sonne of Noe) dwelt not farre one from another. SAMARIA, the keeper of God. (Obserue heere that our Authour mistooke the name of a man for the name of a place: For Sama∣riah, 1. Chronic. 12.5. was one of Dauids friends, that went with him when he fled from the presence of Saul: or, else one of the sonnes of Harim, of the number of those that had maried strange wiues, as is manifest out of 1. Esdr 10.32. when as the city was named in the Hebrew tongue, not Samaria but Shomrom) This city was the seat of the Kings of Israel, the Metropolitane of the tenne tribes, where their princes vsually kept their court. It was battered and laid leuell with the ground by Hyrcanus the high Priest of the Iewes. This afterward being reedified againe by Herod the sonne of Antipater, was called, for the honour of Augustus Caesar, by a Greeke name Sebaste, that is, AVGVSTA. Heere Philip (whose consorts and fellow helpers were Peter and Iohn) first preached the Gospell Actor. 8.5. Samaria is spoken of, 3. king. 18.19. and 4. king. 6.7.10.17. SAREPTA, a melting house, a refining or clensing house: For the Sidonians which first inuented the maner of making of glasse, heere first erected and built their furnaces or glasse houses. In the time of that great famine which raged and was spread all ouer Iudaea, Elias by the prouidence and commandement of God was sent vnto a widdow of Sarepta, whom he together with her sonne preserued from fa∣mine and death, 3. King. 18. Moreouer in the 15. chapter of S. Matth. there is mention made of the Chanaanite woman that besought Christ to heale her daughter. SICHEM, or Sechem, Gen. 12. Thither Abraham went presently after he came from Charram in Mesopotamia. Sichem stood in that part of the country which afterward was allotted to the tribe of Ephraim, neere the famous mount Garizim, and not farre from whence, not many yeares after, the city Samaria was built. The word Shecem signifieth a shoulder, and the city peraduenture was so named of the situation neere the mount Garizim, But the name also of the sonne of Hemor was Shecem, of whom some thinke this place was so called. This towne is oft spoken of in the holy Scriptures. In the last chapter of Iosua it is expresly written, that the bones of Ioseph were buried in this place, as it is also in the 7. chapter of the Acts of the Apostles againe recorded. The same is that Sichem which is mentioned in the 11. and 21. chapters of the booke of Iud. and in the 12. of the 3. booke of King. Ieroboam built Sichem in mount Ephraim. This same is it which in the 4. chapter of the Gospell by S. Iohn is named Sychar, the last syllable being varied whether of purpose or chance, God knoweth, I cannot tell. In the time of S. Hierome it was Neapolis, Naples. This is it which in the 33. of Gen. was called both Sichem and Salem. Now there was another Salem in this country, as we haue shewed before. SICLAG. In this place Dauid dwelt a yeare and 4. months: whereupon it came to passe that euer after the kings of Iuda held this towne as their owne inheritance, 1. Reg. 27. This city in the absence of Dauid, was sacked and fired, 1. Reg. 30. SODOMA, GOMORRHA, ADAMA, SEBOIM and SEGOR were the 5. cities situate in the vale of Siddim, that is, the champion vale or the vale of Salt-pits, Gen. 14.10. which by reason of the great fertility and pleasant situation of it, was com∣pared to the Paradise or garden of God, or like Aegypt the garden of the world, Gen. 13.10. In it were many slime pits, (bitumen the Latines call it) Gen. 14.10. In that same place now is Mare salsum, the salt sea, otherwise called Mare mortuum, the dead sea, or Lacus asphaltites, the lake of slime, a kind of liquid matter like pitch, that issueth out of the earth, and therefore is called Pissaphaltus: this they vse in those countries in the laying of stone or bricke, in steed of lime or mortar. Sodom as seemeth tooke the name of the champion plaine wherein it stood. Gomorrha, of an handfull or gauell of corne. In the Arabicke tongue the theme doth signifie to abide, liue, or stay in a place, Psalm. 25.13. Hebr. 7.23. To prolong life, to cause to liue long, Mahomet in the 45. Azzoara, his Alkoran, and the interpretours of the Psalmes and New Testament, do often vse the word thus. And from hence Gomor, or Homor, (for so they sometime expresse the orientall letter ain) signifieth vi∣tae prolixitatem, the continuance and length of daies of a mans life. Azzoara 31.32. and 36. Item Psal. 31.11 and 90.9. Lastly, Magburah, is the same that Thebel is in Hebrew, or Oecoumene in Greeke, that is, so much of the earth as is habitable, Psa. 33.81. Psa. 107.7. and in Auicen. very often as also in the Geo∣graphy of Nazaradin, where it is opposed to Chala, that is desert, forestie, wast, inhabitable. And so I thinke the more probable deriuation is to be fetched from the Arabicke, rather than from that of the Hebrew. For such is the situation of this place, whether you respect the wholesomnesse and kindnesse of the aire, or fertility of the soile, that before the fall it was so well inhabited, as no place better in all this land. Adama or Admah, red earth, the best kind of soile for carcable land. Zeboim a pleasant and beautifull country. Zeor or Sohar, a little prouince. THABOR, a mountaine in the tribe of Nephtalim neere to Chedes. Thabor signifieth purity, cleannesse, or (by the changing of Thau, into Teth, a letter of like force and instrument of pronunciation) a nauell, bullion, bosse or pommell. For it ariseth vp in the middest of the plaine, like the nauell vpon the belly. For it is 30. furlongs high, and the diameter of the flatte of the toppe is almost 20. furlongs ouer. TYRVS, was a colony drawne forth of Sidon. The Hebrew name is Zor, which signfieth a rebell, or traitour. For it is probable that a part of the citizens of Sidon falling to mutiny, departed out of the city and to haue sought where they might dwell in some other place to their better liking. This great Alexander tooke after he had besiedged it 7 months, putting 7000. citizens to the sword & hang'd vp other 2000. ZIDON, so named o Zidon the sonne of Chanaan, as it is left recorded in the 10. chap. of Gen. The word signifieth an hunting, or taking of any pray. This city being take by Ocho K. of Persia, by the treachery of the soldiers, was burnt by the straglers & baser sort that followed the camp, in which fire perished about 40000. men. In the 5. chapter of S. Marks Gospell, and the 8. of S. Lukes, there is mention made of the country of the Gadarenes, in that history where Christ casteth the di∣uels out of the mad man, and the diuels rushing into the heard of swine do cary them headlong into the lake. This country S. Matthew calleth the country of the Gerge∣senes, which S. Hierome translateth Gerasers. It is therefore to be vnderstood that the town Gerasa, famoused also by Stephanus stood not vpon the South bank of Iordan, where the most fertile and pleasant plaine of Galiley is seated, but toward the desert and wast land, beyond the riuer, vpon the North banke. So that the di∣uers names of one and the same towne, are Gerasa, Gadara and Gergasa. Neither is the cleare lake of Genesareth, of which we haue spoken before, to be thought to be one and the same with the like of the Gadarens, but another situate neere the town Gadara far distant and remote from thence of which Strabo thus speaketh, The water also of the lake of Gadara is troubled and muddy, of which if any beasts do drinke, they will cast their haire, their hoofes and their hornes.
THE PEREGRINATION of SAINT PAVL. THere is no man of meane learning but doth know, that the knowledge of Geography and skill of Mappes and Chartes, is necessary for the vnderstanding of the historicall bookes of holy Scrip∣ture: and if they will not confesse it, yet the thing it selfe doth sufficiently approue it to be so. And thereupon certaine learned men in these our daies haue freely bestowed their labour in this businesse for the furtherance of the studious Diuine. Amongst the which the great Mathemati∣cian, Orontius Fineus of Dolphine in France, was to my remembrance, the first, in that his charte which he made for the vnderstanding of the Old and New Testaments: Tabula ad vtri∣usque Testamenti intelligentiam concinnata; for such is the title of that his Mappe: After him followed Peter Appian, in his Peregrination of Saint Paul. The same was done by Marke Ior∣dan of Holstein. Lastly, Christianus Schrot, in that his Mappe which he intituled, The Pe∣regrination of the Children of God: and B. Arias Montanus, of Ciuill in Spaine, in his Apparatus Biblicus, a learned worke adioined to the King of Spains Bible. This is that, which I in this Mappe attempt to do, according as the narrownesse of roome will permit. For as this Mappe of mine may not compare with theirs for multitude of places, which I do freely con∣fesse, so, that this of ours shall aswell as theirs make for the vnderstanding of both the Testaments, I dare boldly promise. For as all these (only excepting Montanus) haue stuffed their Mappes with the prophane names of places taken out of Ptolemey, which do nothing at all pertaine to this sacred purpose: So I on the contrary do labour in this my Mappe, not to omit any one place that is spoken of in the New Testament. This description of the Peregrination of Saint Paul, we haue heere willingly put downe in this place, framed out of the Mappe of Europe done by Gerard Mercator. IN the yeare after Christs incarnation 34. he came from Ierusalem to Damascus, from thence he went into Arabia, and so againe he returneth to Damascus, and then to Hierusalem three yeares after his conuersion, where he remaineth fifteen daies with Peter, Galat. 1.17.18. From whence, flying from the persecuting Iewes, he came vnto Caesarea in Phoenicia, from thence to Tharsus in Cilicia, Act. 9.30. from which place he was drawne by Barnabas to Antioch in Syria, where he abode one whole yeare, where it seemeth Peter was reprehended by Paul, Galat. 2.11. and so were sent iointly to Ieru∣salem with a subsidie or succour, to supplie the want of the distressed brethren in Iudaea, against the famine that Agabus prophecied should come vpon the inhabiters of the whole world, Actor. 11.28.29.30. They come vnto all the Churches throughout all Iudea, and hauing fulfilled their duty which was inioined them, they returne to Ierusalem, and in the mean time Peter being taken and imprisoned by Herod, is deliuered by the Angel, Actor. 12.5.6.7.8.9. They returne to An∣tioch in Syria, from whence being sent by the Holy Ghost, taking with them Iohn Marke, v. 25. they came downe to Seleu∣cia, and from thence by sea they sailed to Salamine in Cyprus, and thence by land to Paphus, Act. 13.4.5.6. from whence againe they ship themselues for Perga in Pamphylia, (where Iohn Marke left them and went to Ierusalem) v. 13. thence to Antioch in Pisidia, v. 14. from thence to Iconium, a city of Lycaonia, v. 51. from whence they flie to Lystra, then to Derbe the Higher, townes of Lycaonia, Act. 14.6. then backe againe to Lystra, Iconium, Antioch of Pisidia, v. 21. thus hauing passed through Pisidia, they came to Perga in Pamphylia, v. 24. thence to Attalia a city of Pamphylia, v. 25. from whence they went by sea to Antioch in Syria, v. 26. and so, (sent by the Church, by reason of a dissention amongst the bre∣thren) they passing through Phoenice and Samaria they went to Ierusalem, Act. 15.3. where in the 48. yeare after the incarnation of Christ, a Councell was held by the Apostles, about Circumcision and the Ceremoniall law of Moses, Act. 15.5.6.22.28. Thence they returne backe to Antioch in Syria, where hauing deliuered their letters containing the determi∣nation and decree of Councell, v. 30. heere Paul and Barnabas fall at oddes, they part company; Barnabas taking Marke for his consort and companion, sailed vnto Cyprus, v. 39. Paul choosing Silas, departed: and passing through Syria and Ci∣licia, v. 40.41. they came to Derbe, where Paul enterteineth Timotheus into his company, Act. 16.1. from whence they trauelling through the higher cities of Lycaonia, v. 4. through Phrygia and Galatia, at length they come to Mysia, v. 7. where they were forbidden by the Spirit to make any long stay, v. 7. therefore from hence they passe directly to Troas, other∣wise called Alexandria, v. 8. thence with a straight course they went to Samothrace, an iland in the Aegean sea, (now they call it Archipelago) and so the next day to Neapolis, v. 11. then to Philippi, the chiefe city in the confines of Macedony, v. 12. then passing through Amphipolis and Appollonia they came to Thessalonica, Act. 17.1. from thence by night they were conueighed to Berrhoea, v. 10. Heere Paul leauing Silas and Timotheus, v. 14. went by sea to Athens, v. 15. from thence in the ninth yeare of Claudius the Emperour, 51. yeares after the birth of Christ, he came to Corinthus, Act. 18.1.2. where he abode a yeare and six months, v. 11. from hence accompanied with Priscilla and Aquila, two fugitiues, escaped from Rome, he saileth to Cenchrea, v. 18. then to Ephesus, where he leauing Priscilla and Aquila, v. 19. he setteth saile for Ierusalem, by reason that the feast of Pentecost was at hand, v. 21. therefore comming to Cesarea he goeth vp to Ieru∣salem, and then backe againe to Antioch in Syria, v. 22. where he abode for a certaine season, and from thence departing went through the country of Galatia and Phrygia, v. 23. vntill he came to Ephesus, 19.1. where he staied at least 2. yeares and 3. months, 19. 8. 10. from thence in the 12. yeare of the raigne of the Emperour Claudius, and in the 54. after the birth of Christ, he passed through Macedonia, Act. 20.1. then through Greece otherwise named Hellas, v. 2. where he abode three moneths, and then returning backe through Macedonia, v. 3. he came to Philippi, and from thence shipping himselfe for Syria, in the thirteen yeare of the raigne of Claudius, about the feast of Easter or vnleauened bread, came in fiue daies to Troas, (otherwise called Alexandria) where he abode seuen daies, v. 6. from thence a foot to Assos or Assum, v. 13. thence by sea to Mitylene a towne of Lesbos, an iland in the Archipelago, v. 14. the next day they came ouer against Chios, an iland in the same sea now called Scio, and so the next day he arriued at Samos, then staying a while at Trogyllium, an hauen in the maine continent, he went the next day to Miletum, v. 15. where he taketh his leaue of the Elders of Ephesus which he had caused to be called vnto him, v. 17. from thence he went in a strait course to Coos (an iland in the Archipelago now called Stancon, as Bellonius affirmeth, or Lango, as Bordonius, Volatteranus, and Sophianus haue written) thence the
map of the ancient Mediterranean PEREGRINATIONIS DIVI PAVLI TYPVS COROGRAPHICVS. In quo et noui testamenti, in primis autem apostolorum historiae, à sancto Luca descriptae, omnia ferè loca geogra∣phica, oculis inspicienda, exhibentur. Abrah. Ortelius describebat 1579 QVONIAM IGITVR SCIMVS ET PERSVASVM HABEMVS, QVOD QVAMDIV IN CORPORE HABITAMVS, PEREGRINAMVR A DOMINO; PER FIDEM ENIM AMBVLAMVS, ET NON PER VISVM; PROPTEREA CONFIDIMVS ET PEROPTAMVS PEREGRINARI A CORPORE, ET ES∣SE APVD DOMINVM NOSTRVM. SATAGIMVS AVTEM SIVE PEREGRINI SVMVS, SIVE INCOLAE, VT ILLI PLACEAMVS. 2. Corinth. 5.
day following to the Rhodes, and thence to Patara, Act. 21.1. and there finding aship bound for Phoenice, he goeth a∣board setteth forward, v. 2. and leauing Cyprus on the left hand within kenning, passeth by it, and arriueth at Tyrus, v. 3. where he abideth seuen daies, v. 4. and then taketh his iourney againe by sea to Ptolemais, where he staieth one day, v. 7. and then departeth and goeth to Cesarea, where he abode many daies in the house of Philip the Euangelist, v. 8. heere Agabus prophecieth of Pauls captiuity, v. 11. at length he came to Ierusalem, v. 17. where he was apprehended of the Iews, in the fourteenth yeare of the raigne of the Emperour Claudius, 56. yeares after the incarnation of Christ, v. 30. and had by them at that time been slaine, v. 31. had not the Captaine of the garrison there by the help of his souldiers and men of war rescued him and freed him from the hands of that tumultuous multitude, v. 32. yet by reason that about him the vproare grew, v. 31. and for that the captaine supposed him to be Theudas, the Egyptian, who not long before that had made an in∣surrection, and had led a company of ruffians, cut-throats, and disordered fellowes, to the number of 4000. men, out into the wildernesse, v. 38. and chapter 5.36. he caused him to be bound with two chaines, Act. 21.33. and should haue been whipped, Act. 22.24. had he not been a Roman, v. 29. wherefore he was loosed from his bonds, and by the chiefe captaine was brought before the high Priests and the whole Councell of the Iewes, to heare what they could charge him withall, and what he could answer for himselfe, v. 30. but the aduersaries falling at variance and dissentions amongst themselues, Act. 23.7. he was by the Scribes and Pharisies, the greater part, freed and wholly acquited, v. 9. yet the multitude still raged neuerthelesse against Paul, so that the Captaine was forced to with-draw him into the Castle, to secure him from their furie, v. 10. and for further security, he is sent away in the night, by Claudius Lysias the Tribune garded with 200. footmen, 70. horsemen, and 200. archers, v. 23. vnto Antipatris, (a towne in the tribe of Manasses, called in Macchab. 1.31. Ca∣pharsalama, or, as the Greeke copy hath, Capharsarama: it is now called Assur, as some learned men thinke; and was the first towne that the Christians wanne in their voiage to the Holy Land, as Volaterran writeth) v. 31. where the footmen leauing him returned to the castle, he was the next day caried on to Cesarea Palaestinae, where Felix the gouernour lay, v. 32.33. where fiue daies after, he was by him brought foorth before Ananias the high Priest, the elders of the Iewes, and other his aduersaries, there to answer to the faigned and malitious obiections of their prating lawyer Tertullus, Act. 24.1. but because beside their slanderous cauills, and bare affirmations, there were neither depositions nor witnesses present, v. 20.21. he was for that time dismissed and committed as prisoner vnto the keeping of a Centurion, v. 24. In the meane time, Felix hauing now been president full out two yeeres, and being to resigne vp his place to Porcius Festus, (to curry fauour with the Iewes) left Paul in prison, v. 28. He within three daies of his entrance goeth vp to Ierusalem, Act. 25.1. where they a fresh againe renew their suite against Paul, withall desiring Festus to send for him vp to Ierusalem, v. 3. which Festus would not grant, v. 4. but willeth them to bring his accusers and witnesse downe ta Cesarea, where they should be heard without partiality, v. 5. Therefore Festus hauing taried at Ierusalem tenne daies returneth to Cesarea, and the next day cal∣leth foorth Paul before the Iewes, v. 6. who malitiously accused him of many things which they could by no meanes proue a∣gainst him, v. 7. yet Festus desirous to please the Iewes, demandeth of Paul whether he would be willing to be tried before him of those things at Ierusalem, v. 9. Therefore Paul appealeth to Caesar, v. 11. which was allowed by Festus and the coun∣cell, v. 12. But before he could be dispatched to Rome, king Agrippa and Bernice came to Cesarea to salute Festus, v. 13. who being desirous to heare Paul, v. 22. he was brought foorth into the common hall before them, v. 23. where he maketh an apologie for himselfe, Chap. 26. Now when it was concluded that Paul should go into Italie, he was committed to Iulius a centurion of Augustus band, Chap. 27.1. and being shipped in a ship of Adramyttium, a city of Mysia or Aeolia in Na∣tolia, and setting foorth sailed along by the coast of Asia, and came the next day to Sidon, v. 2. and then hoissing saile came close by the shore of Cyprus, v. 4. from thence he crossed the sea by Cilicia and Pamphylia, and so came to Myra, a city of Lycia in Natolia, (now it is called Strumita, as Stunica writeth: the vulgar edition in stead of Myra hath Lystra, which is not a city of Lycia, but of Lycaonia, distant from the sea of Cilicia more than 40. leagues) v. 5. Heere the Centurion shipped Paul and his company into a ship of Alexandria, bound for Italy, v. 6. and after many daies they came ouer against Guidus, a marine or port towne of Caria in Asia minor: from thence they passed hard by Salmone, an hauen of Crete, now called Candy, situate in the promontory Sammonium, (the sea-men at this day call it Cabo Salamo) v. 7. and so with much adoe casting about at last they came to a certaine place named The faire Hauen, (Pulcher portus, or as the vulgar hath Boni-portus, Lyra calleth it Bona Villa) neere to which was the city Lasea, (the vulgar hath Thalassa) v. 8. But be∣cause this place was not conuenient to winter in, they put out from hence, labouring to reach to Phoenice, a port town in the same iland, (of which Ptolemey also maketh mention in the last chapter of his third booke of his Geography) v. 12. But a gust or stormy wind, which the sailours call Euroclydon, (the vulgar hath Euroaquilo) arising caught the shippe, v. 14.15. and caried it vpon a little iland, called Clauda, thus Ptolemey in the 17. chapter of the 3. booke of his Geography writeth it (the vulgar and the Syrian interpretour of the New Testament, nameth it Cauda) v. 16. fearing that they should haue fallen vpon the Quicke-sands (Syrtes, the Syrian retaineth the Greeke word: the Grecians otherwise call these dangerous places Brachea, the Latines Breuia, shelues or flattes) v. 17. But at the last after fourteen nights of continuall storme and danger they were driuen into the Adriaticke sea, v. 27. where falling vpon the coast of the iland Melita, now called Malta, Act. 28.1. from thence, after he had lien there three months, he passed in a ship of Alexandria, v. 11. and arriued at Syracuse in Sicilia, where he staid three daies, v. 12. From whence fetching a compasse they came to Rhegium, a towne in Calabria, a prouince of Italy, it is now vulgarly called Rhezo, where they staid but one day, and then set forward againe and the second day came to Puteoli, a towne in Campiana, now called Pozolo, v. 13. where they staid seuen daies, and so from thence by Appius Market, (Forum Appij) and the three Innes or Tauernes, (Tres Tabernas) they went by land to Rome, v. 15. in the second yeare of the raigne of the Emperour Nero, where he was suffered to dwell by himselfe, committed only to a soul∣dier as his keeper, who had the charge ouer him, v. 16. who after he had remained thus two whole yeares restrained, at length being released, for a long time preacheth the Gospell in Rome and other places of Italy, v. 31.32. Some there are that thinke that after his enlargement he went also into Spaine and France, and planted the Gospell amongst those Nations. Last∣ly, he was againe apprehended by Nero and at Rome put to death by him in the last yeare of his raigne, which was the 70. yeare after the birth of Christ.
The PEREGRINATION of ABRAHAM the Patriarke. ABraham the first Patriarke (whom Iesus the sonne of Syrach, chapter 44. v. 19. calleth a Great man, and Admirable for glory and honour) the sonne of Thare, was borne as Iosephus writeth, in the 292. yeare after the vniuersall floud, in V R, a city of the Chaldees, otherwise called Camarine, as Eusebius witnesseth; it may be it is the same that Ptolemey calleth Vrchoa. He goeth forth of his country and natiue soile, at the commandement of God, when he was, (as Suidas teacheth) but foureteen yeares old, into CHARRAN, which S. Stephen in that oration which he made to the Iewes, Act. 7.2:3.4: as also Achior, in the story of Iudith, chapter 5. v. 7. in his speech to Holofernes, and likewise the 72. interpretours, do ex∣pound to be Mesopotamia; Iosephus taketh it for a city. That this place was Carrae famous for the great ouerthrow heere giuen to the Romane forces, led by Crassus against the Parthians, although there be some which are of that opinion, yet I dare not wholly yeeld vnto them, only I leaue it to the learned to determine. Hauing staid a while in this country of Mesopota∣mia, (his father being dead there, as the same Suidas reporteth) from thence he goeth with Sarai his wife, Lot his brothers sonne, and all his family and the soules or liuing creatures that he had gotten in Charran, toward the land of Chanaan, Gen. 12.5. (And if you will beleeue Nicolaus Damascenus in Iosephus, he dwelt sometime neere Damasco, where in his daies, he saith, there was to be seen a street which they vulgarly called Abrahams house.) When he came from thence into SICHEM, at the plaine of MOREH, (a place which diuers interpre∣ters diuersly interpret, some the Oke Moreh, others the Oke-groue of Moreh; Zozomene writeth that in his time it was called Terebinthus, the Tere∣binth or Turpentine tree.) Gen. 12.6. God appeared vnto him, and promised to giue to him and to his seed that land for an inheritance for euer: therefore in this place he built an altar to the Lord which heere appeared vnto him, v. 7. From thence remouing vnto a mountaine Eastward from Bethel, he pitched his tent hauing Bethel on the Westside, and Haai on the East: and there also he built an altar vnto the Lord, and calleth vpon the name of the Lord, v. 8. thence he remooueth and goeth on toward the South, v. 9. But a great famine arising in that land, and euerie day growing still more grieuous than other, he goeth downe into EGYPT, to soiourne there, v. 10. And comming thither with his wife, a very faire and beautifull woman, v. 11. whom he called by the name of his sister, v. 13. Pharao the king of Aegypt, fell in loue with her, and tooke her into his house, v. 15. and for her sake intreated Abram extraordinarily well, and bestowed great gifts vpon him, v. 16. who also was there, as Iosephus affirmeth, for his eloquence, wisedome and great experience in all things, had in great estimation amongst the Aegyptians. But when the Lord punished Pharao and all his family with many great and greeuous plagues, for Sara Abrams wiues sake, v. 17. he debated the matter with him, and examined him what his reason was, to giue out speech that she was his sister, and that he had not told him that she was his wife, v. 18. and so he restored her to her husband againe, v. 19. and gaue commandement that he, his wife and all that he had should be conueighed out of the land, v. 20. Therefore Abram goeth vp backe againe to Bethel, chapter 13.3. into that place, where formerly he had built an altar and there he called vpon the name of the Lord, v. 4. After this returne Abram and Loth (who had alwaies accompanied him) grew exceeding wealthy and rich in sheep, cattell, tents, and familie, v. 5. that the land could not conteine them both, neither might they dwell together, v. 6. Besides that their heard-men sheep-heards and seruants could not agree, v. 7. Therefore they consent to diuide the land between them, v. 9. Loth he chose the plaine of Iordane, a champion country well watered euery where with that goodly riuer, diuers smaller brookes, lakes, wels and poolles: a tract of ground for pleasantnesse and fertility like vnto Paradise and Aegypt. In this place then stood Sodome, Gomorrha and those other cities, which as yet the Lord had not destroied, v. 10. In these cities Loth dwelt euen vp as high as Sodome: but Abram he abode still in the land of Chanaan, v. 12. Thus they being parted, the Lord appeared vnto Abram, and shewed him all the country round about, Northward, and Southward; Eastward and Westward as farre as he could see, v. 14. all which he promised to giue to him and to his seed for euer, v. 15. From thence he remoued and came to dwell in the plaine of Mambre. (The Septuagint interpretours haue translated it, The oke of Mambre, quercum Mambre, Iosephus hath the Oke Ogyn) Euagrius writeth that in his time the place was called Terebinthus, the Tur∣pentine tree: of the Turpentine tree, as I suppose, that stood six furlongs off, as we read in Iosephus: and which Eusebius Pamphilus saith stood still in that place euen in his time. This place was not farre from HEBRON, or as some write it Chebron, v. 18. Heere Abram hearing of the newes of Lots captiuity with his whole familie, and goods and substance whatsoeuer, taken by the kings of the Nations when they sacked and spoiled Sodom, (for Lot dwelled at So∣dome) chapter 14.11.12. he armed 308. slaues or bond-seruants, bred and borne in his owne house, and with all possible speed maketh out after the enemy; v. 14. following them euen as high as DAN, and CHOBA, (Saint Hierome calleth it Hoba, and Iosephus Soba) v. 15. rescueth his nephew, recouereth all his goods and booty that they had taken, and bringeth them backe againe with the women and all the people, v. 16. Being come home from the slaughter of Chodorlaomer, and the rest of the kings which were with him, at the VALLEY OF SAVE, (the Kings dale, as Saint Hierome doth call it, or the Kings field, as Iosephus nameth it) the King of Sodome meeteth him, v. 17. together with Melchisedech King and Priest of Salem or Ierusalem, who bringing forth bread and wine, entertained him most kindly, v. 18. blessing him and wishing all good fortunes vnto him, v. 19. to whom Abram gaue tith of all that he had, v. 20. These things being thus performed, God appeareth vnto him againe, chapter 15.1. and promiseth him an heire of his owne seed, v. 4. from whom should come an ofspring or issue as great in number as the starres of Heauen, v. 5. or the sand of the sea, Hebr. 11.12. And this he, not conside∣ring now that his body was withered and dead, (as being almost an hundred yeares old) neither the deadnesse of Saraes wombe, but being not weake in faith, nor doubting any whit of the promises of God, knowing certainly that he which had promised was able to performe what he had promised, against all hope, belee∣ued in hope, and therefore it was imputed vnto him for righteousnesse, Rom. 4.18.19. and for a confirmation and further testimony of the truth of the same, he diuided a calfe, a goat, a ramme, a turtle and a doue, in the middest, only the birds he diuided not, and that by the expresse commandement of God, v. 9.10. The birds that lighted on the carkeises Abram draue away, v. 11. Heere God foretelleth him that his seed should be in bondage to the Egyptians 400. yeares, v. 13. and then to returne into this country againe, v. 16. And after the sun was down there arose a great darkenes, and behold a smoaking furnace & burning fire brand, passed between those pieces, v. 17. and the Lord made a couenant with Abram, and gaue to his seed and posterity all that whole country that lieth between Nilus, (the riuer of Aegypt) and Euphrates, that great riuer, which seuereth Palaestina from the kingdome of the Chaldees or Persians, v. 18. Sa∣rai his wife, hauing hitherto been barren, and hauing an Egyptian maid named Hagar, moueth Abram to company with her, chap. 16.1.2. Abram consenting vnto his wife, goeth in vnto Hagar, v. 3. who conceiuing bare him a sonne, whom by the commandement of the Angel, she called Ismaël, v. 4.11. After this A∣bram being 99. yeares old, the Lord appeared to him, chap. 17.1. maketh a couenant with him, with promise greatly to multiply him and his seed, and to make him a father of many Nations, v. 2.4. Therefore he changeth his name from Abram, that is, High-father, (Altiparens) vnto Abraham, that is, Many-father (Multiparens) v. 5. and his wiues name from Sarai, (that is, My princesse) vnto Sarah, (The princesse) v. 15. and promiseth to giue him a son by her, whom he was by the counsaile of the Lord to call by the name of Izahak, and with him maketh the couenant of circumcision, v. 16.19. Abraham therefore tooke Ismaël and all the males of his whole family and cut off the fore skinne of their flesh that selfe same day, as the Lord had commanded him, v. 23. And A∣braham was 99. yeares old, & Ismaël was 13. yeares old, when they were circumcised, v. 24.25. Again the Lord appeared vnto him in the plaine of MAMBRF, as he sate in the tent dore about the heat of the day, chap. 18.1. and lifting vp his eies he saw 3 men (in the 2. v. of the 12 chap. of the Ep. to the Hebr. they are called Angels) which he entertained into his house, chap. 18.1.2.3. and after they had dined & refreshed themselues, goeth along with them toward Sodom, v. 16. In the way as they went, the Lord fore-sheweth vnto him the destruction of Sodom & Gomorrha, v. 17.20.21. Wherefore Abraham earnestly intreateth the Lord to be mercifull vnto them, and to pardon the multitude for a few righteous mens sakes amongst them: but in vaine, for that that great and infinite num∣ber which dwelt in these 5. cities and the territories round about them, could not affoord 10. that truly feared God, v. 32. And being returned home againe, v. 33. early in the morning, looking toward Sodome and Gomorrha, he saw the smoke of the land ascending vp as it had been the smoke of a furnace, chap. 19.28. For the Lord had caused it to raine downe from heauen vpon those cities, fire and brimstone, v. 24. Afterward Abraham went from thence Southward and dwel∣led between Cades and Sur, in the land of GERAR, chap. 20.1. Now Abimelek king of that country, sent for Sarah, (whom Abraham, as before chap. 12. 13. called by the name of his sister) v. 2. but being warned by God in a dreame that she was his wife, v. 3. before such time as he had come neere her, v. 4. he resto∣red her to Abraham her husband vntouched, richly endowed and with great treasure, v. 14.15.16. In this country Sarah trauelled, and bare Abraham a son in his old age, chap. 21.2. (according as the Lord before had promised she should, chap. 17.19.) and Abraham called his name Izaac, v. 3. and circumcised him when he was 8. daies old, v. 4. Now when he was to be weaned, Abraham made a great feast, v. 8. At which feast Ismaël, whom Abraham had begotten of Hagar the bondwoman, mocked Isaac the sonne of the free woman, v. 9. wherefore by the counsell of Sara his wife both Hagar and her bastard sonne are turned out of doores, v. 14. After this Abraham and Abimelech contended about a well of water, which Abimelechs seruants had by force taken from the seruants of Abraham, v. 25. yet the truth being sifted out they agree, and do make a couenant and league of perpetuall amity, v. 27. at a place, which of this euent was after∣ward, called B'ER-SHEBAA, that is, the well of the league or oth, v. 31. Heere Abraham planted a GROVE, where he called vpon the name of the Lord, the mighty God euerlasting, v. 33. and he dwelt as a stranger and soiourner, in these quarters, namely, in the land of the Philistines, a long season, v. 34. These things being thus performed God tempted Abraham, chap. 22.1. commanding him to take Izaac his only sonne, (who was now, as Iosephus writeth, 25. yeares old) by whom he had promised to giue him an innumerable issue, and to offer him vp for a sacrifice, vpon one of the mountaines in the land of MORIAH, v. 2. (this mountaine was since called Zion, vpon which Dauid afterward appointed a temple to be built, 2. Chr. 3.1.) Heere therefore, he nothing distrusting of the good∣nesse and power of God, but perswading himselfe certainly that God could without Izaac raise him a posterity out of the dead, he buildeth an altar, and hauing laid on wood, bindeth his sonne, v. 9. taketh the knife purposing to slay him, as he was commanded, v. 10. but behold an Angel sent from God with a countermand, charged him not to lay hand vpon Izaac, v. 11.12. He therefore looking about him and spying a ramme behind him, entangled by the hornes in a bush, he catch∣eth him and offereth him in steed of his sonne, v. 13. Wherefore Abraham called the name of that place IEHOVAH-YIREH, v. 14. After this Sarah his wife, being 120. yeares old, chap. 23. 1. dieth in KIRIATH-ARBAA, a place that was otherwise called HEBRON, v. 2. but Abraham buried her in the caue of the field MACH∣PELAH, oueragainst Mambre, (the same is Hebron in the land of Canaan) which he had bought of Ephron the Hittite, v. 19. Then he maried a 2. wife, named Keturah, cap. 25.1. who bare him many children, v. 2. Lastly, Abraham being eight score and fifteen yeares old, died v. 7. and Izaac and Ismael hs sonnes buried him by Sarah in the caue of Machpelah, v. 9.10.
map of ancient Canaan, surrounded by 22 images from the life of Abraham, with an inset map of the route from Ur to Salem ABRAHAMI PATRIAR∣CHAE PEREGRINATIO, ET VITA. Abrahamo Ortelio Antverpiano auctore. ABRAHAM EGREDERE DE TERRA TVA, ET DE COGNATIONE TVA, ET VENI IN TERRAM QVAM MONSTRAVERO TIBI. ET DABO TIBI, ET SEMINI TVO POST TE, TERRAM PEREGRINATIONIS TVAE, OMNEM TERRAM CHANAAN, IN POSSESSIONEM AETERNAM. Dn̄o Ioanni Moflinio, Montis S. Winoxij ab∣bati reverendo, viro humanitate & can∣dore eximio, multi∣plici{que} rerum cog∣nitione nobili; Ab. Ortelius in perpetuoe amicitioe pignus DD.
Of the DEAD SEA. OF the Dead sea, or the lake Asphaltites, because we haue described it in another forme than heeretofore it hath been vsually set forth in, I haue thought it not amisle in this place to say something, for the further satisfying of the Rea∣der: For I heere do giue it this forme which I conceiue and perswade my selfe it had in the time of Abraham, before such time, I meane, as it was burnt with fire and brimstone from heauen, by the curse and punishment of God, cau∣sed by the wickednesse of the inhabitants of the same. For we haue made it to be a valley lying between the moun∣taines, watered all along from one end to the other, by the riuer Iordan, in which then stood these fiue citities, So∣dom, Gomorrhe, Admah, Zeboim and Segor. Which place why and how afterward it was conuerted into a lake, the holy Scriptures do at large and copiously describe. Iosephus, in the 5. chapter of his 5. booke of the warres of the Iewes, thus discourseth of it: It is, saith he, a salt and barren lake, in which by reason of the great lightnesse, euen the heauiest things that are, being cast into it, do swimme vpon the toppe of the water: to sinke or go downe to the bot∣tome a man shall hardly do, although he would. Lastly, Vespasian the Emperour, who came thither of purpose to see it, commanded certaine fellowes that could not swimme, to haue their hands bound behind them and to be cast into the middest and deepest place of it; and it came to passe that all of them did flote vpon the toppe of the water, as if they had been forced vpward by the aire or spirits ari∣sing from the bottome. Moreouer the diuersity of the colours of this lake, which changeth and turneth the toppe of the water thrise in a day, and by diuers positions and falling of the sunne beames vpon it, giueth a lusture round about, is most wonderfull. In many places it speweth foorth blacke lumpes of bitumen, which do swimme aloft vpon the toppe of the lake in forme and bignesse of blacke oxen without heads. But when those that farme the lake do come, finding a lumpe so clotted together, they draw it to their shippes: and because it is tough, being full, they cannot breake them off: but as it were binding to the boate it hangeth to the knoll, vntill it be dissolued by the menstrues of women, or with vrine, this Pliny in the fifteenth chapter of the seuenth booke of his Naturall history, attributeth to a threed stained with a womans menstrues.] It is good not only for the stopping of the ioints of shippes, but is also mingled with many medicines vsuall in the cure of diseased bodies. The length of this lake is 580. furlongs, extending it selfe euen vp to Zoara in Arabia. The breadth of it is 150. furlongs ouer. [Diodorus Siculus maketh it but 500. furlongs in length, and three score in breadth.] The land of Sodome, sometime a most blessed and happy prouince for all kind of wealth and commodities, but now all burnt vp, being indeed, as ancient records make mention, for the wickednesse of the inhabitants consumed by fire from heauen, was not farre from this place. Lastly, as yet some remnants of that wrathfull fire, both in the foundations and plots of those fiue cities, and the ashes grow∣ing vp together with the fruites of the earth (which to see to are like vnto good wholesome fruites, but being touched they presently vanish into smoake and ashes) are to this day to be seene. Thus farre out of Iosephus. Tacitus in the fifth booke of his histories reporteth almost the same of it Verbatim, but that he affirmeth, that the heaps and lumps of bitumen after that they are drawen to the shore, and are dried partly by the heat of the sunne and partly by the vapours of the earth, are cleft and hewed out with axes. Moreouer he addeth, that this lake, in shew like the sea, but much more corrupt and stinking both in tast and smell, is pestilent and vnwholesome vnto the neighbours round about: againe, that it is neuer moued or driuen to and fro with the wind, nor suffereth any fish, or water foules to liue in it, as in other waters: yea it entertaineth no manner of liuing creatures, as Pausanias and Hegesippus, in the fourth chapter of his eighteenth booke, do write; so that, as Pliny witnesseth, buls and camels do swimme and flote aloft vpon the toppe of the water of this lake. The same things Strabo writeth, but vnder the name of the lake Sirbon, very falsly: for it is another lake in this country different from this. Diodorus testifieth that the water of it is bitter and stinking: Item, that it beareth vp all things that haue breath, except those things that are massy and solide, as gold, siluer, and such like, although euen those also do heere sinke more slowly than in other lakes. See more of this in the same authour in his 2. and 19. bookes. That all vegetable things that liue not, do sinke to the bottome: and that it will beare vp no such thing except it be besmered ouer with bitumen, (alumen, some copies haue) Trogus Pompeius, doth testifie in the 36. booke of his history. That a lamp or candle light, will swimme aloft; but being out, will sinke, Isidorus hath set down, as a truth, by the relation of others. Aristotle in the second booke of his Meteorologicks doth write, that the water of this lake doth white cloths, if one shall but shake them well, being only wette in the same. Of the fruites like vnto those which are wholesome and good to be eaten, yet in∣deed do vanish into ashes, beside the forenamed authours, Solinus, Iosephus, S. Augustine and Tertullian, do witnesse. Notwithstanding they do all affirme it of apples, not generally of all fruites. Hegesippus to these addeth clusters of grapes, in shape and fashion not in substance. Tacitus writeth that this falleth out not only to all naturall things arising out of the earth of their owne accord, but also to artificiall things made by hand and ingenious inuention of man. This then is the nature and resemblance of this place now, which was sometime as Moses testifieth, Gen. 13.10. to see to, as glorious as the garden or Paradise of God. To these we thinke it not amisse to adioine the opinion of Nubiensis the Arabian, as he hath set it downe in the fifth Section of the third Climate of his Geographicall garden, imprinted in the Arabicke language, at Rome in the yeare of our Lord 1592. The place, saith he, where Lot with his family dwelt, the stinking sea and Zegor, euen vp as high as Basan and Tiberias was called the Vale, for that it was a plaine or bottome between two hils so low that all the other waters of this part of Soria do fall into it and are gathered thither. And a little beneath in the same place he addeth. All the brookes and springs do meet and stay in the lake of Zegor, otherwise called the lake of Sodom and Gomorrha, two cities where Lot and his family dwelt, which God did cause to sinke, and conuerted their place into a stinking lake, otherwise named The Dead lake, for that there is in it nothing that hath breath or life, nei∣ther fish, nor worme, or any such thing as vsually is wont to liue or keepe in standing or running waters: the water of this lake is hot and of a filthy stinking sa∣uour: yet vpon it are little boates in which they passe from place to place in these quarters, and carry their prouision. The length of this lake is 60. miles, the breadth not aboue 12. miles. Moreouer Aben Isaac, who in like maner wrote in the Arabicke tongue, a treatise of Geography (certaine frag∣ments of which I haue by me, for which I am beholding, as also for many other fauours to Master Edward Wright, that learned Mathematician, and singular louer of all maner literature) thus speaketh of this place: The sea Alzengie, saith he, is a very bad and dangerous sea: for there is no liuing creature can liue in it by reason of the vnwholesomnesse and thicknesse of his waters: which happeneth by reason that the sunne, when it commeth ouer this sea, draweth vp vnto it, by the force of his heat, the thinner and more subtill parts of the water which is in it, and so doth leaue the thicke and more grosse parts be∣hind, which by that meanes also become very hot and salt: so that no man may saile vpon this sea, nor any beast or liuing creature liue neere it. Item, the sea Sauk, as Aristotle speaketh of it, which also is in these parts, and doth reach vp as high as India and the parched Zone (so I thinke the word Mantakah, that is, a girdle or belt, which heere he vseth, doth signifie) that there is not in it any liuing creature at all, of any sort whatsoeuer: and therefore this sea is called The Dead sea, because that whensoeuer any worme or such like falleth into it, it mooueth no longer, but swimmeth vpon the toppe of the water; and when it is dead it putrifieth and then sinketh and falleth to the bottome: yet when there falleth into it any stinking and corrupt thing it sinketh immediatly and swim∣meth not vpon the water at all. Thus farre out of Aben Isaac. This sea is of Ptolemey called ASPHALTITES, the lake Ashaltites, of others Asphal∣tes, of the bitumen which it doth yeeld in great plenty; of the Iewes, MARE PALAESTINORVM, ORIENTALE, SOLITVDINIS, siue DESERTI, the Sea of Palaestina, the East Sea, the Sea of the desert or wildernesse, of the situation and position of it vnto the land of Iewry: Item, MA∣RE SALIS, the Salt-sea, of the hot and fitish saltnesse of the same, aboue other salt-waters, which the Arabian iustifieth to be true: Pausanias that ancient and famous historian of the Greekes: and Iustine the abridger of the large volume of Trogus Pompeius, call it MARE MORTVVM, the Dead sea, of the effect: (there is saith Iustine, a lake in that country, which by reason of his greatnesse and vnmoueablenesse of his waters, is called the Dead sea, for it is neither mooued with the wind; the heauy and lumpish bitumen, which swimmeth vpon the toppe of the water all the lake o∣uer, resisting the violence of the greatest blasts: neither is it saileable, for that all things that are void of life do sinke to the bottome: neither doth it sustaine any thing that is not besmered with bitumen) to these both my Arabians do subscribe: of Galen, the Prince of Physitions, it is called LA∣CVS SODOMAEVS, the Lake of Sodome: for him Nubiensis doth stand, who neuer nameth it Bahri, a sea; but Bahira, a lake or standing poole: yet contrariwise Isaac termeth it Bahri, not Bahira, and by this name it is generally knowen to all the Europeans. Solinus calleth it TRISTEM SINVM, the Sad-bay, like as the gulfe of Milinde is of some named ASPERVM MARE, the rough or boisterous sea, like as Isaac my authour, calleth this same lake, Tzahhib, the churlish and dangerous sea. Iosephus in the tenth chapter of his first booke of the Antiquities of the Iewes, saith, that this place where now is the Dead-sea, was before named the Vale of bitumen pits. Strabo, otherwise a most excellent Geographer and curious searcher out of the truth in these discourses, falsly confoundeth this lake, as I touched before, with the Sirbon lake. Why the Arabian should call it Zengie and Sawke, I know not. This we haue heere added partly out of the Geographicall treasury of Ortelius, for the ease and bene∣fite of the Reader, least the diuersity of names might make him mistake the thing. Hauing thus finished the Mappes of HOLY write, It now remaineth that we do in like maner begin and go on forward with those of PROPHANE histories.
A draught and shadow of the ancient GEOGRAPHY. THou hast, gentle and curtuous Reader, in this Mappe a draught (a plot or patterne I might call it) of the whole world, but according to the description & ruder Geography of the more ancient authours & of those of middle age. For this our globe of the earth was not then further knowen, (a wonderfull strange thing) vntill in the daies of our fathers, in the yeare 1492. Christofer Columbus a Genoway, by the commandement of the king of Castile, first discouered that part of the West, which vnto this day had li∣en hid & vnknowen. After that, the South part hitherto not heard of, togther with the East part of A∣sia, much spoken of, but neuer before this time entered, was descried by the Portugals. That part which lieth toward the North, we haue seen in this our age to haue been first found out by the English mer∣chants and nauigatours; a particular view and proofe of which, thou maist see at large, in that worthy worke of the English Nauigations, composed with great industrie, diligence and charge, by my singular good friend Master Richard Hacluyt. By him England still shall liue, and the name of braue Englishmen shall neuer die. The o∣ther countries which as yet do lie obscured within the frozen Zones and vnder both the Poles, are left for succeding ages to find out. Peraduenture, ancient writers that liued many hundred yeares since, haue named some country or some one place or other, out of this our continent; but they haue not written ought of the situation of the same, as being indeed altogether vnknowen vn∣to them. In this continent and circuite, curtuous Reader, (that thou beest not caried away with a vaine and false perswasion of the knowledge of things done in the whole world) or if you please so to call it, within the compasse of that part of the world described by the old Cosmographers, all ancient HISTORIOGRAPHY, both SACRED and PROPHANE, is comprehended: in these all famous acts of mortall men, which from the beginning of the world euen vnto the daies of our fathers, haue been registred by learned men, haue been done and performed. For euery storie, before the forenamed Columbus, written in Latine, Greeke or any other language, exceeded not the limits of the Roman Empire, or the conquests of Alexander the Great, (if you shall only except the tra∣uels of Marcus Paulus Venetus by land, into China: and the nauigation of Katherino Zeni, by the ocean sea, into the North parts, of which we haue spoken in the discourse to the Mappe of Mare del zur) which I make no doubt all learned historians and others will easily grant me. Whereupon we may see how maimed and vnperfect the history of the world is, when as it is very apparant that this part of the earth then knowen, is scarse the one quarter of the whole globe of the world that is now discouered to vs. And (which is especially to be considered, rather than to be commended) we may truly say that now, which Cicero in his third oration against Verres wrote then most falsly: when he said of that age; There is now no place within the vast ocean, none so far remote and distant from vs, none so obscure or hidden, whither, in these our daies, the couetous and bad minds of our men, doth not cause them go. Certaine recordes and testimonies of ancient writers concerning Geographicall Mappes. Anaximander, scholler to Thales Milesius, did set forth as Strabo witnesseth, the FIRST GEOGRAPHICALL CHART. Now Anaximander, who liued in the time of Seruius Tullus, the VI. king of Rome, was borne in the first yeare of the 35. olympiade, which was the first yeare of the raigne of Ancus Martius, the 4. king of the Romanes, 639. yeares before the birth of Christ. The same Strabo maketh mention of a mappe of the HABITABLE WORLD, done by Eratosthenes. Socrates, when he saw Alcibiades to stand so much vpon his welth and great possessions, brought him to a mappe of the VVHOLE VVORLD, & bid him there to find out the prouince of Athens: which when he had found, he againe willed him to point to his landes: and when he answered that they were not in any place there described: he saith, Art thou then proud of the possession of that, which is no part of the World? Aelianus in the 28. chap. of his 3. booke De varia historia. Hamo Carthaginensis setteth out a mappe of his nauigation into the ATLANTICKE SEA, wherein he made a discouery of the COASTS OF LIBYA, which he caused to be hanged vp in the temple of Saturne. Aristagoras Milesius had a Table of Brasse in which was cutte the VVHOLE COMPASSE OF EARTHLY GLOBE, the VVHOLE SEA, with all the RIVERS emptying themselues into the same. Herod. in his V. booke. Augustus and Agrippa set out a mappe of the VVHOLE VVORLD to the publicke view of all men, as Pliny in the second chapter of his third booke hath left recorded. Amongst the Aegyptians there were continually kept certaine Chartes containing all the TRACTS, BOVNDS and COASTS both of sea and land, as Apollonius in the fourth booke of his Argonautickes doth witnesse. Saint Hierome affirmeth, that a MAPPE of PALAESTINA, made by Eusebius Caesariensis, was lost long before his time. That Charles the Great, Emperour of Rome, had a Siluer Table, wherein the VVHOLE VVORLD was portraitured, those authours who liued in his time and haue written of his life and histories, do constantly affirme. Theophrastus Eresius bequeathed and gaue by his last Will and Te∣stament, certaine mappes in which were described the SITVA∣TION of the VVORLD, on condition that they should be put and reserued in the lower part of the gallery, which he built and adioined to his schoole, as Diogenes Laertius writeth in his life. I haue described a Charte of the VVORLD, in 12. sheets of parch∣ment. Thus Dominicanus, the authour of the Annals of the city Celmar in Germany, who wrote about the yeare of Christ 1265. speaketh of himselfe in that his worke. There are certaine GEOGRAPHICALL CHARTS, mentioned and cited by Stephanus Byzantinus, in the word Αινος. The Emperour Domitian, put Metius Pomposianus to death, be∣cause he caried about the country certain mappes of the VVORLD, portraitured in sheets of Velame, as Suetonius recordeth. Varro in the second chapter of his first booke of Husbandrie, hath these wordes: There I light vpon by chance, Caius Fundanius wy wiues father, and Caius Agrius a Knight of Rome, a disci∣ple and follower of Socrates, with Publius Agrasius the Custo∣mer, whom I found looking vpon a Mappe of ITALY, drawen and described vpon a wall. Heere also Vitruuius what he speaketh in the eighth book of his Ar∣chitecture: that these things are, and may be so, the HEADS OF RIVERS do sufficiently prooue, which we do see are described in the Chartes and Mappes of the World. Florus, who seemeth to haue liued in the time of Traian the Empe∣rour, hath these wordes: I will do that that Cosmographers are wont to do, who vse to set out the SITVATION of the VVORLD in a small chart or table. Iulian the Emperour in an Epistle to Alypius thus writeth: I was euen then newly recouered of my sicknesse when thou sentest the GEOGRAPHY: and yet the map which thou sentest was ne∣uer the lesse welcome: For there are in it not only better and more true descriptions, but also certaine excellent Iambicke ver∣ses wherewith thou hast much graced it. But that the Ancients were wont to describe the VVORLD and globe of the earth in Mappes, it is manifest out of Plutarcke in the life of Theseus: as also out of the fourth booke of Properti∣us the Poet, where he bringeth in Arethusa thus speaking to Ly∣corta. Cogimurè TABVLA PICTOS ediscere MVNDOS. We forced are to vnderstand: By charts, the state of Sea and Land.
map of the ancient world, with four corner medallions featuring Europe, Asia, Africa, and America AEVI VETERIS, TYPVS GEOGRAPHICVS. Abrah. ortelius Regiae Mts. Geographus describ. cum Privilegijs de∣cennalib. Imp. Reg. et Cancellariae Brabantiae. Antverpiae Ambivaritorum. 1590. EN SPECTATOR, PILAE TOTIVS TERRAE ICHNOGRAPHIAM. AT VERERIBVS, VSQVE AD ANNVM SALV∣TIS NONAGESIMVM SECVNDVM SVPRA MILLES. QVADRINGENT. COGNITAE, TANTVM GEOGRAPHIAM.
The ROMANE WORLD, OR The ROMANE EMPIRE. AMmianus Marcellinus thus writeth in his foureteenth booke: At such time as triumphant Rome (which shall flourish as long as men do liue vpon the earth) began first to grow into credit and honour in the world, that it might still rise by degrees and lofty steppes into a firme league of eternall peace, vertue and fortune (which often times iarre) did fully consent and agree. For if either of them had opposed themselues, it surely had neuer come to that absolute height and greatnesse. The people of this city from the first infancy euen vnto the last of childhood, which was limi∣ted almost within the compasse of three hundred yeares, abode the bitter assaults and warres of their neighbours round about them: then hauing growen to a striplings age and past the rodde, after many outragious furies of Mars, it passed the Alpes and narrow sea. Being come to mans estate and best yeares, from all quarters of the wide world, it brought away the laurell the signe of conquest and triumph: but now being old and beginning to dote, and sometime only bearing the name of conquerour rather than winning ought indeed, it hath betaken it selfe to a more quiet kind of life. Therefore this city, reuerend for so many glorious conquests of stout and fierce nations, and for so many good and wholesome lawes which it hath enacted, hath now at last, like a kind and thrifty father, both wise and wealthy, committed her patrimo∣ny and possessions to the Emperours, as vnto her naturall sonnes, to be ruled and gouerned. And lately, although the tribes and wardes be idle, the hundreds and wapentakes still and qui∣et, and there be no dissensions in the Senate house, but that the more secure and calmer times, such as Numa Pompilius liued in, were come againe: yet in all parts of the world wheresoeuer, it is regarded as a Mistresse and Queen, in all places the reuerend gray haires of the graue Sena∣tours, euery where the very name of the Roman Nation is greatly esteemed and honourable. Thus farre Ammianus. Moreouer this you shall find in Sulpiciaes Satyricke poeme; Two things there are which raised great Rome to that height, valour in warre and wisdome in peace. As this Romane Empire, in the iudgement of all men, was esteemed very great and large, so also in∣deed it was; especially if you shall compare it with those which haue been in former ages, as that of the Assyrians, Persians and Grecians: Item, with those which since their fall haue sprong vp in their places, as namely, that of the Othomans, amongst the Turkes: the Sophies, amongst the Persians: of the great Cham, ouer the Tartars in Asia: and of Prester Iohn, as we call him, o∣uer the Aethiopians or Abyssines in Africa. But if you shall compare it with that Monarchy which Charles the fifth, Emperour of Rome, within the memorie of our fathers, established in di∣uers parts of the world, and Philip his sonne in our age hath enlarged, and shall by looking in∣to an vniuersall mappe of the Earthly globe, conferre and measure the greatnesse of this with those others, by the eie you shall plainly and truly discerne, that this for largenesse may not only be preferred farre before all those other forenamed, but also euen before that of the Ro∣manes. The kingdome of the Portugals, after that by diuers nauigations they had subdued vnder their obedience the marine tracts and sea coasts of East India, together with the ilands there about, if it did reach and were extended vp as farre within the land, as it commandeth a∣bout the shore, it might doubtlesse be accounted none of the least Empires. Seeing now there∣fore that this also at this day is vnder the obedience of the said K. Philip, who doth not see that this Empire is the greatest that euer was in the world? Of the Empire of Rome, as it stood in his daies, Tertullian in his booke De Pallio, speaketh thus honourably: Reuera Orbis cultissimum huius Imperij rus est; that is, In very deed the whole world is nothing else but a farme well stocked and stored, belonging to this Empire. Lastly, Ouid, in his second booke De Fastis, thus writeth of it: Gentibus est aliis tellus data limite certo, Romanae spacium est vrbis & Orbis idem. All other nations, in the Earth their certaine bounds may name; The com∣passe of the World and Rome, they only are the same.
map of the Roman Empire with an inset family tree or pedigree of the seven kings of Rome ROMANI IMPERII IMAGO. Originis, Incrementi, et Culminis Imperij Romani, breuis enumeratio. Primo sub Regibus septem, Romulo, Seruio, etc. per annos ducentos & tres supra quadraginta, non amplius quam vsque Portum, at{que} Hosti∣am, intra decimum octanum miliariū Romanum processit Imperium Sub Consulib. verò, inter quos interdum Dictatores, et Decemuiri, ac Tribuni militares fuerunt, per annos quadringentos & septem supra quadraginta vs{que} trās Padum Italia est capta: Africa Hispaniae{que} subactae: Gallia, et Britannia tributarie sunt factae: Illyrici, Histri, Liburni, Dalmatae, sunt domiti. ad Achaiam transitum est: Macedones expugnati: cum Dardanis, Moesis et Thracibus est bellarum. ad Danubium est peruentum: ac in Asia (pulso Antiocho) primum pedem posuerunt Romani Mithrida∣te victo, regnum Ponti est captum, cum Armenia minori quam idem tenuerat. in Mesopotamiam progressum est; & cum Partbis foedus initum; contra Carduenos, & Saracenoe ac Arabas pugnatum: Judaea omnis victa: Cilicia et Sÿria, in potestatem redacta: ac tandem in Aegÿptum peruentum. Sub Impe∣ratoribus autem, a Diuo Augusto nempe ad Theodosij superioris, et Honorij ac Arcadij eius filiorum tempora, per annos quadringentos & quadraginta Cantabri, Astures, tota{que} Hispania sub iugum missa est Alpes maritimae, Cocciae{que} et Rhetiae Noricum, Pannoniae et Moesiae, Imperio accesserunt. Omnis ora Danubij in Prouincias est redacta Pontus omnis, et Armenia maior; Mesopotamia, Assÿria, Arabia & Aegÿptus, in Im∣perij Romani iuna concesserunt. At{que} hoc modo his Principibus viris, & populi Romani virtute, ac immortali eorū gloria, hoc Augustissimū Im∣perium ad summū fastigium perductum fuit; Cuius limites fuere ad Occidentē Oceanus, à Septentrione Rhenus et Danubius, ab Oriente Tigris, à Meridie Atlas mons, quae omnia in hac tabula ob oculos (historiae candidatis) ponuntur. Ex Liuio, Dionÿsio, & Plutarcho, hanc ge∣nealogiam septem Regum desumpsimus, at∣que huic tabulae in historiae Romanae studioso∣rum gratiam adiecimus. In qua maxima linea est Regum: mediocres sunt coniugum: mintinae verò filiorum filiarum{que}. Circuli duplicibus cir∣cumferentijs descripti, masculos denotant; simplicibus autem, foeminas. Diuina mens ciuitatem populi Romani egregia temperata{que} re∣gione collocauit, uti Orbis terra∣rum imperio potiretur. Vitruuius lib. 8. Cum Gratia et Priuilegio.
EVROPE. IN the diuision of the world, diuers haue placed Africa in the third part: some few haue made no more but Asia and Eu¦rope only; and Africa they make a part of Europe, saith Salustius. This is that which S. Paulinus in Antonius, out o the opinion of the same Salust, thus writeth of: Europam Asiamquè duo vel maxima terrae Membra, quibus Lybiam dubiè Sallustius addit, Europae admixtam: postit quum tertia dici: Europe and Asia vast, the Earthly globe between them share. Yet whether Africke should a part of this our Europe be; or make a third part by it selfe, Salust doth doubt I see. But Philostratus also in Isocrates doth diuide the world into Asia and Europe: yea Isocrates himselfe, in his Pane∣gyricos. Moreouer in Varroes booke De lingua Latina these words are read; As all the world is diuided into Heauen and Earth: so Heauen is seuered into his quarters: and the Earth into Asia and Europe. Againe the same authour in his booke of Husbandrie writeth thus: First, when as the world, by Eratosthenes, was very fuly and naturally diuided into two parts, the one toward the South, [Asia doubtlesse he meaneth] the other in the North [Europe we call it.] S. Augu∣stine in his 16. booke De Ciuitate Dei: Lucane in his 9. booke: and Orosius in the first booke of his history, haue the like wordes to the same sense. Notwithstanding custome since hath preuailed with all Historiographers and Cosmographers which haue written either in Latine or Greeke, iointly to diuide the globe of the earth into these three parts: Asia, Africke and Europe: the last of which we haue taken vpon vs to describe in this place, not only in forme of a mappe or chart, like a Geographer: but in this present discourse, like an historian. Concerning the forme of it therefore, it is manifold, as Strabo writeth. It is a Peninsula or demy-ile, and not an iland; although Silenus, as Elianus writeth, did sometime to Midas so relate of it. For it is on all sides, as you may see in the mappe, bounded and beaten with the salt sea, but only vpon the East, where it is by a small necke ioined to the greater Asia. Yet by what limits they are there distinguished, the ancient and the later writers do not altogether agree. For those which are more ancient as Aristotle, Plato, Herodotus, and others which do follow their opinion, do diuide Europe from Asia, by the riuer Phasis, (a riuer of Colchis falling into the Euxine sea, Mar maiore, or Maurothalassa, as the Greeks call it) neere Trapezonda: some mappes do now call that riuer Fasso, others Phaz∣zeth: the Scythians, (as Theuet reporteth, Debbassethca) or which is all one, by that Isthmos or neckland which is between the foresaid Mar maiore or Pontus Euxinus, and the Caspian sea (Mar de Cachu, the ancient called it Mare Hyrcanum, the Hyrcane sea) which formerly all old writers thought to be but a bay or gulfe of the Scythian or Northren ocean, as Strabo, Pliny, Mela, Dionysius, Plutarch (in the life of Alexander and in his discourse of the face in the sphere of the Moone) and Iornandes a more late writer, haue left recorded. Yet all of them were deceiued. Only Herodotus truly (as this our latter age doth approue and find to be so) doth affirme this to be a sea of it selfe, and to haue neither in-let nor out-let, or to be intermedled with any other sea. Dionysius, Arrianus, Diodorus, Polybius, Iornandes and Ptolemey haue diuided it from Asia by the riuer Tanais (Don or Tana, as now the Italians name it) who thinketh that both the rise of this riuer, and the land Northward from whence it commeth, are both vnknowen and vncertaine. All doubt where to place and lay their bounds: as indeed who neuer perfectly knew those places toward the East and North, not being then discouered, but only described by them, from the fabulous reports of others: as for example, the Riphaean and Hyperboraean mountaines, which are feined inuentions of the Greekes, as Strabo writeth: together with Aluani montes, heere described by Ptolemey, where now not only these mountaines, but also no other at this day, are to be seene: but in their places diuers huge and vast woods, great fennes and bogges, or large champion plaines. Orpheus also long since described in this part of the continent I meane, between Maeotis palus, the fenne Maeotis, (now called Mar delle Zabacche, and Mar della Tana) and the sea Cronium, an huge wood. Likewise, Dionysius Afer heere abouts placeth an Infinite wood, as he termeth it, from whence he saith Tanais or Don doth spring, which after many windings and turnings at last falleth into the forenamed fenne Maeotis. Isidorus heere hath the Riphaean woods, in which he saith Tanais doth first take the beginning. That Donaw (Danubius) doth diuide Asia from Europe, Seneca in the sixth booke Natural. doth manifestly affirme; of which his opinion, what we do thinke, we will, God willing, set downe in the discourse to the Mappe of Dacia. Hitherto we see the forenamed au∣thours to doubt and disagree between themselues of the limittes of these two parts of the world: If therefore they shall find me a meet vmpier and arbitratour in this matter, I would, not vnfitly, and as I hope to the liking of all parties, decide the controuersie thus: I would make the bounds, to be Tanais, or the ri∣uer Don; the straights or narrow peece of the maine land that is between this riuer and the riuer Rha, (Athel) which emptieth it selfe into the Caspian sea: the East branch of the same Athel: then from his head vnto the riuer Oby, and so euen vnto his mouth or fall into the Northren sea: For by this mouth, I do easily perswade my selfe, that antiquity did verily beleeue that the Caspian sea did vnlade it selfe into the maine Ocean. For that the name of this riuer O∣by is ancient, it is very likely, for that montes Obij, certaine mountaines called Obij are placed heereabout in this tract, by Athenaeus, which he saith for∣merly were called of the ancients montes Riphaei, the Riphaean hils: but then in his daies montes Alpes, the Alpes. Againe Iornandes in this continent, not farre from hence, describeth Ouim, or Obim, a Scythian nation or family. And that these foresaid mountaines, are in this place (not where Ptolemey and Pomponius Mela haue placed them) very many men, of great credit and learning in these our daies, sufficient witnesses do stoutly auouch. Amongst which Baro Herberstein, in his history of Moscouy, is one: Paul Oderborne, in his treatise written of the life of Basilides, is another: lastly, Antony Wied, in his mappe of Moscouy may be the third. Now they name it vulgarly by diuers and sundrie names, but commonly they call it Cingulum mundi, The girdle of the world, as the said Herberstein doth affirme. In a Mappe of these countries set out by Master Ienkinson, an Englishman, who trauelled through these parts, it is called Zona Orbis, The girdle of the Earth. Moreouer I haue in some sort for this diuision, Iornandes and Aethicus, vpon my side, where they say that the Riphaean mountaines do part Asia and Europe. Againe these selfe same hils, yea, and in this tract, are the montes Hyperbo∣rei; not where Ptolemey placeth them. And they are the same with montes Riphaei, Obij and Alpes. Thus farre of the diuision of Asia from Europe. Pliny calleth this part of the world, The Nurce of all Nations; Mardonius, as Herodotus doth tell of him, auoucheth it to Xerxes, To be by farre the beautifullest of all places of the World, to be a most goodly and gallant country, yeelding all maner of fruites and fruitfull trees, and those in their kindes the best; and to be such that it were pity that any king in the World should haue ought to do in but he. Varro in his bookes De re Rustica, of Husbandrie writeth, That it is a more temperate and healthfull soile than Asia. Statius in his Achilleidos, more than once or twice calleth it, The Mighty prouince of the World. Maxima terra viris & foecundissima doctis Vrbibus, Europe for multitude of warlike men and scholers deeply learned, doth farre excell —: thus Mamilius writeth of it. Aristotle, the prince of Philosophers, maketh the inhabiters of this part of the world, to be, A very stout and couragious people. The same authour affirmeth, that, All kind of beasts and cattell heere, are in their kind, greater and stronger than in Asia and Africke. But of the nature of this country, the maners and customes of the people, let vs heare what Strabo that excellent Geographer saith in his second booke; This part is most fertile of valiant and prudent men. It is all generally habitable, excepting only a very small portion toward the North, and abutting vpon the Hamaxici, which dwell vpon Tanais, (Don) Maeotis palus (Mar delle Zabacche) and Borysthenes (Nieper or Dnester) which place, by reason of the extream cold, is not habitable. Yet certaine bleake and mountainous places inhabited, although in re∣spect of the nature of the soile they are tilled and manured with greater difficulty, yet hauing gotten good skilfull and industrious husbands, those also are tamed and much bettered, which heeretofore were badly vsed, and kept only by theeues and out-lawes. And indeed the Greekes when they dwelt vpon the rocks and mountaines, dwelt well and conueniently, by reason of their wise cariage in ciuill matters, arts, sciences and knowledge of those things, which necessarily are required to the maintenance of mans life. In like maner the Romanes, hauing brought many sauage and fierce Nations vnder their seruile yoke, seated, I meane, in places not very conuenient to dwell in, in respect of the nature of the coun∣try, either for that it was rough and craggy, or wanted hauens, or was too bleake and cold, or for other causes, taught them to vse merchandise before vnknowen, and haue brought them from a sauage and brutish life, to liue ciuilly and more humanely. But those parts which are situate in an equall and temperat climate, there nature administreth all things necessary for the maintenance of man and beast. Now when as those Nations which do inhabite and dwell in fertile and rich countries, are maintainers of peace and quietnesse; and those which are seated in barren and vn∣fruitfull countries, are most hardy and stout: it commeth to passe that both are helpfull one to another; while these do vse their weapons for their countries defence, those againe do help and maintaine them by the profits that they raise out of the earth, by their arts and mysteries, as also by their learning, wisedome and policy: euen as in like maner also the dammage is mutuall and either side feeleth a sensible hurt, when the one part doth not helpe the other: yet the estate of the souldier and warlike man is somewhat better, if they be not one come with multitude. And the nature of Europe serueth very fitly for this purpose: for it is all diuersly distinguished by lofty mountaines and lowly plaines; so that euery where the husbandmen and souldiers; the politicians and the martiall warriers do dwell together: yet so as the greatest number are peaceable men: which kind of life they enioy especially by the meanes and labour of their captaines, first of the Greekes, then of the Macedonians; and lastly of the Romanes. Therefore both in peace and warre it is sufficient of it selfe to maintaine and defend it selfe: for it hath great plenty both of stout souldiers, painfull husbandmen, and politique statesmen. In this also it doth excell, that it bringeth foorth passing good fruits, such I meane, as are necessary for the maintenance of mans life: with all sorts of mettall, for what vse soeuer. Spices or sweet smelling things and preti∣ous stones, are brought hither from forren countries, WHICH THINGS VVHOSOEVER HAVE NOT, THEY LIVE NEVER A VVHIT WORSE THAN THOSE DO THAT HAVE THEM. Moreouer this is especially worth the noting, that hauing wonderfull store of cattell, sheep and oxen; it breedeth very few dangerous wild beasts. Thus farre the learned Strabo. Many other things thou maist read of this Europe, together with the nature and condition of the people of the same, in that treatise which Hippocrates, the prince of Phisitions, wrote of the care and waters. This Europe also, and not any other place of the world beside, doth yeeld Succinum or Electrum, (Amber we call it, the Germanes, Gleslum) yet it is not found in Eridianas, a riuer falling into some Northren sea, as Herodotus doth fabulously report: or in Padus, a riuer of Italy (Po) as the poets iestingly af∣firme: nor in the Electrides, certaine fained ilands in the Hadriaticke sea, as some men of better credit, and more diligent searchers out of the truth, as Pliny
map of ancient Europe EVROPAM, SIVE CEL∣TICAM VETEREM, sic describere conabar Abrah. Ortelius. CLARISS. D. NICOLAO ROCCOXIO I.V.L. PATRICIO ANTVERP. EIVSDEMQ. VRBIS SENATORI, HANC ANTIQVAE EVROPAE, NOVAM TABVLAM, ABRAH. ORTELIVS DEVOTISSIME DEDICAB. CVM PRIVILE∣GIO DECEN NALI, IMP. REGIS ET BRABANTI∣AE CANCEL∣LARIAE. 1595.
saith, haue seriously thought: nor in Spaine, as Aeschylus beleeued: nor in certaine rockes at the further end of the gulfe of Venice, (mare Hadriaticum) as some more sober men haue giuen out: nor in Liguria, as Sudinus, Metrodorus, and Theophrastus would haue men thinke: nor in Ethiopia, neere Iu∣piter Ammons temple, or in Scythia, as Philemon imagined: nor in Britaine, as Socatus: nor in the Glessariae, ilands in the Germane occan, as Pliny hath taught: nor in Bannonia or Baltia, (a certain iland) as Timaeus ha h broached: nor in a certain riuer, as Dion Prusaeus hath taught: but neere vnto the neckland or peninsula Haestarum in the bay Pautzkerwicke and Frisch-hast, (Sinus Clilipenus) in the Balticke or East sea, not farre from Dantzk in Pomerell or Sprese: where hitherto it hath been taken (a thing wholly hidden from the ancients) to the great gaine and enriching of the Nations neere inha∣biting: and not many other place of the world beside. In the same Europe are there many goodly and stately cities, amongst the which the most famous, in all ages, are Rome and Constantinople, (which afterward was called New-Rome) and now are London, Venice and Paris. The riuers of greater note are Rhein, Isther or Donaw, and the Thames: the woods more notable are Ardene in Gallia, 500. miles of length, reaching from the riuer of Rhein vn∣to Tourney in France; and Hercynia in Germany, 40. daies iourney long, as Pomponius writeth, and 9. daies iourney broad, as Caesar in his Commen∣taries reporteth: a greater wood than which, or more vast, there is no history maketh mention of. Thus much of Europe. But whereof it tooke the name and was so called, or who first gaue it that name, I thinke saith Herodotius, there is no man vnder heauen doth certainly know or can vpon any probalibity gesse, except one should thinke it so called of Europa Tyria. But wherefore it should so of her be named, I am wholly ignorant, and I perswade my selfe and do verily beleeue, that no man in the world doth truly know. For that she, as we read in the fabulous stories of the poets, was violently taken out of Phoenicia, a country of Asia, and caried from thence into Cyprus, or as others write, into the iland Creta (Candy) all men do know well enough: where, as Eusebius his Chronicle doth witnesse, being taken of Asterius king of Creta to wife, she bare him Minoes, Rhadamanthus and Sarpedon: from whence she went not into Europe, but into Asia, as Herodotus hath left recorded. But what is that to Europe this part of the world? One might easilier beleeue it to haue been so named of Europus, who, as Trogus Pompeius witnesseth, sometime in these parts possessed a large kingdome: which also I do see to be auouched by Eusta∣thius vpon Lycophron, who maketh this Europus to be the sonne of one Himerus. Pausanias saith that one Europa was king of Sicyonia, a prouince of Peleponnesus in Greece: to him Eusebius in his Chronicle doth ascribe, who maketh him equall to the Patriarke Abraham, & to haue liued aboue 3550. yeares since, about 1950. yeares before the birth of Christ. There be some, as Festus writeth, that thinke it so named of the beautifulnesse and excellency of the country. These we are sure are fabulous or vncertaine: may we not therefore, as they haue formed of Phrat, Euphrates, and of Koft, Aegyptus (as we haue shewed before) thinke that of Riphath (the sonne of Gomer, Iapheths sonne, to whom this part of the world was presently after the confusion at Ba∣bel, assigned) they haue likewise formed Europa? And surely the name Riphath, doth very manifestly shew it selfe in Riphaeis montibus, the Riphean hils: item in Riphaeo fluuio, now called the riuer Oby, in Ripe, a city of Peloponnesus, in Rhiphataeis, the people of Paphlagonia, as Iosephus writeth. Pto∣lemey in the second booke of his Quadripartite, in my opinion much more truly, writeth that it was sometime called by a common name, CELTICA, name∣ly of a principall Nation that first did inhabite it. For there is almost no prouince in all this part, in which in time past the CELTAE did not inhabit. For in Spaine toward the West, and beyond Hercules pillars are the Celtae as Herodotus affirmeth. Item, about the riuer Baetis, as Strabo auoucheth, the Ciltica Praesamarci, are in the prouince of Lucensis, and others otherwise named Nerij, as Pliny saith: Dion and Xiphilinus do shew that the Canta∣bri and Astares are the same with the Celtae: Pliny nameth the city Celtica, in the prouince Hispalensis. Antonius hath the Celti: item Celticum promontorium, is the same that Cantabrum promontorium, which now is called Cabo de finis terre. What Geographer or Historian is he amongst the anci∣ents that hath not made mention of the Celtebri? In France were the Celtae and Celtogalatae: and from thence are those in Britaine. For that this iland was first peopled from hence, lying so neere ouer against it, it is a common opinion and very probable. That the Gauls Germanes were vulgarly called Celtae, all Historiographers do iointly agree: and indeed Dion doth affirme, that the Celtae did dwell vpon either side of the riuer Rhein: the Celtae dwelt in Gal∣lia Cisalpina (Lombardy) or Italy, as Appianus writeth. And againe vpon the Ionian sea, (that is, the Hadriaticke) which also Strabo doth auerre. Silius Italicus placeth them about the riuer Eridianus (Po). In Epirus sometime dwelled the Celtae, as Antonius Liberalis hath giuen out: Stepha∣nus placeth the same about the mount Haemus: Arrianus, neere the mouth of the riuer Donaw: as also Strabo in Moesia. The same authour writeth, that the Celtae are intermedled with the Illyrij and Thraces. Who also placeth them vpon the riuer Borysthenes. Moreouer Aristotle in his booke De mundo, ioineth the Celtae with the Scythians. Heere hence the same Strabo and Plutarch do make their Celtoscythae. In Plutarch, in the life of Camil∣lus, I read that the Galatae (which he maketh to haue come of the stocke of the Celtae) passing the Northren sea came vnto the Riphaean mountaines. Againe out of the forenamed Strabo I learne that the Nations dwelling Northward were in his time called Caltae. The which also their ancient lan∣guage, which is called the Celticke or Germane tongue, doth at this day sufficiently demonstrate: which is the same (only differing a little in dialect) with that which is vsed in the ilands neere adioining to these places, as in Island, Groenland, Friesland and others in this ocean. Plutarke in Marius wri∣teth, that Celtica doth begin at the outmost sea (that is, the Atlanticke sea) and so stretcheth it selfe out farre into the North and from thence vn∣to the fenne Maeoris, (Mare delle Zabacche.) Pomponius Mela calleth the Cassiterides (which in another place we haue proued to belong to great Britaine, or to be of the number of those which are named Brittanicae) Celticke Ilands. What is this else, I pray you, than plainly to affirme that THE CELTAE DO POSSESSE ALL EVROPE? Which indeed is that which Ephorus in Strabo did see so many yeares since: when as he diuiding all the world into 4. quar∣ters, saith that, That part which is toward the East, is inhabited of the Indians: that which is in the South, of the Aethiopians: the North parts, of the Scythians: and the West, of the Celtae. The scholiast of Appollonius nameth the Hadriaticke sea, Mare Celticum, the Celticke sea. And Lyco∣phron describeth Celtos, a certaine poole, about the mouth of the riuer Ister. Item he placeth Leuce an iland of Mar maiore (Pontus Euxinus) o∣uer against the mouth of the riuer Donaw. May we not therefore properly, as they call those that inhabit Asia, Asians: and those which dwell in Africa, Africanes: call these which dwell in Celtica, Celtickes? He that out of all ancient stories, penned either in Latine or Greeke doth not know that the Celtae are the Germanes, let him haue recourse to the 22. chapter of Hadrianus Iunius his Batauia, and I doubt not but, hauing throughly waied those many sound ar∣guments, and sufficient testimonies of ancient graue writers, shall rest satisfied and sweare to our opinion. If not, let him listen to the Dutchmen, and he shall heare them call one another in their familiar communication, Kelt. The French also or Gauls I call a German nation. And I can proue by good arguments, if it were a matter pertaining to this our purpose, that the Germane or Dutch tongue is the ancient language of the Celtae, and to be the same which hitherto they haue vsed in all places and now is spoken, except in some places where the power of the Romanes so preuailed, that they banished this, and seated theirs in the roome. It is likely therefore that the etymology and reason of the deriuation of the word Europe, which was vnknowen vnto the old writers, is to be sought and fetched from no other language else, but from that which was most vsuall in this part of the world. For that the inhabitants of any country should take the name of their natiue soile from strangers, it is so absurd and hard to be beleeued, that there cannot any thing more foolish or contrary to truth be inuen∣ted or deuised. Wherefore I thinke it good, concerning this matter, heere to lay downe the iudgement of Goropius Becanus, our countryman, who thinketh it to be so named, not of a woman, (which it is probable, either neuer was, or neuer came heere) but à latitudine videndi, of the largenesse of his prospect (as he speaketh) namely, because (I do cite his owne words out of the 9. booke of his Origines) it doth not only looke toward Asia, on the East and South: Africa, on the South and West: but also the New-found-world beyond the Hyperborei, on the West and North. Neither shall any man perswade me, that Europe had the name from Greece or the Greeke language, seeing that it was first inhabited of the Cimbers (Cimmerij, descended from Gomer, the elder brother) before it was possessed of the Greeks (Iones, come from Iawan a yonger brother, & but the 4. son of Yapheth) we make a dipthong by setting the 5. vowel of the Latins before the 2. which neither the Latins nor Greeks do admit. Therefore if so be at any time they would change the words in which this did light, for We, they put Eu; turning it backward. Therefore our men do term it Verop, not Europ, whereby they vnderstand a worthy company of men: for Wer (a mono-syllable pronounced like a dipthong) signifieth losty, great, excellent & that which is best in euery kind of thing: which notwithstanding some do write ur, without a dipthong, yet with a long vowell. Therefore, as of Terues, they formed Tereus, so of Werop, the Latines & Greeks haue made Europe: so named of the excellency of the Nation, which doth farre surpasse all other men of the World. For Hop, as I haue shewed before, signifieth a company or multitude of men. More of this word thou maist see in his 8. booke Thus farre out of his workes which are foorth in print: that which followeth, is taken out of a booke of his which he also hath set foorth, yet not imprinted, but such as he vsed priuatly, and hath many additions in sundrie places in the margin written with his owne hand, which he had prepared against the second edition. But I waighing, saith he, and comparing this name with that which I haue read in holy Scripture, a∣nother reason farre more excellent, and better commeth into my mind. We see that to Yaphet was promised enlargement or a farre spreading of his posterity, or as some other interpret the word, ioy and gladnesse: which then he truly had enioied, when as Christ had redeemed vs by his death and pretious bloud (which blessing doth agree to this part of the world, rather than to any other vnder heauen beside: and therefore all other countries generall do call Europe: THE KINGDOME OF THE CHRISTIANS: and the Europeans, are called of the Turkes and Arabians, GIAVVR, that is, Christians.) E, therefore doth signifie a lawfull contract and mariage: VR, excellent: and HOP, hope: whereupon it commeth to passe, that Europe signifieth The excellent hope of a lawfull mariage. which is proper to this portion of the world which Noah gaue to Iapheth his sonne to inhabite. For although that the posterity of Sem was by Abraham, for many ages wedded to God, yet at length he put her away and diuorced her from him. But the wedlocke whereby God, by Christ is wed∣ded to Europe his Church, shall neuer be dissolued: so that Europe may most properly be said to be Iaphets portion. But of this word we will speake more in our Francica. Thus farre Goropius. Which I haue very willingly communicated to the curtuous Reader, leauing it to the censure of the learned to be iud∣ged. Yet I know that these things haue been very bitterly skoffed at already by a certaine learned man, but one wholly ignorant of this tongue, and therefore of lesse iudgement in this argument. There are some which do thinke that this Europe was in the holy Scripture called IAPETIA. Thus farre of Europe, to which before I do altogether leaue, I will ad out of Herodotus in his Polymnia, the words of Mardonius to Darius spoken of this country. That it is a country most goodly and beautifull, bearing all maner of excellent fruitefull trees, and those in their kind the best: and to be such that it were pi∣ty that any man but a king only should possesse.
The BRITISH ILES, Now, THE EMPIRE OF Great Britaine. PLiny saith that in the Atlanticke ocean, there be many ilands named BRITANNICAE INSVLAE, The British ilands; but the two greater ALBION and HIBERNIA, (Ireland) are properly so called. Of these, ALBION, in regard that it is both the greatest, and as it were commander of the rest, is most properly called BRITANNIA. And I might easily be drawen to beleeue, that all these ilands were recorded in the ancient monuments of the Greekes, before they were once named or knowen to the Romanes; and to haue generally been called CASSITERIDES, as who say, The Stannaries, and that properly CASSITERA, which the Romans call Britannia. And although I am not ignorant, that Cassitera is held of Dionysius and Stephanus to be Indica Insula, an Indi∣an an iland, or, an iland belonging or neere adioining to India, yet I am not a whitte moued from that my opinion. For I do verily thinke that this was deliuered by them rather of ignorance, than of sound knowledge grounded vpon the skill of Geography: and we know that this is also a common errour in these our daies, to call all countries and ilands vnknowen or farre remote and distant from vs, Indian iles; by which name, not without a manifest ignorance of the truth, they call all that whole continent of the New world, together with the circumiacent ilands first discouered and found out in the daies of our grandfathers; and such also as daily are descried, they call by that name. On my side is Pomponius Mela, a man out of all doubt, of good iudgement and credit, who calleth them CELTICAS, Celtickeiles; as if they were neere neighbours to the Celtae. I do know that these Cassiterides, are of others otherwise described; as of Diodorus Siculus a little aboue Lusitania (Portu∣gall) of Pliny, oueragainst Celtiberia, (Valentia) neere Artabrum promontorium (cabo de finis terrae) by Strabo and Ptolemey: where now there are no ilands at all; (and therefore not these) nor euer were any: whereupon it is apparant that these ilands were rather known to the ancients by name, than true situation. Now all men do iointly commend these ilands for the great abundance of Tinne and Lead, which they yearely did yeeld: Strabo also maketh these ilands rich in Hides or Leather. Do not then these three, whose plentifull store, hath made ENGLAND at this day so famous all the world ouer, manifestly proue that they all pointed and aimed at Britaine? For what country or prouince is there in the whole globe of the Earth, that is so rich in Pelts and Leather: or hath such plenty of fine wooll, as ENGLAND hath? The same Strabo affirmeth, that in the Cassiterides they digge not very deep for mettals. Pliny saith that they are found in the very sourd of the earth. That these do speake both of the same thing, who doth not see? By these I gather, That the Phoenicians in times past, and Spaniards, did for trafficke saile through the straights of Gibraltar, vnto this iland; and for Tinne, Lead and Pelts bring in for exchange Brasen vessels and Salt: like as afterward the Romanes, when Caesar had subdued it, vsed to do the next way ouer land by France. Therefore it was then first knowen to the Romanes, by the name of Britannia, which before that, certaine ages passed, was very famous amongst the Phoenicians by the name of Cassitera. Appianus a reuerend authour, who liued about the time of Hadrian the Emperour, writeth that the Spaniards did forbeare to trauell vpon the West and North ocean, but when they were forced into Britaine, by the violence of the tide. That heere he nameth Britaine, Cassitera, I make no question: but that name was then worne out of vse, and this, as I thinke it very likely, was growen in request and better knowne. Let the learned see, and at their better leisure consider, whether that Sextus Rufus Auienus doth not describe these ilands vnder the name of OESTRYMNIDVM? Surely I am of that opinion he doth. For he saith that these Oestrymniades, are very rich of lead and tinne: and that the country people do make shippes of Leather, in which they saile vpon the maine sea. What is this else then that which Pliny reporteth, That the Britanes do go to sea in shippes made of wickers and couered ouer with raw hides? and doth not Caesar in his first booke de Bello ciuili, affirme that the Britans did vse to make the keele and ribbes of their ships of some light wood, the other part being radled with osiers or roddes was couered with leather? This iland the Romanes, as Dion and Xiphiline do testifie, diui∣ded into the HIGHER, containing all that part which is toward the South: and the LOVVER, toward the North. In the Almagest of Ptolemey, this is called MINOR, The Lesser: and that MAIOR, The Greater: and that about the time of Seuerus Emperour of Rome. But in the raigne of Valentinian the Em∣perour, I find in Sextus Rufus, that it was distinguished by these names, BRITANNIA PRIMA, The First, BRITANNIA SECVNDA, The Second, BRITANNIA MAXIMA, The Greater, CAESARIENSIS and FLAVIA. The booke of Remembrances (Notiar) and Ammianus do adde VALEN∣TIA; which others, as Orosius, Claudian and Hegesippus call SCOTIA, Scotland. Xiphilinus in Seuerus referreth the people generally to these two nations, MAEATAI and CALEDONII: for the names of the rest may, as he saith, welnigh be reduced to these two. (Yet this must needes be false except he meane it par∣ticularly of Valentia, the later part.) He that desireth to know the seuerall Nations of this iland as then it was inhabited, let him haue recourse to Ptolemeys Geo∣graphy, and this our Mappe, into which we haue packed those things which we haue gathered heere and there dispersed in Caesars Commentaries, Tacitus, Pausani∣as and Ammianus; and he shalbe satisfied to the full. But wilt not thou be deceiued? take the learned M. Camden for thy guide: and then I will warrant thy safe conduct. Thus farre of the names of these ilands: now let vs speake in like manner of the iles themselues, and first of the greatest of them which we said was called Britannia. Aristotle vnto Alexander the Great writeth, That this ile for greatnesse doth exceed the rest. Tacitus testifieth, That it is the greatest of all ilands that the Romanes euer had notice of. It is so great, as Appian writeth, that it might seeme to be ANOTHER CONTINENT. And Hegesippus calleth it A∣NOTHER WORLD. Caesar, Diodorus, Strabo and Mela do make it to be Three cornered: and so it may aswell as Sicilia be called TRINACRIA. Taci∣tus out of Liuy and Fabius Rusticus do liken it to a Swingling stocke, or the warlike weapon Bipennis, a twall, or battle-axe. Iornandes saith, It is fashioned like a Conus, that is, to a Geometricall body, which like a taper, is broad at the bottome and sharpe at the toppe. Nubiensis the Arabian, who wrote about fiue or six hundred yeares since, likeneth it to the head and necke of Alnaama, an ostrich. This Iland was first descried and made knowen to the Romane Empire in the time of Iulius Caesar the tyrant, who first of all men (I vnderstand it of the Romans) entered it with a thousand saile of shippes, as Athenaeus in his sixth booke hath left re∣corded. For before that, as Dion in his 39. booke testifieth, whether there were such an iland or not, it was vncertaine. The later writers made a doubt whether it were a part of the maine land, or an ile apart by it selfe: and of this argument they haue written much on both sides, who indeed knew nothing for certaine of it (them∣selues hauing neuer seen it, or learned by the inhabitants what it was) but only by gesse had written of it coniecturally, as euery one had more leasure or learning. In pro∣cesse of time, first when Agricola was vice-praetor (which I vnderstand by Tacitus, was vnder Vespasian) then againe, in our daies, saith Dion, vnder Seuerus, it was manifestly found to be but an iland, and not of the Continent. Before the comming of these men, the iland had neuer borne the yoke of any forren Prince, as Dio∣dorus Siculus teacheth. It was gouerned by many princes: the common people for the most part bore the sway and had a kind of soueraignty, as we learne out of Cae∣sar, Strabo, Xiphiline, and Tacitus: who also moreouer doth adde, that by their princes they are drawne to many factions and taking of contrary parts: and that they neuer haue any common counsell for the state of the whole common-wealth: so that while they fight seuerally, they are seuerally conquered. The temperature of the aire, saith Caesar, is more mild than in France, the frosts and cold are not so eger. Tacitus affirmeth, That heere is neuer any bitter cold weather. Stra∣bo writeth, that the aire is rather subiect to clowdes than snow. Herodian teacheth, that the aire is thicke and foggie: and he thinketh the reason, to be the heat and vapours which do ascend vp out of the fennes and marshes. In Britaine, (saith Minutius Felix, the diuine) the heat of the Sunne is not great, but it is comforted and hartened by a warme and hot streame of the sea, which inuironeth it on euery side. The same forenamed Strabo saith, that the most part of the iland is plaine and cham∣pion, beset with woods and groues: to haue also some earthy hils, but very craggie, and drie without water, as Xiphiline writeth: moreouer some plaines, desert and full of fennes and bogges. This last Herodian auoucheth to be true, who saith that by reason of the frequent ouerflowing of the sea, it is fenny and moorish in diuers pla∣ces. Notwithstanding the Panegyricus maketh it a very fertile and fruitfull soile for Corne; yet it is better for grasse than corne, and is more kind to beast than man, as Mela affirmeth: and therefore heere is infinite store of cattell, as Caesar hath left recorded. Yet it beareth Wheat and Rie, as Strabo testifieth, and that by the meanes of their great store of marle: for this, Pliny saith, doth assure the Britans of greater fertility: which in the time of the Emperour Iulian, was so luxurious and superabundant, that as Marcelline in his eighteenth booke iustifieth, they haue sent ouer corne and prouision into France and Germany. The same history Zozimus doth approue. It yeeldeth all maner of commodities other things as France doth, (excepting the beech and firre tree) yea Hares, Hennes and Geese, as the forenamed Caesar doth testifie. Xiphiline out of Dion doth highly coommend it for wonderfull store of all sorts of Fish: Solinus as much for the great variety and plen∣ty of Mettals. All the world did euer admire it for the infinite abundance of Tinne and Lead. Especially vp higher within the country, as Caesar would haue it. Whose opinion Diodorus Siculus in a maner doth gainesay: who affirmeth that mettals are plentifully found in Cornewall, neere the promontory which Ptolemey called, Antiuestaeum and Bolerium: the same Diodorus, Belerium: Nubiensis Tarfi'lgarbey mina'lgiezira; The outmost bound of the iland toward the West: or as our seamen call it, The lands end, and The cape of Cornewall. Beside these mettals, the same authour saith, that it yeeldeth also Iron, but not in any great quan∣tity, and that in like maner toward the sea coast. Item, Pliny doth testifie, that it affoordeth Lead in great abundance euen in the vpper sourd of the earth. It hath also some veines of Gold and Siluer, if we will beleeue Tacitus and Strabo, two authours of good credit. Item, the prophecies of Sibylla do auouch it to be rich in Gold: peraduenture, saith Ortelius, in respect of that plenty that is brought in thither: for Cicero vnto Trebatius writeth, that the ile of it selfe doth not yeeld one dramme of Gold or siluer: and that nothing is to be caried from thence, nor any maner of booty to be expected, more than that which may arise of slaues. But Cicero heere spake like a lawyer, not like a Philosopher, and louer of the truth. For our histories do approue that there haue been mines, of both those mettals informer a∣ges, found both in England, Wales and Scotland: and the like no doubt we now might find, if we would seeke for them with the like diligence. Pliny and Mela do write that heere are many and great riuers which do affoord both pearle and pretious stones. These pearles are the best in value and estimation, next to those of In∣dia, in the iudgement of Aelianus: the hope and gaine of these. Pliny saith, first moued Caesar to assault this iland. Heliodorus doth highlie commend the Ame∣thyst of England. I read in Solinus that heere are hot baths (fontes calidi, Bathe, I vnderstand) very curiously carued and trimmed for the vse of man: these
map of the ancient British Isles BRI∣TANNICA∣RVM INSV∣LARVM TYPVS. Ex conatibus Geographicis Abrah. Ortelij. Cum privileg. decen. 1595. NATALIBVS INGENIO ET DOCTRINA ILLVSTRI REVERENDOQVE DOMINO D. GEORGIO AB AVS∣TRIA, PRAEPOSITO HARLEBE∣CENSI, AC SERENISS. PRINCIPI CARDINALI ARCHIDVCI A CVBICVLIS, Abrah. Ortelius R. M. Geog. L. M. dedicab.
fountaine, he saith, are consecrated to Minerua, she is president of them. Heliodorus ascribeth also the Amethyst, a pretious stone, to this country. Heere also is the Agath (gagares) the best in his kind, as Solinus and the old interpreter of Dionysius do iointly testifie. Pliny, many yeares since, it seemeth had heard of our English Outers: which one commended who thus wrote of them; — Rutupinoquè edita fundo, Ostrea callebat primo deprehendere morsu. The Poet Gratius doth highly commend the English Dogges, which are transported from hence, as Strabo writeth, for the excellent quality which naturally they haue for their sure hunting: which also Nemesianus was not ignorant of, when he thus wrote of them, — Diuisa Britannia mittit Veloces, nostri{que} Orbis venatibus aptos. Britaine that Other World, hath alwaies borne the name, For swiftest hounds, and best for hunters game. Symma∣chus writeth vnto Flauianus his brother, that in time past the Romanes did greatly admire the English dogges: and Strabo affirmeth that the Gauls did vse their helpe in the warres. There is a kind of these which are lesse than the common sort, which I find described in Oppianus his booke of hunting: Agassae∣us, he calleth it, a beagle, or gase-hound: See M. Camdens Britannia. Whether in former times it hath had wine or not (for Tacitus flatly denieth that it will beare vines or oliue trees) I dare not affirme: yet I vnderstand by Vopiscus, that Aurelianus the Emperour did suffer the Britans to plant vines, and to make wine. Item, the Panegyricus, an oration made to Constantine the Great, doth atttribute to this ile so great a fertility of corne and all sorts of graine, that it hath sufficient both bread corne and drinke corne to maintaine it selfe. Pliny writeth that Sotacus verily beleeued that Amber (Electrum) heere dropped out of certaine trees, which they therefore called Electrides, amber trees, a feigned story inuented by the old writers: as also this perhaps which Clemens in the sixth booke of his Stromaton, writeth from the relation of Heruetus: they which write histories, do report that in Britannia (Britannice, the Greeke copy hath) there is a certaine caue vnderneath an hill, in whose roppe is a chincke or rift: when the wind driueth into the caue, and beateth a∣gainst the sides of is, there is heard a sound, as it were of cymbals making a melodious harmony. Like as that of Solinus also is, who writeth, that there is an altar (ara) in a by-place, or odde corner in Caledonia, a part of Scotland, which by the inscription written in Greeke letters, doth manifestly shew that V∣lysses had landed there to performe some vow that he had made. And whether euer this ile were ioined to the maine continent or not, as Seruius is perswa∣ded I dare not affirme. Now it remaineth that we in like maner do speake something of the people of the same. Caesar and Diodorus Siculus do giue out that it is wonderfull populous: But from whence the people and first inhabitants came, whether they were home∣borne (indigenae) or come from other countries, it is not knowen as Tacitus hath written. The inner partes, higher within the land, are inhabited of those which they say, were borne and bred there: the sea coasts are possessed of those which came thither from Belgium (the Low countries) all of them almost are called by the names of those cities and prouinces from whence they came, and where they were bred, as Caesar reporteth. This his opinion Ptolemey doth con∣firme, who in this ile also doth name and describe the Belgae and Attrebates. Tacitus auoucheth that in that the Caledonij, (a people in Scotland) are red haired and bigge limmed, it is a manifest argument that they are come of the stocke of the Germaines. Their well coloured complections, curled heads, and country opposite to the coast of Spaine, do proue that the ancient Iberi, in former times had crossed the sea and seated themselues heere. That the Galli or Gauls did enter vpon those coasts neere to their country, it is very probable by their ceremonies, superstitious opinions, and similitude of languages. Zozi∣mus in his first booke writeth that the Emperour Probus, sent into this iland all the Burgundians and Vandals that he could suppresse and take aliue, that heere they might dwell and seat themselues. The Saxons and other nations which entered this land, I do of purpose omit: because these were of later times and but the other day: we only determined to touch those things that were of greater antiquity. Generally the inhabitants of this ile, in those daies, were all vnciuill and rude: and as they were more farther remote from the maine continent, so they had lesse knowledge of forren wealth and were lesse desirous of the same. That the Britans were more valiant and hardy than the Gauls, we learne out of Tacitus: that they were more taller of stature than they, Stra∣bo doth affirme: That they vsed strangers discurteously, Horace reporteth: Claudianus the poet nameth this ile saeua Britannia, tyrannous Britaine. And the same authour in his Panegyricus, for the Consulship of Honorius, calleth the people saeuos Britannos, cruell Britans. Quid in his second book of Loue, nameth them virides Britannos, the green Britans: in the fifteenth booke of his Metamorphosis, Aequoreos Britannos, the Britans of the sea. They weare their haire long, all their body in what part soeuer being shauen, beside their head and vpper lippe. The same authour saith that for nature and quality they are for the most part all alike, yet some are more plaine and simply minded, others more rude and barbarous: so that although they haue great store of milke, yet they know not how to make cheese: others are wholly ignorant of sowing, planting, grafting and of such other points of husbandrie. In their cari∣age and conuersation they are, as Diodorus Siculus speaketh of them, plaine, simple and vpright, farre remote from the wily subtillies and crafty deuices of our men which liue more neere the Court. They fare basely and feed vpon grosse meats, and are wholly estranged from wealth and gorgeous life and mainte∣tenance: and as Mela saith of them, they are only rich in cattell, and great lands and compasse of ground. For they do not hold it lawfull to eat either hare, henne or goose: notwithstanding they keepe them, as Caesar writeth, for game and pastime. Yet they haue a kind of geese heere, which they call chenerotes, (bernacles) which they esteeme for great dainties, so that in England they haue not a daintier dish, as Pliny testifieth. They feed vpon milke and flesh meat, as the same authour saith. They lay their corne vp in their barnes in the eare of sheaffe vnthrashed: from whence they fetch and thrash as much as shall serue them from day to day. Of their temperate and sparing diet, together with their patience in aduersity and affliction, Dion in the life of Nero will teach thee. That they did make their drinke, which they called Curmi, (or as now they pronounce it Courow, ale) of barley, Dioscorides, that famous physition, or in∣dustrious and painfull student and searcher out of the true nature of medicinall simples, so many hundred yeeres, hath left recorded. Zonaras writeth that they did vse to make a kind of meat, of which if any man should take but the quantity of a beane, he should neither be an hungred or a thirst for a great time. Beleeue him that list. Of the same Britaines, Herodian thus writeth: they weare no kind of garment: onely about their neckes they claspe a piece of iron, thinking that to bee as great a iewell and signe of wealth, as other barbarous nations do by gold. Caesar saith that they be clad in skins and leather. They vsed to haue tenne or twelue wiues common amongst a certaine company of them: especially brothers with brothers and fathers with their sonnes were thus co-partners: but if any of them were gotten with child, whosoeuer got it, it was accounted to be his who first maried her when she was a maide. Thus Caesar in his time wrote of them. That many of them had but one wife onely, Eusebius in his seuenth booke de Praepar. euangel. hath giuen vs to vnderstand: which al∣so Clemens Alexandrinus in his 9 booke Recognitionum, doth auerre. Plutarch saith that they do ordinarily liue till they be an hundred and twenty yeares old. They vse brasen money or iron rings made of a certaine weight and poise, in steed of gold or siluer coines. Pliny saith that they vsed to weare rings vpon their middle finger. In Caesar I read, that their houses did stand thicke and close together: but as Strabo writeth, they were for the most part made of reeds, or timber. They dwell in woodes like as we do in cities. For they call that a towne, when they haue with a banke or ditch enclosed or fortified a combersome wood, whither they may flocke and resort, to auoid the inuasion and assault of their enemies: as Caesar in his commentaries doth giue vs to vnderstand: and there, as Strabo saith they make cabbines or cottages for themselues, and stables for cattle, such as may serue them for that present necessity. Herodian cal∣leth them a very warlike and bloudy nation. They fight not only on horsebacke and foote, but also with coches and waggons, armed after the maner of the Gauls; Couinos they call them, whose axeltrees or linces were armed with hookes made somewhat like to the Welch bils now adaies vsed, as Pomponius Mela affirmeth; they vse likewise in their warres a great multitude of waines, as Caesar, Strabo and Diodorus do tell vs. They fight with huge great swords, as Tacitus signifieth: these swords, Herodian saith, hang close downe by their bare skinne: only sheathed in a streight peece of leather. Pomponius Mela writeth that they vsed to adorne the pommels of their swords with the teeth of certaine sea fish. They know not what a brigandine, iacke or head-peece meane: these peeces of armour they neuer vse, accounting them to be but a trouble and hinderance to them when they are to passe ouer any bogges or fennes. For they vse to swimme, runne through or to wade vp to the twist ouer those fennes and marishes, and many times being bare-legged they spare neither thicke nor thinne: yet afterward we learne out of Dion by the oration of Bunduica, their queen, that they were wont to arme themselues, for defence with helmets, habergions and greaus: when they gaue the on-set vpon their enemies the same authour teacheth vs, they vsed to make a great noise and to sing terrible and threatning songs. They make warre manie times vpon small occasions and for wantonnesse: and very often they inuade and annoy one another of set purpose; especiallie for a desire of further command and couetousnesse of enlarging their possessions. Tacitus moreouer affirmeth, that they also go in the field vnder the leading and conduct of women: for a manifest proofe of which he bringeth in (in the foureteenth booke of his Annals) Boudicea with her daughters. Dion affirmeth the same: but he calleth her Bunduica: item Tacitus. in the life of Iulius Agricola, writeth her name Voadica. Corpora inficiunt vltrò; they purposedly staine and paint their bodies: (there is a very learned man who thinketh that for vltrò, heere should be read nitro: with saltpeter) but wherefore or to what end they did it, that is vncertaine: Mela and Iornandes do thinke they did it for ornament and to set out themselues: or that they might seeme more terrible vnto their enemies in time of sight, as Caesar saith: who ouermore addeth that they thus paint their bodies with wood (Luteum, he calleth it) which will make a blew or skie-colour. Others heere for Luteum, do read Glastum: on whose side Pliny seemeth to speake, but that he affirmeth this only of the women: where he writeth that the Britans wiues and women did vse to besmere all their body ouer with glastum, (woad, an hearb like plantaine) and to go starke naked to some certaine solemnities, when they were to performe some rites and ceremonies: in this imitating the Blackamoores. (But why I should not reteine the ancient reading, which in Caesar was glasto: for that which now they would haue luteo; I see no reason: seeing that out of a fr gment of a de∣scription of Britaine, done by my good friend M. Humfrey Lhoyd, I vnderstand, that amongst the West Britans in the ancient Brittish tongue, which they still speake euen to this very day, by the word glas, they vnderstand the blew or skie-colour, as also by the same they signifie the hearb Isatis, th t is, woad) which is very like the plantaine.) And that the men also did not onlie staine their bodies with some kind of colour, but also to marke them with diuers kinds of pictures, and counterfeits of sundrie sorts of liuing creatures, and to go naked, least they should hide this their painting, I read in Herodian. Listen, thou shalt heare Solinus speake the same wordes: The countrie is partly possessed by a barbarous and wild people, which euen from their childhood, haue by certaine cutters, men skilfull that way, diuers images and pictures of liuing creatures, drawen and raised vpon their skinne, and so imprinted in their flesh, that as they
grow vnto mans estate these pictures together with the painters staines, do wax bigger and bigger: neither doth the wild people endure any thing more patient∣ly and willingly, than that their limbes by meanes of those deep cuts and slashes, may so deepely drinke in these coloures, that they may sticke long by them. A∣mongst the Goddesses, as I learne by Dion, they worshipped Andates; (for so they call Victoriam, victory) who had a temple and sacred wood, where they vsed to do sacrifice, and performe their religious seruice and worship to her. Beside her they had another which was called Adraste: whether this were the same with Adrastia (which some did take to be Nemesis, the Goddesse of reuenge) which the ancient Grecians & Romans did worship, I leaue to others to determin. Caesar saith, that in former times the Druides, a kind of superstitious priests, dwelt also amongst this people: who affirmeth, that their discipline and religion was first heere inuented, and from hence caried beyond sea into France. That they continued vntill the time of Vespasian the Emperour of Rome, in Mona or Anglesey, it is apparent out of the 14 booke of Cornelius Tacitus his Annals. Frō them, doubtlesse, this nation had their knowledge of the state & immor∣tality of the soule after this life: for this was the opinion of those Druides, as Caesar and others haue written of them. But of the Druides, we will, God willing, speake more in our Old France, or Gallia as it stood in Caesars time. That the Britans did so greatly esteeme and wonderfully extoll the art Magicke, and performe it with such strange ceremonies, that it is to be thought that the Persians had it from hence, I haue Pliny for my patron, who mightily perswadeth me. The forenamed Bunduica, also doth seeme to iustifie the same: who, as soone as she had ended her oration vnto her army, cast an hare out of her lappe, by that meanes to gesse what the issue of that iourney would be: which after that she was obserued to goe on forward, all the company iointly gaue a ioifull shout and ac∣clamation. To sacrifice and offer the blood of their captiues vpon their altars, and to seeke to know the will and pleasure of their Gods by the entrails of men, as the Romans did by the bowels of beasts, these people held it for a very lawfull thing. Thus farre Tacitus: and thus much of Albion: now it remaineth that we in like manner say somewhat of Ireland. HIBERNIA, Or IRELAND. VPon the West of Britaine, in the vast ocean (the Latines call it Oceanus Virginius, that is, as the Welch call it Norweridh, or Farigi, as the Irish pronounce the word) lieth that goodly iland which all ancient writers generally haue called by one and the same name, although eue∣ry one hath not written it alike, (an ordinary and vsuall thing in proper names translated into strange countries) For Ptolemy (and vul∣garly all Geographers which follow him) calleth it HIBERNIA: Orpheus the most ancient Poet of the Greekes, Aristotle the Prince of Philosophers and Claudian, IERNA; Iuuenall and Mela, IVVERNA: Diodorus Siculus, IRIS: Eustathius in his Commentaries vpon Dionysius Afer, WERNIA () and BERNIA: the Welch-men or ancient Britans, YVERDON: the Irish themselues (from whence all the rest were fetched) ERIN: whereof also the Saxons, by adding the word Land, signifying a countrey or prouince (as their manner is) haue framed IRELAND; by which name it is not only knowen to the English, but generally, at this day, it is so called of all Nations whatsoeuer. Thus farre the learned Clarencieux: who also thinketh it so to haue beene named by them, of their Irish word Hiere; which signifieth the West, or Western coast or country. Like as the Celtae, (whose language he proueth to be the same with this) for the same reason and of the same word, named Spaine, Iberia: which afterward the Greekes in their language interpreted Hesperia. In Festus Auienus, who wrote a booke intituled Orae maritimae, the sea coast; it is named INSVLA SACRA, The Holy Iland; who moreouer addeth that it is inhabited of the Hierni, that is, of the Irish-men. Isacius in his Commentaries vpon Lycophron, calleth it WEST BRITAINE: Plutarch in his booke which he wrote Of the face in the sphere of the Moone, calleth it OGVGIA: but why, we know not: yet read him, if you thinke it worth the while: you shall heare many an old wiues tale. The latter writers, as S. Isidore, and the reue∣rend Beda, our countriman, call it SCOTIA, of the Scottes which seated themselues in the West part of this ile, about the yeare of our Lord 310. from whence within a very few yeares after, being called in by the Picts, they came into Brittane: and indeed Paulus Orosius, Beda and Egeinhardus, authors of good credit, wrote that it was inhabited of the Scots. It is in length from South to North 400. miles; in breadth scarse 200. The soile and temperature of the aire, as Tacitus affirmeth, is not much vnlike that of England. It breedeth no snake or serpent, nor any venemous creature: fowle and birds heere are not very plentifull, and as for bees, no man euer saw one in the whole country: yea if so be that any man shall strew dust, grauell or small stones brought from hence, amongst the hiues, the swarmes will presently forsake their combes, as Solinus writeth. (Yet we know by experience that this is all false: for such is the in∣finit number of bees in this country, that they are not only to be found heere in hiues and bee-gardens, but also abroad in the fields in hollow trees and holes of the ground.) The temperature of the aire (saith Pomponius Mela) is very vnkind and vnfit for the ripening of corne and graine: but the soile is so good for grasse, not only great and ranke, but also sweet and wholesome, that their heards and cattell do fill themselues in so short a time, that if they be not driuen out of the pasture, they will feed while they burst. Solinus affirmeth the same, but in fewer words. Furthermore he calleth it an inhumane and vnciuill country, by reason of the rude and harsh manners of the inhabitants. And Pomponius Mela termeth the people a disordered and vnmannerly nation, lesse acquainted with any sort of vertue then any other people whatsoeuer: yet they may in some respect be said to be louers of vertue: in regard that they are very religious and deuout. Strabo saith, that they are more rusticall and vnciuill then the Britans: Solinus calleth it a mercilesse and warlike nation: Strabo writeth, that they are great eaters: Diodorus Siculus saith, they did vse to eat mans flesh: and Solinus he addeth, that those which are conquerers in warre, vse first to drinke the bloud of those which are slaine, and then with the same to besmere their face. Yea they do account it, as Strabo writeth, for a commendable thing to eat the bodies of their parents when they be dead: and to lie men and women with one another openly, not regarding who stand and looke on: and that not only with o∣ther women, but also euen with their mothers, and owne sisters: accounting this for an indifferent thing, neither good nor bad, as Iulius Solinus Polyhistor writeth. Moreouer he affirmeth, that if a great bellied woman shalbe brought to bed of a sonne, she causeth the first meat which he eateth to be laid vpon his fathers sword, and so vpon the point of the sword she gently putteth it into the infants mouth: and with certaine heathenish vowes and praiers, she wisheth that he may neuer die but in the warres or vpon his enemies sword. They which would be more finer and gallant than others, do set out the handles and pommels of their swords with the teeth of certain sea-fish: for they are as white as any iuory: and the chief: delight of the men is in the brauery of their weapons. Eusebius in his Chronicle saith, that in this Iland Galba caused himselfe to be proclaimed Emperour: but it is a fault of the writer, who for Hiberia, wrote Hibernia: for that this was done in Spaine. Thus farre of these two greater Ilands, which were properly called Britannicae: now let vs go on with those which are les∣ser, and do lie about the coast of these. Of the ORKNEY ILES, WEST ILES, MAN, &c. THe ORKNEY ILES (Orcades) lying vpon the North of Scotland are, as Ptolemey and Pomponius Mela doe account them, in number 30. although Pliny and Martianus maketh them to be two: Iornandes 33. S. Isidore very falsly 83. and Solinus as farre short, reckoneth but 3 only: (peraduenture for tres, three: we should read triginta, thirty) M. Camden thinketh them to haue been so named of their situation ouer against Cath-nesse, that is, the promontory, foreland or cape of the Cathini, (not Careni, as the vulgar copies of Ptolemey haue) a nation that possessed this part of Britaine, in the time of the Romans: for thus he found it written and interpreted in an ancient manuscript, Argath; against Cath; (the copy hath supra Getas, aboue the Gothes, falsly: for they had not, till many yeares after this, seated themselues in any part of this ile: but peraduenture by the Getae, he vnderstood Cath, or the Cathini of Ptolemey) Of these, as many men report, diuers are desert and vnmanured, others are habitable and fertile. In Solinus time they were not inhabited, no man dwelt in them: for they had no wood, nor grasse, but were all ouergrowen with rushes, segges and such like: the rest, he saith, are nothing but bare rockes and heaps of sand: yet now they are reasonably populous, and doe yearely yeeld great store of Barly, mary they are wholy void of wood, and altogether vnprofitable for Wheat. They lie all close together not farre one from another, as Pliny and Solinus iointly affirme. The same Solinus, as some learned men thinke, na∣meth POMONA for one of the Orkeny iles, and calleth it Pomona diutina, Long-daied Pomona; by reason of the great length of the day in this climat. In regard that it is farre greater than any of the rest, it is now vulgarly called MAIN-LAND. This is the principall and chiefe of them all, and hath in it, in the towne Kirkwale, a Bishops sea; and two castles for defence of the same. It yeeldeth yeerely some quantity of Tinne and Lead. Amongst these also Ptolemey nameth OCETIS and DVMNA, that we take to be now called Hethy, this Hey. (But that iland which Pliny nameth Dumna, seemeth to be that which at this day they call Faire ile, hauing but one towne and that called Dumo) Eutropis and Orosius haue deliuered, that Augustus the Emperour first annex∣ed these ilands vnto the Empire: yet Tacitus saith, that they were first descried and subdued by Iulius Agricola. Beyond the Orkney iles, aboue Britaine, fiue daies saile Northward (whereabout the old expositour of Horace placeth the Fortunate Iles) doth lie, as Solinus writeth, the iland THVLE, so famous and much spoken of in all ancient writers: but where it should now be, or what, the world hath long doubted. Some take it to be Island, but that cannot be, for many weighty reasons, as diuers learned men haue proued. Synesius doubleth whether there were any such place or not: and our Gyraldus plainly saith, that if euer it were, yet now it is no where in the world to be found. Some doe thinke it to be Shetland, (or as some call it Hetland) a greatter Iland beset with many other smaller, subiect to the crowne of Scotland: and this their opinion they confirme by many argu∣ments. First Gaspar Peucerus, an authour of good credit, affirmeth that the Seamen do commonly call this iland, Thylensell: Secondarily, they are situ∣ate midway betweene Norway and Scotland, where Saxo Grammaticus placeth Thule: Thirdly, these ilands are directly opposite to Bergen (Bergae, not Belgae, as it is falsly and corruptly written: and indeed heereabout Pliny his Bergos, was seated) and heere Mela saith Thule did stand: Againe, So∣linus writeth that from Cath-nesse to Thule, it is but two daies saile: (obserue the proportion of distances: from the Orkney to the West iles he maketh it 7. daies saile: from Orkney to Thule, 5: and from Cath-nesse thither, but 2.) Lastly, which were sufficient of it selfe alone, Ptolemey placeth Thule vnder the 63. degree of latitude, which is precisely the eleuation of the North pole at Shetland. Thus farre of Thule or Shetland, which was not indeed ordinarily, of the ancients, accounted amongst the British, yet we now know it to be one of that number, & subiect to the crown of Brittain. The WESTERN ILES, (called of Ptolemey, Solinus, Stephanus and Pliny, Ebudae, Aebudae or Hebudes: of the latter writers, Hebrides: of Ethicus, Beteoricae) are, as Solinus writeth, 7 daies saile from the Orchades. Pliny saith there be in number 30. yet vulgarly they are esteemed to be 44. and a Scottish gentleman, who
trauelled them al ouer, as he affirmeth, reckoneth vp by their seuerall names, as far as I remember, aboue 200. Solinus, Stephanus and Ptolemey do name but these 5. neither do they mention any more. RICINA or Ricnea, as Pliny writeth it, Antonius nameth Raduna, now they call it Racline: EPIDIVM, now Ila, a large iland, & a fertile champion soile: MALEOS, now Mula, as also in Plinies time, as it seemeth: EAST EBVDA, now Skie, lying close to the coast of Scotland: WEST EBVDA, (Lewes) the greatest of them al, but ful of stones, craggie steep mountaines, and little inhabited. Moreouer in Iona, which Beda nameth Hy, lying between Ila and the maine land, was a monastery erected by S Columba, where diuers of the kings of Scotland haue been buried: beside the bishops sea, in the village Sodore, in whose diocesses all the rest were, and therefore were of it called Insulae Sodorenses. All the other, beside Hirth, are of small account, as being nothing but rocks, stones, and craggie knols, in which you shall scarce all the yere long finde a greene turffe. The people, in maners, behauiour, apparell and language, do much resemble the Irish: as those in the Orkney doe the Goths and Norweyans. More of these see in Solinus and M. Camdens Britannia, to whom we are beholding for this. The ILE of MAN, (which Pliny calleth Monabia; Orosius and Bede, Menauia; Gildas, Eubonia; the Welch, Menaw; they themselues, Maning; Caesar, Mona: and Ptolemey, Monoëda; that is, as who say, Mon-eitha, Mon the father; for a distinction from Anglesey, which is also called Mon) is midway between England and Ireland, as Caesar in his fifth booke of the warres of France, and Gyraldus Cambrensis report: yet the people are more like in language and maners vnto the Irish men. It is in length from South to North, about 30. miles, in breadth in some places it is 15. & in other places, where it is narrowest, not aboue 7 or 8 miles ouer. In Bedaes time it had but 300. families or housholds, now it conteineth 17. parishes very populous and well inhabited. It beareth great plenty of Hempe and Flax. The soile is reasonably fertile, either for Corne or Grasse: and therefore it yeerely yeeldeth both great plenty of Barly, Wheat and Rie, but especially of Oats, whereof they for the most part, make their bread, & maintaineth great store of cattel, and many flocks of sheepe, but that aswell the one as the other are lesse than they be in England. They burne Seacole, insteed of wood, of which they haue none or very little. Vpon the South coast lieth a small ile, which they call The calfe of Man, where there is such wonderfull plenty of sea fowles, which they call Puffins, and of those geese, which we call Bernacles, Clakes or Soland geese, as none which haue not seene them, will easily beleeue. Thus farre of Mona, described by Caesar; the o∣ther Mona, which Tacitus and Dion do speake of, now followeth. That which we now call ANGLESEY that is, The English ile, Tacitus and Dion, as I said, called Mona: the Welchmen, Mon, Tir-mon, & Inis Dowyl, that is, The darke ile; the Saxons, Monege: a very goodly and fruitfull iland, the ancient seat of the Druides, was brought in subiection vnder the Romane Empire, by Paullinus Suetonius and Iulius Agricola, about 46. yeeres after the birth of Christ. It is very neere the coast of Britaine, as Dion saith: yea so neere that from the main, by swimming ouer the flattes and shallow places, Iulius Agricola, as Tacitus witnesseth, conueied in thither both horsemen and foot∣men, to suppresse certaine rebels that held it against the Romans. But of this iland there is in this our Theater, a whole discourse written by Humfrey Lloyd, a learned gentleman, & painfull student in the British stories. Vpon the coast of Wales also lieth BERDSEY, that is, The birds Ile, called of the Britans Enhly: of Ptolemey, Edry; of Pliny, Andros or Adros: a plaine and champion country toward the West, but in the East very hillie and mountainous. Then GRES∣HOLME, and STOCHOLME excellent pastorage, passing pleasant by reason of the sweet smell of the wild Tyme which heere groweth euery where in great abun∣dance. Next to these is SCALMEY, as fertile as any, called of Pliny, Silimnus: of Ptolemey, Limi: and in the catalogue of Martyrs, Lemeneia Insula. In the mouth of Seuern, lie the Holmes, or as the Welchmen call them, the Echni, FLATHOLME and STEEPHOLME (Reoric, in Welch) Item, BARREY, SILEY, CALDEY and LONDEY, small Ilands, but very fertile. Thirty or forty miles off West from the Cape of Cornewall, which the seamen commonly call, The lands end, lie the SORLINGS or the SYLLY; called by Sulpitius Seuerus, Sillinae; of Antonine, Sigdeles: of Solinus, Silurae, or Silurum Insulae: the Grecians, of their situation, named them Hesperides, the West iles: and of their rich commoditie of Tinne (Cassiteros) which they yeeld, Cassiterides, the Stanneries: but why Festus Auianus should name them Ostrimnides, I know not. They are in all 145. beside craggie rockes which are innumerable. There are 10. of them, which also Eustathius doth testifie: S. Mary, Annoth, Agnes, Sampson, Silly, Brefer, Rusco, (or Triscraw) S. Hellen, S. Martine and Arthur, with Minanwitham, and Minuisisand, greater and more famous then the rest for their rich veines of Tinne: from whence, as Pliny saith, Medacritus first brought Lead or Tinne into Greece. Many of them are good corne ground: all of them infinite store of Conies, Cranes, Swannes, Herons, and other Sea-fowle. These are those ilands as Solinus writeth which a tempestuous frith, of two or three houres saile ouer, doth part from the outmost end of Corn∣wall (Danmoniorum ora) whose inhabitants doe still obserue the ancient customes: they keepe no faires or markets: they care not for mony: they giue and receiue such as one another haue neede of: they rather regard more to get necessary things for exchange, than those of high price and great valew: they are ve∣ry deuout in their religious seruices to their Gods: and both women and men in like manner do hold themselues to be very skilfull in foretelling of things to come. Vpon the coast of France, ouer against Normandy, are GERSEY (Caesarea, Antoninus calleth it) a fertile soile, good corne ground, and reasonable pastorage: it hath 12. parishes, wel inhabited and very populous: Item, GARNSEY, SERKE, ALDERNEY, ARME, the QVASQVETS and others, which although the ancients did neuer reckon amongst the number of the Brittish iles, yet we know that they are now subiect to the crowne of England, and euer haue beene since the yere of our Lord 1108. at what time they were by Henry the first, annexed to this kingdome. They are all in the diocesse and iurisdiction of the Bishop of Winchester. Close to the shore of England is the ile of WIGHT, (Ptolemey calleth it Wictesis; Pliny & Suetonius, Vectis; the Panegyricus & Eutropius, Vecta; Diodorus, Icta, all deriued from the Brittish word Guith, which signifieth a deuision, or separation; for that it was once ioined, as then they vulgarly held, vnto the maine land: like as Sicilia was to Italy.) It is 20. miles long, & 12. miles broad. Vespasian first brought it vnder the obedience of the Romans, in the raigne of the emperor Claudius, as Suetonius writeth in the fourth chapter of his Vespasianus: yet Eutropius affirmeth it to be done by Maximianus the emperor. It is by the sea, which entreth vp high within the land, diuided into two prouinces: Fresh-water ile and Binbridge ile. In Bedaes time it conteined but 1200. families, now it hath 36. parishes, villages & castles, which do belong all to Hantshire, and are of the diocesse Winchester. The soile is very fertile either for corne or cattel. Beside many flocks of sheep of passing fine wool, it is wonderfully stored with Conies, Hares, Patridges & Phesants. In the time of William the first, William Fitz-osbern was intituled Lord of Wight, and after that Henry Beauchamp Earle of Warwick, was by King Henry the sixth, crowned King of Wight. See more of it in Diodorus Siculus and Beda. The ile TENET, lying hard to the coast of Kent, of eight miles length, & fower miles breadth, is a chalkie soile, and passing good corne ground. Solinus calleth it Thanatos, or as some copies haue, Athanatos, & thus he writeth of it: The ile Thanatos (Tenit) washed by the French ocean: & disioined from England, the main continent, by a narrow frith, is a very rich corne ground & fat soile: neither is it only good and kind to it selfe, but also to other places: for as in it no snake or venemous serpents do breed or liue, so the earth & dust, caried from thence, to what place of the world soeuer, doth naturally kill such vermine: Thus far Soli∣nus then: but that which he spake of it concerning Serpents, we now in our daies know by experience to be false. Neere to this is that shallow sandy place, so dangerous to sea-men, commonly called GOODVVINS SANDS, an iland sometime the possession of Earle Goodwin, which as our histories report, did sinke in the yeere of our Lord 1097. This should seeme to be Toliapis, of Ptolemey, but that he placeth it neere to Essex or the Trinobantes, when as this lieth a great deale more neere the Cantij. Within the Thames mouth are yet other two ilands, one vpon Kent side, which now we call SHEPEY, that is, the ile of sheep, but how it was called of the an∣cients we certainly know not: The other vpon Essex side, which Ptolemey in his time called CAVNA, CONVENNOS or COVNOS (such is the variety of copies) is still called Conway. It lieth so flat and low that it is sometime all ouerflowen, excepting some little knols and hils whither the cattle do ordinarily flie in such like danger. It feedeth yerely four thousand sheepe at the least, whose flesh is of a most sweet and pleasant taste surpassing those of other places. Thus hauing pas∣sed so many troublesome and dangerous seas, and now being come within kenning of mine owne natiue country, I thinke it not amisse to put into harbrough heere for awhile, to rest our wearied limmes, and purge vs from those brackish humours which in this tedious iourney we drunke in. Thus farre then of the ilands described and named in this Mappe. Yet there are certaine others mentioned in some authours of good note. And Plutarch in the life of Demetrius, giueth out, that there are many ilands neere to Britain, waste and desert: whereof some, he saith, are dedicated to the gods and famous worthies. Amongst these there is one, in which he saith, they report, Saturne lulled a sleepe by Briareus, is kept as prisoner in chaines: he is bound, I say, with sleep in sted of a chaine: and hath many Angels and demy-gods for seruants to wait and attend vpon him. Whether this be that which that Auienus calleth Pelagia, and affirmeth to be conse∣crated to Saturne, I dare neither constantly affirme, nor peremptorily deny. Moreouer, of these same thou maist read something worth the while as not altoge∣ther vnpleasant, though doubtlesse meerly fabulous, in the same Plutarch in his booke intituled De defectu Oraculorum, of the ceasing of oracles: as also in Isacius Tzetzes, vpon Lycophron. Artimedorus in Straboes Geography saith, that there is an iland neere Britaine, where they offer sacrifice to Ceres and Proserpina, in the selfe same manner and with like ceremonies, as they do in Samothrace. Apollonius, in his History of strange and wonderfull things, affir∣meth out of Cytinus Chius, that there is a certaine Brittish ile (not Britaine it selfe, as M. Camden vnderstandeth him) 400. furlongs in compasse, where fruits doe grow without stones or kernels: for you shall neither find a stone in the oliue, nor kirnell in the grape: which also happeneth not only to these 2 fruites, but also to all other of those kinds. But this is more like a feigned tale, then a true story. Moreouer Dionysius Afer nameth the NESIADES, the seat and ha∣bitation of the Ammitae, amongst the number of the Brittish iles: but I would rather iudge these to be ilands vpon the coast of France, than Brittish iles, and that by the authority of Strabo. If any man do desire to know these better, let him repaire to the learned Claurencieux Camden, my singular good friend, who hath in that his Britannia, (a worthy worke composed by him, with infinte paines and trauell) so learnedly and diligently described and set downe their anci∣ent forme, customes, maners, places and cities, together with those of later times, and of these our daies, that they rather seeme to be expressed to the eie in their true colours, by the pencill of a skilfull painter, then by the pen of a painfull student. But some man may say, this is written in the Latine tongue, a language that I vnderstand not. Be patient a while. Thou shalt heare him speake shortly good English. Of mine owne knowledge he is already put to schoole, for that purpose into the country to the learned Philemon Holland. If thou knowest him not: that learned Doctor of Physicke, who lately taught the great Philoso∣pher Pliny of Como; & the renowmed Historian, great Liuy of Padua; two Italians that neuer could sound a word of ours before, to speake English so plainly and well, as neuer none better. No stranger, nay no man, euer spake more properly, none more eloquently. When he beginneth (I know it will not be long) we ruder clownes, will hold our peace. But we cannot forget the worthy paines of the learned M. Verstegan, who hath giuen vs good cause to remember him with thanks, for that his Restitution of decaied intelligence, in antiquities concerning the renowmed English Nation, lately imprinted and dedicated to his most exellent Maiesty.
SPAINE. THis is that warlike Spain, famous I mean, for worthy men & braue souldiers, as Florus speaketh of it, the first country of the maine continent of Europe vpon the West, inuironed round about with the salt sea, but only on that part where it bor∣dereth vpon France, from which it is seuered by the Pyreney mountaines, as it were by a naturall wall or rampart. Some there are which do thinke that it was first called IBERIA; of the riuer Iberus, or, as others would haue it of a king of this country of that name. Auienus deemeth it to haue beene so named of Ibera, (of which you may read in Liuy) a city of the prouince Betica, situate vpon the riuer Iberus, different from that other of the same name in Hispania Tarraco∣nensis. But I could more easily be drawen to thinke that both this country and the riuer did take their name of Iberia, a country in Asia, from whence this people first came and had their originall, where also there is a riuer called Iberus, as Pliny testifieth. That it was also called HESPERIA, of king Hesperus, beside the great Poet Virgil, Honorius and the faigned Berosus, farre latter writers, would faine make me beleeue. But truth will easily enforce any wise man to be∣leeue, that it rather tooke that name of Hesperus, which in Greeke signifieth the West, or the Euening stare: for indeed Spaine, of all the maineland of the whole world, as farre as the auncients knew, lieth farthest into the West. And therupon Horace nameth it Hesperia vltima, The farther Hesperia, to make a distinction betweene this and that other Hesperia, I meane Italie, which Virgil calleth Hesperia magna, The great Hesperia. For as the Greeks haue called this country Hesperia, by reason of the situation, being indeed from them Westward, so the Italians for the same cause haue intituled Spaine, which lieth betweene them and the West, by the same name. But at last it was generally of all sorts of writers in both languages famoused by the name of HISPANIA, and that of one Hispanus, except Trogus Pompeius be deceiued. Whether it hath sometime beene called PANNONIA, as Stephanus, in his booke of cities, hath giuen out, I am not able to say. That it was once knowen by the name of PANIA, it see∣meth to be probable out of the first chapter of the third booke of Pliny his Naturall history. Where he saith that Lusa gaue the name and appellation to that part of Spaine which was called Lusitania: (now Portugall) and Pan, who was sometime gouernour of that country, caused the whole to be denominated after his name. Of this opinion also is Sosthenes, cited by Plutarch, in his third booke of the historie of Iberia; where he writeth that this country of Pan, was first named Pania, but afterward of succedent ages it was corruptly called SPANIA. S. Hierome, vpon the sixtie and fourth chapter of the Prophet Esay calleth it Spania, and that the Chaldaeans did call it Spamia, (peraduenture for Spania) Benedictus Arias Montanus, a man worthy of eternall fame, in his Commentaries vpon Obadiah, doth plainly testifie. And some there are, which, in the 28. verse of the fifteenth chapter of Saint Paul vnto the Romanes, for , do read , as you may see by the edition of Henry Steeuen, and the Syrian copie which Raphalengius vsed: although some impressions of Plantine, and that of Albert Widmanstade haue the contrary. For Hispania, as commonly it is read in the printed copies of Trogus, in the manuscripts I do find Spania. And so the best and most ancient copies of Quintus Curtius haue, as the singular learned Bongarsius hath noted. Thus also the name of this country was alwaies wont to be written aboue seuen hundred yeares since, as the worthy gentleman Ambrosius Moralis, a man of great credit, and a most diligent searcher out of Spanish antiquities, in more then one or two places in his Commentaries vpon the Eulogium, doth teach vs. An ancient Glossary vpon the Poet Iunenall saith, that Tagus est fluuius Spaniae, that is, Tagus is a riuer of Spaine. In an ancient Greeke Lexicon set out by Henry Steeuen, , is put for Hibera, and , for Hispania. Galen, the prince of Physicians in the fourth chapter of his sixth booke of Simples, writeth that there is an oile brought out of Iberia (Spaine) called amongst the Apothecaries Oleum Spanum, i. Hispanum, that is, Spanish oile. In a little manuscript treatise of the Prouinces belonging to the Romane Empire, I found Spania, in that very place where Schonhouius, who first set this booke out in Print, hath Hispania. The inhabitants of this country, which to this day do name it Espan̄a, or Spania, do confirme this writing. For Espan̄a and Spania do differ only in maner of writing, not in sound or pronunciation. For the Spaniards vsually do put E before any Latine words which do begin with S, and so make the Spanish. Examples heereof thou maist find in our Thesaurus, at the word Iberia. Moreouer it was sometime called CELTIBERIA, as Appian and others do testifie. Heerehence it is that the people of this country were anciently called Celtiberi and Celtoscythae, and also Iglerae, as Strabo the worthy Geographer hath left recorded. Of the Iewes it is called SEPHARAD, as the forenamed Montanus, and William Postell do teach vs. But of the name and appellation let this suffice: it remaineth now that in like maner we speake somewhat of the countrie it selfe. Di∣onysius Afer and Strabo do affirme that this country is in forme like vnto an Ox hide: Trogus saith that it is square: Aethicus, an authour of small cre∣dit, in my iudgement, maketh it Three-cornered. In the decree of Constantine, which Ioseph Scaliger hath set out with Ausonius, it is graced with the title of Speciosa, The beautifull. Stephanus diuideth it into the GREATER, and the LESSER. And an ancient inscription maketh mention of Spaine the LOVVER (Inferior.) Learned antiquity did diuide it into CITERIOREM and VLTERIOREM, or EXTERIOREM, The Hi∣ther and the Further or Outter Spaine. Since that certaine yeares, it was distinguished into three prouinces, called by other different names. For that which they called Citerior, was by them named TARRACONENSIS; that part of the Vlterior which lieth Westward, LVSITANIA; and the o∣ther which declineth toward the South, BAETICA. Afterward in the time of the Romane Emperours it was diuided into six shires or prouinces, whose names out of Sextus Rufus are these: TARRACONENSIS, CARTHAGINENSIS, LVSITANIA, GALLICIA, BAETICA, and TRANSFRETANA, which otherwise also they called TINGITANA. Yet the Mappe sheweth that this latter prouince is no part of true Spaine, but a portion of Africa, beyond the streights. Moreouer to these the booke of Records addeth INSVLAREM or Balearium, The Baleares, Malorca and Menorca with other ilands in the Mediterran sea, belonging to this country. All Spaine, thus generally defined, was by the Romanes diuided into four∣teen Iurisdictions (conuentus iuridici;) For in Lusitania Pliny teacheth vs that there were three, to wit, EMERITENSIS, PACENSIS, and SCALABITANVS, and in them were fiue and forty townes: In Tarraconensis or Hither Spaine, there were these seuen, CARTHAGINENSIS, TARRACONENSIS, CAESAR AVGVSTANVS, CLVNIENSIS, ASTVRVS, LVCENSIS, and BRACARVS: in which there were 294. townes. In Batica were these foure, GADITANVS, CORDVBENSIS, ASTIGITANVS and HISPALENSIS, and in them 175. townes. So that the whole summe of all the townes in Spaine is 514. And although Strabo doth seeme to make the number somewhat greater, yet hee thinketh that they do but cog, which say that in Spaine there be more then a thousand: and that they do account great villages for good townes: and with∣all he affirmeth that the country is not capable of many cities, by reason of the drinesse or barrennesse of the soile, and barbarous rudenesse of the people, ex∣cept it be only along by the coast of the midland sea. For the Spaniards for the most part are wild, and do dwell in villages. That Spaine is all ouer inhabi∣ted, one may perceiue by Pomponius; who saith, That it is wonderfully replenished with men. And Cicero, in a certaine oration of his, writeth, That the Romanes ouercame them not by multitudes, but by religion and policy. Pliny out of Varro teacheth vs, That they which inhabited this country were the IBERI, PHOENICIANS, PERSIANS, CELTAE and POENI. The same also is auerred by Appianus Alexandrinus. And I to those may well ioine the ROMANES, who questionlesse, after they had from hence driuen out the Poeni or Carthaginians, did seat themselues and plant their colo∣nies heere. But to speake a word or two of the nature, maners and customes of the inhabitants of this country, and to annex vnto the former, what I find noted of that matter in the writings of the best historians, for that I doubt not but it will be a matter both pleasant and pleasing vnto the Reader, I thinke it will not be amisse. Calpurnius Flaccus doth attribute vnto them flauam proceritatem, talnesse of body, but tawny complexions. Iulius Firmicus saith, that by reason of the elimate and constitution of the heauens there, The Spaniards are impudent proud braggards. Yet this he in the same place addeth, That this foule fault is well left of many of them. Florus saith, that the whole Nation generally is vnruly and will by no meanes be commanded or kept in any due obedience. Dionysius Afer calleth it Nationem magnanimem, A courageous people: Martiall the Poet, Trucem, Grimme: Oppianus, Su∣perbam, Proud: Tibullus, Audacem, Bold: Vopiscus, Astutam, Wilie: Trogus and Liuy, Feram & bellicosam, Fierce and Warlike, and withall very actiue and nimble of body: men of vnquiet spirits, alwaies desirous of newes and alterations in states and common wealths: of nature more like to wild beasts, than ciuil men. Vegetius the warriour, saith that, They are lustier men of body and farre stronger than the Romanes. Virgil in his Georgickes calleth them Iberos impacatos, Turbulent Spaniards: for that, as Seruius interpreteth the word, they are ranke riders and great stealers of cattell: or for that, as Iunius Philargyrus vnderstandeth it, they hold robbing and burglary to be the best kind of life. Their bodies are fit for all maner of labour and hardship, of such stomackes that they will venture life and limme vpon the least cause that is, as Valerius Maximus and Trogus doe testifie: whereupon Silius Italicus writeth thus of them, Prodiga gens animi, & properare facillima mortem, Namque vbi transcendit florentes viribus annos, Impatiens aeui, spernit nouisse senectam, Et fati modus in dextra est, &c. A desperat nation Spaniards are, They care not for their bloud: Assoon as e're they come to grow'th, And yeares of mans estate, To liue vnto a doting age, They scorn't as thing not good: Therefore ech man will be the meanes To hasten on his fate &c. They are so deuoted and addicted to their kings, as Seruius in his Commentaries vpon the fourth booke of Virgils Georgickes, citeth out of Salust, that They will desire to liue no longer then they do. To their enemies they are very cruell, but toward strangers passing humane and kind. For trauellers or forreners such as come to them, they do most curtuously entertaine: so that oft times they do one spite another and contend for that honour and credit, as Diodorus Siculus reporteth. Ptolemey in his Quadripartite writeth, That they are a very neat and cleanly people. This also is a∣uouched by Diodorus, yet he in this one thing misliketh them for this one slouenly and filthy tricke, to wit, for that they do ordinarily vse to wash their bo∣dies all ouer, and their teeth with vrine, taking it to be an excellent Physicke and preseruatiue for the body: yea and the same authour writeth that they do saue and keepe it in cesternes vntill it be stale for that purpose. Yet Strabo the learned Geographer ascribeth this to the Cantabri and their nere neigh∣bours onely. Catullus the Poet attributeth it as proper vnto the Celtiberi. Apuleius in his first Apologie which he wrot in his own defence, maketh men∣tion of the washing of their teeth. We read in Diodorus Siculus, that at their meales they eat lustily vpon sundry dishes, that they make their drink of hony,
map of ancient Spain, with an inset map of the ancient Bay of Cadiz HISPANIAE VE∣TERIS DESCRIPTIO. Ex conatibus Geographicis Abrah. Ortelij. Privilegio Imp. Reg. et Belgico, ad decennium. 1586. SVMMO THEOLOGO DN̄O D. BENE∣DICTO ARIAE MONTANO: VIRO LINGVARVM COGNITIONE, RERVM PERITIA, ET VITAE INTEGRITATE MAGNO: ABRAH. ORTELIVS AMICI∣TIAE ET OBSERVANTIAE ERGO, DD. HISPANIAE LOCA ALIQVOT INCOGNITAE POSITIONIS. POPVLI, Aebisoci, Aequefilici, Allotrigae, Amenionses, Andologenses, Arenates, Axabricenses, Babanouses, Banienses, Bursaonenses, Bursavolenses, Caesarobricenses, Carausiae, Cibilitani, Cincenses, Colorni, Cortonenses, Damenanitani, Eilota, Emanici, Equaesi, Fortunales, Gessorien∣ses, Iadoni, Idienses, Ilumberitani, Interanisenses, Ispalenses, Itani, Karenses, Leuni, Melesses, Onenses, Oppidoni, Ori, Psuri, Palatini, Pleutauri, Rucones, Sacilernusi, Segienses, Solienses, Talori, Teari Iulienses, Tuisi, Ʋelienses, Vermenses, Viaienu, Vilienses, Volciani. VRBES, Abobrica, Accabicus, Adercon, Adrobicus, Agla, Alea, Aliconsis, Alpasa, Andrisippo, Apetua, Apilourium, Arial∣dunum, Asena, Astenas, Atetona, Axatiara, Axenium, Baecor, Baecyla, Baetyca, Belippo, Besaro, Biendium, Brachyla, Branae, Brutobria, Casaris Salutariensis, Caliabria, Calucula, Carabis, Carbulo, Careo, Carruca, Castax, Castra gemina, Castra vinaria, Cedrippo, Certima, Cimbis, Cinniana, Cisembrium, Colenda, Colobona, Coplanium, Cotinas, Crabalia, Cusibi, Danium, Dia, Dumium, Eiscadia, Erisane, Fabreseense, Gemella, Grunus, Helingas, Hellenes, Hippo, Hippo Carausiarum, Ibem, Ilipa minor, Ilipula Laus, Illurco, Ilucia, Indica, Ipasturgi, Ituci, Iulia cognomi∣ne Concordia, Iul. Constantia, Iul. Contributa, Iul. Fidentia, Iul. Restituta, Lancia Transoudana, Lenium, Magala, Malia, Marcolica, Massia, Moron, Merucra, Nobilia, Nuditanum, Olitingi, Olone, Onoba, Opsicella, Osintigi, Ossigi, Ossigitania, Oxthraca, Sacvuna, Saepona, Saon, Segeda, Segestica, Serippo, Sicane, Silpia, Sitia, Soricaria, Soritia, Tabeta, Tarscium, Transsucunus, Tribola, Turba, Turobrica, Tutia, Ʋelia, Ventisponte, Vergentum, Vergium, Vescelia, Vesciveca, Vesperies, Victoria portuo, Vrbicuà, Ʋxena. MONTES, Sacer, Ydrus. FLVMINA, Chalybs, Silicense. FONTES, Tamarici. et quaedam Antonini. item Avieni. Horum omnium situm quamvis ignorarem, abesse tamen ab hac tabula iniquum putari. In omni enim vetere historia (veterem voco ad Caroli Magni us{que} tempora) omnium huius regionis locorum vocabula exprimere valui & ni fallor pressi. Si quae autem doctori in en deesse vide∣buntur; erunt fortassè horum querundam synonyma. de quibus omnibus in nostro Thesaure geographico.
and do buy all the wine they drinke. Yet peraduenture this is meant and to be vnderstood only of those which dwell vpon the coast of the Midland sea. For Flo∣rus and Pliny do write that they vsed ordinarily a kind of drinke made ex frumento soluto, of a kind of bread corne ground or beaten small, (which drinke of theirs Pliny calleth Caelia and Caeria) yea and of Barly too, as Dioscorides in the 110. chapter of his second booke writeth. . that is, Moreouer that kind of drinke which they call Curmy, made also of Barley, vsually drunke in some places in stead of wine, maketh the head ake, breedeth ill bloud and hurteth the nerues and sinewes. Such kind of drinkes also are made of wheat in the West part of Spaine and in England. Thus farre Dioscorides. This kind of drinke the Welchmen do euen to this day call Cwrw, by the same name very little or nothing altered, as we haue shewed before, and is that which the Saxons call Ale. Strabo affirmeth that the Lusitani or Portugals did drinke a kind of drinke which they called Zy∣thum, (made also of Barley but much different from Curmi, as the same Dioscorides at the same place teacheth) for they haue, saith he, small store of wine. And that little which they haue, they spend by and by in banquetting and making merry with their friends and kinsfolke. This their drinke made of steeped corne, as the forenamed Pliny in the 22. chapter of his 14. booke writeth, will endure to be kept long, and is the better for the age. For this cause it was perad∣uenture that Athenaeus in his Deipnosophiston, accounteth the Spaniards amongst those nations that will ordinarily be drunke. The same also doth Plato write of the Celtiberi. That they had but small store of wine in Straboes time, it is very probable, because that Vopiscus hath left recorded, that Probus the Empe∣rour was the first that euer gaue licence to the Spaniards to set and plant vines, and to make wine. Trogus saith that they be hard and very niggardly. And al∣though they be very wealthy, as Athenaeus testifieth, yet they will drinke water, liue sparingly, dine and suppe alone, that they may go braue and hang the more vpon their backs. Nay as Trogus affirmeth, vpon their greatest festiuall daies they neuer vsed to make any great preparation or extraordinary cheere. Dioscori∣des writeth that they vsed wild rocket seed in sted of mustard seed. Pliny writeth, That in his time they did account akorns & mast for a dainty dish: and Strabo saith, that of the flower of them they did vsually make their houshould bread. And Pliny he affirmeth that this kind of bread was lighter than any other sort of bread, because they did leauen it. That they did vse to lie vpon the bare ground, the same Pliny doth testifie. They did weare a short blacke garment, as Dio∣dorus Siculus writeth. Isidorus in the 23. chapter of the 19. booke of his Origines, nameth a certaine kind of garment, worne by the Spaniard, Striges. They had rather haue warres, than rest and peace. When they haue no enemy abroad, they seeke for him at home, if one may beleeue Trogus the Historiographer. In warre not only the horsemen, but also the footmen, are farre stronger, harder, and able to endure any manner of labour and paines then any other nation what∣soeuer. They giue the onset and beginne the battell with songs and poeticall rymes, as the same authour with Silius Italicus doth testifie; Ritu iam moris Ibe∣ri Carmina pulsata fundentem barbara cetra, Then like as Spaniards vse, In stead of drumme they targets sounds, And warlike songs do tune. And lea∣ning or resting themselues vpon two swords, hauing beaten and disordered the enemies horsemen, they light off from their horses, and doe adioine themselues to their footmen: which very same thing Suidas speaketh of the Celtiberi. These swords, as it is apparant out of Liuy and Polybius, by reason of their shortnesse were very nimble, and more fit for close fight: they had also sharpe points, so that in sight they did rather vse foines and thrusts, then downe right blowes. Not∣withstanding Suidas in that commendeth the excellency of the swords vsed by the Celtiberi, that their fight is hot and desperate and that they will abide a mighty stroke with both the hands. Athenaeus also sheweth that they in fight vsed the French weapon called Gesum, where he telleth vs that the Romanes v∣sed to fight with that kind of weapon, and learned to handle it of the Spaniards. And they, as it is very probable out of Iulius Pollux, tooke it of the Africanes, for he calleth it Gaesam Lybicam, and termeth it an iron speare or partisan. They weare head-pieces made of brasse. Their legges they wrappe vp in a kind of bootes made of haire, as Diodorus Siculus testifieth. Strabo, the great Cosmographer, writeth, That in battell they vse to beare a light kind of armour, targets, darts, and slings. They did fight, as Polybius saith, being apparelled in linnen garments garded or laid about with a purple welt, and in long side coates as white as the drift snow. And although they did weare tragicall robes or gownes, and were clad with many coates, and those, when they went abroad, hanging downe to their feet, yet, as Athenaeus testifieth, they were not by that meanes one whit the more vnwealdy in fight, cowardlike, or lesse valiant and courageous. This was their armour and warlike habite. But this one thing, which you shall find in the 7. booke of Aristotles Politickes, I do thinke may not be omitted, to wit, that he there recordeth that so many columnes or pillars were wont to be pitched vp about the graues or sepulchres of the dead, as they had killed enemies. Nor this of Silius Italicus in his 13. booke may be forgotten, Tellure, vt perhibent, is mos antiquus, Ibera Exanima obscoenus consumit corpora vultur, vpland, they say, an ancient custome t'is, That carren crowes and rauening kite should pray and quite consume the flesh Of Spaniards braue departed hence. Yet Aeli∣anus affirmeth this peculiarly of the Barcaei, and that of those only which did die in the field or were slaine in the warres: but those which died in their beds, of any naturall sicknesse, were as he saith burnt to ashes. Caesar writeth that they are all by nature giuen to swimming, and to practise to swimme ouer deepe and broad riuers, and that it is a thing generally so common amongst them, that no man will heere goe into the field or campe without his bladders or water bouget seruing to that purpose. In the fragments of Salust I read that it was their maner, that when yong men were first trained, and were to go to the warres, their mothers did recite vnto them all the valiant acts of their ancestours. Trogus affirmeth, That many of them did more esteeme of their armour, and great horses which had serued in the warres, then they did of their owne liues. They were wont also, as Strabo teacheth vs, to prepare for themselues Toxicum, that is, a kind of confection that killeth a man without any maner of griefe or paine. This they made of a certaine herb like to smallage, (apium) that they might haue it al∣waies by them in a readinesse, what crosse luck or misfortune soeuer should betide them. Florus saith that they do for this purpose draw a certaine poison out of the yewgh-tree (taxus.) Pliny also speaketh of this custome of theirs, but he saith that they make it of the berries of the yewgh-tre. And thus much hitherto of the nation in generall: now a word or two of some of them particularly. The LVSITANI or Portugals were more valiant and better souldiers than the rest, but they were very infamous for pilfering & theeuery, they giue not thēselues to husbandry or tillage of the ground, they are not able fellowes for scowts & ambushes, very nimble, light and quicke of retraict. For their drinke they did vse Zythum, as we said before. Butter doth serue their turne in stead of oile. Their di∣shes and such like vessels were made of wax. Their boates were made of leather, vntill the time of Brutus. Yet afterward they had hoies and such like ships of burden, as it is manifest out of Strabo, who doubteth not to equall the number and greatnesse of them with those of the Africanes. This also is iustified by Sidoni∣us, in his Panegyricke oration made to Maiorianus. Amongst this people, as Pliny reporteth, was the Carbassus, a kind of linnen for sailes of ships, first inuen∣ted. Such was the life of these Lusitaui. The CALAICI, ASTVRES, and CANTABRI, euen vp as high as the VASCONES and the Pyrenaean mountaines did liue much like the Lusitani, as Varro in his booke of Husbandry, Dion Cassius, Iosephus the Iew, and Strabo the great Cosmographer do testifie, in whom and in Diodorus Siculus thou maist read many other things of this people. Sextus Auienus calleth the inhabitants a churlish and rough people; Item, Gens ista dura, gens fera venatibus, Lustrisque inhaerens, This nation's hard and stout, All woodmen wild and giuen to hunt, and range the woods about. But of the CANTABRI, heare what Silius Italicus, the worthy Poet in his 3. booke reporteth: Cantaber ante omnes hyemis{que} aestus{que} famis{que} Inuictus, palmam;{que} ex omni ferre labore. Mirus amor populo, cum pigra incanuit aetas Imbelles iamdudum annos praeuertere saxo: Nec vitam sine Mar∣te pati, quippe omnis in armis Lucis caussa sita, & damnatum viuere paci. In effect thus much in English; The Cantaber can endure the chilling cold of winter, the heat of parching summer, hunger, labour or any maner of toile, better than any other nation of all Spaine. It is a strange thing to see how this people is delighted; assoone as euer they begin to grow in yeares and to be gray-headed, and so no longer fit for labour or any manner of seruice, they'll make an end of themselues. No man heere desireth to liue out of the warres, for euery one thinketh that he is borne for no other purpose, all generally condemning peace and the idle life. Strabo calleth the CELTIBEROS, togatos, peaceable men, and saith that they were sometime held to be the wildest and most barbarous and in∣humane people of all Europe, but now it is a populous and wealthy nation. The same Strabo deemeth the TVRDETANOS to haue beene the learnedst people of Spaine. For that they did vse the Grammar, and had certaine monuments of antiquity, recorded and kept amongst them in writing, and withall their lawes and statutes were written and preserued in verse, and certaine poeticall meeter. The same authour termeth the CARPETANOS, VACCAEOS, LA∣CETANOS, and CALLAICOS, nobiles gentes, noble and braue nations. But of these last I cannot but againe cite the words of the forenamed Silius, where he thus speaketh of them; —Misit diues Gallecia pubem, Barbara nunc patrijs vlulantem carmina linguis, Nunc pedis alterno percussa ver∣bere terra Ad numerum resonas gaudentem plaudere cetras. Haec requies, ludus{que} viris, ea sacra voluptas. Caetera femineus peragit pudor: ad∣dere sulco Semina, & impresso tellurem vertere aratro. Segne viris quicquid duro sine Marte gerendum est. Callaici coniux obit irrequieta ma∣riti. And because that he speaketh heere also of the women, hearken what Trogus saith of them: The women, saith he, do manage all businesses at home and with∣in doores, they looke vnto the husbandrie and plowing of the ground: the men giue themselues wholly to follow the warres, to robbe and steale. The same doth Strabo report of them, who besides addeth that when they are deliuered of child, the husbands at their request shall keepe their beds, and they will scrue thcm. And while they are at work oft times they wash their litle ones, and making them ready, do lay them to sleepe vpon the brinke of some brooke or riuer. Once euery yeare they lay all their webs which they haue spunne in open sight to bee viewed of all men, and shee which in the iudgement of most men hath laboured hardest, beareth away the bell and greatest commendation, as Stobaeus, in the chapter of Temperance, out of one Nicolaus, hath left recorded. Amongst the Cantabri the husband giueth a dowry to the wife, and the daughters are made heires of their fathers lands and goods, and by them the brethren are bestowed in mariage. The fashion of the apparell and maner of attire of these women, is described by the same authour, as you may read in Artimedorus. The buildings and houses of this country were made, as we may vnderstand by Vitruuues, the famous Architect, of timber, roads, straw, reeds and leaues. Wals they haue which they call formaceos, or as some read fornaceos, for that being enclosed round in maner of a form on both sides with two boords, they were rather stuffed then workmanly built, as Pliny in the 14. chapter of his 13. booke doth testifie. Of the religion of the ancient Spaniards I find little obserued by any good authours: and that which is noted of that argument you shall find in Strabo: to wit, That the LVSITANI, did sacrifice a goat to Mars, and beside that, their prisoners taken in the warres, and their great horses. Item, That they vsed to diuine and foretell of things to come by the entrails of their captiues and prisoners. Item, That after the maner of the Greeks they held certaine solemne feasts which they call Hecatombas, wherein an hundred beasts were sacrificed at once. Item, Certaine ga∣mings, in maner of their Olympiackes. That they were not altogether vnskilfull of that kind of diuination, made by the obseruation of the entrails of beasts sacri∣ficed, called by the Romanes Aruspicina, we may see by that saying of Lampridius spoken of Alexander Seuerus, to wit, in that he saith, That he was more skil∣full in that art, than they. In Macrobius I find that the ACCITANI, did worship and do diuine honour vnto Mars, which they in their language call Necys. Some haue reported, That the CALLAICI had no maner of perceiuerance at all of any god. But the CELTIBERI, and their neere neighbours in the North
parts, did worship a certaine vnknowen god at night in the full moone, dancing and making merry, before the gates with all their families and housholds all nightlong. Yet it is apparant out of Pliny that in old time many yeares ago the Saguntim, did reuerence and diuine worship vnto Diana, brought thither by those of Zacynthus (Zante) 200. yeares before the destruction of Troy. Thus far of the nation. But that we may shew a little more plainly the nature and disposition of this people, I think it not amisse out of the best Historians to set downe some few other obseruations which we haue noted concerning this argument. At what time the VETTONES came first to be subiect to the command of the Romans, & did obserue certain captains & lieutenants for recreation sake to stray & wander vp & down the fields, they supposing them to be beside them∣selues, tooke them and led them home to their cottages or dwelling places. For they thought that either they were to sit still in peace at home, or else to fight it out. This was an argument of their simplicity. See the 5. chapter of the 2. book of Aelians de varia historia. In the wars between the Romans and the Cantabri, the mothers killed their owne children, left they should fall into the enemies hands. A child at the commandement of his father, with a sword killed his father, mother and brethren being taken cap∣tiues by the enemy. And againe, a woman in like maner killed her children and husband with others taken with her. One being called into the company of swaggering tosse-pot drunkards leapt into the fire and burnt himselfe. These were arguments of their great loue of liberty. Others of them, being taken in the field and nailed to the pillory, they report, did sing triumphantly as if they had gotten the victory. This was an argument of their contempt of death. Thus much out of Strabo: those which follow are taken out of Trogus. In the Punicke wars the patience of that seruant is highly commended, who reuenging his masters death, in the middest of all his torments did laugh hartily, and with a merry pleasant countenance did ouercome the cruell executioners. This is a notable example of true fortitude and valour. Oft times diuerse of them haue been tormented to death for that they would not bewray such things as were told them in secret: so that they made greater account of fidelity and secrecie, than of their liues. Many such examples as these, might, out of ancient authours, be referred to this place. But of the nature of this nation let these few things suffice. Now let vs addresse our selues to speake something of the country it selfe and nature of the soile. And first of the fertility of the same. Trogus maketh Spaine to be far more fertile than Africa or France. Being neither so much parched as that, with the heat of the Sunne; nor toiled as this, with continuall raging winds: but indifferent between them both: so that partly by reason of the temperature of the aire, and partly by reason of the moderate showres and raine which heere do fall, it is most fertile of all maner of corne and graine. For, as Philostratus hath left recorded, heere the temperature of the aire is such, as it is ordinarily in Autumne at Athens in Greece. Whereupon that in Solinus Polyhistor is trulie spoken of this country. This climate or tract of ground, for goodnesse, may iustly be compared to the best country in the world, it is in∣feriour to none whether you respect the great plenty of corne heere growing, and goodnesse of soile, or whether you respect the number of choice vines and fruit trees, which heere do naturally come vp of themselues, with the great commodity that ariseth of them. It aboundeth with all things, that are either richly prised and greatly esteemed, or found to be necessary for vse. Gold and Siluer if you will seeke for them, they are heere to be found: it neuer failed the Smithes: it giueth place to none for Vines; it excelleth any other country for store of the best Oiles. There is no place of it vacant ground, none barren and altogether vnfruitfull. What place soeuer it be through∣out this whole country that will not beare some kind of corn or other good fruit, that is good meddow or pasture. Yea euen those places that seem to be drie & barren, do beare hempe or such stuffe seruing to make cables for ships. This is also confirmed by Pomponius Mela, in these words: It is, saith he, so fertile and well stored with men, horses, iron, lead, siluer and gold, that if there be any place of it, which by reason of want of water, be barren and not like it selfe, yet there it beareth Hempe, Flaxe, and a kind of shrubbe called Spartum, whereof they made cables for ships. Yet Strabo doth exempt from hence Tudetania, or Batica, who affirmeth that this place hath such wonderfull plenty of both, I mean of Mettal and of Corn, that it is impossible to giue it such due commendations as for the worthinesse of it it doth deserue. Nay it is so fertile of all these commodities, that as the same Trogus reporteth, it yeeldeth not sufficient for the vse of the inhabitants only, but besides that it serueth all Italy and the populous city of Rome. And thus much generally of the nature of the soile and commodities of this country. But Strabo doth somewhat more particularly handle this argument. For he sheweth that all the prouinces and shires of Spaine are not alike fertile and good: and those countries which haue greatest plenty of mines and mettall are good for lit∣tle else. A great part of it also is but meanly inhabited, by reason of the mountaines and woods, with spatious and wide champion barren fields, where the soard or earth is very little or none at all. Neither hath it in all places water inough to serue it, as about Carpentania or Celtiberia, and almost all the North part of it abuttant vpon the sea: which places are not very well inhabited by reason of the cragginesse of the mountaines and bleake coldnesse of the aire. This part beareth no maner of corn at all. (Per∣aduenture Iuuenal in his 3. Satyre meant this tract, when he saith, Horrida vitanda est Hispania, Rough Spaine must carefully be shunned.) Yet the skirts of it where it bordereth vpon the Midland sea aboundeth with Oliues, Figges, Vines, and other such like plants and fruit trees, notwithstanding the vpland countries are not alto∣gether void and destitute of these commodities. So that I may not without good cause heere apply that saying of Silius Italicus, an authour so often by me cited and named: Nec Cereri terra indocilis, nec inhospita Baccho, Nullaque Palladia sese magis arbore tollit. Ceres heere hath taught her trade, God Bacchus heere was lodg'd: For choisest oiles and sigges as good, This country well may boast and bragge. In Lusitania also, that part especially which lieth between the riuer Tagus and the Ariabri, is a very good soile both for corne and grasse. Moreouer it yeeldeth great plenty of Gold and Siluer, and such like things. Athenaeus, in the 8. booke of his Deipnosophi∣ston confirmeth the same. Item, All that part of the country that lieth vpon the South, as Pliny testifieth, is very good: to wit, all that which they call Baetica is more popu∣lous, better manured, a richer soile, more fertile and pleasant than any other country of all Spaine. In this prouince the grasse is so wonderfully ranke, that except the cat∣tell be leazed and sometime brought home out of the pasture and restrained from feeding, they will burst themselues, as Trogus reporteth. But not only the land, but euen the sea which beateth vpon the coast of this Turdetania, is also as fertile: For it is wonderfully stored with all kind of Oisters, Shelfishes, Tunies and Purples, (a kind of shelfish whereof that colour is made) which are very gainfull vnto those that will labour to take them. And besides that, they do salt much of it and preserue it in pickle. Thus farre therefore of the vpper soard of the earth: Now let vs speake a word or two of the admirable rich mettals of this country, which lie hid vnder the same. That Spaine is all ouer bestrewed with Gold, Siluer, Iron, Lead, white and red, Pliny and Strabo do iointly testifie. Of the great plenty of gold and siluer heere found the Holy scripture in the 8. chapter of the 1. booke of the Machabees doth affirme. This also is auouched by Iosephus in the 16. chapter of his 2. booke of the Iewes wars. But it yeeldeth the greatest store in the driest and most barren mountaines, vpon which nothing else will grow or thriue. Yet by reason of the gold, as Pliny witnesseth, they are forced and made fruitfull. Such are those which do inclose Bastetania and Oretania, in which Strabo saith there are some veines of Gold ore. The same authour writeth, That in mount Argent, not farre from Castulon by Ilipa and both the Sisapoes there is a veine of siluer. Polybius saith that this veine runneth along by the city Babyla. In the confines of Milessia, where the city Oringis standeth, Liuy writeth that the inhabitants do find good store of siluer. Neere vnto the riuer Tagus also, in the moun∣taines are mines of mettall. At Cotinas are found both copper and gold, as the same Strabo testifieth. The prouince of Gallecia (this Trogus affirmeth) is wonderous full of copper and lead: it is also very rich of gold, so that oft times euen the plough doth turne vp some clots of gold ore. Pliny doth affirme that the same Gallecia, A∣sturia, and Lusitania, are as fertile of all maner of mettals. Stabo hath left recorded that amongst the sparkes of gold ore heere found some haue beene tried to waigh more then halfe a pound weight. Diodorus Siculus out of Phalereus reporteth the same, who saith, that some of those which heere do dig in the mines do euery three daies find as much in weight as an Euboian talent, which of Troy weight amounteth to aboue 36. pound. Stephanus mentioneth the city Ibilla, where he saith there are mines both of siluer and gold. But the greatest siluer-mine is neere new Carthage, distant from the city about 20. furlongs, where 40000. men are emploied and set on worke; and euery day throughout the yeare, the people of Rome, as Strabo testifieth, receiued from hence 25000. drams of siluer. The same author writeth that there was a pit of siluer cal∣led Bebelus, which did find Hanniball daily 300. pound weight of siluer. That this pit was about the Pyreney mountaines, one peraduenture may gesse by that, which he withall affirmeth, that the Aquitani do fetch their water from hence. The great abundance of siluer which did runne from the Pyreney mountaines, being by casualtie set on fire (which story you shall find in Strabo and Diodorus Siculus) was such that the Phoenicians when they transported it from hence, and yet still there being left more than their ships could carry, in stead of lead they put it vnder the ancors, or, as Aristotle thinketh, about Tartessus they made their ancors of it. It is obserued by Strabo that the Turdetani did make their cribs (praesepia, yet the learned Causabone doth rather thinke that the Greeke word in this place should signifie Lacunaria, a sommer or maine beame in an house) and hogsheads, of siluer. Yea and that certaine riuers of this country do yeeld some sparkes of gold, amongst which Tagus in Lusitania was one, there is none of the old writers but did constantly affirme for truth. Whereupon the Poets of former times haue highly commended Spaine for this matter, to wit, Iuuenall and Sta∣tius: Item Silius Italicus in this verse: Hic certant Pactole tibi Durias{que} Tagus{que}, Rich Pactolus now may yeeld, to Dwere and Tayo stout. The great abundance of mettals which this country did yeeld may easily be proued by the many triumphs of the Romanes, and maruellous store of gold and siluer by them carried and transported from hence; which you shall read of in Liuy, a plentifull witnesse and of good credit, in many and sundry places of his Decades, whereof for examples sake I thinke it not a∣misse to produce one or two: Marcus Heluius, saith he, brought from hence into the Exchequer at one time of vnwrought siluer 14732. pound weight. Of coined siluer, bea∣ring the stampe of a waggon drawen with two horses, 17023. Of Huesca siluer (Oscense argentum) 120438. Cneius Cornelius Lentulus brought from hence of gold 1515. pound weight: of rough siluer 1000. of siluer coine, 34550. denaij, valuing of our money wel-neere 1728. pound sterling. That which the same doth report of Marcus Portius Cato, Quintus Fuluius Flaccus, Quintus Minutius, Lucius Stertinius, Tiberius Gracchus, Cayus Calpurnius, Lucius Quinctius Crispinus, Marcus Fuluius Nobilior, Albinus, and others, let them read, who list to admire the wonderfull store of mettals of this country. Whereupon Antonius Augustinus might well say, That Spain in those times was vnto the Romanes the same, that now the West Indies are to the Spaniards. But now, lest I be too tedious, I will addresse my selfe to speake of other things which heere are found in as great abundance, as namely, horses, dogs, conies, pearles, and diuerse other such things. That in Spain there are great store of conies, Strabo, Pliny, and Aelianus do teach vs. The same is auerred by this verse of the worthy poet Catullus, Cuniculosae Celtiberiae fili, My sonne, in conny-borrow'd Spain ybred. Item, the coyn of Hadrian Emperour of Rome doth testifie the same: vpon which this little beast is stamped as a cognisance of this country. The wooll also of this country (I meane the blacke fleece, is of better estimation than that of the Coraxici, inhabitants of mount Taurus) the flax (wherof most excellent nets are made as Gratius witnesseth) Spartum, a kind of shrubbe like broome, whereof they made their cables, coccum, or graine wherewith they die skarlet, pitch, hony, wax, salt, digged out of the earth, (Sal fossile) Alume, Boras (Chrysocolla) glasse, vermilion, of no lesse estimation then Sinople (Sinopica terra) purple (purpurissum) and other colours, Crystall, the Loadstone, the Glasse-stone, (lapis specularis) vitrum obsidianum, the Ceraunij and Hyacinthi, certaine pearles and precious stones, are highly commended by Pliny, Strabo, Varro, Diodorus, Florus, Trogus; Dioscorides writeth that Spaine doth yeeld red oker, Cadmia, Schistus, and Sory. Pausanias in his Arcadica saith, that in Spaine, Cinoper (Cinnabaris) is commonly found in the same mine with gold. Theophrastus teacheth vs that the Corke-tree groweth plen∣tifully in the Pyreney mountains. Gellius, from the relation of Varro, doth wonderfully extoll the mast of Spaine. Heliodorus mentioneth the Spanisp Amethyst. The Nar, of the Corritani, a kind of fish called of the Latines perna, is by Strabo preferred before those of the Cantabri. Gellius commendeth the Lampreies taken neere Tartessus. of the maruellous fat Swine of this country Varro in the 11. chapter of his 2. booke of Husbandry, telleth a strange tale: to wit, that the skin did hang ouer their mouthes, a foot and three fingers. Oppianus and Iulius Pollux do greatly commend the Hounds of Spaine. So doth Nemesianus. Quorum proles de sanguine manat Ibero: Those whelps the huntsman most commend'th, That Spanish race doth yeeld. The same Varro and Oppianus with Strabo the great Cosmographer doe as highly extoll the
wild horses of this country. Of these I thinke Olympius Nemesianus did speake in these his verses: Quin etiam gens ampla iacet trans ardua Calpes Culmina, cor∣nipedum latè foecunda proborum &c. Aut inconcusso glomerat vestigia dorso, Aut molli pacata celer trahit esseda collo. A mighty nation dwell'th beyond the stately tops of Calpe high, Which store of Horses good doth breed, esteem'd throughout the world so wide. Some pace it well and amble fine, they neuer hotch nor shake at all: Some draw in plough or cart as well, and runne vp hill as swift as wind. Item, Silius Italicus, an authour often in this history cited by me, reporteth the same, in these verses of his, Martius hic sompes campos hinnitibus implet, Hinc iuga cornipedes euecti bellica captant; The warlike steed with mighty noice doth fil the champi∣on fields. Martiall also thus speaketh of them, Hic breuis ad numerum rapidos qui colligit vngues, Venit ab armiferis gentibus Astur equus. This little nag that trot'th so fine, and tread'th the measures round, Did come from warlike Astures, t'was bred in Spanish ground. The forenamed Silius in another place speaketh thus of a∣nother kind: Hic parus sonipes, nec Marti notus. This little apish tit, For warlike seruice is not fit. Of this kind peraduenture Gratius speaketh thus: Non tamen Hispano Martem tentare minace ausim, I dare not for my life to serue in field, vpon the weake-limm'd Spanish tits. Perhaps this is that kind of horse which Pliny cal∣leth Thieldones, and Asturcones, Nags, Hobbies or Gennets, very small of bone and grow'th. Which in their trauell haue not an ordinary pace, as other horses, but by gathering vp their feet round do amble gently, which Plautus termeth tollutim incedere. Senecà in his Epistles calleth them Asturcones & mannos tollutares, Ambling nags or gennets. Of the coach-horses (equi curules, or, quadrigales) bred heere, and for their extraordinary swiftnesse much esteemed farre and neere. Quin∣tus Aurelius Symmachus maketh a long discourse. Hee termeth this country equini pecoris diuitem, rich in multitude of good horses. Silius Italicus, the worthy poet saith, that these horses are so swift, that they will out strip the winds. Of mares got with foale by the wind, (neere the maine sea about Lisbone, or, as Silius writeth a∣mongst the Vettenes) in mount Sintra, (Tagrus) as Varro saith, or Cabo S. Vincente (mons sacer) as Columella would haue it) many men haue written many things, and more peraduenture then is true. All generally do attribute this to the nature and quality of the West wind in those parts. Varro and Columella do affirme that the colts or foales bred by this meanes do not liue aboue 3. yeares: yet Silius saith that they will liue well till they be 7. yeares old. Columella writeth, that it is a thing well knowen to euery man to be true: Varro telleth it for an incredible matter, yet very true; and withall affirmeth that mares do there conceiue by meanes of the wind, as heere hens doe: whose egs by him are called Hypenemia, or, Subuentanea, by Pliny Zephyria, that is, wind-egs. Aristotle in the 5. and 6. books of his history of Liuing creatures speaketh of these egs. And although Iulius Solinus, and S. Augustine, in his booke de ciuitate Dei, do write, that the same commeth to passe, to the mares in Cappadocia; and Homer would make the world beleeue that the North wind makes the mares of Erichthonius with foale, and that I am not ignorant that Aelianus in the 25. chapter of his 7. booke de Animalibus, doth thinke that euen the winds do make mares more fruitfull; yet I do rather thinke with Trogus that this did arise of the maruellous fruitful∣nesse of the mares and swiftnesse of the horses, which is such that in that respect there is iust cause to deeme them to haue beene begotten by the wind. Of these our Silius I∣talicus, himselfe a Spaniard borne, writeth thus: Et venerem occultam genitali concipitaura, By secret meanes they do conceiue, The wind doth make them big. And peraduenture Virgil in these his verses aim'd at this story. Omnes ore versae in Zephyrum stant rupibus altis, Exceptant{que} leues auras, & saepe sine villis Coniu∣gijs vento grauidae, (mirabile dictu.) Beside these there are also certaine other miracles and strange things to be seene and obserued in Spaine. In Cadima (ager Car∣rinensis, or, Catinensis, as some copies haue it) there are two springs, whereof the one swalloweth vp all things that are cast into it, the other casteth them out. In the same prouince there is another which maketh all the fishes that are in it to seem as if they were of a golden colour: yet they being out of the water do nothing at all differ from those of other waters. In Cantabria the three Tamaricke fountaines (fontes Tamarici, Pliny nameth them) 8. foot distant one from another, are ordinarily euery day 12. times drie, and sometime 20. times, so cleane that you can scarce discerne whether euer they had water in them or not. When as notwithstanding there is another large fountain hard by them that runneth continually; thus farre out of Pliny. Suetonius in Galba saith that a thunderbolt fell into a lake of Cantabria, and that there were 12. hatchets (secures) found there. In Spaine there is a riuer which at the first sight differeth nothing from other waters: but if you listen but a little while, you shall heare the water make a fine whistling noice. For assoone as neuer so little wind shall but moue the pooles or deeper places, the water resoundeth melodiously like a musicall instrument. The wind striketh in manner of the quill, the water serueth in stead of the cittron, as Achilles Statius writeth in his 1. booke De Amoribus. In the confines of Gallecia there is a mountaine called Mons Sacer, (Pico Sagro, the Spaniards do yet to this day call it) which it was not lawfull to dig or strike with any iron toole: but if at any time by fall of thunderbolt the ground were brokē, which in these countries is an ordinary thing, the gold which by that means shalbe discouered, is gathered by those which come next, as if it were a speciall gift and fauour of God, as Trogus in the 44. booke of his History testifieth. Strabo writeth that in Lusitania (now Portugall) there is a kind of Salt found which is of a purple colour. Sidonius in Oresius affirmeth, That there is another kind of Salt digged out of the mountains of Tarracon, which is sweet and of a plea∣sant tast. Amongst the Hispani Albini about Iberus, Gellius out of Varro describeth a great mountaine all of cleane salt: from which looke how much soeuer you shall take from it, so much within a while it will wax and grow againe. Lucian in his vowes, maketh mention of Spanish pickle, or saltfish. Pliny writeth that vpon the sea coast of Cantabria there is a very steep high hill that is all nothing else but clean iron. Those which fall sick at Caliz (Gades) as Philostratus reporteth, cannot die, their soules can∣not depart from them, so long as the tide doth drowne or ouerflow the country. And thus much hitherto of old Spaine, terris omnibus terra foeliciore, cui excolendae at{que} adeo ditandae impensius quám caeteris gentibus (as Latinus Pacatus saith) supremus ille fabricator indulsit, that is, This land for goodnesse of soile excelleth all lands in the whole world beside: about the trimming and furnishing of which, and so consequently for the enriching of the same, almighty God creator of all, bestowed more time and care then ordinarily he did for other countries. The description of which I purpose to finish and close vp with that commendation, wherewith Pliny concludeth his Naturall history: Ab Italia, exceptis Indiae fabulosis, proximè quidem dixerim Hispaniam, quocum{que} ambitur mari, that is, Next after Italy, excepting al∣waies those fablous reports of India, I giue Spaine the commendations, vpon those sides especially which do butte vpon the sea. Without the limits of the maine land or continent of Spaine, there is a part of this country called INSVLARIS, or BALEARIVM, that is, The Spanish iles, or, the Baleares. For this part of Spaine consisteth altogether of ilands. The names of those which do lie in the Ocean or Maine sea, are these, GADES (now Caliz) IV∣NONIS insula, GERYONIS monumentum, (S. Pedro, a little ile betweene Caliz and the maine land) LONDOBRIS, ouer against Portugall, now knowen by the name of Barlinguas; CORTICATA, AVNIOS, DEORVM insulae, peraduenture those which they now call Islas de Baiona; and the faigned CASSI∣TERIDES, in this tract. For these famous ilands are indeed those which our seamen call The Sorlings, belonging to the crowne of England, as we haue shewed before. In the Midland sea are these following: the two BALEARES, the Greater and the Lesser MALLORCA and MENORCA: the two PITYVSAE, to wit, EBV∣SVS, (now Yuica, or as some terme it Ibissa) and OPHIVSA; SCOMBRARIA (Cabo di Palos) COLVBRARIA, (Moncolobrer) CAPRARIA (Cabre∣ra) TIQVADRA (Coneiera) PLVMBARIA, PLANESIA, and MAENARIA, all of them, except only the Baleares and Gades, small ilands and of none ac∣count. Gades was much renowmed and famous long since by meanes of the fables of Hercules and Geryon feigned by Poets to haue been acted heere, as also for that the long liued king Arganthonius, who was before his death 300. yeares old, did sometime keepe his court heere. The Baleares were much talked of, by reason the Ilanders were counted good slingers, best experienced and skilfull in that weapon called by the Romanes, Funda. But especially it was much spoken of by meanes of the great famine and dearth that there was caused by conies: of which there was sometime in these Ilands such wonderfull store and abundance, that old stories do testifie, that the country people were forced to entreat of Augustus Caesar a military aid and band of men to helpe to destroy them, keepe them from breeding and spreading any further. Pliny compareth the winds of these Ilands with the best that are made of Italian grapes. I do verily beleeue that Seruius vpon the 7. booke of Virgils Aeneids did mistake the matter, when he writeth that Geryon did rule as king of the Baleares, and the Pityusaes. For all other writers do affirme, that he reigned and kept his court about Gades. Except in de∣fence of Seruius one should alledge this saying of Trogus: In parte Hispaniae quae ex insulis constat, regnum penes Geryonem fuit: that is, In a part of Spaine which consisteth altogether of ilands, Geryon swaied the scepter, and ruled as soueraigne king. But that he spake this of Gades, and the iland, not farre from it in the maine sea, the wonderfull pastorage and rankenesse which he ascribeth to these is a sufficient argument and proofe; which by no meanes may be verified of the Baleares. Againe, Solinus plainly testifieth for me that Bocchoris, and not Geryon, did reigne in the Baleares. But his owne words may perhaps please thee better; therefore listen, thus he speaketh: Bocchoris regnum Baleares fuerunt, vs{que} ad euersionem Phrygum cuniculis animalibus quondam copiosae. In capite Baeticae, vbi extremus est NOTI OR∣BIS terminus, insula à septingentis passibus separatur, quam Tyrij à Rubro profecti mari, ERYTHRAEAM, Poeni sua lingua GADIR, id est, sepem nominarunt. In hac Geryonem habitasse plurimis monumentis probatur, tametsi quidam putent Herculem boues ex alia insula abduxisse, quae Lu∣sitaniam contuetur. Thus rudely in English. The Baleares where Bocchoris, vntill the ouerthrow of the Phrygians, raigned and held his court, were sometime won∣derfully full of Conies. In the entrance and head of Baetica which is the outmost bound of the KNOVVEN WORLD, there is an iland which is distant from the maine land threescore and tenne pases. This the Tyrians, come from the Redsea, called ERYTHRAEA, or, The Red iland: but the Poeni or Carthaginians in their language named it GADIR, that is, The hedge. Heere Geryon did sometime dwell, as monuments and antiquities do strongly prooue; although some do thinke that Hercules did cary the Oxen from another iland, which lieth ouer against Lusitania. Thus farre Solinus. Obserue heere that  Gader, in the ancient language of the Iewes, and Giadir, in the moderne tongue of the farre-conquering Arabians, doth signifie an hedge, enclosure, or fence. Beside these forenamed ilands knowen to the an∣cient and best writers Sextus Rufus Auienus reciteth others by these names: OESTRYMNIDES, ARCHALE, POETANION, AGONIDA, CARTARE, STRONGILE and LVNAE. These because no man else doth seeme to know or take notice of, peraduenture may be some of those which Pliny termeth mari vadoso par∣uas, Small ilands or shelues in the shallow sea, and are in number well neere twenty. What if to these I should adioine CROMYVSA and MELVSSA, certaine ilands vpon the coast of Spaine, as Stephanus citeth out of Hecataeus his Cosmography? Of TRANSFRETANA or TINGITANA Hispania, that other part, I meane, of Spaine, beyond the streights, called Tingitania, (because it did only in name and vsurpation, not indeed and of right belong to Spaine: as also for that it is, thus Pomponius Melawriteth of it, Regio ignobilis, & vix quidquam illustre sortita, paruis opidis habitatur, parua flumina emittit, solo quam viris melior, & segnitiae gentis obscura, Abase country, and hath scarce any good thing in it worth the speaking of. It hath no famous cities but small ragged townes and villages. The riuers which runne through it are very small and not nauigable: yet the soile is better than the men. For the slouththfulnesse and cowardice of the people hath made the country the more obscure:) I will speake nothing of in this place.
GALLIA, (now FRANCE) as it was in the time of STRABO and the rest of the ancient Geographers. ALl that tract of the earth, which the Ocean, the midland sea, the Pyreney mountaines and the riuer Rheine do containe and compasse, is cal∣led of old wtiters GALLIA or GALACIA, and the inhabitants CELTI or CELTAE. Whereupon Ptolemey properly named it CEL∣TOGALACIA. We haue demonstrated and shewed at large in the olde map of Europe, that the name Celtes was more generall in times past: and that Gallia did reach beyond the Alpes as farre as the riuer Rubicon; because indeed that part of Italy (as we know) was possessed and in∣habited by them. But we purpose heere onely to describe that which is properly and truly called Gallia, whose bounds we haue set downe to be the Ocean, the Rhine and the mountaines. This the Romanes diuided into GALLIA TRANSALPINA, that is, Gallia beyond the Alpes and GALLIA CISALPINA, that is, Gallia on this side the Alpes. Mela and Plinic diuided it into two parts, the one lying Northward, the other Southward: this Pliny and his imitatour Solinus by the two hils Gebenna and lura: Mela by the hill Gebenna and the riuer Rhosne: after whch maner alio Entropius and Suetonius do distinguish it. They call that part, which is toward the North GALLIA COMATA; be∣cause the inhabitants did weare long haire: the other toward the South GALLIA BRACCATA, of a short kind of coat, which the people of that countrie did commonly goe in. The whole is diuided of Caesar into three parts: of the which one (saith he) is inhabited by the BEL∣GAE, another by the AQVITANI, and the third by them, who in their tongue are called CELTAE, and in ours GALLI. The riuer Ga∣ronde parteth the Celtes from the Aquitanes, and the riuers Seine and Marne doe diuide them from the Belgae. But GALLIA NARBO∣NENSIS is not mentioned in this diuision: which part Pliny and Pomponius Mela do describe seuerally by it selfe, and Caesar comprehendeth it vnder the name of PROVINCE. Notwithstanding Ptolemey in his description, and Ammianus, who followeth him, doth attribute it vnto Gallia, and diuide the whole into foure parts, to wit, AQVITANIA, LVGDVNENSIS (the very same with Celtica) BELGICA and NARBONENSIS. But all doe not limite this diuision with the same bounds. For Caesar placeth the Heluetians next to the Gaules or Celtes, whom Pliny and the foresaid Ptolemey place in Belgica. Caesar maketh Belgica to reach from the Rhine to Marne, Pliny from the riuer Scaldis to the Seine. Caesar placeth the riuer Garonde as the bound betweene the Celtes and the Aquitanes, so likewise doth Pomponius Mela; but Strabo boundeth it with the riuer Loire, and that according to the prescript of Augustus, with whom also Ptolemey doth agree. The foresaid Strabo (following I know not what authors) saith that the Belgae inhabite be∣tweene the Rhine and the Ocean and amongst them numbreth the Veneti, the vtmost people that dwell towards the West sea. But I feare much, lest in that place in sted of Belgae he should haue said Celtae, seeing that according to all Geographers and Historiographers the people Veneti are placed in Gallia Celtica or Lugdunensis. Succeeding ages diuided the whole country of Gallia into many parts, as we may read in Sextus Rufus, Ammianus, a booke intituled Liber Notitiar: and another called Dignitatum Libellulus, which authors doe reckon all the parts and regions thereof to bee seuenteene; all which we offer to thy view in this our map. But afterward in processe of time, to wit, after the time of Charlemaine it was diuided only into two parts the one AVSTRASIA, that is, East France, the other NEVSTRIA (as they corruptly write it) or Vestria or rather Westria, that is, West France. And so much concerning the name of this countrie, the limitation and the bounds, which Suetonius in the life of Iulius affirmeth to containe in compasse 32. hundred miles. Now it remaineth that we write somewhat in like maner of the nature, temperature and commodities of the same. Claudian writeth that it is a most blessed and a happy country in respect of the situation of it. And Caesar in his third booke of Ciuil wars reporteth it to be most healthful. Seneca in his third of Naturall Questions saith it is full of brookes and riuers. Solinus recordeth it had in times past sacred and vaporous fountaines. Strabo describeth it to be all well watered and moistned with brooks and riuers, and that the places, along which they runne, are for the most part champion grounds (for Sidonius saith, that heere are large and o∣pen) or else small rising hils. The same authour recordeth that it beareth great store of graine, millet, and maste, and that it breedeth all maner of cattell. [The forementioned Sido∣nius in Maioranus his Panegyricke writeth that it is plentifully stored with cattel.] There is in it nothing superfluous, vnlesse it be, where it is either marrish or fenny, or ouergrown with wood. Trebellius in his Balista maketh it to be fruitfull of graine, which same thing Cicero affirmeth to be true in his oration for Marcus Fonteius: where hee wrireth that great store of corne was woont to be carried out of this country by the Romanes, and we may read in Caesars third booke of his Commentaries and in Dions 39. booke how they did vse to send their Ambassadours for prouision of corne vnto the Veneti, a people of this country. But Pliny testifieth that this corne was the lightest and worst kind of all those sorrs of corne that were vsually brought to Rome. The same authour in another place hath left in writing that the people of Aquitane did eate panicke. Solinus extolleth France for a fortunate country in respect of the fatnesse of the soile, and many rich commodities, in many places also replenished with vines and orchards & blessed with store of all things necessarie for the behoofe of man. But let vs heare also what Pomponius Mela saith of this countrie. It is a land verie fruitfull, chieflie of grasse and corne, and pleasant to behold and beautified with many great and goodly forrests. Any kind of corne, that cannot well away with cold, the country yeeldeth not euery where, neither is there heere any great store of hurtfull and noisome beasts. Let vs heere also what Iulian the Emperour in his Misopogones, an eie-witnesse saith of this country: The winter there is most milde, by rea∣son of the heat of the Ocean as it is thought, or else it may be because there bloweth thence a certaine soft gale of winde: and the sea water seemeth to bee warmer than the fresh water. Whether it be therefore for this reason, or for any other vnknowen to me, I cannot tell, yet of this I am sure that this is true. The Winter of that land is verry temperate and milde to the inhabitants: moreouer the best vines do grow there: and many also by their art and industrie haue now made fig-trees to grow there, which in winter they are faine to couer ouer with wheat straw or stubble and such like things, as it were with clothes, thereby to defend them from the violence and iniuries of the aire. Thus farre out of Iulian. It is true indeed that the cold, (because the country, according to Caesar in his first booke of Commentaries lieth farre North) is woont to stay and slacke the ripenesse of corne. Wherefore we may fitly adde to this place that, which Varro hath set downe in his first booke of husbandrie: In Gallia Transalpina (saith he) there are some regions bor∣dering vpon the Rhine, where neither vine, nor oliue, nor apples would grow, vnlesse they did dung their grounds with a kind of white chaulke digged out of the earth, which Pliny calleth marga, that is, marle. but Claudian termeth it Galliam niue feratem, France fertile of snow: and Lucian speaketh of French ice: and hence commeth that prouerbe in Petronius Arbiter, Colder than French snow. Insomuch that Diodorus confesseth, that when the riuers are frozen ouer, they are not only passable to few, but euen to whole armies, with their carts and waggons. He addeth likewise, that in steed of water it is replenished with snow. Heerehence it is, if I be not deceiued, that Aristotle reporteth amongst his wonders, that France breedeth no asses. Seneca in his third booke of Naturall questions affirmeth it to be windie. The North-West winde (Circius) (saith he) annoieth France: to it, notwithstanding that be ready to ouerthrow their houses and buildings, they giue thankes, as to whom they attribute their healthfulnesse, which peraduenture might seeme false and fabulous, if the same author did not in that very place adde these words following: Augustus (who was afterward made a god) erected and dedicated a temple to this wind, at such time as he soiourned in France. Of this wind you may reade more in Aulus Gellius his 2. booke 22. chapter, but I take it to be that Northen winde, which infecteth those places called Campi lapidei Stondon, (whereof we shall speake heereafter) where these things are knowen to be true euen to this day. Cicero in his oration De prouineijs consu∣laribus, moued (as it seemes) with the sharpnesse of this aire, cried out truly or falsly. What can be found more sharpe or rough, than those places? What more desolate than their townes? What more barbarous than their nations? What more large than their Ocean? Yet for all that, the nature of the aire and soile neuer letted or hindered, but that they learned either of Rome from her cradle, (as Macrobius witnesseth in his 2. booke vpon Somnium Scipionis, or of the Massilians as reporteth Trogus 43. to plant both vines and oliues. Pliny noteth that one Elico, a Swisser or Heluetian (hauing beene entertained at Rome for his skill in smiths worke and carpentrie) at his returne againe into his country, brought ouer with him drie figs and raisons, oile & wine. From which time afterwards there was such plenty of vines, that Columella doth as it were complaine, that the Italians did lay vp their vintage here: and Plutarch recordeth that they did vse to send to Rome from Vienna in France that wine, which of a kind of taste that it had of pitch was called vinum Pica∣tum, assoone as it began to be in request there. Therefore I would gladly vnderstand what Vopiscus and Eusebius should meane, who deliuer that the Emperour Probus was the first that granted the Gauls to plant and set vines. Shall any man thinke that vntill his time there were no vines in any part of France, sauing onely in Prouince? Yet Pliny maketh mention of the vine of Berrie, likewise of the vine of Auuergne. I must needs confesse my shallownesse of vnderstanding heerein. Iulian the Emperour writeth in his Misopogones, that in his time there was an excellent vine at Paris, and Isidorus commendeth the vine of Berrie. Strabo plainly sheweth that there were heere mettals both gold and siluer and the best sort thereof in the mountaine Cemmenus, now called Mountaignes de' Auergne, or, de Ceuennes, as Poldus affirmeth. That there were also excellent gold-mines among the Tar∣belli, and iron mines in Perigort and Berrie. Athenaeus writeth that gold was digged vp in some part of Celtica. Ausonius calleth Tarne, a riuer of Aquitane, the golden floud. Diodorus in his fifth booke reckoneth vp in it diuers golden riuers: from hence it commeth, as we reade in Procopius, that the Gauls did coine gold found in their own natiue soile, which was not stamped like other money, with the picture of the Romane Emperours, but only with a stampe of their owne. Cassiodorus in his seuenth booke, and 37. section of his Variar. maketh mention of their coine in these words: Gallis auctoribus sine aliquo adhuc signo ad metalla translata est; Hence it arose, as seemeth that of Manilius Gallia is tearmed rich; of Dion, flourishing in wealth: of Iosephus, the rich Galles: and in Sibyls oracles, the Galles wealthy in gold. And howsoeuer Diodorus writeth that they haue no siluer, yet Athenaeus reporteth that a wood by a mischance being set on fire so inflamed the Pyreney mountaines that there issued and ran foorth great streames of melted siluer. Moreouer Strabo reporteth that there were siluer mines among the Rutheni and Gabali, certaine nations and people of Aquitane: and Caesar speaketh of certaine mines of brasse in diuers places. It is obserued by Pliny that the Amethyst, a kind of iasper, is found in France; as also Corall, neere Marsiles about the Ilands Stoechades. There is also found Amber, in a riuer of the Celtae, if we may beleeue Dion Prusaeus. For as I thinke it to be true if he meant it of the Celto-Germanes, so I deeme it false, if he meant it of the Celto-Galles. There grow heere also, as Pliny affirmeth, the purple vaccinia or whortles, wherewith they did vse to die clothes for their seruants and slaues. In another place he attributeth to this coun∣try those rich tinctures of scarlet, purple and tyrian, which were in such high estimation at Rome. To the same doth Vitruuius assigne another sort of scarlet die. It is true by the te∣stimony of Galen that Nard (which tne Apothecaries vsed for to make treacle withall) was wont to be brought out of France. Pliny sheweth that the best sort of firre that were, grew vpon the mountaines Iura and Vogesus: and elsewhere, that birch first came out of France, which they did vse to boile and out of it to draw a glutinous and clammy slime, which serued in steed of bitumen: Item, that the herbe hyacinth or crow-toe do grow and prosper there exceedingly: that they sow line or flaxe, wherwith being spun and wouen (as Strabo writeth) they make sailes, although Caesar auoucheth that the Veneti people of America or Britaine did vse skinnes or leather in steed of sailes. That there did grow the citron-tree may be gathered out of Paterculus, who affirmeth that Iulius Caesar made preparation for his French triumph of the citron-tree. But as there are in this country these and such like herbs and trees, for the profit and vse of man: so are there those that be venemous and pernicious to mans nature. Of which sort is the yew tree, and thereof, accor∣ding to the testimony of Caesar, very great plenty, which Dioscorides doth deliuer to be in Narbone of so deadly a poison, that whosoeuer do either sleepe vnder it, or shall sit and rest themselues in this shade, they be not only hurt, but oft times they do catch their death by it. Concerning which tree Pliny addeth this much, that it hath beene found by ex∣perience, that in France the wine bottles made thereof for wayfaring men and trauellers haue killed and poisoined those that drunke out of them: And Caesar witnesseth, that one Cat uulcus king of the Eburones made away himselfe with the iuice of the yew tree, whereof (saith he) there was great abundance in France. Aristotle amongst his wonders ma∣keth mention of a kind of poison which is found in this country, called of them xenicon, the Greeke copy hath . But heereof, heereafter we shall haue occasion to speake in another place. And this much concerning things without life: now concerning liuing creatures by your patience we will in as few words as we may, set down what we haue read and obserued written by all ancient writers. Trebellius in the life of Claudius the Emperour maketh mention of a famous breed of mares in this country. The infinite number of dogs of this nation be not only highly commended by the Poets, Ouid, Oppian and Gratius; but euen also by Pollux the Grammarian, and Euphrada the oratour. Pliny saith that he saw with his owne eies in the grand cirque of Pompey the great a hart-woolfe (Lupus ceruarius) brought out of France. Their swine, according to the relation of Strabo, be no∣table for their bignesse, strength and swiftnesse, which are to him that is not vsed to them, as dangerous as the fiercest wolues. For which cause it cannot be denied but that Athe∣naeus wrote very truly that they had the best bacon, and that (the aforesaid Strabo bearing witnesse) in such plenty, that from hence they did therewith furnish not only Rome, but also most places of Italy. I obserue out of Varro his tract de lingua Latinâ, that is, of the Latin tongue, that there be heere very great hares: in which authour also there is mention made of French wooll, which according to Strabo is very course. If any credit be to be giuen to the forceited Pliny, there is found in the vpper coasts of France towards the North Ocean fowle like to a swan called Onocrotalus: item, as he saith, there is found fresh Saln on: in the French Ocean a mighty sea fish called Physeter, or a whirlepoole, raising him∣selfe vp aloft out aboue the sea, in maner of a great columne or pillar, higher then the very sailes of ships, spouting out as it were a deluge of waters, ready to drowne and sinke euen very tall ships: likewise there are, as the same authour saith, mearmaids, elephants and sea-rammes. In the riuer Sone, as Stobeus gathereth out of Calisthenes, there breedeth a huge kind of fish, called of the inhabitants therabouts Clupea, which while the moone increaseth, seemeth white of colour: and the same decreasing groweth blacke and when his body groweth to be of an extraordinary bignesse, he is killed of his owne chines or bones. In the head of this fish is found a small stone, not vnlike to a graine of Salt, (Plutarch in his booke de Montibus, affirmeth it to be like a crumme or little quantity of Frankincense) which is a speciall remedy against the quartane ague, if in the wane of the moone it be but applied to the left side of the body. Glycas out of Anastasius tearmeth this fish Clopia, but Plutarch, in the place before quoted, nameth it, Scolopidon. It is almost incredible what a maruellous multitude of frogs be heere: such was, I say, the abundance of them, that the inhabitants of a certaine city were driuen out and forced to seeke another place to dwell in. Yet Pliny, of whom we haue so often spoken, auoucheth it to be true, citing Varro for his authour; and Trogus in his 15. booke confirmeth it, affirming the like thing to haue hap∣pened to the Abderites, a certaine people of Thrace. But let vs come to other more wonderfull things of this region: and first the history of fishes digged out of the ground, is as strange as any, of which Pomponius Mela vseth these very words: In Gallia Narbonensis is the fountaine Salsula, which shedeth water not sweet but more brackish than the water of the sea. Hard by is a field all greene and couered ouer with short and slender reeds, yet otherwise it swimmeth and floteth aloft vpon a pole that beareth it vp. That it is so, the middle part of it plainly prooueth, which being cut off from the rest about it, swimmeth like an Iland, and suffereth it selfe to be shoued and drawne to and fro. Moreouer by those
map of ancient Gaul GAL∣LIAE VE∣TERIS Typus. Ex conatibus Geogra∣phicis Abrah. Ortelij. AMPLISS. VIRIS DD. EDVARDO VANDER DILFT, ET CAROLO MA∣LINEO, NOBILITATE RE∣RVMQ. PERITIA CLARISS. VRBISQ. ANTVERP. COSS. ABRAH. ORTELIVS L.M. DEDICABAT. Nomendaturae et positionis loco∣rum huius tabulae testimonia, pete ex Thesauro nostro Geographico. Cum Privilegio Imp. Reg. et Cancel. Brab. 1594.
places also that are cut and digd quite through, appeareth the sea sheaded vnderneath it. Whereupon, whether it were through ignorance of the truth, or that they were purposely disposed to make a leasing, it liked is well our authours as also the Greeks, to leaue in writing vnto such as should come after, fish was digged out of the whole ground in that country, which indeed comming out of the deepe sea thither, and there being, killed by such as bobbed for them, was drawen dead out of the aforesaid holes. This much out of him. Now whether Strabo and Athenaeus be to be numbred amongst those Greeke writers, whose credit Mela doth extenuate heerein, I know not. For Strabo in his 4. book de∣liuereth, that about the riuer Ruscino (in the very same prouince that Mela there describeth) there is a lake not far from it, and a little farder off from the sea a waterish fenny piece of ground, full of salt pots, wherein are mullets, which are woont to be drawen and taken out of the earth. For as soone as a man diggeth 3. or 4. foot deepe into the ground, thrusting an eel-speare into the mud, a man shall sometime chance to sticke or kill the foresaid fish, being of a reasonable growth and bignesse. This kind of fish, like the eele, is bred and li∣ueth in the mudde. Thus writes he. Athenaeus in his 8. booke, out of Polybius his 34. booke of histories saith thus: that from the Pyreney mountaines vntil you come to Narbon, the fields, all along through the wh ch the riuers Iliberis and Ruscino do runne, be plaine and champion, in which fields are found those fishes which they tearme fossiles, that is, digged out of the ground. For the soile of that place is soft and greene, much grasse growing thereon: vnderneath the grasse, the earth being for two or three cubites deepe san∣dy, you shall find water that hath soaked thither and issued foorth out of the riuers, in which fishes doe wander through those streames for their food, being exceedingly delighted with the roots of the grasse. All that coast is full of fishes vnder the ground, which assoone as the earth is cast vp, they take. And Dlechampius vpon Athenaeus hath obserued that this maner of fishing doth as yet in hat place continue euen to this day. I haue beene alwaies of this mind, that that little history which Aristotle hath left in writing in his booke of wonders may fitly be referred hither: how that in the borders of the Marseilles nere the Ligusticke sea, there is a lake, which bubbling and streaming foorth casteth out an infinit multitude of fishes, exceeding all beliefe &c. Pliny in his 9. booke, chapter 17. saith, that if in that season, when mullets vse to ingender, in the prouince of Narbone, a man take a milter out of their pooles where they are kept, and draw a long string or line through the mouth and guils and so tie it fast and then put him into the sea, holding the other end of the line still in his hand, if he pull him againe vnto him, he shall haue a number of spawners or females follow him hard at the taile to the bankes side. Semblably, if he do the same with the female in spawning time, he shall haue as many milters follow after her. In the very same prouince, after the same authour, is there a famous well named Orge, within the very head wherof grow certaine herbs, so much desired and sought for by kine and oxen, that to seeke and get a mouthfull of them, they will thrust in their whole heads ouer their eares, vntill they meet therewith. In another place of Pliny I read this following: There is a city of Gallia named Tungri, much renowmed for a noble fountaine, which runneth at many pipes: a waft it hath resembling the rust of iron, howbeit this taste is not perceiued but at the farewell and when you haue done drinking only. this water is purgatiue and driueth away tertian agues, expelleth the stone and cureth the symptomes attending thereupon: Set this water ouer the fire or neere vnto it, and you shal see it thicke and troubled; but at the last it will become red. Moreouer this prouince, as it is described of S. Augustine in his booke De ciuitate Dei, hath a fountaine about Gratianopolis, or Grenoble, very like the holy well in Epyre, which, if you dip a burning torch therein, it presently quencheth it, and if you hold it a good way off without any fire on it, of it owne nature kindleth it againe. Artimedorus is authour, that vpon the sea coast of France there is a lake, which is called Lacus duorum coruorum, that is, the lake of the two crowes, in which he saith two crowes were ordinarily to be seene, each of them hauing their right wings white of colour. Hither repaire all those that haue any matter in controuersie, and vpon a table set on high, each party for himselfe layth downe a cake. When the crowes flie thither, they deuour one cake, and the other they breake all to crums: but he obtaineth the cause against his aduersary, whose cake is broken and cast downe. But Strabo iudgeth this history to be but a meere fable. Aristotle also amongst his wonders reckoneth the high way called in his time Heraclea via, which is reported to haue reached from Italy euen to the Celto-Galles, or Celtiberi. On this way all passengers whether Greekes or homeborne are carefully looked vnto, or guarded by the inhabitants, lest any harme by mischance befall them in their iourney. For they in whose borders the harme is done, are by law punished or bound to make good the losse. Vitrunius writeth, that in Marsiles tiles are made, which being cast into the water do swim and not sinke. I may now fitly amongst these wonders describe that field which is called Campus lapideus, that is, Stondoun, or Stone-field. Geographers do place it betweene Marsiles and the mouth of the riuer Rhone: Pliny calleth it the me∣moriall of Hercules his battels: because that Hercules in this place fighting against Albion & Bergion the sons of Neptune, and hauing spent all his artillery, called vpon his father Iupiter, who powred downe a shewre of stones for his defence and aid: and a man would verily beleeue that it had rained stones indeed, there lie so many, heere and there, and those so farre bespread euery way. This fable also is confirmed by Mela, Solinus, Higinus and Martianus: yet before them all I willingly preferre the opinion of Strabo, who de∣scribeth it: There is a plaine distant from the sea about an hundred stadia or furlongs, about so much ouer from one side to the other, and it is in compasse round. It is of the euent called the stony plaine. For it is full of stones, as big as a man can gripe, vnderneath which groweth grasse, yeelding great store of pasture for cattell: but within the midst thereof there is water, saltpits and salt. The whole region that bordereth vpon it vpwards, lieth open to winds: but vpon this plaine chiefly lieth and bloweth the violent and impetuous Northerne winde, wherewith, men say, stones are hoised vp and whirled in the aire and men blowen down out of waggons and with the force thereof stript both of armour and apparrell. The same authour also bringeth this probable reason of Possidonuis, who said that it had sometimes beene a lake, which when it was dried vp by reason of the conti∣nuall tossing and drift of the water this way and that way, was thereby parted into many stones, resembling somewhat those pebble stones on the banks of riuers, or sea-shoare ve∣ry like one another in greatnesse and smoothnesse &c. Aristotle in his 2. booke of Meteors and 8. chapter affirmeth it to haue beene made so stony by an earthquake and nameth it the Phlegraean plaine. Diodorus describeth the very same plaine (although not by the same name) together with the wind infecting it. The forrest of Ardrine is heere also (in Belgica I meane) of which Tacitus, in his 5. booke of Annals, writeth thus: They sought those forrests, which were named Arduenna. Are there then many of this name? Can it be proued to be so out of Pomponius Mela, because that in one place he saith that Gallia is pleasant to behold by reason of many goodly great forrests? I cannot thinke it to be true: consi∣dering that in all old histories (for as much as I know) there is mention made only of one wood or forest of this name. Notwithstanding I am perswaded that it was scattred both in length and breadth and happily one part disioined from another, yet all vnder one and the selfe same name. For Caesar auoucheth it to be of a huge bignesse: and indeed euen the greatest forest in all Gallia, as that which extendeth it selfe from the riuer Rhine through the middle of the country of the Treuires vnto the entrance of the borders of Rhemes, and then declined towards the place, where the riuers Skeld and Maze meet together: so that it was more than 500. miles in length. These 500. miles (allowing eight stadia for a mile) do amount vnto 4000. stadia, which number Strabo doth assigne it, but out of authours (as he supposeth) not worthy to be beleeued, if that place of his be vncorrupt. For the learned Causa bonus, the glory of France, and honour of that his countrey, in his learned Commentaries vpon the said writer, scarse thinketh the place to be without error. Neither doth it seeme to me likely to be true, that Caesar, who was an ey-witnesse of this forest, was ignorant of the measure thereof. That Diana was sirnamed Arduenna of this forest, is proued out of an old monument of marble, whereof we shal speake more at large heereafter. And thus farre concerning the region. Now it followeth to treat of the people. Pausinias maketh it a populous region: and Liuy, fruitfull of men. Polybius also in his 2. booke of ciuill wars, witnesseth the same. For he writeth that Caesar subdued 400. diuers people of this realme of France. Iornandes saith that they exceed the cōmon stature of men. Their bodies according to Hirtius are to be maruelled at for their mighty lims & great∣nesse, and according to Ammianus they were tall of stature. And that they are of exceeding talnesse aboue other nations, it is apparant out of Caesar, when he saith, that in respect of their owne talnesse and goodly personages, all the Gauls for the most part accompt the Romanes but very dwarfes. Moreouer that they were tall of stature, tender and soft fle∣shed, and very faire complexioned, Strabo plainly testifieth. That they were whitely coloured and snowt-faire these words of Petronius vnto Gyrton do seeme to approue, Increta facies, vt Gallia suos ciues putet: Their faces were painted, that France might thinke them to haue beene French men borne. Namely, that by that meanes they might counterfet the naturall beauty and whitlinesse of the Gauls: and not, as my singular good friend, in that his most learned and exact description of England writeth, who thinketh that the Gauls were wont to cleare their faces to make them looke more beautified: which cannot be proued out of any ancient authour, if I do not forget my selfe. And no maruell, seeing that nature it selfe hath voluntarily bestowed vpon them this beauty and whitenesse. From hence it is, that the Poet saith that the Gauls had Lactea colla, that is, white necks. That they did vsually weare their haire long (for which cause one part of Gallia was termed Comata) I haue for my authours Strabo and Clemens Alexandrinus: as also Agathias, who writeth that it was an ordinarie custome amongst the kings of France neuer to be cut or polled but to continue vnshauen from their cradle to their dying day, and to haue their locks hang∣ing trimly vpon their shoulders, with their haire before curiously sheaded, and falling downe vpon either shoulder. This their haire Liuy deliuereth to haue beene long and yellow. Diodorus saith it was naturally reddish, and yet they augment this colour by art. For according to Leopardus the interpreter in his emendations they washed their haire continu∣ally with a lie made of chalke and turned it vp from the forehead toward the crown and noddle, to the end that they might be conspicuous and eminent, and that their looke might seeme to be most like to Panes and Satyres. They likewise made their haire so thicke, that it differed nothing from the manes of horses. Was this the reason then that Claudian happily saith Gallia crine ferox, that is, The Frenchman grim of countenance by reason of his long haire? Pliny affirmeth that sope was an inuention deuised by the French for to co∣lour the haire of their head yellow: in somuch that Claudian saith, that the Frenchmen haue aureos vertices, that is, yellow heads: and Virgil saith, they haue aureas caesaries, that is, golden lockes. To this purpose also are those words, which Tertullian vseth in his booke De cultu Foeminarum, that is, of the ornaments of women, where he deliuereth that some of them did vse to colour their haire with saffron. To the very like reason Ammianus calleth the French Candidos & rutilos, whitish and ruddy, borrowing their denomination from their skin and haire. I read in Liuy that they all weare long beards. Diodorus set it them out in their true colours, thus. Some saith he, shaue their beards, other some let them grow, although not ouer long. The gentle men and noblemen shaue their cheekes, but they suffer their beards to grow on their chin so long, vntill they couer their bodies. Whereby it commeth to passe, that when they eate, they are euery foot full of crummes and meat: and when they drinke, the drinke will run down as it were through a pipe or channel. They vse all meanes that can inuent, that they grow not too fat and gorbellied: and if any yong man exceed the prescript and set measure of his girdle, he is (as Strabo recordeth) amer∣ced for it. And so much concerning their outward forme and fauour. Now it remaineth to speake somewhat of their nature and disposition, whereof because no writer is more skilfull for knowledge and more ancient for writing than Caesar; take these his words, as they lie scattered heere and there in sundrie places of his Commentaries: The counsels saith he, of the Gauls be hasty and sudden: in their consultations they be variable and for the most part desirous of alteration. This is a common custome among them, to compel euen wayfaring men to stay whether they will or no, and to enquire what newes any man either hath heard, or knoweth of any matter whatsoeuer. And the common people vse to come flocking about the merchants in cities and do vrge them to tell out of what countries they come, and what things they know of there. And being moued with these light re∣ports and hearesaies, they fall to counsell oftentimes euen of most weighty matters: whereof they must needs repent them by and by after, seeing they are so fondly led by vncer∣taine rumours, and seeing also that diuers persons do tell them forged newes to feed their fancies withall. Thus farre Caesar. Moreouer of these people we may read the very same things almost in Polybius, Orosius, Trebellius and Vopiscus. But this peculiar custome of theirs, which they haue in their councels and assemblies, is not to be omitted, which is (as Strabo reporteth) thus: if saith hee, any man among them with noise or other tumult troubleth him that is speaking, the sergeant commeth vnto him with a naked sword or knife in his hand, and commandeth him to hold his peace, threatning him therewith: thus he doth three times, and then if the party holdeth not his peace, and be not quiet, he cutteth off so much of h s cassocke, that all the rest shalbe good for no vse at all. Diodorus and Strabo affirme them to be sharpe witted, and not without some smattering know∣ledge of learning: So likewise doth Symmachus, who commendeth their studies in good lettets. Polybius more maliciously bent against them is not ashamed to say that they nei∣ther apply themselues to learning nor to any maner of trade. But now heare what Hirtius reporteth of them: They be plaine dealing men, and no way deceitfull, they vse to fight their battels by prowesse and not by treacherie. Likewise Strabo thus commendeth them: they be of an honest disposition, without fraud or guile, and no whit malicious or spite∣full. Is it not for this cause thinke you, that of the same authour in another place they are called Simplices, simple? of Seruius, Pigrioris ingenij, of a dull wit? of Firmicus, stolidos, foo∣lish? of Iulian, Stupidos & rusticitatem amantes, blockish and affecting a certaine kind of clownishnesse? But on the contrary side, hearke what Lucius Florus writeth: Let no man only cal the French fierce or stout; for they are crafty fellowes and can do what they entend, very politickely. Is this falsly? Or is it true, and likely that they learned it afterwards of the Romanes? Who (as Trogus recordeth) had sent Seruilius into Africa and had giuen him a priuy charge, if by any meanes he could, to make away Hanniball through the helpe of those, who most of all enuied his greatnesse. But neither was this true, being improued by Iulian the Emperour, that was an eie-witnesse, and daily conuersant amongst them, and therefore the rather in this case to be beleeued, who not only after the aforesaid Florus, but also after all ancient writers whatsoeuer, giueth this commendation of them: to wit, that they know not how to Hatter: they liue honestly and simply without deceit or dissimulation with all men, according to the lawes of iustice and equity: they only intertaine Venus, the goddesse of marriage, for wedlocke and issue; and Bacchus, the authour of mirth, that they may haue a sufficient competency of wine to drinke. Aelian reporteth that of all men liuing they are the readiest to vndergo dangers: Florus saith, that they be Immanissimos, most sauage: Cicero and Eumenus, Immanes & barbaros, cruell and barbarous: Lucane, Trogus and Hegesippus, Feroces, fierce: Auienus and Seneca, Truces, stern or grin: Cassiodorus, Crudeles, cruell: Lucan, Sanguineos, bloudy: Lampridius saith that they haue Duras & retrogradas mentis, hard and backsliding false harts. Vopiscus affirmeth that they be, Gentium omnium inquietissimos, of all nations the vnquietest: Liuy and Polybius, Molles & effoeminatos, delicate and effeminate and the same Polybius in another place, faithlesse and giuen much to surfettings and drunkennesse; which same thing also Diodorus Athe∣naeus and Clemens Alexandrinus doe confirme to be true. The afore-cited Liuy sayth, that they are exceedingly prone to anger, which this nation is not able to bridle or mode∣rate, and withall they are very couetous. Mela writeth that they be proud and superstitious: Silius, Vaniloquos, vaine bablers and Plutarch in his Pyrrhus, that they are exceeding co∣uetous of money. Such like praises hath this nation, but all of them proceeding from a deadly sore, and therefore let them approoue and iustifie the truth of these their assertions. Neuerthelesse there be extant, amongst other, these two examples of their cruelty: the one of them in Togus, who writeth that in their warre and fight against Antigonus, when by diuination by the inwards of beasts offered in sacrifice, their vtter destruction and ouerthrow was foretold; they not cast into any amazement or feare, but rather rapt with furie and madnesse, killed their wiues and children, beginning the hopefull successe of this warre with a most vnnaturall murder &c. The other example you may see in Lucius Flo∣rus, who deliuereth that some of them taken prisoners in battell, did assay to bite and gnaw atwo the chaines they were bound withall, and that they did cut one anothers throats. Vnlesse a man would rather thinke that these were proofes and examples of their loue of liberty. For both Orosius and Leo the Emperour haue left in writing that this people is most desirous of liberty. Notwithstanding Pausanias in his Phocicam, sheweth their great valour in that battell at Thermopilae. I cannot but woonder in my mind at Marcus Victorinus, who calleth these men dastards, cowards and such as put more trust in their heels than in their hands, whom Claudian calleth couragious; and Salust, warl ke, puissant, mighty in armes and feats of warre before the Romanes. Or doth this Victorinus happily interprete thus these words of Caesar? As their courage is forward and ready to enterprise and begin warre, so haue they womanish and faint harts to suffer and endure calamities? or these of Liuy? In the first onset or assault the Gauls are more stout than men, but at last they are more faint-harted than women: or these words of the same authour? Often vse hath proued this to be true; If you can endure and sustaine the first onset, which they make in hot bloud and desperate fury, their bodies faint with sweat and wearinesse, so that they are not able to beare vp their weapons &c. or this in like maner of Flo∣rus? It hath beene found true by experience, that like as their first assault is more than mens, so their last are lesse than womens.
They agree in this one property with the snow of their country: for assoone as they are hot in battell, presently they sweat extremely. And if they stirre ne∣uer so little they melt like snow in the Sunne. Or, this of Dion? The Gauls are carried with vnsatiable lust to performe all matters whatsoeuer they go about, in so much that they know no meane either of boldnesse or of feare, but one while they fall of a sudden from boldnesse into fearefulnesse; and by and by from feare into desperate rashnesse. Or this iudgement of Strabo which he giueth of them? It is a warlike and fierce nation, very forward in fight. Therefore being pro∣uoked to battell they fight vpon heapes thronging together and do lie very open: and that very vncircumspectly. Whereby it commeth to passe that they are ea∣sily entrapped, it their enemy vsing but some stratageme, at his best aduantage, doe traine them out to ioine battell, being appointed and armed with nothing beside strength and desperatenesse. Leo the Emperour in his booke De Bellico apparatu, determineth of them farre otherwise. The Frenchmen (saith he) are stout of courage, valiant in warre. To be faint harted and to giue ground neuer so little they account a great disgrace, and do esteeme it no better than running a∣way &c. Now then if this nation be so womanish and cowardous, so vnpatient of labour, so vnconstant and vnable to hold out in battell, doe but tell me (O thou Romane) why Cicero in his oration Pro Prouincijs Consularibus, did write that this Gallia was so terrible vnto thee? Why did Salust affirme that all Italy did tremble and quake for feare of this people; in so much, that the Romanes did not vse to contend with them for glory and ambition, but only for safegard of their liues and country? How happeneth it, that in Trogus we find these words of the kings of the East? There was so great a terrour of the French name, and of their successe in all warres so prosperous; that these supposed themselues neuer able to keepe either their maiesty out of danger, nor to recouer it againe, being decai∣ed or lost, without the helpe of the French valour and prowesse. And why doth Appian, in his second booke of Ciuill warres, say, that they did strinke such a ter∣rour to the Romanes, that in the law, wherein freedome from seruice in warre was granted to Priests and old men, the French warres were only excepted? So∣sipater, out of Varro his second booke of Antiquities, gathereth, that the Gauls did most ingeniously affect two things, to wit, militarie knowledge, and elo∣quence. From hence is that of Iuuenal: Gallia ve potius nutricula cansidicorum. Whether France should France intituled be or Lawyers nurse I know not certainly. Item in another place: Gallia causidicos docuit facunda Britannos. The prating Frenchmen first did teach, The Englishman to plead at barre. Was this true in Iuue∣nals time? or did he rather prophecie of times to come? For this misery our nation neuer felt till the daies of William the First. Columella in his first booke of Husbandrie saith, that Sine causidicis satis felices olim fuere futurae{que} sunt vrbes. Saint Ambrose, in his Epistle vnto Rusticus, highly extolleth the most flourishing studies of France; and the copiousnesse of the French tongue; and Claudian in his fourth Panegyricke of the consulship of Honorius, commendeth the learned inhabi∣tants of France. Concerning their warefare take these few things gathered out of ancient writers: and first out of Caesar. This is the maner of the Gals (saith he) when they begin any warres they appoint a generall muster, to which by a common law, all the yong striplings are compelled to come in their armour: and he that commeth last of all, is in the open sight of all the rest, with all kind of most cruell torments, put to death. Out of Strabo: Their armour according to their stature is a long sword hanging on the right side, along target, speares sutable thereunto (which Diodorus reporteth to bee headed with iron, a cubite or some∣what more in length, and little lesse than two handfuls broad) and a kind of iaueling called Meris, or rather, as some learned men do affirme, Materis, and to bee the same with that kind of weapon which Caesar calleth Matara. Some of them also vse bowes and slings. They haue moreouer another weapon of wood in forme of a dart, which they fling not with a thong fastned to the middle, [as the Irishmen at this day vse] but meerly with the bare hand, & yet for all that they will throw it further than an archer can shoote. Nonius out of Varro maketh mention of a kind of weapons, proper to the Frenchmen, called Gesa, in these words: Qui gladijs cincti siue scuto cum binis gesis. That is, which were armed with swords and bucklers with two Gesaes. Concerning them also Virgil writeth thus: — Duo Quis{que} Alpina corruscant Gesa manu. Two Geses weapons which the Frenchmen vse to brandisn did ech party chuse. Seruius in his Comments vpon this place doth interprete them, Hastas viriles, manlike speares: and addeth moreouer that valiant souldiers were woont to bee called in the French tongue Gesi. But it ought in∣deed to be written with ae the dipthong, Gaesa: (of which you may see what we haue deliuered in the old mappe of Spaine, or M. Clarencieux Camden his Bri∣tannia, where hee hath learnedly handled this argument, and for this word, amongst the rest, shall satisfie thee to thy fill.) From hence, it may bee, it is that a kind of people there were named Gaesati, because they did weare and vse these Geses. Touching which I haue written more at large in my Thesaurus. The foresaid authour affirmeth that their horsemen be better than their footmen: and that these horsemen did vse to come to the field with many carts and great car∣riages. Liuy also and Pomponius Mela do deliuer that they skirmish in chariots and waggons. The same likewise doth Strabo affirme of them, but that he cal∣leth these waggons, Esseda, which is all one. Out of these charriots (saith Diodorus) they first throw a dart at their enemy comming against them: then after∣ward forsaking their chariots they fight on foot with their swords. I do vnderstand out of Vegetius that in skirmishes they did vse to fight in troupes and seuerall bands containing in number six thousand armed men apiece. Cateruas, he calleth them: Of which word, as also of Essedum, see M. Camdens Britannia. They were naked all aboue the nauill, saue only that they couered their bodies, although very meanly god woot, with a long target, which was not broad inough for the largenesse of their bodies, as Liuy and Polybius do testifie. Likewise Gauls were Scutis protecti corpora longis: shielded their bodies with long targets, as Virgil reporteth. These targets being about the heigth of a man in length, were, as euery man thought fit, adorned with certaine formes and pictures of liuing creatures, embossed and somewhat bearing out higher than the surface of the target it selfe, as Diodorus writeth: who addeth in another place that they defended or ar∣med their heads with a brasen helmet higher then ordinary, wherein were ingrauen either hornes or portraitures of birds or beasts. The same authour witnesseth that they vsed trumpets in their warres. Their swords saith Polybius, were heauy; and very long, as Liuie writeth, and without points, as Strabo telleth vs: made onely for this purpose, that they might wound the enemie with downe-right blowes: whereupon Virgil, (as Seruius noteth) writeth, Altè consurgit in ensem, that is, he lifteth vp his sword on high to giue the greater blow: with which if they did hit, they cut off the heads of their foes at one stroke. Yet notwithstanding these swords were made without art and of a soft kind of iron, as Polyaenus affirmeth in his eigth booke. Wherefore of these same weapons thus gathereth Sui∣das out of Polybius. They are so made that at the first onset they giue one blow, and then presently are so crooked and bended both in length and breadth, that vnlesse you grant them space immediately to retire and to strengthen them with their feet, the next stroke can do no hurt. Diodorus termeth them Spathae, and saith that they hang by a brasen chaine on the right side. Neuerthelesse Iulius Pollux commendeth this French sword, calling it by the Greeke name (machaera.) Polybius, Strabo and Diodorus do teach that they wore about their neckes gold chaines, (which gaue occasion to Virgil to say —Lactea colla Auro innectuntur—. Their lilly white neckes adorn'd with gold.) and about their armes and hands, costly bracelets: and those amongst them that were in place and authority, did weare garments died and garded with gold, (Atque aurea vestis, golden garments the French did weare, saith Virgil.) They did adorne, saith Pliny, and set out their swords, shields, and head-peeces with corall. Some of them also saith Diodore, gilded their iron breast-plates. When they go to battell there is among them such singing, howling, showting, dancing, such noise of targets, which they shake after their countrie fashion and the fearefull clattering of armour so great, that all places round about did seeme to ring therewith, as Polybius and Liuy do iointly testifie. Strabo also and Diodorus affirme, that they did fight against the enemie with dogs. Moreouer they carried with them to the wars (if we may beleeue Possidonius in Athenaeus) parasites, whom they would haue to sing songs in their honour and commendation: and indeed the same thing is auouched by Diodorus. If they haue got the vpper hand of their enemies in battell, they are woont to sacrifice their captiues vnto their Gods, as Athenaeus, vpon the testimonie of Sosipater verilie thinketh. When they returne from battell, (heere what Strabo reporteth of them) they hang the heads of their enemies vpon the manes of their horses and set them vp vpon the towne gates, to be viewed and seene of of all men. But the heads of Noblemen, (heare Diodorus) embalmed with spices, they lay vp in cases with the greatest care that may bee; shewing them to strangers, and will not part with them, either to their parents or to any other their friends, for any money. Liuy writeth, that they did offer vp in triumph, the spoiles of dead bodies, and the head being cut off from the body, in their temple, which is held in greatest reuerence amongst them. Afterward, the head being cleansed, as their maner is, they gild the skull, and that they esteeme for an holy vessell, wherein they drinke at solemne feasts and sacrifices. And this is the cup of the Priests and rulers of the temple. Whereupon Silius writeth thus: At Celtae vacui capitis circumdare Sueti Ossa (nefas) auro & mensis ea pocula seruant. But this vile custome do the Celtes obserue The heads from carcase of their foes to pull: Which set in gold most curiously they carue, And in steed of cuppes doe quaffe in dead mens scull. Of the ordering of their Horse battell which they call Trimarcisia, read Pausanias in his Phocica. Likewise of their Silodunes, as Athenaeus, or Soldures, (souldiers) as Caesar termeth them, reade these aforenamed authours, and, if you please, ad vnto them those things which Leo the Emperour hath writ∣ten in his eighteenth booke De Bellico apparatu, in the eighty and eight section. Now it remaineth that we speake something also of their common maner of liuing. Throughout all Gallia, (saith Caesar) there be but two sorts of men, that are made account of, and had in any great estimation; the one are the Druides, the other are their Knights. These knights (of the Druides we haue spoken at large in our mappe of Gallia described by Caesar) when need is and when any warre chanceth, giue themselues altogether to feats of armes. And among them, as any man is of greatest birth and ability, so hath he about him more seruants and retainers. The Druides are occupied about holy things: they haue the charge of publike and priuate sacrifices; and do interpret and discusse matters of religion &c. For the communalty is kept vnder in maner like slaues: and the noble men may lawfully deale with them in all points as with their slaues. They do not suffer their sons to come in their presence openly, vntill such time as being men growen, they be able to supply the roomes of souldiers: and they count it a shame, that the sonne as long as he is a boy, should be seene abroad in his fathers company. Looke how much money the men do receiue with their wiues in name of their dowry, they make an estimate of their owne goods and lay so much in valew thereunto: all the which is occupied together in one stocke, and the increase thereof is reserued, and which of them soeuer ouerliueth other, the stocke with the encrease of the former yeares falleth to the suruiuer. The men haue ouer their wiues, like as ouer their children, authority of life and death, &c. Thus much wee haue collected out of the sixth booke of Caesars commentaries, where thou maist reade of many other things to this purpose, well worth the obseruation. Diodorus Siculus affirmeth that their women are very goodly personages, and for bignesse of bone and strength, little inferiour to the men: they are very fruitfull and good nources, or, as Strabo reporteth very good breeders and bringers vp of children. They, as Plutarch in the eigth booke of his Symposion, writeth, did vsually bring, when they went to the bath to wash themselues, together with their children and little ones, the skillet and pappe wherewith they vsed to feed them. A notable example of their worth and valour, thou shalt find in his booke of vertues, where hee sheweth that it grew into a custome amongst them, that both for matters at home in time of peace, and abroad in time of warre, they vsed the counsell and aduise of their wiues, and whatsoeuer was done it was partly done by their appointment. Polyaenus also in his seuenth booke reporteth the very same thing of them. Notwithstanding that their women are most beautifull, yet, as Athenaeus and Diodorus do both affirme, they are much giuen to buggery and to loue boies be∣yond all measure. But whether this be true or not I cannot tell. I would rather beleeue that it was not generally affirmed of all the Gauls; but rather specially of those which did inhabite that part of the countrey which was called Gallia Braccata, where the Massilyans, a people descended from the Greekes, did dwell, whose wantonnesse, and effeminate maners, those adagies or prouerbes cited by Suidas, Massiliam venis, and Massiliam nauiges do manifestly reproue for this fault. Hither also I do referre that which I haue read in the ninth booke of Clemens his Recognitions, spoken as I suppose vpon this very same occasion: There was an ancient law or custome among the Gauls, saith he, which did ordaine that to a new married man boies should be giuen openly and in the sight of all the compa∣ny, which was accounted no maner of shame or dishonesty amongst them. And I verily thinke that Strabo spake of this their vsage, in these his words: It was held for no maner of vnseemely thing amongst them, if they did commit buggery with yong men of one or two and twenty yeares old. Of the Celtae also this saying of Stobaeus is not to be omitted: where he writeth, that it was a more hainous crime & offence amongst thē more seuerely punished, if one did kil a stranger, than if one should kill one of his owne countrey men: for this was but banishment, the other was death. But was not this thinke you a law only against such mur∣thers as were committed in via Heraclea? Their apparrell they did ordinarily weare, as Strabo testifieth, was a kind of cassocke somewhat like the Spanish cloake (Saga it is called of the Latines) of which Virgil in these words maketh mention, virgatis lucent sagulis: Trimme they shine in strip'd rugs: They were wouen of a course kind of wooll, and were called in their language Laenae, (yet the iudicious Casaubone in his learned commentaries vpon this place of Strabo, thinketh that the place is corrupt, and that we ought rather to reade Chlenas, than Laenas) They did also weare breeches, (braccae, they call them) set out and bumbasted, or loose, as Lucane saith. In steed of coates they vsed a slit sleeued garment which came downe to their twist and buttockes: and as Martiall saith Dimidias{que} nates Gallica palla tegit: A curtalled pall the Gauls did weare, that scarce would hide their taile. This kind of garment is still in vse heere in the Low countries, made in the very
selfe same forme and fashion and is called in our language a Pallatrocke; for Rocke with the Flemings, is asmuch as Vestis in Latine, a weed, or vesture. Aristotle in the seuenth booke of his Politickes, in my iudgement, speaketh of this kind of garment, when he saith that the Gauls did weare a kind of short gabbardine. The forenamed Martiall doth speake of a kind of weed vsed amongst the Gauls which he calleth Bardocucullus Santonicus, The hooded cloake of Xantoigne. But Pliny beside these, maketh mention of another kind of vesture vsuall amongst them, in these his words: Wooll of it selfe, driuen together and wrought in maner of a felt, doth make a knid of cloath: and if in the making of it, you do worke it with vineger, it will be so stiffe and solide that you shall not be able to pierce it with the stroake of a sword: this I thinke was first inuented by the Frenchmen. The same authour reporteth that these people did first make that cloth that is damasked with scutcheons or lozēge-work. In Isidorus, out of Plautus these words are cited, Linnae cooperta est textrino Gallia. For the sēse of which I refer to the author himself, for the copies of Isidorus are here very corrupt. Diodorus Siculus saith that they did vse to weare rings vpon their fingers: yet Pliny reporteth that they wore them only vpon the middle finger. Caesar testifieth that they tooke pleasure in oxen, and such kind of labouring beasts. Now in like maner we will speake somewhat of their diet and maner of liuing. They vsed in their seruices earthen vessels, very thicke and strong, and goodlily set out with flowres. At supper they generally all of them sit, not vpon stooles, but on the ground vpon woolues skinnes or dogges skinnes spread vpon the same. Strabo saith that at their meat they sit vpon beds or pallades lying vpon the ground. They are serued at their tables with little boies. Hard by them is the fire, where the pots with boiled meats hang see thing, and spits full of roast meat are continually going, as Diodorus reporteth. Their meats for the most part are porke and bacon; yea and sometime they eate anie other kind of flesh whatsoeuer, and that oft times is dressed with milke, as Strabo hath left recorded. But Athenaeus words, which hee citeth out of Posidonius, are worth the noting: The Celtae make their drinkings vpon tables of wood, with a little hay strowed vnderneath; these tables be not very high from the ground. They haue bread, (which, as Pliny writeth, they make light with leauen) but of it they haue no great quantity: their meat is a great deale of flesh sodde in water, broiled vpon the coales, or roast vpon spits. This, when it is brought to the boord, they take vp whole in both their hands, and like rauening lions doe teare it with their teeth: but if there be any of it so tough that they cannot easily gnaw it, that they cut in smaller pieces with a little knife. Their bankets they vse to furnish with all kind of fish, both fresh-fish, sea-fish, and shel-fish, whatsoeuer kind, I meane, that either the fresh riuers, or brackish seas do affoord. These they broile and dresse with salt, vineger and cummin seed, which things also they vse to put into their pots. If many do meet at one table together, they sit round in maner of a circle. The best man alwaies sitteth in the middest: him I terme the best man, that either for martiall prowesse, nobility, or wealth doth excell the rest. The seruitoures, skinkers, or such as do waite at the boord, do carrie drinke to the table in pots like pitchers, either of potters mettall, or else of cleane siluer. Of the same mettall are their dishes and platters, in which they serue in their meat. Yet some of them haue them of brasse: other some in steed of platters do vse ba∣skets, made of twigs or osiers. The wealthier sort do drinke wine brought from Italy, or from the country neere about Marseilles, and that for the most part is of the pure grape, yet sometime they allay it or brew it with a little water: dercoma, they call it. They suppe it vp by a little and little out of the same cuppe, being euery foot sipping and bibbing. A boy carrieth about the pot in both his hands. But Pliny testifieth that they made a kind of drink, of steeped corne, so strong that it would make a man drunke. Diodorus Siculus writeth that they had a kind of drinke, which they call Zythum, (we now cal it Ale, the Britans as Dioscorides testi∣fieth called it Curmi, or Curw as now the Welchmen pronounce the word.) Item the same authour saith that they made another kind of drink of the water wherein they had washed or sod hony combes, (this now we call Mead:) yea and Ammianus Marcellinus saith that they did make and inuent euery day many new kinds of drinke in despite of wine, to counterfet it so neere as they could. I reade also in Diodorus Siculus that they did vse to eate mans flesh. But whether is this to be vnderstood of their enemies flesh only, and of such as they ouercome in battell? For that they did thus at the field fought at Thermopylae, Pausanias doth flatly affirme. Or, whether do you thinke that he so spake of them in regard that they sacrificed men vnto their gods? For this was done, as Pliny reporteth, in such sort, that it was somwhat like as if they had gnawen them. Notwithstanding in Sextus Rufus we reade of the Scordisci Galli, that they vsed to drinke mans bloud, out of the skuls of their enemies which they had conquered in the field. Moreouer Diodorus writeth that they vsed to bid strangers & trauellers to their tables, & after supper or dinner then to ask what they are, wherfore they come, whence they are, and whether they will. They vsed also when they had filled their bellies, fal∣ling into talk vpon any argument as occasion should offer it self, to fal out, and so to rise and challenge one another into the fields, no whit respecting their liues or limmes: and that in this manner, as Posidonius in Athenaeus reporteth: They being armed, saith he, challenge one another to fight aloofe, clashing onely the points of their swords, neuer comming neere there by the length of their weapons, as if they were afraid to hurt one another: yet notwithstanding sometime it falleth out that one of them is hurt; and then except the standers by doe part them, and keepe them a sunder, they will not giue ouer till it hath cost one of them his life: whereupon peraduenture Horace said, Non pauentis funera Galliae, And desperate France that fear'th no death. In old time also it was an ancient custome amongst them, that when the quarters and ioints of mutton were set vpon the table, the strongest and tallest man of them would take the legge, which if so be any other would challenge as due to him, and would offer to take it out of his hand, it must cost one of them his life. Others do take vp in the theater gold, or siluer, or a certaine number of hogges-heads of wine: and assoone as they haue bound themselues with an oath that they will endure that, for which they had receiued these gifts: then taking them, and distributing them vnto their most inward and dearest friends, they stretch themselues out straight vpon their backes, and lay them downe vpon their shields, one standing by that is to stabbe them in their throat and cut off their necke with a sword. They lie downe to sleepe on grasse or rushes strowed vpon the ground, as Polybius testifieth: or vpon deares skinnes, as Diodorus recordeth. In the thirteenth booke of Athenaeus, where you shall find these words, in my iudgement, spoken of Braccata Gallia, (They lie vpon skins betweene two Ganimedes:) For I am verily perswaded, and I thinke all wise men with me, that he meant the Grecians of Marseilles, and not the true and ancient Gauls whose maner it was, as before we haue noted out of Iulian the Emperour, that they vsed that act only for the procreation of children. Their houses and habitations, saith Caesar, for the most part were in woods, or vpon the bankes of brookes and riuers, thereby to shelter themselues from the violence of the Sunne, and heat of Sommer: and those, Vitruuius writeth, were made and couered ouer with oken shingles, or else with straw. Strabo affirmeth that they are built in a maner round, of planks and hardles, couered with a great roofe, made taper-wise or sugar loafe fashion: this roofe, as Pliny writeth, was of stubble. Their gates, if we may beleeue Nicolaus in Stobaeus, did continually stand open. Iulianus the Emperour, in his Misopogonus, relateth a tale, whereby we gather that they had the vse of hot-houses or stoues, such as still to this day are v∣sed in some places of this countrie. Villages they haue, as Polybius noteth, without any wals or rampart for defence against the assault of the enemies: For Tro∣gus reporteth that they learned of them of Marseilles, to enclose their townes with wals and ramparts. The maner of building and fashion of which wals thou maist vnderstand out of the seuenth booke of Caesars commentaries: where moreouer thou shalt find this that followeth: when any great or notable mat∣ter falleth out they giue notice of it through the fields and countries by lowd cries or proclamations one vnto another, and so still forwards, like vnto our hue and cries, vntill it stay at the outmost border of the kingdome. Ammianus in his fiue and twentieth booke saith that they gaue themselues much to swimming. In hunting, as I gather out of Cornelius Celsus, they were woont to strike the deere with a venomed arrow. Item Aulus Gellius out of Pliny citeth these words of the same argument: The Gauls when they went on hunting, were woont to dippe their arrow heads in the iuice of hellebore, verily beleeuing that the flesh of such deere as were stroken and killed with them, was farre more tender than otherwise it would be: but by reason of the venome of the hellebore, they say they did vse to cut off round about, a great deale of the flesh where the arrow went in. Item Pliny also maketh mention of the hearb limeum, wherewith they made a kind of ointment, which they call venenum ceruarium, Hart-poison, with which in hunting they do besmeare their arrowes. Aristotle in his Admiranda, sheweth that amongst the Celtae there is a kind of poison found, called by them Toxicum, (the Latine interpreter did read Xenicum, that is, strange) which infecteth and kil∣leth so speedily, that the hunters of that country when they haue stricken a deere with an arrow dipped in the iuice of this herb, they runne with all speed, and do presently cut out all that flesh neere round about where the arrow went in, lest the venome spreading it selfe further and further, the whole deere should putrifie and so be marred and good for nothing &c. Pliny maketh me beleeue that this confection or poison was made of the yeugh-tree (taxus, they call it) where hee saith that those poisons, which we now call toxica, wherewith they did besmere their arrowes, were sometimes called taxica. Of the poison and venemous na∣ture of the yeugh-tree, we haue entreated before. But there was a tree which grew amongst the Celtae much like vnto a figge-tree, whose fruit that it bare, was fashioned like vnto the chapter of the Corinthiacke pillar. This fruit being cutte doth yeeld a iuice, wherein if any man shall dippe his arrowes, whatsoeuer hee shall strike therewith, will presently die of that wound, as Strabo affirmeth from the report of others. That the Gauls did not feare the danger of Earth-quakes, Aristotle and Plutarch do plainlie testifie. But whether it be true or false, I dare not affirme. Another notable example (except one should thinke it to be a feined and forged tale) of great boldnesse or rather of desperate rashnesse, I find in Aelianus his varia historia, which is thus: They do account it, saith he, so fowle and shamefull a thing to flie or runne away, that oft times they will make no hast to get from vnder houses that they see are ready to fall vpon their heads, nay they will hardly out of those houses that are on fire, so that many times they be burnt to ashes in the flame. Many of them also will stand still vntill the waues and tide of the sea do runne quite ouer them. Moreouer some of them will cast themselues into the sea in their armour, and with their swords drawne, and shaking of their speares, daren the tide, as if they could either fraie or wound the same. Let the credulous Iew beleeue this, if he will, I beleeue neuer a word of it, although I know that Stobaeus, and before him Nicolaus, did verily beleeue it all to be true. Heere I do by experience find, that saying of Pliny to be very true, that There is hardly any greater disparagement to the truth, than when a false told is told by a graue authour. But may not one thinke, that I may requite one tale with another, that this was that sight, which Lucian in his Apologia writeth, that his friend Sabinus went as farre as the West ocean to see? Their funerals according to their maner and state are very gorgeous and costly: all things that the dead men in their life time did especially loue and affect, yea euen such liuing creatures as they best estee∣med, were cast into the fire and burnt: and not long since, within the memory of our forefathers, euen their seruants and followers, whom they loued extraor∣dinarily well, when all ceremonies of the funerall were done, were cast into the fire and burnt together with their Masters or Mistresses; thus Caesar reporteth of them. To this Pomponius Mela addeth, That with the dead they burne and burie in the ground all things that they commonly vsed when they were aliue: their accoumpts and debts were deferred till doomes day. Some there were of them which would willingly cast themselues into the fires and graues of their friends, verily perswading themselues that they should still liue together with them: Item Diodorus Siculus reporteth, that some of them would cast into the fire where their friends deceased were burnt to ashes, their letters, verily beleeuing that they would reade them there: For that opinion of Pythagoras, of the immortality of the soule, had taken footing and deepe root amongst them: being perswaded that afterward, the bodies being dead, in processe of time they should againe returne into other bodies. Listen also what Valerius Maximus saith of this matter: It was an ancient custome saith he, amongst the Gauls, as old records do verifie, vsu∣ally to lend money in this world, to be paid againe in the world to come. Which the forenamed authour termeth Philosophiam foeneratoriam, A couetous or mi∣serly kind of Philosophie, practised then by some vsurers. But can you tell where now a man may borrow an hundred pounds, vpon good security, till that day? I doubt whether there be any pale-faced cut-throat vsurer, glorious smooth-tongued gold-smith, crafty mocke-lawyer Scriuener, or any rag-merchant broker, in this our city, that was euer Pythagoras scholler. This Iewish sect are all, I thinke by their practise, of the opinion of the Sadduces, who thought and taught that there was no resurrection of the soule to be expected after this life. It is no wonder or strange matter to thinke that the Gauls were of this opinion, if so bee that be true, that one Alexander in Clemens Alexandrinus doth tell of, namely, that Pythagoras did trauell into France. Tertullian out of Nicander doth write that they vsed to he abroad all night vpon the graues and tombes of valiant men: and there to expect the answeare of some of oracle. I care not an halfe penny for that opinion of the great Orateur Tully, in that his oration which he made for Marcus Fonteius, where he writeth that The Gauls are hardly addicted to follow any religion at all: For Liuy, although in other things he be partiall and dealeth hardly with this nation, yet he plainly affirmeth that they be not very backeward in religion: And Caesar, in his seuenth booke of the warres of France, who throughly well knew this people, saith, that they were much giuen to religion, and seruice of some god or other. Item he saith, That they did especially worship god Mercury, of whom there were amongst them many images and statues, they affirming him to be the authour and inuentour of all arts and sciences: him also they hold to be their guide and leader in all iourneies and waies through which they are to trauell: him they supposed to haue a great power and stroke in all maner of trafficke and gainfull trade for money: to him they offered mans flesh in sacrifice, as Minutius Felix writeth. Besides him they did also worship Apollo, Mars, Iupiter and Minerua. Of these their gods they held the very same opinion,
that other nations of the world did: viz. That Apollo being praied vnto, did driue away all diseases. Minerua first taught the grounds of all arts and occupations: Iupiter, did rule and moderate the motion of the heauens: Mars, was president and guardian of the warres: That the Celtae did honour Iupiter, whose image or statue was a most goodly tall oake, Maximus Tyrius doth plainly testifie. Of Mercury heare what Pliny in the seuenth chapter of his fowre and thirtieth doth write: Zenodorus, saith he, in our time did in the city Clermont or Auvergne (Aruerniae, the ancients called it) make the greatest and most gorgeous statue that euer was made in the world: who there for tenne yeares together working vpon the statue of Mercury, had for his hire H S. CCCC. that is, as some men reade it, fowre hundred thousand sestertioes; which do amount in our money to 3333. pounds, sixe shillngs and eight pence. Strabo doth testifie that Diana, the E∣phesian Goddesse, had a temple at Marseils. Item, Polyaenus witnesseth, that the French-greekes (Gallo-graeci) did worship Diana: which Plutarch, in his booke of the Fortitude of women, doth auouch to be true. But beside this Diana, they worship another by them sirnamed Arduenna, as is verified by an ancient inscrip∣tion in marble, of which we shall speake more anone. This goddesse by all probability seemeth to haue beene worshipped in the forrest Arduenna. For although it be there written DEANAE ARDVENNAE, yet I thinke there is no man meanly seene and trauelled in ancient inscriptions, that is ignorant that by it is meant Dianae Arduennae: For the ancient Romanes did oft times vse I, for E, and contrariwise E, for I, as the learned can beare me witnesse. And in honour of her was this forrest Arduenna consecrated and made holy, or rather as I thinke heere was some temple erected and dedicated to her seruice, built either by the an∣cient Gauls, so deuout and religiously giuen, as before is shewed, or, if you like that better, by the Romanes themselues, as in the greatest and most renowmed forest or wood within the compasse of their whole Empire, a place most worthy and best beseeming this goddesse. And what maruell I pray you? being, I say, a place most fit and conuenient for this goddesse Diana, to inhabite and make her abode in? For she is called of all ancient heathen writers Venatrix, Nemoralis, Nemorum & syluarum Dea, virgo & custos; The goddesse of hunting, the goddesse of the woods, chases and forests; and the maiden keeper of the same: Lactantius, Lucane and Minutius Felix do affirme that they had three gods which they in their language called Esus, or Hesus, Teutates, and Taranus: But the learned, for the most part, by them do vnderstand Mars, Mercury and Iupiter: See M. Camdens Britannia. In Ausonius there is mention made of a god of theirs which they na∣med Belenus: whom Herodian, by the iudgement of the learned Iulius Scaliger, calleth Belis: And whether this be the same with Tibilenus, whereof Tertullian maketh mention, Petrus Pithaeus in his Aduersaria doth most learnedly dispute; and doth there interprete it to be the same that Apollo is to the Greekes. More∣ouer Abellio was one of their gods, as the forenamed Scaliger, at the same place, out of an ancient inscription, doth teach vs. The same authour also maketh men∣tion of Onuana, a goddesse of theirs. Saint Austen, in his bookes of the city of God, doth affirme that they had certaine vncleane spirits or diuels, called by them Dusij, in the catalogue and number of their gods. But whether they did worship the god Serapis, (the same peraduenture with Pluto) the aboue-mentioned P. Pi∣thaeus, out of certaine words, of the sixteenth booke of Ammianus Marcellinus his history, doth in the third chapter of his Aduersaria, at large and learnedly di∣scourse: to whom I referre thee for farther satisfaction. Out of Florus also we learne that they worshipped Vulcane for a god: who writeth that they did promise to giue him the armour and weapons of the Romanes their enemies. Athenaeus saith that they turned their faces toward the right-hand when they did their ser∣uice to their gods. Of this matter, Plinie in the second chapter of his eight and twentieth booke, writeth thus: In worshipping of the gods wee offer to kisse the right hand, and withall we wind and sway about the whole body: which the Gauls did hold to be more religious, if it were done toward the left hand. To these they did offer in their sacrifices, men and other things, but especially vnto Mars, as Caesar testifieth, who thus writeth of them: To him, (namely to Mars) when they haue fought any battell, for the most part they do bequeath those things that they haue wonne in the field: those beasts and liuing creatures that they conquere and take they kill and offer them for sacrifice: all other things whatsoeuer they bring into one place: In diuers cities, in certaine holy and conse∣crated places, you may see great heapes of these things: and you shall hardly euer find any man so backward in religion or so vngodly, that either will hide and conceale such things as he hath gotten in the field, or that will dare to take away ought that hath beene once consecrated and laid vp in those sacred and religious places: and if so be that any man be either so prophane, or hardly that dareth take ought away, he is to bee punished, by their lawes, with most cruell tortures. Diodorus Siculus reporteth the very like of them, They doe keepe, in the chappels and temples of their gods, saith he, great store of gold, which hath from time to time beene offered to them, lying scattering heere and therein euery corner: and yet no one man for his life, (such is their great superstition) dareth bee so bold as to touch one piece of it. But Caesar goeth on forward in the same discourse: They, saith he, which are sicke or much diseased, and such as are in any great danger, or are to follow the warres, for their sacrifices do either kill and offer other men, or else doe vow hauing obtained their purpose to sacrifice themselues: and in these their ceremonies they doe vse the aduise, direction and assistance of the Druides: And this they doe for this reason: namely, for that they doe verily beleeue that for the life of man preserued, the immortall gods can no way be satisfied and pleased but with the life and bloud of man: And therdfore for that pur∣pose they haue certaine sacrifices appointed to be publickly solemnized and done. Others haue certaine images of an huge and mighty bignesse: whose limmes and parts of the body, being made of osiers wreathen and roddled one within another, they fill full of liue men; these images being set on fire, the men within them are smoothered and at length with them burnt and vtterly consumed to ashes. The death and punishment of such as are apprehended for murther, or fello∣ny, or any other odious crime, they thinke to be much more pleasing to the gods, than the death and sacrifice of other men: but when there do want a sufficient number of such wicked men to furnish this tragedy, then honest guiltlesse men must be forced to play a part, and to vndergoe that punishment that they neuer de∣serued. Thus farre Caesar. The same almost, but much different in words, Strabo doth write of them: Some, saith hee, in their diuine ceremonies they shoot through with arrowes, or else doe hang them vp by the neckes till they be dead: and then making an huge colossus or stacke of hay, and sticking vpright a long pole in the midst of it, they burne altogether, sheepe and all kind of beasts and cattell, yea and reasonable creatures, men and women. Item Diodorus Siculus writeth of this matter thus: Condemned men, which they keepe for the space of fiue yeares together continually bound to a stake, at length together with other goods and cattels they sacrifice and burne in an huge bonne-fire. Minutius Felix also doth testifie, that to their god Mercurie they did vse to sacrifice men. Ter∣tullian in Apologetico, saith, that Maior aetas, Mercurio prosecatur, The ancienter sort are hewed in pieces and sacrificed to Mercury. So, that, it had beene much better for the Gauls, as Plutarch in his booke of Superstition, writeth, that they had neuer had any maner of knowledge of the gods at all, then to haue beleeued that they might no otherwise be pleased and satisfied, then with the liues and bloud of mortall men: and to thinke that this is the best and only solemne sacrifice and oblation that euer was vsed by any. Solinus also plainly affirmeth that this kind of sacrifice and detestable custome, was no maner of worship and seruice pleasing to the gods, but rather a great iniurie and wrong done to religion, much offending them. This custome of killing of men, was not vsed only when they offered sacrifices to their gods, but euen in their diuinations and sorceries. For they tooke those men that were appointed for the sacrifice or ceremonies, and striking them vpon the backe, by the panting of their bodies, they did gesse and diuine of the euent of that action intended, as Strabo doth witnesse of them. When they do deliberate or consult of any great matter, they do obserue, saith Diodorus, a woonderfull and strange kind of custome and ceremonious superstiti∣on. For going about to kill and sacrifice a man they strike him vpon the midriffe with a sword. But without the aduice and presence of one of their Druides, they may not offer any maner of sacrifice at all. And although that these butcherings and massacres of men were forbidden by Tiberius Caesar, as Pliny testifieth, yet Eusebius in his fourth booke de Praepar. Euang. doth greatly lament that they were still practised in his time, who liued, as all men know, in the daies of Constan∣tine the Great. It is recorded by Pliny, that these people did vse, in their sorceries, coniurations and answering to demands in maner of prophesying, the hearb verueine. And thus much of the three Galliaes in generall. Of which thou maist reade many other things in Caesar, Liuy, Ammianus, Strabo, Diodorus, Poly∣bius and Athenaeus. Something also might haue beene said of euery part particularly, if so bee that the smalnesse of this sheet, had beene capable of so large a di∣scourse: as also much might haue beene said of Gallia Narbonensis, the fourth part, which was a prouince of the Romanes, much differing from the other three in nature of soile, temperature of the aire, and quality of the inhabitants and people; which was, as Pomponius Mela writeth, better manured, inhabited, and more fertile, and therefore was also a farre more pleasant and goodly countrie than any of the rest. But of this we haue spoken in another place, apart by it sesfe. Behold the inscription, which we spake of before, and promised to acquaint thee withall. DIS. MANIBVS. Q. CAESIVS. Q. F. CLAVD. ATTILIANVS. SACERDOS. DEANAE. ARDVINNAE. FECIT. SIBI. ET. SVIS. HAERED. IN FR. P. XII. IN AGR. P. XV. IIII. ID. OCTOB. IMP. CAES. FLAVIO. DOMITIANO. VIII. ET. C. VALERIO. MESSALINO. COS. This marble stone was found with this inscription in the highway called Decia Salaria, by a place called the Seuen Bathes, (Septem Balneae) and from thence conueighed to Marcilianum, as Iulius Iacobonius, in his Adioinder to the commen∣taries of Baptist Fontey written of the ancient family and stocke of the Gaesij, citeth out of P. Ligorius. DIANA ARDOINNA also is mentioned in a certaine old inscription, in that worthy worke of Smetius, which he hath written and intituled De Inscriptionibus antiquis, in the eighth number of the two and twentieth leafe. Of other inscriptions, coines, statues, & such like monuments of the Gauls, or such as any way may illustrate the history of this country, if thou beest desirous of further instruction, we do counsell thee to haue recourse vnto the said Smetius, Fuluius Vrsinus, and others that haue of purpose written of that argument.
IVLIVS CAESARS GALLIA: That is, FRANCE, as it stood in Iulius Caesars time. SO I intitle this Mappe: For it is merely Caesars, that is, portraitured and drawen only by that which he hath layd downe in his Commentaries: we haue not added one word or any one place out of any other author: neither haue we, to our knowledge, omitted any place there mentioned by him: Thus much I thought good to aduertise thee of, gentle Reader, lest in vaine thou shouldest in this Map seeke for those things which other ancient writers haue written of Gallia. Of the nature of the country & people there inhabiting, I will not in like maner, which otherwise I vse to do, adde to these any one word out of any other wri∣ter: because euery one that listeth may do this out of Caesar alone, which is an authour very common, and to be found ordi∣narily in euery scholars study. For why should I do this out of others, when as the Map is only framed out of him? But in sted of this I thinke it not amisse here to compose this discourse following of the Druides, selected out of all ancient historians. Caesar in his sixth booke of the warres of France hath left recorded, that in France there were two sorts of men which were in estimation and credit aboue the common sort: One of these, sayth he, were the DRVIDES, the other were the KNIGHTS, (Equites.) Strabo nameth these three, the Bardi, Vates (Prophets) and Druides: like as Lucane doth in these verses, Laudibus in longum VATES dimittitis aeuum: Plurima securi fudistis carmina BARDI: Et vos Barbaricos ritus morém{que} si∣nistrum Sacrorum DRVIDAE &c. You Vates graue, of worthy men long tales do tell: For rymes and verse you carelesse Bardi eke do beare the bell. Of barbarous rites in things diuine you holy Druides write &c. Ammianus Marcellinus affirmeth the same, but that those which Lucane calleth Vates, he nameth Eubages. Diodorus Siculus maketh mention of the Bardi & Druides only; but the latter sort he calleth Saronides, by another & diuers name, yet of the same sense and signification. Pliny seemeth often times to terme them generally by one name Magi. Lucianus in Hercules Ogmios calleth them Philosophers. So much of the name: now somewhat of the persons themselues. The KNIGHTS, (equites) sayth Caesar, when need requireth, and any occasion of warre falleth out, do all go to warfare: and euery one of them, as he is of greater birth or reuenues, so he hath a greater retinue and number of ser∣uants attendant vpon him. Other honour and dignity than this they know none. The BARDI are Poets, as Athenaeus and Strabo ioyntly testifie, and did vsually sing songs and hymnes made in the commendations of famous and worthy men. They are musicall Poets, which do sing to the harpe or other instru∣ments of musicke, songs to the praise and commendations of some, and to the dispraise and disgrace of others. Festus Pompeius also affirmeth that these men did vsually sing ballads made in commendations of the valiant acts of worthy men; and withall he saith that Bardus, in the Gauls language, signifieth a Singer. Marcellinus of these Poets speaketh on this maner: The Bardi did vse to sing to the harpe, in very sweet & pleasant tunes, songs composed in heroicall verse, of the valiant acts of martiall men. In Strabo I obserue that these are called Vates, (Prophets) and did vse to offer sacrifice, and to study naturall philosophy. Ammianus (who termeth them Eubages) writeth thus of them: These men searched deeply into the secrets of Nature, and laboured to lay them open and plaine. The learned Petrus Pithoeus thinketh that all these words, Bardi, Vates, Eubages, Semnothei, and Saronides, are but synonymes of the Drui∣des. And for that I see whatsoeuer of diuers writers are attributed to all these seuerally, doe agree to that one of the Druides only, (as is very apparent by that which followeth) I am easily drawen to be of his opinion. The DRVIDES therefore or Druidae, (for in good authours I finde it thus diuersly written) were, as Diodorus saith, Philosophers and Diuines. Caesar sayth that their discipline and maner of learning was first found out and inuented in England, which also Tacitus in the 14 booke of his Annals shew∣eth and auoucheth to be true, and withall affirmeth that from thence it was translated into France, and that they that desired to be more skilfull in the same, for the most part went thither to schoole to be better instructed. But let vs describe them out of Caesars owne words, for no man hath done it more plainly, no man knew them better: They are present at diuine seruice, they prouide the sacrifices both publike and priuate, they expound the articles of their religion and do shew the vse of their ceremonies: To these great troups of youth, of all sorts, do flocke from all quarters, to be instructed in any matter of learning: these men are greatly esteemed and honoured of all men; for they doe end and determine almost all maner of controuersies, both priuate and publike: whatsoeuer is committed amisse against right and reason, whether it be of any murther that is done, or of any quarrell arising about any title of inheritance, succession or bounds of land betweene neighbour and neighbour, they do decide the controuersie; they do set and appoint all rewards and boones for such as haue deserued well of the state, and likewise punishments for such as are malefactours, and haue in ought offended the law. If there be any man whatsoeuer, whether it be one priuate man, or a whole multitude and society, that will not stand to their arbitrement, they presently suspended him from their sacrifices: this punishment amongst them is esteemed the greatest that may be inflicted vpon any man. They vse not to follow the warres, neither do they pay customes and subsidies as o∣ther men do. They are freed and priuiledged from the warres, and from any imposition and taske whatsoeuer. Whereupon (moued thereto by so many great inducements, liberties and immunities) many of their owne heads do go to them to schoole, others are sent thither by their parents and kinsfolke: there they are said to learne & con by heart an infinite number of verses; so that some of them do stay at schoole twenty yeres at least, before they can attaine to the height of that knowledge. Neither do they hold it lawfull to commit those things to writing, when as almost in all other matters, both in priuate and publike businesses they do vse the Grecke letters. This they seeme to me, to haue done for two causes: First for that they would not haue that kind of learning to be made common and to come into the hands of the vulgar sort: Secondarily, because they would not haue those which learne, to trust too much to their bookes, and so by that meanes not to regard their memories so much as they ought to do: for indeed for the most part it falleth out, that those which relie too much vpon the helpe of their booke, do learne more loosely and negligently, and withall do dull and greatly weaken their memories. This is the first thing that they would beat into their scholars heads, namely, That the soules of men are immortall; that they do not die together with the body, but that after death they do passe from one to ano∣ther: and this they thinke to be a great inducement (by neglecting the feare of death) to moue their minds to follow vertue and true magnanimity. Moreouer they dispute of, and teach to the yong frie, their scholars, many things of the starres and their motion; of the compasse and greatnesse of the world and earthly globe; of the nature of all things vnder the cope of heauen; and of the might and power of the immortall gods. Thus far Caesar. But for thy farther instru∣ction, we will to these adioine that which other men haue written of the same. Pomponius Mela thus speaketh of them: These men do professe themselues to know the compasse of the world and greatnesse of the earthly globe; the motions of the heauens and radiant starres both fixed and planetary: yea to know what the gods themselues do know and do. They teach the nobility, and better sort of men of their nation, many things for twenty yeeres together, secretly in caues or thicke woods and forests. One thing, of all other that they haue taught them in secret, is blazed abroad amongst the common people; namely, to make them the more fit for the warres; That the soules of men are immortall, and that there is another life after this amongst the ghosts. In Marcellinus I reade this of them: The Druidae, men of more lofty spirits and deepe conceits, much addicted to brother like meetings, are giuen to the study and speculation of hidden and high matters: and contemning the world, do peremptorily affirme that the soules of men are immortall. Diogenes Laërtius writeth that they vsed to vtter their opinions of the mysteries of their arte very obscurely in few words and short sentences: videlicet: That God is to be worshipped: That we ought to doe nothing that is euill: and, That we must exercise our selues in feats of armes and true fortitude. But let vs heare what Strabo, in the fourth booke of his Ge∣ography, reporteth of them: The Druidae, saith he, beside their earnest study of naturall philosophy, do dispute many things of the Ethicks or morall vertues. en had a reuerend opinion of them for their seuere iustice: insomuch that both priuate and publike execution of iustice was committed to them alone: yea and sometime two armies being in the field ready to ioyne battell, they haue by their mediation made peace betweene them: but especially the cases of mur∣ther are committed to their censure. And being found true by experience, that they haue alwayes the greatest crops and store of fruits, they do verily beleeue, that these men can obtaine at Gods hand plenty and fertility at their pleasure. These, and also the other, haue determined, that the soule of man, and the hea∣uens or world, are both immortall: yet so as that the time shall come, that sometime the fire and sometime the water shall haue the victory and vpper hand. Out of Diodorus Siculus take this obseruation of them: They do moreouer vse soothsayers, which, saith he, amongst them, foretelling things to come by di∣uination and sacrifices, are of great estimation and account, all the vulgar sort and common people being at their obedience and command. When they consult of any great matters, they do obserue a very wonderfull and strange course: for they, for that purpose killing a man, do strike him with a sword vpon the mid∣riffe; and by his fall tearing and scattering of the parts of his body, and running of the blood, by a certaine old experiment and obseruation, do know what will fall out hereafter. It is an ancient custome duely kept amongst them, that no sacrifice may be done without the presence of a Philosopher: for they doe thinke that sacrifice ought only to be done by such as well knew the nature of heauenly things: as if these were indeed the true and best interpreters of the heauenly language vsed of the gods themselues: and by their intercession and mediation they deeme all good things to be sought and demanded at Gods hand. By their aduie and counsell, they do all things that are done, either in war or time of peace. Of this their slaying of a man, the forenamed Strabo in the seuenth booke of his Geography maketh mntion where he calleth them Vates. Poets are amongst them of such account, that when the field is pitcht & their swords drawen, hauing ca their drt & th armies are ready to ome to handy blowes, not only their friends, but euen also their enemies and the aduers part, at their intreaty and meditation do leaue off fighting, and will not offr to strike one stroke more. Thus euen amongst the most barbarous people that are, rage giueth place to wis∣dome,
map of ancient Gaul GALLIA VETVS, Ad Iulij Caesaris commentaria. ex Conatibus geographicis Abrah. Ortelij. 1590. REVERENDIS∣SIMO IN CHRIS∣TO PATRI, DO∣MINO D. LAEVI∣NO TORRENTIO, EPISCOPO ANT∣VERPIENSI, A∣PVD AMBIVA∣RITOS, EIVS VIRTVTIS CVLTOR ABRAH. ORTELIVS REG. MAIEST. GEOGRA∣PHVS DEVOTIS∣SIME DEDICAB. Cum Imp. Reg. et cancellariae Brabantiae privilegio decennali. Galli apud Cae∣sarem nominati & descripti. IN BELGICA, Atrebas Commius. Eburones Ambiorix Cattivulcus. Bellovaci Corbeus Vertiscus. Nervij Boduognatus Vertico. Treviri Induciomarus Cingetorix. Suessiones Divitiacus Galba. Remi Antebrogius Iccius. IN CELTICA, Aedui Cavarillus Cotus Convictolitanus Dumnorix Divitiacus Eporedix Liscus Litavicus Surus Vedeliacus Virdumarus. Helvetij Orgetorix Verodoctus Numenius Divicus. Sequani Casticus Catamantales. Senones Cavarinus Moritasgus Acco Drapes. Andes Dumnacus. Lemovix Sedulius. Carnutes Tasgetius Cotuatus Conetodunus Guturvatus. Vnellus Viridovix. Cadureus Luterius. Averni Vercingetorix Geliallus Gobanitio Vergasilaunus Critognatus Epasnactus. Aulercus Camulogenus. Nitiobriges Ollovico Theutomatus. Helvij Caburus C. Val. Donataurus. IN AQVITANIA, Piso Adcantuanus. Gallorum ali∣quot populorum elogia, sive de∣scriptiones a∣pud Caesarem. GALLI, sive CELTAE, in his Aedui fratres consanguinei{que} Romanorum dic∣ti, ob veterem ac perpetuam erga P. R. fidem his in omni Gallia summa auctoritas. Helvetij re∣liquos Gallos virtute superant. Senones ci∣vitas inprimis magnae inter Gal∣los auctoritatis. Sequani per se minus valebant. Veneti his longe amplissima auctoritas om∣nis orae mariti∣mae. scientia et usu rerum nau∣ticarum cete∣ros antecedunt. Boij egregia virtute cogniti. Ambarri ne∣cessarij et con∣sanguinei Ac∣duorum. BELGAE, his maxima vir∣tus et omnium Gallorum fortis∣simi, Horum Nervij max∣ime feri, & magnae virtulis: pedestribus va∣sebant copijs. Treviri quo∣rum virtutis opinio singula∣ris. cultu et fe∣ritate non mul∣tum à Germa∣nis differebant. Remi offici∣osi Romanis in Gallicis bellis. et secundum dignitatis lo∣cum, apud hos obtinebant. Eburones civitas ignobi∣lis et humilis. Bellovaci plurimum inter sios valent vir∣tute et auctori∣tate, hominum{que} numero. item magna apud hos virtutis opinio. Aduatici ex Cimbris Teu∣tonisque pro∣creati sunt. Condrusi Trevirorum cli∣entes. Vbij ceteris humaniores. ho∣rum civitas flo∣rens et ampla. AQVITANI hominum mul∣titudo his. opti∣ma gens ad bel∣lum gerendum. Sontiates hi equitatu plu∣rimum valent.
and Mars doth reuerence the Muses. Thus far Diodorus Siculus Now let vs in like maner listen to Dion Prusaeus, who thus reporteth of them: The Cel∣tae haue their Druides, a sort of men amongst them much giuen to diuination and the study of Philosophy, without whose aduice and counsell it is not lawfull for their kings to doe ought, yea or once to goe about to consult what is best to be done: so that if a man should indeed speake that which is trueth, they rule as kings, and beare all the sway: when as their kings are but the seruants, ministers, or executioners of their will and pleasure, although otherwise they sit in golden thrones, dwell in great and stately houses, and dayly fare most daintily, and eat and drinke of the best that may be bought for money. Here also it is not amisse to alledge that of the Poet Lu∣cane: Et vos barbaricos ritus morem{que} sinistrum Sacrorum Druidae positis repetistis ab armis. Solis noste Deos, & coeli numina vobis, Aut solis nescire datum. nemora alta remotis Incolitis lucis, vobis autoribus vmbrae Non tacitas Erebi sedes, Ditisque profundi Pallida regna petunt, &c. Ouer all these Druides, as Caesar testifieth, there is one that is placed as chiefe, and hath a command and authority ouer the rest: after his death, if any man amongst them excelleth the rest for his worth and vertue, he is by and by chosen to succeed in his place: but if there be many that are of equall value and dignity, then he is elected by the grea∣ter number of voices of the Druides assembled together for that purpose. Sometime the controuersie is such as they fall to blowes about, and that souereignty is tried by dint of sword. They, once a yeere, vpon a certaine time, in the confines of Chartraine or Chartres (Carnutes) (neere the riuer Leire, if one may giue any credit to the comedy called Querulus, which goeth vnder the name of Plautus,) which is accounted to be the middle prouince of all France, do meet and keepe court as it were in a place consecrated to that purpose: hither do come all such as haue any controuersies from all quarters round about: euery man referring his cause to their hearing, and being content to stand to their arbrurement and censure. (In Chartraine to this day, a certeine memoriall & note of the name Druides doth seeme to remaine, in a place called Dreux.) Gabriel Simeon in his Caesar newly reuiued, (Caesar renouatus, a worke of his so intitled) writeth that he hath seene, in a forest of this tract, a mention of an olde plot of the palace of the Druides. And thus much of these Druides, whose arte magicke and custome of killing of men, Pliny writeth did continue euen vnto his time, and withall addeth that it was abrogated, and they forbidden to vse it any more, by proclamation from Tiberius Caesar. Suetonius in Claudius aff rmeth that it was first inhabited by Augustus, yet not generally, but to the citizens: and was at length vtterly taken away by the sayd Claudius: wich also Seneca in his treatise intituled Claudij ludus, doth auouch to be true. Yet notwithstanding the name of the Druides was not then cleane extinct, as Tacitus, in the fourth booke of his Hstorie, plainly sheweth: where he writeth, that by the burning of the Capitoll, which hapned in the reigne of Vespatian, the Druides in vaine made men beleeue was signified that the possession and command of the whole world should now come vnto the nations inhabiting beyond the Alps. Aelius Lampridius writeth, that Alexander Seuerus the Emperour going to warre against the Galli, a woman Druide cried out in the Gauls language with a loud voice, Thou goest into the field, but looke not to get the victory, trust not thy souldiers, they will faile thee. Neither was she deceiued, for in those warres he was slaine. Flauius Vopiscus re∣porteth, that Aurelianus asked counsell of the women Druides of France about his Empire, whether it should remaine vnto his posterity, or not. The same authour testifieth, that when Diocletianus was yet but a priuate souldier, it was at Tongeren foretolde him by a Druide woman, that he should one day be Emperour of the whole world. Neither is there after him any mention of them in any history, to my remembrance, except one should straine that of Eusebius in his fourth booke De Proepar. (for he liued in the time of Constantine the Great and Constance his sonne) where he writeth that the Celtae euen to his time, did sacrifice men vpon their altars. Pliny noteth this of the Druides, that there is nothing which they do esteeme more holy than misselto, (which they call dryos hyphear) and so likewise they account of the tree vpon which it groweth, especially if it be an oke: They chose, sayth he, groues of these trees apart by themselues, neither do they any diuine seruice or sacrifice without a branch of this tree: so that they may very well be thought to be called Druidae, of the Greeke word , an oke, as one would say, Oke-priests. And indeed whatsoeuer groweth vpon these trees, they do verily beleeue it to be sent downe from heauen; and that it is a manifest signe that God hath chosen this tree, and sanctified it to himselfe. They call it in their language All-heale. The sacrifices and bankets being duely prepared and set ready vnder this tree, they bring two white bulles, whose hornes were neuer bound before. The Priest putting on a white garment, getteth vp into the tree ordeined for that seruice, and with a golden hooke pruneth and loppeth off all the boughs. These are caught in a white vesture, like a souldiers cassocke, before they come to the ground. Next after this they kill the buls prepared for the sacrifice, and withall make their prayers to God that he would blesse that his gift to the good of euery one that he there did vouchsafe to giue it. They are persuaded that what beast soeuer, though otherwise barren, shall drinke of a potion made of it, shall presently become fruitfull: and that it is a most soueraigne anti∣dote against all maner of poison whatsoeuer. The same authour in the 3. chap. of his 29. booke, telleth a strange tale of a serpents egge, which he affirmeth he saw ex∣perimented and prooued before his face: I my selfe, sayth he, haue seene one of these egges, which was about the bignesse of a prety round apple, couered with a gristly or cartilaginous shell, indented with many concauities like vnto the hollow places wherein the legs of the fish called a polypus do rest: This is the armes or cognisance of the Druides. It is wonderfully commended of them to be a great and secret experiment against all maner of contentions and brawles, procuring him that beareth it the vp∣per hand, as also the fauour and easie accesse to princes and great states, &c. Item, he recordeth that the Druides did first manifest vnto the world that the herbe Sa∣uin had an especiall vertue against all dangers & pernicious accidents which ordinarily betide mortall men. Moreouer, they gather, with the left hand fasting, neuer loo∣king behinde them, an herbe which they call Samolus, and affirme it, as he testifieth, to be a soueraigne remedy against all diseases of hogs or swine. The same authour speaketh thus of another herbe called Selago: like vnto this herbe sauine is that which they call selago: it must not be cut vp with any knife or instrument of iron, but must be gathered with the right hand wrapped in the skirt of his coat, which must be rent off with the left hand, as if he came to steale it: he that doth this feat must be clad in a white garment, barefooted, but so as his feet be very cleane washed and cleered from all filth: he must first offer sacrifice with bread and wine, before he ga∣ther it: lastly, it must be caried home in a new napkin. This herbe thus gathered the Druidae of the Gauls do hold to be a great preseruatiue and defensatory against all dangerous accidents and occurrences that vsually happen to mortall men: moreouer they affirme that the fume thereof is good against all diseases of the eies. Such is the woonderfull superstition of many nations in the world, and that for the most part in friuolous and foolish things, as the same Pliny witnesseth at the 44. chapter of his 26. booke. He that is desirous to know more about the etymologie of the name of the Druides, let him repaire to Goropius his Gallica, where he fetcheth this name from a Dutch word, and proueth that it signifieth a teacher of truth, or a wiseman continually busied in the diligent search of the same. Pomponius Mela also maketh them to be Magistros sapientiae, teachers and informers of others in Philosophy and all maner of humane wisdome. I could be content to say that the word should signifie a Diuine or student in the knowledge of God and heauenly things, (as Diodorus Siculus calleth them) for that I do see that Druthin, in the old Germaine tongue, doth signifie God: and that in Otfrides gospels, a booke imprinted and to be had in diuers mens studies, especially such as are louers of antiquities: and besides that I know that the Islanders, a people which speake the Germaine tongue, although in a dialect farre different in many things from that which now is commonly spoken in High-Germany, (which also is incident to the Danes, and inhabitants of Norwey and Swedland, with other countries nere neighbours and bordeing vpon the Dutch) do yet to this day call God, by the name of Druthin. Diogenes Laertius also seemeth to fauour this opinion, who, out of the authority of Aristotle, writeth that they were termed Semnothei, that is, religious and holy men, such as wholly gaue themselues to the worship and seruice of God. In that laborious and learned worke of my singular good friend M. William Camden, which he wrote of the antiquities of England, and intituled by the name of Britannia, I reade that one Albricus hath written that the Saxons did call a magus. Drij, (by a word that signifieth in that language as much as a Diuine or Philosopher) and indeed Pliny calleth these Dru∣ides, Magi, that is, wise men, as the word is often vsed and expounded by the interpreters of the second chapter of S. Matthewes gospell. For that they were not so de∣nominated of the oke, he himselfe doth in a maner confesse; when he addeth in the same place, that they seeme to be deriued from a Greeke word signifying an oke or misselto. (Now there is no man that knoweth not, that to seeme to be so, and to be so indeed, are two diuers things.) Againe, how can they haue their denomination of the Greeke word , when as Caesar, a very sufficient witnesse, testifieth plainly, that their arte and discipline was first inuented in England; where neuer any colony of the Greeks, for ought I know, was seated: for that voyage of Vlysses, (and so of his comming into this iland) is counted for a fable, and no true story, of all men of sound iudgement and discretion in this kinde of learning. Neither will I euer with Eratosthenes be made to beleeue the same, vntill some man or other shall shew me him that sewed together his bagge full of windes. And that the Germane tongue was spoken here, there is no man can deny, but he that thinketh that the authority of Caesar and Tacitus is of no great validity. For Caesar hath flatly in the same place left recorded, that out of Belgium (The Low-countries, where he also affirmeth that the Germani Cisrhenani dwelt) certaine colonies passed ouer sea into this ile, and seated themselues here. He auoucheth that Caledonia (a great part of this ile) was inhabited of a people which came thither from Germany. And because there is nothing more sacred, in the iudgement of these Druidae, than the Oke and Misselto, as we haue shewed out of Pliny; and for that that Iupiter was here of them represented in the forme of a mighty high oke, as Maximus Tyrius teacheth vs; I do suppose that Diodorus called them by another name, or els of the same signification, although improperly, Saronides, (except euen in this place also we are to read Druidae: which we haue at large handled in the second edition of our Thesaurus) I know that Annius, out of his forged Berosus, doth write that these Druides were called by those diuers and sundry names, of Druius, Barrus, Sarron, certaine kings of the ancient Gauls. But as for these men, let them defend their credit themselues: I know it is shrewdly crackt. Some there are that do thinke that this by-word, Au Gui l' an neuf: With misselto commeth in the new yeere: which to this day euery yeere, vpon the last of December, is commonly vsed openly to be sung in France, came from them. peraduenture of this of Ouid, Ad viscum Druidae, Druidae can∣tare solebant. which are at large handled by Goropius in his Gallica, Vinetus vpon Asonius, and Vigenereus vpon Caesars Commentaries. Conradus Celtes, Irenicus, Althamer, and Auentine, do witnesse with me that these Druides, being driuen hence by Tiberius and Claudius Emperours of Rome, went beyond the Rhein, and seated themselues in High Germany; and here hence amongst them euen to this day remaineth that same kinde of night-bug, commonly called the Phi∣losophicall shoe, or as they terme it druttenfuss. And it is in forme (as the learned Ioachimus Camerarius the yonger hath signified vnto me by his letters) fiue cor∣nered, like vnto the emblem and hieroglyphicke of Hygeia, or, good health. This they engraue vpon their cradles, supposing that by that meanes the yoong infants are safely garded from the fairies, hobgoblins, and night-walking spirits. Conradus Celtes describeth certaine ancient stone images at the foot of the Pine-bearing moun∣taine (Vichtelberg they commonly call it, in the midst and center of all Germany) which as he sayth he saw in a certaine Abbey there. These he thinketh to resemble very liuelily the true counterfet of these Druides. They were in number six, sayth he, set in the wall at the church dore, seuen foot high a piece, barefooted, and bare∣headed, ech of them had on a Spanish cloake with a hood, and a scrip: a long beard downe as low as his girdle, and about his nostrils parted and shod this way and that way: ech of them in his hand had a booke and a walking staffe: they were of countenance sad and grim: their heads leaned somewhat toward one shoulder, hauing their eyes stedfastly fixed vpon the ground. That description of Iames Scepper, which he maketh of them, in his Corography of Germany, in my iudgement is fond and foolish: for he adorneth their necks, wrests, and fingers, with gold chaines, bracelets, and rings: moreouer to these he addceh a paire of buskins, such as the ancient Phi∣losophers were sayd to weare, with party-coloured garments. From whence he had this description I know not: for Pliny doth plainly affirme that they wore white garments; as we haue shewed before: and Strabo in his seuenth booke, (where he calleth them by the name of Va es, Prophets) describeth them in white vestures, with fine linnen frocks put ouer them, fastened together with a button, girt with a brasen girdle, and bare footed.
The LOW COVNTRIES. THe word Belgium, which Caesar, in his Commentaries of the warres of France, vseth more than once or twise: hath long and much troubled the Readers. For some of them do thinke that Caesar by it meant a city, which some, (of whose number are Guicciardine and Marlianus) do interpret it to be Beauois in France; others Bauays in Henault; of this later sort are B. Vignereus, and our owne Chronicles. The learned Goropius thinketh that the Bellouaci, a people of this prouince were vnderstood by it. Some there are which thinke that Caesar vsed Belgium, for Belgica: as Liuy doth Samnium, for the coun∣trie of the Samnites; of this opinion was Glareanus. Iohn Rhellicane saith that it conteined a part of Gallia Belgica, but which part it should be, he doth not name. H. Leodius would haue it to be that part which is about Henault, where the said Ba∣uays now standeth. But omitting these opinions, let vs heare what Caesar himselfe speaketh of this his Belgium. Hee in his 5. booke, where he speaketh of the distributing of the Legions in Belgia, hath these words: Of the which one he committed to Quintus Fabius the Legate, to be led against the Morini: another to Quintus Cicero, against the Neruij: the third to Titus Roscius, against the Essui: the fourth he commanded to winter, with Titus Labienus, in Rhemes, in the confines of Triers: three he placed in Belgium: ouer these he set as commanders Marcus Crassus the Treasurer, and Lucius Munatius Plancus, and Caius Trebonius the Legates: one legion, which he had taken vp hard beyond the Po, with fiue cohorts, he sent against the Eburones. And a little aboue in the same booke, where he speaketh of Britannia, you shall find these wordes: The sea coast (of Britaine he meaneth) is inhabited of those which by reason of pillage and warre, went from Belgium thi∣ther: all which for the most part are called by the names of those cities where they were bred and borne. Heere first it appeareth very plainly that Caesar vnder the name of Belgium comprehendeth not only one city, but many: then, that he vnderstandeth not by it all Gallia Belgica: seeing that he nameth the Morini, Neruij, Essui, Rheni, and Eburones, all which nations, he himselfe and other good writers, do ascribe to Gallia Belgicae. Therefore it is more cleare than the noone day that Belgium is a part of Belgica: but what part it should be that is not so cleare. That it is not about Bauacum (Bauais) in Henault, as Leodius would haue it, it is manifest in that, that this is situate amongst the Neruij, which Caesar himselfe doth exclude out of Belgium. Neither can I be perswaded that it was neere the Bellouaci, but rather that it was that part of Belgica, which is more neere the sea, and lieth vp higher toward the North: namely, where about the three great riuers the Rhein; Maese and Scheldt do meet and fall into the maine ocean: these do affoord an easie passage and fall into the sea and from thence a short cut into Britaine. Moreouer it is more likely that they should passe the sea, which were acquainted and vsed to it, and were seated vpon this shore and bankes of these riuers, then those which dwelt vp higher into the country, to whom the sea was more fearefull and terrible. They therefore that went from Belgium, into Brittaine, did only change coast for coast. Of the originall and reason of the word Belgium and Belgica, the opinions of sundrie writers are diuers. Some there are which deriue it of Belgen or Welgen, a word of our owne, which signifieth a stranger. Another man of great learning and iudgement fetcheth it from Belgen or Balgen, signifying to be angrie, to fight. Our Chronicles do thinke it so named of Belgis, the chiefe city of this prouince. Neither do they agree in the placing and seating of it: for one of them placeth it at Bauais, a towne in Henault: the other at Veltsick a village about Oudenard. They which thinke it so named of the city Bel∣gis (which notwithstanding is no where else read of in any good authour, either Geographer or Historian) they haue Isidore, in the 4. chapter of the 13. booke of his Origines, for their patrone, where he thus speaketh: Belgis is a city of Gallia, whereof Gallica the prouince tooke the name. The same hath Hesy∣chius, the Grecian before him, in his Lexicon: . that is, Belgy was so named of the city Belges: as also Honorius in his counterfeit of the world. Iustine in his 24. booke citeth out of Trogus Pompeius one Belgius (Pausanias nameth him Bolgius) a captaine of the Gauls, from whom it is like they tooke their name, if you will beleeue Berosus that chaungling. For he writeth Beligicos (siue Belgicos) appellari à Beligio (aut Belgio) Celtarum rege: The Beligici or Belgici, were so named of Beligius (or Belgius) a king of the Celtes. Of the city Belgis we haue written in our Geographicall Trea∣sury. Well, let vs leaue these to the censure of the learned, and so proceed to certaine testimonies of ancient writers, which we thinke wilbe both plea∣sant and profitable to the student of Chorography. Caesar, in his 1. booke of the warres of France, thus speaketh: All GALLIA is diuided into 3. parts: of the which the Belgae do inhabite one: the Aquita∣ni another: the third, those which in their language are called Celtae, but in the Latine Galli: Againe, within a few lines after: Of all these the Belgae are most stout and hardy: because that being further off from the quaint behauiour and maners of the prouince: and for that they haue no trafficke with merchants, or such as do bring in those things which effeminate mens mindes: againe because they are next neighbours to the Germanes, which dwell beyond the Rhein: with whom they make warre continually. Item, in the same page he thus describeth the situation of their country: The Belgae do dwell in the skirts of Gallia: they do belong to that part which is within the riuer Rhein: they are vpon the North and East sides of it. The same authour in his 2. booke hath these words: Caesar found that many of the Belgae came from the Germanes, which long since passed ouer the Rhein and seated themselues there by reason of the great fertility of the place: and that they had driuen out the Gauls, which formerly had dwelled there: and that these were the onely men, which in the daies of our fathers, all Gallia being sore troubled, kept the Teutones and Cimbres from entering within the lists of their territories: whereupon it came to passe, that the memoriall and record of these their famous acts haue made them to take much vpon them, and to be highly conceited of their great stomacks and skill in martiall affaires. Suet. in Tib. 9. In the German war he sent ouer 40000. voluntaries into Gallia. Again in the 8. booke of Caes. Com. The Belgae, whose valour was great. Strabo in the 4. booke of his Geography saith: The Belgae weare cassockes or cloakes, their haire long, and side breeches about their loines. In steed of coates or ierkins they vse a kind of sleeued garmert slit, hanging down to their twist, or as low as their buttockes. Their wooll is very course and rough, yet is it cut off close to the skinne: of that they weaue their course thick cassocks, which they call laenas, rugges or mantles. Their weapons accordingly, are long swords hanging down along by their right side, a long target, lances answerable, and a iauelin (meris or materis, as some read) a kind of short pike with a barbed head: some vse bowes and slinges: others haue a staffe like a dart, which they do not cast with a loop or thong, (as our Irish do) but with the hand only; yea and that further than one can well shoot an arrow: this they especially vse in hunting and fowling. They do all for the most part, euen to this day, vse to lie vpon the ground; they dine and suppe sitting in their beds. Their meat generally is made of milke and all kind of flesh, especially porke, both fresh and powdered. Their hogs do lie abroad in the fields night and day: these for bignesse, strength and swiftnesse of foot do surpasse those of other countries; and if a man be not vsed to them they are as dangerous to meet withall as with a rauening woolfe. They build their houses with boords, planks and hardles, couered ouer with a very great roofe. They haue so many and great herds of cattle and hogs, that they do not only serue Rome with those fornamed cassocks or rugs, powdered beefe and bacon, but also many other places of Italy. The most of their cities and commonwealths are gouerned by the Nobility and gentry: informer times the common people vsed yearely to choose one Prince, and one Generall captaine for the wars. They are for the most part subiect to the behests of the Romans. They haue a kind of custome in their councels proper and peculiar to themselues: for if any man do interrupt or trouble another by loud speaking, or by making any tumult, the sergeant commeth to him with a naked knife in his hand and threatneth him if he hold not his peace: this he doth the second and third time: if then he will not be quiet, he cutteth off so much of his cassocke, that the rest may be good for nothing. This is a common thing to them with many other barbarous nations, that the seruices or of∣fices of men and women are ordered clean contrary to the customes & maners which heere we vse. Item, in another place. The Gauls the neerer they are to the North and to the Sea. so much the more hardy and valiant they are. They do especially commend the Belgae, who are diuided into 15. nations (in Caesar! find 31. mentioned) so that the Belgae alone susteined the assault of the Germans, Cimbers and Teutones. What an infinite number of men they were able to make, may here hence be ga∣thered, that long since there were mustered of the Belgae, only of able men fit for the war, 300000. (this number Caesar in the beginning of the 2. booke of the wars of France, encreaseth by 27000. more) Item, some there are which diuide the Gauls into 3 nations: namely, the Aquitani, Belgae and Celtae. Item, The Belgae do pos∣sesse the places neere the Sea, euen as low as the mouth of the Rhein: Dio. Sic. in his 6. booke. A nation for the most part situat in those places toward the North: it is a cold country, so that in winter time in steed of water, it is all couered ouer with deep snow. The ice also in this country, is so great and thicke, that their riuers are frozen so hard that they may go ouer them; and that not only some few in a company together, but euen whole armies with horses, carts and cariage. Plutarch in the life of Caesar. But after that news came that the Belgae, the most mighty and warlike nation of the Gauls, which possessed the third part of all Gallia, had gathered together many thousands of armed men, purposing to make head, he goeth against them with all possible speed, &c. Appianus in his history of France. Caesar spee∣ding himselfe against the Belgae, at the foord and passage ouer a certain riuer, slew so many of them, that the heaps of dead bodies serued for a bridge. Ammian. in the 15 booke of his history. Of all the Gauls the ancients did account the Belgae to be most valiant & stout, for that they were remote from those that liued more court∣like and tenderly, neither were they corrupted and made effeminate with forren delicates and foolish toies, but had long been exercised in wars & quarels against those Germans which dwelt beyond the Rhein: Dion in his 55 booke. The Bataui are excellent horsemen. Again in his 39 booke. The Morini and Menapij dwell not in towns and cities, but in cottages and mountaines enclosed about with very thicke woods. He meaneth Arduenna (Arden) that huge forest which then was more vast than now it is) Florus in his 3. booke. The next was a far more cruell battell, for then they fought for their libertie. Pliny in the 22. c. of his 26. booke. In the prouince of Belgica they cut a kind of white stone with a saw (as they do wood yea and more easily) to make slaits and tiles for couerings for their houses, not only flat and plain, but also hollow and crooked to serue both for roofe-tiles, & gutter-tiles: yea and when they list, for those kind of couerings which they call pauonacea, like the peacocks taile: these also are such as may be cut or sawed. Again in the 36. c. of his 16 book. The Belgae do stamp the tuft or beard of this kind of reed, and lay∣ing it between the meeting of the ioints and plankes of their ships do calke them as sure as with pitch and rozen. Item in the 22 c. of his 10. booke, he writeth that from the country of the Morini geese did come on th feet as far as Rome. In 1. c. of his 12. booke he saith that The plane tree was come now as far as the Morini, into a tributary soile: that these nations might pay custome euen for the shade. In the 25 c. of the 15. book. In Belgia and vpon the banks of the Rhein, the Por∣tugal cherries are most esteemed In the 14. c. of the same booke, where he speaketh of diuers kind of apples: which for that they haue no kernels, are called of the Belgae, spadonia poma, spayd apples. In the 5 c. of his 19 booke: Gelduba is the castle called that is built vpon the Rhein, where grow the best skirwyrts or white parsneps. In the 8 c. of his 17 booke. Of all forren nations that I know the Vbij, whose soile is very fertile, when they plow their ground, do dig vp any sort of earth so that it be at least 3 foot deep: and spreading ouer it a sandy kind of earth a foot thick, do battle and harten their lands as others do with dongue or marle. Mar∣cus Varro in the 9 c. of his 1. book of Husbandrie. In Gallia beyond the Alpes, vp higher into the country about the Rhein, I came to certain countries, where neither vines, nor oliues nor apples did grow, where they compassed their grounds with a kind of white chalke digged out of the earth. Virgil in the 1. booke of his Georgickes. Belgica vel molli meliùs feret esse da collo. Lucan in his 1. booke. Et docilis rector rostrati Belga couini. Martial. in his Xenia. Cantarena mihi sit, vel massa licebit, De Menapis lauti de petasone vorent.
map of ancient Belgium BELGII VETERIS TYPVS. Ex Conatibus Geographicis Abrahami Ortelij. HAC LITTERARVM FORMA, VETVSTIORA PINXIMVS. Quae paulò erant recentiora, his notauimus. Nulla autem antiquitate illustria, hoc charactere. Accentissima verò, Sis vernarulis ab alys distinximus. Prisca vetustatis Belgoe monumenta recludit Ortelius, priscas dum legit historias. Collige prima soli natalis semina Belga, Et de quo veteri sis novus ipse vide. Fauolius caneb. S.P.Q.A. PATRIAM AN∣TIQVITATI A SE RESTITVTAM DEDICABAT LVB. MER. ABRAHAMVS ORTELIVS CIVIS. 1594. Cum privilegio Imperiali et Bel∣gico ad de∣cennium.
GERMANIE. I Thinke there is no man, studious of ancient historie, that is ignorant, that this countrey was called of the most ancient writers, especi∣ally the Graecians, CELTICA, and the people therof CELTI or CELTICA. From whence the word Kelt doth remaine amongst them; whereby they yet do vsually call one another in their familiar speech and communication. Some there are which thinke them to be called by Iosephus ASCHANARI, whenas notwithstanding he sayth that these are interpreted of the Graecians to be the Rhegini: better perhaps and more truly, Rheini, as it were the borderers vpon the Rhene, who also of Stephanus are called . Tacitus reporteth that the word GERMANIA had not beene long vsed, and to be but lately heard of. The same authour ad∣deth, that this name was inuented by themselues. Wherefore I do more easily assent to them, which deriue the originall of this word from the etymon of the countrey it selfe, than from the Latines. For it is much more likely that a nation should impose a name vpon it selfe deriued from that language which it vnderstood, than from a forren and strange tongue whereof it was altogether ignorant. I thinke therefore they erre which thinke this name to be made à germine, that is, of buds or yong sprouts; by reason of the great fer∣tilitie and plenty of all things here growing. Of this opinion are Festus and Isidorus. Those also which deriue the name from the Latine word germanus signifying a brother, as Strabo doth, as who would say, brethren to the Gauls or French men, from whom, as he sayth, they little differ, in my conceit are as farre wide from the trueth. Our countrey man, as Rhenanus and others doe thinke it to be compounded of gar and man, to wit, garman, that is, all man or manlike. Our Goropius of ger and man (comming neerer to the writing or letter) of geen, which signifieth to gather, as scraping together a booty or pray. And the same man in another place deriueth it of ger, which, saith he, amongst our ancesters signifieth warre: which I see also pleaseth Iustus Lipsius best. I know that gerre (or rather guerre) in the latter French tongue signifieth warre; but whether it signifieth so in our ancient Germane tongue, I know not. I doe easily be∣leeue that this nation first wrote and named it selfe werman, of wer, with e long, a mere Germane word, which signifieth any weapon whereby we smite or offend our enemie. From hence weren signifieth to defend himselfe against the enemie: and we call euery man fit to beare armes, weerman or weerbaerman, (that is, a war∣likeman.) Insomuch that they all called themselues wermanos, or, wermannos, that is, warlike men. And Cesar and Tacitus, besides others, are most sufficient witnesses, that this name doth altogether agree with the nature and disposition of this nation. As also Dionysius Afer, who surnameth these Martialists or warlike men . But the cause is plaine why these do call and write themselues Germanes; because they, wanting the digamma or W, in stead of it haue substituted the G. which also we see elswhere done of them in the like case: as, for Wilhelmus, they write Gulielmus; for Waltherus, Galtherus; for Walfridus, Galfridus, &c. So also it is likely that for Walli, they wrote and pronounced Galli. For euen we Germanes, on this side Rhene, retaining the ancient language, doe yet name these Galli by no other name than Walen. The Galli also themselues romanizing (the libertie and ancient tongue being lost) doe vnto this very day imitate this change of letters. These few words out of many are for an example: for they vsually both write and pronounce, vin for wijn, Guesp for Wesp, Gand for Wandt, Guedde for Weedt, by which they meane Wine, a Wasp, a Gloue, and Woad. So also I finde in a manuscript Guandali for Wandali. If any man shall obiect that Strabo, Di∣onysius Afer, Ptolemaeus, and some other Graecians, who knew the digamma Aeolicum, that is, the W, haue notwithstanding written it with a single V, I answer, that this nation was knowen to these men in times past only vnder the name of Celtae, and that this word Germane was first vsed of Cesar or the other Latines in their writings: from whom the Grecians, imitating this writing, haue translated this word into their language. But if any man desireth to reade more of the etymology and reason of the word Germanie, let him peruse H. Iunius his Batauia in the one and twentieth chapter. There are some historians that doe verily beleeue that all the Germanes were in latter times called Alemanes, Vopiscus so persuading them in the life of Proculus. Yet it is manifest out of Aelius Spartianus (who repor∣teth that Antoninus Caracalla the Romane Emperour, both nations by him being subdued, tooke him the surname of them both, and was intituled both by the name of GERMANICVS and ALEMANNICVS) that these were two diuers nations. Moreouer, this same thing is to be seene in the marble inscriptions of the Empe∣rours, Valens, Valentinian, and Gratian: as also in the titles of Iustinian the Emperour. Againe, Ammianus in his 26 booke writeth, that the Almanes brake thorow the borders of Germanie, whereby it is as clere as the noone day that they were diuers. But that was the name of one family or people, this of the whole stocke or nation. Notwithstanding, although this Alemannie of Stephanus, Ammianus, and other writers of that age was accounted only a part of Germanie, namely of that which lieth about the riuer Aleman (commonly called Altmul) yet all men of other countries, ignorant of the Germane tongue, do vse the word Alemanie for all Germanie, and by Alemanes, do meane all the Germanes. But the inhabitants at this day name themselues Teutschen, Tuisiones: whether of god Tuisius, sonne of the earth, of whom Tacitus maketh mention, or of Tuisco, Noë his sonne, of whom Pseudoberosus speaketh; I leaue to the iudgement of the learned reader, for to me it is vncer∣taine. And thus much of the name. Ouid writing to Liuia, doth grace it with a very heroicall surname and honourable titles, when he calleth it ORBEM GER∣MANVM, ORBEM NOVVM, & ORBEM IGNOTVM: The Germane world, The new world, and The vnknowen world. Ptolemey surnameth it THE GREAT. Pliny in the third booke of his Epistles vnto his friend Macer, calleth it LATISSIMAM, A most wide and spacious countrey. Learne the forme of it out of Dionysius and Priscian his interpreter, or as some call him, Rhemnius, in his periegesis in this verse: Haec tergo similis taurino dicirur esse: In forme, they say, it's somewhat like vnto a large buffe hide. (but falsly: for this is truly spoken of Spaine, as Arid. Papius, before me, hath well obserued.) The si∣tuation and limits of this countrey are diuers and sundry wayes described, according to the diuersitie and alteration of times. Plutarch in Marius, doth extend it from the Exterior or Outmost sea, and the Northern parts, to the rising of the Sunne neere the fenne Moeotis [Mar delle Zabbache] where it toucheth the Ponticke Scy∣thia. Pomponius Mela also, and Pseudoberosus, do confine it with Sarmatia Europoea. And Martian stretcheth it fron Hister [Donawe] to the Ocean, euen vp as high as the deserts of Sarmatia: (But the word Armeniae is falsly read for Sarmatiae, that I may with Pintian, by the way correct this fault in this authour.) Dio∣nysius Apher also placeth the Germanes at the fenne Moeotis. Yea and P. Diacono in his first chapter, vnder the name of Germanie, comprehendeth also all Scandie or Scone in Denmarke, where he describeth that denne or caue neere the Scricsinners, in which seuen men slept. And this I thinke to be that Exteriour Germanie which Eusebius in his sixt booke De Praepar. Euang. describeth toward the North. Isidore therefore rightly placeth the Riphaean mountaines at the head of Germa∣nie. Others haue made the sea, the Alpes, Vistula (the riuer Wixell) and the Rheine, to be the limits of the same. But Tacitus taketh from it whatsoeuer is be∣tweene Donawe and the Alpes. For he confineth it within these limits: namely, the Rhene, Donawe, the Dacia's (Transsyluania and Walachia) and the Sarma∣tia's, (Russia) with whom also Ptolemey the prince of Geographers consenteth. But Strabo and Pomponius do notwithstanding extend it euen to the very Alpes, and so by these mountaines do diuide it from Italy, as it were by a certeine naturall rampart or bulwarke. And this is yet at this day the true and naturall Germanie: which on the North side is circumscribed with the sea, on the South with the Alpes, on the West with the Rhene, and on the East with Vistula (Wixell) or Odera. Moreouer, Suetonius, Tacitus, and Dion do diuide this true Germanie into the VPPER and LOWER: they call that the VPPER GERMANIE which is neerer the fountaines or head of the Rhene; that the LOWER which reacheth from thence to the Ocean. But beyond the Rhene also, namely in Belgia, Ptolemey hath other two Germanies, to wit, a SVPERIOR and INFERIOR. To whom agreeth Marcellinus, who nameth this the SECOND, that the FIRST. But I do not iudge these to pertaine to the true Germanie: but that it was so improperly called of the Germanes, who, as Dion witnesseth, afterward possessed it, and fixed their seats there. And first of the Tungri, who as Tacitus writeth, first of all other passed ouer the Rhene. Item we read in Cesar of certaine Belgae, sprung from the Germanes. Hence it is that he witnesseth that the Neruij, Aduatici, Atrebates, Ambiani, Morini, Menapij, Caletes, Verocasses, Veromandui, Catuaci, Condrusi, Eburones, Caeresi, Paemani, Segni, were generally GERMANI TRANSRHENANI, the Germans beyond Rhene. Tacitus saith that the Van∣giones, Triboci, and Nemetes were called Germanes. Suetonius recordeth that Tiberius the Emperour placed fortie thousand Germanes in France neere the banke of the Rhene. Eutropius writeth that there were of them foure hundred thousand. Item by the testimony of Pliny we are made to beleeue that the Germane na∣tion did dwell euen as high as the riuer Scaldis (the Sceldt.) And that at this day the Germans are seated beyond Scaldis, vp as high as the straits of the Ocean, the language which they vse, doth manifestly proue. So that Dion in his 53 booke hath truely related, that they haue spread themselues as farre as the British ocean, vp to the citie Bononia or Boloigne: which Zosimus calleth a citie of Lower Germanie. But let vs omit these things, and returne to the description of the true and ancient Germanie, which we haue set forth in this table. Seneca reporteth, that there is a continuall Winter, vnpleasant aire, and barren soile. Pomponius writeth that it is troubled with many riuers, rough and vneuen by reason of many mountaines, and for the most part not to be trauelled or passed thorow, by reason of the great woods and fennes. Frontinus affirmeth the same, where he writeth, that the Germans were woont to assault the Romans out of these places, as out of obscure couerts, and thither safely to retire themselues againe. Tacitus sayth that it is euery where be spread and couered with hideous woods, and loathsome and stincking fennes, the land or countrey is vnpleasant, the aire is sharpe, it is hard to be plowed, and ill fauoured to behold. It is moister towards the Galliae (France;) windier towards Noricum (Bayern) and the Pannoniae. (Austria and Hungary.) The cause I adde, because here the Alpes are opposite, which entertaining the boisterous Northern winde, do by their extraordinary height beat it backe againe, and so redoubleth the violence of the blast. (The copy here is sound & good, although a great scholar doth thinke it faulty.) There, because the ocean is neerer, Ouid and Horatius call it hideous cruell and sauage. Manilius sayth, that it is sit only for wilde beasts: which indeed is wholly occupied by the Hercynian forrest, being not inferior to any for greatnesse and fame (as Pliny reporteth.) For this Hercynianwood, (which Eratosthenes, Apollonius and Ptolemaeus, being Grecians, name orcynium) of all others by farre the greatest, is threescore dayes iourney in length, as Mela sayth. Which, seeing that no man hath more diligently described this wood than Cesar, we will here set downe his words, which are these: The bredth of this Hercynian wood is nine long dayes iourney ouer. It beginneth from the borders of the Heluetians and Nemeti, and Rauraci, and so running along directly by the riuer Donawe, it commeth vp close by the confines of the Dacia's. From hence it windeth Northward, or toward the left hand, leauing the course of the riuer, and by reason of the huge greatnesse of the same, toucheth the bounds of many nations. Neither is there any man of all this Ger∣manie, which can say that he hath either heard of, or gone to the end of that wood, when he had beene in it threescore dayes together: there is not any man that euer
map of ancient Germany GERMANIAE VETERIS, typus. Ex conatibus geographicis Abrahami Ortelij. DVBIAE POSITIO∣NIS QVAE∣DAM. Achiri Alcetienses Ames Ampsani Aravisci Attuarij nisi sint Ansuarij Aviones Ballonoti Butones nisi sint Gutones Calydona Caracates Carini Cathilci Caulci Chaubi Cinesia Cubij, nisi sint Vbij Foeti Fosi Guarni Harmi Iaravaci Landi Luij, nisi sint Ligij Marsigni, nisi sint Maruigni Mugillones Nusipi, nisi sint Vsipetes Poenina castra Quadriburgum Reudigni Ribisca Scinthi Sibini Solcinium Suardones, nisi sint Pharodeni Subatij Toenij Vadomarius Varini Venaxamodurum Zumi Locorum vocabula circa Caroli Magni tempora primum nata inter vetusta non numero: ea ita{que} nec in ipsa tabula neque hic seorsum nominare visum fuit. Cum Privilegio Imperiali, Regio, et Belgico, ad decenn. 1587. DN. IACOBO MONAVIO SILESIO PATRICIO VRATISLAVIENSI, VIRO ET ERVDITIONE ET HV∣MANITATE ORNATISSIMO, ABRA∣HAMVS ORTELIVS HOC MVTVAE AMICITIAE MONVMENTVM LI∣BENS DONABAT DEDICABATQVE.
hath heard in what place it beginneth, &c. Plinie hath these words of the same wood: The hugenesse of the okes of the Hercynian wood, neuer lopt or cut since the world was made, doth almost for their immortality exceed all other miracles. That I may omit other things which would not be beleeued; it is ma∣nifest, that the little hilles are eleuated by the mutuallil encounter or crossing of the roots one within another: but where the earth is hollow and not fast, there they rise with arches euen vp to the boughs, and striuing as it were among themselues, are crooked like broad gates, that whole troups of horsemen may go vn∣derneath them. Suidas out of Iulian describeth the roughnesse hereof: If any man, sayth he, shall consider the vnpassable Tempe of Thessalie, or the narrow straights of Thermopylae, or the great and steepe hie mountaine Taurus, it is nothing to this; they are not so difficult and hard to doe, as to passe thorow this Hercynian wood. And thus much of this groue or forest, inaccessible, as Florus writeth of it. Nay, but Plinie addeth that the other part of Germanie is al∣so full of woods. Item Tacitus in the fourth of his Annals, sayth that abroad they haue forests of huge beasts, & at home herds or droues of smaller cattell. We reade in the same authour, that the ground of Germanie is sandie couered ouer with a very thin laine of turfes, yet their pastures are very commendable. Tacitus maketh it to be reasonably well stored with cattell, but impatient of fruitfull trees. Herodian reporteth, that the Germans haue few buildings of stone or bricke; and that they rather delight to abide in arbours and bowers made in thicke woods, by coupling and fastening the boughs together. They haue no habitations or houses but such as wearinesse maketh for a day. Seneca in the booke of Gods prouidence reporteth that they defend themselues from storme and tempest by the couerture of reeds or leaues. Tacitus sayth that they make caues vnder the earth, and couer them ouer with dung, and vse them for pla∣ces of refuge, to which they may in danger retire themselues. From whose opinion a place in Strabo doth not farre seeme to differ: where he sayth they dwell in cottages made for one day, that so they may with more ease change their soile, and putting their household-stuffe into carts, may depart whither they best like. For Eusebius mketh them ignorant both of Geometrie and of Architectrie. So that the same Tacitus doth most truly deny that the Germanes do vsually inhabit or dell in cities; or can abide by any meanes to ioyne house to house close together, but to haue them disioyned or seuered, as shall fall out by reason of some brooke, field, or wood. I also will adde this, that they haue anciently had few cities: for in all ancient histories of ech tongue, I see scarse one or two na∣med before Ptolemies time. Neither since him is there any mention of them in any other writer. Capitolinus writeth of Maximinus the Emperour, that he burned three or foure hundred villages: but there is no mention of cities. Strabo (as diligent a writer as any in that kinde) remembreth only Bouiasmus, the palace or court of Maroboduus. Tacitus, to whom Germanie was best knowen, maketh mention of Matium, Arenacum, Batauodurum, and one or two castles neere the mouth of the Rheine, which any man would sooner iudge to be ascribed to France than to Germanie. In other writers, there is not one word of any cities. And thus much in generall of the situation of the soile, the forme and nature of this countrey. Now some things peculiar to it, are to be conside∣red: and first I will speake of the riuer Rheine, that which I haue read in a certaine epistle of Iulian the Emperour to Maximus the Philosopher; his words are these: Rheine doth violently carry away bastard-infants as a reuenger of the vnchaste bed: but those that are borne in wedlocke of chaste parents, it bea∣reth aloft vpon the top of the water, and restoreth them againe to the trembling hands of the mother: and by the preseruation of the infant doth pay as it were the true and incorrupted testimony of chaste and laudable wedlocke. Nazianzene, Nonnus in his Dionysiacks, and an ancient Greeke Epigram doe also auer this to be true. There are other also which do giue another, and in mine opinon, a truer cause of this dipping of children in the Rheine, which we will by and by relate. There is a fountaine among the Mattiaci, which, being drawen, doth boile three dayes together: and about the brinke the waters make pumeise stones, as Pliny witnesseth. The same authour describeth in Frisland, a fountaine of sweet water, whereof if one shall drinke, within two yeeres after his teeth will all fall out of his head: and that the herbe called Britannica, there found, is a present remedie against that danger. As in Nilus so in Donawe or Ister (as Suidas reporteth) there are great falles of water, like a mountaine, growing vnder the water, according to the whole breadth of the riuer, against which the streame falling doth with great & terrible noise swell backe againe; and first making a rumbling amongst the rocks, at length mounting ouer them causeth, the stearme by the violent fall being forced to turne round, whirlpooles, troublous motions, and dangerous gulfs. Strabo also maketh mention of the same. Germanie hath the best Amber (which as Tacitus writeth, they call Glosse) which they gather betweene the shallow foords and the sea shores); Brasse ore, or the brassie stone, which they call Cadmia, crystall, the callais, a precious stone, which they prefer before that of Arabia, the onyx, and a white kinde of those stones com∣monly called Ceraunia, which if you holde in the open aire doth diminish the glittering of the starres; witnesse Plinie and Soline. Here also is found the A∣damant, if Scepsius, in this same authour, doth speake the trueth; and the Topaze (except there be some fault in the copy, in the fourth and eight chapters of the seuen and thirtieth booke: for some books read in this place, Carmania for Germania.) Tacitus dares not denie but that Germanie hath veines both of siluer and golde: and he reporteth that Curtius Rufus dambd vp a caue in the field of Matium, to search for veines of siluer. Plinie reporteth that mines of brasse were found but the other day in Germanie. I finde in the same Tacitus that the Gothini did dayly worke in yron mines. Lycophron describeth the hog fish with foure feet in Donawe. And about the head or fountaines hereof Pliny speaketh of a kinde of blacke fishes, which being eaten are present death. The same authour mentioneth the Esox, a fish proper to the riuer Rheine: (some read Exossem; againe, for Rheine they reade Donawe: for I know the fish Exossis, that is, a fish that hath no maner of bones, no not the backe bone, which liueth in Donawe, as Iornandes testifieth with me, not in the Rheine: of whose clammy flesh, not vnlike to the sauour of yoong porke, we sometimes tasted at Vienna in Austria, but much against our stomacke. They call it Hausen, namely of the greatnesse, shewing it selfe in the water like little houses. Cassiodor in his twelfth booke attributeth the Carpe to Donawe. The riuer Maemus (Aelianus calleth it Danubius) affoordeth the fish called Silurus: the best goose feathers, especially those next the body: the radish roots, as great as little children: the herbe Corruda a kinde of sperage, as Pliny testifieth; who confesseth also that he s here an hony combe eight foot long. The same authour with Solinus and Cesar doth ascribe these beasts as proper to this place, the alcen, the buffe, the vrus, and the machlis. Cassiodor in the third booke of his Variar. chap. 50, sayth that the Alemanes oxen are more precious than those of other places, by reason of their great bodies. Cesar also in the sixt booke of the French warres mentioneth a kinde of oxe, of which he thus sayth: There is an oxe in shape and proportion like to an hart; from the midst of whose fore∣head there groweth betweene the eares, one horne higher than the rest, and straiter than any of those hornes which we know: from the top thereof they spread abroad like the boughs of the palme-tree. There are birds in Hercynia whose feathers doe shine in the night like fire, as Pliny reporteth, or whose quilles, as Solinus sayth, doe glister and shine in the darke, yea although the night be neuer so darke and ouercast: insomuch that the men of that place do often times so appoint their nightly out goings, that they may vse them as lights for the directing and finding of their way: and hauing cast them before in the darke wayes, do see which way to go, by the marke of the glittering feathers. Of these very same speaketh Priscian, or whosoeuer els was the interpreter of Dionysius his Pe∣riegesis, Et pascit volucres mirum fulgentibus alis, Quies ducibus noctu cernuntur flexa viarum. Here liueth the golden feathered fowle, A woonder tis to tell, Whose quilles being strew'd in darkest wayes, Do guide men passing well. Pliny hath left written, that there is seene in Germany, especially in Win∣ter the turdus or felfare. Plutarch in his lesser parallels writeth that there are two altars in Germanie, which yerely vpon a certaine day do sound like trumpets in memorie of the daughter of C. Marius sacrificed long since in that place. Now let vs speake something of the Nation. Columella sayth it is a land of most tall men: Pliny and Solinus who imitated or followed him, say that it is a rich countrey for men, full of very many big and boisterous people. Sidonius calleth the Alemans cruell and fierce: Cassiodor, a proud and innumerable nation. Pausanias in his Arcadia reporteth the same. Cesar, Arrianus, Appianus, He∣rodotus, Polyaenus, Vegetius, and Columella do all ioyntly affirme, that they are all tall of stature and very big limm'd men. Dionysius calleth them, White Germanes: Calpurnius Flaccus, Ruddy: Tacitus, Blew eyed: Iuuenal, Yellow hair'd: others, Red hair'd. Martiall and Seneca describe them with their haire wreathed and bound vp in a knot. Tertullian in his booke De Virginibus velandis, doth highly commend their goodly locks. Appian sayth that they are very crabbed in maners, and cruelly minded. Cesar calleth them barbarous and cruell: Iosephus in the second booke of the Iewish warre, chap. 16, stout and hardy: Dionysius Afer, very warlike and martiall: Hegesippus, boisterous and inuincible: Arrian and Dionysius, souldierlike: his olde interpreter, sterne and surly: Arrianus, proud and arrogant. There is no man more couragious than a Germane, none more eager or hot to giue an onset or assault, none more desirous of warres; as Seneca, in his booke of Anger, writeth. Herodian calleth it a nation very couetous of money: Ouid, faithlesse and trecherous: Cesar, false traitours and deepe dissemblers: Paterculus, most crafty in their greatest cruelty and borne to lie. (But who can expect better commendations and report of an enemie prouoked to the full, beat backe and forced to flie with great losse and slaughter more than once or twice?) Tacitus, who liued among them, in the third booke of his histories, speaketh more vprightly, when he sayth, That the souldiers are most fierce and desperate: and that the nation deligh∣teth much in warre, is nothing wily or crafty, but such as easily layeth open the secrets of their hearts, disclosing their mindes one to another, and such as no man may better trust vpon their credit. The same authour sayth, that Iulian the Emperour in his Misopogonos, who writeth that he hath learned by expe∣rience, that it is a nation which can not flatter, but such as loueth to liue freely and plainly with all men. Ptolemaeus in the second booke of his Quadripartite teacheth that they are by nature and constitution of body temperate, and milde in condition, by reason of the qualitie of the region wherein they dwell. Thus much of their nature and qualities: now a word or two of their rites and maners. Assoone as their children are borne, they cary them to the riuer, (layed vp∣on a shield, sayth the Greeke epigram) as they come warme from their mothers wombe, as Galen and Aristotle in the eight booke of his Politicks, doe te: and there dipping them as the Smith doth his hot yrons into the colde water, do make triall both of the hardnesse of their nature, and by this meanes withall they do much strengthen the body. This is that which Claudian sayth, Nascentes explorat gurgite Rhenus. The riuer Rhene trieth those that are new borne. And this I thinke to be the more likely cause: forasmuch as the Poet attributeth the same to his Italians: for he sayth, Natos ad flumina primùm Deferimus, saeuo{que} gelu duramus & vndis. The babes new borne to riuers cold, In frost and snow we bring, To harden them against all stormes, Into the midst we slng. Which is the same that Sidonius writeth of the Thracians in these words: Excipit hic natos glacies, & matris ab aluo, Artus infantum
molles nix Cambrica durat. Also Val. Flac. 6. of the Scythians, vbi tam saeno durauimus amne, Progeniem, natos{que} rudes, &c. Suidas, in the word Lycurgus, teacheth, that this was proper to the Lacedaemonians: as also Seneca in Suasorijs, who moreouer sayth that the riuer Eurota doth harden tender youth, to make them able to abide the better the miseries of warfare. (This custome doth yet continue amongst the Iaponians, as Mapheius witnesseth.) Caesar sayth they giue themselues to hardnesse from their childhood. If he were borne in Germany (sayth Seneca) he would forthwith being but a child, know how to handle a little iauelin. Yong men, who make it but a pastime, do cast themselues naked, sayth Tacitus, among swords and dangerous speares. The yoong men doe long abstaine from venerie; and Caesar reporteth that they esteeme it a most filthy thing to know a woman before they are twentie yeeres of age. Their marriages are seuere, they are content with one wife apiece; except a very few, which are oftener married for nobility than for lust. The husband offereth for a dowry to the wife, oxen and an horse ready bridled and sadled, with a buckler, iauelin, and sword. She is admonished by these signes of matrimony, that she commeth as a companion or consort of all labours and perils; both in peace and warre, that she is to suffer and attempt one and the same thing with her husband. Adulteries were very few, and those thus presently punished: The husband (sayth Tacitus) thrusteth his wife out of doores starke naked before her friends and kinred, with her haire quite cut off; and thus he whip∣peth her cleane thorow the towne: whereupon it is manifest that Sextus Empyrus lieth loudly, or at least Gent. Heruetus his interpreter, where he writeth, that it is no shame nor dishonesty amongst the Germans, but an ordinary thing, to commit incest and buggery. They giue not their mindes to husbandry, but all their life is hunting, that is their chiefe delight; yet Pliny writeth, that they vsually sowe oats, and ordinarily vse to eat no other pulse. Tacitus wtnesseth, that in Winter they sit all day long by the fir side. Caesar teacheth vs, that the greater part of their food consisteth of milke, flesh and cheese; and Appian sayth, that in pouerty and distresse they are content with greene herbs and sallets. Mela addeth, that they feed also vpon raw flesh. At dinner, as witnesseth Athenaeus, they bring flesh rosted in little pieces or gobbets; and vpon it they drinke milke and wine. Their dishes are simple and plaine, as venison new killed, wildings, and cast creame. Their drinke, sayth Tacitus, is a liquor made of barley or wheat. Neither is there any nation more riotous in their Innes and dayly meetings. It is accounted a shamefull thing and a great discourtesie to driue any man out of doores, or forbid any man to come to their house: neither is it a disgrace for a man to sit tipling and drinking whole dayes and nights together. Yet this is now no woonder, seeing, as Pliny sayth, drunkennesse reigneth in euery corner of the world. I maruell that Athenaeus doth not name the Ger∣mans in that his catalogue of tospots and drunken nations, or are these sober men in respect of those? The richer sort vse no loose garments, but so strait and close to their bodies, that one may tell their ribs and muscles, if they do but stirre: the rest do weare the skinnes of wilde beasts, which the ex∣terior ocean or the vnknowen sea begetteth. The very same is witnessed by Salust, who sayth that they couer their bodies with garments of skinnes: as also by Caesar: but he with Tacitus addeth, that a great part of their bodies are cleane naked. This is manifest out of these words of Isidore, Rheno∣nes are certaine vestures or couerings for the shoulders and breast downe as low as the nauill, made like a rugge of course wooll and haires, that they will keepe out a good showre of raine. Varro perhaps speaketh of these kinde of garments where he sayth, that Rheno is a French garment: and Ser∣uius vpon that of Virgil 3. Georg. Et pecudum fuluis velantur corpora setis, Rhenonibus, Their vpper parts are clad in rugge, or Rhenones made of courser wooll; iustifieth the same. For as Salust sayth in his histories, garments made of skinnes or pelts are called Rhenones. It seemeth in Persius to be a kinde of beast, in this verse, Essedáque ingentes locat Caesonia Rhenos. Interpreters vpon this place do vnderstand by it the Ger∣mans, because, as they say, they do inhabit neere Rhene. But if it may be lawfull for this nation to take denomination from a riuer, it should be lawfull for them to be called rather Danubij, which runneth thorow their countrey, than of the Rheine, which belongeth as well to the French men as to the Germans. And that it is the name of a liuing creature, the siluer money of C. Rhenius doth in a maner perswade, in which a chariot with two wheeles is drawen of two beasts like goats. Olaus describeth the Reynen certaine beasts so called, which of Herbersteinius are named Rhen. Thus much by me concerning these beasts called Rhenones, let other men iudge otherwise if they please. Plutarch in 6. Conuiual. writeth that they weare apparell only against frost and colde of Winter. Pomponius writeth, that the men do couer them∣selues with barkes of trees. And the same man with Tacitus writeth, that they all vse a cassocke for a couering, fastened together with a button or thorne, and that in their childhood they go naked, euen in the greatest colde and dead of Winter. Neither is there any other habit for women than for men, but that the women oft times do couer themselues with linnen garments. Pliny hath noted that they also sowe flax, and that the women make cloth of it; neither do they know any finer garment than that: and that they mingle it with purple. Euery mother giueth sucke to her owne childe, neither are they committed to bondmaids and nurses. We learne out of Eusebius sixth booke de Praeparat. and out of S. Clements ninth booke de Recog. that they giue not themselues to childish things, or any thing which they thought to be vnprofitable, as namely, to stage-playes, painting, or mu∣sicke. Yet they haue giuen themselues to making of verses, but such as are rude and simple, as witnesseth the forenamed Iulian in the same Misopogo∣nos. And this is one kinde of memoriall or Chronicle with them, as Tacitus witnesseth. Otherwise they spend their whole life in warlike and milita∣ry exercises. We reade in Caesar, that robbery is not accounted as any infamy. And Seneca sayth, they take care for nothing more than for armour and weapons. In these they are bred and borne, in these they are nourished. If their countrey haue long peace, they do voluntarily go and offer their ser∣uice to those nations which do wage warre vpon any other, as Tacitus witnesseth. They procure their mothers, children and wiues to bring vnto them being in fight, incouragements and meat and drinke, neither do they feare to sucke and dresse their wounds. They begin the skirmish with singing, sound or clashing of their weapons, and dancings. They animate and encourage one another with shouting and loud hallowings. In battell they vse long speares and pikes, the weapons of the Alemans or Teutones, as Lucan in his sixth booke affirmeth. To leaue his armour behinde him in the field was accounted the greatest disgrace that might be, insomuch that many after their returne home from the warre, haue ended that infamie with an hal∣ter. Hence perhaps is that of Eusebius and S. Clement, which report, that many of the Germans do hang themselues. Dion and Herodotus say that they vsually swimme ouer riuers: for the lightnesse of their armour and the talnesse of their bodies doth lift them vp, and beare them aboue the wa∣ter, as Tacitus witnesseth. Pliny teacheth that the pirats do saile in seuerall hollow trees, whereof some one doth beare thirtie men apiece. The same man sayth that there is yet a custome with them, that the conquered giue an herbe to the conquerours. Appianus Alexandrinus sayth they contemne death, by reason that they are perswaded that they shall returne to life againe. Perhaps for that cause peraduenture it is, that Tacitus speaketh thus of them: They desire no great funerals: that only is obserued, that the bodies of famous and better sort of men may be burnt with some certeine kinde of wood. They heape vpon the fire neither garments nor any sweet sauours. Euery mans armour, and some mans horse also was cast into the fire. The sepulchre is raised with turfs, &c. They haue also a certaine kinde of punishment only vsed here, as Tacitus sayth, who writeth, that they hang traitours and runnagates vpon trees, but idle and lustie fellowes (Lipsius readeth, big-limmed and lazie lubbers) they throw into puddles and fennes, casting an hardle or grate ouer them. (Caesar in his sixt booke de bello Gall. makes me imbrace that reading of Lipsius, where, if I be not deceiued, he maketh them slothfull, whom they account in the number of runnawayes, cowards and traitours: neither do I see how these differ; to accuse a man for idlenesse, and to make him infamous for slothfull dulnesse.) This is that diuersitie of punishment, according to the diuersity of offences. They vse not any sacrifices: and they count them only in the number of gods (if we may beleeue Caesar) whom they see, as the Sunne, the Moone, and Vulcan. But afterwards, as it is manifest out of Tacitus, who liued vnder Verna the Emperour, they got themselues other gods also, as Mercury, Hercules, (whom, if we may credit Lucian, they did call Ogmion) Mars, Isis, and the mother of the gods; beside one named Alcis. The same Tacitus ad∣deth, that they accounted also Velleda and Aurinia amongst the number of their gods. Suidas mentioneth this, but that he readeth Beleda for Vel∣leda. Theodosius out of Dion writeth, that the virgin Ganna gaue out oracles. He also heere maketh mention of the temple of Tanfannae. He sayth that the Sueui (which is the greatest nation of all Germany) did worship the mother Earth, which (as Lipsius readeth) they call Aërtha, which yet is called Aerde. But they haue no images. Tertullian in his Apolog. writeth (if the reading be vncorrupt) that Belenus is the god of the No∣rici. Plutarch, and out of him Clemens Alexandrinus, teacheth that they haue certaine holy women (Tacitus calleth them Agathias & Polyaenus, Fortune-tellers, Prophetesses) who did tell of things to come by the roaring, wirlings, and circumuolutions of riuers. It is very like that Caesar meant these same people, which he reporteth sayd to Ariouistus, that it was not lawfull for the Germans to ouercome, if they fought before the new moone. Hither are those things to be referred which Strabo speaketh of the Prophetesses of the Cimbrians (people of Germanie) in his seuenth booke. Aeli∣an in the second booke of his Var. hist. chap. 31. hath noted that they foretell things to come, euen by birds, entrals of beasts, signes, and forespeakings. Tacitus is witnesse, that they made experimentall diuinings, euen by the neying of their horses. It is manifest out of Suetonius his Domitian, that they had also Diuiners, which foretell by looking into the entrals of beasts. We reade in Tacitus, that at an appointed time they publikely sacrificed those men, and that in their consecrated groues, and by calling on the names of their gods: which I also gather out of Claudian his first booke of the praise of Stilicon, who calleth these woods, cruell by reason of their ancient religion. Tacitus also attributeth vnto these a certaine kinde of casting of lots. Iosephus in his eighth booke of Antiq. chap. 8. doth tell a prety tale worth the reading, of a captiue souldier, concerning their skill in diuination by birds. And thus of many things we haue selected these few particulars of Olde Germany, which hath now a new face, farre other fashions, rites and maners than at that time it had. Caesar will affoord more to the greedy Reader, but especially Tacitus in his peculiar booke written of the Ger∣mans. Moreouer, some things thou mayest finde in a Panegyricke speech made to Aurelius Maximianus the Emperour. The Epitome of Liuie in the 104. booke, witnesseth that he wrote of the situation and maners of Germanie. Caecilius reporteth, that Plinius Secundus his vncle wrote twentie books of the warres of Germanie. Agathias witnesseth that Asinius Quadratus did most curiously describe the estate of Germanie. But we hitherto
want all these books of Pliny and Liuy. Notwithstanding there are some men of no reputation, which bragge that they haue those bookes extant by them, and do suffer them to lie hid and fight with wormes to the great iniurie and dammage to learnings common-wealth. Of this vanquished, and yet inuincible Germanie, these men tooke their names or surnames, to wit, Nero, Claudius, Drusus, (of whom Ouid thus speaketh, Et mortem & nomen Druso Germania fecit: Great Drusus was of Germane named, and there he li'th intomb'd.) Germanicus Caesar this mans sonne, Tiberius Caesar, C. Caesar, Nero, Vitellius, and Domitian; as Suetonius, Dion, Tacitus, and their coines do witnesse. Item, Nerua, Hadrian, Antoninus Pius, Traian, M. Aurelius Antoninus, Commodus, Carocalla, Maximinus, Maximus his sonne, Gallienus, and Claudius; as their ancient coines doe plainly teach. Aurelian also, Maximilian, Valentinian, Valens and Gratian, as ancient stones and inscriptions do testifie. Lastly, Valerius Maxi∣minus and Eusebius in his ninth booke de Histor. Eccles. do auouch the same. Insomuch that the most learned Iustus Lipsius hath rightly obserued and noted vpon the first booke of Tacitus Annals, that almost all the Emperours since Tiberius haue taken their surnames from this most warlike na∣tion. I haue a piece of brasse money in which is the picture of M. Aurel. Antoninus, with this inscription: M. ANTONINVS AVG. TR. P. XXV. on the backe side is a firre tree, neere which standeth Victorie, with a shield in which is written VIC GER. and about the verge or skirt, IMP. VI. COSS. III. It is no maruell that Germanie should be signified, by the firre tree, for it is very common and familiar to this region: and Pliny describeth the best of them all to be in the Alps; in that part or side as I coniecture which looketh toward Germany. For we haue obserued that few or none do grow, scarse in any tract of the Alps, on that side toward Italie. And this is that Germanie, with which the Romane nation waged war from the yeere six hundred and fortie after the building of Rome, Caecilius Metallus and Papirius Carbo being Consuls, euen vnto the yeere one thou∣sand one hundred and sixtie foure: at what time it was taken of the Goths, a people of Germanie, in the reigne of Honorius the Emperour. So long was this Germanie winning, that I may so speake with Tacitus, who doth freely confesse, that it was rather triumphantly conquered, than basely van∣quished. That the disposition of the countrey might the better be vnderstood, I thinke it not amisse to adde these few histories to the former. Of the SIMPLICITY of these people, out of Suetonius de Claudio. He being moued with the simplicitie and affiance of the Germans suffered their am∣bassadours to sit in chiefe roomes of the Theatre, for that being brought into the places where the comminaltie and common sort vsed to sit, they mar∣king the Parthians and Armenians to sit amongst the Senatours, they boldly on their owne accord stepped to those higher places, affirming that their valour and eondition was nothing inferiour to theirs. Here also Tacitus in his 13. Annal. speaking of the Frisian Germans, and being gone to Rome, while they wait and attend Nero's leasure, who was busied about other matters, among those things which are vsually shewed to Barbarians, they come to Pompies theatre, to see the great multitude of the people there assembled. There sitting idle (for they were delighted with playes like fooles) inqui∣ring about the sitting in the lists, differences of states, demanding which is the gentleman, which is the Senatour, they obserued some in strange appa∣rell in the seats of the Senatours: and asking who they should be, they vnderstood, that that honour was giuen to the ambassadours of those nations which did excell in vertue and friendship with the Romans, they cried out aloud, NO MORTALL MEN MAY BE PREFERRED BEFORE THE GERMANS FOR VALOVR AND FIDELITIE: they step aside, leaue their seats, and place themselues among the Senatours: which was well taken of all the beholders: being held for a token of their ancient spirit and courageous stomacke. Nero made them free of the citie of Rome. Of their SECVRITIE, ex Arria. 1. Alexand. Alexander asked the Celtae (or Germans) what thing all the world most feared? thinking that the greatnesse of his power and name had pierced as farre as the Celtae, yea and farre beyond them, that they would haue answered, that they feared him aboue all men in the world beside. But the Celtae answered him farre otherwise than he expected: to wit, that they feared lest heauen should fall vpon them, because they liued farre from Alexander, and dwelt in places hard to come to, and that they saw him make expedition another way. Ale∣xander calling them friends and entertaining them into the number of his friends and confederates, sent them home againe, adding this one thing, That the Celtae are proud and arrogant fellowes. Of their CONFIDENCE IN THEIR OVVNE STRENGTH, ex Caesar. Comment. lib. 4. The Germans sayd that they did neither first beginne warre with the Romans, neither do they refuse to answer them, if they be prouoked, and to meet them where they will assigne; because this is a custome of the Germans continued from their ancestours, to answer him whosoeuer shall proclaime war against them, and neuer to offer conditions of peace vnto their enemies. Yet to say this, that they came vnwillingly thither, being that they were cast out of house and home: if the Romans desired their friendship and amity, they might be able to stand them instead and do them good seruice: or els let them giue them lands, or at leastwise suffer them to hold those which they haue gotten with their swords. They yeeld themselues inferiour to none, but to the Sueui only, to whom they thinke the immortall gods are not equall: otherwise in earth, there is no nation whom they can not ouercome. Of their MAGNANIMITY ex L. Flor. lib. 3. What was the pride of Ariouistus king of the Germans? When the ambassadours sayd, Come to Caesar: he answered, But who is Caesar? And if he will, let him come, sayth he, himselfe, what needeth he care how our Germanie doth? Doe I meddle with Romans? But these things of Ariouistus are more largely handled by Caesar himselfe, in his 1. Comm. de Bel. Gall.
PANNONIA, AND ILLYRIS. IN Dion, an authour of good credit, and who sometime, it is certaine, was President of this country, I read that the PAN∣NONES were so named for that they vsed to were sleeued coats made ex pannis, that is of patches or pieces of wollen cloth, cut and slashed after their manner and fashion, not vsuall in other countries. That they were so named of the Apennine mountaines, Isidore affirmeth he hath read in some one authour or other: but sure I thinke he dreamed when he wrot this, so vnlike it is from the trueth. Ptolemey restraineth PANNONIA, their countrey, within the riuers Donaw and Saw, and the mountaines Cetius and Albanus, making, as seemeth, these to be the true and naturall bounds of the same. The same in effect doth Strabo, who extended the Pannonij Westward vp as far as the city Segestica, (Segesd, the place, where it sometime stood, is yet called, as Bonfinius writeth) Northward vp as high as the riuer Ister or Donawe: South∣ward and Eastward as lowe as Dalmatia and the Sardiaei, a kinde of people dwelling betweene Moesia, Dardania and Dalmatia. Florus writeth that these Pannones are entrenched and walled, as it were, within two great forrests or wilder∣nesses and these three riuers, Dra, Saw, and Donaw. Dion saith, that they dwell and possesse all that tract of ground that is betweene Noricum, (Bauaria, or Bayern) and Moesia Europaea, (Seruia and Bosna.) Appaianus maketh them to abut Westward vpon the Iapo∣des or Iapydes, a people of Illyria now called Craner, and Eastward vpon Dardania (Bossen.) But in this he is deceiued, that he calleth these people Paeo∣nes: a common errour among the Grecian historians, which Dion in his nine and fortieth booke did first discouer: For of the Romans, and of themselues, they are called Pannonij. The Paeones are a nation diuers from these, lying betweene mount Rhodope and the marine coasts of Macedonia. Ptolemey, Strabo, Dion, Aurelius Victor, and ancient inscriptions do diuide Pannony into the HIGHER and LOVVER: Liber Notitiarum, The booke of Remembrances, into the FIRST and SECOND. Optatus Afer maketh three Pannonies: but vntruely, seeing that those aboue named, approoued au∣thours, doe describe but two: and the coine of the Emperour Decius, this countriman borne, doth mention no more. Solinus writeth, that this country is very plaine and champion, and as rich and fertile a soile as any other thereabout. Appian saith, that it is full of woods, and that it hath no cities nor townes, only the lands and fields are diuided vnto certaine farmes and families. In Hygenus I reade that a price and custome was imposed vpon these lands accor∣ding to the fertility and goodnesse of euery aker: for there were fields of the first and second price; woods yeelding yearely great plentie of maste; woods of the meanest sort of feed and pastorage. &c. But Iornandes certaine ages after reporteth otherwise of this his natiue country; and affirmeth it to be beautified with many goodly cities. The people doe liue and fare as hardly as any people vnder heauen, hauing neither good ground nor good aire, nor hauing of their owne growing either oile or wine, but very little and bad, neither doe they regard to plant and set these commodities, the greatest part of the yeare being there very colde and bitter, nothing else almost but a continuall vnkinde Winter. Dion writeth, that they haue some Barley and Millet [Strabo saith, Spelt (Zea) and Millet] of which they make their bread and drinke: and withall affirmeth that he writeth not this by heare-say or relation from others, but of his owne experience and knowledge as he learned and saw at such time as he was Lieutenant there. Yet he saith they are a most stout and hardy people, but hauing nothing woorthy the name of honesty and ciuility, being generally very hasty and bloudy minded, killing and slaying without any respect or feare of God or man, and that vpon euery crosse word and light occasion. Solinus auoucheth the same to be true, saying, that this country is very strong and well furnished with couragious and stout men. Tibullus in his fourth booke, saith that they are a wily and crafty people. Statius and Paterculus called them, Feroces, fierce and cruell. But the same author doth againe asmuch commend them, not only for their great loue of military discipline: but for their skill and know∣ledge of the Latine tongue, and for that diuers of them are learned and studious of the liberall sciences. Ausonius nameth them Armiferos, a warlike peo∣ple. Eusebius in his tenth booke de Praeparat. Euangelica, giueth out that these people, especially those that dwelt about Noricum, (Bauaria, or Bayern) did first finde out the vse of copper or brasse. Herodian saith, that they are bigge bodied, very tall, ready to fight, and to kill and slay vpon euery occasion: but of so dull a conceit and simple, that they doe not easily perceiue whether one deale or speake ought craftily and subtilly, or meane well and plainly. The Panegy∣ricke of Mamertinus nameth this Pannony the Empresse of all nations for valour, and, like as Italy, renowmed for ancient honour. Pliny saith that this countrey yeeldeth great plenty of mast or akornes. The same authour also, in his historie of Nature hath left recorded, as if it were a matter of some mo∣ment, that heere the herbe saliunca, a kinde of lauender, doth naturally grow of it owne accord. Oppian commendeth the Pannonian dogges, which Ne∣mesianus in this verse affirmeth to be good hunters: Nec tibi Pannonicae stirpis temnatur origo: The hounds heere bred are not the woorst that ere I see. The Pannonian cappes made of beasts skinnes or furres, such as souldiours vse to weare, Vegetius in his booke of warre doth highly commend. This country afterward Probus the Emperour permitted to haue vines, and by the helpe of the souldiers himselfe did plant them in mount Almus (Arpatarro) neere Sermium (Sirmisch) the place where he was borne, as also vpon mount Aureus (Meczek) in Moesia superior (Seruia) as Sextus Aurelius Vi∣ctor, in his life, doth testifie. In Paeonia, a prouince heere, abbuttant vpon mount Rhodope toward Macedony in Greece, the soile is rich and fertile of golde, that many men haue found lumps of golde-ore of more then a pound weight. And in the confines of this country Aristotle in his Admiranda doth write, that oftentimes the earth or vpper soard being by continuall showers washed away, that kinde of golde which they call apyrum, (quicke-golde, if I may so call it, such as haue not touched the fire) is found without digging or any other labour. But heere againe I doe also obserue an error very frequent amongst the Greeke writers, mistaking Paeonia for Pannonia: For Pannonia or Hungary euen to this day is so rich of golde, that it is wonderfull and scarse to be belee∣ued of such as haue not seene it, as Bonfinius, Broderith, and Ranzan doe iointly affirme, who do all write that they haue seene very many golden twigges of vines, some as long as ones finger, others of halfe a foote long: but of the richnesse of Paeonia for mines of golde, I haue neuer heard nor read in any authour to my remembrance. Diogenes Laertius, in the life of Pyrrhus Eliensis hath noted, that the Paeones doe vse to cast the bodies of dead men into pondes or deepe pooles. Maximus Tyrius in his eight and thirtieth oration writeth, that the Paeones did worship the Sunne, and that the signe or idoll of the same, which they adored; was a little dish, put vpon the end of along pole and set vpright. But whether this be meant of them, or of the Pannones (for that this authour is a Grecian) I know not, I leaue it to the consideration of the learned. The like is that place of Aelianus in the twelfth chapter of his seuenth booke de Animalibus, where he writeth a discourse of the laborious painfulnesse of the women of this countrey, well worth the reading and obseruation. Tzetzes also, in the three hundred and eighteenth chapter of his tenth Chiliade, nameth the Paeones for the Pannones, where he hath something perteining to this our purpose. Antigonus in his booke de Mirabilibus, writeth that in Illyria and Pannonia is that kinde of beast which they call Monychos: Aelianus termeth it Monops: Others, Bonasus. Diaconus in the eighth chapter of his second booke of the historie of Lombardie writeth that Pannonia breed∣eth great plenty of Buffes or Bugles, (Bisontes) and that he heard of an honest old man, that fifteene men haue beene knowen to lie together vpon one buffe hide, noting thereby the huge greatnesse of this beast. And thus much of both those Pannonia's: now it remaineth that in like maner we say something of Illyris. This country is called of Ptolemey ILLYRIS: of Stephanus ILLYRIA, ILLYRIAE and ILLYRIVM: of Historians and Geographers IL∣LYRICVM. Valerius Maximus writeth, that one Alexander wrot a whole booke of the description of this country. It was so called, if we may giue credit to Appianus Alexandrinus, of Illyrius the sonne of Polyphemus: or Cadmon, as Apollodorus and Stephanus doe thinke. The bounds of this prouince are by diuers diuersly assigned. For Ptolemey confineth it with the Hadriaticke sea, Istria, the two Pannonies, and mount Scardus, (Marinai, they now call it.) Pliny endeth it at the city Lissus (Alesio.) Pomponius maketh it to begin at Tergestum, (Trieste, a city of Friuli,) and to end at the riuer Aea, which is neere Apollonia, (Sissopoli, a towne of Macedony in Greece.) Martianus extendeth it yet further, namely euen vp as high as the Ceraunian mountaines, as in like manner Strabo doth. Suetonius in the life of Tiberius writeth thus of the bounds of this country; ILLYRICVM, which lieth betweene Italy, and the kingdome of Noricum; (Bayern) Thrace, and Macedony, the riuer Donawe and the gulfe of Venice. And Ap∣pian he maketh it yet more large, stretching it out in length from the head of the riuer Ister, (Donawe euen vnto the Ponticke sea, (Mar Maiore.) Sex∣tus Rufus who liued in the time of Valentinian the Roman Emperour comprehendeth vnder the name of Illyricum these seuenteene prouinces: Those two of the Norici, the two Pannonies, Valetia, Sauia, Dalmatia, Moesia, the two Dacia's, Macedonia, Thessalia, Achaia, the two Epiri, Praeualis and Creta. Thus much of the name and limits of this country out of diuers authours.
map of ancient Pannonia and Illyria PANNONIAE, ET ILLYRICI VE∣TERIS TABVLA. Ex conatibus geographicis Abra∣hami Ortelij Antverpiani. Vis consili expers mole ruit sua. Dn̄o Ludovico Hal∣lero ab Hallerstein, Stemmate, eruditione, & animi candore, verè nobili, Ab. Orte∣lius hoc amicitiae mnemosynon de∣dicabat. Loca incertae positionis. In ILLYRIA populi, Agravonitae, Araxiae, Cinambri, Decum, Deremistae, Denari, Dudini, Glinditiones, Grabaei, Hemasini, Hymani, Lacinienses, Mentores, Melcomani, Oxei, Palarei, Plerei, Sassaei, Scirtari, Selepi∣tani, Separi, Stulpini, Syopij, Tralles. Vrbes, Alcomenae, Arduba, Astraea, Bolcha, Bargulum, Bolurus, Cornutum, Dimalum, Eugenium, Hyscana, Iovium, Megara, Melibussa, Nerata, Ninia, Nutria, Oedantum, Olympe, Orgomenae, Pelion, Pherae, Seretium, Sesarethus, Setovia, Sinotium, Sir, Surium, Tribulium. Regio Ias. Fluvius Salancon. Mons Monoechus. Locus Serita. In PANNONIA populi, Arivates, Belgites, Corneatae, Dasnones, Decentij, Desitiates. Vrbes, Albanum, Arsaciana, Burgena, Quadriburgum. Hae urbes quo{que} circa Iapygiam, Istriam{que}, Archimea, Torgium. et populi Eleutij, Moentini. Quaedam etiam ex Anton Itinerar. hic omisimus.
We in this Mappe haue expressed only Ptolemey's Illyricum, which hee diuideth into two parts, namely into LIBVRNIA and DALMATIA, Liuy in his sixe and fortieth booke, according to the people and inhabitants of the same, diuideth it into three parts: of the nature of which prouince Strabo writeth in this maner: All the sea coast of Illyricum is well furnished with fit and commodious hauens: both the maine land, I meane, and the ilands neere adioyning to the same. The soile is very fertile of all maner of fruits and rich commodities, especially of oliues and strong wines. The countrey that is situate about this, is wholly mountainous, colde, and couered with snowe; so that vines are heere very rare, either in the high grounds or plaines and vallies. Where∣upon Propertius not altogether vnfitly called it Gelida Illyria, Bleak and frozen Illyria: Appian nameth the people Incolas bellicosisimos, a most warlike and couragious people. Liuy saith that they are a very hardy nation both by sea and land: Florus and Strabo maketh them cruell and bloudy men, and much giuen to robbe and steale. Iulian the Emperor in his discourse de Caesaribus, testifieth plainly that they are one of the stoutest and valiantest nati∣ons of all Europe. Vegetius recordeth that there were alwaies resident in Illyria two legions called Martiobarbuli: these Diocletian and Maximinian Emperours of Rome named afterward Iouiani, and Herculei: and they were preferred before all other legions whatsoeuer. Illyricis sudant equitatibus alae; as Claudian reporteth in the commendations of Serena. Lampridius maketh them well seene and renowmed for their skill in soothsaying, and diui∣ning of euents to come, when he writeth, that Alexander Seuerus excelled this nation in that skill. Isogonus in Pliny writeth that there be a kinde of men amongst these which doe bewitch with their eies, and doe kill such as they doe beholde and looke vpon any long while together: especially such of them as haue firie eies, like those which are moued with anger, and these kind of people haue two sights in ech eye. Aelianus saith that they are great wine bibbers, and, as Athenaeus reporteth, very much giuen to drunkennesse. Of the maidens and wiues of this countrey see Varro in the sixteenth chapter of his second booke. Claudian in his second panegyricke to Stilico signifieth that they were permitted about the raigne of the latter Emperours, to haue vines, where he thus writeth: Exectis inculta dabant quas secula syluis, Restituit terras, & opacum vitibus Istrum Conserit. Which was done, as seemeth, about the time of the Emperour Probus. In Ammianus Marcellinus I finde mention made of Sabaia, the drinke of the poorer sort of people, which they made of barley or wheat turned into a liquour or kinde of woort. Clemens Alexandrinus in his first booke of his Stromaton, hath recorded that these people first found out that weapon which the Romans called Pelta, a kinde of shield or target. The kine heere euery yeare doe bring two or three calues a piece, and some foure; yea some fiue or more at once: and doe giue so much milke at a meale, that euery day one cowe yeeldeth more then a large gallon. Againe, the hennes doe not lay only once a day, but some two or three egges a peece euery day, as Aristotle in his Admiranda plainly affirmeth. Aelianus writeth that he had heard by re∣port from others, that their goats heere are whole footed, not clouen as in other places. Pliny recordeth that heere groweth the best Gentian, a kinde of bit∣terwoort, or hearbe, whose root is of great vertue and request in physicall vses. The same authour commendeth the cockles of Illyria for their extraordinarie greatnesse. Athenaeus testifieth that heere in the high countrey far from the sea, groweth the best and goodliest Lychnis, or Rose campaine. Ouid in his se∣cond booke de Arte Amandi, doth much commend the Illyrian pitch. Theophrastus, Cornelius Celsus, Ouid, and Dionysius Vticensis, doe mention the Illyrian flower-de-luce, an hearbe, beside his beauty, of soueraigne vse in Physicke: the best of which, and that which is of greatest estimation, as Pliny writeth, groweth in the wildes and woods about the riuers Drilo (Drino, or Lodrino) and Narona, now called Narcuta. In Illyria, if one may beleeue Festus, in the word Hippius, euery ninth yeare they were woont to throw foure horses into the sea, as a sacrifice to Neptune, great commander of the same. Dionysius Vticensis and Caelius Apitius doe speake of oleum Liburnicum, a kind of oile made heere. The same author telleth vs of a cold spring or well in Illyria, ouer which if a man shall spread any clothes they will burne, and at length be cleane consumed. And thus much generally of Illyria: now it remai∣neth that we speake a word or two of Liburnia and Dalmatia, the seuerall parts of the same: whose beginning and ending, as Florus thinketh, is at the ri∣uer Titius, (Cercha, or Polischa:) or at the city Scardona (Scardo) situate vpon the banke of that riuer, as Ptolemey, Dioscorides, Galen and Pliny do thinke. Liburnia is renowmed for those kinde of shippes which heere were first made and vsed, and therefore were named Naues Liburnicae: they seeme to haue beene like vnto our pinnaces or foists, light and swift of saile, and therefore were good for pirates and sea-robbers: and Vegetius in his booke of warre writeth that they were held to be the best kinde of shippes for seruice and fight vpon the sea, and therefore in warre to be preferred before any other kinde of shipping whatsoeuer: this also Appian doth confirme, who saith that for lightnesse and swiftnesse they did farre surpasse any other. And Zosimus writeth that they were as quicke of saile as those gallies that were forced and rowed with fifty oares: but in this he is deceiued, that he thinketh them to haue beene so named of a certaine city in Italy. Apitius telleth vs, as we said before, of a Liburnian oile, vsed, as seemeth, about some seruices in the kitchin. Of the iron mines in Dalmatia, see Cassiodore in his third booke Variarum, dedicated to Symeon. These verses of Statius in his Siluae, doe shew that it hath also some veines of golde: Quando te dulci Latio remittent Dalmatae montes, Vbi Dite viso Pallidus fossor redit, eruto{que} Concolor auro. So doth the poet Martiall in the threescore and eighteenth Epigram of his tenth booke vnto Macer, in these words: Ibis littoreas Macer Salonas: Felix auriferae co∣lone terrae: yet Strabo plainly testifieth that they vsed no maner of mony or coines either of siluer or golde. Moreouer, he affirmeth that euery eighth yeere they make a new diuision of their lands. There are in Dalmatia, as Cicero to Vatinius writeth, twenty ancient townes, which also haue gotten vnto them more than threescore other townes. The rape roote and persnep do grow of their owne accord about Dalmatia, without setting, sowing or manuring, as Athe∣naeus in his ninth booke Deipnosophiston, out of the authoritie of Posidonius, affirmeth. For so Delachampius translateth the Greeks word , not vsed of any other writer to my knowledge. Aristotle in his often cited Admiranda, giueth vs to vnderstand that the Taulantij, a people of Dalmatia, did vse of hony to make a kinde of wine: for taking the hony-combes and powring water vpon them, they presse and wring out the liquor, which they presently seethe in a great kettle and caldron, vntill the one halfe of it be consumed, then they put it into earthen vessels and so let it stand for a certaine time: lastly, they tunne it vp into barrels or treene vessels, and so they keepe it for a long time, vntill it get the true and perfect taste of a strong kinde of wine. The same authour in the same place writeth, that amongst the Ardiaei, a people of Dalmatia, in the confines neere to the Autariatae, there is a great mountaine, and neere to that as great a valley, out of which water runneth in great abundance; yet not at all times, but in the spring time only: which in the day time they powre in∣to a vessell, and keepe it close within the house, at night they set it abroad in the open aire vncouered: which being done for six daies together, at last it congea∣leth, and becommeth as fine salt as may possibly be seene. Pliny in the skirts of Dalmatia placeth a caue which he calleth Senta, with a wide deepe mouth, into which if one shall cast any thing though neuer so light, and in a day neuer so calme, presently there riseth a storme like to a whirlewind. Hither peraduenture belongeth that fable of the two rocks of which Dionysius Afer speaketh. In the same countrey there is a hole called Diana's caue, in which, if one may be∣leeue Phlegon Trallianus, there are many dead bodies, the ribbes of which are more then sixteene eles long a piece. Giue him the whetstone. Thus farre of this countrie and the people of the same, collected out of the most ancient authours that are extant and haue come to our hands. Latter writers haue na∣med this Illyria, SLAVONIA, and the people or inhabitants of the same, SLAVONES, Slauonians: by which name, being reclaimed from the barba∣rous inciuility of other nations, and by holy baptisme incorporated into the body of Christs Church, in the time of Basilius Emperour of Constantinople, and his sonne Leo, who succeeded him in that Empire, they are described in the eighteenth chapter of that his booke de Bellico apparatu, where he thus setteth out their nature and manner of life: It is a populous nation, able to indure all maner of miseries; heat, colde, raine, nakednesse, want of meat, drinke and other such like necessary things, they can easily abide. They were woont to be humane & courteous to strangers: which hospitality they do very diligenly mainetaine and keepe euen to this day: for they alwaies vsed to shew themselues gentle and kinde to trauellers and strangers, to entertaine them friendly and courteously, and to goe with them and conduct them from place to place, to defend and keepe them safe and sound from all hurt and danger. So that if a traueller were wronged by the negligence of his host, they presently made warre vpon him, as against a publike enemy. For they held it for a great argument of fidelity, if the wrong done to a stranger were righted or any kinde of way reuenged. Moreouer, this also doth shew them to be humaine, in that they do not binde their cap∣tiues to a perpetuall seruitude, but rather they detained and kept them with them as captiues, and prescribed them a certaine set time of their seruitude, after which being expired, paying a certaine fine or peece of mony, they might if they pleased returne home to their owne countrie againe: or, if they thought good, stay still amongst them as frinds and freemen. Their women are said to be very modest aboue those of other countries: for many of them doe take the death of their husbands so heauily, that they will die with them, and one way or other make an end of their liues with them: for they cannot abide to liue as widowes alone after their husbands death, and to marry the second time that is counted a foule shame. Their ordinary fare is millet: they are very temperate and spa∣ring in their diet. Other toiles of husbandry they cannot away withall: for they loue to liue more freely and gentlemanlike: by no meanes they will be drawen with great labour and trauell to prepare great and sumptuous banquets and dainties, and then when they haue done, to eat and drinke them vp. In warre they arme themselues with two iauelings or darts a peece. Some of them also do cary great shields which they call Thyrei: for they do vse wooden bowes and shafts, whose heads they dip in a very strong poison: for whosoeuer he be that is wounded, except he presently drinke treacle or some other holsome & soueraigne anti∣dote, or shall by and by cut off all the place which is wounded, that it run no further, the whole body will surely rot and perish. They doe delight to flie to steepe and craggie places, not easily to be assaulted or come vnto, and there to abide and dwell. Thus far Leo the Emperour. Of HISTRIA, which also is contained in this Mappe, thou hast a large and fine description in the twelft booke of Cassiodore his Variarum, directed to the lieutenants and gouernours of this coun∣try: where in respect of the great fertility and store of fruits that it yeeldeth, he nameth it Rauennae Campaniam, Campany of Rauenna, and the store∣house of the Emperiall city.
ITALY. THey which vse to compare the situation of countries to other things do liken Italy to an oken leafe, as Pliny, Solinus and Rutilius haue done: or to an iuy leafe, as Eustathius. The later writers do more truly liken it to a mans legge. One in our time hath described all Europe in the form of a maiden, in whose right arme Italy is portraitured: and not vnfitly, in my opinion, if one do exactly consider the nature of the country and famous acts done in the same: for euen as the strength of the body doth for the most part shew his force and ability in this member; so this prouince in times past de∣clared to the world by this his arme, of what power all Europe the whole body is likely to be. That Italy hath had diuers inhabitants, partly Barbarians and partly Grecians, it is manifest out of the ancient records both of Latines and Greekes. For at the first it was inhabited by the Aborigi∣nes, Siculi, Pelasgi, Arcades, Epei, Troiani, Morgetes, Ausones and Oenotri. And therefore it was cal∣led by diuers and sundry names: as, AVSONIA, OENOTRIA, of the people and nations possessing it: IANICVLA, of Ianus: SATVRNIA, of Saturne: and lastly, ITALIA (which it still retaineth) of Italus their King, or as Varro witnesseth of buls or oxen: for the ancient Gretians did in those daies call buls, : and because that this country did breed and maintaine many goodly buls, it was of them called Italia: or, (as others affirme, which more regard poeticall fables) for that Hercules from Si∣cilia hither followed a worthy bull, which was named Italus. Of the Greekes also it was named HESPERIA, of Hesperus, the sonne of Atlas: or, which pleaseth others better, of Hesperus the euening starre: whereof also in old time Spaine was called He∣speria. For, for the same reason that Italy was sometime of the Grecians called Hesperia, was Spaine of the Latines called Hespe∣ria. Yet for distinction sake, Virgil, in the first and seuen bookes of his Aeneiads, calleth Italy, Hesperiam Magnam, Great Hespe∣ria. But it was also by others named by other names. For I see that of Macrobius, Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, Marcus Cato, Isaac Tzetzes &c. it was called APENINA, ARGESSA, CAMESENA, TVRSENIA, SALEVMBRONA and, TAVRINA. Stepha∣nus writeth that it was called CHONIA and BRETTIA. A part also of it was called by writers of good note MAGNA GRAE∣CIA, Great Greece, of the Grecians that sometime dwelt in it. They report, as Aelianus writeth, that there haue dwelt heere so many and sundrie nations (more than in any other country of the world) by reason especially, that all times and seasons of the yeare are very mild and temperate: againe, for that the goodnesse of the soile is excellent, well watered, and very fertile of all maner of fruites, and yeeldeth great store of pastorage: Item, because it is crossed with many riuers, and hath the sea very com∣modious lying round about it, and the sea coast on all sides open, and cut into sundrie baies, inlets, creekes and hauens, seruing very fitly for the entertainment and harborough of goodly tall shippes. Lastly, the extraordinary kindnesse and humanity of the people inhabiting it, hath been a great meanes to draw others to seat themselues heere. The Italians were euer, as Iulius Firmicus witnesseth, very famous for their princely curtesie and gentlemanlike behauiour. Aethicus calleth this country Heauenly Italy, and The Queen of the World; Rutilius, Rerum dominam, The mistresse of all Nations: Dion Prusaeus, The most blessed and happie country of all Europe: Halicarnassaeus in his first booke, saith, that for many reasons, It is the best country of the whole World. Strabo saith, That none may sufficiently expresse in wordes the due commendati∣ons of this country, according to the worth of the same. But I thinke it not amisse to set out the praises of this country by this one commendation of Pliny, wherewith he concludeth that his famous worke which he wrote of the history of Nature. In the whole World, saith he, the cope of heauen, Italy is the most beautifull country, and of all things it doth possesse the soueraignty: it is another nurce and mother of the World, for men, women, captaines, souldiers, seruants, famous arts and occupations, worthy wittes and inuentions, commodious situation, wholesomenesse and temperature of the aire, easie accesse of all nations, many safe hauens, kind blasts of windes, sufficient good water, pleasant and healthfull woods, goodly hils and mountaines, great store of deere and wild beasts, and those harmelesse, fertility of soile, and multitude of people. Whatsoeuer is necessarily required for the main∣tenance of man and beast is heere to be found, and no where better. Corne, Wine, Oliues, Wooll, Linnen, Woollen and Bullockes. Neither did I euer see better horses, or more esteemed at the runnings or horse-races, than those bred in our owne country. For met∣tals, as Gold, Siluer, Copper and Iron, (so long as they pleased to search for them) it was inferiour vnto none, all which it still re∣taineth in her wombe. Now it yeeldeth all maner of liquors of sundrie force and vertue, together with all sorts of graine and pleasant toothsome fruites. Thus farre Pliny. You may adde to these, if you please, that which the same authour writeth in the fifth chapter of his third booke: Item, that of Polybius in his second booke: of Varro in the second chapter of his first booke of Hus∣bandrie: of Strabo neere the end of his sixth booke; and lastly of Virgil in diuers place. Si factum certa mundum ratione fate∣mur, Consiliumquè Dei machina tanta fuit: If that we shall confesse that heauen by heauenly skill was rais'd, And in the same the massie globe by due proportion pais'd: as Rutilius in his second booke speaketh of Italy. Octauianus Augustus, Emperour of Rome, as Pliny testifieth, diuided this country into eleuen shires: Constantine the Great, as Rubeus, in his second booke of the history of Rauenna, saith, into seuenteen. Or, into eighteen, as I read in the one and twentieth chapter of the second booke of Diaconus his history of Lombardy. Aelianus writeth that it was beautified in his time, with 1197. cities. This is that same countrie, which, when word was brought of the rising of the Gauls, at what time as L. Aemilius Paulus and Caius Attilius Regulus, were Consuls, of it selfe, without any forren aid, yea and without the help of those which dwelt beyond the Po, mustered 80000. horsemen, and 700000. footmen. Polybius saith, that in the time of Hanniball, the trained-men of this countrie were 700000. fotmen, and 70000. horsemen. Pliny maketh these Ilands to belong to Italy: Sicilia, Sardinia, Corsica, Oglasa, (Monte di Christo, or Ianuti) Planar a, Vrgon, (Gorgona) Capraria Aegilium, (Gilio) Dianium, Moenaria, (Melora) Columbaria, Venaria, (Chia, or Elba) Planasia, (Planosa) Astura, (Stora) Palmaria, (Palmarola) Sinonia, Pontiae, Pandataria, (Palmaia) Prochyta, (Prosida) Aenaria, (Ischia) Mega∣ris, (Ouo) Caprea (Capri, or Campanella) Leucothea, (Licoso) Cuniculariae, (Sanguenares, or two ilands, one called Bizze, the other Speragia) Herculis insula (Asinaria) Enosis, (S. Pierro) Ficaria, (Serpentaria) Belerides, (Tauro, and Vacca) Callodes, Hera lutra, Leucatia, Pontia, (Ponzo) Iscia, Ithacesia, (Praca, Braces, and Turrecula) and Vlyssis spelunca. To these I adde the Aeoliae (Merleiae) Parthenope, (Palmosa or Betente) Diomedeae, (de Trimite) Calypson, and D oscoron, together with the Ele∣ctrides, which I find recited and named in Pomponius Mela and Antoninus.
map of ancient Italy ITALIAE VETE∣RIS SPECIMEN. EX NVMMO AEREO IMP. CAES. VESPASIANI AVG. EX NVMMO AEREO IMP. CAES. ANTONINI PII AVG. Cum Privilegio Imp. Reg. et Cancellariae Bra∣bantiae decennali, evulgabat Abrahamus Ortelius.
ITALY of the GAVLS. THis part of Italy in times past was called Gallia. For the old writers did extend the borders of Gallia from the ocean sea eastward euen to the riuer Rubicon (Runcone or Rugoso) There∣fore the Alpes running through the middest of it diuideth it into two parts: this they call TRANSALPINA, and Gallia vlterior, Gallia beyond the Alpes, or the further Gallia: this which we haue heere set out in this mappe, CISALPINA, Subalpina and Citerior, Gallia on this side the Alpes, vnder the Alpes, or the hither Gallia. Ausonius nameth it Gallia the Old; so doth Solinus, where he writeth that the Vmbri are an ancient issue and branch sprong from the old Gauls. Liuy in his 45. booke nameth it Gallia, without any addition. And for that all this part, in processe of time was comprehended vnder the name of Italy: therefore of Appian in his Annibalica, it is called by a fit name, to distinguish it from that other part, ITALIA GALLICA. The booke of records of the Prouinces nameth it, ITALIA MEDITERRANEA Midland Italy. In this part was also conteined that prouince, which was called GALLIA TOGATA. Moreouer this was named ARI∣MINIVM, as you may read in the 28. booke of Liuies Decades, except the place be corrupt. Silius Italicus, in his 9. booke, calleth the people of this place, Celtes, dwelling vpon the riuer Eridanus or Po. In this circuite of ground (which Tacitus nameth the most flourishing side of Italy) are the Eighth, Ninth, Tenth and Eleuenth shires of Italy, according to the diuision of Augustus. This selfe same tract is of the riuer Padus (Po) which watereth it, and diuideth it in the middest, diuided into two parts, namely, GALLIA TRANSPADANA and CISPADANA, Gallia beyond the Po, and Gallia on this side the Po. This later, Cispadana alone, in Ptolemey doth conteine that which otherwise was called Toga∣ta. Vnder this diuision were the Ligures comprehended: who, as we haue obserued in ancient writers, long since dwelt vp as high as the riuer Po. If there be any credit to be giuen to the Origines, a booke which commonly goeth vnder the name of Cato, this same prouince was also called AEMILIA, FELSINA, AVRELIA and BIANORA. Polybi∣us saith, that the forme of this whole tract of Gallia, is triangular or three cornered: whose toppe or vertex, as the Geo∣metricians call it, is made by the meeting of the Alpes and Apenninus, that mountaine that runneth through the mid∣dest of Italy from one end to the other. The base or ground line, is the Hadriaticke sea (Golfo di Venetia). Moreouer he addeth that in it are the greatest champion plaines and most fertile fields of all Europe. It is euery where full of woods, good pastorage for the feeding of cattell, and well watered with many pleasant brookes and riuers, and hath had in it twelue great and goodly cities, so built and seated that they had all things necessary either for the enriching of them∣selues conueniently, or maintenance and prouision for to liue gallantly, as Plutarch doth witnesse in the life of Camillus. The same also Pliny doth affirme, who in like maner saith that it is three cornered: and as in Delta, a prouince of Egypt, the riuer Nilus: so heere Po, doth emptie it selfe and falleth into the ocean sea. Which riuer Po, as Strabo saith, doth water this plaine, maketh it fertile, and also distinguisheth it by many most fruitfull hils, into diuers and sun∣drie parts. This is that riuer which antiquity called Eridanus, famous for the poeticall or fabulous story of Phaëton. Virgil calleth it, The king of Riuers. Claudian giueth it the title of Oloriferus, the swanne-bearing streame. Pliny nameth it Auriferum, the golden streame, and moreouer saith, that for clearenesse it is not inferiour to any riuer whatsoeuer. It issueth out of the bosome of Vesulus, (Veso) the highest hill of all the Alpes: where first arising out of many small fountaines, it draweth to head, then hiding it selfe or running vnderneath the ground for many furlongs together, at last riseth againe not farre from Forum-Vibij or Vibi Forum. From thence (many huge lakes emptying tnemselues into it) accompanied with thirty other riuers, it vnladeth it selfe by manie mouthes into the Hadriaticke bay or Gulfe of Ve∣nice: into which it falleth so swiftly and with such violence, that forcing backe the billowes and tide, it keepeth his own channell in the sea, and, as Pomponius speaketh, maketh the waters fresh and potable amid the brackish surges of the same. Pliny writeth, that in the Ligurian language it was named Bodincus, that is, (as Scepsius there doth interpret it) Bottomlesse. In these quarters, amongst others, the Gauls did sometimes dwell, who first of all mortall men made war vpon the Romanes, tooke the city of Rome, sacked and burnt it, the Capitoll onely being preserued vntouched. This is that part of Italy, which, as Pliny writeth to his familiar friend Iunius Mauricus, retaineth euen to this day much of that ancient frugality and good husbandrie of our ancestours. In the fifth booke of Straboes Geographie, and in the second booke of Polybius history you haue an excellent and large description of this country. Of Venice, a shire of this prouince, read Cassiodore in the foure and twentieth section of his twelfth booke. Bonauentura Castilloneus and Gauden∣tius Merula, borne heere, in this our age haue much graced and painted out this part in their learned writings, and se∣uerall tracts written of the same. They which are delighted with tales and fables, let them repaire to Aristotle, who, in his booke intituled Admiranda, hath certaine things of the Electrides, (a few small ilands supposed by the ancients to be in this Gulfe, but falsly as we haue shewed before) and of Dawes or Choughs which do stocke vp the seed new sowen. Of these also Theopompus speaketh in the sixteenth chapter of the seuenteenth booke of Aelian de Animalibus. Of LIGVRIA, heere some thing might well be said, if so be that this mappe did containe it all: but because a piece of it only is heere expressed (for in time past as good authours do record, it extended his borders beyond Marseilles and the riuer Eridanus, or Po) therefore of it we will surcease to speake much in this place. Only I will set downe an ancient inscription cut in a plate of brasse, found in this prouince long since, for that it conteineth many names of places of the precinct of Genua, mentioned in this mappe and no where else read in any authour whatsoeuer. And for that the anti∣quity of it (although I suspect that also) is the greatest matter to be admired, I will only set it downe in the same maner as it was deliuered by Ortelius. Thus it is expressed word for word by Stunica: Q. M. Minutie is Q. F. Rufeis de controuersieis inter Genuateis & Veiturios in re praesente cognouerunt; & coram inter eos controuersias composeiuerunt: & qua lege agrum possiderent, & qua fine is fierent, dixserunt eos fineis facere, terminos∣que statui iouserunt: vbei ea facta essent, Romam coram venire iouserunt. Romae coram sententiam ex Senati consulto dixe∣runt, eidib. Decemb. L. Caecilio. Q. F. Q. Muutio. Q.F. Cos. Qua ager priuatus Casteli Veituriorum est, quem agrum eos vendere haredem{que} sequi licet: is ager vectigal nei siet. Langatium fineis agri priuati ah tiuo infimo qui oritur ab fontei in Manuicelo ad flouium Edem, ibi terminus stat. Inde flouio suso vorsum in flouium Lemurim. Inde flouio Lemurisusum vs{que}
map of ancient Northern Italy ITALIA GALLICA, SIVE GALLIA CISALPINA. Ex conatibus Geographicis Abrah. Ortelij. Cum priuilegio decennali, Imp. Belgicae, et Brabantiae. Venerando Dn̄o D. Francisco Superantio Veneto, pietate ac sanguine nobili, auctor lubens merito donabat, dedicabatq́ue. INCERTI SITVS LOCA. Acara, Ampelus, Aprona, Auginus, Barderate, Barra, Caelina, Carcantia, Car∣rea quod Potentia, Cottia, Diacuista, Epi∣terpium, Forum Clodij, Iramine, Ordia, Palsicium, Pellaon, Quadratae, Rigo∣magum, Templum, Vcetia. Electrides insulas ante Padum, à priscis descriptas, fabulosas facit Strabo. INCOGNITAE POSITIONIS POPVLI. Casmonates Celelates Cerdiceates Euburiates Flamonienses, qui Vannienses, et Culici Foretani Friniates Garuli Hercates Ilvates Lapicini Magelli Otesini Padinates Quarquerni Treienses Varvani Ʋeliates, cognomine Vecteri Veneni Vergunni Vibelli.
ad riuem Comberane. Inde riuo Comberanea susam vs{que} ad conualem Caeptimam, ibi termini duo stant circum viam Postu∣miam. Ex eis terminis recta regione in riuo Veindupale. Ex riuo Vendupale in flouium Neuiascam. Inde dorsum flouio Ne∣uiasca in flouium Procoberam. Inde flouio Procobora deorsum vs{que} ad riuom Vinelascam infumum: ibei terminus stat. Inde sursum riuo recto Vinelasca: ibei terminus stat propter viam Postumiam. Inde alter trans viam Postumiam terminus stat. Ex eo termino quei stat trans viam Postumiam recta regione in fontem in Manicelum. inde deorsum riuo quei oritur ab fontein Manicelo ad term num quiei stat ad stouium Edem agri poplici quod Langenses posident: hisce finis videntur esse: vbi confluont Edus & Procohera ibei terminus stat. Inde Ede flouio sursuorsum in montem Lemurino infumo: ibei terminus stat. Inde sursum vorsum iugo recto monte Lemurino: ibei terminus stat. Inde susum iugo recto Lemurino: ibei terminus stat in monte Procauo. Inde sursum iugo recto in montem Lemurinum summum, ibi terminus stat. Inde sursum iugo recto in castelum quei vocitatust Alianus, ibi terminus stat. Inde sursum iugo recto in montem Louentionem, ibi terminus stat. In∣de sursum iugo recto in montem Apeninum quei vocatur Boplo, ibi terminus stat. Inde Apeninum iugo recto in montem Tuledonem: ibi terminus stat Inde deorsum iugo recto in flouiom Veraglascam, in montem Berigienam infumo: ibi terminus stat. Inde sursum iugo recto in montem Prenicum: ibiterminus stat. Inde dorsum iugo recto in flouium Tutelascam: ibi ter∣minus stat. Inde sursum iugo recto Blustiemelo in montem Claxelum: ibi terminus stat. Inde deorsum in fontem Lebrieme∣lum: ibi terminus stat. Inde recto riuo Eniseca in flouium Procoberam: ibi terminus stat. Inde deorsum in flouiom Porco∣beram vbei conflouont floui Edus & Probobera, ibei terminus stat. Quem agrum poplicum iudicamus esse: eum agrum Ca∣stelanos Langenses Viturios posidere frui{que} videtur oportere: pro eo agro vectigal Langenses Veituris in poplicum Genuam dent in annos singulos VIC. N. CCCC. Sei langenses eam pequniam non dabunt ne{que} satisfacient arbitratuu Genuatium, quod per Genuenses mora non fiat quo setius eam pequniam acipiant: tum quod in eo agro natum erit frumenti partem vicen∣umam, vini partem sextam Langenses in poplicum Genuam dare debento in annos singulos. Quei intra eos fineis agrum po∣sedet, Genuas aut Viturius quei eorum posedeit. K. Sextil. L. Caicilio. Q. Muutio. Cos. eos ita posidere colereque liceat, eus quei posidebunt vectigal Langensibus proportione dent: ita vti ceteri Langenses quei eorum in eo agro agrum posidebunt fruenturque. Praeterea in eo agro ni quis posideto, nisi de maiore parte Langensium Veituriorum sententia: dum ne alium in∣tromittat nisi Genuatem aut Veiturium colendi caussa. Quei eorum de maiore parte Langensium Veiturium sententia ita non parebit: is eum agrum nei habeto niue fruimino. Quei ager compascuos erit: in eo agro quo minus pecuascere Genuates Vei∣turiosque liceat, ita vti in cetero agro Genuati compascuone quis prohibeto: niue quis vim facito: neiue prohibeto quo minus ex eo agro ligna materiam que sumant vtanturque. Vectigal anni primi K. Ianuaris secundis Veturis Langenses in poplicum Genuam dare debento. Quod ante K. Ianuaris primas Langenses fructi sunt eruntque vectigal inuitei dare nei debento. Pra∣ta quae fuerunt proxuma foenisicei. L. Caicilio. Q. Munitio Cos. in agro poplico quem Vituries Langenses posident: & quem Odiates & quem Dectunines & quem Cauaturineis, & quem Montouines posident: ea prata inuitis Langensibus, & Odiati∣bus, & Dectuninebus, & Cauaturines, & Mentonines, quem quisque eorum agrum posidebit inuiteis eis ni quis sicet: niue pascat: niue fruatur. Sei Langenses aut Odiates aut Dectunines aut Cauaturines aut Mentonines malent in eo agro alia prata inmitere, defendere, sicare, id vti facere liceat, dum ne ampliorem modum pratorum habeant quàm proxuma aestate habue∣runt fructique sunt Vituries. Quei controuersias Genuensium ob iniourias iudicati aut damnati sunt, sei quis in vinculeis ob eas res est: eos omneis soluei mittei leiberique Genuanses videtur oportere ante Eidus Sextilis primas. Si quoi de eare iniquom vid ebitur esse, ad nos adeant primo quoque die, & ab omnibus controuersieis & hono. publ. leg. Moco. Meticanio Meticoni. F. Plancus; Peliani Pelioni. F. Thus farre out of Stunica; for although I know that others haue described this inscription, yet because I iudged his copy best, presuming vpon his diligence and credit (for he protesteth that he hath written it out without any alterati∣on, adding or detracting any one letter) I haue followed him, rather than others: therefore he admonisheth the Rea∣der not to be moued with the diuers writing of one and the same word, as iouserunt and iuserunt; dixserunt and dixe∣runt, susum and sursum; and others such like. Neither let him thinke that these are faults ouerslipped by the negligence of the writers, but to be so diuersly written in the copy. Augustinus Iustinianus (that I may adde this also) for in Mani∣celo, readeth Immanicelum: for Vendupale, Vindupale; for Louentio, Iouentio: and for Berigiena, Berigema. Some other diuersities also there are to be obserued in certaine other words, as you may find by Fuluius and Lipsius in Smetius: Stu∣nica thus vnderstandeth those abbreuiations; VIC. N. CCCC. victoriatos nummos quadringentos, (foure hundred pieces of siluer money called Victoriatus; whereof one was about the value of our groat.) HONO. PVEL. MOCO. One∣ribus publicis liberi, lege Moconia. This plate was found in the yeare of Christ 1506. by a labouring man, as he was digging in the ground, in the li∣berties of Genua, at the bottome of the mount Apenninus, in the vale Proceuera, which they commonly call Sicca, in a village called Izosecco: from whence it was caried to S. Laurence Church in Genua, where it is this day to be seen. It seemeth to haue been written about one hundred yeare after the beginning of the Punicke warre.
TVSCIA, OR ETRVRIA. THe length of this country is bounded by two riuers; with Tiber on the East: and Macra (Magra) on the West: on the South it hath the Tuscane sea (Mare Tuscum, or Tyrrhenum; now mar Tosco) For although, as Liuy and Polybius do testifie, before the Romane Empire it was more large, and extended his bounds beyond the Appenine mountaines, euen as farre as Atria (Atri) whereof the Atreaticke sea, (Hadriaticus sinus, the bay of Hadria, Golfo di Venetia) tooke the name: yet afterward being expelled and driuen from thence by the Gauls, it was conteined within these bounds. Of those eleuen prouinces into which all Italy was by Augustus diuided, as Pliny testifieth, this was the seuenth. The Origines, a booke which commonly goeth vnder Catoes name, do diuide this countrie into the Maritima, (that part which coasteth along the sea, and is of Vopiscus in the story of Aurelia∣nus said to be fertile and full of woods) the Transciminia, beyond the mount Ciminus (Monte viterbo) and the Lartheniana, so named of the city Larthenium. Iornandes and Ammianus in his 26. booke doth make mention of Anno∣naria Etruria, about the towne Pistorium (Pistoia.) Moreouer, Lib. de Limitib. speaketh of Etruria Vrbicaria. Was not this a∣bout the city of Rome? Dionysius Halicarnassaeus in his sixth booke writeth that it was diuided into 12. Dukedomes: Liuy in his first booke calleth them people (populos hundreds, tribes) at which it seemeth Virgill did aime, where he thus writeth, Gens illi triplex populi subgente quaterni. Three Nations great Etruria do possesse, foure tribes ech nation it contein'd. Out of the which chusing one king in common, ech people sent their seuerall sergeants, to attend vpon him. Seruius nameth them Lucumones, at the second booke of Virgils Georgickes, and would haue the word to signifie kings: yet Festus saith that they are men so called of their madnesse, for that they make all places where they come vnluckie and vnfortunate. In the forenamed Origines, they are called twelue colonies; and are thus recited in order, Ianiculum, Arinianum vpon Tiber, Phesulae, and another Arinianum vpon Arnus, Phregenae, Volce Volaterra, Cariara otherwise named Luna vpon the shore, Ogygianum, Aretium, Rosellae, and Vol∣sinium within the land. Volaterranus reckoneth them vp by these names and in this order: Luna, Pisae, Populonia, Volaterra, A∣gyllina, Fesulae, Russellana, Aretium, Perusia, Clusium, Faleria and Vulsinia. An ancient monument of stone, yet remaining at Vulsinium (Bolsena) as Onyphrius affirmeth, maketh mention of fifteen Hundreds of Etruria. The country hath been called by diuers names. For out of Pliny we learne that it was first named VMBRIA: who withall af∣firmeth that the Vmbri were throwen out of it by the Pelasgi, and thereupon it was called PELASGIA. These the Lydi did expell as the same Pliny with Trogus doth witnesse, of whose king Tyrrhenus it was intituled TYRRHENIA, as Paterculus, Halicarnas∣saeus, Strabo and Liuy haue left recorded. Soone after that, of the ceremony of sacrificing, it was called in the Greeke tongue TVSCIA. It was also named, as the same Halicarnassaeus writeth RASENA, of a certaine Duke or Generall of that nation: In Myrsilus, if I be not deceiued, it is corruptly written Rasenua. Moreouer it was called COMARA and SALEVMBRONE, if we will beleeue the feined Berosus, Annius, and such like fabulous writers. The Phocenses, as Herodotus in Clio writeth, sometime possessed it. The fragment of Antonius neere the lake Arnus maketh mention of the Phocenses, and the lake Phocensis. Halicarnassaeus also in his first booke saith that the Siculi did inhabite it before the entrance of the Pelasgi. The nature of the soile is very fertile of all maner of things, yea of vines especially, as Halicarnassaeus hath giuen out. The large champion plaines, diuided into seuerall by-hils and mountaines, are well manured and very fruitfull, as Diodorus witnes∣seth. It is very woody, good pastorage and well watered with many pleasant streames, as Plutarch iustifieth. Martianus saith that for fertility of soile it was euer renowmed and of great estimation: which fertility is no small meanes to draw the people to giue themselues ouermuch to pleasure and ease: for they are, as the same Halicarnassaeus writeth, very fine in their apparell and dainty in their diet both at home and abroad: who indeed beside things necessarie, do carrie about with them, euen when they go to warre, diuers fine things most curiouslie wrought onlie for pleasure and delight. Eustathius calleth it a robbing, cruell and vnciuill nation. Eusebius in his 2. booke de praeparati. Euang. saith that they were much giuen to Necromancie. Arnobius in his 7. booke contra Gentes, maketh it the mother and nurce of superstition. They were alwaies counted very religious, and so were the first that found out sacrifices, diuinations, and soothsayings, from whom also the Romanes receiued these vaine and super∣stitious arts: as also the Sella curulis (coach of estate) paludamenta, trabea, (the rich robe) toga pretexta, toga picta, fasces, secures, (hatchets) litui, apparitores, curcules, annuli, annuli, (rings) musick, & the ludiones (whifflers.) Lastly, all their ornamēts of triumph & robes of the Consuls, or rather, (that I may vse the words of Florus) all the brauery & badges wherewith the honorable estate of the Empire was graced & set out. Cassiodore in the 15. section of his 7. book doth attribute to them the inuentiō of the casting and working of statues of brasse. Heere hence it arose that the Romans first committed their children to the Etrusci, to be taught & brought vp, as afterward they vsed to do to the Grecians, as you may read in Liuy, Strabo and Diodorus Siculus. That the flute (tibia) was the inuention of the Tyrrheni, by which they did not only fight, but also whip their seruants, yea and to seeth, Iulius Pollux doth cite out of Aristotle. Of them Plutarch in the 8. booke of his Conuiual. writeth, that by an ancient statute they v∣sed to disperse their couerleds and blanckets when they rose out of their beds in the morning. Item, taking of their pots off the fire, they left no print thereof in the ashes, but did alwaies rake them abroad. They neuer would suffer any swallowes to come within their house. They might not go ouer a broome. They would keep none in their house that had crooked nailes vpon his fingers. Yet Thimon, in the 12. booke of Athenaeus, his deipnosophiston, calleth them voluptuous and licentious liuers, and none of the best report for their conuersation: heereof you may see manie examples if you take anie delight in such stories. The like you may read in his 4 booke. But I cannot omit this one thing which Heraclides in his Politicks doth recite: namely, that if anie man be so farre in debt that he is not able to paie, the boies do follow him holding vp vnto him, in mockery, an emptie purse. The Etrusci were long since accounted verie wealthie. They were very strong both by sea and by land: and in warre e∣quall in strength to the Romanes. Liuy (to whom Diodorus doth subscribe) saith it is the richest prouince of Italy both for men, munition and money. Plutarch in the life of Camillus, saith, that this countrie did reach from the Alpes Northward as high as the Hadriaticke sea, and Southward as low as the midland sea. That there were 300. cities of the Vmbri, battered and taken by the Tusci, we find recorded, saith Pliny. Such was the wealth and command of Etruria, that it did not onlie filll the land with an honourable report and fame of their name, but also euen the sea all along from one end of Italy to the other. Liuy and Pliny do affirme that Mantua and Atri were colonies of the Tusci; Pomponius and Paterculus do say the like of Capua: as also of Nola, although that Solinus doth ascribe this to the Tyrians (where I thinke the copie is corrupt, and for Tyrijs, I suppose it should be written Tyrrhenis) Trogus and Silius Ital cus do affirme it to haue been built and first peopled by the Chaldicenses. Yea Plutarch in his treatise of famous women, and againe in his Gretian questions, saith, that these Etrusci, in old time did possesse Lemnos, (Stalamine) and Imbrus (Lembro) certaine ilands in the Archipelago or Aegean sea. Tuscus vicus, a street in Rome: Tusculum and Tusculanum, in Latium (Campagna di Roma) tooke their names from hence; Againe mare Tuscum, called otherwise mare Inferum, Notium, Tyrrhenum, and Liburnum, (the Neather sea, or South sea, in respect of the Hadriaticke sea which is called mare Superum, the vpper sea, and is vpon the North from this countrie) as we find in Pliny and Cicero. About Puteoli (Pozzole) as Dion recordeth, there is a creeke of the sea called Tyrrhenus sinus, the bay of Tuscane. But there are also other Tusci, diuerse from these in Sarmatia, as Ptolemey noteth: as also other Tyrrheni, in the ilands belonging to Attica, if you will beleeue Marsylus Lesbius.
map of ancient Etruria TVSCIAE ANTIQVAE TYPVS. Ex conatibus geographicis Ab. Ortelij. LOCA TVSCIAE QVORVM SITVM IGNORO. Ad harnaba Amitinenses Anio Caprium Cora Corytus Cortenebra Cortnessa Crustuminum Etruria, idem fortè cum Tyrrhenia Nacria, quae et Nucria Neueia Olena Perrhaesium, nisi sit Perusia Sabum Sora Tagina Troilium, nisi sit Troitum Turrena Au∣gustalis Tyrrhenia, an idem cum Etruria? Vera Vesentini Vexij, nisi sint Veij. Consule nostrum Thesau∣rum geographicum. Cum privilegio Impe∣riali et Belgico ad decennium. 1584.
LATIVM. LATIVM, which the excellent Poet Virgil syrnameth The Great, The Faire, and The Western, by the description of Augustus, who, as Pliny testifieth, diuided Italy in eleuen shires, the chiefe and principall of the rest, was twofold, to wit, Latium The New, and Latium The Old. LATIVM VETVS, Olde Latium, beganne at the riuer Tiber, and extended it selfe euen vp as high as the Circaeian mountaines (or to Fundi, as Seruius sayth.) LATIVM NOVVM, New Latium, from hence stretched it selfe vnto the riuer Liris, as Pliny and Strabo do ioyntly testifie: yea and farther, as they both affirme: For euen as low as Sinuessa, (which was otherwise also called Sinope) being in that part which is named Adiectum Latium, the same Pliny calleth Latium beyond the Liris, which is indeed a part of Campania. Which peraduenture was the rea∣son that moued Seruius to extend this Latium as farre that way as the riuer Vulturnus. So that the bounds of this Latium are the Tyrrhen sea, the mount Apenninus, the riuers Tiber, Anio, and Liris. The neighbour Nations inhabiting round about it are the Tusci, Sabini, Marsi, Samnites, Praegutiani, and the Campani. It was so named of the Verbe Lateo, signifying To lurke or Lie hid; for that Saturnus here did hide himselfe, as Seruius writeth: and in trueth before him Herodianus, Eutropius, Cyprianus, and Minutius Felix do plainly affirme the same; yea and that Poet, which in all mens opinions is counted the best, in these his verses. Primus ab aetherio venit Saturnus Olympo, Arma Iouis fugiens, & regnis exul ademptis. Is ge∣nus inoc, ac dspersum montibus altis, Composuit, legèsque dedit, Latium{que} vocari Maluit, his quoniam latuisset tutus in oris. Thus Englished by M. T. Phaër: First from Olympus mount (right neere the skies) good Saturne old, When he from Ioue did flie, & from his kingdome outlaw'd stood, He first that wayward skittish kinde disperst in hilles and wood, Did bring to thrift, and gaue them lawes, and all the land this way Did Latium call, for safely here long time he lurking lay. The same, another Poet, as famous as he, both for his eloquence and long exile, relating the words of god Ianus, thus reporteth: Multa quidem didici, sed cur naualis in aere Actera signata est, altera forma biceps? Noscere me duplici me possis in imagine, dixit: Nivetus ipsa dies extenuasset opus. Caussa ratis superest: Tuscum venit ra∣te in amuem, Ante pererrato falcifer orbe deus. Hac ego Saturnum memini tellure receptum, Caelitibus regnis à Ioue pulsus erat. Inde diu genti mansit Saturnia nomen: Dicta quo{que} est Latium terra latente Deo. At bona posteritas puppim formauit in aere, Hespitis aduentum testificata Dei. Prudentius also, the Christian Poet, in his booke which he wrote against Symmachus, thus writeth of Saturnus: Num melius Saturnus auos rexisse Latinos Creditur? edictis qui talibus informauit Agrestes animos & barbara cor∣da virorum? Sum Dus, aduenio fugiens, praebete latebras. Occultate senem, nati feritate tyranni Deiectum solio: placet hic fugitiuus & exul, Vt lateam, genti atque loco Latium dabo nomen. Is't thought that Saturne did the Latines better rule, Who taught them first when as they were as wilde as horse or mule? A god I am indeed, shew where I may me hide; For I haue lost my regall crowne, by Ioues vntimely pride; And still I feare his power, I dare him not abide. If that you'll grant me leaue with you to hide my head, Latium this countrey shalbe call'd long after I am dead. So that Solinus Polyhistor did not without iust cause make this demand: Who is he that knoweth not, that of Saturnus this countrey was named both Latium and Saturnia? But if any man shall suppose these reports to be fabulous and mere Poëticall fictions, let him heare the learned Varro speake, an authour farre more ancient than all those aforenamed, who affirmeth it to haue been so named, quòd lateat inter Alpium & Apennini praecipitia, for that it is hid, enclosed or conteined betweene the steepe and craggie cliffes of the Alpes and A∣penninus. But what shire, I pray you, in all Olde Italy is there, quae non aequè latet? that is not thus inuironed? If I poore goose might dare to keake amongst these well tun'd swannes, I should rather thinke it to haue gotten this name, not à latendo, of lurking, but à latitudine, of the bredth of it: For there is no other countrey of the right and ancient Italie, that betweene the sea and those mountaines doth spread it selfe more broad and wide euery way than this doth: and that the Geographicall charts and mappes of this prouince doe sufficiently approoue. But let antiquity be still beleeued, I poore foole will not impeach their credit, lest at last it turne to mine owne discredit. There are some, as Hieronymus Columna, writing vpon the fragments of the famous Poet Ennius, reporteth, which thinke that this name Saturnus is a meere Syrian word, and in that language to signifie the same that latens (that is, one that playeth least in sight) doth in Latine: And hereupon those ancients, as it were, interpreting the word, haue called that shire and countrey where the Latines dwelt, LA∣TIVM Trueth it is, and all learned in these orientall tongues can beare me witnesse, that the Hebrew thema  Sathar, signifieth to lurke, or hide ones selfe from the presence or sight of others: which signification it constantly reteineth both in the Syrian or Chaldey, and Arabicke dialects. From hence also may analogically be formed  Sithron, (from which by adding us, the Latine termination, is made Saturnus) like as of  Pathar, to interpret, is made  Pithron, an interpretation, and of  Rahama, to be mercifull or pitifull, is made  Rahman, in the Arabian, or  Rahmana in the Syrian tongue, a pitifull hearted man: and of  Thirgem, to interpret out of one language into another, is framed also  Thurgmana, an interpretour; vsed likewise by the Chaldey Paraphrast at the seuenth Psalme: as also by the Arabian interpretour of the New Testament, at the 28. verse of the 14. chapter of the first Epistle of S. Paul to the Corinthians: and vulgarly amongst the Mores, Turks, and other Orientall nations, they call an interpretour, or him who vsually attendeth strangers or trauellers vnexpert of that language a  Turgman, or, as they commonly pronounce it, a Trugman. Obserue moreouer, that euen the word Latium it selfe, supposed to be a pure Latine deriuatiue, together with his theme Lateo, doth sauour of the Hebrew root  Lat, of the same signification: from whence is deriued  Lot, the proper name of Harans sonne, who with Terah his grandfa∣ther, and Abram his fathers brother, came from Vr of the Chaldees, and dwelt in the land of Canaan, Gen. 11.27.31. From the same root also, as some learned men thinke, was deriued  Lotan, the proper name of one of the sonnes of Seir the Horite, Gen. 36.20. which commeth more neere to the Italian Latinus. But of this peraduenture we haue stood too long. That the inhabitants or people of this countrey were called Latini, Strabo with all the an∣cient writers of the Romane histories doth plainly teach vs, denominated of Latinus a king of this prouince, according to that of Virgil — genus vnde Latinum, From whom the Latines tooke their name. Pliny also maketh mention of the Latinienses, a nation of this prouince; but extinct something before his time, as he there addeth. These were called Prisci, as Halicarnasseus and Festus doe testifie. Of the nature of this countrey Strabo in the fifth booke of his Geo∣graphy writeth thus: All Latium, sayth he, generally is a very good soile and fertile of all maner of things, except only some certeine places neere the sea coast, which are morish and very vnhealthfull; as namely the fields about Ardea, and whatsoeuer is betweene Lauinium and Antium, euen as farre as Po∣metia, with some places about Setia; and others neere Tarracina and Circeium; beside all those fields that are stony and mountainous; although euen these grounds are not altogether idle and vnfruitfull: all of them hauing either some good pastures and large woods, or doe yeeld great abundance of fenny and mountainous commodities. Caecubum, a place in this fenne, doth yeeld a kinde of vine which groweth vp in height like a tree, whose wine is counted to be the best of all Italy. Heare also what Theophrastus writeth of this prouince in the fift booke of his history of Plants, at the ninth chapter of the same booke: Latinus ager, the countrey of Latium, sayth he, hath great plenty of water. The champion plaines haue great store of laurell and myrtle trees: item they yeeld a wonderfull kinde of beech (scissima, he calleth it, or oxea, as others terme it) of that maruellous length, that one tree may serue for a whole keele for such kinde of ships as they commonly vse in Etruria. The hilly and mountainous places doe beare the pine and firre trees. Pliny doth highly commend the wines of Latium, (Latiniensia vina.) The same authour affirmeth that their chiefe meat was far, that is, a kinde of bearded or redde wheat; and withall, testifieth that it is certaine that the Romans for a long time together liued with puls, by which they vnderstand all maner of corne beside wheat and barley, not with bread. How populous this countrey was, how many cities and people it conteined, the same authour doth teach vs, where he writeth that in Old Latium only three and fiftie nations are vtterly decayed and extinct without any mention at all remaining of their names. Item, that Pomptina palus, the fen Pontina (now called Aufente palude) a part also of this countrey, had in former times in it three and twentie cities. Of all the cities of Latium, in olde time Alba longa was the chiefe and metropolitan: but afterward Rome, which grew to that greatnesse and power that it was not only the head of this prouince, but also euen of the whole world beside. Whose other name, because it is held an vnlawfull thing to speake that which is concealed and enrowled in cere∣monious mysteries, I will not vtter, lest with Valerius Soranus, I be worthily punished for the same. Yet the syrnames, epithets, and commendable titles where with it was graced and set out by the best writers of all nations, if I shall here reckon vp, I hope there is no man, that is an indifferent Iudge, that will blame me. It is called and intituled a citie AEQVAEVA POLO, As ancient as the heauens, of Claudian: AETERNA, Immortall, of Ammianus, Tibullus, Au∣sonius, and marble inscriptions: ALTA, Stately, by Virgil: ALTRIX IMPERII, The Nurse of the empire, by Corippus: ALTRIX ORBIS, The Nurse of the world, of Rutilius: ANTIQVA, The ancient, by Prudentius and Corippus: ARX OMNIVM GENTIVM, The fortresse or bulwarke of all nations, by Nazarius: ARX TERRARVM, The bulwarke of all lands, by Symmachus: AVGVSTA, The imperiall, by Corippus: AVREA, The golden, by Ausonius and Prudentius: BEATA NOBILIBVS POPVLIS, Most happy for honourable people, of Cassiodorus: BELLATRIX, The warlike, by Ouid, Claudian, and Sidonius: CAPVT GENTIVM, The head of all nations, by Martianus: CAPVT IMMENSI ORBIS, The head of the huge globe of the whole world, by Ouid: CAPVT MVNDI, The head of the world, by Cassiodorus and Sidonius: CAPVT ORBIS, The head of the earthly globe, by Pliny, Ouid, Trogus, Gratius, Fortunatus, Aethicus, and Prudentius: CAPVT RERVM, The head of all things, by Liuy, Ouid, Ausonius and Tacitus: CAELESTIS, The hea∣uenly, by Athenaeus: CELEBERRIMA, The most famous, by Statius: CELSA, The lofty, by Prudentius: CLARISSIMA, The most bright, by Stepha∣nus: DARDANIA, Of Dardanus, by Ouid and Silius Italicus: DEA, The goddesse, in coines: DEA GENTIVM, The goddesse of all nations, and DEA TERRARVM, The goddesse of all lands, by Martiall: DESIDERABILIS, That all men wish to see, by Eustathius and Dionysius Afer: DEVM LOCVS, The seat and place of gods, by Ouid: DICNITATVM CVRIA, The court of dignities and honour, by Sidonius: DITISSIMA, The most rich, by Prudentius: DO∣MINA, The mistresse, by Ouid, Arnobius, Horace, and Nemesianus: DOMINA GENTIVM, The lady mistresse of all nations, by Eumenius: DOMINA RERVM, The mistresse of all things, by Appianus, Eunapius, and Ausonius: DOMINA TERRARVM, The lady mistresse of all lands, by Ammianus: DOMI∣NA TERRAE MARISQVE, The lady mistresse of sea and land, by Halicarnasseus: DOMINA TOTIVS MVNDI, The lady mistresse of all the whole world, of Aethicus: DOMINA VNIVERSORVM, The lady of all things, by Halicarnasseus: DOMINANS, The swey-bearing city, by Silius Italicus: DOMVS AV∣REA, The golden palace, by Ausonius: DOMVS DIVVM, The palace of the gods, by Ausonius: DOMVS MAGNA REGVM, The goodly palace of kings, by Eu∣stathius and Dionysius Afer: DOMVS QVIRINI, Quirinus palace, by Ausonius: ELOQVENTIAE FOECVNDA MATER, A fruitfull mother of eloquence, by Castiodore: EXCELSA, The lofty, by Lucane: FELIX, The blessed, by Propertius, Cassiodor, and a certeine ancient marble inscription: FEROX, The fierce, by Horace: FVTVRA, by Rutilius: GENETRIX HOMINVM ET DEORVM, The mother of men and gods, by Rutilius: GENITRIX RE∣GVM, The mother of kines, by Priscian: GYMNASIVM LITERARVM, A schoole of good learning and liberall sciences, by Sidonius: IMMENSA, The exceeding great city, by Statius: IMPERII LAR, by Ammianus: IMPERII LATIALE CAPVT, by Statius: IMPERII DEVMQVE LOCVS, The natiue coun∣trey of emperours and of gods, by Ouid: INCLYTA, The renowmed, by Virgil, Ennius, and Ausonius: INVICTA, The inuincible, in some old coines: LAETA, The fortunate, by Ouid: LATII PARENS, The mother of Latium, by Ausonius: LEGVM DOMICILIVM, The mansion place of all good lawes and iustice, by Sidonius: LEGVM PATRIA, The natiue soile where all good lawes are bred and borne, by Iustinian in his Code: LIBERTATIS PARENS, The mother of li∣berty,
map of ancient Latium, with an inset of Mount Circea LATIVM Ex Conatibus Geographicis Abrah. Ortelij Antverp. MONS CIRCAEVS, AD VIVVM DELINEATVS, AB ANGELO BREVENTANO. VIRO NOBILI, ET HISTORICO ILLVSTRI, MAR∣CO VELSERO, PA∣TRICIO AVGVS∣TANO, ABRAHA∣MVS ORTELI∣VS DEDICA∣BAT, L.M. Cum privilegio decennali, Imp. Reg. et Brabantiae. 1595.
by Corippus: LVX ORBIS TERRARVM, The light of the whole earth, by Tully: MAGNA, The great, by Virgil, Horace, Calpurnius Siculus, Nonn. Marcelunus. On d and Claudian: MARTIA, The martiall, by Ouid and Ausonius: MARTIGENA, Begotten by Mars the god of battell, by Silius Italicus: MARTIS VRBS, The city of Mars, by the Poët Martiall: MATER CIVITATVM, The mother of cities, the Metropolitan city, by Ennodius: MATER DV∣CVM, The mother of famous generals, by Claudian: MATER DIGNITATVM, The mother of honour and dignity, by Cassiodor: MATER ELOQVENTIAE, The mother of eloquence, by the same authour: MATER MVNDI, The mother of the world, by Rutilius: MATER OMNIVM VRBIVM, The mother of all ci∣ties, the metropolitan city, by Dionysius Afer and Eustathius: MATER REGVM, The mother of kings, by Claudian: MAXIMA RERVM, The greatest of all things to be seene vnder heauen, by Virgil the Poet: MVNDI MIRACVLVM, The miracle of the world, by Cassiodore: MVNDI TOTIVS TEMPLVM, The temple of the whole world, by Ammianus Marcellinus: NVMINIS INSTAR, Like an heauen goddesse, by Lucane: OFFICINA ORBIS, The shoppe of the whole world, by Seneca: ORBIS CAPVT, The head of the world, by Ouid: ORNATA SENATORIBVS, Beautified with graue senatours, by Cassiodore. PATRIA COMMVNIS, The common countrey, by Modestine: PATRIA GENTIVM, The countrey and natiue soile of all nations, by Pliny: PATRIA LI∣BERTATIS, The countrey of liberty, by Sidonius: POTENS, The mighty, by Horace, Ausonius, Paulinus and Ouid: PRAEPOTENS, The puissant, by Na∣zuius: PRIMA TERRARVM, The principall of all lands, by Paulinus: PRIMA INTER VRBES, The chiefe city of the world, by Ausonius: PRINCEPS VRBIVM, The principall city, by Horace: PVLCHERRIMA, The most beautifull, by Virgil: PVLCHERRIMA RERVM, The most goodly and beautifullest thing in the world, by the same Poët: PVLCHRA, The beautifull, by Athenaeus and Ouid: QVIRINI VRBS, Quirinus citie, by Ouid: REGIA, The palace, by Horace: REGINA, The Queene, by Athenaeus and Ammianus Marcellinus: REGINA PVLCHERRIMA MVNDI, The most beautifull Queene or Princesse of the world, by Rutilius: REGINA RERVM, The Queene of all things, by Eunapius: REGINA TERRARVM, The Queene of all lands, by Ammianus and Na∣zarius: REGINA VRBIVM, The Queene of all cities, by Athenaeus: ROMVLEA, Romulus his citie, by Ouid: SACERDOTII FONS, The fountaine and author of Priesthood, in the Code of Iustinian: SACRA, The holy city, by Ausonius, Mamertinus, Aethicus and in some ancient marble: SACRATISSIMA VRBS, The most sacred and holy city, in Iustinians Code: SATVRNIA, Saturnes city, by Ouid: SEDES TOTO MIRABILIS ORBE, A seat which all men in the world do much admire, by Cassiodore: SEPTEMGEMINA, by Statius: SVPERBA, The proud and stately, by Ausonius: TEMPLVM BELLICOSI MAR∣TIS, The temple of warlike Mars, by Plutarch: TEMPLVM LATISSIMVM OMNIVM VIRTVTVM, The most large and spacious temple of all heauenly virtues, by Cassiodore: TEMPLVM MVNDI, The common temple of the world, by Ammianus Marcellinus: TROIVGENA, An impe of Troy, by Liuy: TVRBIDA, The foule and filthy city, by Iuuenall and Persius: VALLATA, The well defenced city, by Silius Italicus: VENERABILIS, The reuerend and honourable city, by Ammianus: VERTEX MVNDI, The top or center of the world, by Sidonius: VICTRIX, The conqueresse, by Ouid: VICTVRA CVM SAE CVLIS, A ci∣ty that shall stand as long as the world endureth, by Ammian: VIRTVTVM LAR, The seat where virtue dwelleth, by Ammianus: VRANOPOLIS, The heauenly city, by Athenaeus. These and diuers other praises and commendations thou mayest obserue in sundry good authours of this city, Cui par est nihil, & nihil secundum, To which nothing is equall, or that may be compared vnto it, as Martiall speaketh of it: Et, Qua nihil in terris complectitur altius aether, A statelier thing than which in all the world The glorious sunne hath neuer seene, as Claudian writeth: And, as Martianus testifieth, It was the head of all Nations for munition, and holy men, so long as it stood in the prime, equalling euen the glory of heauen it selfe: whose walles (as Olympiodorus in his Collections hath, according to the suruey and measure of Ammon the Geometer, at what time the Gothes first ouerran and sacked the same) were found to be one and twenty miles about. Flauius Vopiscus writeth, that Aurelianus the Emperour did so much enlarge this city, that the walles of it were well neere fifty miles in compasse. Of Arpinum, Cicero the famous oratours natiue soile, (for that it is conteined in this Map) I can not but write what Volateranus hath noted of it, namely, that in their ensignes or banners they do beare these three letters, M. T. C. being the first letters of the name and syrname of that famous oratour, Marcus Tullius Cice∣ro, as is supposed. Of the Circaeian mount, for that it is seuerally described in this Table, I thinke it not amisse to make a peculiar description of the same a∣part by it selfe. CIRCAEIVS MONS, Now MONTE CIRCELLO. PLiny and Pomponius Mela call this mountaine CIRCEIVM MONTEM: Strabo and Ptolemey CIRCAEVM. but an ancient inscri∣ption in this same place calleth it CIRCAEVM, denominated as ancient writers affirme of Circes, the famous sorceresse, who sometime dwelt here, as they verily beleeued. Whereupon Mela and Solinus, as also Ouid himselfe, nameth it Circes domum, Circes house. Item Ap∣pollonius in like maner calleth it Circes habitacle, & Ae AE AE portum, (with three diphthongs, as Seruius obserueth in Virgil) the Aeaean hauen. It was so called, as the same Grammarian writeth, of a contemptuous word vsed by those which passed by that way, which they vttered in contempt of those her witchcrafts & sorceries, whereby she turned men into swine, practised in this place. This was long since an iland, and inuironed round with the ocean sea, but now by continuance of time it is ioyned to the continent, as Solinus testifieth. The like doth Pliny affirme of it; It was, sayth he, sometime inclosed round with the maine sea, as Homer seemeth to thinke, but now it standeth vpon the firme land. But was not Homer deceiued? surely so Procopius, in the first booke of his Gothica, seemeth to thinke. Of the mountaine Circeius, sayth he, where they report Vlysses had conference with the enchantresse Circe, as I thinke, they speake many things that are not true: except that peraduenture one might say that this mountaine was therefore an iland, for that it shooteth out an huge way into the vast ocean &c. And although that Homer heere hath Theophra∣stus, in his history of Plants, and Seruius in his Commentaries vpon Virgils Aeneides, vpon his side, as Patrons of fabulous antiquity, yet that I should rather leane vnto Procopius, the opinion of the learned M. Isaac Casaubon, who in those his laborious Commentaries vpon the Geography of Strabo hath obser∣ued, that oft times amongst the best Geographers, Ilands and Promontories are confounded, and one put for another: so that that which one authour termeth a promontory, another calleth by the name of an ile or a neckland. Therefore I do willingly preferre the description of Strabo of this place, before those descriptions of any other authours whatsoeuer, as more true and probable. From Antium, sayth he, two hundred foure score and ten furlongs, is situ∣ate mount Circello [Circaeum] an hill inuironed partly with the sea and partly with moorish fennes and bogges. Those things also which the Poets do tell of the witchcraft of the sorceresse Circe, and that fabulous transmutation and changing of men into diuers and sundry formes or shapes, with Seruius I doe ra∣ther attribute to the force of nature, than to magicke or witchcraft. namely, of the horrour of those which passe by that way, whereby men do seeme to be changed into beasts. and with Pliny I may say, How infinite are those fables that are tolde of Medea of Colchis, and others, but especially of our Italian Circe, who for her excellent skill in the arte magicke was canonized for a goddesse? And be it farre from me, and from euery Christian man, that we should beleeue those things which it were wicked and profane to thinke or imagine. For I haue read in the Ancyrane councell, that they are woorse than Pagans and infidels, who doe beleeue that any creature may by any man be turned and transformed into any other shape or similitude, than by the Creatour him∣selfe, who first gaue them that forme and fashion. Therefore let all other men say what they will, and perswade what they can, they shall neuer make me be∣leeue these fables. It seemeth that the fable arose of the nature and quality of the place. for those places which lie out into the sea, as this promontory doth, are woont to be in more danger of storme and windes than any other places whatsoeuer. Which blasts, accompanied with the waues, ebbes and tides of the sourging sea, falling vpon the rocks, cliffes and hollow places, do cause such sundry sounds and noices, that such as doe saile by this way, not without a great horrour and trembling, doe seeme as if they heard at one instant men mourne, lions roare, wolues howle, dogs barke, hogs grunt, and beares to make a noice. Hither do those words of Lucan in his sixt booke belong; Omnia subducit Circaeae vela procellae. That this promontory is full of trees, especially of okes, myrtles, and bay-trees, Theophrastus writeth from the relation of others. Strabo sayth that it aboundeth with diuers sorts of roots: peraduenture, as there he addeth, they affirme this of it, that they may the better apply it in all respects vnto the fable of Circe. And do you not thinke that this saying of Aristotle the Prince of Philosophers, in his Admiranda, did arise from hence? They report, sayth he, that in the mount Circello there groweth a deadly poison, of such great force, that so soone as euer it is taken, all the haire of the body immediatly falleth off, and it so weakeneth all the parts and members of the same, that they wex so litly and dwined, that outwardly they beare the shew of dead carkeises, such as it would grieue any man to beholde. Strabo writeth that in this mountaine was an altar dedicated to Minerua. and withall there is to this day to be seene a certeine goblet or bowle of Vlysses. but this latter he affir∣meth to be from the opinion and report of the vulgar sort only. But passing ouer these fables, let vs returne againe vnto the historicall narration of such things as in trueth are either here found or haue happened in this place. Horace hath left recorded, that the sea vpon this coast yeeldeth great store of good oisters, which thereof are called Ostrea Circaeia. Suetonius reporteth that Marcus Lepidus was by Augustus Caesar for euer confined and banished into this place. Plutarch writeth that Iulius Caesar had a purpose, hard beneath the city, by a deepe channell to conuey the riuer Tiber another way, and to turne the course thereof toward this Circaeium promontorium, and so to haue caused it to fall into the sea, at the city Anxur: by which meanes those which for trade and trafficke were by ship to trauell vp to Rome, he meant to make their passage more easie and safe; but being preuented by death, performed not what he had purposed. Here also was the city CIRCAEIVM or Circaeia, or as Strabo termeth it Circes towne. That it was made a colony of the Romans by Tarqui∣nius, Liuy, Halicarnasseus, Cicero and Plutarch, do ioyntly testifie. Strabo sayth that it hath a good and conuenient hauen. I would thinke that the menti∣on or plot of this ancient citie Circaeia doth still remaine in this mountaine in that place where in this description thou seest certeine ruines and foundations of the walles, as it were of a city rased long since and layd leuell almost with the ground: which place at this day is called by the name of Citta vecchia, that is as much to say, as, The old citie. Certeine remnants of this name doth yet remaine to be seene engrauen in the top of this same mountaine, as Angelus Bre∣uentanus, a man of good credit, the authour of this description, and a most diligent searcher out of the Romane antiquities, doth from his owne know∣ledge plainly testifie, yet much defaced, as he also affirmeth, and worne out with continuance of time, to wit, in this forme; depiction of an inscription PROMVNTORIVM VENERIS CIRCAEIENSIVM XXI The forenamed Breuentanus thinketh that by this inscription is shewed the distance of this place from the city of Rome. And it is to be seene at this day in that place of this mountaine, where thou seest this marke of a starre * imprinted.
MAGNA GRAECIA, OR GREAT GREECE. THat a great part of the true and ancient Italy (if not all of it) together with all Sicily was sometime called by the name of GREAT GREECE, I thinke there is no man meanly seen in Geographie that maketh any doubt: for the Grecians did in former times possesse, as Trogus writeth, not only a part, but welnigh all Italy. Listen what Pliny, in the fifth chapter of his third booke, saith, Of it the Gre∣cians, a Nation very prodigall in commending themselues, haue giuen their verdict, in that they haue named a great part of it Great Greece. Hither also pertaine those wordes of Festus. Italy was cal∣led Great Greece, because the Siculi, sometime passed it, or for that many and the greatest cities of it, were built by the Grecians. Seruius in his Commentaries vpon the first of Virgils Aeneids, writeth thus: Italy was termed Megale Hellas, Great Greece, for that all the cities from Taranto, (Tarentum) euen vnto Cumae, were first founded by the Grecians. And therefore it was not altogether vnfitly of Plautus in his Menechmis, called Graecia exotica, outlandish Greece. Seneca, in his Consolation, thus speaketh of it: All that side of Italy, which coasteth along with the Neather sea (Mar Tosco) was called Great Greece. That Campania (Terra di lauoro) was possessed by the Grecians, Pliny doth plainly affirme. Maximus Tyrius in his six and twentieth Oration describeth Auernus lacus, the lake of Tipergola, in Campania, to be within the compasse of Great Greece. And that these authours speake truth, Trogus par∣ticularly sheweth in the twentith booke of his history, in these wordes: The Tusci which dwell along by the coast of the Neather sea, came from Lydia: Item, the Venetians (Veneti) which now we see to be seated neere the vpper-sea, (Golfo di Venetia, the Hadriaticke sea) Troy, when it was taken and sacked, sent thither vnder the conduct of Antenor: moreouer, the city Adria (Atri) which first gaue name to the Adriaticke sea, neere neighbour vnto the Illirian sea, is a city built by the Greekes: Diomedes, after the ouerthrow of Troy, built the city Arpi, (Sarpi, or Monte S. Angelo a city in Apulia) being himselfe and his company caried thither by violence of storme and tempest. And Pisae in Liguria, (Pisa in Riuiera di Genoa) was first begun by the Grecians: as also in Tuscane the Tarquinij, (Tarquene) came from the Thessalians and Spinambrians: and the Perusini (Perugia) from the Achaians: what shall I say of the city Caere (Ceruetere?) what of the Latini? which do seeme to haue had their beginning from Aeneas: now the Falisci, Nolani, Abelani, are they not generally held for to be no other but colonies deriued from the Chalci∣denses of Asia the Lesse? what shall I speake of the whole shire of Campania? of the Brutij and Sabini? of the Samnites and Ta∣rentini? haue we not heard oft that they came from Lacedaemonia, and were commonly called Spurij? They report that Philo∣ctetes built the city of the Thurini, (Terra noua) where to this day his tombe is to be seene: as also the arrowes of Hercules, which were the bane of Troy. The Metapontini, (Torre di mare) also do still reserue, in the temple of Minerua, the tooles wherewith Epeus (from whom they are descended) made the Troiane horse, whereby the city was betraied. Whereupon all that part of Ita∣ly, was called GREAT GREECE. Thus farre Iustine out of Trogus Pompeius. Whereby we gather, that the pleasant poet Ouid in the fourth booke of his Fastorum, did speake but the truth, when he said: Itala nam tellus Graecia Maior erat: For Grecia Great, that land was called, which now Italia hight: and so foorth, as followeth in the same place. The same almost that you haue heard out of Trogus. Of this same Great Greece I cannot but adde that which I haue obserued contrary to the opinion which some ve∣ry learned men in our time, haue written of it: namely, that euen as Sicilia, as Strabo in his sixth booke testifieth, was compre∣hended vnder the name of Great Greece; so contrariwise also this Great Greece, was now and then vnderstood by the name of Si∣cilia: for proofe heereof consider these authorities: Saint Hierome saith, that Rhegium Iulium Brutiorum, (Reggio in Calabria the Lower) is a city of Sicilia: Aelianus and Suidas affirme the same of Tarentum in Calabria: the sixth Counsell of Constantino ple, held in the time of Constantine the Great, doth the like of Baiae in Campania: Stephanus describeth Sinuessa, a towne of Campania; Caulonia, (Castro veto) of the Locri, Lagaria, of the Thurini; and Mataurus, of the Brutij; by the name of places of Sicilia: the like doth Eustathius, by Crathis (Gratti) a riuer in Calabria: the Scholiast of Theocritus, by Neaethus, a riuer of the Crotoniatae, a people of Vmbria. Item, Liuy an Italian borne, a man of singular iudgement, and more ancient than those, hath Siculas vrbes in Campania, cities of Sicilia in Campania. Yea Pliny hath left recorded, that Togata Gallia, the furthest prouince of Italy toward the VVest, before such time as the Gauls came thither, was possessed of the Siculi. Thucydides writeth, that the Siculi being expelled by the Opici, a people of Campania, seized vpon this iland. And if we will not giue credit vnto Seruius, yet against Halicarnassaeus a writer of good credit, we cannot except, who hath written the very selfe same thing: namely, that the Siculi, a people borne and bred in Italy, and did first of all nations whatsoeuer inhabite and possesse the Romane soile. Lastly, that this prouince, called Great Greece, was inhabited of the Siculi, Strabo in the fith booke of his Geography doth testifie out of Antiochus. Thus farre of that ancient Great Greece, or, if you please so to call it, of Sicilia: all which we haue not described in this Mappe, but only the outter part of it; in which, beside Calabria, Apulia, the Brutij and Locri: there is Great Greece, properly so called by Ptolemey, Liuy, Polybius, Athenaeus and Valerius Maximus: and that, as Strabo in his sixth booke, and Cicero in his 2 booke of his Oratour, thinke because Pythagoras the Grecian Philosopher dwelt sometime in these quarters; or, as Synesius in his oration de Dono wri∣teth, for that it alwaies maintained and brought foorth schollerlike and militarie men. Yet I rather relie vpon the iudgement of Atheneus, who writeth that it was so called of the infinite number of Grecians which vsually dwelt in this prouince. And that Festus and Trogus are of this opinion, I haue partly shewed before. These forenamed countries of Halicarnassaeus, are compre∣hended vnder the name of EAST ITALY. Pliny calleth them, The front of Italy: which, as Mela saith, is diuided into two hornes, called in the fragments of Salust, two promontories, nesses, capes, or forelands, namely, Brutium, (Capo di Sparto vento, or, Capo de Larme) and Salentinum (now of some called Capo de S. Maria: of others, S. Maria de fin terre: and Capo de Leuca; item Stalat.) In the second booke of Straboes Epitome, they are termed coryphae, toppes: and are named Leucopetra, and Iapygium: (for these are synonymes with Bruttium and Salentinum.) But Paulus Diaconus calleth them Hornes: this The left horne, that, The right. For Salentinum, we read Lacinium, in Pliny: but whether it be a fault of the writers, or an errour of the authour, let the learned iudge, I determine nothing. The same Pliny compareth this tract to the forme of the Amazonian shield, that is, to the halfe moone, as Seruius expoundeth it, at that verse of the first booke of Virgils Aeneides, Ducit, Amazonidum lunatis agmina peltis. There is in these quarters, the wood Sila (La Sila) of which Salust, Virgil and Vibius haue made mention. Strabo writeth that it is seuen hun∣dred furlongs in length: full of goodly tall trees and well stored with good water. Cassiodorus in the twelfth booke of his Varia∣rum, vnto Anastasius, doth highly commend the cheese made heere about. From hence commeth Calabrian pitch (pix Brut∣tia) which Dioscorides in the ninety and eight chapter of his first booke De medica materia, speaketh of: and which Pliny, in the seuenth
map of ancient mainland Greece, with an inset of the Trimiti Islands Itala nam tellus GRAECIA MAIOR erat. Ouid. 4. Fast. Hanc Italiae partem exteriorem sic de∣scribere conabar Abrahamus Ortelius. cum Privilegio decennali. 1595. CL. V. DNO D. IOACHIMO CAMERARIO, R.P. NVRENBERG. MEDICO CELEBER∣RIMO, VERO ET VE∣TERI SVO AMICO, ABRAHAMVS ORTELIVS DEDICAB.
euenth chapter of his fowre and twenty booke of the history of nature affirmeth, that it is especially commended for the trim∣ming and stopping of wine vessels: I would iudge that this wood, in the booke of Remembrances, is called Carminianensis, sylua; and peraduenture, Carmeiana, in the booke De Limitibus. The forenamed Cassiodorus in his eighth booke and last epi∣stle, describeth in the territories of Consilinum (Stylo) a city of this tract, Marcilianum suburbium, which he termeth the na∣tiue soile of Saint Cyprian; of which (that by the way I may speake one word of this) there is nothing spoken (which indeed is strange) in the liues of the Fathers, or Martyrologies of the Saints, or in any other authour to my remembrance. Nor, which is more strange, in any of those writers, which, like as Gabriel Barry and Prosper Parisius, haue particularly named and wrote of the seuerall Saints of this country. But of the Nature, Situation, proper Qualities, and Antiquities of this prouince I will not speake one word more; because the same is most exactly and learnedly done by two learned men both borne heere, who therefore knew it well, before I began once to set pen to paper to draw this my Mappe: I meane Gabriel Barrius, in his booke intituled Calabria, where he so largely and curiously tricked out Great Greece, Brutium and the tract possessed sometime by the Locri, that euen that Reader, which hardly will be satisfied with such like stories, may doubtlesse heere take his fill: and An∣tony Galatey, who hath painted out his Iapygia, (which is in truth the ancient Calabria) that his Reader shall not only depart skilfull and cunning in the knowledge of this country, bur also much bettered in his vnderstanding and instructed with rules of good learning and Philosophy: in him also there is a description of the city Gallipoli: Of Tarentum, a city of this prouince, Iohannes Iuuenis harh set out a seuerall treatise. Of Diomedes iles, belonging to this country, we haue gathered these few lines which follow. DIOMEDES ILES, Now, ISOLE DE TRIMITE. PLiny describeth two ilands by this name: so many also doth Strabo mention: whereof the one he saith is inhabited, the other wast and desert. Ptolemey reckoneth vp fiue, all called DIOMEDES ILANDS; and so many there are at this day called by seuerall and distinct names, if one shall account rockes and all. Whether euery one of these were knowen to the ancients by seuerall names or not, I know not. Festus, Stephanus and others, call properly one of these Insula Diomedea, Diomedes ile, like as amongst the Bri∣tannicae insulae, the Brittish iles, one is properly named Britannia, Brittaine. One of them Tacitus calleth TRIMERVS: (or peraduenture Trimetus; for otherwise I doe not see from whence that name of Trimi∣te: whereby the greatest of them at this day is called, and of it the rest, should come.) Pliny calleth ano∣ther of them TEVTRIA: the other for ought I know, the ancients left vnnamed: as for Electris and Febra, which Seruius mentioneth at the eleuenth booke of Virgils Aeneids or Sebria, and Aletrides, whereof Pomponius Sabinus, vpon the same place, speaketh, I do very willingly confesse, that I haue not found them spoken of, by any ancient writer. They are seated in the Adriaticke sea, not farre from the sea-coast of Puglia, opposite to Monte de S. Angelo, Mons Garganus, or Promontorium Garganum. Not within kenning or sight of Taranto (Tarentum) a city of Apulia, as very falsly, at the same place, Seruius hath set downe. The name was deriued by the testimony of all writers both Latines and Greekes, from Diomedes the king of Aetolia, (Artinia, Nicetas calleth it) whom they report, after the surprising of Troy, in his returne homeward, not being enterteined of his owne nation, to be driuen hither and to be interred heere, and that his temple, monument or tombe did re∣maine in the greatest of them properly called Diomedea (S. Maria di Trimite) and that the Plane tree was first brought hither for to shaddow Diomedes tombe, Pliny in the first chapter of his twelfth booke of the history of Nature, hath left recorded. Into Trimerus, as Tacitus writeth, Augustus banished sent his neece Iulia, conuict of adulterie: where he furthermore ad∣deth, that she endured that punishment of exile the space of twenty yeares. In Platina, in the life of Hadrian the first, I read, that Paullus Diaconus was once condemned thither, by Charles the Great. Of Diomedes birds (which Iuba calleth Catarractae: Aristotle, Charadrij: of others, Erodij, a kind of Cormorant or rauenous sea foule) proper to these ilands (for they are onely to be seene in this one place of all the world, if we may beleeue old writers) read Ouid in the thirteenth booke of his Metamor∣phosis, where he thus speaketh of them: Si volucrum quae sit dubiarum forma requiris, Vt non cignorum, sic albis proxima cignis. The doubtfull formes of birds most strange, if that you seeke to know: They be no swannes, yet white they be, as white as a∣ny snow. Suidas maketh them to be like to storkes. Aristotle in his Wonders, calleth them vaste and huge birdes with very long, and bigge bils. Pliny with Solinus do write that they be like the Fulica, a kinde of coote: of colour white, hauing teeth and eies of a fiery sparke. Some there are which do thinke them to be Heronshawes. Robert Constantine testifieth that the coun∣try people of these ilands do now call them Artenae: and that they make a noise like the crying of yong children. Item, that the fatte or grease of them is a soueraigne remedie against diseases arising of cold causes. Blondus writeth that he vnderstood by some of the inhabitants of these iles, that these fowles, still retaining the name of the Diomedean birdes, are of the bignesse of a goose. But to be very harmelesse creatures, yet neither doing them, nor the Church any maner of pleasure. They which desire to know more of these birdes, as also of the Metamorphosis and transmutation of Diomedes consorts into these fowles, or of their nature and quality, as of their kindnesse toward Grecians (honest-men, Strabo calleth them) and their curstnesse to strangers, (wicked-men, as Strabo hath) and of the purifying of the temple, and of other poeticall fables deuised of them, let them haue recourse to the authours aboue named: to which they may ad that list, that which Aelianus hath written in the first c. of his 1. booke S. Aug. in the 16 c. of his 18 book De ciuitate Dei; Antigonius, Antony Liberalis, Lycophron, and his Scholiast Isacius. At this day these ilands are vnder the command of the kingdome of Naples: & are al generally called by one name Tre∣mitanae, ilands de Trimite: & euery one by a seueral & proper name by it selfe, as thou maist read in our Geographical treasury. They are now all desert & void of inhabitants, only that except in which sometime was the temple of Diomedes: where now is the Monasterie vulgarly called Santa Maria de Trimiti: possessed by regular canons, which Eugenius the fourth, Pope of Rome, enlarged and endowed with great reuenews, as Blondus recordeth. These, as Zacharte Lillie reporteth, go to Church so dili∣gently, heare diuine seruice so deuoutly, and relieue those which by storme and tempest are driuen thither so charitably, that they are not onely very famous and reuerently esteemed of those that dwell round about them, but also of all seamen which trauell by that way. Leander Albertus saith that these ilands do breed most excellent horses.
SICILIA, OR TRINACRIA. THat this was sometime a peninsula, or demy-ile, adioined to Italy, as a part of Brutium in Calabria neere to Rhegium (Rhezzo) and afterward was by violence of tempest seuered from the same (and of that accident the city Rhegium tooke the name) it is a generall opinion of all antiquity. But when, or at what certaine time, this diuision happened, there is not any memoriall, for ought I know, remaining in any ancient writer. Strabo, Pliny and Dionysius do write that it was caused by an earthquake: Silius and Cassiodorus, do thinke it to haue been done by the rage and violence of the tide and surges of the sea. They which lend their listening eares to fables, do attribute the cause of it to Neptune (as Eustathi∣us witnesseth) who, with his three-tined mace, in fauour of Iocastus, the sonne of Aeolus, diuided it from the maine land, and so made it an iland, which before was but a demy-ile; that by that meanes he might the more safely inhabite and possesse the same. Diodorus Siculus, moued by the authority of Hesiodus, ascribeth to Orion: who, that he might be compared to Hercules, cutting through the rockes and mountaines, first ope∣ned the Sicilian streights, as he did of Gibraltar. Therefore Trinacria quondam Italae pars vna fuit; sed pontus & aestus Mutaue∣re situm, rupit confinia Nereus Victor: & abscissos interluit aequore montes, &c. They which esteeme the ilands of the midland sea, according to their quantity and content, do make this the greatest, as Eustathius and Strabo, who affirme this not only to excell the rest for bignesse, but also for goodnesse of soile. As concerning the forme of this iland, Pomponius Mela saith it is like that Ca∣pitall letter of the Greekes, which they call Delta. That the whole iland was consecrated to Ceres and Libera, that is, Proserpina, all old writers do generally with one consent affirme: to Ceres it was dedicated, because it first taught the rules of setting & sowing of corne: to Proserpina, not so much for that she was from hence violently taken by Pluto, as for that (which Plutarch and Diodo∣rus do report for truth) Pluto, as soone as she vncouering her selfe first shewed herselfe to be seene of him, gaue it her for a boone; which kind of gifts and fauours the Greekes call anacalypteria. Of the fertility and riches of this country, there is a famous testimonie, written by the learned Oratour Cicero, in his second ora∣tion against Verres, where he saith that Marcus Cato did call it, The garner and storehouse of the Romane common wealth, and the nurce of the vulgar sort. The same Cicero doth adde in that place, that it was not only the storehouse of the people of Rome, but al∣so it was accounted for a well furnished treasurie: for without any cost or charge of ours saith he, it hath vsually clothed, maintai∣ned and furnished our greatest armies with leather, apparell and corne. Strabo in his 6. booke reporteth almost the same thing of it. Whatsoeuer Sicilia doth yeeld, saith Solinus, whether by the kindnesse and temperature of the aire, or by the industry and labour of man, it is accounted next vnto those things that are of best estimation: were it not that such things as the earth first putteth forth are ouergrowen with Centorui saffron (Crocus Ceturipinus). Aristotle in his Admiranda, writeth, that about Pelorus (Cabo de la torre del Faro) saffron groweth in such abundance, that any man that listeth may load and carie it away by whole cart loads. But Dioscorides doth affirme, that that which groweth about Centuripinum (a towne now called Centorui) is much weaker and of lesse force, than that which groweth in other places. Diodorus Siculus saith, that in the fields neere Leontium, (Lintini) and in diuers other places of this iland, wheat doth grow of it selfe, without any labour or looking to of the husbandman. That this iland was made a prouince first before any other forren nation, amongst other Cicero and Diodorus haue left recorded. Martianus shew∣eth that there were in it 6. colonies, and 60. cities. Pintianus, at the 8. c. of Plinies 3. booke, readeth 73. free colonies & cities. Silius in his 14. booke, and Ouid in diuers places reckoneth vp the names of many of them: but this our mappe speaketh of many more. That it was in the beginning possessed and inhabited by Giants, Laestrigones, Anthropophagi, and Cyclopes barbarous and vnci∣uill nations, all histories and fables do iointly with one consent auerre. Yet Thucydides saith that these sauage people dwelt only in one place of the iland. Afterward the Sicani, a nation of Spaine, so called of the riuer Sicanus, (or as Solinus and Berosus, haue giuen out, of their king Sicanus) driuen out of their country by the Ligures, possessed it. That these Sicani were not bred in the ile (although some do so thinke) Thucydides and Diodorus do constantly auouch. Of these it was named SICANIA. The Elymi and some of the Pho∣censes, seated themselues heere: after them succeeded the Phryges driuen from Troy, as Pausanias thinketh: and the Morgetes expel∣led out of Italy by the Oenotri, as Strabo writeth. In Plutarch his Conuiual. Quaest. and Iulius Pollux his 2. booke de Manibus, I read that the Dores sometime did inhabite it. Lastly, it was all conquered by the Siculi, a people of Italy ouerthrowen & cast out of their possessions by the Opici, and of them it was called SICILIA; when as before it was knowen by the name of TRINACIA, as Dionysius wri∣teth: or TRINACRIS, as Ouid: or TRINACRIA and TRIQVETRA, as Pliny reporteth, of the triangular forme. Whereupon the Romans in their money were wont to counterfait or expresse this prouince by 3. legs ioined together about the vpper end of the thigh, (not much vnlike those armes of the E. of Darby, as I thinke,) Lycophron for the same reason giueth it the title or epithite of TRICERVIX, 3. necked: and Pindarus in like maner calleth it TRICVSPIS, 3. pointed. Homer the prince of poets nameth it CYCLOPVM TERRA, the land of the Cyclopes, being peraduenture in his time not knowen by any proper name. Iulius Firmicus, saith that the Siculi, the people of this iland, are acute and nimble witted: Quint. in his 6. booke of his Orat. saith that they are lasciuious and full of words. Besides many famous acts done by these people both at home and abroad, aswell in peace as in war there be many other things which haue made this iland very renowmed: the birth of Ceres, the rauishing of Proserpina, the Giant Enceladus, the wonderfull mathematician Archimedes, the famous geometrician Euclide, the painfull historian Diodorus, Empedocles the deep philosopher, the ingenious architecture of Daedalus, the tombe of Sibylla Cumana, Syracusae the famous tetrapolis, or as Strabo saith, a pentapolis (one city made of 4. or 5. cities: like as London, in respect of Westminster, and Southwarke, may be said to be a tripolis) the foun∣taine Arethusa, the lake Palicus, the mount AEtna, Scylla and Charibdis, and the notorious harlot Lais. Beside many miracles and wonderfull workes of nature, which thou maist read of in Solinus, Trogus in his fourth booke, Antigonus de Mirab. l. and A∣chilles Statius in his 2. booke of Loue: Item statues costly images, for art and curious workemanship of great estimation; which are described by Cicero in his orations against Verres. Athenaeus commended highly the cheese, doues and diuers sorts of garments of Sicilia. Antigonus writeth that the Cactos (a kind of thorne) doth grow in this ile, and not in any other place of the world be∣side: as Theophrastus affirmeth: vpon which if a stagge shall tread and pricke his foote, his bones will yeeld no sound, and there∣fore they wilbe naught to make pipes of. Heere also, as Pliny saith, is found the Smaragde, a kind of pretious stone, of great esti∣mation in those daies: in the sea, the same authour affirmeth, that Corall is gotten by such as do seeke for it. Iulius Pollux doth write, that this iland had at first no hares, but such as were brought in by Anaxilas Rhegnius The Sicilian sea, which beateth vpon this ile on the East side, was also called Ausonium mare, and was the deepest of all the Mediterran sea, as Strabo testifieth. There is another iland in this sea neere to Peloponnesus, called Sicilia, as Stephanus reporteth. The ile Naxus (Nicsia, it is now called in the AEgean or Archipelago, Pliny saith, was sometime named Sicilia minor, Sicilia, the lesse. Pausanias also speaketh of Sicilia a little hill not farre from Athens in Greece. Moreouer there is a place in the Palace of Rome, of that name, as Capitolinus hath left recorded in the life of Perlinax the Emperour. But these are by-matters nor so directly to our purpose. Diuers adagies, prouerbs, or by-words haue sprong from hence: as Siculissare, spoken of one that is sullen or tetchie: Siculum mare, the Sicilian sea, meaning that which is dangerous: Siculus miles, A Sicilian souldier, that is, a mercenary or stipendary: Si∣culae gerrae, and Incidit in Scyllam cupiens vitare charybdim, He falleth vpon the rockes that laboureth to shunne the quicke sands; spoken of him that coueting to escape one danger falleth into a worse. But of these and such like thou maist read Erasmus his Chiliades.
map of ancient Sicily with inset of the Gulf of Syracuse SICILIAE VETERIS TYPVS. Ex Conatibus geographicis Ab. Ortelij. Territorij Syracusani loca, in∣certae positionis: Acrillae, Echetla, Magel∣laX Veteris Siciliae loca, incertae aut pror∣sus incognitae positionis VRBES. Acharenses Acra Adrÿie Amathe Ancÿrg Arbelo Artacia Aterium Atina Bucinija Calauria Caulonia Chimera Comitianum Crastue Cronidas qui philippi Cijdonia Didÿme Eggÿna Elerii Emporium Ergetium Erÿce Exagyios Halentina Hippana, que et Ipana Homotÿles Iaetia, an Ietas? Ichana Indara Lichindus Megarsus Miscera Morgÿna Nacona Noae, an fortè Nooeni Nonÿmna Ochÿra Omphace Piacus Pirina Plinte Propalae Prostropaea Sinoessa Stilpe Talaria. ARCES, Cype Eizelos Elauia Eucarpia Motÿlae. VICI, Paradisus MONTES, Atulirius Torgium FLVVII, Achates Danÿrias Elysius Hypas Pachisus Rhÿacus Triopala REGIONES, Aphannae Craserium Epiora Pelagonia Rhybdus STAGNA, Gonusa Gelonium POPVLI, Loestienses Etini Chalcides Herbulenses Icilienses Letini Timaei LOCA, Ambicas Apollinis ref. Achillaeum Cabala Chalie refug. Cÿmba Cronium Draxum Hipponium Italicum Mela Mergana Mesopotanium plaga Micite Gorgium Nomae Phaedae Rhÿacus Saturni fan. Senis Scritaea.
DACIA, and MOESIA. THe inhabitants of DACIA, the Greekes called DACI: the Latines GETAE; as Pliny, Dion, Ste∣phanus and others do testifie: (This also Cottiso, sometime the King of that nation, doth confirme: whom Suetonius nameth, The king of the Getes; Horace calleth him, Dacum: a Dake) Item, Ior∣nandes saith, that the Romanes indifferently called them DACI, or GOTHI. I do obserue that Herodotus and the writers about that age haue generally comprehended them vnder the name of the SCYTHAE, Scythians: to whom also the foresaid Iornandes doth wholly assent and agree, Item, the abouenamed Stephanus nameth them DAOS and Strabo DAVOS, Daces, or Dawes, who notwithstanding maketh this distinction betweene them: that the Getae were those which were seated farther Eastward; the Daci, those which dwelt more into the West: Notwithstanding they speake one and the same language: namely, the Duche tongue, vsed also by the Thracians, as may be demonstrated out of Pliny and Iornandes. Moreouer Arrianus writeth, that the Getae were also called APATHONI∣ZONTES: but it is to be amended: and out of Herodotus first booke, to be written ATHANATIZONTES, as who say, Immor∣tall: for they do verily beleeue, that they shal neuer die: but after their departure out of this life, go presently vnto one Zamolxis, a Saint or Idol which they especially worship and adore. But of this their Saint and ceremonie you may read more in the said authour. Suidas sheweth that in his time these people were knowen by the name of the PATZINACITAE. That those Dakes did inhabite on either side of the riuer Donaw (Danubius) euen vp as high as mount Haemus, I do find recorded by Dion: whom I do perceiue, vnder that name, to conteine also the Moesi. And indeed we shall heereafter proue that the same Dakes were often translated afterward into these Moesiaes. Therefore Saint Paullinus, for that reason, maketh this same DACIA twofold, in his treatise Of the returne of Nicetas, in this verse; Et Getae currunt, & vterque Dacus: The Getes in troupes doe throng, both Dakes they do the like. In the Digests of the ciuill law mention is made of two Daciaes. But of the Moesiaes we will speake heereafter, this place we haue assigned to the true DACIA, properly so called, whose bounds Ptolemey, the Prince of all Geographers, maketh to be the riuers Donaw (Danubius) Teissa (Tibiscus or Pathissus, as Pliny nameth it) Pruth (Hierasus) and the mount Carpates. Iornandes, this countrie man borne, saith, that the next neighbours to this Dacia, vpon the East, are the Roxolani; vpon the West, the Tamazites: (Zyges I would rather read, moued so to thinke by likeliehood and probability of the thing it selfe: as also by the diuers reading of another copy, which hath Taziges, a word no where else found) vpon the North, it hath the Sarmatae and the Bastarnae: and on the South, the riuer Donaw (Danubius.) This Dacia, as the same authour saith, oueragainst Moesia, beyond the Donaw, is enclosed round with mountaines, and hath only two passages in and out; one by Bontas (Rotteothurn) and Tabae (Bross.) Xiphiline, I thinke, calleth this later Taphae. Ammianus Marcellinus to this addeth Succorum angustias, the streights of Turkzuest, by the towne Succi. Aurelius Victor, Eutropius, Marcellinus, Comes, the booke of Remembrances, and the Miscellan story, do diuide this country into two prouinces, MEDI∣TERRANEA and RIPENSIS: There are some (of which Lazius is one) that to those do adde a third called ALPESTRIS, vp∣on what ground and proofe, I know not. VANNIANVM REGNVM, of which Tacitus and Pliny do speake, was, as seemeth heere abouts. This is properly that prouince of Dacia, which Eutropius saith did conteine in circuite a thousand miles. The chiefe city of this part was Zarmisogethusa, which afterward was called COLONIA VLPIA TRAIANA AVG. DACIC. ZARMIS. as we find in certaine inscriptions in Marble, and was so named of Vlpius Traianus the Emperour. For he first by conquering ouercomming their king Decebalus, made it a prouince. Of which warre, made by Traiane against the Dakes, (for the histories of it, written by himselfe, cited by Priscian the Grammarian, are lost) you may read in Dion in the life of this Emperour. Behold also and view the columne set vp by the Senate of Rome, in Traianes market place, which yet to this day re∣maineth whole and sound. This columne, Hieronymus Mutianus the famous painter, shaddowed out with his owne hand and imprinted at Rome, in 130. tables. The same hath F. Alphonsus Ciacconus so liuely expressed and declared with such a learned and laborious Commentary, that in it a man would thinke that he had rather seen this battell fought, than to haue read or heard ought of the same, from the relation of others. Florus writeth, that this country doth lie amid the mountaines. Item, he calleth it, a copsy country, full of woods and forrests. For he affirmeth that Curio came vp as high as Dacia, but durst go no fur∣ther, for feare of the dreadfull darke woods. Strabo in the seuenth booke of his Geographie, and Virgil in the third of his Ge∣orgickes, do speake of the deserts and wildernesses of the Getes. The same authour calleth it, Gentem indomitam, an vnruelie nation. Statius saith, that they are hirsuti, hairie, intonsi, vnshorne, pelliti, furred or clad in skins, inhumane, sturdy, stern, braccati, wearing long side breeches and mantles, like to our Irishmen. I read in Pliny that they vsed to paint their faces [like vnto our Britans.] That there is not a more stern nation in the World, Ouid the Poet, who did not only see the country, but also dwelt amongst them and saw their manners, very truly wrote of them. Vegetius, who wrote of the Art of warre, saith that it is a very warlike people: Hauing indeed, as the Prince of Poets testifieth, god Mars for their Lieutenant and Gouernour. Of Claudian, it is named, Bellipotens, a mighty nation for warlike men. Philargyrius, out of Aufidius Modestus writeth, that when they go to warre, they will not set forward, before they drinking downe a certaine measure of the waters of the riuer Ister (Donaw) in the maner of hallowed wine, do sweare that they would neuer returne home againe into their owne country, vntill they had slaine their enemies. Whereupon Virgil called this riuer Istrum Coniuratum, coniured Donaw. Trogus wri∣teth, that this nation, with their king Orotes, (another copy hath Olores: in Dion I read, Roles) did fight against the Bastarnae, with very ill successe: in reuenge of which cowardise, they were by their king enioined, when they go to bed, to lie at the beds feet: or to do those seruices to their wiues, which they were wont to do for them. They were in times past so strong, as Strabo writeth, that they were able to make an army of 200000. men. Of them also peraduenture this speech of Silius Itali∣cus is to be vnderstood: At gente in Scythica suffixa cadauera truncis, Lenta dies sepelit putri liquentia tabo. Iosephus in his se∣cond booke against Appian writeth there are a certaine kind of Dakes commonly called Plisti, whose manner of life he com∣pareth to the course of life of the Essenes. These I do verily beleeue are the same with those which Strabo calleth Plistae and were of the stocke of the Abij. And thus much of Dacia, now the Moesi do follow, who, as Dion Prusaeus noteth out of Homer, were sometime named Mysi. By the name of MOESIA was all that country vulgarly called, which the riuer Saw (Sauus) falling into Donaw, aboue Dal∣matia, Macedonia and Thracia, doth diuide from Pannonia. In the which Moesia, beside diuers other nations, there do inhabit those which anciently were named the Triballi, and those which now are called Dardani. These are the wordes of Dion Ni∣caeus. It is by Ptolemey enclosed and bounded with the same limits. Pliny also doth extend the coasts of it from the meeting of the riuer Saw with Donaw, euen vnto Pontus (Mar maiore) Eastward: and Iornandes maketh it to reach as farre as Histria, Westward. We haue said before, that MOESIA was sometime called DACIA: for proofe whereof I could alledge Flauius Vopiscus: who writeth that Aurelianus the Emperour, borne heere, did bring certaine people out of Dacia, and placed them in MOESIA and to haue named it DACIA AVRELIANA, after his owne name, which is now that prouince that diuideth
map of ancient Dacia and Moesia DACIARVM, MOESIARVM∣QVE, VETVS DESCRIPTIO. Vrbes Moesiae II. incognitae positionis: Accissum, Ansanum, Anthia, Aphrodisias, Bidine, Borcobe, Ca∣bessus, S. Cyrilli, Eumenia, Genucla, Gerania, Ibeda, Latra, Libistus, Mediolanum, Megara, Parthenopolis, Securisca, Talamonium, Thamyris, Theodoropolis, Tro∣czen, Ʋsiditana, & Zigere. Moesiae I. Daphne, Laedenata, Pincum, Regina, & Zmirna. Daciae, Aixis, Bereobis, Burgus, Siosta, Sostiaca, et Zerna. Flumina Daciae, Atarnus, Athres, Atlas, Auras Lyginus, Maris, et Noes. Mons, Coegenus. Cum Privi∣legijs decen∣nalib. Imp. Reg. et Cancellariae Brabanticae. Ex conatibus Abra∣hami Ortelij. 1595. NOBILISS. DNO IOANNI GEORGIO A WERDENSTEIN ECCLESIAR. AVGVSTANAE ET EYCHSTETEN∣SIS CANONICO, SERENISSIMI DVCIS BAVARIAE CONSILIARIO, SVPREMOQ. BIBLIOTHECARIO, ABRAH. ORTELIVS AMORIS MNEMOSYNON HOC DD. Proefuit his Graecine locis modo Flaccus, et illo Ripa ferox Istri sub duce tuta fuit. Hic tenuit Mysas gentes in pace fideli: Hic arcu fisos terruit ense Getas. Ovid. 4. de Ponto, Eleg. 9.
the two Moesiaes one from another. The same doth Suidas in the word DACIA, report. The prouince Dacia, saith Lutro∣pius (speaking of the same Aurelianus) he placed in Moesia where it now abideth on the South side of Donaw, when as before it was seated vpon the North side of the same. And Sextus Rufus sheweth, that by the same Emperour, there were two Da∣ciaes made of the countries of Moesia and Dardania: whereupon in the Code of the ciuill law these wordes are read, Mediter∣ranca Mysia, seu Dardania: vpland Moesia, or Dardania: confounding the one with the other. Vnderneath the name of Da∣cia, beside those countries abouenamed, was conteined also PRAEVALITANA, and that part of Macedonia commonly called SALVTARIS, as the booke of Remembrances (liber Notitiarum) doth manifestly affirme. Of the people heere, brought from other places, Strabo likewise writeth, that in his time (who we know liued in the time of Augustus and Tiberius) by AElius Catus (or rather, as the learned and industrious Causabon out of Dion would haue vs read, Licinius Crassus:) were conueighed of the Getes which dwelt eyond the Donaw (Ister) into Thracia, more than 50000. men, and were afterward called MYSI, Mysians. An inscription of an ancient stone, mentioned in Smetius saith, that AElius Plautius propraetor of Moesia, did transport into this country, of the people and nations beyond the Donaw, more than 10000. men, together with their wiues, children, nobles, princes and kings. This MYSIA, or, as for the most part the Latines write it MOESIA, Pto∣lemey diuideth into the VPPER and NEATHER (Superior & Inferior) this in the Code of Iustinian is called SECVNDA, that PRIMA, (the Second, and First.) The neither is named of Iornandes MINOR SCYTHIA, the Lesser Scythia: of Zosimus, SCYTHIA THRACENSIS, Scythia of Thrace: of Plutarch in Marius, SCYTHICA PONTICA, Scythia of Pontus: and the in∣habitants of the same Celtoscythae: of Polyaenus, PONTICA MARITIMA, Pontus vpon the sea: of Ouid and others, PONTVS, simply without any addition: Some there are which do call it FLACCIA, of one Flaccus, a Romane, whom it is certaine out of Ouid, was sometime heereabouts lieutenant for the state of the Empire. Neither doth this seeme to be altogether false or vn∣probable; for the name Waiachia or Valachia, whereby it is knowē at this day doth import so much. By Ouid also in sundrie places it was described vnder these names, Sarmaticū solum, Geticū littus, Cymmeriū littus, and Barbaria: the Sarmatian soile, the Gottish or Cymmerian shore, and Barbaria. These countries are very fertile of all maner of fruites and commodities, so that, as Solinus witnesseth, the Romanes commonly called it Cereris horreum, Ceres barne. The poet, as Procopius in his 4. booke AEdifici. noteth, calleth these people Enchemachous, such as fight aloofe and farre off. Mysos in palustra feroces: and Quum Geticis ingens premeretur Mysia plaustris: when Mesia great was much oppressed with Gottish waines: thus Claudian, the poet writeth of them. Dant illis animos arcus, plena{que} pharetrae: They much presume vpon their bow, and cunning great in archery: as Ouid in his first booke de Ponto, writeth of them. Aelianus sheweth that they were able by their owne strength and power to keepe out the Scythians from entring their country, and euery way to defend the same from that furious and vi∣olent enemy. Strabo saith, that they were exceedingly giuen to robbe and steale. Vix hâc inuenies totum, mihi crede, per or∣bem, Quae minus angusta pace fruatur humus: Scarse maist thou find in all the world, so small a plot of ground: Where bloudy wars their hideous noise, more oftentimes do sound; as the forenamed poet writeth of this country: as also this that follow∣eth in another place: In quibus est nemo qui non coryton & arcum, Tela{que} vipereo lurida felle gerat. Amongst these men ther's none, but hath his sturdie bow, With poisoned arrowes sharpe and swift, to fight against his foe. How faire and stout they were, thou maist see by this of Florus. One of the Captaines, saith he, stepped out before the army, and entreating their si∣lence, demandeth, who are you? It was iointly with one voice answered of all, We are Romanes, lords of all nations of the world. To which answeare they replied againe, So you are indeed, if you can conquer vs. Posidonius in Strabo affirmeth, that they forbeare the eating of flesh for religion and conscience sake: and do feed only vpon butter and cheese. Of the fabu∣lous story of a kind of horses heere, if thou desire to know, see Elianus: as also Solinus of the strange hearb growing in that part of the country called Pontica. In Moesia also is the prouince called DARDANIA, which we said was called MYSIA MEDI∣TERRANEA, Vpland Moesia, for that it is farre remote and distant from the riuer Donaw. Of the inhabitants and people of this country, the same authour thus speaketh: In all their life, as I heare by report from others, these people do onely bath or wash themselues three times; once, as soone as they are borne: another time when they marry: and againe at their death. Of the Triballi, a people of this country take this of Pliny as he alleadgeth it out of Isigonus. They do bewitch and kill with their eies such as they do stedfastly looke vpon, any long time together; especially if they be angrie: which mischiefe of theirs, strip∣lings are most subiect vnto, and soonest hurt by. But that is most notable and worth the obseruation, that in ech eie they haue two sights apeece. He that desireth to read more of this country, especially of the Lower Moesia, let him repaire to Ouids 3. booke de Ponto, at the 1. 4. and 10. Elegies. Of their barbarous manners, rites, customes and ceremonies, thou shalt find much in the 7. Elegie of his 5. booke de Tristibus: of the riuer Donaw or Ister (which Elianus in the 23. chapter of his 14. booke de Animalibus calleth, The king of Riuers. Of Apollonius, in the fourth booke of his Argonautickes, it is named Cor∣nu oceani, the horne of the sea) for that it runneth through the middest of those countries which heere we haue described, it is not amisse, in my iudgement to say something of that also. That Ister or Donaw, of all the riuers of the Romane Empire, for greatnesse is next vnto Nilus, we do read in the fragments of Salust. Gyraldus in his Syntagmata Deorum, affirmeth, that the kings of Babylon were wont to reserue certaine of the water of Donaw or Ister, in ther treasuries amongst their pretious iewels. Caesarius, Nazianzenus brother, in his dialogues saith, that this is one of the riuers of Paradise: and to be that which the holy Scripture calleth Phison: which I will easily grant him to be true, when he shall perswade me, that by Paradise is meant the whole world or massie globe of this lower element of the earth: which I do verily beleeue he thought to be true. Seneca, in the sixth booke of his naturall Philosophy, saith, that this Donaw doth part Europe and Asia. Notwithstanding all writers generally both Latines and Greekes, aswell ancient as those of later times do attribute this to the riuer Done (Tanais.) And what is he, I pray you, that euer dreamed that Germany which is beyond this riuer should be a country of Asia? Shall we correct the copy? Or shall we retaine that reading in Horace, vpon the credit and perill of Acron his expositour? where he saith, that Tanais is also called Danubius. I leaue it to the censure of the learned. (This we know for a certainty aswell Tanais as Danubius, is of the inhabitants neere about, called Done: and surely I thinke that both the Greeke Tanais, as the Latine Danubius, were made of the barbarous Done or Tane; which in that language peraduenture for ought I know, may signifie a riuer or streame: so Nilas, as Pomponius Mela seemeth to affirme tooke his name of Nuchul, which generally signifieth a ri∣uer, as all men meanly skild in Hebrew or Arabicke can testifie with him.) Isidore also in the ninth chapter of the seuenteenth booke of his Origines, seemeth to be of this opinion, where he writeth that Rhabarbarum, rhew barbe, groweth in solo barba∣rico, in a barbarous country, beyond the Donaw: For we know at this day, that it groweth neere the riuer Rha, which is be∣yond the Donaw Eastward. In Pliny we read that euery one of his mouthes, whereby it emptieth it selfe into the sea, are so wide and great, that it is affirmed to ouercome the sea for forty miles in length together, and that so farre the waters may be perceiued to be sweet amid the brackish surges of the salt sea. Polybius in his fourth booke to these adioineth, that by the vio∣lent and swift fall of the waters of this riuer into Pontus (Mar maiore) there are certaine knols, hils, or shelfs, which the sea∣men call Stethe, that is, breast bones, made of the gathering together of such things as the riuer bringeth downe with it, and are more than a day saile off from land, vpon which oft times the seamen falling by negligence, are in great danger of ship∣wracke. Strabo also maketh mention of the same. They which desire to know more of this riuer, his name, nature, quality, fountaine, mouthes, and streames which do runne into it, let him read the commentaries of William Stuckius written vpon Arrianus Periplus of the Euxine sea: for there he hath most plentifully and learnedly descr bed all these things. Of the Thra∣cians, Moesians, Getes, Dakes and other countries, nations and people of this mappe, read the seuenth booke of Straboes Geography, and the Epitome of the same.
PONTVS EVXINVS, now called MAR MAIORE. THe sea which heere we purpose to describe (famoused of ancient writers by meanes of the Argonantes and fabulous story of the golden fleece) was called, as we find recorded, by diuers and sundrie names: first it was called PONTVS by the figure Synecdoche; then PONTVS AXENVS, that is, inhospitale, the harbourlesse sea, but afterward it was named PONTVS EVXINVS, hospitale mare, the good harborough, as Pliny, Ouid and others do witnesse. Strabo, Tacitus, Plutarch, Ptole∣mey and Iornandes do call it PONTICVM mare, the Ponticke sea, without any addition at all. Lucretius nameth it PONTI mare, the sea of Pontus, of the country Pontus abuttant vpon it. For the same reason it is, of Valerius Flaccus, Ouid and Mar∣tianus, named SARMATICVM and SCYTHICVM mare, the Sarmatian and Scythian sea; of Claudian AMAZONI∣VM: of Herodotus and Orosius, CIMMERIVM: of Festus Auienus, TAVRICVM: of the Sarmatians, Scythians, Amazones, Cimmerians and Tauri, certaine Nations dwelling vpon the coast of this sea. Of the prouince Colchis, neighbour vnto it vpon the East, Strabo nameth it COLCHICVM mare, of the mountaine Caucasus, which heere beginneth: Apollonius intituleth it CAVCASEVM: of the riuer Phasis, which vnloadeth it selfe into this sea, (or towne of that name situate vpon that riuer) Aristides calleth it PHASIANVM mare. Procopius saith that it was sometime named Tanais, vnfitly and falsly, as I thinke. Almost all ancient writers haue likened this sea (or more truly, this bay or gulfe) vnto a Scythian bow when it is bent: so that the string doth represent the South part of it: namely from the streights of Constantinople, vnto the further end of it Eastward, toward the riuer Phasis: for excepting only the promontory Carambis, (Cabo Pisello) all the rest of this shore hath such small capes and creekes, that it is not much vnlike to a right line. The other side or North part doth re∣semble an horne that hath two crooked ends, the vpper end more round: the lower more straight: which proportion this our mappe doth very precisely expresse. This sea also hath two promontories; one in the South, then called Promontorium Carambis, now Cabo Pisello: the other in the North, Ptole∣mey nameth it Criou metopon, Arietis frons, the rammes head: Paulus Diaconus calleth it Acroma, and now it is knowen by the name Famar. These two capes are opposite one against the other, and are distant one from another about 2500. furlongs, as Ammianus and Eustathius do testifie: which although they do make 312. Italian miles, yet they are distant only 170. miles, as Pliny saith: or as Strabo reporteth, so much as a ship will saile in three daies: not∣withstanding to those, which do saile either from the East to West, or from West to East, they seeme to be so neere one to the other, that one would thinke that there were the end of the sea, and that Pontus Euxinus were two seas: but when you shall come in the middest between these two capes, then the other part appeareth, as it were a second or another sea. The compasse of it round about by the shore Strabo maketh to be 25000. furlongs: Polybius but 22000. and yet from this Ammianus taketh 2000. and that by the authority of Eratosthenes, Hecataeus and Ptolemey, as there he affirmeth. Herodotus an eie-witnesse of the same, writeth that he measured the length of it and found it to be 11100. furlongs: and likewise he found the breadth of it (where it was furthest ouer) to be 320. furlongs. This measure Strabo and Pliny in the twelfth chapter of his fourth booke, do more distinctly, partly out of their owne and partly out of other mens opinions, set downe. Strabo writeth that about 40. riuers do vnloade themselues into it. Yet this our mappe doth shew many more. Antiquity doth hold that this sea, of all our seas, was by farre the greatest; (heere hence I suppose that the Italians haue giuen it that name of Mar maiore, the Great sea) and that heere (as there at Caliz, without the straits of Gibraltar) was the end of the World: and that it was innaui∣gable, both for the huge greatnesse of it, as also by reason of the barbarous nations which daily did annoy the shore, and vse all maner of cruelty and in∣humanity toward strangers and aliens. From hence arose those epithites and adiuncts giuen by the ancient poets to this sea of Pontus; vast and rough, Virgil and Catullus call it: Ouid, infinite and terrible: Lucane, a deuouring and dangerous sea; Silius, raging: Statius, an vncertaine and swelling sea: Valerius Flaccus, perilous: Manilius, horrible, spitefull and furious: Seneca, mad and churlish: Festus Auienus, raucisonum, making a hoarse ill fauoured noise. Thus farre of the Names, Forme and bignesse of this sea: of the Situation and Nature of the same, although Herodotus, Pomponius, Strabo, Pliny, Ouid and Macrobius (that I may say nothing of others) haue spoken much, yet in mine opinion, no man hath done it more exactly and diligently than Ammianus in his 22. booke; whom he that listeth, may adioine to this our discourse: and if he be not satisfied with these, he may to them adde a whole booke, writ∣ten by Arrianus of this sea: together with the large commentaries, of Struckius, vpon the same. As for vs we will content our selues in this place with a few peculiar obseruations of this sea, gleaned heere and there out of the ancient monuments of learned writers of former ages. It is sweet, or at leastwise more sweet than other seas: moreouer, the waters of it are more light than others; and do neuer ebbe and flow, but alwaies keep one and the same stint of run∣ning one way, as Lucrece, Macrobius, Pliny and Ouid do witnesse. Which I take to be the cause that sometime it hath all been frozen ouer. For this I re∣member I haue read, in Ouid, Marcell. Comit. and others, sometime to haue happened. Aristotle in his Problemes writeth, That it is whiter than other seas: (yet the Greekes now call it Maurothalassa, and likewise the Turkes Caradenis, that is, as Lucian doth interpret them both, Mare nigrum, the Blacke sea. Contrariwise mare Aegeum, the Archipelago, or Mediterran sea, the Turkes call Acdeniz, and the vulgar Greekes Aspra thalassa, both signifying as the learned Leunclaw expoundeth them, Mare album, the white sea.) Aelianus in his Varia historia writeth, That it breedeth no tender or soft shelfish, but ve∣ry seldome and those very few. It feedeth no Whales, only certaine small seales, and pretty little dolphins sometimes are heere taken, as Plutarch in his Morals hath left recorded. There is no rauenous creature that praieth vpon fish doth liue in it, beside seales and dolphines, as Pliny writeth. Strabo in the se∣uenth booke of his Geography saith, That there are about 40. riuers, which comming from diuers quarters do vnload themselues into it. Yet we, in this our Mappe, do point at a great many more beside. The cities, vpon the coast of this sea, more famous, are BYZANTIVM, (Constantinople) of which we will say nothing in this place, because we haue before in the mappe of Thrace written of it at large, in respect of the narrownesse of the place which is assigned for such like purposes. Then TOMOS (Tomisuar, as Calcagninus; or Kiouia, as Ciofánus thinketh) famous by the banishment and exile of the noble poet Ouid. BORYSTHENES, otherwise called Olbia and Miletopolis, (Strapenor, a city in Sarmatia Europaea, situate at the mouth of the riuer Bori∣sthenes) of which Dion Prusaeus hath spoken much (that I may omit others) in his 16. oration. DIOSCVRIAS, which was also called Sebastopolis, built, if you will giue any credit to poeticall fables, by the waggoners of Castor and Pollux: it is yet to this day knowen by the name of Sauatopoli or Sauastopoli. This city was in times past so famous, as Pliny telleth out of Timosthenes, that there ordinarily resorted vnto it 300. seuerall nations, speaking so many dif∣ferent languages: so that the Romanes for the dispatch of all matters for their state, did maintaine there 130. interpretours. There are heere many other cities, which were nothing so renowmed, as TRAPEZVS (now vulgarly called TREBIZONDA: of the Turkes, Tarabasson: but of the barbarous nati∣ons neere adioining, as Theuet reporteth, Waccamah: CERASVS (Cherasoda, or as the barbarous people call it, Omidie) PHARNACEA (Platena) A∣MISVS (Amid or Hemid, or as Niger thinketh Simiso) SINOPE (Pordapas, yet the Turkes to this day call it Sinabe) HERACLEA (Aupop, and Penda∣rachia) and oueragainst Constantinople, where we began, is CHALCEDON (Chalcidona, or as the Turkes terme it, Caltitiu) a free city and of great com∣mand in those daies, but now as P. Gyllius saith, it is a small street without any mention of wals. Vpon the West side of this sea, the Thracians did dwell: vpon the South the Asians: as the Bithynians, Galatians and Cappadocians. The Colchi did possesse the Eastern coast. All along generally vpon the North aswell in Europe as Asia, inhabited the Sarmatians and Scythians, distinguished into diuers and sundry nations: amongst these are the Tauroscythi∣ans, (which tooke their name from thence) and their Cherronnesus, or demy-ile, vulgarly knowen by the name of Taurica Cherronnesus, and Scythica Cherronnesus. Appianus nameth it Pontica Cherronnesus, the demy-ile of Pontus: which Pliny writeth, was sometime inuironed round with the sea. For forme and quality it is compared and thought to be much like Peloponnesus. Strabo, from the mouth or relation of others, hath left written, that it was sometime annexed to the maine land by an isthmos, or neckeland of 360. furlongs in length. The country toward Metopon (Frons Arietis the rammes head) is rough, mountainous and much subiect to Northren stormes, cold and violent blasts. Neere to Theodosia, (Caffa or Cofe, as the Turkes write it: a city situate vpon the sea, whose hauen is so capacious and large, that it is able to entertaine an hundred tall shippes at once) it is a good and fertile soile. Athenaeus writeth that bulbi, certaine bolled rootes, which do grow heere of their owne accord, are so sweet and pleasant that they may be eaten raw. In it also is the hill Berosus, where, as Pliny witnesseth, are three wels, of which, whosoeuer drinketh, he dieth without any griefe and without any remedy. Plutarch in Tanais, maketh mention of an oile made in this mountaine Berosus, which the country people do presse out of a certaine plant which they call Halinda. With this oile they annoint themselues, and then being once warme they feele not the cold although it be neuer so bitter. The same authour telleth of the hearb Phryxa, which groweth about Borea antrum, the caue Borea, which if the stepchildren shall haue about them, they shall suf∣fer no wrong at their stepmothers hand. This hearb is colder than Snow: yet as soone as euer the stepmothers shall go about to wrong their sonne in lawes, it presently casteth out flames of fire: and by that meanes they shunne all eminent dangers and causes of feare. Thus far of Cherronnesus Taurica. They which take any pleasure in fables or fictions of poets belonging to this Pontus or spoken of the same, let them haue recourse to Senecan Medra, or the Iphigenia of Euripides, and others that haue written of the voiages of the Argonautes, or the story of Iasons Golden fleece. But before I leaue this sea I thinke it not amisse to put thee in mind what Iosephus writeth in the 11. chapter of his 9. booke of the Antiquity of the Iewes. Hee there saith that Ionas the Prophet being deuoured and swallowed vp of the whale about Issicus finus (Golfo de Atazzo, a bay of the mediterran sea, neere to Issus, a city of Sili∣cia, which now they vulgarly call Atazzo) was after three daies cast vp againe, into this Euxine sea, aliue vnhurt or any way perished. One part of this his relation I will beleeue, if you will beleeue the other. Robertus Constantinus in his supplement of the Latine tongue saith, that Lamia was a fish. Of the fenne MAEOTIS, (Mar delle Sabacche, it is commonly called now a daies: the Italians, of a towne abuttant vpon it, name it Mar della Tana, and Mar bianco, the white sea: of the Scythians it is called Carpaluc: of the Arabians Bohari'lazach, as Baptista Ramusius witnesseth) beside other Geographers, read Polyb. in his 4. booke, and Arist. in the end of his 1. booke, and beginning of the 2. of his Meteor. The length of it is 6000. as Themistius Euphrada writeth. In this sea there are not many ilands, yet these are not all inhabited or manured; and the people which dwell in them do liue very poorly: for they vse the flesh of great fishes, dried in the sunne, and then beaten and stamped to powder, in steed or meale for bread: for as Pomponeus saith, they yeeld no great store of prouision for victuals.
map of the ancient Black Sea area or Pontus Euxinus ΠΟΝΤΟΣ ΕΥΞΕΙΝΟΣ. PONTVS EVXINVS. Aequor Iasonio pulsa∣tum remige primum. Ex conatibus geographi∣cis Abrahami Ortelij. Cum Priuilegio Imp. Reg. et Belgico, Ad decennium. 1590.
THRACE. VNder the name of THRACIA many and diuerse countries with sundry people are comprehended: for except the Indies it is the greatest country of the world as Herodotus doth testifie: for Pliny doth confine it by the riuer Ister, Pontus, Propon∣tis, the Aegean sea, and the riuer Strymon. Yea and Strabo in the first booke of his Geography, according to the opinion of Homer, extendeth it as farre that way as the riuer Peneus, which riuer Ptolemey attributeth to Macedonia. Mar∣cellinus maketh the Scordisci to be a people of this country. Appianus to these conioineth the Illyrians. So also doth Mela vpon the West, who moreouer vpon the South to it doth assigne the mount Athos. Many of the ancient writers likewise doe make the peninsula or demy-iland Pallene, a portion belonging to this country. Yea if one may credit Eratosthenes, the hill Olympus doth part Macedonia from Thrace. And the Epitome of Strabo in his seuenth booke maketh yet a farre other description of the bounds of this region. (For in Strabo himselfe the description of Thracia is wholly missing.) This Epitome, I say, seuereth Thrace from Macedony by the mouth of the riuer Nessus. Yea and indeed in succedent ages the compasse of this country was not much lesse: for Ammianus, Procopius, Sextus Rufus, and the booke of Records (Notiti∣arum) do diuide it into these sixe shires or prouinces; Moesia, the Second or Lower, Scythia, Europa, (peculiarly calling this part by the generall name of that quarter of the world wherein the whole did stand) Rhodopa, Haemimontus, and Thracia, properly and specially so called. Heere hence it is that in Trebellius and Orosius; there is mention made of the THRACIA'S, in the plurall number. Yet this our Mappe is not so farre extended toward the North. For we haue indeed followed the description of Ptolemey in butting and bounding it; who seuereth it from other Northren countries by the mount Haemus. And this true THRACIA we do thinke to haue beene so named of the inchanting Nymph Thraca, as Eustathius out of Athenaeus teacheth vs; hauing been in former times called PERCA: And had beene also sometime, as many do verily thinke, knowne by the names of ARIA, ODRYSA, CRE∣STONIA and SCYTONIA. Iosephus a most graue authour affirmeth, that it was of the Iewes called THYRAS. The abouenamed Ptolemey in it na∣meth these foureteene shires, Dantheletica, Sardica, Vsdicefica, Selletica, Moedica, Drosica, Coeletica, Sapaica, Corpialica, Coenica, Bessica, Bennica, Samaica, and Vrbana. Plinie diuideth it into fifty (or two and fifty, as I remember Dalechampius hath) Regiments, (Strategiae) shirewickes, I thinke, they call them in some places of England, Hundreds, or Wapentakes I would call them. This Thracia, properly so called, Ammianus likeneth vnto the halfe Moone: or, to a Theater, whose higher part is enclosed with high and steep mountaines, which do diuide this same country from Dacia; The lower part openeth toward the Aegean sea. Of the nature and quality of this country, Virgil speaketh on this manner: Terra procul vastis colitur Mauortia campis: A martiall country li'th farre off, vast champions it conteinth: Plutarch teacheth vs that it hath in it many huge fennes and bogges, and that it is diuided or crossed this way and that way by diuerse deep and dangerous riuers. Pliny saith that the soile of Thracia is very fertile for all manner of corne, and commendeth the wheat of the same, for waight and heauinesse: Item, for goodnesse he affirmeth that this kinde of wheat possesseth the third place. Athenaeus testifieth that it beareth some vines, especially about Biblina, which otherwise is called Oesyma. Item, Pliny highly commendeth Vinum Maroneum, the wine of Marogna, or Marolia, as Lewnclawe calleth it. Homer also affirmeth, that the Achiui were wont, by shippe to transport wines from Thace into Grecce. Xenophon writeth, that in the mount Pangeus, there is a gold-mine: and Strabo affirmeth the like to be about Philippi. Heere also is the Thracian stone, which is kindled by the water, and quenched with oile, as Pliny witnesseth. But because no man of all the ancient writers, hath better described this countrie than Pomponius Me∣la, let vs heere him speake: It is, saith he, a countrie that cannot much bragge either of the goodnesse of their soile, or wholesomenesse of their aire: nay indeed, except it be in some place neere the sea coast, it is barren, cold, and verie vnkinde to all things generally that are set, sowne, or laid into the same. It seldome beareth any apple-trees or other fruit-trees: yet vines do heere and there grow in diuers places: but the grapes neuer ripen kindly, or come to any perfection, except in some places where the vine-dressers do, by the leaues, keepe the cold from them. It is a countrey much more kinde to men: yet they are none of the properest: for they are very clownish, vnhandsome and rough hewed fellowes: but otherwise for number and hardinesse (for they are many and those very vn∣ciuill) this nation farre surpasseth others neere adioining. This latter also is auerred by Pausanias who affirmeth it to containe such wonderfull multitudes of men, that, if you shall except France (Gallia) it may for ought that I know, in all likely-hood, for multitude of men be preferred before any countrie in the world. Item, Herodotus saith, that next after the Indies, it is the greatest countrey of the whole earth. Liuy calleth it a desperate and most fierce Nation: and Solinus he saith, that they are a verie stout and hardy people: Sextus Rufus maketh them the most cruell and furious people that euer he saw or heard of: which Florus well expresseth by this example, when he writeth that certaine of them being taken by the Romanes, and giued as the manner of captiises is, did bite the fetters and manacles with their teeth, and so themselues to haue sufficiently punished their owne barbarous cruelty: and that there are of their parents euen from their cradle trained vp to this wild inhumane kinde of life, Sidonius doth teach vs in these words: Excipit hic natos glacies, & matris ab aluo Artus infantum molles nix cimbrica durat. Pectore vixaliter quisquam, sed ab vbere tractus. Plus potat per vulnus equum, sic lacte relicto, Virtutem gens tota bibit. Creuere parumper, Mox pugnam ludunt iaculis: hos suggerit illis. Nutrix plaga iocos: pueri venatibus apti, Lustra feris vacuant. rapto ditata iuuentus, Iura colit gladij. consummatámque senectam Non ferro finire pudet. Tali ordine vitae Ciues Martis agunt. So soone as infant heere is borne, The thing they say is sure, To frost and snow their tender limmes They presently inure. Scarce one of ma∣ny thousands heere, Doth sucke the Nurces teate: Warme blood of warlike horses heere, For most part's infants meat: This diet mak'th them bold and hard. And as they come to growth They learne to tosse the speare and pike: Heere no man liueth in slowth. These are the sports that these men vse: As soone as boies can ride The fallow deere they learne to chase: &c. But to these let vs adde that commendation of them, giuen by the Emperour Iustinian in his Authentica: That is most certaine, saith he, and for a truth confessed of all men, That if any one do but name the countrie of Thracia, by and by together as soone as the word is out of his mouth, there presently entreth into the heart of the stander by, a conceit of manhood and warlike valour fit for all manner of ser∣uice in the field. For these things naturally bred in the bone, and as it were proper qualities peculiar to this country onely. Valerius Maximus highly commen∣deth the valorous wisedome (Animosam sapientiam) of the Thracians. Yet Thucydides saith it was such, as it was the next doore to barbarous crueltie: wheresoeuer the Thracian is secure and thinketh he may safely insult, there he is most bloudy and tyrannous. When it thundereth and lightneth, they shoote their arrowes vp into the aire, threatning euen God himselfe, for that indeed they thinke there is no other God but that whom they adore. These gods, as He∣rodotus writeth. Mars, Bacchus, Diana and Mercury, they worship onely and none other. Yet the same authour in another place nameth Plistorius, for a God proper vnto this nation onely. Ammianus also writeth that these people do worship the gooddesse Bellona. To these their gods, as Eusebius affirmeth, they slew and sacrificed men, before they set forward and attempted to daren battell. In which they vsed, by the report of Liuy, two hand swords of an huge length. Their salades or head peeces were of woolues skins, euery man wearing his dart, and his target with a short dagger or poinyard. Euery man heere thinketh it a gallant thing and very honourable to liue by the warres, and by robbing and spoiling. An idle fellow heere is accounted for a right honest man: and it is a most base and contemptible thing to be an husbandman. Clemens in the seuenth booke of his Stromaton writeth, that these people are of complexion and colour lion tawney, and wanne, or as it were of a skie colour. Homer calleth them Comatos Thraces, Long-locked Thracians: Iulius Pollux, In vertice crinitos, wearing a long-locke vpon the crowne of the head. It was accounted for an honourable thing amongst them to haue their faces full of skarres: and in∣deed Herodotus saith, that it was no disgrace to any man. Yea and Plutarch addeth that they vsed to imprinte markes vpon their wiues faces: which Athe∣naeus in the twelfth booke of his Deipnosophiston iustifieth to be true. Heraclides and Sextus Empiricus do iointly affirme, that euery man vsually had more wiues than one. It is very certaine, that they were great drinkers of wine and sound drunkerds, and that they brewed their wine with hony, we learne out of Pliny. Yet in Pomponius Mela I read that diuerse of them did neuer know what wine meant; but when they meant to be merrie, sitting round about the hearth, certaine seedes were strawen vpon the coales, which cast vp such a smoake or steame, that it made euery man so light-headed and pleasant, as if he had beene cup shot, or had taken a pot or two too much of strongest beere or wine that might be drunke. Athenaeus also writeth that they had heere a kinde of drinke which they called Brytum, made of barly and other kinds of corne. Suidas writeth, that what wine soeuer the pot-companions, in their quaffings and carowsings could not drinke out was presently powred vpon their heads. The same authour reporteth, that they are much delighted to eate garleeke, as being indeeed of it selfe very hot, and their country wherein they dwell very bleake and cold. Iulius Pollux writeth, that they vsed to exchange slaues for salt. Whereupon Sale empti, bought with salt, was spoken prouerbially of bad seruants and such as were taken vp at iade-faire. Item, he affirmeth, that this nation first inuen∣ted a kinde of musicall instrument called Canthorum. But of the manners and behauiour of this people, many other things may be obserued in the reading of those authours which before I haue cited, especially in Herodotus, Athenaeus, Solinus, Pomponius Mela, and Heraclides his Policies. These, although meere Barbarians and vnlearned, yet in this one thing, diuerse of them iudged not amisse, in that they thought and verily beleeued the soule to be immortall: others did thinke that it did die, yet so as that it was in better estate then when it liued. Heereupon it is, that they morned when women were brought in bed, and wept at the birth of their children. An ancient writer affirmeth, that there was a kind of nation of the Thracians that could not reckon further then the number of foure, any greater number they could not remember. Now it remaineth that we should, out of Antigonus, say something of the miracles, and strange things found and obserued in this countrie. In Chalcidis, a prouince heere, there is a place called Cantharoletron; for that any beast that goeth in thither, may come safe and sound out againe: saue only the beast called Cantharus: these neuer come out from thence aliue, but they presently fall a turning
map of ancient Thrace or Thracia THRACIAE VETERIS TYPVS. Ex conatibus Geographicis Abrah Ortelij. LOCA CIRCA BYZANTIVM, INCER∣TAE POSITIONIS. Anaplus, Bathycolpus, Canopus, Casthenes, Chetumesum, Chlidium, Chrysa porta, Colone, Coparia, Crompi, Daphne, Fretum angustum, Hermoeum, Rhesium, Senum portus. Plura preterea sunt apud Dionysium Byzantium quem vide in Gyllij Bosporo. ex quo quum hunc ip∣sum seorsum iconicè delineare cogitabam, experior sine eo comite hoc mihi tam difficile, quam illi com∣mentarijs describere fuit, sine suo Dionysio. THRACIAE ALIQVOT INCOGNITI SITVS, LOCA; Barathrum, quod et Orygma, Berzetia, Caria, Drongilum, Ergisce, Gammaides, Ganiada, Maura, Nice, Onocarsis, Parthenium, Phalesina, Psycterius, Tentyra, Thrasum, Vlucitra: REGIONES, Aezica, Cecropis, Chytropolis, Mocarsus, Petalia, Ze∣rania: VRBES, Abrus nisi sit Aprus, Acragas, Adrane, Aegae, Aegialus, Aegistum, Agessus, Alapta, Alexandria, Ampelus, Amytron, Anastasiopolis, Arne, Bellurus, Benna, Bepara, Beres, Beripara, Bertisum, Bibastus, Bistiros vel Pistiros, Bola odipara, Bona mansio, Borcobe, Borijaros, Bre, Bylazora, Bymazus, Cabessus, Coenurgia, Capturia, Carasyra, Castrozarba, Cissine, Cizya nisi sit Bizya, Cobrys, Cobryle, Cucasbiri, Cursazura, Cusculis, Cycla, Cynoetha, Dalasarda, Daunion murus nisi sit Daonium, Dengium, Denizus, Dorium, Drison, Drys, Elaeoe, Elce, Galepsus, Garmaa, Heliopolis, Hyrcania, Isdicea, Isgipera, Libethrus, Ludice, Lycozia, Mandepsa, Mastira, Myrtion, Mysia, Nipsa, Nysa, Odrysa, Omole, Ozarba, Paroreia, Passa, Petra, Phorunna, Pinsum, Pissyrus, Plysenum, Prastillus, Probatum, Sacisus, Scelenas, Scempsa, Scitaces, Scotusa, Sipte, Sirra, Sozopolis, Spartacus, Strambae, Sudalene, Tamombari, Tharsan∣dala, Therne, Thestorus, Thraces, Tylis, Zeirinia, Zositerpum; GENTES, Banisoe quae et Basanisoe, Bantij, Botioei, Brinci, Bryces, Bybe, Carbilesi et Carbileti, Cerronioe, Cinchropsoses, Cyrmianoe, Darsij, Datylepti, Desili, Diobesi, Disorae, Droi, Drugeri, Eleti, Entribae, Erasinij, Gondrae quae et Cyndrae et Rondaei, Hypselitae, Ligyrij, Maduateni, Mypsaei, Podargi, Priantoe, Pyrogeri, Sabi, Satro centae, Scaeboae, Sindonaei, Trisplae; MONTES, Cissene, Dunax, Edonus, Ganos, Gigemorus, Libethrius, Melamphyllon, Meritus, Mimas, Nerisum, Pindus, Zilmissus; FLVVII, Aristibus, Cebrinus, Cius, Cyndon, Edon, Zorta; VICI, Aliphera, Asae; SINVS Bennicus; NEMVS Abroleua; FONS Inna; CAM∣PVS, Areos pagos. Plura erant his addenda, uti quo{que} in ipsa tabula referenda; ex Zonara, Cedreno, Nicephoro, ceteris{que} Byzantinae historiae graecis scriptorib. at quia hos inter veteres non numero, consulto omisi. Cum Imp. et Belgico privile¦gio decennali. 1585.
round vntill they die. In this countrie is the riuer Cochryna, of whose water if any sheepe do drinke, they bring foorth none but blacke lambes. Between By∣zantium (Constantinople) and the Chersonesus, there is an hill which they call The holy mount, neere to which, the sea oftentimes carieth vpon the top of his waters a kinde of slimy substance called of the Latines, Bitumen. In Agria, a shire of this country, the riuer Pontus, carieth downe in his channell cer∣taine stones much like vnto coales: which being kindled, and water cast vpon them, they burne the better: but being blowne with bellowes, they go quite out. There is no manner of vermine or venemous creatures that can abide the smell of this kinde of siring. Amongst the Cinchropsoses there is a fountaine, of whose water, whosoeuer shall drinke they die immediately. In Botiaea, there groweth a stone, which by the heat or reuerberation of the Sunne beames kindleth, and casteth foorth sparks and flames of fire. Plutarch writeth, that there is a spring not farre from the hill Pangaeus, of whose waters if one fill one and the same vessell, and then weight it, he shall finde it to be twise so heauy in the winter, as it was in the summer. Plutarch (whom Tzetzes calleth, The yonger: another nameth him Parthenicus) reporteth certaine things of the herbe Cythara, the stones Pansilypus and Philadelphi, found in the riuers Ebrus and Strymon: which, because they are more like to fables, than true stories, I do in this place willingly omit. To reckon vp heere the seuerall Nations, Moun∣taines, Riuers or Cities of this country, I thinke it nothing necessary: because they are at one view better to be seene in the Mappe it selfe. Yet of the city By∣zantium (now Constantinople) for that it is sooft mentioned in ancient histories, to say nothing at all, for that we do in some sort hold it an iniury, I thinke it not amisse to write these few lines following, of the description of it. The first founder of BYZANTIVM, which was also in times past called LYGOS, was, as Trogus and Eustathius do thinke, one Pausanias a Captaine of the Spartanes: and that, as Cassiodorus writeth, at such time as Numa Pompilius was king of the Romanes. It was so called of Byzantes, the sonne of Ceroessas, a captaine of the Megareans: whom Eustathius affirmeth, to haue beene the vp∣rightest and most iust man that euer the earth did beare. This city is situate vpon an high cliffe, at the narrowest place of Bosphorus, Thracius (the frith or streights of Constantinople) in a very fertile soile, and vpon a fruitfull and commodious sea (fertili solo & foecundo salo) as Tacitus writeth. In respect of which situation, being strongly fortified by nature, it is thought to be almost inuincible. Whereupon Trebellius Pollio calleth it claustrum Ponticum, The blocke-house of Pontus. Orosius termeth it, Principem gentium, the soueraigne of all Nations; Sextus Rufus, Arcem secundam Romani orbis, The second bulwarke or fortresse of the Romane Empire: Procopius, Arcem Europae & Asiae obicem ponentem, The Castle of Europe, and barre against Asia: Themistocles Euphrada, Magnificentiae officinam, The shop of all manner of brauery and courtlike fashions: and Ouid he calleth it, Vastam gemini maris ianuam, The huge gate of the two seas, to wit, Propontis (Mar di marmora) and Pontus Euxinus (Mar maiore.) For the rampart and wals of it (which Pausanias and both the Dions so highly commend) were so strong that the Athenians vsed in former times, as the same Eustathius writeth, to cary all their goods and treasure thither and there to bestow it, holding it to be a place impregnable and not to be surprized by any enemy whatsoeuer. Of the great felicity of this city you may read many things worth the obseruation in diuerse ancient writers; especially in Polybius, Herodian, Xiphiline, Dion Prusens, and Themistocles Euphrada in his sixth oration: who deemeth the citizens thereof to be most happie men, both for the goodly riuer which passeth by it, temperature of the aire, fertility of the soile wherein it standeth, capacious hauen and creeke of the sea, gorgeous church and stately wals of the same. Heerupon grew that daintinesse, luxury, drunkennesse and wantonnesse of these people: which vices of theirs are noted by Athenaeus in the tenth booke of his Deipnosophiston: and Aelianus in the foureteenth chapter of the third booke of his varia historia. This city, fortune often frowning vpon it, was sometimes possessed of the Spartans or Lacedemonians: after that it was vnder the command of the Athenians. Then shaking off their yoke, it began by a little and a little to chalenge vnto it selfe a kinde of soueraignty and freedome from any forren iurisdiction: which it held for a while, vntill Vespasian the Romane Emperour, subdued it, and reduced it vnto the forme of a prouince. While it thus stoode vnder the command of the Romanes, it was, by Septimius Seuerus, who held on Nigers side, assaulted, battered, raced to the ground, and of a goodly flourishing city, made a poore and beggerly village, and withall was adiudged to belong vn∣to the Perinthij. But Antonius Caracalla, Seuerus his sonne, restored them to their ancient liberties, and was called by the name of ANTONIA, as Eu∣stathius testifieth. Yet for Antonia (that I may note this by the way) an ancient brasse coine, of the Emperour Seuerus which I haue, doth teach vs that it ought to be read Antoninia. For vpon this peece of money was stamped ΑΝΤΟΝΕΙΝΙΑ ΒΥΖΑΝΤΙΩΝ ΣΕΒΑΣΤΑ, that is, An∣toninia the Emperiall city of the Bizantini. But after this it was againe wasted by Gallienus the Emperour, and all the citizens and garrison souldiers thereof slaine and put to the sword. Yet for feare least the Scythians, Getes and other barbarous nations might breake in to the Romane territories on that side, it was againe reedified, repaired and fortified by the same Emperour. But Constantine, worthily in deed and name surnamed the Great, did yet farre more strongly fortifie it: and adorne it with the most goodly temple of Santa Sophia: and moreouer gracing it with many stately ornaments and curious workes of Architecture which he caused to be brought out of Asia, Africa, Europe, yea and from Rome it selfe, and after his owne name by proclamation caused it to be intituled and called by the name of CONSTANTINOPOLIS, that is, Constantines city. Item, he tooke it from the Perinthij, made it a free cor∣poration and endowed it with many large and ample priuiledges. After him, as Themistius Euphrada in his sixth oration testifieth, Theodosius the Great did beautifie it with diuerse gorgeous and costly buildings. Moreouer Iustinian the Emperour, as Procopius an eie-witnesse affirmeth, adorned it with ma∣ny most faire and beautifull workes of curious Architecture. But especially he graced it by that glorious worke of that stately temple of Santa Sophia, which he repaired (being a little before burnt downe, and vtterly defaced by fire) and of it bestowed such cost, that the Emperour himselfe, as Glycas witnesseth, bold∣ly said that in this edifice he had exceeded euen glorious king Salomon, in that his building. Which worke of his, as P. Diaconus writeth of it, did so much excell all other buildings, that in the whole world beside there was not to be found another that might in any respect be compared vnto it. Whereupon Corippus thus speak th of this Church: Iam Solomoniaci sileat descriptio templi, Cedant cunctorum miracula nota locorum. That stately worke of Salomon, great Iudahs glorious king, May now be still and bragge no more: The greatest woonders of the world, may well giue place to this, No eie hath seene the like be∣fore. Consta. Manasses calleth it Orbis ornamentum, The glorie of the world, which he verily beleeueth the very Seraphim themselues did reuerence and adore. But if any one be desirous to know the fashion and modell of this building, let him haue recourse to Procopius his first booke of Edifices. Of this church Paulus Lyrus Florus wrote a treatise in heroike or hexameter verse, as Agathias in his fifth booke testifieth. So that it might seeme that there was nothing more that might be wished for the further beautifying of this city. Sozomen doubted not boldly to affirme, That Constantinople both for multitude of men, and store of wealth and money, by all mens ioint consent, did farre excell euen great Rome it selfe. Moreouer Nazianzen writeth, That Constantinople for beauty and brauerie, did as much excell all other cities of the world beside, as the highest heauens in glory do exceed the lowest elements. Whereupon of some it was graced with these proud titles, VRBS AETERNAE, VRBS REGIA, NOVA & SECVNDA ROMA, The eternall City, The Emperi∣all City; New Rome, and Another Rome. In the praising and tax of the chiefe cities of the Romane Empire, this city, in a Councell there held, was placed in the second degree: but in former times, as Egesippus testifieth, it possessed only the third place. Zosimus writeth, that there is no other city whatsoeuer, whe∣ther you respect the large compasse and circuite of the wals, or great felicity of it euery way, that may iustly be compared vnto it. The buildings of it are so close and neere together and the houses and streets are so pestered and thronged, that whether a man keepe home or walke abroad he shall be so crowded and thrust, that scarcely he might go without danger, by reason of the huge throng of men and infinite of multitude of cattle alwaies passing to and fro in the same. He that desireth to know all the glorious ornaments and woonderfull things worthy of obseruation to be seene in this city, let him read George Cedren his historie of the life of Theodosius the Great. Where he doth not onelie receite them all and reckon them vp curiously, but also he doth most artificially describe them and paint them out in their true colours. This city was taken, in the yeere of Christ 1453. by Mahomet the first of that name, Emperour of the Turkes, who at this daie do yet possesse it. Manie other things pertaining to the beautie and magnificence of this city are to be seene in the booke of Records of both the Empires, and in Procopius his first booke De Aedificijs. Of the originall and famous buildings of this city, read George Codinus: for no man hath handled that argument better than he. But of the later writers, Petrus Gyllius hath most exactly and learnedly described the same. Of the Thracians, this one thing in this place I cannot omit; namely, That in former times they bore a great sway in forren countries, and were great Lords out of their owne natiue soile. For they conquered and had vnder them a great part of Asia, which is situate ouer against them, and caused it after their name to be called THRACIA ASIATICA: yea and toward the South, beyond the bounds of their owne country, vpon the Aegean sea (where Pausanias described THRACIA CARIA) they had long since placed their colonies. This prouince, Porphyrogenneta calleth THRACESIVM. Xenophon doubted not to call this kingdome the greatest of all other between the Ionian sea and Pontus Euxinus. Moreouer Strabo maketh mention, of a certaine nation, dwelling aboue Armenia, which were called Thra∣ces Seraperae. To this Thracia, is annexed a Chersonesus or Neckland, which thereupon was sirnamed THRACIA CHERSONESVS. Suidas cal∣leth it CHERSONESVS HELEESPONTIACA, of the sea Hellespontus, neere neighbour vnto it. It is also named PALLENE of Halicarnasseus and Stephanus, who moreouer addeth, that it was inhabited of the Crusaei. Xenophon saith, it was a most rich soile, and fertile of all manner of things what∣soeuer: and withall affirmeth that in it were eleuen or twelue great and goodly townes. But wee out of all ancient Historians haue much exceeded this number, as the Mappe doth sufficiently approue. This Neckland or Chersonesus belonged sometime to Marcus Agrippa, after whose decease, as Dion reporteth, it fell vnto Augustus Caesar. He that desireth out of ancient writers, a more ample description of Thracia, let him read Wolfangus Lazius his Histories of Greece: Item, the fifth booke of Agathias a Grecian borne. A strange thing it is that William Brussius writeth of this Chersonesus, that by no manner of meanes or diligence vines can be made to grow heere in any great abundance.
GRAECIA, OR HELLAS. THat country which the Latines call GRAECIA, Greece, of the Greekes themselues general∣ly was named HELLAS: yet the out-borders of it are not the same, according to euery mans description and limitation. That was truly and most anciently called Greece, which Ptolemey, Pliny and Mela, name ACHAIA; in which Athens, the first and most flourishing Vniuersity of the World, and most renowmed citie of these parts was seated. Heere Iupi∣ter himselfe, as Athenaeus witnesseth, kept his Court. It is a free city, as Pliny calleth it, and needeth as he saith, no further commendations, so famous and honourable it is, and euer hath been beyond all measure or conceipt of man. Yet it is manifest, not only out of the writers of the common sort of Historiographers, but also euen out of Strabo himselfe, the prince of Geogra∣phers, that many countries are comprehended vnder the name of Graecia or Hellas, as namely, Macedonia, Epirus, Peloponnesus, and those other prouinces and shires, conteined vnder these names: so that all Greece, as it is gene∣rally taken, is on three sides bounded with the Ionian, Aegean (Archipelago) and the Libyan seas: toward the maine land it abutteth vpon those mountaines which do part Macedonia from Thracia, (Romania) Mysia the vpper, (Ser∣uia, Bosna and Bulgaria,) and Dalmatia, (now it is called Sclauonia.) This is that Greece, which, as Manilius saith, is Maxima terra viris, & foecundissima doctis Vrbibus, &c. Renowmed Greece, for warlike men, and schollers deeply learned, doth farre excell— &c. which, (as Cicero writeth in his oration pro Flacco) for honour, renowme, learning, diuers arts and sciences, ciuill policy in time of peace, and feates of armes and martiall chiualrie abroad, hath euer been famous: or, as Tro∣gus Pompeius in his 8. booke saith, was for valour and estimation, Princesse of the World. From hence, as Pliny saith, the bright lusture of all maner of literature and humane learning, first call forth his beames, and enlightned the rest of the world on all sides round about. In this country humanity and letters together with the maner to write and read, how to till the ground and sow corne, was first inuented and practised, as Plinius Caecilius hath left recorded in his epistle written to his friend Maximus: And this is that country, saith he, from whom we had our statutes: that I meane, which receiued not lawes, as those do which are at the command of the conquerour, but willingly and curteously did communi∣cate them, to such as did demand them. MACEDONIA, possesseth the greatest part of Greece. This long since hauing conquered the greatest part of the World, passing through Asia the Lesse, Armenia, Iberia, Albania, Cappa∣docia, Syria, Aegypt, the mountaines Taurus and Caucasus, subdued Bactria, Media, Persia and the rest of those Eastern countries, euen as farre as India; (in this following the steps of Bacchus and Hercules) of which also it became the Empresse, yea thou maist say, if thou wilt, of the whole world, answeareable to that of Manilius, — & Macedum tellus quae vicerat Orbem: — and Macedonia stout which all the world subdued. This is that Macedonia, 72. of whose cities, Paulus Aemilius, a Romane Consull, sacked and sold in one day. Then next after this followeth PELO∣PONNESVS, a peninsula or demy-ile, (not much inferiour for goodnesse of soile, fertility and riches, to no coun∣try vnder heauen) is very like in forme to the leafe of the plane tree. In this standeth binaris Corinthus, the city Corinth, the fortresse, bulwarke and gate of all Greece, situate between two seas in the isthmos, neckeland or narrow place between this prouince and Achaia. Heere also is Lacedaemon (Misithra or Zaconia, as some thinke, but it was in old time called Sparta) reuerend and honoured of all men for the politique gouernment & commonwealth in∣stituted by Lycurgus, for many memorable acts done both at home and abroad. But that the name of Greece did extend it selfe further than before specified, on ech side of the sea, it plainly appeareth out of the records of the best writers: for how great a portion of Italy was in old time called Magna Graecia, Great Greece? A great part also of the maine continent in Asia, beyond the sea ouer against Macedonia, of certaine colonies transported thither and seated there by the Greekes, was named also by this name: whose inhabitants, Plutarch in his Laconica apothegma∣ta, for distinction sake, nameth Graecos Asianos, Asian Greekes. For Lucian in his treatise of Loue, (de Amoribus) wri∣teth, that the insulae Chelidoniae, certaine small ilands, or rocks, as some call them, in the midland sea (they are now called Isole corrente, as Castaldus iudgeth, or Caprose, as Pinetus thinketh:) were the ancient bounds of Greece. Isocrates in his oration intituled Panegyricos, writeth that the Grecians did inhabit from Cnidus, (a town in the prouince of Doris in Asia the Lesser) euen vnto Sinope (a city of Paphlagonia in Asia, situate vpon the Euxine sea, Chalcondylas calleth it Pordapas, the Turkes, as Leunclaw reporteth, Sinabe.) In like maner the Aegean sea (Archipelago) which beateth vpon the coast of Macedonia, and also vpon this forenamed Asia, is called of Thucydides, Plutarch, Arrian and Polyenus, (Hellenice thalassa) of Pliny Graeciense mare, the Greeke sea. Strabo and Pausanias, amongst the rest, haue described Greece, as then it stood, most diligently and curiously. Of Graecia Asiatica, this part of Greece in Asia, the Lesser, which thou seest opposite to Macedonia, read Pausanias in his Achaïa: and Vitruuius in the fourth chap∣ter of his first booke of Architecture.
map of ancient Greece Ελλας. GRAE∣CIA, SO∣PHIA∣NI. Abrahamo Ortelio descriptore. Cum Priuilegio
CYPRVS. THat this iland was sometimes a part of Syria and ioyned to the maine land, Pliny in his Naturall history doth affirme: and that it shall againe be reunited to the same, Apollo hath prophesied, as Strabo in his Geographie hath left recorded. Amongst those ilands of the Midland sea more noted for their greatnesse, this doth possesse the sixth place. In respect of the forme, it is, as Eustathius writeth, compared to a sheeps skin: or, as Hyginus noteth, to a French target. It is longer one way than another, by the iudgement of Strabo; who moreouer addeth, that for excellency and goodnesse of soile, it is inferiour vnto no iland whatsoeuer. Pliny and Mela do testifie, hat in former times nine kings did reigne in it at once. Herodotus sayth, that king Amasis was of all mortall men the first that tooke it, and made it tributary vnto his crowne. It was all ouer somtime so woody and ouergrowen with bushes and trees, that the ground by no meanes might be ploughed and manured: a great part of which although it was dayly spent in the melting, and refining of copper and siluer, (for the iland is very full of mettals) as also for the building of ships; yet notwithstanding for all this they neuer were able vtterly to destroy their huge woods and infinite luxuriousnesse of the same, vntill by proclamation free liberty and licence was giuen and granted to euery man that list, to fell and cary away what wood and timber they pleased: Item, that what ground so euer any man had cleared by stocking vp the bushes and trees, that he should for euer after hold for his owne by a free tenure. The woonderfull fertilitie of this soile Elianus doth be∣wray, when as he writeth, that stagges and hindes do oft times swim hither out of Syria to fill their bellies: so good is the feed of this ile. The manifold variety and plen∣ty of all sorts of commodities here, those words of Ammian in his 14 booke do sufficiently demonstrate vnto vs: when he giueth out, That it needeth no maner of forren helpe of other countries, only of it selfe it is able to build a shippe euen from the very keele to the top saile, to rigge it and send it foorth to sea furnished with all maner of necessaries whatsoeuer. The great riches of this iland, these words of Sextus Rufus do manifestly declare: CYPRVS famous for great wealth, moued the begger∣ly Romans to attempt the same; so that indeed the interest that we haue in that iland, we gat rather by violence, than any right we had vnto it. Florus writeth, That the riches of this iland when it was once wholly subdued did fill the Exchequer of the city of Rome more full, than any other conquest that euer they got wheresoeuer. Carystius lapis, (Caristium, I thinke a kinde of greene marble) a stone of great estimation is found here, as Antigonus writeth: and as Pliny testifi∣eth, the Diamond, Smaragd, Opalus, Crystall, Alume, and a kinde of whetstone, which they call Naxium. The same authour affirmeth, that the Rosen of this iland doth far surpasse that of any other places of the whole world. He also highly commendeth the oiles and vnguents of the same for pleasure and delight, as also their wax and reeds as much for medicines and necessary vse in physicke. Athenaeus extolleth their passing faire doues. Fabulous antiquity did verily beleeue that the goddesse Venus here first came vp out of the sea: for whose honour and memory peraduenture, the women of Cyprus (as the same authour affirmeth) do offer their bodies to be abused of euery man that list. Why it was not lawfull for any Iew to come within the ile of Cyprus, reade Dion in the history of Hadrian. The diuers names of this iland as we haue noted out of sundry authours are these: ACAMANTIS, AEROSA, AMATHVSA, ASPELIA, CERASTIS, CITIDA, COLINIA, CRYPTVS, MACARIA, MEIONIS, and SPHECIA: of which see more particularly in our Geographicall treasury. Of the Cyprians, or people of this i∣land, thou maist reade many things in Herodotus. There are also other three Cyprianiles, called by this name, about this iland, as Pliny teacheth. EVBOEA. THis iland is seuered by so small a frith, (thus Solinus describeth it) from the maine land of Boeotia, that it is hard to say whether it be to be accounted amongst the number of the ilands or not: (Thus some haue thought of the Ile of Wight:) For on that side, which they call Euripus, it is ioined to the continent by a faire bridge, and by the meanes of a very short scaffold one may passe from the firme lana thither on foot: and, as Procopius in his iiij. Aedifi. testifieth, by the laying ouer, or taking away of one rafter or planke, one may go from one to another on foot or by boat as one please. Pliny writeth that it was sometime ioined to Boeotia, but was afterward seuered from it by an earth-quake: and indeed the whole iland is much subiect to earth-quakes, but especially that frith or Euripus which we mentioned a little aboue, as Strabo telleth vs; who moreouer addeth that by that meanes a faire citie, of the same name with the ile, was vtterly sunke and swallowed vp of the sea. Of all the ilands of the Midland sea this in bignesse is held to possesse the fifth place. In diuers authours it is called by diuers and sundry names: as MACRA, and MACRIS, ABANTIAS, ASOPIS, OCHE, ELLOPIA, ARCHIBIVM, &c. Item, CHALCIS, of the chiefe and metropolitan city of the same, situate vpon the forenamed frith. This, I say, was the greatest city and metropolitan of all the whole ile, and was of that power and command, that it sent forth colonies into Macedony, Italy, and Sicilia. In Lalantus, that goodly champion, there are, as Strabo writeth, certaine hot baths, which Pliny calleth Thermas Ellopias, The baths of Hellopia. They are very soueraigne against diuers diseases. Here are, as Strabo reporteth, the riuers Cireus and Nileus, of which the one causeth such sheepe as drinke of it to be white, the other blacke. Pliny doth also highly commend a kinde of greene marble here which they call Carystium, for that it is digged out of a rocke nere the towne Carystus, in the East corner of this ile, where also the marble temple of Apollo is described by Strabo. Copper was first found in this iland: here do growe the woorst firre trees, as Pliny affirmeth; item, here bloweth olympias, a winde proper to this countrey: againe, that the fishes taken in the sea here abouts are so salt, that you would iudge them taken out of pickle. Of the Euripus (where they say Aristotle abode and died) very strange things are tolde by diuers writers; namely that it doth ordinarily ebbe and flowe seuen times in a day, and as many times in the night, and that so violently and high that no windes can preuaile against it, nay and the tallest ships that are, though vnder saile, it driueth to and fro as it listeth. Of all men, Strabo in his tenth booke hath most curiously described this iland. See also what Procopius in his fourth booke de Aedificijs Iustiniani, saith of it. Item, Wolfgangus Lazius, in that his Historie of Greece, hath set out a very large Commentarie of the same. Libanius Sophista, in the life of Demosthenes, writeth, that it had sometime two and twentie cities. Yet we, in this our Mappe, out of sundry writers, aswell Latines as Greeks, haue gathered together and noted downe the names of many more. RHODVS. THe braue and franke RHODVS, was also of the ancient called OPHIVSA, STADIA, TEICHINE, AETHRAEA, CORYMBA, POEESSA, A∣TABYRIA, and TRINACRIA, yea and by diuers other names also, as thou mayest see in our Geographicall treasurie. Pliny giueth out that this ile did rise vp out of the bottome of the sea, hauing beene before all drowned and couered ouer with water: and Ammianus he writeth, that it was sometime bedrenched and sow∣sed with a golden showre of raine: for the fabulous writers do tell that heere it rained gold, when Pallas was borne. Therefore this soile, aboue all other was beloued of Iupiter, the mighty king of gods and men, as the poet saith. In Diodorus Siculus we read that it was beloued of the Sun, and made an iland, by the remouing of the water which before had couered it all ouer: for before this it lay hid in the bowels of the sea, or else was so full of bogs and fennes that it was altogether inhabitable. In memory of which kindnesse of louely Phoebus, that huge Colossus of the Sun, one of the seuen wonders of the world, was vulgarly said to haue beene erected. This, we read, was made by Chares Lindius, Lysippus his scholler, and was at least seuenty cubites high: Festus saith, that it was one hundred and fiue foot high. This image, saith Pliny, within six and fifty yeeres after, was by an earth-quake ouerthrowen and laid along: notwithstanding, as it lay it was a woonderment to the behol∣ders. Few men were able to fathom the thombe of it: and the fingers of it were greater than many large statues. Those parts of it that were by any casualty broken did gape so wide, that they were like vnto the mouths of hideous caues: within it were huge massie stones of great weight, wherewith he ballaced it when it was first set vp. It was finished in the space of twelue yeeres: and the brasse thereof waighed three hundred talents. There are beside in sundrie other places of this city, an hundred less r colosses, yet wheresoeuer any of them were, they did much grace the place. In another place the same authour writeth that, that there were in it aboue three thousand statues. Strabo writeth, that this Colossus, in his time, was by an earth-quake ouerthrowne and lay along, and was broken off at the knees: after which time the Rhodians were by the oracle of Apollo, forbidden to set it vp againe. Of this Earth-quake read Polybius in his fifth booke. The aire is neuer so thicke and cloudy, nor the heauen euer so closely maskt, saith Solinus Polyhistor, but the sunne doth shine in Rhodes. Whereupon Manilius writeth thus of it, Tuquè verè domus Solis, cui tota sacrataes. And thou who truly sacredart, and princely court of glorious Sunne. Pliny and Athenaeus do commend the Wines and Figges of Rhodes aboue those of other countries. Phylostratus in his second booke of Images affirmeth, that the soile of this ile is very good and fertile of Grapes and Figges. Eusebius writeth that the inhabitants and people of this ile, alwaies vpon the sixth day of May, vsed to sacrifice a man vnto their gods. There are some which boldly affirme, that these people were called Colossians, of that famous Colossus, before mentioned. Amongst which are Eustathius, Zonaras and Glycas: as also Suidas, but that he calleth them not Colossenses, but Colassenses, sounding a, the first vowell, not o the fourth, in the second syllable. Others, of whose opinion I am, do rather thinke, that those are called Colossenses, which do inhabite Colostae, (now Chone, as Porphyrogennetas sheweth) a city of Phry∣gia in Asia the lesse, to whom S. Paul wrote his Epistle, not to these Rhodians, as we haue shewed in our Treasury. Diodorus Siculus and Polybius do speake much of Rhodes: but of all men Strabo doth describe it best. Of this iland see the third chapter of the seuenth booke of Aulus Gellius. It had seuen Arsenals or docks whre shippes were built and repaired, as I reade in the fift booke of Polyaenus in Heraclides. Their great store of shipping was a manifest argument of their great strength and power. Of their empire and command which they had in Asia, the maine continent see Liuies 37 and 38 books. Item, of their iurisdiction ouer cer∣t ine ilands in the midland sea, looke Ammians 22. booke. For they had vnder their command all Caria, part of Lycia, Carpathus, and the Calymnae, certaine ilands in the Aegaean or Carpathian sea (Archipelago) as we are giuen to vnderstand out of the one and thirtieth oration of Dion Prusaeus. LESBOS. THis iland of ancient writers was called by diuers and sundry names: as namely, AEGIRA, AETEIOPE, HEMETTE, LASIA, PELASGIA, ISSA, MACARIA, MITYLENA and MYTANIDA. There are some, as Strabo writeth, which do thinke it to haue beene sundred from Ida. The fabu∣lous story of Arion, the excellent musician and lyricall poet, hath made this iland more famous. Of this story thou maist read more at large in Aelianus: Item, Sap∣pho, the poetresse, who, as Pausanias witnesseth, wrote much of Loue, and the temple of Apollo, with the chappell of Lepetymnus (situate in the mount Lepe∣tymnus) as Antigonus writeth, haue likewise made this iland much talked of. In the fables we find recorded, that about Antissa, Orphaeus head was buried: and that the nightingals do heere sing much better, than in other places, Antigonus, out of the authority of Myrsilus, borne in this ile, doth affirme for a certaine truth. Diodorus Siculus writeth, that it was first inhabited of the Pelasgi: then of Macarius, the sonne of Iupiter Cyrenaicus, together with the Iones: after that, of Lesbus, the sonne of Lapithus. Pliny and Athenaeus do affirme it to be a very fertile soile and good for vines; the wine Athenaeus doth so highly commend, that he
map of the ancient islands of Cyprus, Chios, Rhodes, Icaria, Delos, Rineia or Rhenea, Euboea, Samos, Kea, Lesbos, and Lemnos, Greece INSVLAR. ALIQVOT AEGAEI MARIS ANTIQVA DESCRIP. Ex Conatibus geographicis Abrahami Ortelij Antuerpiani. LEMNOS. LESBOS. CIA, et CEOS. SAMVS. EVBOEA, Insula. RHENIA. DELVS. ICARIA. RHODVS. CHIOS. CYPRVS, Insula laeta choris, blandorum et mater amorum. Cypri insulae incognitae positionis LOCA Esmaeus Tyrrhia. GENTES Asphax Otienses. VRBES Acra Acragas Alexandria Alcathi villa Asine Capbalus Cerbia Cinyria Cresium Cyrenia, nisi sit Ceronia Dionia Epidarum Erysthia Gerandrum Lacedaemon Malum Togessus Tembrus Vrania Cum priuilegio decennali. 1584. Psieus flu., et Aous flu. Aoius mons.
saith that it is indeed more like to Ambrosia than meere wine. Pomponius Mela saith it hath fiue goodly townes: but Pliny speaketh of eiht: yet we out of Greeke and Latine authours haue found the names of many more, as thou maist see in the Mappe. This, amongst the iles of the midland sea, famous for their larger compasse and greatnesse, doth possesse the seuenth and last place. In Strabo thou shalt find much of this iland. CHIOS. AThenaeus writeth that this iland is full of thicke woods and ouergrowne with trees and bushes: Item, that the people and inhabitants of the same were of all the Grecians the first that vsed to buy slaues to doe their seruile workes and drudgery. It had a city of the same name, which Thucydides calleth the greatest and richest of all the cities of Ionia. There is nothing in this ile more renowmed, than the wine which they call Chium vinum, the best of all Greeke wiues, as Strabo, Aelianus, and other good authours affirme. The vines whereof this wine is made do especially grow in the fields of Aruisius (Amista, it is now called) about the mount Pelmaeus. whereupon this wine was since called Vinum aruisium, and by addition of one letter Maruisium, of which later we do commonly call it Malmesy. Athenaeus sheweth, that vinum nigrum, the red wine or blacke wine, was first knowne in this ile. It is no lesse famous for the Lentiske tree which yeeldeth Ma∣sticke, that sweet and wholesome gumme. The marble also of this ile is much commended by Pliny: who thinketh, that the quarries of Chios did first shew vnto the world that marble of diuers colours, which they vse in building of wals. Vitruuius describeth a fountaine in this ile, of whose waters if any man shall drinke vna∣wares they presently become starke fooles, bererued of all vnderstanding and reason. That there is heere a kinde of earth called Chia terra, of soueraigne vse in Phy∣sicke, the same authour doth plainly affirme. Eusebius testifieth that in former times the inhabitants were woont vsually to sacrifice a man, cut in pieces as small as flesh to the pot, vnto Omadius Bacchus. This iland was also knowne by other names, as CHIA, AETHALIA, MACRIS, and PITYVSA. Some thing of the history and famous acts of these ilanders thou maist read of in Herodotus: as likewise againe in Strabo. Of Drimacke, a slaue or bond-seruant, a story very well woorth the reading done in this iland, thou maist see in the sixth booke of Athenaeus his Deipnosophiston. LEMNOS. LEMNOS is situate ouer against mount Athos, (Agion oros they now call it: the Italians, Monte santo: the Turks, Manastir:) which, as Statius and Soli∣nus report, doth cast his shadow into the Market-place of Myrina, (now Lemno) a wonderfull thing to tell; seeing that Athos is from this iland at the least 86 miles. This ile is consecrate and sacred to Vulcan: for olde fables do tell, that, being by Iupiter throwen headlong out of heauen, he light in this ile. Tzetzes out of Hellanicus affirmeth, that fire was first found in this iland, as also that armour and warlike weapons were first deuised and made here. Of those foure Labyrinths, fa∣mous all the world ouer, and reckoned vp by Pliny, the third was in this countrey. The surueyers and architects of this worke were Zmilus and Rholus, together with Theodorus, this countrey-man borne. It was made of hewen and polished stones, arched in the top, and vpheld by 140 columnes of more curious and wonderfull worke and greatnesse than the rest: whose bosses in the shop did hang so equally poiz'd, that while they were wrought and turned, one boy alone did strike the laue. Cer∣t ine pi ces and remnants of it did remaine euen vntill Plinies time. This same authour also doth for certeine affirme, that rubrica Lemnia, or, terra Lemnia, a kinde of red earth here found, was of greatest estimation: of whose soueraigne vse in physicke see h m in his history of Nature, as also Galen, the Prince of Physicians, in his book intituled De simplic. Medicam. In the first booke of Apollodorus his Bibliotheca, you may reade a history of the women of this iland. SAMOS. THat this SAMOS was called by diuers names; as PARTHENIA, ANTHEMVS, MELAMPHILVS, CYPARISSIA, IMERASIA, and STE∣PHANE, we haue found in reading of diuers authours, as thou mayst see more at large in our Geographicall treasury. It is an iland fertile and rich of all maner of commodities, wine only except, which here is none of the best, nor in any great quantity: whereupon they do vse to say in a common by-word, That in this iland their hennes giue milke. Athenaeus writeth, that here Figs, Grapes, Peares, Apples, and Roses do ripen twise a yeere: yet we finde recorded in Aelianus, and Heraclides in his Politicks, affirme that it was sometime a forest, full of woods, and wild beasts. Pliny doth speake of Lapis-Samius & Terra Samia, a certaine stone and kind of earth only found in this iland, and doth highly commend their souereigne vertue and physicall vse. Item, he saith that the Samian dishes were of great request at princes tables. Moreouer, he addeth that here also was a Labyrinth, built by Theodorus. But in Samos there is nothing more notable, or maketh it more famous than that Pythagoras was this countreyman borne, Eusebius also in his Chronicles testifieth, that that Sibylla which was surnamed Hierophila, was borne heere. Aelianus writeth, that the Samians vsed to worship a sheepe: and with that stampe to coine their money. Athenaeus commendeth the Peacocks bred here. This fowle, antiquitie did hold to be consecrated to Iuno: and that this iland was greatly esteemed of Iuno, these verses of Virgil doe plainly auouch: Quam Iuno fertur terris magis omnibus vnam, Posthabita coluisse Samo. Thus Englished by M. Thomas Phaër: Which towne aboue all townes to raise was Iuno's great'st de∣light, Forsooke her seat at Samos ile, &c. You shall finde much of Samus in the 12 booke of Athenaeus his Deipnosophiston; in Apuleius his second booke Florid. in Plutarch, in the life of Pericles; and Strabo in the 14 booke of his Geography: out of whom it is not amisse to annex this one history of Polycrates a tyrant of this countrey. This Polycrates, they say, grew so rich and mighty, that beside his command vpon land, he was lord also of the sea: for proofe of which, they report this histo∣rie: that he throwing of set purpose a ring of great value (both for the price of the stone, and curious cutting of the same) into the midst of the sea, within a while after a certaine Fisherman tooke a great fish, which had swallowed it downe, and opening it, found the ring in her belly, so that by that meanes it came to the kings hands a∣gaine. This selfe same story doth Herodotus in his Thalia tell, but much more eloquently and with farre finer termes, as his maner is. DELOS, and RHENIA. DELOS is situate amongst the Cyclades. Pliny writeth, that this ile was farre and neere knowen and talked of by reason of the Temple of Apollo and the great market or faire ordinarily kept there. Pausanias calleth it, The Mart of all Greece; Festus, The greatest mart of all the world; Thucydides termeth it, The Exchequer of Greece; another nameth it, The natiue soile of the gods: for the fabulous tales of Poets haue made the world beleeue that Diana and Apol∣lo were borne here. Of which conceit and opinion of men, it rose, as Tully against Verres writeth, that this iland was held to be consecrated vnto them: and such the authority of holinesse and religion of it both is and alwaies hath beene, that the Persians making warre vpon Greece, in defiance both of God & man, and landing at De∣los with a thousand ships, they neuer once offered to profane or once to touch any thing here. Immediatly after the first deluge or floud in the time of Ogygius, this iland, as we find recorded by Solinus, before all other lands & countries whatsoeuer, receiued the lusture of the sun-beames, & thereupon it obteined that name of DELOS, that is, Apparent, or easily & soone descried. It had also other names giuen to it of other accidents and euents that fall out in the same: as namely, PELASGIA, LAGIA, ORTYGIA, CYNETHVM, CYNTHON, CHLAMIDIA, SCYTHIA, ANAPHE, ASTERIA, &c. (But Asteria was the name of a citie in this ile, which citie was afterward, as Apollodorus and Seruius do testifie, called also Delos.) Pliny nameth it ARTEMITA and CELADVSSA. A∣thenaeus noteth three things here worthy of speciall obseruation; A market wonderfully furnished with all maner of victuall and dainty dishes; The great multitudes of all maner of people dwelling in it; and The infinite number of parasites, smell-feasts or trencher-chaplaines belonging to this god. Pliny writeth of the fountaine or head of the riuer Inopus, that altogether in the same maner, and at the same time it doth ebbe and flowe with Nilus in Egypt, so that the people doe verily beleeue, that it commeth by secret passages vnder the sea from the Nilus vnto them. The same authour maketh mention of certeine rocks of Delos (petrae Deli) where he saith, the fishes by nature are so salt, that one would deeme them to haue beene layd in pickle, and may well be accounted for salt-fish, and yet in the hauen of the same they are fresh. In old time the copper of Delos was held for the best, as we reade in the same authour. In his time, he affirmeth, there was a palme-tree still to be seene, that had stood there euer since Apollo was borne. Pausanias (who liued in the reigne of Hadrian the Emperour) writeth, that in his time this iland was so desert and dis∣peopled, that the gard of the Temple which the Athenians sent thither being remoued, if one should reckon only the Delians, was wholly waste and void of inhabitants: It is wonderfull to see how time doth alter the state of all things. In this iland it was not lawfull, as Strabo and others report, to keepe a dogge, to bury a dead man, or to burne his corps, as then the custome was (Thucydides sayth, that no man might either be borne, or die here.) Therefore the corpses of dead men were from thence conueyed into the next ile called RHENIA, which is a very small iland, waste and wholly desert, distant from hence not aboue foure furlongs. Plutarch sayth that Nicias made a bridge from one to the other. Thucydides in his 1 and 3 booke writeth, that it was taken by Polycrates the tyrant of Samus, annexed by a great long chaine to Delos, and consecrated to Apollo Delius. Antigonus affirmeth, that neither cats nor stags do breed or liue here. Athenaeus describeth a kinde of table that is made in this iland, & therupon it is called Rheniarges. It was by violence of storm rent off from Sicilia, & vtterly drowned, as Lucian in his Marine dialogues, writeth. To these adde that which Seruius hath left written at the third Aeneid. of Virgil. Of Delos read the hymne which Callimachus hath written of this ile. ICARIA. THe tale, death and buriall of Icarus, gaue occasion of the name both to this iland, as also to the sea which beateth vpon it. For long since it was called DOLICHE, ICHTHYOESSA, and MACRIS. Strabo saith that it was desert, yet greene and full of goodly medowes and pastures. The same authour maketh it a colony of the Milesij Notwithstanding Athenaeus commendeth vinum Pramnium, a kind of wine so called of Pramnium, a mountaine in the iland, where the vines wherof it is made did growe. This wine he moreouer affirmeth to be otherwise called Pharmatice. Of the fabulous story of Icarus, reade Ouid, Pausanias, and Arrianus. CIA. THat iland which Ptolemey calleth CIA, Strabo nameth CEVS. Ceus, sayth Pliny, which some of our writers call Cea, the Greeks call HYDRVSSA: It was seuered by tempestuous from Euboea, and was sometimes 500 furlongs in length: but pr sently after, foure fift parts of it, which lay Northward, being deuoured & swallowed vp of the foresayd sea, it hath now only remaining these two townes, Iulis and Carthea: Coressus and Paccessa are lost and perished. Aeschines  his epistles nameth Nereflas for a towne of this iland; but vntruly and falsly, as I thinke. From hence that braue garment so much esteemed of fine dames, came, as Varro testifieth. The first authour and deuiser of this loose gowne, was Pamphila, the daughter of Latous, who is by no meanes to be defrauded of her due commenda∣t ons for this her inuent on, as being the first that taught how to make that kind of thin sarsnet wherewith gentlewomen might couer their bodies, yet so as notwithstand∣ing their beauty and faire faces might easily be discerned thorow. Aelianus in his varia historia, writeth that it was a custome here, that they which are decrepit and very old, do inuite one another, as it were to a solemne banquet, where being crowned they drinke hemlocke ech to other: for that they know in their consciences that they are wholly vnprofitable for any vses or seruices in their countrey, beginning now to dote by reason of their great age.
CRETA, now CANDY. ALthough there be many things which do make this iland famous and much talked of amongst Hi∣storians and Poets, as the comming of Europa: the louers of Pasiphaë and Ariadne: the cruelty and calamity of the Minotaure; the labyrinth and flight of Daedalus: the station and death of Talus: (who thrise in a day, as Agatharcides reporteth, went round about it) yet there is nothing that made it more renowmed than the natiuity, education and tombe of Iupiter. Yet it was also much honoured for the natiuities (if we may beleeue Diodorus Siculus) of many other Gods: as namely of Pluto, Bac∣chus, Pallas and Dictynna, whom some thinke to be Diana: so that one may not vnfitly call this iland, THE CRADLE OF THE GODS. Moreouer, they say, that in the confines of Gnosia, (Cinosa) neere the riuer Therene, the manage of Iupiter, with Iuno was celebrated and kept. The history of Minoes the Law-giuer: and Radamanthus, the seuere Iusticier, hath made it more talked of, than any other ile in this ocean. That it is very full of mountaines and woods, and hath also diuers fertile valleies and champion plaines, Strabo doth sufficiently witnesse. Solinus maketh it to be a country well stored with wild goates. Item, he sheweth that the sheep, especially about Gurtyna) are red and foure horn'd. Pliny calleth it, The natiue soile of the Cypresse tree: for which way soeuer any man shall goe, or wheresoeuer he shall offer to set his foote, especially about mount Ida (Psiloriti) and those which they call, The white hils, except the soile be planted with other trees, this tree sprowth vp, and that not only in any peculiar or made ground, but euery where of it owne accord naturally. Cornelius Celsus speaketh of Aristolochia Cretica. That there is heere no Owle, or any mischieuous and harmefull creature, beside the Phalangium, a kind of perillous Spider, Plutarch, Pl ny, Solinus, AElianus and Antigonius do iointly testifie. Ammianus Marcellinus, in his 30. booke, doth commend the dogges or hounds of this iland for excellent hunters. These Iulius Pollux, in the fifth booke of his Deipnosophiston, diuideth into two kindes, Parippi, (light foot and his kinde) and Diaponi (Toyler, with her whelpes) that is, The one sort excelled for swift∣nesse of foote, the other for painefulnesse and sure hunting. Pausanias, Liuius, Aelian, Xenophon and Ctesias commend the in∣habitants and people of this ile for the best Archers. Plutarch saith, they are a warlike people and very lasciuious: item, deceit∣full, rauenous and couetous: Athenaeus he affirmeth that they be great wine-bibbers, and cunning dancers: S. Paul in his Epistle to Titus, chap. 1. ver. 9. calleth them, by the testimony of Epimenides a poet of their nation, Alwaies liers, euill beasts, and slow bellies. Notwithstanding Plato in his Lawes writeth, that they more regard the sense and true vnderstanding of mat∣ters, than words and quaint termes. Diodorus Siculus reporteth that the ile was first inhabited of the Eteocretae, a people bred and borne there (indigenae) whose King he calleth Creta: yet this king Solinus nameth, the king of the Curetae, and from hence the iland was called CRETA. But if we may beleeue Dociades, whom Plinie citeth, it tooke the name of Creta, a nymph so cal∣led. It was also named CVRETIS, of the Cureti a chiefe nation which did sometime inhabite it: this doth Plinie and Solinus testifie: Item, they affirme that it was before that called AERIA, Item, MACAROS, Blessed; and MACARONNESOS, The bles∣sed ile; of the temperature of the aire: Stephanus calleth it IDAEA and CTHONIA: Item, TELCHIONIA, of the Telchines the in∣habitants, as Gyraldus witnesseth: Item, HECATOMPOLIS, of the hundred cities, which in former times it had, as Plinie, So∣linus and Strabo out of Homer reporteth: who otherwise saith (which Plato iustifieth) that it had only fourescore and tenne. Yet I, in this my mappe, out of the writers in both languages, haue gathered an hundred seuerall names of cities, and more: many of which, for that I knew not their situation and place, I haue set apart by themselues, as certaine other places heere men∣tioned by some authours. Amongst the greater iles of the midland sea, this, as Eustathius testifieth, possesseth the fourth place. In Strabo, Diodorus, Heraclides, in his Commonwealth, and Athenaeus in his Deipnosophiston (beside other) you may read ma∣ny things of this iland. SARDINIA, Now SARDEGNA. OF those seuen ilands of the Midlandsea, more famous and memorable than the rest for their greatnesse, some there are, as Eustathius writeth which make this the third. They which describe countries by their formes and proportions, do liken this to the print of a mans foot: whereupon it was sometime named ICH∣NVSA and SANDALIOTIS: of the Greekes it was called, of Sardon, Hercules his sonne, SARDON; of the Latines, SARDINIA. This, by the testimonie of Pausanias in his Phocica, may be compared to those iles which, either for greatnesse or goodnesse of soile, are most highlie commended. Polybius saith, That for greatnesse, multitude of men, and all manner of excellent fruites, it beareth the bell from other ilands in this sea. AElianus calleth it, The best nurce for cattell: Strabo maketh it, The best soile for corne, where∣upon Florus termeth it, Annonae pignus, a pawne for all maner of prouision. Prudentius writeth, That a nauie, which should bring ouer into Italy the store of graine in Sardinia, would burst all the barnes of Rome. Saluianus nameth this iland, Vitalem vrbis Romae venam, the vitall artery, or veine wherein the life bloud of the citie of Rome doth consist. Sidonius in Pane∣gyrico Maiorani, saith that it is very fertile of siluer. It is an iland verie rich and fertile of siluer, as Pomponius writeth: Item, hee writeth that the soile is much better than the aire: and as it is verie fruitfull, so is it for the most part pestilent and vnwholesome: the which Strabo also confirmeth, where he saith, That in sommer time it is verie dangerous for sickenesses, especially in those places where it is most fertile. To these discommodities, the hearb Sardonia, also may be adioined, which, as Dioscorides, in the foureteenth chapter of his sixth booke, writeth, that if it be eaten troubleth the braine, taketh away a mans memorie, maketh him yawne, and so to die as if he laughed. There is also the Solifuga, (as Pliny calleth it, or Solipungia, as Festus) a little creature, much like to the Spider, vpon which, whosoeuer shall chance to sit, he lightlie shalbe dangerouslie hurt. The Musmo, a beast like to a ramme, which Pliny saith is proper to Corsica, Strabo attributeth to this ile: to whom also AElianus in the foure and thirtith chapter of his sixteenth booke De Animalibus, doth seeme to giue his voice. Suidas saith that heere are bred the best and finest purples. Nonnius Marcellus, by the authority of Varro, in his booke De genere vestimentorum, commendeth the Sar∣dinian tapestrie (except there be a fault in the copie, and for Sardineae, it should be written Sardianis, of Sardis the citie of Asia: which I do rather thinke to be true and more probable: for of the Sardian tapestrie we maie read in Athenaeus and others.) Claudianus in the later end of his treatise De bello Gildonico, doth most finely describe Calaris, (Calari, or Caglire) the chiefe city of the same. Strabo maketh the depth of the sea heere to be M. elles. Other things proper to this ile you maie see in Pausani∣as, Solinus, Eustathius, Claudian and others. This iland of Iustinian in his Code, is reckoned amongst the iles of Africa. CORSICA. THis iland the Grecians called CYRNVS, the Latines CORSICA, of Corsa, a certaine woman so named, as Eustathius thinketh: or rather of the toppes of the craggie mountaines, as Dionysius hath written: For as Stra∣bo saith, it is rough and very vneuen: in many places not passable nor scarce habitable. There is no iland Dionysius saith, more woodie. That it is full of tall trees, very fit for ship timber, Theophrastus, in his fifth booke of the History of Plants, teacheth that the Romanes, out of those woods heeretofore, at one time, cut downe such wonderfull store of timber, that of it they made a flote that was driuen with 50. sailes. Some do thinke that it was called of Ouid, Therapne. The Scholiast of Callimachus saith that in his time it was na∣med TYROS. Beleeue him that list. Pliny, out of Diodorus writeth, That it is very full of Box, and that the Hony heere is bit∣ter; Item, that it hath abundance of Foxes, Conies and wild fowle: but as for Oxen, Goates, Woolues, Hares and Stags, it breedeth not any at all, as Polybius in his 12. booke witnesseth. Procopius, in his 3. booke of the warres of the Gothes, saith
map of ancient Crete CRETA Iouis magni, medio iacet insula ponto. Ex conatibus geographicis Abrahami Ortelij. Incertae positionis locorum nomina. LOCA, Adrasus, Athrona, Corium, Hippocoro∣nium, Onychium, Pergamia, Tripolus. POPVLI, Ceretae, Drÿitae, Lÿcij, Orij. FLVVII, Amnisus, Oaxes, Tethrÿnes, Triton, MONTES, Asterusia, Arbius. Carine, Lasion. Othrÿs, Styracium. STAGNV̄, Coresium. TEMPLV̄, Rocceae Dianae. INSVLAE. Asticla, Naumachos. Ʋrbium Cretae nomina, quorum situs ignoratur. Albae Arcadia, Archidium Asos, Aulon, Axus, Biennus, Boeae, Cantanus, Catrea, Caunus, Chalcetoriū, Clatos, Cytinos, Dulopolis, Drauca Elyrus, Etia, Glamia, Grammium, Hierapolis, Holopyxos, Hydramia, Hattia, Lasio, Istros, Lycastos, Marathusa, Methymna, Miletus, Mycenae, Myrina, Nauphra, Naxus, Oaxus, Olus, Olyssa, Pergamum, Phalanna, Phalannea, Pharoe, Proefus, fortè Prasum, Priesus, Pyloros, Rhaucos, Rhizenia, Rhytium, Satra, quae Eleutherna, Sibyrtus, Strenos, Syia, Syrinthos, Tegea, Therapnae. map of ancient Corsica Loca incoḡita positionis. Alalia Blesino. Carax. Enconiae. Prosidium. Vapanis. map of the ancient islands of the Ionian Sea map of ancient Sardinia Incognitae positionis vocabula Sardonica. VRBES, vel LOCA. Agraule Aradis Biora Carbia Caput Tyrsi Celiem Charmis Cochlearia Elephantaria Fan. Carisy Ferraria For. Traiani Gemellae Ad Herculē Longones Lugudonec Media Metalla Molaria Nafa Othoca Porticenses Sarrapos Sorabile Tharpos Turobolis Ad Turres Ʋiniolae Ad Puluinos POPVLI. Aconites Balari Pellidi Sossitani Diagebres, qui quondam Io: laenses, fortè ijdem cum Iliensibus.
that it breedeth Horses, but so little, that they are not much bigger than sheep: Item, Apes, if one may beleeue him, very like vnto a man in shape and proportion. Liuy, in his 40. booke of his History, hath giuen out, That there hath been heere such maruellous plenty of Hony, that Marcus P narius a Praetor caried out from thence 100000. pounds at once. In bignesse, of all the iles of the midland sea, it chalengeth the third part. That the ilanders are more sauage and inhumane than wild beasts, and to liue by robbing and cutting of throats, we do read in Strabo. That they are very long liuers, Eustathius sheweth, and before him Athenaeus affirmed the same. Martianus Capella, hath giuen vs notice of 33. cities, which this iland sometime had: and the mappe will shew, that I, out of Latine and Greeke writers, haue gathered the names of many more. The student of Geogra∣phy, if he please, may haue a larger description of this iland, in the 5 booke of Diodorus Siculus. Seneca also in his Consolation to Albinus, and likewise againe in his verses, describeth the same. The ILANDS of the IONIAN SEA. THe Ilands of the Ionian sea, of better note, are these, Corcyra, Cephalenia, Zacynthus, Ithaca, Leucadia, and Echi∣nades: of which seuerally take these few lines: CORCYRA (now called Corfu) the natiue soile of Alcinous, as Dionysius saith, was called CERCYRA, as also long since by diuers other names; as PHAEACIA, SCHERIA, DREPA∣NVM, CERAVNIA, ARGOS, MACRIS, and as some thinke CASSIOPE; as thou maist see more particularly in our Geographicall Treasury. This iland grew to such great strength and power, as Eustathius writeth, that it sub∣dued many other ilands and cities, and brought them vnder their command: Item, that it was so strong in ship∣ping, that it alone, in the Persian warre, did set out and furnish threescore shippes. Yet afterward it was brought to that deso∣lation, that of it became this prouerbe, Cercyra est libera, caca vbi volueris; Corfu is emptie now, you may vntrusse where you list. There is another Corcyra, different from this, in the Hadriaticke sea, named otherwise Melaena. CEPHALENIA, otherwise called MELAENA, SAMOS and TAPHOS: as also DVLICHIVM, as some men haue written, by the testimony of Strabo. Eustathius and Tzetzes haue written that it was sometime inhabited of foure sundrie nations; namely, of the Pronij, Samij, Palenses and the Cranij: to these Liuy addeth the Nesiotae. In this iland, if one may trust Aelianus, the Goates drinke not for the space of six moneths together. Looke in the discourse of Zacynthus following. In Antigonus we read, that a cer∣taine riuer runneth through the middest of it, vpon the one side of which there are great store of grasse-hoppers, and on the other side not one. ZACYNTHVS, (now Zante, and as Erythraeus saith, somtime Hierusalem) HYRIA it was in old time called, and CASSIOPA, the poet nameth it Nemorosa, woody. These ilanders, Athenaeus saith, are no good souldiers; the reason he yeeldeth to be, for that they be very wealthy, and haue such plenty of all things, that they giue themselues to nought else but to their ease and plea∣sure. The Phalangium, a kind of spider, is heere more dangerous and hurtfull to mankind, than in any place of the world beside, as AElianus saith. So long as the Etesiae, (East windes which rise ordinarily in the dogge daies) blow, the Goates stand yaw∣ning and gaping with their noses vp into the North: and are so satisfied therewith, that they looke after no water nor euer care for drinke, as Antigonus hath left recorded. That in this iland there is a caue commonly called Coeranium, Plutarch, in his booke of the comparisons of beasts, doth affirme. It hath a fountaine very full of fish: out of which great store of pitch is taken, if we may giue credit to Ctesias. Item, heere F. Desiderius Lignamineus Patauinus writeth that he found this Epitaph of Cicero; M. TVLLI. CICERO. HAVE; God be with thee good Cicero: which he saith was in the yeare 1544. Adamus Tefellenius Louaniensis in his Iournall (a manuscript copy of which M. Hadrian Marselar, lent me to read ouer) writeth, that he in this iland in the yeare of Christ 1550. handled the bones of Cicero, and read vpon his tombe this epitaph: Ille oratorum princeps, & gloria linguae Romanae, iacet hac, cum coniuge Tullius, vrna: Tullius ille, inquam, de se, qui scripserat olim, O fortunatam natam me consule Romam. The learned Tully, who for fined tongue, in Rome had neuer peere, With louing wife, in clay full low, lie both enterred heere: That Tully great, I meane, who of himselfe, sometime thus proudlie said: Now Rome, thou blessed art indeed, since I thy scepter swaied. ITHACA, which was also in old time called NERITIA, of Neritus a mountaine, if I be not deceiued, is now vulgarly of the Italians called Valle di Compare, and as Porcaccius saith, Teachi: of the Turkes, as the learned Lewnclawe writeth, Phiachi. More∣ouer in the 10. booke of Straboes Geography, I find that there is heere a city called Ithaca, which Plutarch in his Greeke Que∣stions nameth, Alalcome, but Stephanus, Alcomenae. Athenaeus writeth, that it hath many hauens, but withall is very mountai∣nous, rough and craggie: so that it will not easily, without great and infinite labour and toile, yeeld any small or meane profit, vnto the husbandmen, as Plutarch telleth vs. In Porphyry, out of the writings of Artimedorus, I read that this iland, from Pa∣normus, an hauen of Cephalina, lieth Eastward, and conteineth in compasse 85. furlongs. It is very narrow, but high. In it is, as the same authour, with Homer doth witnesse, a caue of the Nymphs. We read in Antigonius, that it breedeth no Hares at all. Except it had been the natiue soile, and country where Vlysses was borne, there had no mention at all of it remained in a∣ny recordes of ancient writers. LEVCAS or LEVCADIA (now S. Maura) although Pliny maketh it but a peninsula or demy-ile, yet Mela calleth it flatly an iland. That it was made an iland and was seuered from the maine continent, yet afterward by force and violence of windes ioined to the same againe, Strabo doth teach vs. In a very high foreland or promontory of this ile, AElianus describeth the temple of Apollo Aelius, from whence yearely they were wont to tumble some one or other downe into the sea headlong, thereby to ap∣pease the wrath and fury of their Gods; as Strabo hath left recorded. ECHINADES, (Echidnae, Seneca in his Troas, and Euripides in Iphegenia in Aulide, call them: but Stephanus, Echinae) so named of the great multitude of the Echini, Vrchines or Hedge-hogges, which do greatly infect this iland. Apollodorus calleth them, STROPHADES; now they are knowen by the name of the Cozzulari: they are, as Ouid in the 8. booke of his Metamorphosis wri∣teth, in number 5. these were also part of the continent, as Pausanias in his Arcadia, testifieth; their forme and fashion is often altered and changed by the ebbing and flowing (if I may so speake) of the mudde of the riuer Achelous (Aspri or Pachicolamo) at whose mouth they stand, as Strabo would faine perswade vs. Neere these are the Taphiae and Acutae, otherwise called Thoae. Plutarch in his treatise of the ceassing of oracles, telleth a story (or fable, rather) worth the reading, of the death of Pan, which tell out about these ilands.
AFRICA PROPRIA, AFRICA properly so called. AS that part of Asia which is inclosed with Mar Maiore, Archipelago, Midland sea, and the riuer Euphrates, is of the Geographers properly called Asia: so this part of Africa, aboue all other prouinces of the same, hath alwayes hither∣to beene knowen by the name of AFRICA PROPRIA. This also is worth the obseruation, that in all ancient stories, when Asia or Africa are generally or indefinitly named, these seuerall prouinces of those greater parts, are only to be vnderstood. The bounds of this prouince of Africa on the West are the riuer Ampsaga, and the Mauritania's, the coun∣tries of the Moores, their next neighbours: on the North, lieth the Midland sea: Arae Philenorum, a village betweene it and Cyrenaica, is the vttermost bound of it Eastward: the Inner Libya and the deserts of the same do confine it vpon the South. This countrey was otherwise sometime called ZEVGIS and ZEVGITANA. It comprehendeth with∣in this compasse these three shires, NVMIDIA (named of some MASSYLIA) BYZACIVM and TRIPOLI∣TANA. Diodorus Siculus diuideth this prouince into foure nations, the Poeni, Libophoenices, Libyi, and the Nu∣midae. At such time as the Romans bore a sway here, and Scipio Aemilianus commanded their legions in these parts, this Africa was diuided into two prouinces: that neere Carthage, they called OLDE AFRICA: that which conteined Numidia, NEW AFRI∣CA, as Pliny, Appian and Dion do ioyntly testifie. Numidia, and Byzacium, were vnder the command of the Consuls; that wherein Carthage stood, belonged to the iurisdiction of the Proconsuls, as Sextus Rufus reporteth. (And this diuision they made, as Pliny writeth, by a certaine ditch drawen betweene them.) In the first booke of Iustinians Code, and in the seuen and twentieh title of the same, thou shalt finde another maner of diuision of this countrey, and a farre other maner of gouernment of it by Presidents and Lieutenants. Numidia, beside the great store of Marble there found, called by the name of Numidian marble, and the maruellous plenty of Deere and wilde beasts which it yeeldeth, hath nothing worth the remembrance, as Pliny affirmeth. Liuy, Pliny, and Solinus do giue it the praise for the best horsmen for seruice in the warres, of any countrey whatsoeuer. They doe as highly commend the fat soile of Byzacium; which is such that it yeeldeth an hundred for one: yea, it hath beene knowen, that one bushell of wheat being sowen, hath yeelded at haruest the increase of an hundred and fifty bushels againe. The Lieutenant of this place sent from thence vnto Augustus Caesar, Emperour of Rome, forty eares of corne sprung and growen vp from one root, and one graine, as was probable. Item there were sent likewise to Nero from thence three hundred and forty stalks with eares of corne come vp of one and the some graine. To this also may be adioyned the goodnesse of the soile, which is such, as Columella reporteth of it, that the husbandman, after he hath layd his seed in the ground, from seed-time to haruest, neuer looketh to his fields, nor once medleth with it more, for that searse any weed or other such thing, which vsually hindereth the growth of corne, doth here come vp of it owne accord, except it be either set or sowen by hand. Halicarnasseus also maketh mention of this great fertility of Africa. But Titus the Emperor of Rome, in one word, doth sufficiently declare the woonderfully fruitfulnesse and plenty of all things here, in an Oration of his written vnto the seditious and mutinous Iewes, where he nameth it, Altricem orbis terrarum, The nourse of all nations of the world. Yea and Saluianus in his seuenth booke ter∣meth it, Animam Reipublicae Romanae, The soule of the Romane Common-wealth, or politicke body there; where thou mayst reade many other things worth the obseruation, of the riches, command and power of this countrey. Herodian maketh it a country very fertile of men. Polybius on the other side doth as much commend it for the great abundance of cattell and all sorts of liuing creatures that it breedeth. So that for multitude of Horses, Oxen, Sheepe, and Goats, it doth farre surpasse almost all the rest of the world beside. And that which is most woonderfull of all other, it is no strange thing here (as Columella, out of Dionysius, Mago, and Marcus Varro, telleth vs) to see Mules to breed, and bring forth yoong: so that the inhabitants do as oft see the foales of Mules there, as we do of Mares here. The same authour in the first chapter of his fourth booke sayth that the people are very ingenious and witty. Hirtius calleth it, Gentem insidiosam, A treacherous nation: Maternus nameth it, Gentem subdolam, A wily and crafty people: so that Vlgetius doubted not to say, That for wiles and wealth the Romans were alwayes inferiour to the Africans. Iuuenal the Poet termeth it, Causidi∣corum nuticulam, The nurse of prating petifoggers. Athenaeus recounteth the Carthaginians amongst those nations which delight much in quassing and carowsing, and vse to be often drunke. Saluianus in his seuenth booke De Prouidentia, sayth that they are generally so inhumane, such drunkards, so deceitfull, fraudulent, couetous, treacherous, disloyall, leud, lecherous, and vnchaste, that he that is not such an one, he surely is no Africane. Lastly, there is, as he there addeth, no maner of wickednesse or villany that they are not giuen vnto. All histories do make mention of the vnfaithfulnesse and false-heartednesse of this nation: which indeed is such, and they for the same so greatly noted and famous, that they grew for it into a common by-word among all such nations as had any conuersation or ought to do with them. And thus much of this Africa, a land, as the Poets terme it, most rich for triumphs; the fortresse or castle, as Cicero calleth it, of all Prouinces belonging to the Romane Empire. The Ilands neere adioyning and belonging to this country, more famous and of better note, are, Melita, Menyx, Cosura and Cercina; beside some other lesser ones, and of lesse account: of which, as also the people, ri∣uers, mountaines, townes, and cities, see this our Table. That Sardinia, that goodly iland which lieth ouer against Genua, did sometime belong to this Africa, Iustinian doth testifie in the seuen and twentieth Title of the first booke of his Code. But of CARTHAGE, the chiefe and metropolitane citie of this prouince, although Salust sayth it is better farre to say nothing at all of it, than to speake little: yet notwithstanding I thinke it not amisse to adde somewhat of that also in this place. This city of the Latines was called CARTHAGO, of the Greeks CHARCHEDON. Solinus Polyhistor repor∣teth that it was first called CARTHADA, which word, sayth he, in the Phoenician tongue, (of neere affinity to the Hebrew and Arabicke) signifieth Ciuitatem nouam, The new city. And indeed, truth it is, that  in the Arabicke dialect, and  Kariat hadátha, in the Syrian doth signifie, A new city, or castle. Hereupon it is that Stephanus nameth it , NOVAM VRBEM, The new city. He moreouer calleth it OENVSSA, CACABE, and CADMEIA, but vpon what ground and authority I know not. Cadmeia, peraduenture, it was named of the Hebrew , which in that language (as also in the rest of the orientall tongues deriued from hence) signifieth, the East; or, first and chiefest: both which may well agree to this city: for the first inhabitants, who built it, and enclosed it with an huge wall and ditch, were Easterlings, Cadmonim, or such as came thither from Kedem, the East. Againe, in respect of the greatnesse, power, goodly beauty and lusture of it, it might iustly (and indeed so it did, as we shall shew in that which followeth) deserue the name of Cadmia, that is, the chiefe and principall metropolitane city: and it may be that for the same reason it was also of them called Cacabe, Stellaris, the glistring starre; of  Caucabi, a starre: answerable to Asteria, or Asteris, an iland in the Midlandsea: Asterius the name of a place in the ile Tenedos: Astron, or Astrum, a riuer of Troas, issuing out of the mount Ida, as Pli∣ny testifieth: Item, a great and goodly city of Argia in Peloponnesus: with diuers other places in Greekland, of the like denomination; all deriued from Aster, and Astrum, which in the Greeke tongue signifie A starre. There are many learned men, which do thinke, that in the Holy Scripture this ci∣ty is called and described by the name of THARSIS. And thus much of the ancient names and appellations of this city: for in succedent ages it hath beene called also by diuers others beside these, as we shall shew hereafter. Yea and ancient writers haue graced it with diuers honorable titles and epithites: calling it Celsam and Almam, The Stately and Honourable city Carthage: Apuleius nameth it, Romani imperij aemulam, terrarum orbis aui∣dam; Prouinciae magistram venerabilem; Africae Musam coelestem; Camaenam togatorum; The great enuier of the Romane state, and yet it selfe desiring all the souereignty of the world; The honourable mistresse of the Prouince; The heauenly Muse of Africa; The delight and paradise of the gentry of the land. Of Solinus it is intituled, Alterum post vrbem Romam terrarum decus: Next after the goodly city of Rome the only glory of the world. Of Ptolemey, Manilius & Pliny it is called Magna, The great city. Of Victor Vticensis & Suidas, Maxima orbis terrarum, The greatest city of the whole world. And that not without iust cause: for Orosius testifieth that it was twenty miles about within the walles, almost round enclosed with the sea. The abridgement of Liuy sayth that it was foure and twenty miles about. Strabo maketh it in compasse three hundred and threescore frlongs (stadia) which do make fiue and forty Italian miles. How true this is I leaue to the discretion of the learned Reader to determine: This city was situate in a peninsula, or demy-ile, ioyned to the continent of Africa, by a neckland (Isthmos the Greeks call it) of three miles bredth, or as Appian, the dilignt Chorographer of this place reporteth, 25 furlongs ouer. Siluis Italicus thus writeth of it, Haec caput est, non vlla opibus certauerit auri, Non portu, celsouè situ, non dotibus auri, Vberis, aut agili fabricanda ad tela vigore. The more famous places in it are Megara, a part of the city so called. Byrsa, the castle, which conteined in circuit, as Scruius hath noted, two and twenty furlongs; (in this stood the temples of Iuno, Aescu∣lapius and Belus:) The Theater, Thermae Gargilianae, and Thermae Maximianae, certeine hot bathes: The Delphicum, or temple of Apollo, the chapal dedicated to the goddesse Memoria, the Horse-race (Hippodromus) Basilica Celerinae, the church of Theoprepia, Lypsana a certeine place so called  Via coelestis, Heauen walke; except the copy in this place be faulty and corrupt. In the middest of the city there was a groue, and in it the temple of Iuno, as the famous Poet Virgil hath left recorded: Item, the temple of Elisa, as Siluis Italicus testifieth. What places afterward
map of the ancient coast of North Africa, with inset map of Carthage AFRICAE PROPRIAE TABVLA, In qua, Punica regna uides; Tyrios, et Agenoris vrbem. Illustri ac Amplissimo viro Domino Christophoro ab Assonleville: Equiti aurato: Altevillae domino: Regis Ca∣tholici Consiliario primario. Abrahamus Ortelius dedicabat, lubens merito. EX CONATIBVS GEOGRAPHICIS ABRAHAMI ORTELII. Cum priuilegio Imperiali, Regio, et Bel∣gico, ad decennium. 1590. Sinus Carthaginensis, ipsaeq́ue vr∣bis, atque locorum aliquot vicino∣rum plenior descriptio, LOCA INCOGNITAE POSITIONIS, ex varijs antiquae notae auctorib. Abba, Achris, Adis, Agar, Ale∣le, Bada, Baste, Canthele, Caput∣bada, Cemma, Cilla, Cillaba, De∣cimum, Ethine, Graesa, Her∣mio, Ismuc, Lectum, Locha, Males, Mamma, Marthama, Massilia, Menephessa, Meschela, Miltina, Nargara, Ophe, Oros∣copa, Parthos, Phara, Phellina, Pithecussae, Salera, Sarsura, Sin∣tae, Solis campus, Syllectum, Te∣gea, Tergasa, Thabena, Tholuns, Thon, Tinges, Tisiaus, Tisidium, Tocas, Tricamarum, Tuman, Vazua, Zama, Zella, Zincha, Zona. Ex Augustino, Cypriano, et concilio Carthaginensi, Abarina, Abbir, Accura, Acyrega, Agra, Amac∣cura, Anthypatiana, Asuaga, Avasafa, Audurus, Ausciaga, Auspha, Autumnum, Ballita, Barus, Becena, Begetselita, Bobba, Buslacena, Calama, Capra picta, Carpeta, Cartemita, Casae Medianae, Casae Nigrae, Cen∣turiones, Chullabi, Cibaliana, Colusita, Diaba, Diony∣siana, Eugitana, Fetulae, Foratianum, Formae, Furnae, Galbae castrum, Gazana, Gazanfala, Getabinustum, Girpa, Gor, Gradus, Iacena, Iosiniana, Lemella, Li∣mata, Liniacum, Luperciana, Mactarum, Mar∣cellianum, Mileuis, Midila, Mirita, Migirpa, Muzula, Nice, Obba, Opte, Pambestum, Piste, Rucuna, Rusugonio∣tum, Subulae, Sullestiana, Synica, Tabeae, Tambada, Tarassa, Telepte, Thagabe, Thibarum, Thucabarum, Thygate, Tibina, Timida, Tisigita, Tubunae, Tyzica, Vcrensia, Victoria, Vinianum, Ʋlula, Vnzibilis, Vzalis, Zataria, Ziquensis, Zurinia. Ex Plinio, opidum Aboriense, Abuticense, Acharitanum, Auinense, Melzitanum, Salaphi∣tanum, Theudense, Tigense, Tiphicense, Tiricense, Tuburbis, Tuburnicen∣se, Tunidrumense, Vigense. Ex Libro Notitiar. limes Balensis, Balaritanus, Bazensis, Bubensis, Columnatensis, Madensis, Ma∣mucensis, Sarcitani, Tintiberitani, Varensis. His recentiora, veteris geographiae tabulis non inferimus.
Iustinian the Emperour of Rome builded here and repaired, Procopius in his sixth booke of the buildings of this Emperour, relateth at large. Of him also if we may giue credit to Balsamon, it was called IVSTINIANA. The builders of this city, which layd the first foundations of it, were the Phoeni∣cians Xorus and Carchedon, or, as some other report, Elissa or Dido, King Agenors daughter, fifty yeeres before the ouerthrow of Troy: or three score and twelue yeeres before the building of the city of Rome, as Appianus affirmeth. Siluis Italicus sayth that Teucer was the first that began the foundation of this city. It was built, as Iosephus in his disputation against Appion writeth, in the hundred and fiue and fifty yeere after the death of So∣lomon, the glorious king of Israel. The valour and great strength of this city, as it was alwayes eminent and famous in forren warres abroad, so hath beene often shaken and ouermastered many & sundry times at home. At length hauing stood in flourishing estate, as most authours affirme, seuen hundred and seuen and thirty yeeres, it was by the Romans, as an enuious enemy of their state and empire, assaulted, battered, taken, sacked, vtterly spoiled, and at last consumed to dust and ashes. And thus it continued for the space of one hundred and one yeeres: when by the commandement and prescript of the Se∣nate it was againe reedified, who, sending thither certeine people to inhabit and dwell there, made it a Romane colony: and this was the first colony of the Romans that euer was transported foorth of Italy. It was of Cayus Gracchus called IVNONIA, as it is recorded by Appian, Solinus, and Dion; who also addeth that it was afterward by Augustus Caesar againe the second time made a Colony: because that when Lepidus had wasted a great part of it, and left it destitute and without inhabitants, he in maner seemed to haue dissolued the right and priuiledge of the Colony. Therefore this city began againe to flourish, and vnder the Romane Emperours, to be renowmed vnder the name of The second Carthage. So that that city which lately was re∣nowmed for seats of armes and martiall prowes, was now, as Martianus writeth, as honourable for worldly felicity and all maner of earthly blessings. It tasted also of the beneuolence and bounteous magnificence of the Emperour Hadrian, and thereupon it was of him called HADRIANOPOLIS, that is, Hadrians city, as Spartianus hath left recorded. Item, the Romane Emperour Antoninus Pius did much grace it with many sumptuous and stately buildings as you may reade in Pausanias. Lampridius writeth, that in respect of the fauourable kindnesse of the Emperour Commodus toward this ci∣ty, it was in like maner of him named ALEXANDRIA COMMODIANA TOGATA. But, (as the state of all things vnder the cope of heauen is vnconstant and variable) the same city vnder Gordianus the Emperour, was, as Herodian testifieth, by one Capellianus Lieutenant of Mauritania taken the second time, and spoiled, about six hundred and foure score yeeres after it first had submitted it selfe to the command and iurisdiction of the Ro∣mans. In the reigne of Honorius the Emperour it was by treachery the third time taken, sacked, and vtterly defaced, by Genserichus king of the Wan∣dals, in the foure hundred and thirty yeere after the incarnation of CHRIST our Sauiour. The like it suffered of certeine mutinous souldiers vnder one Salomon a lieutenant of the Maurusij, or Barbary, as Procopius hath recorded. From these it was woon by Belisarius, in the yeere of CHRIST fiue hundred thirty eight, in the time of Iustinian the Romane Emperour, who caused it to be repaired, and fortified with a strong wall and deepe ditch; who moreouer beautified it with many goodly publike buildings, of most curious architecture, as Cloisters, Galleries, the Theodorian Bathes, the gorgeous Church of our Lady, the chiefe Saint, and others which are reckoned vp by the same Procopius. After this it continued vnder the Romans vntill the time of Heraclius the Emperour, when as it was conquered and surprised by the Persians, about the yeere of CHRIST six hundred and sixteene. It was taken, sacked, and spoiled by the Egyptians, three score and six yeeres after that, as Procopius and others do constantly witnesse. Neither was this the last misery of this city: for it being spoiled, rased almost to the ground, layed waste, and left dispeopled and void of inhabitants, by the Mahumetanes; so continued vnto the dayes of one Elmahdi a Bishop, who, as Iohannes Leo Africanus reporteth, gaue it vnto certeine people of that countrey, which were in number so few, that they did not replenish aboue the twentieth part of it. The same authour, an eye witnesse of that which he wrote, affirmeth that of all this greatnesse and glory, beside certeine ruines of the walles and a part of the Conduit, there remaineth at thus day not any whit or mention at all. This now in these our dayes is the fate and forme of this most goodly city. This is that city, which, as Herodian testifieth, in time past for wealth, mul∣titude of people, and greatnesse of circuit, did only yeeld it selfe inferiour to Rome; and with Alexandria of Egypt long contended for the second place. Item, this is it which long since was of that power that it commanded all the sea coast of Africa from Arae Philenorum, all along as far as to the Straights of Gibraltar: ouer which they passing by ship, conquered all Spaine, euen vp as high as the Pyreny mountaines. So that Appian, a graue writer, doth deeme the Empire and command of this city, of equall value to the power of the far-commanding Greeks, or wealth & riches of the braue Persian: which were an easie matter for one to iustify out of Strabo and Pliny, two authours of good credit. For this man affirmeth, that this city commanded in Africa alone three hundred cities; and it selfe conteined seuenty thousand men, dayly inhabitants within the walles of the same. Item, Scipio hauing conque∣red this city, transported from thence vnto Rome foure hundred and seuenty thousand pound weight of siluer. Of this city, (which, as long as it stood out, and was master of it selfe, as Trogus witnesseth, was esteemed as a goddesse; and in Africa, as Saluianus writeth, was accounted as another Rome) there remaineth now no more but the bare name onely. Of the nation of the Africans, from whence they came into this country, and what they were, Pro∣copius, in the eleuenth booke of his History of the Wandals, hath written somewhat worth the obseruation. Of Heauen-walke, (Via coelestis) which we in a word touched before, I thinke it not amisse here in this place to speake somewhat more at large. In Victor Vticensis these words following are read in all copies that euer I saw: Nam & hodiè si qua supersunt, subinde desolantur, sicut in Carthagi∣neo Theatro aedem Memoriae & viam quam Caelestis vocitabant, funditus deleuerunt. For viam, I make no question but the authour did write etiam, that it might be referred to aedem, (or templum, as Iulius Capitolinus in Pertinax, doth call it) that is, a chapell, temple or church. Further∣more, of this Caelestis dea, Heauenly goddesse, as Capitolinus in Macrinus and Trebellius Pollio in Celsus tyrannus, do call her a goddesse peculiar to Africa, there are here and there diuers things to be obserued in diuers authours. Aelianus writeth that the Egyptians doe call Venus, Vrania, that is, Heauenly. Venus caelestis (which is all one) is expressed in an ancient piece of coine which I haue of Iulia Soëmia's. S. Augustine in his booke De ci∣uitate Dei doth speake of the Heauenly Virgine (Virgo caelestis) meaning doubtlesse the Heauenly goddesse: but by that epithite, I suppose, he had a purpose to distinguish her from that other; I meane that wanton, which Iulius Firmicus calleth Venerem virginem. Herodian nameth her Vrania; and addeth moreouer, that of the Phoenicians she is called Astroarche. Alilat, Herodotus sayth she was named, and affirmeth that it is the Moone. S. Hierome in his treatise against Symmachus writeth that the Persians call her Mithra. idque pro diuersitate nominis, non pro numinis varietate; all these different names signifying, as S. Ambrose sayth, one and the same goddesse. Apuleius in the sixth booke of his Golden Asse, witnesseth that all the nations of the East countreys do generally call her Zigia. There is a notable record of this goddesse, this Caelestis Venus, in the eleuenth booke of the same treatise of Apuleius: which he there calleth both by the name of Regina caeli, The Queene of heauen; and Syria dea, the Syrian goddesse. Of whose diuers and manifold forme or shape, the great variety of distinct and different names of the same, if any man be desirous to know more particularly, let him haue recourse to this foresayd authour, as also to Lucians treatise intituled De Dea Syria; to which if he shall adioyne certeine coines of the Emperours, Seuerus and Antoninus his sonne, he shall vnderstand that in this one idoll, almost all the diuinity of the ancient Gentiles is comprehended. Philastrius, who wrote of the heresies of former times, sayth that this goddesse was of certeine hereticall Iewes named Fortuna caeli, Heauenly fortune. I might easily be drawen to beleeue, that this very goddesse is that idoll which Ieremy in the foure and fortieth chapter of his Prophesie, doth terme The Queene of heauen. To whom the wicked Israelites did offer sacrifice, and reuerence as to the immortall God. For it was not hard for this nation, so prone and inclined to idolatry, out of their next neighbour Hierapolis, in Syria, (where Lucian testifieth this goddesse was most religiously worshipped) to transport this idoll into their countrey Palaestina, as the Phoenicians did out of the same Syria conuey her beyond the sea to Carthage: vnder the conduct and leading, as is probable (and which Herodotus iustifieth to be true) of Queene Dido, Agenors daughter. Many other things of this goddesse, out of diuers other authours, might heere to these be adioyned: but we at this time are content, with Plato to demonstrate that there were two Venuses: of which, one, whom the Carthaginians did worship, was this which hitherto we haue spoken of: that same, I meane, which was called Dea Syria, or Venus Assyria, as Oppian in his first booke of Hunting calleth her. This, I do vnderstand out of the sixt booke of Apuleius, was the same that Iuno was, where he termeth her Vecturam leonis, The burden or cariage of the lion: and whom they report, Did loue olde Carthage more than all the world beside: for here her charet alwayes stood, her weapons here did lie; as the Poet writeth of her: whereupon I make no question, the city Carthage was for the same rea∣son also called Iunonia: for so I finde it recorded by Plutarch and Solinus. By her Charet, I vnderstand the Lion, vpon which she rode: by her wea∣pons, the thunderbolt, with the other ensignes of the gods and goddesses, which in those forenamed coines are expressed. Saluianus in his booke De Prouidentia, maketh mention of an Heauenly god (Deus caelestis) an idoll also of the Africans. Vlpianus in like maner, in the Tit. qui haeredes institui possunt, § deo haeredis, speaketh of Caelestis deus Salinensis Carthaginensis. But this is nothing to this our goddesse. And peraduenture, we, purposedly speaking of Geography, haue sayd too much of this goddesse.
AEGYPT. AEgypt is the gift and fauour of Nilus: For antiquity did verily thinke that all that whole tract, which now this countrey doth possesse, was sometime a creeke or bay of the Midland sea; and by the oft ouerflowing and tides of the same, was at length filled vp, and so made firme land. Whereupon perchance it was of Stephanus called POTAMITIS, that is, if I may so speake, Brook-land or Creek-land. Item, the same Stephanus, with Dionysius, calleth it by diuers other names; as, AERIA, AETIA, OGYGIA, HEPHAESTIA, and MELAMBOLOS. Apollodorus calleth it The coun∣trey of the MELAMPODES, for that it is farre more fertile than any other countrey whatsoeuer. Item the fornamed Stephanus and Eustathius do call it AETHIOPIA, by reason of the Aethiopians which do inhabit and dwell there. It was also sometime long since called THEBAE, as Herodotus and Aristotle do testifie. In Holy writ, of Misraim the second sonne of Ham, (Gen. 10.6.) who first after the confusion at Babel, seated himselfe here, it is named MESRAIM, as Io∣sephus writeth: by which name it is still to this day knowen to the Arabians, their next neighbours round about them. Item, as the learned Arias Montanus thinketh, it is in some places called CVS, or Chus, of Chus, father of the Aethiopians, eldest sonne to the sayd Ham. Againe, Plutarch in Osiris writeth, that in the sacred writings of the Aegyptians it was named CHEMIA, of Ham, or Cham, (for thus diuersly forren writers expresse the Hebrue let er Hheth, nay sometimes they wholly omit it: as in Ammon, their chiefe god, which they worshipped, deriued, as I thinke, from that cursed root) sonne to Noë, and father of the aboue-mentioned Chus, and Misraim. And indeed Isidorus saith that the inhabitants do, to this day, in their owne language, call this countrey Kam. Yet Pinetus and Marmolius do iointly affirme (and that truely, as we haue before in the other Mappe of Aegypt demonstrated) that the Aegyptians themselues, as also the Turks, do commonly call it  Elquibet, Elchi∣betz, and Chibth. Lastly, Honorius writeth that it was sometime intituled EVXAEA, but vpon what authority or ground, I know not: let him therefore iustifie the trueth of that his assertion. The bounds of this prouince are these: vpon the East it is confined with the Arabian gulfe (Bahri'lkolzom, the Red Sea) Iudaea, and Arabia Petraea: on the West with the mountaines of Libya, and Marmarica (Barca) another countrey of Africa: in the South it is seuered from Aethiopia, (which they terme Aethiopia beneath Aegypt) by the Greater Cataract or fall of Nilus (Catadupa, Tully, in Scipio's dreame, calleth it, A place where the riuer is so penned vp betweene two mountaines, that there it runneth not, but rather falleth and powreth downe amaine with such an huge and terrible noise, that some report that the people, nere inhabitants thereabout, naturally, by that meanes, are all deafe or very thicke of hearing.) The Mediterranean or Mid∣land sea, or, if you like better of that, the Egyptian sea (so named of this countrey) doth beat vpon the North coast of it. It is diuided into The Higher E∣gypt, Middle Egypt, and Lower Egypt. THE HIGHER EGYPT was also otherwise called Thebais: (Auicenna in the 47. chapter of the 2. tract of his 2. booke, (and in diuers other places often) with Nubiensis my Arabian, calleth it  Alsahid, or Said, of the theam Saada, as I thinke, which signifieth to ascend or rise vp in height.) MIDDLE EGYPT, sometimes called Heptapolis, and Heptanomia, (of the number of the Nomoi, or shires of this part) and of some, Arcadia. THE LOWER EGYPT, which later authours haue named Augustamnica, is diuided, in the Nouella of Iu∣stinian, into The first, and The second. The booke of Remembrances (liber Notitiarum) diuideth Egypt into six prouinces: namely, Libya the vpper, Libya the Neather, Thebais, Aegypt (properly so called) Archadia and Augustamnica. That part of the Lower Egypt which is enclosed betweene the sea, the two mouthes or floud-gates of the riuer Nilus, Heracleoticum and Pelusiacum, and from their parting a little beneath Memphis in the South, is of all ancient Geographers, Historians and Poets, in respect of the forme and proportion of it, called DELTA: for it is, as you see, of forme triangular like vnto Δ, the fourth capitall letter of the Greeke alphabet. And this also of Ptolemey (who was borne here, and therefore knew the state of it best) diuided into Great Delta, Little Delta, and Middle Delta, or the Third Delta. This Delta, as Pliny testifieth, of all the chiefe parts of the world was somtime accounted the Fourth, and reckened vp amongst the ilands, and was not esteemed as any portion of the continent. Vnder Egypt also, the three OSITAE, beyond the Libyan mountaines, are vulgarly comprehended: yea and LIBYA it selfe to, if a man may giue credit to Ammianus. This countrey is watered with no other riuer than NILVS, of all the riuers in the world the most famous and renowmed, and therefore called & knowen by the greatest variety of names: for the ancients haue giuen this riuer many titles: Some haue called it AEGYPTVS (from whence the whole country tooke the name); others OCEANVS (the sea, in respect of the greatnesse of it); AETOS (an eagle, for the swiftnesse of the streame); NIGIR, MELAS, (or Melo) SIRIS, TRITON, CHRYSORRHOAS (Gilden-flood, of the goodnesse and beauty of his waters); and others, DYRIS. Orus Apollo writeth, that the Egyptians in their language called it NOYVM, that is, as I thinke,  sweet, pleasant, delightfull: for so the impostor Mahomet v∣seth this word in the xxxij. Azoara of his wicked Alcoran; as also the Arabian paraphrast, 2. Pet. 2.13. And R. Saadias Hagaon, Gen 2.15. calleth Pa∣radise, Phardusi'nnaym; which the forenamed beast, at the 66. Azoara, nameth Ginnati'nnaym, The pleasant garden. Iosephus calleth it GEON, or Ginon, for that, as R. Salomon Yarhi the great Rabbine thinketh, it runneth from his fountaine, or rather rusheth on with great violence and hideous noise: Arias Montanus affirmeth, that in the Holy Scripture it is named PHISON, because, as the forenamed Iew sayth, his waters do spread themselues, swell, and wax so high, that they flow ouer the banks, and water the whole land: And SIHOR, that is, blacke, or troubled, for that the waters of the same, issuing from a durty fenne, with great violence oft breaking ouer into the medowes and marsh grounds, by which it coasteth along for many hundred miles to∣gether, are thicke and muddy. The Georgians call it MAHARA, that is, swift, or violent: item, BAHARI'NNIL, the sea of Nilus. The Africanes, as Marmolius writeth, commonly call it NIL, that is, in my iudgement  Nehil, or Neil, of the theame Nahal, which in the Arabian dialect signi∣fieth to be liquid, thinne, dissolued and apt to runne: from whence in the Hebrew tongue is deriued Náhal, a streame, or swift water course. And this opini∣on of mine Pomponius Mela the worthy Geographer doth seeme to patronage, where he writeth, that In horum finibus fons est, quem Nili esse aliqui∣bus credibile est, Nuchul ab incolis dicitur, & videri potest non alio nomine appellari, sed à barbaro ore corruptius, &c. In the confines of Ethi∣opia there is a spring, which some do verily thinke to be the head of Nilus, Nuchyl the inhabitants and countrey people do call it; and it may seeme probable that they name it by no other name, only the barbarous word is corrupted and otherwise pronounced of forreners, &c. The Abassines, Ethiopians and other nations inhabiting neere vnto it, do call it by diuers and sundry other names, as thou mayest see more at large in our Geographicall treasury. It vnladeth it selfe, as most men thinke, and all antiquity hath constantly affirmed, into the Midland sea by seuen mouthes or very great floudgates. Ptolemey in his time made mention of nine, but of them, two were false gates (pseudostomata, he termeth them) then almost quite stopped vp. Pliny speaketh of eleuen, of which foure were false gates, the other seuen were great and more renowmed. Herodotus also mentioneth two false gates, but in all he speaketh not of more than seuen: with him Eustathius word for word agreeth. And that which of these mouthes or falles are of this man held for a trueth, in others are held for false and contrariwise. The like difference there is about the names and proper appellations of these mouthes, euen in the best approoued authours. Pliny ma∣keth Heracleoticum to be a diuers and distinct mouth from Canopicum: in which notwithstanding, it seemeth, he is much deceiued: yea and Diodo∣rus Siculus doth flatly deny it, affirming that Canopicum is otherwise named Herculeum, or Heracleoticum. All this difference about the names, number, and nature of these mouthes, if I mistake not the matter, arose in continuance of time, from the change and alteration of places. For euery man de∣scribeth them according to the situation of the sea coast, as it then was in that time wherein he liued, which by violence of tide and inundatious, drifts of sand and shifting of the same backe againe, in processe of time haue sometime one forme, somtime another, as is very likely, and they do very well know which dwell neere to the sea; who do neuer wonder to see riuers change their channels and leaue their ancient course: to see their mouthes sometime to be quite dette vp with sand, and to seeke new issues and channels, where neuer none were before: or to see them which in former times were not nauigable, but full of flats and shelfs, afterward to become deepe and able to entertaine ships of good burden. Galen sayth, that this riuer, for goodnesse of water, hath but few peeres. A∣rethaeus the Cappadotian sayth that the water is thicke: Plutarch in the eighth booke of his Conuiual. calleth it turbidam troubled, and muddy: Statius in his fourth booke Amor. sayth that it is sweet, and coole without any vnpleasantnesse in taste: and therefore he addeth in the same place that the Egyptians do neuer feare any want or dearth of wine. Diodorus Siculus sayth, that for sweetnesse it doth surpasse all other riuers in the whole world beside: which opinion of his, Pescennius Niger, an Emperor, did long since auouch to be true, when he thus answered his garrison souldiers, demanding wine of him, Haue ye Nilus, and yet do ye demand wine? A description of this riuer thou maist see in Claudian. Of his inundation and ouerflowing euery yere, beside others, reade Stra∣bo, and the Panegyricke oration pronounced before Traian Emperour of Rome. Item Achilles Statius and Heliodorus. He that listeth and hath more vacant time, to these may adde Plutarch, in his treatise of mountaines. Mountaines of Egypt, beside those which Ptolemey mentioneth; namely, Mon∣tes Libyci, Troicus, Alabastrinus, Porphyritis, Smaragdus, Aiaces, Acabes, Niger, Basanites, and Pentadactylus, are diuers, as Nitria, Pherme, Sinopius, Climax, Eos, Lacmon, Crophi, and Mophi. They haue many Fennes, yet these two only, Moeris and Maria, are of name. Ancient writers haue diuided this countrey into many Nomous, (Pliny expoundeth it Shires or Counties, ech hauing a Shiriffe or Lieutenant ouer it) of which Herodotus mentioneth but 18. Diodorus Siculus sayth that there were of them 36. and Ptolemcy speaketh of 46. and reckoneth them vp all by their seuerall names: and so many or more Pliny telleth vs of. Strabo writeth of 36. and thus generally pointeth them out: Thebais, saith he, conteined 10. Delta as many: and Middle Egypt 16. But we out of all sorts of olde writers haue found aboue 60. decyphered by their seuerall names and situation, and haue brought them within the compasse of this Mappe. But with Pliny we find by experience, that the names of them oft times are changed, and one place put for another: of which we haue spoken more fully in our Geographicall treasurie. Eusebius writeth that in this one countrey there were more cities, than in all the whole world beside. Egypt, beside their brag of great antiquity, boasteth, that in the time of Amasis their king, it had 20000. cities: and now it hath very many, as Pliny sayth, although they be but small and of no great account. Of these, there stood but 3000. vnto Diodorus Siculus his time. We, although
map of ancient Egypt with inset map of Alexandria AEGYPTVS ANTIQVA. Terra suis contenta bo∣nis, non indiga mercis Aut Iouis, in solo tanta est fiducia Nilo. Lucanus 8. INCERTAE POSITIO∣NIS LOCA: Amythaonia, Apeliotes, Athos, Cephro, Cessan, Colluthium, Cusi, Elysius, Eurychorian, Focis, Litrae, Melite, Metole, Metopium, Nelupa, Pyrae, Taeniotis, Te∣vochis, Tityus, REGIONES; Dulopolis, Pentapolis, NOMI; Anthites, Anytios, Aphthala, Bathrithites, Crambetites, Croites, Omnites, Phanturites, Ptenethu, Sebrithites, Thermopolites. VRBES; Abotis, Achoris, Anthiti, Anysis, Arcadia, Arieldela, Arype, Asphinum, Atharrabis, Auaris, Bosirara, Bucaltum, Burgus Seueri, Byblos, Calamona, Cassanoros, Chiris, Chortaso, Cos, Cotenopolis, Crambutis, Crialon, Cros, Cyrtus, Flagoniton, Gavei, Gazulena, Helos, Isidis opidum, Juliopolis, Iustiniana II. nova, Maximianopolis, Mucerinae, Muson, Mylon, Naithum, Narmunthum, Nupheum, Oniabates, Paprinus, Paremphis, Pasteris, Ptemengyris, Pempte, Philadelphia, Pinamus, Paebebis, Polis, Precteum, Praesentia, Proxenupolis, Psinaphus, Psinaula, Psoc∣hemnis, Python, Sadalis, Sampsira, Sargantis, Scenae, Sella, Senos, Sosteum, Spania, Syis, Terenuthis, Thamana, Theodosiana, Ticelia, Tindum, Tisis, Titana, Tohum, Toicena, Trichis, Tyana, Vantena, VICI; Anabis Daphnusium Diochites, Nibis, Phoenix, Psenerus, Psentris, Psinectabis, Psittachemnis. MONS; Laemon, FLVVIVS; Phaedrus. INSVLAE; Hiera, Nichocis. Horum vocabulorum, et ceterorum que in ipsa tabula describuntur, testimonia et auctoritates veterum, videre sunt in nostro Thesauro Geographico. Ex conatibus geo∣graphicis Abraha∣mi Ortelij. cum Priuilegio decennali. 1595.
we haue most diligently sought the names of them out of all maner of writings and monuments of antiquity, yet we could not finde mention of many more than 300. as this Mappe doth giue thee to vnderstand. Thus mighty Ioue doth sport himselfe in earthly things. The Mappe doth shew the situation of this countrey, and therefore I shall not need to speake ought of that. What the great fertility and richnesse of soile of this prouince was, that worthy commendation vulgarly spoken of it, wherein it is sayd to be, The common barne of all the world, doth sufficiently shew. For, although it neuer raineth here, yet it breedeth great plenty of men and beasts, with all maner of cattell whatsoeuer. But this indeed their riuer Nilus, by his inundation euery yeere, bringeth to passe: wherupon, as the poet Lucan writeth, this is Terra suis contenta bonis, non indiga mercis, Aut Iouis: in solo tanta est fiducia Nilo: A land that of it selfe is rich enough, It need'th no forren aid, Ioues helpe it scorn'th: so much it stand'th, vpon the bounty of the Nile. Yea they were woont proudly to vaunt, as Pliny testifieth, that they caried in their hands the dearth or plenty of the Romans those mighty conquerours. The riches and wealth of this countrey one may easily esteeme, by that of Diodorus, who writeth that the Kings of Egypt vsed yerely to haue, of Alexandria only, a Subsidie of aboue twelue thousand ta∣lents; item, out of Strabo, in whom I reade that Auletes, father to Cleopatra, leuied yeerely in Egypt a Subsidie of twelue thousand and fiue hundred talents (which doth amount, according to Budey his estimation, to seuenty fiue hundred thousand French crownes:) and that, as he there addeth, vnder a very loose and bad kinde of gouernment. Eusebius in his second booke de Praepar. Euang. reporteth that Osiris their king did erect and make, for Iupiter and Iuno his parents, and for other gods, temples and shrines of beaten gold and siluer: a maruellous shew of their woonderfull wealth and riches Of the golde-mines of this countrey Agathar∣cides hath written something. But so many endlesse and immortall works yet extant, hauing hitherto euen to this day abode all assaults and iniury of time, do suffici∣ently shew what their great command and power in former times hath beene; as namely, are those huge Pyramides, so many Obelisks of solid marble of one whole stone of such woonderfull height, Colosses, Sphinges, Statues, and Labyrinths: so many gorgeous Temples, of which this one countrey could shew more than all o∣ther countreys beside whatsoeuer, as Herodotus, who himselfe was an eye-witnesse of the same, doth plainly affirme. The infinite number of people and inhabitants (which Philo, in his booke of Circumcision, ascribeth vnto it) gather out of Iosephus and Egesippus, who writeth, that beside the citizens of Alexandria (which as Diodorus testifieth, were three hundred thousand free men) there were seuenteene hundred and fifty thousand enrolled and made free-denisons of Rome at once. It is a very prudent and wise nation, as we may vnderstand by diuers histories; very ingenious in the finding out of any maner of artes and sciences: very quicke of conceit in the search of any inuention whatsoeuer, as Aulus Gellius hath left recorded. They are fit and able to attaine to the vnderstanding of all maner of diuine knowledge, as Macrobius affirmeth; who also calleth Egypt, The mother of all artes. But Trebellius Pollio, in the life of Aemilianus the Tyrant, sayth that it is a furious and outragious nation, easily mooued to sedition, tumults and rebellion vpon euery light occasion. And Quintus Curtius sayth that they are a light hea∣ded and giddy brained people, more fit to set matters abroach, than to follow them wisely, when they are once afoot. Hadrianus the Emperour, as Flauius Vopiscus in the life of Saturninus reporteth, calleth it, Gentem leuem, pendulam, & ad omnia famae monimenta volitantem: A light and vnconstant nation, hanging as it were by a twin'd thread, and mooued at the least blast and puffe of newes that might stirre. Seneca to Albina calleth it Infidam, A faithlesse nation. Vento∣sam & insolentem. A bragging, proud and insolent nation. Pliny, in his Panegyricke to Traian the Emperour, termeth them: Nequitias tellus scit dare nulla magis: No countrey in the world I am sure, More vilder knaues did ere endure, sayth the Poet Martiall. Philo in his booke of Husbandry sayth that they haue Innatam & insignem iactantiam, that is, that, they it bred in the bone that an Egyptian should be a famous bragger. Yet he sayth that they are withall wise and in∣genious. Apuleius termeth them Eruditos, Learned Egyptians: and Themistius Euphrada, Sapientissimos homines, Very wise and cunning fellowes. Philo∣stratus sayth, that they be much giuen to Theology and study of heauenly things. Strabo hath left recorded, that they were no warlike people. Of famous knaues they possessed the middle ranke, according to that olde prouerbe, Lydimali, secundi Aegyptij, tertij Cares. The Lydians are the great knaues, The Egyptians meane knaues be, The clownish hobs of Caria are The least knaues of the three: as Eustathius vpon Dionysius Afer reporteth. Of the customes and maner of life of this nation, Porphyrius speaketh much in his fourth booke, intituled, Of abstinence from flesh meats. The most famous cities, which we haue read of in the ancient writers of both languages, are these: First, ALEXANDRIA, which Athenaeus nameth The beautifull and golden citie: the Councell of Chalcedon, The great citie: Marcelline, The head of all cities in the world: Eunapius, Another world. Dion Prusaeus sayth, that it is the second citie of all that are vnder the cope of heauen. The chiefe temple heere called Sebasteum (or Augusteum, that is, Princely, or, Emperiall) hath no peere. This thou mayst see described by Philo Iu∣daeus in his booke De vita contemplatiua. The Serapium, another stately building in this citie, so adorned and beautified with diuers goodly galleries, many gor∣geous and lofty columnes and pillars, set out with most liuely imagery, and diuers and sundry other rare works and deuices, the best that the most excellent Architects of the world might inuent, that next after the Capitoll, of which reuerend Rome doth so much glory, the whole world it selfe hath neuer seene ought more rich and sumptuous, at Ammianus Marcellinus writeth of it. Strabo in the seuenteenth booke of his Geography, doth most brauely describe the whole citie. The like doth Statius Alexandrinus in his fifth booke of Loue: and Diodorus Siculus in the 17 booke of his history. Item, Hirtius in his booke De bello Alexandrino. THE∣BAE was the next citie of great note, famous for the multitude of gates that sometimes it had: and thereupon it was otherwise called Hecatompylos, Hundred-gate; and Diospolis, Gods-towne: item, Busyris: and Thebestis, as S. Hierome affirmeth. MEMPHIS, an ancient towne, renowmed by reason that their kings ordi∣narily kept their Court here, was accounted one of the greatest cities of this kingdome. COPTOS, a great Mart-towne, well frequented with Arabian and Indian merchants. Of this city the whole prouince tooke the name, as we haue elswhere shewed before. ABYDVS, the Court and Emperiall seat of Memnon their king, fa∣mous for the temple of Osiris. I omit SYENE with diuers others: for it were more than needeth here to recken them vp all; because they offer themselues at an in∣stant, to him that shall but cast his eye on the Map. Besides that, Herodotus, Diodorus, Pliny, Iosephus, Marcellinus, Philostratus, Eusebius, and diuers other good authours, yet extant, and in many mens hands, haue most eloquently and diligently described them, and set them out in their true and liuely colours. The situation of this countrey, the riuers, mountaines, cities and strange things there to be seene, we haue already described, according as the capacity of the place assigned, would permit. Now it remaineth that with like breuity also we do, out of Diodorus, Herodotus, Strabo, Athenaeus, Aelianus, Plutarch, Philo, Euse∣bius, Pliny, Heliodorus, Lucian, Ammian, Clemens, Athanasius, Prudentius, and others, speake something of their religion. Eusebius in his first booke De Praepar. Euang. teacheth me, that the Egyptians were the first men, that euer honoured the Sunne, Moone and the rest of the Starres, for immortall Gods. But not only the Holy scripture, but euen profane authours also doe plentifully testifie that they were euer from the beginning the vainest men of the world, and in this their di∣uine seruice, and choice of gods, of all other most fond and foolish: for beside the gods of the Gentiles, as Iupiter, Iuno, Vulcane, Venus, Bacchus, and such others, which they had and worshipped common with all the world, (yet by their seuerall and different names, as Isis, Osiris, &c.) they moreouer, as Artemidorus and Ci∣cero in the third booke of the Nature of gods do testifie, consecrated all kinde of beasts and liuing creatures. Herodotus affirmeth, that they accounted all maner of beasts which they had in Egypt, as sacred and holy; so that, as Dion reporteth, they farre surpassed all nations of the world in multitude and variety of gods. Nei∣ther did they only reuerence these as gods, but also Anubis, Orus, Typhon, Pan (whom they called Mendon and painted him with a goats head) and the Satyrs. Item another, which, as Plutarch in Osiris writeth, they called Cneph. Moreouer, Minutius Felix sayth, that they worshipped a man, and in the city Anabis did all maner of diuine seruice vnto him, as vnto an immortall God, as Eusebius auoucheth; who furthermore addeth, that they had another peculiar god, which they cal∣led Canopus, and expressed in the forme of a pot. (This Bembus hath described in his Hieroglyphicall table.) Athanasius and Heliodorus doe testifie, that they accounted the water, but especially Nilus, for a god. Of foure footed beasts, the Crocodile, the Oxe, the Mneuis, the Lion, the Beare, the Cat, the Hee-goat, the Monkey, the Ape, the Bull, the Ramme, the Shee-goat, the Hogge, the Dogge, the Ichneumon or Indian rat, the Woolfe, the Sheepe, the Weazell, and the Shrew∣mous, they put into the inuentory of their gods. Of fishes, the Oxyrinchus, the Lepidotus, the Latus, the Phagrus, the Maeotis (fishes proper to the riuer Nilus) and the Eccle: beside the Cantharus, as Porphyrius in his booke De sacrificijs testifieth. Of birds, the Eagle, the Ibis, and the Hawke: beside the Owsell or Blacke-bird, if we may beleeue Hyginus: and the Vulture and Rauen, as Aelianus affirmeth: with the Sparrow, as Porphyrius in his Treatise De Abstinentia, maketh vs be∣leeue. Iosephus in his second booke against Appion sayth that they worship the Ferrit. They had beside these, the Dragon, (or serpent) the Aspis (which they na∣med Thermathis) and the Beetle. The counterfets of these for the most part they adored and worshipped as gods; yet some delighted rather to honour the very beast themselues aliue: so that it was felony for a man to kill any of them, although it were by chance. And if so be that one of them should fortune to die of any disease, they vsed to bury it with mourning and great solemnity. Item certaine vegetable things without life, as Onions, Leekes, and Garleeke, they did adore with diuine ho∣nour, as S. Hierome, against Iouinian, testifieth of the Pelusiotae. Nay they did not content themselues with these naturall things, but euen certeine monsters, such as were neuer seene in the world, they did in like maner consecrate for gods: as the Cynocephalus, with a dogges head, worshipped of the Hermopolitani: and Cepus, honoured of the Babylonians. To these you may adde out of Athanasius the Serpenticipites, idols with serpents heads: and Asinicipites, with asses heads. Moreo∣uer, in the villages and vpland townes, Lucian reporteth, (I know not whether in iest or earnest) that some held the right shoulder for a god: but those that dwelt o∣uer against them, the left. Some did sacrifice to the one halfe of the head: others to a Samian cup or dish. Diodorus Siculus reporteth, (I blush to speake it) that they accounted the priuy parts for a god. Eusebius, in the second booke De praeparat. Euangel. seemeth to restraine it only to Osiris. Clemens in the fifth booke of his Recognitionum addeth (blush foolish idolaters, for I will tell it, and let another say surreuerence) that the Egyptians worshipped the Iakes and a Part for their gods; which also is auerred and iustified by Minutius Felix. This is that which Lactantius reporteth of them, that they reuerenced certaine beastly and shamefull things. Philo Iudaeus sayth, that all things vnder the cope of heauen are consecrated and enrowled amongst the number of their gods. And Sextus the Philosopher sayth of them, that there was not any thing which they did not hold for sacred. Thus much of their gods: more thou mayest see of this matter in Clemens, but especi∣ally in Iuuenall the Poet. These do hold themselues to be the first and most ancient Nation in the world, and to haue first had the knowledge of God, to haue built tem∣ples, groues and conuents in honour of them, as Lucian testifieth. Afterward, when the light of the Gospell began to shine forth, here great swarmes of Monkes and Heremites were bred, and from hence were spred and scattered all Christendome ouer, as we finde in the Records of the Primitiue Church: so that a man may iustly terme this countrey The Seminary or Nursery of all religions. Of the Philosophy, and Hieroglyphicall secrets of the Egyptians, reade the sixt booke of Clemens Ale∣xandrinus his Stromaton. Item, Orus Apollo and Pierius his Hieroglyphicks.
The VOIAGE of ALEXANDER THE GREAT. IF Archelaus the Chorographer, whom Diogenes Laërtius affirmeth to haue described all that part of the earthly globe or maine continent conquered by Alexander the Great, that famous king of Macedony: or Beton [Baeton, Athenaeus calleth him] and Dio∣genetus, whom Pliny writeth were the measurers of the iourney of the said Alexander: or if the Commentaries of Strabo, which he saith that he composed of the histories and famous acts of that great Conquerour, were now extant, it would out of all doubt haue beene an easier matter for vs to haue made this map which heere we purpose to set foorth to the view and benefit of the serious stu∣dent of Geography, of the VOIAGE OF ALEXANDER THE GREAT: But being destitute of those helpes, first we haue laid the plot of it out of Ptolemey, and some other later writers. Then we haue set downe in it all those particular places which Quin∣tus Curtius, Arrianus and Plutarch doe make mention of in the historie of this expedition. For these three, of all those which haue at large written of his life, and are come to our hands, haue of purpose handled this his voiage and expedition. To these, as helps, we haue adioined what we finde making for this our purpose, in Strabo, Diodorus, Trogus, Orosius and Plutarch, in that his booke which he hath intituled, Of the fortune and prosperous successe of Alexander, for these men, although they haue not purposedly intended that argument, yet notwithstanding by the way they haue shewed themselues, in the setting out of his memorable acts, very diligent and faithfull authours. Item Philostratus, Solinus and Pliny haue in like maner done vs some seruice heerein. And while I looke ouer all maner of histories written either in Greeke or Latine, by any other authours whatsoeuer, beside those aboue named, I could picke very little or nothing out of them, that might serue vs in this our argument to any sted at all. For although some things may be obserued in the reading of Liuy, Valerius Maximus Polybius, Athenaeus, Polyaenus, Aelianus, Seneca, Stobaeus, Quintilian, Apuleius, Dion Pruiaeus, Maximus Tyrius, Theon Sophista, Plutarch in his treatise of Moun∣teins, and the Panegyricke made to Maxim. and Constant. yet those doe rather seeme in my iudgement, to concerne his priuate life, naturall inclination, maners, ver∣tues, and vices, then this his voiage and expedition. Francis Iuret, in his annotations vpon Symmachus, doth confesse that he hath by him the life of Alexander the Great, written first in the Greeke tongue by one Aesope, and since that translated into Latine by Iulius Valerius. This authour as yet we haue nor seene, and therefore of him we say nothing. We haue therefore (in the description of this Empire of the Macedonians, the greatest, as Liuy in his fiue and fortieth booke nameth it, of all the whole earth, begunne by this our Alexander) performed what we could, not what we would. To this we haue caused the plot and portraiture of Iupiter Ammons o∣racle, famous, as Pomponius Mela writeth, for the certainty of his predictions, to be adioined for an auctuarie and ornament; and for that it is so often named & men∣tioned in all ancient histories: as also for that this our Alexander in this his expedition, went vnto this place, to demand of the Oracle what the issue and euent of this his iourney should be. Lastly Curtins and Trogus do iointly affirme that he commanded that his body, after his death, should heere be buried although it be certaine that this was not performed: for his corps was interred at Alexandria in Egypt. Of it therefore out of sundrie authours we haue collected that which followeth. The ORACLE of Iupiter Ammon. THe place where the temple of Iupiter Ammon stood hath round about it vast and huge wildernesses, great heapes of hungry sand, round enclosed on euery side with waste and barren grounds, places wholly vnmanured and vnhabitable. Heere are diuers large fields, as Arrianus, Curtius and Diodorus Siculus doe describe them, cleane couered ouer with sand, like as we oft times see low-meddowes ouerflowed by the breaking in of some great riuer. The middest of this place (Silius Itali∣cus calleth it Lucus fatidicus, The fate-telling wood) which conteineth but a little plot of ground (for where it is broadest, it is, as Arrianus writeth, but forty furlongs, or at most, as Diodorus would haue it, not aboue fifty furlongs ouer) is beset with diuers sorts of fruitfull trees, namely, as Arrianus testifieth, with oliues and dates: or, as Theophrastus writeth, with a kinde of Cypresse, or sweet smelling aromaticall tree, which he calleth Thuia (our herborists call it, The tree of life) and with the Paliurus, a kind of very sharpe thorne, very plentifully growing in Palestina, wherewith some learned men do verily thinke that our Sauiour Christ was crowned by the Romane souldiers, and thereupon is of some called Christs thorne: Yea, as Diodorus Siculus reporteth, here doe grow all manner of goodly trees, but especially all sorts of fruit-trees, most plentifully. Pliny also doth highly commend the goodly palme trees of this place. It is watered with diuers pleasant and holesome wels, springs and brookes; and by that meanes it is inhabited, by the Ammonij, a people which dwell in cottages heere and there scattering a good way distant one from another. In the middest of this place there was a tower enclosed with three wals, whereof the first compassed about or defended the ancient pallace of their kings (tyrannos, Cur∣tius calleth them) within the second were kept their wiues, children and concubines: heere also stood the temple or Oracle of that god. Within the third and inner wall the guard and armed men did keepe and giue their attendance. Diodorus Siculus reporteth that before the Oracle there was a fountaine, in which, all things whatsoeuer were to be offered to the god, were first washed and purified. And thus farre of the naturall situation of this Oracle, and the maner of the building and ar∣chitecture of the same: now it remaineth that we should in like maner speake something of the forme and shape of this Libyan god, as Dionysius Afer termeth him; whom they painted not, as we vsually do, casting of thunderbolts, but with a paire of rams hornes vpon his head, as Arnobius, Ouid, Macrobius and others haue left recorded: and those very crooked and wreathen, as Lucian and Ouid haue written. Lucian saith that they expressed him in the forme and shape of a ramme: yet Hero∣dotus seemeth to vnderstand it only of his head and face: In Martianus he is painted with a paire of rammes hornes and a iagged or fringed coat: this also is that which Atheneus meaneth when he calleth it , as Natalis and Dalechampius do both vnderstand the word. Yet Quintus Curtius doth set him out after another ma∣ner, in this his description of him; That which is worshipped for a god, hath not the same shape and similitude, which commonly artistes and workemen haue attri∣buted to gods: it was like a bosse (vmbilicus, he calleth it) made of smaragds and orient pearls. This idol, when an answer was demanded of it, was carried by the Priests in a golden boate or shippe, with diuers and sundrie siluer goblets and peeces hanging round about on each side of the same. Immediately after it did follow a great company of old women and yong maidens, singing in that their language a rude and homely song: whereby they doe verily beleeue they doe much please their god, and do winne him to giue a good and certaine answer to the demand that then is made vnto him. The like doth Diodorus Siculus report of it, who moreouer addeth, the Priests daily attendant heere were in number foureskore at the least. Why he was painted with rammes hornes amongst others, Germanicus and Hyginus in Ariete, doe plainly teach vs: when they write that this temple was first erected by Bacchus, in honour of the ramme, (  Hamil, the Arabians, Dutch and Spaniards call him) wh ch was his guide and conducted him, (being himselfe with his whole army in great distresse, and almost famished for want of drinke) through these desert and sandy wildernesses, vnto this place well serued with water and abounding with diuers wholesome wels and springs. Yet I am not ignorant that He∣rodotus doth bring another reason of the same. This temple (in which, as Plutarch in his booke intituled, Of the ceasing of Oracles, writeth, a lampe did burne continually) was first erected, as Herodotus giueth out, by Thebana Aegyptia, an Aegyptian woman, a Priest of Thebes. Diodorus Siculus teacheth vs that it was built by Danaus an Egyptian. Pausanias he writeth that it was so called of a certaine sheepeheard, which first built a temple heere to Iupiter. Virgil in his fourth booke of his Aeneides, seemeth to ascribe the building of it to Hiarbas King of the Getuli, and sonne of Iupiter. All other ancient authours for the most part do deriue the name from the Greeke word , which signifieth the sand; so that Iupiter Ammon, should bee nothing else but Sandy Ioue: yet Plutarch contrary to all men, in Osiris, writeth that of the Egyptians it was called  (or Thamos, as Plato in his dialogue intituled Phaedrus, affirmeth) which word in that language he there moreouer addeth, doth signifie an hiding, or any thing that is hid and secret, for proofe whereof he bringeth in Manethon Sebennites, an Egyptian borne, for a witnesse: affir∣ming withall that this idol is corruptly and falsely called Ammon. And indeed the learned doe know that in the Chaldey tongue, (a language of neere affinity vnto the Egyptian)  Hama, doth signifie to hide, or to conceale from the sight of other mens eies: in the eight and twentieth chapter of Iob: item, to escape, and be∣take himselfe to some place of refuge, to take sanctuary: except the copies in those places be corrupt and faulty. But this is certaine that  Tham, or  Tamtam, in the same language doth signifie, to shut vp, to locke vp or hide from the sight of others; as men doe their treasures, answering directly to the Hebrew theme  Thaman. I cannot but woonder when I call to mind the inscription of an Egyptian obeliske or statue erected in the city Thebes by king Ramesses, where there is oft mention made of Ammon, as thou maist read in the seuenteenth booke of Ammianus Marcellinus. This Oracle, although it was of all heathen nations far and nere round about, had in great reuerence, and held for most certaine and true: yet Strabo the famous Geographer, who liued in the daies of Tiberius Caesar, at such time as Christian religion began more cleerely to shine forth; and Plutarch, who liued in the time of Traiane the Emperour, do iointly and plainly testifie, that in their times it was very much neglected. Prudentius, the Christian poet, who wrot about the reigne of Theodosius, iustifieth the same in this his verse: Nec responsa refert Libycis in syrtibus Ammon: God Ammon on the Libyan sands, now answer'th no demands at all. In the daies of Iustinian, it seemeth by Procopius in the sixth booke Aedificior. that it was altogether desert and vnfrequented. Whether this be that same place which is described by Clemens Alexandrinus in his Stromaton, and by Eusebius in his booke De praeparat. Euangel. vnder the name of Gerandryus, placed by them in these sands, I would gladly learne of those that are more learned than my selfe. About this Oracle which we haue hitherto described, there is on the East side, a forest or groue, Curtius calleth it nemus, Solinus, lucus: but Diodorus saith it is a chappel: templum. within which there is Aqua Solis, or, as others terme it Fons Solis, the fountaine of the Sunne: whose water is, as Ouid writeth, at noone as cold as stone, at eeuen and morne as hot as heat of Sun. This fountaine is thus described by Pomponius Mela: This fountaine, saith he, assoone as any man shall but touch it with his hand, it pre∣sently beginneth to swell, and so to tosse vp the sand and to rise in great billowes like vnto the maine sea in tempestuous weather. At mid-night it boileth: by and by, it beginneth by a little and little to coole, vntill at length about the breake of day it becommeth key-cold: Then as the Sunne ariseth, so it waxeth by degrees colder and colder, vntill at noone it becommeth as cold almost as ice. After noone it beginneth againe to waxe warme, and at night it becommeth very hote; and so as the night passeth it groweth still hotter and hotter, vntill at last about midnight it become almost scalding hot. The very same doth Curtius, Diodorus, Herodotus, Pliny, and Lucretius write of this fountaine. The same Lucretius in his sixth booke doth yeeld the reason of this strange miracle. Item, S. Augustine and Solinus doe speake the like almost word for word of it. But Solinus and also Isidorus do make mention of another spring not far from th s place: whose water, as they say, doth binde toge∣ther the dust and clods, and presently turneth embers & ashes into firme ground and solide turffe: Or as Lucane in his ninth booke writeth, Qui putria terrae alligat, & do∣mitas vnda connectit arenas: which rotteth and turneth all things to fertile solid ground: and scattering sands in massie lumps of stone it tieth. Againe Antonius Liberalis maketh mention of another spring, which he saith, at Sunset doth congeale and as the Sunne commeth toward it againe doth stand st ll. Item Pliny telleth of another spring in the country of the Troglodites, a people nere inhabiting to this place, which about noone is sweet and coole, but at midnight it boileth & groweth to be very bitter. I will surcease to speake any one word more of these things, after that I haue added that which I haue read in a certaine epistle of Synesius, vnto his friend Euopti∣us, of the inhabitants and people dwelling nere this temple of Ammon, namely that the women haue heere such great paps, that they do not giue their children sucke as heere they vse, but do cast their breasts ouer their shoulders and do giue them sucke behind their backs. And lest any man should doubt of the truth heerof, hear see what Iuuenall writeth of the same in his Satyres; In Meroē crasso maiorem infante mamillam. In Meroë the teat oft times is found much bigger than the sucking child. Thus much therefore of the Oracle of Iupiter Ammon, and the fountaine of the Sunne. In the 30. chapter of the booke of Iob, in the originall text  Hamma is vsed of the Holy ghost for the Hebrew  Semes, the Sunne, which in the 19. Psalme doth signifie drought or a parching heat, such as is in those countries nere the tropicks of the Sunne: Item  Hamam, in the Arabicke tongue signifieth an hot bath, such as this fountaine is, by the authority of many authors described to be. Why then may we not say (aswell for that this Oracle or temple was built neere vnto this fountaine, as also for the ioy and comfort, as is said before, that Bacchus and his consorts enioied by meanes of the same) that this god and his temple tooke the name of Ammon, not of the Sand, but of the Sunne (Hamma) whereof the well or spring did beare the name; or otherwise of Hammam, a bath? Surely the analogy is proper, and in regard of the affinity of the languages, by ods the etymology more pro∣bable. For I cannot easily be perswaded that the names of places heere were fetched from Greece. But of this argument we shall haue occasion, God willing, offered to speake more fitly and more coously. Pausanias in his Eliaca, amongst the goddesses of Libya, reckoneth vp Iuno Ammonia, which was worshipped in her haire, but this is beside our purpose. It remaineth onely that we speake a word or two of Memnon, which, Quintus Curtius reporteth, Alexande had also a great desire to see. In
map of the ancient Empire of Alexander the Great in east Asia, with inset representation of the temple of Zeus-Ammon at Siwa ALEXANDRI MAGNI MA∣CEDONIS EXPEDITIO. IOVIS AMMONIS ORACVLVM. INGENIO, IVDICIO, ET ERVDI∣TIONE PRAESTANTI, DOMINO HENRICO SCHOTIO, VRBI ANTVERP. A CONSILIIS: AMO∣RIS ET BENEVOLENTIAE ER∣GO, HANC TABVLAM DEDICAB. ABRAH. ORTELIVS. Cum Priuilegio Imp. et Ordinum Belgicor. ad decennium. 1595.
the 4. booke of Quintus Curtius you shall find these words spoken of Alexander. He had an earnest desire (and not without great reason although there were also some reasons to the contrary) to see not only the high country of Egypt, but euen Ethiopia it selfe. The stately pallace of king Memnon and Thiton, famous for the great antiqury o, did force him to venture that way almost beyond the tropicke of Cancer. Thus farre Curtius. Strabo, Solinus and Pliny, in the fifth booke of his histo∣ry of Nature, doe describe this palace of Memnon to haue beene in the city Abydus. Yet the same Pliny in his 36. booke writeth that it was in Thebes which opinion Pausanias and Dionysius Afer doe confirme to be true. But heere by Thebes I vnderstand Thebais, or the country of Thebae: for both Thebae and Abydus, were ci∣ties of this prouince. In this palace was the image or statue of the said Memnon, as Pliny calleth it: Strabo saith it was a Colossus: and Tacitus termeth it Sxiam offigi∣a, a counterfet cut in stone. For, as Strabo testifieth, it was made of one solide stone: of colour blacke, as Philostratus affirmeth: or red, as Tzetzes, I know not vpon what ground and authority, would make vs beleeue. Pausanias and Philostratus doe write, that it was the image of a king sitting in his chaire of estate. Moreouer the same Philostratus saith that it did represent the forme of a beardlesse yong man. Strabo recordeth that in his time he saw the vpper part of this image broken off aboue the seat vpon which it was placed. Which Pausanias also doth testifie to be true, affirming that he himselfe had seene the same. the other part, he saith, is yet to be seene sitting. Philostratus writeth that it resteth it selfe, or lying groueling vpon the hands, & beareth the shape of a man that would willingly raise himselfe being downe. This image, all the forenamed authors do affirme, euery day at sun rising (and, as Philostratus reporteth, as long as the sun beames touched the same) did make a noise at the mouth, much like to the sound of an harpe; which is also auouched by Pausanias: although we are not ignorant that Tacitus writeth that it did speake and counterfet the voice of man. Pliny saith that it did but crackle. It is apparent that Lucian doth but scoffe and iest, (which is an ordinary thing in him) when as he writeth that hee heard th s image speake, and that not after a vulgar maner making a foolish and vaine babling, but to vtter an oracle in meter of 7 verses long. I do in like maner hold that of Tzetzes, in 64. section of his 6. Chiliade (as also many other things in him in other places) to be but a meere fable, when as he reporteth, that this image in the day time did vsually sing a pleasant song, but in the night a very mournfull and lamentable dittie. Peraduenture he had this from Callistus, who writeth that this image when the Sun came toward it, did make a pleasant noise, but when it went from it, it made a heauy and sorrowfull sound. But of this noise or sound let vs heare Strabo, a graue authour, a man of great credit and a diligent obseruer of this strange woonder: I my selfe, saith he, was present with Aelius Gallus, together with a great mul∣titude of his friends and souldiers that were with him, about one of the clocke in the day, and I heard a sound, but whether it came from the basis, or from the colosies, or image it selfe, or from some of those that stood about it, I was not able to discerne, nor dare not for truth affirme: seeing that by reason of the vncerainty of the cause, I had rather suspect any thing, than to beleeue and teach that stones laid and ioined together in that maner should make a sound Eustathius vpon Dionysius Aier doth obserue that this was ordinarily done by a kind of instrument: but I dare not giue much credit vnto him, who is oft times himselfe too light of beliefe. Pausanias writeth that the Thebenes do flatly denie this to be the statue or image of Memnon the Aethiopian, but to be indeed the counterfet of Phanemophes, a natural Egyp∣tian borne. Item, that the heard say of some that it was the image of Sesostris. Strabo writeth that there be some which thinke Memnon to haue beene called of the E∣gyptians Ismandes. Dion Prusaeus in his 31. oration writeth that it had no maner of inscription or letters written about it at all. But it seemeth to haue beene the statue of Memnon, in regard that Heliodorus, amongst the gods, worshipped by the Ethiopians, doth also reckon Memnon for one. Mention is in like maner made of this image in that verse of Iuuenall: Diminio magicae resonant vbi M-mnone chordae; Where curtall'd Memnons harpe, by magicke skill, with musicke sweet and warbling sound the eares doth fill. Dimidium, curtall'd, hee calleth it, as I thinke, because the vpper part, as wee heard before, was broken off from the rest of the body, which Pau∣sanius saieth vpon Cambyles: but Strabo rather thinketh it to be done by an earthquake. Vpon the forenamed verse of Iuuenall, an ancient glosse writeth thus, (I deli∣uer it for no truth; only take it as it is, corrupt and false) The statue, saith he, of Memnon, made of brasse, holding an harpe in his hands, at certaine houres made a plea∣sant sound. This king Caubis (Cambyles, I thinke he meaneth) caussed to be broken vp, supposing that there had beene within it some engine or mechanicall auto∣maton, that had made this sound yet notwithstanding the statue which had beene made and consecrated by art magicke, after it had beene opened, did still at certain times make a noice as afore. But these are meere fooleries: as also these following are, out of another ancient interpreter of the same poet, as they are alleadged by Ia∣nus Do in his commentaries vpon Catullus; namely, that this statue or image did vsuallie in plaine words salute both the Sunne and the King: but after that Cam∣byses had broken or cut off a peece of it, it saluted the Sunne onely, but not the King. The Chronicle of Eusebius relateth, from the opinion of the common people, th t it spake vntill the comming of our Sauiour Christ. And thus much of this statue of Memnon, which Curtius saith Alexander had a great desire to see: the reason of whose strange miracle, Tacitus reporteth, Germanicus Caesar did much labour to conceiue: and which, Spartianus testifieth, Septimius Seuerus the Emperour did verie diligently view, and behold with great admiration. By that description of Iupiter Ammon in Curtius, it seemeth that he meant to expresse vnto vs two formes of it: viz. one which was accounted to bee his image or counterfet, the other was that which was worshipped for a god: that had the shape of a ramme, this the forme of a bosse (vmbilicus) For I vnderstand by the word vm∣bilicus, any high thing that steeketh out (as the nauil in a man) in maner of a pyramis, or conus round or square: Like as in books almost finished, as Porphyrius testifieth, they ordinarily vsed to doe either for ornament or some speciall purpose; yea and yet to this day still they are put vpon the outside in forme of a round globe. For men of ancient families were wont, as we do gather by many circumstances, oft times in this rude manner to point at their gods, rather then truely to expresse them in their true forme and proportion. In the temple of Delphos, as Strabo in the 6. booke of his Geography reporteth, there was a bosse preserued, curiously lapped vp in skarfes and ribbends, to demonstrate and shew vnto the world, that this place was in Vmbilico, that is, in the middest or center of the whole earth: and it was made, as Pausanias writeth, of pure white marble. For the statue or image of the goddesse Venus, which was to be seene at Paphus in Cyprus, as Tacitus reporteth, was a continuall cir∣cle, broad at the bottome, with a thinne edge or brim, rising vp narrower and narrower by degrees, in manner of a pyrarnis. Maximus Tyrius in his 38. oration spea∣keth the same of it, almost word for word: but that he saith it was like a white pyramis. The same authour in the same place writeth, that the Arabians portraitured their god in forme of a square or cubicall stone: and as Suidas affirmeth, it had no manner of carued worke vpon it at all. But this he speaketh of the Arabians of Pe∣tiaea, and withall addeth that this their god is called Mars. Minutius Felix maketh the same god to be but a rough stone, vnhew'd or vnpolish't. Liuy also testifieth that the Pessinuntij, a people in Phrygia, did honour a stone for the mother of the gods. Arnobius in his 6. booke saith that it was a flint stone, of no great bignesse, of co∣lour blacke or very darke and duskish, verie craggy, rough and vneuen. Prudentius also in his 7. booke saith, that it was of colour browne or inclining to blacke. He∣rodianus reporteth almost the same of the forme of the statue of the Sunne or Elagabalus, that Quintus Curtius doth of his god Ammon: These are his words as you may read in his 5. booke: They haue no image carued and made by arte of man, after the manner of the Greekes or Romanes, to expresse the similitude of that god: But there is a very great stone, round at the bottome, and tapred vpward almost in manner of that Geometricall body which the Mathematicians do call Conus. The Sicyonij, citizens of Sicyona city in Peloponnesus in Greece, as Pausanias writeth, did make their Iupiter Milichius in forme of a pyramis or taper. The Semni, a sect of Philosophers in India, as Clemens Alexandrinus reporteth, did adore and do religious seruice to a pyramis. Hither peraduenture that signe of the profane Sa∣crament mentioned by Firmicus, is to be referred. Yea and the Romanes themselues vnder this forenamed figure doubtlesse did meane to expresse some god or other, as appeareth by that scaffold or chaire, described by the foresaid Herodian, made in manner of a turret or lanterne, in which their Emperours were crowned and en∣stalled, and was indeed of them enrowled amongst the number of their gods or saints as you please to terme them. For this also was so built that it did rise from the bottome vpward lesse & lesse by degrees, vntil at length it came to the highest & last roome, which was the least and narrowest of all. Hither also are to be referred those obeliskes or pyramides of the Egyptians, built in forme not much vnlike those Vmbilici, before mentioned, dedicated also to the Sunne. Item those spires (metae) in the theaters dedicated to the Dioscuri or Tyndarides. The fire (which signifieth the goddesse Vesta,  Esta, the Chaldees call the fire) also was expressed in this forme, whose temple was built round, and tapered vpward. All which do come very neere to the forme of a bosse (Vmbilicus) or that Geometricall body called by them Conus. Out of these I gather that the ancient reading in the old imprinted copies of Quintus Curtius, which haue Vmbilico similis, like a bosse, is much better and more probable, than that late edition set out the other day by a learned man, which readeth, Vmbilico tenus arieti similis, to the nauill like a ramme. But all these will appeare more plaine and cleare to the reader by the comparison of certaine monies and coines, as may be seene in those authours which haue of purpose written of the ancient Romane coines. Moreouer certaine nations also (although this be not altogether to our purpose, yet I take it not amisse to adde a word or two of it, by the way) were woont to attribute no great beauty to their gods. For Arnobius writeth that the Scythians for the signe or idol of their god did vse a skene or short sword. The The∣spij, citizens of Thespia, a city in Boetia in Greece, did adore and do diuine honour to a bough of Progne: The Romanes for Quirinus (or Romulus, as some thinke) to a speare. The Samij did reuerence a well for Iuno: and the Carij, a rough and vnhewed peece of timber, for Diana. Pausanias witnesseth that the Sicyonij honou∣red Diana Paetroa, vnder the forme of a columne or rude pillar rough and vnpolished. Maximus Tyrius reporteth that the Celtae did do reuerence to a very high oke as vnto the signe or image of mighty Ioue. The same authour testifieth that the Paeones for the Sunne, did diuine honour to a little dish or platter put vpon the toppe of a long pole. Tertullian telleth vs that Pallas Attica, and Ceres Farrea were put vpon the end of an ill-fauor'd pole, rugged stake or rough peece of wood. Faria, or Pharia, which Lipsius liketh better, to whom also I assent, for that in a certaine coine which Antonius Augustinus setteth out in his Dialogues, together with the image and picture of this goddesse, there is this inscription ISIS PHARIA. seeing that also as Herodotus and Plutarch doe testifie, that this same goddesse is the same that Isis, which is worshipped of the Egyptian, is: item that Isis is the same that Dea Pessinuntia is, and this the same that Cybele. So that Pharia, as he would haue it, should be the same with Aegyptia, vnderstanding thereby Isis of Aegypt. Moreouer Minutius Felix maketh mention of Pharia Isis. Pausanias in his Achaica writeth that in times past it was an ordinary thing generally practised by all the Grecians to worship rude and vnpolished stones for their gods. Item, Herodotus in Clio doth writnesse that the Persians were not woont to make any images, to reare any temples or to build any altars to their gods. We read also that it was the custome of some nations ne∣uer to make any image, portraitures or pictures of their gods at all. For Tacitus writeth that the Syrians neuer made any similitude or temple to their god Carmel, only they built him an altar, and did adore him with a religious worship. The same authour saith, That the Germanes did make no similitudes of their gods: nor did euer attribute vnto them the shape and feature of any mortall man: and moreouer he addeth, that they did see them onely in their deuotions. Strabo saith that the Persians did neither erect images nor altars to their gods. Silius Italicus speaketh thus of the chappell of Hercules at Caliz: Sed nulla effigies, simulacráue nota Deorum, Ma∣iest ite locum & saro impleuere timore. Yea and the Romanes themselues, as Varro telleth the tale, for more then an hundred and fifty yeares together, did worship their gods without any images or idols at all. And indeed Pliny plainly affirmeth, that it is the weakenesse of mans nature to seeke for any similitudes or counterfets of them. But because there is nothing more absolute and perfect than God, it is very probable that the Gentiles did reuerence him vnder that forme, wherewith in all their acti∣ons, when they come to perfection, they are ordinarily beautified, as with a most rich and costly ornament. Why they vsed to carrie this god Ammon in a boate or pinnace, peraduenture we may vnderstand by that of Cornelius Tacitus: where he teacheth that the Sueui were woont to make the image of Isis in manner of a small barke or pinnace: thereby to shew that their religion and manner of seruice of their gods vsed by them, was brought from beyond the sea from forrein countries. Pausanias hath left recorded that the Cyreneans did at Delphos dedicate their God Ammon sitting in a waggon [Vehiculum, the interpreter calleth.] Sic bona posteritas [Romana scilicet] Puppim formauit in aere, Hospitis aduentum testificata Dei. So Romanes old for loue did make This shippe, of purest brasse, To testifie that this their god A farre borne stranger was: this Ouid in this first booke of his Fasti, speaketh of the Romane god Ianus. So that what the Romanes meant by this their shippe, [puppis] that they meant by their pinnace or wagon [nauigium, or vehiculum.] Moreouer, amongst the Germanes also in an iland of the maine sea, as Tacitus testifieth, there was a place which he calleth Castum nemus, in which there was a waggon consecrated and sanctified, couered ouer with a cloth, and adored as a saint. But peraduenture we haue beene too tedious in this argument. As we haue out of old and ancient histories laid downe two diuers and sundry formes of this god Ammon; so out of the same it is very probable that hee had two diuers temples: For Diodorus in his seuenteenth booke in the description of this temple, doth say that it was built by Danaus the Egyptian. And the same authour a∣gaine, in his first booke saith, that Ofiris also erected a temple for Iupiter Ammon, in Thebes a city in Egypt: which was all of beaten gold, cleane contrary to that which we haue described before, as appeareth out of these verses of Lucane in his 9. booke: Non illic libyeae posuerunt ditia gentes Templa, nec Eois splendent donariagemmis. In E∣gypt it was, not in Libya, as is manifest out of the second booke of Herodotus. Where you shall find this description of it; Iupiter being not willing that Hercules, who came to visit him, should see him, yet at length by importunity being ouercome, vsed this deuice to deceiue him; He tooke a ram, flead him and cut off his head: this fell, with the head, wool and all, he put vpon him, and thus sheweth himselfe to Hercules. Wherupon the Egyptians haue decreed to make the image of Iupiter and to picture him with a rammes head. For him euery yeare, vpon a certaine day, they kill a ramme in like manner as before is shewed, and the skinne they put ouer the image of the said &c. And because the temple of this god Ammon was in the city Thebes, which thereupon is of good writers called Diospolis, that is, Ioues towne; I was of o∣pinion that the Holy scripture did also in some place or other speake of it. And indeed in the thirtieth chapter of Ezechiel the septuagints for the Hebrew No, haue Dspolu. and againe in the third chapter of Naum, for No Amon, they haue . It is very probable therefore that Amon (, Hamon, which in the Hebrew tongue signifieth a multitude) was the proper name of this place.
THE VOYAGE OR Nauigation of AENEAS, especially gathered out of the renowmed Poet VIRGILL: with some other matters perteining to that historie, collected out of others. TRoy being surprized, sacked and burnt, Aeneas betooke himselfe for a refuge to the mount IDA, a hill in the prouince of Troas, in Asia Minor, a place verie well wooded and serued with water: from thence, forsaking his natiue soile, he went to ANTANDRVS a towne in Mysia abutting vpon the Aegean sea, [taking with him, as Xenophon sayth, all his kindred both by fathers side and mothers side] with a nauy of twenty saile putteth forth to sea, and at length landeth in THRACE, [or as Dionysius Halicarnasseus writeth, at PALLENE a promontory, and city of the same name, in Macedony:] neere vnto which he built the citie Aenos (Oeno, or Inos, they still call it.) [Lycophron sayth, that he came to CISSVS, (Cis) a hill of Almopia a shire of the kingdome of Macedony. Liuy writeth, that he stayed about OLYMPVS.] But our authour reporteth, that from Thrace he came to DELOS, (Sdiles) an iland in the Aegean sea, of the number of those which the ancient Geographers called Cyclades. [Here he maried Lauinia the daughter of Anius, a Priest be∣longing to the temple of Apollo, as you may see in a Treatise written of the originall of the Romane nation: but let them beleeue him that list, for Halicarnasseus condemneth him for a very lying and fabulous authour.] And from Delos he setting saile, saluted NAXOS, (Nicsia,) PAROS, (Pario) DIONYSA, OLEARVS (Quiniminio) and other ilands of the Ae∣gean sea, and the third day after arriued at CRETA (Candy) where he built the cities RHOETEVM and PERGAMEA. From hence putting off to sea againe [and, as Dionysius Halicarnasseus writeth, saluting CYTHERA, (Cerigo) an iland in the Midland sea, where he built a Temple de∣dicated to the honour and seruice of the goddesse Venus: then CYNETHIVM, a foreland or promontory of Peloponnesus, and there layed the foundation, as Pausanias and Halicarnasseus haue left recorded, of the cities APHRODISIADES and OETIA] and the fourth day after landed at the STROPHADES, (Striuali) two ilands in the Ionian sea. From these he passed to ZACYNTHVS (Zante) [where he dedicated, as Halicarnasseus writeth, a chapell to Venus:] then passing by DVLICHIVM, SAMOS, NERITVS, and ITHACA, came to LEVCATE. Thence to ACTIVM neere the Temple of Apollo, and so leauing CORCYRA, (Corfu,) coasting along by CHAONIA a prouince of Epyrus in Greece, [and AMBRACIA, as the same authour affirmeth] he came at length to BVTHROTVM (Golfo de Butronto.) From hence on foot o∣uer land, he went and visited DODONA, a citie of Epyrus, and the CERAVNIAN mountaines, and vpon the third day came to Anchises Hauen, ANCHISAE PORTVS, where his ships meeting him, he crossed ouer the Hadriaticke sea into ITALY; [his consorts landed on this side the for∣land IAPYGIVM (Cabo de S. Maria,) himselfe with some few others, as the same Halicarnasseus witnesseth, at the forland or promontorie ATHENAEVM (Rossia, or Cabo de Campanella) so named of the Temple of Minerua, called of the Greekes Athene, which stood in this place.] From thence he passed by sea to TARENTVM, (Taranto) LACINIVM, (Cabo delle Colonne) CAVLON (Castro veto, or vetore) and SCYLACEVM (Squilacci.) Afterward sailing by SCYLLA (Scyllo) and CHARYDIS, (Galofaco,) by the CYCLOPES, (giants, or a certaine kinde of people neere mount Ethna in Sicilia, of an extraordinary stature and strength, feined by the Poets to haue but one eie and that in the mid∣dest of their fore-heads,) the mouth of the riuer PANTAGIAS, (Porcari) by the bay of MEGARA, a sea towne sometime called Hybla, by THAP∣SVS, a neckland or peninsula now knowen by the name of Manghisi, by the forland PLEMMYRIVM, (Cabo Massa Vliuien) by ORTYGIA, by the riuer ELORVS, (Abyso, or Atellari) by the forland or promontory PACHYNVS, (Cabo Passaro) by the citie CAMARINA, by the CAMPI GE∣LOI, by the riuers GELA, (Cherza, or Salsi,) by AGRAGAS, (Draco) by the citie SELINVS, (Salemo, or Terra de Pulici) then by the promon∣torie LILYBAEVM (Cabo Boëi, or Cabo Coco) and so at length to the forland DREPANVM, (Trapani) From hence leauing the strait course, he fetcheth a compasse about by those dangerous rocks which our authour calleth SAXA or ARAE, directing his course toward CARTHAGE, in Africa, where hauing stayed a while with Queene Dido, who enterteined him and his most kindly and in the best maner, at length hoiseth saile, and returneth backe into SICILIA againe; heere landing his men [at the riuer CRIMISVS, as Halicarnasseus writeth] after diuers games, iusts or triumphs; he ordei∣ned that those dayes yeerely, for euer after should be solemnly kept as holy, in honour of Anchises his father: and moreouer also he built the citie ACESTA or Egesta [and ELIMA (Alymite, or Palymite) if we may beleeue Halicarnasseus.] Item he founded the TEMPLE of Venus Idalia, vpon the top of mount Eryx (monte S. Iuliano.) Yet Pausanias in his Arcadia maketh another maner of relation of Anchises and of his buriall. Heere putting to sea againe, he commeth to the SIRENVM SCOPVLI, certaine dangerous rockes vpon the coast of Italy, in the bay of Cumae; and first casting anchor at PALINVRVS (Paliuro, or Cabo Palemudo) [at LEVCASIA, (Licoso) as Halicarnasseus sayth: or, INARIME (Ischia) and PROCHYTA (Profida) as Ouid affirmeth] and then againe at CVMAE where putting to land he goeth to Sibylla's caue, ANTRVM SIBYLLAE, and to A∣VERNVS lake (Lago di Tripergola) thence to the airie mount MISENVS, (Miseno) to CAIETA, King Lamus citie, at this day called Gaietta, and lastly to the riuer TIBRIS, where with seuen of his twentie ships remaining, he entreth, landeth his men and goods, and so endeth his seuen yeeres long and dangerous voyage, which we haue thus described, as you see partly out of Virgill, Ouid, and Lycophron, famous poets: and partly out of Liuy, Hali∣carnasseus, Pausanias, and Xenophon, as worthy renowmed historians. But heere I cannot omit that which I haue read in Pausanias his Phocica, namely, that certaine of Aeneas his consorts, seuered and driuen from his company and the rest of the nauy by storme and tempest, did seat themselues in the ile SARDINIA. Item, it is worth the obseruation that Halicarnasse∣us and Liuy do iointly testifie, That Aeneas did not stay at Tibris, but at LAVRENTVM, (S. Laurentij,) and landed not with aboue sixe hundred men, as Solinus reporteth: which indeed seemeth somewhat more probable and like to be true: for that both by ancient histories and moderne experience, we finde that Tibris, the riuer which runneth by Rome, is not capable of a fleet or nauy of any bignesse. Therefore it is to be thought that the Poet fained this of his owne head, or els spake it in loue and commendations of this riuer. Neither was it a voyage of seuen yeeres, but of two at the most, as Halicarnasseus doth plainly affirme: Solinus out of Cassius Hemina auoucheth the same. There are some, as Strabo in the thirteenth booke of his Geography witnesseth, which do thinke all this voyage to be a fained tale and fiction of the Poets: and that Aeneas stayed still in Troy, and succeeded in the kingdome after his father, as likewise his childrens children did after him for many generations. Of this opinion Homer doth seeme to be. Xenophon in his booke of hunting, telleth this tale another way, where he writeth, That Aeneas manfully defending his father, and carefully preseruing the gods of his father and mother, gat himselfe a great reputation and credit amongst all sorts of men, for that his piety and religion; insomuch that euen the very enemies themselues, granted to him only, aboue all other which they had taken captiue in the surprizing of Troy, that in the sacking of the same no man should spoile or lay hand of ought that was his. Moreouer, that that his voyage vnto Carthage is not mentioned by any approoued historian, but fained by the poet, Macrobius doth plainly teach. Item, Appian, a writer of good credit, doth much discredit that story of his meeting and communication with Queene Dido, who writeth that CARTHAGE was built by the same Dido fiue hundred yeeres before the destruction of Troy. Againe, the graue historiographer Trogus, in his eighteenth booke doth make a relation of the life and death of this Dido or Eliza farre different from this. But the poet, as it seemeth, had a purpose to disgrace this citie and to strike a deepe impression of the fatall hatred which it alwayes bare towards the Romans, like as long before, Homer vnder the person of Helen had shewed how much the Greeks in heart did malice the Troians. Whereupon not vnfitly, I thinke, this Epigram of Ausonius which he wrote vpon the counterfet or picture of Queene Dido may heere to those former be adioined: Illa ego sum Dido vultu, quam conspicis hospes, Assimulata modis pulchra{que} miri∣ficis. Talis eram, fed non, Maro quam mihi finxit, erat mens: Vita nec incestis laeta cupidinibus. Nam{que} nec Aeneas vidit me Troius vnquam: Nec Libyam aduenit classibus Iliacis. Sed furias fugiens, atque arma procacis Iarbae, Seruaui, fateor, morte pudicitiam, Pectore transfixo: castos quod pertulit enses. Non furor, aut laeso crudus amore dolor, Sic cecidisse iuuat, vixi sine vulnere famae. Vlta virum, positis moenibus, oppetij. Inuida cur in me stimulasti Musa Maronem, Fingeret vt nostrae damna pudicitiae? Vos magis historicis, lectores, credite deme, Quàm qui furta Deum, concubitus{que} canunt. Falsidici vates: temerant qui carmine verum: Humanis{que} Deos assimilant vitijs. Which Priscian, or whosoeuer els he were, that was the authour of that ancient translation of Dionysius Afer, doth to the same sense, but in farre fewer words, vtter in those two verses: At{que} pudicitiam non perdit carmine falso, Quae regnans felix Dido per secula viuit. This fained tale, first forg'd in faithlesse poets braine, It neuer may, I trow, the honest fame distaine, Wherein thou Dido long didst liue amongst thine owne, And still of wiser sort thorowout the world is knowne.
map of the ancient Mediterranean AENEAE TROIA∣NI NAVIGATIO Ad Virgilij sex priores Aeneidos. Ex conatibus Geographicis Abrahami Ortelij Antverp. DOCTRINA ET HVMANITATE CELEBRI DNO BALTHASARO ROBIANO, R.P.ANT. THE∣SAVRARIO, VIRO ANIMI CORPORISQ. DOTIBVS ORNATISS. Ab. Ortelius veteris amicitiae memor dedicabat. Sum pius Aeneas, raptos qui ex hoste Penates Classe veho mecum, fama super aethera notus. Bis denis Phrygium conscendi nauibus aequor, Vix septem conuulsae undis, Euróque supersunt: Europa atque Asia pulsus. Aeneid. i.
The PEREGRINATION of VLYSSES. THe manifold wandring voiages of Vlysses (Errores, Ausonius in diuers places calleth them) were from all antiquity so fa∣mous and renowmed amongst all men, that The Peregrination of Vlysses, grew into a by-word, and to be spoken prouerbially of any hard and difficult trauell that any man did vndergoe, as Apuleius, in the second booke of his Golden Asse, doth testifie. Therefore for the benefite of the Readers and Students of that history, and at the earnest request of sundrie learned men, my friends, I haue thought good out of ancient Historians, to describe the twenty voyages of this famous Captaine, who, as Tzetzes writeth, with twelue shippes, set forward from TROY, (or, as the Greekes call it, Ilium,) a city of Troia or Troas, a prouince of Asia Minor, continually wandring vp and downe vntill at last he came to ITHACA, an iland in the Ionian sea, where hee was borne, now called, as Sophianus and others do testifie, Valle di Compare, or Teachi, as Porcacchius affirmeth; but of the Turkes Phiachi, as Leunclaw witnesseth. Therefore after the tenne yeares siege, taking and sacking of Troy by the Greekes, Vlysses or Odysseus as they call him, hauing a pur∣pose to returne home to his owne country, shipped himselfe and his company, put foorth to sea, and arriued within a few daies vpon the coast of the CICONES, a people of Thracia in Europe, whose chiefe city ISMARVS, (Zimarus, Dictys Cretensis falsly calleth it) hee sacked and spoiled. This city, as Suidas, Hesychius, and Tzetzes do testifie, was called MARONEA, now Marogna, as Sophianus and Niger both do peremptorily affirm, or, Marolia, as Leunclaw writeth. In Hyginus fables it is falsly written Marathonia. And that it should be amended & written Ma∣ronea, it is very manifest, for that the wine wherewithall Vlysses afterward made the great lubber Polyphemus drunk was fetched from hence, as hee there writeth, and which Euripides in his Cyclops doth iustifie to be true. Moreouer Vinum Maroneum, the wine of Maronea, hath beene in old time much esteemed of and was as famous as any other sort whatsoeuer. Therefore after the sacke of this city, and as Suidas reporteth, Hecuba, ending her daies, neere the sea, being there intombed in stone in a place commonly called by the name of CYNOSSEMA, he was assaulted by the Cicones a sturdy and rough kind of people inhabiting amongst the mountaines of Thrace; and so by that meanes was forced with great losse and slaughter of his men to horse saile and put off to sea againe. And directing his course toward MALEA, (Cabo Malio, or S. Michaels wings) a promontory or foreland of Peloponnesus, the weather growing very foule, he was sore troubled and his ships rent and torne most grieuously, as Homer testifieth. But first it is very probable that he put into DELOS (Sdiles) an iland in the Archipelago, lying directly in his way, and where they write, that before the altar of Apollo, Vlysses saw a tall and slender Palme-tree grow: which, Cicero in his booke of Lawes affirmeth, was still to be seene in his time: and it is likely was the very same, which Pliny reporteth in his time had remained from the daies of Apollo. Homer also and Pausanias do speake of this palme tree. From Malea, he came to the ile CYTHERA (Cerigo) in the Ionian sea not farre from the coast of Peloponnesus, and from thence he went to the LOTOPHAGI. The Lotophagi, a kind of people which liue especially by the fruit of the lote tree, are by Historiographers placed in Africa, yea and that heere and there in diuerse and sun∣dry places of the same. But those Lotophagi vnto whom the consorts of this our Vlysses came, I am of opinion with Isaac Tzetzes, that they dwelt neere Hyperia, a city of Sicilia, or were next neighbours to Camarina, a city there still knowen by the name of Camarana. Neither can I bee perswaded that these Lotophagi are to be sought for in Africa: seeing that it is apparant euen out of Homer himselfe that the next day they went from the Lotophagi vnto the CYCLOPES, which out of Africa, so farre remote from Sicilia, they could by no meanes haue done. Item I haue Ausonius in his Periocha, vpon my side, who there testifieth that these Lotophagi did butte vpon the ile of the Cyclopes. Now almost all authours which haue written of this argu∣ment do iointly affirme that some of his consorts, much delighted with the sweetnesse and pleasant taste of the fruit of the Lote tree, staied heere still and would by no meanes euer returne backe againe. This I thought good, gentle Reader, to admonish thee of, lest thou shouldest in vaine in this our Mappe thinke to find any part of the continent of Africa. Moreouer in Pausanias I reade, that Vlysses in this his iourney did build the ATHFNEVM, that is, the chapell of Minerua, in Arcadia. From Cythera, he went to CACRA, a porte towne of Sicilia, which the forenamed Tzetzes testifieth was of him afterward named Vlyssis portus, Vlysses hauen, and had beene also sometime called Engyon, now knowen by the name of Longina. From hence hee went to the ILE of the Cyclopes, and so to the CAVE of Polyphemus; where he offered sacrifice and performed all due religious ceremonies vnto the gods, as Athenaeus testifieth. Now this Caue, as Vibius Sequester sheweth, was vpon the brinke of the riuer Acis, now called Freddo. Heere making Polyphemus drunke with the forenamed Maronean wine, and putting out his eies, he went vnto the AEOLIAE, or, as the Gods call them, the Planetae, certaine ilands continually casting foorth sparkles and flames of fire. Heere of Aeolus, king of these ilands, he had giuen him a bottle or bagge made of an oxe skin, wherein all the winds, but Zephyrus the West wind (or, if we may giue credit to Agatharchides, none but the North and South windes onely) were conteined and enclosed. For the West wind for those that saile with a strait course from Sicilia to Ithaca, is the best that can blow. With this pro∣sperous gale of wind, in nine daies, as Ouid reporteth, they comming within sight and kenning of the ile Ithaca, while Vlysses was asleepe, his consorts vp∣on the tenth day, as the foresaid authour writeth, opened the bagge, which they had alwaies hitherto beene verily perswaded was full of gold and siluer. By this meanes contrary winds and stormes arising, they are forced backe againe, and redoubling their course, (yet an ancient Lyricall Poet, saith it was but the bottle that went backe againe) to come the second time to the AEOLIAN ILANDS: where being by Aelous, as contemners of the Gods, and skorners of all religion, for bidden to land, they came vnto the LAESTRYGONES, a sauage people, that vsed to eat men, (like as they now write of the Canibals of America) who set vpon them, as enemies, neere to the city Lamus, and the fountaine Artacia. From hence with one ship onely (the other e∣leuen, as Ouid and Ausonius do testifie, being sunke by the Laestrygones) he came vnto the ile AE AE AE, otherwise called Circeia, (Hyginus in his fables doth falsly call Aena) the place of abode, where Circes, (called after her death, as Lactantius writeth, Marica) the daughter of Sol, or the Sunne, a woman famous for her Sorcery, passing skilfull in all maner of Magicke and witchcraft: by whose conduct and direction he went to AVERNVM, (Ce∣drenus nameth it Neciopa) a lake in Italy now called Lago di Tripergola; where amongst the soules that are in Purgatory (apud Inferos) hee hath conference with his mother Anticlia, and of her and by her meanes he vnderstood many things concerning his iourney that now he was to take. This done comming backe againe to Circeia, he found Elpenor one of his consorts whom he had left with Circes, as also Tiresias the wisard or sooth-saier, with di∣uerse other worthies and braue men, dead and buried. From thence he returned to the SVPERI, and entred there the Ocean. Lastly, he made a fu∣nerall and performed all ceremonies as he had promised to do, for his friend Elpenor, and withall built him a stately tombe. And thus much of that mat∣ter. Of this his nauigation through the vast Ocean, although many things by diuers authors are diuerslie reported: (as of Vlyssea, and Vlyssipona, certaine cities of Spaine, &c. built by this our Vlysses: Of an altar in Caledonia, mentioned by Solinus, a prouince of Great Britaine, hauing an inscri∣ption vpon it written in Greeke letters, there consecrated and dedicated to some God whose gratious fauour he had largely tasted of in this his iourney: Of Asciburgium, a city built by him, as Tacitus writeth, vpon the brinke of the riuer Rheine, and of an altar there consecrated to his seruice:) yet that they are altogether fained and meere fables, there be many things that do strongly proue. And indeed Aulus Gellius, in the sixth chapter of his foureteenth booke, sheweth, that long since this voiage vpon the Ocean seas was doubted of and called in question: videlicet, they made a question whether Vlysses wandred through the maine Ocean, as Aristarchus would haue it: or whether he neuer went out of the inner sea, (so Strabo and Pliny do call the Medi∣terran or Midland sea) as Cratetes would perswade vs. And truely in Ausonius his Periocha there is not a word of this nauigation through the Ocean. Item, Vlysses himselfe relating vnto his wife the summe of all his peregrination, doth not once name the Ocean. Neither doth Dares Phrygius, Hyginus in his fables, or Isacius vpon Lycophron, mention any such thing: and yet euery one of these men doe make a large discourse of that his wandring voiage. Againe those things which we find in Strabo of this matter, as he himselfe plainly confesseth, were taken out of Possidonius, Artemidorus, and Asclepiades (euery one of which authours it is certaine liued many a day since Homer) and not out of Homer himselfe. Item, the wise Seneca in the 88. chapter of his seuenth booke, calleth it Angustum iter & errorem longum, A short iourney, but long in regard of many turne-againes, before it was ended. But because it was also before me, by the learned Iohn Brodey, a man of good iudgement and quicke conceit, accounted for a meere fable, I will heere, out of the third booke of his Miscellanea, set downe his opinion in his owne words, which in English are thus: They, saith he, who thinke that Vlysses euer sai∣led vpon the Maine Ocean, do labour to prooue that their opinion, out of this verse of Homer, in the tenth booke of his Odysses, , But when thou shalt by ship haue pass'd the Ocean seas: Of which opinion although I do find the learned Strabo to bee, yet I see no reason, why I may not freely propose to the censure of the learned what I doe thinke of the same. When I doe consider the fashion and maner of building of
map of the ancient Indian Ocean, Arabian Sea, and Bay of Bengal, with inset maps of the Aegean Sea and Ionian Sea, West Africa, and the Artic Circle ERYTHRAEI SIVE RVBRI MARIS PERIPLVS, olim ab Arriano descriptus, nunc verò ab Abrah. Ortelio ex eodem delineatus. VLYSSIS ERRORES, ex Conatib. Geographicis Ab. Ortelij. ANNONIS PERIPLVS. Cum Imp. Reg. et Can∣cellariae Brabantia priui∣legio decennali. 1597.
Vlysses shippes described by Homer, to be open, without deckes and hatches, I doe perceiue them to haue beene much too weake and too low, to abide the bil∣lowes and stormes of the maine sea: which for three moneths of the yeare galleies and tall shippes, well and strongly built of the best timber, and well seaso∣ned can hardly be able to sustaine. That any man should thinke that Astypyrgium, (or, Asciburgium, which wee spake of a little before) was built by Vlysses, as some men haue gathered out of Cornelius Tacitus, it were extreame madnesse. For if one would passe the Spanish, French and English seas, and then at length to returne backe againe through the Germane Ocean, and in diuers places, on Gods name, vpon the sea coast to build and erect altars, he had need haue a nauy of many tal ships strongly built & wel appointed, he must not think to do it with one little bark or rotten barge rowed to & fro with oares and strength of men. But authours of good credit do make mention of Vlyssipo, and of other famous monuments of him to be seene in Portugall. What then? Whether that any thing of Vlysses his doing be there to be seene or euer were I greatly doubt: and if there be, yet that it was made by this Vlysses, whose life & famous acts Homer did describe, I flatly deny. And yet it is not incredible to beleeue, that as we do suppose that there were many Herculesses, so that there were in like maner more Vlyssesses then one: which in mine opinion seemeth very probable and likely to be true. Thus farre Brodey. To those arguments of his I adde, first, That Odyssopolis is; by Cedrenus and the Historia Miscella, described, to be neere Pontus in Asia. And who is so madde to beleeue that this city was so named of this our Odyssus or as the Latines call him Vlysses? And seeing that I do see that Homer himselfe doth not make mention of any one place vnto the which he did put in or landed in all this his trauel vpon the Ocean sea: I am easily perswaded that this notable Poet doth, not only in this verse, but euen in diuers other places also by the Ocean, poetically mean the sea. For example, neere the end of the 10. book of his Odys¦ses & ni the beginning of the 11. assoone as euer he is returned from the Inferi, presently Homer maketh him to enter the Ocean. But you will say he entred the Ocean, neere wherabout the Cimmerij did dwell, as appeareth plainly by that which he writeth in the beginning of the 12. book of his Odysses: True. But where I pray you, did these Cimmerij dwell? No where surely, but in Italy, within a little of the ile Circeia, & being returned from thence, he burieth, according to his promise, the body of Elpenor. The body I mean, after so many moneths, or, which is more probable, so many yeres (for those nauigations in old time were not the next way through the middest of the sea, but much further about, as we haue shewed in our Thesaurus at the word OPHIR, along by the shore within sight of land) corrupt, or, which is more likely turned to dust and ashes, or quite consumed to nothing. If any man shall againe obiect (with Ouid in the first booke of his Tristium, who saith that illius pars maxima ficta laborum est: The most part of Vlysses toile, was forged in Poets braine) and say that this whole history, and not only this nauigation vpon the Maine Ocean, was but a feined tale. I answer, that all the story, except this part of his nauigation by the vast Ocean only, is somewhat probable, and nothing in it impossible but might haue beene done. In this voiage by the Ocean sea, I haue stated the longer, lest the Reader might suspect that either through negligence or ignorance it were left out in this our Mappe. Now let vs, if you please, go on forward with our intended iourney. Vlysses departing from the iland Aeaea, and taking his leaue of his hostesse Circes, by whom, hauing kept with her by the space of an whole yeare, he begat his sonne Telegonus, he went his way safe and sound. For Mercury had giuen him the hearb Mo∣ly (so the Gods do call it) a sure antidote and preseruatiue against all maner of inchantments and witchcraft. And sailing along by the SIRENVM IN∣SVLAE, (the Mirmaides ilands) he built the temple of Minerua (Fanum Mineruae) in CAMPANIA in Italy, as Strabo writeth. In this tract also, videlicet, in LVCANIA, as the same authour recordeth, he built the chapell of Draco (Sacellum Draconis) one of his companions in that his voiage. From thence he sailed along by the shore, and at length landed at TENESSA, a city of the Bruttij; (Isacius vpon Lycophronfalsly writeth, that he landed in England, mistaking Britannos, for Bruttios, or ignorantly confounding  with :) as Pausanias hath left recorded: Item, Suidas out of Pausanias affirmeth the same, but withall he addeth that heere one of the sailers did rauish a virgin, and for that vild act was by the townesmen stoned to death. Neere to this towne the chapell of Politas, (Fanum Politae) one of Vlysses consorts, by Strabo is described to haue stood. From hence it is likely out of Pliny, that he came to the iles ITHACEIAE, or, as otherwise they are called, Vlysses specula, that is, Vlysses beacon or lanterne. From hence setting forward, and warily auoiding the dangerous Scylla, and Charybdes, (although not altogether without the losse of some of his company) he came againe into TRINACRIA, or the Iland of the Sunne, (Insula Solis) twise, as Horace saith, or as Ausonius writeth, often losing his way, and failing of his course: where while he himselfe was asleep, some of his company killed certaine sheep of Sol, the gouernour of that place, out of his flocke, which, as Appianus Alexandrinus in the fifth booke of his Ciuill warres writeth, did feed neere Artemisium, a towne in Sicilia, which Barrius at this day thinketh to be called Agatha: for which their villanie and foule act committed by them, they were all cast away and sunke. Vlysses himselfe alone, getting vp vpon the mast of the ship, escaped and was carried into the ile OGYGIA, where hee dwelt seuen yeares, as Homer writeth, or six yeare, as Ouid testifieth: or tenne yeares, as Seruius would make vs beleeue, with the Nymph Calypso, by whom he gate his sonne Auson. After all this, building a ship with his owne hands, he shippeth himselfe and setteth saile all alone, for meere naturall loue of his country (preferring it before im∣mortality, which the goddesse had promised if so be he would stay with her) committing himselfe to the sea, out alas he feeleth againe the second time the waight of Neptunes wrath, for that, as we haue shewed before, he had put out the eies of his sonne Polyphemus. For the eighteenth (or, as Ouid writeth, the eightith) day after his first setting out, when as he came so neere Ithaca, that he might easily descry the smoke of the chimneies (mark the crosse lucke) tempestuous winds and raging stormes do on euery side arise, so that his ship was ouerturned, and himselfe throwen into the sea, but, as God would haue it, rising againe instantly he caught hold of the ship. The Nymph Leucothea, (Nausicaa, others call her) seeing him thus toiled and wandring in the mid∣dest of the sea, tooke compassion vpon him, and presently relieued him: she aduiseth him to let go the ship, to put off his apparell, and to commit himselfe naked to the sea only; and withall she giueth him her fillet or haire-lace wherewith her head was bound vp: which he tying about his middle, swom vntill he came vnto the country of the PHAEACES, (Cedrenus, falsly, hath Phoenices) where he arriued neere vnto the riuer Callirhoë. The foresaid Ce∣drenus writeth that he was carried from hence into Creta to Idomeneus; and by him conuieghed thence into Corcyra, vnto Alcinous. But let vs pro∣ceed. With this fillet of Leucothea, he being tied vnto the ship and hanging at it, (except heere Philostratus which is ordinary with him, doe tell a tale,) with his owne strength, vsing his hande in steed of oares, he swomme through the middest of the sea. Yet that the shippe came thus farre and further, it seemeth out of Pliny to be not altogether improbable: because he writeth that about Phalacrum, a promontory or foreland of Phaeacia, or Corcyra, this ship was turned into a rocke: which rocke Martianus saith is in fashion and proportion like a ship: although falsly hee in that place calleth this foreland Phalarium for Phalacrum. But if any man shall say that he doth requite one tale with another, I will not greatly gainsay him. From Phaeacia, by Alci∣nous king of that country, who had most honourably intertained him, he was at length conueighed to Ithaca his natiue country, whose smoake he had ma∣ny times and often desired before this to see. Where killing the woers, which were in number, if one may beleeue Athenaeus, an hundred and eight, or as Dictys Cretensis saith but thirty onely, he embraceth and kindly saluteth his louing wife Penelope. And this is the end of all these wandring peregrina∣tions, in which, as Ouid saith, Iactatus dubio per duo lustra mari: Tenne yeares he wandred vp and downe in seas vnknowen. Signifying that the rest of the yeares were spent in trauels and troubles endured vpon the land. Of which the same authour also thus speaketh, Ille breui spatio multis errauit in annis, Inter Dulichias Iliacas{que} domos. In trauell many yeares he spent, his iourney was not farre, Betweene the iland Zante and Troy, that fa∣mous towne of warre. Isacius vpon Lycophron testifieth that Vlysses, by the counsell of Minerua, went to TRAMPYA, a city of the Eurytanes, a people of Epyrus or Aetolia, there to offer sacrifice vnto the Gods: and withall this our authour there addeth, that these people are the very same that Homer in the eleuenth booke of his Odysses speaketh of in these words, , that is, vntill hee came amongst those men, that ne'r heard tell of Ocean sea. Againe the same authour moreouer affirmeth that in this city Vlysses was worshipped as a god, and that hee had an oracle there. Not farre from hence amongst these people also Stephanus placeth the city BVNIMA, first founded by Vlysses. That he was reuerenced as a god, I do find by a certaine speech of Seneca that he vseth of him vnto Serenus: and therefore it is no maruell that he should giue foorth answers and oracles. And that I may omit nothing of his labours, Dares Phrygius amongst diuers other of his dangerous attempts writeth that hee put in to harborough at MONVCHA. Cassiodorus in the twelfth booke of his Variar. writeth that the towne SCYLLACIVM was also built by him. That he erected a chap∣pell vpon the toppe of mount BOREVS in Peloponnesus, to Neptune and Minerua Sospita, I do find in Pausanias his: Arcadica. Apollodorus, as Strabo citeth, writeth that Vlysses in this his voiage came to the ile CANNVS, but which this should be I know not. For of this name there are diuers, as thou shalt find in our Thesaurus. And peraduenture it is not vnlikely to be true, that Vlysses was tossed to and fro to diuers and sundry places; which Era∣tosthenes, as Strabo alledgeth, saith he will then find out, when it shalbe his chance to meet with the cobler which sewed the bottell wherein he carried the windes which Aeolus gaue him. And thus much generally of the wandring voiage of this Captaine, which happened to him as he passed inter Dulichi∣as Iliacasque domos, Betweene the iland Zante and famous Troy, as Ouid reporteth. Sed perlege Odysseam omnia nosse volens, But read o're learned Homers workes, He telleth this tale at large: as Ausonius in his Epitaphs counselleth. Yet of this our Vlysses I cannot with silence passe ouer that of Plutarch in his Morals; namely, for that he had killed those Suters, it was by Neoptolemus decreed against him that hee must leaue his country and be seene no more in Ithaca, Dulichium and Zacynthus. So that in this his banishment he went againe into Italy. But where he left his life, it is vncer∣taine.
Isacius vpon Lycophron, an authour oft cited by vs, affirmeth out of Theopompus, that hee died in GORTYNIA, a city of Tyrrhenia in Italy. Yet Dictys Cretensis toward the latter end of his sixth booke (whom also thou maiest read if thou thinkest good) saith, that he died in ITHACA. All men for the most part generally report, that he was slaine vnawares by his sonne Telegonus (holding still in his hand a cuppe, as Athenaeus telleth the tale) with an iron dart, headed by his mother Circe, with a puffens quill (pastinaca marina, they call it) but for another purpose, as Oppianus in the second booke of his Halieutica writeth, namely to kill his enemy, not his father. Hyginus in the 127. fable recordeth that assoone as he was dead hee was carried into the ile Aeaeato Circe, and was there by her interred. Some there are, as Isacius testifieth, that do report that Circe by her sorceries restored him a∣gaine to his former life. More peraduenture might haue beene said of this our Vlysses, if Cratinus Comicus, whom Athenaeus reporteth to haue written De Vlyssibus, were now extant and to be gotten. Notwithstanding, after this larger discourse of the wandring voyage of this famous Captaine, I thinke it not amisse to speake a word or two of Vlysses himselfe, because I verily perswade my selfe that it cannot but bee a matter that the Reader will very well like of. In a certaine siluer coine or piece of money of Caius Mamilius Limetanus, who, as the report goeth, (thus testifieth Liuy) was lineally descended from Vlysses, and the goddesse Circe, was stamped vpon one side the head of Mercury, and therefore it had, as is very probable, on the other side the sig∣net or counterfet of Vlysses: which may be easily prooued out of those particulars and testimonies that doe heereafter follow. Plutarch in the life of Cato the Elder, doth giue out that Vlysses had a purpose to haue gone backe againe to the caue of Polyphemus, for no other cause but to demand his Cappe and Girdle, which there he had left behind him & forgotten. Therfore, it is here hence apparant that he did vsually weare a Cap and a Girdle. Yet we reade in Pliny that Nicomachus the painter did first paint Vlysses with a cappe vpon his head. And to be painted wearing a Cappe was a cognisance and badge of nobility, as Soranus in the life of Hippocrates doth plainly affirme: item, Dion Prusaeus in his foureteenth oration seemeth to intimate as much. Again, by an ancient custome of the old Romanes they were woont by putting on a Cappe vpon a mans head, to make those that were slaues, free. Whereupon they vsed this phrase of speech Ad pileum vocare, To call a man to the Cappe, for Ad libertatem vocare, To make one a freeman. That this Cappe af Vlys∣ses was in fashion round, it is manifest out of these words of Saint Hierome, Rotundum pileolum, quale in Vlysseo conspicimus, A round Cappe, such a like one as we do see vpon the counterfet of Vlysses. I may also adde this one thing although somewhat farre fetched, That they were called Pileati, as Iornandes testifieth, which amongst the Goths were accounted of greater birth and nobility, or of deeper reach and experience then the common sort of men were of, because they went with their heads couered with a kinde of bonnet or cappe. Moreouer he carried in his hand a staffe, wherewith he staid him∣selfe where the waies were slippery, and defended himselfe from such as in his trauell did assault or molest him; as Homer testifieth of him in the fourteenth booke of his Odysses. He had also a dog, as the same authour affirmeth, which after twenty yeares absence, at his returne home knew his master. Now the name of this dogge, as we read in the same authour, was Argus. Which also Plutarch, in his booke of the tranquillity of the mind, doth auouch to be true. And withall addeth this moreouer, that he wept for his dogge when he died. Pausanias in his Phocicis, describeth this our Vlysses with a corslet or coat-armor vpon his backe. Homer in the fifteenth booke of his Odysses saith that he was bald or very thinne haired. Which is to be vnderstood of his latter daies when he grew in yeares. For Suidas out of the aforesayd authour sheweth, that his haire was blacke and curled. Beside that, he saith that he was somewhat hog-backed or stoup-shouldred. That he bare in his shield or scutcheon a Dolphin, and why, thou maist read in Plutarch in his book of the Com∣parison of liuing creatures. But some man may aske me, why Mercury, wearing a broad brimmed hatte, with his verge or mace in his hand, was stamped vpon the backeside of Vlysses coine? If it be lawfull for me to gesse and interpose mine opinion, I answer, For the especiall and singular loue and fauour of this God aboue the rest, shewed at sundrie times toward this braue Captaine. For when in that his peregination all the Gods well neere were set and opposed against him, only Mercury was found to fauour him and to sticke close vnto him. For he only gaue him an antidote or preseruatiue against the sorceries and inchantments of the mischieuous witch Circe. And indeed we read that this God of all others was wont especially to be honoured in any maner of magicall seruices whatsoeuer, as we may see in the fourth booke of Papirius his Thebaidos. Item, of this God he obtained leaue to depart, and that he might bee no longer detained by the nymph Calypso &c. And peraduenture there may be also another cause assigned; namely for that Vlysses, whom Homer and other authours do highly commend for a most eloquent oratour, and one that could speake most wisely and to the purpose in any kind of matter, did take this god Mercury (whom the Gentiles did make the president of orators and eloquence) for his guardian and protector, thinking thereby to bind him so much the more neerely vnto him. Pausanias saith that in Motya, a city of Sicilia there was the statue or counterfet of this our Vlysses, but by Nero the Emperour it was from thence transported to Rome in Italy. And thus much of this braue Captaine, Qui mores hominum multorum vidit & vrbes, who, as the Poet writeth of him, saw many mens maners and knew many cities. Of whom also thus speaketh Ouid, Si minùs errasset, notus minùs esset Vlysses? If great Vlysses had not strai'd, he had beene more obscure. But of him I will speake no more: lest peraduenture with the Grammarians, I bee hit in the teeth with that of Diogenes: who said that while they did search diligently to know all the crosses and euils that befell Vlysses, did forget their owne. And moreouer that worthy admonition of wise Seneca, where he saith, Quid proderit inquirere vbi Vlysses errauerit, quàm ne nos semper erremus? What shall it auaile vs to seeke where and which way Vlysses wandred, more then to restraine vs that we do not in like maner alwaies wander as he did? And now it is high time to take penne from paper. As for those coines which we haue spoken of before, I wish thee to repaire to Goltzius and others which haue at large and peculiarly handled that argument. A description of the RED SEA, now vulgarly called, The INDIAN SEA. MARE ERYTHRAEVM, or, as the Latines call it, MARE RVBRVM, The Red Sea, which heere we offer to thy view in this Mappe, for as much as we can gather out of ancient writers, stretcheth it selfe from the West, as Liuy writeth along by the coast of A∣frica or Aethiopia, euen vnto India in East, yea and beyond that, I know not how farre, as Arrianus testifieth: whereupon Ptolemey, Pliny and Melado call it MARE INDICVM, The Indian Sea. But Herodotus calleth it MARE PERSICVM, The Persian Sea. Which Pliny doth seeme to iustifie to be true, where he saith, That the Persians do dwell along by the coast of the Red Sea, between the coast of Africa, and the iland Taprobana. Strabo that worthy Geographer, he calleth it MARE MAGNVM, The Great sea, who moreouer doth affirme it to be a part of the Atlanticke sea, and that truly. A part of this sea, to wit, where it toucheth the coast of that Aethiopia which lieth beneath Aegypt, Pliny, of the countrie Azania (which at this day some do thinke to bee called Xoa) nameth it MARE AZANIVM. Where it ioineth with the Bay of Arabia, it is of Ptolemey named HIPPADIS PELAGVS, now called of some Archiplago di Maldiuar. Item, of the same Ptolemey it is otherwise called BARBARICVS SINVS, The Barbarian bay: I meane in that place where it beateth vpon Aethiopia, and the iland Menuthesia, now of the seamen generally called, The iland of Saint Laurence, but of that country people Madagascar, and of Theuet Alba∣gra. There are two Baies or Gulfes, as the Italians and Spaniards terme them, of this sea much talked of in all ancient histories: to wit, SINVS PER∣SICVS, The Persian Bay, and SINVS ARABICVS, The Arabian Bay, which some, not well read in old writers, do for the most part call Ma∣re Rubrum, The Red Sea. Very improperly, being indeed but a part of that sea, properly called the Red sea, which we haue hitherto spoken of. But why it was of the Greekes named Erythraeum, and of the Latines Rubrum, Red, it is a great question amongst the learned not yet decided. Some there are which do deeme it to haue beene called, The Red Sea, of the colour of the water: but this, of all late writers, trauellers, seamen, and other eie-witnesses of good credit, which haue in this our age, & euery day do saile through this Sea, & haue diligently viewed the same, is improued and found to be altogether false. Moreouer Qu. Curtius amongst the ancients doth plainly testifie that it differeth no whit in colour from other seas. Some there are as Pliny writeth, which do thinke that, by reason of the reuerberation of the Sunne beames, it seemeth to cast vp such a like colour to the sight of the beholders. Others doe thinke that this is caused by reason of the colour of the sand or earth in the bottom of the same: others do affirm it to be the very nature of the water. Some do write that it was so named of king Erythrus, Perseus sonne, whose tombe, as Quintus Curtius writeth, did in his time remaine in a certaine iland of this sea not farre distant from the maine land: (Strabo calleth this iland, Tyrina: Pliny and Pomponius Mela, Ogyris: Arrianus, Oaracta:) or else of a certaine Persian named Erythras, as the forenamed Strabo giueth out. Who, as Pliny with him testifieth, in a small barke or barge first sailed through this sea and discouered the same. Which story also is at large handled by Agatarchides. Yet our authour calleth him Hippalus, who first found out the course to saile through the middest of this sea. Pliny by that name calleth the wind by which they make their iourneis through this sea. (So called as is ve∣ry probable of the inuentour.) Which wind the same authour in the thirteenth chapter of his 6. booke, maketh the same that Fauonius is vnto the Latines. Mela & Agatarchides do call it a tempestuous, stormy, rough and deepe sea. Pliny, Philostratus, Elianus, & Athenaeus do giue it the title of Margaritife∣rum,
the pearle-bearing sea. And the same Pliny maketh it Arboriferum, a tree-bearing sea. For he writeth in the fiue and twentieth chapter of his thirteenth booke, that it is full of groues and tall woods: the toppes of whose high trees he affirmeth are seene much aboue the waters, and therfore at high tide they vse to fasten their shippes vnto the toppes, and at the ebbe vnto the roots of the same. Item, the same authour, in the two and twentieth chapter of the sixth booke of his Naturall historie, writeth that about Colaicum, (which also is called Colchi) or as Solinus affirmeth about Tapobrana, an iland not farre hence, the sea is of a very greenish colour, and so full of trees that their toppe boughes are barked and brushed with the rudders or sterne of those ships that saile this way. Moreouer that trees do grow in this sea Megasthenes, out of Antigonus de Mirabilibus, doth affirme, which Plutarch in his Naturall questions, and againe in his booke de facie Lunae, doth auouch to be true: where he doth particularly nominate some of them, to wit, Oliue-trees, Bay-trees, and Plocamus, which otherwise they call Isidis Capillus. This also Strabo in the sixth booke of his Geography iustifieth to be true: so doth the forenamed Pliny, who teacheth vs that it is a plant much like to corall without leaues. Agatarchides saith that it resembleth much the blacke rush. Athenaeus out of Philonides the Physician writeth, that the vine was first brought from the Redde-sea and planted in Greece. In the eigth chapter of the fourth booke of Theophrastus his history of plants, you may reade of diuerse other kinds of trees and herbs which do naturally grow in this sea. Pom∣ponius sheweth, that this sea hath more and greater monsters that do liue and breed in it then any other sea in the world beside. Quintus Curtius affir∣meth that it is full of whales, (balaenae) of such an huge bignesse that they are in bulke equall to the greatest shippes or vessels that are. Solinus saith that one of them will couer two akers of ground. The same authour doth there describe vnto vs certaine blew wormes, which haue their forelegges not lesse then six foot long. These are of that wonderfull strength that oft times they do with their clawes lay hold vpon Elephants comming thitherto drinke, and by maine force pull them into the sea. Item, he telleth of certaine whirle-pooles, Physeteras, he calleth them, of that huge bignesse, that they are to see to like vnto great and massie columnes, these doe many times raise themselues vp as high as the crosse-mast, from whence they spout out such abundance of water out of their gullets, that oft times by the violence of the storme the vessels of those which saile and passe by that way are sunke and cast away. Strabo hath left in writing, that Amazenas, the admirall of the Indian fleet, did there see a whale of fifty foot in length. Arrianus in his Indica describeth cer∣taine balaenas, whales or whirlepooles, of an huge and wonderfull bignesse, with three sorts of great and terrible kind of Serpents, which as Solinus wri∣teth will couer more then two akers of lands. It is recorded by Pliny that the Hydri, certaine sea-monsters of twenty cubites in length, did much affright the nauy of Alexander the Great. Item, he telleth of torteises of such a maruellous bignesse, that the shell of one of them will make a couer for a prettie house: and againe, That they vsually do saile in these shels vpon this sea, like as they vse in other countries in shippes and boates. Yea, as Agatarchides affirmeth, these fishes do serue those which dwell vpon this sea coast, instead of houses, boats, dishes and meat. About the iland Taprobana, now called as generally all learned do thinke, Samotra, there are certaine fishes, which do liue partly vpon sea and partly vpon land, whereof some are like oxen, others like horses, and other some are like other foure footed beasts, as Strabo in his fifteenth and sixteenth bookes hath left recorded. And thus much of the name, situation and nature of this Redde-sea, which Liuy in his 45. booke tearmeth, Finem terrarum, The outmost bound of the world. He that desi∣reth to know more of this sea, let him haue recourse to Agatarchides and Arrianus in his Indica. Item, let him consult with Baptista Ramusio, who tran∣slated this Periplus, or discouery, into the Italian tongue, and hath enlarged the same with a discourse, as hee calleth it, of his owne, of the same argu∣ment. And I would wish him not to omit Stuckius, who also translated the same into the Italian tongue, and hath illustrated it with his most learned and laborious Commentaries. Lastly, Athenaeus in the fourteenth booke of his Deipnosophiston, maketh me beleeue that Pythagoras that great and famous Philosopher, did write a booke of the Redde sea. HANNO'S PERIPLVS, OR, Discouery of the Atlanticke Seas and Coasts of Africa. THis Periplus of Hanno king of Carthage, was first translated out of Greeke into Latine by Conradus Gesnerus, a man that hath very well deserued of all sorts of scholars & succedent ages, & hath illustrated the same with his most learned and painfull Commentaries. But before him Baptista Ramusio turned it into the Tuscane tongue, and hath to it adioined a discourse, as he termeth it. Of the ancient writers Pomponius Mela in the second chapter of his third booke, & Pliny in the first chapter of the fift book of his history of Nature, who there calleth him a captaine of Carthage, not king of Cathage, haue made mention of this Periplus or Discouery. But he calleth this discourse by the name of Commentaries, not of a Periplus. The same Pliny in the one and thirtieth chapter of his sixth booke calleth him an Emperour. Yet Solinus in the last chapter of his worke, out of Xenophon Lampsacenus, maketh as if hee had beene a king of the Poeni. Arrianus also toward the latter end of his Indian stories mentioneth this Periplus. Moreouer Pliny in the sixteenth chapter of the eighteenth booke of his Naturall historie, and Aelianus in the fiftieth chapter of his fifth booke De Animalibus, do make mention of one Hanno, who was the first man that euer was heard of in the world that durst handle, and take vpon him to tame a Lion. But whether he be the same with this our Hanno, I am not able to determine. For there haue beene many of that name: of which, if any man be desirous to know more, let him repaire to the Commentaries of the forenamed Gesner, which he wrot vpon this Periplus. These words in Pliny and Martianus in very deed are meant of another Hanno, diuers from this of whom wee haue hitherto spoken. Hanno, say they, at such time as the Punicke Empire stood in flourishing estate, sailed round about by the coast of Barbary, and so from thence South-ward all along by the shore, vntill at length after a long and tedious iourney he came to the coasts of Arabia. More∣ouer that student that is desirous to know more of this Periplus or Discouery, may adde to these collections of ours, such things as Iohn Mariana hath writ∣ten of it, in the latter end of his first booke of his history of Spaine. ORBIS ARCTOVS, OR, The Northren frozen Zone. THe draught of this we haue in this place heere adioined both for an auctuary, and for the better beautifying or proportioning of this Mappe. To wit, that there might be something that might answer to the modell of Hannoes Periplus. This wee intreat the diligent student of ancient Geography to take in good part. Peraduenture succedent ages shall heereafter manifest to the world another diffe∣rent from this of ours and perhaps more true, by the diligent and painfull trauels I hope of our English nation or their consorts the Hol∣landers. For these both haue spared no cost nor refused any danger to find out a passage through the Northren seas from hence to Chi∣na and India: (For hitherto there is no other way discouered to saile thither but by the South, by Cabo de buona speranza, which is a long and most tedious iourney:) But of this read hose worthy labours of M. Richard Hackluyt, who, to the great benefit and sin∣gular delight of all men, hath set out the English voyages, to the immortall praise and commendation of this our Nation, and those braue Captaines and Seamen which haue vndertaken and performed the same.
ARGONAVTICA, That is, IASONS voyage for the GOLDEN FLEECE. THere is none almost of the ancients which hath not as it were by the way touched the story of the ARGONAVTES, that is, of IASON, or of the GOLDEN FLEECE: but amongst those which of set purpose haue handled that matter as Cleon, Herodotus, Pisander, Dionysius, Milesius, Varro At∣tacinus, and Epimenides (who, as Laertius recordeth, set out the same at large in 6500. verses) there are only three remaining at this day, that haue come to our handes; namely, Valerius Flaccus, Orpheus and Apollonius Rhodius. In all which three, the iourney foorth-ward of those Argo∣nautes (that is, of Iason and his consorts which sailed with him in the ship named the Argo) is reasonably alike described, but in the returne of them homeward they differ very much one from another in their relations: For Flaccus bringeth them backe from Colchis, by the North shore of the Euxine sea, (Mar maiore) and so vnto the mouth of the riuer Ister or Danubius (Done or Donaw) and there he leaueth them; being preuented by death, as he peraduenture supposed. Apollonius bringeth him vp against the streame of the said riuer, and so out of it by the riuer Sabus (Saw) as Pliny and Trogus do thinke, into the Hadriaticke and Ionian seas: not farre off from Tergeste (Trieste, in Friuli) but as Pliny saith, they were forced out of the way by the riuer E∣ridanus (Po) into Rhodanus (Rhosne) vnto the Stoechades (Isles de hyerres) certaine ilands in the Ligusticke sea (Mar di Leone) ouer-against Narbone in France: out of which sailing through the Midland and Aegean seas, they came safe home to the place from whence they first set out. But Orpheus he telleth the story with a farre greater circumstance, and maketh them to fetch a larger compasse about, namely, by the riuer Tan (Don) and that huge wood (as he calleth it) or endlesse, as Dionysius Afer termeth it: and that not without iust cause: for I deeme it to be the greatest wood of the whole world that yet to vs is descried. (These latter ages call'd by one proper name Orcynium, or Hercynia.) Then by the North sea, called of them Croni∣um (named by Seneca in his tragedie, intituled Medea, Vrsae vetitum mare) and by the Atlanticke sea vnto Hercules pillars (the streights of Gibraltar) compassing round all Europe, came at last home safe againe to their owne houses. This voyage there∣fore we haue in this our Mappe, framed out of those three forenamed authours: which will easily and plainly appeare to him that shall examine the same with the stories set downe by them. Beside those places named by them, we haue added certaine other, out of other authours, neuer touched by them, yet pertaining to this their purpose: as namely, Salmydessus in Thracia, where Apollodorus saith they landed or put into harborough. Item, AEmonia, a towne built by the Argonautes in that place where they laying the Argo, their ship, vpon ingines [their shoulders, as Pindarus and Trogus haue giuen out, and so Pliny saith, the best authours affirme] caried it from the shore 400. furlongs: or, which is all one, 50. miles, euen vnto the coastes of the Thessalians (Italians, Zozomen readeth: differing in word and maner of writing, not in truth of story: for they were Thessalians by birth and parentage, now seated in the land of Italy) as we find recorded in Zosimus and others. There is the city Pola, a worke begun and perfected by the Colchi, who, being sent to pursue Medea, vp to the riuer Done, (Ister) vp as high as the ilands then called Absyrtides, where, being frustrate of their purpose, they staid: and of the riuer Ister, vp which they sailed: they called the country through which it runneth Istria. Phla, or if you please Phila, an iland in the lake Triton, in Africa, where Herodotus writeth that Iason arriued, and the North wind blowing stiffe against him was driuen to Malea, a promontory or foreland of Peloponnesus, and there to haue giuen his tripos, (or treuet) to Triton. Polybius saith, That Iason built a temple at Bosphorus Thracius (Stretto di Constantinopoli, the streights of Constantinople: the Greekes call it Laimon, the Turkes, Bogazin) and that to the honour of Neptune, as Pindarus reporteth: where he also consecrated twelue altars for those seruices and sacrifices. This selfe same Temple Demosthenes nameth the Temple of the Argonautes. In Pau∣sanias and Varro, we read that the same Iason dedicated a Temple to Iuno, in the ile Samos, (Samo.) Item, to Iuno Argiua in agro Picentino, (Principato, or Costa de Ainalfe) as Pliny hath left recorded. And that hee erected altars neere the riuer Ister, (Done or Donaw) where it diuideth it selfe into two streames, emptying his waters partly into Pontus (Mar maiore) and partly into Adria, (the Gulfe of Venice) Aristotle teacheth in his Admiranda. I suppose he meant this of the Caucasian rockes, (Caucasij scopuli.) Fabulous antiquity verily beleeued that the riuer Ister had issue out into the Hadriaticke sea. Perad∣uenture mooued by that which Pliny in the fifteenth chapter of his fourth booke, hath most fabulously written, that certaine fish called Tunies, breed in the Euxine sea, (Pontus Euxinus Mar maiore) do swimme vp the riuer Ister, and from thence do passe, by secret passages vnder the ground into the Hadriaticke sea. And thus farre of this gadding and rouing voiage by sea, which from their first setting forward vntill their returne, as Apollodorus reporteth out of ancient recordes, was performed in the space of foure moneths. Which in my iudgement seemeth not very probable: I beleeue he dreamed when he wrote this storie. For so many moneths would scarce be sufficient for one to saile vp the riuer Ister, against the streame, from his mouth where it falleth into Mar maiore, vnto Tergeste, (Trieste) vpon the Gulfe of Venice, much lesse could they be able in so short a space to go so long and tedious a iourney as this was described to be. More true and likely by farre are those wordes of Hypsipula to Iason, (for she intertained him into her house at the ile Lemnos (now it is named Stalamine.) Tertia messis erat, cùm tu dare vela coactus, Implesti lachrymis talia verba meis: Abstrahor Hypsipule: si dent modò fata recursum: Vir tuus hinc abeo, vir tibi semper ero. Quod tamen è nobis grauida celatur in aluo, Viuat, & eiusdem simus vterquè parens. Thus in English by M. George Tuberuile: When third Autumne came on that thou of force wert faine, To hoise thy sailes, these words thou spakest with gushing teares amaine; Mine owne, I must depart: if fortune say Amen, From hence I passe thy spouse and will thy spouse repasse againe. The imp within thy wombe God grant that it may liue; And we his parents both y feare a decent name may giue. They which desire a larger description of this nauigation, (which Philostephanus saith was made in one long shippe; or with a nauy or saile of diuers shippes, as Pharax reporteth) let him repaire to those three forenamed au∣thours often cited by vs. To these he may adioine Diodorus Siculus in his fourth booke: Ouids seuenth booke of his Metamor∣phosis: Hyginus fables: Pindarus and Callimachus: and if he please, the history of Dares the Phrygian. Appian in his Mithri∣datica writeth, That Cneius Pompeius after that he had pursued Mithridates, euen as farre as Colchis, that he went aland heere,
map of the ancient Mediterranean, with inset maps of Europe, the Black Sea and Thessaly ARGONAVTICA. ILLVSTRISSIMO PRINCIPI CAROLO COMITI ARENBERGIO, BARONI SEPTIMONTII, DOMINO MIRVARTII, EQVITI AVREI VEL∣LERIS, ETC. ABRAH. ORTELIVS DEDICAB. L. M. Ex conatibus Geographicis Abrah. Ortelij Antverp. Cum Imp. Reg. et Belgij privile∣gio decennali. 1598.
to view the peregrinations and trauels of the Argonaures, and to see the mount Caucasus, and the couch or bed of Prometheus. This is that which we heere in this mappe offer to the eie and consideration of the student desirous of this knowledge, with a great deale lesse toile and trauell, and peraduenture with as much contentation and pleasure. Cydias the painter, drew this story of the Argonautes in a table so curiously that he sold it, as Pliny in the eleuenth chapter of his fiue and thirtieth booke writeth, to Hortensius the famous Romane Oratour, for 144. sesterces. That the Argonautes, which were otherwise called Minyae, Dioscuri, and Tyndaridae, were in number fifty, Lucian in his Saltationes and Philostratus in his Icones do plainly testifie: Item, Valerius Flaccus in his seuenth booke in these wordes: Quin∣quaginta Asiam (pudet heu) penetrauit Iason Exulibus. Braue Iason with his fifty mates, I blush to tell, Did first set foot in Asia great. Orpheus reckoneth vp two and fifty. Diodorus Siculus and Apollonius foure and fifty. We, out of diuers and sundrie writers, haue gathered together more than fourescore. And these are their names, with their authours by whom they were mentioned. Acastus, by Apollodorus, Apol∣lonius and Val. Flaccus. Actor, by Apollodorus. Actorides, by Orpheus and Flaccus. Acterion, by Orpheus. Admetus, by Orpheus, Apollo∣nius, Valerius Flaccus and Apollodorus. Aethalides, by Orpheus, Apol∣lonius and Valerius Flaccus. Aglaus, by Orpheus. Almenus, by Apollodorus. Amphiaraus, by Apollodorus. Amphidamas, by Flaccus and Apollonius. Amphion, by Apollonius, Flac. and Orpheus. Ancaeus, by Apollodorus, Or∣pheus, Apollonius and Val. Flaccus. Anchistaeus, by Orpheus. Areices, by Apollonius and Or∣pheus. Argus, by Apollonius, Apollo∣dorus and Valerius Flaccus. Armenius, by Trogus. Ascalaphus, by Apollodorus. Asterius, by Orpheus, Apollo∣nius, Apollodo us and Flac. Atalanta, by Diodorus and A∣pollodorus. Augeas, by Apollonius, Orphe∣us, Apollodorus, and Phi∣lostratus. Autes, by Valerius Flaccus. Autolicus, by Apollodorus and Flaccus. Buphagus, by Orpheus. Butes, by Orpheus, Apollonius and Apollodorus. Caeneus, by Orpheus. Calais, by Apollodorus, Apollo∣nius, Orpheus, Pindarus, Val. Flaccus and Oppianus. Canthus, by Orpheus, Apollo∣nius, and Val. Flaccus. Castor, by Apollodorus, Hero∣dotus, Diodorus, Apollonius, Orpheus, Flaccus and Pin∣darus. Cepheus, by Flaccus, Apolloni∣us, Orpheus and Appollo∣dorus. Climenus, by Val. Flaccus. Clytius, by Apollonius. Coronus, by Apollonius. Deiloontus, by C. Valerius Flaccus. Deucalion, by C. Val. Flaccus. Echion, by Orpheus, Flaccus and Apollonius. Erginus, by Apollonius, Apollo∣dorus, Orpheus and Valerius Flaccus. Euphemus, by Flaccus, Apol∣lodorus and Pindarus. Euryalus, by Apollodorus. Eurybotes, by Apollonius and Flaccus. Eurydamas, by Orpheus and Apollonius. Eurytus, by Orpheus, Apollo∣nius, Flaccus and Apollo∣dorus. Glaucos, by Athenaeus. Hercules, by Apollodorus, A∣pollonius, Diodorus, Orphe∣us, Pindarus and Flaccus. Hylas, by Orpheus, Apollonius and Liberalis. Iason, by Diodorus, Orpheus, Apollonius and Val. Flac. Idas, by Apollodorus and A∣pollonius. Idmon, by Orpheus, Apolloni∣nius, Flaccus and Marcell. Iphidamas, by Orpheus. Iphitus, by Valerius Flaccus and Apollonius. Iphyclus, by Diodorus, Orphe∣us, Apollonius, Flaccus and Apollodorus. Iphys, by Valerius Flaccus. Iritus, by Apollodorus. Laertes, by Apollodorus. Laocoon, by Apollonius. Laodocus, by Orpheus, Apol∣lonius and Valerius Flaccus. Leitus, by Apollodorus. Lynceus, by Apollonius, Apol∣lodorus, Orpheus and Flac. Meleager, by Flaccus, Apollo∣nius, Orpheus, Diodorus and Apollodorus. Menoetius, by Orpheus, Apol∣lonius and C. Val. Flaccus. Mopsus, by Pindarus, Orphe∣us and Valerius Flaccus. Nauplius, by Orpheus, Flaccus and Apollonius. Nestor, by C. Val. Flaccus. Olieus, by Apollonius, Orphe∣us and Flaccus. Orpheus, by Apollodorus, and Diodorus. Palaemon, by Orpheus, Apollo∣nius and Apollodorus. Peleus, by Orpheus and Apol∣lodorus. Peneleus, by Apollodorus. Periclymenus, by Apollonius, Apollodorus, Pindarus, Or∣pheus and Flaccus. Phanus, by Apollodorus. Phalerus, by Pausanias, Orphe∣us, Apollonius and Flaccus. Philoctetes, by C. Valerius Flaccus. Phlias, by Apollonius, Orphe∣us and Flaccus. Phogus, by C. Val. Flaccus. Poeas, by Apollodorus. Pollux, by Apollodorus, Diodo∣rus, Pindarus and Herodo∣tus. Polyphemus, by Flaccus, Or∣pheus, Apollodorus and A∣pollonius. Staphylus, by Apollodorus. Sthelenus, by Ammianus. Taenarius, by Orpheus. Talaus, by Apollonius and Val. Flaccus. Telamon, by Diodorus, Orphe∣us, Apollodorus and Flaccus. Theseus, by Pindarus, Apollo∣dorus and Plutarch. Tideus, by C. Val. Flaccus. Tiphys, by Orpheus, Apollo∣dorus, Flaccus, Philostratus, Ouid, Pausanias and Mar∣cellinus. Zetes, by Apollodorus, Apol∣lonius, Orpheus, Pindarus, Flaccus and Oppianus. All which, Philo Iudaeus saith, were gentlemen, free men borne, and of good parentage: allied to Kings, and of the bloud royall, as Varro in his second booke of Husbandrie writeth: The deare darlings of the Gods, as Theocritus in his seuen and twentith Idyllion, or Demy-gods, as Philostratus in his Icones nameth them: Whereupon the poet Catullus thus saluted them: Heroes saluete Deûm genus: All haile braue woorthies borne of seed diuine. As for the Argo (which Flaccus calleth fatidicam, the fortune teller: Lucian, Claudian and others loquacem, the pratling shippe: and was at last, as Manilius reporteth, taken vp into heauen) of whom it was so named, who made it, in what place, of what wood, from whence it did first set saile, &c. Hieronymus Columna, in his Commentaries vpon the fragment of Ennius, imprinted at Rome, hath most diligently gathered and selected out of all ancient writers, and followed to the full. These Argonautica, Martiall in his seuenth booke of Epigrammes, where he speaketh of the fragment or broken keele of this Argo, maketh of it, except he iest, a true story, not a feigned tale and fiction of the poets: Fragmentū quod vile putas & inutile lignū Haec fuit ignoti prima carina maris. Quā nec Cyaneae quondā potuere ruinae Frāgere, nec Scythici tristior vnda freti. Secula vicerūt, sed quamuis cesserit annis, Sanctior est salua parua tabella rate.
TEMPE THESSALICA, OR The PARADISE of THESSALY. BEing admonished in my sleepe by the Goddesse Fessonia, (which they were wont to adore and pray vnto, that by reason of any great labour or farre trauell were faint and weary (fessi) that after this long and tedious peregrination ouer the whole world, I should bethinke my selfe of some place of rest, where the painfull students, faint and wearied in this long and wearisome iourney, might recreate themselues; I presently, as soone as I awaked, went about it: and while I surueigh all the quarters of the huge globe of the Earth, behold the noble TEMPE, famous for their sacred groues, by the leading of Pomponius Mela, that renowmed Geographer, do offer themselues to my view and consideration: those therefore shaddowed out in their true and liuely colours with the best art of painters pencill: and rudely described by our more vnskilfull penne we haue annexed to the end of these our labours. They are si∣tuate in AEMMONIA, as Ouid and Athenaeus do testifie: or THESSALIA, which is all one in the iudgement of Solinus and Liuy. But in regard that the riuer Peneus (Pezin, or Salampria) doth part Thessaly from Macedony, they seeme ra∣ther to be situate in the confines of both these countries, than to be conteined wholly within the bound of one. Strabo Pliny, Herodotus, Liuy and Theon, the petifogger, by the iudgement of Theopompus, do place these Tempe, or this large and pleasant plaine (through the middest of which the goodly cleare riuer Peneus doth runne) between the two stately mountaines Ossa, (Olira, or Cossouo) and Olympus, now called Lacha. Solinus also is of the same opinion, as appeareth by these his wordes: Peneus the riuer, which running between the mountaines Ossa and Olympus, with the goodly hils rising and falling gently by degrees, and woody vales, doth make the pleasant Tempe in Thessalia; Tempe, quae syluae cin∣gunt super impendentes, The Tempe which the ouer-hanging groues do round inclose, as Catullus the poet in his Argo∣nautickes, hath left recorded. It is, as Pliny saith, about three lands breadths ouer, (sesqui iugerum, AElianus calleth it Plethrum.) The length (which they do define to be from the mouth of the riuer Gannum, euen vnto the bay, now vul∣garly called Golfo di Salonichi, then Sinus Thermaeus) is as Liuy testifieth fiue miles, or as AElianus saith, which is all one, forty furlongs. These mountaines, Liuy writeth are so high, steepe, and craggy on all sides, that a man may scarce looke downe from off the toppe of them, without a dazling of the eies, and giddinesse of the braine. The noise also and depth of the riuer Peneus, which runneth through the middest of the valley, is very terrible. Pliny saith that the stately toppes of these mountaines, on euery side do rise by little and little vp higher into the aire, than a man may well discern. Within these hils the goodly riuer Peneus doth runne; which for his crystall waters, rowling ouer the smooth pebbles; the goodly meddowes and grasse alwaies fresh and green vpon the bankes: the ouerhanging groues and trees continu∣ally resounding with the melodious harmony of sweet singing birds, is so pleasant and delightsome as any in the world beside. But because all these authours haue spoken of it, as it were by the way, and not of set purpose: I thinke it not a∣misse to set downe in this place, the description of it, done by AElianus as you may read in the first chapter of his third booke De varia historia, where it is most curiously and absolutely set out in his true and liuelie colours. These therefore are his wordes. There is a place between Olympus and Ossa, the two loftiest mountaines of all Thessaly, disioined one from another, by the diuine prouidence of eternall God, by a faire plaine or leuell running between them: the length of this plaine or valley is fortie furlongs: It is from one side to the other in some places, two or three lands breadths ouer, in some places it is somewhat broader. Through the middest of this valley runneth the riuer Peneus: into which also other riuers fal∣ling and mingling their waters with his, do much encrease the streame of Peneus. This place is most pleasant and de∣lightsome, by reason of his great varietie of all sorts of alluring and inticeing pleasures, neuer made by any art or industry of man, but by nature it selfe, shewing all her skill in the beautifying of this valleie, at such time as it was first made. There is in this place great store of iuie alwaie green and flourishing, alwaie budding and putting forth his pleasant slowres, euer clinging and winding in maner like the goodlie vine, about the tallest trees, and clambring vp by little and little vn∣till it come euen to the verie toppe. In the same places grow the aie-green yeugh-tree, which lifting vp it selfe aloft vpon the rockes, shaddoweth the caues, holes and cliffes, which beneath lie lurking in the vale. All other things whatsoeuer do flourish, blossome, and beare flowers are there to be seene: this is a most gallant and glorious shew for the eies to be∣hold. In the plaine, when the sunne is at his height in summer, you shall haue manie goodlie shaddowie groues and di∣uers places of shelter, into which trauellers, desirous for to refresh their wearied limmes from the violence of the heat and their noisome sweat, do betake themselues, as into the most pleasant and delightsomest innes and harboroughs that are in the world. Moreouer of ouerflowing wels and pleasant springs of most coole and fresh waters running heere and there in sundrie places of this valleie, there are verie manie and diuers: which if we shall beleeue the report of our fathers, haue been verie wholesome and soueraigne to sundrie sorts of diseased persons that haue washed themselues in the same. Againe, diuers birds heere and there dispersed in these groues and woods, do make the guests great mirth at their ban∣quets, with their sweet singing and pleasant tunes: especially those which haue the lowdest and sweetest voices, do so please and hold the eares of the heares, that those which passe by this waie are so rauished and delighted with this their musicke, that they instantly forget all their trauels and businesse. On ech banke of the riuer such are the delights, plea∣sures and recreations for the wearied trauellers, as before we haue mentioned. Yet the riuer Peneus, going on leasurely, and smoothly like an oile, runneth quietly through the middest of the Tempe. About this riuer, by reason of the trees which grow vpon the bankes, and their farre-spreading boughs, is a most goodly shade: so that such as row in boates, vp and downe vpon this streame, for almost a whole day together, may saile in the pleasant shade free from the violence and schorching heat of the sunne. The people which dwell vpon this riuer, do oft times meet in companies, sometimes in one place and sometimes in another. Hauing done diuine seruice and ceremonies in due forme and maner, they ban∣quet and make merrie. Therefore those which do these seruices and performe these ceremonies being very many, it is no maruell though such as come hither to walke for recreation, those which trauell by this way or saile vp or downe this riuer vpon what occasion soeuer, do continually smell a most sweet and fragrant sauour. In this maner this place was consecrated with great honour & religious seruices. These things and many other hath Aelianus written of these Tempe.
depiction of the ancient paradise of Tempe in Thessaly TEMPE. Delineatum et auditum auctore Ab. Ortelio cum privilegio decennali. 1590. Est nemus Aemoniae praerupta quod undi{que} claudit Silva, vocant TEMPE, per quae Penëus ab imo Effusus Pindo, spumosis volvitur undis. Ovid. i. Metamorph.
Of these also Procopius (although he nameth them not by name) hath written in his fourth booke De Aedif. Iustiniani Imperatoris. There is a braue description of these places in Catullus his Argonauticks. But I thinke it good here to set downe out of diuers writers certaine seuerall things of these Tempe, as they are here and there dispersed in their works. Maximus Tyrius, in his xxxix. oration, hath left recorded, that diuine honour in olde time was done to the riuer Pe∣neus, for his maruellous goodly beautie and farre-surpassing cleere waters. Pliny writeth, that this riuer doeth admit into his channell the streame of the brooke Eurotas, but so as it swimmeth aloft like oile; and hauing caried it so for a certaine space, casteth it off againe, as refusing to quaint and intermeddle his siluer streame with his filthy stincking troubled waters. The same authour sayth, that here groweth great plentie of Laurell, Polypody, Dolichus (a kinde of beane) Wilde-time, and Water-lilly: but this hath a blacke flower, if we may beleeue Apuleius. Pausanias in his Pho∣cica, writeth that the temple of Apollo at Delphos was built of Laurell boughes which grew in this place. Mela and the Poets do speake of Ossa, the mountaine memorable for the fabulous storie of the Giants: who also doe report, that the Lapithae a people of Thessaly, did sometime dwell here. In the same mountaine I reade in Polyaenus his fourth booke, that Alexander King of Indica, (for so I do rather yeeld to haue it read, than India, as hitherto the interpretours haue set foorth, seeing that Indica is a countrey hard by Pontus, as Stephanus directly auerreth) by hewing downe the craggie cliffes of this mountaine, did make certaine small staires, which sequent ages called Alexanders ladder. Nere these Tem∣pe there is a water described by Seneca and Pliny, which is so ilfauoured and filthy, that it will make any man affrayd to looke into it; and which, they say, will eat and consume both brasse and yron. Vitruuius also in the third chapter of his eighth booke saith, That in Tessaly there is a well or spring of running water, whereof no cattell will drinke, nor any ma∣ner of beast will once come neere; hard by this fountain is a tree which beareth a purple flower. Thus far Vitruuius. Of the mount Olympus (which Homer, in the second booke of his Odysses, calleth The seat of the Gods) Solinus out of the sixt booke of Varro, De lingua Latina, citeth, That it riseth vp so exceeding high into the aire, that the people neere adioyn∣ing do call his lofty top, Heauen. Lucane saith that it is higher than the clouds. For it is tenne furlongs high, as Plutarch in Aemilius, by the authority of Xenagoras, who measured it, hath left recorded. No bird nor fowle doth flie higher than the toppe of this hill, as Apuleius in his booke intituled De Deo Socratis, doth affirme. In the very toppe of it there is an Altar built and consecrated to Iupiter, where if any of the entrals of beasts sacrificed be left, they are neither blowen a∣bout by the blustring blasts of the roughest windes, nor dissolued by the dampish aire or washing stormie raines: but the next yeere after, that time twelue-moneth, looke how they were left, so they shall finde them: and at all times and seasons of the yeere, whatsoeuer is there once consecrated and offered to that God, is preserued from all putrefaction and corruption of the aire: Letters also written and drawen in the ashes doe so remaine vntill the next solemnity of the like rites and ceremonies the yeere following. Thus farre Solinus Polyhistor. Et nubibus intactum Macedo miratur O∣lympum: The Macedonian braue admir'th Olympus top to see So high and stately, far aboue the highest clouds to be: as Claudian the poet hath spoken of it in his poeme of the warres of the Goths. Of this mountaine, Varro, in his sixth booke De lingua Latina, noteth that the Muses were named Olympiades. And thus far generally of these Tempe, which from the beginning had not this forme and goodly countenance as all ancient writers doe constantly with one consent affirme: but the riuer Peneus, being inclosed with mountaines, and entertaining many riuers into it, did all ouerflow the valley, making it to stand full of water like a fenne or pond: and afterward when the mountaines Olympus and Ossa, which sometime did touch one another, were disioyned and rent asunder (which happened by reason of an earthquake, as Strabo, Seneca, and Athenaeus haue written: others, as Herodotus, Claudian, and Philostratus, do ascribe it to Neptune: others, as Diodorus and Lucane, to Hercules) and so by that meanes Peneus found an issue and way to vnload it selfe into the maine ocean; whereby it came to passe that the valley was emptied and cleane dried vp. By Stephanus in his booke of Cities, I finde that this tract and plot of ground was first called LYTAE, before it was disburdened of those waters. Eurypides in his tragedy intituled Troades, calleth it Semnan choran, the sacred and honourable countrey. Amongst the poets there is euery where much speech of this most goodly coast: to wit, in Virgill, Ouid, Horace, Catullus, Clau∣dian, Statius, Lucan, Flaccus and Seneca, where you may obserue these epithites attributed and spoken of it; some cal∣ling it Tempe Thessala, Peneia, Heliconia, Phthiotica; others, Tempe Frigida, Tenebrosa, Nemorosa, Opaca, Gratissima, Lucentia, Oloria, and Teumessia. The paradise of Thessaly, Peneus, Helicon, Phthiotis: the colde, shadowy, woody, coole, kinde, swanny and Teumessiam paradise; although this latter, with the singular learned man Hermolaus Barba∣rus, I doe thinke not to belong properly to this place, but rather vnto another most delightfull place in Boeotia, where we learne out of Pausanias, Strabo, Stephanus and Hesychius, that the mountaine Teumessus is seated. For Lutatius the Grammarian I hold to be deceiued, who calleth the place The city Trumessia. Neither is this altogether an vnaccusto∣med thing or vnusuall amongst writers, especially poets, to vse this word Tempe, and to speake it figuratiuely of other places, famous for their many delightfull pleasures; as you may see by Heloria Tempe, a place in Sicilia; and another in Tiburtina villa Latij, a place in Villa Hadriani; if you will giue credit to Spartianus in the life of the Emperour Hadrian: againe there was a College in Athens knowen by this name. So Dionysius and Priscianus do name Daphne, the suburbs of Antioch, Tempe. Plutarch in Flaminius describeth a place neere the riuer Apsus (Spirnasse or Vreo in Macedonia) for pleasantnesse much resembling the Tempe. Of these and such like places I cannot but I must needs adde these words of the Emperour Iulian vnto Libanius the sophister, and so to end my speech of this most goodly valley: Then, saith he, Batnae, a city of Mesopotamia, did entertaine me: a place such, as, only Daphne, the suburbs of Antioch in Syria excep∣ted, in all my life I neuer saw the like: Daphne which now is compared to Batnae, when as before excepting the temple and image, I would not doubt not only to compare it, but also farre to preferre it, before Ossa, Pelion, Olympus, and the Thessalian vallies &c. (he meaneth Tempe). These Batnae are situate (if any man be desirous to know) in Osroëna, a pro∣uince of Mesopotamia, as Zozimus and Stephanus doe thinke; or in Anthemusia, as Ammianus affirmeth; in the way betweene Antioch of Syria, and Carrae. Thus farre of these Tempe. But because I see that Daphne, the suburbs of An∣tioch in Syria, is of some writers conteined vnder this name, and that it is as pleasant a place as the Tempe, I will addresse my selfe to describe and tricke this out also; but in the next page following, not in this.
DAPHNE, OR The pleasant Suburbs of Antiochia in Syria. DAPHNE of Antiochia in Syria, vpon the riuer Oronies, that famous and pleasant Suburbs, which Ammianus calleth, Amoenum & ambitiosum, A delectable and gorgeous place, is distant from the citie about fortie furlongs. It is in compasse foure-score furlongs (or, which is all one, tenne miles) as Strabo writeth; who moreouer saith, that it is a pretty village, within a huge darke groue, watered with diuers goodly brookes and running waters. But take this larger description of it, out of Sozomen: It is a place, sayth he, round beset and shadowed with many Cypresse trees, [and those of infinite height, as Philostratus reporteth] yet here and there it is bedecked with sundry o∣ther sorts of goodly trees: by reason of the thicknesse of whose boughs and leaues, which by no meanes suffereth the Sunne-beames to come vnto the ground, it is all close couered ouer with a shadow as it were with a roofe. Vnder the trees, the earth, according to the seasons of the yeere, bringeth forth of all sorts, most pleasant and sweet-smelling flowers, one after another. Item, it is a place, both for the great plenty and pleasantnesse of the waters [Strabo calleth them, Running waters; Philostratus, Still or standing waters:] as also in respect of the temperature of the aire and kinde seasons of the yeere; lastly, in regard of the coole blastes and gales of windes which here doe ordinarily blowe, (yeelding also, as Calistus addeth, a sweet and pleasant whistling noise) most dele∣ctable, and for all maner of pleasure and recreation, passing fit and commodious. Here is also a spring, which is supposed to fetch his waters from Castalius, a spring by Parnassus in Greece: wherefore some men haue attributed to it the vertue and power of diuination, and doe verily perswade themselues, that it was of equall force and nature with that at Delphos. The vulgar sort and common people to these do adde this fable; namely, That the daughter of Ladon (Ouid hath Peneus) a riuer in Arcadia, did flie hither from her louer, and here was transformed into a tree. Yet Apollo not thus quieted in minde, but crowning himselfe with the boughes of that tree which he especially delighted in, and embracing the tree, and the place where it stood, beloued of him aboue all places in the world beside, did honour and grace it more than euer any other what∣soeuer. Gulielmus Tyrius, in the tenth chapter of his fourth booke, doth make mention of a fountaine or spring called Daph∣nis; which, he sayth, by deuices and pipes into diuers places is so cunningly conueyed, that it affoordeth, at certeine set times, great plenty of water. The situation therefore and nature of the place, the argument and matter of the fabulous story, which was altogether of loue, and applied vnto wantonnesse, oft times did imprint in the mindes of corrupt and ill disposed yoong men (taking this slight occasion) twise so great a desire of this wanton life as by nature they had before. For they, repeating those matters, spoke of in those fables, as it were in defence and excuse of their follies, were the more inflamed and pricked forward to the same: so that, casting off all shame and honesty, they are in these their lasciuious acts caried with such heat and violence, that by no meanes they are able to temper themselues, nor abide to see here any modest man in company with them. The nature therefore of this place being thus, it was held for a vile thing and great disgrace, for any honest and ciuill man to be seene in it. For if any men, of those places neere adioyning, were by chance seene heere without his wench, he was counted for a very clowne or sot, a man of no bringing vp, or good maners, nor fit for any gentle-mans company. Thus farre Sozomen. It was a defencible place, enclosed with a strong wall or rampart, as appeareth out of the seuen and twen∣tieth booke of Trogus Pompeius, who writeth that Beronice betaking her selfe to this place for a refuge, was besieged by Se∣leucus, but might by no meanes be taken. Item, he maketh mention of the Enginers of Daphne, (Ballistarij Daphnenses.) Moreouer, it was also, as Metaphrastes writeth in the life of Artemius, graced with many goodly buildings, houses and bathes. In it was a chapell of very gorgeous and costly workemanship, wherein stood the braue statue or image of Apollo Daphneus, or, of the Daphneian god, as Iulian the Emperour termeth it; equalling, as Ammianus sayth, the greatnesse of the counter∣fet of Iupiter Olympius. Heere also was a temple and sanctuarie of Diana, as Strabo testifieth. Item, heere Germanicus Caesar kept his Courts, as Tacitus hath recorded: and here afterward, saith Suidas, Constantine the Great built a palace, where he set vp the statue of Helena his mother: (Augustale, he calleth it; which is, that I may note this by the way, as Quintilian, in the second chapter of his eighth booke of his Institutions, doth interpret it, Tabernaculum Ducis, The pauilion of the generall.) The same Constantine caused this place to be named after his name, CONSTANTINIANA DAPHNE. Callistus and Grego∣ras do report, that one Mamianus, in the time of Zeno the Emperour, did build that place which was called ANTIFORVM. Here also was the church of Saint Euphemia, where S. Thomas the Abbat was buried. Item, the church of S. Michael, which, as Procopius in his second booke of the Persian history writeth, was burnt by Cosroes. That this was a most pleasant place, beside those things heere alledged, other histories also doe plainly shew: for Eutropius hath left recorded, That Cneus Pom∣peius being delighted with the pleasantnesse of the place, and great plenty of water, gaue vnto the Daphnenses a certeine plot of ground, that they might there farther enlarge the same. Iulius Capitolinus writeth, That Verus, that voluptuous Empe∣rour, did vsually spend the Summer in Daphne, the rest of the yeere at Antiochia. Lampridius sayth, That Alexander Seue∣rus executed some of the Tribunes of his legions or companies, for that by their negligence they had suffered diuers souldi∣ours to keepe riot and take their pleasure too much in Daphne. In Volcatius I reade of Auidius Cassius, That he caused procla∣mation to be made, that euery man should repaire to his Ancient, and to haue caused billes to be set vpon euery wall, That if any man were found in Daphne armed, (cinctus) he should returne from thence disarmed (discinctus.) (For Seruius at that place of Virgill, Discinctus Mulciber Afros, doth interpet the word, Discinctus, id est, militiae inhabilis.) Notwithstanding, it was of the Gentiles had in no lesse reuerence and estimation for the certeinty of those Oracles, which, as Suidas reporteth, were vttered and giuen forth in a coole and soft blast, breathed forth of the waters there. For they say that Hadrian who af∣terward was Emperour, before such timeas he was called to any publike office, hauing in a fountaine here dipped a Cypresse leafe, did together with the water sucke in a certeine faculty of diuining things to come. Iulianus in his Misopogonos writeth, That he had so many times and oft gone vnto this Oracle, that he could not possibly call to mir de how oft. In his time also, Sozomen, Theodoret, and Saint Chrysostome do write, that this Oracle ceased to giue any answer at all. For Gallus the brother of this Iulian, being elected Caesar by his father Constantius, because he was by profession a Christian, determined to cleanse and purge this place of that heathenish superstition, and that by this meanes: He commanded the coffin of Saint Babyla, that constant Martyr, and of others, which in the persecution of Numerianus suffered martyrdome with him, to be brought from Antiochia thither: by whose presence onely, which Gallus before had truely deemed, that diuell at an istant became wholly dumbe. But the foresayd Iulianus purposing to make warre vpon the Persians, and according as his maner was, comming with great deuotion to this his Daphne, and killing many oxen and other cattell for sacrifices, demanded of the Oracle what the euent of this his warre would be; answer was made him, by the idoll, that by reason of the neerenesse of the dead bodies
depiction of the ancient paradise of Daphne at Antioch DAPHNE. Ex utriusque lingua scriptori∣bus adumbriabat Ab. Ortelius. Cum priuilegio decennali.
(meaning Babyla with the rest, although he named them not) he was neuer able any more hereafter to answer ought of things to come. Iulianus taking this hardly, commanded the Christians to cary away the coffin of Babyla from thence into another place: which was straightway accordingly performed. Not long after (the very next night, as one authour affirmeth) by chance the chapell was set on fire, which consumed the roofe of the same, and burnt the image to ashes. This was the end of this Apollo of Daphne, as also of his temple. Saint Chrysostome writeth, that in his time there stood one columne or pillar of it firme and sound, which neither any violent tempest of winde and weather, or trembling earth-quake had shaken or ouer∣throwen; so that he supposed that it expected and looked to be amended and repaired againe by some succedent Emperours or others: And although Procopius affirmeth that this temple was reedified by Iustinian the Emperour, yet Cedrenus (who li∣ued long since Saint Chrysostome) sayth, that in his time there remained neither sticke nor stone of it. Which also my good friend M. Ioachimus Axonius Grauianus, a man for diuers and sundry farre trauels vndertaken and performed by him, and e∣specially for his skill in diuers strange languages very famous and honourable, an eye-witnesse of this same place, doth iustifie to be true: for he being by my selfe demanded of the moderne estate of this place, plainly answered, that beside certaine trees, there is not any thing of it at all to be seene. But of the firing and burning downe of this temple, the report of diuers writers is diuers. Saint Chrysostome sayth that it was done by the diuell. Many affirme it to haue beene kindled by thunder and lightning from heauen. The infidels commonly did father this act vpon the Christians. Iulianus the Emperour in his Misopogonos writeth, that it was defaced by the negligence of the warders or watchmen, and the desperate rashnesse of some wicked and base fellowes. But the Sextens, Church-keepers, and Priests, as Theodoret testifieth, when they were whipped for their negligence, sayd plainly, that the fire began not at the ground or bottome, but at the top, and so consequently by all likelihood did fall from heauen. And the clownes and countrey-people which dwelt not farre off, affirmed that they saw lightning fall from heauen vpon that place. But of this let vs heare Ammianus Marcellinus, who in his two and twentieth booke hath these words of it: Iulianus had the Christians in a iealousie for the fact, moued thereunto, as he thought, by enuy and malice. But the same was, although but lightly reported and of small credit, that this chapell was fired vpon this occa∣sion: Asclepiades the Philosopher comming to see Iulianus the Emperour, staying in these suburbs, was woont whithersoe∣uer he went to cary about him a little siluer image of the heauenly goddesse (Dea coelestis) which he set below vnderneath the feet of this idoll; and lighting torches and waxe candles, as the maner was, went his way: whereupon about mid-night, when no man could be there nor at hand to helpe, the sparkles flying vp gat hold vpon the old rotten timber, and the fire be∣ing kindled and increasing greatly by reason of the drinesse of the fewell, streamed vpward and caught hold vpon whatsoeuer it might reach, yea indeed were it neuer so high, and burnt it cleane downe to the ground. Notwithstanding, we learne out of Nicephorus Callistus, That this same place from that time was not altogether forsaken and contemned, but was woont of a long time after to be frequented, and that games, playes and shewes were vsually held and kept there. Aethicus (or, more truly, Iulius Orator) accounteth this Daphne (yet falsly and vntruely he calleth it Daphe, not Daphne) amongst the most goodly and famous townes of the East sea. Metaphrastes also, in the life of S. Artemius, maketh it a citie: Claudian, the Christian Poet, calleth it Apollineum nemus, Apollo's groue: Dionysius, Sacra Tempe, The holy Tempe: and his old interpreter, Optima Tempe, The goodly Tempe: in ancient coines, we sayd before, they were called Constantiniana Tempe, Constantines Tempe: in the iournall set forth by Peter Pithoeus, Palatium Daphne, The Palace of Daphne. But why should I not here insert these verses of Petronius Arbiter written of it? Nobilis aestiuas platanus diffuderat vmbras, Et baccis redimita Daphne, tremulaequè Cupressus, Et circumtonsae trepidanti vertice pinus. Has inter ludebat aquis errantibus amnis Spumeus, & querulo vexabat rore capillos. Dignus amore locus. In summer time the broad-leafd plane had cast his shade about, Braue Daphne crowned was with bayes, sweet Cypresse proud and stout, And here and there the taller pines with rounded toppes look'd out: Amid these ran a foaming brooke, with wandring streame so fast, That all their lower boughs beneath with water were bedasht. This pleasant place who can but loue? And thus much of the name, situation, & nature of this place: now there do yet remaine some things somewhat pertinent to this matter, which I thought good to adioyne to those former. Saint Hierome, Eusebius in his Chronicle, and Sextus Rufus do write, that Pompey the Great, returning from Persia, consecrated this groue, and thereto adioyned a goodly large forrest. Ammianus attributeth the building of the temple to Antiochus Epiphanes: Sozomen, and Callistus, to Seleucus: Theodoret saith, that the image or statue, within was of wood, but on the outside gilt all ouer: this also Simon Metaphrastes, in the place before cited, doth iustifie to be true: where he maketh a large description of the same: Cedrenus affirmeth, that this image was the workmanship of Bryxides, or, Bryaxides, as I had rather reade with Vitruuius, Clemens Alexandrinus, Columella; and Pliny, who writeth that he was one of the foure that carued the Mausoleum, that is, the tombe of Mausolus king of Caria, made by his wife Artemisia. It was inhibited by proclamation, That no Cypresse tree should be taken from hence, or cut downe, and that whosoeuer should fell any of them, was to be grieuously punished by an act made by Theodosius the Emperour. These Cypresse trees were preserued here, as Philostratus writeth, in memory of Cyparissus, a yong man of Assyria, turned in∣to this tree. Suidas recordeth, that this place was the natiue soile of Theon the Philosopher and Stoicke, who wrote a defence of Socrates. I doe also remember, that I haue read in some good authour, whose name I haue forgotten, that there was one of the Sibylla's borne here. Ammianus telleth of a monster borne here, as he himselfe both saw with his eies, and heard with his eares from the relation of others: namely, of a childe hauing two mouthes, two teeth, a beard, foure eies, and two very short or little eares. In Strabo I finde recorded from the relation of Nicolaus Damascenus, that from Porus, a King of India, certaine Ambassadours came hither to Augustus Caesar. Procopius in the second booke of his Persian stories writeth, that Cosroes the king of Persia did here sacrifice to the Nymphes. With what pompe and traine Antiochus Epiphanes did once come to this place, what shewes and bankets he made here, as also one Grypus at another time, if any man be desirous to see, let him reade Athenaeus his fifth and tenth books, and I doubt but he will greatly woonder. Of this Daphne, I would to God that worke of Protagorides, which he wrote of the Daphnensian Playes, Feasts, and Assemblies, whereof Athenaeus maketh mention in his fourth booke; together with that oration written by Libanius the Sophister, which Iulian in his epistles spea∣keth of, and so highly commendeth, were extant. Agathias in the prooeme to his historie affirmeth that he wrote the histo∣ries of this Daphne in Hexameter verse. I sayd before out of Tacitus that Germanicus Caesar kept his Court in this forrest, in whom, at this day in the 11 booke of his Annals, we reade these words: His tombe was at Antioch, where his corps was burnt: his court he held at Epidaphne, in which place he ended his dayes. Here for Epidaphne I reade Daphne, or, at Daphne: For of Epidaphne, for the name of a place, I finde no mention in any history, beside in Pliny, in his one and twentieth chapter of his fifth booke, where thou hast these words: Antiochia libera, Epidaphnes cognominata: as if this were a synonyme or equi∣ualent to Antiochia; yet being indeed as corrupt and falsly written as that other, and ought to be thus amended, Antiochia libera apud Daphnen, Antioch by Daphne is free. That this is true, Strabo, Plutarch, Ammian, and others do sufficiently testi∣fie, as we haue shewed more at large in the second edition of our Geographicall treasurie, in the word ANTIOCHIA.
Of the first FOVNDATION and ORDER of the GERMANE EMPIRE in the West. THE FIRST TABLE. AFTER that IVLIVS CAESAR had by continuall warres appeased almost all those broiles and seditious quarels which for certaine yeeares passed had much troubled the Romane state, and had sent Pompey and those other vnfortunate enuiers of his valour and prosperous successe in martiall affaires, either dead vnto the Diuell, or aliue by banishment had remooued them farre off into forren countries, as a valiant Conquerour of all entereth triumphantly into ROME: where challenging and assuming vnto himselfe a soueraigne authority and honour aboue all (himselfe indeed as a Monarch at his pleasure commanding all) was the first that began the FOVRTH MONARCHY, which of the place where it first seated it selfe, was sirnamed, The Romane Monarchy. In this dignity, which was the greatest that could be giuen to any mortall man, carrying himselfe most tyrannously and proudly (for he commanded that his statue or image should be set vp amongst the odious and wicked kings, and that his chaire of Estate shoud be made of beaten gold, and withall requested the Citizens to giue vnto him diuine honour; and to worship him as a god) certaine Al∣dermen or Senators, loathing that his lordly gouernment in the Senat house wounded him in three & twenty seuerall places, whereof he died, in the yeare 709. after the building of the city of Rome. Notwithstanding he being thus made away, the chiefe authority and Empire ceassed not to reside amongst the Romanes, for AVGVSTVS, the sole adopted heire of Caesar, presently steppeth into the Imperiall seat, and by force of armes layeth hold vpon the soueraigne dignity and whatsoeuer else his predecessour had by hooke or crooke possessed and en∣ioyed. Vnder his gouernment all things being still and hushed, there being now not so much as the least noice of tumultuous warres stirring in the world, all men generally admiring this blessed and happy peace, do withall in like maner of all policies, highly extoll the monarchy, as authour and preseruer of the same. Vnder the name of this title, the Romanes alone for many ages together most honourable and fearefull to others, were victours and conquerours wheresoeuer they became; vntill at length certaine idle and cruell minded men being promoted vnto that dignity, did choose rather tyrannouslie to shew their force and power at home against their kinsfolke, friends, subiects, and best men of all sorts, then abroad a∣gainst the publicke enemy and disturber of the state. These men by all maner of vnlawfull meanes succeeding one another, at last the Empire and managing of the common-wealth was onely in the hands of Tyrants and Vsurpers: neither was there any man now that euer would once trouble himselfe to defend the same from the furious assault of the raging enemy: and no maruell. For euen the Empire it selfe, and whatsoeuer did of right belong vnto the same, was by the souldiers bought and sold for money, or giuen for fauour and affection. While all things stood thus in the Roman Empire, ODOACER, king of the Hunnes, with a mighty army inuadeth the same, and in all places wheresoeuer he became, ouerthroweth and beateth downe the Romane forces and garrisons: for at this time in the idle and dissolute souldiers there remained neither strength nor true fortitude. AVGVSTVLVS the Emperour, hearing of these newes, being smitten into a great feare, flieth, and that he might the better escape vn∣knowen, in the flight throweth off his imperiall robes and ornaments. In the meane time Odoacer speedeth himselfe toward Rome, besiegeth it, taketh it, and within a few daies after he was wholly and quietly possessed of it, changeth the name of it, and after his owne name caused it by pro∣clamation to be called ODOACRIA: but together with the ancient name this city leaueth the former beauty and lusture, there is nothing now heere to be seene but miserable destruction and ruine. This prosperous successe and easie inuasion of the city of Rome by Odoacer, within foure∣teen yeares after, giueth occasion to THEODORICVS, king of the Gothes, who was then in Thrace, to attempt the same. Therefore mustering his men, with many thousands of Goths, he entreth Italy, driueth Odoacer out of Rome, and again the second time neere to Verona setteth vpon him, and putting him & his forces to flight, followeth him to Rauenna, where he besiegeth him continually for the space of three yeares together, but at length being forced to yeeld the city he was by him taken and put to death. Neither did this satisfie frowning Fortune that Rome was thus once or twise taken, sacked and consumed with fire, except the LONGOBARDI, Lombardes, a strange and cruell people do also inuade Italy, to deface and ouerthrow all things whatsoeuer the former enemies had left vntouched and standing. All things are now deformed and cast downe whatsoeuer in former times were most beautifull and glorious, the Romane citizen is compelled to forsake that ancient and famous title so long en∣ioied by them, and by meanes of this so irrecouerable a dammage the name of an Emperour was for euer banished out of Italy. The case thus stan∣ding with the Romanes, destitute of all helpe at home, and in vaine expecting the same from the Greeks, (who for their Empire contented them∣selues only with Constantinople) the Pope of Rome for defence of the Church was forced in this great distresse to entreat aid of Charles, king of the Frankes, who afterward was sirnamed CHARLES THE GREAT. This good king pricked on forward with a godly zeale for the mainte∣nance of Christian religion, passing with a great army ouer the Alpes, putteth the Lombards to flight, taketh their king Desiderius with his wife and children, vtterly ouerthroweth their kingdome and cleane extinguisheth that impious race. The Pope obseruing his inuincible courage, and his siugular loue that he bare to the Church and religion, with the generall consent and admirable applause of all men, in the yeare after Christs in∣carnation 801. crowneth him with the Imperiall diademe, and giueth him the title of AVGVSTVS and GREAT EMPEROVR of the West. This king was the first that of the Dutch was called Emperour, and that translated that dignity from the Greekes vnto the Germanes. He valiantly assailed the Hunnes, and at last with continuall wars so afflicted them that they were neuer after able to gather head againe. The Normanes, Frei∣ses, Danes, Angles, Saxons, and others molesting the Empire, he wonderfully vexed and weakened. Hauing on all sides greatly enlarged his Em∣pire, and for the space of fowreteene yeares swaied the scepter quietly at home, void of tumults and noise of warre, he committed the gouernment of the same to his sonne Lewis, sirnamed the Religious, and ended his life at Aquisgran. After the reigne of this Charles, the digni y and title of the Empire remained not amongst the Germanes without continuall warres and bloudshed, diuers kings coueting to annex the same to their crowne and nation, by dint of sword assaied by all meanes to bring their purpose to passe. To seat it amongst the French, Charles the Bald, spareth no cost, ventureth life and limme, and setteth all the world together by the eares: yet the Germanes valiantly fighting for the Imperiall ti le and dignity; do after many sore conflicts quite and cleane driue him out of Germany. Lewis the Fourth most furiously setteth vpon Berengarius an vsurper lately proclaimed Emperour in Italy, ouercommeth him in the field, and forceth him to betake him to his heeles. The Italians oft desired that this dignity once lost might againe be restored to them. (and no maruell: seeing that euery nation doth account it a most honourable thing to haue the name of an Empire resident amongst them.) Yet maugre all externall spite this dignity for many ages together remained in the hands of the Germanes, the Princes of this country manfully defending and preseruing it by force of armes from all iniuries and forren inuasions whatso∣euer. Vntill at length the forenamed Princes, foreseeing what was best for the state and good of the Empire, did chuse for their Emperor, Otto the Fourth, the naturall sonne of Otto the Third, a yong man brought vp at Rome, & had been somtime in the custody and tuition of Henry Duke of Bayern. This Emperor perceiuing that it would not be an easie thing to appease and end the warres and controuersies that did arise about the ele∣ction and choice of the Emperor, except by some other meanes & order this choice were made, did therefore inuent a certaine order and maner of election, whereby heereafter all cause of dissention and tumult, was wholly taken from all men, and by which for euer it might quietly be retai∣ned amongst the Germanes. This order is heere expressed in this Mappe, and is in effect thus much: In the first ranke are the Seuen PRINCE ELECTOVRS and Officers of the sacred Romane Empire, instituted by Otto the Third: whereof the Three vpon the right hand, are Ecclesiasti∣call persons or Churchmen, to wit, the ARCHBISHOP OF TRIER, (a city situate vpon the riuer Moselle) chiefe Chancellour for the Empire in the kingdome of France: The ARCHBISHOP OF COLEN, vpon the Rhein, Chiefe Chancellour in Italy; and the ARCHBISHOP OF MENTZ, Chiefe Chancellour in Germany: The other Foure vpon the left hand, are Secular or Lay men: the First, is the KING OF BOHE∣MIA, the Cup-bearer: the Second is the COVNTY PALATINE of Rhein, the Sewer: the Third is the DVKE OF SAXONY, the Sword-bearer: the Fourth is the MARQVESSE OF BRANDENBVRG, the Lord Great Chamberlaine to the Emperour. In the Second ranke doe follow, first the Foure Dukes of the Empire, to wit, the DVKE OF SVVITZERLAND, the DVKE OF BRVNSVVICKE, the DVKE OF BAYERN, and the DVKE OF LOREIN. Then vpon the left hand, the Foure MARQVESSES, videlicet, the MARQVISSE OF MEIS∣SEN, the MARQVESSE OF MORAVV, the MARQVESSE OF BADEN, and the MARQVESSE OF BRANDENBVRG. In the Third and last ranke do follow the Eight EARLES of the Empire: whereof the LANDTGRAVE OF DVRINGEN, the LANDGRAVE OF HESSEN, the Earles of LVCHTENBVRG, and of ALSATIA, are Earles Prouinciall: the other Foure, MEIDENBVRG, NVRVBERG, RENECK, and STOMEBVRG, are Earles Marshall or of the field.
depiction of the three ecclesiastical electors of the Holy Roman Empire, the four secular electors, four dukes, four marchises, four provincial earls. and four earls marshal, each with a blazon or coat of arms ORDINES SACRI ROMANI IMP: AB OTTONE III INSTITVTI
Of the FOVNDATION and ORDER of the GERMANE EMPIRE in the West. THE SECOND MAPPE. OTTO the Fourth, or, as some haue written, OTTO the Third, of whom wee haue spoken in the former Mappe, vnderstanding that Gregory the Fifth, Pope of Rome, whom he had not long since promoted to that dignity, was driuen out of his Sea, and Crescentius a Consul or Alderman of Rome by the Romanes made Emperour, passeth the Alpes with a great power, furiously assaulteth Italy, forceth the Romanes, and any other cities that had stood out against him for the aduerse part, to set open their gates and to yeeld themselues to his mercy. Crescentius, when he heard that the enemy was receiued into the city, was ex∣ceedingly amazed, and therefore betaketh himselfe with Pope Iohn, the vsurper which he had promoted to that dignity, vnto Adrians castle, which not long before he had fortified and repaired, for their last re∣fuge and succour. But being not able to sustaine the batterie and violent assaults which dayly the Empe∣rours souldiers made against him, at length yeeldeth the castle and himselfe to Otto: who presently com∣mandeth Crescentius the authour of this commotion to haue his eies put out, his nose cut off, and to be caried on horsebacke round about the towne with his face to the horsetaile: This being done his iudgement was to haue his hands and feet to be cut off, and at the townes end to be hanged vpon a paire of gallowes, where, before he was altogether dead, the souldiers do pitifully wound and man∣gle him from top to toe. Moreouer Pope Iohn, the vsurper, being displaced, Gregory vpheld and maintained by Otto, the Empe∣rours authority, climbeth vp againe into the Papall throne, from which before he had most iniuriously, by Crescentius, beene expel∣led. Then Gregory to requite the kindnesse of the Emperour and his Germanes, and withall that he might sufficiently reuenge him∣selfe of the Romanes for the intolerable wrongs that they had done vnto him, consulteth with the Emperour about a new law and forme of election of the Emperour, to be made by the Princes of Germany, that this choice might only and for euer remaine in their power, and againe that they should alwaies choose one of their corporation or body, as it were, vnto that dignity, which custome remaineth euen to these our daies duely kept and obserued. By vertue of this their choice, he is by and by vpon that their election to be called only, CAESAR and KING OF THE ROMANES, but hauing receiued the Imperiall diademe from the hands of the Pope, he was euer after to beare the title of IMPERATOR AVGVSTVS. But before these ordinances were published, Otto calling toge∣ther the Princes and States of Germany, shewed them how confusedly and disorderly the choice and election of the Emperor had hi∣therto beene made, and how many there haue beene, which haue assaied by all meanes possible to preferre their friends and kinsfolke vnto that dignity, which thing cannot but in continuance of time, breed great dissention and danger to the Christian common∣wealth: and that it were therefore good that some of the Princes of Germanie were chosen, which might haue the whole power and authority of this election; and withall admonisheth them, that the fewer there were of those Electours, so much lesse the contention would be that should arise about the choice. Moreouer he endeuoured to perswade them that these Electours might bee appointed and taken out of the Peeres and Officers of the Empire, for that they of all other best knew what was good for the body and state of that kingdome and empire. All men generally liking of that course and counsell by him proposed, the Emperour and the Pope nomi∣nated vnto them first, Three ecclesiasticall Princes, bishops of Germany, which they wished might be the Lord Chiefe Chancellours of the Empire, to wit, The bishop of Mentz, for all matters in Germany; The bishop of Colen, for Italy; The bishop of Trier, for France; To these they adioined Foure Secular Princes, which should in all things aid the Emperour, attend vpon his person, and that should acknowledge him for their Lord and Monarch of the World: viz. The Duke of Saxony, Sword bearer to his Maiesty, signifying that hee is the fountaine of Iustice: The Marquesse of Brandenburgh, Lord Great Chamberlaine: The County Palatine of Rhein, Sewer: and The K ng of Bohemia, Cup-bearer: these were to attend vpon the Emperour and to gard his person. By these the King of the Romans was chosen, the Caesar (or he that was next to be Emperour) was appointed: in their hands the whole right, interest and authority of choosing that king resided, lest any man heereafter, as heeretofore had beene vsuall, should challenge this dignity vnto himselfe as due by inheritance from his ancestours. Charles the Fourth many yeares after this comprised this instrument or act into a bullion or tablet of gold, which to this day is extant, wherein hee explaned euery particular more expresly and significantly. It is reported that this ordinance was decreed vpon, and made in the yeare of Grace 1001 and did much discontent the Frenchmen, who tooke it hei∣nously as a great indignity offered vnto them. Yet beside these there were then, and afterward in succedent ages were, made many and sundry other ordinances and decrees in the Romane Empire, and diuers other Offices appointed and erected for the state and greater maiesty of the Empire. For beside these seuen Electours, there were appointed, Foure Dukes, Foure Marquesses, Foure Landt∣graues, Foure Burggraues, Foure Earles, Foure Barons, Foure Knights of the field, Foure Cities, Foure Villages, and Foure Yeomen or Rusticks, all which offices we haue expressed in their true characters in these two mappes appointed for that purpose only. Notwith∣standing other Emperours following, not content with these constitutions and ordinances, haue daiely made new Dukes and Earles, yea and many that were but Earles before they haue aduanced to the title and honour of Dukes. To these forenamed dignities, that they might, as much as was possible, strengthen the state of the Empire, they haue adioined certaine other new officers, to wit these which follow: Foure HIGH MARSHALS, as Bappenheim, Gulich, Meissen, and Vnistingen: Foure LORDS OF THE SOILE, Mil∣lan, Scala, Padua, and Mirandula: Foure BORROVGHS of the Empire, Aldenburgh, Meidenburgh, Rotenburgh, and Mecklenburgh: Foure KNIGHTS or Seruants, Waldeck, Hirten of Fulchen, Arnsperg, and Rabnaw: Foure SOVLDIERS, Andlaw, Meldingen, Stron∣decke, and Fornberg: Foure LORD ABBOTS, Fulden, Campidon, Wissenburgh, and Murbach: Foure HVNTSMEN, Hurn, Vrach, Scomburgh, and Metsch neere to Curia: Foure VILLAGES, Ingelheim, Altdorff, Lichtenaw, and Deckendorff: Foure MOVNTAINS of the Empire, Nunsterberg, Friedberg, Heydelberg, and Nurnberg: Foure OFFICES hereditary to the Dukedome of Switzerland, The Sewer of Waldprugh, The Cupbearer of Radach, The Marshall of Merkdorff, and The Chamberlaine of Kemnat. Yer many of these di∣gnities are altered and changed into others, or wholly abolished and extinct by the death of those which held them, as it is at large to be seene in Munsters Cosmography. If any man be moreouer desirous to know the names of the Imperiall cities, let him repaire to the same authour, he shalbe satisfied to his full content. Item Charles the Fourth, Emperour of Germany did make besides these many other constitutions. When the Emperour sitteth in his Maiesty and chaire of Estate then the Archbishop of Trier sitteth ouer against him, the Archbishop of Mentz vpon his right hand, and the Archbishop of Colen on his left: The King of Bohemia taketh his seat vpon the right hand of the Archbishop, and by him the County palatine of Rhein placeth himselfe, the Duke of Saxony sit∣teth vpon the left hand of the Archbishop, and by him the Marquesse of Brandenburgh. But of these offices, diuers authours do write diuersly; wherefore it being not our purpose to make a large discourse of this matter, we send the Reader, for further satisfaction heer∣in, to the forenamed Sebastian Munster and other Historiographers of Germany, who haue handled this argument more amply.
depiction of four barons of the Holy Roman Empire, four knights, four freemen, four citizens, four villagers. and four yeomen, each with a blazon or coat of arms Otho III Saxonioe Dux, Othonis II filius, a princibus Germanis, Imperator Romoe dictus, a Gregorio Vpontif. Max. consanguineo suo Bruno antea Vocabatur) quem ille pontificem crearat, diadema imperiale accepit: Sed cum Saxoniam peteret Imperator, Gregorius pontifex a Iohanne ponti: Ʋrbe pellitur Quare Otto irarum plenus maximis copÿs Italiam ingressus vi Romam capit.De his consule Munster: Crescentium consulem dissidȳ authorem cum suis cōpli∣cibus punit, Gregoriumque pristinae dignitati restituit. Cum veró consideraret sapientissimus Coesar perpetúo oestuare Gallos et Italos, transfe∣rende imperialis maiestatis cupiditate a Germanis, et inter Germanos quoque propter electionem nonnūquā dissensiones defuis se apud suos Maiores: tulit cum Gregorio sanctionem vt in posterum sola authoritas eligendi Imperatoris, penes septem Germanioe principib{us} prima rios remaneret: Erat tum Otto natus annos 28 et propter ingeny proptitudinem miraculum mundi dictus: factum hoc as serunt Ao salutis nonagen∣tesimo septuame quarto licet scriptores tempore multum varient, quod lectori manifestū erit ex lectie Historiarum, Nomina 4 Comitum et Militum Imperij superius omissa, hic legenda ponimus. 4 Comites Imperij. Swartzēburgēsis, Clivensis, Ciliae, et Sabaudiae. 4 Milites Imperij. Andelato, Meldingensis, Strongendoch, Frauwēberg.
The KINGS MONASTERY of Saint Laurence, for Friars of the order of Saint Hierome, in Escuriall in Spaine. OLd stories do much talke of seuen wonders of the World, whereof hitherto it hath much bragged, yet notwithstanding they, (such is the mutability of fortune) at this day are all consumed, and by tract of time; brought to nothing, so that now there remaineth not any monument or mention of them at all. This our age also hath certaine wonders and strange things equall or superiour to the most of those. Spaine, amongst other, hath a most stately and princely building, a worthy worke of the Catholike King, of in∣finite cost and charges consecrated to holy and religious vses; to wit, a Church, not such as that was in Asia, sometime dedicated to the Ephesian Diana, and at last set on fire and defaced by Herostratus, but one as gorgeous and sumptuous as that, consecrated to Saint Laurence, that zealous Martyr and glory of the Spanish nation, of whom they crake so much. The cause of the dedication, as they say, was a vow. For in the voiage vnto Saint Quintins, the Metropolitane and chiefe city of Vermandois, vndertaken by the Catholike King, Philip the second, of the house of Austrich, against Henry the second, the French King, there was a notable battell fought betweene the Frenchmen and the Burgundians, in the yeare of our Lord 1557. Vpon the tenth day of August, in which the flower of chiualrie and chiefe Nobility of France being slain and ouercome, the victory fell vnto Philip and his Burgundians: which victory was such, as I am not able to say whether the house of Austrich euer saw a greater or not. This day euery yeere is kept holy for Saint Laurence the Martyr, to whom and his good praiers this good Prince doth thinke himselfe beholding for this victory. There∣fore, the King, assoone as he was returned home, remembring his vow, tooke care for nothing more then to performe his promise made to God and his holy Martyr Saint Laurence. Therefore he performeth the same very magnificently, and most bountifullie laieth on cost, bestoweth many yeares and almost infinite treasures vpon this worke: so that now it is not onely one, and that a most gorgeous and stately Monastery, but foure, according to the number of the corners of the building, beside a maruellous princely Palace with a Library well stored with diuers and sundry ancient manuscripts and rare bookes. The village, which by reason of the great multitudes of labourers and workemen which resorted thither of all trades, now is become a pretty towne, commonly called ESCVRIAL (Escuriacum, in Latine) is fiue miles from Madrid, an ancient city which Ptolemey in his time called Mantua Carpeta∣norum. Round about it are diuers very steepe and high hils, out of which almost all the stone was digged, that was vsed about this building. The Friars which do inhabite and possesse these Monasteries are of the order of Saint Hierome, who very deuoutly euery day at nine of the clocke in the quire of that Church do sing Psalmes and powre out their praiers to Almighty God for the health and preseruation of all Christian Princes. There also the King hath erected an Vniuersity, and hath allowed large maintenance not onelie for the Professors and Readers of Diuinity, Philosophy and other liberall sciences: but also for the scholars and students of the same. Yet it is a place of no great resort, being of purpose built a good way distant from the high rode way, lest the great resort thither of strangers, which oft times commeth to passe, should corrupt the maners and minds of the students, or alienate them from their books. But let vs come to some particulars heere well worth the obseruation. Within the inner Court, on the foreside of this building, you shall see a goodly cloister or walke couered ouer head, which beginning at the West side of the Abbey, runneth all along by the North side, paued with small stones partly round and partly square. The foreside and chiefe shew of this Abbey is toward the West, and in the foure corners of this building there are foure turrets. Ouer the fore-dore of this Church, vpon their seuerall footstals doe stand the statues or counterfets of the sixe kings of Israel carued out of white marble and blacke touchstone, each of them being eigh∣teene foot high. The great porch of this Abbey vpheld and standing vpon pillars of Ionicke and Doricke worke is all of Geat or blacke Agate. Vpon the North side there is a Courtyard, through which they go to the Kings palace, the foure walkes of the Col∣ledge and the Vniuersitie: all which are built vpon this North side. Here also you shall see some of the shops and worke-houses of those handicrafts, tradesmen and others that do belong aswell to the Church and Colledge as to the Monasterie. On the South side also are certaine gardens, orchardes, the walke belonging to the Hospitall, certaine Stilling houses, with an Apothecaries shop and a gallery by which they passe from the Monastery vnto the guessen parlour. Let vs come now vnto the inner ornaments of this state∣ly peece of work. And first, with the staires by which they go vp from the great doore of the Church, a goodly gallery, which leadeth vnto the open walke which is betweene the Colledge and the Monastery, doth offer it selfe to thy view. In this gallery you may go vp by a broad paire of staires to go into the Church, and from thence you come vnto another floore, which leadeth to the crosse en∣try which is before the Church, from whence they of the Monastery go one way, those of the Colledge another way, into the church, and so from thence into the lower roome of the Quire. The place or platforme of this Quire is square, hauing within the square three Cloisters. By this place of the lower Quire on each side there is an open Court, from whence the lower Quire and the two Chap∣pels situate by this Court, do receiue their light. In this Quire there are two stately Altars. Ouer this Quire, which is arched, there is another Church with a Quire belonging to it. Which Church beside the great Chappell, the Inner and Outter roomes of the Quire, is square, standing vpon foure pillars, and other necessarie staies and vpholders. In it are two paire of Organes, each of them hauing, as they terme them, two and thirty Registers. Moreouer in this Churh are six and thirty Altars, with a most stately Dore, by which they go vnto the great lower Vault, at such time as praiers are said. This Church is thirty foot higher then the lower Quire: and the vpper Quire is as many foot higher, then the Church it selfe. The floore is laid checkerwise with white marble and a kind of blacke stone, in like maner as the floores of the outter and inner Quires are: Heere are to be seene diuers and sundry Seruice bookes and Masse bookes, both written and printed, with others many belonging to such Church businesses. In the roofe of this Quire the Sunne, the Moone, the Starres and all the hoast of heauen are most curiously painted, like as also vpon the wals of the same the coun∣terfets of diuers vertues are so cunningly portraitured as one would thinke them to be liue persons, beside certaine histories of Saint LAVRENCE and S. HIEROME. The Seates are made of very fine wood, carued and set out with turned pillars of Corinthiacke worke most artificially. Vpon the South side of the Church is the Porch doore beautified and adorned with diuers and sundrie goodly pi∣ctures. In this Porch is a Fountaine made of diuers kinds of iasper and marble, running at seuen cockes for the vse and benefit of such as are purposed to go to Masse there. The floore is paued and garnished with blacke and white marble. The Vestrie also is a very stately place, and richlie adorned, in which are diuers coffers and chests wherein are laid vp and kept the copes, vestments and other ornaments belonging to the altars and Priests which they put on when they say Masse. Out of this vestry they go vp to the high altar which standeth vp a loft in the vpper end of the Church. The place where this altar standeth is paued with the best iasper stone of di∣uers colours. To this are adioning certaine Chappels and closets where the Noblemen and Princes do sit to heare masse. This way
depiction of the Royal Seat of San Lorenzo de El Escorial SCENOGRAPHIA TO∣TIVS FABRICAE S. LAV∣RENTII IN ESCORIALI. AD PHILIPPVM II. HISPANIA∣RVM ETC. REGEM CATHOLICVM. Michaelis vander Hagen Antverpij carmen. Caesarcas moles, at{que} alta palatia Regum Ne posthac Latium, aut Graecia iactet ouans; Pyramides, et aquaeductus, mira Amphitheatra, Et Circos veteres Inclyta Roma premat; Prisca fides sileat vasti Miracula Mundi; Nam faciunt nostra ad secula, prisca nihil; Vitus enim Hesperioe Rex Maximus ille Philippus Miracla exuperans omnia condit opus; Non opus; at Molem. qualem neque tota vetustas Vidit: et hoec oetas non habitura parem. Nempe Duces olim parti monimenta triumphi Victi erexerunt ambitione mala; Atque trophaea Dijs posuerunt capta profanis, Aut operis magni in secla perenne decus; Relligionis Apostolicae verum vnicus ille Defensor, voti Rex memor vsque pij, Sancti operis dudum aeternos molitur honores; Quo maius nihil hic Maximus Orbis habet. Is Collegium enim Augustum, et Regale dicauit. Laurenti, sacrum, tempus in omne, tibi; Cuj certo numero praesunt Hieronymiani: O felix Ordo; ô corda sacrata Deo. Non est hîc aliud nisi Magni Sponsa Tonantis; Maies tate Dei terribilisque locus; Est vbi Maiestas, et Magnificentia Regis Prodiga, inexhaustas et bene fundit opes. Regia sic summi est ibi Principis, at{que} supremj Numinis. ô qualis gloria? quale decus? Quis gazas? quis splendorem fando explicet omnem? Angustum ingenium est, lingua{que} nostra nimis. Quis vero Regi par, atque secundus Ibero? Miraclum Mundi solus et ille facit. Macte animis; porro tua tanta potentia crescat; O Heros populi Inuicte Philippe tuj. Euge autem ô felix Hispania, et euge Madrida; Quoe nisi tam Magno haud Proefide tanta fores.
they goe into the chappell which is vpon the North side of the church, where diuers pretious reliques of Saints are kept inclosed in their seuerall chests and boxes. Such another there is for all the world vpon the South side. Hard by the high altar there is a little roome most richly adorned, where the holy communion is administred. Within this roome by the high altar there is a closet, where the Sacrament is kept and reserued, set out most statelily with seuen pillars, of the best iasper, and the statues of the twelue Apostles, as curiously wrought as arte might deuise. The Doores of this closet made of the best and purest Crystall, which they call Crystall of the mountaine, are enclosed and hanged in certaine hinges of cast mettal double gilt and laid ouer with gold. This work is thought to be the most curious and artificiall that elsewhere is to be seene in all the world. The suruey or and famous architect of this building, Master Ieames Trezzo, was sixe whole yeares at the least in cutting and polishing of the iasper which was vsed in this worke onely. Moreouer the high altar is a worke as costly and curious as this, made in like maner of iasper and marble, and garnished with sundry stately pictures and statues. The MONASTERIE, or place of residence for the monkes and friars, hath a very goodly Steeple wherein doe hang a fine ring of Bels, with a Clocke and Diall, with an Index shewing the Naturall and Planetary howres. The Wardrope, Hall or Roome where the monkes and friars do vse to dine and suppe, with the spittle, are most goodlily built with Sollers, Galleries and Walkes. Moreouer heere is a faire Cloister or Square, where publike praiers are daily read: In the middest of this square is a very fine garden most artifi∣cially diuided into beds and curious knots. In the middest of it is a goodly piece of worke, built eight square in maner of a temple, with fountaines of the best iasper. To this Cloister is adioining the Chapter-house, with another roome very like vnto it. The Seats of the monkes are round about by the sides: but the Seat of the Priour doth farre excell the rest, a famous piece of worke made of marble, gloriously set out with pictures, and curiously arched ouer the head. The LIBRARY which is vpon the toppe of the Abbey, is 185. foot long, and 32. foot broad. It hath three sundrie roomes; In the first are all the Liberall Sciences protraitured. At the feet of euery picture, are the Bookes of that facultie very orderly and finely placed, all of them gilt, and bound alike. Heere also is an huge Parchment booke, wherein all manner of liuing creatures that are in all the whole world, elsewhere to be seene, are most curiouslie drawen and expressed in their true and liuely colours. In the Second are onely manuscript Latine, Greeke and Hebrew bookes of Di∣uinity. In the beginning of euery booke is set the picture and counterfet of the authour of the same. In like maner the third roome is furnished only with manuscript copies of sundrie writers, and different argument in diuers languages, to wit, Historiographers, Po∣ets, Mathematicians &c. These also haue, where they might possibly be gotten, the liuely portraitures and counterfets of their au∣thours set before them. This Library was much augmented by the addition of the Library of Didacus Hurtadus Mendoza, who ha∣uing sometime beene Ambassadour for Charles the fifth, Emperour of Rome, vnto the Venetians, receiued from the High country of Greece a ship full of manuscript Greeke copies: so that excepting the Vaticane in Rome, which is the Popes Library, there is not, as most men thinke, a more stately and better furnished library then this in all Europe. I come now to the VNIVERSITY, and the KINGS PALLACE, both which are vpon the North side. In the VNIVERSITY there are three seuerall Schooles or Hals, where the three most famous and worthy artes Diuinity, Law and Physicke are read by their seuerall and proper Lecturers, beside the other liberall Sciences which together with them are there taught and expounded vnto the yonger sort of students. To this is adioined a Free Schoole for Grammar scholars, with sundry other court yards, and hals or dining roomes. The PALACE is so situate, that from thence you may easily goe vnto the Church, the Colledge and monastery. It were a long discourse particularly to describe the seuerall lodgings of the King, the Ambassadours, Comptroulers, Chamberlaines, Noblemens, Pensioners, Yeomen of the guard and other Officers belonging to the Court. The Kings Gallery openeth toward the North side of the Church, vpon whose wall is painted the battell at Higueruela, in which King Iohn the Second ouercame the Moores of Grana∣do. Which picture doth so liuelily expresse the whole story and euery thing in it as it was done, as it is wonderfull. It sheweth in what order, and how the maine battell was set, where the Horsemen, the Footmen, the Pikemen, the Targeters, the Archers, which then were in great request, did stand, and how and where they seuerally charged the enemy. This piece of worke was made at the commandement of Philip the second, king of Spaine, by an old patterne drawen in a piece of linnen cloth of an hundred and thirtie foot long, found in the old Towre of Segouia, which was first drawen at that time that this battell was fought. Moreouer vpon the East and South sides of this building there is a most goodly and pleasant Garden, which is an hundred foot broad, and is set out and beautified with diuerse knots, rare hearbs, floures and fountaines. To this garden is adioined an Orchard planted and set with all ma∣ner of trees. Within the precincts of this monastery there are more then forty fountaines. Such is the wonderfull number of Keies and Lockes about this house, which do amount vnto certaine thousands, that there is a seueral and proper Officer for to looke to them onely, called, The master of the Keies. The forme of the monastery is foure-square, and euery side is two hundred and twenty foure pases long; only that side except that is next to the Pallace, which of purpose was made shorter then the other three, that the compasse or externall forme of the Abbey might represent the fashion of the square of a gridiron, for that S. Laurence, to whom this house was dedicated, was broiled to death vpon a gridiron. The Monkes which are in number three hundred, and as I haue she∣wed before, of the order of S. Hierome, do inhabite not past the third part of this whole building. Their yearly reuenews do amount to 35000. Duckets. The other part of the reuenewes they doe bestow vpon the king and his family. That I may conclude, it is fur∣nished with so many Hals, Parlours, Chambers and other closets and roomes for necessary vses in an house, that there is roome inough to entertaine and lodge fowre Kings and their Courts at once, to that it may worthily challenge the first place amongst the greatest miracles of the whole world. FINIS.
IRELAND. GIraldus Cambrensis, a good Writer, that liued in the time of Henry the Second, & wrote aboue 400 yeeres since, describeth IRELAND on this maner: HIBERNIA, saith he, post Britan∣niam, insularum maxima, vnius contractioris diei nauigatione vltra Britannicas VVallias, in occidentali Oce∣ano sita est. Intra tamen Vltoniam & Scoticas Galwedias duplo ferè angustiore spacio mare coarctatur. Vtra{que} verò vtriusque terrae promontoria, hinc distinctius, illinc ratione distantiae confusius, satis apertè sereno tempore perspici possunt & notari. Insularum occidentalium haec vltima. Hispaniam, ab Austro, trium dierum naturali∣um nauigatione, collateralem habet: Britanniam Maiorem, ab Oriente: Solum Oceanum, ab Occidente: Ab Aqui∣lonari verò parte, trium dierum velifico cursu, borealium insularum maxima Islandia iacet. That is: IRE∣LAND, the greatest iland of the world but Britaine, lieth in the maine sea, distant Westward from Wales about a dayes saile: but betweene Vlster and Gallaway, a prouince of Scotland, the Sea is not much more than halfe so farre ouer. The promontories, capes, or forlands (as you please to call them) of both these countries, may very easily, in a bright sunne-shinie day, from hence be seene and descried: yet these more plainer, those, by reason they are farther off, more obscurely. Of all the ilands of Europe this lieth farthest into the West. Vpon the South side it hath Spaine, distant from it about three dayes and three nights saile. Vpon the East lieth Great Britaine. On the West side of it is nothing but the vast Ocean sea. Vpon the North, three daies iourney off, lieth Island, which of all the Northren iles is by farre the greatest. Againe, a little beneath he addeth: Hibernia quantò à caetero & communi Orbe terrarum semota, & quasi ALTER ORBIS esse dignoscitur: tantò rebus quibusdam, solito naturae cursu, incognitis, quasi peculiaris eiusdem NATV∣RAE THESAVRVS, vbi insignia & pretiosiora sui secreta reposuerit, esse videtur. Looke by how much Ireland is disioy∣ned from the rest of the knowen world, and in that respect is commonly holden to be as it were ANOTHER WORLD: so, for certeine things, by the common course of Nature, to others vnknowen, it seemeth to be a spe∣ciall and peculiar Treasurie or STOREHOVSE OF NATVRE, where it hath bestowed and layed vp her most excellent and rarest secrets. Orosius (and Isidore from him) reporteth, That Ireland is much lesse than England, but by reason of the situation, and temperature of the aire here, it is generally more fertile than England. Yea and reue∣rend Beda, our country man, he sayth, That the aire in Ireland is more healthfull and cleare than it is in England. (Hi∣berniam tum aëris salubritate, quàm serenitate multum Britanniae praestare.) Yet Giraldus denieth the latter. For (sayth he) as France for thinnesse and clearnesse of the aire doth far excell England, so England for the same doth as far excell Ire∣land. For, this is certaine, the farther you go Eastward, looke by how much the aire is more subtile, pure and thinne, so much is it more fierce, sharpe and piercing. On the contrary, the farther you go toward the South and West parts of the world, by how much the aire is more thicke, cloudy and foggy, by so much it is more temperate, kinde and healthfull. For this countrey, lying in the midst indifferently seated betweene frozen Island, and parched Spaine, and by that meanes getting a meane temperature betweene hot and cold, aswell in respect of that temperature and hole∣somnesse of the aire, is a most goodly & fertile iland. The champion fields do yeeld great store of corne; the moun∣taines do feed many heards of cattell, the woods affoord many Deere and other kind of wild beasts, the lakes and ri∣uers great variety and plenty of good fish. Yet the soile of this iland is better for Pastorage than Arable-ground; for Grasse than Corne. Multam fruges in Hibernia, saith he, plurimam in culmis, minorem in granis spem promittunt. Abundè satis & campi vestiuntur, & horrea farciuntur, sola verò granaria destituuntur. Here their corne, as long as it is in the grasse (for Hiber∣nia I read herba) is maruellous good, but much better it seemeth to be when it is shot vp and spindled, only it faileth when it commeth to the threshing, then it is seldome found to be casty. In the field it maketh a goodly shew, yea ordinarily it is as thicke as may stand vpon the ground, their barnes are crammed full and mowed vp to the top, only their garners are empty. Thus farre Giraldus: and because we haue handled the generall description of this iland in another place of this our worke, we will conclude this discourse with a briefe description of some few of their cities and principall townes, as we haue learned of that worthy gentleman Richard Stanihurst, this countreyman bredde and borne. DVBLIN, situate vpon the riuer Liffe, in the countie of Dublin, the Metropolitan and chiefe citie not only of Leynster, but also of all Ireland, for goodly faire buildings, multitude of people, ciuility, for sweet aire and si∣tuation, doth as farre excell all the other cities of this ile, as the lofty cypresse doth the lowest shrubs. The Cathedrall church of S. Patricks was first founded by Iohn Cinim Archbishop of Dublin, in the yere of our Lord God 1197. That great and goodly strong Castle was built by Henry Loundres Archbishop also of Dublin, about the yere of our Lord 1220. This city is very ancient, and was in Ptolemeys time (as learned men thinke) called Ciuitas Eblana, The city Eb∣lan. The next city in order and dignity is WATERFORD, a well gouerned towne, and one that hath been alwaies faithfull to England. It is very populous and ciuill, and (for that the hauen here is far better and more safe than that of Dublin) much resorted vnto for trade and trafficke, by merchants of forren countreys. The streets of it are very narrow and darke. Here no cutthroat-Iewish vsurer is permitted to vse his diuellish occupation, that is, as Cato sayd, to kill men, or to liue by the sweat of other mens browes. The third is LIMMERICK, which in regard of the good∣ly riuer Shenyn whereupon it is seated and standeth, as also for the commodious situation of the same, might iustly challenge the first place. For this riuer is the greatest and goodliest of all Ireland, whose depth and channell is such, that notwithstanding the city standeth at the least threescore miles from the maine sea, yet ships of great burden doe come vp euen to the towne walles: besides that it is woonderfully stored with great variety of fresh fish. King Iohn did like the situation of this city so well, that he caused there a goodly castle and faire bridge to be built. The last and least is CORCK, situate vpon the riuer Leigh. This hauen is one of the best in all Ireland, and therefore the citizens are very wealthy and great merchants. These three latter are all within the prouince of Mounster. But if thou desi∣rest a larger discourse of these particulars, I wish thee to repaire to the foresayd authour Richard Stanihurst, he shall satisfie thee to the full.
map of Ireland IRLANDIAE ACCVRATA DESCRIPTIO, Auctore Baptista Boazio. SERENISSIMO INVICTISSIMOQVE IACOBO MAGNAE BRITANNIAE, FRANCIAE, ET HIBERNIAE REGI, IOANNES BAPTISTA VRINTS ANTVERPIANVS, D. DEDICAT. Ioannes Baptista Vrints, Geographicarum tabularum calcographus, excud. Antuerpiae. EXPOSITIO VERBORVM HIBERNICORVM. Glyn Nemus. Can Promontorium. Caric Rupes. Knoc Collis. Slew Mons. B. vel Bale Vicus. Kill Pagus. Lough Lacus. Enis Insula. Mo. Monasterum. Mc. Territorium filij Satrapae. O Caput familiae.
ENGLAND, OR The Ile of GREAT BRITAIN, as it stood about the time of the entrance of the Normans, described by a Nubiensis the Arabian. The second section of the seuenth Climate. IN this second part of the seuenth Climate we comprehend a part of the b Ocean sea, where c ENGLAND, which is a very great iland, in forme and fashion not much vnlike to a d Storkes head, standeth apart from the rest of the world. In this Iland there are many e populous Cities well inhabited, steepe Hilles, running Waters, and goodly Champion grounds. f Heere it is alwaies Winter. The neerest of maine land vnto it, is g Wady-shant, in the prouince of Flanders. Betweene this Iland and the Continent, the passage is about h twelue miles ouer. Amongst the cities of this ile, which are in the outmost borders of it Westward, and in the entrance of the narrow∣est place thereof, is the citie i SIHSETER, which is distant from the k sea twelue miles. From this citie vn∣to the citie l GORHAM, by the sea shore, are threescore miles. Item, from the citie Sihseter, vnto the out∣most border of the iland Westward, are m three hundred and fourescore miles. From it also vnto the hauen n DARTERMOVTH, are fourescore miles. Then from thence vnto the o LANDS END called Cornwallia, are an hundred miles. From the citie Sihseter vnto the citie p SALEBVRES within the land, Northward, are threescore miles. Item, from the citie Gorham vnto the liberties of the citie q HANTONA, which standeth vpon a Creeke that falleth into the sea, are fiue and twentie miles off: into this creeke there runneth from the East part thereof the riuer of r Wynseter. From s WYNSETER vnto Salebures, Westward, are fortie miles. From Hantona vnto the citie t SHORHAM, are threescore miles. This citie is neere the sea. From it, along by the sea coast, vnto the city u HASTINGES, are fifty miles. From it, following the shore Eastward, vn∣to the citie w DVBRIS, are seuenty miles. This city is at the head of the x passage whereby they passe from England vnto the maine Continent on the other side ouer against it. From the citie Dubris vnto the citie y LVNDRES, vpland, are forty miles. This city standeth vpon a great riuer which falleth into the sea be∣tweene the city Dubris and the city z GIARNMOVTH. From which city Giarnmouth vnto the city a TAR∣GHIN are fourescore and ten miles. This city Targhin riseth vp higher into the countrey about the space of ten miles. From the city Targhin vnto the city b AGRIMES, vpon the sea coast, are fourescore miles. From the city Giarnmouth aforesayd the sea bendeth all at once Northward, in maner of a circle. And from the ci∣tie Agrimes afore-named vnto the citie c EPHRADIK are fourescore miles. This city is farre from the oce∣an sea, hard vpon the borders of the iland of SCOTIA, which is notwithstanding ioyned to the ile Eng∣land. From the citie Ephradik vnto the fall of the riuer of d VVyska are an hundred and forty miles. e This WYSKA is a fortification vpon that riuer, vp higher into the countrey, from the sea twelue miles. From the citie Agrimes, before-mentioned, vnto the city f NICOLA, vpland, are an hundred miles. A g riuer di∣uideth this citie in the middest, and runneth from it vnto the citie Agrimes, and so vpon the South side of it falleth into the sea, as we haue sayd before. From Nicola an vpland citie vnto the city Ephradik, are likewise fourescore and ten miles. From thence, vnto the citie h DVNELMA, are fourescore miles Northward, vp∣land, and farre from the sea. Betweene the coast of the Wild of Scotia, vnto the coast of the ile i IRELAND, are two dayes saile, Westward. From the coast of the ile England, vnto the iland k DANAS, but one dayes saile. From the coast of Scotia, Northward, vnto the iland l ROSLANDA, are three dayes saile. From the coast of the ile Roslanda, Eastward, to the ile m ZANBAGA, are twelue miles. The length of the ile Roslanda is n foure hundred miles: the bredth of it, where it is broadest, is but an hundred and fifty miles. ANNOTATIONS, by the Translatour, vpon some particulars, for the better helpe and direction of the Reader. a THe Arabicke Geography, imprinted at Rome, in the yeere of our Lord 1592, set out by Baptist Raymund, at the cost and charges of the most illustrious Prince Ferdinand Medices, Graund Duke of Tuscane in Italie, is but an Abridgement of a greater worke, intitled  Nazahti'lmoshtak, that is, The pleasant garden, as the authour himselfe in his Preface, to that his worke, doth plainly confesse: which Abbreuiatour, as he himselfe, in the beginning of the fourth section of the first Climate, testifieth, was an African, borne in Nubia: For he there saith, that in this Parallel there be two riuers called Nilus; whereof the one, which is vulgarly knowen by that name, and is for difference sake cal∣led Nilus of Egypt, runneth along by our countrey, ( Ardiana) from South to North, vpon whose banks almost all the cities both of E∣gypt and of the Iland are built and situate. By many places of this his worke it is manifest that he was a Mussulman, that is, by profession a Ma∣hometane. He liued, as I gather, aboue fiue hundred yeeres since, presently after the entrance of the Normans into England: For at the second se∣ction of the fourth climate he writeth that when he wrote this his worke, Roger was King of Sicilia: but whether this Roger were Roger the fa∣ther, sonne of Tanchred the Norman, who draue the Saracens from thence; or Roger his sonne, who in the yeere after Christs incarnation 1103 tooke vpon him the gouernment of that kingdome, it is vncertaine, and (for ought I know) not to be learned out of his words. b  Albahri'lmodtlim, or  Bahri'ldtulimato, The darke or dangerous sea (for the word in Arabicke signifieth both.) Basil
map of England and Wales ANGLIAE REGNI FLO∣RENTISSIMI NOVA DESCRIP∣TIO AVCTORE HVMFREDO LHVYD DEN∣BYGIENSE Cum Priuilegio.
the great Diuine calleth it, Mare magnum, & nauigantibus horrendum, The Great sea, hideous and fearefull to Sailours and sea faring men: whereupon it was in former times thought to be a miracle or strange wonder for any man to passe these seas in the dead of Winter, as Iulius Firmi∣cus (not the Astrologer but another a Christian) in his Tractate of the errour of profane religions dedicated to the Emperours Constance and Constantius, in these words doth plainly teach vs: Hyeme (quod nec factum est aliquando, nec fiet) tumentes & saeuientes vndas calcastis Oceani Britan∣nici, sub remis vestris. In English thus much; In Winter (which neuer heeretofore was knowen to haue beene done, nor euer shall be done heere∣after) by strength of men and sturdy oares you cut the raging sourges of the British Ocean. Thus farre out of M. Camdens Britannia, to whom you are beholding also for that which followeth. c  Alinkalaterra, as the Spaniards, Italians and French do call it, that is, England, or The Angles land (so named by Egbert, king of the West-Saxons, about the yere of our Lord 800) is of the three the greatest, most fertile & flourishing kingdome of this whole ile: and therfore it is hereby this our authour, in this place by a figure put for Great Britaine, the part for the whole. Neither is this any strange thing, not vsed by any other: for Raymundus Marlianus, that adioyned those Alphabeticall descriptions of Cities, Places, Mountaines and Riuers, to Caesars Com∣mentaries, doth put Angliam Insulam and Angliae Insulam, The Ile England and The Ile of England, for Britanniam, Britaine. Such is the maruel∣lous greatnesse of this Iland, that when it was first descried by the Romans, they thought it almost well woorthy the name of ALTERIVS OR∣BIS, Another world. And he that made the Panegyricke oration to Constantius, writeth that Iulius Caesar, who first discouered it to the Romans, ALIVM se ORBEM TERRARVM scripserit reperisse, tantae magnitudinis arbitratus, vt non circumfusa Oceano, sed complexa Oceanum videretur, did write vnto his friends, that he had found Another World; supposing it to be of that wonderfull greatnesse, that it could nor possibly be inui∣roned round on all sides of the sea, but rather that it contrariwise did enclose the sea. And for that it lieth so farre remote from the South, like as Thule, it was by poets and other ancient writers, intituled Vltima Britannia, Great Britaine, the farthest part of the world Northward. d  Alnaama, In Auicen is a fowle called of the Latines, Struthium, an Ostrich; as Gerardus Cremonensis, his interpretour, vnderstan∣deth the word: and indeed the South part of the ile, the sea falling in betweene Wales and Cornwall, doth represent the necke and head of such a like fowle, with the mouth gaping wide open. Liuy and Fabius Rusticus did liken it Oblongae scutulae, vel bipennt, To aswingling stocke or sword, which those vse that dresse hempe and flax; to a twall or twibill, a kinde of warlike weapon vsed in fight by some nations. And indeed the whole iland being triangular (triquetra, they call it) but of vnequall sides, (which kinde of figure the Geometers call Scalenum) may also aswell as Sicilia be named TRINACRIA. For from Taruisium, a promontory or forland in Scotland, now called Howburne, all along by the shore, vnto Be∣lerium, the cape of Cornwall, are 812. miles: from whence to Cantium, The Forland of Kent, are 320 miles: from thence againe to Howburne in Scotland, 704 miles. So that by this account the circuit and compasse of Britaine is 1836 miles: which commeth much short of that account of Pliny, and is somewhat lesse than that of Caesar. e The first inhabitants which seated themselues heere presently after the vniuersall floud in the dayes of Noe, came hither from France, as Necrenesse of place, Likenesse of maners, Gouernment, Customes, Name and Language, doe very demonstratiuely prooue and euince. And thereupon they call themselues Cumro, as come from Gomer the sonne of Iapheth (called of Historiographers Cimber) from whom are descended the Celiae or ancient Gauls, the inhabitants not only of France, but generally of all the Northwest parts of Europe. What thinke you then of that story of Brute? Mary I thinke he wanted honesty that first inuented that fable, and he wit that beleeueth it. But Iohn Wheathamsted, some∣time Abbat of S. Albans, a graue learned man and of good iudgement, shall speake for me; Totus iste processus, saith he, de Bruto, poëticus est potius quàm historicus, opinatiuus{que} magis propter varias causas, quàm realis: That whole discourse of Brute, is rather to be accounted as a fable and fiction forged in poets braine, then a true history, done and acted indeed. Item William of Newbury, a writer of good credit, and one that liued at the same time with this Geffrey of Munmouth, did accuse him to his face of forgery, and challenged him for the same. For first, for the name of Bri∣tons they neuer knew what it meant vntill the entrance of the Romans, and was then as harsh vnto these Cumbri, as the name of Welchman, is to them at this day; which it is certeine diuers of the vpland people do not acknowledge nor vnderstand what it should meane. Againe, Ludouicus Vines, Hadrianus Iunius, Buchanan, Polydore Virgil, Bodine and other great men, do all iointly confesse that there was neuer in the world any such man as this Brutus. Moreouer, That presently after the confusion at Babell, in the infancy of the world, when the iles of the Gentiles were diuided into their lands, as the Scripture speaketh, euery man after his tongue, after their families in their nations, that is, That such men as by rea∣son of difference and diuersity of language, did separate themselues from such as they vnderstood not, and therefore could not conuerse withall, into their seuerall companies and hords, did beare the name and denomination of their father and prince of that family, it is very plaine and mani∣fest: but that any nation was named or called after the name of the chiefe leader and conductour of a colony, I yet find not auouched by any good authour. It is most certaine and without all controuersie true, That diuers countries haue beene called by sundry names, by forreners and stran∣gers, neuer knowen nor acknowledged of the nations themselues. Do you thinke that the ancient inhabitants of Spaine did euer know what He∣speria meant? None surely euer called that countrey by this name, but the Graecians only. Albion and Britannia doubtlesse were names as barba∣rous vnto these our Cumbri, and neuer heard of before the entrance of the Romans. There is no Colony, although neuer so small and few, but will reteine much of their owne countrey language, either wholly vncorrupt, or els manifestly to be distinguished by the phrase and proprietie of speech. Those few Flemmings who (their countrey being by the breaking in of the sea ouerflowen and drowned) obteined of King Henrie the first, a part of Penbrooke shire in Wales which the Welchmen call Rosse, lying betweene two riuers, not farre off from Milford hauen, are they not to this day distinguished, from their neighbours round about them by their speech and language? And because their speech doth much re∣semble the English, is not their countrey commonly called, of those which inhabit neere vnto them, Little England beyond Wales? The like you shall obserue by the British colony, which aboue eleuen hundred yeeres since tooke possession of that part of France, which of them euer since hath beene knowen by the name of Britaine: Of the colony of the Scots in Ireland, and of the Irish in Scotland. If any man will say that there is the like resemblance betweene the Welch tongue and the Greeke or Latine, I will iustifie it that there is as great affinitie betweene the Welch and Arabicke, and againe that these are as like the one to other as an apple is to an oister. Moreouer, this entrance of Brute was an absolute con∣quest, the giants (if there were euer any such) being vtterly destroyed or quite chaced out of the land, and therefore there is no reason to the con∣trary but they should haue, for the space of seuen hundred yeeres, kept their language from corruption, as well as they haue done since, being since the entrance of the Romans sixteene hundred yeeres and more. The Latines or Greeks so prodigall alwayes in their owne commendation, would doubtlesse not haue forgotten to record the setting forth of such a famous colony. Could this affinity haue beene hid from Caesar? would they not, thinke you, haue claimed kindred of the Romans? Constans and Constantius Emperours of Rome were the first, by the testimony of Iu∣lius Firmicus, that euer durst venture thorow these seas. How then did this Brutus, so many hundred yeeres before, in such small barks, so slightly built, passe the same? Aeneas, they report, of his many ships lost all but one before he could get home, in the Midland sea, which is nothing so dangerous and troublesome. Can it be thought credible that such a warlike nation as these Troians, hauing so lately got footing and seated them∣selues in so goodly a countrey as Italy, would so suddenly remoue so farre off, to a place vnknowen? The Romans hauing such dangerous warres, and such occasion to vse men and braue commanders, would neuer haue suffered them in such troopes to passe out of their countrey. If it had tooke the name of Brutus, it should doubtlesse haue been called Brutania, not Britannia, as Caesar nameth it, nor Bretania, Pretanice, or Pretanis, as the Greeks do write it. But list what Caesar sayth of this matter, Britania pars interior, sayth he, ab ijs incolitur, quos natos in insula ipsi memoria pro∣ditum dicunt. Maritima pars ab ijs, qui praedae ac belli inferendi causa ex Belgio transierant. The inner part of the ile is inhabited of such people as were bred and borne there, as they themselues do report from their ancestours. The sea coast is possessed of such as haue come thither from Flanders and thereabout, to robbe and spoile the countrey. If this were all that was then knowen, and that Gildas Sapiens and Venerabilis Beda knew no∣thing to the contrary, how came this our authour, so many hundred yeeres after them, to the knowledge of this so absolute an history, where not only persons, places, and actions are so distinctly set downe with their precise difference of time, as if they had beene done but yesterday? The historian, for things done in his owne time, or not long before, is beleeued vpon his owne word, but for such things as were done many ages be∣fore he was borne, he must bring his author to iustifie his assertion. If there had beene any such tradition commonly deliuered from man to man, it would questionlesse haue beene intimated to Caesar. Records can not be preserued but by writing; and that knowledge came in with the Ro∣mans. But if it be a question whether there were euer any such city as that Troy, so much renowmed by meanes of that learned poëme of the fa∣mous Poët Homer, what will become of the stories of Aeneas (which, if I mistake him not, the great Historiographer Titus Liuius doth make a doubt of) and of this our Brutus neuer patronaged by any great learned wise man? I know that is improued by some, and I thinke it may be de∣monstrated. For further satisfaction I referre thee to M. Camdens Britannia, where this argument is handled at large and most learnedly. Only in defence of Gaulfridus, lest any man should thinke that I haue all this while spoken against his person, I conclude with this sayng of a learned man of our time; Cardanus ait, sayth he, illius aetatis scriptores tantopere mendacio & fabulis fuisse delectatos, vt in contentionem venerint quis plura con∣fingeret. Cardane sayth, That the Historians and Writers of those times (betweene foure hundred and fiue hundred yeeres since) were so much delighted with fables and lies, that they stroue who should lie fastest, and win the whetstone. It was, you see, the fault of the time and age where∣in he liued, not of the man. The learned Oratour Tully, in the second booke of his Offices, as I remember, thus describeth the vertues of a true
Historiographer: Ne quid falsi scribere audeat; Ne quid veri non audeat; Ne quam in scribendo suspitionem gratiae; Ne quam simultatis ostendat. A good Historian may not dare to write any thing that is false; He may not be afrayd to write any thing that is true; He must not shew any partiality or fauour in writing; He ought to be void of all affection and malice. Learned Antiquaries follow this good counsell of the graue Philosopher; Sell vs no more drosse for pure mettall; Refine what you reade and write; Euery tale is not true that is tolde: Some authours want iudgement; others honesty: Let no man be beleeued for his antiquity: For you know what Menander sayd, ; Grayhaires are not alwayes a signe of wisdome and deepe vnderstanding; olde men do sometime dote, and will lie as well as others. One sayth; Nesc to quo casu illud euenit, vt falsa potius quàm vera animum nostrum captant. I cannot tell, sayth he, how it commeth to passe, but surely true it is, that we are more easily caried away with lies and fables, than with truth. And how hard a matter it is to remoue one from a setled opinion, though neuer so false and absurd, any man meanly experienced doth very well know. f Yet Caesar saith that Britanniae Loca sunt temperatiora, qùam in Gallia, remissioribus frigoribus: The temperature of the aire in England, is better then in France, the cold is nothing so bitter. That is, as the authour of the Panegyricke oration made to Constantius the Emperour doth inter∣pret it, In ea nec rigor est nimius hyemis, nec ardor aestatis: In it neither the cold of winter, nor the heat of summer is very excessiue. And Minutius Felix hee writeth that, Britannia sole deficitur, sed circumfluentis maris tepore recreatur. In England the Sunne shineth not very hotte, but that de∣fect is repaied by a certaine steame or hot vapour which ascendeth vp out of the sea that inuironeth this iland on all sides round. g What place this should be, I dare not for truth constantly affirme, Perhaps he meaneth Vitsam, or as we call it Whitsan, a little towne in the country of Bolloine some fiue or six miles from Calais, situate vpon the sea coast, built at the mouth of a small riuer, which peraduenture he cal∣leth Shant: For in the Arabicke tongue Wadi-shant, importeth so much. h This is false and by himselfe contradicted: for in another place, if I be not deceiued, he maketh it twenty fiue miles ouer: wherefore I doubt not but for a mile the authour did put a parasange, which conteineth three English miles: And this is somewhat neere the mark. i I take it that he meaneth Cercester, in Glocestershire, which vulgarly they now call Ciceter. It is an ancient city called of Ptolemey Corinium, of Antonine Durocornouium, of the Saxons Cyrenceaster, taking the denomination from the riuer Corinus, or Churne, vpon which it is situate. The tract of the decaied wals of it which are two miles about, doe testifie that it was sometime a very great citie. Many antiquities and auncient mo∣numents doe plainly shew that in the time of the Romans it was a place of good rekoning. Now it is nothing so populous and well inhabited. k From the Seuerne, I vnderstand it, which at euery floude enterteineth the salt water a great way vp into the countrey. l Warham, is a sea towne in Dorsetshire, strongly fortified by nature, vpon the South and North with two riuers, Ware, and Trent (this now they call Piddle) and with the maine sea, vpon the East, only vpon the Wew it lieth open to the assailaunt. Yet it was in times past defended with a faire wall, and a strong Castle. It was very populous, well inhabited, and graced with the Kings mint, for the refining and coining of his mo∣ny, vntill the time of Henry the Second: since whose daies by reason of ciuill warres, casualty by fire, and stopping of the hauen, it is much decaied, and hath lost much of that former beauty. m This distance is much too great, whether he meaneth the lands end in Cornwall, or the farther part of Wales Westward, which I rather in∣cline to. But obserue this once for all, that there is no great heed to be taken to those his accounts of miles and distances. n Dartmouth, an hauen towne in Deuonshire, situate vpon a little hill running out into the sea, at the mouth of the riuer Dart or Dert, as some write it. The hauen is defended with two strong Castels or Block-houses. It is very populous, well frequented with Merchants, and hath many goodly tall shippes belonging to it. King Iohn granted them certaine priuiledges and euery yeere to chuse a Maior for their supreme magistrrate and gouernour in ciuill causes vnder the King. o Thus our seamen cal it at this day: The Arabian termeth it  Tarfi'lgarbi mina'lgiezira, The Westerne bound of the iland. Master Camden, in his Scotland, that I may note this by the way, affirmeth that Taurus, in Welch, doth signifie the end or limbe of any thing. Heere in Arabicke, thou seest, it signifieth the same. And in English wee call, if I be not deceiued, the brimmes of an hatte, The tarfe. p SALISBVRY or rather SARISBVRY a sweet and pleasant city, within the County of Wilt, situate in a plaine at the meeting of the riuers Auone and Nadder. It is not that ancient city Sorbiodunum, mentioned by Antoninus in his Iournall, but built of the ruines of it, as seemeth very probable. For this old towne being often distressed for want of water, and at length spoiled and rased to the ground, by Swein the Dane, in the yeare of our Lord 1003. (although it reuiued againe a little after, about the time of William the First) was forsaken and abandoned by the citi∣zens, who laid the foundation of this new citie about 400. yeares since, at what time Richard the First was King of England. That most stately Cathedrall Church, which they report hath as many doores as there be months in the yeare; as many windowes as the yeare hath daies; and as many pillars as there are houres in the yeare; was at the same time begunne by Richard, Bishop of Sarum, in a most goodly plot of ground, which vulgarly was called MERIFEILD, and in fourty yeares with infinite cost and charges, it was by him and others finished and brought to that per∣fection which it is at now at this day. q SOVTH-HANTON (we now call it,) built vpon an arme of the sea betweene two riuers, is enclosed with a double ditch and a faire stone wall. For the better defence of the Hauen Richard the Second caused a very goodly castle to be built all of free stone. It is a passing fine city, ve∣ry populous, rich, and well frequented of Merchants. Clausentum, that ancient city mentioned by Antoninus, and stood sometimes in that field which at this day is called Saint Maries, was often spoiled and sacked by the Danes, and at length, in the time of Edward the Third was vtterly consumed and burnt downe to the ground by the French-men: Of whose ruines this New city was built in a place much more better and com∣modious. r This riuer, peraduenture, was anciently called WENT, and thereof the citie Wentchester, happily tooke the name: like as the cite Colnche∣ster in Essex, was so called of the riuer Colne, vpon Which it standeth. s WINCHESTER, A very auncient citie, well knowen to the Romanes, and is oft mentioned in old historians. Afterward in time so the Saxon Heptarchie, the West Saxon Kings ordinarily kept their court heere. Straite after the entrance of the Normans, and peraduenture some∣what before, the Records for the whole land were here bestowed and laied vp. It was once or twise much defaced by casualty of fire, and oft spoi∣led and sacked by vnruly souldiers in time of ciuill warres: but Edward the Third, to salue these damages and hinderances of the citizens and townesmen, placed heere THE STAPLE, or marte for wooll and cloth. At this time it is very populous and well inhabited. The wals of this citie are about a mile and an halfe in compasse. It hath six faire gates, and very large Suburbes adioyning to euery one of them. t SHORHAM, an ancient Borough and hauen towne in Sussex, first called, as Master Camden writeth, CIMENSHORE of Cimen, the bro∣ther of Cissa, who together with Aella their father, landed a greater multitude of their Saxons. But in continuance of time a greate part of that towne being eaten vp with the sea, and the mouth of the hauen with beech and sand det vp, of a goodly towne it is become a small village, at this day knowen by the name of OLD SHOREHAM, the decay of which gaue occasion of the building and name of another not farre off from it, commonly called NEVV SHOREHAM. u Heere Athelstane King of the West-Saxons, who made a lawe that no man should be so hardy as to dare to coine money out of great townes priuiledged by the King for that purpuse, erected a Minte for the coyning of his Siluer and other mettals, by which means it became so famous that in the time of the Saxons it deserued the name of a city and was then called by them HASTINGACEASTER. In a plaine, before this towne, that bloody battaill betweene William, the bastard, Duke of Normandy, that cruell tyrant, and Harold the vsurper, sonne of Earle Good∣win, was fought vpon the fourteenth day of October, in the yeare of our Lord 1066. It is one of the cinque ports. w DOVER, before the entrance of the Saxons was called Dubris, as Antoninus in his Iournal testifieth, who nameth it Portus Dubris, The ha∣ven Dubris. Vpon that side next the sea that was sometime defended with a strong wall, whereof some part is to be seene at this daie. Victred King of Kent did heere erect a goodly Church, which hee dedicated vnto Saint Martines. The castle which standeth vpon the toppe of an exce∣ding high cliffe, and is thought to be the strongest holde of all England, and therefore called by Matthew Paris Clauis & repagulum Angliae, The key and barre of England, was begunne, as is probable, by the Romans; yet not by Iulius Caesar, as they would faine make men beleeue. Vpon another rocke or cliffe, ouer against this on the other side of the towne, there was, as seemeth, a lanterne or watch-tower (Pharus, they call it) opposite and answerable to that which the Romans had built at Bollein, beyond the straights in Fraunce, which afterward being decaied was re∣paired by Charles the Great, and at this day is called by the French, Tour d'order, by the English, THE OLD MAN OF BVLLEN. x This is that famous passage (traiectus,) from the Continent vnto this Iland, by which Caesar and the Romans alwaies entred and had accesse hither: For vntill the time of Constans and Constantine Emperours of Rome, it was thought almost impossible to come hither from Rome, with a nauy thorough the maine Ocean: And since that long, it was, in time of Christianity, by proclamation forbidden, that, whatsoeuer hee were, borne within the alleageance of England, that had a minde to goe beyond the seas for religion or pilgrimage, it should not be lawfull for him to take shipping any where else but heere. The Frenchmen vulgarly call it Le pas de Calais, but the English call it The streights of Douer. y London, (we now call it) but of the French and Strangers it is commonly called Londres or Londra. Yet Tacitus, Ptolemey, Antonine, and Ammianus Marcellinus doe with one consent write it LONDINVM or LONGIDINVM, so named of the Britons, as is probable, of Llong,
Ships, and Dinas, a Citie: answerable to those places of Graecia Naupactus, Naupactus, Naustathino, &c. denominated of Ships. It is doubtlesse a very anci∣ent citie, as Ammianus Marcellinus testifieth, who twelue hundred yeares since called it Vetustum oppidum, An ancient towne. Yet Iulius Caesar neuer mentioneth it in all his writings. Cornelius Tacitus, who liued in the daies of Nero, that bloody Emperour, was the first, if I be not decei∣ued, that euer wrot of it, calling it by the name of Oppidum, copia negotiatorum, & commeatu maxime celebre, A Towne very famous both for traf∣ficke and great concourse of Marchants, as also for victualls and all manner ot prouision whatsoeuer. Nay he that made the Panegyricke oration to Constantius the Emperour, and Marcellinus who liued after him, giue it no better title. Yet at this day it is An abridgement or breefe view of the whol iland, The Imperiall seate of the Brittish iles, Regum{que} Angliae camera, and The chamber of the English Kings: and therefore it may now iustly assume that title of AVGVSTA, The roiall city, which Ammianus so many hundred yeeres since gaue vnto it. And being situate vp∣on the rising of a little hill, in a most wholsome and healthfull aire, in the middest of the richest countries of the land, all a long vpon the North side of the Thames, one of the goodliest riuers of Europe, it is at this day as famous a Marte, for all manner of trade and trafficke as any in the whole world beside. The wals of this citie, which are about three miles in compasse, are not ancient, although some doe write, that at the entrea∣tie of Queene Helena, Constantine the Great caused them to be built. Beside those many and large Suburbes without the wals, there is ioined to it, vpon the West the citie of WESTMINSTER, and vpon the South by a faire stone bridge the BOROVGH OF SOVTHVVARKE, equall for bignesse and multitude of people to many great and good cities: So that London in this respect may iustly be called Tripolid' Angliterra. This Bridge was begunne first of timber, and afterward in the time of King Iohn it was made all of Free-stone. The foundation of that goodly Mynster or Cathedrall Church of Saint Paul was first laid by Ethelbert King of Kent. z Yarmouth, as we now call it, a very goodly sea towne in the county of Norffolke, situate at the mouth of the riuer Gerne (Garienis,) whereof it tooke the name, and was first called Giernemouth, and then by corruption in processe of time Garmouth, and Yarmoth. It is inclosed almost on all sides with water, vpon the West with the riuer aforesaid: vpon the South and East with the maine sea: only vpon the North it lieth open to the firme land, vpon which side it is defended from the assault of the enemy by a very strong wall, which together with the riuer doe make a kinde of Square figure longer one way then an other. On the East side standeth a Block-house, well furnished with great ordinance to defend the ha∣uen and towne from pirates and sea robbers. It hath but one Church, but that is a marueillous faire great one with a very high Spire, seene far off both by sea and land. a What this towne should be, and where it should stand I cannot say for certaine. The letters in the Arabicke, and the proportion of distance from Yarmouth and Grynsby, doe directly point at Drayton in Northhampton-shire. But because it is too far off from the sea, and was neuer greater then now it is, and for that I finde him so often faulty in those accounts, I doe not beleeue that he meant that place. The name commeth very neere to Torksey, which is situate vpon the Trent, and, as Master Camden sath, although now it be but a small towne, yet in times past it hath beene much greater and more famous. For in time of William the First, as appeareth by Doomesday booke, it had two hundred citizens, and enioyed many great and large priuileges. b Grimsby, in Lincolnshire, sometime a very great Marte towne, much resorted vnto from all quarters both by Sea and Land, so long as the ha∣uen lay open ready to entertaine Ships of any reasonable burden. But as the hauen did in continuance of time decay, so the glory of the towne, by little and little vanished, and resigned vp her trade vnto Kingston vpon Hull, her ouerthwarte neighbour, which euer since the time of Rich∣ard the Second, hath greatly flourished, in whose daies of a small village and a very few poore Fisher-mens cottages it began to grow to that great∣nesse, that of a sudden it was not much inferiour to many prety cities. c Yorke, a very goodly citie, situate vpon the riuer Ouse. For beauty, greatnesse, strength, riches and pleasure it is inferiour to none in all Eng∣land, but London only. Old writers call it EBORACVM, the Welchmen Ebrauc, or Effroc: the Saxons Eferwic: And therefore I suspect that this my authour did write it  Efferwic, not  Effradic: but I alter nothing. It is a very ancient citie oft mentioned in Roman Coines and histories, whereby it is manifest that Legio sexta victrix, the sixth conquering legion, did ordinarily reside in this city. The Emperours Seuerus and Constantius, father to Constantine the Great, so long as they abode in this ile, did keepe their court heere, and dying in these parts, were bu∣ried, in this city. This Constantius being a very godly and religious Christian Prince; made it first as our histories report, a Bishops sea, which Ho∣norius Bishop of Rome, afterward aduanced vnto the dignity of a Metropolitane, or Archbishopricke, which, beside the large iurisdiction that it had heere in England, had also vnder it all Scotland. d Wiske, it is called at this day. It riseth in Richmond-shire not farre from Wharleton Castle, as Christopher Saxto maketh me beleeue. e I finde no mention at all of this place, either in Master Camden, or any other. Onely in the same Saxton vpon the foresaid riuer, some two or three miles aboue Northaluerton, I finde Danby Wiske: but whether our authour meant this or not I cannot tell. But I would gladly learne of what place the Lord of Vescy, tooke his name. f Lincolne, a large and faire city, situate now vpon the North side of the riuer Witham, called by Ptolemey and Antonine LINDVM, by Beda Lindecollinum, by the Normans, as Master Camden testifieth, Nichol. g This is very false: For this riuer hauing hitherto, from his fountaine, bent his course Northward as if it meant indeed to vnload it selfe at Grimesby, doth notwithstanding heere alter that determination, and turning it selfe cleane another way at length falleth into the sea at Boston; a place almost full South both from Lincolne and Grimesby. h Durham, situate vpon the top of an hill, by the riuer Weare, which runneth almost round about it, and thereupon was called by the Saxons Dun-holme, that is, if we shall interpret it into English, The hill-ile, is no ancient city: For the fiirst stone of it, as our histories report was laid by the Monkes of Lindesferne, in the yeere of our Lord 995. before that we find no mention of it. William the First built the Castle vpon the top of the Hill, which since that time was the Bishops palace. i Ireland, the greatest iland in these Seas, Brittain only excepted: for it runneth out in length from South to North about foure hundred miles: and where it is narrowest it is well neere two hundred miles ouer. But of this we haue spoken in another place. k Denmarke, (we now cal it) is for the most part inuironed and washed with the salt sea: and therefore he doth not greatly erre, in that he termeth it An Iland. l Island (if I be not deceiued) which Solinus in the thirtie fiue chapter of his Polyhistor, saith, is two daies saile from Cathnesse, the North cape of Scotland: His words are these, A Caledoniae promontorio Thulen petentibus bidui nauigatio est. Those that doe trauell betweene the cape of Caledonia or Cathnesse and Thule, doe make it two daies saile. Item in the same chapter, a little beneath, he writeth that, Ab Orcadibus Thulem vs{que} quin{que} dierum & noctium nauigatio est. From the Orkney iles, to Thule are fiue daies, and fiue nights saile. Yet Island is not that ancient Thule, as Master Camden, in his Britania, proueth at large. The position and distances answer well to Thule, but the quantity or bignesse argueth that he meant Island, which is much farther off either from the coast of Norway, or borders of Scotland, as we shall by and by shew more plainly. m So it is written apparently: But obserue heere, That of the Arabicke letters, diuerse in forme and shape of body, are the very same, and are onely distinguished one from another by pricks or points, placed either ouer their heads or vnderneath them. Heereupon it is that that Arabicke word which heere I call  Zanbaga, (supposing only one letter to be misplaced, which might be the fault of the printer) may indifferently be either  Norbaga, or Norwega, as the Danes call it: or  Neriga, or Nerigon, whereof Pliny speaketh; which is all one in effect. For Pomponius Mela saith that Thule Bergarum (thus the learned Clarencieux readeth, not Belgarum) litori apposita est: that is, Thule is vpon the coast of Norway, oueragainst the citie Bergen. And it is out of all question, saith the same authour, that by Nerigon Pliny did vnderstand that same country which at this day we call Norway. n That our authour did meane Island, if there were no other argument, this one were alone sufficient to prooue it. For I doe not remember that any one of the ancient writers euer tooke vpon him to define Thule according to his length and breadth: only Ptolemey and those other au∣thours haue pointed at it, as we haue shewed before, and haue told vs whereabout it lieth in the Sea by the longitude and latitude of it, as also by the situation of it from Scotland, The Orkeney iles, and Bergen in Norway. Whereas he saith that the length of Rosland is 400 miles, it is, I say, apparant that he meant Island. For Ortelius in his Island thus writeth of it: Patet haec insula in longitudiue centum milliarium Germanicorum, vt vul∣gus scriptorum habet: The length of this Iland, as the common sort of writers doe testifie, is one hundred Germane miles: Now that a common or ordinary Dutch mile, doth containe foure English or Italian miles, it is a thing so commonly knowen that it needeth no proofe. But hauing hand∣led, Gentle Reader, the particulars, for the most part before in their seuerall places, least I be too tedious in a thing not greatly needfull I cease to trouble thee any longer.
GALIZIA, a kingdome of Spaine. THe kingdome of GALIZIA is bounded vpon the West and North, with the Ocean sea; vpon the East, with the Asturias and the kingdome of Leon: vpon the South, with the riuer Min̄o, and the Kingdome of Portingall. It was sometime, as Ferdinand Oiea, the authour of this Mappe, writeth, much greater then now it is at this daie, and was then held to be one of the lar∣gest kingdomes of all Spaine: For it extended it selfe Eastward vp as farre as the mountaines of Biscaya, and the head of the great riuer Duero, (Durius Pliny calleth it) and so from thence it ranne all along by the banke of this riuer euen till where it falleth into the maine sea, as our said authour prooueth, by the testimony of Marius Aretius in his description of Spaine, of Annius Viterbius, and Floriano de Campo in the 40. chapter of his fourth booke; and likewise in the third chapter of his fourth booke. It is very vneuen, and mounteinous, or euery where full of dry barrein hils and dales; and therfore much of it, by reason it wanteth water, is waste and not inhabited. Their Villages and townes, (especially the greater and better sort of them,) are situate vpon the Sea, or vpon some great riuer not farre from thence, except San∣tiago, Lugo, and Mondon̄edo with one or two more. Yet, which is very strange, heere are bred such woonderfull store of horses, that that fable, which reporteth that hereabouts in Spaine the mares conceiue with foale by vertue of the winde, may seeme to be something probable. Yea and this our authour Fernandez Oiea, saith, that it hath great store of cattell, and of all manner of Deere aswell for necessary prouision and mainteinance of the house, as for game and disporte for the nobility and gentry of the land. But of Fish heere taken, not only in the Sea but also in the fresh riuers, there is such va∣riety and woonderfull store that it is from hence conueighed to most places throughout all Spaine. It hath many hot bathes, and other springs and waters of rare and soueraigne vertues. It yeeldeth great plenty of wine, and that so good, especially that which is made about Orense and Riuadauia, that it is transported from hence farre and neere into all coun∣tries Christian. It offordeth much good fruite of all sorts, but especially of Limons and Orenges. Silke and Flax, are ve∣rie great and gainefull commodities vnto the inhabitants. Heere were sometime, as Pliny testifieth, very rich Mines of gold. And Niger writeth that, amongst the Artabri, (who inhabited not farre from Cape finister,) the riuers and brooks did bring downe, after any great store of raine, Earth mingled with Siluer, Tynne and Gold-ore: yea and that the soile heere was so fertile of Gold, Copper and Lead, that ofttimes the husbandmen with their ploughes did turne vp great cloddes of good gold. Yet we know now, saith Maginus, that the Mines of this country at this day are of no great ac∣count. It hath also some quarreis of fine marble. Pedro de Medina reckoneth vp threescore Cities and townes of note in Galizia, of which these following are the most famous and renowmed, and therefore the more worthy the speaking of in this place. COMPOSTELLA, a goodly city situate betweene the two riuers Sar, and Sarela, is now commonly called and knowen by the name of SANTIAGO, Saint Ieameses, for that the body of the glorious Apostle Saint Iames, elder brother to Iohn the Euangelist, who first preached the gospel heere and planted Christianity amongst the Spaniards, lieth heere interred: and in honour of this blessed Apostle, by the consent generally of all, Prince, Nobles and Prelates, it was long since adorned with the title and dignity of Metropolitan. This by-word is common amongst the Spaniards, That there be three Apostolicall Churches in the world most renowmed and famous. Saint Peters in Rome, Saint Ieamses in Spaine, and Saint Iohns in Ephesus. They commonly hold, that the first Church that euer was built in Spaine, was that of our Lady in Saragosa, the second was this of Saint Iames. Heere also is a goodly Vniuersity and schoole of good lear∣ning, where all the Liberall Sciences are professed and taught, and many students are brought vp and maintained vntill they come to be of age and abilitie for publike seruice either in the Church or Commonwealth. The GROINE, is a very goodly towne, situate in an isthmos or demy-ile, betweene two baies or creeks of the sea, whereof the one is held to be one of the best hauens of the world: And therefore heere for the most parte of the Kings ships, in time of peace doe lie at anchor. LVGO, one of the principall cities of all Galizia, standeth vpon the Min̄o, not farre from Castro de Rey where this riuer ariseth. It is very ancient, and was out of doubt, knowen to the Romans, at such time they bore the sway in these parts: yet there be some which doe thinke it to haue beene built by the Vandals, long since the decay of that estate. MONDONNEDO is a faire city seated vpon a little riuer toward the Northren sea coast, not farre from Riuadeo. It was aunciently called Glandomiro. ORENSE, situate vpon the riuer Min̄o, is a very great and large citie. The wines that are heere made, are counted to be of the best, and equall to those of Riuadauia. Some thinke that it was in old time called Auria, yet the Romans, as it is probable, called it Aquas Calidas, of the hotte bathes, which heere are founde, and are now of the Spaniards called Burgas. TVY, or, as some write it, Tuyd, built also vpon the riuer Min̄o, not farre from the maine Sea, was first founded, as they fable by certaine Greeks, who came hither from Troy with Diomedes. Lucius Marineus Siculus maketh BVRGOS to be a city of Galizia. His words are these: Burgos, saith he, is a very famous and ancient city of Galizia in Spaine. It was sometime, as some authours reporte, called Masburgi, Liconitiurgis, Brauum, and Auca, or as Pliny writeth it, Ceuca. It is a very rich and populous citie, much resorted vnto by Gentlemen and Mar∣chants: of the one sorte for pleasure, of the other for profit; and therefore it is euery day greatly enlarged with goodly and sumptuous newe buildings. If thou desire more of this city, I wish thee to repaire to George Braun his Theater of the chiefe cities of the world: If more of this kingdome, read Peter de Medina his Las Grandezas ycosas notabiles de Espan̄a, of the strange and memorable things of Spaine; and I make no doubt, if not with truthes and good historicall discourses, yet with tedious tales and fables, thou shalt haue thy belliefull.
map of Galicia, Spain, with inset of four angels with a hymnnal and the blazon or coat of arms of Galicia DESCRIPCION DEL REYNO DE GALIZIA, AVTH. F. FER. OIEA, ORD. PRED. A DON PEDRO FERNANDEZ DE CASTRO Y ANDRADE, CONDE DE LEMOS, DE VILLALVA Y ANDRADE, MARQVES DE SARRIA. &c. Galizia es vno de los muchos Reynos de Espan̄a, que possée nuestro Rey Filipo. Era antiguamente mucho mayor que ahora, comprendia todas las tierras. y prouinçias que ay dentro de los limites siguientes, de la mar del Norte y montan̄a de Iunto à Vizcaya, husta las fuentes del gran Rio Duero, y de ay todo lo que el corre hasta dar consigo en la mar, y caminando por las orillas della hasta-botuer al mismo punto de dunde salimos. Marij Aretij dialog. de descript. Hisp. apud Berosum, et Viterb. in inquirid. et Florian. de Campo lib. 3. c. 40, et 42. et lib. 4. c. 3. Oy en dia con la mudança del gouierno, y de los tiempos, ha quedado con este-nombre solo lo que parece en esta tabla: de lo qual tiene V. Exa. vna gran parte. y assi por ella como por la mucha afficion que todos los Principes de su casa han tenido siempre a las cosas deste Reyno; me parecio se le deuia de Iusticia la ymagen y descripcion del. Supplico á V. Exa. la reciua con la gracia y amor que suele. &c. Abunda de carnes este Reyno y de todo genero de caça, de mucho y muy-buen pescado, assi de mar como de rios, de que se prouée la mayor parte de Espan̄a. Tiene grande abundancia de aguas frias y calientes que llaman ban̄os, mucho vino y del mejor que se halla en toda la Europa, particularmente el de Orense, y Riua dauia, del qual se prouen muchas prouincias del Reyno, y de fuera del. Tiene muchas y muy buenas frutas, limas y naranjas de todo genero, Seda y mucho lino, muchos minerales de Oro y pla∣ta, hierro &c. y algunas canteras de marmol. Su temperamento ni frio ni caliente. JOANNES BAPTISTA VRINTS, AEMVLVS STVDII GEOGRAPHIAE D. ABRAHAMI ORTELII. P.M. COSMOG. REGII, EXCVDIT. HOC MYSTERIVM FIR∣MITER PROFITEMVR.
FRANCE. FRANCE (or GALLIA, as the Latines called it,) at this day one of the goodliest and greatest Kingdomes of Europe, hath notwithstanding in forepassed ages, beene much larger then now it is. For in Iulius Caesars time it conteined all that Westerne part of the Maineland inhabi∣ted and possessed by the Belgae, Aquitani, Celtae and Heluetij, bounded vpon the North by the Rhein, vpon the West by the maine Ocean sea, vpon the South with the Pyreney mountaines, and vpon the East with the stately Alpes. For thus he writeth in the First booke of his Com∣mentaries of the warres of France: GALLIA est omnis diuisa in partes tres: Quarum vnam in∣colunt BELGAE, aliam AQVITANI, tertiam qui ipsorum lingua CELTAE, nostra GALLI, ap∣pellantur. Gallos ab Aquitanis Garumna flumen, à Belgis Matrona, et Sequana diuidit. All FRANCE is diuided into three parts: whereof the one is possessed of the Belgae, the other of the Aquitani, the third of those people which they in their language call Celtae, wee in ours Galli. The Galli (or Gaules) are diuided from the Aqui∣tanes by the riuer Garonne; and from the Belgae by the Marne and Seine. Item a little beneath hee saith that, GALLIA beginneth at the riuer Rhosne, and it is bounded with the Garonne, the Ocean sea, and Belgium; moreouer toward the Sequani and Heluetij it abbutteth vpon the Rhein: It bendeth somewhat Northward. BELGIVM beginneth at the out∣most borders of Gallia; and from thence it costeth along by the inner side of the riuer Rhein: It lieth North and by East from the rest of Gallia. AQVITANIA ariseth at the riuer Garonne, and so from thence it falleth downe to the Pyreney mountaines, and the Spanish seas: It lieth West and by North from the rest of France. Nay beside this diuision, there was yet another much more large, extending the bounds of France beyond the Alpes which did include a good part of Italy, and therefore it was of the Romans named GALLIA CISALPINA, Fraunce on this side the Alpes, or Italia Gallica, France in Italy. But of these and the like diuisions we haue in the former spoken plentifully, and therefore we now surcease to repeat them againe in this place. And we are not ignorant how much of this large compasse heere described is at this day seuered from the crowne of France, and hath these many yeeres beene gouerned by seuerall Lords and Princes. A great part of Gallia Belgica, as namely Flaunders, Brabant, Artois, Limburgh and other) belongeth vnto the King of Spaine; Holland, Zeland, with the rest of the Low-countries are gouerned by the States: Zuittzerland, Cleue, Lorrain, Alsas, Sauoy, Piemont, and some other prouinces are held of the Emperour, and are subiect to their proper Princes: and no one foote, for ought I know, of Italy beyond the Alpes doth belong now to the crowne or kingdome of France. The seuerall Shires or Prouinces of this kingdome are very many, whereof the most principall are these, Boulennois, Ponthieu, Caux, Picardy, Normandy, Fraunce, Beausse, Bretaigne, Aniow, Le Maine, Poitow, Lymosin, Santoine, Guien, Gas∣coigne, Perigot, Quercy, Champaine, Berrey, Gastinois, Sologne, Auuergne, Niuernois, Lyomois, Charrolois, Bour∣bonois, Maine, Daulphein, Prouince, Languedocke, Bloys, or Blasois, Forram, Burgundy, La Franche Conte, Verman∣dois and some few others mentioned in this Mappe. The whole land generally is very fertile and withall passing pleasant and healthfull: and thereupon they vse to say that Lombardy is the garden of Italy, and France is the garden of Europe. Yet some places are more fertile for some one commodity then others are. Picardy, Normandy, and Languedocke are as goodly countries for Corne, as any in all Christendome beside. Some places doe afforde great store of fruits, some as great plenty of Wood: In some places Flax and Hempe doe grow in great abundance, in other places they make as great a commoditie of their Woad. The whole countrey generally in all places affordeth much wine, but the best is made in Beausse about Orleans. They haue some mines of Iron, but many of Salt. Whereupon La Noüe saith, that the Corne, Wine, Salt and Woad that is from hence transported into forraine Countries, doth bring in yeerely to the sub∣iects and crowne of France twelue hundred thousand pounds of currant mony. And Iohn Bodine affirmeth that Such springs of Corne, Salt and wine doe heere flow so copiously, that it is almost impossible to empty them or drawe them quit dry. Another, a country man of ours, a worthy gentleman and of as good iudgement, as the best of them, saith that in the prouince of Limosin, are the best Beeues: about Orleans, the best Wines: in Auuergne, the best Swine; and in Berry, the choisest Mutton, and greatest store of Sheepe. In France there are twelue Archbishoprickes: and one hun∣dred and foure Suffraganes, or Bishops. Bodine saith that there are in France twentie seuen thousand and foure hundred Parish Churches, counting onely euery city for a Parish. The cities and walled townes in this country are very many, but of them all PARIS is the chiefe, which doth as much excell the rest, as the lofty cedar doth the lowest shrubbes: And I haue heard say, if my memory faile me not, that the King of France, being demaunded by an Embassadour, how many cities there were in all that his whole country and kingdome, reckoned vp a great number, and amongst them made no mention at all of Paris: and being againe asked the reason why he did not account that for one amongst the rest, answea∣red that Paris was another world. This towne is seated in the Ile of France vpon the riuer Sein, in as pleasant and fertile a place as elsewhere may be found in this whole kingdome. It is a very ancient city, called by Caesar Lutetia, by Ptolemey Lucotecia, and by Iulianus in his Misopogonus, Leucetia. Zosimus nameth it Parisium, and Marcellinus, Castellum Pari∣siorum, The castle of the Parisij: For this prouince which now they call properly France, or The Ile of France, was the ancient seat and habitation of the Parisij. The riuer Sein, (Sequana) parting it selfe into two streames, diuideth this towne into three parts, to wit, The Burge vpon the North side: The Vniuersity, vpon the South: and The Ville, in the middest, in the ile aforesaid, which seemeth to be the old towne mentioned by Caesar. For thus he writeth in the seuenth booke of his Commentaries of the warres of France: Id oppidum (Lutetia hee meaneth) Parisiorum, positum in insula fluminis Sequanae. Lutetia that towne of the Parisij, is situate in an iland in the riuer Sein. It is, as our learned country∣man reporteth, tenne English miles about by the wals. The Vniuersity was founded by Charles the Great in the yeere of our Lord eight hundred. For other particulars I wish thee to looke backe to that which we haue written before gene∣rally of France, or particularly of diuers and sundry seuerall Prouinces of the same. And beside those authours before named, thou maiest adioine that our learned countriemam, who not long since set out a discourse of this kingdome inti∣tuled, The view of France.
map of France GALLIA. Geographica Galliae descriptio, de integro plurimis in locis emendata ac Regionum limitibus distincta; auctore Petro Plantio Quicquid terrarum Rhene, Alpibus, mari Mediterraneo, Pyre∣nais montibus, oceano Aquitanico Britannico et Germanico clauditur; communi nomino Latinis Galliae appellatur: quibus limi∣tibus potentissimum Francorum regnum, Sabaudia, Burgundia comitatus, Holvetia, Alsatia, Lotharingia, inferior Germania, et quaedam aliae regiones hodie continentur. Ioannes Bapt∣ista Ʋriuts excudit
The Duchie of LIMBORGH, in the Low Countries. GERMANIA INFERIOR, or, as we now call it, The Low countries, is at this day diuided into these seuenteene prouinces: to wit, foure Duchies, Brabant, Limbourgh, Lukenburgh & Guel∣derland: seuen Counties, or Earldomes, Flanders, Artois, Heinault, Holland, Zeland, Namur, and Zurphen: one Marquisate, commonly called The Marquisate of the Sacred Empire: fiue Grand Signeories, Frizeland, Mechlin, Vtreckt, Ouer-issel, and Groninghen. Of the most of these we haue in the former spoken seuerally and at large, onely of Limborgh, which although it be one of the least, yet in honor and dignity not the least, we haue hitherto spoken little or no∣thing. The Dukedome of LIMBOVRGH, therefore, is a very little prouince, situate in the mid∣dest betweene the Duchie of Gulich, Gelderland, the Bishopricke of Leege and Lutzenburge: The citie Limburgh, or as they vulgarly call it Lympurch, the chiefe towne of this prouince and whereof it tooke the name, standeth vpon the riuer Wesse, or Wesdo, as they name it, and is distant from Aix three leagues, but from Leige it is foure at the least or somewhat more. It is a very strong towne both by nature and arte: For being built vpon the rising of a stony hill, it is enclosed round with a very defensible wall, garded heere and there with di∣uers strong towers, beside a goodly large Castle all of free stone vpon the toppe of the hill. The situation and prospect of this citie is most pleasant and commendable. For at the foote of the hill, at the townes side, runneth the riuer, vnto which adioineth a goodly fertile plaine where daily great store of cattell are kept and mainteined to the great commodity and gaine of the inhabitants round about. This city is not ancient, nor once mentioned by any old writer, as D. Remacle Fusch, a learned Physician, this countriman borne, plainly confesseth, and yet he saith that hee had diligently searched and turned ouer all authours, who either of set purpose, or by the way, haue handled that kind of argument. The soile is very good and fertile, both for corne and pasture, especially about Heruey, a fine village not farre from Clermont. Onely wine it yeeldeth none at all; but in sted of that, they make of barley steeped and sodden, a kinde of very strong drinke, which will assoone make the tosse-pot drunke, as the strongest wine in France. Lewis Guicciardine writeth that, about halfe a Dutch mile off, from this towne, there is a Mine or quarry of stone, that is very like to mettall: of Pliny, in the 10. Chapter of the foure and thirtieth booke of his Naturall historie it is called Lapis aerosus, Cadmia, and lapis calaminaris (if I be not deceiued) The brasse stone, or Copper ore. D. Fusch testifieth that it hath also diuerse veines of Lead and Iron. A kinde of blacke stone cole, like vnto that which we heere call Seacoale, of a sulphurous nature, a good fuell and much vsed of Farriers and Smithes, is in diuers places of the country digged out of the ground in great abundance. Moreouer heere are found diuers sorts of stone, not much vnlike to Marble or Iasper party coloured, very beautiful and good for buil∣ding. This countrey at the first was no more but a County or Earldome: vntill that Fredericke, surnamed Barbarosso, in the yeere of our Lord 1172. graced it with the title and dignity of a Duchie. The first Duke that enioied this honor was Henry the First, lineally descended from Henry the Fourth, that valiant and religious Emperour. At length Henry the Second Duke of Limburgh, dying without heire male, Iohn the First Duke of Brabant, about the yeere after Christs in∣carnation 1293, by right of inheritance claimed the same, and by dint of sworde, driuing out Reynold Earle of Gelderland, the Vsurper, obteined it, since whose daies it hath beene quietly possessed by the house of Brabant. Therefore for iustice in ciuill causes, not only Limburg, but also Faulconburg, Dalem and other liberties and free townes beyond the Mose, do come to the courts of Brabant, which ordinarily are held at Brussels: otherwise for ecclesiasticall iurisdiction they doe be∣long to the diocesses of that Bishop of Leige. But beside this dukedome of Limburgh there are diuers other Iursdictions and Signiories described in this Charte; of the which these following are the chiefe, whereof it shal not be amisse to speake a word or two. Faulconburgh, (Valckembourg it is called of the Dutch, but of the French, Fauquemont) is a very prety towne, which hath iurisdiction and command ouer a large circuite of ground conteining many fine villages. It is three great Dutch miles from Aix, and but two small miles from Mastricht. It was conquered and taken by Iohn the third, Duke of Brabant; who ouercame Ramot the Lord of Faulconburgh, a troublesome man, that at that time laid seege to Mastricht and had much and oft vexed the country round about him. DALEM is a prety fine towne, with a Castle, but of no great strength. It is three long miles from Aix, and two from Liege: It was honoured with the title of an Earldome, and had iurisdiction and command ouer many villages and a great circuit of ground vp as high as the riuer of Mose. Henry the Se∣cond, Duke of Brabant conquered it and adioined it to his dominions. ROIDVCK, or, as Guicciardin calleth it Rhode∣le-duc, is an ancient little towne with an old Castle, about one long Dutch mile, as the forenamed authour would haue it, from Faulconburg: yet this our Mappe maketh it about two. AIX or AIX LACHAPELLE, if we may beleeue Mun∣ster, was that which the Latines called Aquisgranum so much spoken of and mentioned in the stories of Charles the Great and others of those times. Others would haue it to be that which Ptolemey in the 9 chapter of the second booke of his Geography calleth Veterra, and where he saith the thirtieth Legion, called Vlpia legio did reside. Limprand nameth it Pa∣lais de Grau, Rheginon, Palais de eaux, that is, the Water palace; which in my iudgement seemeth most probable; be∣cause I find that that city in Prouence in France which the Romans called Aquae Sextiae, the Frenchmen do at this day call Aix. This city is situate betweene Brabant, Limburgh, the Duchie of Gulicke, and the Bishopricke of Liege. Some thinke that it was destroied and laid leuell with the ground by Attila king of the Humes: others thinke that it was first founded by Charles the Great. But to leaue all these as doubtfull, this is certeine that it standeth in a most pleasant plaine and as healthfull and sweet an aire, as any may be elswhere found in these parts. That faire Church, of our Sauiour and the blessed Virgin his mother, was built by this Emperour, and by him was endowed with great lands, priuiledges, ma∣ny holy and precious reliques brought thither from sundry places of the world. Beatus Rhenanus writeth that Charles the Great made it the head and chiefe city of the kingdome of France, and generally of all the whole Empire, the ordinary Court and place of residence for the Emperour in these Westerne parts of the same. Moreouer he ordained that heere the Emperour should, by the Bishop of Collen, Metropolitan of this prouince, be crowned with a crown of Iron: at Millan, with a crowne of Siluer; and at Rome with a crowne of Gold. Ouer one of the doores of the Towne-house are written these six Latine verses, Carolus insignem reddens hanc condidit vrbem, Quam libertauit post Romam: constituendo, Quòd sit trans Alpes hic semper regia sedes: Vt caput vrbs cuncta colat hanc, & Gallia tota. Gaudet Aquisgranum prae cunctis munere clarum, Quae prius imperij leges nunc laureat almi. And ouer another doore, these two, Hîc sedes regni trans Al∣pes habeatur, Caput omnium ciuitatum, & prouinciarum Galliae. This famous Emperour hauing reigned ouer the French∣men 47. yeares and worne the imperiall diadem 14. ended his life in the yeere of our Lord 813. and was heere enterred in a tombe of Marble, in our Ladies Church with this plaine epitaph; Caroli Magni Christianissimi, Romanorum Imperatoris Corpus hoc conditum est sepulchro. That is, the body of Charles the Great, Emperour of the Romans, lieth heere inter∣red in this tombe. Thus farre Guicciardine, to whom I wish thee to repaire if thou desire a larger discourse of these par∣ticulars.
map of the Low Countries LIMBVRGENSIS DVCATVS TABVLA NOVA, EXCVSA SVMPTIBVS IOAN. BAPTISTAE VRINTS, AEMVLI STVDII GEOGRA∣PHIAE D. AB. ORTELLI. P. M. COSMOGRAPHI REGII. &c. ILLVSTRISSIMO DOCTISSIMOQVE DOMINO D. GASTONI SPINOLAE COMITI BRVACENSI, &c. ORDINIS EQVESTRIS S. IACOBI, PRIMO A STA∣BVLIS, ATQVE A CVBICVLIS SERENISSIMI DVCIS BRABANTIAE, EIVSDEMQVE IN BELLICIS CONSILIIS ASSESSORI ORDINARIO, DVCATVS LIMBVRGENSIS, TOTIVSQVE REGIONIS VLTRA∣MOSANAE GVBERNATORI VIGILANTISSIMO, OMNISQVE ERVDITIONIS ASYLO VNICO HANC TABVLAM GEOGRAPHICAM NOVISSIMIS DIMEN∣SIONIBVS A SE AD EXACTISSIMAM REDACTAM PERFECTIONEM AEGIDIVS MARTINI ANTVER∣PIENSIS IN VTROQVE IVRE LICENTLATVS ET MATHEMATICVS FECIT ET DEDICAVIT. ANNO M.DCIII.
AN EPISTLE OF HVMFREY LHOYD, VVRITTEN TO ABRAHAM ORTEL, COSMOGRAPHER TO PHILIP, the Second, King of SPAINE, wherein at large and learnedly he discourseth of the iland MONA, the ancient seat of the DRVIDES. TO satisfie your request concerning the Name and situation of the ile MONA, most learned Ortell, and to set downe in writing what I haue obserued of that argument in the reading of ancient and moderne authours, what I haue found by experience and trauell, and what I haue gathered by the knowledge of the British tongue which to this day is spoken vulgarly by the inhabitants of this iland, were but so much as I confesse is due to your kinde loue and manifold courtesies, whereby you haue many wayes eternally bound me vnto you: Notwithstanding in so doing I am sure to be seuerely censured of many, condemned of some, and generally to be subiect and op∣posed to the obloquy, and scandalous speeches of the baser sort, such I mean as haue no maner of learning or sound iudgement. For a preiudicate opinion, though neuer so false and absurd, nay euen the grossest errors if they be once receiued and setled in the heart, will hardly euer be remoued, especially being patro∣naged and defended by the authority of Polydore Virgil, a graue learned man, and one that for those times was accounted very eloquent. But by their leaue I may say, That this man hath stuffed his Histories with many manifest errours, mille mendis & mendacijs, with a thousand faults and falshoods; which he fell into, not only for that he wanted the knowledge of the British tongue, (which now the English, after the maner of the Germans, call Welsh, that is, Strange or Barbarous) without which euen the very name of the iland can by no meanes be truely vnderstood: But also either for that he neuer read the best of our Authours, or els for that he bearing a proud splene and malice against the Britons, (whom the best and most honorable of all the Romane Emperours did loue and greatly esteeme) little weighed their authority, and haughtilie attributing too much to his owne, neglected the better, and followed the steps, poore blinde man, of one William Little, little in name and little in estimation and credit, as blinde a foole as himselfe. But let this brasen faced diminisher of the Britons honour, burst himselfe if he will, and do what he can to the vttermost of his might and malice, so long as Diodorus Siculus, Dion Cassius, twise Consul of Rome, Herodian, Plu∣tarch, Pausanias, Ptolemey and Strabo, are extant amongst the Greekes; Caesars Commentaries, Tacitus his Annals, Eutropius, Suetonius, Orosius, Aelius Spartianus, Iulius Capitolinus, Aelius Lampridius, Flaui∣us Vopiscus, Aurelius Victor, Ammianus Marcellinus, Sextus Rufus, The Panegyricks of Mamertinus and others, Pliny, Antonine, Mela and Solinus, amongst the Latines; beside the Annals of the three Gildases, Ninnius, and diuers other very learned men, written many hundred yeres since in the British tongue, who before the comming of the English, (which our countreymen to this day call by their ancient name, Sax∣ons) haue learnedly penned the histories of this their natiue countrey: and beside Asserius, Obbern, Felix Monumetensis, Henricus Huntingtonensis, Malmesburiensis, Annouillanus, Iscanus, Neccham, Gyraldus Parisiensis, Trenetus, and infinite others, which since those Saxons conquered that part of the iland, (which they call England, but we, reteining the old name Lhoëgria,) haue done the like. Let, I say, this proud Italian burst himselfe, and let him snarle at the worthy acts of the Britons, while so many, and such ancient authours do liue to sound the trumpe of their honour, no impudent lying fellow shall euer be able with his calumnies to obscure the bright lusture of the Britons glory, to impeach the honourable fame of their re∣nowmed deeds, spread abroad by such worthy men, or to fasten the least infamy vpon them. But now it is time to come to our proposed argument, and to speake more particularly of MONA, which Polydore Virgil, taking vpon him more than he well might, hath depriued of the ancient name, and leauing it name∣lesse, hath giuen both it and Menauia, to the Ile of Man, as may thus be proued both out of the Greeke, La∣tine, and British writers, as also out of the language which here to this day is spoken by the inhabitants. It is apparent out of Caesar, Tacitus, and others, that MONA was an iland very neere to the coast of Bri∣taine, betweene it and Ireland: In which Sea there are but two (beside the Hebrides) that are of any note and bignesse: Therefore it must needs follow, that one of those two is that MONA which is so often men∣tioned in ancient histories: Wherefore I thinke it not amisse to set downe before your eyes the position of them both, and how they do lie from the coast of England & other ilands round about them, that by that meanes that which followeth may the better be vnderstood. The first of these, which Polydore calleth ANGLESEY, is very neere to that part of Britaine, which we call Cumry, and the English, Wales, from which it is seuered by a very narrow frith or bay of the sea, (the countrey people call it Menai) which ouer∣against the middest of the iland, is hardly a mile ouer. Vpon the East side of this ile there is a very strong castle, and a prety fine citie, called Beaumarish, (Bellum mariscum) both built by Edward the First, King of
England. On the other side of the iland, opposite to this city, there is a maruellous conuenient place to take shipping for Ireland, and therefore it is much for that purpose resorted vnto and frequented by the English. They call it Holy-head, but of the Welsh men it is called Caërgybi, that is, Gubchester, or, The citie of Kybi. In this iland is Aberfraw, which within these three or foure hundred yeeres was the chiefe seat where ordinarily the King of Northwales, (Gwynedia, or as some barbarously write it Venedocia) did reside and keepe his Court. This iland, for the bignesse of it, mainteineth and breedeth much cattell and sheepe. It yeerely yeeldeth such plentie of wheat, that in respect of that fertility it is commonly called, The mother of Wales. They haue little wood here growing: yet euery day the bodies of huge trees, with their roots, and sirre trees of a woonderfull length and bignesse, are heere by the inhabitants found and digged out of the earth in diuers places, in low grounds and champion fields. The people speake the Welsh tongue, and for the most part they do not vnderstand one word of English: notwithstanding they haue for these three hū∣dred yeeres and more beene subiect, as the rest of Wales hath beene, to the Kings and Crowne of England. But now let vs come to the other iland, to which also Polydore Virgil hath not long since without any ground or good authoritie, giuen the name of MONA. That standeth in the middest of the maine sea, distant from the neerest place of England at the least fiue and twentie miles. It is almost as bigge as that o∣ther, but it is farre more barren and waste, and those men that are borne and bred there, are weake and no∣thing so fit for the warres and seruice in the field, only those excepted that are sent thither by the Earle of Darbie, to whom this ile doth by right of inheritance from his ancestours belong. They do speake the Scotish language, or the Irish, as you please to call it, for they be both one. The one is as farre from Ire∣land as the other. These things being taught and conceiued, let vs now heare what the Romans haue writ∣ten of Mona. The first authour that euer made mention of it, as I remember, was Caesar; next after him, Pliny and Dion Cassius: But they doe but name it only, and withall affirme it to be situate in the maine sea betweene England and Ireland. Thus much we both confesse. Cornelius Tacitus, a very learned man, and one that by meanes of Iulius Agricola, his father in law, very well knew the state of Britaine then, of the situation and distance of Mona from the Continent, teacheth vs many things making much to this our purpose. Therefore let vs listen awhile to that which he speaketh in the foureteenth booke of his Annals: But then was Paulinus Suetonius Lieutenant of Britaine, one that for his great experience and knowledge of militarie matters, popular fame, and estimation amongst the meaner sort of men, (which for the most part suffereth no man of rare virtues and qualities to liue without a compere) did alwayes contend with Corbulo, labouring by all meanes possiblie to match that his honou∣rable seruice in conquering Armenia, by ouercomming and quieting those Rebels which in these parts did stand out against the Romans. Therefore he maketh great preparation, and prouideth all things necessarie for the assault and taking of the iland Mo∣na, a place not only by nature, but also by reason of the multitude of people which do there inhabit, very strong and defencible, and is indeed the sanctuarie and place of common refuge for all such as runne away from their Capteines or Commanders. He caused boats to be made with flat bottomes, because the sea there neere the shore is verie shallow, and euerie where full of flats and shelfs. Thus they conueyed ouer the footmen, the horsmen followed them partly wading thorow the foords and shallow pla∣ces, and partly swimming where the waters were more deepe. Vpon the shore, to empeach our landing, a very great armie, ve∣rie well appointed and armed for all assaies, stood close thronging together, intermedled with women running to and fro betweene the ranks with torches in their hands, in mourning gownes and their haire about their eares, of all the world like to the Furies or madde women. The Druides also on euerie side with hands lifted vp to heauen, powring out many bitter curses and deadlie im∣precation, with the strangenesse of that sight strooke the souldiers into such a dampe, that they stood stone still, not once moouing their bodies, as if they had willingly offered their throats to the enemie: yet at length by the exhortation and encouragement of the Generall, and one animating and heartening on another, that they might not seeme to be afrayd of a companie of seelie women and other frantike people, they aduance forward the standerd, display their banners, and such as offered to resist, they beat to the ground, and force them to runne into their owne fires. This being done, he placed garrisons in their townes and villages, and caused their woods to be cut downe and vtterlie destroyed; which, by reason of their cruell ceremonies and superstitious sacrifices there offered, were by them esteemed holy. For they accounted it lawfull to embrue their altars wth the blood of their captiues, and to seeke to know the secret counsell of the eternall God and euents to come by the entrailes and bowels of men. Thou hearest, gentle Reader, how the footmen followed the horsmen in the foords and shallowes, and where the water was more deepe, they swomme ouer with the horses. The same Authour also, setting forth, in the life of Iulius Agricola, the same Agricola's voyage into this iland, writeth on this maner: MONAM insulam, cuius possessionem reuocatum Paulinum, &c. Thus translated by the learned Sir Henrie Sauile (for I know not whe∣ther Great Tacitus scorneth any other interpretor or no) He deliberated to conquer the iland Mona: from the pos∣session whereof, as before I haue rehearsed, Paullinus was reuoked by the generall rebellion of Britanie: But as in a purpose not purposed before, ships being wanting, the policie and resolutenesse of the Captaine deuised a passage, commanding the most choise of the Aides, to whom all the shallowes were knowen, and who after the vse of their countrey were able in swimming to gouerne themselues with armour and horses, laying aside their cariage, to put ouer at once, and suddenly to inuade them. VVhich thing so amased the enemie, attending for ships and such prouision by sea, that surely beleeuing nothing could be hard or inuincible to men which came so minded to warre, they humbly intreated for peace, and yeelded the Iland. Thus Agricola at his first entrance into his prouince (which time others consume in vaine ostentation and ambitious seeking of ceremonies) entring withall into labours and dangers, became famous indeed and of great reputation. Here thou seest againe, how the souldiers gat into Mo∣na by swimming without the helpe of any ships or boats. Neither did this our authour heare this from the
report of any obscure fellow of little knowledge and lesse vnderstanding in these matters, but euen from the mouth of Agricola himselfe, his wiues father, a man very famous, and one that was the Generall and chiefe commander in this voyage. But marke, I pray you, how Polydore Virgil answereth all this: For thus he writeth in the first booke of his Historie of England. This sometime (he speaketh of Mona) was seuered from Britaine by a very narrow arme of the sea, so that so oft as the sea did ebbe, which heere at all times maketh very high tides, it was so neere to the Continent, that men might go thither without boats. And againe, a little beneath he writeth thus of it: See, sayth he, what continuance of time can bring to passe, That iland is now fiue and twentie miles from any part of England, which sometime was scarse one mile from it. What will not malice, and a crosse humour alwaies opposing it selfe against other mens opinions, although neuer so much turning to his owne disgrace and discredit, yea euen in the best wits, force a man to do! This Italian dreameth of a strange inundation and ouerflowing of the sea, whereof neuer any Hi∣storian, Latine, English, Irish or Scotish euer spake, I dare auouch, one word: and that which is most strange of all, the countrey people neuer haue heard, as seemeth, from their ancestours, of any such kinde of drowning. He complaineth also of the straightnesse of that other iland, and of the scarsitie of Corne and Wood. Where also I could wish that the Authour had had a little more discretion and honestie: For this iland (I meane his Anglisea, which indeed is the true Mona) is about fiue and twentie English miles long, and sixteene miles ouer, euery mile containing one thousand and two hundred Geographicall pases. Therefore it conteineth in compasse well neere threescore and twelue Italian miles: For in some places it is not full sixteene miles ouer. That which he speaketh of the scarsitie of wood here, it is very true: For Ta∣citus reporteth that the woods were cut downe and destroyed by the Romans, an infinite number of the bodies of which, as I haue shewed before, couered with earth and hid within the ground, are at this day by the countrey people found in sundry places of the ile. And that there haue beene woods here within these foure hundred yeeres or thereabouts, it is very manifest by our histories. Of the barrennesse of this Iland I know not well what to say, seeing that he is not ashamed to write that which all men do know to be most false: For such is the fertilitie of this iland, that our people vse to say prouerbially, that Anglesey is the mother of Wales (Mon mam Gymry.) Moreouer, the inhabitants (for their proportion, and state of our coun∣trey) are verie wealthie, and withall, stout and valiant, as appeareth out of the English Historiographers: For the English men haue oft times assaulted this iland by sea, and laboured to get the possession thereof, but all in vaine: For they haue been alwaies there slaine, or put to the worst. This, Hugh Earle of Shrews∣burie and Arundell there slaine, can testifie to be true. This also Henrie the naturall sonne of Henrie the First, with many noble men with him there slaine can well testifie. [How true this is I can not tell; but this I finde, that two Hughs of the Norman blood, the one Earle of Chester, the other Earle of Shrewsbu∣rie, did enter this iland, greatly vexe the inhabitants; and that they might the better retaine them in due obedience, did build the castle at Aber Lhienioc: and of these two, Hugh Earle of Chester was indeed there slaine: but how? not in the entrance or assault of the ile, but in the defence of it after he had gotten quiet possession of the same? yet not by the Welsh men, but by the Norweighians, who vnder the conduct of Magnus their Generall landed heere, slew many of the people, robbed the countrey, and departed with great spoile. Of that Henrie I finde not one word in others.] What should I say more? Polydore Virgils Mona distant from the coast of Britaine twentie fiue miles, no whit bigger than this, but much more bar∣ren, and such as breedeth a weaker kinde of men descended from the Irish, euen by the iudgement of Poly∣dore himselfe, doth now renounce the title of Mona. But what other men also do thinke of this matter, let vs heare in few words. Ptolemey the Prince of Geographers, vpon the East side of Ireland placeth foure i∣lands, MONARINA (or as other copies do reade, Monaida) MONA, ADROS and LYMNOS. The two latter are very well knowen vnto vs at this day; for that indeed they doe still reteine those auncient names. Adros of our countrey men is called Ynys ador, that is, as the words doe signifie, The iland of birds. Lymnos they now call Enlli, which the English men call Bardesey, that is, as he would faine interpret it, Insula Bardo∣rum, The Bardes iland. [But I doubt whether our Saxons did euer vnderstand what the Britons Bardi meant: yet of this I am sure, that the learned M. Camden in his Britannia is of another opinion.] Of the other two then, the one must of necessity be our Mona, the other Polydores Mona. Monaria is by Ptolemey placed much farther Northward than Mona, and Mona hee maketh to lie somewhat more Easterly than Monaria: For this, Monaria, I meane, or Monaoeda, as Ptolemeyes copies vulgarly haue it, lieth, as he wri∣teth, from the Canaries Eastward 17 degrees and 40 minutes, but vp so high into the North, that the pole there is eleuated aboue the horizont 61 degrees and 30 minutes: when as the other, to wit, Mona, lieth from the Canaries but 15 degrees, and from the North but 57 degrees and 40 minutes. Polydores Mona leaneth both more toward the North and East than ours doth: Therefore it is Ptolemeys Monaria that he speaketh of, not Ptolemeys Mona. And this our Mona shall still reteine that ancient name of Mona, which Ptolemey gaue vnto it in his time. This we haue collected out of forreine histories: Now let vs come to our owne Writers, who I thinke, in a matter of names of places in their owne country and language ought rather to be beleeued than an Italian, a meere stranger borne and brought vp beyond the seas, farre from this our countrey. But that these things may the better be vnderstood, some few lines are here by the way to be inserted. All men do know and confesse this to be true, that the Britons, before the entrance of the
English or Saxons did possesse this whole iland: vntill such time as being by them conquered and subdued, they were forced to abandon the better part of the same, leauing it to the possession of their enemies; and to content themselues with the Western parts only: And they being thus seated, were called by the names of the places were they dwelt, as for example those which possessed Cambria, were named Cambri: those which inhabited Cornouia, were knowen and called by the name of the Cornouij. Yet the English men did, after the maner of the Dutch (who name the French and Italians, VVelsh) call them all generally VVelshmen: Adding for difference sake the names of the countries, as it is manifest by those histories, which yet are ex∣tant, written in the Saxon tongue. For those our Brits, are in them called VValae: and the Cornouij, Corn∣walae; not, as the vnlearned do thinke, Cornugalliae. Neither can I with silence ouerpasse that shamelesse im∣pudencie of Polydore, who braggeth that he was the first that euer found this out, and committed the same to writing; when it is most certeine that he stole this etymologie and reason why this our countrie was cal∣led Wales, out of Syluester Giraldus. But, that I may returne vnto that where I left, the Welshmen being thus cooped vp into a corner, did notwithstanding reteine the ancient British tongue: so that the Coun∣tries, Cities, Riuers, Ilands, and people of Britaine, are by the Welshmen called by those names whereby they were knowen and called at such time as they possessed the whole. For our countrey people, such I meane as are borne and brought vp farre within the land, do not know what the name of an English man doth meane, but all the English they do generally terme Saisson, that is, Saxons, (for they haue no x) Eng∣land they call by the ancient name Lhoëger: Wales, Cambri: Cornwall, Corniw: Scotland, Alban: Ireland, Yuerdhon: and indeed some old Writers do write the name of this iland not Hibernia, but Iuernia, as M. Cam∣den sheweth at large in his Britannia. So also we doe still call all the Cities of England by those names whereby they were sometime called before the entrance of the Saxons. But let vs come againe to Mona. Our countreymen and the inhabitants of this ile (speaking now at this day the ancient British tongue) doe know no other name of it than MON, for so they all generally call it. Polydore Virgil calleth it ANGLE∣SEA, that is, The English ile. I grant that this iland being subdued by the English men, was beautified and graced with their name, and that the English men do so call it I do not denie. But, I pray thee, did the Eng∣lish men first descrie this iland, was it neuer seene before, or had it no name at all before their comming? Hearest thou Polydore, bethinke thy selfe; thou mayest aswell say that England is not that land which was sometime called Britannia, nor that was not Gallia, which now we call France. Nay, which is a greater mat∣ter than this, and more strange, the inhabitants of this ile (notwithstanding they be subiect to the crowne of England) do neither know what England or an English man doth meane: For an English man they call Sais, (but in the plurall number speaking of more than one, Saisson) and this their natiue countrey they name Mon. Moreouer, that faire citie built vpon that arme of the sea or frith, aboue mentioned, on the o∣ther side ouer against the West part of this iland, is called Caeraruon, that is, The citie vpon Mon: For Caer, in our language signifieth a walled towne; (Kir, in Hebrew is a wall, and Kartha, in those Easterne tongues is a walled citie:) Ar, is as much to say, as Vpon: and as for the v, in the last syllable, for m, that is the pro∣prietie of the language in some cases: for in all words beginning with m, in consequence of speech, that let∣ter, after some certeine consonants is changed into v, for which our nation doth alwayes vse f: because that v, with them is euermore a vowell: So we call Wednesday (Diem Mercurij) Die Mercher, but Wednesday night Nos Fercher. Mary, we call Mair; but for our Ladies church we write and pronounce Lhanuair. Nei∣ther is this citie only thus named, but euen that whole tract of the continent of Britaine that runneth along by it is called Aruon, that is, Opposite or ouer against Mon. But let it be, that this iland was not that Mona so oft mentioned by the ancients, then ought Polydore for his credits sake haue found another name for it, and not to haue left it wholly namelesse. Now let vs come vnto the other, which our countreymen do call MENAW: and which all the inhabitants generall, as also the English and Scots (reteining the Welsh name, but cutting it somewhat shorter) MAN. Therefore there is no man, for ought I know, beside this proud Italian, and one Hector Boëthius, a loud liar, that euer called this iland by the name of Mona. But leauing these demonstrable arguments, which indeed do make this matter more cleere than the noone day, let vs come vnto authorities and testimonies of learned men, which in some cases are rather beleeued than any o∣ther arguments whatsoeuer: by these I doubt not but the true and proper name shall be giuen to ech of these ilands, and the controuersie decided without any maner of contradiction. There is a piece of Gildas Britannus, that ancient writer, a man euery kinde of way learned, at this day remaining, in the Librarie of the illustrious Earle of Arundell, the only learned Noble man of his time; in which he hath these wordes: England hath three ilands belonging to it: Wight, ouer against the Armoricanes, or Bretaigne in France: The second lieth in the middest of the sea betweene Ireland and England. The Latine Historians doe call it Eubonia, but vulgarly in our mother tongue we call it MANAW. Thou hearest, gentle Reader, a natu∣rall Welsh man speaking in the Welsh tongue: For thus we call Polydore Virgils Mona in our natiue lan∣guage euen at this day. Moreouer, the reuerend Beda, that worthy Englishman, famous thorow all Chri∣stendome in his dayes for all maner of literature and good learning, in the ninth chapter of the second booke of his Historie writeth thus: At which time also the people of Northumberland (Nordan Humbri) that is, all that nation of the Angles which did inhabit vpon the North side of the riuer Humber, with Ed∣win their king, by the preaching of Paulinus (of whom we haue spoken a little before) was conuerted vnto
the faith of Christ. This king in taking of good successe for his enterteinment of the Gospel, did grow so mightie in Christianitie and the kingdome of heauen, and also had that command vpon the earth, that he ruled (which neuer any king of the English did before him) from one end of Britaine to the other, and was king not only of the English but also of all the shires and prouinces of the Britons. Yea and he brought vn∣der his subiection, as I haue shewed before, the iles of Man (insulae Menaniae.) Here I do thinke, that for Me∣nauiae, it ought to be written Menauiae: seeing that there is such small difference betweene an n and a u, that they may easily be mistaken, and one put for another. Moreouer, Henry Archdeacon of Huntingdon, a worthy Historiographer, who wrote about the yeere of our Lord 1140, one that followed Beda in many things almost foot for foot, doth seeme also to correct this fault, and cleere the doubt. For he setting forth the great command and conquests of this Edwine King of the Northumbers, brusteth out into these words: Eduwyn the king of the Northumbers ruled ouer all Britaine, not only ouer that part which was inhabited of the English, but ouer that also which was possessed of the Britons, Kent only excepted. More∣ouer, he brought the ile Menauia, which lieth between Ireland and Britaine, and is commonly called MAN, vnder the obedience of the Kings of England. Here obserue, that this English man did giue also to this i∣land (which Polydore Virgil falsly calleth Mona) the English name: for it is commonly, sayth he, called Man: by which name it is knowen & called at this day of all the English. Besides this also Ranulph of Che∣ster in the foure and fortieth chapter of the first booke of his Polychronicon, doth thus speake of those i∣lands which are neere neighbours vnto Britaine: Britaine, sayth he, hath three ilands lying not farre off from it (beside the Orkney iles) which doe seeme to answer vnto the three principall parts of the same: For WIGHT lieth hard vpon the coast of Loëgria, which now is called England (Anglia:) MONA which the English call Anglisea, perteineth vnto Cambria, that is, to Wales: But the ile EVBONIA, which hath two other names, Menauia and Mania, lieth oueragainst Scotland. These three, Wight, Man, and Anglisea (Vecta, Mania, Mona) are almost all of one bignesse, and conteining the like quantitie of ground. Thus farre Ranulph of Chester. The reason why Gildas and others haue called this iland Eubonia, I take to be this; because it was first inhabited of the same nation (to wit, the Irish) of the which the Euboniae, the West iles, commonly of the Historians called Hebrides, are. The reuerend Beda and Henry Huntington, in that they write it Menauia, do seeme to allude to the Welsh name Manaw: but this is it which we would haue thee di∣ligently to obserue, that none of them do call it Mona. By these arguments and testimonies it is manifest that Mona is that iland which the inhabitants (as I haue shewed before) doe at this day name Mona, or Mon, acknowledging no other name, and is that which of the English is called Anglisea: but the other, which Polydore Virgil, and such as doe loue with him to wallow in the mire, rather than to seeke for the cleere streames, doe call Mona, is of Gildas called Eubonia, of Henry Huntington Menauia, and of others Mania. Here I will conclude this discourse with this one testimonie, which may indeed woorthily stand for many; to wit, this of Syluester Girald a Welsh man borne, a man no lesse famous for his learning, than for his no∣ble birth: For he was descended from that noble house of the Giralds, to whom the Kings of England are beholding for that footing which they haue in Ireland. Moreouer, he was greatly beloued of Henrie the second King of England, and was afterward Secretarie to King Iohn his sonne; whose name also is very fa∣mous and oft mentioned in the Popes Decretals: For being but bishop of S. Dauids in Wales, he did not∣withstanding contend with the Archbishop of Canturburie about the prerogatiue & primacy: This man, I say, in that his booke which he intituled Itinerarium Balwini Archiepiscopi Cantuariensis, crucem in infideles per Cam∣briam praedicantis, The Iournall or trauels of Baldwin Archbishop of Canturbury, when as he preached the Gospell and crosse of Christ against the Infidels thorowout all Wales (whose company he neuer forsooke in all that peregrination) writeth thus of the ile MONA. On the morrow we passed by the castle of Caer∣aruon, and from thence thorow the valleys and steepe hilles and mountaines we came vnto Bangor, where we were most kindly enterteined of the bishop (whose name was Gwian, who was almost constrained to take vp the crosse of Christ) with a great lamentation and shout of all sorts of people both men and wo∣men. From thence, crossing a vety narrow arme of the sea, we passed ouer to MONA, an iland lying a∣bout two miles off from the maine land. Here Rothericke the yonger sonne of Owen came very deuout∣ly with all the people of that ile and of the countreys round about him, to meet vs. There they making as it were a theater of the craggie rocks, by the preaching of the Archbishop, and of Alexander the Archdea∣con of that place, many were wonne vnto the crosse and to beleeue in Iesus Christ, but certeine yong men, lustie-bloods, of the seruants and followers of Rothericke, which sate oueragainst vs, would by no meanes be drawen to beare the crosse. Of these some, within a little while after, following certeine theeues or free-booters, being slaine outright, others hurt and dangerously wounded, did of their owne heads lay a world∣ly crosse one vpon anothers backe. Rothericke was married to Prince Reese's daughter, who was allied to him in the third degree: her, by no admonitions, he could be made to put away from him, hoping that by her meanes he should the better be able to defend himselfe against his brothers children, whom he had disherited and put by their lands and possessions: notwithstanding it fell out contrary to his expectation, for within awhile after they recouered all againe out of his hands. This Iland hath three hundred three and fortie villages or farmes, yet it is esteemed but at three Cantreds. Britaine hath three ilands lying not farre off from it, all almost of like quantitie and bignesse: VVight, vpon the South; Mon, vpon the West;
and Man, vpon the Northwest. The two former are very neere to the continent, the armes of the sea by which they are seuered from England, being but very narrow and not farre ouer. The third which is called Man, lieth mid way betweene Vlster, a prouince of Ireland, and Gallawey of Scotland. Mona, or Mon, of the inhabitants, by reason of the great plenty of wheat which it yeeldeth ordinarily euery yeere, is called The mother of Wales. And a little beneath, the same Authour writeth thus of this iland: Hugh Earle of Shrewsbury and Arundell, with Hugh Earle of Chester, entring this iland by force, did shut dogs all night in the church of Fefridanke, which the next morning were found all starke madde; and he himselfe after∣ward by the inhabitants of the Orkeney iles, comming thither as pirats and sea-robbers, vnder the leading of Magnus their captaine, being shot in the eye (which part of his body only was vnarmed and subiect to the enemies weapon) fell stone dead from the decke of the shippe into the sea: which Magnus beholding, cried out in the Danish language, Leit loope, that is as much to say in English, Let him leape. Moreouer, Henry the Second, going into North-Wales with an armie of men, ioyned battell with the aduersarie at Caleshull in a narrow straight betweene two woods, and withall sent a saile of ships into Mona, which spoi∣led the foresayd Church with other places there: wherfore they were almost all slaine, taken, dangerously wounded, or put to flight by the inhabitants of that ile. There were in this company two noble men, and his vncle which wrote this story, with other mo sent hither by the King, to wit, Henry the sonne of Henry the First, and the vncle of Henry the Second, begotten of the honourable lady Nesta, daughter of Reese, Theodore's sonne, borne in the confines of South-Wales, I meane in the skirts of it next vnto Deme∣tia or West-Wales, and the brother of Steuen, brother to Henry by the mothers side, but not by the fa∣thers, a man that first in our dayes, breaking the way for others, not long after this, attempted the entrance and conquest of Ireland, whose worthy commendations the prophicall history doth at large set foorth. Henry being too venturous, and not being seconded in time, was killed at the first encounter with a pike. But Robert distrusting his owne strength and doubting whether he should be aided or not, fled, and being sore wounded, very hardly recouered the shippes. This iland outwardly appeareth as if it were barren, rough, and ouergrowen, like as the countrey of Pebidion neere Menauia doth, although indeed it be very fertile of many things in diuers places. Thus farre Gyraldus. What could euer be spoken or written more plainly and euidently of the name, situation, fertility and valourous inhabitants of Mona; as also of the si∣tuation and name of that other iland? The same authour in his description of Wales, thus speaketh of this Iland: In North-Wales betweene Mona and Snowdon hilles is Bangor the bishops sea. As of all Wales, the South part about Cardigan shire, (Cereticam regionem, he calleth it) but especially euery where in West-Wales, (Demetia) by reason of the champion plaines, and commodiousnesse of the marine coasts, are farre the more pleasant and better: so North-Wales (Borealis Venedotia) is knowen to haue many countries and places farre more strong and better fortified by nature and situation, many more goodly braue men, euerie where to haue much better and more fertile ground: For like as Snowdon hilles are thought to be able to finde pasture for all the cattell in Wales if they were all driuen thither, so it is reported that the ile Mona (Anglisea) may for a time finde all Wales bread-corne; such is the woonderfull store of wheat that it doth yeerely yeeld. What man is he that is so blockish and void of vnderstanding, that shall read and consider these arguments and allegations, that will make any doubt whether Polydore's Anglisea be the true Mona, that ancient seat of the Druides, so renowmed by the Romane warres, and oft mentioned in their histories? Moreouer, who can doubt, whether that other Iland, which the Welshmen call Manaw, and the English Man, which he and some other learned men (chusing rather to drinke puddle water from a neere channell, than to seeke farther for a cleere streame or pure fountaine) haue falsly named Mona, or whether we ought not rather with Ptolemey to call it Monaria, or Monaida; Eubonia, with Gildas; Menauia, with Beda and Henrie Huntington; or Mania, with Gyraldus? Many more arguments and testimonies of learned men I could in this place haue alleaged: but lest I should be too tedious and troublesome to the Reader, I will at this time with these content my selfe: no∣thing doubting but these, to any learned man, or any one well acquainted with the Welsh histories, shalbe thought sufficient to stop the mouth of the scandalous aduersary, and to answer all the cauils of the maliti∣ous enuiours of the Britons glory. Therefore I must entreat thee, most learned Ortell, for that thy kind∣nesse and humanity which thou art wont to shew to others, to take this in good part, and in that thy good∣ly Theater, to set out this our Mona, in the ancient colours, to the publicke view of the world: And I hope before it be long to send you a more absolute description, not only of this our Mona, but also of all Wales, illustrated both with the ancient names vsed by the Romans and Britons, and also with the moderne Eng∣lish, whereby they are knowen at this day of that nation. Moreouer, I haue a Geographicall Chart or Map of England, described according to the moderne situation and view, with the ancient names of riuers, townes, people and places, mentioned by Ptolemey, Pliny, Antonine and others, that those grosse and shamelesse lies of Hector Boothe may by that means the easilier be descried: against which Hector Boothe our Leland, that famous and learned Antiquary wrote this most worthy Epigramme: Hectoris historici tot, quot mendacia scripsit, Si vis vt numerem, Lector amice, tibi; Me iubeas etiam fluctus numerare marinos, Et liquidi stellas connumerare poli. Would'st haue me, gentle Reader, tell I he lies that Hector Boothe did write? I may aswell count sand of sea, Or starres of heauen in cleerest night. I haue also a very exact description of the marine tract or sea coast of Scot∣land:
all which when I shall come vp to London (which God willing shall be before the end of April next) I will send vnto you: Whereby the manifest and palpable errours of certeine learned men shall be discoue∣red: who in their Geographicall Chart, trusting too confidently to certeine vnlearned mens relations and writings haue most falsly and erroneously set downe the names of diuers places, cities and riuers, to the great preiudice and danger of such as shall giue heed vnto them. In the meane time I bid you heartily farewell, beseeching you, of all loues, if there be any thing wherein I may pleasure you, not to entreat it, but to command it, by the law of friendship and league of lear∣ned scholars. Richard Clough, a verie honest man, and one that was the cause and procurer of this our loue and acquaintance, aswell your friend as mine, shall both bring your letters from you to me, and mine to you, that interest I know we both haue in him. Againe farewell, most kinde ORTELL: from Denbigh in Guynedh or North-Wales this fifth of April, in the yeere of our Lord God M.D.LXVIII. Thine to his vttermost power, HVMFREY LHOYD of Denbigh in Wales. printer's device of John Norton and John Bill, featuring Mercury's hat and caduceus with two cornucopias and seascape (McKerrow 293) LONDON, Printed for IOHN NORTON and IOHN BILL. 1606.
