19120 S120566 99855762 21264
ANTHONY PAINT THE Blaspheming Caryar. Who sunke into the ground vp to the neck, and there stood two day two nights, and not to bee drawne out by the strength of Hor or digged out by the help of man: and there dyed the 3. of Nouember. 1613. Also the punishment of Nicholas Mesle a most wicked blasphemer. Reade and tremble. Published by Authoritie. At London printed for Iohn Trundle: and are to be sold at Christ Church Gate. 1614.
THE STRANGE PVNISH∣MENT AND IVDGEMENT OF GOD, VPON A CVRSED blasphemer: ANTHONY PANETER Caryer. TRemble all yee people, stoope now and fall downe vnder the dreadfull and most iust Iudgement of that great Iehouah, which holdes in his hand, Heauen, Earth, and e∣uery thing that therein is, weighing them in scales as though it were dust: Bee now amazed at the might of so mighty an arme, which in the twinck∣ling of an eye crusheth and beateth downe sinners in his wrath, scattereth them as the winde doth the Gra∣shoppers, and maketh them the subiect and argument of his glorie, in the sight of all Nations. O fearefull iudgements of the most High, which suffers not his glorie to be troden vnder foote, but when hee thinkes fit brings the iust and horrible plagues of his auenge∣ment vpon the despiser of his holy Name. How ter∣rible and full of horrour, quoth the Psalmist, it is to fall into the Lords hands, when hee puts on the armour and weapons of his wrath; as the holy Apostle Paul, sheweth in the tenth Chapter of the Epistle to the He∣brewes, he may when he pleases punish with diuers pu∣nishments
and temporall plagues, besides the eternall damnation those that rebell against him and offend his sacred Maiestie. Tremble and shake againe (O Sin∣ners) (for the Prophet Moses, in the 14. of Exodus pro∣nounceth vnto you the decree from heauen so dire and frightfull, saying, that this great God without vsing the ministerie or meanes of any man sendeth his An∣gels (the executioners of his vengeance) against the proud profane which sets light by his holy Name; That high minded Nabuchodonosor King of Baby∣lon shall bee, though to his great shame, the first wee will produce for an ensample to all posteritie. Pharao King of Egypt, and the ten notable plagues, which, the same God, auenging his honour, did send vppon that swaggering spirit, are euident proofes of the same; waters turned into bloud, filthy Frogges, Lice, a∣noyance of Flies, the mortalitie of men by pestilence, murren and death of Cattell, Boyles and Scabbes, Haile, and frighting Thunders, Grashoppers, obscu∣ritie and palpable darknesse, briefely the very Angell of the same God whom he blasphemed made warre against him, yea' by things that seemed very contemptible and of no force; by the onely winde of his mouth and by his destroying Angell he ouerthrowes and quite vndoes the proud and insolent blasphemer Senacherib King of the Assyrians, for attempting with blasphemous words to spite this Soueraigne God, but the same most migh∣tie God made him well knowe and all men after him, that it is he that punisheth and sheweth mercie, which killeth and keepeth aliue, which makes wonders in hea∣uen and earth, and hee throweth e'en downe to the ground that loftie man, by the hands of Sarazar and A∣dramalec his owne Children, within the temple of his owne false God Nezrok in Niniuie: And as the same
our great God hath diuers and sundry wayes at hand, so doth he diuersly inflict and layeth paines vpon sin∣ners: sometimes by the Elements, as Moses witnes∣seth in the 26 of Leuit. and 11. of Deuteronomie. Some∣times by sicknesses of sundry sorts. Exod. 15. Deut. 28. Sometimes by the Sword and by Warre. Ezech. 5. Sometimes by Famine, by Fire, by Captiuitie, briefly in a thousand manners when it pleaseth him to take re∣uenge for his honour offended: night cannot hide the sin∣ners from him: their strength and nimblenes of their bodie cannot saue them: Monarkes, Emperours, Prin∣ces and Kings doe tremble and shake vnder his mightie hand: the strongest, and best fortresses tumble bowne at his onely looke: It is that terrible and potent God, of whom spake that Captaine of the Hebrues, Iudas Mac∣chabeus, who is like in force and greatnes to the migh∣tie God of the Hebrues? and the same posie hee vsed in his ensignes of war. Doe you think then you wretched and accursed blasphemers of the Name of the most High (at whose terrible lookes the earth doth tremble, the elements do , the heauen fadeth away, and the sea flyeth out) doe you thinke (say I to you) doe yee thinke to shunne the furie of his face, and escape the heauines of his arme that can not be auoided; O accur∣sed blasphemers, the first and cheefest, more wicked and more abhominable than all other sinners, doe you not sée, that as many times as you open your stincking mouthes to blaspheme the Name of the Almighty, as many times the Diuels and frightfull fiends doe enter within your selues through euery blasphemie? Doest thou beléeue wretched blasphemer, that God which séeth and vnderstandeth thee is deafe or a sleepe, or else di∣stracted and busie about some other busines, like the Idols of the Paynims, as the holy Prophet Elias did
in old time, reproach vnto the Idolaters of those dayes? Dost thou thinke thou must neuer be called to accompt, for thy foule and stinking blasphemies, bee it neuer so late, that letting loose the reines of thy desolate tongue, which polluteth both heauen and earth, thou shalt thus still liue without God, without Faith, and Religion in this world? Thou art, O blasphemer! farre worse and more wicked than a Theefe, a Niggard, a Murthe∣rer, a Lyar, a Whooremonger, a Wanton, an Adul∣terer, a Drunkard, a Glutton, an Idolater, a Ruffian and Pandar, or a Conceaier of st althes: for thou art traiterous and rebellious vnto God, spitting in his face as many times as thou blasphem'st against his holy Name, with no lesse indignitie and ignominie, than the Iewes which did buffet and spit vpon the blessed Sauiour of the world. And if Saint Paul said in the sixt to the Hebrues, that sinners do crucifie once againe the Sonne of God, that being said in generall how much more in particular may it be applyed to the Swearers and Blasphemers of the Name of God. For, those (as saith Saint Augustine) doe not sin lesse, which blaspheme our Sauiour Christ, raigning in hea∣uen, than those which haue crucified him walking vpon the earth: Yea it may be said, that it is lesse sinne to blaspheme Iesus Christ hanging and dying on the Crosse, than now he is sitting and raigning in heauen, liuing, and triumphing. The Iewes, not knowing that he was the Sonne of God, did blaspheme and fil∣thily bespit him; but now blasphemers, that know him to be the very Sonne of God, doe yet worse than euer the Iewes did, and are yet more wicked than the dam∣ned which blaspheme God, in that by blasphemies they make this world their very Hell, by anticipation; It is most certainely held amongst the Diuines, that
God is nothing so angry for the blasphemies of all the damned altogether, as for the blasphemie of one blasphemer aliue, for blasphemie is not forbidden to the damned: on the contrarie as the glorie of the Saints in heauen is to praise and blesse GOD, so is it a punishment and torment to the damned to blas∣pheme him: but vnto the liuing it is most expresse∣ly forbidden to speake blasphemie, vpon paine of e∣ternall damnation: whence it followeth as it is aboue∣said that the blasphemers, what pretence and colour soeuer they will couer their accursed swearing with∣all, are worse and more wicked than the damned, and are like to this Monster fained by Homer, expoun∣ded by Lucretius in this verse, Prima Leo, postrema draco, media ipsa Chymera. A true Hyerogliphick or poesie of the wretched blas∣phemers, swaggering like Lyons, venemous like Dra∣gons, and no lesse abhominable diuerse and counter∣fet in the framing their blasphemies, than these Chy∣meraes hideous and inuented Monsters; But that wee may not stay ouerlong in the choise and picking out of the iust iudgements and plagues inflicted and vsed by the great GOD from time to time vppon blasphemers, wee will insist vpon one onely example among many, being an accident of fresh memorie and aboue all other most exemplarie, worthy to be consi∣dered and remembred, in all ages; Set before your eyes this notable and dreadfull example of the iudge∣ment lately executed by the Diuine vengeance vppon one named Anthony Paneter, an ordinarie Carrier in the territorie named La Condamina, three leagues di∣stant from the Cittie of, Genoa in Italy: This man returning from the Cittie with two horses loaden with diuers wares, and his horses for the heauines of their
burthen scarcely able to goe fast inough to bee at home afore night, fell vnto such chafing and rage, that cur∣sing, banning, blaspheming despitefully, and with a desperate madnes the holy and fearefull Name of Al∣mightie God, calling the Diuell to come to help him, or else that hee should carrie him away and his horses withall (as, alas! it is to ordinarie an vse of some Car-men, and Carriers both by Sea and by Land euery foote to blaspheme and curse the holy Name of GOD) this vile wretch not ceasing his furie on a sudden was stricken with the reuenging hand of him against whom hée did so outragiously vomit his blas∣phemies; for beeing about two leagues forward on his way, still continuing his outragious cursing, swea∣ring, and blaspheming, The earth mooued and sha∣ken at the very horrour of his oathes and blasphemies would not, nor yet could any further beare and su∣staine so vile a Monster, but at the will and iudge∣ment of the Creatour opened it selfe, and gaped vn∣der the feete of that vile wretch, and swallowed him vp to the necke, so that hee could by no meanes de∣liuer himselfe from thence. Stay now and behold yee bloudie blasphemers, and detestable swearers; wor∣ship heere in feare and trembling, the Maiestie and power of him against whom your voice speakes, and your tongue vtters such vile oathes and fearefull cur∣ses; Let this wretch bee an example vnto you of a∣mendment, leauing that filthy and damnable custome, whilest you haue time, & whilst yet God stayes his hand to call you vnto repentance & amendment. This wretch thus stricken with the hand of God, his two horses still followed their way vntil they came home; his wife seeing the horses thus come without their vnfortunate maister was instantly taken with great feare and amaze∣ment,
least that her husband should be slaine or robbed vpon the way by some théeues or others, so she stayed a little still looking for him, but hearing no newes of his comming, she gets out of the house and goes all lamen∣ting and dolefull along the highway towards the Citty of Genoa, accompanied with some friends or neighbours of hers, because it was already late & about thrée houres in the night. She went not farre but that she found on the way one of her neighbours named Ambrose Vidoze, of whom (all amazed and distracted as she was) she as∣ked whence he came, he said he came from Genoa; she further asked him whether he had met with her husband whereat yet all affrighted trembling and astonished at the horrible and frightull cries of this miserable Catiffe which he had heard, he told her that lately without see∣ing him or any body hee did heare a voyce and dreadful crye vppon the way which said in these wordes. I am damnd, I am damnd to all the diuels of hell, because I haue so often and in so many fashions sworne and blas∣phemed the holy name of God: Thus the poore Vidoze stricken with the terror of this fright could speake no more, but went home; where casting himselfe on his bed he died sodainly not able to speake a word: a thing ve∣rily at the which our hayres may stand vpright on our heads able to shake and amaze all our sences. The woman with her company pittifully crying and tearing herselfe, followes on her way and neuer leaues till they had found the said Anthonie Panetier whose frightfull voice they heard a far off stil crying that he was damned with all the deuils in hell, because he had so often and wickedly blasphemed the holy Name of GOD; besides that (a thing most wonderfull) hee was enuironed and assaulted by a troope of hungry and rauenous Wolues ready to deuoure him, had
not some men with swords, staues, peeces and shot ranne thither, and yet could scarce maister them, so raging were these beasts against the man, as though they had beene sent thither like so many Sergeants to execute the vengeance of the Almighty. That wicked wretch made no long stay there but hee was summo∣ned and cited before him whom hee had thus blasphe∣med, for the next day hee was found dead, and yet could not bee drawne from thence. Such was the iudgement of the Diuine Maiestie, against this wretch: Such was the end of the said Painter, which shall re∣maine for an ensample vnto all cursing, swearing, banning, and blaspheming persons, which make but a iest and mockerie at euery word to bring an oath and teare and take at their pleasure that great holy and dreadfull Name of Almightie GOD without any reuerence, or discretion; nay without any sub∣iect, occasion, anger, choller, or crosse in the world; but through a most vile accursed and detestable vse and custome they haue inured themselues vnto, So that now a dayes (so depraued is this our age) a man thinketh to bee esteemed more braue and more drea∣ded, which at euery word can sweare and trimme his speech with oathes, taking and tearing GOD from the head to the foote, and if any hearer hauing horrour bee offended, or goes about to rebuke them, his returne shall be vile words, and oftentimes blowes. The holy Doctors of the Church agree all vppon this point and hold for certaine that all wickednesse, parricides, incests, poisonings, murthers, and other crimes are nothing so great, neither deserue such pu∣nishment as doe blasphemie, inasmuch as all wicked∣nesses (as the Prophet Samuel said) are at their first committed against men, but blasphemies are first and
directly against the honour of God, and e'en as it were to spight him. If Dathan, Corah, and Abiran for hauing mur∣mured against Moses and Aaron, in the wildernesse, haue beene gulped vp and swallowed aliue with all their families into the deepest bowels of the earth, what must blasphemers looke for and expect but the very same and worse? If any back-biteth or speaketh ill neuer so little of his King and Prince, hee is by and by chastned and put to an exemplarie death; Why should not the blasphe∣mer be vsed so, sith that by his blasphemie hee doth no lesse then spit vpon the very face of God, which is the King of Kings, the Lord of Lords, and the Soueraigne Monark of all the world. If the Law of worldly Kings and Princes is vn∣violably obserued and executed against such men, Why shall not Gods Law bee likewise put in execution, which expressely and vpon great threatnings doth com∣mand Kings and Magistrates to put the blasphemer to death, and to cut and roote him out from amongst his people to appease his anger? The ancient Romanes did so abhorre and detest a Blasphemer, that finding no torments fit inough for his punishment they did giue him vp to the fury of their gods, after he had béen publikely whipped, causing this to be proclaimed before him.
Doe not sweare by the name of the Gods rashly. HEsiodus in the first booke of his daies and workes affirmeth, that in all ages the Blasphemer hath beene bitterly punished by the Gods (for hée was a Pagan and knew not the true God) and that the first Blasphemers were laid out and set for a prey vnto Vultures, add rauenous birds to feede vpon, which did eate their eyes, tongue and Liuer; Alas! if these poore Heathen haue beléeued that their false Gods thus would, and did auenge their honour, how can we make any doubt beeing Christians, but that the true God, which we worship, will punish the blasphemers, sith that he commands it to the Iudges and Magistrates of the earth without any restriction. The wise man in his Ecclesiasticus chap. 13. saith that the man which vseth to sweare shall be filled with iniquitie and the plague and affliction shall not goe farre from his house. In the 12. chap. of Saint Mathew the blasphemie of the Spirit shall not be pardoned, neither in this world, nor in the other. Saint Iohn in in his Reuelation, chap. 16. giues a reason for it, saying, that the damned shall chew their tongues for very smart and dispaire, and for their plagues they shall blaspheme the God of heauen, be∣cause they did not amend themselues. The Théefe hideth himselfe to steale: The Letcher seekes darknes out to commit his wickednes in, the proud counterfetteth himselfe to bee humble, the enui∣ous, the couetous, the glutton, and the idle, couer and
draw out of mens sight their vices; as being ashamed of them, but the blasphemer alone is a shamelesse, sawcie, wicked one, vttering publikely and without shame and feare his blasphemies against the holy Name of God, nay thinkes it a meane to be esteemed a braue and vali∣ant fellow, and so he is; but in the Diuels Schoole and in the academie of the damned and Reprobate, O how happie was the age of that great Doctor Saint Chry∣sostome, In whose time blasphemers were presently pu∣nished, and with great rigour, as it appeareth in his first Homily to the people of Antiochia, grounded vppon the places of Scripture there cited in these words: whoso∣euer shall heare the voice of the blasphemer if hee accu∣seth him not, he shall beare his iniquitie. Leu. 5. chap. God said vnto Moses cast out the blasphemer out of the Campe, and let all the people stone him. Leu. 14. In the same place God saith, The blasphemer shall die the death; The same sentence was executed vpon a blasphemer, whose mother was an Israelite, and his fa∣ther an Egyptian which was stoned to death in the wil∣dernes. Iudas Machabeus for the same crime caused the tong of Nicanor to be cut and minced for foode to the birds of the ayre, Mac. 2. booke, last Chap. The blasphemer of Corinth was deliuered to the Di∣uell S. Paul. 1 Cor. chap. 3. Nabuchodonosor by a solemne Decree commanded that whosoeuer should blaspheme the God of Daniel should die the death? Dan. chap. 3. The lawes of the Church Extr. de maledict. C. Statui∣mus, thus condemne them, that whosoeuer shall be found to haue blasphemed the holy name of God, the Virgine Mary, or the Saints, must stand by seuen Sundaies at the Church doore and not goe in, and the last Sunday of
them must be there barefoot, & a halter about his neck; he refusing to do so, hee must be thrust out and sepera∣ted from the Church and depriued of Christian buriall. The ciuill and Imperiall law punisheth them seuere∣ly, decreeing that it is a greater sin to blaspheme the e∣ternall Maiesty then the temporall or worldly Maiesty. Phillip the faire alias le Bel, King of France decreed that blasphemers should be thrown into a riuer or poole. Robert King of France iudged them to death without pardon. S. Lewis King of France would haue them marked in the forehead with a hot Iron and their tongue peirced through King Hnery the 3 likewise made an excellent statute against them. The matter then being so weighty and of so high a consequence as directly touching the honour of Almigh∣ty God: Let all good and faithfull Christians be vppon their knees holding vp their handes, and pouring out teares at the feet of our gracious Soueraigne Lord and King) whom God blesse with long and hap∣py yeares) of his most wise counsell, and of the Lords of his iustice with most humble and deuout petition that by this notable example they would bee pleased better and better to put in execution the decree of God against blas∣phemers confirmed and obserued from time to time through all lawes, Commonwealthes, and kingdomes, that thereby God being appeased for the sinnes of this World, we may see vnder our King Lewis 13. and his most wise mother Regent a golden age, vice exiled, chastened, and extinguished, vertue and Christian faith exalted, that so our France may be a mirror of vertue, piety and iustice vnto other nations. So be it.
Briefes drawne out of the Registers of the Court of Parliament. VPon the motion and complaint made vnto the Court by the Kings Atturney generall, that as well in Paris as in other places, from whence notice was giuen to him by many of his Substitutes or de∣puties in sundry Shires, and Iu∣risdictions or resorts of Senes∣chaldoms and other Territories, amongst the huge wic∣kednesses, and horrible impieties brought in through the vnbridled licentiousnes of the ciuill warres, the Blas∣phemies against the holy Name of God, of the blessed Virgin his mother, and the execrable oathes, detestable renouncings, abominable cursings and defyings or spigh∣tings of their names and power, are growne so com∣mon and familiar amongst all persons, of what conditi∣on so euer, that to appease the ire and wrath of God, it is very necessarie to renew and bring in againe the seue∣ritie as well of the auncient Statutes of the Kings S. Lewis: of Philip; Charles the 8. Lewes 12. Henry the se∣cond, and Charles the ninth: as also the Decrees and ordinances of the said Court in the yeeres 1544 1572. and 1575. Requesting that an order may therein be ta∣ken by the Court, and that which herevpon shall bee or∣dered by the same, shall be reade and proclaimed with a loude voice, in the high places and markets through the
towne and Suburbs, likewise in all the Iustice-seates or Courts, as wel generall as particular of all the shires, Seneschaldomes, and Prouostships of this resort and power. The said Court according to the former Orders and Decrees, did make, and makes inhibition, did forbid and forbids all persons in generall of what state qualitie or condition they bee, to sweare and blaspheme the holy Name of God, of the blessed Virgin his Mother, or his Saints, vpon the penalties in the said Orders and De∣crees enioined, and danger of life and death, if the case requireth it: hath enioined and enioines or commands all Vshers, Sergeants and Officers of the Iustices, to take, arrest, and carry vnto prison instantly, all those whom they shall finde blaspheming, that the Law may goe spéedily vpon them, and they be made an ensample; and commands all persons which shall heare them swear to denounce and accuse them to the Magistrates, adiud∣ging therefore to the Denonciators or Promotours the third part of the fines fined vpon them. And this present decrée shall bee read and proclaimed, which the sound of the Trumpet, and publicke cry by the markets and high places of this Towne and Su∣burbs, and places vsed and ordinarie for cries and pro∣clamations: Also through all the Cities, Townes, Bo∣roughs, Villages, Shires, Senescaldomes and Pro∣uost-ships of this resort and power; Enioined and char∣ged to all Iudges of Prouinces to keep a straight hand, and employ their power for the execution of this De∣cree, and to the Substitutes of the said Atturney gene∣rall to take all the courses and orders therevnto neces∣sarie, vpon penaltie of forfetting their Office. Done in Parliament the 26. Ianuarie 1613. And read and proclaimed with trumpets sounding and publike crie
through the high places and Markets of this Towne and Subburbs of Paris the 27. of the said Moneth; Signed Voysin. A Decree and Iudgement of the said Court against Nicholas le Mesle Blasphemer. THe Court hauing seene and viewed the processe cri∣minall or euidence made by the Senescall of
Mayne, or hisA Iudge to to sit vpon life and death. Lieutenant criminal in the territorie of Mans, at the sute of the Substitute of the Kings At∣turney generall Complainant and accuser, against Ni∣cholas le Mesle Prisoner in the prisons of theAs the pri∣son of the Gatehouse. Concier∣gerie (or Ward) of the Palace hauing appealed (or com∣plained) of the sentence giuen against him by the said Se∣nescall or his Lieutenant the 14. of May 1598. by the which sentence for publicke amends and reparation of the cases in the said processe mentioned and prooued, the said Mesle was condemned to make the amends (called) honourable bare head, and bare foote, holding in his hand a burning Torch of two pounds weight before the great Portall and chiefe gate of the Col∣legiall Church of Saint Peter; of the said Towne of Mans, and there shall say publikely, and with a loude voice, that rashly and maliciously hee had blasphe∣med against the Name of GOD, of whom hee cra∣ued pardon of the King and his Iustice, this beeing done, bee banished from the Country and Countie of Maine for fiue yeeres, and in that while forbidden to bee found there, vpon the penaltie in the Kings Statutes; and besides condemned in two crownes fine to the King, and two crownes for the poore. The prisoner hauing beene heard and examined vpon the causes of his appeale and vpon the cases laid on his charge hauing heard also the Kings Atturney generall which as for case newly comming to his knowledge had himselfe declared to appeale a minima of the said sen∣tence, requesting to bee admitted to his appeale (as well prouided) and therevpon and vpon his conclusions (or demands) to haue right and Law; All beeing consi∣dered, It is said or decréed that cōcerning the appeale de∣clared by the said Mesle, that he did appeale ill and with∣out greeuance, and shall be fined for: The Court hath
receiued and doth receiue the Atturney generall to his appeale, a minima from the said sentence, admitted, and admits it (as well prouided) and doing right vpon the same, hath annihilated and annihilats both appeale and sentence from the which he appealed, without fine; And for the cases contained in the proces (or euidences) hath condemned and condemns the said le Mesle, to doe the a∣mend (called) honorable before the chiefe gate of our Ladies church of Paris, barefoote, and bare head, in his Shirt, a halter about his neck, holding in his hands a burning Torch of Waxe of two pounds weight, and there on his knees to say and declare that wickedly and maliciously he hath spoken and vttered the execrable blas∣phemies against the holy Name of God, and of the Vir∣gin Mary, whereof he repenteth and craued pardon of GOD, of the King and his Iustice; That beeing done, shall his tongue bee pearced through with a hot iron, and his two lippes slit or clouen, and afterwards hath banished and does banish him from the Kingdome of France for euermore; hath enioyned him to keep and obserue his banishment vppon penaltie where he shall bee found to bee hanged to death without any other processe: hath declared and declares all his goods done and confiscated to the K ng, taking first vppon them the summe of a hundreth crownes to bee applyed for the bread of the Prisoners of the Con∣ciergie of the Pallace. Ordaineth that the pro∣cesse and euidence (on the which followed this decrée) shall be burned. The Court also makes inhibitions and forbids all per∣sons of what qualitie or condition soeuer they bee to sweare & blaspheme the Name of God vpon the penaltie contained in the Statutes and decrees formerly made,
And this present Decree shall be reade in the Iudge∣ment seate of Mans in the Sises time, and when they are sitting, at the sute and solicitation of the sub∣stitute of the Atturney generall in that place. Pronounced to the said le Mesle, and executed the 27. of Ianuarie 1613. Signed. Voysin. Translated out of French: and printed at Paris.
