19483 99849432 14579
THE POPES COM∣PLAINT TO HIS MINION CARDINALS, AGAINST THE GOOD successe of the BOHEMIANS and their generall Pro∣ceedings. (☞) Non pacem petimus superi, Date gentibus iras: Nunc vrbes excite feras, Coniuret in arma mundus. Lucan: Lib. 2. Pharsal:
☞ The Speakers Names: Pope PAVLVS QVINTVS, A Burghesian: BVRGHESIVS CAESARIO ROMANO Cardinalls. A Dominican FRYER: PASQVILL. Strangulat inclusus dolor at{que} exaestuat in∣tus: Ouid. tristib: Lib. 5.
THE POPES COMPLAINT to his Cardinalls against BOHEMIA. POPE. O My Caesario! what shall we doe now? Since men dare thus our Proiects disalow: Deride our Cursses, and make slight our Power, Scoffe at Religion, as if now the hower Were come indeed to pull downe Babilon, For so our Citie Rome they raile vpon. They will no more our Indulgences haue, Nor Trentals, Dirges, Masses, doe they craue: They laugh at Purgatoryes flames and fire, Deny our Merits, onely doe desire Saluation from the Passion of our Lord, And all Our Canons are by them abhord: To heare the Aue Bell is made a sporte, Vnto Confession none will scarce resort, So that I feare, of Christian libertines We Atheists shall become, by outward signes: Caesario. Your Holines hath tolde a grieuous tale, Made faint my hart, my bloodles cheekes looke pale, I quake to haue You thus affrighted bee; And yet there is no cause, for ought I see.
Pope. No cause Caesario, why? I then begin To tell the cause: what care I for their sinne? Or whether men in world liue ill, or well: Or whether dying, goe to Heauen or Hell? Whether that Princes swell with heat of pride, Or doe make hatefull warres on euery side? Whether whole Countries subjugate each other? Deny the Faith, and all their vices smother? So we doe holde Supremacie secure, Haue certaine wayes our Annuals to assure, Keep them in awe, that dare withstand our Cursse, Blessing the meanes which doe enrich our Pursse: So we our Glory and delights maintaine, Or else, what hath beene done is all in vaine. Caesario. Why so ye doe: who dare oppose your Plea? Who sendeth not for Blessings to your Sea? Who is not correspondent to your Will, Seeking your Holy pleasure to fulfill? Except some scatterd Lutherans of late, As Malcontents for their deboist Estate, Some scambling Scismaticks, penurious fooles, A fewe of Hereticks in wrangling Schooles, A common tricke of Sathans for contention, As in all times the Church hath had dissention: Pope. Some few! Aye me, how can you say some fewe? When that whole Kingdomes (as it is too true) Haue thriued in reuolts from our designes, And packing sent our Legats and Assignes:
Who cares in England for our threates or hate? Scotland is worsse in matters of debate, In Ireland our Priests are made a pray, The other Northerne Kingdomes keep away: France is our eldest Sonne, but what can France Doe gainst him selfe, our Power to aduaunce? The Netherlands Tryumph for Their rejection, And from their natiue Princes seek annection To other Soueraigntie, and ne'r againe Will once obay, or Austria or Spaine: But of all others, Curst be that prowd Towne, Prowd of a Fennish Lake to beare Vs downe: And as they thinke, impregnable to stand, Geneua. Scorne all the Forces that may come by Land: These led the Dance, and these doe boast of Time Three hundred yeares agoe, that all their Clime, The Zwitzers, Cantons, and the Grisons haue Sought our Religious Orgies to depraue: And so by them was Wicklife taught to stray, And the Waldenses tooke the wronger way: Then followed Hierome, and Bohemian Husse, And other Satanists, who did discusse Gainst our good Discipline, and made a breach By Germaine Factions, as their Church did teach: So that a Prouince I can scarce now name, Who as Apostat incurre not defame: But neuer had the Deuill such a tricke, That strooke it home, and touch't vs to the quicke: To raise a Frier to withstand a Prince! O God how Luther dared not long since
Our mightie Charles affront vnto his face, And gainst our Sea proclaymed all disgrace? But more then these? the Grecian Church complaines, That they are poor, and we haue all the gaines. They liue deprest, wee doe vsurpe their pride, They were the first, we tryumph on each side. So they had rather liue in seruitude, Then for the Latines any way conclude. Caesario. If it be so, rowse vp your Holinesse, And be the same you doe your selfe professe, Peters successor, both to binde and loose, Open the Churches Treasure, and out-choose Your Bulles, your Cursses, Fulminations, With all those Maledicting Relations, That haue in former times kept Kings in awe, And made the Empire subiect to your Lawe. Dominicke. With Reuerence vnto the Papacy, (And awfull care to Peters Legacy) Let a poor Frier open now his minde, For well I see there much remaines behinde: Alas, alas, what now will Cursses doe? Or Bulles, or Threatnings? If they all put to Their helping hand, more then in former times, To make a scoffe at our poor Friers Rimes? Not long agoe, we did begin with Spayne, Both Sonne and Father we thought to restrayne: Charles. 5. But for the Father, Burbon sack't our Cittie, Teaching the Cloistred Nunnes to cry for pittie,
The Matrons, Virgins, wrung their hands for ruth, To see such rauishments of chastest Youth, Yea, all both sortes and sexes did lament Those foule outragies, to their discontent: And for the Sonne durst Aluas Duke controule, The Conclaue and the Pope him selfe, whose soule Phillip. 2. He baited, hunted with strong inference Of Pastorall duties, and more consequence Of humane clemency, religious Zeale, Humbled regard, and after did appeale To Iesus Christ himselfe against that Cursse, That made the Armies, and the Cause the worsse: And this was all wee got by our fine skill; Which they call Tyrannie, as others will Disclaime the like: For when our Father had That Prince of Princes, so reputed bad, That great Elizaheth out of the Church With Menaces cast, we fell in the Lurch: She as a Rocke immoueable did stand, And all our Priests were hated in her Land: Yea, other Princes from their strong Allyance, Prepared to withstand our strange defiance. Come nearer home! what did our Threatning worke, But rowse the sleeping Lyon, who did lurke Cowchant before, and by St. Mark his Charme Resolued was to doe vs no great harme: But when we would not so appeased stand, He Panther-like opened his stronger hand, And shewed his Tallents, when within his reach, The Prey was come: so Venice made a breach
Against our Walles: Yea, hilly Sauoy dare To counterchecke our Discipline not spare, And therefore sure when we are thus withstood, These Bulles and Fulminations doe no good: Burghesius. Then doe as Peters vision biddeth vs, Both kill and eate, what need we more discusse? If mansuetude cannot confirme our Sate, Let slaughters on each side quench the debate: Some, either loue or money will perswade; Or hope of Blisse, such Tyrants to inuade: Dominick. O say not so; this makes vs odious, And is against Religion dangerous: Looke into holy Writ, and you shall finde, How Regicides haue still bene cast behinde, The Captaines, that kild Ishbosheth, were slaine, And he which fell on Saul, lyed all in vaine: Thus of the rest: But come to later times, Was not stout Nassaus murthers counted Crimes? Prince of Orenge. Reueng'd with punishment, abhor'd with hate, And made a cause of malice, and debate? What got we by those Henries of France, Kild by our Iacobines, whome to aduance With Saint-like honour, Rome did nothing spare? But then alas, the Princes did declare Vpon the same, our enemies profest: The Hugonites grewe strong, and did detest Such crueltie, yea with Inuectiues durst For that foule Sinne; holde Rome herselfe accurst.
And as for England, as of late was seene, The strange Attempts against that peerelesse Queene (For so I needs must say, how e're wee know Shee was seduced another way to goe:) Affected with Remorse, such as so wrought, That Catholickes themselues, e'ill of Vs thought. But when I once the Powder Treason name, I doe protest, I tremble at the same, And must confesse the Deuill disappointed, By such a Stratagem 'gainst Gods annoynted. For how so ere Kings in Religion faile; Yet Cyrus is Gods seruant to preuaile In his designes, and they Vicegerents are For good or bad, to manage all his warre: Nay come to Fryer Paul of Venice State, Whose Life so many wayes was sought of late: It makes me thinke vpon the stubborne Iewes, Who Paules good Doctrine did so much refuse, That Vowes were made to kill him in the way, But he preuented them: Thus, thus I say To kill will doe no good, but cause the Foe More stronger with an armed Guard to goe, And raise a Scandall on your Fatherhood, Tearming the Cardinalls the Serpents broode, That haue no better meanes the Truth to teach, But Lessons of foule Murther still doe Preach: Romano. Then let vs doe as Machabans did, When the poore Iewes were in the Mountaines hid,
For feare of proude Antiochas: take Armes, Rowse vp our Courages with warlike charmes, Summon our Friends, open our Treasures store: Aduance the Churches Standard, and before The Armies Catholicke with Blessings goe, These Caitiffe Heretickes to ouerthrow. Dominick. This sauors better then the former twaine, For this is Manly, Princely: Yet againe How shall wee thus preuailingly proceed, When our own Countries are not well agreed? It is not now, as when our Innocent Did treade vpon the Dragon, and was bent To sommon Fredericke to Romes high Throne, Where that that his Holinesse as on a Stone, Did set his Foote vpon the Emperors necke, The proudest Monarchies to counterchecke! It is not now, as when three Dayes together, Henry the Third (though Caesar) in foule weather Did Bare-leg wayte with his Empresse and Sonne, Eu'n at your Pallace Gate: Men then begun To reuerence the Church, and durst not stray, From true Religion the wronger way: It is not now, as when our Pandulph came To Englands Iohn, and taught him a strange Game Of poore Submission, least French Lewis might, Dismisse him of his Dignity, and Right! It is not now, as when Henry the Fift. That Germane Prince, his Father durst out Lift
From the Imperiall Seate at your behest, And raisd such Armies, when you did request! It is not now, as when that you Deuisde For Millaine, Naples, and great State premisde For Charles of France, so deare to Peters Chaire, So Louing, Carefull, True, and Debonaire; That hee brought downe his Troopes to Vs amaine, And surely ment the Empire to regaine, When of Constantinople hee was Crown'd Chiefe Emperor, and so most Warlike found Against your then supposed Foe: Vntill That Pauies Battaile wrought a fatall ill! It is not now, as when the Priests and Friers, Stucke to their Beades with limited Desires, And went no further then a motion, To stirre vp men to true Deuotion, Were not transcendent in their Practises, Nor past themselues in Forraine extacies: For on my Soule, If euer Rome had crosse, Or Subject must bee vnto greater losse: It is the stirring Iesuites that wrought it, And they as Clergy polliticks haue sought it. Good GOD what hath Religion to doe But with Religion, men to stirre and wooe To Holy duties, Sanctitie of Life, Pennance for sinne, to Cure debates and strife, To saue the Soules of such as goe astray Like silly Ignorants the wronger way. So that I know not, as the Case now stands, But Mischiefe is on foote in Christian Lands:
And to my feare I speake when you make tryall, The end will bee our Scorne, or worse Denyall. You send to Albert, as a Grandsires Sonne, Not doubting but an Vnckles name hath wonne Much of regard: An answer soone is made, Hee Liues and Dyes vnder the Austrian shade, But 'las for him! These Flemmish Burgers range As farre as Cleue, and stand in euery Grange, Strong in their Courts of Guard, and will not yeeld To giue him way in any Towne, or Field. You send to France, why France is scarse her owne, The Protestants then Catholickes are growne More strong, and such are their Great Princes Power, That no man knowes against them at this hower Who may preuaile: but onely this is plaine, They cannot spare a man to goe in vaine: You send to Phillip Catholicke, and Sonne, Who hath so many Crownes, & Countries wonne, But how shall they be kept on Head secure Without great force? and how shall he endure To raise a forraine Army for your sake, That was compeld a sodaine Peace to make With your worst friends? Expect not ayde from thence Sufficiently to further your pretence: You send to Pole, hath Pole no Warres in hand With Turkes, with Swenes, or with the neighbour Land? And are you sure the Passages are free, Silesia's Gates, and Countries opened bee? Is not Lusatia shut, Morania gon, And how can Poles reliefe bee hoped on?
Except some stragling Cosacks heere and there, As of all Nations you the like may heare: As for the Cantons, Swisse, and Grisans stout, It is but folly for to goe about Their succor's more then Mercenary pay, And so to either side they make their way: I neede not name your Principates about yee, Nor other Prouinces that are without yee, Of whome some watch the Turke, some are at jarre Amongst themselues, some for to raise a Warre Haue little meanes, lesse men, and lesser minde, And so must prooue vnto your Sea vnkinde. But in a worde, the Princes are so strong Of this last Vnion, that the meanest Wrong Done vnto one, is done vnto another, A Brother cannot better loue a Brother. Pope. Then it should seeme, wee shall let all alone, And sigh, and weepe, and crye, lament and grone: Pule at this outrage, kisse the scourging Rod, And onely like a Childe, crye out O GOD! Giue way to Rumor, and with Patience, Beare the report of Shame with feeling sence. One day doth bring vs newes, that Bohem Dare Against their Emperour themselues declare; Rejecting Austria, as it were in scorne, Forsaking Vs, as if wee were forlorne: Another Day reportes, the Palatine, With other Lutherans a League combine
That traytorlike haue Crowned him a King Against his Soueraigne, and Encomions sing For many good successes, as they thriue In warlike Stratagems, and doe contriue To raise more Forces, send abroad to Friends, Proposing stranger thinges for stranger ends. Bohemia has a Prince borne in the Towne, The Warres preuaile, their Foes are beaten downe, Our Ferdinand doth Droope, Vienna standes As in a maze, folding their Armes and handes. The people throng in heapes and flocke a pace, In euery Towne, to hearken our Disgrace: Bucquoy is beaten, and Dampire is fled, the Polish Cossacks they are slaine and Dead: The Troopes are ouercome, and in the Field Two thousand lost, Foure hundred they did yeeld, Anholt and Mansfuld, had a glorious Day, Besides reuolters, who still runne away, And leaue their Prince to serue a Strangers turne, Oh that consuming Fier might them burne! But heer's not all: for now to Vexe vs more, Then either they, or Wee thought of before, They looke for Ayde from Brittaine, Horse and Foote, With vnbeleeued Sommes of Golde to boote: Which London Heretickes of their free Guift, For to disburse with Largenes haue made shift: Nay when they heare Religion is the Cause, They flocke amaine without or stop or pause: But when they talke of Romes great ouerthrow? They clap their handes for Ioy, and so doe show
Their Hate to Vs, wishing no other Warre Nor recompence for all their Coyne: Thus farre, These heauy headed Dutch haue wrought their ends, And doe increase, as wee decay in Friends. Caesario. Then I perceiue it needes must end with blowes, And if successe attend: Our Lady knowes To what a mountaine of foule Prodegies, Their Pride may rise to with their Victories. But are you sure the Emperor hath sent For succour into Spaine, as it was ment, Rather to breake off Peace & Leagues with all, Then see the Austrian Diadem to fall, And this me thinkes your Holinesse might moue By speciall Embassy, and so reproue Their great retardance, which hath giuen them leaue Refractary to growe, as I conceiue: Dominicke. Then you conceiue amisse, nor are you wise, To make your Passion author of aduise, Greatest Designes attend on Circumstance, And sauerie Pollicie must them Aduance: For if hee start from England, as it stands, Or breake the League with Hollands Netherlands, How can Hee all these turnes supply together, Or keepe his Nauy safe, from raging weather? Whereas to temporise and to renue A stronger League by Peace, this may ensue, That all those Forces, which hee well can spare With so much Treasure, as his Princely care
May husband for this purpose, shall be sent Vnto th' Imperiall Townes incontinent: Then with some more Security they may From Naples, Millaine, Sicell, March away Those trayned Garisons, filling their roomes With other Spaniards, and new come Groomes: Yet take you heede, this can but once bee done, And that's well ended, which is well begun: But marke their Passages so hard to finde, As Swisse and Grisons proue to them vnkinde: (For if your Holines wish for a Brother, No way but this: You cannot name another) From Millaine to Vienna must they goe, Ouer fiue Mountaines full of Ice and Snowe, And in the Summer, which is strange to tell, It is not for their Marches halfe so well: Yet in extreames there is no remedy, Patience beares out the greatest extacy. Well let them goe, health and good Spirits guide them, And all the Saincts of Heauen goe beside them: For I am sure, whether they March or Troope, The third man in the Trauaile needs must Droope. Burghesius. Then holy Sir your Legate send to France, Who cannot but this Cause as much Aduance, Or rather more: For France is eldest Sonne Vnto our Rome, and should with ease bee wonne. Dominick. Are you a Conclauist, and know no more, Of France her State? you might haue heard before
That Condyes Prince, and others of esteeme, Would with their bloods Religion redeeme; And stand 'gainst all Edicts vpon their Guard, Hoping at last to haue a good award: Yet for all this hath Ferdinando Writ, (How euer Bolloigne did mislike of it:) That some Commaunder might him Forces bring, With loue and liking of the youthfull King, Nor did hee thus, as barely, without charge: But in good Tearmes declare his minde at Large. Most Noble Prince remember Charles the Great Supported Rome, and got th' Imperiall Seate: As of the Church only Protector cal'd, Which was by Gothes and Saraceus enthral'd, And thereupon is France the eldest Sonne, And for true valour hath such honour wonne: Then be not now to Catholicks vnkinde, But let vs your Reliefe as Princely finde. A second Inference he had from Blood, Which seem'd amongst the Statists neer as good: The Emperour was Vncle to the Queene, As may within the Records well be seene: This he enforst from bond of Amitie, Arising out of Consanguinitie. A third was Morall, from protection Of other Princes in rejection, Oh for to help distressed, is a glory, As you may read in many an ancient Story. The fourth had ground vpon good Policie, Of iust reuenge to scourge iniquitie: Reuolts I meane, and disobedience To lawfull Kings, from a strong inference
Of Treason in their soule enormous Crimes, As hath appeared in all moderne Times: The fift was taken from a Holy feare, Least that the Turke might of these troubles heare, And so the youth of Othoman awake, Aduantages of our Distresse to take, And then no doubt they might repent too late, That e're they durst the Austrian house amate. Burghesius. And was not this well Vrg'd? nay was it not A president for Princes to haue got, Of excitation 'gainst so great a Foe, That sure will worke more mischiefe and more woe? If Poland heard of this, or Russis, If Denmarke, Pomeran, and Persia, If Triple Crowned Brittaine knew it sure, Hee would the same as forcible endure: If Venice, Sauoy, Florence, and the rest Were taught this Lesson, they would count it best: Yea eu'n the Cantons and the Snowy Vales, Could not repute it as some olde wiues Tales: But for the Good of Christian Nations, The League make strong by Combinations. Dominick. I doe confesse it hath some outward show Of a preualent Reason: But on to goe The dogged Duke of Bolloigne, as I heare To Burbon and the rest a Dangerous Peere, Hath answerd all: Retorting Argument To Austria, thus of greater Consequent. Touching the First: Religion is no Plea! Nor Ferdinand, did so affect our Sea:
But eu'n the Catholicks of best esteeme, Were still enforst their Freedomes to redeeme▪ Affrighted were with Cruelties, and Pride Of Austrias house extended on each side, Found Great Mathias sterne, this man too heady, Vnconstant, Cruell, and in Truth vnsteady: And now they liue vnder this Nouelist More quiet farre, as doing what they list. The second with like reason Answer had: The greatest Monarchies (though ne'r so bad) Were Fathers of their Kingdomes, and to looke Vnto their Subjects Peace, which they forsooke As Tyrants, if they brought them to a Warre Against their willes, of perill, or too farre: And how could France dilacerate her State; Empty her Treasure at so great a rate, Send Forces to a Forraine Prince, and leaue Her Natiue children? This were to bereaue Them of their dearest Liues: For why at home, Mischiefe enough in euery Towne did rome. Besides, vnto Bohemias King there is So great Allyance, if I doe not misse, That neuer Prince in any Age had more, Nor could Catalogue such a Role before: Great Brittaine by his Daughter calls him Sonne, Denmarke and Norway on his side are wonne: The one an Vnckle, as is Brunswicke knowne, The other as a Friend with Sweden growne: The Prince of Orenge is so neere in Blood, That I am sure hee'le doe him any good. His other Kindred come from Brandenburgh, With many a Count and Duke of Wittenburgh,
I name not Bolloigne, nor Confederates With many Princes in their best estates, Nor doe I twenty Prouinces recite, With all their Lords of full sufficient might, Who are his owne: so that (if Reason yield) They must be drawne into the bloody Field. As for the third, the matter that doth driue The Mill, doth drowne it: For if you contriue The Argument from former charitie, Or Lawes of Nations louing amitie, To ayde distressed Princes: then hath France Farre lesse to doe the Austrians to aduance, Then help the Palatine: For who knowes not, When they had newes of both our Henries got And of their murthers, they did laugh out right, As if they meant remonstrance of despight: And when Duke Neuers to Mathias went, They with a scornfull Answer home him sent, Bidding yong Lewis looke himselfe about him, And no way meddle with the thinges without him: For why, the Message had relation Vnto the concord of each Nation? As for the Palatine, he friendly stood, And with great sommes of Money did them good: Therfore if that the succourlesse haue aide, To help Bohemia they are well appaide. The fourth did no way fasten well together, For Treason or reuolts (euen choose you whether) Were different in States Electiue, and Such as by Claime of Heritance did stand, Nor was the Austrian house enfeoft so sure Vnto the Empire, but it might endure
Fraction of nombers: As for President, They haue example of great consequent: First France the Westerne Monarchy possest, How e're the Germans could it not digest: Then they contriu'd a strong Election Conditionall in the reiection: Nor is it Newes an Emperour to haue, From other German Princes layde in Graue, And so hath Hungar and Bohemia Had Kings at once, though not of Austria, And therefore this had poorest Inference, As hauing to that Crowne a reference; So that to name Reuolts in such a case Vpon the scanning would the cause Disgrace. As for an Interceding, which they bring, That Ferdinand was chosen once their King, Compulsion they doe Answer is no Lawe, And then the Faction kept them all in awe: So that it was not orderly contriu'd, But soone Reuersde by such, as now suruiu'd. The last was weakest of them all: The Turke Would by this meanes all Europe set on worke: Nay saide the Bolloigne Duke, if it bee so, There is no sence against the King to goe. For then the Warres must needs protracted bee, And greater troubles wee shall dayly see: The onely way our strength for to Increase, Is for the Emperor to aske a Peace, And with the King of Boheme to Combine A League of amitie, or else resigne, As from the First, vnto Election Of the Seauen Princes, whose connection
May well, if all State matters so dispose, As perfect Friends be made of greatest Foes: Thus writ the Duke, and sauour how it list, How er'e your Holines may thinke he mist, As not acquainting Rome with these euents, Yet wrought it to the People great contents. Romano. Rather then thus: euen I my selfe will goe To Turke and Tartars for their farther woe: What, shall our Father and the Church submit To Traiterous Heretickes? Wee'l none of it: But raise vp Strangers to defend our cause, To vnderstand our Canons and our Lawes, To breake the necke of contumacious pride, And whip these drunken Scismaticks beside: And if the Goths were cal'd The Scourge of God, Wee'l bruise them with a Mahumetan Rod. Dominick. Come, this is frency and no policy, No Zeale, religion, nor morallity: Because a finger akes, we therefore cut The whole hand off, and so still foolish, put The body vnto cauterising paine, As hauing greater cause still to complaine: For thus haue Kingdomes lost their siberty, And subiect bene vnto captiuity. Britaine for succour sundry Nations cal'd, VVho in their seueral times their freedomes thral'd, The barb'rous Irish went for Dermonds Rape To Englands King, and so they did not scape▪ The Grecian Empire called Strangers in, VVho presently did all their Countries win:
Yea Spayne hath felt the like, when Iulian Count, In recconing vp disgraces, did surmount In his reuenge about his Daughters crosse, When by the Mores it had so great a losse. And this will be the end of Turkish aide, Nay, in my soule I further am affraide▪ That Rome shall feele their tyranny farre worsse Then any Warre, or Hereticks foule cursse. Pope. Yet somthing must be done; shall we giue way To all these Treasons, and not once assay To adde a Cataplasme vnto this wound, Which will the body of the Church confound? Shall we let Ferdinand be thus abused, And Spayne dispis'd, when Austria is refused? No sure, if God help not, the Deuill must, If euer man, or skill, or Arte did trust. Dominicke. O say not so, your Holines may take A calmer course, and all extreames forsake: Dismisse the bloudy Iesaits from hence, With all strange Projects doe your selfe dispence, Abstaine from murthers, cruelties and rage, Doe not the Church exotickly engage, But send abroad some holy Priests of Name, Who may with quietnes discourse their blame, Dispute with reason, and religious care, Teach them, of foule Damnation to beware, Plead out for Conscience, and true loue of God, Who else will whip them with a scourging Rod: Vrge their obedience vnto Kings of worth, Whose Gouernment such proffit bringeth forth
Of Peace and Plenty, that what e're befall, They doe Religious Zeale professe in all: O 'tis a comfort, When that men be wrought By gentlenes to God, and so are taught To yeeld by Loue, and not for slauish feare, Which makes but temporising, and doth beare Two faces in one hood: Therefore deare Sir Be rul'd by mee, and worke no further stirre. Pope. Come Pasquill I will talke with thee: For these Doe not my humour nor my fancy please; What Councell dost thou giue, what shall be donne To worke the good of this Imperiall Sonne? Pasquill. Who I? of all the world you wrong me more To aske Aduise of me: Why? I haue store Of stranger Newes! I must proclaime a troth, Which Vncompeld I would bee very loth. I am to tell you Wonders, Prodegies, Inuectiues, Satyres, Rimes, and prophesies, There's not a Worde of mine, but must affright Ill tuned Songs by day, slumbers by night, Affrighting Starres, and Apparitions, The burning Element with Visions: All tending still vnto a further matter, Then either Priest, or Cardinall dare clatter. Pope. Nay, like enough: eu'n Speake and spit thy gall, I am resolu'd, and meane to heare it all: When that the worst is past then better sure Shall bee proposde for Patience to endure.
Pasquil. Why this it is to stirre a sleeping Dogge: I all this time lay like a sencelesse Logge, But seeing now I vtter must my minde, Blame me not Sir, though I doe proue vnkinde, For sure the hand vpon Belshazers wall, Did not so much, as my Tale must appall: That onely knokt the knees, and strooke amaze: This sunders heart and life! Nay doe not gaze, For though I sing a Song of vncouth ruth, Yet I doe vowe to answer nought but Truth. They are with Popes and Cardinals so bolde, That all at Rome is now for Money solde: They talke of Tales in their mad Bedlam fitte, That Nauclerus and Platina hath writte 'Gainst Two and twenty Popes of seuerall names, Who solde to Sathan vnto all their shames Their very soules for Necromanticke spels, Had diuers Magicke skils from sundry Hels, Working affrighting terrors in the Land, Euen in that place, where Rome it selfe doth stand. They talke of Incest, Murther, actes of Treason, Of Sodomitry, and without all reason Name fortie sixe Delinquents in these kindes, Bishops Apostolickes to please their mindes. They Catalogue 'gainst Cardinals, with store Of foule Inuectiues: what would you haue more? There's not a sinne the Deuill euer bred, But hath the Cardinals stood in some sted: Nay, they goe further, and a semblance make From Affricks monsters, As you there doe take Notice of stranger Beasts, then are else-where:
So Rome begets such sinnes, as All doe feare A worse reuenge, then Sodome at the first Felt, when in wrath the God of Hosts them curst. They talke of Antichrist, of lyes, and wonders, Of Plagues and pestilence, of stormes and thunders, Of miracles, which Costrus doth recite, With other Authors, who long since did write What strange euents in Pontificean Sea Passed for currant, as a formall Plea. They talke of irreligion by the way, Of falsifying Scripture, Nay they say There's nothing there but diuelish Heresie: And filthy Scismes, sauering Apostacie: Adding withall, a Friers deadly hate To burne vp Magunee, though it was too late: Onely because Printing was there inuented, Which All the World so much hath since contented. They leaue not so, but raise the dead to speake, With thundring terrors hardned harts to breake. They from the Sybils Tales portentous tell Of Antichrists damnation into Hell, That Rome shall be deuasted, set on fier, Pul'd downe to rubbish, by those that desier▪ Her vtter ruyne, wish her pride abated: And this amongst them all is ofte related. They forward doe proceed to holy Writ, Which they auerre onely to ayme at it With Character of whorish Babilon The filthy Strumpet: Thus they cast vpon Her beauteous face foulest aspersions, Naming her Iesabel by false inuersions. The Pope himselfe they call that man of sinne,
And when so er'e to murmure they begin Against our Churches flourishing, they say A fatting Beast is kept for slaughter day. They roue at Brimstone, Sulphur, fier and flames, At Sword and Famine, and at stranger names, And all for Romes demolishing: O God! The very naming is a scourging rod. From Iohns Apocalips they forward goe To strange Predictions, and a hundred showe Of our owne Saints and Writers, 'gainst your Seat, And with our owne rods doe the Carkas beat. Some talke of one Baptista Nazarus, And of a Monke surnamed Lazarus: Some of an Abbot Ioachimus tell, Who of these thinges doth write exceeding well. Some Paracelsus name, Laurentius, Theodricke, Merlin, and Hieronimus, Some of Iohn Wolfius and Grebnerus speake, Whose Prophesies with terrors out doe breake. Some Nostradamus, Gallus, Reymer, name, With diuers others, who long since defame The glory of our Rome and holy Popes, Seeking to blot out all religious hopes. Not thus content, they come to Hildegard, A Saint and Nun, who sentence did award To this effecte, that Rome should purged be By sword and fier, as some Age shall see. They cite Matilda a professed Nunne, Who for her holines such credit wonne She plainly saith, that Rome must be destroyed, Because her filth hath all the world annoyed. Elizabeth another Sainct is brought, Who by a stranger Prophesie so wrought,
That very Boyes the Day and time durst name Of deuastation, to your vtter shame. Saint Bridgtt was a fourth, of fearfull noate, Who in her time cryed out with open throate 'Gainst Popes and Popes, 'gainst Rome and all her glory, And of her Prophesies made a whole Story. The last Saint Katherine of Siena was, Who brought as much discomfort: For alas She talk'd of nothing, but repent, or die, For Babilon must fall: The God on high Had so disposde; and Rome was Babilon: I dare no more: and thinke, that what is done You raisde it vp, as if a darkning Clowde Should threaten rayne, when that the windes belowde. Pope. Now out vpon thy foule wide mouth, thy tongue Out-rooted shall be, cause it is too long: A Myne of Powder shall thy body blowe Into the Ayre, and all thy ashes throwe Into the Sea, that no more memory Be made of this thy rauing extacy: Pasquil. And that were wisely done, but Sir, take heed, From Hidras cut off head seauen other breed. Pope. And dar'st thou speake againe? then let's away: I will not for a greater mischiefe stay: For sure I see, that all the world's delighted To haue Vs thus abused, and despighted. FINIS. Terruerant satis haec pauidam praesagia plebem, Sed maiora premunt: Lucan. lib: 1.
