20204 S102567 99838339 2714
A godly and holsom preseruatyue a∣gainst disperaciō at al times necessarye for the soule: but then chiefelye to be vsed and ministred when the de∣uil doth assault vs most fiersely, & deth appro∣cheth ni∣este. Be sobre, and watch, for your ad∣uersarye the deuell as a roring lyon: walketh about, seking whom he may deuoure, whom resyste, stedfast in the fayth 1 Pet. 5. M.D.L.I.
The preface. THys preserua∣tiue (gētle rea¦der) is prepa∣red for thy pro¦fite: yt thou re∣ding it at lea∣sure maist chose oute suche com∣fortable sentences as may bothe staye thi owne cōscience in ye time of tēptacion: & also quiet othes when ye Deuil shalbe busie with them.2. Cor. 2 For we be not ignoraunte of ye thoughtes of satan, howe he continually furnisheth hym selfe to bende his ordinaunce agaynst mā. And now wt the cōsideratiō of ye greatnes & multitude of syn Now with the terrour of death & dampnaciō.Ephe. 6 do labour to beate ye buck let of fayth out of our han∣des,1. Tess. 5 to strike ye helmet of hope frō our head.Ephr. 6 And to wrest frō vs the swerd of the spriit, which is gods word
But here christyan reader is thy swerd and buckeler deliuered vnto the, here is thy helmete put vppon thy heade here thou shalte find suche armoure and weapon, wherbi thou shalt both be able to withstand the force of oure com∣men enemy the Deuell: and also (by the counsell) to rescue others that they perysh not, Yea heare yu shalt find choise of most comfor∣table sentences, wherby mans cō¦science may be stayed from damp¦nable desperacion. 1. Cor. 16.Watche therfore, stand sted∣faste in faithe, play the man, and be of good comfort.Iacob. 4. Resist the de¦uell, and he wyll flee frome the Not for feare of thy owne power strength or holynes: but for feare of Chryste: in whome by faythe thou art ingraffed,. For it is crist through whome god hathe geuen. Cor. 15.
vs vyctory agaynst synne, deathe hell, & the deuyll.Acto. 4. Nether is there ani other name vnder heuē geuen vnto man wherin we maye be sa∣ued, but the name of Iesus Christ our lorde. To whome with the fa¦ther, and holye ghost, be all ho∣nour and glory. AMEN
A prseruatiue FOrsomuche as ye diseases of the bo¦dy and corporall deathe, dothe so trouble mannes mynde, that we commonly trimble and quake at the onely mencyon of them: How much ought we to feare the sick∣nes of the soule and death of the same, then whiche, there can no greater nor more fearefull cala∣mytye chaunce vnto man. And seinge that euery man doth auoyde (so muche as in hym ly∣ethe) the payne, myseryes, dys∣eases, and deathe of the bodye: howe much more ought we to de¦cline and eschewe, the causes of these euilles, which be sinnes and offences, and feare the ire of god, which we so (by oure enormities) do prouoke. Yf we be neuer so ly¦tle
sick in our body, by and by we send for the phisycion, we spare no cost we sike for medecines and remedy, thoughe they be neuer so chargable, & al to patch and clout vp this earthen vssell of oure bo¦dye. which do we neuer so muche can not last long. And why vse we not lyke dylygence in de∣siring & seking remedies against the diseases of the soule whyche like as thei be more greuous euē so they bring with them (without comparison) infinitely more daū∣ger. For what can it profit a man thoughe he haue all the riches in the world, though he liue a thou∣sand yere, and that in such health & pleasure, that he is not ones tou¦ched with sickenes or gryefe: hys soule in the meane time being poi¦soned with sinne being captiue to satan, hauing God displeased wt
him, and dampnacion readye for him after thys lyfe. For truelye thys lyfe must once haue an ende nether know we whan, where, af∣ter what maner,Math. 25. or how sone. Therfore sayth Christ watch for ye nether know the day nor hour when the sonne of man wyl come And lest we this shorttime of our abode (omittinge thinges mooste waightye and profitable) shulde folow trifulles, & things of smal price: he hathe vouchesafe to pre∣scribe vs an order and as it were a breue, certaine and sure way: to come vnto true felicite sayeng. Seke first for ye kingdom of god and righteousnes therof:Math. 6. and all thynges shalbe added vnto you. Care for liuing, care for ryches, care for worldly dignytie, world∣ly fauoure, worldlye estimacion and such lyke transitory thinges
which in dede doth lytle profitte but many times be cause bothe of filthy vices and also of greuous calameties (doth besy, doth vexe doth trouble, doth euē defatigat vs both day and nyght but in se¦king for and procurynge of god∣ly & heuenly thinges: we be most negligent, most slacke, most dull most forgetfull. And I pray you what can be a greter blindnes or a more dangerous madnes? why¦les we be lustye, whyles we be in helthe, whyles we be in prosperity we scaselye thinke vpon any lyfe to come we remembre not once yt we shall dye, But when we be in perell, and daunger by syckenes, and deathe begynneth to knocke at our dore. Euen at that same houre when we shulde playe the menne and fyght agnynst our e∣nimy, being sufficiently armed &
weponed afore) thē begin we first to thinke vpon oure armoure to thinke vpon our wepon, to think vpon mending of our lyfe. These thinges declare vs to be smallye exercised soudiers to be mē of pre¦posterous iudgement, and verye weaklings in fayth. God be mer¦cyfull vnto vs. Amen But yet though a man be neuer so old though the day be neuer so far past, so he amend whiles he is here, eare it be night, his repētāce cometh not out of season, Neuer¦theles it were to be wished, ye no man shuld differ his repētance to his last & most dangerous cōflict For euē thei shal haue much ado to stand and to defend thē selues from the assaultes, ye guiles, & in∣uasions of the enemy whych in ye time of their helth prepared & ar∣med them selues, what then shall
come of them whiche not fearing god neither minding once repen∣taunce hath led a dissolute filthie and naughty lyfe? how shal thei fyghte? howe shal they be able to wythstand the force of satan? ¶ Seinge therfore the mul∣titude of people is great, and the ministers of the gospel very few nether able to be euerye where to do their office to euery man: I ha¦uing a wil to help al men: haue gathered to gether, & written out of scriptur, a certaine brief forme how to admonishe, instructe, and comfort such as be sicke, that thei either reding these thīges, or hea¦ring them red bi others: may con¦ceiue certaine hope & perfit conso¦laciō, lest in this most daūgerus cōflict they faint, geue ouer like cowards, & so be ouercomed & pe¦rysh: For this is certain, whē soe∣uer a man is takē wt extreme sick¦nes
& is in daunger of deth, he is assauted with diuers many, & gre¦uous tentacions. First it is a gre∣uous and vehemente tentacyon, when he seeth the moste terrible i∣mage of deathe afore hys eyes, when he seeth he must leaue thys light, leue this life, leue frendes, leaue landes, goodes, kynfolkes father, mother, wyfe, childern, all thinges wherin he had here ether pleasure or comforte. Then such synnes as be against the wil and pleasure of god hathe committed shall shewe and present them sel∣ues, and shall appere more in nū∣bre, and more greuous then euer they semed afore, and so shal won¦derously vexe and torment the cō¦science. Then death, iudgemente, hell, dampnacyon as it were in a plumpe, shal assault and lay sege with diuers daungerous engens
agaynst the old man of ours. In these Agonies, except a mā be armed with a sure and constāt faith: it is to be feared, leste he be weried, tired and at last ouercom¦med. For these tentacious whych chaunce vnto men lyeng in extre¦mes: appeare most houge fearful and daungerouse, and that for bi¦cause our fayth is verye slender, and waueringe, nyether yet able to see, perceaue or apprehend, the incomprehēsyble and inestimable riches of the children of god, why¦che be remissiō of synnes through Christ, resurreccion of the fleshe, communion of saynctes, euerla∣sting life and all these geuen vn∣to vs in Christ and for Chryst. In these articles of our fayth we must dayly exercyse our selues. These we must diligentli reuolue and earnestly expend in our min∣des.
For thoughe all the artycles of our fayth are diligentlye to be remembred and without al waue¦ringe beleued: yet in the Agonye and poynte of deathe these foure (that is) the communion of saync¦tes, remission of sinne, by ye bloud of Christe, the resurrection of the fleshe, and euerlastinge lyfe: are chiefely to be mynded expended, and inculcated. For like as deth is the paine & stipend of sinne:Rom. 6. euen so for sinne God dothe commenly punish vs with diuers diseases and plages, As it is to be sene ī diuers places of scryptur. Io. v. Psa. 88. Deut xxviii.ii. Reg. xxiiii Neuertheles afflictions be ma¦ny tymes layd vpon vs that our fayth may be tried: For than is it easy to be perceaued howe much we loue GOD, what faythe we
haue in him, howe we trust hym, when we be pressed & greuyd wt aduersytie. In this case therfore we must bewayle & acknowledge our sinnes for the which we haue iustlye incured Goddes displea∣sure, and deserued most greuous paine, We must turne to god wt true repentaunce in all our harte & mynde withoute all faynynge and conterfating, we muste haue recourse vnto the Gospell where we shall fynd most bountiful cō∣solaciō. i, absoluciō or remissio of our sinnes which christ hath insti¦tuted ī ye churche Io. xx, Receaue (sayth Christe) the holye ghooste whose sīnes ye forgiue thei ar for geuen. This inestimable treasur is dayly opened & offred vnto vs Whē remission of sinnes is thus desire, & optayned: vndoutedly thē ye paine of sinne which is the
disease or affliccion shall sone ceasse and leaue vs, or elles accordinge to the most beneficiall will of our heuenly father: shall turne to the profit and soule helth of him that is diseased or afflicted, For this maye we be sure of, that the paine and affliccion in the body in this worlde (seme it nuer so greuous a bourden or heauye yoke to the flesh) as comenlye nothinge elles but a fatherly rod, wherwyth god doth drawe vs his children from synne,Psal. 88. and call vs home to hym, Truly our heuynly father dothe loue vs moste feruentlye, he bea∣reth vs good mynde,Heb. xii. and dothe all thinges, for our amendmente and profit for whome GOD lo∣uethe, him he chastisethe, and cor∣rectythe vs temporally here:. Cor. 11. that we shuld not be punished in hell euerlastingly. Thoughe he se∣mith
angrie: he louith singuler∣lye. Nether is his Ire the Ire of a tiraunt or tormētour desirynge our perdycion: but of a father e∣king our amēdement and sauftly First therfore we muste crye God mercy desire pardō & forgeuenes of our sinnes (but by Chryst, but with a hart truely penetente) that we may be at one wyth God and haue him merciful vnto vs This done we may then desyre GOD to deliuer vs from ye Imminente and present affliction and disease For so teacheth ecclesiast.Ecclesi. . Sonne in thy infermitye neglecte not thy selfe, but pray to the lorde: and he shall delyuer the. Also in the Ps.Psal. 70 remembre not o lord god our old iniquites but let thy mercye spe∣dely preuent vs: for we be verye miserable, helpe vs God oure sa∣uiour. Lord God of power turne
vs howe longe wilte thou be an∣grie? shewe thy face and we shall be saued, Here we be taught fyrst to desire remyssion of synne that we may so be at one wt God: and after that to haue his wrathe, and the tokens of ye same taken awai. But when so euer we desire to be deliuered or to be eased of ye crosse that presseth vs we must alwaye annexe this addicion.Mar. vi Thy wyll (o heuenlye father) be fulfylled. Neither knowe we so well what is profytable vnto vs. Nether cā we so well prouide for our selues as our most louing heuēly father Which is both of infinite powre and also of incomprihensible wis¦dome whyche neuer turneth hys eys from vs, whiche carieth conti¦nually for vs whch knoweth the numbre of our yeres, whych doth quicken, norish, fede, kepe, defend
prouide for al his creatures much beter then thei can wish or desire. But to drawe to the more perticu¦ler temptacions, & to shewe what thinges do most fierlly  daunge¦rously at the time of deth assault vs. And how we shal wtstād thē. ¶ There be thre thinges, whych at the houre of death doth wonderously vexe trouble, & feare our mindes (that is to saye) synne, death hell or dampnacion. Syne WHerten we haue vngodlye myspent our life, wherby we haue greuosly offēded God and our neighbour: This cōmyng to oure remembraunce when we lye vpon our death bed, doth dryue vs to a wonderous feare,Rom. ii pensiue¦nes, and anxiety. As sainct paule sayth, wrath indignacion to trou¦ble and anguishe agaynst euerye loule of man that doth euell.
¶ A medicine agaynst synne vexinge and troublynge our conscience. LEt vs call earnestly to remē¦braūce that the sonne of god came downe from heuen, be∣came man, toke vp on his backe the synnes of the worlde, died for them vpō ye crosse, there makynge satisfaction for vs and paing our dettes. This most precyous blod of christe was shed also for vs, & of this death we be also partakers so we ryght lye beleue in Chryste Nether nede we to doubt but Chryste died aswell for vs, as for Peter and Paule:Rom. 6. For we be bap∣tised also (as saynct Paule sayth) in the deth of chryst. Thys ought to comfort, vs this ought to erect and stay our myndes. For seinge we be baptised in the deathe of chryste, Chistes deathe bryngethe
also vnto vs helth and saluaciō. By Chrysts deth we be also dead to synne: by Chrystes deathe we haue also certaine and sure remis¦sion of our synnes, by chrystes deth we be raised also to a newe and euerlastynge lyfe. For bap¦tyme is a couenand betwixt god and vs. And a sygne of his grace and fauour towarde vs wherin we be reconciled and made at one wyth god againe, so that we may nowe haue a ioyfull and quiet cō¦science, for somuch as our sinnes be forgeuē vs through the resur¦rection of Iesus chryst, yea christ also in the institucion of the most blesed sacramēt of his last supper speaketh also to vs saynge, yt hys bloud is shed for the remission of synne. Nowe although we haue not liued alwaye innocentlye ne∣ther led suche a lyfe as we ought
to haue done: Yet we maye not dispaire, but without delay resort vnto god, by true repentaūce, cal faithfully vpon hys name, and we shalbe saued.Rom. x Ye let euery one of vs with a meke harte burst out into these, or like wordes and say O most mercyful god, father of al mercy, father of oure LORD Iesu Chryste, be mercyfull vnto me a wretched synner, make spede to deliuer me, for the moste bitter (but moost precious) death, and passion of Iesu Chryste thy only begotten sonne, our redemer, and only sauioure: Amen. Enter not (o lord) into iudgement wyth thy seruaunte, handle me not accor∣dynge to my deseruyng, neyther do vnto me after my iniquities: but according to thy infinite and botomles goodnes & mercye take me vnto the. I a miserable and
wretched creature am in thy hand I am in thy debt & daunger thou mayst do with me what it please the. O moost mercyfull father forsake me not, nor caste me of. I am thine all that I am, There can no man comfort, no man help no man delyuer me, but yu alone. Thou art the true comforte, the most present helpe the surest bul∣warke in all necessite. Thou god art my refuge, my strengthe, my helpe in al troubl. Thou art my Lord in thy handes resteth al my chaunce and affaires. Shew thy louinge and mercifull face vpon thy seruant, saue me in thy mercy O lord: but many wayes in our extreme sicknes and affliction let vs beware we loke not to earnest¦ly nether to longe vpon oure sin∣nes. But rather let vs haue the i∣mage of Christes moste helthfull
and precious deth before our eys. Let vs fix that in our mynd and be full perswaded that Christe is now bourdened with his synnes, that he hathe nowe taken theym vpon his owne shoulders and so hath satisfied for theim and was∣shed them awai that he wil neuer charge vs with thē but frelye for geaue vs theim as we professe in our Crede, whē we sai Credimus remissionē peccatorum, we beleue the remission of synnes. ¶ Here it shalbe mete that in our syckenes we call to remembraunce such pla∣ces of holy scripture as testi¦fieth of remission of synne purchased by Christe of the which some be here sub∣scribed. Ioh. i.BEhold ye lābe of God which takith away the synne of the worlde.
We are bought with no golde nor siluer,i. Pet. i nether any corruptible price, but with the precious bloud of the vnspotted and vndefyled lambe Iesus Christ. ¶ So god hath loued the world that he gaue hys onely begotten sonne to the ende that we so bele∣uynge in hym dothe not peryshe but haue lyfe euerlastingIo. iii I come not to call the righteous but the sinners to repentaunce.Mat. ix Come vnto me all ye that labour and are laden and I shall refresh you, Lo he calleth all,Mat. xi he refuseth he excludeth none, we must includ also our selues within his words All we must resorte to him, and he wil receaue and reffeshe vs, God setteth forth hys loue to¦ward vs: For Christ died for vs,Rom. v when we were yet sinners, muche more now therfore we being iusti¦fied
bi his blood shalbe sauffe frō wrath by him. i. Cor. iChrist Iesus is be commed vn¦to vs wisdom, righteousnes, holi∣nes & redempciō. Here let vs con∣fort our selues yt though we haue be neuer so gret sinners, let vs cō¦fesse and knowledg our synne let vs call for mercye and pardon, let vs vnfainedly beleue christ to be our only helth Iustice, and redēp¦t on: and strayght waye he is so, he wyl by and by couer and put awai our sinnes in such sort yt we shal nede fere no peril nor daūger ii. Cor. vHim that knew no sinne, hath god made sinne .i. a payment of sinne for vs, that we shuld becōe the righteousnes of god by hym.Gal. i Christ gaue him selfe for our sinnes that he myghte delyuer vs fro this presēt wicked world acor¦ding to the wil of god our father
In Christ we haue redemption throughe hys bloude,Ephe.  euen the re∣mession of synnes according to ye riches of his grace. Christ Iesus is come in to this world to saue synnersi. Tit. i Christe Iesus hathe geuen hym selfe a redempciō for al mē.i. Tit, ii This let vs cōstantly beleue vndoub∣ted we be of ye nombre of those yt shalbe saued. For whē he is come a redemption for all, these thyn∣ges ye he hath suffered pertayneth no lesse to the & me & euery one of vs (so we beleue) than to Peter or Paule Christ hath borne our sin¦nes in his body vpon the crosse.i. Pet. ii Christ died ones for our synnes ye ryghteous for ye vnrighteous.i. Pe.. ii. The bloud of Iesus chryst clen∣seth vs from all sinne.i. Ioan. i If ani man doth sinne we haue a aduocate wt the father euē Iesusi. Ioan i
Chryst the ryghteouse and he is ye attonemente for our synnes: Not for ours onely: but for the synnes of the whole worlde. By these places and suche lyke we maye se howe god the father (which wyll not the death of a sin¦ner, but that we shulde turne and lyue) for that moost feruente bur∣nyng loue that he beareth toward vs hath eased vs of the burden of our sin, & hath layd it vpō ye back of his most dere beloued sonne. which his sōne hath so takē, borne and suffered for them: that they can neuer condemne vs. For god taketh and reputeth the deathe of his sonne for a full satisfactyon & paiment for al our sinnes, so that we truly beleue in hym: For seing that our sinnes thus layde vpon Chryst could not ouercome hym, retain him in deth, nor dāpne him
(for why he rose againe) vndoub∣tedly a full satisfaccion is alredye made for them, the iustyce of god is fully answered, and they be vt∣terly hid and forgeuen. Let vs be¦leue thys and we shall not perysh euerlastingly. For chryst is nowe become ours, with al that he hath with hys death, with hys resurrec¦tion, wyth his assencion into hea∣uen, with his lyfe,Qui pro∣prio filio suo non se∣percit. his merites hys glorye. As saynt Paule wytnesse. Rom. viii. wherfore Satan hath nowe no title to vs, he can not me¦dle with vs, he hathe no power to hurt vs. Forsomuch as we be iu∣stified by christ purged from our synnes and made the chyldren of god by Chryst who hath reconcy∣led vs & wrought our peace, we must therfore be of good cōforte. For seinge we be in the handes of god, that is omnipotent, who is
now our best most louīg & trusty father we be in a sureporte, we be wtout daūger, there cā no incom∣modity nor aduersitie hurt vs for we be inuironed wt the custodi of god & the gard of angels, oute of the handes of this heuenly father can no creature by force pluck vs When we be at an end by deathe of thys crosse and corporal aflic∣tion then haue we ended our iour¦ney, then hae we fynyshed oure warre: Christ hathe borne the same crosse Chryste hathe passed the same waye, he hathe suffered lyke deathe, he is oure heade we must be lyke to hym we mst suf¦fre with hī yf we intend to raygn with him we must leue thys cor∣porall lyfe ere that we can enioye lyfe euerlasting. Lette not oure sinnes trouble vs: lette them not tormente oure conscyence, as
though they coulde not be forge∣uen. They are alredy forgeuen, if we repent and beleue: Christ is al ours as muche as he is. He by hys innocency hath couered and taken away our synnes. As Chryst can not be dampned, euen so we can not be dampned, yf wt a ryghte faythe, we cleaue vnto hym. As synne, deathe, and hell, hadde no power agaynst Chryste so haue thei no power against vs so we be in Chryste, and Chryste in vs. Yf the matter hadde be left and cōmitted to vs to haue borne our owne sinnes and to haue sa∣tisfied for them, they wolde haue be to heuy for vs, we had not be able to stande vnder theym they wold haue pressed and sunke vs downe to hell. But christe bothe god and man hathe (of hys owne
free will) offered hym selfe for vs. he hath taken our turne, he hathe playd our parte, and paide for vs all that we ought. As it is in the Psalme spoken in the persone of christ, I payd that I oughte not, We had trespased, we were ye det∣ters, so farre behind hand, that all that was in vs, was not able to paie ye lest sōme we ought. Christ became our suerty, paid for vs ac¦quited vs, and set vs at libertie yea, made vs coheires wyth hym of euerlasting glorye If it were possible for one man to commit the sinnes of the whole worlde, so he truelye repente and cleaue by true fayth to Chryst he can not be dampned, hys synnes be sufficiently and abundātly by Christ satisfied for. For Chryst (as touching hys godhead one in substance with the heuenly father
As touchynge his man hede oure very flesh and bloode (hath pur∣chased and truely boughte grace and pardon for vs. For Chryst be came man for vs, was borne for vs died vpon ye crosse for vs, rose from death for vs, ascended into heuen for vs, and hath accomply∣shed and perfourmed all thynges mete for our saluacion for vs. If therfore we beleue in christ we are becoe partakers of Gods fauor we are eased of the packe & bourdē of sinne, we are made the heires of god and coheiris with Chryst for euer, and that by chryste and for christ. For withoute Christ there is no consolacion on helth no hope no helpe. In Chryste alone is all comforte, all helthe, all hope, all succoure▪ all refuge all grace and mercy more habundant more plē∣teous, more excelēt than any man
is able either to comprehend or to wishe. God graunte vs therfore a true and a constant faith. In this forme or in like sort we most com¦fort our selues in our sickenes or calamitye, and our brother beinge visited. But in ani wais and with al dilygence it is to be foreseene, yt we wythdrawe oure mynde from the fearefull and terryble contem¦placyon of synne, death, and dam¦nacyon. And that we fixe these of our mynd and whole thoughte v¦pon christe onlye, ye we cleue vnto him, that we call vpon hym, yt we cōmit our self wholy to hym. For in christ we shal espie nothng but innocencie, iustice, lyfe, saluacyon which al be deriued from Chryste into vs, so that we wyll acknow∣ledge him, & receaue him for ye au¦thor of our saluacion and only re¦demer, yf we haue christ crucified afore our eyes: if we imprinte him
in our hart, yf we flee to hym with out fath: if we wholy clyue to him Then shal hel gates nothyng pre¦uayle against vs, then shal we be able to wythstād al the forcible as¦saultes of Satan, though thei be neuer so sore, neuer so fierce, neuer so terrible. Let vs cal to remembraunce wt what lenitie, what gētilnes, what humanitie, what clemency Chryst (as it is in ye euangelicall history) hath called vnto him and receued al suche sinners as hath repented them and desired his helpe. We shall finde Mary Magdalen, the synner that honge vpon the right hand of christ crucified, the pub∣licane, zache, wyth other mo whōe Chryst most louyngly receiuinge pronoūced cleare frō sin, (though they had synned greatlye) and the chyldern of saluacion, chryste is
very grace, mercy, helpe, comfort, life, ioye, and saluacion to al those which loke for these things at his hādes: and put theyr trust in hym And all these thynges hathe God (who is truethe it selfe & can not lie nor wyl not deceyue) promysed vnto vs for chrystes sake. Fynallye whē deth approcheth we must do as Chryste dyd vpon the crosse,Mat. vi we must praye for our enemyes and forgeaue them with our harte. Yf we haue offended any man we must be hartely sory for it, we must desire forgeuenes. yf we haue iniured anye man, we must make hym amendes, or take such order that amendes maye he made vnto him, yf t passeth oure power to make restytucyon and amendes: it shalbe ynoughe that we desire forgeuenes. And wyth our hartes forgeaue others which
hath hurt vs ether 11. name, body subance or estimacion. For if we truely forgeue: god hathe promy∣sed we shalbe fyrgeuen as it is in the syxt of Mathew. It is verye necessarye also and profitable for the confirmacion & strengthening of our fayth to re∣ceaue the most blessed sacramente of the body and bloud of our sauy¦our christ which we ar cōmaded to receaue in remembraūce of his benefytes, that hereby, we may be truely sertyfied in our conscyence hys body to be geuen for vs, and his bloud to be shed for remission of our synnes. Dethe OF our flesh & fraill nature is so ferd & abhorted yt whē he approcheth, mans hert is filled and laden wyth suche sorowes, panges, and anxieties as tong is
not able to expresse. ¶ A medicine agaynst the feare of death. WE muste call to our remem∣braunce deathe to be ouer∣comed and abolyshed by Chryst. So that nowe the soules of so many as trust in Christ, cā not dy nor peryshe: but departynge from the body goeth straight to Chryst For thus was it sayde to the thefe at his houre of death. Thys daye shalt thou be with me in paradise The bodye thoughe it reste and pause for a whyle yet we be in cer¦taine hope that at the laste daye it shalbe raysed againe to immortal and euerlasting life. And therfore scripture calleth the deathe of the body but a slepe, for yt thys same frayle, weke, vyle, mortall and cor¦ruptible bodye, whych we cary a∣bout, which lieth sicke & sore disea¦sed, which shortly shalbe put into
the earth, burne to asshes, deuou∣red wt bestes or fooles, drowned in water, ye same self bodi (I say) shal be raised again incorruptible, glo¦rious, bewtifull, stronge, pure im∣mortall to possesse a newe and e∣uerlastyng lyfe:i. Cor. xv where there shall neither be hūger, thirst, heate cold, synne, deth nor any kynde of cala¦mitie, but iustice, innocencye, lyfe, ioye blesse, world withoute ende. For as the body of Chryst laid in the graue rose agayne the thirde day neuer more to dye, euē so shal the bodies of al ye beleue in chryst at the latter day be resuscitate to a lyfe, after whiche shall folowe no death. God who is of infinite po∣wer and infallible truth hath pro¦mysed these thynges, they muste therfore nedes be so. And here it shalbe profitable to call to remem¦braunce suche places of scrypture
as treateth of the resurrectyon of the flesh, which be the words not of man but of god, who is able & will certeynly fulfill what soeuer he hath spoken. No man can chaunge his wil, no man can alter his purpose. No creature can fru¦strate let or tary his sentence. He is omnipotēt, he is true, he is faith¦full, his goodnes and mercye is inexpicable. Let no man therfore doubte of the trueth of his wor∣des let no man doubte of the per∣formaūce of this promise. ☞ Here after foloweth certayne places of scripture witnessing the resurrection of the dead accordynge to the article of oure fayth wherin we say we beleue that this flesh shal rise agayne. Ioan, viTHis is the wyl of my father which sent me, yt who soeuer seith ye sōne & beleueth in hī shal haue life euer lastinge and I
wyl raise him vp again in the last daye.Iohan. v The houre cometh wherin all they that be ī the graues shal here the voice of the sonne of god and shall go forth thei that haue done good vnto the resurrectiō of lyfe. For if so be that the spirite of him which raysed vp Iesus from the deade dwell in you:Rom. vi.i. euen he that raysed vp Iesus Chryst from the dead shall also quicken your mor¦tall bodies because of hys spiryte that dwelleth in you.i. Cor. vi God hathe both raysed vp oure Lord Iesus Christ and shal also raise vs vp by his power.Iohan. xi Christe sayeth Lazarus was but a slepe where in verye dede he was dead and buried. But Christ is the resurrectiō and lyfe (as it is in the same place) so that he that beleueth on him thought he were
dead he shall lyue, In verefienge whereof he raised strayghte waye Lazarus being foure dayes dead and stynkynge. And because we be naturallye in the agonye of deathe virye fearefull, weake and faintherted: to thende yt we myght be the easelier perswaded in the ar¦ticle of resurrectiō: Scripture ma¦keth mencion of manye whiche in the tyme of the prophetes Chryste and thappostles were called from death to lyfe. Luc. vii Luc. i.Christ raysed the widowes sōne He raised the ruler of the sina∣goge his daughter. Iohan. xi Act. ixHe raised Lazarus. Peter restored to life Tabitha. Act. xx 4. Reg. iiii.Paule raised again Eutichus Elizeus the prophete called a∣gaine to lyfe his hostes sonne 4, Re. xvii.Helias raised the babe of ye wo¦man of Sareptanie.
God toke also vnto him out of this frail and transitory life,Gen. v. 4. Reg. ii. these two excellent and holy men enoch and Helias quicke bothe bodye & soule, to giue vs (as it were) a tast and representation of the true life to come, lest after the opinion of ye ethnickes and epicures we shulde thynke there were no worlde, nor beinge after this wretched & mise¦rable lyfe. Let vs not forget what christ Iesus lorde of lyfe, & death, sayth in ye .viii. of Luke, wepe not the maid is not dead but a slepe. Reason not cōprehēding ye miste∣ryes of god, nether perceiuing his pooer doth laugh this saīg to scor¦ne, but crist proueth his saīg true, he raiseth by & by ye dead maide to lyfe. The .xv. chapter of ye first e∣pistle to the Corin. is replenished wt most godly pleasaūt and pithy consolacions. Trulye it is more
precious than any golde. For in that Chapit. saincte Paule dothe so annexe and couple oure resur∣reccion to the resurrectiō of christ as though thei coulde in no wyse be seperate or deuyded after thys forme. Chryst is rysen from death (which thing is certen) ergo  al∣so shal vndoutedly rise. For christ is our head and we his membres: Thys head is nether without, ne∣ther wyll forsake his membres. Thē it foloweth that where christ is, there shall we be. For why, we are the members of hys body and euen of his fleshe and bone,Ephe. v what tonge, what penne, what wytte is able to set forthe (as it is worthy) this ineffable, & inestimable glory of the mercye and grace of god, ye God hathe vouchsafe so lowe to humble himself as to become mor¦tal man that this feble and fraile
nature or man vnited and knit to the diuine natur by the power & fficacie of the godhead, myght be in haunced & promoted to immor∣talitie. For trulye the nature of al faythfull men whyche, ether were before chryst hath be sens, at now or shalbe to the worldes ende: vn∣doubtedlie in chryst very god and man hath optained immortallity The consolacion therfore ye riseth of christes resurrection is of great efficacitie. As when sainct Paule saythe to the Corinthians:i. Cor. xv. Christ is risen againe from dead, and is the firste fruictes of theim yt slepe for by one man truly cam death & bi one man cometh the resurrectiō of ye dead. And as al die in Adame euyn so shall all be made alyue in chryst but euery one in his order. The first is christ. Thē thei which are christes whych hathe beleued
in his comming. And saint Paul dothe adde a similitude taken of naturall thynges wherby he doth set forthe and declare the resur∣rection of bodies. The symilitude is takē of sede whych is cast into the earthe by the husbandman dieth as it were and rotteth. Ne∣uer the lesse it is not vtterlye loste but at lenght spryngeth & cōmeth forthe of ye earth, goodlye, beauty¦ful & pleasaunte. So our bodyes shall rise agayne not feble, vyle, corruptyble, mortall: but stronge glorious incorruptible, immortal neuer to dy again but euer to liue The wai into true and euerla¦stynge lyfe to our longe home, as they call it, and contrey is by cor¦porall death. Fleshe and blood be¦inge corruptible and mortall can¦not inherit ye kydgdō of god wher nothing is but life. Therfore this
corruptible bodi must put on īcor¦rupciō,Oze. xiiii. Esa. xxv, & this mortal must put on immortality. Than shal the saing that is writtē be fulfilled, Death is swalowed vp in victory. They that beleue in Chryste hath nowe ouercommed synne, deathe, and hel. Therfore not fearinge deathe but stronge, hold, and well harted in Chryste: they maye saye deathe where is thy sting? death where is thy victorye? The stinge of death is synne, and the power of synne is the lawe. But thankes be vnto God whiche hathe geauen vs the victorye through our lord Iesus Chryste. Let vs heare also more sentēces full of godly and mightye conso∣lacion. He that hath raised vp Iesus shal rayse vs vp also with Iesusii. Cor iiii
Our conueracion is in heuē frō whence we do loke for the sauiour our lord Iesus christ which shall chaūge our vile body yt it may be like fashioned vnto hys glorious body accordyng to the workynge of his power,Philli. iiii by the which also he is able to subdue al thinges vnto him selfe. Ye are dead and your life is hid with christ in god,Col. iii. but when christ your life shal appere then shall ye also appere in glory with him. We wolde not brethern) that ye shuld be ignorant concerninge them that slepe,i. Tess. iiii that ye sorow not also as other do whyche haue no hope. For if we beleue that Iesus chryst died and rose agayne: euen thē also which are a slepe through Iesus shal god bringe with him. Saynct Paule also doth cō∣fort Timothii. Tim. ii. with the article of
resurrection sayng. Rmembre ye the lord Iesus Christe beyng he sede of Dauid rose again from ye dead according to my gospell. And if we be deade with hym we shal also lyue with him. If we suffer paciētly we shal also raign with him. It was written also to ye hebrusHeb. ii that Chryste tasted deathe for all men, and that he was partaker of fleshe and bloude .i. became ve∣ry man ye he mighte destroye hym which had the rule of death (that is) the deuell, and that he myghte delyuer them which were in bon∣dage al thir lyfe time by the rea∣son of the feare of death. God hath delyuered vs,ii. Tim. i and called vs wt an holy calling not according to our workes but ac∣cording to his purpose and grace whyche is geauen vs in Chryste
Iesu before the time of the world but is now made manifest by the apperinge of oure sauioure Iesu Christ which truly hath destroy∣ed deathe and hath broughte lyfe and immortalite to lyghte, by the gospell. i. Ioh. iiiWe know that we are trans∣lated from lyfe to deathe because we loue the bretherne. Iohn. 41In this hathe the loue of god appered in vs, because god sente his onely begotten sonne into the world yt we mighte lyue through him. Iob. xixI knowe that my redem er doth lyue, and in the last daye I shall ryse agayne, and agayne be wrapped in my owne skine. And in my owne fleshe shall see God, whome I my selfe shall se & these my eyes shall beholde and none othere
These places of holye scryp∣ture and suche lyke, yf we diligent¦lye remēbre & faythfully imbrace: we shall perceaue greaet consola∣cion and conforte And euen wyth sayncte Paule reioyse,Phil. iii. that we knowe Chryste and the power of his resurrectyon, wherby death is ouercomed. Nether is there nowe (to these that beleue in Christ) any thynge in deathe terrible or to be feared, sauinge onlye the Image and outwarde forme, hurte it can not. Lyke as a dede serpente kea∣peth stil his old fearefull shape & forme: but to stynge or do harme he hathe no power at al. And lyke as by the brasin serpente whyche Moyses by goddes commaunde∣mente sette vp in deserte when it was loked vpon through the po∣wer of goddes woorde men were delyuered from daunger of the
lyuelye and venyme serpentes so our deathe is made harmles and we deliuered frome the feare and daunger of it, so ofte as wyth the eyes of our faythe we do beholde the helthefull and medycynable dethe of Chryst. In conclusion deathe is nowe become but a I∣mage and shadowe of deathe, yea the entraūce and gate to lyfe. For Christ who is trueth it self sayth, Yf anye man kepe my worde,Iob. viii. he shall neuer see death, For a man trustynge to the mercye of God, through faithe, whiche he concea∣uith by herynge of Chrystes gos∣pell: is so vnite and knyt to christ his lord and mayster, that he can not be plucked nor seperate frome hym. The bodye in dede for a tyme is seperate from the soule but in certayne hope of risinge agayn to
euerlastinge lyfe. And so he that beleuethe in Chryst dothe not see nor fele the euerlastinge dethe of body and soule, which is euer∣lasting dampnacion, For the death of good men is nothynge els but a departure from thys transi∣tory and mortal life: to immortality to chryst, to hys angelles and sainctes. ¶ Hell and dampnacion. DOth offer it self at ye hour of death, so that many ty∣mes man doth greatli feare lest he be abiecte frō the fauour of god & appoynted to euerlastynge payne
The deuyll (whyche seketh by al meanes howe to deuoure vs) ste∣rynge vp in youre myndes manye daungerous & troubellous thou∣ghtes concernyng our electyon & predestinacion. ¶ A medicine against the feare of hell and dampnacion. WHen the deuil goeth about to cause vs to dyspaire or to doubt of our electiō: whether we be of the numbre of them that are appointed to euerlastyng lyfe or no, In any wayes let vs not be to boulde in copynge wyth hym, let vs not enter dysputacyon a∣gaynste hym (for he is to subtyle and expert for vs) but say shortly vnto him. Away Satan with sor¦rowe, it is written, thou shalte not tempt the lord thy God. For seing that god as a most louyng father
hathe not onlye geauen vs lyfe. fedde and preseruyd vs, to thys houre: but also hathe indued and euen loden vs from tyme to tyme with hys singuler benefites, what madnes were it contrary to oure former experyence, nowe to doubt of his mercy? He hathe receauyd vs into hys flocke by baptime. He hathe sente vs the Gospell of hys grace, wherein he hathe pro∣mysed to become oure father. We haue he fedde wyth the fleshe and bloude of hys sonne oure sauiour CHRISTE in remem¦braunce that oure debtes be payd and we acquyted, whye shoulde we nowe then doubte of the good wyl of GOD towarde vs? lette vs not therfore admytte the dout¦full and daungerous Imagy∣nacyons of oure predestinacion
which the deuell like a crafty and malicious marchaunt doth labor to iustil. But let vs thinke vpon suche sentences as God woulde haue our mindes occupied wyth all, whych Christe hym selfe hath prescribed, as Iohn. iii, where he sayethe. GOD hathe so loued the woorlde, that he hathe geuen his onelye begotten Sonne that who so euer beleueth in him shall nor perishe, but haue lyfe euerla¦stynge. Loo here we see that he which beleueth in Chryst, which faythfully acknowlegeth chryste to be his sanctificacyon, iustyce redempcyon and satisfaccion: can not be dampned, but is assured of euerlasting lyfe. So many as conceaue faythe by bearynge of Goddes ord: and so truste sted∣fastly vpon the mercy of chryste Vndoutedlye they be of the num¦ber
of those whych be chosen to e∣verlastyng blysse, knowen before in CHRISTE predestinate. and written long syth in the boke of lyfe. These thynges be mooste certayne and most true, God can neyther deceyue nor be deceaued.Rom. viii. Such is hys good wyll, so hathe he purposed and decreed afore the worlde beganne, what thyn∣ges so euer therefore oure enne∣my the deuell (spytinge oure sal∣uacion, and sekynge our destruc∣tyon) shall put in our minde con∣trary to this doctrine. Lette them not moue vs, lett them not make vs afrayde, but lette vs trust tru¦ly in christe: and so shall he be come oures, and we become hys, who beynge our good LORD, we can mot perishe nor be damp∣ned.Io. x For he wyl lose none of those
that hys father hathe geuen hym, we muste fyxe oure eyes vppon Chryste, we muste flee to hym, we muste cleaue to hym. He is oure onelye and true sauyoure, who muste be apprehended and imbraced by faythe, yf we loke to be saued. For they that beleue ryghtelye in Chryste they are pre∣destinate to euerlastynge lyfe. Here we muste diligently remem∣bre and earnestelye expende the godly exhortacion of saynt Paul whych he writeth in the .xii. to the Hebrewes, whose wordes be these Lette vs runne by pacyence vn∣to the battell that is sette afore vs,He. xii. lokynge vnto Iesus, the auc∣tore and finisher of fayth, whyche when the ioye was set afore hym, suffered the crosse, and dyspysed the shame, and sitteth at the ryght hand of the seate of God.
Furthermore all the greuous temtacyons and afflictyons that Chyste suffered, he sufferyd them for our sakes.Heb. iiii As saincte Paule sayth also in the .iiii. to the hebrus we haue not a highe priest yt is not able to haue compassyon on oure weakenes: but such one was pro∣uyd in all pointes wythout synne let vs therfore wyth bouldnes go vnto the seat of hys grace, that we may otayne mercye and fynde grace to helpe in tyme of nede Let vs in any ways consider and deplye imprinte ī our harts, christ to be geuin vnto vs, not onlye to thend yt we might be redemid, re∣cōciled & made partakers of euer∣lastyng saluaciō: but also yt ī him we myght haue an example, bothe howe to liue, and also how to end oure lyfe. Nether can anye man
liue, suffer or dye well: vnles he loke vpon and folowe the lyfe, suffrynge and death of Chryst, if therfore we desire to end thys lyfe well and godlye: let vs consider and remembre howe Chryste be∣haued him selfe in that bitter and smarte agonye, when hangyng vpon the crosse, he was assaulted with diuers fyersse and most gre∣uous temtacyons, and praye that we may haue grace to folowe hys example. FIrst he was temptyd wt syn whan being hāged betwixte two theues as a notable and hay∣nous synner: it was sayd vnto hī yf thou beist the sonne of God,at. xxvii. come downe from the crosse. By this cōtumelious voyce what do they signifye elles, but that they iudged hym a noughtie and vn∣godly
person, such one as by craft subtiltye, falsheade, sosserye, and other vnlawfull meanes had de∣ceaued the people, hadde blynded the worlde, and to be nothynge lesse then the sonne of GOD. Euen in lyke maner at the houre of deathe doth the deuyll tempte man, what soeuer man hath com∣mitted againste god, al the sinnes that euer he dyd, he sheweth vnto hym, he doth exaggerate them to the vttermoste, to thende that the multitude and hainousnes of thē considered and perceaued manne shulde doubte of the mercye and fauoure of god, and, so fall into desperacion. Here we had nede to stande sure. And euery one of vs had nede to aunswer our enemye, thus temptinge vs after thys ma¦ner I knowledge mi selfe to haue synnes aboue all numbre, and
measure but Chryste, who neuer sinned in whose mouth was foūd no guile, who is that verye inno∣cent lambe, hathe suffered deathe for my synnes, he hathe wasshed them awaye, he hathe satysfied aboundantlye for them,Esay. iiii. howe ma¦nye and howe greate so euer they were, Christes deathe partayneth also to me he was wounded also for my iniquities, he was brused for my vngracyousenes, by hys strypes I am also healed. All my synnes hath Chryste taken to him selfe, so that nowe I haue none (thankes be to CHRIST) who hathe satysfyed for theym in hys owne body. CHRIST was tempted al∣so wt death, when it was said vnto hym:Math. 7. he hathe saued other, but he canne not saue hym¦selfe.
(As thought it shoulde be sayd he) is nowe at appoynte, he must dye, there is no remedye, he canne not escape. Thus dothe oure olde and erreconcyble enne∣my labour to feare vs wyth deth but let vs holde out the buckeler of faythe in Chryst agaynst hym Lette vs remembre that Chryste our Lord, kynge of glorye, and prynce of lyfe, coulde not be ouer commed nor holden of death, but thoughe he once tasted of deathe: he nowe liueth and raygneth for euer. Thys lorde of oures will not leaue vs, nor suffer deathe to execute any tyranny agaynst vs, that after he hath suffered vs to be tempted a whyle he wyll also that we dye corporally: al that is wholy for our welth. Neyther coulde we other wayes
come to euerlastynge lyfe but by temporall death. We must there¦fore leaue this present lyfe ere we can inherite the eternall life. Also thys corporall deathe bringethe thys comoditie that by tastynge the bitternes and sowernes of it: we haue experyence and knowe the excedynge loue that Chryste bare towarde vs, and the inesty∣male benefite yt he did for vs in clensyng our synnes, in abolys∣shynge of death, in breakinge vp of hel gates, and al by his death. Other wayes we could neuer haue knowen the power of chryst in abolishing of deathe, we could neuer haue iustly estemed the ex∣cellency of thes benefit, we could neuer haue sene howe iuste cause we haue to geue thanks to christ our Lord and redeamer. Chryste lyuing trulye, we shall also lyue.
and this corporal deth to vs shall be nothynge els but a swete and holsome slepe, an intraunce and gate into the true & blessed lyfe. For after thys transitory lyfe thē begynne we fyrst truly to lyue. THirdli christ was tempted wt hel, or euerlastynge dā∣nation, whā it was said vnto him he hath trusted in GOD let him, now delyuer hym yf he wyll. As thoughe they should saye. Nowe it appearethe yt he hathe hoped in God in vayne. For god wyl none of hym, he hathe forsaken hym, he likethe hym not, he dothe abhorre hym, he wyll caste hym downe to hel & perpetually cōdempne hym. When therfore the temptor shall lasche at vs wt lye temptacyons, we maye not shrinke, we may not
be afraid, w may not be dyscora∣ged but cōmend our self, wholy to CHRISTE, hange vpon hym who is wholye oures, who hath geuē him self wholy to vs, so that synne, deathe, nor hel, hath no thynge to do wyth vs. Chryste with a inestimable price, his owne bloude hathe deliueryd vs frome the tyranny of the deuyl, and euer¦lastinge dampnaciō, he is become our innocency, our lyfe, and oure iustice. Let vs take hede in anye ways that we turne not our har∣tes from CHRISTE, cru∣cifyed. Yf we cleue to hym, we are set vpon a sure and inexpugna∣ble rocke, agaynste the whyche all the power of hell is able to do nothinge. So that we may boldli exclame, and euery one saye th
CHRISTE I prouided the lorde afore my eys all waye,Psal. xvi for he is at my ryght elbowe, that I shulde not be mouyd, therefore my harte hath be gladde and my tonge hathe reioysed, moreouer my flesshe shall reste in hope. By faythe in CHRISTE we be∣come the sonnes of GOD, the bretherne and coheires of Chryst, and partakers of euerlastynge lyfe, by this faith departing hence we shall go to the kyngdome pre∣paryd for the electe, afore the be∣ginnynge of the world. And if in the feruentnes of these tēptacyōs our faythe begine to wauer yf we do not bere pacyentlye the wyll of oure heuinlye Father, if our loue towarde god waxe faynt and cold yf o hope beginne to be feble &
weake: and therfore we begynne to feare, lesse god and we be not all at a full poynt, but that he is yet desplesed with vs (which ten∣tacion surely is verye greuous painful, dangerous, and hard to ouercome) we must cal to remem¦brance Christ to haue suffred for vs so intollerable and inuincible tentacions: that there apered no help, no confort, no refuge, wher¦in GOD and the whole worlde: semyd to haue for saken him, and to be against him: In so mouche that he exclamed, O mi god, o mi GOD why haste thou forsa∣ken me. Oh here was a greuous tentacion. A sharpe and a bytter deathe that CHRSTE suf∣fered for vs, and all to make the way of the crosse and death easy vnto vs. Therfore seynge that,
CHRISTE of hys owne free wyll, caste hym selfe in to the fe∣lynge of intollerable payne, ca∣lamty, and anxeity (GOD our most louynge Father beyng ther¦with contente) vndoubtedlye he knoweth and considereth our en∣firmite, vndoubtedly he will not deale with vs accordynge to the rigour of the lawe, but will bere much with vs and pardon many thinges to our infirmity. Dothe not CHRIST speake to all men? doth he not call men, when he sayth: Come vnto me all you that do labour and are laden and I shal refresh you? how can ther be any greater consolacyon? how coulde CHRISTE speake more mercyfull to vs. There be many thinges that pynche▪ vexe, and trouble man greuously: but
what thyng is it that can trouble the conscience of a synner, more thē whē he doubteth of the mercy of god, then whan he feareth lest God will cast him of then whan he cā not persuad him self to con∣ceaue ani trust of gods mrci but Imagine that us withered mem∣ber he shall cut of and cast away. Here we had nede of christs presēt helpe, here we had nede of spedi cō¦fort, lest this violente tempest o∣uerwhelme and drowne vs. But let vs not feare. CHRISTE is no decembler, he wyll stande by his worde, he wyll perfourme hys promise, He wyll helpe and refreshe Therefore when we begynne to trimble and feare in our conscience, when we beginne to doubt of goddes mercy, when
we perceaue our faythe to be fea∣ble. Let vs forthwith call vp∣pon GOD, and that feruentlye, and that indesinantlye, euen from the bottome of oure harte, that he tourne not his face from vs. Lette vs power beore hym all that dothe trouble vs. Let vs dis∣close to hym oure meserye, oure imbecillitye, oure incredulity. Let vs crye wyth the disciples, Lorde increase oure fayth. And wyth the Father of the Lunatycke,Luc. xvii. Lorde we beleue, helpe our incredulyte. And wt the prophet.Marci. i Lorde make haste to help vs. For thy mercy is aboue all thy workes. O mooste louyng, O moste mercyful father lord god of our healthe,Psa. lxi our onlye helpe and refuge. Enter not into iudgemente with thy seruauntes.
Chryste is our iustyce oure redep¦tion, and innocēcy, he for vs hath suffered most bitter & cruel death. Let these thynges moue the o father of mercy. For this thi son our sauior chrysts sake haue mer¦cy vpō vs, confirme and strength our harte in fayth cōfort vs with the consolacions of thy holy sprt, that we may finally optayne Ioy euerlastyng, through Iesus christ Amen, After thys sort yf we (laboryng wresting and stryuinge wyth our imbecillyty, accusing afore god, & lamentinge our pusilianitye and incredulity) do catch hold of christ and clene fast to hym, earnestlye and feruently desiryng hys help, that he wyl vouchsafe to take our place & to supplye that is lackyng
in vs. These thinges if we do, sure¦ly all thinges shalbe well, we shal auoyde and escape easly al daun∣ger & peril, we shalbe safe inough For these two, to beleue in Chryst and with hart to desire fayth, doth not much differ the one frō the o∣ther. For though we fele yet great weaknes and imperfection in our selfe yet this ought to comfort vs that god willeth & commaundeth that he shoulde be called vpon, yt he hath promised to here and help these, that cal ryghtly vpon hym. Now as nothing is more iustli or necessarily desyred thē true fayth, euen so god hearyth no prayer so∣ner or more gladly thē whan man findyng no goodnes in hym selfe, doth acknowlege his owne infyr∣mity, hys owne mysery, hys owne beggerlines, dothe accuse and la∣ment
his owne increduliti, & with depe sighes, & harti desres calleth for fayth. These sighes, these desy¦res, these payers, this litil sparke of faithe is the very sede of God, wrought in vs by him which saith of chryste by the Prophet Esay, yt he shall not quenche the smoking filaxe, nor breake the brusyd rede, Therfore let vs stedfastly beleue, or at the leaste earnestelye and hartely pray that we maye beleue, bewayling afore god our lacke of fayth, whiche thinges if we do, we nede not doubt bot we be acceptid of god, we be taken for his childrē For it is not for noughte, nor in vayne that he hathe layde oure imbecillitie and synnes vpon hys only begoten sonnes backe. In MathewMath. v. it is said blessed be those that mourne, for thei shalbe
comforted, blessed be those that hōger after righteousnes, for hey shalbe satisfid. These wordes ar spokn also to vs, they may iustly be applied to vs, we mourne and are sorye in our hartes ye we haue mispendid our life past. We wish and desire, yea we euen honger & thirst after righteousnes. Let vs be of good chere, we shall otain our desyre, we shalbe comforted we shalbe counted iust afore god for Chryst our sauioure his sake. Finally let vs after this example of Chryst and sainct Steuen cō¦mend our soules into the handes of god your heuēly father, sayng euery one after this maner. O Most merciful father I com¦mend into thy holye handes my
spirit, yea thy spirit, for thou hast creat it, thou haste commytted it for a tyme to the body, thou hast geuen it thy owne Image and si∣mylitude. Thou hast sente for the redēption of it, thi owne most dere¦ly belouyd sonne to shed his bloud. Thys the spirite, I resigne into thi han∣des, O GOD of all mercye, I am thyne al that I am, I be¦seche the refuse not thy owne, but receaue, kepe and place me in euerlasting glory for the sake of Ie∣sus Christ, thy only begotten sonne Amen.
¶ A prayer to be sayde at the houre of death. O Lorde Iesu, whych art the onely health of al menne li¦uynge and the euerlastynge lyfe of them whyche dye in thy fayth: I wretched synner geue and sub∣mit my selfe wholy vnto thy most blessed will. And I beynge sure yt the thynge cannot peryshe whych is cōmytted vnto thy mercy: wyl∣lyngly nowe I leaue thys frayle and wycked fleshe, in hope of the resurreccion, which in better wyse shal restore it to me againe. I be∣seche the most mercyful lorde Ie∣su Chryst that thou wylte by thy grace: make stronge my soule a∣gaynst all temptacyons and that thou wylte couer and defende me wyth the buckler of thy mercye a∣gaynst al ye assaultes of the deuyl
I se and knowledge that there is in my selfe no helpe of saluacion, but al my confidence hope, & trust is in thy mooste mercyful good∣nes.  haue no merytes nor good workes which I maye allge be∣fore the: Of sinnes & euyl workes alas & see a great heape: but tho∣rowe thy mercy, I truste to bee in the numbre of thē, to whom thou wylt not impute theyr sinnes, but take and accept me for ryghteous and iust, & to be thinheritour of e∣uerlastynge lyfe. Thou mercyful Lord werte borne for my sak, yu dyddest suffe bothe hungre and trust for my sake, ye dydest preache and teache thou didst pray & faste for my sake thou diddest all good woorkes and dedes for my sake, yu sufferedest most greuous paines and tormētes for my sake: And fi∣nally thou gauest thy moste precy¦ous
body to dy, and thy bloud to be shed on the crosse for my ake. Now moost mercyfull sauyour, let all these thynges profyte me, whyche thou freely, haste geuen me, that haste geuen thy selfe for me: let thy bloude clee, & washe awaye the spottes and foulnesse of my synnes, Lette thy ryghte∣ousnesse hyde and couer myne vn∣ryghteousnesse. Lette the merytes of thy passyon and bloude, be the satisfaccion of my synnes. Geue me Lord thy grace, that my faythe and saluaciō in thy bloud, wauer not in me, but euer be fyrme and constante, that the hope of thy mercy, and lyfe euerlastynge, ne∣uer decaye in me, that charytye ware not colde in me: fynallye, that the weakenesse of my fleshe be not ouercome wyth the feare of death. Graunte me mercyfull
sauioure, that when deathe hath shutte vp the eyes of my bodye, yet that the eyes of my soule maye styll beholde and loke vpon thee, that whē death hath taken awaye the vse of my tonge and speache, yet that my harte may crye & saye vnto the In mans tuas domine commendo spiritum meum: that is to sy: O lord into thy handes I gue and commytte my soule. Domine Iesu accipe spiritu me¦um. Lorde Iesu receiue my soule vnto thee Amen. ¶ Imprynted at London by Wyllyam Copland, for Ry∣chard Kele.
