22436 99852523 17848
THE BIRD IN A CAGE. A Comedie. As it hath beene Presented at the Phoenix in Drury-Lane.The Author IAMES SHIRLEY, Servant to Her Majesty. IUVEN. Satyra. 7. Et Spes, & ratio Studiorum, in Caesaretantum. LONDON Printed by B. Alsop. and T. Fawcet. for William Cooke, and are to be sold at his Shop neere Furnivals-Inne Gate, in Holborne.1633.
The Persons. DVKE of Mantua. PERENCTTO Captaine of his Guard. PHILENZO Lover of Eugenia, under the Dis∣guise and Name of Rollyardo. Noblemen. FVL. 10. ORPIANO. Courtiers. MORELLO, DONDOLO, RVTTI. Embassador of Florence. BONAMICO a Mountibanke, or decayed Artist. SERVANT. GVARD. Attendants. EVGENIA the Dukes daughter. Ladyes Attendant on the Princesse. DONLLA, CATHERINA, MARDONA, FIDELIA, CASSIANA.
To Master VVILLIAM PRINNE, Vtter-Barrester of Lincolnes-Jnne. SIR, THe fame of your Candor and Innocent∣Love to Learning, especially to that Musicall part of humane knowledge Poetry, and in particular to that which concernes the Stage and Scene (your selfe as I heare, having lately written a Tragedie) doth iustly change from me this Dedication. I had an early desire to congratulate your happy Retirement, but no Poeme could tempt mee with so faire a circumstance as this in the Title, wherein I take some delight to thinke (not without imitation of your selfe) who have ingeniously fancied such Elegant and ap∣poste names, for your owne Compositions, as Health's Sicknesse, The Vnlovelinesse of Love▪ lockes, &c.) how aptly I may present you at this time, with The Bird in a Cage. A Comedy, which wanteth I must confesse, much of that Ornament, which the Stage and Action le it, for it comprehending also another Play or Inter∣lude, personated by Ladies, I must referre to your imagi∣nation, The Musicke, the Songs, the Dancing, and o∣ther varieties, which I know would have pleas'd you infi∣nitely in the Presentment. I was the rather inclined to make this Oblation, that Posterity might read you a Pa∣tron to the Muses, and one that durst in such a Criticall Age▪ bind vp the Wounds which Ignorance had printed vpon it and the Professors: Proceed (Inimitable Mece∣nas)
and having such convenient leysure, and anindfati∣gable Pegasus, I meane your Prose (which scorneth the Roade of Common sence, and despiseth any Stile in his way) travell still in the pursuit of new discoveries, which you may publish if you please, in your next Booke of Digressions. If you doe not happen presently to convert the Organs, you may in time confue the Steeple, and bring every Parish to one Bell.— This is all I have to say at this time, and my owne Oc∣casions not permitting my personall attendance, I have intreated a Gentleman to deliver this Testimonie of my Seruice, many faults have escaped the Presse, which your Iudgment will no sooner find, then your Mercie correct, by which you shall teach others a Charity to your owne Vo∣lumes, though they be all Errata. If you continue where you are, you will every day inlarge your fame, and beside the engagement of other Poets to Celebrate your Roman Constancie, in particular obliege the Tongue and Pene of your Devot Honourer,— IAMES SHIRLEY.
THE BIRD IN A CAGE. Actus. I. Scaena. I. Enter Fulvie, Orpiano. Orpiano. HE does not meane this building for a Colledge, I hope? Fulv. That were an ill Foundation, there are more Scholers then can live one by another already; 'tis pitty we should haue more plenty of learned Beggers. Orp. 'Tis past all my conjecture, why he built it. Fulv. Signior Perotto, Captain oth' Guard Is of Counsell onely with the Duke in't. Enter Morello. Mor. Signior Orpiano, and Fulvi. Fulv. My Sparke? Whither in such hast? Let vs change Aye a litle▪ Mor. You are travailing to your Mistris▪ Orp. Madam Donella is newly return'd to Court. Fulv. With the Princesse? Orp. She was but late retyr'd into the Country: What's the matter? Mor. Your Lordships I hope have heard, the Duke sent
Poste for them, as they say, there is something in't. Fulv. What? Mor. Does not your Lordship know? Fulv. Not I. Mor. Your Lordships wisedome and mine is much about a scantling then, yet for ought I heare, there be others of the Court as ignorant as we—your Honors pardon I be∣seech you, I must in all haste to the Princesses Lodging. Orp. Farewell Signior. Your amorous locke has a hayre out of order. Mor. Vm? what an oversight was this of my Barber, I must returne now and have it corrected, deere Sign. Ex. Fulv. Here's a Courtier that will not misse a hayre of his Complement, when he is to appeare before his Mistris: every morning does this fellow put himselfe upon the Racke, with putting on's apparell, and manfully indures his Taylor, when he skrewes and wrests his body into the fashion of his doublet—but that the Court cannot subsist without a Foole, I should marvaile what this fellow does to follow it. Orp. There are more have much about his parcell of Braines, the benefit of youth and good clothes procur'd their places, and ignorance and impudence have since main∣tayn'd em. Fulv. Two great helpes as the world goes. Enter Gentlemen Vshers, Dondolo, Grutti. Gent. Cleere the presence, the Duke is entring. Enter Duke, Eugenia, Perenotto, Attendants. Eugen. I ever was obed ient— Duke. 'Tis for thy Honor, which I know▪ Is to thy selfe a precious sound—that Building I late erected, then shall be thy Pallace. Eugen. Or my Prison Sir, if I doe rightly understand. Duke. That name Is too unworthy of it, my Eugenia, Nor will it seeme restraint to my lov'd daughter,
Since free to all delights, thy mind shall be It's owne Commander, every day shall strive To bring thee in fresh rarities, Time shall bee. Delighted with thy pleasures, and stay with thee. Eug. Indeed I shall thinke Time has lost his wings When I am thus Cag'd up. Duke. Thou shalt give To him feathers when thou pleasest. Mantua Shall powre her raptur on thee—why have I A Crowne, but to command what thou canst wish for, My deere Eugenia. Eugen. A Deere it seemes, For as you had suspicion of my wildnesse, You'l measure out my walke. Duke. I am thy Father, Who by example of the wisest Kings, But build a place to lay my Treasure in, Safe from the Robber, where Ile place a Guard— Eugen. Doe you suspect I shall breake Prison? Duke. To keepe off violence, and solliciting Which may disturbe thy pleasures, vntill we Shall find out one to match thy Birth and Vertues, My Dukedome is too poore that way, maintaine Thy Fathers Soule: thou hast no bloud to mixe With any beneath Prince—forget as I shall Thy Love was ever falling from thy Greatnesse, Into the Armes of one carryes but stile of Honour. Eugen. Sir, I am your Daughter. Duke. Th'ast deserv▪d my blessing, and thy obedience In this, new Crownes thy Father: I see I need not Vrge what I am to move thee, and lay force, Thy understanding does appeare convinc'd, And loving duty teaches thee to more, Then the Command—Perenotto— Eugen. What narrow ground I tread? I know he is Too passionate to be denyed his will, And yet to yeeld will make me miserable; 'Tis my misfortune to be borne so great.
Each common man and woman can iioy The ayre, when the condition of a Princesse Makes me a Prisoner. But I must obey In hope it will not last—I have a Soule Is full of gratefull duty, nor will suffer me Further dispute your precept: you have power To steere me as you please. Duke. All the Graces Speake in my Girle—Each syllable doth carry A Volume of thy Goodnesse: all my Cares So well rewarded doe convert to sweetnesse I thanke thy filiall piety: know my Girle That place wherein I looke so rich a Iewell, I doe pronounce againe, shall be thy Paradice: Thy Paradice my Eugenia, saving that In this man onely finds no being—other Delights shall streame themselves into thy Bosome, And those that passe, shall flow agen t'invite Thy sence to tasting—Perenotto. Peren. Your Graces pleasure? Duke. Admit those Ladyes that attend— Fulv. The Duke shewes much Indulgence. Orp. Obserue the yssue. Duke. Wee will not limit thy companions, Elect what Mantuan Beautyes thou canst best Delight in, they shall serue thee: or if some Of your owne Traine, whom we haue thought most proper To be your personall Guard, affect you, they Enter Donella Katherina, Mardona & Fidelia. Attend our pleasures: see, they are ignorant Yet of our purpose, if to any, thy Affection be not free, thy Breath discharge them, And point thy owne Attendants. Eugen. I shall be pleas'd with your appointment, Ladyes, I know you loue me. she goes to the Ladyes. Don. Doth your Grace hold suspition, any of vs Serve you not with our heart? Eugen. I doe not doubt,
Or if I did, you now approach a Tryall, For my sae can you be content to be All Prisoners. Ladyes. Prisoners? Eug. Yes, shut up close Prisoners, and be bard The , nay the sight of men. Kath. Marry Heaven defend, wherein haue we offended That we must loose the sweet societie Of Men. Mard. How have we for feyted our freedome? Duke. No man argue—'tis our pleasure. Don. 'Las Madam, I am new contracted to a handsome Signior. Kath. I have but newly entertain'd a Servant, that gave me these Gloves, they smell of him still, a sweet Courtyer. Don. Not one man among so many Ladyes? Not a Gentleman-Vsher? Nor a Page? How shall we doe Madam? Mard. I beseech your Grace let me be exempted, If I haue committed an offence, deserues your Anger, Let one of your Lords cut off my head rather, Sign. Dondalo. Fidel. Shall we expresse, So cold a duty to her highnesse? Fye Ladyes. Eugen. You shall but suffer with me: I pertake As much Seuerity, as any of you shall. Duke I will expect your duties Lords in silence, Orpiano, you shall to Ferrara, with Our daughters picture, your Commissions sealed— Now faire Ladyes, I hope y'are fixd to waite vpon Eugenia. If your restraint be a Burthen, it shall be In her power to inlarge you, and elect New Friends into your places. Ladyes. 'Tis our Duties To obey your Grace and her. Duke. Perenott—Are all things prepar'd? Per. They are my Lord. Duke. For once theu let vs vsher you. Kat. Whether doe we goe? Peren. Ile tell you.
Done. Whither? Peren. To take Phisicke Madam. The Duke has prepar'd to stay all loosenesse in your bodies You must be all fast: stone walles and morter will bind. Fid. Come follow with a Courage. Donel. I hope we shall be allowed our little Dogs and Monkeyes. Dond. Sweet Madam. Exit on. man. Fulv. Orp. Dond. . Grut. Madam Katherina, they are gone Signior. Dond. Would I had knowne this afore? Fulv. The Duke will be censur'd for this Act. Orp. 'Tis very strange, good Lady, I read a forc'd obedience in her Eye, Which hardly held up Raine. Enter Morello. Mor. Save you deare Sign. which way went the Ladies? Grut. Newes, Signior Newes. Mor. I beseech you I may pertake. Fulv. Have you forgot there was suspicion She affected Signior Philenzo the Cardinals Nephew? Orp. Alas poore Gentleman, he suffers for't. Fulv. By this restraint he would make her sure, his jealo Is not yet over—Signior Morello, is your locke rectified, You have mist your Lady but a hayres bredth. Mor. Nay, but my Lords and Gentlemen, where are the Ladies gone indeed? Grut. We ha' told you. Mor. What, committed to New Prison: Fulv. Very true, Signior. Dond. Our dancing dayes are done, shut vp close, not A man must enter. Mor. Would I were a Mouse then—why, but is the Duke mad▪ Orp. Take heed what you say Signior: though we be no Informers, yet walles have Eares. Mor. Eares? Would I had left mine behind me, heere's Newes indeed! Fulv. And y▪ad come a little sooner, you might ha ta∣ken your leave, but 'twas your Barbers fault. Mor. Would he had left me ith' suds an houre agoe! What shall we doe Gentlemen, 'tis a hard case, when a man that has an intention to marry and live honest—
Enter Rolliardo. How now, what art thou? Roll. Any thing, nothing: yet a man, yet no man for I want. Mor. What? Th'art no Capon I hope. Roll. Mony sir, will you spare any from your precious sinnes. Grut. Th'art very free. Roll. Yet Sir I am in debt. Dond. What dost owe? Roll. Nobody harme. Fulv. Whence cam'st— Roll. I dropt from the Moone. Orp: So me thinkes, thou talk'st very madly— Th'ast much humour in thee. Roll. Ha yee any thing to doe that yee account impos∣sible Gentlemen. Fulv. Why, wilt thou do't? Roll. And you'l pay for't. Let mee have mony enough and Ile doe any thing. Orp. Hold, hold. Roll. Yes I will hold. Mor. Ile lay with thee, what wilt hold— Roll. Why Paradoxes. Grut. Dond. Paradoxes! Mor. I hold you a Paradoxe. Fulv. Let's heare some. Roll. There are no beasts but Cuckolds and Flatterers; no cold weather but i'th Dog-dayes; no Physicke to a whoore, no foole to an Alderman, no Scholler to a Iustice of Peace, nor no Souldier to a Belt and Buffe Ierkin. Orp. A smart fellow. Enter Duke. Mor. The Duke. Duke. So my feares are over, in her restraint I bry all my Iealousies:—How now? What fellowes this? Fulv. Such an Humorist as I neuer before converst with∣all: it seemes he makes himselfe free of all places. Duke. What would he have? Roll. Thy pardon mighty man, if it be no Treason to pray for thee, save thee, wilt imploy me? 'Tis Vacation, and I want worke, aske me not what I can doe, let me have money enough, and Ile doe any thing.
Duke. You haue your Sences? Roll. Five, the small Birds dare not peepe for him, I take it: I can see greatnesse big with an Impo∣stume, yet towring in the Ayre like a Fawlcon: I can heare a man sweare I am thy Eternall Slave, and will serve thee: whē if opportunity were offer'd, for price of a Plush Cloak, he will be the first shall strip thee to the very Soule: I can taste wine that another man payes for, and rellish any thing that comes of free cost: I can smell a Knave through a Bar'd Gowne, a Politician, through a Surplace; a Foole, through a Scarlet out-side: I can touch a Wench better then a Lute, and tell mony with a Secretary, to shew I ha lost my eeling: tush, all's nothing, I have a humour to doe some thing to be talked on, nothing can come amisse to me, let me have mony enough, and my life to a cheese payring, Ile doe any thing. Duke. You'l except somewhat. Roll. Not to doe o're the Seven Wonders of the World, and demolish 'em when I ha done, let me have money e∣nough, what starre so high, but I will measure by this a∣cobs staffe: Divine mony, the Soule of all things Sublunary, what Lawyers tongue will not be tipt with silver, and will not mony with a Iudge make it a plaine Case, does not gowty Greatnesse find ease with Aurum palpabile, and he's a sleight Physitian cannot give a Golden Glister at a dead lift:—Mony, I adore thee, it comes neere the nature of a Spirit, and is so suttle it can creepe in at a Cranny, bee present at the most inward Councels, and betray em: Mony, t opens lockes, drawes Curtaines, buyes wit, sels Hone∣sty, keepes Courts, sights Quarrels, pulls downe Chur∣ches, and builds Almeshouses. Duke. A wilde fellow. Fulv. Will your Grace have him punisht for this inso∣lence? Duke. No, his humor is good mirth to vs; whence art? Roll. I am of no Country. Duke. How? Roll. I was borne vpon the Sea. Duke. When? Roll. In a Tempest I was told— Mor. A blustering fellow. Duke. Thy Name.
Roll. Rolliardo. Duke. And how long hast thou beene mad thus? Roll. Your Highnesse may be merry-and if you have no Employment for me, I am gone. Duke Stay we command you, and bethinke agen, What to except in your bold vndertaking. Roll. I except nothing, nothing Duke, it were no glory Not to be generall, active in all, let me have Mony Enough and Ile doe any thing. Duke. You shall. Fulv. Will your Grace set him aworke? Roll. Name the Action. Duke. What say you to a Lady? Roll. I will fall vpon her, as Iupiter on Danae, let me have a shower of Gold, Acrisius brazen Tower shall melt agen, were there an Army about it, I would compasse her in a Moneth or dye for't. Duke. Ha?—A Lady without guard would try your wit, and mony to get her Love. Roll. A toy, a toy. Duke. Through a Credulity, you may too much Traduce the Sexe, and merit such a Iustice No Mony will buy off:—admit some Branches Grow not so straight and beautifull, as Nature Intended them, will you disgrace the stemme Or for some womans Leity, accuse That fayre Creation? Mony buy their Love Promise a Salary of that sacred flame Themselves cannot direct, as guided by Divine intelligence. Roll. Your Highnesse Pardon; if you prohibite I must not undertake, but let me have freedome, and Mony e∣nough (for that's the Cicle I walke in) and if I doe not conjure up a spirit hot enough to inflame a frozen Lucrec bosome: make Mummy of my flesh, and sell me to the A∣pothecaries: try me with some Master peece; A womans Love is as easie as to eate dinner without saying Grace, getting of Children, or going to bed drunke: Let me have
Money enough, and taxe me to the purpose. Fulv. Orp. He's constant. Duke. Admit there be a Lady, whom a Prince Might Court for her Affection; Of a Beauty, Great as her Vertue, adde unto them Birth, Equall to both, and all three but in her Not to be match'd—Suppose this Myracle (Too precious for mans Eye) were shut vp, where A Guard more watch ull then the Dragons; did Frbid accesse to mankind:—Men pick'd out Betweee whose Soules and Mony were Antipathy that which we know; and you assoone Mght bribe to be a Saint:—what would you doe With your enough of mony, were your life Ingag'd to winne her Love? Roll. The sky may fall, and Aldermen cry Larkes About the City. Duke. The fellow's impudent: Sirrah, thou hast landed thy selfe upon a Rocke, you shall have sence of what you would contemne, a Life: put on a most fortified resolution, you shall need it; we haue a daughter thus lock'd up— Fulv, What does the Duke meane? Duke. A Virgin. Orp. He is in Passion. Duke. Shalt not ingage thee on a worke so much Impossible as procurement of her Love, Make it appeare with all the Art thou canst Get but accesse to her; a Moneth we limit But take heed Boaster, if you faile; your Life Shall onely satisfie our charge, and teach All other Mountibanks to be at distance, With such bold undertakings: you shall expect A severe Iustice: By this, I shall try the Fidelity of those are trusted. Roll. 'Tis a match, I shall have mony enough? Duke. You shall. What d'yee call enough, yet it shall be under 20. thousand Crownes: I will not leave the Pawne here, for twice so much.
Roll. I will not be particular and agree oth' Summe, you looke I should dye if I performe not, and Ile looke to bee merry and want nothing while I live, Ile not take the Ad∣vantage on you, because I hope to receive credit by it: if I use now and then a round summe set me up oth' Ticket for't, but who shall passe his word if I doe this feate, you'l let me keepe my head a my shoulders. Duke. Our royall word secure thee. Roll. 'Tis enough. Fulv. What security can your Grace expect for his foorthcomming, if he fayle. Duke. We ha studyed that, 'Tis but the losse of some superfluous Crownes, Let the end carry what successe Fate please, All the expence will not be lost, to try The faith of those we shall imploy in this; Our Citie's strong, the River that invirons On three parts, shall be carefully attended, A wall makes safe the fourth, which shall be guarded Our Vigils shall be so exact, he shall Deserve his liberty, if he escape vs, We are constant Sir. Fulv. Would he might pay for his curiositie. Roll. Ile waite upon your Highnesse for some earnest: I have a Moneth good, let me have faire play and my bargaine Mony enough, if I doe come short, let my head be too hea∣vie for my shoulders; if I doe more then is expected, you'l beleeve it possible hereafter: when a man has money e∣nough he may doe any thing. Duke. Maintaine your humour still—attend vs. Exeunt Manent Morello, Dondolo, and Grutti. Mor. Here's a mad fellow, does he meane to get into the Ladyes? Dond. It seemes so. Gr. Or I wud not be in his taking when the Moon chāges. Mor. Our best course then is to observe and humor him, he may have a tricke more then we know; he seemes to be a good Fellow, let's be drunke together, and get him to confesse it—ha?
Don. Grut. A match. Mor. Like orrand Knights our valiant wits must wrastle To free our Ladyes from the inchanted Castle. Exeunt. Actus. II. Scaena. I. Enter Bonanico and a Servant. Serv. D'Yee thinke this Hayre And habit will sufficiently disguise you, From your inquiring Creditors? Bon. No question, Have you disperst my Billes about the City, Does every publike place carry the scrole, As I commanded? Serv. I have beene carefull. Bon. What doe they say abroad, doe they not wonder? Serv. They are strucken dumbe at reading, he that has The use of tongue, employes it to expresse His admiration of your Art, your deepe, Invisible Art. Bon. There's hope then we shall prosper, In this beleeving Age, Jtaly is full Of Iugling Mountibanks, that shew trickes with oyles, And powders, here an Emperick dares boast Himselfe a Paracelsian, and dawbe Each Post with printed follyes, when he went A'th ticket with some Midwife, or old woman For his whole stocke of Physicke, here a fellow Onely has skill to make a handsome perewig, Or to sowe teeth i'th gummes of some state Madam, Which she coughes out agen, when so much phlegme As would not strangle a poore flea, provokes her, Proclaimes himselfe a rectifier of Nature, And is beleev'd so, getteth more by keeping
Mouthes in their quarterly reparations, Then knowing men for all their Art, and paines I'th cure of the whole body—shall we doubt To be made rich, rich Carlo, by our Art Whereof I am the first and bold Professor In Jtaly, we shall grow fat and purchase, Dost not thinke so? Serv. To goe invisible Who will not learne at any rate. Bon. True Carlo. There may be in the throng of our admirers, Some will presume't above the power of Art To make men walke and talke invisible. But we can cleere the mistery, and make Mantua in the proofe acknowledge it A matter feasible—here's some Customer Enter Rolliardo. Ha? 'Tis the Humorist, the Vndertaker, The Bird I spread my Art for, he has mony Enough, and's apt to prove a fortune to me. Roll. So the Covenants are seal'd, I am like a famous Cathedrall with two ring of Bells, a sweet Chime a both sides, now 'tis noys'd I ha mony enough, how many Gal∣lants of all sorts and Sexes court me, here's a Gentleman ready to run himselfe in the Kennell, for hast to give me the Wall, this Cavalier will kisse my hand, while th'other Signior cinckles ith' hammes, as hee were studying new Postures against his turne comes to salute me. As I walke, euery Window is glaz'd with eyes, as some tryumph were in the street; this Madova invites me to a Banquet for my discourse, t'other Bona roba sends me a Sparke, a third a Ruby, a fourth an Emerald, and all but in hope to put their Iewels to vsury, that they may returne agen with precious Interest—Thus farre it goes well, very well, what's next- Bon. Save you Signior. Roll. What art thou? Bon. One appointed by fate to doe you service Sir. Roll. But I gave fate no Commission to take you up for
me, I ha more followers then the Duke already, prethee have me commended to the Lady Destinyes, and tell 'em I am provided. Bon. Mistake me not, he speakes to you, has power To make you happy. Roll. Prethee make thy selfe happy with a warme suite first, thy house is but poorely thatched, and thou beest so good at making happy, why hast no better clothes. Bo. 'Tis no felicity, or admit: the Sunne Dispenceth a rich warmth about the World Yet hath no heate it selfe. Roll. Philosophie. Bo. To omit circumstance, I know what you Haue vndertaken to the generall Amazement: vpon penalty of death, You must procure accesse to the faire Princesse, 'Tis in my Art to helpe—to perfect what The Duke holds so imposible. Roll. How canst thou assist mee. Bo. Although my outside promise not, my braine Is better furnished, I ha gain'd by study A secret, will aduance the worke you labour with, Ile teach you Sir to goe invisible— Roll. How? t'hast no clouen foote, I sent brimstone, and thou beest a Diuell tell me. Bo. I trifle not, I am a man, whose fame Shall out-liue time, in teaching you this Mistery For which I must expect reward—you are, (Lowd noise proclames it) able, & can pay me Out of the Dukes Exchequer, being your selfe His walking treasury. Roll. You'l teach me to goe invisible you say. Bo. I can, and with your safety, for I deale not With magick, to betray you to a Faith Black and Satannicall, I abhorre the Diuell. Rll. Very like so. Bo. Which some haue coniured into a Ring, To effect the wonder, I admit of no Suffumigation, incense offer'd to
Infernall Spirits, but by Art, whose Rules Are lawfull and Demonstrative— Roll. You thinke I admire you all this while—Harke, when did you eate? or doe you hope agen, that you are put to this pitifull and desperate exigent. I see you my would be Invisible, fine Knave. Bon. D'ee mocke me, Sir? Roll. Ile tell you a better project, wherein no Courtier has prefool'd you. Sticke your skin with feathers, and draw the rabble of the City for pence a peece to see a monstrous Bird brought from Peru, Baboones have past for men al∣ready, beene taken for Vsurers, i'their furr'd Gownes and Night-caps, keepe a foole in pay, to tell the multitude of a Gentle fayth, that you were caught in a Wildernesse, and thou mayst be taken for some farre Country Howlet. Bon. Doe you despise my Art? Roll. Art? but such another word, and I shall marre the whole expectaion of your invisible traique, in, to your nest; and leave me, distinguish men before you practise on 'em, 'tis wholsome caution. Bon. I leave you to the misery of your unbeleefe, when you heare of me hereafter, you will curse your fortune to have thus neglected me, fare you well, Sir. Exit. Enter Perenotto, with 3. or 4. of the Guard. Roll. This is Perenotto Captaine of the Guard. Per. Not yet attempted you? 1. We have not seene him my Lord. Per. He's here. 2. Is that he that has gold enough? would I had some of his yellow hammers. Rol. Dee heare, you are one of the List. 1. A poore Halbert man Sir. Rol. Poore? hold thee, there's gold for thee:—thou woo't be honest now? 1. O yes Sir. Roll. Not a peny, and thou hadst not beene a foole, thou wouldst ha bin a Knave, & so thou might'st have got by me, yet by those scuruy legs there's ōe hope thou't be cōverted at all adventures take it. 1. I will be what you please Sir. Roll. Tell me what condition is that Sign. of? is he rich? 1. He loves money. Roll. Come? Shalt be my Pensioner—here's more gold for
1. D'yee make question of that Sir? he bought his Office, & therefore may sell his Conscience, he has sold 200. on's twice over, he was brought up at Court, and knowes what belongs to his place, I warrant you. Roll. Good. 1. Am I not a Knave now Sir? Roll. I like thee. 1. To your cost:—I hope you wo'not tell him what I say: but if you doe, and he chance to turne me out of my office, your gold is restorative. Per. To your stations, and be circumspect. Ex. Guard. Roll. Noble Sir, you are the onely man I have Ambition to honour. Per. I should be proud to merit such a Phrase. Roll. 'Tis in your power to oblige my Soule—w'are pri∣vate, I am jealous of the Wind lest it convey Our noyse too farre: This Morne I had some traffique With a Ieweller, and if my Iudgment erre not, H'as richly furnish'd me. What sayes your Lordship to this Diamond? Per. 'Tis a glorious one. Roll. Does it not sparkle most divinely Signior, A rowe of these stucke in a Ladies Forehead, Would make a Persian stagger in his Faith, And give more Adoation to this Light Then to the Sun beame: I ha fellowes to 'em A Nest of bright ones. Per. This Boxe is studded like a frosty Night with stars You have out bid their Value, make me a gainer In changing them for your commends. Per. How Sir. Roll. I'm serious. Per. I never shall deserve this Bounty, if You'd point me out some service to begin my gratitude— Roll. You have a Noble Soule Ile teach you how to merit more. Peren. I am Covetous of such a knowledge. Roll. Make but my path a smooth one to the Princesse, I am briefe, you know my undertaking.
Per. So I should be a Traytor. Roll. It comes not neere the question of a life: do't Ile enable you, to buy another Dukedome, State, and Title. Per. Although 'twere necessary in the Affayres Of such high consequence to deliberate, Yet for this once, Ile be as briefe as you, I wo'not doe't. Roll. How? Per. No indeed Signior, you shall pardon me At this time, and Ile keepe your Iewels too For they are guifts: hereafter you will know me So fare you well Sir. Exit. Roll. Was I not told this Officer was corrupt? I want Faith to beleeve the Myracle. Sure he does but iest with me, ha? Enter Morello, Dondolo, Grutti. Mor. The Guard will accept no money. Don. What an ago do wee liue in, when officers will take no bribes. Grut. Not the Golden one. Don. Here's Rolliardo. Roll I'me quite lost. Grut. 'Tis he. Roll. Yet he keepes my jewels, there may be some hope Ile to him agen, 'tis but his modesty At first not to see me easie, he must be courted Statesmen like Virgins first, should giue denyall, Experience and opportunity make the tryall. Saue you Gallants. Mor. And you goe thereto: saue your selfe, you are in a worse pickle then wee are. Don. And how i'st wee Signiour? Grut. Doe you thriue in your hopes? Roll. I doe not dispaire Gentlemen, you see I doe not weare my hat in my eyes, crucifie my armes, or intreate your Lordships braine to melt in a Petition for me. Mor. I did but iest, I know you haue a way to the
wood in your Pericranium, what is't wee are honest simple minded Lords. Roll. I thinke so. Grut. Nay nay, impart. Don. Wee tell no tales. Mor. Woo'd wee were whipt and wee doe. Roll. Why shall I tell you—you are three. Mor. Very secret— Roll. Coecombes. All 3. How? Roll. A miserable leash of Court Mimicks. Mor. Mimicks? what's that. Roll. You perfumd Goates. Mo. Oh is that it, I neuer heard what a Mimick was before. Roll. Dee thinke I am so wretched in a point that con∣cernes my life and honour, to trust my wayes and purpo∣ses to you that haue no soules. Don. No soules. Mor. Peace how comes he to know that? Grut. Why hast thou none? Mo. 'Twas more then euer I could see in my selfe yet. Roll. Things that haue forfeited their Creation, and had not your Tailors tooke compassion on you, you had di∣ed to all mens thoughts, who long since wod ha forgotten that euer there were such thinges in Nature. Don. Shall wee suffer this? Roll. Yes, and make legs, in token of your thankefull∣nesse, if I were at leisure, I would make you shew trickes now. Mo. Doe I looke like a Johnanapes? Roll. But I wonot. Mo. It were not your best course. Roll. How? Mo. Alas Sir I should but shame my selfe, and be laughed at afore all this Company. Roll. When you see mee next avoide mee, as you would doe your poore kindred when they come to Court.
Get you home, say your Prayers, and wonder that you come off without beating, for 'tis one of my Myracles. Mo. Had wee not better a gone to Tauerne, as I plot∣ted at first, he could not ha beene more valiant in his drinke. Grut. Im'e glad hees gone. Don. I know not what to make on him. Mo. Make on him quotha, he made little reckning of vs, but and he had not gone as he did, I should ha made Don. What? Mo. Vrine in my breeches—he sqeezed me, I thinke I was ready to melt'o, both sides. Grut. But harke you Signior, wee forget the Ladies still Mo. Well remembred. Don. Lets consult to purpose about that—shall wee? Mo. No, euery one thinke what he can by himselfe, my thoughts shall be private, and not free at this time; euery one scratch his owne head. Grut. And he that gets the first hint, communicate— Don. A match. Mo. Let me see—umh. Don. What if I did—nothing, my braines are dull. Grut. Ten to one, but if I did—let it alone, a pox on't, I were best drinke some Sacke, they say it helpes in∣uention. Mo. O rare. Both. Rub rub, out with it. Mo. No, 'tis gone backe agen, I drunke buttered Sacke this Morning and it slipt backe when 'twas almost at my tongues end—but it was a delicate proiect, whatsoe∣uer it was. Grut. Recouer it with thy finger. Don. Follow it Morello. Mo. Now, now, now, let me alone—make no noise, 'tis comming agen, I ha't, I ha't— Don. Hold it fast now. Grut. Loose it not, thou art great with wit, let vs de∣liuer thee, what, ist?
Mo. Some wiser then some. They follow him vp and downe for discouery. Don. Wilt not tell vs? Grut. Didst not promise. Mo. No hast—as occasion serves—it cost more then so yet you may know't. Don. Well said. Mo. Hereafter, but not now—away, doe not tempt me I will eate the sweat of my owne braine, O rare! neuer was such a straine of wit inuented.—Dee heare, Gentlemen; if you will command me any service to the Ladies, I doe purpose to visite em—with quirke—hey. Grut. How? Mo. Marry doe I. Don. Nay Morelle. Mo. Gentlemen, as I told you, if you haue any thing to the Ladies, before I goe I am the messenger,—there is a crotchet and so forth—a carwhichet is found out - your eares—I will doe such a stratagem as neuer the like was heard of in the world.—Oh rare.— Exit. Don. Hees mad. Grut. So am I, that he is so reservd What shall's doe. Enter Bonamico disguised. Bon. Saue you Signiors, pray where abouts is the signe of the invisible man. D. G. The invisible man. Bon. Cry yee mercy now I see it. Exit. Don. See't he does more then wee can, the Gentleman's mistaken, heeres no such signe, yet hee went in there. Grut. Hee has better eyes then wee to distinguish it. Enter Servant to Bon: disguised. Ser. This, It his is it. Don What is it pray? Ser. Whats that to you? Grut. In courtesie wee aske:
Ser. Then by the signe this is the house, whether I am going to enquire for a Gentleman that teaches men to walke invisible. Grut. That wo'd be seene, this is newes. Ser. Newes, either you haue slept long, or you are Gentlemen of very small intelligence, examine the next paper you see aduanced, and informe your selues, farewell Gallants. Exit. Don. Hee's entred there to. Grut. Teach men to walke invisible, a very fine trade. Don. Would 'twere true, wee should desire no other device to get into the Ladies. Enter Bonamico and Seruant in other disguises. Grut. 'Tis impossible—see, see, more Gentlemen, pre∣thee lets to him, this will bee a tricke worth our learning. Don. Stay, wee are not acquainted, lets knocke first. Enter Servant. Ser. Your pleasures Gentlemen. Don. Pray Sir, what signes is this? Ser. The invisible man Sir. Grut. Man, I see no man. Don. Heres nothing but a cloude. Ser. Right Sir, and hee's behinde it, the mans invisible. Don. Pretty faith, It may bee the man i'the Moone for ought weeknow. Ser. Would yee any thing with my Master. Gurt. He does teach to walke invisible they say. Ser. He is the onely Professor of the miraculous invi∣sible Art. Don. May wee change a little discourse with him. Ser. There are some Gentlemen with him—but i'le tell him, I am preuented, hee's comming forth himselfe.
Enter Bonamico. Don. Signior Altomaro I take it. Bon. 'Tis my name Sir, a poore Artist, not warme in these parts of Italy. Grut. And you were not too busie Sir— Bon. Please you walke in, I am now alone, your per∣sons will grace my poore habitation. Don. Wee saw 4. or 5. enter but now. Bon. I ha dispatch 'em they are fresh departed. Don. Which way. Grut. Here's not a man, are they not suncke, came they out heere? Bon. Vpon my credit Sir no other way. Don. Then they went invisible. Bon. Right Sir, they came hither to that purpose, their designes required hast. Grut. This man can doo't I see already. Don. Sir if you can assure vs this invisible walking, for wee are not so ignorant as wee seeme, wee ha seene the Play of the Inuisible Knight, and— Bon. That of the Ring too, ha ye not. Don. Yes. Bon. The one was Magick, and t'other an imposture, what I doe is by Art faire and naturall, are you in debt and feare arresting, you shall saue your money in protections, come vp to the face of a Sergiant, nay walke by a Shole of these mankind horse-leaches, and be mace proofe. If you haue a mind to raile at 'em, or kick some a their loose flesh out, they shannot say blacks your eye, nor with all their linces eyes discouer you: would you see when the Mercers abroad, how his man playes the Merchant at home with his Mistris silkeworme, and deales vnderhand for commodity—would your selfe talke with a Lady in secret, sit downe, play with her, rauish a Diamond from her finger, and bind her soft wrist with a bracelet, kisse her abroad, at home, before her seruants, in the presence
of her jealous husband, nay trusse her vp, when the tame Lord is a bed with her, and to his eyes be vndiscovered as the winde Signior—doe you suspect your Mistris playes double? would you heare how she entertaines the t'others loue, and know what she does i'the closet with the smooth Page—would you be present at secret Counsels, betray letters, see how such a Lord paints his thighes, this per∣fume his breath, t'other marshall his fine French teeth, see this Statesmans eyes put out with a bribe, how that officer cozens the Duke, and his Secretary abuses 'em both, this Lawyer takes fees a both sides; while the Iudge examines the fertility, and price of the Mannor, before the witnesses and then decrees who shall haue the Land? would you see iustice employ her scales to weigh light Gold, that comes in for fees or corruption, and flourish with her sword like a Fencer to make more roome for causes 'ithe Court. Don. All this and more may be done, if we can but goe invisible, but how can you assure vs of that. I would faine see any man goe invisible once. Bon. See him Sir? Grut. Video pro intelligo I meane Sir. Bon. Nay Sir you need not distinguish, for it is possi∣ble to see a man invisible obserue me, you see mee now per∣fectly, in euery part, if I should walke before you without a body. Grut. How? Bon. My head onely visible and hanging in the Ayre like a Comet. Don. That were a strange sight? Bon. Sometimes nothing shalbe seene but my arme, another while one of my legs, hopping without a body. Grut. This is admirable. Bon. When I please I will haue nothing conspicuous, but my hand, nay, perhaps my little finger. Don. Doe not you conjure then? Grut. Come you will cast a mist before our eyes. Bon. 'Tis a Mistery indeed but a safe one Signiors. Don. Why looke you Sir, if you will be pleased that
wee may see you first walke invisible, wee shall not onely credit your Art, but at any rate be ambitious to bee your Disciples. Bon. Why Gentlemen, you speake but Iustice, you shall haue experiment. I wilbe invisible first, but as to o∣ther in this kinde, I will not demonstrate without halfe in hand, let me haue 50. Crownes apeece, le point you a day when I will be invisible▪ Grut. Can you not doe it presently. Bon. I can be invisible in a twinckling, but what assu∣rance can you haue, that I am here at the same instant, when you see no part of mee, I may deceiue you. Don. He sayes true. Bon. I doe purpose therefore to giue you reality and proofe, for I will walke invisible, all but—my hand. Both. Your hand? Bon. Onely my hand, you shall touch it, see euery line in't, and the rest of my body be to you invisible, this will require a little time for preparation, and when with the consent of your eyes and vnderstandings, I keepe my pro∣mise in this point, you will thinke your monies well ex∣pended to be taught the Mistery. Don. This is very faire. Grut. The crowne shall be ready Sir. Don. Expect'em within this houre. Enter Rolliardo. Bon. At your owne pleasures, ha Rolliardo? I must not be seene Gentlemen. Exit. Both. Farewell incomparable Signior—what lucke had wee to light vpon this Artist, he shanot publish it, wee'l buy the whole secret at any value, and then get him re∣moue into some other Province, who's this. Roll. Am not I mad, sure I am, though I doe not know it, and all the World is but a Bedlam, a house of correction to whip vs into our sences, I ha knowne the time when jewels and Gold had some vertue in'em, the generation of men now are not subject to corruption; Democritus the
Worlds refin'd. Don. 'Tis Rolliardo, he lookes Melancholy, lets haue a fling at him, giue you joy of the great Lady Sir, which is the next way to the Moone pray? Roll. Bolt vpright Mnskat, and if you make hast you may be one of her Calues, next time she appeares, you shall see her beckento you, with a paire of hornes, iust a'the size of those are preparing for your forehead, my precious ani∣mall. Don. Ha, ha, ha, the fellowes mad. Grut. Can you tell Sir, what became of all the Swal∣lowes, Cuckoes, and small birds, wee had here last Sum∣mer? Roll. Marry Sir they went to Sea, to aide the Cranes, and there haue bin mustering euer since, but for want of a Woodcocke they ha left behind 'em, they dare not ven∣ture vpon the Pigmies, you may doe well to ouertake the Buzzard and releeue the Army Sir. Grut. Ha, ha, ha. Exit. Roll. I shall be grinnde to death as I walke the streetes, 'tis no policy to be dull and modest—but let me see, which way to compasse my worke, and put my selfe out of the common laughter the very children will ieere mee shortly I thinke, and point me out with stones, the pre∣cious vndertaker. I might haue had more wit then to run my selfe into this calamitie whom haue wee next. Enter the Duke, Embassador, Fulvio, Dondolo, Grutts attendants, Courtiers. The Duke? what stranger's that? I must not seeme de∣iected. Emb. Is this he your Highnesse discoursed of? Duke. This is the peece made vp of all performance The man of any thing without exception, Giue him but Gold, Kings daughters and their heires Though lockt in towers of Brasse, are not safe from him.
Nay though I play the chimist with my trust And from a Million of sure confidences I draw the spirit of honesty into a few, He can corrupt 'em. Roll. You are my Prince great Sir, and you haue spoke Not much vnlike a braue one. Don. Heele jeere the Duke too Roll. If my head Come to be paid to you, before Sunne-set That day when it is forfeite, I ha cleerd with you, And shall depart out of your Royall debt There's all you can demand, a good sharpe sword Will make an euen reckning. Emb. He seemes confident. Court. 1. With your Graces leaue, let me come to him. Roll. Now a fierce dog. 1. What came into thy mind, thou daring madman, foole is a word of favour to thee. Roll. So Sir. 1. To vndertake such an impossible taske. Roll. Mushroumpe—Ile cast away a few words on thee Had I another life, I'de vndertake yet Though I below in all opinion, To venture it, with the riches I haue spread To corrupt others, to make thee my parasite, I would engage my life to weare no steps To thy white daughter, thou and thy graue Matron Most humbly should present her, when I was pleased too For feare I should refuse the sport you brought mee. Duke. I neuer knew man beare his scorne so high, too him some other. Grut. Not I Sir, you shall excuse me, 'twas the last thing I did. 2. In the position generall, 'ile not touch him For mony may be said to purchase all things But to aspire to my good Soueraignes daughter Of blessed memory. Roll. Shee's not dead I hope.
2. There Gold and trash was impudently inferr'd, And 'twas a taske too insolent, in that point You'd willingly give a pound of your proud flesh, To be releast. Roll. I heard a pound of flesh, a Iewes demand once Twas gravely now remembred of your Lordship—releast? Fortune, and courtesie of opinion Gives many men Nobility of Birth, That never durst doe nobly, nor attempt Any designe, but fell below their Honors. Cas'd up in Chambers, scarcely ayre themselves But at a Horse-race, or i'th Parke with Puppets, That for which I'm your laughter, I speake to You flattering tribe of Courtiers, to you Glowormes Is my chiefe glory, that perhaps being sprung From humble Parentage, dare yet attempt A deed so farre above me, that sets all Your Wisedomes in Combustion, you may thinke I've made a sorry bargaine for my life, Let Scorners know in ayming at her onely My memory after death, receives more honour Then all your marble Pinnacles can raise you, Or alablaster figures, whiter farre Then ere your soules were, and that houre I dye If you dare looke vpon me, without fainting (Which I much feare) you shall see death so scorn'd, I meane for any terrour, you shall thinke him My slave to take my upper Garment off. Don. I told your Hignesse—How you shud find him. Emb. A brave Resolution. 'Duke. Be this the Prologue to the mirth, my Lord Attends to entertaine you; set on, we'll leave him. Ha, ha, ha. Exeunt. Roll pulls Fulvio backe. Roll. Sir, I observ'd you Noble, and not apt To throw derision on me with the rest, Which does encourage me, to aske you a question. Fulv. Name it Sir.
Roll. Pray what strange'rs that walk'd with the Duke? Ful. 'Tis an Embassador from Florence Sir. Roll. An Embassador, his designe I pray? Ful. To treate of Marriage betwixt our Princesse And the great Dukes sonne, desired much by our'Master Who has some hope,,t'wilbe effected too. Has brought rich presents to her. Roll. This is all. Ful. You haue it freely. Exit. Roll. Y'aue honored me, married to Tuscany? so, if my am∣bition had beene fortunate, I might haue beene his taster, but my starres want influence, they are too dull, and weary of my fate, Rolliardo then must forfeit, why that's the worst on't, I will make a glorious blaze in death, and while I liue, make the Dukes trea∣sure pay for't, nor shall he accuse me, I exhaust him poorely, i'le study out some noble way to build me a remembrance. ha.—a Church or Colledge? Tedious, my glasse has but few sandes, I must doe some thing I may liue to finish: I ha't, I will send to all the prisons ith Citty, and pay the poore mens debts for 'em: the world wants such a President: I ha mony enough since I faile in my other ends, I will doe some good deedes before I dye, so shall I be more sure of Prayers, then if I built a Church, for they are not certaine to continue their foundation, fate I despise thee, I sinke vnder no cheape and common action, but sell my life too Fame, in catching my death by so braue an aspiring. If I obtaine a Monument, be this all Write on my graue. This man climbe'd high to fall. Exit.
Actus III. Scaena I. Enter Guard. 1. Come Gentlemen, wee must watch still, that none run a∣way with the Princesse. 2. He must haue an excellent stomacke, that can breake these stone walles to come to her. 3. Beside this moueable wall of flesh which we carry. 2. One makes toward vs,—'tis a Lady. Enter Morello like a Lady. Mo. So, now am I as valiant as Hercules, when he turned spnister, greate Iupiter, the patron of scapes, assist my petticote, and at my returne, I will sacrifice my linnen-breeches to thee,—here be the men, the men of mettle, now Venus I beseech thee, and they bee men they will let a Lady enter without many que∣stions. 1. Saue you sweet Lady, your affaires this way? Mo. I goe but in to the Princesse. 1. From whom? Mo. From the Dukes Grace. 1 What may be your Ladiships name? Mo. I neuer thought to giue my selfe a name—my name is Madam—um. My name is something an odde name, but—I doe not stand vpon't—my name's Thorne. 1. Indeed Madam Thorne, if his Grace haue sent you to such a purpose, you must shew something for our discharge. Mo. Why hearke you it was but forgotten, of the Duke to send his signet—but I ha brought some of his Highnesse de∣puties wo'mee, I hope that will satisfie. As he takes out mony discouers Breeches. 2. By this gold, breeches 3. No, they are but silke—here will be sport, I haue a hint already.
1. Say you so? 'Tis very well—but Madam, we are many, and we would be loth to venture—deale ingeniously sweet Lady, have you no more gold in your breeches? Mor. Not a doyt, as I am vertuous and sinfull. 1. Passe—but d'ee heare—and you shud not be secret now. Mor. As I am a Gentleman. 3. A Gentleman? do'st heare him? ile put him to't. Mor. I have left some Crownes with your fellow. 2. Tush, that wo'not satisfie me. Mor. Indeed, I ha no more mony. 2. You have commodity, hang this transitory gold—give me—what's this? Mor. Nothing but a wart a'my little finger. 2. A wart, let me see't. Pulls off his Glove. Mor. 'Tis a Diamond, 'twas my Mothers Legacy—or else 2. Is it your will I should have it? Mor. It was my Mothers will I should weare it, her Ghost will haunt me, and I should give it away. 2. You know the way backe Lady. Mor. You will give me my gold agen. 1. Not a doyt, as I am vertuous and sinfull, stand with him for a toy, and know y'ave no warrant from the Duke, 'tis in our power. Mor. D'ee heare Sir, and it were a Diamond of gold you shud have it. 2. Lady, I kisse your hand. Mor. Y'ave kiss'd the Ring of a my finger Ime sure. 2. Vse your fortune, passe. Mor. If I get to the Ladies, some body shall pay for this, that's my comfort. 3. Can you wrastle Madam. Takes him by the shoulder. Mor. Ah—wrastle Sir, Ladies doe not use to wrastle. 3. They are throwne downe with their good wills then, come you and I will have a bout, I must hug your little body. 1. Humor him, and y'are past danger. Mor. Wod you ha me teare my clothes? 1. Ile perswade him. 3. To tell you true Madam, this fellow is an abhominable
Lecher, there is no scaping him without a fall, a very Satyre, he leapes all comes neare him, if your Ladiships modesty can dis∣pence with a private favour—you understand; for our parts, we are satisfied otherwise, and our lips are sow'd up, take him a 'toside, and see how you can mollifie him, hee's a Cocke a the Game, and will tread you and you were ten Thornes. Mor. Mollifie him, doth he use Ladies so, he will molifie me. 2. And you were his sister, all's one to him, the Divell is not more hot and Robustious, where he finds opposition to the sport; therefore the Duke made choyce of him, as suspecting some Lord might come disguis'd a this fashion, to prevent dishonour to the Princesse and Ladies—use your owne discretion. Mor. What will become of me, if he be such a Wencher he'll ravish me, and discover all, what a Rascall was I to venture thus, ile giue thee my Fan to perswade him—helpe, helpe. 3. Nay then. He throwes him downe, and discovers his Breeches. Why how now? Breeches? 1. This is a man. 2. Sure 'tis a woman. Mor. To tell you true Gentlemen, I am neyther a man nor a woman, I am an Hermaphrodite. 1. How? an Hermaphrodite? What would you doe among the Ladyes then. 2. An Hermaphrodite. 3. Let's search him. Mor. Ah. 1. Stay let's be advis'd, if he be such a Monster, our best way is to carry him to the Duke. 2. 3. Agreed. Mor. I shall be undone—d'yee heare Noble friends 'tis but a folly to dissemble, I am no such thing, I am no Herma∣phrodite, I am a friend of yours. All. Of ours. 2. Your Name, I beseech you. Mor. I did but jest all this while, the Duke himselfe put me upon't, to see whether I could cozen you, my Name's Mo∣rello. 1. Signior Morello, 'tis not possible. Mor. As I am vertuous, I am, I am no Hermaphrodite, no matter for the Gold or Diamonds tis your owne—ile acquaint his Grace how carefull I found you, and if he doe not reward you beside, ile say hee's the poorest Duke in Christendome: Ile tell him presently.
3. Noble Signior wee'le waite vpon you to him. Mo, No, no, 'tis better for me to goe alone. 1. Your pardon, you shall tell him how carefull you found vs wee'le relate to him how cunningly you carried the businesse. Mo. Nay d'yee heare Gentlemen. All. It must be so Sir, come sweet effeminate Signior. Exeunt. Enter Fulvie, Embassador. Emb. Y'aue done me a noble office Signior in this Discouery, where now liues her banished Louer? Ful. My kinsman liues in Florence, but 2. dayes since I receiued letters from him. Emb. In Florence too? Ful. Sir you may censure me, But my affection to the iniurd Lord, And not without respect vnto the Honor, Of your Master too, hath bin the cause of My free Language. Emb. Trust me Signior We are all ingag'd to study you a recompence, But Mantua was iniust to banish him, For being too much a Seruant. Ful. Sir, when Princes resolue to punish. Emb. Vertue shalbe Treason 'Twas tyranny,—why now is she thus cag'd? Ful. I can coniecture nothing but his jealousie Which wilbe euer actiue, by that Loue Wee enterchang'd at Pisa, when wee grew Together in our studies—I coniure Your Noblenesse to silence me. Emb. You will dishonor me by suspition:—I am charmd. Enter Perenotto, Dondolo, Grutti. Per. My honord Lord. Emb. Signior Perenotto. Ful. My gentile sparkes. Do. Gr. Your seruants. Ful. You are all Courtship. Per. Is your Lordship for this wonder? Emb. What wonder my Lord?
Per. These paire of Gentlemen haue discourst me in∣to admiration, there's one has vndertaken to goe invisible. Emb. Invisible? Per. This hower expected, and in this place. Ful. How? Don. With a tricke that he has. Ful. Doe you beleeve him, Gentlemen. Grut. You shall see't. Don. Wee were heretickes in that point, but our vn∣derstandings are convinc'd, he did demonstrate. Grut. And because you shall know the truth of his Art, he wilbe inuisible all but his hand, what thinke you of that? the rarest fellow in Christendome. Emb. Nothing visible but his hand. Don. As sure as wee haue giuen him a 100. Crownes in hand. Emb. Why is not the Duke presented with this no∣ueltie. Don. Hee's trauailing to the Emperour first, onely as he goes for our sake, he will shew vs a fig∣gary of his Art. Enter Rolliardo. Here's Rolliardo, hee's somewhat costiue a tother side wants Faith. Roll. Saue you nest of Courtiers, smooth faces, rich clothes, and sublime complements, make you amorous in sight of your Ladies. Donzell del Phbo, and Rosiclee are you there? what pestilent diseases haue you got, that you weare so much musk and ciuet about you. Oh for a Priest of Cupid to sacrifice you now, how your breeches would burne like incense, & your haire disguised in sweet powder, leaue your bodies in a mist, while your bones were inwardly consuming with the fire of Dame Venus al∣tar. Don. The same humorist still. Roll. I heard say, wee shall haue strange apparitions i'th aire and yet invisible wonders, a hand must appeare as fa∣tall to some as that hung o're the Capitoll; for there is a suspition some ses wilbe iugled emptie, and as silent as the Moone, no bright Sol appearing, nor a peece of pale fac'd siluer in your silken Hemispheres.
Grut. He is an Infidell. Roll. Right Iehochanan, right, my precious Iew, wee are all In fidell that wonot beleeve the Court catechisme - my Lord Embassador you are welcome from Florence, does the great Duke pick sallats still, I meane continue his as∣size, returne into his Exchequer once in seauen yeares the wealth of Tuscany. Vespasian was held couetous for ordai∣ning vessels to receiue the beneficiall publick vrine, but 'tis Heathenisme among Christians not to hold Dulcis o∣dor Lucri è re qualibt. Emb. Hee's mad. Roll. Signior Perenotto, it has puzzled my vnderstan∣ding, how you can subsist at Court without making vse of the common sinnes, flattery, and corruption; take heed, y'are a great man, and 'tis ominous to dye in your bed, a signe your children are like to in herite but weake braines, thou maist goe to Heauen, but thy heire had rather thou shouldest make a journey to Erebus, for the proverbe sake, happy is that Sonne, whose Father goes to the Divell.—Why when comes out my Don invisible, may be, hee's heere already for wee cannot see him, what sayes my squir∣rill? thou lookst dull and Phisicall me thinkes, the crownes will returne agen invisibly, neuer feare it, and how does my graue Gymnosophist whose ambition is to be regist∣red an honest Lord, though thou beest buried vpon almes, carried to Church with foure torches, and haue an inscrip∣tion on thy marble worse then the ballad of the Devill and the Baker, and might be sung to as vilde a tune too.—Gentlemen, i'le invite you shortly to see my head cut off, and doe onely entreat, you would not laugh at me when I am dead, 'twill shew but poorely in you, and I shall re∣uenge it with my Ghost walking. Ful. Either he is very confident to atchiue his designe or late growne desperate, he talkes so wildly. Enter Seruant. Don. I wonder, Signior Altomaro forgets vs. Now, now, yee shall heare, this is his seruant I know he is not
farre off, where is thy Master? Ser. He is invisible—this Letter is directed to you. The Letter. GEntlemen, that you may perceiue I deale plainely with you, I am now inuisible; all but my hand, and here it is, you may with ease read euery line, as I promised vpon the receipt of your Crownes.—his hand. Ser. I Sir, 'tis his owne hand I can assure you. Omnes. Ha, ha, ha. Don. He does not meane to serue vs so, thou dost but iest, where is he invisible. Ser. Here I thinke, for I cannot see him, nor doe I know when I shall, or where he wilbe visible agen, vpon diligent search I found this paper, but my Master is not to be found. Ful. Then he is invisible indeed. Roll. All but his hand. Ha, ha. Grut. I doe incline to beleeve, that wee are cheated. Per. With a tricke that he has. Ha, ha, ha. Emb. You were Heretickes in that point, till he did demonstrate. Ha, ha, ha. Roll. I cannot containe my merry spleene. Ha, ha. Ful. Come my Lord, lets leaue them now, to be their owne derision. Exeunt Embassador, Fulvio. Enter Guard with Morello. Don. Signior Morello, ha, ha, ha. How came he in a Petticote. Mor. Carry me away quickly, they wil laugh me out of my little wit. Roll. No, no, doe not Gentlemen, remember your selues. Grut. Wee wonot then. Per. Morello? 'Ile waite vpon him to the Duke my selfe. Mor. What wise man in Italy would be in my coate now. Exit. Roll. I was costiue, and an Infidell, you are Christian coxcombes, and so, while I see what will become of the mirth, that is gone before, I leaue your wise Signiorships
to the mercy of your Garters, which is a speedy way, af∣ter a little time, to make your selves invisible indeed. Fare you well. Exit. Dond. Signior Grutti we are gull'd. Gr. I alwayes thought he would cheat us, what shall's doe, to prevent more laughter? Serv. I am resolv'd—I shall get no more money by him, Gentlemen be not head-hung, droope not, 'tis in this Sconce, to revenge your selves, and it may bee, recover your Crownes too. Dond. How prithee? Serv. My Master— Dond. Is invisible, we know't too well. Serv. What will you give mee, if I discover him to your eyes agen, nay give him to your possession. Give him mny. Dond. This. Grut. And this—oh quickly. Serv. Then first know, my Master is not that man you tooke him for, no Altomaro he, but Bonamico the decayd Artist, he that made Properties, and grew poore for want of Pictures, who for feare of is Creditors left his dwel∣ling, and in this quaint disguise, set up the Trade of coze∣ning such wise Gentlemen as you are. Grut. Dond. Bonamico! Serv. The same. Dond. Oh that we could reach him againe. Serv. Follow me close, and I will bring you within an hayres bredth of his false Beard immediately. Grut. That will be excellent. Dond. Nimbly good Mercury, nimbly. Exeunt. Enter Eugenia, Fidelia, Mardona, Donella, Catarina, Cassiava. Fid. Madam you are too passive, if you bee deiected what must we, whose hopes and blisses depend upon your Fortune. Don. Oh liberty, liberty; are all the Roman spirits ex∣tinct? Never a Brutus in Nature, to deliver poore Ladies from this Captivity. Cass. Since there is no probability of our enlargement, let's be merry, and despise our Sufferings, laugh, tell Tales,
sing, dance, any thing to cozen our melancholy. Eug. There are some thoughts that stick upon my memory, I would faine discharge. Cat. Shall we try our Lutes Madam? Eug. And voyces if you please. Don. Yes you may try, they say Musicke built the wals of Thebes, it were a greater myracle if you could charme these to fall, I shall never indure to live an Anchorite thus, and it were not for the happinesse that I doe sometimes dreame of a man, I should leape the Battlement. Now would I give all my jewels for the sight of a paire of Bree∣ches, though there were nothing in em. Song. This but feedes our dulnesse, shall we dance Madam and stirre our selves. Cass. I am for that Musicke, we shall grow to the ground and we use no more activity. Eug. With all my heart. Don. None a your dull measures, there's no sport but in your Country Figaries, a nimble dance will heate, and and make us merry. They dance, which done, a Bell rings. Eug. Harke, the Bell. Exit Donella, and enters againe with a letter. Don. Some newes from the Duke. A Letter Madam and these iewels. Eug. Ha! whence—from Florence?reades. This is my fathers practise, ile peruse the Paper. Exit. Don. I have an excellent hint Ladyes of a mirth, Cannot but please the Princesse. Fid. What is't? Don. It will require every ones indeavour, What if we play some pretty Commick Story, Kat. A Play? Cass. Shall we?
Don. Wee? Doe not distrust your owne performance, I ha knowne men ha bin insufficient, but women can play their parts. Mar. I like it, t'wilbe new. Don. Wee will not present it to the Princesse But ingage her person in the action, We shalbe too few else, some pretty Enterlude To square with our number—d'yee allow it. All. Willingly. Don. Come 'ile acquaint you with a plot, then instant∣ly: referre your selues to me for your parts, we can re∣ceiue no disparagement, our spectators cannot jeere vs, for weele speake but to the people in the hangings, and they haue as much Iudgment, as some men that are but Clothes, at most, but walking pictures. Fide. I shalbe ont. Cass. What part will you giue me, I'le be a King. Kat. Thou't play a Tyrant brauely. Don. Let me alone, Ile fit you all I warrant you. Exeunt Enter Dondoio, and Grutti. Don. Now our invisible Marchant is cag'd, wee may redeeme our opinion and passe agen in the ranke of dis∣crete Courtiers. Grut. I thinke now to most of the beholders, he is in∣visible all but his head, for he has but a small grate to look out at. Don. He shall gull no more with his art I warrant him. Grut. Nay, he is like to lye by't, for I heare since, all his Creditors, like so many Crowes haue light vpon him, and they'le leaue him but a thin Carkasse. Don. Let 'em picke out his Eyes, what care wee. Grut. He sent me an Epistle to take pitty on him. Don. But I hope thou hast more wit then to shew thy selfe a Christian to such a Rascall as he is. Grut. I returned him my Court complement, that I was sorry I could not serue him: I would doe him any office that strecth'd not to mine owne prejudice, that
wee had taken order with his Keeper; vpon payment of our summes disburst, he might be enlarged. Don. Which is impossible. Enter Bonamico braue. Prethee let me see his Letter, in what submissiue language the Rogue does beseech vs,—Most hoique Signiors,—good—I throw my selfe at the feete of your mercy, for to your Iustice, I beg I may not be made a Sacrifice—nay, wee'll make him begere wee h'adone. Grut. At the grate. Don. I confesse I ha' done you wrong—does he so? it shall not serve the turne—there is no hope I shall e∣uer satisfie you,—all the better, lye and rot—if I be known a Prisoner to my Creditors, I am irrecoverably lost, oh compassionate, a miserable man, who otherwise must soone forfeite his day light, and dye in a dungeon. Ha, ha, ha. Bon. Saue you noble Signiors.— Grut. —Ha. Don. ▪Tis he. Grut. Did he not dye in prison, and his Ghost haunts vs, braue!—'Tis not hee. Bon. When this eternall substance of my Soule, did liue inprison'd in my wanton flesh, and so forth? and how d'yee like Don Andrea Gentlemen; poore snake, but hee has cast his skin, and recouered a new coate oth' destinyes spinning. The Bird is flowne againe. Don How the Diuell came he at liberty. Grut. And thus Gallant. Bon. The slaue does not beg of your Heroicke Signi∣orship, a Court▪ compassion, debts must be paid, there is no danger of the grate as the case goes, nor of forfeiting his daylight in a dungeon, if I mistake not, my illustrious paire of widgens, my serene smooth-fac'd Coxcombes, whose braines are curdled this hot weather: will your neate worship sell your cloake, ha? or you that superflu∣ous double hatch'd Rapier, there be sommes in Nature to lend you, vpon security that I shall like of. Don. He jeeres vs.
Grut. Would wee durst beate him. Bon. You see me now Gentlemen perfectly, what if I should walke before you without a body, my head hang∣ing in the aire like a comet. Enter Rolliardo. Grut. Would thou wer't hang'd any way. Don. Heere's Rolliardo too. Let's be gone. Bon. Or shall I appoint you a day when I will be invi∣sible all but my hand? Don. No, I thanke you Sir, we haue some businesse at this present. Grut. Let's to the prison, and know the wonder better—Noble Signior. Bon. For your Crownes. Don. Wee are glad wee had 'em for you, deare Signior talke no more on 'em, Exeunt. Bon. Farewell Phantasmas then—ha? 'tis he, Sir. Roll. Keepe your way. Bon. You doe not know me But I ha brought a life which by your meanes Has bin preservd from wretchednesse, your Bounty, Deserues you should dispose it. Roll. What are you. Bon. I was the obiect of a charity Wee seldome meete in Mankind, from a prison You sent a summe to free me. Roll. Prethee friend, if th'ast receiu'd a benefit, goe home, and say thy prayers:—I would forget it. Bon. 'Mong many whom your Noblenesse inlarg'd, I came to make you tender of my service: Despise not Sir my gratitude. Roll. D'yee mocke mee? Bon. May my soule want Heauens mercy then: to you, Next my Creator, I doe owe my this Being I haue a Soule is full of thankes, but name Imployment to assure you, and you make me twice happy. Roll. I ha nothing to say to you. Bon. Then I ha something to say to you. Roll. How.
Bon. And you shall heare it too, and give me thankes Y'ave sow'd your Charity in a fruitfull ground, Which shall returne it tenfold; nay one hundred. What you have done for me you shall acknowledge I will deserve toth' height. Roll. Th'art liberall in language. B. Ile be active—off with thissullen face, It seurvily 'ecomes you, d'yee heare. I studyed for you, since you payd my debts, Il doe you a courtesie and save your life, Which your attempt upon the Princesse has Left desperate, a happy fancy Sir, If Heaven will please to prosper it, and you Not be your owne enemy to refuse it. Roll. Ha, ha, ha, what mean'st? Bon. Nay you shall laugh and heartily ere I ha done The Duke does love his Daughter, sends her all Rarities are presented to him. Roll. His soule's not dearer to him—what of that? Bon. Why then you shall be admitted into the Castle of comfort, that's all; the conceipt is in my braine, and would you could as probably get her consent, to untye her Virgin Zone, as I dispose your accesse to her: it shall not cost you much, if I fayle, instead of saying of my prayers, Ile curse the Destinies and dye with you. Roll. D'yee heare, I ha bestow'd 300. Crownes alrea∣dy to set your heeles at Liberty, if you doe mocke mee, it shall cost me 500. but Ile ha▪you clapt up agen, where you shall howle all day at the Grate, for a meale at Night from the Basket. Bon. You are in earnest now? Roll. Yes. Bon. By all that you have threatned, so am I, have but the patience to walke and heare me. Roll. Can thy Art procure this? Bon. My Art? Why looke you, I made this Watch. Ile bestow it on you. Roll. What to doe? to reckon the houres I ha to live.
Bon. It sha' not cost me so much trouble as that Toy did to make you master of your wishes, still if Heaven prosper it: come let's talke privately, you shall ha the plot. He that doth many good deeds it may fall, Among the rest, one may reward them all. I long to be discoursing it, pray lead the way. Roll. Provide agen you mocke me not—come on Sir. Actus, IIII. Scaena, I. Enter Dondolo, and Grutti. Dond. ROllyardo pay his debts? Sure the fellow that never saw much money in's life, now by the Duke made Master of so many summes, is growne madde with 'em. Grut. Many other he hath discharg'd they say. Dond. He'l undoe the Exchequer, and hee hold on, he shall be Chronicl'd for't. Grut. He has some cause to imagine himselfe short liv'd, and that makes him so desperately charitable, to∣ward his end. Signior Perenotto. Enter Perenotto. Peren. Dondolo and Grutti, Newes, Newes for yee. Don. What we beseech you. Per. You have lost the best mirth in Italy in your ab∣sence, your Companion Morello— Don. Was carryed to the Duke in a Peticote, in which he attempted a passage to the sequestred Ladyes—what's the yssue. Per. Mirth in Aboundance. Grut. How came he off? Per. Nay 'tis on still, the Duke to make himselfe sport, would call a Counsell, before whom the poore Signior
must be arraign'd; not to hold you in circumstance, the Businesse was merrily discust, & the pitifull proiector was iudg'd— Don. How, how? Per. To weare the petticote for a Month, if he appeare without it during the Terme, hee incurres his perpetuall exile from Court. Don. Gru. Ha, ha, ha. Per. You may imagine with what variety of lamentable faces, the Courtier heard his unexpected sentence, some would have pleaded for him but for laughter, which con∣tinued so long and so high, hat he had time to collect his scattered senses, and instead of sowning, which was ex∣pected, he grew fortifi'd, and most humbly besought the Duke, since his sentence had past so definitive, hee would be so mercifull, to admit him that course of a Moone to be his Ieaster, that since hee could not shake off the Fooles Coat, that he might have that favourable pretence to keepe it on. Grut. Very good— Per. 'Twas easily granted, but ever since, to the asto∣nishment of the hearers, he is growne so▪ iocund and ayrie, nay as if he had beene borne with a Song in's head, he talkes everlasting Ballad, no man laughes at him but hee lashes him in Rime worse then a Satyr, the Duke has priviledg'd his mirth, made him foole-free, and now hee playes the Tyrant—hee's here already. Enter Morello like a Jeaster. Mor. Oyes, o yes, o yes, If there be any one in City or in Towne Can shew me a wise man Ile please him for his paine. Per. Disgrace has made him witty. Don. What will you say to him, will shew you a wise man? Mor. Marry if he goe farre, he is not so wise as hee should be. Dondolo, Grutti! Old acquaintance how is't? How is't? Grut. The case is alter'd with you.
Mor. It does appeare so, but nothing can make mee proud, Ile know my Fellowes. Per. How doe you meane Morello? Mor. Your Lordship may make one at Football, ▪Tis all the sport now a dayes. What other is the world then a Ball, Which we run after with whoope and with hollow, He that doth catch it is sure of a fall, His heeles tript up by him that doth follow. Dond. Doe not women play too? Grut. They are too light, quickly downe. Mor. Oyes, they are the best Gamesters of all, For though they often lye on the ground, Not one amongst a hundred will fall, But under her coates the Ball will found. With a Fading. But we be three of old, without exception to your Lord∣ship, onely with this difference, Iam the wisest Foole, for you play the foole in your old clothes, and I have a new Coate on. Per. Does it not become him. Don. Rarely well, doe you ever meane to resigne it. Grut. 'Twere pitty but he should have a patent for't, to him and his posterity. Mor. Harke you Gentlemen, d'yee heare the Newes? Dond. Newes! what newes? Mor. Dee not heare on't yet, why 'tis in a Ballad al∣ready. Grut. And thou canst sing it? Mor. 'Twas well guest, and I can but hit oth' Tune. There was an Invisible Foxe by chance, Did meet with two invisible Geese, He led e a fine invisible dance, For a hundred crownes a peece. Invisible all but his hand he would goe, But when it came to be tride,
Not onely his hand which was left he did show, But a faire paire of heeles beside. Invisible since their wits have beene, But yet there is hope of eyther, Their wit and their Crownes may returne againe, Invisible altogether. Exit. Grut. And he continue thus but a Moone, he'll make the Court mad. Per. Oh 'twill be excellent, since it is not safe for a wise man to speake truth, 'twere pitty fooles should loose their priviledge.—The Duke. Enter Duke, Fulvio, and Courtiers. Fulv. My Lord. Du. What is't? Fulv. Here's an important Suiter calls himselfe An Artist, humbly craves admittance with A present which he'd tender to your Acceptance, And if my iudgment erre not, a most pleasing one. Du. Let us see him, and his present It will reward my Daughters patience Love and Obedience:—All the Rarities Ten Kingdomes yeeld, shall not be thought too weightie, That she may shift each solitary houre With a fresh Obiect. Enter Bonamico. A Cage discovered. Dond. Bonamico? Grut. Tis he. Duk. By my Love to goodnesse It is a Master-piece, 'twill feed the Eye With plenty of delight. Bon. I am as iocund since I am admitted, I talke as glib Me thinkes, as he that farmes the Monuments. Du. Is't not Sirs? Per. My Lord, I ha not seene so much delight In any piece these 7. yeares. Du. Where's the Master of this Worke? Bon. My Lord, I am the Constable, that put all these in the Cage,
and you may call it a point of Iniustice, for they never kept late houres, though they all weare feathers, there's not a Rorer amongst em, and yet were they suffer'd, they'd flye high, for some of 'em are very lofty minded. Duke. A pleasant fellow too. Bon. Oh my Lord, w'are all borne in our degrees to make one another merry, the Birds make me merry, I make my wife merry, the Foole makes your Courtiers merry, and the Courtiers make your Grace merry. Duke. And whom doe I make merry? Bon. The whole Common-wealth if you governe handsomely. Duke. There's salt in's mirth:— Ile ha this fellow wayt ith' Court. Bon. I shall be kickt out by the Pages. Duke. Why so? Bon. Because I cannot flatter. Duke. A conoeyted Thing, We lacke the Humourist Rollyardo heere. Dond. We see him ith' Court ere while my Lord. Duke. This humor would habin a gadflie to him And stung him to the quicke. Bon. Not altogether so Duke? Grut. Fellow, what Bird is that? Bon. Fellow?—Cry mercy, I'de forgot you, fellow Ile tell thee, d'ee not know him, tis an Arabian Wood∣cocke, the same that carried a Bunch of Grapes in January last to Bethiem Gabor. Dond. And what call you this? Bon. This was the Duke of Venice his owne Bulfinch, And taken by the urkes. Du. By the urkes sayst thou? He droopes indeed. Bon. Since his Captivity the Wretch indur'd Much misery by the infidell, it had nothing But bread and water for three Months. ulv. A shrewd Calamity. Duke. I doe affect this Fellowes prate. Per. VVhat's this?
Bon. This is the Blackbird, which was hatcht that day Gondamoure dyed▪ and which was ominous About that time Spinola's Thrush forsooke him. Per. Was this he— Bon. Yes. Duke. And what was this? Bon. This was the Pidgeon was so shrewdly handled For carrying Letters at the siege of Bergen. Per. Alas pretty Bird— Bon. This a Wagtayle of the City, which a Silkeman So deerely lov'd, he call'd it wife, but could not (Though in much Iealousie he had cag'd her up) Keepe her from flying out: This was a Rayle, Bred▪up by a zealous Brother in Amsterdam Which being sent unto an English Lady, VVas tane at Sea by Dunkirks—Name but Rome, And straight she gapes as she would eate the Pope▪ A Bird to bee made much on: Shee and the Horse That snorts at Spaine, by an instinct of Nature Should ha shewne trickes together: I could run over— But your gracious pardon. Duke. How, our pardon? Bon. I'm now another man, and know my distance. Duke. This man is good at all. Brn. My Buffoone face is off, I did but shew The impudent condition of a Mountebancke That sets off base Toyes with miraculous Lyes Thus farre Ile boast: they are the onely choyce Italy and other parts of Europe yeeld For the worke if it prove so fortunate To receive Grace from your divine acceptance The workeman-ship (so duty suffer not) I freely tender— Duke. No, that were to quench The fire in all Deservers—Fulvio. Fulv. My Lord. Duke. Pay the cost double, Ile send it to my daughter. Bon. It takes, as Art could wish it. Duke. I know it is a present, the sweet soule Will rayse much joy in:—Signior Perenotto—
Per. My Lord. Bon. There are two Birds I ha not m'd. Dond. What are they▪ Bon. A paire of Guls, which you may share betweene you. Per. It shall my Lord. Duke. If Florence now keepe touch, we shortly shall, Conclude all feare, with a glad Nuptiall. Exeunt. Enter Eugenia, Fidelia, Mardona, Donella, Cass. Katerina. Don. Yee like this Story best then? Eug. That of Jupiter and Danae comes neare our owne. Don. Be it so, we are all perfect in the plot I thinke. Eug. You shall dispose the rest. Don. You will not be ambitious then, and quarrell About the parts, like your spruce Actor, that will not play out of the best Clothes, and the fine young Prince, who if he fight, 'tis sixe to foure he kils all and gets the Lady. Fid. We are constant, you shall appoint 'em. Don. Then Madam without Ceremony, you shall ply Danae, that is shut up in the Brazen Tower. Eu. Well I'm contented, 'twill suit with my present for∣tun▪ Don. I need not to instruct you in the Character: you shall bee the King Acrisius her father, a iealous, harsh, crabbed man, who in feare of the Oracle, commands her to be thus inclos'd. Mar. So:—Ile fit you for a Vineger King. Don. No matter for Properties— We'l imagie Madam you have a eard. Fid. What shall I play? Don. You must be Ladies whom the King leaves to keepe her Company, entertaine what humor you please. Cass. Kat. This is our owne parts indeed. Don. Yee will play it the more naturally, and let me a∣lone to play the Thunderer, Ile wanton love it:—now wht your inventions and about it, imagine our Scene ex∣prest, and the New Prison the Title advanc'd in forme.
Eug. The new Prison! why? Don. O 'tis an excellent Name, where Spectators throng ogether; as ours doe me thinkes in the Arras already: the Musique ha their part, dispose your selves for your en∣rances, while I speake the Prologue to our mixt audience of Silke and Cruell Gentlemen in the hangings—hem. Kat. Let it be a confident Prologue howsoever. Mu∣sique. Don. Y'are welcome to new Prison, we have still, Our ancient Keeper, and we feare he will Speake in his old Key too, but doe not looke for Choyce dyet, for alas, we play the Cooke for All you are like to feed on, let your Pallat Expect at most then, but a Root or Sallat. Pick'd from the Prison Garden, we know you are Indicious Hangings, and well seene, nor dare, We lift you up (too bold) let we incense Your greene and spreading wits with impudence. As I began, let me conclude in Rime. Hang Still you learned Criticks of the Time. Now Danae and the Ladies. Eug. Was ever Father to his Childe So unkind, it makes me wilde. When to beguile a tedious houre, From the top of this high Tower, I see every other Creature, Injoy a Liberty by Nature. Can the silver running Fountaines. And the Cloud aspiring Mountaines. very Grove, and flowery field, ut a new Affliction yeeld. Don. This is excellent, she has plaid the part before. Cass. Waste not your selfe in wofull plaint, orrow will not helpe Restraint. Thinke Madam all is but a dreame, That we are in—Now I am out—beame, creame. Helpe me Katerina, I can make no sence rime to't. Don. Creame is as good a Rime as your mouth can wih, , ha, ha.
Cass. Does not the Arras laugh at me? it shakes me thinks▪ Kat. It cannot chuse, there's one behind does tickle it. Eug. A dreame! Alas 'tis no reliefe For us to flatter so much griefe. Fancy wants power to delight, Or if we could thinke it might, Such a dreame so sad would make us, That it could ot choose but wake us. Don. My Lady has helpt her pretty well out of her dreame. Kat. The Sunne with glittering golden Rayes, May appeare one of these dayes. You know alwayes after Winter, Comes the Spring and pleasant Summer. Don. Winter and Summer, ha, ha, ha. Mar. Winter and Summer? By my faith that's wll, there's but halfe a yeare betweene, there be some call them∣selves Poets, make their Rimes straddle so wide, a 12. Moneth will hardly reconcile 'em, and I hope, a Lady may stradle a little by Poeticall Licence. Cass. Madam your father King Acrisius. Mard. Must I enter already—hm. Eug. This is his houre to visite us. Mard. How fares our daughter? Cass. What voyce is that? Don. The King speakes through a Trune. Mard. How is't heroicke Birth, what dulnesse cold As Saturnes, dwels on thy forehead, be bold To give thy griefe a Tongue, instruct, child My paternall Nature, left I grow wild As the rude North:—thought of the makes my hayres▪ Silver, my bloud is curdled with my cares. Don. Most high and mighty Nonsence, sure the King has swallow'd Pilles, and his stomacke not able to digest 'em, does vomit 'em up againe. Mard. Is thy Organ dumbe Or am I growne cheape in Maiesty, triviall Foole Shall I reape crabbed Thistles in neglect for rich Love?
Cass. Crabbed Language I am sure. Don. Sure my Lady does not understand him. Eug. If my brow so sad appeare My Fortunes Livery I weare, Mar. Weepe no more, thy eyes pave the ground with pearle. My power is rac'd, My Crowne thy Tribute Girle▪ Here is nothing to want. Eugen. Nothing to want indeed: to bee A Prisoner speakes all Miserie. Mar. Curse not thy soft Starres, but take thy fayre Blisse With comfort, free from lowd noyse and Feare, is Thy gawdy Station, when I have unskrew'd Mistique Oracles, which not understood, Doe perplexe with involv'd sence,- I shall then Enlarge thy person Danae, till when If ought else doe clog thy Thoughts, with unkind Thoughts, unload the darke burthen of thy mind. Pronounce thy griefe aloud my amourous Darling And I will— Cass. Let him choose his Rime I beseech you Madam. Mar. Vh, uh—cold phlegme obstructs my Language—barling, carling. Don. Ha, ha, 'tis time to make an end, He was almost choak'd with his owne phrase. Mard. And you get me to play an old man againe.— Don. We'l have a yong one for thee, 21. and a Coat, is a double game:—my turne comes next. Eug. Hee's gone and leaveth us behind To tell our passions to the wind. Ha? what oth' suddaine doth surprize My active motion? On my eyes What darke and heavie Cloud doth sit, To perswade me it is Night, It is some Charme, I cannot keepe These windowes open, I must sleepe. Enter Jupiter. Cass. This was well passionated, now comes Jupiter To take my Lady napping, we'l sleepe too, let the wanton
have her swinge, would she were a man for hr sake. Jupit. Let the Musique of the Spheares, Captivate these Mortall Eares; While Jove descends into this Tower, In a golden streaming shower. To disguise him from the Eye Of Juno, who is apt to prye Into my pleasures, I to day Have bid Ganimed goe play, And thus stole from Heaven to bee Welcome on Earth to Danae. And see where the Princely Mayd, On her easie Couch is layd. Fayrer then the Queene of Loves, Drawne about with milkie Doves. To thee let Paphian Altars smoake, Priests thy better Name invoke. When Hymen lights his holy fires Thou that canst infuse desires In the Gods, from thy Lip Let Iove heavenly Nectar sip. And translate by kissing thee Into thy breast his Deity: But I rob my selfe of Treasure, This is but the Gate of Pleasure. To dwell here, it were a sin, When Elizium is within. Leave off then this flattering Kisses, Bell within. To rifle other greater Blisses. Eug. The Bell—Newes from my Father. Cass. Then your play is interrupted Iove-Madam Ile see. Don. Beshrew the Belman, and you had not wak'd as you did Madam, I should ha' forgot my selfe and play'd Iu∣piter indeed with you, my imaginations were strong upon me; and you lay so sweetly—how now? Cass. A present Madam from the Duke: one of the fi∣nst pieces of Pageantry that ere you saw: 'tis a Cage with
variety of Birds in it: it mooves on wheeles: your Assi∣stance Ladies to bring it in. Eug. A Cage—if from Florence it shall to the fire, Or whences're it cannot be intended But as a Mockery of my Restraint I'm very sad oth' suddaine: ha? tis so Breake it to pieces. Don. 'Twere pitty Madam to destroy so much Art. Eug. Yet spare the Workemanship, in the perufall Ther's something pleades for Mercy:—I feele within Some alteration, I know not what Let me intreat your absence for some Minutes, I am in earnest, pray doe without Reply. Your eyes shell feed with plenteous satisfaction On this gay object, when I call you. Lad. We obey you. Eug. Yet can't I say I am alone, that have So many Partners in Captivitie? Sweet fellow Prisoners, 'twas a cruell Art, The first Invention to restraine the wing. To keepe th'Inhabitants oth' ayre close Captive That were created to Skye freedome: Surely The mercilesse Creditor tooke his first Light And Prisons their first Models from such Bird Loopes; I know yo Nightingale is not long liv'd, See how that Turtle mournes wanting her Mate. And doth the Duke my Father, thinke I'can, Take Comfort eyther in restraint, or in The sight of these that every moment doe Present it to me, were these tendered me? They shall no more be Prisoners to please me, Nor shall the woods be rob'd of so much Musique: She opens the Cag, and Rolliardo comes from the Piller. Roll. I take you at your word faire Princesse, I am the truest Prisoner, tremble not, Feare flyes the Noble mind, for injury dares not come neare. Eug. Sir, what are you? Roll. The humblest of your Servants.
Eug. You are not mine, for in this bold Attempt You have undone me. Roll. You see I keepe at distance. Eug. Y'are too neare, I will discover you, th I fall my selfe by your presumption. Roll. Hold, be counsell'd rather But to calme Silence for a paire of minutes And none shall perish, you shall save him too That would for your sake loose himselfe for ever. Eug. For my sake? What Relation has my Birth Or any passion I call mine to you. Roll. Nor doome me unto scorne, I am a Gentleman▪ And when my inimitable Resolution In those Attempts whose very sounds breeds Earthquakes In other hearers, shall your knowledge fill, With wonder and amaze; you will at least Thinke I fall too low, if I love beneath you. Eug. Ha? this is a strange accident. Roll. Was it lesse Then death deare Princesse to adventure hither. Eug. It will be death how ever. Roll. Y'are deceiv'd Lady. Eug. How I'm perplex'd. Roll. It had beene death Your sight gives me a Lease of longer life, My head stands fast. Eug. He speakes all mystery, I shannot get him off I feare without some staine. Roll. The truth is Princesse, if you now discover me, (Tho I made nice at first to put your fright by) You cannot harme me much, I ha' done my taske, Doe you feare me still? why is there such a space Betwixt us Lady?—Can you keepe that man At so unkind a distance, that for your sake Has in his undertaking swallow'd danger Rob'd death, of all his feares. Eug. For my sake.
Roll. Yours—faire Princesse, dare you so far trust me yet To let me  your hand. Eug. Audacious Sir, I shall grow lowd if you forget your distance Nor that you may hold long—— I'm studying how I should bee rid of him without theyr Knowledge: yet that's dangerous too, and might Shew guilt in me, for he will boast on't. Roll. Such was the Duke your gracious fathers care He would put confidence in none about him, But saw me brought himselfe. Eug. This is a fine Paradoxe. Roll. Which must be to high purpose: come be wise And keepe me while you have me, 'tis but reaping This fruitlesse Harvest, from my cheeke and chin And you can forme the rest, y'are young and beautifull Loose not the blessing of your Youth sweet Princesse Fayre opportunity waytes vpon your pleasure, You want but the first knowledge of your ioy. Your Bloud is ripe, come I am confident Your will is but controul'd by upstart Feares, Like advanc'd Beggers, that will checke their Princes, My safest way is yours, now to conceale me, It may be thought I have inioy'd you else, Ill Censure soone takes fire, nay perhaps To be reveng'd of your sterne cruelty, Ile sweare my selfe I have possest you freely, Play your game wisely then, your honor lyes Full at my mercy, come, 'tis in your love, To lead me to a secret Couch. Eug. Bold Villaine For these uncivill most unhallowed words, Ile dye but Ile undoe thee. Roll. Stay and let me circle in mine Armes All happinesse at once, I have not Soule Enough to apprehend my ioy, it spreads
Too mighty for mee: know excellent Eugenia I am the Prince of Florence, that owe Heaven More for thy vertues, then his owne Creation. I was borne with guilt enough to cancll, My first puritie, but so chast a Love As thine, will so refine my second being When holy marriage frames vs in one piece, Angels will envie me. Eug. Ha? the Prince of Florence. Roll. I ha made no travaile for so rich a Blessing, Turne me to Pilgrimage, divinest Beauty, And when I ha' put a girdle 'bout the World, This Purchase will reward me. Eug. Purchase?—I am not bought and sold I hope? Roll. Give it what name you will, y'are mine Eugenia. Eug. Your's Prince? I doe not know by what Title you pretend this claime; I never yet remember that I saw you, And if I had any interest in my selfe, Produce your witnesse, when I gave it you, I have possession yet, ere I deliver it, You must shew stronger evidence. Roll. Are we not Contracted? Eug. Contracted? when? where?—Good Prince I pitty your abuse. Roll. 'Tis firme betweene our Fathers. Eug. Mine cannot give away my heart. Roll. Cannot? Eug. Shall not Prince, your travaile and your trouble With this Conceipt to boote, were it your owne Invention, withall your Birds about you That can take me. Roll. Is it my person Madam You hold unworthy? For my birth and Fortune Cannot deserve your scorne. Eug. It takes not from The greatnesse of your State, or bloud my Lord To say I cannot Love you, since Affection Flowes uncompel'd, and rests in the cleere obiect, Nor doe I rob your person of iust valew, If to me other seeme as faire, and comely▪ Fore may apparell, and become what we
Affect, not cause true Love, you have enough To promise you a happyer choyce, attempt A Nobler Fate, and leave me to my selfe And humble Destiny, for know Florentine I have but one Faith, one Love, and though my Father Locke up my person, 'tis beyond his Will To make me false to him I gave my faith to. And y'are not Noble now if you proceed, Be then what you were borne, and doe not tempt A woman to commit a Sacriledge: For when I give my heart to any other Then my Philenzo, I commit that sin. He discovers himselfe. Roll. If you'll not pardon, Ile deliver up. Philenzo to be punish'd for this tryall—See Lady. Eug. My deere banisht Philenzo! Roll. O let not such a glorious building stoope It is my duty, Eug. I will make it mine. Roll. I have a double duty, for I owe Your Constancy as much respect and Reverence▪ As your most Princely person. Eug. What for our safety? Roll. Oh with what willingnesse could I be lost In this distracted Wildernesse of Ioy. To morrow Madam, I goe to my Arraignment. Eug. How? Roll. Spend no feare upon't Your Story shall be pleasing:—I ha' much To tell you—for your Ladyes. Eug. They are mine, what should our innocence Feare in their knowledge, I desire to heare The Circumstance of this wonder Roll. It attends, The Story past; we must some Counsell find, The puzzle of our Fate, is still behind. Exeunt. Finis Actus Quarti.
Actus, V. Scena, I. Enter Dondolo, Morello, Grutti. Don. VVE are sorry, we gave thee distaste, come let's be friends, you did apprehend too nicely. Mor. Nicely? it might ha beene your owne case. Grut. Come, you were unkind to rub us before the Duke so. Mor. Be wise hereafter, and make the Foole your friend, 'tis many an honest mans case at Court. It is safer to displease the Duke then his Iester, every sentence the one speakes,   make an , but let the impu∣dent foole barke never so absurdly, other men ha the wit to make a Ieast on't, 'tis policie in State, to maintaine a Foole at Court, to reach great men discretion. D. Gr. Great men, we are none. Mor. No but you may be, by the length of your wit and shortnesse of your memory, for if you have but wit enough to doe mischiefe▪ and oblivion enough to forget good turnes, you may come to great places in time, keepe a foole a'your owne, and then you are made— Don. Made? What? Mor. Cuckolds, if my Lady take  liking to the inno∣cent, O your Foole is an excellent fellow upon all occasions. Song. Among all sorts of people the matter if we looke well in, The Foole is the best, he from the rest▪ will carry away the Bell too. All places he  free of▪ and fooles it without blushing At Maskes and Playes, is not the Bayes thrust out, to let the plashin▪
Your foole is fine, he's merry, and of all men doth feare least, At every word he Jests with my Lord, and tickles my Lady in earnest: The foole doth passe the Guard now, he'l kisse his hand and leg it, When wisemen prate, and forfeit their state, who but the fine foole will beg it. He without feare can walke in, the streets that are so stonie, Your Gallant sneakes, your Marchant breakes, he's a Foole that does owe no mony. Enter Rollyardo. Roll. The Duke, where is the Duke? Mor. He's forthcomming, there's no more mony ith▪ Exchequer. Roll. I come to give up my accounts and reckon with him, some body tell him so. Mor, And you doe not reckon well with him, he'll be even with you, Ile doe your Message. Roll. Doe, and say I sent a Foole a my errand prithee, cry mercy, such an Office would ha' become eyther of you Gentlemen. Dond. His tongue moves circular in abuses. Grut. The Duke. Enter Duke, Fulvio, Perenotto, &c. Duke. How now, what day is't? Roll. 'Tis Holyday. Duke. How? Roll. Therefore wee are preparing a Morris to make your grace merry, they have chosen mee for the Hobby∣horse, and if doe not deceive theyr expectation, they will laugh at me extreamly before I dye. Duke. Doe you come like one prepar'd for death? Roll. Not so well I hope, as I may be hereafter, unlesse you will be uniust▪ and have a desire to be clapt into the Chronicles with some your Predecessors, for cutting off
heads, when you doe not like theyr complexion, tis but laying one block vpon another, and I am quickly sent of a headlesse errand. Duk. Iniust doe you remember what sommes you owe for, doe not iest away your life. Roll. I craue no longer day for't, and I proue not my selfe free from my engagements. Duk. How? Rol. For although I had not the art to goe invisible as these wise Courtiers nor could counterfeit another sex so becommingly as tother gaudy Signior, to introduce me to the Ladies, yet with your Princely licence I may say, 'tis▪ done. Duk. Done? what is done. Per. Hee's mad sir. Roll. I come not to Petition for a mercy But to cry vp my merit, for a deed Shall drowne all story, and posterity When it shall finde in her large Chronicle My glorious vndertaking, shall admire it More then a Sybils leafe, and loose it selfe In wonder of the action, Poets shall With this make proud their Muses, and apparell it▪ In rauishing numbers, which the soft haird Virgine Forgetting all their legends, and Loue tales Of Venus, Cupid, and the scapes of Joue Shall make theyr onely song and in full quire Chant it at Hymens feast. Duk. What meanes this boasting? Ful. Rolliardo. Roll. You thinke I am a lost man; and your gay things That eccho to your passions, and see through Your eyes all thats presented, do already Tickle their very soules, with expectation To see me beg most miserably for life But you are all deceiu'd—here I pronounce The great worke done that cancels all my debts I haue had accesse vnto the faire Eugenia
Your Princely daughter, staid, discourst with her▪ More, shee has entertained me for her seruant. Per. Sir doe you beleeue him. Duk. Thou hast prophaind a name will strike thee dead, Roll. It cannot be, for if you meane your daughter 'Tis that is my preseruer, blest Eugenia To whose memory, my heart does dedicate It selfe an altar, in whose very mention My lips are hallowed, and the place a temple Whence the diuine sound came, it is a voyce Which should our holy Churchmen vse, it might Without addition of more exorcisme Disinchant houses, tye vp nightly spirits Which fright the solitary groues, Eugenia When I haue nam'd, I needs must loue my breath The better after it. Duk. Thou hast vndone. Thy selfe i'th repetition, and in this Wherein thou cunningly wouldst beg our pittie Thou hast destroyed it, and not left a thought To plead against our anger, where before Thy life should haue beene gently inuited forth Now with a horrid circumstance death shall Make thy soule tremble, and forsaking all The noble parts, it shall retire into Some angle of thy body, and be afraid To informe thy eyes, least they let in a horrour They would not looke on. Rol. I am still the same, and let me be so bold To plead your royall word, 'twas my security Nor shall you take mine to induce your faith To what is done I haue more pregnant euidence, Your highnesse knowes that character. Duk. Ha? 'tis not so, I'le not beleeue my eyes Come hither Fulvio, Perenotto read But not too loude, does shee not write to me It is iniust you let Rolliardo dy Vnlesse Eugenia beare him company.
Give mee the Paper. Per. 'Tis counterfeit my Lord, cut off my head If this be not a Iygge of his invention. Du. My soule is in asweat. I feele my blood Heave in my Veynes—he lookes as he had seene her. More my Propheticke thoughts doe whisper to me— Fulv. Beleeve it not Sir. Duke. I wonnot—Perenotto— Don. I know not what to thinke. Grut. The Duk's perplext, observe. Roll. Will eyther of you speake for me Gentlemen, if the Iustice of my cause should fayle me, Ile pay you for't, I know Courtiers that live upon countenance, must sell their tongues, what is the price of yours pray? Grut. Humble your selfe you Coxecombe. Duke. Away, and let not him stirre I charge you. This does intrench too much upon her person, Have my endeavours to preserve Eugenia Of whom I thought so many men unworthy Ruin'd themselves? Humane invention Could not instruct me to dispose her where She could be more defenc'd from all mens eyes An Anchorite lives not prison'd in a wall With more security. 'Tis not possible Why am I troubled thus? My feare abuses me, In such a cause I would checke an Oracle. And shall his dexterous forgery, unsettle My confidence, I wonot shew a guilt, Of so much weakenesse in me, Fulvio— And Gentlemen—we'll speake to you anon. Roll. I ha spoke too much already it seemes, sure he has sent for her, I dare repose my life on her, to whose trust I gave my heart, she is a tbousand witnesses in her selfe. Fulv. It will be mirth Sir. Roll. I like not this consulting, they breake of pleasant∣ly now in the name of Mercury what crotchet. Duke. I see it is in vaine
To interrupt our fate, what is decreed Above, becomes not mortals to dispute Sit there,—nay be not modest, you were borne to't And therefore take your place, nay nay, be cover'd Imagine that a Crowne, and these your Subiects As when I dye, you know 'twill come to that. In right of my sole daughter—so, does he not Looke like a Prince indeed, appeares he not A pretty lumpe of Maiesty. Don. He's studying some speech Ile lay my life— Duke. Against his Coronation, to thanke all His loving Subiects, that as low as earth Draw their Swords: Eugenia enters and Perenotto. Thus offer him their duties. Eug. Hold I beseech you Let not my duty suffer misconstruction If while my knee doth beg your blessing, here I throw my armes, and circle next to Heaven What must be dearest to me. Duke. Ha? Eug. My ioy of life. Du. Destroy me not? Eug. Alas-I would preserve all, am so farre from killing, That I would dye my selfe, rather than see One drop of bloud forc'd frow his crimson Fountaine, Or but one teare rackt from your eye, oh heare me And after let your anger strike two dead. So you would let us dwell both in one Grave; And did you know how neere we were in life You would not thinke it fitting that in death Our ashes were divided, you have heard When the poore Turtle's ravisht from her Mate The Orphant Dove doth grone away her life In Widowes solitude, let me call him husband And tell your selfe the rest. Duke. Kill not thy Father with one word Eugenia, Thy Husband? Eug. I doe beseech you heare me. Duke. Beg thou mayst be forgotten, 'tis sinne 'Bove my forgivenesse, this a match for thee?
What man can bring me a certificate He had a father, or was christen'd? Hee? We all are in a dreame, awake me thunder. Roll. Temper your passion Sir. Duke. Some tortures to enforce confession from him How he procur'd accesse. Roll. They shannot need, you sent me Sir your selfe. Duke. Wee? Roll. The Cage was my conveyance. Per. That was presented lately with the Birds, you gave command. Du. Be dumbe, I dare not heare you. Dod. This was a Bird in a Cage indeed. Du. Search for the Traytor Bonamico presently He has betray'd me, they shall suffer both Before the noyse be spread to our dishonour. Eug. Yet will you heare me. Du. I heare too much, thou haft forgot thy birth, Thy Fortunes, and thy Father, were my cares So wondred at abroad, censur'd at home Worthy of nothing but contempt from thee For whom they were begotten? thou hast plough'd Vpon my Face, cant thou undoe a wrinckle Or change but the complexion of one Hayre. Yet thou hast gray'd a thousand, taken from mee, Not added to my comforts, more then what Like an indulgent Parent I have flattered My selfe into. Enter Bonamico. Grut. Here is the other Traytor Sir. Duke. Away with 'em to death. Eg. Let me goe too. Du. It needs not, thou art dead already Girle, And in thy shame. I and the Dukedome suffer, Thou mayst remember (false to thy owne vow) Philenze whom I banish'd, for thy sake. The title of my Subiect, and thy Love To him, pull'd our displeasure on him, since Wee studying to adde more height to thee,
Thou hast made thy selfe lesse, and for ought wee know, Clasp'd with the sonne of Earth to coole the Feuer Of hote sinne in thy veines, ingratefull to Philenzo, cold already in thy memory. Roll. 'Tis happinesse enough that you haue mentioned him, And whither to your Mercy, or your justice, See that Philenzo kneele. Omnes. Lord Philenzo. Ful. My Noble cozen so neere mee, and conceal'd. Eug. Your daughters knees ioyne with his bended hear To beg your pardon. Duke. Philenzo? were not you banish'd Sir. Roll. It was your sentence. Duke. In paine of death not to returne, blest Fate Thou hast relieued mee, had'st thou died before By our command, it would haue beene thought Tiranny Though none durst tell vs so, now wee haue argument Of iustice, and our euery breath is Law To speake thee dead at once, wee shannot neede To study a diorce, thy second exile Shall be Eternall, Death. Roll. You doe me honour. Duke. Be it your punishment, as you preferd him By Art to her, now by another Art For euer to deuide 'em, be's Executioner, And after make him higher by the head, To cure's ambition, see't aduanc'd. Roll. Ere I goe, dread Sir, I haue an humble suite, it is not life Ile aske, for that I giue up willingly And call it Mercy in you to immortalize The affection I shall owe Eugenia, Your other banishment is onely Death, You new create me now, it was my ayme And my attempt you thought so bold, I made To serue this end, that since I could not liue I might dye for her; pray reprieue my breath
But till I take my leaue, one minute does it It shall be a very short, and silent farewell. Enter Embassadour. Duk. 'Tis granted. Fu. My Lord Embassadour. Duk. Not the least whisper of Philenzo, as you value our regard—O my good Lord welcome. Emb. Letters to your Grace. Duk. They re gratefull as my comfort—Perenotto, let them withdraw; Her vaine will be discouered—Ful∣uio follow and part 'em, giue order for his execution, off with his head instantly—I can read no more for ioy, Pe∣renotto vse your bst oratory on my daughter to forget that Traitour, and prepare to marry Florence, 'tis concluded to be solemnized by proxie. D. Ile see the execution. Exit. Duk. Now to the rest, Your last letters were acceptable; and our sonne before had intention to finish the marriage in his person, but lately receluing intelligence, that one  of Noble birth, now in exile, though without your consent, had long since intrest in your daughters affection, wee thought meet ra∣ther to aduise for his repeale then  to our disho∣nour; where the hearts meete, there onely marriages are sacred, and Princes should be exemplary in all Iustice, al∣though we disclaime in this designe, on our parts, we will continue all other Princely correspondence. I am iustly punished and haue run my selfe Into a laborinth, from whence no art Can bring me of with safety—my Lord you may Please to retire your selfe, a thousand wheeles Do moue preposterous in my braine, what cre? I loose my selfe, runne with a hast thou wod' Preserue my life, and stay the execution. I will not haue a drop of blood fll from Philenzo for my Dukedome, flye I say Thou should'st be there already.
Enter Dondolo. How now, has Philenzo still a head on? Don. Yes my Lord. Duke. Follow him, and with that Nimblenesse thou would'st Leape from thy Chamber when the Roofe's a fire Proclayme aloud our pardon to Philenzo. And bring him backe to us. Dond. 'Tis too late Sir, Philenzo's dead already He sav'd the Executioner that trouble. The voyce is, he is poyson'd. Enter Fulvic. Duke. Poyson'd, how— Where is Philenzo? This foole reports him poyson'd, what circumstance? Fulv. He had no sooner parted from Eugenia, But suddainly he fainted, at which fall Of his owne spirit, he seem'd griev'd with shame To shew so little courage neere his death, Which he call'd Martyrdome, and presently Whither supply'd by other, or prepar'd By himselfe we know not, he had a Violl Of water soveraigne as was pretended To inlifne his dull heart, he dranke it up And soone shew'd cheerefull in his eyes, wee led Him smiling forward, but before we could Approach the place of death, he sunke agen But irrecoverably, for in vaine we applyed Our helpe, by which we did concludo he had Drunke poyson. Duke. All this talke is such, and through My eare I take it in, with as much danger, I feele it active in my Braine already. Call our Physitians I will hang em all Vnlesse they can recover him, it shall be Death to save any man hereafter, if They suffer him to perish.
Enter Perenetto, Eugenia. Fulv. Sir your Daughter It seemes the accident has arriv'd at her. Du. Arriv'd at her? Fame will soone spread it Fulvio, About the world, and wee shall be theyr mockery. He's dead they tell me Girle, poyson'd they say, too. Eug. Oh my Philenzo. Enter Grtti, Philenzoes Body is brought in, and layd vpon a Carpet. Duke. Eugenia 'shat not marry Florence now, Nor any other since Philenzoes dead, But thou wo't not beleeve me, had he liv'd He had beene thine, that minute tooke him hence, Wherein I first resolv'd to ha given thee to him. Eug. Oh doe not mocke me Sir, to adde to my Affliction, you nere would give me to him. Duke. May Heaven forgive me never then, but what Availes too late compunction? Noble Gentleman Thou shalt have Princely Funerall, and carry On thy cold marble the Inscription of Our sonne in death, and my Eugenias Husband. Fulv. Madam, this sorrow for his losse is Reall. We met the Florentine Embassadour Who told me the Expectation of that Prince Was now dissolv'd, and Messengers were sent To stay the Execution. Duke. Who now Shall marry my Eugeniae, I have undone The hope of our posterity. Eug. Not so Sir, If yet you'l give me leave to make my choyce Ile not despaire to find a Husband. Duke. Where?
Eug. Here Royall Sir, Philenzo is not dead But made by Vertue of a drinke to seeme so Thus to prevent his suffering, that I might Or other friend by my confederacy▪ By begging of his body fit for buriall, Preserve him from your anger. Duke. Dost not mocke me Eug. Let me beg your pardon, Confident of your change to mercy, I have Confess'd what terrour could not force me to. Enter Morello, and Ladies, Grut. This is pretty Dondolo. Duke. Blessings fall doubly on thee. Eugen. He expects Not such a full streame of happinesse, heaven dispose him To meet it quickly, Per. Here are strange turnings, see he stirs. Roll. Where am I now? no matter where I be ▪Tis Heaven if my Eugenia meet me here She made some promise sure to such a purpose. This Musicke sounds divinely, ha Eugenia 'Tis so, let's dwell here for Eternity If I be dead, I wonot live agen If living—ha! I'm lost, lost for ever. Duke▪ Not found till now, take her a guift from me And call me father. Roll. I am not yet awake. Eug. Thou art Philenzo, and all this is truth, My Father is Converted. Roll. 'Tis a Myracle. Duke. You must beleeve it, In signe how we are pleas'd proclaime this day Through Mantua a pardon to all offenders As amply as when we tooke our Crowne. Mor. Then my Petticote is discharg'd. Dond. Now Lady you are free▪
Grut. Make me happy to renew my suit. Mor. And mine, shall's to Barlibreake I was in Hell last, ▪tis litle lesse to be in a Petticote somtimes. Roll. Madam vouchsafe him kisse your hand Wee owe him much. Duke. We'll take him to our Service. Dond. I am too much honour'd. Duke. And you into our bosome, this day shall Be consecrate to tryumph, and may time When 'tis decreed, the world shall have an end By Revolution of the yeare make this The day that shall conclude all memories. Exeunt Omnes. FINIS.
The Printer to the Reader. GEntle Reader, let me desire thy fauorable correction of these places. viz. Act. 1. Page the fifth, for Ferrara reade Florence. Page the tenth leaue, out these words. Yet it shall be vnder 20. thousand Crownes, I will not leaue the pawne for twice so much. Act. 4. in a Song for (two invisible) reade (two visi∣ble many other Errors, (though for the most part literall,) thou shalt meete, which thou canst not with safetie of thy owne, interpret a defect in the Authors Iudgment, since all bookes are subiect to these misfortunes. Vale et mitius interpretare.
