4030 99842725 7408
William Laud Arch-B: of Canterbury Prymat of England. W.M. sulps
CHRISTIAN Praiers and holie Meditations, as wel for Priuate as Publique exercise: Gathered out of the most godly learned in our time, by Henrie Bull. Wherevnto are added the praiers, com∣monly called Lidleys praiers. PSAL. 55. In the Euening and Morning, and at Noone, vvill I pray vnto the Lorde, and he vvill heare my praier. ¶ AT LONDON, Printed by Henrie Middleton, dwelling in Fleetestreate at the signe of the Falcon.
Ianuarie hath xxxj. dayes. 1 A The Circumcision of Christ. 2 b On which day Noe being in the Arke vpon the waters, began to see the tops of the high mountaines. Gene. 8.13. 3 c 4 d 5 e   6 f The Epiphanie: Or apparition of our Lord Iesus. 7 g 8 A   9 b   10 c The 10. Nabuchodonosor besieged once againe Ierusalem. 2. Reg. 15. 11 d 12 e   13 f   14 g   15 A The midde Winter after Ptolomaeus. 16 b   17 c The 17. the good Prince Scanderbeg king of Epirus, a scourge to the Turke, as vpon this day died. 1466. 18 d 19 e 20 f   21   22 A The 22. the Duke of Somerset as vpon this day was beheaded. 1552. 2 b 24 c   25 d   26 e   27 f The 27. Saint Paul as vpon this day, of a persecuter was conuerted, as he ioin¦neyed vnto Damascus. Actes. 9.3. 28 29 A 30 b   31 c  
Februarie hath xxviii. dayes. 1 d   2 e The Purification of Marie. 3 f As vpon this day Christe our Sauiour was offered vnto the Lord in the Tem∣ple at Ierusalem, and his mother the Virgine Marie, was purified according to the Lawe, Luk. 2.22. 4 g 5 A 6 b 7 c 8 d   9 e   10 f   11 g The 11. Noe fourtie daies after he had seene the toppes of the mountains, sent out the Rauen, and after that, the Doue, which returned. Gen. 8. 12 A 13 b 14 c 15 d   16 e   17 f   18 g The eighteene day, Noe put out once againe the Doue, which brought an O∣liue braunche. 19 A 20 b 21 c   22 d   23 e   24 f Matthie Apostle. 25 g The Doue was sent the third time, & returned no more to Noe. 26 A 27 b   28 c  
March hath xxx. dayes. 1 d   2 e   3 f The thirde, the Temple of Ierusalem was wholie finished and consecrated. 1. Esdras. 6. 4 g 5 A 6 b   7 c   8 d   9 e   10 f The 10. as vpon this day, Christ being on the other side of Iordē, was aduerti∣sed of the sicknesse of Lazarus. Ioh. 11.3 11 g 12 A 13 b The 13. the feast of Hester was cele∣brated, bicause that day was appointed to put the Iewes to death. 14 c 15 d 16 e The 16. Lazarus was raised vp againe. Iohn. 11. 17 f 18 g   19 A   20 b The 20. Christ made his entrance in∣to Ierusalem. 21 c 22 d   23 e   24 f The 24. he made his Supper. 25 g Annuntiation of Marie. 26 A The 25. was taken. 27 b The 26. was crucified. 28 c The 27. he rested in the Sepulchre. 26 d The 28. he rose againe from death. 30 e   31 f  
Aprill hath xxx. dayes. 1 g Noe vncouered the Arke. Gene. 8. 2 A The tabernacle was prepared by Mo∣ses. Exod. 40. 3 b 4 c   5 d Iesus Christ the eight day after his resurrection appeared againe to the A¦postles which were assembled, where S. Thomas was present. 6 e 7 f 8 g 9 A   10 b The 10. the people of Israel went o∣uer Iorden drie footed. Iosua. 3.4. 11 c 12 d The 13. Assuerus gaue out proclama∣tion to put all the Jewes within his kingdome to death. Hester. 3. 13 e 14 f 15 g The 14. was the celebration of the Passeouer. 16 A 17 b The 15. the people came out of Egypt Exod. 22. 18 c 19 d The 18. the people went ouer the red sea drie footed, & Pharao was drowned with all his hoast. 20 e 21 f 22 g The 22. the people came to Mara, the waters whereof they could not drinke. Exod. 5. 23 A 24 b 25 c Marke Euangelist. 26 d The 24. the reuelation was made to Daniel of that which should come to passe, from the time of the Kinges of Persia, vnto Christ, and from thence vn∣til the ende of the world. Dan. 10.11.12 27 e 28 f 29 g 30 A
May hath xxxj. dayes. 1 b Philip and Iacob. 2 c   3 d The ascension of Christ into heauen fourtie dayes after his resurrection. Mark. 6. 4 e 5 f 6 g God commaunded Noe to carrie vi∣ctuals into the Arke. Gen. 6. 7 A 8 b   9 c   10 d   11 e   12 f   13 g   14 A The 14. Ezekias did first celebrate the Passeouer. Para. 30. 15 b 16 c The 15. the children of Israel murmu∣red after flesh, and God sent them plen∣tie of Quailes. 17 d 18 e 19 f This was the thirtie day after the de∣parture from Egypt. Exod. 16. 20 g 21 A The 16. day GOD made Manna to rayne down. Exod. 16. 22 b 23 c The 17. Noe entered into the Arke. Gen. 17. 24 d 25 e The 20. The people departed from mount Sina. Num. 9. 26 f 27 g The 22. fire from aboue consumed a part of the hoast of Israel. Num. 11. 28 A 29 b   30 c   31 d  
Iune hath xxx. dayes. 1 e This day the children of Israel came to mount Sina, and went thence the third moneth, where they taried almost a yeare. 2 f 3 g 4 A 5 b   6 c The 6, the Temple of Diana in Ephe∣sus was burned, the yeare before Christ 54. 7 d 8 e 9 f   10 g   11 A   12 b   13 c The 13. day of this moneth, king As∣suerus gaue out proclamation in fauour of the Iews against Haman and his con∣spiracie. Hest. 8. 14 d 15 e 16 f 17 g   18 A   19 b   20 c   21 d   22 e   23 f   24 g Iohn Baptist. 25 A   26 b The Arke of Noe was lifted vp the seuen and twentie day, by the waters of the floud. Gen. 7. 27 c 28 d 29 e Peter the Apostle. 30 f  
Iulie hath xxxj. dayes. 1 g   2 A   3 b   4 c   5 d   6 e The 6. day of this moneth, the Iosias of our age, EDWARD the sixt, king of England died. Anno. 1553. 7 f 8 g 9 A Dogge dayes beginne. 10 b The 9. of this moneth the citie of Ie∣rusalem assieged by the space of eigh∣teene mone: h, was finally taken by the king of Babylon. Iere. 39. 11 c 12 d 13 e 14 f   15 g About this time, the great Sweat be∣ganne in England. Anno. 1551. 16 A 17 b   18 c   19 d   20 e   21 f   22 g Marie Magdalen. 23 A   24 b   25 c Iames Apostle. 26 d   27 e As vpon this day the Atheniens re∣ceiued a great ouerthrowe in Sicilia, of the Syracusians. 28 f 29 g 30 A   31 b  
August hath xxxj. dayes. 1 c Aaron died in the mountaine of Hor being a 123. yeares old, 40. yeares after the comming out of Egypt. Num. 20. & 33.38.39. 2 d 3 e 4 f 5 g   6 A   7 b   8 c   9 d   10 e The 10. the Temple of Ierusalem was set on fire by the souldiers of Titus, and hath not since bene builded againe. Io∣sephus lib. 6. cap. 26. 11 f 12 g 13 A 14 b   15 c   16 d   17 e   18 f   19 g Dogge dayes end. 20 A   21 b   22 c   23 d   24 e Bartholomevv Apostle. 25 f   26 g   27 A Religion as on this day, was refour∣med, according to Gods expresse trueth in the most renoumed citie of Geneua. Anno. 1535. 28 b 29 c 30 d 31 e  
September hath xxx. dayes. 1 f   2 g   3 A   4 b   5 c   6 d   7 e Our Soueraigne Ladie QVEENE E∣LIZABETH was borne as vpon this day, at Greenewich. Anno 1532. 8 f 9 g 10 A The 9. of this moneth, Ierusalem was put to fire and sword, and wholy ouer∣throwne, as Christ foretold them. Iose∣phus lib. 7. cap. 26. 11 b 12 c 13 d 14 e Chrysostome being chased out of his Church of Constantinople, as vpon this day, dyed. 15 f 16 g 17 A   18 b   19 c   20 d   21 e S. Matthevve Apostle. 22 f   23 g   24 A   25 b The 25. Nehemias did finish the re∣payring of the walles of Ierusalem, Anno 1444. before Christ. Nehe. 6.15. 26 c 27 d 28 e   29 f S. Michael. 30 g  
October hath xxxj. dayes. 1 A   2 b The Iewes fasted and wept for Go∣dolias. Iere. 41. & 42. 3 c 4 d   5 e   6 f   7 g   8 A   9 b   10 c The 10. day was the feast of reconci∣liation, which was the onely day that God ordained to fast. 11 d 12 e 13 f   14 g   15 A   16 b   17 c   18 d Luke Euangelist. 19 e The 17. day, which was the 150. after the beginning of the floud, the Arke re∣sted vpon the mountaine Ararat in Ar∣menia. Gen. 8. 20 f 21 g 22 A 23 b   24 c The 24. Titus gaue foorth 3000. Ie∣wes to the wilde beastes. Anno. 73. 25 d 26 e   27 f   28 g Simon and Iude. 29 A   30 b   31 c  
Nouember hath xxx. dayes. 1 d All Saintes. 2 e   3 f   4 g   5 A The 10. This day happened the woe∣ful slaughter of Varna, where Ladislaus king of Hungarie was slaine by the Turke, Anno. 1444. Also as vpon this day Martin Luther was borne. Anno 1483. 6 b 7 c 8 d 9 e 10 f 11 g   12 A   13 b   14 c   15 d The 15. day was the counterfet feast by Ieroboam, after he had withdrawne the tenne tribes of Israel from the obe∣dience of Roboham their lawfull king, the which he ordained in Dan, and Be∣thel, after he had set vp the golden cal∣ues, to the intent the people should goe no more to worshippe in Ierusalem. 1. Kings. 12. 16 e 17 f 18 g 19 A 20 b 21 c 22 d 23 e 24 f   25 g The 17. day of this month QVEENE ELIZABETH begane her reigne. 26 A 27 b   28 c   29 d   30 e Andrevve Apostle.
December hath xxxj. dayes. 1 f   2 g   3 A   4 b   5 c The shortest day. 6 d   7 e   8 f   9 g   10 A   11 b   12 c The 15. day the yeare before the Na∣tiuitie of Christ 165. Antiochus the greate set vp an Idol vpon the altar of the Lord in Ierusalem. 1. Macha. 1. 13 d 14 e 15 f 16 g The 20. day, Esdras gaue foorth pro∣clamation to the Israelites, to forsake their strange wiues that they had mar∣ried, and to send them away. 1. Esdr. 9. 17 A 18 b 19 c 20 d   21 e Thomas Apostle. 22 f   23 g S. Iohn Euangelist died in Ephesus, be∣ing of the age of 89. yeres, vnder Train 24 A 25 b The Natiuitie of Christ. 26 c S. Stephen. 27 d S. Iohn Euangelist. 28 e Innocentes. 29 f the Emperour, about 30. yeres after the destruction of Ierusalem. 30 g   A  
A rule to knowe when the Terme beginneth and endeth. HIlarie Terme beginneth the three and twentie of Ianuarie, if it be not Sun∣day: if it be, then the next day after, and endeth the twelfth of Februarie. Easter Terme beginneth seuenteene dayes after Easter, and endeth foure dayes after the Ascension. Trinitie Terme beginneth the next day after Corpus Christi day, & endeth the wed∣nesday fortnight after. Michaelmas Terme beginneth the ninth of October, if it be not Sunday & endeth the seuen and twentie of Nouember. Eight dayes before any Terme begin, the Exchequer openeth, except Trinitie Terme, which openeth but 4. days before.
An Almanacke for 21. yeares. The yeares of our Lorde. Dominical let. Easter day. VVhit sunday. Aduent Sun¦day. 1578 E 30. Mar. 18. May. 30. Nouem. 1579 D 19. April. 7. Iune. 29. 1580 CB 3. 22. 27. 1581 A 26. Mar. 14. 3. Decemb. 1582 G 15. April. 3. Iune. 2. 1583 F 31. Mar. 19. May. 1. 1584 ED 19. April. 7. Iune. 29. Nouem. 1585 C 11. 30. May 28. 1586 B 3. 22. 27. 1587 A 16. 4. Iune. 3. Decemb. 1588 GF 7. 26. May. 1. 1589 E 30. Mar. 18. 30. Nouem. 1590 D 19. April. 7. Iune. 29. 1591 C 4. 23. May. 28. 1592 BA 26. Mar. 14. 3. Decemb. 1593 G 15. April. 3. Iune. 2. 1594 F 31. Mar. 19. May. 1. 1595 E 20. April. 8. Iune. 30. Nouem. 1596 DC 11. 30. May. 28. 1597 B 27. Mar. 15. 27. 1598 A 16. April. 4. Iune. 3. Decemb.
AN INTRODVCTION TO PRAYER. FOR AS MVCH AS OF our selues we are desti∣tute of all good thinges, and vtterly voyde of all necessarie helpes to sal∣uation: the Lorde our GOD of his owne free mercy and goodnes, offereth himselfe to vs in Christ, and in him he giueth vnto vs, in the steede of our miserie, all felicitie, in the steede of our pouertie, the vnspeakeable ri∣ches of his grace: he openeth vnto vs in him the treasures of heauen, that our Faith might wholy beholde him, and our Hope be fully fixed vppon him. In whome it hath pleased him that the flnesse of his grace shoulde dwell, that from thence we might all drawe (as out of a most plentifull founteine) the waters of eternall life. This secrete and great miserie is reueiled to such onely, whose eyes the Lorde hath opened, to see light in his light. Therefore since we are taught by Faith that whatsoeuer wee haue neede of and is wanting in vs, the same is laid vp with God for vs in Christ: it remaineth that we seeke it in him, and with Prayer craue it of him. The Apostle therefore,Rom. 10. to shewe that true faith cannot be separate from the inuocati∣on
of Gods holy name, hath set this order, that as faith commeth by the Gospell, so by the same faith our heartes are stirred vp to call vpon the name of God: and therefore he saith, that the spirite of adoption, which sealeth in our hearts the witnesse of the gos∣pell, raiseth vp our spirites that they dare with boldnesse shewe foorth their desires: it stirreth vp in vs vnspeakable groninges, and causeth vs to crie with confidence: Abba Fa∣ther. By the benifite of prayer therefore wee attaine to those riches which God hath laide vp in store for vs: for thereby we haue fami∣liar accesse to God, and boldlie entering into the sanctuarie of heauen, we put him in mind of his promises: so that nowe by experience we feele and finde that to be true in deede, which by the worde we did before but onely beleeue: nowe we inioy those treasures by prayer, which by faith wee did before but onely beholde in the Gospell of our Lorde Iesus. Nowe how necessarie and profitable this exercise of prayer is, it appeareth, in that the Lorde himselfe witnesseth our whole saluati∣on to consist in the calling vppon his name, whereby he is wholie present, with vs: name∣ly by his prouidence and fatherly care by the which he watcheth ouer vs: by his power,
by the which he susteineth and succoureth our weakenesse, being euerie moment ready to perish: and by his goodnesse & mercie, by the which he receiueth vs into fauour, being miserablie loadē & pressed downe with sin▪ And hereby groweth singular rest and quiet∣nesse to our conscience. For when wee haue disclosed to him our necessitie, herein wee finde most ioyfull and perfect quietnesse, that none of our euils are hidden from him, whom we are persuaded to be both most willing & also most able to helpe vs. Now that our prayer may be made in such wise as it ought to be, firste we must see that we be in hearte and minde no otherwise pre∣pared, then becommeth those that enter in∣to talke with God, as we are taught. Eccle. 18. Before thou pray, prepare thy selfe, and be not as one that tempteth God. We must consider therfore whē we pray, in whose presence we stand, to whō we speak, and what we desire. We stand in the presence of the almightie creator of heauen & earth, and all thinges therein conteined: to whose eternall maiestie innumerable thousandes of Angels doe assist, seue and obey We speake vnto him, who knoweth the secretes of our hearts: before whom nothing is more odious then hypocrisie, and dissimulation. We aske
those things which be most to his glorie and the comfort of our consciences. We must therefore diligenly endeuour our selues to remoue all such thinges as may offende his diuine maiestie. And first, that we be free from al worldly cares & fleshly cogitations, whereby our mindes are caried hither and thither, & being drawne out of heauen, and from the pure beholding of God, are pressed downe to the earth. And here let vs call to minde how vnre∣uerently we abuse the great goodnes of God, calling vs into familiar talke with him, when we haue not that reuerent feare of his sa∣cred maiestie, that we woulde haue of an earthly creature or a worldly Prince: but suffering our heartes to be caried away with wandering thoughts and worldly imagina∣tions, are otherwise occupied, and forsake him in the mids of our prayer. As God is a spirite, so he will be worship∣ped in spirit and truth: that is, in the inward affections of the heart, & with a true, faith∣full and vnfeined kind of worship. And ther∣fore as at all other times he requireth the heart: so specially in the time of prayer, whē we shew our selues in his presence, & enter into communication with him: & therevpon when he promiseth to heare all those that
cal vpon him, he maketh a restreint & saith: that call vpon him in truth. Seing therefore the chiefe dutie of prayer consisteth in the heart, we must with our whole heart poure out our prayers vnto God the searcher of hearts, & with a sincere, vnfained, & ardent affection & opening of our heart before God call vpon him, or else we shall not find him. Let vs know therefore, that none prepare themselues rightly to prayer, but such as haue a reuerende feare of Gods maiestie, which they cannot haue that come not to it vnburthened of earthly cares & affections. And thi is it that is ment in the Scriptures by the lifting vp of handes, that we should remember our selues to be farre off from God, vnlesse we lift vp our heartes & mindes also on high. An therefore it is saide in the Psalme:Psal. 25. To thee haue I lift vp my soule. The Scripture vseth also this manner of speach, To lift vp prayer: that they which desire to be heard of God, shold not haue their minds caried away with earthly cogitations & va∣nities. And though it be hard to be so bent to prayer, but that we shall finde that many bie thoughtes will creepe vpon vs to hinder our prayer: yet the more harde it is, the more earnestly wee must wrastle to ouer∣come all lets and hinderances, & labour with
inwarde groninges vnto the Lorde,Psal. 86. that he will linke our heartes fast vnto him, and not suffer vs to beledde away from him, by the vayne suggestions of Sathan, who at al times compassing vs about, is neuer more busie, then when we addresse our selues to prayer, secretly and subtilly creeping into our brea∣stes and calling vs backe from God, so that oftentimes, when wee with all reuerence should speake to God, we find our harts, tal∣king with the vanities of the world, or with the foolish imaginations of our owne hearts. Finally we must be in christian charity, loue, and concorde with all men, seeking vnfai∣ned, hearty, and brotherly reconciliation, if we haue offended any man, before we enter into prayer, or else God will not heare our prayers: yea they are otherwise execrable, & full of damnable hypocrisie in Gods sighte. And this that is spoken of prayer, may be said also of hearing of Gods word, or any other seruice of God. We must therefore laye aside all malice, enuie, wrath, grudge, contention, wrang∣ling, dissimulation, all guilefull, craftie, and subtile dealing, and with a single hearte doe to other, as we woulde they shoulde doe to vs,1. Pet. 2. Peter willeth, that such as haue once tasted howe good and bounteous the Lorde
is, and are become new creatures by the hea∣uenly regeneration, through the doctrine of the Gospell, shoulde like holy and innocent babes, lay aside all such workes of the flesh, which doe depriue a man of the kingedome of God.Gal. 5. And S. Paul commaundeth vs, that laying aside those cursed vvorkes of darknesse, vve shoulde in the stead thereof, put on (euen as the e∣lect of God, holy and beloued) tender mercie, kind∣nesse, humblenesse of minde, meekenesse, long suffe∣ring, forbearing one another, & forgiuing one ano∣ther, if any haue a quarell to another, as Christ for∣gaue vs: and aboue all these things, (saith he) put on loue vvhich is the bonde of perfection, and let the peace of God rule in your heartes.Mark. 11. VVhen ye shall stande and pray (saith S. Marke,) forgiue, if ye haue any thing against any mā, that your father also vvhich is in heauen, may forgiue you your tre∣spasses: for if ye vvill not forgiue, your father vvhich is heauen vvill not pardon you your tres∣passes. Moreouer we must haue such a feling of our owne miserie and wretchednesse, as may worke in vs an earnest sorrowe and vexati∣on of mind for the same. Example whereof we may see in the deare seruauntes of God, when they, say that out of the deepe deepe∣nesse, and out of the middes of the iawes of death, they vtter vnto the Lorde a sorrowfull
voyce. He that desireth mercie, must haue a feeling of his owne miserie, And therefore saith Dauid: Heale my soule O lord, for I haue sinned against thee.Psal. 41. Psal. 38. There is no health in my flesh (saith he) because of thy displeasure, neither is there any rest in my bones, because of my sinne. Thi anguish and sorrowe, stirreth vp in Gods children a feruent desire to obtaine comfort, helpe, and succour at Gods hand, and therefore such as feele themselues op∣pressed with great calamities, hauing by the helpe of man no hope of deliueraunce, doe crye vnto God with afflicted heartes, as Da∣uid did in his distresse▪ My soule thirsteth for God,Psal. 41. euen for the liuing God. And, as the Hart being vvounded, brayeth for the riuers of vvater, so panteth m soule after thee, O God. This is that godly sorrowe which S. Paul saith, worketh in Gods children repentance to saluation.1. Cor. 7. Psal. 34. The Lord is nigh to them, saith Dauid, that are of a conrue heart, & vvill saue all such as are afflicted in spirite. To him vvill I looke,Psal. 66. euen vnto him (saith the Lord) that is af∣flicted and broken hearted, and trembleth at my vvordes. Therefore Dauid calleth the time of trouble, the fit and conuenient time for the faithfull to fly vnto God by prayer. And albeit they bee not at all times in like distresse, or continually groaning vnder the
burdē of present euils: yet must thei needs be euer in dread of new daungers, and carefully afraide of further troubles to followe. As trouble and feare therefore are the verie spurs to stir them vp to heartie and feruent prayer: so by occasion thereof, they haue more free accesse vnto God, as though he did thereby call them vnto him. This godly sorrowe for sinne, and feruent desire and longing for Gods louing mercie and fauour, commeth not of our selues▪ but of the speciall goodnesse of God: for we are of our selues dull & without all lust to pray: yea, so great is our imperfection, that wee know not how to pray as we ought, and therefore the spirite helpeth our infirmitie, instructeth vs what is right, and guideth our affections. He maketh intercession for the Saints (saith S. Paul) according to the vvill of God, and that vvith sighes and groninges vvhich cannot be expressed: that is, he stireth vp our heartes, giueth vs a desire and bouldnesse to pray: and causeth vs to mourne when wee are by any meanes hindered from it, and feele not our selues moued therevnto with such feruent zeale & affection as we shoulde be. Now although we knowe that it is the onely worke of the holy Ghost, thus to moue and incline our hearts to prayer, notwith∣standing
we may not be negligent & sloth∣full to dispose and stirre vp our selues there∣vnto, but rather contrariewise, so often as we feele our selues, colde and not disposed to prayer as we ought to be, we must make our supplication vnto the Lorde, that it woulde please him to inflame vs with his holy spirit, whereby wee maye be framed to pray with such feruencie of minde, as we ought to doe. When we are cast downe by the sense and feeling of our owne infirmitie, sinne and mi∣serie: Yet must we pray (notwithstanding) in sure and stedfast hope to obteine our re∣questes▪ These be thinges indeed contrarie in shew, to ioyne with the feeling of the iuste vengeance of God, sure affiance of fauour: which things do yet very well agree, in that it is the goodnesse of God onely that raiseth vs vp being oppressed with our owne euils, from the which of our selues wee cannot rise. For as repentance and faith are knit as cōpanion together, (albeit the one driueth vs downe with feare, and the other lifteth vs vp againe with comforte) so in praying they must needes goe together. And this a∣greement Dauid expresseth in few wordes.Psal. 5. I vvill (saith he) in the multitude of thy mercies en∣ter into thy house, and in the temple of thy holi∣es, I vvill vvorhippe thee vvith feare.
Therefore when we are once touched with true repentance and feeling of our own miserie, wee must withall haue such a per∣suasion of Gods fauour and mercie towardes vs in all our prayers, that they shall be ac∣cepted of God so farre foorth as it shall be necessarie for vs. This is the assurance, saith S. Iohn,1. Iohn. 5▪ that vve haue in God, that if vve aske any thing according to his vvill, hee heareth vs. Jf we haue not a sure trust and confidence in the mercie and promises of God, it is vn∣possible to make our prayer to him aright: and whosoeuer doubteth whether God hea∣reth his prayer, that man obteineth nothing: for to such prayers, God hath made no pro∣mise. But contrariewise he saith, VVhat se∣ye shall aske in prayeer,Matth.  Mark. 11. if ye beleeue, ye shall re∣ceiue it. And againe: vvhatsoeuer ye desire, be∣leeue that ye shall obteine it, and it shall be done vnto you. Aske saith Saint Iames, in faith, and vvauer not, for hee that vvauereth, is like to the vvaues of the sea,Iames. 1. vvhich are tossed of the vvinde and caried avvay. And why shoulde wee wauer or doubt, seeing the holy scrip∣tures testifie of God, that hee is faithfull, iust and true in all his wordes and promises, saying: The Lord is faithfull in all his vvords, he vvill euer be mindefull of his couenaunt: the tr∣the of the Lorde indureth for euer?
And although our faith be not so strong, and therefore our prayer so hearty and zelous as it ought to be, yea though our faith be faint and colde, yet let vs hold fast this principle, that our prayers are not frustrate or in vaine. For our comfort herein, we haue an ex∣ample in the father which brought his son, first to the Apostles, & afterwarde to Christ, and saide:Marke. 9. If thou canst Lorde, helpe: and yet afterwardes he acknowledged the weake∣nes of his faith▪ & desired to be made strong. I beleeue Lorde (saith he) helpe mine vnbeleefe. Howe often doe the children of God com∣plaine of this imperfection and imbecillitie of faith? Such as are exercised in true pray∣er, doe feele, that in crauing of God the for∣giuenesse of their sinnes, they bring scarce∣ly the tenth part of that sacrifice which Da∣uid speaketh of,Psal. 51. where he saith: An accep∣table sacrifice to God, is a troubled spirite: a bro∣ken and an humble heart, O God, thou vvilt not despise. Many times they are driuen to wra∣stle with their owne dulnesse and coldenesse in prayer: many times thier mindes slippe aside and wander away in vanitie: many times they feele not their owne lacke and miserie to pricke them sharpely inough to prayer: yea, and many times they are so bea∣ten downe with the sense and feeling of their
owne sinne and miserie, as though they were forsaken of God, and their faith vtterly ex∣tinguished. In what horror and anguish of heart was Dauid when he said vnto the Lorde:Psal. 8. VVhy doest thou reiect my soule? VVhy hidest thou thy face from me? And againe, Cease from me vntill I goe avvay and be not.Psal. 39. Whereby it might seeme, that he (like a desperate man) desireth nothing else, but that the hand of God cea∣sing, e might rot in his euils: but it is not so. For he saith it not, for that he woulde haue God to depart from him, as the repro∣bate doe: but onely he complaineth, that the wrath of God vvas too heauie for him to beare. A hard temptation is it, vvhen the faithfull are compelled to crie:Psal. 80. Hovve long vvilt thou be angrie against the prayers of thy seruants as though their very prayers made God more angry. So vvhen Ieremy saith, The Lord hath shut out my prayer:Lamen. 3. no doubt, he vvas shaken vvith a vehemēt pang of temptatiō. These are the imperfections of Gods chil∣dren, vvhich euen in beleeuing and hoping doe oftentimes vtter, some vnfaithfulnesse, and in the verie remedies fall into nevve di∣seases: for there is no prayer they make, which the Lord would not worthily loath and abhorre, if he should not winke at their
spots and imperfections. And such examples are common in the scriptures. Whereby wee see, that the Lorde often times suffereth his to be greeuously tempted and afflicted, and hideth from them the comfort of his spirite, as though they were cleane forsaken, but to their great consolation in the end. This is the schole wherein the wisedome of God nurtureth and trieth hir children, as we may see Ecclesi. 4. First she vvill vvalke vvith them (saith he) by croked vvayes, and bring them vnto feare and dread, and torment them vvith her discipline, vntill she haue tried their soules, and haue proued them by her iudgementes: then vvill shee returne the streight vvay vnto them, and comforte them, and shevve them her secretes, and heape vppon them the treasures of knovveledge and vnderstanding of righteous∣nesse. Thus wee see the state of Gods chil∣dren, that when the Lorde hath shewed them what they are of themselues by the sight and horror of their sinnes and terrour of Gods iudgement for the same: then wil he shewe them what they are in Christ,Esai. 54. as Esai saith. For a time, a little vvhile I haue forsaken thee, but I vvill gather thee together in vvonder∣full mercies. In a shorte time of vvrath I hide my face a vvhile from thee, but I vvill haue mer∣cie on thee for euer, saith the Lorde thy redeemer.
Such is the louing kindenesse and mercie of God towardes the afflicted, when they are sorie for their sinnes, lamenting and mour∣ning in their hearts to be deliuered from the same, that they might serue God in the free∣dome of conscience. This is that mourning, this is that hunger and thirste that Christe speaketh of: Blessed are they that mourne,Matth. 5 for they shall be comforte: blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righ∣teousnesse▪ for they shall be satisfied. God for his trueth sake, will put the righ∣teousnesse of Christe on them, and washe their vnrighteousnesse away in his bloode. The brused Reede vvill he not breake, and the smoking flaxe vvill he not quench.Esai. 42. The affli∣cted▪ the heauie and broken harted, the vveake and feeble vvill he not forsake: Yea, be they neuer so feeble and fraile, yet so longe as this luste, desire and mourning to be deliue∣red from their sinne and miserie, remayneth in them, God seeth not their sinnes, rekoneth them not, nor laeth them to their charge, for his truehes sake and loue to Christ. He is not a sinner in the sight of God, that woulde be no sinner. He that woulde be deliuered, hath his hart loosed already: his heart sinneth not, but mourneth, repeneth, and consēteth to the law and will of God, & iustifieth God,
that is, he beareth recorde that God which made the law, is righteous and iust: and such an heart trusting in Christs blood, in Christs righteousnesse, is accepted for righteous, and his weakenes, infirmitie and frailtie is par∣doned, and his sinnes not looked vpon, vn∣till God put more strength in him: the in∣crease whereof he shall daylie feele in such sort, that at the length he shall in all troubles be able to say with Dauid:Psal. 23. If I shoulde goe through the shadovv and dangers of death, I vvill not feare vvhatsoeuer happen. Nowe to stirre vp our heartes in conside∣ration of our great miserie and necessitie to a more feruent prayer, the Lord himselfe hath commaunded vs to call vpon him for helpe and succour. Therefore let vs haue the com∣maundementes of God alwayes in our sight touching prayer, and whiles wee pray, let vs call them to our remembrance▪Matth. 7. Psal. 40. Ephe. 6. Aske, seeke, knocke, vvatch, and pray. Call vpon me (saith God) in the day of thy troble. Pray alvvay vvith all maner of prayer and supplication, & vvatch therevnto vvith all diligence.1. Tim. 5. Reioyce alvvaye, pray continually, in all thinges be thankefull: for this is the vvill of God in Christ Iesus tovvardes you▪Col. 4. Philip. 4. Continue in prayer, and vvatch in the same vvith thankesgiuing, Let your requestes be shevv∣ed vnto God in prayer and supplication, vvith
giuing of thankes. And this we are also no lesse bounde to do by the commandement, whereby we are forbidden to take the name of God in vaine. For in that we are there forbidden to take the name of God in vaine, we are cōmanded also to take and to vse it to his glorie, giuing vnto him the prayse of all goodnesse, helpe, and succour, whiles we aske and looke for the same at his hand. Wherefore except we fly vnto him in our trouble, & necessitie, ex∣cept we cal vpon him for reliefe & soccour, we prouoke his displeasure no lesse, then if we shoulde make vnto our selues Idols, or worship strange gods: for in the contempt of euerie one of the commandemēts, we shewe like contempt and disobedience to the will of God, and all these sentences which com∣maund vs to call vppon God doe apperteine vnto his commaundement: Thou shalt not take the name of the Lorde thy God in vaine, and so prayer is a worke and chiefe seruice be∣longing to this commaundement. We may not therefore thinke that there are no sinnes but Idolatrie, murther, theft, whore∣dome, & such like, but that it is vndoubted∣ly a great sinne also, not to render this ser∣uice to God, that is, not to pray, not to aske, not to looke for helpe from God in our ne∣cessities
not to render thankes for the bene∣fites we haue receiued. Therefore if our vnworthinesse at any time doe crie out against vs, stoppe or feare vs, in such sort, that our consciēces are asto∣nied and flee from God: if wee doubt whe∣ther God hath respect to our prayers, gro∣nings, and teares, wee must set before our eyes, howe that we are commanded, though we be neuer so vnworthie and our sinnes ne∣uer so many and great, to pray for reconci∣liation, Gods fauour and forgiuenesse of our sinnes. For else, whereas God commandeth vs to abstaine from theft, murder, whore∣dome, &c. we may in like sorte excuse our selues and say, that we are vnworthy to obey Gods commaundementes. Great is our ini∣quitie, and manifest is our contempt and de∣spising of God, when we neglect & delay to call for his help. Such as flee vnto God ther∣fore & call vpō him in their necessities, obey his will, & find therein no small consolation, knowing that thereby they do vnto him most acceptable seruice, for as much as hee pro∣noūceth y• nothing is to him more accepta∣ble, thē obedience to his wil & cōmandemēt As wee are commanded of God boldly and without all respect of our owne vnwor∣thines to come vnto him as a mercifull fa∣ther,
and one that knoweth our necessitie, & pittieth out miserie: so hath he promised ve∣rie gratiously to heare vs, and graunt our re∣questes. And hereof riseth yet a farre more comfortable and greater consolation: wher∣in consisteth our whole confidence and trust of obteining succour and mercie at Goods hand. Wherefore he allureth vs wh manie sweete promises to call vpon him.Matth. 7. Aske, saith he, and ye shall haue: seeke, and ye shall find: knocke, and it shall be opened vnto you. Ye shall crie vnto me,Jere. 25. and I vvill heare you: ye shall seeke me & ye shall finde me.Psal. 50. Psal. 145. Call vpon me in the day of trouble, and I vvill deliuer thee. The Lord is nigh to all them that call vpon him, that call vpon him in trueth: he doeth the vvill of them that feare him, and he vvill heare their prayers. He shall call vppon me,Psal. 91. and I vvill heare him: I vvill be vvith him in his trouble, I vvill deliuer him and glorifie him.Esai. 65. At the voyce of thy crie hee vvill rtainelie haue mercie on thee, vvhen he heareth thee, he vvill ansvvere thee. He that is Lorde ouer all,Rom. 8. is rich and bountifull tovvardes them that call vppon him.Psal. 145. He vvill fulfill the desire of them that feare him, he vvill heare their crie, & vvill saue them. And God to declare his rea∣dinesse in hearing of sinners,Esai. 6. saith: Before they crie I vvill ansvvere, and vvhiles they are yet thinking vvhat to speake, I vvill heare.
Among many sweete promises of GOD, though these might be sufficient to prouoke vs to feruent and heartie prayer, yet there be certaine other notable and most comforta∣ble promises, which we shoulde specially haue in remembrance,Luk. 11. as these: If ye vvhich are euill, can giue good giftes to your children, hovv much more shall your heauenly father giue the holy ghost to them that desire him?Ecclus. 2 Consider the olde generation▪ and marke them vvell: vvas there euer any confounded that put his truste in the Lord? or vvho hath continued in his feare and vvas forsaken? or vvhom did he euer dispise that called vpon him? And of all other that is the most notable, which by the Prophet Ioel is added immediatly after the prophesie of that horrible destruction that was at hande, say∣ing: vvhosoeuer shall call vpon the name of the Lorde, shalbe saued. HERE let vs consider the order of the promises, which perteine either outwardly to the bodie, or inwardlie to the soul. Which part (the soule I meane) because it is much more precious then the other, we must first craue such thinges as properly belong to the saluation thereof. But first of all confessing our sinnes vnto God with most humble and penitent heartes, let vs set before vs the pro∣mises of remission of the same. For this
sentence is true: God heareth no sinners, that is, such as delight and continue in sin. Wher∣fore in all our prayers, yea, when we be a∣bout to aske any other thinges, whatsoeuer they be, let vs firste thinke of the remission of sinnes,1. Iohn. . hauing alway in our sight some com∣fortable promises thereof, as this: If vve con∣fesse and acknovvledge our sinnes, he is faithfull and righteous to forgiue our offences, and to cleanse vs from all iniquitie. And herevnto let vs craue the light of the holy ghost, to kindle & con∣firme in vs the true knowledge of God. Let vs pray for the continuance of Gods holie worde and Gospell amongest vs, for the en∣larging of his kingdome, and the aduaun∣cing of his glorie. Let vs begge the gift of faith, repentance, feare, patience, prayer, hope, loue, ioye, peace of conscience, with such other fruites of the spirite, and for euer∣lasting life. And here also we must remember that we doe not onely call our selues continually to account for our newe sinnes, crauing at Gods hand, mercie and forgiuenes of the same, but also for those sinnes which might seeme to haue beene long ago forgotten:Psal. 51. as Dauid ha∣uing confessed an heinous offence, by that occasion returneth euen to his mothers wombe, wherein he had gathered the infec∣tion,
heaping together the sins of his whole life. Euen so in an other place when hee as∣keth an other thing,Psal. 25. he saith: Remember not he sinnes of my youth: remember mee according to thy mercie, for thy goodnesse sake, O Lord. Againe, looke vpon mine affliction and trauell, and for∣giue all my sinnes. When wee haue thus prayed for thinges pertaining to the soule and to the kingdome of God, wee must pray also for corporall be∣nefits, as well common as priuate: as peace & tranquilitie of those countries which giue harborough to the true professours of the gospel & godly congregations, being in this life as Daniel in the midds of the lions. Pray for the peace of Ierusalem,Psal. 122. saith Dauid. Also for defence from misery, deliuerance from trou∣ble, for happie successe in the workes of our vocation, for health, liuing, protection of life, goods, name, &c. And although the Lord knoweth before we aske what we haue need of, & is ready to giue liberally, yea and doth giue often times vndesired: and furthermore hath promised, that seeking first the kingdome of God & the righteousnes thereof, all other things should be giuen vs: yet he commaundeth vs to aske corporall benefits, & that for three causes. FIRST, that wee should know that he is
the authour and giuer thereof, and therefore should not onely be thankefull for the same, but also stirred up, thereby to seeke, loue, and worship him. SECONDLY, that we should be well per∣suaded of his good prouidence towardes vs,Iosu. 1. when wee vnderstand that he doth not one∣ly promise that he will neuer faile vs, but also hath his hand alwaies stretched out to helpe them that cal vpon him. THIRDLY, that our faith of reconciliatiō & forgiuenes of sinnes, should bee exercised through the asking of those corporal things. And herein we must specially & aboue all things seeke the glory of God, & therefore we must pray for these corporall thinges in such sort, that we may offer therwith our o∣bedience vnto God. Hereof we haue exam∣ples of Christ when he saide: father, if it be pos∣sible, let this cp passe frō me: neuertheles, not as I vvill, but as thou vvilt. With this obedience to the wil of God spake Dauid, when he desi∣red to be brought againe into his kingdome, saying: If I shall find fauour in the sight of the Lord,2. Reg, 15 he vvill bring me againe: but if he shall say vnto mee, thou doest not please mee: I am ready: let him do as it seemeth him good.Iob▪ 3. And Iob saith: though he kill me, yet vvil I put my trust in him. Therefore for as much as wee do knowe
that it is the lotte of Gods children to be al∣way vnder the crosse, and therefore concer∣ning these corporall benefites, we knowe not how, or what to aske as we ought: wee must herein offer our obedience vnto GOD, abiding his good will and pleasure so longe as it shall seeme good vnto him to exercise vs in the want therof, who suffereth vs som∣time to be afflicted for our chastisement, and for the probation of our continuance, and also that we may receiue with greater glad∣nesse (if to his diuine wisedome it seeme ex∣pedient for vs) that which with ardent de∣sire we long looked for.1. Cor. 15 S. Paul saith, VVhen vve are iudged, vve are chastened of the Lorde, because vve shoulde not be condemeed vvith the vvorld. But whē we pray for spiritual things, we must aske them absolutely and without condition: for therevnto doe perteine the chiefe promises of the Gospell, of the which God woulde haue vs most assured.Iohn. 6. Verilie, ve∣rily, I say vnto you (saith Christe) he that be∣leeueth in me,Eze. 33. hath euerlasting life. As sure as I liue (saith the Lorde) I vvill not the death of a sinner, but that he returne and liue. To the promises of God we muste ioyne examples, whereby we learne that God hath heard & holpen those that call vpon him. For all deliuerances, whether they be of other
(whereof the scripture is full) or of our sel∣ues (whereof we haue experience) are exam∣ples of Gods promises. Hereby did Dauid comfort himselfe in the anguish and heaui∣nes of his heart,Psal. 77. saying: I vvill remember the vvorkes of the Lorde, and call to minde thy vvonders of olde time. Thou hast mightily deliue∣red thy people, euen the sonnes of Iacob and Io∣seph. Againe,Psal. 31. I vvil be glad and reioyce in thy mercie: for thou hast seene my trouble, thou hast knovvne my soule in aduersitie. And thus be∣ing warned both by promises and examples, let vs learne to cast our care vpon the Lorde, to call vpon him, and to looke for helpe at his hand: So shall our faith by little and little be more firme & certaine, and our heart shall rest in hope & expectation of Gods helpe. But for as much as of our selues we are vnworthie to appeare in Gods sight, whose terrible maiestie comming once into our minde, it is impossible, but that we shoulde flie from him as a fearefull iudge: therefore he hath giuen vnto vs a mediatour, euen our Lorde esus, that he being a meane betweene GOD and vs, might change the throne of dreadfull glorie into the throne of grace, and that we by his merites hauing accesse vnto God, might haue assured trust to finde grace in his sight.1. Ioh. 2. If any man sinne, saith S. Iohn,
vve haue an aduocate vvith the father, Iesus Christ the iust, and he is the Reconciliation for our sinnes. To him saith S. Peter, beare all the Prophets vvitnes,Acts. 10 that through his name all that beleeue in him, shall receiue forgiuenesse of their sinnes.Ephe. 5. By vvhome saith S. Paul, vve haue bold∣nesse and entraunce in all confidence through faith in him.Heb. 4. And againe, VVee haue not an high Prieste vvhich can not haue compassion on our infirmities, but vvas in all pointes tempted like as vvee are, sinne execpted: let vs goe boldly therefore vnto the throne of his grace, that vvee may receiue mercie and finde grace to help in time of neede. And as we are commaunded to call vp∣pon God, and haue a promise also to bee heard: euen so we are commaunded to make our prayers vnto him in the name, faith, and confidence of this our mediatour, and wee haue no promise to be heard without him: in whome are all the promises of God, yea, and Amen,2. Cor. 1. Luk. 11. confirmed and fulfilled. And no man commeth to the father, but by the sonne. For he is our mouth whereby wee speake to the father, hee is our eye whereby wee see the father, and hee is our right hande where∣by wee offer our selues to the Father. What¦soeuer therefore wee aske in his name, wee haue a promise to obtaine it.Iohn. 16. Verily, verily
(saith Christ) I say vnto you, vvhatsoeuer yee shall aske the father in my name, he shall giue it you: in my name, that is, for my sake: your high byshop praying for you. Hitherto ye haue not as∣ked any thing in my name:Ioh. 14 aske and ye shall re∣ceiue. In that day ye shall aske in my name, and vvhatsoeuer ye aske, I vvill doe, that the Father may be glorified in the Sonne. Of prayer there be two partes, Petition, and thankesgiuing. By petition wee poure foorth our desires before God, requiring first those thinges that may set foorth his glorie, and then such benefites as are pro∣fitable and necessarie for vs. By giuing of thankes, we prayse and magnifie his bene∣fits bestowed vpon vs, acknowledging that whatsoeuer good thinges we enioie, we haue receiued them of his free goodnes and libe∣ralitie. Therefore Dauid ioyneth these two partes togither in one verse, when he saith: Call vpon me in the day of necessitie:Psal. 5 I vvill de∣liuer thee, and thou shalte glorifie me The scripture commaundeth vs to vse both, and that continually. For our necessi∣tie is so great, our life is so full of troubles and calamities, and so many daungers hange ouer our heades euery moment, that wee haue all cause ynough, yea euen the most holy with sighes and groninges continually
to flye vnto God, and to call vppon him in most humble wise. But this wee may better perceiue in things pertaining to the soule. For when shall so many great sinnes, whereof wee know our selues guiltie, suffer vs to bee without care and not to craue par∣don of GOD for the same? when will sathan giue vs reast and quietnes? when wil he cease to range about, seeking whome he may de∣stroy? when shall our tentations giue vs∣truce, so that we shall not need to hasten vn∣to GOD for helpe? Finally, the desier of the kingdome and glory of God ought so to drawe vs wholy vnto it, not by fits, but cō∣tinually, that all times should be fit & con∣uenient for vs to pray. Wherefore, not with∣out cause we are so often commaunded to pray continually. And though we be not driuen with like necessitie at al times to pray, yet in this case S. Iames teacheth vs what we ought to doe. Is anie man heauie or afflicted, saith he? Let him pray, that i, let him craue of God helpe and comfort: & vvho so is merry, let him sing, that is, let him praise God. Moreouer the benefites and blessings of God, are large and plentifull towards vs, which way so euer we turne vs, that we can neuer want matter and occasion of prayse and thankesgiuing. And seeing wee ought
to acknowledge God to be the authour and giuer of all good thinges▪ we should alway receiue the same at his hand with thankes∣giuing▪ for to that end God continually be∣stoweth his good blessings and benefites v∣pon vs, that we should continually shewe foorth his prayse, and be thankfull vnto him for the same, and so we render vo him his due honour. And S. Paul, when he saith, that they are sanctified by the worde and prayer, signifieth, that to vs they are not holy and cleane without the word and prayer; and therefore Dauid saith, when he had felt the liberalitie of the Lorde, that there was put into his mouth a newe song▪ that is, a newe occasion of prayse and thankesgiuing. Wher∣by he signifieth, that it is a wicked silence, if we passe ouer any of Gods benefites with∣out praise▪ seing that as ofē as he doth good vnto vs, so often he giueth vs occasion to speake good of hm. We shoulde therefore continually, that is, as much as is possible, at all times, in all places, and in all thinges, as occasions are continually offered vnto vs, lift vp our prayer vnto God in crauing helpe at his hand, and confessing his praise, whereby we may both obteine of him all good thing, & also praise & magnifie his name for all. How this perseuerance in prayer is re∣quired
of vs, Christ himselfe teacheth vs by the parable of the three loaues, and of the widowe,Lu. 11.18 and wicked Iudge: wherebie wee are taught to continue in prayer, with all earnestnesse and feruent supplication, and neuer to faint or giue ouer, vntill we be as∣sured in our spirit, that our prayer is heard. The prayer of the humble, (saith the sonne of Sirach) goeth through the cloudes:Eccle. 35 it ceaseth not vntill it come neere, and it vvill not departe vntill the most high God haue respect therevn∣to. Beholde saith Dauid,Psal. 123. as the eyes of the seruants looke vnto the hande of their maisters, and as the eyes of a maiden vnto the hande of her mistresse: so our eyes vvaite vppon the Lord our God, vn∣till he haue mercie vppon vs. And thus must we not cease to doe, vntill we may bold∣ly say also with Dauid: The Lord hath hearde the voce of my vveeping, the Lorde hath hearde my humble petition, the Lord hath receiued my prayer. Nowe, concerning the forme and manner of praying, leaste wee shoulde followe our owne fantasie, being of our selues so blinde that we knowe not how to pray, or what is meete and expedient for vs, the Lord him∣selfe hath sufficiently instructed vs: Who as he hath taught vs, throughout the whole scripture, how and for what thinges wee
ought to pray: so hath hee set foorth one manner of prayer, in the which hee hath briefly comprehended all such thinges as wee ought, yea or in any wise may aske of God. Wherein hee hath expressed what is due, pleasing and acceptable to him, what is necessarie for vs, and what hee will graunt: so that there is nothing herein omitted, that might be thought vppon, to the prayse and glory of GOD, or come into the minde of man for his profit and commoditie. And this is that prayer that our Lorde Iesus Christ taught his Disciples:Matth. 9. Luke. 11. when they asked of him how they should pray. Whosoeuer therefore shal aske any thing that is not contained in this prayer, they presume to adde some thing of their owne to the wisedome of God, they are not obe∣dient to his will: and they pray without faith, hauing no worde of God to warrante them, and therefore they shall obtaine no∣thing. This praier, saith Tertullian, is the do∣ctrine of the wisedome of God, wherein hee hath taught whatsoeuer hee willed, & wil∣led whatsoeuer was needefull. Albeit we are not so bound to this forme of prayer, that we should not vse any other kinde of words then the Lorde himselfe herein hath vsed. For there are elsewhere set forth in the scrip∣tures,
many prayers farre differing from this in wordes, and yet written by the same spi∣rite, and verie profitable to be vsed of vs. And many prayers also are continually vt∣tered of the faythfull by the same spirite, which varie from the same in wordes. But this is required of vs, that none should looke for, seeke, or aske any other thing at all, then that which is brieflie comprehended in this praye; and which, though it differ in wordes, yet differeth not in sense and sub∣stance: like as it is certaine that all the pray∣ers which are founde in the scriptures, and which do continually proceede frō the harts of the faithfull, are referred by the direction of Gods spirite vnto this prayer, howsoeuer they differ in the varietie of words. Many good and godly men, euen in our dayes well exercised in prayer, haue left vn∣to vs most worthie examples and testimonies hereof, furnished with ample and large mat∣ter to forme holy and true prayer, and full of power to inflame the hearte to a feruent inuocation of Gods holy name: whereof we haue giuen here some taste vnto the godly, and especially to the simple, not yet well ex∣ercised. ¶ Reade them, meditate, and pray, and ye shall finde comfort in your soules.
A Meditation concer∣ning Prayer. THE MINDE OF man hath so large roomthe to receiue good thinges, that nothing in deed can fully fill it, but on∣ly God, whome then the minde ful∣ly possesseth, when it fully knoweth him, fully loueth him, and in all thinges is framed after his will. They therefore (deare Lorde God) that are thy children, and haue tasted somewhat of thy goodnesse, doe per∣petually sigh, that is, doe pray vntill they come thereto: and in that they loue thee also aboue all thinges, it wonderfully woundeth them, that other men doe not so, that is, loue thee, and seeke for thee with them. Whereof it commeth to passe, that
they are inflamed with continuall prayers and desires, that thy king∣dome might come euery where, and thy goodnesse might be both kno∣wen, and in life expressed of euery man. And bicause there are innumera∣ble many things, which as well in them selues, as in others, be against thy glorie, they are kindled with continuall prayer and desire, sighing vnspeakably in thy sight, for the in∣crease of thy spirit. And sometimes, when they see thy glorie more put backe, then it was wont to be, ei∣ther in them selues, or in any other, then are they much more disquieted and vexed. But bicause they knowe, that thou doest rule all thinges after thy good will, and that none other can helpe them in their need, they often∣times do goe aside, all businesse laide
apart, and giue them selues to godly cogitations & talke with thee, com∣playning to thee, as to their father, of those thinges that grieue them, begging thereto, and that most ear∣nestly, thy helpe, not onely for them selues, but also for others, specially for those whome singularly they imbrace in thee, and often doe re∣peate and remember thy gratious benefits both to others, and to them selues also: wherethrough they are prouoked to render to thee heartie thankes, thereby being inflamed, as well-assuredly to hope well of thy good will towardes them, and pati∣ently to beare al euils as also to stu∣die and labour to mortifie the affec∣tions of the flesh, and to order all their whole life to the seruice of their brethren, and to the setting foorth of thy glorie. This they knowe is that prayer,
which thy sonne Iesus Christe our Lord commanded to be made to thee in ye chamber, the doore being shut. In this kinde of prayer he him selfe did watch often, euen all the whole night. Herein was Paul frequent as all thy Saints be. This kinde of prayer, is the true lifting vp of the minde to thee. This standeth in the affections of the heart, not in words and in the mouth. As thy children be endued with thy spirite, so frequent they this talke with thee. The more thy spirite is in them, the more are they in talke with thee. Oh giue me plentifully thy spirite, which thou hast promised to poure out vpon all flesh, that thus I may with thy Saintes talke with thee night and day, for thy onely beloued sonnes sake, Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Moreouer, thy Saintes, to pro∣uoke them to this kind of prayer, do
vse first their necessitie, which they consider in three sortes: inwardly, concerning their soules: outwardly, concerning their bodies: and finally concerning their name & fame: wher∣to they adde the necessitie of those that be committed to them: the ne∣cessitie of thy Church, and of the Common weale. Secondly, they vse thy comman∣dements, which require them vnder paine of sinne, to pray to thee in all their neede. Thirdly, they vse the considera∣tion of thy goodnesse, which art na∣turally mercifull to young Rauens calling vpon thee, much more then to them, for whome Rauens and all things else were made: for whome thou hast not spared thy deare sonne, but giuen him, &c. Fourthly, they vse thy most sweet and free premises, made to heare; and
helpe all them that call vpon thee in Christes name. Fiftly, they vse examples, howe that thou which art the God of all, and rich vnto all them that call vp∣on thee in Christes name, hast heard and holpen others calling vpon thee. Sixtly, they vse the benefits gi∣uen them before they asked, thereby not onely prouoking them to aske more, but also certifying their faith, that if thou wast so good to graunt them many things vnasked, nowe thou wilt not denye them any thing they aske, to thy glorie and their weale. Last of all, they vse the reading and waying of Psalmes and other good prayers, bicause they knowe that thereby peculiarly, besides the other Scriptures, there is no small helpe: as may appeare by Paule, E∣phes.
5. Col. 3. where he willeth the congregation to vse Psalmes, hym∣nes, and spirituall songes, but so, that in the heart we would sing and say them. Not that thy children doe not vse their tongues and wordes in praying to thee: for they doe vse their tongues, speach, and wordes, to stirre vp their inward desire and feruencie of ye minde, ful wel know∣ing, that else it were a plaine mock∣ing of thee, to pray with lippes and tongues onely. Oh that I might feele nowe thy spirite so to affect me, that both with heart and mouth, I might heartily and in faith pray vn∣to thee. Now concerning the things that are to be prayed for, thy children know, that the prayer taught by thy sonne, most liuely and plainely doth containe the same, and therfore they often vse it, first asking of thee their
heauenly father, through Christ, that thy name might euery where be had in holinesse and praise: then, that thy kingdome by regeneration and the ministerie of the gospel might come: & so thirdly, that willingly, perfect∣ly, and perpetually, they might stu∣die to doe, yea doe in deede, thy will with thy holie and heauenly An∣gels, and spirits. These things they seeke and pray for, namely thy king∣dome and thy righteousnesse, before and worldly benefite. After which petitions, bicause all things, yea euen the benefits of this present life doe come from thee, they doe godly desire the same vnder the name of daily breade, being instruc∣ted of thy wisedome, that after spi∣rituall benefites to aske corporall, is not vnséemely vnto thy children, which know both spiritual and cor∣porall to come from thy mercie.
In the other petitions they pray for thinges to be taken from them, beginning with forgiuenesse of sin∣nes: which were impudently prayed for, if that their heartes were not so broken, that they could forgiue all things to al men for their part. They adde their profession, that is, chari∣tie, whereby they professe, that they haue forgiuen all offences done to them. Howbeit, bicause it is not inough to haue pardon of that which is past, except they be preserued from newe offences, they pray thee, not to leade them into temptation, by permit∣ting them to the peruerse suggesti∣ons of Sathan, but rather to deliuer them from his importunitie and po∣wer: vnderstanding Sathan the au∣thour of all euill. Oh (deare God) that thou wouldest endue me with thy spirite of grace and prayer with
thy children accordingly, to make this prayer alwaies when so euer I doe pray. As for outward euills, so long as they do not (as it were) inforce thy people to sinne, in that christian per∣fection doth account them amongest thy benefites: thy Sonne hath not taught thy Church to pray for the taking away of them in this praier: for here he hath contained but those things, for the which all Christians generally and particularly may of faith pray at all times. It often commeth to passe, that exteriour euils, bicause they be not euils in deede, that is, they be not a∣gainst Gods grace in vs, therefore they cannot of faith be prayed for, to be taken away: for thy children that haue faith, doe alwayes preferre thy iudgement, before their owne. The which iudgement, when they know
by that which hapneth to them, they submit them selues thereto wholy: although ye spirit make his vnspeak∣able gronings to helpe their infirmi∣ties by prayer, not to haue them ta∣ken away, but that they might haue strength and patience to beare the burden accordingly. Which burden, if it be too heauie in the better sense and feeling therof, they in their prai∣ers doe complaine something, rather then pray to haue it taken away, as our Sauiour did in ye garden, when he added to his complaint: Not my will, but thy will be done. So do thy people in al their com∣plaintes adde, Not as we will, but as thou wilt: for they are taught by thy spirite, no otherwise to pray for the taking away of corporall euils, either from them selues, or from o∣thers, vnlesse they by the same spi∣rite doe certainely see the same to
make to thy glorie: as did thine A∣postles and seruants, when abso∣lutely and without condition they did aske health or miracle for any, when they healed or raised the deade by prayer: for they knewe, nothing can be better then when it is accor∣ding to thy will. Oh that I might alwaies know thy wil in al things, and for euer apply my selfe thereto. Hereof it commeth that thy saints and deare children, which loue their neighbours as them selues, doe yet notwithstanding, in their prayers aske vengeance of some (as we may reade in the Psalmes of Dauid) bi∣cause in praying and talking with thee, they see by thy holy spirite (for without it is no true prayer) some∣times thy iudgements vpon some, which they perceiue to sin to death, and therefore ought not to be prayed for: bicause thy glorie can not be set
foorth as it should be, without their destruction. Thy wil is alwayes best, and the thing whereto they frame all their desires. Therefore, when they per∣ceiue that it is decreed with thee, such and such by their destruction to set foorth more mightily thy glorie, how should they but desire and pray for the same, and write it as Dauid hath done, that the godly in reading and waying such prayers, might receiue comfort, and the vngodly be afraide: else, when that they perceiue not so manifestly the determined iudge∣ment of God, they in their prayers doe most heartily pray for them, as Samuel did for Saule, Moses for the Israelites, and Abraham for the Sodomites, Oh good father, for thy mercies sake, giue me the true loue of mankinde, but yet so, that I may loue man for thee, and in thee, and
alwayes preferre thy glorie aboue all thinges, through Christe our Lorde. Nowe though thy children doe knowe that thy will can not but be done, and nothing can be done, but that thou of thine owne wil hast de∣termined to doe, although no man should desire the same, yet are they earnest and frequent in prayer: first to render obedience to thee, which requirest prayer as a spirituall ser∣uice to thee: secondly, bicause thou hast ordained prayer to be as an in∣strument and meane, by the which thou workest thinges with thee al∣readie decreed and determined. Thy children do vse prayer to of∣fer thee their seruice, if it shall please thee to vse the same: and as they doe eate and drinke, which is a meane ordained of thee for the conseruation of their life, not looking hereby to
lengthen their dayes aboue their boundes, which alreadie thou hast appointed, but as becommeth them, to vse thy meanes, which thou hast ordained to serue thy prouidence: so doe they (as men herein not curious to knowe thy prouidence further then thou reuealest it) vse prayer as a meane by the which thou art accu∣stomed to worke many of thy chil∣drens desire, that according to thy good will, thou mayest vse the same. They do not thinke a mutabilitie in thee (for thou art GOD, and art not chaunged, with thee there is no variablenesse,) and therefore they pray, not as men which would haue thy determinations and ordinances, (which are in most wisedome, and mercie) to be altered, but rather that they might submit their willes to thine, and make them more able to heare thy will and pleasure.
They knowe thou hast promised to helpe them calling vpon thee: wherefore they dout not, but so thou wilt doe, and therefore pray accor∣dingly. They loue thee hartily, and there∣fore they can not but desire much to talke with thee, that is, to pray: euen as a well manered and louing wife will not take vpon her to aske any thing of her husband at all, but that she hopeth he will take in good part, & doe of his owne freewill, although she had spoken nothing thereof. When she knoweth what her hus∣bands will is in things, she gladly talketh with him thereof, and accor∣ding as she seeth he is disposed to do, she will often desire him to do it. Euen so thy children (I say) which hartily loue thee, in that they knowe thy wisedome and will is best, howe can they but often talke with thee,
and desire thee to doe that which they know is best, which they know also thou wouldest do, if none shuld aske or pray for the same? Thy children vse prayer, as a meane, by the which they see plainly thy power, thy presence, thy proui∣dence, mercie and goodnes towards them, in graunting their petitions, and by prayer they are confirmed of them all. Yea thy children vse pray∣er, to admonish them, howe that all things are in thy handes. In prayer they are (as it were) of thee put in minde of those thinges which they haue done against thee, their good Lorde. By reason whereof repen∣taunce enueth, and they conceiue a purpose to liue more purely euer af∣terwardes, and more heartily to ap∣plie them selues to al innocencie and goodnesse. Who nowe considering so many
great commodities to come by rea∣son of prayer, would maruell, why thy children are much in prayer, and in laboring to prouoke others there∣vnto? For as none that is a suter to any other, will vse any thing which might offend or hinder his sute: so no man that vseth prayer, wil flatter him selfe in any thing that should displease thee, to whom by prayer he moueth sute, whensoeuer he praieth: so that nothing is a more prouoca∣tion to all kinde of godlinesse then prayer is. As concerning outward thinges which thy childrē pray for, although they know thy wil and decree is not variable, & thy purpose must needes come to passe, yet do they receiue by their prayer no small commoditie. For, either they obtaine their re∣questes or not. If they doe obtaine them, then proue they by experience
that thou doest the will of them that feare thee, and so they are more kind∣led to loue and serue thee. And in deed for this purpose thou art wont, when thou wilt doe good to any, to stirre vp their mindes to desire the same good of thee, to the ende that both thou and thy giftes may be so much the more magnified and set by of them, by howe much they haue bene earnest suters and petitioners for the same. For howe can it but inflame them with loue towardes thee, to perceiue and feele thee so to care for them, heare them, and loue them? If they doe not obtaine that they pray fort, yet vndoubtedly they re∣ceiue great comfort, to see that the euils which presse them, and wherof they complaine still, doe not oppresse and ouercome them, and therefore they receiue strength to beare the
same the better. O good father helpe me, that I might heartily loue thee, complaine to thee in all my needes, and alwayes by prayer to poure out my heart before thee. Amen. Iohn Bradford. A meditation vpon the Lordes prayer. Our Father. Exod. 1.THou good Lorde which madest heauen and earth, the sea, and all that is therin, together with thy dearely beloued sonne Iesus Christ, and with thy holie spirite, thou the same God which openest thy selfe to Adam by thy promise:Gen. 3. Gen. 12.22.23.24.25. Exod. 13.14.15. Exod. 19.20. thou the God of Abraham, Isaac, & Iacob▪ yt which broughtest thy people of Israel foorth of Egypt with a mightie hand, and a stretched out power: thou which gauest thy lawe vpon Mount Sinai:
thou which spakest by thy Pro∣phetes,Heb. 1. and last of all in these latter dayes, by thy dearely beloued sonne Iesus Christ, whom thou wouldest should be made a second Adam,1. Cor. 15 Rom. 5. that as by the first▪ we are Children of wrath, carnall, and full of concupis∣cence: so by him we might be made children of grace, and spirituall, by communicating with him the qua∣litie, merites, vertues, and grace of his flesh, through the operation of his holie spirite, as he communica∣ted with vs ye substance of our flesh, in the wombe of the Virgin Marie, in the operation of the same holie spi∣rite,Matth. 1. Luk. 1. being that blessed seede which was promised to Adam,Gen. 3.12 26.28. Psal. 89.2. Reg. 7. Luk. 1. Psal. 110. Abraham, I∣saac, Iacob, and Dauid, which should bruse the Serpentes heade, which should bring the blessing on all na∣tions, which should reigne ouer thy house for euer, and mightily ouer∣come
thine and our enimies, as in∣deede he did by his incarnation, na∣tiuitie, circumcision, exile, baptisme, fasting, temptation, doctrine, mira∣cles, workings, agonies, bloudie prayer, passion, death, resurrection, and ascension,Rom. 8. and yet he still doth by his meditation and intercession for vs,Matth. 24 and at the length will on all partes fully accomplish by his com∣ming to iudgement, which will be soudenly in the twinckling of an eye,1. Cor. 15. in the blast of a trumpet, and shoute of an Archangel,1. Thes. 4.1 2. Cor. 5. Exod. 32.33. Psal. 5. Ioel 2. Psal. 15. Gen. 6. when he shall be seene with thousandes of Saintes, & innumerable thousands of Angels, al the whole world being on fire, & all the people yt euer were, are, or shall be, then standing before his tribunall or iudgement seate, to render an account of that they haue done in this body, be it good or bad: Thou (I say) this God which art
holy, righteous, true, wise, pure, chast, mightie, mercifull, good, grati∣ous, a hater of sinne, & a reuenger of vnrighteousnes, &c. Our hart is by na∣ture so corrupt and vn∣searcha∣bly euill, that out of it sprin¦geth all wicked concupis∣cence, so that the inclinati∣on therof is prone to euil, e∣uen from our birth vp: & our mind and vnderstan¦ding is so darkned that of our selues we cānot perceiue those thin¦ges that be of god as is all the wise∣dom whi¦ch we re∣ceiue frō Adam na∣turally, or other∣wise at∣taine by labour or studie be∣fore rege¦neration. wouldest that I which am borne in sinne, and con∣ceiued in iniquitie, which by nature am a childe of wrath, and in whome dwelleth continuall enimitie against thee: that I which am nothing but sinne, and one that doth euil always before thee, should call thee and be∣leeue thee, this God and Father of our Lord & Sauiour Iesus Christ, to be in very deed my father: that is, thou wouldest I should be most as∣sured, that thou of thine owne good wil which thou barest to me wards before I was, yea before the world was, hast in Christe chosen me to be thy childe, and through him art be∣come my most louing Father, from whome I should looke for all good things, & be most certenly persuaded
that looke howe much thou art more then a man, so much thy loue and fatherly prouidence towardes me, passeth the loue and prouidence of any father towards his childe, in lo∣uing me, caring howe to helpe me, prouiding for me, nurturing me, and helping me in al my needes. So cer∣taine thou wouldest haue me to be of this, that to doubt of it doth most displease thee and dishonour thee, as though either thou were not true, or not able to doe these thinges, or else becamest not my father in respect of thine owne goodnesse in Christ only, but also in respect of my worthines and deserts. And that I should not wauer or doubt of this,Causes to comfort our faith, that God s our fa∣ther. that thou art my deare Father, and I thy childe for euer, through Iesus Christ, it is required in the first commaundement, which saith: I am the Lord thy God, yu shalt
haue none other Gods but me. Againe, thy sonne doth here com∣maund me to call thee by the name of father. Moreouer, in the first ar∣ticle of my beliefe, I professe the same, in saying: I beleeue in God the Father almightie. Besides this, there are many other things to confirme me herein, as the creation and go∣uernement of the world generally, and of euery creature particularly, for all is made and kept for man, and so for me, to serue me for my commo∣ditie, necessitie, and admonition. A∣gaine, the creatiō of me, in that thou hast made me after thy Image, ha∣uing a reasonable soule, body, shape, &c. where thou mightest haue made me a toade, a Serpent, a Swine, de∣formed, frantike, &c. Moreouer, thy wonderful conseruation, nourishing and keeping of me hitherto in my in∣fansie, childhood, youth, &c. all these
(I say) should confirme my faith of thy fatherly loue. But of all things, the opening of thy selfe by thy word and promise of grace made after mans fall, first to Adam, then to Abraham, Isaac, Iacob, and so to other, being published by the Prophetes from time to time, & last of all accomplished by thy deare Sonne Iesus Christ,2. Cor. 1. in whom thy promises are yea and Amen: the o∣pening of thy selfe thus (I say) in and by Christ, is the most chiefe and sure certificate, that thou art my fa∣ther for his sake, & I thy deare child, although of my selfe I am most vn∣worthy. For thou according to thy promises,Iohn 3. Ephe. 5. hast not spared thy deare sonne Iesus Christe, but giuen him to the death of the Crosse for my sinnes. Thou wouldest he should be made flesh of our flesh, and bloud of our bloud, in the wombe of the
Uirgin Marie, by the operation of thy holie spirit, that we by the wor∣king of the same spirite, through the merites of his flesh and bloud, might be made flesh of his flesh, and bloud of his bloud: that is, as he hath the substaunce of our flesh and bloud: euen so we might haue and for euer enioy in him and through him, the qualities, vertues, and gifts of righ∣teousnesse, holinesse, innocencie, im∣mortalitie, and glorie, wherewith he hath endued our nature in his owne person for vs all, that as nowe in faith and hope we haue the same, so in his comming, we might fully en∣ioy them in verie deede: for then shall our bodies nowe vile,Phil. 3 be like to his glorious bodie. Herein appeareth thy loue,1. Iohn 3. not that we loued thee, but that thou lo∣uedst vs, and hast giuen thy Sonne for vs. Herein doest thou commend
vnto vs thy loue, that when we were yet sinners, Christe thy deare sonne dyed for vs, so that nothing should separate vs from thy loue in Christ Iesus,Rom. 5. neither affliction, an∣guish, persecution, famine, neither life nor death,Rom. 8. Rom. 5. &c. For if when we were enimies, we were reconciled vnto thee by the death of thy sonne, much more we being reconciled, shal be saued by his life. And that I should not doubt hereof, but certainely be persuaded all this to pertaine to me, where I might haue bene borne of Turkes and Infidels, loe thou wouldest I should be borne of Christian Pa∣rents, brought into thy Church by Baptisme,What Baptisme is, and what it requireth which is a Sacrament of adoption, and requireth faith as well of remission of my sinnes, as of sanctification and holinesse, to be wrought of thee in me by thy grace
and holie spirite. Where I might haue bene borne in an ignorant time & Region, thou wouldest I should be borne in this time and Region, wherein is more knowledge reuealed, then euer was here, or in many places is. Where I might haue bene of a corrupt iudgement, and entangled with many errours, loe, thou of thy goodnesse, as thou hast reformed my iudgement, so doest thou keepe it, & nowe for the same iudgements sake, doest vouchsafe, somewhat by the crosse to trye me.What is the effect or fruite that com∣meth of this cer∣taine per∣suasion, that God is our Fa∣ther. By all which things I should confirme my faith of this, that thou alwayes hast bene, art, and wilt be for euer my deare father. In respect whereof, as I should be certaine of saluation, & of the in∣heritance of heauē for euer: so should I be thankefull, call my whole care
on thee, trust to thee, and call on thee, with comfort and certaine hope for all things that I want. For in that thou hast giuen to me this benefite to be thy childe vnde∣serued and vndesired on my behalfe, simplie and onely in respect of thine owne goodnesse and grace in Christ, least at any time I should doubt of it, howe should I but hope certain∣ly that nothing profitable to me can be denyed, in yt thy power is infinite. For as thy good will is declared in adopting me, so nothing can be final∣ly wanting in me, which may make for my weal, for then should not thy power be almightie: & therefore my beliefe requireth, that I should be∣leeue in thee the father Almightie. In consideration wherof, I shuld in all thinges behaue my selfe as a child, reioice in thee, praise thee, trust in thee, fear, thee, serue thee, loue thee.
call vpon thee, &c. But alas, how heauie hearted am I? How vnthankfull am I? howe ful of vnbeliefe, and doubting of this thy rich mercy? how little do I loue thee, feare thee, call vpon thee, &c? Oh be merciful vnto me, forgiue me, good Father for thine owne sake, and graunt me the spirit of thy chil∣dren, to reueale thy selfe vnto me, & Iesus Christ thy deare Sonne our Lorde, by whome we are made thy children, that I may truely knowe thee, heartily loue thee, faithfully hang vpon thee in all my needes, with good hope call vpon thee, ren∣der faithfully this honor to thee, that thou art my God and father, and I thy deare childe through thy grace in Christ, and so alwayes be indued with an assured hope of thy good∣nesse, and a faithfull obedient heart in all things to thy holie will.
At thy handes and from thee, as I must looke for all thinges, so come I vnto thee, & pray thee to giue me these thinges, which thy deare chil∣dren haue, and thou requirest of me, that I may come and aske them of thee, as nowe I doe, through Iesus Christ our Lord. As by this worde (Father) I am taught to glory of thee and in thee, and all that euer thou hast (for thou art wholy mine, my Lord, my God, my father:) so by this word (Our) I am taught to glorye of all the good that all and euerie of thy seruaunts that euer were, are, or shall be, had, haue, or shall haue. For nowe I am taught to beleeue that thou hast cal∣led me into the communion of thy Church and people, whome hereby I perceiue thou hast commanded to be as carefull for me, as for them selues, and in all their prayers to be
as mindful of me, as of them selues. Againe, as by this word (Father,) I am taught to remember and ren∣der my dutie I owe to thee wardes, faith, loue, feare, obedience, &c. so by this worde (Our) I am taught my dutie towards thy people, to be care∣ful of them, and to take their sorrow, pouertie, affliction, &c. as mine own, and therfore to labour to helpe them in heart and hand after my vocation and abilitie, vtterly abhorring all pride, selfeloue, arrogancie, and con∣tempt of any. By reason whereof I haue great cause to lament, and to reioyce. To lament, bicause I am so farre from consideration, much more from do∣ing my dutie to thy people, in thou∣ghtes, words and deeds. To reioyce, bicause I am called of thee, and pla∣ced in the blessed societie of thy Saintes, and made a member and
citizen of the heauenly Ierusalem: & bicause thou hast giuen in comman∣dement to all thy Church, to be as carefull for me as for them selues. But alas, howe farre am I here∣from? As I am guiltie of vnthank∣fulnesse for this thy calling me into the blessed communion of thy deare sonne and Church, yea of thy selfe: so am I guiltie of selfeloue, vnmer∣cifulnesse, pride, arrogancie, forget∣fulnesse, and contempt of thy chil∣dren: for else I could not but be o∣therwise affected, and otherwise la∣bour then I doe. Oh be mercifull vnto me good father: forgiue me, and graunt for Christes sake, that as my tongue soundeth this worde Our, so I may in hart feele the true ioy of thy bles∣sed communion, and the true loue and compassion which thy children haue and feele towardes their bre∣thren:
that I may reioyce in al trou∣ble, in respect of that ioyful commu∣nion: that I may denye my selfe to honour thy children vpon earth, and endeuour my selfe to doe them good for thy sake, through Iesus Christe our Lorde. I come onely to thee, to giue me that which I can not, nor must not elsewhere haue, and thou requirest it of me, that therefore I should as thy childe, come and craue it to thy glorie. Which art in heauen. AS by these wordes Our Father, I am taught to glorie & reioyce for the blessed cōmunion which I am called to with thee, deare Father, with thy Christe, and with thy holie Church: so also am I here taught by these wordes, Which art in heauen, to reioyce in respect
of the place and blessed ioyes where∣vnto at the length in thy good time I shall come. For nowe I may per∣ceiue that as heauen is thy home, so is it mine also, being, as I am, thy childe through Christ, although here for a time I am bodily on earth and in miserie. Againe, by these words, which art in heauen, I am admonished, not on∣ly to discerne thee from earthly Fa∣thers, and to knowe howe that thou art Almightie, present in all places, and of most puritie, to confirme thereby my faith, to be prouoked the more to feare thee, to reuerence thee, &c. But also I am admonished to iudge of thy fatherly loue, by hea∣uenly benefites, and not by corporal, simplie and alonely: for oftentimes ye wicked prosper more in the world, and haue more worldly benefites then thy children. So that by this I
see, thou wouldest pull vp my minde from earth and earthly thinges, to heauen and heauenly thinges, and that I should see further by corpo∣rall benefites, thy heauenly proui∣dence for me. For if thou place me thus on earth, and thus blesse me as thou doest, and hitherto hast done from my youth vp, in that thou art nothing so carefull for my body as for my soule: howe should I but thinke much of thy prouidence, for it is thy home, where is such glorie as the eye hath not seene, &c. Of which thinges these corporall bene∣fites of thine giuen me on earth, should be (as it were) inductions, & the taking of them away, admoniti∣ons to be more mindfull of perma∣nent thinges, and lesse mindfull of transitorie things. By reason hereof I haue great cause to lament, and to reioyce. To
lament, bicause I am so earthly minded, so litle desirous of my home, so vnthankefull for thy prouidence and fatherly protection here on earth. To reioyce, bicause of my home, and the great glorie thereof: bicause thou doest so prouide for me here, bi∣cause thou doest so correct and cha∣sten me, &c. But alas, I am altoge∣ther a wretch, earthly, and vnthank∣full, not onely for these corporall be∣nefites, health, riches, friends, fame, wisedome, &c. for thy fatherly cor∣rection, sicknesse, temptation, &c. but also for thy heauenly benefites, for Christ Iesus, for the promise of thy spirite, for thy Gospell, &c. yea, euen for heauen it self and thy whole glo∣rie,. 106. as the Israelites were for the land of Canaan, and therefore neuer enioyed it, but perished in the wil∣dernesse. I am proud in prosperitie
and forget thee, waxing secure and carelesse. I am impatient in ye crosse, and too much consider worldly dis∣commodities. Oh deare father, forgiue me for thy Christes sake all mine vnthank∣fulnesse, loue of this world, contempt and obliuion of thy heauenly bene∣fites, and graunt me thy holy spirite to illuminate the eyes of my minde with the light and liuely knowledge of thy presence, power, wisedome, & goodnesse in thy creatures, but spe∣cially in Christe Iesus thy sonne, & so by the same spirite inflame myne affections, that I may desire nothing in earth but thee,Col. 3. Philip. 3. and to be present with thee, that my conuersation may be in heauen continually, from whence graunt me still to looke for the Lorde Iesus, to make this my vile bodie like vnto his owne glori∣ous and immortall bodie, accor∣ding
to his owne power, by which he is able to doe all things. As thou hast giuen me to be thy childe: so I pray thee, giue me these things whi∣che be the properties of thy children, giuen from thee in thy good time. Hallowed be thy name. THy name is that whereby thou art knowne: for names serue to discerne & know one thing from an other.Rom. 1. Nowe, though thou art knowne by thy creatures, yet in this our corrupt state, they serue but to make vs excuselesse. Therefore most properly, liuely, and comfortably thou art knowne by thy holy worde, & especially by thy promise of grace, and freely pardoning and receiuing vs into thy fauour for Christ Iesus sake.Psal. 48.138. How Gods name is hallowed For the which goodnesse in Christe, thou art praysed and mag∣nified, according to thy name, that
is, so much as men knowe thee in Christe, they magnifie thee, & praise thee, which here thou callest hallow∣ing or sanctifying. Not that thou art the more holy in respect of thy selfe, but in respect of men, who the more they knowe thee, the more they cannot but sanctifie thee: that is, thei cannot but as in them selues by true faith, loue, feare, & spirituall seruice honour thee: so also in their outward behauiour and wordes, they can not but liue in such sort, as other seeing them, may in, and by their holinesse and godly conuersation, be occasio∣ned, as to knowe thee, so to sanctifie thy name accordingly: and there∣fore thou settest foorth here vnto me, what is the chiefe & principall wish and desire of thy children and peo∣ple,The chei desire of gods chidren. namely that thou in Christe mightest be truely knowne and ho∣noured, both of them selues and of
other, inwardly and outwardly: as by the contrarie a man may easily perceiue,The grea∣test griefe of Gods people. that the greatest sorrowe and griefe thy people haue, is igno∣rance of thee, false seruice or religi∣on, and wicked conuersation. A∣gainst the which they pray and la∣bour diligently after their vocati∣ons, as they for the obtaining of the other, both to other and to them sel∣ues, doe take no small paine in pray∣er, studie, and godly exercise. By reason hereof I see, that I am farre from this desire and lamenta∣tion which is in thy children.Our ig∣norance. I see mine ignoraunce of the true know∣ledge of thee and thy name: for else it had not needed thee so by thy word to haue reuealed thy selfe. I see also mine owne ignorance of the excellencie of the same: for else woul∣dest thou not haue tolde me, that the sanctfying of thy name is the chiefest
thing thou requirest of euery man. Againe,Our great neede. I see my great want of holinesse: for else thou needest not to teach me to seeke and pray for that I want not. Moreouer, I see my great per∣uersitie, which would not seeke at thy handes for sanctification, al∣though I see my neede thereof. For the which thou wouldest not haue commaunded me to pray, if I seeing my want, would haue prayed vnto thee for the same. Last of all,Gods loue. I see thy wonderfull goodnesse, which wilt vndoubtedly giue vnto me sanctification and ho∣linesse: for thou wouldest not that I should aske for that thing, that thou wilt not giue me. So that I haue great cause to la∣ment and reioyce. To lament, bi∣cause I am so farre from this desire and lamentation which thy children
haue. Also bicause of my ignorance, pouertie, peruersitie, vnthankfulnes &c. but most of all, bicause thy holie name, word and religion is so blas∣phemed both in doctrine & in liuing, of many, especially in this realme. To reioyce I haue great cause, for thy exceeding goodnesse and mercie, which wouldest so disclose thy selfe by thy workes, word, and Gospell: which wouldest open these things thus vnto me, and also giue vnto me and others sanctification in thy sight by faith, and in the sight of men by purenesse of life, and godly conuer∣sation. But, alas, I do heartily nei∣ther the one nor the other, that is, la∣ment or reioyce, as thou father whi∣che searchest my heart, doest right well knowe. Oh be merciful vnto me, and for∣giue me, yea, giue me of thine owne pitie, thy holie spirite to reueale and
open to my minde effectually my miserable estate and condition, my ignorance, peruersitie, & my careles∣nesse for thy true honour and disho∣nour: in such sort, that I may hear∣tily lament these euils, and haue thē pardoned & taken from me, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Againe, good Father, giue me the same thy holie spirite, to reueale to me thy name, worde, and Gospell, that I may liuely know thee, vnfai∣nedly loue thee, heartily obey thee, and aboue all thinges desire and la∣bour by all meanes lawfull, that all godlinesse in doctrine and conuersa∣tion may be exercised both in me and in all others, for whom thou woul∣dest I should pray. Here thinke vpon ye state of religiō, and ye life of the professors of the Gos∣pell, yt thou maiest lament some, pray for some, and giue thankes for some.
Let thy kingdome come. Gods kingdom in respect of his po∣wer.THY kingdome is in two sortes to be considered: vniuersally and particularly. Uniuersally, accor∣ding to thy power, wherewith thou gouernest all things euery where in earth, heauen, hell, diuels, Angels, men, beastes, foules, fishes, and all other creatures. Psal. 104.Of this kingdome spake Dauid when he said: This kingdome ruleth ouer all Particularly thy kingdome is to be considered according to thy grace,Gods kingdom in respect of his grace. wherewith thou reignest only in thy Church and elect people, ru∣ling and gouerning all and euerie member of thy Church, to thy glorie and their eternall comfort. Not that out of this Church I exclude thy power, (for as therwith thou defen∣dest thy people, so thou punishest
thy enimies:) but bicause thy grace is specially considered, being (as it were) the verie keeper that keepeth and guideth thy people. The time wil be when this king∣dome of grace and power,Gods kingdom in respect of his glorie. now being as distinct, shall be vnited and made one kingdome of glorie: which will be when Christ shall giue vppe his kingdome into thine hands, that is, in the resurrection, when death the last enimie shall be subdued, & thou shalt be all in all. In the meane season, this king∣dome of grace is miraculously and mightily propagated,Howe Gods kingdom is here cōserued and en∣larged. enlarged, and gouerned by the true Ministerie of thy word and sacraments, through the working of thy holie spirit. And this is the meane and way where∣by, as thou didst first plant, so doest thou enlarge, amplifie, and preserue the same.
This kingdome of grace begun, continued, and enlarged by the true preaching of thy Gospell, and mini∣stration of thy sacramentes, is the thing which Christ teacheth here thy children to pray for, that it might come: that is to say, that thy Gospel might so mightily, purely, and plen∣teously be preached (mauger the head of all thine enimies) that the number of thine elect might be brought in, and so the kingdome of thy glorie might appeare. So that, as I see thy children desire, pray, and labour that thy Gospell might be truely preached, heard, and liued in them selues and in others: so they lament the not preaching and refu∣sing, the not liuing and not beleeuing thy Gospell: yea they lament the lingring of ye cōming of thy Christ: for in his comming they knowe they shall be like vnto him, and hauing
this hope,1. Ioh. 3. they purifie themselues as he is pure. By reason hereof I see, first that I am farre from this de∣sire and lamenting, which thy chil∣haue:Our ig∣norance. I see my ignoraunce of thy kingdome and power euerie where: also of thy grace in thy Church one∣ly, and of thy glorie when all the e∣nimies of thy grace shall be cast downe, and thy glory and power shal embrace each other. I see my igno∣rance, howe acceptable a seruice to thee is the true preaching, and the hearing of thy Gospel: for else thou hadst not needed to haue placed this petition next to the petition of the sanctifying of thy name. Againe, I see here mine vnable∣nesse to enter into thy kingdome, and to attaine to it: for else what neede should I haue to pray for that to come from thee, which otherwise may be atchieued?
Our per∣uersitie.Thirdly, I see my peruersitie and contempt of thy kingdome & grace: for although I see my want, yet I would not desire thy kingdome to come, if thou diddest not commaund me so to pray: and if I would haue praied for it, thou wouldest not haue commaunded me. Gods goodnes.Last of all, I see thy goodnesse, which wilt bring thy kingdom, and that as generally, by sending foorth ministers to preach truely: so parti∣cularly, by regenerating me more and more, & by giuing me, as grace here, so glorie elsewhere: for thou wouldest not I should pray for that which thou wilt denye. So that I haue great cause to la∣ment and reioyce. To lament, bi∣cause of my miserable state and con∣dition: bicause of my sinne, igno∣rance, rebellion, peruersitie, sathans power, contempt of thy grace, thy
Gospel, and ministerie here, or else∣where. To reioyce, bicause of thy goodnesse & great mercie which hast brought me into thy Church, keepest me in it, and wilt do so stil. Also bi∣cause of the ministerie of thy worde and sacraments, by which the holie Ghost is and will be effectuall: and finally bicause of the great glorie wherevnto thou hast called me, and which nowe thou wilt giue vnto me asking the same. But alas, how vnthankful I am and sorrowlesse, Lord thou knowest, for my hart is not hid from thee. Oh be mercifull vnto me and forgiue me good father, and graunt me the spirit of thy children, to reueale vnto me my ignorance of thy kingdome, my pouertie and peruersitie, that I may lament the same, and daily la∣bour for thy helpe and thy holie spi∣rite, to suppresse the kingdome of
sinne in my selfe and in others. Againe, graunt me that same thy holie spirite to reueale to me thy kingdome of power, grace and glory, to kindle mine affections, to regene∣rate me more and more, to reigne in me as in a piece of thy kingdome, to giue to me to desire, to pray, and to labour for thy kingdome both to my selfe and to others effectually to thy glorie, and to assure my conscience of thy goodnesse, that thou wilt giue me grace and glorie, &c. Here call to minde the state of the ministerie and ministers, the light and life of gospellers, the errors and here∣ies which men be intangled withall. Thy will be done. Gods om¦nipotent will vn∣knowne and vnre∣uealed.AS thy power is infinite, so is thy wisedome accordingly. Whereby, as we may perceiue yt nothing is, or can be done against
thy power, or otherwise then by it: so is there not, nor cannot be any thing done against, or otherwise then by thy omnipotent & secrete will, which is alwayes (as thou art) good holie, and iust, howe farre so euer it seeme otherwise to our foolish reason and iudgement: and therefore here we are taught to pray, that thy wil may be done here without sinne on mans behalfe, as it is on the Angels be∣halfe in heauen. Againe, for as much as thou art incomprehensible of thy selfe, as wel concerning thy power,Gods wl reuealed and kno∣wen. as concerning thy wisdome: we may not according thereto search thee, but rather adore and worship thy maiestie, and trem∣ble at thy iudgements, and workes, and therefore pray alwayes, that we may be content with thy wil, and be buxome and obedient thereto. And for as much as thou hast re∣uealed
to vs so much of thy will in thy word written, as is necessarie for vs in this life to knowe, yea, as we can attaine vnto, and a little further: we ought to take all things done a∣gainst the same, as sinne and trans∣gression, although thou canst vse the same sinne, to serue thy prouidence: of the which prouidence we can not, nor may not iudge further then thou hast, and shalt open it vnto vs. So that this petition, Thy wil be done, is not simplie to be vnderstoode concerning thy omnipotent wil vn∣reuealed, against the which nothing is nor can be done, but rather concer∣ning thy will reuealed in thy lawe and Gospell, the which thou here teachest me that we should desire, not only to know it, but also to do it, and that in such perfection and wil∣lingnesse, as it is in heauen. The which thing I perceiue hereby, that
thy children doe desire daily in and for them selues and others, and doe lament that contrarie, in whome so euer it be: so that often their eyes gush out with riuers of teares,Psal. 119. bi∣cause men keepe not thy lawes. By reason hereof I see that I am farre from the sighes and teares of thy people. I see my ignorance of thy will,Our ig∣norance. if thou haddest not opened the same by thine owne mouth. I see my ignoraunce, howe acceptable a seruice obedience to thy will is, and therefore doest thou place this peti∣tion among the first and continuall desires of thy children. Againe I see my pouertie in god∣ly obedience,Our need. which had neede to be taught to pray for it, thereby to sig∣nifie vnto me my want and vnabili∣tie to attaine it, but by thy gift. Thirdly,Our diso∣bedience. I see my disobedience: for else neuer wouldest thou haue
commaunded me to haue prayed for the doing of thy will, if I seeing my want, would haue prayed so. Gods goodnes.Last of all, I see thy goodnesse, which wilt giue to me and others, to obey thy will: that is, to loue thee with all our heartes, to loue our neighbor as our selues, to dye to our selues, to liue to thee, to take vp our crosse and to followe thee, to beleeue, to repent, &c. for else thou wouldest neuer haue bidden vs to pray for a thing which we should not looke for. So that I haue great cause to la∣ment and reioyce. To lament, bi∣cause of my miserable state and con∣dition, bicause of my sinne, ignorance pouertie, and peruersitie: also bicause thy will is euery where, either not knowne or contemned, and sathans will, the wil of the world, and of the flesh, readily obeyed. To reioyce I haue great cause, for
that thou hast opened thy selfe and will vnto mankinde: for that also thou peculiarly hast taught me these things, and bicause thou wilt grant me grace to do the same. But alas, howe vnthankefull I am, and howe hard hearted, thou Lord doest know. Oh be merciful vnto me, and for∣giue me: I beseech thee gratious God. Graunt me thy holy spirite to reueale to me my ignorance of thy will, my pouertie & peruersitie, that I may hartily bewaile it, &c. and by the helpe and working of the same spirite, may suppresse the will of the flesh. Againe, graunt me thy holie spirite to reueale to me thy will de∣clared in thy lawe and Gospell, that I may truely knowe the same: and inflame so my affections, that I may will and loue the same in such sort, that it may be my meate and drinke to doe thy will.
Here cal to mind the ten comman∣dements of God particularly or gene∣rally, what therein he requireth, and pray for the same particularly as you see your neede, and that not only for your selfe, but also for others. Pray for patience to suffer what crosse so euer God shal lay vpon you, and pray for them that be vnder the crosse, that they may be patient: pray for spiritual wisdome in euery crosse, peculiar or publike, that you may see and loue Gods will. Giue vs this day our daily bread. Bread.BY Bread, the foode of the bodie, are vnderstoode all thinges necessarie for this corporall life, as meate, drinke, health, successe in our vocati∣on, &c. Giue.By this worde Giue we should vnderstand, that not only spirituall thinges, but also corporall benefites
are Gods free giftes, and come not for our worthinesse or trauell taken about the same, although our trauels be oftentimes meanes, by the which God doth giue corporall things. By Daily we vnderstand the con∣tented mindes of thy children,Daily. with that which is sufficient for the pre∣sent time, as hauing hope in thee, that they shall not want, but daily shall receiue at thy handes plentie and ynough of all things. By this word Our are as wel vn∣derstoode publike benefites,Our. as peace in the Common weale, good Magi∣strates, good lawes, seasonable wea∣ther, &c. Also particular benefites, namely children, health, successe in the workes of our vocation, &c. And besides this, by it we should see the care, euen for corporal things which thy children haue for others, as well as for them selues.
So that here I may learne howe farre I am from that I should be, and that I see thy children are come vnto, I see my ignorance also, howe that, as spirituall thinges doe come from thee, so doe temporall thinges: and as they come from thee, so are they conserued and kept of thee: and therefore thy children are thankfull, & looke for them as thy meere giftes, notwithstanding the meanes which they vse if they haue them: howbeit they vse them but as meanes,Psal. 127. for ex∣cept thou worke therewith, all is in vaine. Againe, here I am taught to be content with that which is sufficient for the present time, as thy children be which haue the shortnesse of this life alwayes before their eyes: and therefore they aske but for daily su∣stenance, knowing this life to be cō∣pared to a day, yea a watch, a sound,
a shadowe, &c. Moreouer, I may learne to see the compassion and brotherly care which thy children haue one for an other. Last of all, here I may see thy goodnesse, which as thou wilt giue me all things necessarie for this life, (or else thou wouldest not bid me aske, &c.) so thou commaundest all men to pray and care for me, & that bodily, much more then, if they be a∣ble, they are commaunded to helpe me both in body and soule. By reason whereof I haue great cause to lament and reioyce. To la∣ment, bicause I am not so affected as thy children be, bicause of my ig∣norance, my ingratitude, my peruer∣sitie and contempt of thy goodnesse, and of the necessitie of thy people, which (alas) be in great miserie, some in exile, some in prison, some in po∣uertie, sicknesse, &c.
To reioyce I haue great cause, bicause of thy goodnesse in teaching me these thinges, in commaunding me to aske what so euer I want, in giuing me so many things vnasked, in keeping the benefites giuen me, in commaunding men to care for me, to pray for me, to helpe me, &c. But alas, how far I am either frō true lamenting or reioycing, Lorde thou knowest. Oh be mercifull vnto me, and helpe me, forgiue me, and graunt me thy holie spirit to reueale to me my neede, ignoraunce, great ingratitude, and contempt of thy mercies and thy people, and that in such sort, yt I might heartily lament and bewayle my miserie, & through thy goodnesse be altered with thy people, to mourne for the miseries of thy children, as for mine owne. Againe, reueale to me thy good∣nesse, deare father, euen in corporall
things, that I may see thy mercie, thy presence, power, wisedome and righteousnesse in euerie creature and corporall benefite, and that in such sort, that I may be throughly affec∣ted truely to reuerence, feare, loue, and obey thee, to hang vpon thee, to be thankefull to thee, and in all my neede to come vnto thee, not onely when I haue ordinarie meanes, by the which thou commonly workest, but also when I haue none, yea, when al meanes & helpes are cleane against me. Here remember ye state of your chil∣dren and familie: also your parentes, neighbours, kinsfolkes: also your friendes, countrie, Magistrates, &c. as you shall haue time thereto, and by Gods good spirit shal be prouoked. Forgiue vs our debts, as we forgiue them that are debters vnto vs.
Debtes.BY Our debtes we vnderstand, not onely the thinges we haue done, but the omission and leauing vn∣done of the good things we ought to doe. Our.By Our we vnderstand, not only the particular sinnes of one, but also generally the sinnes of all, and euery one of the Church. Forgiue∣nesse.By Forgiuenesse we vnderstand, free pardon and remission of sinnes, by the merites and desertes of thy deare sonne Iesus Christ, who gaue him selfe a raunsome for vs. Our for∣giuing.By Our forgiuing of other mens offences to vs ward, we vnderstand thy good will, not onely that it plea∣seth thee that we should liue in loue and amitie, but also that thou woul∣dest haue vs to be certain of thy par∣doning vs of our sinnes. For as cer∣tain as we are, that we pardon them that offend vs, so certaine should we
be that thou doest pardon vs: wher∣of the forgiuing our trespasses is (as it were) a sacrament vnto vs. So yt by this petitiō I am taught to see that thy children, although by imputation they be pure from sinne, yet they acknowledge sinne to be & remaine in them, and therefore doe they pray for the remission and for∣giuenesse of the same. Againe, I am taught hereby to see howe thy children doe consider and take to heart, not only the euils they doe, but also the good they leaue vn∣done: and therefore they pray thee heartily for pardon. Moreouer, I am here taught to see that thy children are carefull for other men, and for their trespasses, and therefore pray that they might be pardoned in saying: Our sinnes, and not My sinnes. Besides this, I am taught here
to see howe thy children not onely forgiue all those that offend them, but also pray for the pardoning of the offences of their enimies, and such as offend them: So farre are they from maliciousnesse, pride, re∣uengement, &c. Last of all, I am taught to see howe mercifull thou art, which wilt haue vs to aske pardon (whereof thou wouldest that we should in no oint dout, but be most assured, that for Christes sake thou hearest vs) & that not onely for our selues, but al∣so for many others: for thou doest not commaund vs to aske for any thing which thou wilt not giue vs. By reason whereof I haue great cause to lament and reioyce. To la∣ment, bicause of my miserable estate, which am so farre from these affec∣tions that are in thy children: which am so ignorant and carelesse of sinne,
not only in leauing good vndone, but also in doing euill, and that daily, in thought, word, & deede, &c. I speake not of my carelesnes for other folks sinnes, as of my parentes, children, familie, magistrats, &c. neither of the sinnes of them to whom I haue gi∣uen occasion to sinne. To reioyce I haue great cause, bicause of thy mercy in opening to me these things, in commanding me to pray for pardon, in promising me pardon, and commanding others to pray for me. And surely I ought to be persuaded of thy mercy, though my sinnes be innumerable: for I see not onely in this, but in euerie peti∣tion, howe that euery one of the Church prayeth for me, yea Christe thy sonne, who sitteth on thy right hand, prayeth for me, &c. Oh deare father, be mercifull vnto me, and forgiue me al my sinnes, and
of thy goodnesse giue me thy holie spirite to open mine eyes, that I may see sinne, the better to knowe it, the more truely to hate it, and most earnestly to striue against it, and that effectually, both in my selfe and others. Againe, graunt me the same thy holy spirite, to reueale vnto me the remedie of sinne by Christ only, and to worke in me faith to embrace the same by Christe, and thy mercies in him, that I may hencefoorth be in∣dued with thy holie spirite, to begin to obey thy good will more & more, and to increase in the same for euer. Here call to minde the special sin∣nes you haue committed heretofore. Remember, if you haue occasioned any to sinne, to pray for them by name. Remember that Gods lawe should be so deare vnto vs, that the breaking thereof in others, should be
an occasion to make vs to lament with teares, &c. Lead vs not into temptation. BIcause of our continuall & great infirmities: bicause of the great diligence and subtilties of our enimies: and bicause thou art wont to punish sinne with sinne (which of all punishments is the greatest & most to be feared) in this petition thou wouldest haue thy children to haue the same in remembrance, and for a remedie hereof thou hast ap∣pointed prayer, so that ye only cause why any are ouercome and led into temptation, is for that they forget what they desire in the petition go∣ing before this, which should neuer be out of their memorie, to prouoke them to be more thankefull to thee, and more vigilant and heedie here∣after for falling into the like perils.
For which to be auoyded, yu doest most gratiously set foorth a remedie, in commaunding vs to pray after pardon for our sinnes past, & for thy grace to guide vs, so that we be not led into temptation, but might be deliuered from euill. And bicause y• wouldest haue all thy children to hang wholy vpon thee, to feare thee only, & only to loue thee, thou doest not teach them to pray, suffer vs not to be led, but lead vs not into temp∣tation, that (I say) they might only feare thee, and certainly knowe that sathan hath no power ouer so much as a pig, but what so euer thou gi∣uest vnto him, and of thy secrete, but most iust iudgement doest appoint him to vse, not as he will (for then we were all lost) but as thou wilt, which canst will nothing, but that which is most iust: as to giue them to the guiding of sathan, which will
not be guided by thy grace, as thou diddest Saul, &c. Occasions to euil are in two sor∣tes:Occasiōs to euill in two sorts One by prosperitie and successe: an other by aduersitie and the crosse, &c. The euils comming of successe, commonly are vnthankfulnes, pride, securitie, and forgetting of our sel∣ues forgetting of others, forgetful∣nesse of God, of our mortalitie, &c The euils comming of aduersitie, commonly are impatiencie, murmu∣ring, grudging, dispairing, contem∣ning of God, flattering of men, stea∣ling, lying, with many other euils, whereto tentations will entice a man that is left to him selfe:What ten¦tations are to the godly, & what the are to the wicked. where as to one that is guided with Gods spirite, temptations are but trials to the glorie of GOD, comfort of the tempted, and edifying of thy Church. But (as I saide) if a man be left alone, tentations entice euē to
the diuell him selfe: and therefore thy children pray to be deliuered from euill, vnderstanding thereby Sathan him selfe, the sower and supporter of all euill. And this thy children do as wel for others, as for them selues. So that I may learne hereby many good thinges: First to remember often our infirmitie and weaknesse, and the dangerous estate we stande in, in respect of our flesh, of the world which is full of euill, of Sathan which seeketh to sift vs, & as a roaring Lion to destroy vs, and of our sinnes which deserue al kinde of punishments and correction, that I might with thy children feare thee, watch, pray, and desire the day of redemption and deliuerance from all euils. Againe, I may learne here, that to auoyde all daungers and euils, is not in the power of man, but onely
thy worke. By reason whereof, I should consider thy great goodnesse, which hitherto hast kept me from so many euils both of soule and bodie, yea of name, goods, &c, as thou hast done in my infansie, childhood, youth, middle age, &c. Thirdly, I may learne here that I should be carefull for others, both that they might be deliuered from their euils, and that they might be preserued from temptation, & from being ouercome in the same, & there∣fore thou teachest me not to pray, Deliuer me from euill simply, but, deliuer vs from euill. Last of al, I am taught hereby to see thy goodnesse towardes me, whi∣che wilt deliuer me from euill, and from being ouercome in tentations: for thou wouldest not haue me aske for that which I should not certain∣ly looke for at thy handes. By reason
whereof thou wouldest haue me to be in a certaintie of my saluation for euer. For else I can not beleeue my prayer to be heard, if that finally I should not be deliuered from euill: and therefore thou ioynest hereto a giuing of thankes, which with thy Church I should say: For thine is the kingdome, thine is the power, thine is the glorie, for euer. By reason whereof, I haue great cause to lament and to reioyce. To lament, bicause of my corruption, infirmitie, weakenesse, obliuion, and carelesnesse for thy people, ingrati∣tude, &c. bicause of sathans power, vigilancie, & prudencie, which hath ouercome most, graue, wise and holy men, whereof some neuer recouered: as Cain, Cham, Achitophel, Saul, Iudas &c. To reioyce, bicause of thy good∣nesse, which teachest me this, and shewest me the remedie, commaun∣dest
all thy Church to pray for me, and wilt at length deliuer me from all euill, and giue me glorie. But alas, I am altogether carelesse and miserable. Oh be mercifull vnto me deare father, and for Christes sake forgiue me all my sinnes: graunt me thy holy spirit, to reueale to me mine infirmities, weaknesse, perils, daun∣gers, &c. in such sort, that as I may heartily lament my miseries, so I may aske and obtaine thy grace to guide me from all euil for euermore. Againe, graunt me the same thy holy spirite to reueale to me thy loue and kindnesse towards me (and that in eternitie:) in such sort, that I may be throughly persuaded of the same, become thankfull vnto thee, & daily expect and looke for the reuelation of thy kingdome, power, and glorie, as one that for euer shall haue the frui∣tion of the same, through thine owne
goodnesse and mercy in Christe, pre∣pared for me before the beginning & foundation of the world was laide. Here call to mind our securitie, sa∣thans vigilancie, our negligence, his diligence, our infirmitie, his abilitie, our ignorance, his craft and subtiltie, &c. Againe, call to minde, how that he hath ouerthrowne for a time, many of the deare Saintes of God, to whome we are to be compared in nothing: as Adam, Eue, Lot, Iudas, Thamar, Mo∣ses, Aaron, Myrian, Sampson, Gedeon, Ely, Dauid, Solomon, Ezechias, Iosias, Peter, Thomas, & innumerable moe. Also cal to minde the goodnesse of God, and of our sheepeheard Christe, which hath kept vs hitherto, keepeth vs still, and teacheth vs here to knowe that he will keepe vs for euer: for he would not haue vs aske for deliue∣rance from euill, if that he would not
we should certainely looke for the same. If thou doubt of finall perse∣uerance, thou dishonourest God. Be certaine therefore, rest in hope, be still in his word. See also howe he hath commaunded his whole Church, and euerie member thereof, to pray for thee as wel as for them selues, in these and all other things. Nowe and then goe about to rec∣kē how many & diuers kinds of euils there be, & thereby as you may know you are deliuered from none but by Gods great goodnesse: so may you see that the number of euils that you haue, are nothing to be compared to the multitude of euils wherewith, if your Christ were not, the diuel would al to beray you, infect & corrupt you. But what are all the miseries and euils that can be, to be compared to ye least ioy prepared for vs in heauen? Oh thinke of those ioyes, and pray
that when the tide of death commeth, we may hale foorth of the hauen of this flesh, and this world ioyfully. In praying this petition, call to minde the euils you haue bene in, the euils you are in, & the euils you may fall into, if God should not preserue you, that you might be stirred vp the more to thankefulnesse, to prayer, to trust in God. For thine is the kingdome, thine is the power, thine is the glorie, for euer. AS in ye beginning of this praier by these words (Our father whi∣ch art in heauen) thy children are excited & stirred vp to a ful cōfidence of obtaining the petitions folowing, & all things necessarie: so in the later end thou hast added for ye same pur∣pose these wordes (For thine is the kingdom, thine is &c.) wherin I am
taught these many things. First that in prayer I should haue such consi∣deration of thy kingdome, power, glory, and eternitie, that my minde should be striken with an admirati∣on of the same. Secondly, that I should so consider them, especially in prayer, that I should not doubt, but that thou workest rulest and gouer∣nest all things euerie where, in all persons and creatures, most wisely, iustly, and mercifully. Thirdly, that in prayer al my petitios shuld tend to the etting foorth of thy power, of thy kingdome, and of thy glorie. Last of al, that in praier I should in no wise doubt of being heard, but be assured that thou, which hast com¦maunded me to pray, and hast pro∣mised to heare me, dost most grati∣ously for thy mercies sake, & truthes sake, heare my petitions, according to thy good wil, through Iesu Christ
thy deare sonne our Lorde and onely Sauiour. By reason whereof I haue great cause to lament and reioyce. To la∣ment, bicause I consider not these thinges in prayer, in such sort as should moue me to admiration, and gratitude: bicause I consider not thy power and wisedome generally in al things: bicause I am so carelesse for thy kingdome: and bicause I am so full of dubitation and doubting of thy goodnesse. To reioyce I haue great cause: bicause thou reuealest these things vnto me on this sorte: bicause of thy power, kingdome and glory, which maketh to the hearing of my prayers, and helping of me: bicause thou wilt vse me as thine in¦strument to set foorth thy kingdome, power, and glorie: and bicause it pleaseth thee to heare my prayers, and assuredly wilt saue me for euer.
But alas, howe farre am I from these lamentings and reioycings? By reason whereof I deserue dam∣nation. Oh, be mercifull vnto me, and forgiue me, and of thy goodnesse grant me thy holie spirite, to reueale to me my blindenesse, obliuion, and contempt of thy kingdome, power, and glorie, with the greatnesse of my doubtings, that I may heartily, as lament them, so haue them pardoned and taken from me, through the me∣rites of Iesus Christ thy sonne. Againe, giue me thy holy spirit to reueale to me in such sort, thy king∣dom, power, glory, and eternitie, that I may always haue the same before mine eyes, be moued with the admi∣ration thereof, labour effectually to set foorth the same, and finally, as to haue the fruition thereof after this life: so to increase in an assured, cer∣taine, and liuely expectation of the
same, that I may alwayes and in all thinges reioyce in thee, through Christ, and giue lauds, thankes, and prayses perpetually, vnto thy most holy name: Oh blessed Father, Sonne, and holy Ghost, three per∣sons and one God, to whome be all honour and glorie, world without end. Here thinke that if the kingdome, power, glorie, and eternitie be Gods, which is our Father, what our digni∣tie is, which be his children. If the po∣wer be our fathers, of whome should we be afraid? If the diuell be subiect to the Lordes power and kingdome, (as he is) howe can the subiect haue power ouer vs which be sonnes and heires, in that he hath not power ouer Porkets, without the prouidence and permission of God? Therefore full well should we pray, Lead vs not into temptation, rather then, let vs not be lead
into temptation: for power is the Lords, and the diuell hath none but that he hath of Gods gift. No, he were not a∣ble to receiue power, if God did not make him able, although the ex∣ecution of it, is rather of Gods permission. Giue all thankes, prayse, and glorie, to God our Fa∣ther, through Christe our Lord and Sauiour. So be it. Iohn Bradford.
PRIVATE PRAYERS for the Morning and Euening, and for other times of the day. When you awake out of your sleepe, pray thus. MOst mercifull God and father of our Sauiour Iesus Christ, I most humbly thanke thee for the sweete sleepe and comforta∣ble rest which thou hast giuen me this night past: beseeching thee, that like as thou hast nowe awaked my bodie from sleepe, so thou wouldest awake my soule from the sleepe of sinne and darkenesse of this world: and that which thou hast now awa∣ked out of sleep, thou wouldest after death (whereof this sleepe is but an image) restore and raise againe to life euerlasting. O gratious God,
make my bodie, I heartily pray thee, such a companion, or rather a mini∣ster of godlinesse to my soule, this day and all the time of this present life, that in the life to come, it may be partaker with the same of euerla∣sting happinesse, through Christe Iesus our Lord. Awake thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall shew light vnto thee. Ephe. 5. Occasions to Meditate. Here call to mind ye great mirth & blessednes of the euerlasting resurre∣ction. Also remember to muse vpon that most cleare light, yt bright mor∣ning and newe clearenesse of our bo∣dies after the long darkenesse which they haue bene in. All then shall be full of vnspeakable ioy and felicitie. When you behold the day∣light, pray.
O Lord God, thou most glorious, & true light, from whence this light of the day and sunne doth spring, and shine vnto vs: O light which lightenest euerie man y• com∣meth into this world: O light whi∣che knowest no night nor euening, but art alway a midday most cleare and faire: without whom al is most horrible darkenesse, and by whom al things are most cleare and bright: O thou wisedome of the eternal father of mercies: lighten my minde, that I may see those thinges only which please thee, and may be blinded to al other things. Grant me so to walke in thy wayes by the light of thy ho∣ly worde, that nothing else may be light and pleasant vnto me. Lighten mine eyes, Oh Lorde, that I sleepe not in death, least mine eni∣mies say, I haue preuailed against him. Psal 30.
Occasions to Meditate. Muse a while, how much the light and eye of the minde and soule is bet∣ter then of the bodie. Also howe much more we ought to care for the soule, that it may see well, then for the bo∣die. Moreouer, that beastes haue bo∣dily eyes as well as men, but men on∣ly haue eyes of the minde, and that, such as are godlie wise. When you arise, pray. OUr first parents cast downe them selues from a most excel∣lent, high, & honorable state, in∣to shame & miserie, & into the deepe sea of all wickednesse and mischiefe: but oh Christ, thou putting forth thy hand, didst raise them vp againe. E∣uen so we, except we be raised vp by thee, shall lie still for euer. O good Christe, our most gratious redee∣mer, as thou doest mercifully rayse
vp now this my body, euen so I be∣seech thee, raise vp my minde and heart to the true knowledge & loue of thee, that my conuersation may be in heauen where thou art. If you be risen with Christ, thinke vpon those things yt be aboue. Col. 3. Occasions to Meditate. Thinke howe foule the fall of A∣dam was by reason of sinne: and so of euery one of vs from the height of Gods grace. Againe, thinke vpon the inestimable benefite of Christe, by whose helpe we daily arise againe from our fallings. When you apparel your selfe, pray. O Christe, clothe me with thine owne selfe, that I may be so farre from making prouision for the flesh to fulfill the lustes ther∣of,
that I may cleane put off all de∣sires, and crucifie the kingdome of the flesh in me. Be thou vnto me a garment to keepe me warme, and to defend me from ye cold of this world. If thou be absent (deare Lorde) all things are colde, weake, and deade: but if thou be with me, all things are warme, fresh, and chearefull, &c. Graunt therefore, that as I com∣passe this my bodie with this gar∣ment: so thou wouldest cloth me wholy (but specially my soule) with thine owne selfe. Put vpon you, as the elect of God, bowels of mercie, meekenesse, loue, peace, &c. Col 3. Occasions to Meditate. Call to minde a little howe we are incorporate into Christ. Againe, howe he doth cloth vs, gouerne and nourish vs, and vnder his winges, protection & prouidence, preserueth vs.
When you are made readie, to begin the day withall, pray. O Almightie God and most mer∣cifull father, thou knowest and hast taught vs also something to know, that the weakenesse of man and woman is great, & that without thy grace they can neither doe nor thinke any good thing. Haue mercie vpon me, I humbly beseech thee, thy most weake, fraile, and vnworthie childe. Lighten my minde, that I may with pleasure looke vpon good things only. Inflame my hart with the loue therof, that I may careful∣ly couet them, and at the last by thy gratious conducting may happily attaine them, through Iesus Christ our Lorde. I distrusting altogether mine owne weakenesse, commend and offer my selfe, both soul and bo∣dy into thy handes.
Thy louing spirite lead me foorth into ye land of righteousnes. Psal. 143. Cogitations meete to begin the day withall. Thinke first that man consisteth of soule and body, and that the soule is from heauen heauenly, firme and im∣mortall: but the bodie is from the earth earthly, fraile, and mortal. Againe, thinke that though by rea∣son of sinne wherein you are concei∣ued and borne, the partes of the soule which doe vnderstande and desire, be so corrupt, that without speciall grace to both partes, you can neither knowe nor loue any good thing in Gods sight, much lesse then doe that is good: yet this notwithstanding, thinke that you are regenerate by CHRISTES resurrection, (which your Baptisme requireth you to be∣leeue) and therefore haue both those
partes something reformed, both to knowe, and to loue, and therefore to do also some good in the sight of God through Christe: for whose sake our poore doings are accepted for good, the euill and infirmitie cleauing ther∣vnto, not beeing imputed through faith. Thinke that by faith, which is Gods seede (for they which beleeue are borne of God, and made Gods chil∣dren) giuen to those that be ordained to eternall life: thinke (I say) that by faith you receiue more and more the spirite of sanctification, through ye vse of Gods word and sacramentes, and earnest prayer, to illuminate your mindes, vnderstanding, iudgement, and reason, and to bowe, forme, frame, and inflame your affections with loue and power to doe that which is good, and therefore vse you the meanes a∣foresaid accordingly.
Thinke that by this spirite, you are through faith coupled to Christe as a liuely member, and so to God, and (as it were) made one with him: and by loue, which springeth out of this faith, you are made one also with all that be of God, and so you haue felowship with God and all good men that e∣uer were or shall be, in all the good that God and all his Saintes haue or shall haue. Thinke that as by faith, and loue, through the spirite of God you are nowe entred into this communion (the blessednesse whereof no tongue can expresse (so after this life you shal first in soule, and in the last day in bo∣die also enioy for euer the same so∣cietie most perfectly, which nowe is but begunne in you. Thinke then of your negligence, that doe so little care for this your happie estate.
Thinke vpon your ingratitude to God for making you, redeeming you, calling you, and so louingly adop∣ting you. Think vpon your folly in fantasing so much earthly & bodily pleasures. Thinke vpon your deafnesse and blindnesse, which heare not God not see him, he calling you so diligently by his workes, word and sacraments. Thinke vpō your frowardnes which will not be led of God, and his spirit. Thinke vpon your forgetfulnes, & in consideration of your heauenly e∣state, how your body is the temple of the holy Ghost, your members are ye members of Christ, the whole world, and all things therein are your owne. Therefore say vnto your soule, O my soul, arise, follow God, contemne this world, purpose wel and pursue it, long for the Lords comming, be readie and watch, that he come not vpon thee vn∣wares.
And for so much as you must liue to Gods pleasure, see the vocati∣on and state of your life wherevnto God hath called you, and pray to God for grace, knowledge, and abilitie, to take the most profitable thinges in hand, well to begin, better to goe on, and best of all to end the same, to Gods glorie, and to the profit of your brethren, and thinke that time lost wherein you speake not, or doe not, or at the least thinke not some thing to Gods glorie, and the commoditie of your brethren. When you go foorth of the doores, pray. NOwe must I walke among the snares of death, stretched out of sathan and of his mischieuous ministers in the world, carying with me a friende to them both, and a foe to my selfe, euen this body of sinne
and sinnefull flesh. Oh graund cap∣taine Christ, lead me and guide me, I beseech thee. Defend me from the plagues & subtilties, whereof I am in danger. Graunt that I may take all things that happen, as I should doe, and setting mine eyes vpon thee onely, I may so goe on forward, in thy wayes, as by nothing I be hin∣dred, but rather furthered, so that all my doings may tend to thy glorie. Shewe me thy wayes (O Lord) and teach me thy pathes. Psal. 25. Occasions to Meditate. Consider, howe vainely the most part of men are occupied: how many wayes they trouble and cumber them¦selues, thereby much alienating their mindes from the knowledge and co∣gitation of that which they should most esteeme, and so become a lette and an offence to others. As in going
abroad you will see that your appa∣rell be seemely in the sight of men: so see howe seemely you appeare in the sight of God. When you are going any iourney, pray. THis our life is a pilgrimage. From the Lord we came, and to the Lord we make our iourney: howbeit through dangerous and pe∣rillous wayes, which our cruell eni∣mies haue and do prepare for vs, be∣ing nowe more then starke blinde by reason of sinne. O Christ, which art a most true loades-man and guide, and also most expert, faithfull and friendly, put thou out thine hande, o∣pen mine eyes: make thy high way knowne vnto me, which thou did∣dest first enter into, out of this cor∣ruptible life, and hast prepared the same for vs to immortalitie. Thou
art the way, leade vs vnto the father by thy selfe, that all we may be one with him, as thou and he together be one. Shewe me the way that I should walke in, for I lift vp my soule vnto thee. Psal. 124. Or pray thus. MErcifull father, thou art wont to send to thy seruaunts & men of simple hearts, thine Angels to be their keepers, & (as it were) guides, as elder brethren to watch vpon thy weake children. So diddest thou to young Tobias, to Iacob, to Abra∣hams seruant, to Iosua, &c. O gra∣tious God, though we be much vn∣like vnto them (so many are our sin∣nes) yet for thine owne goodnesse sake, send thine holie Angels to pitch their tents about vs, to hide vs and defend vs from Sathan & his slaues,
to carrie vs in their handes, that we come not into further daunger then thou wilt deliuer vs out of, for thine owne sake. His Angels are ministers for them that are heires of saluation. Heb. 1. Sathan sleepeth not, but seeketh al∣wayes to destroy vs. 1. Pet. 5. Occasions to Meditate. Thinke something howe wee are straungers from our countrie, from our home, from our original, I meane from God. Againe, thinke vpon our madnesse, that doe linger and loyter so gladly in this our iourney and pil∣grimage. Also howe foolish we are to fantasie things which we can not car∣rie with vs, and to contemne consci∣ence, which will alwayes be a compa∣nion to vs, to our ioy, if it be good, but to our shame and sorrow if it be euil and corrupt. Finally howe vnna∣turall
we are, which so little desire to be at our home, to be with our onely father, Master, fellowes, and friends. When you are about to receiue your meat, pray thus. THis is a wonderfull mysterie of thy worke (O maker and gouer∣nor of the world) that thou doest sustaine the liues of men and beastes with these meates. Surely this po∣wer is neither in the bread nor foode, but in thy will and word, by which word al things do liue and haue their being. Againe, howe great a thing is it that thou art able continually to giue sustenaunce to so many crea∣tures? This is spoken of by thy pro∣phete in setting foorth thy prayses: All things looke vp to thee,Psal. 145. and thou giuest them meate in due season: thou openest thy hand, and fillest with thy blessing euerie liuing thing.
These doubtlesse are wonderfull workes of thine Almightinesse. I therefore heartily pray thee (O most liberal Lord and faithfull father) that as thou by meate, through thy word doest minister life to these our bo∣dies: euen so by the same word, with thy grace thou wouldest quicken our soules, that both in soule and bodie we may please thee, til this our mor∣tall carkasse shall put on immortali∣tie, and we shall neede no more any further foode, but thee onely, which then wilt be all in all. Taste and see howe good the Lord is. Psal. 34. Blesse the Lord (O my soule) which feedeth and filleth my mouth with good things. Psal. 103. Occasions to Meditate. Thinke a little how great Gods po∣wer is that made vs. Also thinke howe
great his wisedome is to preserue vs. But most of all, thinke howe many things are giuen to our vse: howe won∣derfull it is to giue vs life, but most of all to propagate and aduaunce to im∣mortalitie the life of the soule by his onely becke. Last of all thinke, that God by his prouidence for thy body, would haue thee to confirme thy faith of his prouidence likewise for thy soule. In the meale time pray. O Most liberall distributer of thy giftes, which giuest vs al kinde of good thinges to vse, and being pure, giuest pure things, being holie giuest holie things: graunt to vs thy grace that we misuse not these thy gratious giftes giuen to our vse and profite. Let vs not delight in these things, but let vs delight in thee from whome they come, as necessarie
for vs for a season: till we come vnto thee. Graunt vs to be conuersant a∣mongest thy giftes, soberly, purely, temperately, and holily, bicause thou art so. Then shall we not turne that to the poyson of our soules, which thou hast giuen for the medicine of our bodies: but vsing thy benefites thankfully we shall finde them pro∣fitable, both in soule and body. Occasions to Meditate. Thinke that the meats and drinkes set before you, are giuen to you to vse and not to abuse. Thinke they are gi∣uen to profite, and not to hurt you. Thinke that thei are not giuen to you alone, but vnto others also by you. In eating and drinking, thinke that you doe but feede the wormes. Remember the poore prisoners, the sicke, the afflic∣ted, &c. as though you were in their case.
ohn 6. ohn 4.Thinke vpon the food of your soul, Christes bodie broken, and bloudshed. Desire the meate that lasteth for euer: labour for it. Christes meate was to do his fathers will. After your meate, pray. BY corporall meates thou doest sustaine our corporall daily life, ready otherwise to perish. The which surely is a great worke: but yet this is much greater, more profi∣table and more holie, that thy grace (O Iesu Christ) doth preserue vs from the death of the soule. For this life we ought much to thanke thee: and bicause thou doest prolong it with thy good giftes, we most hear∣tily praise thee. Howe be it, this life is but the way to eternall life, which we beseech thee for thy deathes sake that thou wilt giue vs, and so shall we not onely giue thee (as we may)
thankes for a time, for temporall things: but also eternall thankes for eternal things. O graunt to vs these our desires for thy mercies sake. A∣men. Occasions to Meditate. Thinke nowe that God hath giuen thee this his blessing of foode and su∣stenaunce, and thereto time that thou mightest, as repent, so seeke his glorie, and the commoditie of thy brethren: therefore goe thereabouts: but first pray for grace well to begin. Againe, consider how thou hast bene partaker of other mens labours, as of the Hus∣bandmans, the Milners, the Bakers, the Bruers, the Butchers, the Cookes, &c. See therefore that thou be not a drone Bee, but rather such a one as may helpe the hiue. If God haue thus fed thy body which he loueth not but for thy soules sake: howe can it be
then, but that he will be much more readie to feede thy soule? Therefore take a courage to thee, and goe to him for grace accordingly. Cogitations for about the midday. As thy bodie is nowe compassed on euerie side with light, so see that thy mind may be also. As god giueth thee thus plentifully this corporall light, so pray him that he will giue thee the spirituall light. Thinke that as the Sunne is nowe most cleare, so shal our bodies be in the day of iudgement. As nowe the Sunne is come to the high∣est, and therfore will beginne to drawe downeward: so is there nothing in the world so perfect & glorious, whi∣che when it is at the full, will not de∣crease and so weare away.
When you come home againe, pray. THere is nothing (O Lord) more like to thy holie nature, then a quiet mind. Thou hast called vs out of the troublesome disquietnesse of the world, into that thy quiet rest and peace, which the world can not giue, being such a peace as passeth all mens vnderstanding. Houses are or∣dained for vs, that thereby we might be defended from the iniurie of the wether, from crueltie of beastes, from disquietnesse of people, and rest from the toyles of the world. O gratious father, graunt that through thy great mercy my body may enter into this house, from outward actions, but so, that it may become boxom and obe∣dient to the soule, and make no re∣sistaunce againste the same, that in soule and body I may haue a godly
quietnesse and peace to praise thy ho∣lie name. Amen. Peace be to this house, and to all that dwell in the same. Matt. 10. Occasions to Meditate. Thinke what a returne and howe merrie a returne it will be to come to our eternall, most quiet, and most hap∣pie home, then will all griefe and sor∣rowe cease. What so euer here is plea∣sant and ioyfull, the same is nothing but a verie shaddowe in comparison of that which is to come. At the Sunne going downe, pray. HOwe vnhappie are they, (O Lord) from whom thye Sunne goeth downe & giueth no light, I meane thy grace which is alwaies cleare as the midday. Darke night vnto them is the midday, which de∣part
from thee. In thee is neuer night, but alwayes day light most cleare. This corporall Sunne hath his courses, nowe vp, nowe downe: but thou deare Lord, if we loue thee, art alwayes one. O that this blocke and veile of sinne were taken away from me, that there might be alwaies cleare day in my minde. Occasions to Meditate. Thinke that as we are not sorrie when the Sunne goeth downe, bicause we knowe it will rise againe: euen so we should not sorowe for death, wher∣through the soule and bodie doe part asunder: for they shall eftesoones re∣turne and come together againe in most glorious wise.This is meant of the blou∣die time of queene Marie. So long as the Sunne is vp, wilde beastes keepe their dennes, Foxes their burrowes, Owles their holes, &c. but when the Sunne is downe, then come they abroade: so
wicked men and hypocrites kepe their dennes in the time of the Gospell, but it being taken away, then swarme thei out of their holes, like Bees, as this day doth teach. When the candles be light, pray. MOst thicke and darke cloudes do couer our mindes, except thy light (O Lord) doe driue them away. Thy sunne (O most wise wor¦ker) is as it were a firebrand to this worlde. Thy kingdome whereby light commeth both to soule and bo∣die, is a firebrand to the spirituall world. After day when the night commeth, thou hast giuen for the re∣medie of darkenesse a candle. After sinne for the remedie of ignoraunce, thou hast giuen thy doctrine, which thy deare sonne hath brought vnto vs. O thou that art the authour and
master of all trueth, and art the true light, make vs so to see, that the dim∣nesse of our mindes may be driuen cleane away. Lift thou vp the light of thy coun∣tenaunce vpon vs, and send ioy and gladnesse into our hearts. Psal. 4. Thy word is a lanterne to my feete, and a light vnto my pathes. Psal. 119. Occasions to Meditate. Thinke that the knowledge which God giueth vnto vs by ye candlelight, (whereby we see those things in this night of our bodies which are expedi∣ent for vs) should make vs to wish much more for this doctrine of God and spirituall light of our soules, and when we get it, the more to esteeme it, and diligently to embrace it. Againe, that as all would be horrour without candlelight, so there is nothing but meere confusion, where Gods word ta∣keth no place.
When you make your selfe vnreadie, pray. THis our life and weake knit bo∣die by reason of sinne, by little & little shall be dissolued, & so shall be restored to the earth from whence it was taken: then will be an end of this vanitie, which by our follie we haue wrought to ourselues. O most meeke father, so doe thou vntie me (for thou art he that hast knit these our weake members together) that I may perceiue my selfe to be losed & dissolued, and so may remember both of whome I was made, & also whi∣ther I must goe, least I be had vn∣prouided vnto thy tribunall seate. Put off the olde man with his lustes and concupiscences. Col. 3. Ephe. 4. Be content with Ioseph to put off thy prison apparell, that thou mayest put on newe. Gen. 41.
Occasions to Meditate. Thinke that as we do willingly put off our garments, bicause we shall re∣ceiue them againe when the night is past: so we should not willingly for∣sake our bodies when God by death shall call vs, bicause we shall receiue them againe in the resurrection of the iust. When you enter into your bed, pray. THe day nowe ended, men giue them selues to rest in the night, and so this life finished, we shall rest in death. Nothing is more like this life then euerie day: nothing more like death then sleepe: nothing more like to our graue, then our bed. O Lorde our keeper and defender, graunt that I now laying me downe to rest, being vnable to keepe my self,
may be preserued from the craftes and assaultes of the wicked enimie: And grant further, that whē I haue run the ace of this life, thou woul∣dest of thy mercy call me vnto thee, that I may liue and watch with thee for euermore. And nowe gratious God giue me to take my rest in thee: and bring to passe, that thy goodnesse may be euen in sleepe before my eyes, that sleeping I be not absent from thee, but may haue my dreames to drawe me vnto thee, and so both soul and bodie may be kept pure and holie for euer. I will lay me downe in peace, and take my rest. Psal. 4. Occasions to Meditate. Thinke that as this troublesome day is nowe past, and night come, and so rest, quietnesse, and pleasant sleepe, which maketh most excellent Princes
& poore wretches alike: euen so after ye tumults, troubles, tēptations and tē∣pestes of this life, they that beleeue in Christ, haue prepared for them an ha∣uen and rest most pleasant and ioyful. As you are not afraide to enter into your bed, and to dispose your selfe to sleepe, so be not afraide to dye, but ra∣ther chearefully prepare your selfe therevnto. Thinke, that nowe you are nearer your end by one dayes iourney, then you were in the morning. When you feele sleepe to be comming, pray. O Lord Iesus Christ, my watch∣man and keeper, take me into thy protection. Graunt that my body sleeping, my minde may watch in thee, and be made merrie by some sight of that celestiall and heauenly life, wherein thou art the king and
prince, together with the father and the holie Ghost, where the Angels & holy soules be most happie citizens. Oh purifie my soule, keepe cleane my bodie, that in both I may please thee, sleeping and waking for euer. Amen.
A GENERALL CON∣fession of sinnes, with other prayers for the Morning and Euening, to be vsed in families and pub∣like assemblies. O Most mercifull and louing father, whose loue is infinit, whose mercie endureth for euer, we sinfull cre∣atures, trusting in thine vnspeakable goodnesse and loue toward vs, do appeare this morning before thy diuine maiestie, most hum¦bly confessing our manifolde sinnes and innumerable transgressions of thy commaundements and fatherly will. Against thee onely, against thee (O Lorde) haue we sinned, we ac∣knowledge our offences: we accuse our selues vnto thee (O mercifull Lord) and will not hide our vnrigh∣teousnesse.
We find in our selues no∣thing but ignorance of thy wil, diso∣bedience, mistrust, doubtfulnesse in thy goodnesse, and incredulitie, hatred and contempt of al spirituall things, selfeloue, confidence in our selues, & feruent lusting after earnall things of this world: and this tree of our corrupt nature, bringeth foorth conti∣nually in vs none other fruites but rotten and vnsauorie workes of the flesh, in thoughtes, wordes and do∣ings vnto condemnation. Wherefore we humbly beseech thy fatherly goodnesse, euen for thy sonne Iesus Christes sake, (whome thou hast set foorth for a purchaser of mer∣cy to vs through faith in his bloud) make our heartes cleane: take away our stonie heartes, and giue vnto vs a true and liuely faith, working in vs vnfained repentance and amend∣ment of our sinnefull life. Haue
mercy vpon vs, and forgiue vs our sinnes for thy Sonnes sake: certifie our consciences of remission of the same, by thy holy spirite: by whose operation so mortifie in vs our olde man, the whole body of sinne, that we continually dying, vnto sinne, may walke in newnesse of life, to the glo∣rie of thy holie name, through Iesus Christ our Sauiour. Amen. An other confession of sinnes. O Eternal God and most merciful father, we confesse, and acknow∣ledge here before thy diuine ma∣iestie,Rom. 3. Psal. 14. that we are miserable sinners, conceiued and borne in sinne and in∣iquitie,Psal. 51. Rom. 7. so that in vs there is no goodnesse: for the flesh euermore re∣belleth against the spirite, whereby we continually transgresse thy holie precepts and commaundements, and
so purchase to ourselues through thy iust iudgement, death, and damnati∣on.Gal. 5. Rom. 2. Iere. 3. Esai. 20. Notwithstanding, (O heauenly father) for as much as we are displea¦sed with our selues for the sinnes we haue committed against thee, and doe vnfeinedly repent vs of the same, we most humbly beseech thee for Iesus Christes sake, to shew thy mercy vp∣on vs, to forgiue vs al our sinnes, and to increase thy holy spirit in vs,Col. 3. Rom. 6. Ephe. 4.5. 1. Pet. 2. that we acknowledging from the bot∣tome of our harts our owne vnrigh∣teousnesse, may from hencefoorth, not onely mortifie our sinfull lustes and affections, but also bring foorth such fruites as may be agreeable to thy most blessed wil, through Iesus Christ our onely Sauiour: whome thou hast already giuen an oblation and an offering for our sinnes, and for whose sake we are certainly persua∣ded that thou wilt denye vs nothing
that we shall aske in his name, ac∣cording to thy will. For thy spirite doth assure our consciences, that thou art our mercifull father, and so lo∣uest vs thy children through him, that nothing is able to remoue thy heauenly grace and fauour from vs. To thee therfore with the sonne and the holy Ghost, be all honour and glorie, world without end. So be it. A prayer to be said in the Morning. O Eternall GOD and heauenly father, seeing that by thy great mercy we haue quietly passed this night, graunt we beseech thee, yt we may bestowe this day wholy in thy seruice, so that all our thoughts, wordes, and deedes, may redound to the glory of thy name, and good ex∣ample of our brethren. And as it hath pleased thee to make the sunne
to shine vpon the earth, to giue vs bo¦dilie light: euen so vouchsafe to il∣luminate our vnderstanding with the brightnesse of thy spirit, to direct vs in the way of righteousnesse, so that what thing so euer we shall ap∣plie our selues vnto, our speciall care and purpose may be to walke in thy feare, and to serue and honour thee, looking for all our wealth & prospe∣ritie, to come from thy only blessing, and that we may take nothing in hand, which shall not be agreeable to thy most blessed will. Furthermore, that we may in such sort trauell for our bodyes, and for this present life, that we may haue alwayes a further regard, that is, to the heauenly life, which thou hast promised to thy children: and in the meane season, that it may please thee to preserue and defend vs both in bodie and soule, to strengthen vs
against al the temptations of the di∣uell, and to deliuer vs from all perils and daungers that may happen vnto vs, if we be not defended by thy god∣ly power. And for as much as to begin well and not to continue, is nothing: we beseech thee to receiue vs not onely this day, into thy holy protection, but also for the time of our whole life, continuing and increasing in vs daily, thy grace and good giftes ther∣of, vntill thou shalt bring vs to that happie state, where we shal fully and for euer be ioyned vnto thy Sonne Iesus Christ our Sauiour, which is the true light of our souls, shining day and night perpetually. And to the end that we may ob∣taine such grace at thy hand, vouch∣safe (most mercifull father) to for∣giue and forget all our sinnes, which we haue heretofore committed a∣gainst
thee, and for thine infinit mer∣cies sake to pardon the same, as thou hast promised to those that aske of thee with vnfeined heart, for whom, as for our selues, we make our hum∣ble petitions vnto thee, in the name of thy sonne our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ, in such sort, as he hath taught vs, saying: Our father, &c. An other prayer to be said in the Morning. O Almightie and most gratious God, we hartily thanke thee for the sweete sleepe and comforta∣ble rest, which thou hast giuē vs this night past: and for as much as thou hast commaunded by thy holy word, that no man should be idle, but all occupied in godly and vertuous ex∣ercises, euery man according to his calling: we most humbly beseech thee, that thine eyes may attend vp∣on
vs, daily defend vs, cherish, com∣fort, gouerne vs, and al our counsels, studies, and labors, in such wise, that we may spend and bestowe this day according to thy most holy will, set∣ting thee alwaies before our eyes, ly∣uing in thy feare, working that may be found acceptable before thy diuine Maiestie, through Iesus Christ our Lord. So be it. An other prayer for the Morning. WE humblie and heartily giue thankes vnto thee (O heauē∣ly father) through thy deare∣ly beloued sonne Iesus Christ, that to thy innumerable benefites, hither∣to powred vpon our soules and vpon our bodies, thou hast kept vs this night past from many euills, both spirituall and corporall, and nowe of thy mercy doest offer & giue vs time
to repent and to amend our liues, so that we might liue hencefoorth, not as we will, but as thou wilt: and as our bodyes doe drawe continually nearer and nearer their end (the graue I meane:) so our soules might ap∣proch to their end, that is, heauen and not hell: for in one state we stand not still, but either we are nearer & nea∣rer the happie state of life, or else the vnhappie condition of death eternal. Wherefore we beseech thee to be mercifull vnto vs, good father, and as of thy goodnesse thou giuest vs time to repent and liue godlie, so of the same thy goodnesse in Christe, we humbly beseech thee to giue vs thy gratious gift of true, holie, perfect, & perpetuall repentaunce, that we may more and more lament our former sinfull life, trusting vnfeignedly in thy rich mercy, through the merites of Iesus Christe, for the pardon of
all our sinnes, and that we may vn∣faignedly purpose, and effectually la∣bour to amende our liues this day, & so long as we haue to liue, in all our doings and wordes, and euen in our verie thoughtes, to the praise of thy holie name, and good example of our brethren. And for as much as thou knowest our weaknesse, our ignoraunce, and great vntowardnesse to carrie any great crosse or affliction: we beseech thee our sweete father, so to temper and order al things towards vs this day and for euer, that we be neuer further proued & tempted, then thou wilt make vs able to beare, and so to helpe vs in the same, as may be most to thy glorie and our saluation, tho∣rough Iesus Christe our Lorde. A∣men. An Euening prayer.
O Lorde God, father euerlasting, and full of pitie, we acknow∣ledge and confesse, that we be not worthie to lift vp our eyes to heauen, much lesse to present our sel∣ues before thy diuine Maiestie, with confidence that thou wilt heare our prayers and graunt our requestes, if we consider our owne wretched de∣seruings. For our consciences do ac∣cuse vs, & our sinnes witnes against vs, & we knowe that thou art an vp∣right Iudge, which doest not iustifie the sinners and wicked men,xod. 2. but pu∣nishest the faultes of such as trans∣gresse thy commaundementes. Yet most mercifull father, since it hath pleased thee, to commaund vs to call vpon thee in all our troubles and aduersities, promising euen then to helpe vs, when we feele our selues, as it were swallowed vp of death & desperation,sal. 50. sal. 18. we vtterly renounce all
worldly confidence and trust, & flee to thy souereigne goodnesse, as our only stay and refuge, beseeching thee not to call to remembrance our manifold sinnes and wickednesse,Psal. 79. whereby we continually prouoke thy wrath and indignation against vs: neither our negligence, nor our vnkindenesse, which haue neither worthilie estee∣med, nor in our liues sufficiently ex∣pressed the sweete comfort of thy ho∣lie Gospel reuealed vnto vs: but ra∣ther to accept the obedience & death of thy sonne Iesus Christ our Lord,Heb. 9.10 who by offering vp his bodie in sa∣crifice once for all, hath made a suffi∣cient recompence for all our sinnes. Haue mercy therefore vpon vs (O Lorde) and forgiue vs our offen∣ces. Teach vs by thy holy spirit,Psal. 19. that we may rightly way them, and ear∣nestly repent vs for the same: and so much the rather (O Lord our God)
because that the reprobate,sal. 58. sal. 5. and such as thou hast forsaken, can not praise thee, nor call vpon thy name: but the repenting heart, the sorrowful mind, the conscience oppressed, hungering and thirsting for thy grace, shall euer more set foorth thy praise and glorie. sal. 22.And albeit we be but wormes & dust, yet thou art our creatour, and we be the worke of thy handes:. Cor. 6. yea thou art our father, and we thy chil∣dren: thou art our shepheard, and we thy flock: thou art our redeemer, and we thy people whome thou hast dearely bought:ere. 10. thou art our God, and we are thine inheritance. sal. 6.Correct vs not therefore in thine anger (O Lord our God) neither ac∣cording to our desertes doe thou pu∣nishe vs, but mercifully chastice vs with a fatherly affection, that all the worlde may knowe, that at what time so euer a sinner doeth repente
him of his sinne from the bottome of his heart,zech. 18 thou wilt put away all his wickednes out of thy remembrance, as thou hast promised by thy holie Prophet. Finally, forasmuch as it hath plea∣sed thee to make the night for man to rest in, as thou hast ordeyned him the day to trauell, graunt (O deare father) that we may so take our bo∣dily rest, that our soules may conti∣nually watche for the time that our Lord Iesus Christe shall apeare for our full deliuerance out of this mor∣tal life,Luke 12. Matth. 6. Luke 22. and in the meane season that we be not ouercome by any fanta∣sies, dreames, or other temptations, but may fully set our mindes vppon thee, loue thee, feare thee, and rest in thee, in such sort that our verie sleepe also may be to the glorie of thy ho∣ly name. Furthermore, that our sleepe bee
not excessiue or ouer much, after the insatiable desire of the flesh, but onely sufficient to content our weake na∣ture, that we may the better be dis∣posed to liue in all godly conuersa∣tion to the glorie of thy holie name, and profite of our brethren, through Iesus Christe our Lorde: in whose name we make our humble petitions vnto thee, as he hath taught vs. Our father which &c. Almightie and euerliuing God, vouchsafe we beseech thee to graunt vs perfect continuance in thy liuely faith, augmenting and increasing the same in vs daily, vntill we growe to the full measure of our perfection in Christe: whereof we make our con∣fession, saying: I beleeue in God the father, &c. The Lorde blesse vs and saue vs, the Lorde make his face to shine vpon vs, and be mercifull vnto vs: the Lorde
turne his fauourable countenance to∣wardes vs, and graunt vs his peace. The grace of our Lord Iesus Christ, the loue of God, and the communion of the holie Ghost be with vs, and re∣maine with vs for euer. So be it. 2. Cor. 13. An other Euening prayer. MOst mercifull God and tender Father, which besides thine in∣estimable mercies declared and giuen vnto vs in the making of the world for our sakes, in redeeming of vs by the death of thy deare Sonne Iesus Christe, in the calling of vs to the knowledge of thy blessed worde, in keeping of vs hitherto in thy ho∣lie Church, and in thy most grati∣ous gouerning of vs, and all things hitherto for our singular wealth and commoditie, hast also most fatherly
cared for vs, and kept vs this day from all daungers both of soule and body, giuing vs health, food, apparell, and all other thinges ne∣cessary for the comfort and succour of this poore and miserable life, which many other do want: for these and all other thy good gifts and gra∣tious benefites, which thou of thine owne goodnesse only and father∣ly prouidence hast hitherto powred vppon vs, and doest presently powre vppon vs and many other, wee most humbly thanke thee and praise thy holy name, beseeching thee, that as all things are now hidden by meanes of the darkenes which thou hast sent ouer the earth, so thou wouldest vouchsafe to hide and burie all our sinnes, which this day or at any time heretofore wee haue committed a∣gainst thy holy commaundementes: and as nowe wee purpose to lay our
bodies to rest, so graunt the garde of thy good Angels to keepe the same this night & for euermore: and when soeuer our last sleepe of death shall come, graunt that it may be in thee good father, so that our bodies may rest both temporally and eternally, to thy glorie and our ioye, through Iesus Christ our Lorde. So be it. An other Euening praier. O Eternall God and most merci∣full father, who this day, and al the time of our life hast grati∣ously defended, nourished, and pre∣serued our soules and bodyes, and made such fatherly prouision for vs poore sinners, ye of thy louing kind∣nesse we haue rich portions, not only in the creatures of heauen and earth, but also in that plentiful redemption which thy most deare sonne Iesus
Christ hath purchased for vs: graunt vnto vs (O merciful father) the assi∣stance of thy grace and holie spirite, that as our bodies shall nowe take their naturall rest, euen so our soules and mindes, at the beholding of thy goodnesse towardes vs, may quiet themselues in thee, and conceiue such inward pleasure & heauenly sweete∣nesse in thy loue, that whatsoeuer we shall from henchfoorth, either thinke, speake, or doe, it may be all to the ho∣nour of thy holie name, through Ie∣sus Christ thy deare sonne our Lord and onely Sauiour. Amen. Thy mightie hand and outstretched arme (O Lord) be stil our defence: thy mercie and louing kindnesse in Iesus Christ thy deare sonne, be our salua∣tion: thy trueth and holie word our instruction: thy grace and holie spi∣rite, our comfort and consolation vnto the end, and in the end.
A praier for the remission of sinnes. O Almightie and euerliuing Lord God, the deare Father of our Sauiour Iesus Christe, which hast made heauen and earth, the sea, & all that therein is, which art the only ruler and gouernour, conseruer and keeper of all thinges, together with thy dearely beloued Sonne Christe Iesus our Lorde, and with the holie ghost the comforter: O holy, righte∣ous, & wise: O strong, terrible, migh∣tie, and feareful Lord God, gouernor of the whole world, iudge of al men: O exorable, patient, and most grati∣ous father, whose eyes are vpon the wayes of all men, and are so cleane, that they cannot abide impietie: thou searchest the heartes, and triest the verie thoughtes and reynes of all men, thou hatest sinne, and abhorrest iniquitie.
For sinnes sake thou hast grieuous∣ly punished mankind, thy most deare creature, as thou hast declared by the penaltie of death layde vppon all the children of Adam: by the casting of Adam & his ofspring out of Para∣dise, by the cursing of the earth: by the drowning of the world: by the burning of Sodom & Gomor: by hard∣ning the heart of Pharao, so that no miracle coulde conuert him: by the drowning of him and his people in the redde sea: by the ouerthrowing of the Israelites in the wildernesse, so that of sixe hundreth thousand there were but two that entred into the lande of promise: by reiecting King Saul: by the punishmentes vppon thy seruaunt Dauid, notwithstāding his heartie repentaunce: by gree∣uously afflicting Solomon in him∣selfe and his posteritie: by the cap∣tiuitie of the tenne tribes: and by the
thraldome of the Iewes, wherein vntil this present day they continue, a notable spectacle of thy wrath to the world, against, and for sinne. But of all spectacles of thy anger against sinne the greatest and moste notable is the death and bloudy pas∣sion of thy dearely beloued sonne Iesu Christ. Great was thine anger against sinn, when in heauen & earth nothing could be found which might appease thy wrath, saue the bloud∣shedding of thine only & most dear∣ly beloued sonne, in whom, was and is all thy delight. Great was the sore of sinne that needed such a salue: mightie was the maladie, that nee∣ded such a medicine. If in Christ, in whom was no sinne, thy wrath was so fiarce of our sins, that he was con∣strained to cry: My God, my god, why hast thou forsakē mee? Howe great & importable then is thine anger a∣gainst
vs, which are nothing but sin∣full? They that are thy children, through the contemplation of thine anger against sinne, set foorth most euidently in the death of Christe, doe tremble and are afraide, lamenting them selues vpon him, and heartily crying for mercie: whereas the wic∣ked are altogether carelesse and con∣temptuous, nothing lamenting their iniquities, or crying to thee heartily for mercie and pardon. Amongest whom we are rather to be placed, thē amongst thy children, for that we are so shamelesse for our sinnes, and care∣lesse for thy wrath, heaping daily sinne vpon sinne, so that the measure hath ouerflowed and ascended vp to heauen, and brought thy heauie pla∣gues vpon vs, which are but earnest for greater to ensue: therefore to vs pertaineth shame, and nothing else is due but confusion.
What shall we doe? what shall we say? who can giue vs penitent heartes? who can open our lips, that our mouthes might make acceptable confession vnto thee? Alas, of our sel∣ues we cannot thinke any good, much lesse wish it, and least of all do it. As for Angels, or any other creatures, they haue nothing but that which they haue receiued, and thei are made to minister vnto vs: So that where it passeth the power of the master, the minister must needes want. Alas then, what shall we doe? Thou art holie, and we vnholie: thou art good, and we nothing but euill: thou art pure, and we altogether impure: thou art light, and we most darke darke∣nesse: howe then can there be any a∣greement betwixt vs? O what now may we do? Dispaire? No, for thou art God, and therefore good: thou art mercifull, and therefore thou forgi∣uest
sinnes: with thee is mercie and propiciation and therefore thou art worshipped. when Adam had sinned, thou ga∣uest him mercie before he desired it: and wilt thou denie vs mercie which nowe desire the same? Adam excused his fault and accused thee: but wee accuse our selues and excuse thee: and shall wee be sent emptie away? Noe found fauour when thy wrath a∣bounned, and shall we seeking grace, be frustrate? Abrahā was pulled out of Idolatrie, when the world was drowned therein: and art thou his God onely? Israell in captiuitie in Egypt was gratiously visited, & de∣liuered: & deare God, the same good Lord shal we alwaies be forgotten? How often in the wildernes didst thou defer and spare thy plagues at the requests of Moses, when the peo∣ple them selues made no petition to
thee? and seeing wee not onely nowe make our petitions vnto thee thrugh thy goodnesse, but also haue a me∣diatour for vs, farre aboue Moses, euen Iesus Christ, shall we (I say) deare Lorde departe ashamed? So soone as Dauid saide, I haue sinned, thou diddest foorthwith answere him, that he should not dye: thou haddest taken away his sinnes: and gratious God, euen the selfe same God, shall not we which nowe with Dauid gladly confesse, that we haue sinned, shall we (I say) not heare by thy good spirit, that our sinnes be pardo∣ned? O graunt that with Manasses we may finde fauour and mercy. Remember that thou hast not spa∣red thine owne onely deare Sonne Iesus Christ, but giuen him to dye for our sinnes, to rise for our righte∣ousnesse, to ascend for our possession taking in heauen, and to appeare be∣fore
thee for vs for euer, a high priest after the order of Melchizedech, that through him we might haue free ac∣cesse to come to thy throne, nowe ra∣ther of grace, then of iustice. Remēber that thou by him hast biddē vs aske, and promised that we should receiue, saying: Aske and ye shall haue, seeke and ye shall finde, knocke and it shall be opened vnto you▪ O deare GOD and most meeke and mercifull father, we heartily beseech thee to be merci∣full vnto vs, for this thy Christes sake, for his deaths sake, for thy pro∣mise, trueth, and mercies sake. Haue mercie vpon vs, pardon and forgiue vs al our sinnes, iniquities and tres∣passes, what so euer we haue com∣mitted against thee, in thought, word or deede, euer or at any time hitherto by any meanes. Deare father, haue mercie vpon vs. Though we be poore, yet our Christ is riche: though
we be sinners, yet he is righteous: though we be fooles, yet he is wise: though we be impure, yet is he pure and holie: for his sake therefore be mercifull vnto vs. Call to minde how thou hast pro∣mised that thou wilt powre out of thy cleane waters, and wash vs from our filth, and cleanse vs from our e∣uills. Forget not that thou hast pro∣mised to take from vs our stonie heartes, and to giue vs soft heartes, new hearts, and to put into the mid∣dest of vs right spirites. Remember thy couenant, namely, that thou wilt be our God, and we shall be thy peo∣ple: that thou wilt put out of thy memorie for euer, all our vnrighte∣ousnesse, and hast promised to write in our mindes and heartes thy lawe and testimonies. Remember that thou dost straitly charge vs to haue none other Gods
but thee, saying, that thou art the Lord our God. O then declare the same to vs all, we heartily nowe be∣seech thee. Forgiue vs our sinnes, forget our iniquities, cleanse vs from our filthinesse, wash vs from our wic¦kednesse, powre out thy holie spirite vpon vs. Take from vs our hard heartes, our stonie heartes, our im∣penitent heartes, our distrusting and doubtfull heartes, our carnall, our secure, our idle heartes, our impure, malicious, arrogant, enuious, wrath∣full, impatient, couetous, hypocriti∣call, and epicurical harts: and in place therof giue vs new harts, soft harts, faithfull hearts, mercifull hearts, lo∣uing, obedient, chast, pure, holy, righ∣teous, true, simple, lowly, and patient hearts, to feare thee, to loue thee, to trust in thee for euer. Write thy lawe in our harts, graue it in our mindes, we heartily beseech
thee. Giue vs the spirite of prayer: make vs diligent and happie in the workes of our vocation: take into thy custodie and gouernaunce for e∣uer our soules and bodies, our liues, and all that euer we haue. Tempt vs neuer further, thē thou wilt make vs able to beare: and what so euer thou knowest we haue neede of in soule or bodie (deare God and grati∣ous father,) vouchsafe to giue vs the same in thy good time: and alwayes, as thy children guide vs, so that our life may please thee, and our death praise thee, through Iesu Christ our Lorde: for whose sake we heartily pray thee, to graunt these thinges thus asked, and al other thinges ne∣cessarie for soule and body, not onely to vs, but to al others also, for whom thou wouldest that we should pray, specially for thy children that be in thraldome, in exile, in prison, miserie,
heauinesse, pouertie, sicknesse, &c. Be mercifull to the whole realme of England, and graunt vs all true repentance, and turne from vs the euils that we so wickedly haue de∣serued. Pardon our enimies, persecu∣tors and slaunderers, and if it be thy pleasure turne their hearts. Be mer∣cifull vnto our parents, brethren, and sisters, friendes, kinsefolkes, and fa∣miliars, neighbours, and such as by any meanes thou hast coupled and lincked to vs by loue or otherwise: and vnto vs poore sinners here ga∣thered together in thy holie name, graunt thy blessing and holie spirite to sanctifie vs, and dwel in vs as thy deare children, to keepe vs this day and for euer from all euill, to thy e∣ternall glorie, and our euerlasting comfort, & the profite of thy Church, which mercifully maintaine, cherish and comfort, strengthening them that
stand, so that they neuer fall, lifting vp them that be fallen, and keepe vs from falling from thy truth, through the merites of thy dearely beloued sonne Iesu Christ our onely Saui∣our, which liueth and reigneth with thee and the hole Ghost, to whome be all praise and honour, both nowe and for euer. Amen. I. B. A prayer for the true know∣ledge of the mysterie of our re∣demption in Christ. O Almightie God, and father of our Lord Iesus Christ, and by him also our father, the father of all mercy, & God of all consolation, haue mercie vpon vs and heare our prayers. We most humbly beseech thee, for thy deare sonne Iesus Chri∣stes sake, for his merites and cruell death which he suffered to deliuer vs from eternall death, and the power of
darknesse: send into our heartes thy spirit of truth, to worke in vs a true, liuely, & stedfast faith, that the cleare light and brightnesse of thy Gospell, the glorie of Christ, may shine vnto vs, and lighten our mindes, that we may learne and vnderstand the won∣derfull and vnspeakable riches of the misterie of our redemption in Christ and by Christ.Ephe. 2. O Father of glorie, giue vnto vs the spirite of wisedome, and bring vs into the true know∣ledge of this thy beloued Sonne Iesus Christe, and the knowledge of thy selfe. Open and lighten the eyes of our mindes and vnderstan∣ding, that we may knowe what the hope is wherevnto thou hast called vs, and howe rich the glorie of thine inheritance is vpon thy Saints, and the exceeding greatnesse of thy power towardes vs: that by true faith, by vnderstanding & knowledge of thine
eternall wisedome (which is Iesus Christe) we may be in deede as we are called, true Christians, and vn∣feigned professors of thy holy name, to worship thee in spirite and trueth, and to set forth the glory of thy grace giuen vnto vs in Christe Iesu our Lord. Amen. O deare Father, write in our heartes loue of thy lawe, hate to all sinne, thankfulnes of heart, and con∣tinuall heate of thy holie spirite, for thy sonne Iesus Christes sake: To whome with thee and thy holie spi∣rite, be all honour, maiestie, glorie, thankes, rule, empire and dominion, for euermore. Amen. A forme of thankesgiuing for our redemption, and prayer for the strength & in∣crease of faith. Lord increase our faith. Luk, 17.
Ephe. 4.ETernall prayse and thankes be giuen vnto thee, deare God and father of our Lord Iesus Christ, which hast blessed vs with all spiri∣tuall blessing in heauenly things by Christ, in that thou hast chosen vs in him before the foundation of the world was laide, that we should be without blame before thee through him, by whome we haue redemption through his bloud, euen the forgiue∣nesse of our sinnes: in whome, after we heard the word of truth, the gos∣pell of our saluation wherein we be∣leeued, we are sealed with the holie spirite of promise, which is the ear∣nest of our inheritance, which spirite hath and doth beare witnesse vnto our spirits, that we are thy children, and therefore cryeth in our heartes: Abba Father. 8. And thus (most grati∣ous father) when thou hast once gi∣uen the earnest pennie of our salua∣tion
into our heartes, thou doest not repent of thy gift and calling, neither wilt thou at any time breake thy co∣uenant of grace and mercie in Christ thy Sonnes merites, confirmed in vs by that seale and loue token. For what though we be weake in our be∣liefe,Rom. 3. shall our vnbeliefe make thy promise of no effect? No, thou wilt alway be found true, but all men are liars. And yet Lord, thou doest most gratiously beholde and accept, be it neuer so little a sparke of faith. We say therefore and cry vnto thee, with one that wept and saide:Matth. 9. I beleeue Lord, helpe my vnbeliefe. Yea, that little, be it neuer so litle, is thy meere gift also. The which as thou begun, so (most mercifull Lord) increase the same more and more, to the peace and comfort of our conscience, and the glorie of thy name, through Iesus Christ. Amen.
A thankesgiuing to God for his great benefites. HOnour and praise be giuen to thee (O Lorde God almightie) most deare father of heauen, for all thy mercies and louing kindnesse shewed vnto vs, in that it hath plea∣sed thy gratious goodnesse, freely and of thine owne accorde, to elect and choose vs to saluation afore the be∣ginning of the world: and euen like continuall thankes be giuen vnto thee, for creating vs after thine owne image, for redeeming vs with the precious bloud of thy deare Sonne, when we were vtterly lost, for sanc∣tifying vs with thy holie spirite in the reuelation and knowledge of thy sacred word, for helping and succou∣ring vs in al our neede and necessitie, for sauing vs from all dangers both of bodie and soule, for comforting vs so fatherly in al our troubles and af∣flictions,
for sparing vs so long, and giuing vs so large a time of repen∣tance. These benefites (O most mer∣cifull father) like as we do acknow∣ledge that we haue receiued of thy onely goodnesse, euen so we beseech thee for thy deare sonne Iesus Chri∣stes sake, to graunt vs alwayes thy holie spirite, whereby we may conti∣nually growe in thankefulnesse to∣wardes thee, be led in all trueth, and comforted in all aduersitie. Strengthen our faith, O Lorde: kindle it more and more in feruent∣nesse and loue towardes thee and our neighbours for thy sake. Suffer vs not (most deare father) to receiue thy word any more in vaine, but graunt vs alwaies the assistance of thy grace and holy spirite, that in heart, word, and deede,Halowe be thy name. we may sanctifie and doe worship to thy holy name: that we may helpe to amplifie and increase
thy kingdome,Thy king¦dome come. Thy will be done. and that what so euer thou sendest, we may be heartily wel content with thy good will and plea∣sure. Suffer vs not to lack the thing (O father) without the which we can not serue thee:Giue vs this day, &c. but blesse thou so all the workes of our hands, that we may haue sufficient, and not to be chargeable, but rather helpefull vnto other. Be mercifull, O Lorde, vnto our offences:Forgiue vs &c. and seeing our debt is great which thou hast forgiuen vs in Iesus Christ, make vs to loue thee and our neighbors so much the more. Be thou (O father) our captaine and defender in all temptations:Leade vs not into temptati∣on. holde thou vs by thy mercifull hande, that we thereby may be deliuered from all inconueniences,But deli∣uer vs frō euill. and end our liues in the sanctifying and honouring of thy name, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
A praier for true mortification. O God my creator, preseruer and euerlasting defender, where first in my creation I was made like vnto thine owne likenesse, the diuell (alas) hath since by Adams fal made me ougly, monstrous, and like euill fauoured to him selfe. For what are nowe,Col. 3. Lord, mine earthly members, but (as thine Apostle writeth) adul∣terie, whoredome, vncleannesse, vn∣naturall lustes, euill concupiscence, couetousnesse (which is the worship∣ping of Idols) and such other, for the which thy wrath is wont to come vpon the children of vnbeliefe? Ne∣uerthelesse, Lorde, of thy great mercy and goodnesse, against this so great a mischiefe, a much greater remedie thy fatherly prouidence hath ordai∣ned: for thou hast sent Iesus Christ thy deare & only natural Sonne into this worlde, the vale of miseries, to
loose the workes of the diuell,1. Iohn 3. and to take away my sinnes. 1. Iohn 5.Therefore sathan hath nowe no∣thing to brag of, for through Christ, all that beleeue in thee and so become thy children, do ouercome the world, the flesh,Iohn 3. and the diuell. And this is the victorie which ouercommeth thē all, euen our faith. That faith I meane, which is persuaded that who so euer beleeueth in Christ, shall not perish,1. Iohn 5. but haue euerlasting life. That faith which beleeueth ye te∣stimonie to be true which thou God the father doest testifie of thy sonne, so making thee no liar: and this is ye testimonie, that thou hast giuen vs eternall life.Rom. 8. That faith which belee∣ueth that thou father, who raisedst vp Christ from death, shalt also quic∣ken our mortall bodies through thy holie spirite dwelling in vs. That faith which beleeueth it to be true
which thy Sonne Christe affirmed with a double oth,Iohn 14. verily, ve∣rily I say vnto you, he that beleeueth in me, the workes that I doe, the same shall he doe, and greater woorkes then these shall he doe, bicause I goe to my father. And finally, that faith which beleeueth that nowe Christe hath bene lift vp on the crosse,Iohn 12. he shal draw al things vnto him. This faith (I say) is the victorie which ouer∣commeth our enimies, the diuell, the world, and our flesh. Thou therfore, deare father, which hast promised to giue what so euer I shal aske in thy deare sonne Iesus name,Iohn 14 for thy great mercie and in∣fallible truthes sake, doe nowe in me the thing that he came for: lose in me the workes of the diuel, & take away my sinnes,1. Iohn  I beseech thee: make sted∣fast my faith and confidence in thy promised mercies and mercifull pro∣mises:
so that I assuredly beleeuing in thee, may haue (as thou promisest) euerlasting life, & making thee (deare God) no liar, may beleeue, feele, and knowe in my heart and conscience, that the same euerlasting life is thy meere and free gift vnto me, yea, al∣readie of thy great goodnesse, vndou∣tedly giuen me, being nowe transla∣ted from death to life. Of a thankfulnesse wherof, Lord, cause me nowe daily to mortifie my earthly members:Rom. 8. yea, deare father, sith thy spirit which raised vp Christ from death, dwelleth within me, doe thou (who raisedst Christ frō death) quicken my mortall bodie through thy spirite so dwelling in me, I be∣seech thee: yea Lord Iesu, according to thy promise (bicause thou art now gone to thy father) make me worke this wonderfull great worke yt thou spakest of,Iohn 14. I meane, make me being
of my selfe but a lumpe of sinne, and a monster most ougly, (as the vices whereon the members of my earth∣ly bodie are aboue declared to be cō∣pact,Col. 3. doe proue) make me, I say, yet through thy grace, to hate, abhorre, flee, and subdue all adulterie, whore∣dome, vncleannesse, vnnaturall lu∣stes, euill concupiscence, vnordinate desires, wantonnesse, tendernesse, de∣licatenesse, idlenesse, dronkennesse, gluttonie, slothfulnesse, distrust, des∣paire, ignorance, weakenesse, wilful∣nesse, idolatrie, superstition, hypocri∣sie, heresie, error, sects▪ variance, strife, wrath, enuie, slaunders, lying, swea∣ring, cursing, vainglorie, pride, coue∣tousnesse, theft, deceit, flatterie, and what so euer else, O Lorde, fighteth or rebelleth against thy holy spirite: and then (O Father) I will boast & make vaunt against myne enimie the diuell, that I haue done greater
workes then thy deare sonne Iesus did,Iohn 14. at what time hee spake these wordes among the Iewes, because albeit he vanquished Sathan, yet in as much as hee himselfe was vtterly without sinne, the victorie seemed the more easie. But I to vanquishe sathan, being my selfe altogether sin∣full, yea, contrarie to my most sinfull nature to subdue sinne, the diuel, and mine owne fleshe, it seemeth a more victory and a greater worke then the other. For the which neuerthelesse, I will with all submission acknow∣ledge vnto thy diuine maiestie, that the whole victorie, Lorde, in deede, is thine, and thy holy spirite the be∣ginner and finisher both of the will and the worke. Now therfore (Lord Iesu) streng∣then mee with thy grace and might, that thou maist by mee a most sinfull wretche, drawe all these my earthly
members and horrible vices before rehearsed, vnder my feete, that I may not onely fight against them, but also subdue them,Rom. 8. Iohn 12. so that they may all turne to the best for mee, as meete matter whereon I may exer∣cise my faith, powre forth my hearty prayer, and giue thee most heartie thankes for victorie: wherby I may learne and haue experience that thou hast in mee drawne all thinges vnto thee, insomuch as thou thus (Lord) of thy diuine power drawest both the diuel and the sinne that dwelleth in me, to set foorth thine honour and glorie, which thing for thy mercies sake bring to passe, O God my crea∣tor, preseruer & euerlasting defender. A meditation for the exercise of true mortification. HE that will be ready in weigh∣tie matters to denie his owne
will, and to be obedient to the will of God, the same had neede to accu∣stome him selfe to denye his desires in matters of lesse weight, and to ex∣ercise mortification of his owne will in trifles. For if that our affections by this daily custome be not (as it were) halfe slaine, surely, surely, whē the plunge shall come, we shall finde the more to do. If we can not watch with Christ one houre, (as he saith to Peter) we vndoubtedly can much lesse goe to death with him. Where∣fore, that in great tentations we may be ready to say with Christ: Not my will, but thy will be done: (for as much as this cōmonly commeth not to passe, but where the rootes of our lustes, by thy grace deare father, are almost rotten and rooted out by a daily deniall of that they desire) I humbly beseech thee for Christes sake to helpe me herein.
First pardon me my cherishing, and (as it were) watering of mine affections, obeying them in their de∣uises and superfluous desires: where through, in that they haue taken deepe roote, and are too liuely in me. I secondly doe beseech thee to pull them vppe by the rootes out of my heart, and so hencefoorth to order me, that I may continually accustome my selfe to weaken the principall roote, that the by rootes and branches may loose all their power. Graunt me (I beseech thee) that thy grace may daily mortifie my concupiscence of pleasure in thinges, that is, of wealth, riches, glorie, libertie, fauour of men, meats, drinkes, apparel, ease, yea, and life it selfe, that the horrour and impatiencie of more grieuous things may be weakned, and I made more patient in aduersitie. Wherevnto I further desire and
pray thy goodnes, deare father, that thou wilt adde this: namely that I may for euer become obedient and readie to doe thy good will in all things hartily and willingly to serue thee, and do whatsoeuer may please thee. For doubtles althogh wee ac∣custome our selues in the pleasaunt thinges of this life, to a mortifica∣tion and deniall of our selues, yet we shall finde inough to doe, when more better & weighty crosses come. For if thy sonne our sauiour (euer wonte to obay thy good will) prayed so har∣tily and often: Not my will, but thy will be done, (whereby he declareth himselfe to be verie man) how can it be, but we, whose nature is corrupt, not onely in natiuitie, but in the rest of our whole life also, shall find both our handes ful in great and greeuos temptations, wholy to resigne our selues vnto thee.
Graunt therefore deare father, for thy Christes sake, to mee a most mi∣serable wretch, thy grace and spirite to be effectuall in mee, that daily I may accustome my selfe, to deny my will in more easie and pleasant thin∣ges of this life, that when neede shall be, I may com vnto thee with a re∣signed wil, alwaies stedfastly expec∣ting thy mercie, and in the meane season, continually obeying thee with readinesse and willingnes, do∣ing what so euer may most please thee, through Christ our Lord, who liueth with thee, &c. A meditation of the comming of Christ to iudgement, and of the reward both of the faith∣full and vnfaithfull. OH Lord Iesus Christ the son of the euerliuing God, by whom all thinges were made, are ruled
and gouerned: as of thy loue for our redemption thou didst not disdaine to be our mediatour, & to take vpon thee our nature in the wombe of a virgin purely and without sinne, by the operation of thy holie spirite, that both thou mightest in thine owne person wonderfully beautifie and ex∣alt our nature, and worke the same in vs also, first abolishing the guilti∣nes of sinne by remission, then sinne it selfe by death, and last of all, death by raising vp again these our bodies, that they may be like to thine owne glorious and immortall body, accor∣ding to the power wherewith thou art able to subiect all thinges vnto thee: as (I say) of thy loue for our re∣demption thou becamest man, and that most poore and afflicted vpon earth, by the space of three and thirtie yeares at the least, in most humilitie, and paiedst the price of our ransome
by thy most bitter death and passion: (for the which I most heartily giue thankes to thee) so of the same thy loue towardes vs, in thy good time thou wilt come againe in the clouds of heauen, with power and great glo∣rie, with flaming fire, with thousāds of Saintes, wt Angels of thy power, with a mightie cry, shout of an Ar∣changel, and blast of a trumpe,Matth. 24 sou∣denly as a lightening which shineth from the East, &c. when men thinke least, euen as a theefe in the night, when men be asleepe, thou wilt so come, I say, thus soudenly in the twinckling of an eye,Matth. 2 all men that e∣uer haue bene, be, or shall be, with women and children, appearing be∣fore thy tribunall seate, to render an account of all thinges, which they haue thought, spoken, and done a∣gainst thy lawe, openly and before all Angels, Saintes, and diuels, and so
shall their corruptible bodie put on incorruption: then shall they be en∣dued with immortalitie, and glorie: then shall they be with thee, and goe whither thou goest: then shall they heare: Come blessed of my father, pos∣sesse the kingdome prepared for you from ye beginning &c. then shall they be set on seats of maiestie, iudging ye whole world: then shall they reigne with thee for euer: then shall God be al in al with them and to them: then shall they enter and inherite heauen∣ly Ierusalem, and the glorious rest∣full lande of Canaan, where it is al∣ways day and neuer night, where is no manner of weeping, teares, infir∣mitie, hunger, colde, sickenesse, enuie, malice, nor sinne: but alwayes ioy without sorow, mirth without mea∣sure, pleasure without paine, hea∣uenly harmonie, most pleasant melo∣die, saying and singing: Holie, holie,
holie, Lord God of hoastes, &c. Finally the eye hath not seene, the eare hath not heard, neither hath it entred into the heart of man, that they shall then inherite and moste surely enioy, although here they be tormented, prisoned, solicited of Sa∣tan, tempted of the flesh, and intang∣led with the world, wherethrough they are inforced to cry:Apoc. 22▪ Thy king∣dome come: Come Lord Iesu, &c. Howe amiable are thy tabernacles? Like as the Hart desireth the water brookes,Psal. 42. &c. Nowe let thy seruant de∣part in peace. I desire to be dissolued and to be with Christ.Rom. 8. We mourne in our selues, wayting for the deliue∣raunce of our bodyes, &c. Oh grati∣ous Lorde, when shall I finde such mercie with thee, that I may repent, beleeue, hope & looke for these things, with the full fruition of those hea∣uenly ioyes which thou hast prepa∣red
for all them that feare thee, and so rest with thee for euermore. I.B. A meditation of the life euer∣lasting, the place where it is, and the incomparable ioyes thereof. THat there is an euerlasting life none will denie, but such as wil denie God. For if he be true and iust, (which he must needes be, or els he is not God) then can there not be but an eternall life. That he hath both spoken it, and promised it, in Mat. 25. 1. Cor. 15. Heb. 4.11.13. 1. Pet. 1. it plainely appeareth & else∣where in very many places. So that to deny an euerlasting life, is to de∣nie God, to denie Christ and all that euer he did: also to denie all pietie and religion, to condemne of foolish∣nesse all good men, Martyres. Con∣fessors, Euangelistes, Prophets, Pa∣triarches.
Finally the denial of eter∣nall life is nothing else but a deniall of the immortalitie of the soule, and so a plaine making of man nothing better then beastes. If it be so, let vs then eate and drinke,1. Cor. 15 for to mor∣rowe we shall die. Lord preserue vs from this Saduceall and Epicuriall impietie, and graunt vs for thy mer∣cies sake deare God, that we may be assuredly persuaded, that there is in deede an eternall life and blisse with thee, for them that put their trust in thee: amongest whome accompt mee for thy mercies sake. Againe this eternal life,Where this eter∣nal life is. and the place apointed for them that bee thy seruantes, all men do graunt to bee with thee. Albeit they do not thinke, that because thou art euerie where, therfore eternal life is euery where. For they by thy worde do knowe, that in as much as no man canne see
thee and liue,Iohn 4. this eternall life and thy blessed presence is most pleasant and had in fruition, after in an other world, wherevnto by corporall death they doe depart, and are translated to a place aboue them,. Tim. 6. where thou dwel lest in a light whervnto no man can approch. Abrahams bosom (they read) was aboue, as the place for the wic∣ked was alowe and beneath. Helias was caught vp into heauen, and thy deare Sonne our Sauiour prayed, ye where he is,Iohn 17. those also might be which thou haddest giuen him, and might see his glorie. Nowe he (deare father) we learne by thy spirite, was ascended & taken vp in his very body into heauen,Acts. 7. whither Stephan looked vp & saw thy Christ standing on thy right hande, to whome he prayed, O Lord Iesu receiue my spirite. Graunt, I beseech thee, gratious God and fa∣ther, that I may haue a cleane heart,
more and more to see thee, and so in spirite to see and looke often vpon this place: whither bring me at the length in bodie also I humblie pray thee. Nowe what a thing this euerla∣sting life is, no man is able to con∣ceiue, much lesse able to vtter: For the peace of God which is eternal life,1. Cor. . passeth al vnderstanding. The eye hath not seene, the eare hath not heard, nei∣ther can mans heart conceiue those thinges which thou (deare God) hast prepared for them yt loue thee. What so euer therefore can be spoken or imagined of thy kingdome, of the clearenesse, ioy, and felicitie of the same, is nothing in comparison, as we may see by thy prophetes: which (bicause they could not otherwise) vnder corporall thinges, haue shad∣dowed the same.What know∣lege may be had in this life of the life euerla∣sting. So that the confi∣dence of eternall life, what a thing it
is, can in no wise be tolde. How∣beit, somwhat wee may be brought into some sight of it by earthly thin∣ges, to thinke on this sort. If God haue giuen here so many things in a strange place, how many are ye great good things yt be at home? if in prison are so many mercies, how many are they in the Palace? If the wicked haue so many benefites, what is the store prepared for thy seruantes, Oh Lord? If thy children finde such cō∣forts in the day of tears & mourning, what shall they find in the day of the marriage? If with beastes men bee∣ing, haue ye vse of innumerable bles∣singes, Oh how many are the bles∣singes which they shall enioye with thy Angels, and with thy selfe (O deare God) when they shall see thee, and haue the fruition of thee: in whō is fulnes without lothing of all good and faire things, so that nothing can
be more desired, & that for euermore. This thy chidren do not so see as they now beleeue it: I say yt euen in their bodies they shall see it for euer: as Iob saide.Iob. 19. They beleeue that they shall see thee, and their owne eyes beholde thee, when these our corpo∣rall eyes, our bodies being raised, shall do their duties. Such a know∣ledge of thee they beleeue to haue, as shall not be only intellectuall and by faith, as now it is, but euen a full sight and fruition, yea, a coniunction and fellowship with thee.1. Cor. 13 Now they see but as in a glasse, euen in a darke speaking: but then they shall see thee face to face.Heb. 11. For faith, though it be the substance of things hoped for and a certaine darke sight of thee: yet it may not be compared to the reward of faith,1 Ioh. 13. and glorious sight which we shall see in the life to come, when faith and hope shall cease.
Nowe, thy children knowe that they be thy sonnes, though it yet ap∣peare not what they shall be. We know (say thei) that when our Christ God and man shal appeare, then shal we be like vnto him, for we shall see him euen as he is. Oh great prero∣gatiue to see Christ as he is: which is not to be considered so much for ye manhood, as for the godhead it selfe, as Paule doth also write,1. Cor. 15 that when all things are subiect vnto the Sonne, then shal he be subiect vnto thee deare father also, yt God may be al in al. And therfore Christ our Sauiour prayed for vs, that we might knowe thee the onely true God: Not that our Christ thy Sonne is not with thee, the true, coequall, and substantiall God, but that we might knowe how that after the iudgement such a mysterie of his mediatourship shall not be in heauen, as is now in earth.
Then thou blessed Trinitie, God the Father, God the Sonne, and God the holy Ghost shalt be al in al: thou shalt be the end of our desires: thou shalt be looked vpon without end: thou shalt be loued without lo∣thing: thou shalt be praised without wearinesse. Although lothsomenesse be wont to followe fulnesse, yet our fulnesse in the contemplation of thy pleasures shal bring with it no kinde at all of lothsomenesse. Satietie of ioyes shalbe in the beholding of thee.Psal. 16. Pleasures are on thy right hande for euer. We shall bee satisfied when we arise after thine image,Psal. 17. I meane in the resurrection. O deare father, shewe thy selfe vnto vs, and we aske no more. Oh graunt vs with thy saintes in euer∣lasting life, to praise with perpetual prayses thy holy name. Happie then and happie againe were wee, if that
day were come, that we might singe with thy Angels, elders, and innu∣merable thousands, a new songe, and say:Apoc. 5. Thou Christ Iesu which wast slaine, art worthy to receiue power, & riches, and wisedome, and strength, & honor, and glorie, and blessing. In this blessed life all kinde of maladies, griefes, sorrows, and euils be far away, and all full of all kinde of mirth, ioy and pleasure. Oh that we might see now a little with saint Iohn that holy citie newe Ierusalem, descending from heauen prepared of God as a bride trimmed for her hus∣band. Oh that we might now som∣thing heare the great voyce speaking out of the throne: Behold the Taber∣nacle of God is with men, and he will dwel with them, and they shall be his people, and hee shall bee vnto them their GOD: he will wipe away all teares from their eyes, and death sha
be no more, nor weeping, nor cry∣ing, nor sorrowe, for the former thinges are gone. I. B. An other meditation of the blessed state and felicitie of the life to come. THis body is but a prison, where∣in the soule is kept, and that ve∣rily not beautilfull nor bright, but most foule and darke, disquiet, fraile, & filled vp with much vermine & venomous vipers (I mean it con∣cerning our affections) standing in an aire most vnwholsome, & prospect most lothsome, if a man consider the excrements of it by the eyes, nose, mouth, eares, handes feete, and al the other partes. So that no Bocardo, no Little ease, no Dungeon, no Bishops pri¦son, no Gatehowse, no sinke, no pit, may be compared in any poynt to be so euill a prison for the body, as the
bodie is for and of the soule: where∣through the children of GOD haue bene occasioned to cry & lament their long being in it. Oh saith Dauid, Howe long shall I lye in this prison? Oh wretch yt I am (saith Paule) who shall deliuer me out of this bodie of sinne?Rom. 7. which is an heauie burden to the soule, as the wiseman saith. And the godly cry:Luke 2. now let thy seruant de∣part in peace. O ye I were dissolued, & had put off this earthly and frayle tabernacle.Psal. 143. Take me vnto thee, and bring my soul out of this prison, that it may giue thanks vnto thee, O Lord. For so long as we be in this bodie, we can not see the Lord: yea, it is as an heauie habitation, and depresseth downe sore the spirit from the famili∣aritie which it else should haue with God. This world & life is an exile, a vale of miserie, a wildernesse of it selfe, being voyde of all vertues and
necessaries for eternall life, full of e∣nimies, sorrowes, sighings, sobbings, gronings, miseries, &c. In daunger to hunger, colde, heate, thirst, sores, sicknesse, tentations, trouble, death and innumerable calamities, being momentanie, short, vnstable, and no∣thing but vaine, and therfore is com∣pared to a warfare, a womans tra∣uell, a shaddowe, a smoke, a vapour, a word, a storme, a tempest, in ye which Gods people feele great molestatiōs, griefes, & troubles, now of satan him selfe, nowe of the world, now of their owne flesh, & that so wonderfully, di∣uersly, daungerously, and contrarily, that they are inforced to cry: O Lord, when shall we come and appeare be∣fore thee? when shall this miserie end? when shall we be deliuered out of this vale of miserie? out of this wildernes? out of these continuall afflictions and most perillous seas?
But where thou art (Lorde and deare Father of mercie) there is not onely no prison, no doloures, no sor∣rowe, no sighings, no teares, no sick∣nesse, no hunger, no heate, no colde, no paine, no tentations, no displea∣sure, no malice, no pride, no vnclean∣sure, no contention, no torments, no horror, no sinne, no filth, no stinche, no dearth, no death, no weeping, no teares, no miserie, no mischeefe: there is (I say) not onely no such thing, or any euill, noysom, or displea∣sant thing, but all libertie, all light, all pleasantnesse, all ioye, reioycing, mirth, pleasure, health, welth, riches, glorie, power, treasure, honour, tri∣umphe, comfort, solace, loue, vni∣tie, peace, concorde wisedome, ver∣tue, melodie, meeknesse, felicitie, beatitude, and all that euer can bee wished or desired in most securitie, eternitie, and perpetuitie, that may
be thought not onely of man, but of Angels an Archangels, yea aboue al thoughtes.1. Cor. 2. The eye hath not seene the like, the eare hath not heard, nor no heart is able to conceiue in any point, any part of the blissefull bea∣titude which is with thee most deare Lorde and Sauiour, most gratious God and comforter. Where thou art, O blessed God, the Archangels, Angels, Thrones, Powers, Dominatiōs, Cherubines, Seraphines, Patriarches, Pro∣phets, Apostles, Martyrs, Uirgins, Confessours, and righteous spirites cease not to sing night and day: Ho∣ly, Holy,Apoc. 4. Holy, Lorde God of Hostes, Honour, maiestie, glorie, power, em∣pire, and dominion, be vnto thee, Oh God the creator, O Lord Iesu the Re∣deemer, Oh holy spirit the comforter.Apoc. 5. In recordation of this, O howe thy children reioyce? howe contemne
they the pleasures of this worlde? Howe little esteeme they any corpo∣rall griefe or shame? howe desire they to be with thee? Howe amiable are thy tabernacles, Oh Lorde GOD of hoastes,Psal. 84. say they? My soule hath a de∣sire to enter into the Courtes of the Lord: my heart and my soule reioy∣ceth in the liuing GOD: blessed are they that dwell in thy house, that they may be alwayes praising thee. For one day in thy Courtes, is better then a thousand elsewhere. I had rather be a doore keeper in the house of my God, then to dwell in the tentes of vngod∣linesse, for the Lord God is a light and defence.Psal. 42. And againe, Like as the Hart desireth the water brookes, so longeth my soule after thee, O God. My soule is a thirst for God, yea, euen for the li∣uing God. When shall I come to ap∣peare before the presence of God? My soule thirsteth for thee,Psal. 63. my flesh also
longeth after thee, in a barren and dry land, where no water is. They (thy children I meane O Lorde) desire the day of that their redemption.Rom. . Still they cry, Let thy kingdome come.Apoc. 22▪ Phil. 3. They cry, Come Lord Iesus. They lift vp their heads, looking for thy appearing, Oh Lord, which will make their vile bodies, like to thine owne glorious and im∣mortall bodie. For when thou shalt appeare, they shallbe like vnto thee. Thy Angels wil gather them toge∣ther,Matt. 24. and they shall meete thee in the cloudes, and be alwayes with thee. They shall heare this ioyfull voyce: Come ye blessed of my father, possesse the kingdome prepared for you from the beginning. Then shal they be like to thy An∣gels. Then shall they be like vnto the Sonne in thy kingdome.Matt. 13. Apoc. 7. Then shall they haue crownes of glorie,
and be indued with white garments of innocencie and righteousnesse, ha∣uing palmes of victorie in their han∣des. Oh happy is he that may but see that immortall and incorruptible in∣heritance which they shall inioy for euermore. Amen. I. B. A meditation of the pre∣sence of God. THere is nothing that maketh more to true godlinesse of life, then the persuasion of thy pre∣sence, (deare father) and that no∣thing is hid from thee, but all to thee is open, and naked, euen our verie thoughts which one day thou wilte reueale and open either to our praise or punishment in this life: as thou didest Dauids faults which he did se∣cretly. 2. Reg. 12. or in the life to com Math. 25. for nothing is so hid that
shall not be reuealed. Therfore doth the prophet say: Wo to them that keepe secrete their thoughtes, to hide their counsell from the Lord, and do their workes in darknesse: saying, who seeth vs? Graunt mee therefore deare God, mercie for all my sinnes, especially my hidde and close sinnes. Enter not into iudgement with me, I humbly beseech thee, giue mee to beleeue tru∣ly in thy Christ, that I neuer come into iudgement for them, and that with Dauid I mighte so reueale them vnto thee, that thou wouldest in thy great mercie couer them. And graunt further, that hencefoorth I may alwaies thinke my selfe conti∣nually conuersaunt before thee, so that if I do wel, I neede not to passe of the publishing of it, as hypocrites do: if I thinke or do any euil, I may forthwith knowe that the same shall
not alwayes be hid from men. Graunt me that I may alwayes haue in minde that day wherein the hid workes of darknesse shal be illu∣minated, and also that sentenee of thy sonne, that nothing is so secret which shall not be reuealed. So in trouble and wrong I shal finde comfort, and otherwise be kept through thy grace from euill, which doe thou worke I humbly beseech thee for Christes sake. I.B. A meditation of the proui∣dence of God. God wor¦keth al in al maruel¦lously, iu∣stly, and holilie.THis ought to be vnto vs most certaine, that nothing is done wtout thy prouidence, (O Lord) that is, that nothing is done, be it good or bad, sweete or sower, but by thy knowledge, that is, by thy will, wisedome, and ordinaunce, (for all these knowledge doth comprehend
in it) as by thy holy worde wee are taught in many places, that euen the life of a sparrowe is not without thy will,Matth  nor any libertie or power vpō a porket haue all the diuells in Hell,Matth. . but by thy appoyntment and will: which will we alwaies must beleeue most assuredly to be all iust and good, how so euer otherwise it seeme vnto vs: for thou art maruellous and not comprehensible in thy wayes, and holy in all thy workes. But herevnto it is necessarie also for vs to knowe no lesse certeinely,God wor¦keth▪ by meanes, without meanes, & against meanes. that though all thinges be done by thy prouidence, yet the same proui∣dence hath many and diuerse meanes to worke by, which meanes beeing contemned, thy prouidence is con∣temned also. As for example. Meat is a meane to serue thy prouidence for the preseruation of health and life here, so that hee which contemneth
to eate because thy prouidence is cer∣teine and infallible, the same con∣temneth thy prouidence. In deede, if it were so that meate could not be had, then should we not tie thy prouidence to this meane, but make it free as thou art free, that is. that without meate thou canst helpe and giue health and life, for it is not of any neede that thou vsest any instrument or meane to serue thy prouidence. Thy power & wisedome is infinite, and therefore should we hange on thy prouidence euen when all is cleane against vs. But for our erudition & infirmities sake, it hath pleased thee by meanes to worke and deale with vs here, to exercise vs in obedience, and because we cannot lse (so greate is our corruption) su∣steine thy naked and bare presence. Graunt me therefore deare father, I humbly beseech thee for Christes
sake, ye as I something now knowe these things, so I may vse this know¦ledge to my comfort & commoditie in thee: that is, graunt that in what state soeuer I be, I may not doubt but the same doth come to mee by thy most iust ordinance, yea, by thy mercifull ordinance: for as thou art iust, so art thou merciful: yea, thy mercie is aboue all thy works. And by this knowledge graunt mee that I may humble my selfe to obey thee, and looke for thy helpe in time conuenient, not onely whē I haue meanes by which thou maiest worke, and art so accustomed to do: but also when I haue no mea∣nes, but am destitute therof, yea, whē all meanes be directly and cleane a∣gainst mee: graunt I say that I may yet still hang vpon thee and thy pro∣uidence, not doubting of a fatherly end in thy good time.
Againe, least I should contemne thy prouidence, or presume vppon it by vncoupling those thinges which thou hast coupled together: preserue me from neglecting thy ordinarie & lawfull meanes in all my needes, if so be I may haue them, & with good conscience vse thē, although I know thy prouidence be not tied to them further then pleaseth thee: and grant that I may with diligence, reue∣rence and thankfulnes, vse them, and thereto my deligence, wisedeme and industrie in all thinges lawefull to serue thereby thy prouidence, if it so please thee: howbeit, so that I hang in no part on the meanes or on my diligence, wisedome, and industrie, but onely on thy prouidence: which more and more persuade me to be altogether fatherlie and good, howe far so euer otherwise it appeare and seeme, yea, or else is felt of me. By
this I being preserued from negli∣gence on my behalfe, and despaire or murmuring towards thee, shall be∣come diligent and patient through thy meere and alone grace: which giue and increase in me, to the praise of thy holy name for euer, through Iesus Christ our Lord and onely Sauiour. Amen. I. B. A Meditation of Gods power, beautie, goodnesse, &c. BYcause thou Lord wouldest haue vs to loue thee, not onely doest thou will, entice, allure, and pro∣uoke vs, but also doest command vs so to do, promising thy self vnto such as loue thee, and threatning vs with dānation, if we do otherwise. Wher∣by we may see both our great cor∣ruption & naughtinesse, & also thine exceeding great mercie towards vs. First concerning our corruption
and naughtinesse: what a thing is it, that power, riches, authoritie, beau∣tie, goodnes▪ liberalitie, truth, iustice, (all which thou art good Lord) can not moue vs to loue thee? Whatsoe∣uer thinges we see faire, good, wise mighty, are but euen sparcles of that power, beautie, goodnesse, wisedome, which thou art. For to the ende thou mightest declare thy riches, beautie, power, wisedome, goodnesse, &c. thou hast not only made, but still doest conserue all creatures to bee (as Dauid saith of the heauens) de∣clarers & setters forth of thy glory, & as a book to teach vs to know thee. How faire thou art, the beauty of the Sunne, Moone, Starres, light, flowers, riuers, fieldes, hills, irdes, beastes, men, and all creatures, yea, the goodly shape and forme of the whole worlde doth declare. How mightie thou art, wee are
taught by the creation of this world euen of naught, by gouerning the same, by punishing the wicked migh∣tie Giants thereof, by ouerthrowing their deuises, by repressing the rages of the sea within her bounds, by stor∣mes, tempests, & fires. These & such like declare vnto vs thine inuisible, almighty, & terrible power, whereby thou subduest all things vnto thee. Howe rich thou art, this worlde, thy great and infinite treasure house doth well declare. What plentie is there not onely of thinges, but also of euerie kinde of thinge? Yea how dost thou yearly and daily multiply these kindes? How many seedes dost thou make of one seede? Yea what great increase dost thou bring it vn∣to? These can not but put vs in re∣mēbrāce of the exceeding riches that thou hast. For if to thine enemies which loue thee not (as the moste
part in this world be) if to them thou giuest so plentifully thy riches here, what shall we thinke that with thy selfe yu hast laid vp for thy friendes? Howe good thou art, all creatures generally and particularly do teach. What creature is there in the world which thou hast not made for our cōmoditie? I will not say how that thou mightest haue made vs crea∣tures without sense or reason, if thou haddest would. But amongest all things, none doeth so teach vs thy great loue towardes vs, as doeth the death of thy most dearely beloued sonne,Iohn 15. who suffered the paines & ter∣rors thereof, yea and of hell it selfe, for our sakes. If this thy loue had bene but a small loue, it would neuer haue lasted so long, nor Christ should neuer haue died. I.B.
A Meditation concerning the sober v∣sage of the bodie, that it may be sub∣iect and obedient to the soule. THis our bodie which God hath made to be the Tabernacle and mansion of our soule for this life, if we consider it accordingly, we could not but vse it otherwise than we do: that is, we would vse it for the souls sake being the guest thereof, and not for the bodie it selfe, and so should it be serued in things to helpe, but not to hinder the soule. A seruant it is, & therfore it ought to obey to serue the soul, that the soul might serue God, not as the bodie will, neither as the soule it selfe will, but as God will, whose wil we should learne to know & behaue our selues thereafter. The which thing to obserue is hard for vs nowe, by reason of sinne which hath gotten a mansion house in our
bodies, and dwelleth in vs as doth the soule. To the which (sinne I meane) we are altogether of our selues inclined, because we naturally are sinners and born in sinne, by rea∣son wherof we are ready as seruants to sinne, and to vse our bodies accor∣dingly, making the soule to sit at re∣ward, and pampering vp the seruant to our shame. Oh therefore (good Lord) that it would please thee to open this geare vnto me, and to giue me eyes to con∣sider effectually this my body what it is, namely a seruant lent for the soule to soiourne in, and serue thee in this life: yea it is by reason of sinne that hath his dwelling there, become now to the soule nothing else, but a prison, and that most streit, vile, stin∣king, filthie, and therfore in danger of miseries to many in al ages, times and places, till death haue turned it
to dust whereof it came, & whither it shall returne, that the soule may re∣turne to thee from whence it came, vntill the day of iudgement come, in the which thou wilt raise vp that body, that then it may be partaker with the soule, and the soule with it inseparably of weale or woe, accor∣ding to that is done in and by the same bodie here now in earth. Oh that I could consider often and hartily these things, then should I not pamper vp this bodie to obey it, but bridle it that it might obey the soule: then should I flie the paine it putteth my soule vnto by reason of sinne and prouocation to all euill, & continually desire the dissolution of it with Paul, and the deliuerance from it as much as euer did prisoner his deliuerance out of prison: for al∣onely by it the diuell hath a dore to tempt, and so to hurt me: in it I am
kept from thy presence, & thou from being so conuersant with me, as else thou wouldest be: by it I am restrai∣ned from the sense and feeling of all the ioyes and comforts (in manner) which are to be taken as ioyes and comfortes in deede. If it were dis∣solued and I out of it, then could Satan no more hurt me, then woul∣dest thou speake with me face to face, then the conflicting time were at an end, then sorrowe would cease, and ioy would increase, & I should enter into inestimable rest. Oh that I could consider this accordingly. I.B. Another Meditation cōcerning the sober vsage of the bodie and pleasures in this life. THe beginning of all euill in our kinde of liuing, springeth out of the deprauation and corruptnesse of our iudgement, bicause our will
alwaies followeth that which reason iudgeth to be followed. Nowe, that which euery mā taketh to be friend∣ly and agreeing to his nature, the same doth he iudge necessarily to be good for him, and to be desired. This is meate, drinke, apparell, riches, fa∣uour, dignitie, rule, knowledge, and such like, bicause they are thought good and agreeing, either to the bodie or to the minde, or to both, for they helpe either to the conseruation or to the pleasure of man accounted of e∣uerie one amongest good things. Howbeit, such is the weaknesse of our wit on the one part, & the blind∣nesse and too much rage of our lustes on the other part, that we being left to our selues, can not but in the de∣sire of things which we iudge good and agreeing to our nature, by the iudgement of our senses and reason, we can not (I say) but ouerpasse the
boundes wherby they might be pro∣fitable vnto vs, and so we make them hurtfull vnto vs, which of them∣selues are ordeined for our health. What is more necessary then meat and drinke, or more agreeing to na∣ture? but yet howe fewe be there which doe not hurt them selues by them? In like manner it goeth with riches, estimation, friends, learning, &c. yea although we be in these most temperate, yet when there wanteth the spirit our regeneratour, we are so drowned in them, that we vtterly neglect to lift vp our mindes to the good pleasure of God, to the end we might imitate and followe God our maker by yeelding our selues ouer, duly to vse his gifts to the common & priuate vtilitie of our neighbors. But now, God only is life and e∣ternitie, and can not but demaund of vs his handie worke, that we should
render our selues and all we haue to the ende wherefore wee were made, that is, to resemble for our portion, his goodnesse, as they which be no∣thing else but witnesses and instru∣ments of his mercie: So that when wee wholy doe naturally striue a∣gainst that kinde of life wherevnto he hath created vs, by seeking alwais our selues, what other thing ought to insue, but ye he should againe de∣stroie vs, and take away his notable giftes, wherewith he therfore indued vs, that by all kind of wel doing we should resemble his image: yea what other thing may ensue, but that hee should leaue vs, and that eternally, that we might feele and by experi∣ence proue howe bitter a thing it is to leaue the Lorde, in whome is all goodnes? Oh that I might therefore finde such fauour in thy sight (deare father) that thou wouldest worke in
me by thy holie spirit, a true know∣ledge of all good things, and heartie loue to the same: through Christ Ie∣sus our Lord and onelie Sauiour. Amen. I. B. A Meditation of death, and the commodities it bringeth. WHat other thing doe we daily in this present life, but heape sinne vpon sinne, and hoorde vp trespasse vpon trespasse? so that this day is worse alwaies thē yester∣day by increasing, as daies, so sinnes, and therefore thy indignaiion, good Lord, against vs: but when we shall be let go out of the prison of this bo∣die, & so taken into thy blessed com∣panie, then shall we be in most safe∣tie of immortalitie and saluation, then shall come vnto vs no sicknesse, no need, no paine, no kind of euill to soule or bodie, but what so euer good
we can wish, that shall we haue, and what so euer we loath, shall be farre from vs. O deere father, that we had faith to behold these thinges accor∣dingly. O that our hearts were per∣suaded thereof, and our affections inflamed with the desire of them. Then should we liue in longing for that which nowe we most loath. Oh helpe vs, and graunt that we beeing ignorant of thinges to come, and of the time of our death, (which to thee is certain) may so liue and finish our iourney here, that we may be ready, and then depart when our departing may make most to thy glory, and our comfort through Christ. What is this life but a smoke, a vapour, a shadowe, a warrefare, a bubble of water, a worde, grasse, a flower? That thou shalt die, it is most certeine, but the time no man can tell when. The longer in this life
thou doest remaine, the more thou sinnest: which will turne to thy more paine. By cogitation of death our mindes be often in manner op∣pressed with darkenesse, because wee doe but remember the night of the body, forgetting the light of the mind and of the resurrection. Hereto remember the good things that after this life shall insue with∣out wauering in certeintie of faith, and so shall the passage of death bee more desired. It is like a failing ouer the sea to thy home and countrie: it is like a medicine or purgation to the health of soule & bodie: it is the best Physition: it is like to a womans trauell. For as the childe being de∣liuered commeth into a more large place, then the wombe wherein it did lie before: so thy soule beeing deliue∣red out of the bodie, commeth into a much more large and faire place,
euen into heauen. I. B. A meditation vpon the passion of our Sauiour Iesus Christ. OH Lord Iesus Christ, the sonne of the euerliuing God, by whom all thinges were made, and be ruled and gouerned: thou the liuely Image of the substance of the Fa∣ther, the eternall wisedome of God, the brightnes of his glorie, God of God, light of light, coequal, coeter∣nal and consubstantial with the Fa∣ther: thou which of the loue thou hadst to mankinde, when he was fallen from the fellowshippe of God into the societie of Sathan and al e∣uill, didst vouchsafe for our redemp∣tion, to become a mediator betweene God and man taking to thy godhead our nature, as concerning the sub∣stance of it, and so becamest man, al∣so the heire of all, and most mercifull
Messias, which by the power of thy Godhead and merites of thy man∣hoode, hast made purgation of our sinnes, euen by thine own selfe, whi∣lest thou was here on earth, beeing nowe set on the right hande of thy father for vs, euen concerning our nature, in maiestie, glorie, and power infinite. I pray and humbly beseech thy mercie to graunt me at this pre∣sent to rehearse some of thy passions and sufferinges for me the last night that thou wast here before thy death, that thy good spirite might therby be effectuall to worke in me faith, as well of the pardon of my sinnes by them, as mortification of mine af∣fections, comfort in my crosses, and patience in afflictions, Amen. In the middest of thy last supper with thy deare apostles, these things could not but be before thee, name∣ly that they all would leaue thee,
the most earnest would forsweare thee, and one of the twelue should most traiterously betray thee: which were no smal crosses vnto thee. Iudas was admonished of thee to beware, but when he tooke no heede▪ but wil∣fully went out to finish his worke, contemning thy admonition & coun∣sell, he could not but vexe thy most louing heart. After supper there was contention amongest thy Disciples, who should be greatest after thee, yet dreaming carnally of thee and thy kingdome, & hauing this affection of pride and ambition busie amongest them, not∣withstanding thy diligence in repro∣uing and teaching them. After thy admonition to them of the crosse that would come, therby to make them more vigilant, so grosse were they, that they thought they coulde with their two swordes put
away all perils, which was no little greefe vnto thee. After thy comming to Gethsemane, heauinesse pressed thee, and therfore thou wouldest thy disciples to pray. Thou didst tell to Peter and his fellowes, that thy hart was heauie to death. Thou didest will them to pray, being carefull for them also least they should fall into tentation. After this thou wentes a stones cast from them, and diddest pray thy selfe, falling flat and groue∣ling vpon the earth: but (alas) thou feltest no comfort, and therefore thou camest to thy disciples (which of all others were moste sweete and deare vnto thee) but loe, to thy fur∣ther discomforte they passe neither of thy perils, nor of their owne, & there∣fore sleepe apace. After thou hadst awaked them, thou goest againe to pray, but thou foundest no comfort at all, and ther∣fore
diddest returne againe for some comfort at thy deerest friends hands. But yet againe, (alas) they are fast a sleepe. Whereupon thou art inforced to go againe to thy heauenly father for some sparke of comforte in these thy wonderfull crosses and agonies. Nowe, here thou wast so discoraged & so comfortlesse, that euen streames of bloud came running from thine eies and eares, and other partes of thy bodie. But who is able to ex∣presse the infinitenesse of thy crosses, euen at thy being in the garden? All which thou sufferedst for my sake, as wel to satisfie thy Fathers wrath for my sinnes, as also to sanctifie all my sufferinges, the more gladly to be susteined of me. After thy bloudie prayer thou ca∣mest and yet againe foundest thy dis∣ciples a sleepe, and before thou canst well awake them, loe, Iudas com∣meth
with a great bande of men to apprehend thee as a theefe, and so do∣eth, leading thee away bound to the high Bishops house Annas, and so from him to Caiphas. Here now to augment this thy miserie, behold thy disciples flee from thee: false witnes∣ses be brought against thee: thou art accused and condemned of blasphe∣mie: Peter euen in thy sight forswea∣reth thee: thou art vniustly stricken for answearing lawfully: thou art blindfold, stricken and buffetted all the whole night in the Bishop Cai∣phas house of their cruel seruants. In the morning betimes thou art condemned againe of the priestes of blasphemie, and therefore they bring thee before the secular power to Pi∣late, by whom thou art openly ar∣rained as other theeues and malefac∣tors were: and when he sawe that thou wast accused of malice, yet he
did not dismisse thee, but did sende thee to Herod, where thou wast sham¦fully derided in comming and going to him and from him all the way, especially after Herod had apparel∣led thee as a foole. Afore Pilate againe therfore thou wast brought and accused falsely: no man did take thy part, or speake a good worde for thee. Pilate caused thee to be whipped and scourged, and to be handled most pitifully, to see if any pitie might appeare with the prelates, but no man at all pitied thee. Barrabas was preferred before thee: all the people, heade and taile, was against thee, and cried: hang him vp. Uniustly to death wast thou iudged thou wast crowned with thorns that pearced thy braines: thou wast made a mocking stocke: thou wast reuiled, beaten & most miserably handled.
Thou wentest through Ierusalem to the place of execution, euen to the Mount of Caluarie: a great crosse to hang thee on, was laide vpon thy backe to beare and drawe, as long as thou wast able. Thy bodie was racked to be nay∣led to the tree, thy handes were boa∣red through, and thy feete also, nailes were put through them to fasten thee thereon: thou wast hanged betweene heauen & earth, as one spued out of heauen, and vomited out of the earth, vnworthie of any place: the high Priest laughed thee to scorne: the elders blasphemed thee, and saide, God hath no care for thee: the com∣mon people laughed and cried out vpon thee, thirst oppressed thee, but vineger onely and gall was giuen thee to drinke: heauen shined not vpō thee: the sunne gaue thee no light: the earth was afraid to beare thee: sa∣thā
tempted thee and thine owne sen∣ses caused thee, to crie out: My God my God why hast thou forsaken me? Oh wonderful passions, which thou sufferedst. In them thou teachest me: in them thou comfortest mee: for by them GOD is my father: my sinnes are forgiuen. By them I should learne to feare God, to loue God, and neuer to leaue him for any tentations, but with thee to crie: Fa∣ther into thy handes I commend my spirite. A prayer to Christ crucified. AS thou, O Lord, wast crucified for me, so I beseech thee crucifie me with thee, that I may rise againe with thee to euerlasting life. Thy fleshe was crucified for me: crucifie with thee (O Christe) the kingdome of the flesh, which hath dominion in me, that I may put off the olde Adam, and by newnesse of
life may be transformed into thee the second Adam, sinne, infidelitie, and the whole tyrannie of sathan beeing vanquished and ouercome. Bring to passe (O Lord) that by thy crosse and paineful suffering, thy yoke may be to me made light, and thy burthen easie, that willingly & gladly following thee, I may come whither thou art gone: that is, to thy father most blessed and immor∣tal, from whom nothing shall after∣ward be able to separate vs. God forbid that I should reioyce in any thing but in the crosse of our Lord Iesus Christ, whereby the world is crucified vnto me, and I vnto the worlde. Gal. 6. A prayer to Christ ascended and reigning in glorie. OH good Christ, our first begot∣ten brother and tender hearted
Ioseph: Oh naturall sonne of that Father, to whom we are made chil∣dren of adoption through thee: Oh our head reigning on high in glorie: forget not vs thy poore members here on earth, whervnto abasing thy selfe thou camest downe and suffe∣redst for vs most cruel death. Out of this thy throne of Maiestie & glorie, thou puttest vs in assured hope and confidence, that we also shal attaine to that blessed place, whither thou art gone before to take possession for vs. Oh our strong tower of defence and succour, what can hurt vs nowe trusting in thee? Most vnhappie are they which are ignorant of thee: Most happie are they, which always behold thee. Blessed are they which haue knowen thee here in the dayes of their mortalitie: But more bles∣sed are they which see thee in the heauens, and shall see thee reigning
with thy Father in ioyes incompa∣rable. Oh Lorde the onely ioye and comforte of our soules, shewe vs thy louinge countenaunce, embrace vs with the armes of thy mercie: re∣ceiue vs, O good Ioseph, thy yon∣ger brethren with ye kisse of comfort: powre into our harts thy holy spirit: plucke vs vp from the earth & earth∣lie things: open our eyes & lift them vp vnto thee: open thy mouth, & call vs vnto thee: open our eares that we may heare thee, so that whatsoeuer we do, speake or thinke, it may be directed vnto thee alone our redee∣mer, mediator and aduocate. If ye be risen againe with Christ, seeke the thinges which are aboue, where Christ sitteth at the right hand of God: set your affection on thinges that are aboue, & not on things which are on the earth. Col. 3.
An other. THou Lord didest put away Ma∣rie Magdalen from the kissing of thy feete,Iohn. 2▪ because thy flesh was not yet exalted, and shee knewe not yet the dignitie of thy clarified bo∣die, and beautified with the glory of immortalitie, but was addicted one∣ly to thy bodily presence. She yet sought the liuing among the deade,Luke. 24▪ neither was it knowne to her that thou wast equall with thy father. Wherfore thou wouldest not suffer her so much as to kisse thy feete: because it was a thing vnwor∣thy for thy maiestie, Oh thou migh∣tie Lion of the tribe of Iuda: thou cō∣querour of hel and death, euer liuing and immortall, thou art nowe risen from death for vs: thou art now as∣cended to thy father and our father, and sittest at his right hand in glo∣rie: suffer vs to come neare vnto thee
that wee may kisse thee: yea, Lorde, thou louer of our soules,Cant. 1. come thou rather vnto vs, and kisse vs with the kisse of thy mouth, that we may bee glad and reioyce in thee: drawe vs that we may runne after the sauour of thy sweete oyntmentes:Psal. 17. that wee may beholde thee in righteousnesse, and when thy glorie shall appeare we may be satisfied: for in thy pre∣sence there is fulnesse of ioy,Psal. 16. and in thy right hand there are pleasures for euermore. A prayer for true repentance. MOst gratious God & mercifull Father of our Sauiour Iesus Christ, because I haue sinned & don wickedly, and through thy good∣nesse haue receiued a desire of re∣pentaunce, wherevnto this thy long suffering doth drawe my harde hart:
I beseech thee for thy great mercies sake in Christ, to worke the same re∣pentance in me, and by thy spirite, power, and grace, so to humble, mor∣tifie, and feare my conscience for my sinnes to saluation, that in thy good time thou maist comfort and quicken me again, through Iesus Christ thy dearely beloued sonne, So be it. I. B. A prayer for the strength and increase of faith. O Merciful God and deare father of our Lord and sauiour Iesus Christ (in whome as thou art well pleased; so hast thou comman∣ded vs to heare him) for as much as he often biddeth vs to aske of thee, and also promiseth that thou wilt heare vs, and grant vs that which in his name we shal aske of thee: loe gratious father we are bold to begge of thy mercie through thy sonne Ie∣sus Christ one sparkle of true faith
and certaine persuasion of thy good∣nesse and loue towards vs in Christ, where through I being assured of ye pardon of all my sinnes by the mer∣cies of Christe thy sonne, may bee thankefull to thee, loue thee, & serue thee in holinesse and righteousnesse all the dayes of my life. I. B. A prayer for the true sense and feeling of Gods auour and mer∣cie in Christe. OH Lord God and deare Father, what shall I say that feele all things to be (in maner) with me as in the wicked? Blind is my mind crooked is my will, and peruerse con∣cupiscence is in mee, as a spring or stinking puddle. O howe faint is faith in me? How little is my loue to thee or to thy people? How great is selfe loue? Howe harde is my heart▪ By the reason whereof I am
moued to doubt of thy goodnes to∣wardes me, whether thou art my mercifull father, and whether I be thy childe or no. In deede worthily might I doubt, if that the hauing of these were the cause, & not the fruite rather of thy children. The cause why thou art my father is thy mer∣cie, goodnes, grace & truth in Christe Iesus which can not but remain for euer. In respect whereof thou hast borne me this goodwill, to bring me into thy Church by baptisme, and to accept me into the number of thy children, that I might be holie, faith∣full, obedient and innocent: and to call me diuerse times by the ministe∣rie of thy worde into thy kingdome: besides thy innumerable other bene∣fites, alwayes hitherto powred vp∣pon me. All which thou hast done of this thy good will which thou of thine owne mercie barest to mee in
Christ, and for Christe, before the worlde was made. The which thing as thou requirest straitly yt I should beleeue without doubting, so woul∣dest thou that in all my needes I should come vnto thee as vnto a Fa∣ther, and make my mone without mistrust of beeing heard in thy good time, as most shall make to my com∣fort. Loe, therefore to thee deere Fa∣ther, I come through thy sonne our Lord, mediator and aduocate Iesus Christ, who sitteth on thy right hand making intercession for me, and pray thee of thy great goodnes and mer∣cie in Christ to bee mercifull vnto me, that I may feele in deede thy sweete mercie as thy childe. The time (Oh deare Father) I appoint not, but I pray thee, that I may with hope still expect and looke for thy helpe. I hope that as thou for a lit∣tle while hast left mee, so thou
wilt come and visite me, and that in thy great mercie, whereof I haue need by reason of my great miserie. Thou art wont for a little season in thine anger to hide thy face from them whome thou louest, but sure∣ly (O Redeemer) in eternal mercies thou wilt shew thy cōpassions. For when thou leauest vs, O Lord, thou doest not leaue vs verie long, ney∣ther doest thou leaue vs to our owne losse, but to our iucre and aduaun∣tage: euen that thy holie spirite with bigger portion of thy power and ver∣tue, may lighten and cheare vs, that the want of feeling of our sorrowe, may be recompenced plentifully with the liuely sense of hauing thee to our eternall ioy: and therefore thou swa∣rest that in thine euerlasting mercie thou wilt haue compassion on vs. Of which thing, to the end we might be most assured, thine oth is to bee
marked,Esai. 54. for thou saiest: As I haue sworne, that I will neuer bring any more ye waters to drown the world: So haue I sworn that I wil neuer more be angry with thee, nor reprooue thee. The mountaines shal remoue, and the hilles shal fall downe, but my louing kindenesse shall not moue, and the bonde of my peace shall not faile thee. Thus saist thou, the Lord our mercifull redeemer. Deare father, therefore I praye thee remember, euen for thine owne truth and mercie sake, this promise and euerlasting couenant, which in thy good time I pray thee to write in my hart, that I may know thee to be the onely true God, and Iesus Christ whom thou hast sent: that I may loue thee with all my heart for euer: that I may loue thy people for thy sake, that I may be holie in thy sight through Christ: that I
may alwayes not only striue against sinne, but also ouercome the same daily more and more, as thy chil∣dren doe, aboue all thinges desiring the sanctification of thy name, the comming of thy kingdome, the doing of thy will here on earth as it is in heauen, &c. through Iesus Christ our redeemer, mediatour, and aduo∣cate. Amen. I. B. A prayer against our spirituall enemies, the diuel, the worlde, and the flesh. O Lord God, the diuell goeth a∣bout like a roaring Lion, see∣king whom he may deuour: the flesh lusteth against the spirite, the world persuadeth vnto vanities, that we may forget thee our Lord God, & so for euer be damned. Thus are we miserably on euery side beset and be∣sieged of cruell & vnrestfull enemies,
and like at euery moment to perish, if we be not defended with thy god∣ly power against their tyrannie. We therefore poore and wretched sinners despairing of our owne strength, which in deede is none, most hartily pray thee to indue vs with strength from aboue, that wee may bee able through thy helpe, with strong faith to resist sathan, with feruent prayer to mortifie the lustes of the fleshe, with continuall meditation of thy holy lawe, to auoide the foolish va∣nities and transitory plesures of this wicked worlde: that through thy grace we being set at libertie from the power of these our mortall ene∣mies, may serue thee here in true ho∣lines and righteousnes, and after be partakers of the euerlasting ioyes prepared for thy children, which as they are greate and vnspeakeable, so are there fewe that doe enioye them.
For straight is the way, and narrow is the gate that leadeth therevnto, & fewe there be that find it. Notwith∣stāding (O God) thou hast a little flock to whom it is thy pleasure to giue that ioyfull kingdome: whose names are written in ye booke of life. Make vs therefore of ye number, for Iesus Christs sake, and place vs a∣mongest those thy sheepe which shall stande on thy right hand to receiue ye blessed inheritaunce, and dwell with thee for euermore. A prayer for present helpe in tentation. DEare father, to whom it is more easie to do all thinges, then for me to thinke any one good thing: Loe, doe thou but speake a worde, and thy deadlie sicke seruaunte my soule, shalbe made whole. Helpe (O Lord) for thy great mercie sake,
for thy truth sake, and for thy deare sonne Iesus Christ sake, and let thy strength suffice against my weake∣nesse, and thy holy spirit against my sinfull flesh and old man. Thou art faithfull (O Father) who hast promised that I shall not be tempted further, then▪ thou wilt make me able to beare. Giue nowe therefore thy grace and strength vn∣to thy seruaunt, that I may with a strong faith in thine infallible truth and promised mercie, vanquishe and subdue what so euer rebelleth a∣gainst thy most blessed wil. Preserue and keepe holy my soule and body, and let them not be defiled & made a dungeon of diuels & wicked spirits, through delectation in sinne. Behold deare father, the postes thereof are sprinkled with the pretious bloud of thy deare son, & of thy great mercie they are made the temple and taber∣nacle
of thy holy spirite. Shall now (alas) the diuell, the worlde, or the fleshe, plucke from thee that thing which presently crieth to thee with assured trust in thy promised helpe? Nay father▪ but graunt that I may by thy mightie power, turne all their crafts, deceits, and raging assaultes vnto the increase of my faith, & that by experience of thy fatherly assi∣stance in this my present temptation, I may with assured hope & trust in thy ready helpe & comfort, ouercome my saide enemies hereafter in like assaultes, and prayse thy holy name for the victorie, through Iesus Christ our Lord. My sonne, if thou wilt come in∣to the seruice of the Lorde, stande fast in righteousnesse and feare, and prepare thy soule to tentation. Eccle. 2.
Remedies against sinneful mo∣tions and tentations. First remember that sinne is so hei∣nous a thing, that God by his iustice might worthily damne thee for the same, and is therefore to be abhorred as a sweete poyson, a flattering death and destruction of the soule which would out thee off from God thy Sa∣uiour, and make thee a bondslaue to sathan thy deadly enemie. Auoide therefore euen at the first the occasions thereof,Psal. 137. and betimes quash out the braines of the children of Babylon against the harde stones, whiles yet they be young and weake, least when they be growen elder and stronger, they dash thee to peeces. And for remedie against the same, flee vnto God, who commandeth thee to call vpon him in thy troubles, and promiseth to deliuer thee, and wil not
suffer thee to be further tempted then he wil make a way out,1. Cor. 11. whereby thou shalt escape: and doubt not, but hee that causeth thee to hate the sinne which thy nature is to loue, will deli∣uer thee also from the daunger there∣of, and make thee to triumph ouer sa∣than, to his confusion, to Gods glorie, and to thy great comfort: which are causes that our tender louing father sendeth tentations vnto vs: and he that is not tempted, what is he? Now after thou hast obteined the victorie, remember two thinges: first to giue most heartie thankes to God for his grace and assistance, whereby thou hast ouercome, and be not vn∣thankfull in any wise: and then that he who continually goeth about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may deuour, will not be long or farre away from thee, but wil attempt againe the same or as euill wayes to ouercome
thee. Watch therefore and pray. A prayer for the auoyding of Gods heauie wrath & ven∣geance for our sinnes. OH Lord God, strong & mightie, great and fearefull, which dwel∣lest in the heauens, and workest great wonders, wee thy miserable children here vppon earth, doe moste humbly beseech thee to be merciful vnto vs, to pardon our offences, and to forgiue vs all our sinnes. O Lord, enter not into iudgement with thy seruantes, for if thou doe, there shall no fleshe be saued in thy fight. We confesse and acknowledge, O Lorde, that it is our sinnes, whiche hath moued thee to wrath, and to shewe such fearefull tokens of thy displeasure towardes vs in these our dayes: first with fire from heauen,
betokening thy hote burning indig∣nation and wrathfull displeasure for sinne, which aboundeth at this daye: then with such horrible and mon∣strous shapes against nature, as were neuer seene here in our dayes, nor in any time before vs, which do be∣token to vs none other thing, but thy plagues to come vpon vs for our degenerate and monstrous life and conuersation: and nowe besides all this, by great mortalitie, plague, and pestilence thou hast terribly threat∣tened vs, fatherly warned vs, & mer∣cifully called vs to repentance. The axe is set to the roote of the tree, and if wee bee not as rotten members without all sense and feeling, wee may perceaue our fearefull de∣struction and desolation to bee at hande, (vnlesse wee speedily repent and turne to thee) because wee haue bene so long taught out of thy most
holy and sacred word, & yet no fruits of repentance or Christian life will appeare. Woe and alas to these our dayes, that neither preaching by word most comfortable, nor preaching by fire most terrible, nor preaching by mon∣sters most strange and ougly, nei∣ther yet by plagues and pestilence most horrible, will stirre vp our sto∣nie heartes, and awake vs from our sinnes. We feare (O Lorde) that the Turkes with all the rest of the vn∣beleeuing will condemne vs in the last day: which if they had bin so long instructed by the comfortable prea∣ching of thy word, and sweet promi∣ses of thy Gospel, or seene the woon∣ders which we haue seene, no doubt their righteousnesse would haue shi∣ned at this day, to our great shame and confusion. Thou hast no lesse
warned vs (O Lorde) of thy feare∣full displeasure & heauie plagues at hand for our great wickednesse, then thou didest the Israelites of that hor∣rible destruction which came vpon them, whom thou first in mercie diddest cal to repentance by the prea∣ching of thy worde: but when no warning would serue, thou diddest send them monstrous and fearefull signes and tokens, to declare that thy visitatiō was not farre off. But they like vnto vs at this day, did always interpret these things after the ima∣gination of their owne vaine hearts, promising to themselues peace, when destruction was ouer their heads. Which things when we do call to minde (for as much as they are writ∣ten for our learning, example and warning) it maketh vs to tremble and quake for feare of thy iust iudge∣ments. For if thou hast thus dealt
with thine owne deare and chosen children, in token of thy great wrath against sinne: what shall wee looke for, who do no lesse deserue thy fear∣full scourge (for of mercie it is that thou doest thus long forbeare vs) and liue as though there were no God at all to be reuenged vpon our sinnes? It maketh vs to feare & crye inwardly in our soules: Come Lorde Iesu, holy & true in all thy doings, & shorten our daies:Apoc. 22. bring this our pil∣grimage to an end: suffer vs not to heap sinne vpon sinne vntill the day of vengeance, least we be caught vp amongst the number of the wicked and reprobate, which shall neuer see thy louing countenance. It maketh vs to crie to thee (O Lorde) Let thy kingdome come, and end this our sinefull life, wherein we doe nothing but prouoke thee to wrath.
Correct vs not,Psal. 6. O Lord, in thine in∣dignation, neither chasten vs in thy heauy displeasure. And though to vs belongeth nothing but shame & con∣fusion, though our offences haue de∣serued to be visited with the rod,Psal. 89. and our sinnes with scourges: yet in mercie Lorde, & with fatherly correctiō, cha∣sten vs, and thy louing kindnesse take not away from vs.Psal. 57. To thee we flee for succour: vnder the winges of thy mer∣cy shalbe our refuge, vntill thou turne thy wrathfull countenaunce from vs. We know that thy mercie is aboue all thy works,Eccle. 2. and euen as great as thy selfe: therfore wit we say with holy Iob,Iob. 13. Though thou kill vs, yet will wee put our trust in thee. Thou camest to comfort & pluck out of the dungeon of hell, suche wretches as wee are. Thou art the good Samaritan that camest to heale
our deadly woundes: thou art that good Physitian that camest to cure our mortall infirmities: thou art the good sheepheard that camest to seeke vs wandering and lost sheepe,Luk. 15. and to bring vs to thy folde againe: & more then that,Ephe. 5. thou art our brother, flesh of our flesh, and bone of our bones, which hast tasted of our infirmities, felt our temptations,Esai. 53. and borne the burden of our sinnes: therefore at thy handes we looke for mercie against the day of vengeance. And though thou punish vs, yet our hope is and euer shallbe, that thy rodde shall no further touch vs, then shal make to thy glorie, our commoditie, and the strengthening and increase of our faith. Let this thy Preaching sundrie ways (O Lord) be sufficient for our warning, and graunt that we may speedily & from the bottome of our
heartes repent, endeuour to doe thy righteous and blessed will reuealed in thy worde, and frame our liues according to the same, that we may here liue in thy feare all the dayes of our life, and after this our sinnefull course is ended, may dwel with thee in thy blessed kingdome, through the death & merites of Iesus Christ our onely redeemer. So be it. Another praier for the auoiding of Gods deserued wrath hanging ouer vs for our sinnes. WHen we looke backe and be∣hold our sinful life past, what a dongeon of errours, vice, & wickednes, openeth it selfe vnto vs? so that there is no man but he must needes be ashamed of him selfe when he calleth to mind what he hath ben: & trembleth when he considereth the wickednes and sinneful course of his
life to come: for who shall vndertak that the rest of our life shall bee any better then that is past? How can we thē sufficiently magnifie & praise thy great mercy, which hast deferred thy punishmēt so long? Beholding ther∣fore this our daungerous & misera∣ble state we come vnto thee (O thou great and mightie Iudge) in trem∣bling and feare, humbly beseeching thee not to heape vpon vs thy deser∣ued vengeance, but let thy tender kindnes & loue thou bearest to Iesus Christ thy sonne our gratious Lord and redeemer, couer our iniquites: for whose sake (though we deserue all extremitie) thou doest pardon vs. If thou Lorde shall straitly marke our iniquities, O Lord, who shalbe a∣ble to abide it? Psal. 103. A prayer to be saide of all such as suffer any kinde of crosse.
ALmightie God, king of al kings, & gouernour of al things, whose power no creature is able to re∣sist, to whome it belongeth iustly to punish sinners & to be mercifull vnto them that truely repent: wee con∣fesse thou doest most iustly punishe vs, for wee haue greeuously sinned against thee, and wee acknowledge that in punishing vs thou doest de∣clare thy selfe to be our most mer∣cifull father, as well because thou doest not punishe vs in any thing as we haue deserued, as also because by punishing vs thou doest call vs, and (as it were) draw vs to increase in repentance, in faith, in prayer, in con∣temning of the world, and in heartie desiring for euerlasting life and thy blessed presence. Grant vs therfore gratious Lord, thankefully to acknowledge thy great mercie, which hast thus fa∣uourably
dealte with vs in puni∣shing vs, not to our confusion, but to our amendement. And seeing thou hast sworne that thou wilt not the death of a sinner, but that he turne and liue, haue mercie vppon vs and turne vs vnto thee, for thy dearely beloued sonne Iesus Christes sake, whome thou wouldest shoulde bee made a slaine sacrifice for our sinnes: thereby declaring thy great and vn∣speakeable anger against sinne, and thine infinite mercie towards vs sin∣full wretches. And for as much as the dulnesse, blindnes, & corruption of our hearts is such, that we are not able to arise vp vnto thee by faithfull and heartie prayer, according to our great neces∣sitie, without thy singular grace and assistance: graunt vnto vs, gratious Lorde, thy holy and sanctifying spi∣rite, to worke in vs this good work,
with grace to weigh and consider the neede and greatnesse of that wee doe desire, and with an assured faith and trust that thou wilt grant vs our re∣questes, because thou art good and gratious, euen to younge Rauens calling vppon thee, much more then to vs for whome thou hast made all things, yea, and hast not spared also thine owne deare sonne: because thou hast commaunded vs to call vppon thee: because thy throne whereto wee come, is a throne of grace and mercie: because thou hast giuen vs a mediator Christe to bring vs vnto thee, being the way by whome wee come, being the dore by whome wee enter, and being our head on whome we hang and hope, that our poore pe∣titions shall not be in vaine, through him and for his names sake. Wee beseech thee therefore of thy rich mercie, wherein thou art plenti∣full
to all thē that call vpon thee, to forgiue vs our sinnes, namely, our vnthankfulnesse, vnbeleefe, selfeloue, neglect of thy worde, securitie, hypo∣crisie, contēpt of thy long suffering, omission of prayer, doubting of thy power, presence, mercy, and good will towardes vs, vnsensiblenesse of thy grace, impaciencie, &c. and to this thy benefite of correcting vs, adde thy gratious gift of repentaunce, faith, the spirite of prayer, the contempte of this worlde, and heartie desiring for euerlasting life. Indue vs with thy holy spirit according to thy co∣uenant & mercie, as well to assure vs of pardon, and that thou doest accept vs into thy fauour as thy deare chil∣dren in Christ and for his sake, as to write thy lawe in our heartes, and so to worke in vs, that we may nowe begin and goe forwards in beleuing lyuing, fearing, obeying, praying,
hoping, and seruing thee, as thou dost require most fatherly and most iust∣ly of vs, accepting vs as perfect in thy sight, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. A prayer of the afflicted for the profession of Gods worde. O Gratious God, which seekest all meanes possible, howe to bring thy children into the fee∣ling and sure sense of thy mercie, and therefore when prosperitie will not serue, then sendest thou aduersitie, gratiously correcting them here whō thou wilt haue elswhere to liue with thee for euer: wee poore wretches giue humble prayses and thankes to thee, that thou hast vouched vs wor∣thy of thy correction at this present, hereby to worke that which wee in prosperitie and libertie did neglecte. For the which neglecting and many
other our greeuous sinns, wherof we nowe accuse our selues before thee, (most mercifull Lord) thou mightest most iustly haue giuen vs ouer, and destroied vs both in soule and body. But such is thy goodnes towards vs in Christ, that thou seemest to for∣get all our offences, and as though we were farre otherwise then we be in deede, thou wilt that wee should suffer this crosse nowe laide vpon vs for thy truth and gospels sake, and so be thy witnesses, with thy Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, & Confessours, yea, with thy dearly beloued sonne Iesus Christ: to whom thou doest now here beginne to fashion vs like, that in his glory we may be like to him also. O good God, what are we on whō thou shouldest shew this great mer∣cie? Oh louing Lord, forgiue vs our vnthankefulnesse and sinnes. Oh
faithfull father, giue vs thine holy spirite nowe to crie in our heartes, Abba deere father: to assure vs of our eternall election in Christ: to reueale more and more thy truth vnto vs: to confirme, strengthen, and stablishe vs so in the same, that we may liue and die in it as vessels of thy mercie, to thy glorie, and to the commodi∣tie of thy Church. Indue vs with the spirit of thy wisedome, that with good conscience we may alwayes so aunswere the enemies in thy cause, as may turne to their conuersion or confusion, and our vnspeakeable cōsolatiō in Christ Iesus: for whose sake wee beseech thee hencefoorth to keepe vs, to giue vs patience, and to will no otherwise for deliuerance or mitigation of our miserie, then may stand alwayes with thy good plesure & merciful will towards vs. Graunt this deare father, not on∣ly
to vs in this place, but also to all others else where, afflicted for thy names sake, through the death and merites of Iesus Christ our Lorde. Amen. I. B. A prayer to God the father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghost. O Almightie and euerliuing God, the eternall father of our Lorde Iesus Christ, which of thy vn∣mesurable goodnes hast opened thy self vnto vs, and with a loude voyce hast saide of thy sonne Iesus Christ our Lord, Heare him: O maker & pre∣seruer of all thinges, with thy coe∣ternall sonne our Lord Iesus Christ, which reigneth with thee, and was manifested in Ierusalem, & with thy holy spirite, which was powred vp∣pon the Apostles: O wise God, mer∣cifull Iudge, and mightie Lord which hast saide: As truely as I liue,
I will not the death of a sinner, but ra∣ther that he should conuert & amend: whiche also hast saide: Call vppon me in the day of thy trouble, & I will deliuer thee: haue mercie vpon vs for Iesus Christes sake, whome thou wouldest of thy merueylous and in∣comprehensible counsell shoulde be made for vs a slaine sacrifice, media∣tor, reconciler,Heb. 9.10 and peacemaker, to the end yt thou mightest shewe thine exceeding great wrath against sinne, and thine inestimable mercie to∣wardes mankinde. Sanctifie & illu∣minate our heartes and soules with thy holy spirite, that wee may truly beleeue in thee, call vppon thee, bee thankefull vnto thee, and obedient to thy holy will. Defend, gouerne and cherish thy Church, as thou hast promised,Esai. 59. saying: This is my couenāt that I haue made with them, my spirit which is in thee, and my worde which
I haue put in thy mouth, shall not de∣parte out of thy mouthe, nor out of ye mouth of thy seede for euer. Preserue those kingdomes and cōmon weales, which giue harborough to the peo∣ple, and maintaine the ministerie of thy holy word and Gospell, that the kingdom of thy sonne Iesus Christ may encrease and shine throughout all the worlde. O Iesus Christ, Sonne of the e∣uerliuing God,A prayer to God the sonne crucified for vs, and raysed also from the deade, and nowe reigning at the right hand of thy fa∣ther, that thou maiest giue gifts vn∣to mee, which hast saide: Come vnto mee all ye that labour,Iohn. 14. and are heauie loden, and I will refresh you, haue mercie vpon vs, & praye for vs vnto thy eternall father: sanctifie and go∣uerne vs with thy holy spirite: helpe and succour vs in all our necessities as thou hast promised, saying: I will
not leaue you comfortlesse. O holie and blessed spirite,A prayer to the ho¦ly ghost. toge∣ther with the father and the son, one true and euerliuing God, full of ma∣iestie and power, which with thy heauenly inspiration quickenest the mindes of those that afore were dead in sinne, makest ioyfull the heartes of the faithfull penitent, bringest in to the way of trueth, all such as haue erred and gone astraye, comfortest the soules of such as hunger & thirst after righteousnesse, and plenteous∣ly inrichest those with diuerse giftes, which aske them in Iesus Christes name: purifie our heartes (wee be∣seech thee) and inflame them with the fire of thy loue: replenishe them with thy heauenly benefites and spi∣rituall blessinges, that they may be made meete temples for thee: leade vs into all trueth, which art the one∣ly fountaine of trueth, and mortifie
in vs whatsoeuer proceedeth not of thee. Or else pray thus. O Holy spirite, powred vppon the Apostles, which hast promised vnto vs by the sonne of God our Redee∣mer, to kindle in vs a true know∣ledge and inuocation of God, as it is written:Zach. 12. I will powre vppon you ye spirite of grace & of compassion: make to arise in our heartes a true feare of God, and a true faith and knowledge of thy mercie, which the eternall fa∣ther of our Lorde Iesus Christ hath promised vnto vs for his sonnes sake. Be our comforter in all our counsels and daungers. Illuminate our vn∣derstanding, & fill our heartes with newe affections and spirituall moti∣ons, and renewe vs both in soule and bodie, that we may die to sinne, and liue to righteousnesse, and so in true
obedience may prayse the father of our Lorde Iesus Christ, & his sonne our redeemer, and thee also our com∣forter euerlastingly. A thankesgiuing to God the Fa∣ther, the Sonne, and the holy Ghost. WE render thanks vnto thee, O almightie & eternall GOD, with thy deare sone our Lord Iesus Christ, & with thy holy spi∣rit, for that of thine exceeding great goodnesse, thou hast made thy selfe knowne vnto vs by most assured and euident testimonies: & for that thou hast gathered and chosen vnto thy selfe, a perpetuall Church, & woul∣dest that thy sonne our Lorde Iesus Christ shoulde suffer death, to re∣store vs from death to life: for that thou hast giuen to vs thy Gospel and the holy Ghost: for that thou for∣giuest vs our sinnes, deliuerest vs
from the power of the diuell, and from eternall death, and giuest vnto vs euerlasting life: finally, for that thou hast visited vs with many great benefites, giuing vs life, foode, doc∣trine, peace in such places as we haue liued in, & hast diminished the paines which we haue iustly deserued. A thanks¦giuing to the sonneWe giue thankes vnto thee, O Lorde Iesus Christ, sonne of the li∣uing God, crucified for vs and risen againe, because thou hast coupled vnto thee our humane nature, and of thy inestimable loue diddest giue thy selfe to death for vs, turning vpon thee the great wrath of God thy fa∣ther conceiued against vs, to recōcile vs vnto him, and to purchase vs eter∣nall redemption: because thou hast brought vs to this grace, wherein wee stande and reioyce in hope of the glorie of GOD: because thou doest preserue, cherishe, and de∣fende
thy Church against the Di∣uell and all thine enemies: because thou giuest & renewest often the light of thy Gospell, and mayntainest the ministerie of thy worde: be∣cause thou doest forgiue vs our sinnes, and giuest vnto vs euer∣lasting life: because thou art our Mediatour, and makest continuall intercession for vs: & finally because thou doest succour and preserue vs in all our necessities, daungers and af∣flictions. We giue thankes also vnto thee,A thanks¦giuing to the holy Ghost. Oh holy spirit, the giuer of life, whi∣che wast powred vpon the Apostles, because thou kindlest thy light in our hearts: because thou rulest, in∣structest, admonishest, and helpest vs: because thou gouernest and gui∣dest the labours and workes of our vocation, and sanctiiest vs to eter∣nall life.
A prayer to God for his helpe & protection against the obsti∣nate enemies of the trueth. MOst righteous Iudge, God of all mercie and comfort, which by thy secrete iudgement and wise∣dome doest suffer the wicked to tri∣umph and increase for a time, for tri∣al of the faith of thy welbeloued li∣tle flock, and the mortifying of their lustes, but at length to the vtter con∣fusion of thy enemies, and ioyfull de∣liuerance of thy people: looke downe wee beseeche thee on thy dispersed sheep, out of thy holy habitation in heauen, and strengthen our weake∣nes against their furious rages: a∣bate their pride: asswage their ma∣lice: confounde their deuises, wher∣with they lift vp themselues against Christ Iesus thy sonne our Lord & sauiour, to deface his glory, and to set vp Antichrist. We be not able of our
selues to thinke a good thought, much lesse to stande against their as∣saults, except thine vndeserued grace and mightie arme defende and deli∣uer vs. Performe thy promises made to Iacob, and stoppe the mouthes of the cursed Edomites. Call them to repentaunce whome thou hast ap∣pointed to saluation: bring home them that runne astray, lighten the blind and teach the ignorant: forgiue all those that wilfully and obstinatly rebell not against thy holy will. Let thy fearefull threatnings pearce our stonie heartes, and make vs tremble at thy iudgementes. Make the ex∣amples of them whome thou hast ouerthrowne in their owne deuises, as Cain, Cham, Nimrod, Esau, Pharao, Saul, Achitophel, Iudas, and such other to be a warning for vs, that we set not vp our selues against thy holye will. Graunt free passage to thy ho∣lie
worde: that it may worke effec∣tually in vs the worke of life and blessed hope of our saluatiō, to the e∣ternall praise of thy maiestie through our mediator Christe Isus: to whom with thee & the holy Ghost, three persons and one God, be praise and thankesgiuing in all congrega∣tions, world without end. So be it. A prayer for the afflicted and persecuted vnder the tyrannie of Antichrist. O Mercifull Father, who neuer doest forsake suc as put their trust in thee: stretch foorth thy mightie arme to the defence of our brethren, by the rage of enemies per∣secuted, and greeuously tormented in sundrie places for ye true profession of thy holy Gospel, who in their extrem necessities crie for comforte vnto thee. Let not thy long suffering, O
Lord, be an occasiō, either to increase the tyranny of thy enemies, or to dis∣courage thy children, but with speed O Lorde, consider their great mise∣ries and afflictions. Preuent the cru∣ell deuise of Haman: stay the rage of Holophernes: breake off the coun∣sell of Achitophell: Let not the wic∣ked say, Where is nowe their God. Let thy afflicted flocke feele present aide and releefe from thee O Lord: looke downe vppon them with thy pitifull eye from thy holy habitation: send terrour and trembling among their enemies: make an ende of their out∣ragious tyrannie: beate backe their boldenesse in suppressing thy truth, in destroying thy true seruantes, in defacing thy glorie, and in setting vp Antichrist. Let them not thus proud∣ly aduaunce themselues against thee and thy Christ, but let them vnder∣stand and feele that against thee they
fight. Preserue and defende the Uine, which thy right hande hath planted, and let all Nations see the glory of thine anointed. Amen. A prayer to be saide before the preaching of Gods word. ALmightie God and most merci∣full father, whose word is a lan∣terne to our feete, and a light vn∣to our stepes, wee most humbly be∣seech thee to illuminate our minds, that we may vnderstand the myste∣ries conteined in thy holy lawe, and into the selfe same thing, that we godly vnderstand, wee may bee ver∣tuously transformed, so that of no parte we offende thy diuine maiestie, through Iesus Christe our Lorde. An other. IN this great darkenes of our souls (O Lord) thou shinest diuers ways
vnto vs by the light of thy grace, but in nothing so effectually as in the preaching of thy worde. Great is the Haruest (as thou thy selfe hast saide) and the workmen are few. The greatest part of men are ignorant & wrapped in miserable blindnes, and fewe there be that teach thy worde truely, and as they ought. We be∣seech thee therefore to sende foorth workemen into thy haruest. Sende teachers (O Lord) which are taught of thee, and instructed by the spirite of godly wisedome and vnderstan∣ding, which by their preaching will seeke, not themselues, but thee, be∣cause they are godly: and can so do, because they are wise & vnderstande. Giue to the preacher of thy worde here present, out of the treasures of thy wisedome, that which hee may powre vpon vs to our saluation: and vnto vs giue thy grace & holy spirit
(O Lord) so to heare and to receiue thy worde, that the good seede whi∣che falleth vppon vs be not choked with thornes, or withered away with heate, or deuoured by the foules of the aire, but may growe vp in a good grounde, and fructifie with great increase. A prayer to be saide after the Preaching of Gods worde. 1. Pet. 5.ALmightie God & most mercifull father, wee heartily beseech thee that this seed of thy worde nowe sowen amongest vs,Num. 29. Deu. 9. Ios. 7. Matth. 13 may take suche deepe root, that neither the burning heate of affliction, or persecution cause it to wither, neither the thor∣nie cares of this life do choake it, but that as seede sowne in good ground, it may bring forth thirtie, sixtie, and an hundreth folde, as thy heauenly wisedome hath appointed. And be∣cause
we haue neede continually to craue many things at thy handes, we humbly beseech thee (O heauenly father) to graunt vs thy holy spirit,Luke. 11. Rom. 8. Iames. 5. 1. Iohn. 5. Rom. 12. Wisdō. 9▪ so to direct our petitions, that they may proceed from such a feruent minde, as may be agreable to thy most blessed will. And seeing that our infirmitie is such,2. Cor. 3. Iohn. 19. Philip. 2 Psal. 40. 1. Pet. 1. that we are able to do nothing without thy helpe, and that thou art not ignorant with howe many and great tentations we poore wretches are on euerie side compassed and in∣closed, let thy strength (O Lorde) susteine our weakenesse,1. pet. 5. Luke. 17. and assist vs with thy grace, that we may be safe∣ly preserued against all the assaults of Sathan, who goeth about like a roaring Lyon seeking to deuoure vs. Increase our faith (O mercifull Fa∣ther) that wee doe not swarue at a∣nie time from thy heauenly worde.
Augment in vs hope and loue,Psal. 95. Heb. 3.15 1. Iohn. 2 with a carefull keeping of all thy com∣mandements, that no hardnes of hart, no hypocrisie, no concupiscence of the eies, nor inticements of ye world, doe draw vs away frō thy obedience. And seeing the times are dangerous wherin we liue, let thy fatherly pro∣uidence defende vs againste the vio∣lence of all our enemies, and speci∣ally againste the furious rage of that Romishe idoll, enemie to thy Christ. 1. Tim. 2.Furthermore for as much as by thy holy Apostle we bee taught to make our prayers and supplications for all men, we pray not onely for ourselues here present, but beseech thee also to reduce all such as be yet ignorant, from the miserable capti∣uitie of blindnesse and errour,Rom. 15. 1. Cor. 1. Ephe. 4. to the pure vnderstanding of thy heauenly trueth, that we all with one consent
and vnitie of minde, may worshippe thee our onely God and sauiour. We beseech thee also (most deare father) for all pastors and ministers to whome thou hast committed the dispensation of thy holy worde, and charge of thy chosen people,Ioh. 21. Math. 28. 2. Iohn. 9. Mark. 6. that both in their life and doctrine they maye be found faithfull, setting onely be∣fore their eyes thy glorie, and that by them all poore sheep which wan∣der and go astray, may be sought out and brought to thy folde. Againe, that it would please thee to deliuer thy Church from such idle sheepeheardes, wolues, and hire∣linges, as seeke themselues and their bellies, and not thy glory, and the safegarde of thy flocke. Moreouer because the heartes of rulers are in thy handes,Pro. 21. Rom. 17. Ioh. 16. Rom. 13. Iohn. 16. wee make our prayers vnto thee for all Princes and Magistrates, to whome thou
haste committed the administration of iustice:Iohn. 16. especially (O Lorde) for the Queenes Maiestie, that it would please thee to indue her with thy plentifull grace and principall spi∣rite, that she may with a pure faith acknowledge Iesus Christ thy onely sonne to be King of all Kinges, and gouernour of all gouernours, euen as thou hast giuen all power vnto him both in heauen and in earthe: & so work in her heart, that she con∣sidering whose minister she is, may hartily seeke, and zealously promote thy true honour and glory, careful∣ly traueling to bring thy people com∣mitted to her charge, (& yet remai∣ning almoste in all partes of this realme in miserable blindnesse and darke ignorance) to the true know∣ledge of thee, ruling and guidinge them, as she is taught & commaun∣ded by thy holy word.
Also we beseech thee, to indue all such as are in any authority vnder her, with thy grace and holy Spirite, that they may be founde vprighte & faithfull in their calling, fauourers and furtherers of thy holy Gospell, maintainers & defenders of the true Preachers and ministers therof, and such as in singlenes of heart wil seeke not themselues, but thy glory and the commodity of thy people. And for that we be all members of the mysticall body of Christe Ie∣sus,2. Cor. 2. Rom. 12. Iacob. 5. wee make our requestes vnto thee, (O heauenly father) for all such as are afflicted with any kinde of crosse or tribulatiō, as warre, plague, famine, sickenes, pouertie, imprison∣ment, persecution, banishment, or any other kinde of thy roddes, whe∣ther it be griefe of body, or vnquiet∣nesse of minde,2. Cor. 1. Heb. 13. that it would please thee to giue them patience and con∣stancie,
till thou sende them full deli∣ueraunce out of all their troubles. Finally (O Lord) we most humbly beseech thee to shew thy great mer∣cie vppon-our brethren which are persecuted, cast in prison, and daily condemned to death for the testimo∣nie of thy trueth,Heb. 13. Rom. 8. Psal. 41. Iohn. 1. and though they be vtterly destitute of all mans aide, yet let thy sweete comforte neuer depart from them, but so inflame their heartes with thy holy spirite, that they may boldly and cheereful∣ly abide suche triall as thy godly wisedome shall appoint:1. Pete. 1. Actes. 2. Math. 10. Luk. 21. so that at length as well by their death as by their life, the kingdome of thy sonne Iesus Christ may increase and shine through all the worlde. In whose name we make our humble petiti∣ons vnto thee, as he hath taught vs, saying: Our father which art, &c.
A prayer to be saide before the re∣ceiuing of the communion. O Father of mercie and God of all consolation, seeing all creatures do acknowledge and confesse thee to be their gouernour and Lorde, it becommeth vs, the workemanship of thine owne handes, at all times to reuerence and magnifie thy godly maiestie:Gene. 1. Ephe. 2. Galat. 1 Gen. 3. Actes. 4. Heb. 9. Firste, for that thou hast created vs to thine owne image and similitude, but chiefly because thou hast deliuered vs from that euerla∣sting death and damnation into the which Sathan drewe mankinde by the meanes of sinne:Apoc. 5 Iohn. 3. Heb. 8. Heb. 4. 1. Pet. 1. Esa. 43.53. Matth. 3.17. Iere. 31. from the bon∣dage whereof neither man nor An∣gell was able to make vs free: but thou (O Lord) rich in mercie & infi∣nite in goodnes, hast prouided our redemption to stande in thine onely and welbeloued sonne: whom of very loue thou diddest giue to be made
man like vnto vs in all thinges,Heb. 8. Rom. 5. Heb. 2. Iohn. 6. Gen. 3. Rom. 5: Ephe. 3. sinne excepted, that in his bodie he might receiue the punishment of our trans∣gression, by his death to make satis∣faction to thy iustice, and by his re∣surrection to destroye him that was authour of death, and so to bring a∣gaine life to the worlde, from which the whole ofspringe of Adam was most iustly exiled. Ephe. 2. Ioh. 6.17 Gene. 6. Rom. 3. Esai. 64. Psal. 5.12 Rom. 7. Math. 16. 1. Cor. 2. Luk. 11. Mark. 10.O Lorde, wee acknowledge that no creature was able to comprehend the length and breadth, the deepenes and heighte of that thy most excel∣lent loue, which moued thee to shew mercie where none was deserued, to promise and giue life where death had gotten victorie, to receiue vs in∣to thy grace when we could do no∣thing but rebell against thy maie∣stie. The blind dulnes of our cor∣rupt nature will not suffer vs suffici∣ently to wey these thy most ample
benefites. Yet neuerthelesse at the commaundement of Iesus Christe our Lorde, we present our selues to this thy table (which he hath left to be vsed in remembrance of his death vntill his comming againe) to de∣clare and witnesse before the world,Matth. 16 Luk. 22. 1. Cor. 11. Iohn. 8. Galat. 5. Rom. 8. 1. Pet. 1. Ephe. 5. Ephe. 2. Heb. 4. Rom. 3. Math. 25. Philip. 3. Ephe. 1. Ephe. 2. Apoc. 13. that by him alone we haue receiued libertie and life: that by him alone thou doest acknowedge vs to be thy children and heires: that by him a∣lone wee haue entraunce to the throne of thy grace: that by him a∣lone we are possessed in our spiritu∣all Kingdome to eate and drinke at his table, and with whome we haue our conuersation presently in hea∣uen, and by whome our bodies shall be raised vp againe from the dust, & shall be placed with him in that end∣lesse ioye, which thou (O Father of mercie) hast prepared for thine electe before the foundation of the worlde
was layd.Rom. 3. Ephe. 2. Titus. 3. Rom. 8. And these most inestima∣ble benefites wee acknowledge and confesse to haue receiued of thy free mercie and grace, by thine onely be∣loued sonne Iesus Christe. For the which therefore we thy congregati∣on, moued by thy holy spirite, doe render to thee all thankes, praise and glory for euer and euer. A thankesgiuing after the re∣ceiuing of the Communion. MOst mercifull father, we render vnto thee all praise, thanks, ho∣nour and glorie, for that it hath pleased thee of thy great mercies to graunt vnto vs miserable sinners, so excellent a gift and treasure, as to receiue vs into the fellowshippe and companie of thy deare sonne Iesus Christ our Lorde,1. Cor. 10 whome thou hast deliuered to death for vs,Rom. 4. Iohn. 6. and hast giuen him vnto vs, as a necessarie
foode and nourishment vnto euerla∣sting life. And now we beseech thee also (O heauenly) father to graunt vs this request, that thou neuer suf∣fer vs to become so vnkind as to for∣get so worthy benefites, but rather imprint and fasten them sure in our heartes, that we may growe and in∣crease daily more and more in true faith,Luk. 25. Galat. 5. 1. Tim. 4. Ephe. 5. 2. Pet. 3. Matth. 5. 1. Pet. 2. which continually is exercised in all manner of good works: and so much the rather, (O Lord) confirme vs in these perillous dayes & rages of Sathan, that we may constantly stand and continue in the confessi∣on of the same, to the aduancement of thy glorie, which art God ouer all things, blessed for euer. A lamentation of a sinner afflic∣ted in conscience for his offences. IN the middes of the desperate as∣saultes of my soule, the intollera∣ble
heauinesse of my minde hath heretofore (Lorde) cryed as shril in thine eares, as though I had shri∣ked and with lamentations cryed out saying, helpe: helpe mee my God, my creatour, my most prouident ke∣per and euerlasting defender, for be∣holde I perish. On this occasion (Lorde) when heauinesse of minde did heretofore assault me, I remembred that thou haddest many times set before mine eyes the wonderfull greatnes of thy most tender loue towardes mee, by the great multitude of thy benefites powred vppon mee, which benefites euerie of thy workes (as they came before mine eyes) gaue mee iust oc∣casion to be mindfull of. Woulde not (thought I) if I had in a manner any grace at all, woulde not such loue bring nowe into my heart a wonderfull delectation, ioy,
and comfort in God for the same? And againe, coulde such delight in Gods sweete mercie and tender loue towardes me (if I were not as euill as a castaway that were none of Gods children) be without lothing of my sinne, and lust and desire to do Gods holy will? And these thinges thought I (fie vppon me vnthanke∣full wretch) are either not at all in mee, or else in deede so coldly and slenderly, that they beeing truely weighed and compared to righteous∣nesse,Esai. 64. are more vile then a filthy cloth starched in corrupt bloud. Oh (thought I) I am affraid, I haue deceiued my selfe: for thy ser∣uauntes at all times (I trowe) feele otherwise then I now doe, ye fruites of thy spirit, as loue, ioy, peace, & such like. But my loue (alas) towards thee, what is it? my ioy is not once almost felt of mee: for my verie soule
within mee (as Dauid in his heaui∣nesse saide) refuseth comfort,Psal. 77. and fa∣reth as though it did vtterly des∣paire: & what peace can I feele then, or certaintie of thy fauour and loue? Iustly may I powre out this dolo∣rous lamentatiō of Sion: The Lord hath forsaken mee,Esai. 49. and my Lord hath forgotten mee. Euen in the middest (I say) of these my former desperate assaultes, mine intollerable heauines cried to thee, O my God, and from heauen thou heardest my groaninges, and therevpon first preparedst my hearte to aske comfort of thee, & then thou diddest accept my prayer, and gauest me plentifully my asking. Oh my soule, consider well that thou art neuer able to declare the exceeding goodnesse of God in this, that hee hearde the verie desires of thee being afflicted: who is so rea∣die
fauourably to grant the requests of the afflicted, that oftentimes hee tarrieth not vntill they do cal, but or euer they call vpon him, hee fauou∣rably heareth them, as the Psalmist saith:Psal. 10. The desire of the afflicted thou hearest O Lorde: thou preparest their heartes, & thine eares heareth them. Oh Lorde my God, meruellous thinges are these, whether I consider this meruellous manner of thy hea∣ring, or else the meruellous nature and propertie of thy goodnesse. Mer∣uellous (no doubt) is that thy hea∣ring, whereby the verie desires of the afflicted are hearde: but much more maruellous is this thy good∣nesse, which tarriest not vntil the af∣flicted doe desire thy helpe, but pre∣parest first their hearts to desire, and then thou giuest them their desires. Yea Lord (worthie of all praise) it cannot otherwise bee. For howe
shouldest thou do otherwise then thy nature and propertie is? Art not thou verie goodnesse and mercie it selfe? Howe canst thou then but pi∣tie and helpe miserie? Art not thou both the creatour and also the conseruer of all thinges? in so much as the Lyons whelpes roaring after their pray,sal. 104. sal. 147. do seeke their foode at thy handes, and the Rauens birdes lacking meat, do call vppon thee. If then thy fatherly prouidence and tender care (O Lord) vppon all thy creatures be so great, that the ve∣rie beastes and foules haue this ex∣perience of thy goodnes in their ne∣cessities that their roarings and cry∣ings haue the strength of earnest cal∣linges and desires: howe much ra∣ther doe these sighinges, groninges, and desperate heauines of men, but chiefly of thy children, crie and call
lowde in thine eares, though they speake neuer a worde at all? Shoulde I then nowe despaire of thy fatherly mercie, whiles present∣ly I feele thee,Psal. 77. stirre vp my soule and hearte to craue helpe at thy hande? Should I thinke that thou wilt ab∣sent thy selfe for euer? that thou wilt be no more intreated? that thy mer∣cie is cleane gone? that thy promise is come vtterly to an ende? and that thou wilt nowe shut vp thy louing kindnesse in displeasure. Nay Lorde, for all alterations are of thy right hande, and turne alway to the best to them that feare thee, All this is but mine owne infirmi∣tie: for thou art euer one, thy promi∣ses be infallible, and thy loue to∣wards thine, euerlastingly during. I will therefore in this my present tentation, & greuous assaulte, powre out the heauinesse of my hearte be∣fore
thee deare father. Out of the deepe will I crie,Psal. 77. & lift vp my soule vnto thee, from whom I assuredly know my helpe is comming. I will also for my present comfort, cal to re∣membrance (O Lorde my God) thy tender mercies towards me already shewed, the multitude of thy bene∣fites, the greatnes of the same, the longe continuance of them, euen frō my conception vntill this instant, & finally thy continuall luste & desire to powre them vpon me. And moreouer, sith thy goodnesse is so great (O Lord) that thou dost not onely pitie miserie, but also cal∣lest the heauie hearted and afflicted vnto thee,Matth. 11 promising that thou wilt ease their miserie: for as much as by the motion of thy good spirit I loth and abhorre my sinnes, feele the gre∣uousnesse of them, and thy heauie wrath towardes me for the same, and
finally, what neede I haue of thy gratious ayde and succour: therefore (Oh Lorde) in thy Sonne Christes name, with sure confidence and trust in thine infallible promise, in this mine anguish & trouble I come vn∣to thee at thy mercifull calling, and craue comfort at thy hand. For thou hast promised, that when I loath my sinnes, thou wilt vterly forget them: when I feele the greeuous burthen of them, thy mercie swalloweth them vp: when I seeke that I want, thou wilte assuredly graunt it me, For sith thou mouest my hearte to desire helpe, how shoulde I mistrust, but thou wilt for thy truth sake, giue me my asking? Yea, where I knowe not howe, or what to desire as I ought, thy holy spirite gratiously working in mee,Rom. 8. maketh intercession mightily for me with groninges which can not bee
expressed, and therewithall certifieth my spirit, that by adoption through thy great mercie and goodnesse I am become thy childe and heire. Why should I not then be of good comfort and ioyfull in thee my God? For if thou be on my side, who can be against mee? Since thou diddest not spare thine owne sonne, but ga∣uest him for mee, euen when I was thine enemie:Rom. 8. howe shalt thou not with him, nowe that by his death I am brought into thy fauour, giue mee all thinges with him, and for his sake? Who shall lay any thing to the charg of thine elect? It is thou Lord which iustifiest mee. It is Christe that hath dyed for mee, yea rather that is risen againe for mee, who also is set on thy right hand, & hath taken possession, yea, and perpetual∣ly maketh there intercession for me, vntill that ioyfull day be come, when
I shall haue full fruition of the moste glorious presence of thy diuine maiestie,Ephe. 1. in that kingdome whiche thou hast prepared be∣fore the beginning of the world, but in time (to thy gratious goodnesse thought best) made knowen to me, by giuing thy holy spirite into my heart: whereby, when I first (Lord) beleeued thy holy worde (which is thine owne power to saue all that beleeue) I was sealed,Rom. 8. confirmed, and stablished in the certaintie of yt thine euerlasting kingdom and inheritāce. For the which inestimable bene∣fite of thy rich grace (Oh Lorde my God) I beseech thee, euen for the loue thou bearest to Christe Iesus thy son, & thy mercie thou haddest on him when he cried on the crosse:Matt. 27. My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? Help, help, I say & inflame my heart with loue so plentifully towardes
thee againe, that I may be euen swa∣lowed vp in the ioyfull feeling of the same, in such sort that I may of verie thankefulnesse loue thee my GOD alone, thee I say my deare GOD, and nothing but thee, and for thy sake. O holy spirite whose work this is in mee, increase this thy worke of thine infinite mercie, and preserue mee that I neuer become vnthankefull vnto thee therefore, A∣men. A prayer for the sicke. O Most mercifull God, which ac∣cording to the multitude of thy mercies dost so put away ye sins of those which truly repēt, that thou remembrest them no more: open thy eyes of mercie, and looke vpon this thy sicke seruant, who most earnest∣ly desireth pardon and forgiuenesse. Renue in him (most louing father)
whatsoeuer hath beene decayed by the fraude and malice of the diuell, or by his owne carnall will and frail∣tie. Preserue and continue this sicke member in the vnitie of thy Church. Consider his contrition▪ accept his teares, assuage his paine as shall bee seene to thee most expedient for him. And for as much as he putteth his full trust onely in thy mercie, im∣pute not vnto him his former sin∣nes, but take him vnto thy fauour, through the merits of thy most dear∣ly beloued sonne Iesus Christ. A prayer to be saide at the houre of death. O Lord, Iesus Christ, which art the onely health of all men li∣uing, and the euerlasting life of them yt die in thee: I wretched sinner do submit my selfe wholy vnto thy
most blessed will, and being sure that the thing cannot perish which is cō∣mitted vnto thy mercie, willingly now I leaue this fraile and sinnfull fleshe, in sure hope that thou wilt in better wise restore it to mee againe at the last day in the resurrection of the iust. I beseech thee most mer∣cifull Lorde Iesus Christ, that thou wilt by thy grace make stronge my soule against all tentations, and de∣fende mee with the buckler of thy mercie against all the assaults of the diuell. I see and acknowledge that there is in my selfe no helpe of saluation, but al my confidence, hope, and trust, is in thy rich mercie and goodnesse. I haue no merites or good workes which I may alledge before thee: of sinnes and euill workes (alas) I see a great heape: but yet through thy mercie I trust to be in the number of
them to whome thou wilt not im∣pute their sinnes, but wilt accept and take mee for righteous and iust, and to be an inheritour of euerlastinge life. Thou mercifull Lord wast borne for my sake: thou diddest suffer both hunger and thirst for my sake: thou diddest teach, pray, and fast for my sake: all thy holy actions, and works thou wroughtest for my sake: thou sufferedst most greeuous paines and tormentes for my sake: finally thou gauest thy most precious bodie and bloode to be shed on the crosse for my sake. Now, most merciful Sauiour, let all these thinges profite me, that thou freely hast done for me, which hast giuen thy selfe also for mee. Let thy blood cleanse and wash away the spottes and fowlenesse of my sinnes. Let thy righteousnes hide and couer my vnrighteousnes. Let the merites
of thy passion and bloudsheding be the satisfaction for my sinnes. Giue me Lord thy grace, that the faith of my saluation in thy bloude wauer not in mee, but maie euer bee firme and constant: that the hope of thy mercy and life euerlasting neuer de∣cay in me: that loue waxe not colde in me: finally, that the weakenesse of my fleshe be not ouercome with the feare of death. Graunt me mercifull Sauiour, yt when death hath shut vp the eyes of my bodie, yet the eyes of my soule may still beholde and looke vppon thee: and when death hath taken a∣way the vse of my tongue, yet my heart may crie and say: Lord into thy handes I commend my soule: Lord Ie∣su receiue my spirite. A prayer for a woman with childe.
THou art wonderfull (O Lord) in al thy workes, and what so e∣uer thy good pleasure is, yt doest thou easily bring to passe, neither is there any thing vnpossible with thee that thou wilt haue done. And albeit this thy almightie power sheweth it selfe aboundantly in al thy works, yet in conceiuing, forming, and brin∣ging foorth of man, it shineth most e∣uidently. At the beginning O (Father) when thou madest man and woman, thou commandedst them to increase, multiplie, and replenish the earth. If through the subtill inticementes of Sathan they had not transgressed thy commaundement by eating the forbidden fruite, the woman whome thou hast appoynted to be the instru∣ment and vessell to conceiue, nourish and bring foorth man through thy wonderful workmanship, had with∣out
any labour, paine or trauel brou∣ght foorth her frutie. But that which thy goodnes made easie, sin and disobedience hath made harde, painefull, daungerous, and without thy speciall helpe and suc∣cour, impossible to bee brought to passe: so that nowe all women bring foorth their childrē in great sorowes, paines, and troubles. Notwithstan∣ding, that which through their owne imperfection and feeblenes, they are not able of thēselues to passe, thou through thine vnspeakable power makest easie in them, and bringest vnto a ioyfull end. We therefore being fully persua∣ded of thy fauour and goodnesse, of thy present helpe, and of thy sweete comforte in all miseries and necessi∣ties, knowing also by the testimo∣nies of thy holy word how great and intollerable the paines of women
are that trauell of childe, if through thy tender mercie they bee not miti∣gated and eased: most humbly pray thee for Iesus Christes sake thy son our Lorde, to helpe and assist this thy seruaunt nowe in trauell and la∣bour, that by thy almightie power shee may safely bringe foorth that which by thy goodnes she hath con∣ceiued, and that thy louing kindnes may make that easie and tollerable vnto her, which sinne hath made hard and painefull. Ease (O Lord) the paines which thou most righteously hast put vpon her and all women, for the sinne and disobedience of our graundmother Eue, in whom al we haue sinned. Be present with her in her trouble, ac∣cordinge to thy mercifull promise: Giue her strength, and make perfect that which thou hast so gratiously begun. Let thy power be shewed no
lesse in the safe bringing foorth, then in the wonderfull forming and fashi∣oning of that she beareth. Make her a glad and a ioyfull mother, that she through thy goodnesse, being safely deliuered and restored to health a∣gaine, may liue and praise thy blessed name for euer. A psalme to be saide in the time of any common plague, sicknes, or other crosse and visitati∣on of God. Psal. 9 5.O Come let vs humble our selues and fall downe before the Lorde with reuerence and feare. For he is the Lord our God, and we are the people of his pasture, and the sheepe of his handes. Osee. 6.Come therefore, let vs turne a∣gaine vnto our Lorde, for he hath smiten vs, and he shall heale vs. Actes. 1.Let vs repent and turne from our
wickednesse, and our sinnes shalbe forgiuen vs. Let vs turne,Ionas. 3. and the Lorde will turne from his heauie wrath, and will pardon vs, and we shall not pe∣rish. For we acknowledg our faultes,Psal. 51. and our sinnes are euer before vs. We haue sore prouoked thine an∣ger (O Lord:Lamen. 3) thy wrath is waxed hote, and thy heauie displeasure is sore kindled against vs. Thou hast in thine indignatiom striken vs with greeuous sickenesse,Esai. 64. and by and by we haue fallen as leaues beaten downe with a vehe∣ment winde. In deede we acknowledge that our punishmentes are lesse then our deseruinges:Iudeth. 8 Iob. 11. Sapi. 124 but yet of thy mercie Lorde correct vs to amendment, and plague vs not to our destruction. For thy hand is not shortned, that
thou canst not helpe: neither is thy goodnesse abated, that thou wilt not heare. Esa. 65.Thou hast promised, O Lord, that afore we crie thou wilt heare vs: whi¦lest we yet speake, thou wilte haue mercie vpon vs. Tobias. 3 Iob. 5. Oseas. 6.For none that trust in thee shall be confounded: neither any that call vpon thee shalbe despised. For thou art the onely Lord, who woundest and doest heale againe, who killest & reuiuest, bringest euen to hell, and bringest backe againe. Sapie. 22Our fathers hoped in thee, they trusted in thee, and thou diddest de∣liuer them. They called vppon thee, and were helped: they put their trust in thee, and were not confounded. Psal. 6.O Lorde, rebuke vs not in thine indignation: neither chasten vs, in thy heauie displeasure.
O remember not the sinnes and offences of my youth:Psal. 25. but according to thy mercy thinke thou vpon vs, O Lord, for thy goodnes. Haue mercie vpon vs, O Lord, for we are weake: O Lord heale vs, for our bones are vexed. And nowe in the vexation of our spirits and the anguish of our soules,Baruc. 3. Ionas. 2. we remember thee: and we crie vnto thee, heare, Lord, and haue mercie. For thine owne sake,Danie. 9. and for thy holy names sake incline thine eare and heare, O mercifull Lord. For we doe not powre out our prayers before thee, trusting in our owne righteousnes: but in thy great and manyfold mercies. Wash vs throughly from our wic∣kednes: and cleanse vs from our sins. Turne thy face from our sins, and put out all our misdeedes. Make vs cleane heartes, O God:
and renne a right spirite within vs. Psal. 70.Helpe vs O God of our saluation, for the glorie of thy name: O deliuer vs, and be mercifull vnto our sinnes for thy names sake. So we that be thy people, & sheepe of thy pasture, shall giue thee thanks for euer, and will alwaies be shew∣ing foorth thy praise from generation to generation. Glorie be to the father, &c. As it was in the beginning, &c. A psalme of thankesgiuing for deliuerance from the plague, or a∣ny other kind of sicknes, trou∣ble or affliction. LOrd, thou art become gratious to thy lande,Pal. 85. thou hast turned away the afflictions of thy ser∣uants. Thou hast taken away all thy dis∣pleasure, and turned thy selfe from
thy wrathfull indignation. For if thou Lord hadst not helped vs,Psalm. 94▪ it had not failed but our soules had beene put to silence. But when we said: our feete haue slipped, thy mercie (O Lord) helped vs vp. In the multitude of the sorrowes that we had in our heartes, thy com∣fortes haue refreshed our soules. Our soules wayted still vpon the Lorde,Psal. 62▪ our soules hanged vpon his helpe, our hope was alwaies in him. In the Lordes word will we re∣ioyce, in Gods word did we comfort our selues. For the Lorde saide:Psalm. 50 Call vpon me in the time of trouble, and I will heare thee, and thou shalt praise me. So when we were poore,Psal. 40 needie, sickly, & in heauines, the Lord cared for vs: he was our helper and our de∣liuerer
according to his word. Psal. 17.In our aduersitie and distresse he hath lift vp our heades, and saued vs from vtter destruction. Pal. 33.He hath deliuered our soules from death: he hath fed vs in the time of dearth, he hath saued vs from the noysome pestilence. Psal. 27.Therefore will we offer in his ho∣ly temple the oblation of thankesgi∣uing with great gladnes: we wil sing and speake prayses vnto the Lorde our Sauiour. Psa. 106.We will giue thankes vnto the Lord, for he is gratious, & his mer∣cie endureth for euer. Psal. 86. Psa. 103.The Lord is ful of compassion and-mercie, long suffering, plenteous in goodnes and pitie. Psal. 57. Psa. 108.His mercie is greater then the hea∣uens, and his gratious goodnesse rea∣cheth vnto the cloudes. Psal. 103Like as a father pitieth his owne
children: euen so is the Lord merci∣full vnto them that feare him. Therefore will we praise thee and thy mercies,Psam. 71. O God: vnto thee will we sing, O thou holy one of Israel. Wee will sing a newe song vnto thee,Psalm. 68 O God: we wil praise the Lord with Psalmes of thankesgiuing. O sing prayses,Psal. 47. sing prayses vnto our God: O sing prayses, sing prai∣ses vnto our king. For God is the king of the earth: sing prayses with vnderstanding. We wil magnifie thee,Psal. 145. O God our king: we will praise thy name for e∣uer and euer. Euery day will we giue thankes vnto thee, and praise thy name for e∣uer and euer. Our mouth shal speake the praises of the lord, & let all flesh giue thanks to his holy name, for euer and euer. Blessed be the Lorde God of Is∣raelPsal. 72.
for euer: and blessed be the name of his maiestie, world without end▪ Amen. Glorie be to the father, &c. As it was in the beginning. &c. Praiers to be saide before meales and after. AL things depend vpon thy pro∣uidence (O Lord) to receiue at thy hands due sustenāce in time cōuenient.Psa. 104. Thou giuest to them, and, they gather it: thou openest thy hand and they are satisfied with all good thinges. O heauenly father which art the fountaine and full treasure of all goodnesse, we beseeche thee to shewe thy mercie vpon vs thy children, and sanctifie these giftes which we re∣ceiue of thy mercifull liberalitie,1. Tim. 4. graunting vs grace to vse them so∣berly and purely, according to thy
blessed will: so that hereby we may acknowledge thee to be the authour and giuer of all good thinges:Tim. 2, and a∣boue all, that we may remember continuallie to seeke the spirituall foode of thy worde,Iohn. 6. wherewith our soules may be nourished euerlasting∣ly, through our sauiour Christ, who is the true bread of life, which came downe from heauen, of whom who∣soeuer eateth shall liue for euer, and raigne with him in glorie worlde without end. So be it. An other prayer before meales. WHether ye eat or drinke (saith S. Paul) or whatsoeuer ye doe else,1. Cor. 10 let al be done to the praise and glorie of God. Eternal and euerliuing God, fa∣ther of our Lord Iesus Christ, who of thy most singular loue which thou
barest to mankinde, hast appointed to his sustenaunce, not onelye the fruits of the earth, but also the foules of the aire, the beasts of the field, and fishes of the sea, and hast commaun∣ded thy benefites to bee receiued as from thy handes with thankesgi∣uing, assuring thy children by the mouth of thine Apostle, that to the cleane all thinges are cleane, as the creatures which be sanctified by thy worde and prayer: grant vnto vs, so moderately to vse these thy giftes present, that our bodies being refre∣shed, our soules may bee more able to proceede in all good workes, to the praise of thy holy name, through Ie∣sus Christ our Lord. So be it. Our father which art in heauen, &c. An other. O Eternal God, the verie God of peace and all consolation: which
broughtest againe from death our Lorde Iesus the great sheepheard of the sheepe, through the bloud of the euerlasting couenant: make vs fruit∣full in all good works to doe thy wil, and worke in vs that which is accep∣table in thy sight. Sanctifie vs throughout, and keep our whole spi∣rit, soule, and body, faultles vnto the comming of thy deare Sonne our Lorde Iesu Christ. Thou art faith∣full (O Father) who hast promised this, who also shalt bring it to passe: to thee therefore be giuen euerlasting praise, honour, and glorie. Amen. A thankesgiuing after meales. LEt al nations magnifie ye Lorde, let all people reioyce in praysing and extolling his great mercies: For his fatherly kindnesse is plenti∣fully shewed foorth vpon vs, and the
trueth of his promise endureth for∣euer. We render thankes vnto thee, O Lord God, for the manifolde bene∣fites which we continually receiue at thy bountifull hand, not onely for that it hath pleased thee to feeede vs in this present life, giuing vnto vs al thinges necessarie for the same: but specially because thou hast of thy free mercie fashioned vs a newe, into an assured hope of a farre better life, the which thou hast declared vn∣to vs by thy holy Gospell. Therfore we humblie beseech thee Oh heauenly father, that thou wilt not suffer our affections to be so in∣tangled and rooted in these earthly and corruptible thinges, but that we may alwayes haue our mindes di∣rected to thee on high, continually watching for the comming of our Lord Iesus Christ, what time he
shal appeare for our full redemption. To whome with thee and the holy Ghost be all honour and glorie, for euer and euer. So be it. An other thankesgiuing after meales. GLorie, praise, and honour be vn∣to thee most mercifull and om∣nipotent father, who hast fedde and daily dost feede (of thy most bon∣tifull goodnes) all liuing creatures: we beseeche thee, that as thou hast nourished these our mortall bodies with corporall foode, so thou woul∣dest replenish our soules with the perfect knowledge of the liuely word of thy beloued sonne Iesus Christ, to whome with thee and the holy Ghost be praise, glorie and honour for euer. So be it. ¶An other.
MOste bountifull and gratious God, which feedest all flesh, and hast promised that asking of thee, wee shal not lack, if we first seek thy kingdome and the righteousnes thereof, we feeling presently the be∣nefite of this thy gratious promise in feeding our bodies with this cor∣porall foode, do render vnto thee most heartie thanks for the same, beseech∣ing thee likewise to feede our soules with that heauenly foode which pe∣risheth not, but abideth into euerla∣sting life: so that we being nourished by thy goodnes both in bodye and soule, may be apt and readie to do all good works which thou hast prepa∣red for vs to walke in, through Ie∣sus Christ our Lord. Vnto him that loued vs, and was∣shed vs from our sinnes in his bloud, and made vs kinges and Priestes vnto God his father, be all glorie, power &
dominion for euermore. Amen. An other. THe God of glorie who hath crea∣ted, redeemed, and presently fed vs, be blessed for euermore. Amē. The God of all power, who hath called from death the great pastour of the sheepe our Lorde Iesus, com∣fort and defend the flocke which hee hath redeemed by the bloud of the e∣ternall testament: increase the num∣ber of true preachers: represse the rage of obstinate tyrants: lighten the heartes of the ignorant, releeue the paines of such as be afflicted, but spe∣cially of those that suffer for the te∣stimonie of the trueth: and finally confound Sathan by the power of our Lord Iesus Christ. So be it.
PRAYERS, COMMON∣ly called Lidleys prayers, with certaine godly ad∣ditions. Before thou prayest, forgiue, if thou hast any thing against any man, & come not to GOD with a double heart, but lift vp pure handes with∣out wrath or doubting. 1. Tim. 2. ALmightie and moste mercifull father, I thy poore creature and worke of thy handes, acknowledg and con∣fesse vnto thee my manifoulde sinnes and offences, which I frō my youth vp vnto this day, haue committed against thee in thought, word, and deede, beseeching thee for Iesus Christ thy deare sons
sake, to haue mercie vpon me, and to pardon the same, according to thy great mercie, which hast promised, that At what time so euer a sinner doth repent him of his sinne, from the bottome of his heart, thou wil put al his wickednesse out of thy remem∣brance. O Lord, I confesse that I was borne in sinne and conceiued in wic∣kednesse, and am by nature a Childe of wrath: For in my fleshe dwelleth no good thing, and of my selfe I am not able to thinke a good thought, much lesse to do that thou in thy law requirest of me, saying: Cursed is he yt continueth not in all thinges that are written in the law, to do them. Againe Thy law is spiritual, but I am carnall, fold vnder sinne. Therfore, O Lord I come vnto thee for grace (which hast said, Aske & ye shal haue: seeke & ye shal find: knock & it shalbe opened
you) to preuent & draw my wil vnto all goodnes: for none can come vnto thee except he be drawen: and except we be borne from aboue, we cannot see the kingdome of God. Therefore (O Lorde) renewe in mee a right spirit, that I may receiue strength and ablenes, to do thy righ∣teous will. Graunt that I may euer desire & will that which is most pleasing and acceptable to thy will. Thy will be my will, and my wil be alwayes to followe thy will. Let there be euer in mee one will and one desire with thee, and let mee neuer desire to will or not to will, but as thou wilt. Graunt me that aboue all thinges I may rest in thee, and fully quiet and pacifie my heart in thee: for thou Lord art the true peace of the heart, and the perfect rest of the soule.
Thou knowest Lord, what is most profitable & expedient for mee: wher∣fore doe with mee in all things as it shall seeme best vnto thee. For it may not bee but well that thou dost, which doest moste iustly & blessedly dispose all thinges after thy most godly wisedome. Therefore whe∣ther it be by prosperitie or aduersitie, losse or gaine, sickenesse or health, life or death, thy will be done. Cast out of my heart, all vnprofi∣table cares of worldly thinges, and suffer mee not to be led with the vn∣stable desires of earthly vanities: but giue me grace that all worldly and carnall affections may be mortified & die in me. Graunt vnto mee the strength of thy holy spirite, to subdue this body of sinne with the whole lustes there∣of, that it may bee obedient both in will, minde and members, to doe thy
holy will. Assist me with thy grace (O Lord) that I may be strengthened in the in∣warde man,Ephe. 9. and be armed with thy holy armour, whiche is the brest∣place of righteousnes, the shielde of of faith, the hope of saluation for an helmet, and the sworde of the spirite, which is thy holy word, that I may stand perfect in all that is thy will and bee found worthie, through, Christ, to receiue the crowne of life which thou hast promised to all them that loue thee. Giue me grace that I may esteme all thinges in this world as they be, transitory & soone vanishing away, and my self also with them drawing towardes mine ende: For nothinge vnder the sunne maye longe abide, but all is vanitie and affliction of spirite. Oh Lorde God which art sweete∣nes
vnspeakeable, turne into bitter∣nes vnto me al transitorie and earth∣ly delightes, which may drawe mee from the loue of eternall thinges: and for all worldly comfortes, giue me the sweete comfort of thy holy spirite: for thou Lorde art my ioye, my hope, my crowne, and my glorie: Blessed are they that for the loue of thee, set not by the pleasures of this world, but crucifie the flesh and the lustes therof, so that in a cleane & pure conscience they may offer their prayers vnto thee, and be accepted to haue companie with thee, together with thy Angels & heauenly spirits. O euerlasting light, sende downe the beames of thy brightnes, & ligh∣ten the inward partes of my hearte. Open my hearte, that I may be∣holde thy lawes, and teache mee to walke in thy commandementes. Beholde my weakenes (O Lord)
and consider my frailenesse, best kno∣wen vnto thee. Faine would I cleae fast to hea∣uenly thinges, but worldly affecti∣ons and tentations plucke mee back: they daily rebell, and suffer not my soule to liue in rest. Which although they drawe mee not away to consent, yet neuerthe∣lesse their assaults be verie grieuous vnto me. Oh what a life may this be cal∣led, where no trouble nor miserie lacketh? where euery place is full of snares of mortall enemies? For one trouble or tentation o∣uerpassed, an other commeth by and by, and the first conflict yet during, a newe battell sodenly ariseth. Tedious it is to me to liue in such battel: but I perceiue such conflictes are not vnprofitable for me, whilest I know my selfe and mine infirmi∣ties
the better, and am thereby com∣pelled to seeke helpe at thy hand. It is good for mee (O Lord) that thou hast thus exercised and hum∣bled me, that I may learne to dread thy secrete and terrible iudgements, which scourgest euery childe that thou receiuest, which bringest down to the gates of hel, and bringest backe againe. I yeeld thee thanks therefore that thou hast not spared my sinnes, but hast punished mee with scourges of loue, and hast sent afflictions and an∣guish within and without. Of grace & fauour it is (O Lord) that thou sufferest thy seruants to be troubled and afflicted in this world, because they should not be condem∣ned with the world. Thou wouldest that they shoulde here be broken with affliction, that they may after rise in a newe light, &
be clarified and made glorious in thy kingdome. Oh holy father, thou hast ordey∣ned it so to be, and it is done as thou hast appoynted. Wherefore (O Lord) giue mee the grace to rest in thee aboue all thinges, and to quiet my heart in thee aboue all creatures, aboue all glorie and honour, aboue all dignitie and power, aboue all health and beutie, aboue all riches and treasure, aboue all ioy and pleasure, aboue all fame and praise, aboue all mirth and con∣solatiō that mans heart may take or feele besides thee. For thou Lord art most good, most wise, most righte∣ous, most holy, most iust, most bles∣sed, most high, most mightie, most comfortable, most beautifull, most louing, most glorious, in whom all treasures of goodnesse most perfectly rest.
And therefore whatsoeuer I haue besides thee, it is nothing vnto mee: for my heart may not rest, nor fullie be pacified, but onely in theee. Oh Lord Iesu▪ who shal giue me winges of pefecte loue, that I may flee vp from these worldly miseries, and rest with thee? Oh Christ, the king of euerlasting glorie, my soul crieth vnto thee with continual gronings, & saith: how long arieth my Lord God to come to me? Oh, when shall the end come of all these miseries? When shall I cleane be deliuered from the bondage of sinne? When shal I Lord, haue my mind onely fixed on thee, and be merie in thee with perfect ioye and gladnesse? When shal that blessed houre come that thou shalt visite me, and make me glad with thy blessed presence, when thou shalt be to me all in all?
When shall I come vnto thee, and feele and enioy those sweete consola∣tions which with thy blessed saintes are alwayes present? When shall I haue peace without trouble, peace without, & peace with∣in, & on euery side stedfast and sure? O Lord Iesu when shall I stand and beholde thee, and haue full sight and contemplation of thy glorye? When shall I be with thee in thy kingdome, that thou hast ordeined for thine elect before the beginning? Oh blessed mansion of that hea∣uenly cittie: Oh most cleare day of eternitie, whome the night may ne∣uer darken. This is the day always cleere and merie, alwaies sure and neuer chan∣ging. This day shineth cleerely to thy saints in heauē (Oh gratious God) with euerlasting brightnesse: but to
vs here on earth (so great is the dark∣nes of sin in vs) it shineth obscurely, and as it were a farre off: we see but a glimmering thereof. Woulde to God this day might shortly appeare, and shine vnto vs, and that these worldly vanities were at an end. Thy heauenly Citizens know and feele how ioyfull this day is: but we the Children of Eue, strangers and exiles here on earth, doe lament and bewaile the bitter tediousnes of this present life, short and euil, full of sor∣rowe and anguish. Where man is oftentimes defiled with sinne, disquieted with troubles, oppressed with cares, busied with vanities, blinded with errors, o∣uercharged with laboures, vexed with tentations, ouercome with vaine delightes and pleasures of the worlde, & miserably wrapped in
many kindes of calamities. Wherefore, O Lord arise, and help me: comfort mine exile: assuage my sorrowe: destroy the power of mine enemies, the kingdome of sinne, Sa∣than, the world, and my wicked flesh, which alway make battell against me, and bring these conflicting dayes to an end. So shal I sing praises vn∣to thee (O God of my saluation) and magnifie thy holy name world with out end. Amen. A confession of sinnes, and a prayer for the remission thereof. O Lord God, rich in mercie, and of great goodnesse, who of thy tender loue towardes vs, euen when we were thine enimies, diddest send into the world thine own deare sonne Iesus Christ to be a slaine sa∣crifice for our sinnes: so that whoso∣euer
beleeueth in him, should not perish, but haue life euerlasting: haue mercy vpō me, according to thy great mercies, and according to the mul∣titude of thy, compassions put away mine iniquities▪ For mine iniquities are gone ouer my head,Psal. 38. and as a weightie burthen they presse me downe. Against heauen and against thee haue I sinned,Luke. 15. O Lord, I am not worthy to be called thy childe. I am ashamed to lift vp mine eyes vnto thee, for my sinnes are ascended vp into thy sight. There is nothing sound in my flesh because of thy displeasure,Psal. 38. neither is there any rest in my bones because of my sinne. Behold I am sold vnder sin,Rom. 7. and in my flesh ther dwelleth no good thing. For the good which I would doe, I doe not: but the euill which I
would not doe, that I doe. Wash me therfore O Lord frō mine iniquities, & clense me from my sin. Psal. 51.Purifie my heart by the sancti∣fying of thy holy spirite▪ and by the sprinckling of the blood of thy deare sonne, from the filth of sinne and an euill conscience. Psa. 51.Make me to heare ioy and gladnes, that the bones which thou hast bro∣ken may reioyce. Create in me a new heart, O God, and renue a right spirit within me. Cast me not away from thy pre∣sence, and take not thy holy spirite from me. Restore to me the ioy of thy salua∣tion, and stablish me with thy free spirite. Psal. 9.For thou art good to them that trust in thee, and to the soule that see∣keth thee. Psal. 25.Al thy wayes are mercie and truth,
to them that seeke out thy couenant, and thy testimonies. The fountaine of thy goodnes is e∣uer full and ouerflowing: thy mercy neuer decayeth. Thou woundest and healest againe, thou killest and reuiuest, bringest e∣uen downe to hel, and bringest backe againe. Thou raisest vp those that are faln, thou comfortest the broken harted. Thou strengthenest the wearie handes and crooked knees: and out of the gulph of hell thou deliuerest the afflicted. Out of darknes thou bringest light, out of death, life, and out of damna∣tion thou bringest saluation. Heare me therefore, O Lord, ac∣cording to thy louing kindnes: turne vnto me according to the multitude of thy tender mercies. Looke vpon mine affliction and myPsalm. 2
trauell, and forgiue all my sinnes. Psal. 63.Remember not the offences of my youth, nor my rebelliōs against thee. Psal. 130For if thou, Lord, shouldest marke our iniquities, Lord, who should be able to stande in thy sight? Iob. 15.Seeing thou hast founde iniquitie euen in thine Angels, and the heauēs are not cleane in thy sight: muche more is man abhominable & filthy, which drinketh iniquitie like water. Notwithstanding thou hast said, O Lord, that as the righteousnes of ye righteous man shall not saue him whensoeuer he offendeth: so shal not the wickednesse of the wicked man hurt him whensoeuer hee forsaketh his wickednes and turneth to thee. For thou knowest thine own han∣die worke: thou remembrest what wee are: thou seest that wee are but weake and feeble flesh. Psal. 83.Looke not therefore vppon my
sinnes, O Lord, but looke vpon the face of thine annoynted. For he hath borne our iniquities,Esai. 52 he hath caried our sorrowes. He was wounded for our trans∣gressions: he was broken for our in∣iquities: the chastisemēt of our peace is layde vpon him. He gaue his body to be beaten, and his cheekes to be striken: he bare the sinnes of many, and prayed for the offenders. He came to bring glad tydinges to the poore,Esai. 61. to binde vp the broken har∣ted, to preach libertie to the captiues, to comfort them that mourne in Si∣on, and to giue vnto them beautie for ashes, the oyle of ioye for mour∣ning, the garment of gladnes for the spirite of heauinesse: that they might be called trees of righteousnesse and the planting of the Lord. For his sake therefore, O Lord,
be mercifull vnto me, and say vnto my soule: behould I am come to thee, thy health and thy saluation. A prayer for the true knowledg and vnderstanding of the word of God. sal. 119LEt my prayer come before thee, O Lord, and giue me vnderstan∣ding according to thy word. Blessed art thou, O Lorde, teach me thy statutes: That with my lips I may declare all the iudgementes of thy mouth: That I may delight in the way of thy testimonies aboue all riches: That I may meditate in thy pre∣cepts, and consider thy wayes: That I may take pleasure in thy statutes, and not forget thy word. Be good vnto me thy seruant, O Lord, yt I may liue & keep thy word. Open mine eyes, that I may see
the wonders which are in thy lawe. I am a stranger vpon earth, not∣withstanding hide not from me thy commaundements. For my hart languisheth with the desire that it hath to thy iudgments. Thy testimonies are my delight and my counsellers. I will praise thee with an vpright hart, when thou hast taught mee the iudgements of thy righteousnesse. Shew me thy wayes,Psal. 25. O Lorde, & teach me thy pathes. Leade mee foorth in thy truth, and teach mee: for thou art my God and my saluation, in thee doe I trust all the day long. Make mee vnderstand the way of thy precepts,Psal. 119. and I wil consider thy wonderous workes. Thy handes haue made me and fashioned me, giue mee vnderstan∣ding that I may learne thy cōman∣dementes.
That they which feare thee, seeing me, may reioyce: because I haue tru∣sted in thy word. Shew the light of thy countenance vpon thy seruaunt, and teach me thy ordinances. Thou art good and gratious, there∣fore according to thy goodnesse teach mee thy statutes. O Lord, of whose goodnesse the earth is ful, teach me thy ordināces. O Lord, I beseech thee accept the sacrifice of my lippes, and teach me thy iudgementes. The righteousnesse of thy testi∣monies is euerlasting: graunt me vnderstanding and I shall liue. Deale with thy seruant according to thy mercies, and teach me thy sta∣tutes. I am thy seruant, graunt me vn∣derstanding, that I may knowe thy
testimonies. My lippes shall shewe foorth thy praise, when thou hast taught me thy statutes. My tongue shal talke of thy word, for all thy commaundementes are righteous. For in thee is a wel of liing wa∣ters,Psalm. 36 and euer flowing, & in thy light shall we see light. A prayer for the leading of a Godly life. I Crie vnto thee with my whole hart,Psal. 119 heare me (O Lord) and guide me, that I may keepe thy stautes. I call vpon thee: saue mee, that I may keepe thy testimonies. Let my prayer bee directed in thy ight as incense,Psal. 141. and the lifting vp of my handes, as an euening sacrifice. I haue gone astraye like a lost sheepe:Psa. 119. seeke thy seruaunt, for I doe
heauen and earth, and all thinges therein conteined: Oh incompre∣hensible vnitie: Oh alwayes to bee worshipped most blessed Trinitie: I humbly beseech thee and pray thee by the assumption and crucified hu∣manitie of our Lorde Iesus Christ, that thou wouldest incline and bowe downe the great depth of thy deitie, to the bottomlesse pit of my vilitie. Driue me from al kinde of vice, wic∣kednes and sin. Create in me a cleane heart, and renue in me a right spirit, for thy holy names sake. Oh Lorde Iesu, I beseech thy goodnes, for the exceeding great loue which drewe thee out of thy fathers bosome, into the wombe of the holy Uirgin, and for the assumption of mans nature, wherein it pleased thee to saue me, and to deliuer me from eternall death: that thou wouldest drawe me out of my selfe into thee
my Lorde God, and graunt that this my loue may recouer againe to mee thy grace to increase and make per∣fect in me that which is wanting, to raise vp in me, that which is falne, to restore to me that which I haue lost, and to quicken in me that which is dead and should liue, that so I may become conformable vnto thee in all my life and conuersation, thou dwel∣ling in me, and I in thee, my heart being soupled with thy grace, and setled in thy faith for euer. Oh my God, loose and set at liber∣tie my spirit from al inferior things. Gouern my soule and so worke, that both in soule and body I may be ho∣ly, and liue to thy glory, world with∣out end. Amen. I. B. A prayer necessarie to be saide at all times. O Boūtiful Lord Iesu, O sweete sauiour, O Christ the sonne of
God, haue pittie vpon mee, mer∣cifully heare mee, and despise not my prayers. Thou hast created me of nothing, thou hast redeemed mee from the bondage of sinne, death, and hel, neither with Gould nor Siluer, but with thy moste precious bodie once offered vpon the crosse, and thine owne blood shedde once for all for a ransome. Therefore cast me not a∣way, whom thou by thy great wise∣dome hast made. Despise me not, whom thou hast redeemed with such a precious treasure, nor let my wic∣kednesse destroy that which thy good∣nes hath builded. Now whiles I liue O Iesu, haue mercie on me: for if I die out of thy fauour, it will be too late afterward to call for thy mercie. Whiles I haue time to repent, looke vpon me with thy mercifull eyes, as thou didest vouchsafe to looke vpon Peter thine
Apostle, that I may bewaile my sin∣full life, and obteine thy fauour, to liue and die therein. I acknowledg that if thou shouldest deale with me according to thy iustice, I haue de∣serued euerlasting death. Therefore I appeale to thy highe throne of mercie, trusting to obteine thy fauour: not for my merites, but for thy desertes (O Iesu) who hast giuen thy selfe an acceptable sacrifice to thy father, to appease his wrath, and to bring all sinners truly repen∣ting and amending their euill life, vn¦to his fauour againe. Accept me (O Lord) among the number of them whom thou hast in Christ elected and chosen to saluati∣on. Forgiue me my sinnes: giue me grace to leade a godly and innocent life: graunt me thy heauenly wise∣dome: inspire my hart with faith, hope, and charitie: giue me grace
to bee humble in prosperitie, pati∣ente in aduersitie, obedient to my rulers, in all my doinges faithfull, dealing truely with all men, to liue chastly in wedlock, to abhorre adul∣terie, fornication and all vncleanes, to doe good after my power vnto all men, to hurt no man: that thy name may be glorified in mee during this present life, and that I afterwarde may atteine euerlasting life, through thy mercie, and the merites of thy death and passion. Amen. A prayer for grace and remissi∣on of sinnes. O Lorde God mercifull father, I poore wretched sinner come vn∣to thee in the name of thy dear∣ly beloued son Christ Iesus my sa∣uiour, beseeching thee for his sake, to be mercifull vnto me, and to cast all my sinnes out of thy sight, euen
through the merites of his bloodie death. Poure vpon me (O Lord) thy holy spirite of grace and wisedome, to gouerne and leade my bodie and soule in thy holy worde and com∣maundementes. Shewe thy mercy vpon me, and so lighten the naturall blindenesse and darkenesse of my hart through thy grace, that I may day∣ly be renewed by thy holy spirite. Open my hard hart and grosse eares, to heare and reade thy worde and heauenly voyce, and to beleeue and followe it in my conuersation, and e∣uer to hold fast that blessed hope of euerlasting life. Mortifie and kill all vice in me, that my life may expresse my faith in thee. Mercifully heare the humble supplication of thy ser∣uaunt, and graunt mee thy peace all my dayes. Gratiously pardon my in∣firmities, and defende me in all dan∣gers, both outwardly in my bodie,
goodes and name, and inwardly in my soule, against all euill tentations and subtile baits of sathan that roa∣ring lyon, seeking whome he may deuour. Graunt (O Lord) that I and euerie member of thy Church in his vocation and calling, may truly and godly serue thee. Grafte in my heart the loue of thy name: increase in me true religion: replenishe me with all goodnesse, and of thy great mercy keepe me in the same vnto the end. Giue vnto me the spirite of prai∣er, true humilitie, perfect patience, and continuall ioye in the holy ghost. I commend vnto thy protection (O Father) my house and all that thou hast giuen me: my whole familie, my wife and children: ayde me, that I may well & holily gouerne, nourish, and bring them vp, in thy feare and seruice. And forasmuch as in this worlde
I must alwayes be at warre, not with one sort of enimies, but with an infinite number: not onely with fleshe and blood, but with the diuell, which is the prince of darknes, grant me thy grace, that being armed with thy defence, I may stand in this bat∣tell with an inuincible constancie a∣gainst al corruption which I am in∣compassed with on all sides, vntill such time as I hauing ended the cō∣bate which during this life I must susteine, in the end I may atteine to thy heauenly rest which is prepared for me through Christ my Lord and Sauiour. Amen. A prayer taken out of the first Psalme ALmightie and moste gratious God take away from vs al euil counsel, and then our sinnes: suf∣fer vs not to runne into an vngodly
and wicked life: and finally keepe our mindes farre from the contempt of godlynesse and scorning of ver∣tue, and in the steade of these euills, graunt that we may continually bee occupied in thy law and sacred scrip∣tures, that we be not caried about like the wicked, as light duste and fruitelesse chaffe, with euerie blast of affection and doctrine: but rather that wee as trees planted by the wa∣ter brookes, indewed with the life of thy spirite and faith, may also bring foorth the fruites of good workes: and that what so euer we take in hande may prosper, and tend to the praise and glorie of thy name and furthe∣rance of our saluation: and at the last, when the wicked shall fall away in thy iudgement▪ we may stand sted∣fast and be made perfect through Ie∣sus Christ our Lord. Amen.
Out of the same Psalme. ALmighty God we are sufficient∣ly taught, that greeuous calami∣ties and miserable plagues doe therefore dayly vexe and trouble thy Church, because we haue not ceased to followe the counsel of the vngod∣ly: which being once knowne, we ought to haue eschewed. The way also of the wicked we haue not shunned: yea we haue not ceased to walke their race by continual trans∣gressing of thy commaundementes. we haue also of long time, contem∣ned all godly correction and disci∣pline, and whatsoeuer hath beene taught vs out of thy word, hath bin too little regarded▪ yea without all shame neglected and scorned. Wherefore it is no maruell, if we in the steede of that happinesse and quiet peace, which we (alas) haue too long abused, be nowe compelled to
suffer all heauie, greeuous, and most bitter plagues. But now, O God, in humblenes of heart we flee vnto thee confessing our greeuous offences, and we most humblie and hartilie be∣seech thee, that those euils which we so foolishly and wretchedly haue com∣mitted, thou wilte mercifully for∣giue vs, and frame our minds wholy to the obedience of thy lawe, in such wise that our heartes may be occu∣pied both day and night in nothing else, but in the meditation of thy holy scriptures, for so shall we gi∣uing credite to thy wordes, bringe foorth seasonable and pleasant fruite, and shall not be spoyled of the graces of the Holy Ghost: yea our doinges shal neuer be without happy successe Nowe we are tossed hither & thither not vnlike to leaues and chaffe, with the wind of aduersitie and affliction: yet grant (O most mercifull father)
that our life perish not with the wic∣ked, but that the cause of the iust, may bee defended by thy singular prouidence and protection: so that in iudgement and in the companie of the iust we may be able to stand, and not to be confounded: through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Out of the same Psalme. ALmightie God, for as much as we haue nowe learned, that a great part of our felicitie, so long as we liue here, consisteth in this, that we refraine from vngodly counsell and wicked manners, and also auoyd the company of those that despise and deride all good thinges: and that in the stead of these euils, we giue our selues to the heauenly study of thy holy lawe, to be occupied and exerci∣sed therein both daye and night,
(whereby wee doe perceiue that wee haue verie much erred and strayed from this way of our saluation, yea we haue in these thinges most wic∣kedly offended:) therefore wee be∣seech thee, euen for thy mercies sake that thou wilt pardon our offences, and that hencefoorth by the continual studie and exercise of thy word, thou wilt vouchsafe to make vs fruitfull plantes, that we may not onely bring forth wholsome fruits in thy Church whiles we liue here, but also may be able in the other worlde to stande in iudgemente before thee, who best knowest the way of the iust, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. A prayer taken out of the se∣cond Psalme. WE perceiue (most mercifull & mightie God) that not onely Antichrist, but also the power and strength of the whole world, cō∣spireth
against thee, and against thy Christ: which thinke the Gospel and  building vp againe of thy Church, to be an intollerable bondage & harde yoke. Wherefore they labour by all possible meanes, to breake a sun∣der the societies and congregations of the faithfull, and cast away all dis∣cipline. But forasmuch as thou sit∣test in heauen, and  not ignorant what the diuell or wicked flesh goeth about: laugh thou to scorne their aine counsels, and bring their pur∣poses to nought Let them feele thine anger to bekindled against them, and make them astonished at the fiercnes of thine indignatiō, so that they may not be able to destroy thy Church, o∣uer whom thou hast apointed Iesus Christ our onely sauiour to be a go∣uernour, that in it he might raigne by his word and spirite with inuin∣cibl might and power. Wherefore
grant vnto vs although vnworthie and shrinking children, such faith and constancy, that we may finde him and also cōfesse him to be our onely king, and that we may nothing doubt, but that we be his nation, people and heritage, being most assured of this, that he is of such strength and power, that with his word more strong then yron, he is able to destroy whom he will, and breake them in peeces like earthen pots. Therefore, O God, turne the Kings and Princes of the world vn∣to thee, that they may be wise and vnderstand, whereby they may vn∣faignedly acknowledge, imbrace, and kisse thy sonne, least when his anger shall once be kindled, they perishe and be destroyed for euer. And when it shall be thy good pleasure, make them blessed for euermore, which cō∣mit themselues to thy gouernance
and protection, by Christ Iesus our Lord▪ Amen. Out of the same Psalme. MOste Mightie and mercifull Lord God, though the diuell rage, the powers of the world daily rise vp, and the flesh with al her bondslaues cōspire against the king∣dome of thine onely begotten sonne Iesus Christ our Lord: yet make vs to vnderstand, & with constant faith to be persuaded, that thou deridest & contemnest al such whō thou caust in thine anger & fierce displeasure when thou wilt, sodenly destroy and bring to nought. In this faith, seeing we are somtimes so weak; yt being ouer∣come with sundrie kindes of terrour and dread, we are not so obedient to thy cōmaundements as we ought to be▪ we therefore beseech thee, for thy great▪ goodnes sake to bee mercifull
vnto vs, and grant that we may con∣stantly beleeue thy son our king and our redeemer, to haue the highest power and dominion with thee in all thinges. For seeing thou hast begottē him, thou hast also deliuered to him all nations to be ruled by his power, as his own inheritāce. Graunt ther∣fore vnto vs, that yet at the length we may be wise & vnderstand, in such sort as we may serue thee with all due feare and worship, that in the last day we be not dashed in peces as ear∣then vessels, with the rodde of thine indignation: through Iesus Christ our Lord, Amen. A prayer which M. Iohn Brad∣ford said a little before his death in smithfeelde. Mat. 27.MErciful God & father, to whom our sauiour Christ approched in his feare and neede by reasō
of death, and found comfort: gratious God and most bounteous Christ, on whō Stephen called in his extreme neede,Actes. 7. and receiued strength: most be∣nigne holy spirit, which in the midst of all crosses and death didst comfort the Apostle S. Paul with more con∣solations in Christ, then he felt sor∣rowes and terrors in the world: haue mercie vpon me, a most miserable, vile and wretched sinner, which now drawe neere the gates of death, deser∣ued both in soule and bodie eternal∣ly, by reason of my manifolde, hor∣rible, olde and newe transgressions▪ which to thine eyes (O Lord God) are open and knowne. Oh be mer∣cifull vnto mee, and forgiue mee for the bitter death and bloodsheading of thine onely sonne, Iesus Christ. And though thy iustice do require in respect of my sinnes that nowe thou shouldest not heare mee, contem∣ning
thy dayly callings: yet let thy mercie which is aboue al thy works, and wherewith the earth is filled, let thy mercie (I say) preuaile to∣wardes me, through the merites and meditation of Christ our sauiour, for whose sake it pleaseth thee to bring mee foorth nowe as one of his wit∣nesses and a record bearer of thy ve∣ritie and trueth taught by him, to giue my life therfore. Of which dig∣nitie I doe acknowledg (deare God) that there was, neuer any so vnwor∣thie and vnmeete, no not the theefe that hanged with him on the crosse. I humbly therefore praye thee that thou wouldest accordinglie ayde, helpe, and assist me with thy strength and heauenly grace, that with Christ thy sonne I may finde comfort, with Stephen I may see thy presence and gratious power, with Paul and al o∣thers, which for thy names sake haue
suffered afflictions and death, I may finde so presente with mee thy grati∣ous consolation, that I may by my death glorifie thy holye name, set foorth and ratifie thy veritie, comfort the hearts of the heauie, confirme thy Church in thy truth, conuert some yt are to be conuerted, and so depart out of this miserable world (where I do nothing but daylie heape sinne vpon sinne) and enter into the fruttion of thy blessed mercie: whereof nowe giue and increase in me a liuely tast, sense, and feeling, where through the terror of death, the tormentes of fire, the paines of sinne, the dartes of sathan, and the dolours of hell, may neuer ouercome me, but may be dri∣uen away through the working of that most gratious spirit which now plentiously indue withall, yt through the same spirite I may offer (as now I desire, & am readie to do) in Christ
and by him my selfe wholy soule and body, to be a liuely sacrifice, holy and acceptable in thy sight (deare father) whose I am and always haue beene euen from my mothers wombe, yea euen before the worlde was made: to whom I commend my selfe, faith, and name, familie & friends, country and all the whole Church, yea, euen my verie enimies, according to thy good pleasure, beseeching thee intire∣ly to giue once more to this Realme of England, the blessing of thy word againe, with godly peace, to the tea∣ching and setting forth of the same. Oh deare father, now giue me to com vnto thee: so purge and purifie me by this fire in Christes death and passion through thy spirite, that I may be a burnt offering of sweete smell in thy sight, which liuest and reignest with the sonne and the holy Ghost, nowe and euermore worlde without end. Amen.
The Letanie. O God the father of heauen, haue mercie vppon vs miserable sin∣ners. O God the father of heauen, &c. O God the sonne redeemer of the world, haue mercie vpon vs misera∣ble sinners. O God the sonne redeemer of &c. O God the holy Ghost proceeding from the Father and the sonne: haue mercie vpon vs miserable sinners. O God the holy Ghost, &c. O holy, blessed, and glorious Trini∣tie, three persons and one God, haue mercie vpon vs miserable sinners. O holy blessed and glorious &c. Remember not Lord our offences, nor the offences of our forefathers, neither take thou vengeance of our sinnes, spare vs good Lord, spare thy people whome thou hast redeemed
with thy most precious bloode, and be not angrie with vs for euer. Spare vs good Lord. From all euil and mischeefe, from sinne, from the craftes and assaultes of the Diuel from thy wrath, and from euerlasting damnation. Good Lord deliuer vs. From blindenesse of heart, from pride, vaine glorie & hypocrisie, from enuie, hatred and malice, and all vn∣charitablenes. Good Lord deliuer vs. From all fornication, and al other deadly sin, and from al the deceits of the world, the flesh, and the Diuel. Good Lord deliuer vs. From lightning and tempest, from plague, pestilence & famine, frō battel and murther, and from souden death. Good Lord deliuer vs. From all sedition and priuie con∣spiracie, from all false doctrine and
heresie, from hardnes of hart & con∣tēpt of thy word & cōmaundement. Good Lord deliuer vs. By the mysterie of thy holy incar∣nation, by thy holy natiuitie and cir∣cumcision, by thy baptisme, fasting and temptation. Good Lord deliuer vs. By thine agonie and bloody sweat. by thy crosse and passion▪ by thy glo∣rious resurrection and ascension, and by the comming of the holy ghost. Good Lord deliuer vs. In all time of of our tribulation, in all time of our welth, in the houre of death, and in the day of iudgement. Good Lord deliuer vs. We sinners do beseech thee to heare vs O Lorde God, and that it may please thee to rule and gouerne thy holy Church vniuersally in the right way. We besech thee to hear vs good Lord.
That it may please thee to keepe & strengthen in the true worshipping of thee, in righteousnes and holynes of life, thy seruant Elizabeth our most gratious queene and gouernour. We beseech thee to heare vs, &c. That it may please the to rule her heart in thy faith, feare, and loue, and that she may euermore haue af∣fiance in thee, and euer seeke thy ho∣nour and glorie. We beseech thee to heare vs, &c. That it may please thee to be her defender and keeper, giuing her the victorie ouer all her enimies. We beseech thee to heare vs, &c. That it may please thee to illumi∣nate all Bishops Pastours and mi∣nisters of ye Church, with true know¦ledg and vnderstanding of thy word, and that both by their preaching and liuing they may set it forth and shew it accordingly.
We beseech thee to heare, &c. That it may please thee to indue the Lordes of the counsel, and all the nobilitie with grace, wisedome and vnderstanding. We beseech thee to heare vs, &c. That it may please thee to blesse and keepe the Magistrates, giuing them grace to execute iustice, and to mainteine trueth. We beseech thee to heare vs, &c. That it may please thee to blesse and keepe all thy people. We beseech thee to heare vs, &c. That it may please thee to giue to all nations vnitie peace and concord. Wee beseech thee to heare vs, &c. That it may please thee to giue vs an heart to loue and dread thee, and diligently to liue after thy cōmaun∣dementes. We beseech thee to heare vs, &c. That it may please thee to giue all
thy people increase of grace to heare meekely thy worde, and to receiue it with pure affection, & to bring foorth the fruites of the spirite. We beseech thee to heare vs, &c. That it may please thee to bring into the way of trueth, all such as haue erred and are deceiued. We beseech thee to heare vs, &c. That it may please thee to streng∣then such as do stand, and to comfort and helpe the weake harted, and to raise them vp that fall, and finally to beate downe sathan vnder our feete. We beseech thee to heare vs, &c. That it may please thee to succour, helpe and comfort all that be in dan∣ger, necessitie and tribulation. We beseech thee to heare vs, &c. That it may please thee to preserue all that trauell by lande or by wa∣ter, all women labouring of child, all sicke persons and young children, and
to shewe thy pitie vpon all prisoners and captiues. We beseech thee to heare vs, &c. That it may please thee to defend and prouide for the fatherlesse chil∣dren and widowes, and all that be de∣solate and oppressed. We beseech thee to heare vs, &c. That it may please thee to haue mercie vpon all men. We beseech thee to heare vs, &c. That it may please thee to forgiue our enimies, persecuters and slande∣rers and to turne their heartes. We beseech thee to heare vs, &c. That it may please thee to giue and preserue to our vse the kindely fruites of the earth, so as in due time we may inioy them. Wee beseech thee to heare vs, &c▪ That it may please thee to giue vs true repentane, to forgiue vs all our sinnes, negligences and ignorances,
and to indue vs with thy holy spirit, to amend our liues according to thy holy worde. We beseech thee to heare vs, &c. Sonne of God, we beseech thee to heare vs. Sonne of God, wee beseech thee, &c. O Lambe of God that takest away the sinnes of the world, Graunt vs thy peace. O Lamb of God that takest away the sinnes of the world. Haue mercie vpon vs. O Christ heare vs. O Christ heare vs. Lord haue mercie vpon vs. Lord haue mercie vpon vs. Christ haue mercie vpon vs. Christ haue mercie vpon vs. Lord haue mercie vpon vs. Lord haue mercie vpon vs. Our father which art in heauen, &c. And lead vs not into temptation:
But deliuer vs from euill. Amen. The versicle. O Lord deale not with vs after our sinnes. The answere. Neither rewarde vs after our ini∣quities. Let vs pray. O God mercifull father, that de∣spisest not the sighing of a con∣trite hart, nor the desires of such as be sorrowfull, mercifully assist our prayers that we make before thee in all our troubles & aduersities, when soeuer they oppresse vs, and grati∣ously heare vs that those euils which the craft and subtiltie of the diuell or man worketh againste vs, bee brought to nought, and by the pro∣uidence of thy goodnesse they may be dispersed, that we thy  being hurt by no persecution  e∣uermore giue thankes vnto thee in
thy holie Church, through Iesus Christ our Lord. O Lord arise, helpe vs▪ and deliuer vs for thy names sake. O God, we haue heard with our eares, and our fathers haue declared vnto vs the noble workes that thou didest in their dayes, and in the olde time before them. O Lord arise, helpe vs, and deliuer vs for thine honour. Glorie be to the father, and to the sonne, and to the holy ghost. As it was in the beginning, is nowe, and euer shalbe world without ende. Amen. From our enimies defende vs O Christ. Gratiously looke vpon our afflicti∣ons. Pitifully behold the sorrows of our heartes. Mercifully forgiue the sinnes of
thy people. Fauorably with mercie heare our prayers. O Sonne of Dauid▪ haue mercie vpon vs. Both now and euer vouchsafe to heare vs O Christ. Gratiously heare vs O Christ, gra∣tiously heare vs, O Lord Christ. O Lord let thy mercie be shewed vpon vs: As we doe put our trust in thee▪ Let vs pray. WE humbly beseech thee (O fa∣ther) mercifully to looke vp∣on our infirmities, and for the glorie of thy names sake, turne from vs all those euils that we most righ∣teously haue deserued, & graunt that in all our troubles we may put our whole trust and confidence in thy
mercie, and euermore serue thee in holines and purenes of liuing, to thy honour and glorie: through our one∣ly Mediatour and aduocate Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. A prayer for the Queenes Maiestie. O Lord our heauenly father, high and mightie, King of Kinges, Lord of Lords, the onely ruler of princes, which doest frō thy throne beholde all the dwellers vppon the earth: moste hartily we beseech thee with thy fauour to behold our most gratious soueraigne Ladie, Quene Elizabeth, and so replenish her with the grace of thy spirite, that shee may alwayes incline to thy will and walke in thy feare, indue her plen∣tifully with heauenly gies, graunt her in health and welth long to liue: rength her, that she may vanquish
and ouercome all her enimies, and fi∣nally after this life, she may atteine euerlasting ioy and felicitie: through Iesus Christ our Lord▪ Amen. A prayer for Bishops and Mi∣nisters of the Church. ALmightie and euerliuing God, which onely workest great mar∣uels, send downe vpon our Bi∣shops & Curates, & al congregations commited to their charge, the health∣full spirite of thy grace, and that they may truly please thee, powre vpon them the continual dewe of thy bles∣sing. Graunt this (O Lord) for the honour of our aduocate and media∣tour Iesus Christ. For rayne. O God, heauenly father which by thy sonne Iesus Christ, hast promised to all them that seeke
thy kingdome and the righteousnes thereof, all things necessarie to their bodilie sustenance: sende vs we be∣seech thee in this our necessitie, such moderate raine and showers, that we may receiue the fruites of the earth, to our comforte, and to thy honour, through Iesus Christ our Lord. A∣men. For faire weather. O Lord God, which for the sinne of man diddest once drowne all the world, except eight persons, and afterwarde of thy greate mercie diddest promise neuer to destroy it so againe: we humbly beseech thee, that although we for our iniquities haue worthily deserued this plague of raine and waters, yet thou wilte sende vs such weather, whereby we may receiue the fruites of the earth in due season, and learne both by thy
punishment to amend our liues, and for thy clemencie to giue thee prayse and glorie, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. In the time of dearth and famine. O Merciful God and heauenly fa∣ther, whose gift it is yt the raine doth fall, the earth is fruitfull, man and beastes increase, & fishes do multiplie, beholde wee beseech thee, the afflictions of thy people, & graunt that the scarcitie and dearth which we do now most iustly suffer for our iniquitie, may through thy goodnes be mercifullie turned into cheapnes and plentie, for the loue of Iesus Christ our Lorde, to whome with thee and the holy Ghost, be prayse for euer. Amen. In the time of Warre. ALmightie God, king of al kings and gouernour of all thinges▪
whose power no creature is able to resist, to whome it belongeth iustly to punishe sinners, and to be merci∣full to them that truly repent: saue and deliuer vs (we humby beseech thee) from the handes of our eni∣mies: abate their pride, asswage their malice, and confounde their deuises, that wee being armed with thy de∣fence may be preserued from all pe∣rils, to glorifie thee, which art the onely giuer of all victorie, through the merites of thy onely Sonne Ie∣sus Christ our Lord. So be it. In the time of any common plague or sickenesse. O Almightie God, which in thy wrath, in the time of king Da∣uid, didst slay with the plague of pestilence threescore and ten thow∣sand, and yet remembring thy mer∣cie didest saue the rest: haue pitie vp∣on
vs miserable sinners, that nowe are visited with great sicknesse and mortalitie, that like as thou didest then commaunde thin Angell to cease from punishing: so it may now please thee to withdraw from vs this plague & greeuous sicknes: through Iesus Christ our Lord. A prayer for the strength and comfort of the holy ghost. ALmightie and moste mercifull God, which giueth to thine e∣lect people thy holy spirit, as a sure pledge of thy heauenly kingdome, we most humblie beseech thee so to replenish our heartes with the grace of thy holy spirit, that he may beare witnesse to our spirites that wee be thy children, and heires of thy king∣dome, and that by the gratious wor∣king of this thy good spirit, we may kill all anall-lustes, vnlawfull
pleasurs concupiscences and euil af∣fections, contrarie to thy most bles∣sed wil, through our Lord and Sa∣uiour Iesus Christ. So be it. For sure hope and true taste of euerlasting life. O Almighty God, which hast pre∣pared euerlasting life for al those that be thy faithfull seruauntes, graunt vnto vs sure hope of this life euerlasting, that whiles we be here, in this miserable world, we may haue some taste & feeling of it in our harts, through the merites of our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ. So be it. For the true knowledge of God and his worde, and a life agreea∣ble to the same. GRaunt vnto vs (O mercifull God wee most heartely beseech thee) knowledge and true vn∣derstanding
of thy blessed will and worde, that all ignorance beeing ex∣pelled, we may know what thy will and pleasure is in all thinges, and how to doe our dutie, and trulie to walke in our vocation, and that also we may expresse in our liuing those things that we do know, that we be not onely knowers of thy will and worde, good Lorde, but also may be hartie and faithfull workers of the same, through our Lord and sauiour Iesus Christ. So be it. A prayer for the strength and increase of faith. O Almightie & euerlasting God, which not onely giuest euerie good and perfect gift, but also increasest those giftes that thou hast giuen: we most humbly besech the to increase in vs the gift of faith, that we may tly beleeue in thee, and in
thy promises made vnto vs in Christ Iesu our Lord, and that neither by our negligence nor infirmitie of the fleshe, nor by greeuousnes of tenta∣tions, neither by the subtile crafts and assaultes of the diuel, we be dri∣uen from this faith in the bloude of our Lord & Sauiour Iesus Christ. So be it. For a godly life. ALmightie God, giue vs grace that we may cast away ye works of darknes and put vpon vs the armour of light, nowe in the time of this mortall life (in the which thy sonne Iesus Christ came to visit vs in great humilitie) that in ye last day, when hee shall come againe in his glorious maiestie to iudge the quick and the dead, we may rise to the life immortall, through him who liueth and reigneth with thee and the holy
ghost, now and for euer. So be it. A prayer for true perseuerance and assured hope of eternall life. BLessed God, which hast caused al holy scriptures to be written for our leaing, graunt that we may in such wise heare them, read them, marke them, & inwardly print them in our heartes, that by pacience and comfort of thy holy word, we may imbrace and euer hold fast the blessed hope of euerlasting life which thou hast giuen vs in our Lord and Sa∣uiour Iesus Christ. So be it. A prayer for the obteining of our petitions. ALmightie God which hast gi∣uen vs grace at this time with one accord, to make our common supplications vnto thee, & doest pro∣mise that when two or three be ga∣thered
togeather in thy name, thou wilt graunt their requestes: fulfill now (O Lord) the desires and petiti∣ons of thy seruants, as may be most expedient for them, graunting vs in this world knowledge of thy truth, and in the world to come life euer∣lasting. Amen. The ende of the Letanie.
¶ A GODLY INSTRV∣ction, conteining the summe of all the diuinitie necessarie for a Christian conscience: Made by Iohn Bradford. A MAN that is regene∣rate and borne of God (the which thing that e∣uerie one of vs bee, our Baptisme the sacrament of regeneration doth require vnder paine of damnation, and therefore let euerie one of vs with the virgin Marie say: Be it vnto me▪ O Lorde ac∣cording to thy word, according to the sacrament of Baptisme, wherin thou hast declared our adoption, and let vs lament the doubting hereof in vs, striuing against it as we shalbe made able of the Lord) a man (I say) that is regenerate, consisteth of two men
(as a man may say) namely of the old man,The olde man. and of the newe man. The olde man is like to a mightie giant, such a one as was Golyah, for his birth is nowe perfecte:The new man. but the newe man is like vnto a little child, such a one as was Dauid, for his birth is not yet perfect, vntill the day of his generall resurrection. Why the olde man is strōger then the new.The olde man therefore is more stronger, lustie and stirring then is the newe man, because the birth of the newe man is but begun now, and the olde man is perfectly borne. And as the olde man is more stirring, lu∣stie, and stronger then the newe man: so is the nature of him cleane con∣trarie to the nature of the newe man, as being earthly and corrupt with Sathans seede, the nature of the new man beinge heauenlye and blessed with the celestiall seede of God.In what respect one mā is both an old man, & also a new mā. So that one man, in as much as he is
corrupt with the seede of the serpent, is an old man: and in as much as he is blessed with the seede of God from aboue, he is a newe man. And as, in as much as he is an old man, he is a sinner and an enimie to God: so in as much as he is regenerate, he is righteous and holy, and a friende to God, the seede of God preseruing him from sinne, so that he cannot sin, as the seede of the serpent, where∣with he is corrupt euen from his con∣ception, inclineth him, yea, infor∣ceth him to sinne, and nothing else but to sinne. So that the best parte in man before regeneration, in Gods sighte is not onely an enimie, but e∣nimitie it selfe. One man therefore which is rege∣nerate,How one man may be called alwaies sinnefull & alwais iust. well may be called alwayes iust and alwayes sinnefull: iust in re∣spect of Gods seede and his regene∣ration: sinfull in respect of Sathans
seede and his first birth. Betwixt these two men therefore, there is con∣tinuall conflict and war most dead∣ly.Why the olde man often∣times pre¦uaileth a∣gainst the new mā. The fleshe and the olde man by reason of his birth that is perfecte, doth often for a time preuaile against the newe man (being but a childe in comparison) and that in such sort, as not onely other, but euen the chil∣dren of God themselues thinke that they be nothing else but old,The olde man so mightily preuai∣leth som∣times a∣gainst the new man in the children of God, that the spirit and seede of God see∣meth to be vtter∣ly taken frō them, whereas in deede it is not so, as af∣terward. to their great cō∣fort they finde and feele. and that the spirite and seede of God is lost & gone away, where yet notwithstan∣ding the trueth is otherwise, the spi∣rite & the seede of God, at the length appearing againe, and dispelling a∣waye the cloudes which couer the Sunne of Gods seede from shining, as the cloudes in the ayre do the cor∣porall Sunne: so that sometimes a man cannot tell by any sense, yt there is any sunne, the cloudes and windes so hiding it from our sight: Euen so
our cecitie or blindenes, and corrupt affections doe often shadow the sight of Gods seede in Gods children, as though they were plaine reprobates. Whereof it commeth, that they pray∣ing according to their sense, but not according to the truth, desire of God to giue them againe his spirite, as though they had lost it, and he had taken it away. Which thing GOD neuer doth indeede although he make vs to thinke so for a time: for alwaies he holdeth his hand vnder his chil∣dren in their falles, yt they lie not stil as other doe which are not regene∣rate. And this is the difference be∣twixt Gods children, which are re∣generate and electe before al times in Christ, and the wicked castawayes: that the elect lye not still continually in their sin, as doe the wicked, but at the length do returne againe by rea∣son of Gods seede, which is in them
hid as a sparkle of fire in the ashes: as we may see in Peter, Dauid, Paul, Ma∣rie Magdalen, and others. For these (I meane Gods children) God hath made all thinges in Christ Iesu: to whom he hath giuen this dignitie, that they should be his inheritance and spouses. This our inheritour Christ Iesus, God with God, light of light, coeternall & consubstantiall with the father and with the holy Ghost, to the ende that he might be∣come our husband (because the hus∣band and the wife must be one body and flesh) hath taken our nature vp∣on him, communicating with it and by it in his owne person, to vs all his children, his diuine maiestie, (as Peter sayth) and so is become fleshe of our flesh,2. Pet. 1. and bone of our bones substantially, as we are become flesh of his fleshe, and bone of his bones spiritually: al that euer we haue per∣teining
to him, yea euen our sinnes, as all that euer he hath, perteining vnto vs, euen his whole glorie. So that if sathan should summon vs to answere in our debtes, and sinnes, in that the wife is no sutable person, but the husbande, we may well bid him euer his action against our hus∣band Christ, and he will make him a sufficient answere. For this end (I meane yt we might be coupled & maried thus to Christ, and so be certaine of saluation, & at peace with God in our consciences) God hath giuen his holye worde, which hath two partes (as now the children of God doe consist of two men:The law pertai∣neth to the olde man: and the Gos∣pel to the new man.) the one part of Gods word being proper to the old man, and the other parte of Gods worde being proper to the newe man. The parte properly perteining to the olde man is the lawe: the part properly pertei∣ning
to the newe man, is the gospell. What the lawe is.The law is a doctrine which com∣maundeth and forbiddeth, requiring doing, and auoiding. Under it there∣fore are contained al precepts, threat∣nings, promises vpon conditions of our doing and auoiding▪ &c. What the Gos∣pel is.The Gospel is a doctrine which alwaies offereth and giueth, requi∣ring on our behalf, not as of worthi∣nesse or as a cause, but as a certificate vnto vs, and therefore vnder it are contained all the free and sweete pro∣mises of God: as I am the Lorde thy God, &c. In those that be of yeares of dis∣cretion it requireth faith,The con∣science feared & beaten downe with the terror of Gods iudgmēt against sin, may not look vpon the lawe, but fle to the Gospel for relief & cōfort. not as a cause, but as an instrument whereby we our selues may be certaine of our good husband Christ, and of his glo∣rie: and therefore when the consci∣ence feeleth it selfe disquieted for feare of Gods iudgement against sin,
she may in no wise looke vpon the doctrine perteining to the olde man, but to the doctrine onely that per∣teineth to the newe man, in it not looking for that which it requireth, that is, faith, because we neuer be∣leeue as we should: but onely on it which it offereth, and which it giueth, that is, on Gods grace and eternall mercie and peace in Christe. So shall she be in quiet when she looketh for it altogether out of her selfe in gods mercy in Christ Iesu: in whose lap if she lay her head with S. Iohn,Iohn. 13. Whē the consci∣ence is quiet & at peace with God, the law ser∣ueth on∣ly to kepe downe the olde man then is she happie, and shall finde quietnesse indeede. When she feeleth her selfe quiet, then (in Gods name) let her looke on the lawe, and vpon such thinges as it requireth, thereby to bridle and keepe downe the olde Adam, to stay the Goliah: from whō she must needes keepe the sweete pro∣mises, being the bedde wherein her
spouse & she meete & lie together. For as the wife will keepe her bed onely for her husband, although in other things she is contented to haue fel∣lowship with others, as to speake, sit, eate, drinke, go, &c. so our consciences which ar Christs wiues, must needs keepe the bed, that is gods sweet pro∣mises al onely for our selues and our husband, there to meete together, to imbrace and laugh together, and to be ioyfull together. If sinne, the law, the diuell, or any thing else woulde creepe into the bedde and lie there, then complaine to thy husbande Christ, & forthwith thou shalt see him play Phinees part. Thus my dear∣ly beloued,Num. 25. I haue giuen you in fewe wordes, a summe of all the Di∣uinitie which a Christi∣an conscience can∣not want. FINIS.
The Table. AN introduction to prayer. fol. 17. A meditatiō con∣cerning prayer. 49. A meditation vpon the Lords prayer. 68. Priuate prayers for the morning, euening, & o∣ther times of the day 132 VVhen you avvake out of your sleepe. eod. VVhen you beholde the day light. 134 VVhen you arise. 135. VVhen you apparell your selfe. 136. VVhen you are made readie to beginne the day vvithall. 138. Cogitations meet to be∣gin the day vvithal. 139 VVhen you goe foorth of the dores. 143 VVhen you are going ann iourney. 145 VVhen you are about to receiue your meat. 148 In the meale time. 150 After your meat. 152 VVhen you come hom againe. 155 At the Sunne going dovvne. 156 VVhen the candles be light. 158 VVhen you make your selfe vnready. 160 VVhen you enter into your bed. 161 VVhen you feele sleepe to be comming. 163 A general confession of sins, vvith other prayers for the morning and eu∣ning, to be vsed in fami∣lies and publike assem∣blies. 165 An other confession of sinnes. 167 A prayer to be said in the morning. 169 An other. 172 An other. 173 An euening prayer. 176 An other. 181 An other 183 A prayer for remission
of sinnes. 185 A prayer for the true knovvledge of the myste∣rie of our redemption in Christ. 197 A forme of thankesgi∣uing for our redemption, and a prayer for the strength and increase of faith. 200 A thankesgiuing to God for his greate bene∣fites. 202 A prayer for true mor∣tification. 205 A meditation for the exercise of true mortifi¦cation. 211 A meditation of the cōming of Christ to iudg∣ment, and of the revvard both of the faithfull and vnfaithfull. 215 A meditation of the life euerlasting, the place vvhere it is, & the incō∣parable ioyes therof. 222 An other meditation of the blessed state & fe∣licitie of the life to come▪ 231 A meditation of the presence of God. 238 A meditation of the prouidence of God. 240 A meditation of Gods povver, beautie, goodnes, &c. 245 A meditation concer∣ning the sober vsag of the body that it may be sub∣iect and obedient to the soule. 249 An other meditation concerning the sober vsag of the body and pleasures in this life. 252 A meditation of death and the commodities it bringeth. 256 A meditation vppon the passiō of our sauiour Iesu Christ. 259 A prayer to Christe crucified. 267 A Prayer to Christ as∣cended and reining in glorie. 268
A prayer for true re∣pentance. 272 A praier for the strength & increase of faith. 273 A prayer for the true sense and feeling of Gods fauour and mercie in Christ. 274 A prayer against our spirituall enimies, the di∣uell, the vvorlde and the flesh. 279 A praier for the present helpe in tentation. 281 Remedies against sin∣full motions and tenta∣tions. 284 A prayer for the a∣uoyding of Gods heauie vvrath and vengeance for our sinnes. 286 An other. 263 A prayer to be said of such as suffer any kind of crosse. 595 A prayer of the affli∣cted for the profession of gods vvord. 299 A prayer to God the father▪ the sonne, and the holy ghost. 302 A thankesgiuing to God the father, the sonne & the holy ghost. 307 A prayer to God, for his heple and protection against the obstinat ene∣mies of the truth. 310 A prayer for the affli∣cted and persecuted vn∣der the tirannie of An∣tichrist. 312 A prayer to be said be∣fore the preaching of gods vvord. 314 A prayer to be saide after the preaching of gods vvord. 316 A prayer to be said be∣fore the receiuing of the communion. 323 A thankesgiuing af∣ter the receiuing of the communion. 326 A lamentation of a sinner afflicted in consci∣ence for his offēces. 327 A prayer for the sicke, 338
A prayer to be said at the houre of death. 339 A prayer for a vvomā vvith child. 343 A psalm to be said in the time of any common plague, sicknesse, or other crosse and visitation of God. 346 A Psalme of thankes∣giuing for deliuerāce frō the plague or any other kinde of sicknesse, or affli∣ction. 350 Prayers to be saide be∣fore meales & after. 354 An other prayer to be said before meales. 455 An other 356 A thankesgiuing after meales. 357 An other thankesgi∣uing after meales. 359 An other. 360 An other. 361 Prayers, commonly called Lidleys Prayers, with certaine godly additions. A Confessiō of sins. 362 A confession of sins, and a prayer for the re∣mission thereof. 374 A prayer for the true knovvledge and vnder∣standing of the vvord of God. 380 A prayer for the lea∣ding of a godly life. 383 A prayer for the deli∣uerance from sin, & to be restored to Gods grace & fauour againe. 387 A prayer necessarie to be said at all times. 489 A prayer for grace and remisson of sinnes. 392 Prayers taken out of the first Psalme. 395 Prayers taken out of the second Psalme. 400
A prayer vvhich M. Iohn Bradford said a lit∣tle before his death in Smithfield. 404 The Letanie. 409 For the Queenes ma∣iestie. 420 For Bishops and mini∣sters of the Church. 421 For raine. 421 For faire vvether. 422 In the time of dearth & famine. 423 In the time of vvarre. 423 In the time of any cō∣mō plage or sicknes. 424 For the strength and comfort of the holy ghost. 425 For sure hope and tr taste of euerlasting life. 426 For the true knovve∣ledg of god & his vvord, & a life agreeable to the same. ibid. For the strength & in∣crease of faith. 427 For a godlie life. 428 For the true perseue∣rance and assured hope of eternall life. 429 A prayer for the obtei∣ning of our petitiōs. 429 A godly instruction, conteining the summe of all the Diuinitie necessa∣rie for a Christian con∣science. 431 FINIS. Imprinted at London by Henrie Middleton, dwelling in Fleete∣streate at the signe of the Faulcon.
