4268.5 29633209 28049
A Paumflet compyled by G. C. To master Smyth and Wyllyam G. Prayenge them both, for the loue of our Lorde, To growe at last to an honest accorde. THe fynest wyt that is alyue Cannot deuyse by tunge nor pen The spytefull malyce to descryue That reygneth now i dyuerse mē We maye perceyue by them that stryue For castynge out a carde of ten That charyte is set at nought So reygneth malyce in mannes thought. Whych thynge doth force me thus to wryte Concernynge the vncharyte Of two that nowe with hatefull spyte Do blame eche other openly To none of bothe I owe despyte Ner this is none Apology For nether parte: but stryfe to stent Is grounde of all myne argument. The stryfe I speake of, is betwyxt One master Smyth & Wyllyam G. Theyr wrytynges are confusely myxt With bytynge wordes, and vylany In eche of them, a wyll is fyxt To maynteyne styll his vanyte Which hath a very feble grounde Wherwith his enemy to confounde. All this began, fyrst by a knaue I wote not who, that wrote a trolle Wherin he dyd but rage and raue He knewe full lytle of saynt Poule Which wrytte the loue that men shuld haue And for one dyd thys trolle controlle Lo master Smyth a boke hath pende This tryflynge troller to defende. Some saye, it was for flatterye And some do saye, it was for mede For to aduaunce him selfe therby Such men (they saye) do soonest spede That least can skyll of modesty But what he meant, therby in dede If I shall iudge, as I do take it Naught but malyce, made him make it. For thorow out his raylyng booke Of charyte no worde is spoken Tyll all his malyce purpose tooke For malyce, forthwith wylbe wroken And whoso lyst therin to looke Maye iudge him well, by his owne token A raylynge knaue, for to defende Is, in no wyse man to commende. If master Smyth had marked well The purpose of that foolyshe dawe Which trolde vpon the Lorde Crumwell Wyth ragged ryme, not worth a strawe He myght haue founde that wretch rebell Both ageynst God, and all good lawe And not haue blamed Wyllyam G. For blamynge his vncharyte. But when W. G. dyd fele the prycke So threattyng and malycious I wonder not though he dyd kycke For why, it was too sclaunderous And for the kycke, was somwhat quycke Lo, he agayne as enuyous A testy aunswere strayte dyd wryte With checke for checke, & spyte for spyte. But of this stryfe, the chefe effect That maynteyned is so knappyshly Is rysen by the great suspect Of popyshnes and heresye One sayth the other is infecte With such a spyce of knauery I wyll not iudge, which it shulde be But bothe theyr wrytynges are to se. These sortes are both to dyscommende In any man, where they be founde For papistes do nought els pretende But Christes glorye to confounde And Heretykes, God them amende Haue but a very feble grounde If that they preache, that is forbod Or dyffer from the worde of God. For heresye is nothynge elles But swaruyng from the true belefe As holy wrytte expresly telles And he is worse then any thefe That thereagaynst in ought rebelles Or he that seketh his relefe Of false goddes, and not of Christ Is no les▪ then an Antechrist. But he that hathe a popyshe harte And wyll not vnto Christ be wonne He seekyth not, but to subuert All that the kynge hathe well begonne No reason maye hys wyll conuert But he wyll do, as he hathe done Wyth tothe and nayle, for to vpholde Hys blynde belefe, and errors olde. I wryte not thys, meanyng therbye That master Smyth is of that sorte Ner I iudge not that willyam G. Is soche as Smyth dothe hym reporte But wryte my mynde wyth charyte The partyes bothe for to exhorte That he that fyndes hym in the cryme May fyrst recante, hys raylynge ryme. But thys is for to dyscommende In master Smyth aboue althynge That he so rashlye wolde defende A braynles buz, in hys wrytynge And afterwarde styll forth contende Wyth malyce, and wyth threatenyng Agaynst that poore man wylliam G. Farre from all godlye charyte. Wrestyng the scriptures as hym lyst For his owne purpose out of frame But he that stryfe doth so resyst That perfect worde, he doth defame Wherin our helth doth whole consyst For that is it, the very same That teacheth vs the loue and drede To God and to the Kynge our hede. Perchaunce yt Smyth wyll take it yll That I iudge him so openly No force for that, it shall not skyll For he is knowen suffyciently But I protest, that in my wyll I meane nothynge malycyously But yet men must, for all his heate Repute him hotte, that see him sweate. Lykewyse the other dyd offende Wyth wrytyng so impacientlye For that is no waye to amende An harte that cankers inwardly But he his cause, shulde styll defende Wyth mekenes and wyth charyte And not wyth malyce nor despyght But suffer mekely wronge and ryght Euyn as the Gospell dothe vs teache Whych is oure chefe profession For Paule hym selfe dyd alwaye preache That, for the chefe confession Of christen heartes, to make thē stretche Theyr fayth vnto Christs passyon The only entry into healthe All other entryes are but stealth. Lo, thus I fynde them both to blame Wyshynge to eche with all myne heart An honest mendement, wythout shame And praye to Christ that he conuert Oure iudgementes all into such frame That they and we, in euery parte Wythouten grudge, debate or grefe Maye fyrmly stande in one belefe. Whych teacheth vs to loue and dread Hym that hathe power vnder God I mean the kynge that is our head That here in earth doth beare the rod Of true iustyce in Chrystes steade▪ By precyse wordes we be forbod Hym to wythstande, or to wythsaye In euery cause we must obaye. For whome, as for our only guyde Oure greatest helpe and chefest staye That daylye doth for vs prouyde To saue vs sounde wythout decaye In warre and peace on euery syde Wyth one accorde let vs all praye To sende hys grace, vs here amonge Honour, encrease, good lyfe and longe. God saue the kynge. ¶Imprynted at London by Rycharde Bankes. Cumpriuilegio ad imprintendum solum. And be to sell in Pater noster rowe, at the sygne of the Roose,
