4493.7 24298566 27505
TO ALL CHRISTIAN PEOPLE to whome these presents shall come to be read: and Vice-chancellor of this Vni∣uersitie of Cambridge sendeth greeting. Know yee▪ that I the said Vice-chancellor, with mine assistant the Right Worshipfull  and one of his Maiesties Iustices of peace within the Vniuersitie and Towne of Cambridge, and the precincts thereof, haue admitted and allow∣ed  in the Countie of Cambridge  to keepe a common ale-house or tipling-house within the town of  aforesaid, hauing before taken bond of h said  by recognizance, in the summe of ten pounds of good and lawfull money of England, and of  of in the countie of Cambridge and of  of the same Towne & Countie sureties of the said  in the seuerall summes of fiue pounds a peice of the like good and lawfull money of England, in the name of our Soueraigne Lord the Kings Highnes that now is, for the due obseruation of all and singular the statutes and acts of Parliament in that behalfe hertofore made and prouided, for the good ordering of common ale-houses, and also for the obseruing and keeping the clauses and articles here vnder written. In wit∣nesse whereof I haue vnto these presents set my seale of office, to continue during the good will and pleasure of me and my successor. Giuen at Cam∣bridge the  day of  in the  yeare of the raigne of our Soueraigne Lord IAMES by the grace of God of England, France, and Ire∣land, King, defender of the Faith, &c. and of Scotland the I. That you suffer no schollers, no neighbours children, nor seruants, nor any dwelling in your parish to tipple in your house. II. That you suffer none to tipple in your house on the Sabbath, day nor fe∣stiuall day at the time of sermon or seruice, or at any time after nine of the clocke at night. III. That you suffer no carding, dicing, or other gaming in your house. IIII. That if any vagabonds or suspicious persons come to your house, you shall acquaint the officers therwith, and so shal you likewise do if any goods be offered in your house to be sold by any. V. That you suffer no drunkennesse, nor dissolute disorder in your house; and if any happen to be, to acquaint the Constables of your Towne and parish with it, that the offender may be punished. VI. That you drawe your beere by ale-quart or pint, and not by Iugges nor cups, and sell the best after the rate of a quart a pennie, and the worst after the rate of an halfe-pennie the quart. VII. That neither your selfe nor any in the house doe sell, or offer to sale any Tobacco.
