5865 99844506 9326
AN Armor of Proofe, brought from the Tower of Dauid, to fight against Spannyardes, and all eni∣mies of the trueth, By R. C. The name of the Lord is a strong Tower: the righteous run vnto it, and are exalted.Pro. 18. 10. Imprinted at London by G. Simson and W. White. 1596.
To the right Honorable Gilbert Talbot, Earle of Shrewesburie, Lord Talbot, Furniuall, Strange of Black∣meare, Verdon and Louetoft, Knight of the most noble order of the Garter: Roger Cotton wy∣sheth grace and peace in Christ Iesus. THe Lord our God (Right Ho∣norable) who in great mercy hath caused by his spirit, the ho∣lie Scriptures to be written for our learning: hath also com∣manded, that all men shoulde studdy therin both day & night: that so by the helpe of the same spirite, men might write them in their hartes. The ende hereof is, that thereby they may recouer the Image of that new man, which againe is created after the like∣nesse of God in knowledge and holinesse. And while the people of Israel obserued this: they in∣ioyed peace throughout their borders, and great plen∣tie within their Pallaces. And such feare God strocke into the harts of their enemies round about, that none durst stirre against them. But at what time they cast off this, and chose new Gods, and made no account of the knowledge of the true God, nor of the learned, that
should to them the same God teach: Then was there warre in the gate, and no peace to any that went in or out, but great troubles arose to all the inhabitantes of the earth. For nation destroyed nation, and Cittie de∣stroyed Cittie, and God troubled them with all maner of aduersities. This standing thus, and God remaining vnchange∣able, I assure my selfe of all kingdomes (to whom the worde of God is sent) this may be spoken. That they, Elias, I meane, the men like Elias: Iosua, Samuel, Dauid, Daniel, and such: whose delightes are in the law of the Lord, are the Horses and Chariots of a kingdome. O noble Sir, I beseech you therefore consider well therof: and let those gracious words of good king Asa, when ten hundreth thousand came against him: and those of King Abiah, when eight hundreth thousand came against him: and those of Ioab the Captayne, when the Ammonites & Aramites came against Dauid, be writ most sure in your noble hart: that so they may proceede from your lippes, to the incouragement of the common sort; whose hartes often fayle in rumors of troubles. I know your Honor needeth not to be taught, how Nobilitie giuen to the holy worde, must be the strongest pillers of the Church. Israel through all ages so stoode firme: but otherwyse fell. Iosua being equall to a Prophet, conquered the land through his constancie and courage in diuinity. But af∣ter him great contempt of Religion arose: wherefore much of their land againe they lost: and greatly trou∣bled was that state, vntill the dayes of Samuel. For as they often fell away, so the Lord often sould them into
the handes of spoylers: whereby in the ende that state became Ichabod, no glory. For the glory of God the space of seauen moneths departed from them: yet by meanes of good Samuel, faithful in religion, was againe setled in Israel: and so by him, the state was well helde vp all his dayes: who although he descended from re∣bellious Corah, yet is he for Leuy a conquerer of better then Sichemites: and as he, so, or more, did that noble and valiant Dauid, euen by diuinitie, recouer wholy the land first conquered by Iosua: and Dauids title is not so euident for a warryer, as it is for the pleasant in songs to Israel. For to this day, most sweete is the voyce of that sweete singer, to all that rightly vnder∣stand his tune. But he that should vnderstand him to the full, had need of the spirite of an Apostle. A true patterne indeed (Right honorable) of true Nobilitie. But yet full soone was this true patterne lost: where∣vpon ten partes of that stately kingdome became in short time, not onely Izrael and Loruchama, but Loam∣my also. For full often did the Lord visit them with the sword, aswell at home, deuouring one an other, as by the enemy abroad: and in the ende suffered them to be carryed quite away by the Kings of Asshur. And God tooke no pittie: but euen as they had cast off him from being their Lord, so he cast of them from being his people. Now as Ieroboam the sonne of Nebat, of the vertu∣ous Ioseph, is set forth as a patterne for discommenda∣tions to all that followed his wicked steps: so noble Dauid of the house of Iuda, is the patterne set forth for commendation to all that had care to walke his godly
pathes. Therefore no further in story for sample to true nobilitie need I here to seeke. Yet in so much as the fame of one of your owne most noble progenatours soundeth in our eares to this day, I trust it shall of none be thought amisse, yf I lay him before your Honorable eyes, as an other example. That noble Earle IOHN TALBOT is the man: who nei∣ther liued as languishing in idlenes, riot, or excesse: nor died as hauing surfited with vaine pleasures, and fonde delyghtes: but of manly woundes receiued in open feelde, after he had valiantly warred foure & twentie yeeres in defence of his Princes right: a death and life most honorable to them that are truely noble and va∣liant. Euen so this worthy peere, togeather with his va∣liant Sonne the Lord Lisle, in that sore battle fought at Castilion in Fraunce, their sweete lyues did ende: where a monument of the Earle remayneth vnto this day, and this inscription folowing, ingrauen thervpon. Heere lyeth the right noble Knight Iohn Talbot Earle of Shrewsburie, Earle of Washford, Waterforth and Valence, Lorde Talbot of Goodritche and Vrchingfeilde: Lorde Strange of Blackmeare, Lord Verdon of Alton, Lord Crum∣well of Wingfeilde, Lord Louetoft of Worsoppe, Lord Fur∣niuall of Sheffeilde, and Lord Falconbridge, Knight of the most noble orders of S. George, S. Michael, and the Golden Fleece, Great Marshall to King Henrie the sixt of his Realme of Fraunce, who dyed at the battle of Castilion neare Burdeaux, Anno. 1453. Now as this, and other your noble ancestors, haue been alwayes at home most honorable for their fayth∣fulnes towardes the Crowne of Englande: and for
their seruice both at home, and abrode against the enemie, in so much that euen the very name of the Talbot to them, hath been tirrible: so no doubt there is, but that your selfe will shew your selfe, in all nobilitie, as descended from such. A most noble warryer, and faithfull subiect vnto his annoynted Prince was he, whose example therein you follow. Therefore one poynt more I beseech your honor, learne of that noble Dauid your patterne. And as you and your honorable fathers haue followed him in the other two most ho∣norable quallities of true nobillitie, so let your selfe surmount them all in the third. The point desired, is, his great loue and zeale to the Church & house of God: which was such, as no scoffes of wicked contemners could stay him from preferring of the same: but by how much more he seemed as a foole, and vaine in the sight of such, for so doing, by so much more cared not he, to become more vile, & low in his owne eyes, if by such meanes, he might do good thereto. Therefore if it might please your honor to follow him in this, as you haue in the other: you shall be sure that honour which he there speaketh off, will follow you with great increase. And moreouer, then shall that speech which good Abygall vsed vnto him your noble patterne, take full effect in you. For the Lord hath not onely promised to make my Lord a sure house, because he is ready to helpe his noble Deborah to fight the Lords battels, and because he is so faithfull towards his annoynted, that no euill can be found in him: but also for the third point, that which is much more; euen the soule of my Lord shall be bound vp
in the bundle of life with the Lord your God, and the soule of your enemies shall God cast out, as out of the middle of a Sling. Thus, being euery way ouer bould with your ho∣norable patience, I craue pardon. I am no Scholler, but a Draper: therefore not able to contriue my spea∣ches in such sort, as willingly I would. My trust is, your honor will the rather pardon me, and accept the affecti∣on of my hart, and not weigh the rudenesse of my pen. I was borne in Whitchurch; which, as I thinke, is one of your honors principall Lordships: where my Ance∣stors haue of long time beene poore well willers vnto your noble Progenitors, as at this present my eldest brother there, and we the rest of his bretheren here in London, are to your honorable selfe. These things con∣sidered, together with your honorable inclination to∣wards good things, made me bolde to make choise of you, to be the patron of this my smal worke of medita∣tion against the enemy. I beseech your honor accept thereof, according as the matter requireth, and not as the skill of the writer deserueth. The matter is good, though rudely handeled. That God, who is able to do both for your Honora∣ble selfe, and that vertuous Lady the Countice your wife, far exceeding abundantly aboue al that I can aske or thinke, giue vnto you both, all honour, with increase thereof heere in this lyfe, and in the life to come, that crowne of glory, which he hath prepared for all those that loue and honoure him in Christ Iesus. Amen. Your honors to command, R. COTTON.
To the christian Reader. FOr as much (deare Christian) as many weake ones are often terrified with ru∣mors of troubles more then they should, and many others lesse regarde them then they ought: I thought good to put foorth a fewe rude verses, of my poore Meditation therevpon: partly to incourage the weake and feeble in faith towards God, and partly to call the rashe hardy, to learne better the cause thereof, if any such befall vs. As some times God reuengeth sinnes, where men little looke for punishment: yea and full often and many wayes God striketh, when sildome the strocken, consider whose hand it is, or for what cause it is. Therefore my small worke tendeth to shew vnto such, who it is that striketh, and the cause why so many and sundry wayes we are strocken: I trust none of right modestie can dispise my good meaning herein. And as I would gladly accept the like incouragement from others, so I trust this of mine, shall be taken in good part: and somewhat mooue some vnto meditation vpon Gods word, which is an helpe ready to all that come with care to seeke saluation: to which worde, I pray God giue you grace to flie vnto in all distresse, as vnto your chiefest hould and Tower. Amen. Yours in the Lord, R. C.
An Armour of proofe, brought from the Tower of Dauid, to fight agaynst Spannyardes. WHen God of hosts in eighty eight had brought,Ier. 25. 8. 9. & Esa. 10. 5. 6. an host of men, our Countrey to annoy: in that distresse the Lord by vs was sought,Haba. 1. 6. whereby our woes were turned then to ioy. But yet full true to vs may this be sayde, in your distresse,Esa. 26. 16. you onely seeke my ayde. For then in deede, and only then we seeke, when troubles great, and greeuous plagues aryse: But those once past,Iere. 2. 20. & 5. 23. no promise made, we keepe, nor yet by them can learne to be more wyse: But as the Sow in fylth agayne doth wallow,Esai. 1. 5 so we our sinnes of former tymes do swallow.2. Pet. 2. 22 For great and small,Iere. 8. 6. no sinnes of olde forbeare. No rich,Pro. 20. 9. no poore, can say in hart, I ioy: For garment whyte,Reue. 19. 8. & 3. 5. which I now dayly weare, but steede thereof,Esai. 3. 16. to the ende. we faigne and frame each toy, each toy, yea toyes and tayles, such to behold, with wyer and heare,1. Pet. 3. 3. & 1. Tim. 2. 9. that monsters be we would.
Yet few there be whose hartes consider well, what sinnes are wrought each day by men of might. No one there is that thinkes how God doth tell, his owne misdeedes he worketh day and nyght:Psal. 56. 8. yet doth the Lord the least of them regarde,Hebr. 2. 2. & Pro. 24. 12 and will in time, giue each his full rewarde. But how,Iudges. 2. 11. to 15. to whip by Spayne, as some men deeme? Not so be sure,Iosu. 23. 15. & 24. 20. those Rods would proue to sore: For neuer yet, the Lord his solde I weene, to sworde of foe,Iere. 25. 6. & Deu. 4. 26. 27 & Psal. 78. 58 to 63. vnles Gods they had store. But rather with his owne most gentle hand, he hath and will still beat a sinfull land. But wilt thou know what is the sinne of sinnes:Pro. 13. 13. & Iere. 6. 10. to 21. & 7. 23. 30. & 8. 9. 11. chap. & Rom 1. 28. Iudg. 2. It is contempt of Gods most holy worde: for that cast off, Idolatrie begins, false Gods then sought, God draweth out his sword, his sword? yea all his plagues therewith are sent, when on false Gods the mindes of his are bent.Leui. 26. & Deu.. 28. Alas,Iere. 5. 7. how then can we escape his hand? Haue not all sortes his holy worde off cast? Not so,Of Ohim, Zim, & Iem, reade Esai. 13. 21. & 34. 11. to ende. for then nought els but plagues in land, and it to ly both desolate and wast. Wast? nay worse: for Ohim therein then should dwel, yea Zim and Iem in stead of men to tell.
For wilt thou see for this,2. King. 25. & 2. Cho. 36. what God once wrought on his owne seate, Ierusalem of fame? In dust she lyeth, by Babel first so brought: once buylt agayne: yet Rome hath spoylde the same. Too greeuous were her harmes all to be tolde,Ezra, Nehe∣miah, Aggay, & Math. 24. & Luke. 21. she lyeth in dust, that glittered so with golde. Euen shee, whose beautie shone so cleare and bryght, that all the worlde,Lamen. 2 15. Perfection did her call: Yea,Psal. 48. 2. & Lamen. 2. 15. shee, the ioy of all that were vpright, none such there was, nor neuer like there shall: yet downe she is,Dan. 9. 27. & Math. 24. & Luk. 21. 20. to 34. and neuer shall be buylt: thou mayest so see in Gods booke, if thou wylt. And so Aholah sister hers lykewyse, before her long,Ezek. 23. 4. with Asshurs rod was whypt: for that new goddes amongst them did aryse,2. King. 17. Gods worde cast off,Micha. 6. 16. and Omries lawes well kept, from Ahabs house their manners still they sought:Esai. 28. and Ezek. 23. and Ier. 3. & Hos. wherfore to dust, their glorious crowne was brought And so in dayes of Iudges, long before, the Lord his solde,Iudg. 2. to spoylers rounde about: because their goddes they dayly did adore, and praysed them, whom God had bid thrust out: but quite forgot the Lord, who did redeeme their neckes from thrall: him did they not esteeme.
And hath not this of vs yet taken holde? Not full I hope: for though great store therebe who make them Gods of wealth and wedge of gold,Iob. 31. 24. & 1. Tim. 6. 17. & 2. 3. 4. of lustes of flesh, and pleasures of the eye: All those who loue their wealth or pleasure more then they do God,Math. 6. 24. to them,Luke. 16. 13. Gods they are sure.Phelip. 3. 19. But yet this sinne on all hath not layde holde, For though on some, yet many more there bee, who neuer sought to Gods yet made of mould,Deut. 4. 19. or Sunne or Starres:Psal. 65. 2. for such ne heare nor see, To one they call,Psal. 19. and Deut. 4. 10. & Psal. 147. 19. 20. who can their sute well heare, and doth to them by worde and workes appeare. To God alone we seeke in hope to finde,Psal 50. 15. by meanes of Christ,Math. 18. 19 eternall sonne of his, who did our sinnes and foes to tree fast binde,Colo. 2. 14. 15 when he on earth Gods statutes none did mis:Psal. 40. 6. 7. 8 yet death he tooke,Heb. 10. 5. to 11. the wages due for sinne, and so by death,Rom. 6. 23. Heb. 2. 14. spoyld him that death brought in. Who after death,Iohn. 17. 5. & Luke. 24. 26. all glorie was to haue: which earst he had with God before all time, and there doth sit,1. Ioh. 2. 1. 2. & Heb. 4. 14. & 7. 24. 25. & 9. & 10. & Iohn. 17. in shape of man to craue, the lyke for all that are of him true vine. Wherefore by him our prayers we present, which are to God a sweete and pleasing scent.
We maruell much what foolysh doults do meane, to fall to blockes,Seeing God hath sworne that euery knee shal how to him. or call to Saincts on hie: since none on earth or heauen yet doth raigne, but God alone,Esai. 45. 23. who can our thoughtes espie: For Abram knoweth vs not, doth EsaiEsai. 41. 26. say,Psal. 65. 2. & 139. 2. and Iacob wanteth eares to heare vs pray.Esai. 63. 16. That Virgin pure,Yet she needed a sauiour, & reioy∣ced in him, euen in Christ her sonne & Lord. most blessed was in deede, in wose small wombe the Lord of lyfe did dwell: yet for to know what time we stand in neede, she hath no skill, the Scripture playne doth tell: for God alone,Psal. 65. 2. our prayers all doth heare: wherefore to him by Christ we still draw neare.Heb. 10. 21. 23. We holde them fooles that labour so in vayne, to call on Paul,Seeing the lord hath cōmaunded to call on him. psal. 50. 15. 1. or Peter, or on Pope: for had they eyes, saint Iohn hath tolde them playne, that who now sinnes,Ioh. 2. 1. 2. Christ now must be his hope: for he now only mediator is, cause Arons trade our sinnes could not dismis.Heb. 10. 1. 2. We haue Gods worde to teach vs fayth and feare,We learne not from ye precepts of men, as those in Esay and the Papistes do. we learne by it, all secrets meete to know. No writ of man, to vs yet is so deare, or like esteemd Gods councels vs to shew: We are most sure that God by it must gayne, such wanderyng soules as must with Christ heere raine.
We haue the Sacramentes in perfect sort,Math. 26. 26 27. &. 1. Cor. 11. 23. to 30. as Christ him selfe at first did them ordayne. Our foes are false,It is the spirit that quickeneth, the flesh profy∣teth nothing. who giue vs this report, that we holde not, that Christ doth there remayne. But how? not Really, as they do teach: but there by fayth,Iohn. 6. 63. as learned heere do preach.For the heauens contayne his bo∣dy vntyl the end of the worlde. Actes. 1. Yf this be true, that all Gods trueth we holde, what neede we then of Spayne to be afrayde: For God I say, hath neuer yet such solde to sworde of foe: but still hath sent them ayde. The trueth we haue,Now frō south, as of olde from north, but not to haue the lyke successe. yet therein walke not wee, wherefore oft times God hisseth for a bee. In deede? Then must we all looke for the same, for few there be, that will of God do seeke, but all degrees, contemne his holy name: Few rich or poore,Ier. 17. 21. to ende, & Esai. 58. 13. 14. one Saboth true do keepe: and all are bent their owne willes to obey, but will of God, we seeke it no one day. For whereas we should spend our lyues and time,Iosh. 1. 8. & Iohn. 5. 39. in Gods owne Booke, his will to see therein: great store there be,Ephe. 5. 17. that neuer sought one lyne, to write in hart,Deut. 6. 6. that so they might know him. And so Gods will of vs not being knowne,Iere. 6. 19. & Rom. 1. 28. he castes vs off, to follow wayes our owne.
O Englande,Be instructed o Ierusalem; and let not the great thinges of the lawe, which for thy sake are written, be coun∣ted of thee as strange thinges, Iere. 6. 8. and Hose. 8. 12. then consider well thy state, oft reade Gods worde, and let it beare chiefe sway within thy hart, or els thou canst not scape the wrath of God: for he will surely pay. Yea diuers rods the Lord of Hostes doth vse, to chasten such,Reade Leuit. 26. & Deut. 28. as do his worde refuse. His sworde thou knowest,Leuit. 26. 25. & Deut. 28. he threatened sore to draw, in eightie eight; but then he did thee spare: yet since that time, in thee great sinnes he saw: wherefore for thee great plagues he did prepare. The Pestilence through out thy coastes hath bin,Leui. 26. 25. & Deut. 28. 21. and now with sworde, to threat he doth begin. Thy land as hard as Brasse hath oft bin made.Leuit. 26. 19. & Deut. 28. 23. Thy heauens haue as Iron bin likewyse: they both conspier to stay their wonted trade, whereby to thee great darthes and famines ryse. Thy corne fayre growen, with blasting hath bin spoyld well gotten in, yet meldeaw hath it soyld. Thy Trees,Leuit. 26. 20. & Deut. 28. thy Vines, thy Cow, and clothing Sheepe: all fruitefull thinges, to thee oft fruiteles are, because with God,Iere. 5. 25. thou promise none dost keepe, thy feeldes and fayth,Iere. 2. 19. 20 & 5. 23. 25. through barrennes are bare: In steade of rayne, much dust abrode doth fly: for want of deaw,Deut. 28. 24. thy ground doth burned ly.
Thy Oxe and Cow with blaynes and murrens mad, thy Sheepe with rot destroyed oft haue bin: Thy house with fire, thy goodes thy foes haue had, thy land and right,Deut. 28. 31. the, vile oft tymes do win. Thy troubles great by law do dayly ryse,1. Cor. 6. 5. 6. 7. 8. because Gods worde can not yet make thee wyse. And for this cause opprest thou art with wrong,Deut. 28. 29. 33. yea pylde and polde by tythes, by toules, by rent, by Landlordes bad, who thinke thy Lease too long: by neighbours ill, to mischiefe that are bent. Thy owne bad minde to law oft moueth thee,1. Cor. 6. 8. and wilt not cease, tyll all be spent on fee. Thy foes and aduersaries dayly do aryse, God styrreth them thy troubles to increase:1. King. 11. 14 23. But good Dauid was so wyse. 2. Sam. 16 10. 11. And all for this, yet art thou not so wyse, to know that he doth make them breake thy peace: But rather thou the like for like dost lend,As would the sonnes of Ʒer∣uiah haue had Dauid to done to Shemei. whereas by them thou shouldst thy selfe amend. Thy Seruantes they rebellious be and nought, they fyltch, they steale, they rob, & seeke thy spoyle, in goodes and name,The wicked giue heede to false lyps, and a lyer harkeneth to the naughty tongue. pro 17. thy hinderance they haue sought they run & range, they daunce, and keepe a quoyle, Thy neighbours tongues by them are set on talke, for prate and heare they must, as they by walke.
And when a tale to some of them is tolde, they can well add,What good comes of these praters & tale bearers, reade Pro. 26. 20. 21. 22. and 1. Tim. 5. 13. to bring thee in disgrace: for thy deare name for nought, by them is solde, to many more that dwell in further place: And by and by as ware that rots with them, they make great hast to sell it other men. And thus the land with wicked tongues is fraught, whereby one may in maner playne descrne,Iame. 4. 11. 12 that Gods pure law by them is iudged naught:When ye wicked can do no other harme, then wyl they smyte with the tongue, as they did good Ieremie. ler. 18. 18. for els by it, to speake well they would learne. Wherefore as men from flesh do wysedome take, so fleshly rods do often times them wake. And what els more, for this cause dost thou feele? Thy body sicke with agues colde and hot,Leuit. 26. 16. & deut. 28. 22 with greeuous paynes from head downe to thy heele, because of this,Deut. 28. 35. doth fall vnto thy lot. Yet were it well, if bodyes payne were all: but soule for this is still in bondes and thrall. For it,They shal wan∣der from sea to sea, from north to south, to seeke the worde, but shall not finde it. Amo. 8. 12. & pro. 1. 20. to the ende. as blynde and lame doth range about, and plundged is in pitts of crosses store, and there doth lie, when Gods worde helpes not out: and so oft tymes with such floods is forlore, but iustly then to helpe doth it refuse, since oft it would, but thou wouldst not it vse.
And what now wantes of all Gods plagues to thee? now surely store;Reade Leuit. 26. all, and Deut. 28. all. there is yet more behinde. But yet this one I would thee wysh to see, the which to view, I pray thee be not blinde: the Spanyardes now with Armour braue them dight, in hope to finde thy fayth, but vayne and lyght. Remember then thy former loue and zeale, which thou to God,Reue. 2. 5. and to his worde didst beare: and let them now agayne with thee preuale: and so no force of forrayne shalt thou feare.Esai. 55. 7. None shall then moue thy Candlesticke from thee,eue. 2. 5. yf thou from it a lyght wilt take to see. But is there nothing els for to be don? Yes sure; we are to haue both Shylde and Speare, good Armour bright, with Arrowes, Bowes & Gon. These being had, we neede not Spayne to feare. But if thou trust in these,Iere. 17. 5. and strength of men, then know, as broken Reedes, shall all proue then. For woe to them that Egypts helpe do seeke,Esai. 31. 1. or trust in store of Horse, and Charrets strong, or wit of man:Iere. 17. 5. for none of these could keepe those anciant Townes, or yet their peace prolong: for noble peares of Zoan proued fooles:Esa. 19. 11. 13 yea so did all, that wrought by such like tooles.
Samarias Oxe, nor Bethels Calfe of golde,1. Kin. 12. 26. to the ende, & Hose. 8. 5. & Ezek. 23. 5. 7. 9. nor Ieroboams fine deuice for wit, could saue ten Tribes, when God had them once solde to Asshurs Rod, no helpe could saue from it: For all such wysedome, drunkennes became, yea all deuice of man did then proue lame. And so will now, if these we make our ayde: Wherefore agayne,Psal. 108. 12. & Iere. 17. 5. best helpe I will thee show. To turne to God,Esai. 55. 6. 7. & Mala. 3. 7 to 13. for so him selfe hath sayde: and that well done, will proue best fence I know: But how? to cast on mournyng for a day? No no,Esai. 58. such fastes with God can beare no sway. But this is it that shall thy Lord well please,Psal. 1. 1. 2. & Iohn. 5. 39. to reade his Booke with all delyght and care, both nyght and day,Ioshu 1. 8. 9. vntill thou know his wayes: and that his lawes within thy hart writ are:Deut. 6. 6. to 10. Which lawes well kept, for weapons haue the name, then for thy helpe, I will bring foorth the same. When Sinai hill,Exod. 19. 18. & Deu. 4. 10 and Horeb mount did burne,Deut. 33. 2. and thunder clappes made Seir with them to shake.Exod. 19. 13. 19. When trumpet shrill did sound,Exod. 19. 16. & 20. 18. & Ebr. 12. 20. 21 & loude blew horne, then Iacobs sonnes for feare thereof did quake: they quakde for feare,Deut. 33. 2. though God from Paran came, with lawes to saue all those that keepe the same.Deut. 4. 5 & 30. 15. to ende.
Yet thou deare frende needst not to feare or quake,Ebre. 12. 21. & Exo. 19. 16 & 20. 18. though Moses did, and thousands more with feare: for now no Sinai terror shall thee shake, because a Lambe in Sion doth appeare:Ebre. 12. 22. 23. 24. & Reue. 14. On Sion hill there standes a Lambe most meeke, who bids thee come in peace,Rom. 10. 4. Gods lawes to seeke. Ten thousand Sainctes did God attend,Deut. 33. 2. when hee those glorious Lawes,Exod. 20. in sayinges ten proposed: In which thy debts towardes God are all to see,Math. 22. 37. to 41. yea all thou owst towardes men are there inclosed, inclosed are thy duties all therein:Rom. 13. 8. to 11. the which to learne in time thou must begin.Ephe. 6. 4. & Pro. 22. 6. First then,Exod. 20. the Lord requires of thee to heare, that he alone from Egypts thrall thee brought. None other Gods before thee must appeare,What folly is in them that break this commande∣ment, reade Esai 44. and 46. nor none such serue, as may be made of nought: Of nought some Gods are made, which men do serue, as those of Wood and Stone, which fine they carue. But such,Deut. 4. 15. to 25. the Lord commandes thee not to make, nor any thing that may him represent:To whom wyll ye make me like or equal, or com∣pare me? that I shoulde be lyke vto him. Esay 46. in heauen or earth, or yet from sea or lake, one wyght to take, whereon thy mynde is bent: one wyght to take from none of these thou art, to bow vnto, or worshyp in thy hart.
For if thou doest, the Lord thy God is hee, a ielous God,Exod. 20. and therefore will not spare, to punysh sinnes to third and fourth degree, on those whose hartes on feigned gods set are: Wherefore on him,Blessed is ye man in whose hart are thy wayes. plas. 84. 5. let all thy hart be set, so mercies great to thousandes thou shalt get. Thou must not take the name of God in vayne,Bring the blas∣phemer without the hoast, and let all that heard him, put their hands vpon his head, and let all the congregatiō stone him. Exod 24. 14. but thereof speake with trembling and with feare: for if thou dost, he hath in store great payne, to power on thee, and those that do him teare: him teare by othes, or speaches els prophane, not meete to vse on his most holy name. The Saboth day remember well to keepe, both thou, thy Man, thy Mayde, thy Oxe thy Asse: Thy owne affayres in that day do not seeke,Thou shalt not folow thy owne wayes, nor seeke thy owne wyll, nor speake a vayne worde on my Saboth. ne from thy gate then let the Stranger passe: for in sixe dayes thou labour mayest full free, and God will cause thy blessignes store to bee.Esai. 58. 13. Lyke as him selfe, the heauens all did make, the earth, the sea, and all that is therein, within sixe dayes, and seuenth rest did take: so would he haue thee sample take by him: by him, the seuenth day was sanctified, in which thy soule on him must be imployed.
Vnto thy Parentes honour thou must giue.Exo. 20. 12. & Ephe. 6. 1. 2. Thou must not kill, nor whoredome once commit: to steale abhor, but labour hard, to liue. And witnes false to beare,Pro. 25. 18. let none thee get. To couet house, or wyfe, or man, or mayde, or oxe, or asse, of neighbours be afrayde. These are the sum,In burnt offe∣ring & sinne of∣fering haddest thou no pleasure. Then said I, lo, I come: a body hast thou orday∣ned me, & with∣in my hart thy lawes are writ, and of me it is written, that I shoulde do thy wyll, O God. psal. 40. and Heb. 10. of many more, all pure: of which poore store, though none canst thou fulfil, yet haue no feare: for all are writ most sure in Christ his hart, and he hath done Gods will. The will of God, that Lambe hath done for thee, and bids not feare, his preceptes all to see. These Lawes so pure (good freende) do thou esteeme aboue the golde, the pearle, the precious stone: all Iewels rare,The commaun∣dementes of the Lord are pure, and more to be desired thē gold, yea then much fine golde. psal. 19. 8. shall nothing then be seeme, thy Necke lyke them, yf thou wilt put them on: Yf all Gods lawes within thy hart thou hould, more strength will be, then can with pen be tould. Thy soule to God they will conuert and turne.The law of the Lord is perfect, conuerting the soule, it geueth lyght vnto the eyes, wysedome vnto the simple, sharpenes of wit vnto the dull of spirit. Thy sight so dim, they will make cleare and bright. Thy thoughtes so foule, they will consume and burne. This will they do, yf thou with them thee dight, yf dight thy selfe with armour this thou wilt, thy soule gaynst sinne shall dayly strong be built.
The Tower of Dauid they will be to thee,Thy necke is as the tower of Dauid, buylt for Defence, a thou∣and shyldes hang therein, & all the targettes of y• strong men. Can. 4. 4. wherein a thousand shyldes and targets strong: yea many weapons more therein will bee, for thy defence, gainst those that would thee wrong: That would thee wrong in soule, in goodes, or name, gaynst euery harme, a weapon for the same. A Shylde for Fayth it is,Ephe. 6. 16. both sound and good. A Sworde for Spirit,Ephe. 6. 17. a Plate for Brest well tryde. A Helmet for thy health, not made of Wood, but made of Right and Trueth, which will abyde. Which will abyde, thy health still to procure, yf to thy sydes thou wylt them fasten sure. Thy Loynes must be still gyrt with Veritie,Ephe. 6. 14. thy Feete still shod the Gospels peace to seeke:Ephe. 6. 15. 18 Thy shute to God in prayer each day let be, that from thy foes he would thee safely keepe: He would thee keepe, from ghostly foes great store, which thee to spoyle, seeke dayly more and more. Since then thou art each day (my freende) to fight,For this cause take vnto you the whole armor of God, that so ye may be able to resist in the euyll day. Eph. 6. 13. agynst the Flesh, the Worlde, and Ghostly foe: with armoure tryde, thy selfe each day bedight: so shalt thou from their harmes still safely goe, still safely shalt thou goe, gaynst fende so fell, yf all Gods lawes within thy hart do dwell.
Thus to conclude,For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against princi∣palities and po∣wers. Ephe. 6. 12. deare friend, be strong in God, put on the armour whole which he hath made: which is his worde, from ende to ende each iod, and so no foe thy strength shall then inuade: inuade can none, ne yet thy soule annoy, yf euery part thereof thou wilt inioy. Stande vp therefore,Haue not I com¦maunded thee, saying: be strong and of a good corage: feare not, for I the Lord thy God wil be with thee where so euer thou goest. losu. 1. 9. and corrage to thee take. Cast off thy sinne, and cloath thy selfe with right, and then no noyse of Spanniardes shall thee shake, or yet once quayle thy wonted force and might: Thy might, say I, no, God thy might hath bin, and still will be, if turne thou wilt to him. Returne thou then,Can. 6. 12. returne o Shulamyte, returne to God,Whom hast thou rayled on, & against whom hast thou exalted thy voyce, and lyfted vp thyne eyes? euen a∣gaynst the holy one of Israel. and so thy foes shall see, an armie great, with men of might to smite, all forces downe, that shall rise vp gaynst thee: gaynst thee, nay, gaynst thy Lord they shall then fight, when thou from sinne returnest cleare in sight.2. Kin. 19. 22. Awake therefore,These wordes which I com∣mandethes this day, shall be in thy hart. Deut. 6. 6. and to the Lord giue eare, thy hart lykewyse vnto his Lawes incline: print all therein, that so they may appeare to giue thee light in darke estate of thine, and so no plagues of Spayne, or Egypt olde, shall lyght on thee,Deut. 7. 15. the Lord hath thee so tolde.
For what if Spayne,Psal. 3. 6. and thousandes ten such more, should hem thee in, or cumpas thee about: yet will the Lord, as Captayne go before, and fight thy feelde,Deut. 31. 3. 4 agaynst the proude and stoute. Since then he hath this promise past to thee, be not afrayde,Deut. 31. 6. yf Spannyardes thou do see. For what are they?Deut. 9. 2. Are they of Anake sonnes? Suppose they were: yet be not thou afrayde: for though with slaues such speach of terrour runnes, yet come gaynst thee, they are full soone dismayde. For thou a noble people art of name, thy valiant actes sound through the worlde with fame. Thy God hath thee now almost fourtie yeeres, as his olde folke, in Wildernes safe kept: A wonder through the worlde, as it appeares. When they at warre,Psal. 3. 5. & 4. 8. then quiet thou hast slept: and yet much more, in this time hast thou wonne, for now to all thy terror is begunne. We are the men, not Spannyardes, well I know, to whom God sayth:Deut. 2. 25. This day do I begin, to sende thy feare through out the worlde to show what God it is, whose seruice thou art in. The Lord of Hostes is he, whom we do sarue: But Gods of Spayne, are mettals which they carue.
What neede we then of them to be afrayde? For when they call, their gods are oft a sleepe: or els abrode;1. Kin. 18. 27. as one of olde hath sayd, and can not heare: wherefore they houle & weepe. For though their gods the like gods do subdue, yet fight gaynst ours,Esai. 37. 18. 19 their cases thus they rue. Wherefore yf they should aske to feare the weake, what were become of Sepharvaims gods? Or what of Indians,2. King. 19. 13 & Esai. 37. 11 to 14. which they dayly breake? with many more: all which haue felt their roddes. Yet answere thou, They had no Gods at all, no maruell then,Esa. 37. 18. 19 though Spanyardes gaue the fall. And what yf they should once demaund agayne,As that proude beast Sanahe∣rib did to good king Ezekiah. 2. king. 18. 13. to the ende, & 19. & Esai 36. & 37. and aske thee of Samarias gods likewyse? and tell how Assors Rod is now in Spayne? And as hee then, so they shall now surpryse. Yet answere thou agayne thou mayest full true, Samarias Gods were then of Heathens hue.1. King. 12. 28 Euen so are all the Gods quite rounde about, where euer yet the Spanyardes bore the sway: though Christians names yet are they none no dout: for Christ by them, is driuen quite away, and Cakes of bred with them, are Gods in deede, as Calues of golde,. King. 12. 28 to ten Tribes as we reade.
Yet thou Ierusalem,Eber. 12. 22. & Apo. 3. 12. which we now are, hast no such Gods,And will ney∣ther slumber nor sleepe psal. 121. 3. 4. for thine in heauen dwelleth: who doth for thee all good thinges still prepare, and woundes thy foes, thy blood so deare that spilleth yet doth he thee, by them sometimes correct, but yf thou turne,Apo. 19. 2. & Deut. 32. 43. he doth thee not reiect.Iere. 30. 11. Returne therefore, returne thou Shulamyte, returne to God,Can. 6. 12. and his pure worde imbrace: Returne in time,Zach. 1. 3. & Mala. 3. 7. and he thy foes will smyte, when teares of greefe shall trickell downe thy face:Esai. 37. 16. to 21. and ioyfull then his holy ones will be, to strike thy foes,Esai. 37. 36. that would haue sore stroke thee. For wilt thou see,Esai. 27. 7. & Iere. 25. & Ioel. 3. how God of olde did deale with all the foes of his owne folke that were? now sure to hell he sent each common weale, that bent their force,Esa. 13. & 14 & Ezekie. 32. 17. to the end. his owne poore folke to teare. no Rod there was, which God for his did hier: but if too sharpe, he cast the Rod in fier. For didst thou Babylon,Esa. 13. & 14 & 21. & 46. & 47. & Ier. 25. 26. & 27. 7. & 50. & 51 & Dan. 5. 26 olde Rod scape free? Or hadst thou Rome, new Rod, for this, cause peace? No Babylon, thy blowes all men may see: And thou, O Rome, thy plague shall neuer cease. Two instrumentes,Iere. 50. 29. too hard for wrathfull ire, were for that cause,Apo. 14. 9. 10 11. & 18. & 19. well mollyfied with fire.
What Rome? why,Two proper speaches in the 17. of the Apo∣calips do so plainely Describe Rome, that no man can Deny, but that Rome is there meant: as this. The. 7. heades are. 7. hilles: they are also 7 kinges: & the woman is ye great citie that raigneth ouer ye kinges of the rarth. she is vp a loft agayne. But what for that; Shall shee as chiefe raigne still? No, no, her beawtie can not long remayne, but low in dust with Babel must she dwell: As she of ancient Babel beareth name, so both a lyke, for mischifes, shall haue shame. But what became of Assur, Ephraims rod? Did he escape, for seruice done gaynst him? No sure: for he the whip, would needes be God: the axe be hee,Esai. 10. and 37. 36. 37. 38. who did the helue put in: But he that tooke this instrument to hier,Reade the Prophet Na∣um. his worke once done, set instrument on fier. And what became of Egypt,Counting from the time that Is∣mael began to persecute Isaak, vnto the last yeere of pharoh his rage. that hard rod, that rod, which did foure hundreth yeeres long last? Would not the Lord then shew him selfe a God, to burne the same, which did his people wast? He did not burne:Exod. 14. but it in Sea he dround,Exod. 1. 22. because therewith his people they did wound.Reade more of Egypts plagues long after these dayes, in Ezek. 30. And what of Edom and of Pallistine? Of Tyer and Zoan,Iere. 25. 15. to end, & Esai. 14. 29. to end, Obadyah and Ezek. 36. and 37. 38. & Esai 34. & 23. & 19. of Vz and Buz withall? Hath not the Lord to all these, drunke in Wine? Yes wrathfull Wine, more bitter then was gall. Which cup of gall, to Elam kinges he sent: yea Iauan dranke, till all that wrath was spent.
So now, O Lord, cause all thy foes to drinke, this bitter cup,Iere. 25. & Esai. 34. 2. 8. which thou of olde didst fill, to Nations all, whom thine to spoyle did thinke: but yet could not, one straw breadth passe thy will. Repay them Lord,For it is a right∣eous thing with God, to trouble thē that trouble vs. 2. Thes. 1. 6. with thine eternall fier, for thou hast sayd, that such shall be their hier. And cursse, O Lord, yea Meroz folke cursse still, which now are slacke,Iudg. 5. 23. thy poore flocke to defend. But blesse our QVEENE, the hand-mayde of thy will: who doth with Iael, thy foes sound blowes stil lend. Our gratious QVEENE,Iudg. 4. 21. to end, and. 5. 24. to end. aboue all let be blest: because alone, she fights against the beast. Be thou O Lord,Psal. 18. 1. her buckler and her shylde, her strong defence, agaynst all forren power: yea gaynst all foes, that forces now do yeelde to helpe that Beast,Apo. 13. & 17. cahpe. thy people to deuoure. Confounde them Lord: their faces fill with shame: And helpe our QVEENE, for honour of thy name. Be thou her peace,2. Thes. 3. 16. her plentie, and her myght. Arme her with fayth,Ephe. 2. 14. thy Gospel to defende. Cause thou her Crowne,Ephe. 6. 16. to shine long, fresh, & bright: yea Dauids dayes,Psal 132. 18. twise double do her lende. Cause her in peace,2. Sam. 5. 4. with Sallomon to raigne,1. Kin. 4. 21. 24. in spight of all, that now are ioynd with Spayne.
Make her, O Lord, a mother olde and graue: for she to vs true Deborah hath bin,Iudg. 5. 7. So keepe her still, thy people long to saue, from those new Gods,Iudg. 5. 8. which former dayes brought in: and let them not such Gods agayne erect, for fayne they would: but Lord do them reiect. For yf they should, they would then brag and vaunt, and say to vs, Where now is hee your God? Yea thus they will thy seruauntes mocke and taunt,Psal. 79. 10. yf now at last they should be made thy rod.For the enemie is proude. Lam. 1. 9. Wherefore O Lord, thy glorious name regarde, and burne these rods,Psal. 79. 9. that so would thine rewarde.Psal. 79. 12. So will we prayse and magnifie thy name,Psal. 79. 13. thy glorius name to ages we will show: which is,Reue. 1. 8. that was, and still will be the same, to all that seeke, thy face in Christ to know. Christ is the ende of Law,Rom. 10. 4. & Iohn. 6. 47. & Actes. 16. 30. 31. for righteousnesse: Beleeue in him, Gods kingdome then possesse, FINIS.
