9251.3 S122628 23979763 27048
ARTICLES OF PEACE, EN∣TERCOVRSE, AND Commerce, Concluded in the names of the most high and mighty Kings, CHARLES by the grace of God King of Great Britaine, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, &c. And PHILIP the fourth King of Spaine, &c. In a Treaty at Madrit, the fift day of Nouember after the old Stile, in the yeere of our Lord God M.DC.XXX. Translated out of Latine into English. ¶ Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Maiestie: And by the Assignes of Iohn Bill. 1630.
¶ By the King. WHereas it is found meete and expedi∣ent, vpon weigh∣ty considerations moued to His Ma∣iestie, by the inter∣vention of some of His friends, to lay aside Hostility with the King of Spaine, and so to remooue by faire and peaceable means the cause of the Warre, which hath bred interruption to the Ami∣ty betwixt the two Crownes, vpon assurance giuen His Maiestie here∣of by that King, His most Excel∣lent
Maiestie hath condescended to renew the ancient Amity, and good intelligence betwixt ye two Crowns, their Realmes, Countreys, Domi∣nions, Vassals and Subiects, And doeth accordingly make knowen to all His louing people, that the sayd Peace and Friendship being so esta∣blished, not onely all Hostilitie and Warre is to cease on both sides from henceforward, But also the former Trade and Commerce, as it stoode in the vse and obseruance of the Treatie, made by His Maiesties blessed Father, is restored and con∣firmed betweene the sayd Kings, their Kingdomes, Territories, and Subiects aswell by Land as Sea and Fresh Waters. Which His Maiestie hath thought fit to declare vnto all manner of His Subiects, of whatsoeuer estate they be, strictly charging and command∣ing them to obserue and accomplish
all that hereunto belongeth, As it is certainly promised to be published on the side of the King of Spaine, the Date of these Presents. Giuen at His Maiesties Palace of West∣minster, the fift day of December, in the sixt yeere of His Maiesties Reigne. God saue the King.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV · ET · MON · DROIT
¶ The Preface or Intro∣duction to the Treatie with Spaine. BEcause the pre∣sent effect and be∣nefit of the recon∣ciliatiō lately con∣cluded betwixt the Kings most Excellent Maiestie, and the King of Spaine, will consist in the renewing and frequenting of a free and open Trade by the Subiects of both Crownes, His Maiestie hath thought it expedient for the better encou∣ragement of the Merchants,
and their direction in the said Commerce, to publish the Arti∣cles of the said Treaty & Peace, being in substance the same with the former Treatie made by his blessed Father of glori∣ous memory, Sauing that (be∣sides what is priuately agreed concerning Forreigne parts) it is prouided both by publique and priuate stipulation, that Commissioners shalbe appoin∣ted on either side to redresse and settle all defects and controuer∣sies in matter of Trade, betwixt the subiects of the two Crowns, which is agreed shall bee done with all conuenient expedition.
❧ Articles of the Treaty. FIrst, it is conclu∣ded, and accor∣ded, that from this day forward there shall bee a good, sincere, true, firme, and perfect Amitie, League, and Peace to endure for euer, and inuiolably to be obserued and kept,
aswell by Land as Sea and Fresh∣water, betwixt the most renowned King of Great Britaine, France, and Ireland; &c. And the most renowned King of Spaine, and their Heires and Successors whom∣soeuer, their Kingdomes, Countries, Dominions, Lands, Peoples, Liege men, and Subiects, now beeing, or which hereafter shall bee, of what∣soeuer condition, state, or degree they are or may bee, so as the said Vassals, and Subiects from hence∣forth are each of them to fauour o∣ther, and to vse one another with all kinde and friendly Offices.
II. AND that from hencefoorth all Hostilitie and Enmitie shall cease, and all Offences, Jniu∣ries and Damages which either part in time of the troubles hath sustained by the other, shall bee ta∣ken away and forgotten in such sort, as that hereafter neither par∣tie against the other for and vpon occasion of any Damages, Offen∣ces, Depredations or Spoyles past may pretend any matter, but that there shall bee a perfect Abolition of all and euery of them vntill this present day; And that all actions for the same shall bee held and re∣puted
to bee extinguished, excep∣ting all such Depredations which shall bee committed, within the Narrow Seas after the space of fifteene dayes; and betwixt the Narrow Seas and the Jslands after the space of three Moneths; and beyond the Line after the space of Nine Moneths fully en∣ded, to be reckoned from the Pub∣lication of the Peace: Or imme∣diately after the notice of the Peace sufficiently giuen in the said places, by Authenticall Actes or Leters respectiuely to bee shewen, Because of these an account and full restitution is to be made. And each partie shall hereafter ab∣staine
from all Depredations, Of∣fences and Spoyles as well by Sea as Land and fresh Waters, in whatsoeuer the Kingdomes, Do∣minions, Places or Gouernments of the other: Neither shall the a∣foresaid Kings consent, that any of the Grieuances before mentio∣ned, be done by any of their Ʋas∣sals, Inhabitants or Subiects: And they shall also cause Restitu∣tion to be made of all Depreda∣tions and Spoyles, which heere∣after shall be committed, and of the Damages growing by meanes thereof.
III. ITem, That none of the fore∣named most Renowned Kings, their heires, or Successors who∣soeuer, by himselfe, or by any o∣thers, shall Doe, Treate or At∣tempt any thing against the other, or against their Kingdomes, Lands or Dominions, whatsoeuer in any place, on Land or Sea, or in the Ports or Fresh Waters, by pretence of any cause or vpon any occasion; neither any of them shall giue Assistance or Consent vnto any Warre, Counsell, Attempt, or Treaties, had, made, or to be made
in the preiudice of either or against the other. IV. ITem, That neither of the for∣mer parties, shall themselues giue or shall consent to be giuen by any of their Vassals, Subiects, or Jnhabitants, Aide, Fauour, or Counsell, directly or indirectly, on Land, Sea, or Fresh Waters: Nor shall supply and minister, nor consent to be supplyed and mi∣nistred, by their said Ʋassals, In∣habitants and Subiects, vnto the Enemies or Rebels of either part, of what nature or condition soeuer they be, Whether they shall in∣uade
the Countries and Domini∣ons of either of them, or with∣draw themselues from their Obe∣dience and Subiection, any Soul∣diours, prouision of Victuals, Mo∣nies, instruments of Warre, Mu∣nitions, or whatsoeuer other aide else to maintaine Warre. V. ANd furthermore, the fore∣said Kings shall renounce, as by the Tenour of these Pre∣sents euery of them hath and doth renounce, Whatsoeuer League, Confederation, Capitulation and Jntelligence, made by what man∣ner soeuer, in the preiudice of the
One or the Other, which doth or may repugne against this Peace, or Concord, and all and singular the Contents thereof: All which and euery of them, so farre as they doe concerne the effect afore∣said, they shall annull and make void, and declare to be of no force or moment. VI. ITem, It is agreed and accor∣ded, that the said most renow∣ned Kings shall take care, that their Subiects shall from hence∣forth abstaine from all force and wrong doing, And that they like∣wise shall reuoke all Commissions,
and Letters of Reprisall and Mart, or otherwise containing Licence to take Prizes, of what condition or kinde soeuer they are, being to the preiudice of the one or other of the said Kings, or of their Subiects, whether the same haue beene giuen or granted by them vnto Subiects or Inhabitants, or vnto Strangers, and shall declare the same to be void & of no force, as by this Treatie or Peace they are declared so to be; And who∣soeuer shall doe any thing to the contrarie, hee shall be punished not onely criminally according to the merit of his Offence, but shall also bee compelled to make Restitution
and Satisfaction for the losses to the parties damnified, requiring the same. VII. ITem, It is agreed and accorded, that betweene the most renow∣ned King of Great Britaine &c. and the most renowned King of Spaine &c. and euery of their Ʋassals, Inhabitants and Subiects, as well by Land as Sea and Fresh Waters, in all and singular their Kingdomes, Dominions, Islands, and other Lands, Cities, Townes, Ʋillages, Hauens and Streights of the said Kingdomes and Domini∣ons, there be or may be free Com∣merce:
In which before the warre betweene Philip the second King of Spaine, and Elizabeth Queene of England, there hath beene Commerce betwixt the said King∣domes, according as it was agreed on in the Treatie of peace made in the yeere a thousand sixe hundred and foure, in the ninth Article, like and according to the vse and obser∣uance of the ancient Leagues and Treaties made before the said time, in such sort and manner, as that without any safe conduct or other li∣cence generall or speciall, the Sub∣iects of the One or other King, may freely, as well by Land as by Sea and fresh waters, goe, enter, and
saile, in and to the said Kingdomes and Dominions, and all the Cities, Hauens, Shores, Sea-rodes and Streights thereof, and put them∣selues into whatsoeuer Hauens of the same, Where before the aboue said time, there hath beene a mutu∣all Commerce, and like and ac∣cording to the vse and obseruance of the ancient Leagues, and Trea∣ties aforesaid, with Carriages, Horses, Burdens, Ships as well la∣den, as to bee laden, to bring in Merchandises, and there to buy or sell as much as they will, and in the same places vpon iust prices to pro∣cure and haue prouision of victuals for their Sustenance and Voyages;
And likewise as occasion shall re∣quire, to repayre such shipping and carriages, as either appertaine vnto them in propertie, or else they haue hired or borrowed, and from thence also with their Merchandises, Goods, and other Commodities whatsoeuer, the Customes and Tolles, as they are presently rated according to the Ordinances of the places, beeing paid, they may with like freedome depart and goe to their owne Countries, or any other places at their pleasure, without let or impediment.
VIII. ITem, It is likewise agreed and accorded, that it may be lawfull to haue accesse vnto the Ports of the said Kings, and there to make stay, and from thence with the same liberty to depart, not onely with their Shippes of Merchandises and burthen, but also with other shipping furnished for warre, and prepared to withstand the force of enemies: Whether they shall arriue there either by force of tempest, or for repairing their ships, or for pro∣uision of victualls, so as they exceede not the number of sixe or eight ships, when they come in of their owne ac∣cord,
nor that they continue nor make stay in the hauens, or about the Ports longer then they shall haue iust cause for the repaire of the same shipping, or for prouision of other necessaries, lest they should be any occasion of interruption vn∣to the free Commerce and Enter∣course of other friends and Na∣tions in Amitie: And whensoeuer any greater number of Ships of war then is before specified, shall haue occasion of accesse into those Ports, then shall it not bee lawfull for them to make any entrance without the priuitie and consent of the King. Prouided also, that they doe no hostile Acte within the said
Ports, to the preiudice of the Kings; but demeane themselues there quietly, as Friends and Con∣federates, with speciall caution euer to bee had, that vnder the colour and pretext of Commerce, no war∣like ayde, prouision of victualls, or of Armes, or of Munition, or other such like materials for the warres bee carried by the Subiects, Ʋas∣sals, or inhabitants of those King∣domes, to the commoditie or benefit of the enemies of the one or other King. And whosoeuer shall at∣tempt to the contrary, shall be puni∣shed with those sharpe paines and punishments, vsed to be inflicted vp∣on seditious persons and breakers
of faith and peace. Prouided al∣so, that the Subiects of the one in the Dominions and Territories of the other, be not worse handled, then the naturall Subiects in their sales and contracts for their Mer∣chandises, as well in respect of the prices, as otherwise, but that the condition of forreiners bee equall and like herein vnto naturall Sub∣iects. Notwithstanding any Sta∣tutes or Customes to the contrary. IX. ITem, It is agreed and accorded, that the said most renowned King of Great Britaine, &c. shall prohibite, and after the confirming
of these present Articles, by Pro∣clamation foorthwith prouide, that no one of his subiects, inhabitants, or vassalls, shall Lade, or carry ouer by any meanes, directly, or indirect∣ly, in his owne name, or in the name of any others; neither shall lend his Ship or other Vessell for carriage, or vse his name for the transporting or conueying of any Ships, Merchan∣dises, Manufactures, or any other thing, out of Holland and Zeland into Spaine, or other the King∣domes and Dominions of the King of Spaine; neither shall carry in his Ships any Holland or Zeland Merchant vnto the said Ports, vpon perill of his Maiesties in∣dignation,
and other punishments vsually inflicted on the contemners of Royall Commandements. And to the effect, that fraud, which through the likenesse of Mer∣chandize might happen, be the bet∣ter auoided; It is also prouided in this present Article, that the Mer∣chandizes to bee carried and con∣ueyed out of England, Scotland, and Ireland, to the Kingdomes and Dominions of the King of Spaine, shall bee registred and sea∣led with the Seale of the Towne or Citie from whence they shall be Laden, and that they being so regi∣stred and sealed, shall without any difficultie or question whatsoeuer,
bee reputed and held for English, Scottish, and Irish Merchandi∣zes, and so respectiuely, according to the Seale or marke, bee allowed and admitted. Alwayes excep∣ted, that in case of fraud, proofe shall bee admitted, without stay not∣withstanding or let of the course or venting of the Merchandizes in the meane time. And touching such Merchandizes, as shall not bee registred nor sealed, the same are to bee confiscated and taken for good Prize. And likewise all Hollan∣ders and Zelanders, which shall be found in the same Ships, may also be tken and detained.
X. ITem, It is also agreed, that Eng∣lish, Scottish, and Jrish Mer∣chandises may freely bee conueyed and transported out of the said Kingdomes, into Spaine, and other Dominions of the said most renow∣ned King, paying only the Customes and Tolles vsually required. XI. ITem, Jt is likewise agreed, that for the Merchandises, which English, Scottish, and Irish Mer∣chants shall buy in Spaine, or other the Kingdomes of the said King of Spaine, and shall carry in their
owne Ships, or in Ships hired or lent vnto them (except, as before hath beene said, the ships of Hollanders and Zelanders) no new Customes or Tolle shall bee encreased: yet so as they conuey and carry the same goods and Merchandises to the Kingdomes of the said most renow∣ned King of Great Britaine, &c. or to the Ports of the Prouinces being in obedience to the King of Spaine. And for the more surety that fraud be not committed heere∣in, and that the sayd Merchandises bee not transported to other places and Kingdomes, and especially into Holland or Zeland, It is conclu∣ded, that the said Merchants shall
binde themselues, at the time that they do Lade their Ships in Spaine, or in the other Kingdomes and Dominions of the said King of Spaine aboue declared, before the Magistrate of the place in which they shall Lade, to pay the Impositi∣on of thirty in the hundred, in case they carry the same goods and Merchandises to other Domini∣ons and Countreys: And to obtaine also within the space of twelue mo∣neths following a Certificate from the Magistrates of the places where they shall discharge or vnlade the same goods, testifying their dis∣charge to haue beene either in the Kingdomes and Dominions of the
King of Great Britaine, &c. or in the Ports of the Prouinces vn∣der the obedience of the said King of Spaine: Ʋpon the exhibiting whereof, the Obligations concerning those matters shall be deliuered vp, vnto the bringers of the same Cer∣tificates. XII. ANd also that the said most renowned King of Great Britaine, &c. shall prohibite soone after the confirming of this accord, that none shall export any Mer∣chandises out of Spaine, or other Kingdomes of the King of Spaine, to be carried to other places, then to
His Maiesties Kingdomes, and the said Ports of the Prouinces in obe∣dience, vpon penaltie of confiscati∣on of all their Merchandises to the vse of the said King of Great Bri∣taine, &c. to be payd into His Ma∣iesties Exchequer: Of which Mer∣chandises, or the value thereof, one halfe is to be giuen to the Jnformer, the imposition of thirty in the hun∣dred being first deducted, to be paid to the Ministers and Deputies of the King of Spaine, & the proofes lawfully receiued in Spaine, and transmitted into England in au∣thenticall forme, are to bee credi∣ted. And it is also declared, that the said prohibition of goods to be
carried out of Spaine, vnto other places, then the Kingdomes of Bri∣taine, and the obedient Prouinces of Flanders, doeth no way compre∣hend those Kingdomes and Domi∣nions which enioy a free trade with the Kingdome of Spaine: For the Subiects of his Maiestie of Great Britaine, may lawfully transport the goods of the Kingdomes of Spaine, vnto those that haue a mu∣tuall trade with Spaine; the afore∣mentioned Cautions, Conditions, and Penalties rehearsed in the pre∣cedent Articles against the offen∣ders, remaining still in force and strength.
XIII. ITem, That the Magistrates of the said Townes, or Cities of his Maiesties Kingdomes, which shall make Certificates of the vnlading of Ships, and are to giue testimonie of the Registring of the Merchan∣dises, shall not commit any fraud therein, vnder perill of indignation of the Kings Maiestie, and paine of losse of their offices, and other more grieuous punishments at the Kings pleasure. XIV. THat which hath before beene expressed concerning the free
Commerce, granted vnto the Sub∣iects of the said most Renowned Kings, is to bee vnderstood to bee likewise, and in the same manner agreed on for the Subiects of the most Renowned King of Great Britaine, &c. and of the obedient Prouinces of Flanders; To wit, that in all places whatsoeuer, their Subiects are bound reciprocally, to respect, and to fauour each other, and by mutuall kind offices, friend∣ly to entertaine the one the other, and that by Land, Sea, and Fresh∣waters, without any safe conduct or other licence, generall or speciall, they may vnto the said Kingdomes, Dominions, Lands, Ʋillages,
Townes, Cities, Sea-shores, Ha∣uens, Sea-rodes whatsoeuer, freely, safely, securely, come, enter, saile, carry, and recarry their Merchan∣dises, buy and sell, remaine, abide and conuerse in the same so long as it shall please them; take vp any kinde of prouision for victuall, and things necessary for sustenance, and for Ʋoyages, at iust and reasonable prices, and there repaire also (as occasion shall require) their Ship∣ping and Carriages, whether the same be their owne, or whether they bee hired, or borrowed: As also to depart from thence with like liber∣tie, with Merchandises, Goods, and other things whatsoeuer, (the
Customes and Tolles, according to the Statutes of those places being payd) and to dispose, and follow their businesses freely, & to returne at their owne pleasure, either into their owne Countreys, or to any o∣ther place, without any impediment or let, so as the Subiects of the most Renowned King of Great Bri∣taine, &c. vse not the Shipping of the Hollanders, or the vnited Pro∣uinces, and bring not into the obedi∣ent Prouinces any of the Manu∣factures of Holland, or of the vni∣ted Prouinces, bought wheresoe∣uer; neither any other thing, for which there was paid in Holland any tribute, nor that they transport
anything from the obedient Pro∣uinces, vnto them of those Prouin∣ces, vntill a pacification be confir∣med: nor that they receiue any the Goods of Hollanders, or of those other places vnited, into their Ships, nor trust any of their owne Goods in the Ships of Hollanders, nor frau∣dulently by lending their names, colour the Goods of any Hollan∣der, or other of the vnited Prouin∣ces: For that if any thing be com∣mitted to the contrary, and the same be found, it shall bee held for iust and lawfull Prize.
XV. AND the aforesaid prouisoes are not onely to be vnderstood of Ships laden, or to bee laden, in cause of Commerce, but also of Ships of Warre, which the said Kings haue, or shall haue armed to represse the attempts of their ene∣mies: Insomuch as that it may bee lawfull for such Ships of Warre, not exceeding the number before mentioned, if they happen to be con∣strained, either by force of tempest, or for buying of victuals, or other things, or for repaire of Shipping, to vse the same libertie in arriuing, staying, and departing; so that they
doe no bostile act in the said Ports, but demeane themselues honestly, and quietly, as it becommeth confe∣derates and friends: And so that they stay and remaine not in, or a∣bout the same Ports, any longer then shall bee need full for repara∣tion and prouision of necessaries, that thereby they bee not a hinde∣rance, or interruption to the free Commerce and Entercourse with other Nations, that are in Amitie and Friendship: But where occa∣sion shall fall out of arriuall of any greater number of Shipping then before specified, it shall not be law∣full for them to enter, but with the knowledge and allowance of the King.
XVI. AND as the said Kings doe religiously promise, that they will not at any time yeeld any war-like succour to any of the others e∣nemies, So it is prouided, that their Subiects, or the inhabitants in their Realmes, of what nation or quali∣tie soeuer they bee, may not vnder colour of Entercourse and Com∣merce, nor vpon any other collour or pretence giue any ayde or helpe to the enemies of the said Kings, or of either of them, or conferre or supply them with money, prouisions of Ʋictuals for Warre, Armour, Munition, Ordinance, Artillery
or other warlike prouision, and those which shall doe the contrary, are to take knowledge, that they shall be punished with the seuere punish∣ments accustomed to bee inflicted vpon breakers of League, and se∣ditious persons. XVII. AND that also greater bene∣fit may through this Concord come vnto the Subiects of the most renowned King of Great Bri∣taine, and of the most renowned King of Spaine, in their obedient Prouinces, It is accorded and con∣cluded, that the said most renowned Kings ioyntly and seuerally will doe
their endeauours, that their Sub∣iects haue not the passages stopped or letted vnto any of their Ports, Kingdomes and Dominions, that thereby they be not hindered, freely and without impediment to come and goe with their Shipping, Mer∣chandise and Carriages (the ordi∣nary Customes and Tolles being paid) to all the said Ports, King∣domes and Dominions: And with the like libertie (when it shall seeme so good vnto them) with other Merchandises from hence to depart.
XVIII. BVt as concerning the ancient Treatises of Entercourse and Commerce, whereof diuers are ex∣tant, betwixt the Kingdomes of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions of the Dukes of Burgundy and Princes of the Low-Countreys, which notwith∣standing during the late troubles haue beene intermitted, and perad∣uenture in some parts impaired; Jt is agreed by way of prouision. That they shall retaine and haue their an∣cient Force and Authoritie; And that they shall bee vsed on both parts as they were before the Warre
betweene Elizabeth Queene of England, and Philip the second, according as it was agreed on in the Treatie of Peace made in the yeere a thousand, sixe hundred & foure, in the two and twentieth Article. And if it happen that either by both parts, or any one part, any breach thereof bee alledged, or that the Subiects shall complaine, that the Conuentions are not obserued, or that more grieuous burdens then were accustomed, are imposed on them, there shall bee Deputies ap∣pointed on either part, which may meete, and calling vnto them (if neede be) Merchants experienced in such matters, may friendly
Treate, and equally renew and re∣store such things, as shall bee found either to haue slipped out of course, or to haue beene changed by the in∣iurie of time, or by corrupt custome and vse. XIX. AND for that the rights of Commerce which do ensue by Peace, ought not to bee made vn∣fruitfull, as they would bee, if the Subiects of the most renowned King of Great Britaine, &c whilest they haue recourse to and from the Kingdomes and Dominions of the said King of Spaine, and doe re∣maine there for Commerce, should
bee molested in the cause of Con∣science: Therefore to the intent their Trafficke may bee safe and without danger, as well on Land as on Sea, the said most renowned King of Spaine shal take care, and prouide, that for the said cause of Conscience they shall not bee mole∣sted nor inquieted in vsing their Trade and Commerce, so as they giue not scandall vnto others. XX. ITem, That if it happen any Goods or Merchandizes pro∣hibited to bee carried or conueyed out of the Kingdomes and Domi∣nions of the said most renowned
Kings, by the Subiects of the One or of the Other; That in such case, the person onely offending shall in∣curre punishment, and the Goods onely prohibited shall bee Confis∣cated. XXI. ITem, That the Goods of the Subiects, dying within the king∣domes or Dominions of either, shall be conserued to the right heires and successors of the deceased; the right of a third person alwayes reserued. XXII. ITem, That the Graunts and Priuiledges giuen by the
Kings to Merchants of either of the Kingdomes, comming to their said Kingdomes, and which Priui∣ledges through the Warres haue ceased, shall from henceforth whol∣ly bee reuiued, and haue their full force and strength. XXIII. ITem, If it shall happen hereaf∣ter (which God forbid!) that any displeasure doe arise, betwixt the said Most renowned Kings, the King of Great Britaine, and the King of Spaine, whereby dan∣ger might grow of the interruption of Entercourse and Commerce, then the Subiects of either King are
thereof so to bee admonished, as that they may haue fixe moneths from the time of the monition, to transport their Merchandizes, without any Arrest, Disturbance, or Hurt in the meane season, to be done or giuen vnto them, either in their persons or Merchandizes. XXIV. ITem, That none of the fore∣said Kings shall imbarge or stay for their prouision in Warre, or for any other seruice, to the preiudice of the owners, the ships of the Sub∣iects of any of the others, being in their Ports, or waters, vnlesse the King of those parties to whom the
Ships doe appertaine, shall first be admonished thereof, and shall also yeeld his consent thereunto. XXV. ITem, It is accorded, that if du∣ring this Peace and Amity, any thing happen to be attempted, com∣mitted or done against the force and effect thereof by Land, Sea or Fresh Waters, either by any of the said Kings, their Heires, and Suc∣cessors, their Vassals, Subiects or Al∣lies comprehended in this League, or of any the Heires or Successors, of those Allies, their Subiects or Ʋassals; Yet notwithstanding this Peace and Amitie shall remaine in
strength and vertue, and the at∣tempters and such as doe offend therein onely, and no other, shall be punished for their attempts. XXVI. ITem, That such as haue beene taken in Warre, and are Cap∣tiues on either part, although they bee condemned to the Gallies, shall be released and dismissed, the char∣ges of the diet of such as are not in the Gallies being first discharged, and the ransomes of such as haue before agreed for the same, being by them payed.
XXVII. ITem, It is concluded, that all ciuill actions, which at the time when the last warres began, were of Ʋaliditie and of Force, may yet be exercised and pursued, not∣withstanding any lapse of time du∣ring the same Warre, so as no pre∣iudice shall be vnderstood to haue growen vnto them, during the con∣tinuance of the Warre, those onely excepted, which are already come to the Exchequer or Princes Treasurie.
XXVIII. ITem, Jf any controuersie hap∣pen to bee mooued in the King∣domes and Dominions, of the One or other of these Kings, by any person not being Subiect to the same King, for or vpon occasion of any depredations or spoyles committed; The cause is to bee remitted to the Iudge of the Iurisdiction vnder that King, against whose Subiect or Sub∣iects the suit is commenced. XXIX. ITem, That if the Hollanders, and other Confederate States will propose conditions of pacifica∣tion
with the most renowned King of Spaine and his Successors through the meanes of the most re∣nowned King of Great Bri∣taine: The said most renowned King of Spaine and his Successors, will alwayes willingly hearken vnto that which shall bee proposed iust and reasonable therein; And will desire that by the helpe of the said most renowned King of Great Britaine: they may bee brought to propose equall conditions, wherein they shall well vnderstand, how much the said King of Spaine doth attribute vnto the authority of the said King of Great Britaine, his louing brother.
XXX. ITem, Jt is concluded and ac∣corded, That in this present Treatie of Peace, there bee com∣prehended, the Adherents, Friends, and Confederates of the forena∣med Kings: That is to say; On the part of the most renowned King of Great Britaine, &c. Ferdinand, Roman Empe∣rour, with the Arch-Dukes of Austria, and the Electors of the Empire, together with the States & Cities of the Empire.
The Duke of Lorraine. The Duke of Sauoy. The Dukes of Brunswick, Lunenburg, Meckelburg, VVirtemberg. The Landgraue of Hessen. The Marquis of Baden. The Dukes of Pomerania. The Prince of Anhalt. The Earle of East-Friesland.
The Cantons of Heluetia, and the Grisons. The Hauns Cities. The French King. The Kings of Denmarke, and of Poland, and of Swed∣land. The Duke and State of Ve∣nice. The Duke of Holstein, and the Duke of Florence.
On the part of the most renowned King of Spaine. Ferdinand, Roman Empe∣rour, and his brethren, and o∣ther Princes, Arch-Dukes of Austria, Princes of the Em∣pire. The Electors, Cities, and States, subiect to the Empire. The French King. The King of Poland and Swedland. The King of Denmarke.
The Duke and State of Ve∣nice. The Duke of Sauoy. The Duke of Baueere. The Duke of Cleue. The Duke of Holstein. The Duke of Lorraine. The Duke of Parma and Placentia. The Bishop and Prouince of Liege.
The Duke of Florence. The Duke of Mutine and Regium. The Duke of Vrbine. The Confederates and Can∣tons of the Heluetians and Grisons. The Cities of the Haunse. The Earle of East-Friesland (without notwithstanding any preiudice of the right by the King of Spaine and Arch-Dukes, pretended for their States)
The Duke and Common∣wealth of Genua. The Principall of the House of Columna. The Prince of Oria. The Principall of the house of Vrsine. The Duke of Sermoneta. The Lord of Monacho. The Earle of Mirandula. The Prince of Massia.
The Earle of Sala, and the Earle of Colorno. XXXI. ITem, It is likewise accorded and concluded, that the said most renowned Kings, Charles by the grace of God, King of Great Bri∣taine, France, and Ireland, &c. and Philip King of Spaine, &c. shall sincerely, and faithfully ob∣serue and keepe, and procure to bee obserued and kept by their Subiects and Jnhabitants all and singular the Capitulations in this present Treatie accorded and concluded: Neither shall they directly, or in∣directly
infringe the same, or con∣sent that the same shall bee infrin∣ged directly, or indirectly by any of their Subiects or Inhabitants: And they shall ratifie, authorise, and confirme all and singular the Con∣uentions before accorded, and con∣cluded by Letters Patents, sub∣scribed with their owne hands, and sealed with their great Seales, in sufficient, auaileable, and effectuall forme, and the same so formed and made, shall vpon the first occasion deliuer, or cause to bee deliuered faithfully, really, and effectually, whereby they may mutually binde themselues in, the Word of a King, and by oath to bee solemnely taken
vpon the holy Euangelists, to ob∣serue and performe all and singu∣lar the premisses, whensoeuer they shall be by either part thereunto re∣quired. And furthermore they shall cause this present Treaty of Peace to be published in the manner and places accustomed, so soone as conueniently the same may be.
¶ Imprinted at London by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the KINGS most Excellent MAIESTIE: and by the Assignes of IOHN BILL. M.DC.XXX.
