B1822 R23680 7869963 40227
CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE. Composed by the R. Father ROBERT BELLARMINE, of the Society of Jesus, and CARDINAL. Translated into better English than formerly. device of Society of Jesus IHS The Last Edition. Printed for A.L. Anno Dom. 1676.
The A. B. C. ✚ A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P Q R S T V U W X Y Z. ✚ A a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s s t v u w x y z. ✚ A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P Q R S T V Ʋ W X Y Z. ✚ a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s s t v u w x y z, 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000.
A BRIEF CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE. To be learned by heart. Of the end of a Christian, and of the signe of the Holy Cross. Master. A Are you a Christian? Scholar. I am by the grace of God, M, What mean you by a Christian? S. Him that maketh Profession of the Faith, and Law of Christ, M, In what doth the Faith of Christ chiefly consist?
S. In two principal mysteries, which are included in the sign of the Holy Cross, that is, in the Ʋnity and Trinity of God: and in the In∣carnation and Death of our Saviour. M, What meaneth Unity, and Trinity of God? S. It meaneth, that in God there is one only Divinity, or, as we say, Essence, and Divine Nature, which nevertheless is in three Divine Persons, that are called Father, Sun, and Holy-Ghost. M, Wherefore, are these Divine Persons? S. Because the Father hath no beginning, nor proceeds from another Person. The Son proceeds from the Father. And the Holy-Ghost from the Father and the Son. M, Wherefore are these three Persons only one God? S. Because they have one self Essence
one self Power, one self wisdom, and one sef-Goodness. M. What meaneth Incarnation, and Death of our Saviour? S. It meaneth, that the Son of God, who is the second Person of the blessed Trinity, became Man, & dyed upon the Cross to save us, M. How are these two Mysteries in∣cluded in the sign of the Cross? S. Because we make the sign of the Cross by putting our right∣hand, first to the head, saying, In the name of the Father; then under the breasts, saying, & of the Son; finally to the left & right sholders saying & of the Holy-Ghost Amen. M. How then is there shewed the first Mystery of the most Blessed Tri∣nity? S. Because this word, In the name, signifieth the Ʋnity, the other words signify the Trinity.
M. Shew now the second. S. The figure of the Cross doth represent the death of our Savi∣our, who after he was made man, and had taught the way of Salva∣tion, with Doctrine, with Example, and with miracles, dyed upon the Holy Wood of the Cross. A Declaration of the Creed. M. WHich is the Rule of our Belief? S. It is the Symbole of the Apostles, which we commonly call the Creed, M. Say the Creed S. 1. I believe in God, the Father-Almighty, Creator of Heaven and Earth. 2. And in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord. 3. Who was conceived by the Holy-Ghost:
born of the Virgin Mary. 4. Suffered under Pontius Pilate was crucified, dead & buried. 5. Descended into Hell, the third day he rose again from the dead, 6. Ascended into Heaven, sitteth at the right hand of God the Father Almighty. 7. from thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. 8. I believe in the Holy-Ghost. 9. The holy Catholick Church, the Communion of Saints. 10. Remission of sins. 11. Resurrection of the flesh. 12. Life everlasting. Amen. M. Who made the Creed? S. The twelve Apostles, & there∣fore there be twelve Articles. M. What do these Articles contain in sum? S. All that which principally & expresly we must believe of God
and of the Church his Spouse; be∣cause the eight first Articles pertain to God, the four last to the Church M. Declare the first Article. S. I firmly believe in one only God, who is the natural Father of his only begotten Son: and is also Father by the grace of all good Christians, who are therefore called the Adopted Sons of God: finally, he is Father by Creation, of all other things. And this God is Omnipotent because He can do all that he will, and hath created of nothing Heaven and Earth, with whatsoever is in them, that is, the whole universal world. M. Declare the second Article. S. I believe also in JESUS CHRIST: who is the only be∣gotten Son of God the Father be∣cause he was begotten of the same Father Eternal, and is God Eternal,
Infinite, Omnipotent Creator and Lord of us and of all things, as he is the Father. M. Declare the Third. S. I believe that Jesus Christ is not only true God, but also true Man; because he hath taken man's flesh of the immaculate Virgin Ma∣ry, by virtue of the Holy-Ghost & so was born on earth of Mother without Father, as in Heaven he was born of Father without Mother. M. Declare the Forth. S. I believe, that Jesus Christ to redeem the world with his pre∣cious blood, suffered under Pontius Pilate Governour of Jury, being scourged, crowned with Thorns & put upon the Cross, on which he dyed; & being taken down from the same was buryed in a new Sepulcher. M. Declare the Fifth.
S. I believe, that Jesus Christ as soon as he was dead, went with his soul to Limbus, or the place of holy Fathers, and the third day which was the Sunday, he rose glori∣ous, and triumphant. M, Declare the sixth. S, I believe that Jesus Christ af∣ter he had forty dayes remained with the holy Apostles, to prove with many apparitions his true Resurrection, mounted up to the highest Heaven, and there sitteth above all the Quires of Angels, at the right hand of the Father, that is, in glory equal to the Father, as Lord & Governour of all Creatures. M, Declare the seventh. S, I believe that the same our Lord, in the end of the world shall come from Heaven with most great power & glory, and shall judge all men, giving to every man the re∣ward,
or punishment he hath de∣served. M, Declare the eighth. S. I believe in the Holy Ghost, who is the third Person of the most blessed Trinity, and proceedeth from the Father and the Son, and is in all and every thing equal to the Father, and to the Son; that is, he is God, Eternal, Infinite, Omnipotent, Creator, and Lord of all things, as the Father and the Son. M, Declare the ninth. S. I believe also that there is a Church, which is the Congregation of all the faithfull Christians that are Baptized, and I do believe & confess the Faith of Christ our Lord, and acknowledge the high Bishop of Rome for Vicar of the same Church on Earth. M, Why is this Church called Holy and Catholick?
S. Holy, Because it hath the Head, which is Christ, Holy and for that it hath many holy members, the Faith & Law, and Sacraments holy; and it is called Catholick, that is, Univesal. M. What signifieth the Commu∣nion of Saints? S. It signifyeth the Participation of Prayers & good works that are done in that Church; even as in a mans body, all the members are par∣takers of the good of one member. M. Declare the Tenth. S. I believe, that in the holy Church there is true remission of sins, by means of the holy Sacra∣ments, Whereby men, of children of the Devill, and condemned to death, become the Children of God, and Heirs of Paradise. M. Declare the Eleventh, S. I believe that in the end of the world all men shal rise, taking again
the same bodies which before they had, and this by the power of God, to whom nothing is impossible. M, Declare the last. S. I believe, that for good Chri∣stians there is life everlasting, full of all felicity, & free from all kind of evil; as contrariwise for Infidels and for evil Christians, there is e∣ternal death, replenished with all misery, and void of all good. M, What mean you by Amen? S, I mean, so it is, or, So be it, in truth and verity. A Declaration of the Pater Noster, and the Ave-Mary. M. HAving spoken now of that which we must believe, let us see if you know that, which we must hope for, and of whom we must have hope. Know ye the Pater-Noster
S. I know it right well, for it was the first thing I learned, and I say it every morning and evening, together with the Ave Mary, and with the Creed. M, Say then the Pater Noster. S. Our Father which art in Heaven. 1. Hollowed be thy Name. 2. Thy Kingdom come. 3. Thy will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven. 4. Give us this day our daily bread. 5. And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors. 6. And lead us not into Tempta∣tion. 7. But deliver us from evil Amen. M. Who made this Prayer? S. Christ our Saviour made it, and therefore it is the most excel∣lent of all others. M, What is briefly contained in this Prayer?
S. All that we can demand, and hope for of God; for there be se∣ven Petitions. In the first four we demand that he give us all good: in the three following, that he deliver us from all evil. And con∣cerning that which is good, we first demand the glory of God. Secondly, our Greatest Good. Thirdly, Grace to obtaine it. Fourthly the means to get, and keep the said grace Touching that which is evil, we demand that he deliver us from evil past. Secondly from evils to come. Thirdly, from evils present, and so from all evils. M. Declare these words that go before the first Petition, that is, Our Father which art in Heaven. S. This is a little Preface, in which is given the reason, why we should have courage to speak unto so
our request. We say then, that God is our Father by Creation & Adop∣tion, & therefore as Children we have recoutse to Him and we add, that he is in Heaven as Lord of the Univetsal world. And for this we know, that he can grant our petiti∣ons, if it so please him, as we do hope he will, seeing he is our Father M. Declare the First Petition. S. In the First Petition, we de∣mand that God be known by all the world, and his holy name be honoured, and glorifyed by all, as is fitting. M. Declare the second. S. we demand in the second, that the Kingdom which he hath pro∣mised us, come speedily, that is to say, that, the battles which we have with the Devil, the World, & the Flesh being ended, we may arrive to everlasting felicity, where we
shall reign with God, without any impediment. M. Delare the third, S. We demand in the third, the grace of God, with which we may perfectly obey his holy Command∣ments, as the Angels always obey him in heaven. Because the ladder to mount us up into Heaven, is obedience to his Commandments. M. Declare the Fourth, S. We demand in the fourth our daily bread, as well spiritual, that is the word of God, & the Sacraments; as corporall, that is, Sustenance & Apparel: for the word of God deli∣vered to us by Preachers, and read by us in spiritual Books, & the ho∣ly Sacraments) chiefly of confessi∣on & Communion) are most efficati∣ous means on their part (that is, if we our selves be not in fault) to ob∣tain & conserve the grace of God,
of which we have spoken in the former Petition. Sustenance & Ap∣parel is necessary for us to main∣tain this life in the service of God. M. Declare the fifth. S. We demand in the fifth, that God deliver us from evils past, that is, from sins already committed, & of the pains which for them we have incurred. And we add, As we forgive our debtors their debts, that is, as we pardon the offences of our enemies: for that it is not a reasonable thing, that God forgive us our sins, which are most great offences, if we will not pardon in∣juries done unto us, which are offences of small importance. M. Declare the sixth. S. We demand in the sixth, that God will deliver us from temptati∣ons, which are evils to come, by not permitting us to be tempted,
and giving us grace that we be not overcome. M. Declare the seventh. S. We demand in the seventh, that God will deliver us from evils present, that is from all affliction and misery, and from all vain pro∣sperity, and temporal advancement if he see that it be hurtfull to our salvation. M, Say now the Ave Mary. S. Hail Mary full of grace, our Lord is with thee, blessed art thou a∣mongst Women; & blessed is the fruit of thy womb Jesus, Holy Mary, Mo∣ther of God, pray for us sinners, now and in the hour of our death, Amen. M. By whom were these words spoken? S. Partly by the Archangel Ga∣briel, partly by S. Elizabeth, and partly by the holy Church, M. To what end doe you say
the Ave-Mary, after the Pater-No∣ster. S. To the end, that by the inter∣cession of the most B. Virgin, I may more easily obtain that which I beg of God, because she is the Ad∣vocate of sinners, full of mercy, and is seated in Heaven above all the Quires of Angels, and most accep∣table to God. M. Have you no recourse also to other Saints? S. Yea, to all the Saints, and in particular to the Saint of my name, and my Angel-Guardian. Of the Commandments of God. M. LEt us come now to that, which we must do, To love God and our Neighbour. Say you then the ten Commandments. S. I am thy Lord thy God, 1 Thou shalt have none other Gods before me
2. Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain. 3. Remember that thou keep holy the Saboath day. 4. Honour thy Father and Mother. 5. Thou shalt not Murther. 6. Thou shalt not commit adultery. 7. Thou shalt not steal. 8. Thou shalt not bear false witness, 9. Thou shalt not desire thy Neigh∣bour's Wife. 10. Thon shalt not covet thy Neigh∣bours Goods? M. Who hath given these Com∣mandments, S. God himself in the old Law, and afterwards Christ our Lord hath confirmed them in the New. M. What do these Command∣ments coutain, in brief? S. All that which we must do, oo love God and our Neighbour. Be∣cause the first three Command∣ments
teach us how we ought to behave our selves towards God with heart, with mouth, and with works. The other seaven do learn us to do good to our neighbour, & not hurt him in person, in his ho∣nour, in his goods, neither in deeds nor in words, nor in thought. And so the end of all the Command∣ments is the Commandment of Charity, which doth command us to love God above all things, and our Neighbours as our selves. M. Declare the first Command∣ment. S. In the beginning, God doth admonish us that he is our true & supream Lord, & therefore we are obliged to obey him with all dili∣gence. Next, he commands us, that we must not acknowledge any o∣ther for God: wherein the Infidels do sin, who do worship Creatures
instead of the Creator: also Witches and Inchanters, who worship the Devil for their God. M. Declare the second Command∣ment, S. The second Commandment forbiddeth Blasphemies, which are most grievous sins: false, or un∣necessary Oaths: breaking vows: and all other dishonour that is done to God with words. M. Declare the third. S. The third commands the keep∣ing of Sunday, and other Feasts holy which consists in abstaining from servile works, in considering the benefits of God, visiting the Churches, praying, reading spiri∣tual Books, hearing Divine Service, and Sermons, and doing such other spiritual and holy works. M. Declare the fourth. S. The fourth ordaineth, that we
honour our Father & Mother, not only with reverence of words, or uncovering our head to them; But also with helping, and succouring them in their necessities. And that which we say of Father or Mother, we ought also to observe towards other our neighbours, although there be not so great obligation as to Father and Mother, who have given us our Being and brought us up with great pains. M. Declare the fifth. S. In the Fifth is commanded, that we kill no body unjustly, nor do them harme in their Persons; I say unjustly, because Judges who condemn malefactors to death, and Ministers of Justice, who put them to death, as also Solders in a just War, do not sin whilst they wound and kill. M. Declare the sixth.
S. The sixth, commands that we commit not Adultery, that is, sin with the wife of another man: and it is also understood, that we commit not Fornication, nor any other carnall sin. M. Declare the seventh. S. The seventh commandeth, that no man take away the goods of others secretly; which is called Robbery, nor commit any deceit in selling, buying, and like contracts; and finally, do no harm to his neighbour in his Goods. M. Declare the eighth. S. In the eighth is forbidden false witness, murmuring, detrac∣ting, flattering, lying, and all other hurt, which is done to our Neigh∣bour with the Tongue. M. Declare the two last. S. God commanded in the two last Precepts, that none desire the
wife or goods of others, because he that seeth our hearts, will have us holy and clean, not only out∣wardly but also inwardly, so that we may be intirely and truly just. Of the Commandments of the Church, and of Councils. M. ADd to the Commandments. Of God, those few which the Church hath added. S. The Commandments of the holy Church are six. 1. To hear Mass upon the Sun∣days, and Holy-days of command∣ment. 2. To Fast Lent, Vigils com∣manded, & Ember-days, and not to eat Flesh on Fridays or Saturdays. 3. To confess our sins at the least once a year. 4. To receive the B. Sacrament at the least at Easter.
, To pay Tithes. 6, Not to celebrate Marriage in time forbidden, that is, from the first Sunday of Advent, until Twelf-day, and from the first day of Lent till Low-Sunday inclusive. M, Besides the Commandments, which we are all bound to keep, be there any Councels of perfection? S, There be three Counsels by our Saviour Christ, given to those that desire to attain to perfection. M, Which be these Counsels? S, Voluntary Poverty per∣petual Chastity, and obedience in every thing that is not sin. Of the Sacraments. M, WE have already treated of that which we must believe, hope for, and do; it re∣maineth that we speak of the Holy Sacraments, by means whereof we obtain the grace of God.
M. Say therefore, how many Sa∣craments be there? S. There be seven, [viz.] 1. Baptism, 2. Confirmation, 3 Eu∣charist, 4. Penance, 5. Extream Unction, 6. Order, 7. Matrimony M. Who ordained them? S. Christ Jesus our Lord. M. What effect doth Baptism work? S. It maketh a man become the Child of God, and Heir of Para∣dise: it blotteth out all Sins, and filleth the Soul with Grace, and spiritual gifts. M, What effect doth Confirmation work? S. It fortifyeth a man that he be not afraid to confess the Faith of Christ our Lord; and so it ma leth us become the Soldiers of our Saviour. M. What effect maketh the Eucha∣rist?
S. It nourisheth Charity, which is the life of the Soul, & doth daily increase it more. And therefore it is given under the form of Bread though truly it be not Bread, but the true body of our Lord: as like∣wise that which is in the Chalice, is not Wine, albeit it seem Wine; but is the true blood of the same Christ our Lord, under the form of Wine. M. What effect worketh Penance? S. It forgiveth sins committed after Baptism, and bringeth again to the frienship of God, him who through sin was become his enemy M. What must we do to receive this Sacrament? S. We must first have sorrow for our own sins, with purpose never more to commit them, Then we must confess them all to a Priest, ap∣proved by Superiors: and finally we must do the penance that is en∣joyned by the Priest.
M, What effect doth Extreame Unction work? S, It blotteth out the relicks of sin; giveth joy and strength to the soul, to fight against the Devil in the last hour; and also helpeth to recover bodily health, if it be so expedient for the salvation of the soul. M. What effect worketh the Sacra∣ment of Order? S. It giveth Virtue and Grace to Priests, and other Ministers of the Church to be able to do well their Duties. M, What effect hath the Sacra∣ment of Matrimony? S. It giveth Vertue & Grace to those that be lawfully joyned to∣gether, to live in Matrimony with peace & charity, & to beget & bring up their Children in the holy fear of God, to the end they may have joy in this life, and glory in the other.
Of the Theological and Cardinal Virtues. M. WE have now ended the four Principal parts of the Christian Doctrine, which be the Creed, the Pater Noster, the Com∣mandments, and the Sacraments. I will now, that we talk of Virtues and Vices, and of some other things which do help us much to live con∣formably to the will of God, Tell me therefore, How many Principal Virtues be there? S, There be seven: three Theo∣logical, and four Cardinal; M, Which be the Theological? S, Faith, Hope, and Charity, M, Wherefore be they called Theo∣logical? S, Because this word Theo∣logical signifyeth a thing that re∣gardeth, or appertaineth to God,
M, How doth Faith then apper∣tain to God S. Because it makes us believe all that which God hath revealed to his Holy Church. M. How doth hope pertain to God? S. Because it makes us put our trust in God, and hope for eternal life of him, by means of our merits which yet do proceed from his grace. M. Why doth Charity pertain to God? S. Because it makes us love God above all things, & our Neighbour as our selves for the love of God. M. Why are they called Cardinal? S. Because they are Principal, and as it were the Fountains of all good works. M. Which be the Cardinal Virtues? S. Prudence, Justice, Fortitude, and Temperance. M. Declare unto me the office of these Virtues.
S. Prudence makes us considerat and wary in every thing, to the end we our selves be not deceived, nor deceive others Justice makes us render to others, that which is theirs. Temperance makes us bridle our inordinare desires. For∣titude causeth that we fear not any danger, nor even death it self for Gods service. Of the Gifts of the Holy Ghost. M. HOw many are the Gifts of the Holy-Ghost? S. They be seven, 1. Wisdom. 2. Understanding. 3. Counsel, 4. Fortitude. 5. Knowledge. 6. Piety. 7 Fear of God. M. Whereto do these gifts serve? S. They serve for the help of vir∣tue, and to make us perfect in the way of God, because through Fear, we abstain from Sin: through Piety we are devout & obedient to God:
through Knowledg we are taught to understand the will of God: by Fortitude, we are holpen to put the same in execution: through Coun∣cils we are admonished of the de∣ceits of the devill: through Ʋnder∣standing, we are elevated to pene∣trate the misteries of Faith: through wisdom we become perfect, order∣ing all our life, & all our works to the glory of God; because the wise man doth know the last end, and direct every thing there unto. Of the works of Mercy. M, HOw many be the Works of Mercy, of which we shall be demanded account in particular, at the day of Judgment? S, They be seven, 1, To give Food to the Hungry, 2, To give Drink to the Thirsty, 3, To cloath the naked, 4, To harbour the Pilgrims, 5, To visit the Sick,
6, To visit the Imprisoned, 7, To bury the dead, M, These be corporal works of Mercy: Be there any spiritual? 8, There be other seven; To wit, 1, To give counsel to the doubtful, 2, To instruct the ignorant, 3, To admonish sinners, 4, To comfort the afflicted, 5, To pardon offences, 6, To endure patiently those that be troublesome, 7. To pray to God for the living, and the dead, Of Sins, TO come now to sins, How many sorts be there of sins S, Two, Original and Actual, which are afterwards divided into Mortal and Venial, M, What is Original Sin? S, It is that in which we are all born, and we have it as it were by
Inheritance from our first Father Adam. M, How is this sin blotted out? S. With holy Baptism: and there∣fore he that dyeth without Baptism goeth to Limbus, and is deprived for ever of the glory of Heaven. M. What is Mortal sin? S, It is that which we commit against the Charity of God, or of our neighbour; and it is called mortal, because it depriveth the Soul of her spiritual life, which is the grace of God. M. How is this sin forgiven? S. By holy Baptism when a man is Baptized in age, and hath com∣mitted sin actually before: or by the Sacrament of Penance, as hath been said before. And who dyeth in mortall sin, goeth to the ever∣lasting pains of Hell. M. What is venial sin?
S. It is that which is not against Charity, and deprives not the Soul of Grace, nor sends it to the Pains of Hell: yet nevertheless it dis∣pleaseth God, because it is not con∣formable to his will: and it dimi∣nished the fervour of Charity, and therefore it is needful it be purged in this World, or in purgatory, which is in the other life. M. How many are the Capital Sins and as it were the Fountains of all others? S. They be Seven: and to every one is opposite a contrary Virtue. Capital Sins. Pride Covetousness Luxury Anger Gluttony Envy Sloth Opposite Virtues. Humility Liberality Chastity Patience Abstinence Brotherly love Diligence. M. How many are the Sins against the Holy Ghost?
S. They be Six. 1. Despair of salvation. 2. Presumption of God's Mercy. 3. To impugn the known Truth. 4. Envy at another mans Good. 5. Obstinacy in sin. 6. Final Impenitence. M. How many are the sins that cry to Heaven for vengeance? S. They are four. 1. Wilful Murther. 2. Carnal sin against Nature. 3. Oppression of the Poor. 4. To defraud Workmen of their Wages. Of the four last things: and of the ROSARY. M. HOw many are the last things of man, which the scripture so calls, and which being well consider∣ed, make us abstain from sins?
S. Four. 1. Death. 2. Judgment. 3. Hell. 4. Heaven. M. What exercise have you to maintain your Devotion? S. I say the Rosary of our Lady; and do meditate the 15 Misteries of the same, wherein is contained the Life of our Lord Jesus Christ. M. Which are the Fifteen Mysteries of the Rosary? S. There are five joyful. 1. The Annuntiation of the Angel. 2. The Visitation of S. Elizabeth. 3. The Nativity of our Lord. 4. The Presentation in the Temple. 5. The disputing of the Child Jesus with the Doctors. Other five are sorrowful. 1. The Prayer in the Garden. 2. The whipping at the Pillar. 3. The crowning with Thorns. 4. The carrying of the Cross. 5. The Crucifying and Death of our Saviour.
The five last are Glorious. 1. The Resurrection of our Lord. 2. His Ascension. 3. The coming of the Holy-Ghost. 4. The Assumption of our B. Lady. 5. Her Coronation and Exaltation a∣bove all the Quires of Angels. Live, Jesus, live, and let it be My life to dye for love of thee.
THE MANNER OF Serving a Priest at MASS. The Clerk must kneel at his left hand, and answer him as follows. P. INtroibo ad Altare Dei. C. Ad Deum qui laetificat ju∣ventutem meam. P. Judica me Deus, & discerne causam meam, de gente non sancta, ab homine iniquo & doloso erue me. C. Quia tu es Deus fortitudo mea, quare me repulisti, & quare tristis incedo dum affliget me inimicus? P. Emitte lucem tuam, & verita∣tem tuam: ipsa me deduxerunt, & adduxerunt in montem sanctum tu∣um, & in Tabernacula tua.
C. Et introibo ad altare Dei, ad De∣um qui laetificat juventutem meam. P. Confitebor tibi in cythara De∣us, Deus meus: Quare tristis es ani∣ma mea, & quare conturbas me? C. Spera in Deo, quoniam adhuc confitebor illi: salutare vultus mei, & Deus meus. P. Gloria Patri, & Filio, & Spi∣ritui Sancto. C. Sicut erat Principio, & nunc, & semper, & in saecula saeculorum. Amen. P. Introibo ad altare Dei. C. Ad Deum qui laetificat juven∣tutem meam. P. Adjutorium nostrum in nomi∣ne Domini. C. Qui fecit Coelum & Terram. P. Confiteor Deo &c. C. Misereatur tui omnipotentes Deus, & dimissis Peccatis tuis, per∣ducat te ad vitam aeternam. P. Amen.
C. Confiteor Deo omnipotenti, B. Mariae semper Virgini, beato Micha∣eli Archangelo, beato Joanni Bapti∣sta, S. Apostolis Petro & Paulo, omni∣bus Sanctis, & tibi Pater, quia pecca∣vi nimis cogitatione, verbo & opere, (knock your breast, and say) Mea cul∣pa, méa culpa, mea maxima culpa, Ideo precor B. Mariam semper Vir∣ginem, B. Michaelem Archangelum, B. Joannem Baptistam, Sanctos A∣postolos Petrum & Paulum, omnes Sanctos & te Pater orare pro me ad Dominum Deum nostrum. P. Misereatur vestri, &c. C. Amen. P. Indulgentiam, absolutionè, &c. C. Amen. P. Deus tu conversus vivificabis nos C. Et plebs tua laetabitur in te. P. Ostende nobis Domine miseri∣cordiam tuam. C. Et salutare tuum da nobis. P. Domine exaudi orationem me∣am.
C. Et clamor meus ad te veniat. P. Dominus vobiscum. C. Et cum spiritu tuo. P. Kyrie Eleison. C. Kyrie Eleison. P. Kyrie Eleison. C. Christe Eleison. P. Christe Eleison. C. Christe Eleison. P. Kyrie Eleison. C. Kyrie Eleison. P. Kyrie Eleison. P. Dominus vobiscum, or, Flecta∣mus genua. C. Et cum Spiritu tuo, or, Levate. P. Per omnia saecula saeculorum. C. Amen. At the end of the Epistle, say, Deo gratias; then remove the Mas-Book, and ever kneel or stand on the contrary side to it. P. Sequentia Sancti Evangelii, &c. Here make the sign of the Cross, and say: C. Gloria tibi Domine.
Then make reverence at the begin∣ning and ending of the Gospel, and at the name of Jesus, and at the end say, C. Laus tibi Christe. P. Dominus vobiscum. C. Et cum Spiritu tuo. Here the Clerk is to give Wine and Water decently, prepare Water and Towel for the Priest, and answer. P. Orate Fratres. C. Suscipiat Dominus hoc sacrifici∣um de manibus tuis; ad laudem & gloriam nominis sui, ad utilita∣tem quoque nostram, totiusque Ecclesiae suae sanctae. P. Per omnia saecula saeculorum. C. Amen. P. Dominus vobiscum. C. Et cum Spiritu tuo. P. Sursum corda. C. Hebemus ad Dominum. P. Gratias agamus Dom. Deo nostro C. Dignum & justum est.
When the Priest spreads his hands over the Chalice, light the Candle; kneel, and hold up the Priests Vest∣ment, till the Elevation be past; that done, kiss the Vestment, and so often as you pass before the Blessed Sacrament, adore on your knees. P. Per omnia saecula saeculorum. C. Amen. P. Et ne nos inducas in tentationem. C. Sed libera nos à malo. P. Per omnia saecula saeculorum. C. Amen. P. Fax Domini sit semper vobiscum. C. Et cum Spiritu tuo. The Clerk must take the Pax, and kneeling, give it the Priest to kiss. P. Pax tecum. C. Et cum Spiritu tuo. Pausing a little, rise, give the Pax to the audience, according to every ones dignity, then give Wine and Water to the Priest, and if there be any Commu∣nicants,
provide Towel and Wine, and say Confiteor. After they have Re∣ceived, give them Wine, remove the Book, take away the Towel, and put out the Candle. P. Dominus vobiscum. C. Et cum spiritu tuo. P. Per omnia saecula saeculorum. C. Amen. P. Ite misfa est, or, Benedicamus Domino. C. Deo gratias. Note, that in the Mass for the dead, the Friest saith not, Ite missa est, but, P. Requiescant in Pace. C. Amen. Remove the Book, if he leave it open, kneel, and take the Priests blessing, arise, and say at the beginning of the Gospel, Gloria tibi Domine. At the end say, Deo gratias. Put out the Candles, and lay up all handsomely, And if you have leisure, meditate a while, and say the Prayers following.
A devout Prayer to our Lord Jesus Christ, to be said both Morning and Evening. GLory, Honor, and Praise, be to our Lord Jesus Christ: may all the world adore thee, blessed be thy holy Name, who for us sinners vouchsafest to be born of an humble Virgin; and blessed be thine infi∣nite goodness, who dyedst upon the Cross for our Redemption. O Jesu, Son of God, and Saviour of mankind, have mercy upon us, and so dispose our lives here by thy Grace, that we may hereafter re∣joyce with thee for ever in thy heavenly Kingdom, Amen.
The entertaining of good Thoughts. Sunday. O Repose! O glory everlasting! What is it to enjoy you; and what to be without you! Munday. The hour of Death will come, then all will be past: What would I at that time wish to have done? Let us now do it, O my Soul, let us now do it. Tuesday. Ah poor Soul, thou must come to judgment all alone, thy Works, thy Words, thy Thoughts shall be seen of the Saints and Angels of God; and all shall there be laid o∣pen! Oh, have therefore a special care of thine own good.
Wednesday. To burn in hell fire, for all eter∣nity, and that with Devils! O tor∣ment greater than all torments! Thursday. He that loseth his Soul, loseth all: he that offends God, loseth his Soul! O sin, what a loss dost thou bring unto us! I detest thee from the bot∣tom of my heart, most detestable sin. Friday. O sweet Jesus, to thee I conse∣crate my life, my desires, my Soul, For me wast thou nailed on the Cross. For thee will I give my life, & dedicate my self wholly to thee. Saturday. O Blessed Virgin Mary, how in∣tirely did you love your Son Jesus! O cause me to love and serve him, and that nothing in this world may ever separate me from his Holy Grace.
The Application or practise of the fore∣said good Thoughts. EVery day, Morning & Evening, for the space of one Ave-Mary or two, in a most serious & affectu∣ous manner, think upon that which is set down for every particular day before: And renew the same good thought every hour, which may ea∣sily be done at all times, and upon e∣very occasion, either sitting, stand∣ing, walking, working, &c. And all sorts of people, though never so rude, may be made capable hereof, Viz. Children, Laborers, Servants, yea, even amidst their imployments and businesses, be they never so great or serious. The Blessing. THe Blessing of God Almighty, Father, Son, and Holy-Ghost, descend upon us, and dwell in our hearts for ever.
An Oblation to ALMIGHTY GOD. To be made every Morning & Evening. O My most merciful Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, Father, Son, and Holy-Ghost; to the great glory of thy most holy name, to the honor of the most blessed Mother the Virgin Mary: To the honor of my Angel-keeper, and of S. Michael, S. Gabriel, S. Raphael, and the S. S. N. and N. my holy Patrons and Pa∣tronesses, and to all the holy Saints and Blessed Spirits in Heaven, to the increase of their joy and glory. Here I, a most wretched and mise∣rable sinner, prostrate, adore, and worship thee, offering up in all hu∣mility,
immortal praise & thanksgi∣vings for all thy Blessings; especially for that unspeakable charity, where∣in thou didst send down thy only be∣gotten Son into the Vale of Tears, for the Work of our Redemption. Eternal love of Heaven & Earth, I praise and magnify thy ever glori∣ous Name for thy Sons most holy Incarnation & Nativity, for his po∣verty & innocent conversation, for heavenly Doctrine & Miracles, for his Death and Passion; for his Re∣surrection and Ascension. I yield thee all due and possible thanks for that Divine Mystery of his precious Body and Blood in the venerable Sacrament of the Eucha∣rist, wherewith we are nourished, cleansed & sanctified, and our Souls made partakers of all Heavenly Graces, and Spiritual Benedictions. I give thee most humble & hearty
thanks, that of a handful of dust, and nothing, thou hast vouchsafed first to wash me with the Laver of Bap∣tism, in remission of that Original corruption, contracted in my first Parents; that after in due and con∣venient time, thou hast brought me to the exercises and acts of a right Faith, not ceasing daily to increase the same in me, by the Doctrin and Instruction of the Holy-Ghost. I most humbly thank thee also, that from my cradle thou hast nourished & cloathed me, supplying all things necessary for the relief and mainte∣nance of this my feeble body. I evermore extol and magnify thy holy Name, that in thy great mercy thou hast hitherto spared me, wan∣tonly rioting in manifold excesses, & patiently expected me, till by thy Grace I might be awaked from the sleep of sin, and reclaimed from my
vanities and wicked Courses. For hadst thou dealt with me according to my demerits, my Soul long ere this (oppress'd with innumerable sins) had been plunged in Perditi∣on; yea, the yawning gulph of hell had swallowed me quick. In respect of all which thy mercies and blessings, I most humbly desire that my heart may be evermore en∣larged, to render thee a more ample tribute of Praise and Thanksgiving then heretofore it hath done. O my Lord, & most indulgent Fa∣ther, never leave me to my self, but let the bridle of thy holy fear be ever in my jaws to curb & keep me with∣in the compass of my obedience; that I may dread nothing so much in this world, as in the least sort to offend thee: To which end, let thy holy love so temper all trials and temptations which befall me, that I may pro∣fit
my self by them; for thou know∣est how frail I am of my self, and how my strength is nothing. Moreover (most merciful Father) even by the profound humility of thy Son Jesus Christ, I beseech thee that thou wouldst preserve me thy Servant from all Pride of mind, all self-love and vain-glory, all obstina∣cy and disobedience, all craft and dissimulation. Cast down, I beseech thee, the Spirit of gluttony and un∣cleaness, the Spirit of Sloth & hea∣viness, the Spirit of malice & envy, the spirit of hatred and disdain; that I may never despise any of thy Crea∣tures, nor prefer my self before o∣thers, but ever seem little in my own eys, to think the best of others, and judge the worst of my self. Invest me (most holy Father) with the weding-garment of thy beloved Son, the supernatural virtue of hea∣venly
Charity, that I may love thee, my Lord GOd, with al my heart, with all my soul, & with all my strength; that neither life nor death, prospe∣rity nor adversity, nor any thing else may ever separate us from thy love Grant that all inordinate affections to the transitory things of this world, may daily decay in me, that thou alone mayest be acceptable to my soul. O my most gracious God, give thy servant an humble, contrite, and obedient heart, and understanding always imployed in honest & pious cogitations: A will tractable, and ever prone to do good; affections al∣ways calm and moderate; a watch∣ful custody of my Senses, that by those Windows no sin may enter in∣to my soul, a perfect government of my tongue, that no corrupt or un∣seemly language may proceed from
my lips, that I may never slander or speak ill of any whomsoever; that I may not busie my self in the faults and imperfections of others, but wholy attend to the amendment of my own. And finally (most loving Lord) so long as I am detained in this Prison of my body, let this be my comfort, that being free from all secular cares, I may wholly devote my self to thy Service, and only give enter∣tainment to thy Heavenly Doctrin, and to the good Motions and Inspi∣rations of thy Holy Spirit. In these sweet exercises let me pass the solitary hours of my tedi∣ous confinement, with Patience ex∣pecting the shutting up of my days, and a happy end of this my mise∣rable life. And grant, O Redeemer of man∣kind, my Lord and God, that when
this my Earthly Tabernacle shall be dissolved, through contrition, and the virtue of the Sacraments of the Holy Church, I may be reckoned in the number of those blessed souls, who through the Merits and Passion of thy dear Son, are held worthy to reign with thee, and to enjoy the glorious presence of the blessed Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy-Ghost, to whom by all Creatures in Heaven and Earth, be rendred Praise and thanksgiving, world without end. Amen. O Lord my God, O Lord my God, Possess my Soul, Possess my Soul, Possess my Soul.
A Table of SINS. To help the Ignorant, and ill of Memory; where∣in, when they would be confessed, they may presently find out with little labour, the sun∣dry and manifold ways of offending God. Of the Ten Commandments. The First Commandment. NOT loved God above all things. Born over much love to Creatures. Doubted or staggered in matters of Faith. Ignorant of the Ten Commandments. Of the Commandments of the Church. Of the Articles of Faith. Murmured against God in adversity. Lack of Confidence in God. Presumption of his Goodness. Desperation of his Mercy. Believed Dreams, or tellers of Fortunes. Gone to witches, or cunning men for coun∣sel.
Read, or keep Heretical Books. Favoured Hereticks. Conversed with them without necessity. Hindred any ones Conversion from Here∣sie or Schism. Not recommended my self daily to God and his Saints. Not conformed my Will in all things to the Divine Will. The Second Commandment. TAken the Name of God in vain: Blasphemed God. Forsworn my self. Sworn by the Body, or Members of Christ. Cursed my self. Cursed the Creatures. Given my self, or others to the Devil. Broken my Vows. Angred others so far, as to make them Swear or Blaspheme God. The Third Commandment. NOt kept Holy the Sabbath day, and other days commanded. Bought or sold things, not of necessity for that day. Done or commanded some servile work. Nor heard Mass.
Talked, gazed, or laughed in the Church. Not cared to hear Catholick Sermons. Spent the day in dancing, drinking, dicing, or carding. Omitted to say my Mattins, Even-song, or other Devotions. The Fourth Commandment. NOt Honoured my Parents or Superi∣ours. Despised them. Spoke evil of them. Disobeyed them. Not succoured them. Made them heavy. Cursed them. Murmured against them. Not prayed for them. Not used due reverence to aged Persons. Mocked or jested at them. The Fifth Commandment. DEsired the death of some one, or of my self. Born hatred. Oppressed my Debtors. Desired Revenge. Not forgiven. Refused to speak. Given discourteous Language.
Threatned, or strucken others, not in your Charge. The Sixth Commandment. COmmitted Adultery. Procured pollution. Unclean thoughts, word, or deeds? Jealous without cause. Unchast looks. Lascivious dressing. Over-curious beholding. Lewd company. Dishonest Books. Unchaste Songs. Love Letters. Shewed my Skin, or some naked part of my body to entice others. Eaten hot Meats, or drunken hot Wines, to procure Lust. The seventh Commandment. STealth. Cozenage. Deceit in Gaming. In Reckoning. In Buying. In Selling. In Wares, Prices, or Weights. Bought of such as could not Sell. Taken of such as could not give. Wilfully endamaged another mans Goods. Negligently spoiled them. Forged false Money. Clipped Money. Not payed my debts. Not fulfilled my Promise.
The Eighth Commandment. BOrn false witness. Called one filthy Names. Uttered anothers secret Sin. Spoke evil of others. Dispraised others. Believed false Reports. Not defended their good Names. Sowed Discord. Opened others Letters. Judged rashly. False suspected. Too much distrusted. Listned to others talk. Concealed the truth, to the detriment of a another. The Ninth Commandment. Coveted my Neighbours House. The Tenth Commandment. COveted his Wife. His Man Servant. His Maid-Servant. Or somewhat that is his. Of the Seven deadly Sins. The First of PRIDE. PRide, Vain-glory, Ambition, Superfluity Presumption, Vaunting, Hypocrisie, Idolatry, Dissimulation, Obstinacy, Cu∣riosity,
Flouting, and Scoffing, Contempt of others. Of Covetousness COvetusness. Niggardliness. Greediness Miserableness. Unprofitableness. Not given Alms. Not lent to some in need. Non contented with my own Estate. Of Luxury. OF the Sins of Luxury, see the Sixth Commandment. Of Anger. ANger. Impatience. Hastiness. Rage or Fury. Disdainfulness. Waywardness, Fretfulness. Discontentedness. Picking of Quarrels. Immoderate Grieving. Severe Correcting. Of Gluttony. GLuttony. Drunkeness. Delicate Dishes. Eating more than one Meal on Fasting days. Eaten Flesh on prohibited days. Banquited and Feasted above my ability. Given to Dogs that which the Poor would have been glad off.
Of Envy. ENvy. Grieved at another mans pros∣perity or gettings. Or to hear them well spoken of. Rejoyced at their hurt. Dispraised their Merchandize. Interpreted their Words or sayings in worser sort. Of Sloth. SLoth. Indevotion. Drowsiness or sleepiness. Idleness, or Laziness. Overmuch seeking mine own ease. Incon∣stant in good purposes. Neglect∣ed things given me in charge. In∣gratitude to God for his benefits. Unthankful to my friends and benefactors. Chosen rather to want, than to work or labor for my living. Not prayed for the faithful Souls departed.
PRAYERS. O God whose Property is al∣ways to have Mercy, and to spare, receive our Petition, that the tender Mercy of thy Pity may mildly absolve us, and all thy ser∣vants, whom the Chain of sin doth bind. HEar we beseech thee, O Lord, the Prayers of thy Supplicants, and pardon the sins of them that confess to thee, that thou being to us Benign, mayest in like manner give us Pardon and Peace. SHew with Clemency, O Lord thy unspeakable mercy unto us, that thou dost acquit us of our sins, and deliver us from the Pains which for them we deserve.
Prayers. O God, who by sin art offended, and by Penance pacified, mercifully respect the Prayers of thy supplicants, and turn away the scourges of thy anger, which for our sins we deserve. O Almighty and eternal God, have mercy upon thy Servant N. our chief Bishop, and direct him according to thy clemency, in the way of everlasting Salvation; that thou condescending, he may desire things agreeable to thy will, & with all his Power may perfect them. O God from whom all Holy Desires, righteous Counsels, and just Works proceed, give unto thy servants that Peach which the World cannot give, that our
hearts being disposed to keep the Commandments, and the fear of our enemies taken away, the times through thy Protection may be peaceable. ENflame, O Lord, our reins and heart, with the holy fire of thy holy Spirit; to the end we may serve thee with a chaste body and clean heart. O God the Creator & Redeemer of all the Faithful, give the Souls of thy Servants Men and Wo∣men, remission of their sins, that through godly Supplications, they may obtain the Pardon they have always wished for. PRevent, we beseech thee, O Lord our actions, by thy grace assist∣ing, and in helping forward prose∣cute them, that all our Prayers and
works may begin always from thee, and begun, may by thee be ended. O Almighty and Eternal God, who hast Power over the li∣ving, as also over the dead, and hast mercy on all those whom thou foreknowest shall be thine by Faith & Works; we humbly beseech thee, that for whom we have determined to pour forth our Prayers, and whom this present world as yet in Flesh retains, or the world to come hath taken unto it, now being deli∣vered from the body, all thy Saints making for them Intercession through the Clemency of thy pity, they may obtain Pardon of all their sins, through our Lord Jesus Christ thy Son, who liveth and reigneth God with thee, in the Unity of the Holy-Ghost, world without end. Amen.
V. O Lord hear my Prayer. R. And let my cry come unto thee. V. Almighty and most merciful Lord, graciously hear us. R. Amen. V. And let the souls of the faith∣ful through the mercy of God, rest in peace. R. Amen. Grace before Meat. GOod Lord bless us, and these thy Gifts to us, which we re∣ceive of thy bounty, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
Grace after Meat. WE give thee thanks, Almighty God, for all thy benefits, who livest and reignest world without end, Amen. Blessed be the Name of our Lord, from this time forth for ever, Amen. Vouchsafe, we beseech thee, O Lord, to all our Benefactors, for thy names sake, life everlasting, Amen. And may the Souls of the Faith∣ful departed, through the mercy of God, rest in Peace, Amen. FINIS.
