B3754 11956119 51512
A SUMMARY OR COMPENDIUM, OF The Life of the most Famous PHILOSOPHER Renatus Descartes. Written originally in Latin by Peter Borellus Physitian to the French King; to which is also added an Epitome of his Life by Marcus Zu∣rius Boxhornius Historio∣grapher at Leyden. LONDON, Printed by E. Okes, for George Palmer at the King and Duke of York's Head near Arundel-House in the Strand, 1670.
The Authors Epistle Dedicotory to Paul Pellisonius Fontane∣rius, Counsellor, and Secreta∣ry to the French King, King∣dome, and Crown of France. SInce you have vouchsafed, from my very infancy, to shew your benevolence towards me, and to oblige me to you by many signal favours; I should be guilty of gross ingratitude, if I left not some Monument of my Respects to You. Permit me therefore, Renowned Sir, to wear your Name in the Front of this small Treatise, which may produce a larger. I shall not undertake, according to the
usual mode of Epistolary Ad∣dresses of this nature, to expa∣tiate upon your deserved com∣mendation, which, I am confi∣dent, is unwelcome to You, and sufficiently known to all the World: All I desire is, that the present and future Age may testifie, that I am no waies un∣mindful of the benefits You have been pleased to confer up∣on me; and that I shall ever ac∣knowledge my self to be infi∣nitely obliged to You: Farewell.
THis Translation, or rather Collection, out of Peter Bo∣rellus, Physitian to the French King; and Marcus Zurius Box∣hornius Historiographer in the Ʋniversity of Leyden, presents you with the Life of the Famous Monsieur Descartes, giving you an account of his Parentage and Education, during his Minority, as well as the Course and Method of his Study, in his Riper Years; together, with an exact Catalogue of all his Manuscripts, which were found at Stockholme in Swede∣land, after his Death; and the names of all his Books that have been Published, with the Places
where they were Printed; as al∣so the several Epitaphs that were bestowed upon him by his Contem∣poraries, after his Decease. If this Epitome receive a kind entertain∣ment; 'tis very probable (when the Author, according to promise, exposeth a larger Treatise to pub∣lick View, concerning this Sub∣ject) that it may be also taught to speak English, for the satisfaction of those who want the advantage of the Latine, and are only skilled in our Mother-Tongue. This Compendious Discourse of the Life of so Eminent a Person, and great a Light in the Firmament of Learning, is all that we can
furnish you with at present, till we meet with an opportunity to gratifie you with a more Complete Relation in a larger Volume.
THE LIFE OF Renatus Descartes. THat there are certain Wits, whom Nature (like her most conspicuous Luminaries) only exposeth to view, and im∣mediately withdraws them from our sight; and by a certain kind of
envy, for which I want a name, suddenly snatcheth away with one hand, what she liberally contributed with the other, is a thing notorious to all men. Yet such Wits are rarely produ∣ced by her in the compass of an Age. Wherefore the Great Des∣cartes being one of that number, it seems to me a piece of inju∣stice and ingratitude, that the Life of so famous a Person should never as yet be printed or published in any place whatsoever. And although, my stilebe too unpolisht for so sub∣lime a Subject; yet I have pre∣sum'd to make an Essay in this weighty matter, and endeavou∣red
to give you a Compendium, the proportion of the foot of that Lion, as a fore-runner of a more full description of his Life, hoping it may be acceptable; to the end, that so great a Light might not be in a manner hid under a Bushel; for what the Roman Naso sang of old con∣cerning Pythagoras, we may de∣servedly apply to him. —isque licet regione remotus Mente Deos adiit, & quae Natura negavit Visibus humanis, oculis ea pecteris hausit; Cumque animo, & vigili perspex∣erat omnia cura
In medium discenda dabat— Translated to my hands by Mr. Sands. Though far from Heaven his minds divine ascent Drew near the Gods, what Na∣tures self denies To humane sight, he saw with his Souls eyes, With studious care his know∣ledg he profest. This renowned Person began to draw his first Breath in the year 1596, between the Britains and Poictevins, in the City cal∣led Castrum Eraldum, born of
a most Noble Father, Senator of his Countrey, whose Family was illustrious for their antient No∣bility, and was the only Son of his second Wife; he was a man of no mean estate, since he had between six and seven thousand pounds a year. He himself hath given you a Relation of his first course of Life, in the third Page of his Treatise de Methodo, as Clauber∣gius Professor at Teutoburg upon the Rhine hath observ'd; who affirms that Descartes made eve∣ry thing that was knowable, the Subject of his study, being in one of the best Colledges, imagining that he should find out the
Truth among those that were Learned; but being frustrated of his expectation, nine years were elapsed, before he could discover what Course he was to steer. He was thin fac'd, of a pleasant countenance, speak∣ing seldome, but excellently; healthful, sober, concealing his own parts, a hater of Disputes, but by proving the truth, he de∣tected error, a most bitter ene∣my to ostentation; preferring Reason before authority, though he made use of it: he delighted to discourse with Women; he often desired the renown of o∣ther persons, as he himself te∣fieth;
for he was no Boaster; nay, he was so modest, that he had not the confidence to assert what he understood. He was educated and taught in the Schools of Flexia, and had run through the whole course or race of his Study at seventeen years of Age. His Portraicture is carried a∣bout in all places, and in Hol∣land and Paris to be had in Copper: and because he was good both at the Pen and the Pike, he loved the valiant as well as the prudent and Learned, and so by a happy conjunction of Arms and Arts, in his younger years he made it his business to
understand Military Discipline among the Hollanders, the best Nursery for Souldiers; and as a Voluntary underwent all the dangers of War without any Pay, for the space of three years, he only received one Duplio, a piece of Money so called which he always kept as the Monu∣ment of his Warfare; he also re∣fus'd publick command, because he had a desire to perform the duty of a private Souldier, that he might be the better acquain∣ted with that Art, and the labo∣riousness thereof; and was twice present at the Siege of Breda, and in the Battel of Prague, from whence he visited Italy, ha∣ving
first taken a view of the large Engines of Tycho Brahe, and discours'd with his Relati∣ons. But in Italy he met with Ga∣lileus and other eminent Per∣sons, and thence he came to the Siege of Capha or Gava near Ge∣noa, and at length return'd to France, and was present at the Siege of Rochel, and in other Military Expeditions; nay, he went voluntarily to that Siege. He performed a memorable thing before Cardinal Barba∣rini, the Popes Nuncio, then Cardinal Berullius and o∣ther renowned and ingenious men, who assembled together to
hear Monsieur Chandou Dispute of the new Principles of Philo∣sophy: and when he had gain'd the applause of them all for his Speech, Descartes only except∣ed, they ask'd his opinion con∣cerning his Arguments, who commended the Authors Speech, but not the Company, because they were only satisfied with a bare probabilty, and did ingage to prove any probable Truth, false, by twelve several Ar∣guments, and so on the contra∣ry; which when he had at∣tempted, they were struck with admiration and astonishment; therefore they inquired of him, whether there was any way to
avoid Sophisms; and he assur'd them that the Truth might be Mathematically demonstrated in all things according to his Principles: then they intreated him that he would publish them; which request he was com∣pell'd to condescend unto, and betook himself to Holland, that he might the better prepare his conceptions for the Press. Afterwards he would needs take a journey into Denmark, where Stephen Bressiaeus our Countrey-man, a most skilful Physician and Chymist, & a per∣son very ingenious in Mechanicks (who visited him out of his ear∣nest desire of Learning) accom∣panied
him; but he was detain'd by the Emperors Forces in the County of Embden; then he endeavor'd to see Tyrol and Ve∣nice, and designed from thence to go to the Siege of Casal, which lasted above two years after all, which are sufficient testimonies, that he understood the Intrigues of Government. But he return'd again to Am∣sterdam, being accompanied with our friend Bressiaeus, that he might be present at the Kings return. He was in Holland in the year 1648, and thence cal∣led by the King to Paris, upon very honorable terms. Whilst he continued at Paris,
he so disposed of his annual Re∣venues, that he might receive them by the hands of a friend where he pleas'd. Therefore he went to Holland, where, in a De∣sart, he compos'd his so much applauded Works, of which we will give you a Catalogue. He had also before visited Germany and Huugary, whilst he was in pursuit of the Truth; where he was present at the Em∣perors Coronation. When he could not fine out that Democritical Truth a∣mong men, which lies hid, as it were in a bottom; he fell upon the Contemplation of the Book of the World, and of himself,
and studied Anatomy, Chymi∣stry, &c. from whence he ex∣tracted admirable things; he was slenderly stor'd with Books, because he understood they were not true, the Mathematical only excepted; wherefore be∣ing asked by a friend, whether he had a Library, and desired to shew it; lifting up the cloath, he discovered to him a Calf dis∣sected; Behold, saith he, my Library! O noble expression! so Hippocrates found Democritus heretofore studying among A∣nimals dissected: he was not tempted with the desire of gain, honor, or worldly Dignities, but he did Philosophize, out of the
love he had to vertue, and his de∣sire to make inquisition after the Truth. In this he did imi∣tate the Antients, which was the reason that he, according to their Custom, spent some years in Travel, and visit in the Ar∣mies, Cities and Courts of Prin∣ces. His chiefest design was to discover the equability of Judg∣ment, a virtuous mind, and the necessity of a Method; whilst he followed the War, in the Win∣ter he employed his vacant hours in Philosophical Contemplati∣ons, and being desirous to unlock the Arcana of the Mathe∣maticks and Philosophy with the same Key, he did so admira∣bly
conjoyn Nature and Disci∣pline, that he obtained his end. Yet he run through all the Arts and Languages, and in a short time turn'd over all sorts of Books, being in quest of the Truth, he perus'd those that were superstitious and false, that he might leave nothing unsaluted. He was so excellent in Philo∣sophy, that according to that constant desire which he ever had of restoring Philosophy, and re∣forming his own knowledge, he did invent an absolute new Phi∣losophy, and invented the true Principles, and most emnent Me∣thod thereof, insomuch that
his works were printed in all parts, & publikely profess'd by many famous men, and taught as now at Paris, where there are several private Academies, in which his Philosophy is only read. When he found that there was nothing worth his know∣ledge among men, he made choice of a desert (as Democri∣tus and other true Philosophers did) at Egmond in Holland, and there led a solitary life for the space of five and twenty years, and discovered many admira∣ble things by his contempla∣tion. He was so eminent in the
Mathematicks, that he did things beyond apprehension, especially about Prospectives; and to the end that he might prove his experiments, he pre∣pared Prospectives of a large size, either of ice or artificial black polisht marble made hol∣low according to his desire, and the various forms he phancyed by the assistance of Bressiaeus, a most ingenious man; and when he had accom∣plisht his design, he brake them in pieces, and made new ones of the same matter. And before the same Bressi∣aeus, by a hidden secret in the Opticks he would shew him a
company of souldiers march∣ing in his chamber, which he did much admire; but this pro∣ceeded from the smal figures of Souldiers which he conceal'd, and brought forth multiplied without doors. He believ'd the Heaven was fluid, as in truth it is, for the air alone is the Heaven, nor differs it from ours, therefore it is confoun∣ded in the History of Genesis. He did acknowledge Demo∣critus his Atoms to be the Principles of all things, as he most excellently proved. He had many, nay an innu∣merable, number of friends; among whom were Cardinal
Barbarini, and Berullius; Eli∣zabeth Princess of Bohemia, Monsieur Chaut, Monsieur de Clervelier, Mervenus, Monsieur Desargnes, Monsieur Holleng, Monsieur de Faber Governor of Sedam, Gassendus Balsaack, for whom Bressiolus did no ill office against Father Goulu his Enemy at Cardinal Barbari∣ni's; yet he had some that did hate and envy him; for envy alwayes aimes at high things; but he confuted their writings excellently. His chiefest ene∣mies were the Fathers of the Christian Chruch. Cyrianus Lentulus, Confes∣sor of Hereborn, injuriously
objected to him, that he com∣par'd himself to God, saying at the end of his notes, humane things are not to come in com∣petition with those that are di∣vine; he farther saith, that he doubted all things; which is a mistake, but heretofore in∣deed, like the rest of vulgar Philosophers, he was sceptical, before he had reform'd Philo∣sophy. he calls him also a Person of small esteem; but the Learned Clanbery replies excellently, you call him a man of mean repute, whom prudent men stile Natures Darling, and one that Pythagoras would tru∣ly call Philosopher. Revius Go∣vernor
of Westfrizeland in Holland was so bold as to call him Magician and Atheist; and so formerly all men of great Learning were accus'd of being Magicians, because they did things beyond the apprehensi∣on on of Sciolists; as Gabriel Nau∣dasus, in his Apologie for those men that were accus'd for dea∣ling with Magick, strongly proves. Yet so many were the plots contriv'd by his Antagonists Peripatetick Professors, (whose weak sight could not endure the rays of so great a Lumina∣ry, because like the Sun he ob∣scur'd their smaller lights,) that
they stirring up their Pupils and the whole City to a muti∣ny, durst banish him from the City of Ʋtreck by the sound of a Bell, whom Kings & Queens that were remote did in vit, and cherished in their bo∣some. The integrity of his life purg'd him from all calum∣nies; yet he on the contrary was no Detractor, nor injuri∣ous to any person. For he ne∣ver committed injuries to me∣mory, but to oblivion, and ar∣riv'd at the wonderful know∣ledge of God by contemplati∣on on the Creatures. It were as hard a taske to reckon his fol∣lowers,
& admirers, as to count the stars, or number the sand. The Learned Gassendus also, and Koberval his worthy suc∣cessor, writ some things against him; but this was done rather out of an earnest desire to en∣quire after the truth, then out of any hatred; Marinus Mersenus being an affector of curiosity, promoting and stirring them upto it, that he might oblige men of such great parts to dis∣course of many rare things, to satisfie his own curiosity. In fine, this Learned and fa∣mous man was call'd from his retirement by Christina the quondam Queen of Swedeland,
and infinitely belov'd by her, insomuch that she would hear him almost constantly arguing, which much prejudiced his health; for he being alwayes bare, and discoursing with her, the major part of the night, u∣pon those subjects she most de∣sired, by that means he had lit∣tle rest, and fell into a distem∣per, which he neglected, think∣ing it an usual disease, and that he might soon be freed from it; but when shortly after he per∣ceiv'd it was another kind of malady, and understood it was an inflammation of the Lungs; he ordered a vein tobe opened, which prov'd ineffectual, and
on the seventh day of his dis∣ease, he deceased: which proves these known Verses to be true; Annos & Regnum Filii Re∣gente, Legatus Ordinarius Petrus Cha∣nul Hoc monumentum Ad gloriam Die, bonorum omni∣um datoris, Gallici nominis honorem, Perpetuam amici Chariss. memo∣riam Renati Descartes poni curavit Anno 7. ab excessu Ludovici Justi.
The Third Front. Renatus Descartes Perronii Dominus, &c. Ex Antiqua & nobili inter Pretones & Armori∣cos gente; In Gallia natus. Accepta quantacunque quae in scholis tradebatur eruditione, ex∣pectatione sua votisque minore. Ad militiam per Germaniam & Pannoniam adolescens profectus, & in otiis hybernis naturae myste∣ria componens cum legibus Ma∣theseos, Ʋtriusque arcanaea∣dem clave reserari posse ausus est sperare.
Et omissis fortuitorum studiis, in villula solitarius, prope Eg∣mundum in Hollandia, Assidua 25. annorum medita∣tione, auso potitus est; Hinc orbe toto celeberrimus: A Rege suo conditionibus hono∣rificis evocatus: Redierat ad contemplationis delicias, unde avulsus, admirati∣one virtutum, Maximae Reginae; Quae quicquid ubique excel∣luit suum fecit, Gratisssimus adve∣nit, serio est auditus, & defletus obiit.
The fourth Front. Noverint posteri Qualis vixe∣rit Renatus Descartes; Ʋt cujus doctrinam olim susci∣pient, mores imitentur, post instauratam a fundamentis Phi∣losophiam, Apertam ad penetralia Natu∣rae Mortalibus viam Novam, certam, solidam. Hoc unum reliquit incertum, Major in eo modestia esset, an scientia. Quae vera scivit ve∣recunde affirmavit. Falsa, non contentionibur, sed vero admoto refutavit: nul∣lius
Antiquorum obtrectator, nemini viventium gravis. Invidorum criminationes pur∣gavit innocentia morum: Injuriam negligens, am irtiae tenax, quod summum tandem est: Ita per Creaturarum gradus ad Creatorem est conatus; Ʋt opportunus Christo, gra∣tiae authori, in avita Religione quiesceret. I nunc viator, & cogita, Quantus fuerit, Christinaeque qualis aula, cui mores isti pla∣cuerunt.
This Monument was in form four square, but somewhat long, eight foot and a half in heigth, four in breadth, and seven foot and a half in length; the heigth or pile had three Divisions: the Basis being somewhat lar∣ger with three pedestals, the Tables whereon the Inscripti∣ons were, were four, and the Ornament at the top made of one stone covering the whole monument a foot and a half. Many persons besides be∣stowed Epitaphs upon him at his Death; which we judge not convenient to be here in∣serted. He left many posthumous
Works, as well published as in Manuscript; the latter Monsi∣eur Chaunt Ambassador in or∣dinary of Swedeland preserves, and de Clervelier, who will shortly publish his select E∣pistles. A Catalogue of the Manuscripts of Descartes, found at Stock∣holm after his Death. Anno 1650. A. Decem codices Responsio∣num ad quaesita eruditorum circa Mathematicas disciplinas. B. De Numeris irrationali∣bus,
de quantitate linearum quae in dato circulo inscriptae sunt quantitatem Circumferen∣tiae cui datae lineae subtendun∣tur, cognoscere, aliaque propost∣ta ac demonstrationes. Problema ad numerum repe∣riendum, cujus partes aliquotae sub duplices sint. Propositio de Parabolis com∣positis, & de partibus aliquotis numerorum. Cogitationes variae de a∣nimo. Quaestiones quaedam de nu∣meris.
Considerationes quaedam Phy∣sicae incipientes. Quare pueri labuntur in som∣num, dum cunae concutiuntur. Promiscuae Animadversiones de coelis. Physicae Quaestiones, & Con∣sideratio Physica. Thaumantis Regia. Epistola de Mersenum. Liber anni 1619. Kal. Jan. sub titulo Parnassi de conside∣rationibus Mathematicis. C. Olympica & ad margi∣nem 11. Novembris coepi intelli∣gere fundamentum inventi mira∣bilis.
Quaedom in scientias conside∣rationes. Quaedam de Algebra. Democritica. Experimenta. Praeambula. D. Introductio ad Algebram suam 155. pag. E. Scriptum sic inciens. Vitellio sic numerat. Aliud, Metallorum pondera. Primae cogitationes circa ge∣nerationes animalium 19. fol. cont. De Magnete Kircheri. De formatione Animalium. 5. folia.
Historiae Metallorum. Remedia, & vires Medica∣mentorum. Observationum de natura Plan∣tarum & Animalium pag: 16. De partibus in inferiore ven∣tre contentis. F. Codices novem de Regulis utilibus & claris, ad ingenii di∣rectionem in veritatis inquisiti∣ene. G Descriptio Corporis humani. De natura Hominis & Ani∣malium; an imperfect piece. H. Progymnasinata de parti∣bus aliquotis numerorum.
1. Epistolae. K. Secunda pars tractatus de Passionibus. L. Querela Apologetica ad amplissimum Senatum Vltraje∣ctinum, contra Voetium & Dema∣tium. M. Progymnasmata de solido∣rum Elementis. N. De natura Passionum∣nimae. O. Sub forma Epistolae ad Dominos...... nine Books. P. Collectanea de calculo ad Geometriam utilia; in twelve Books.
Q. Veritatis Inquisitio Lu∣mine naturali. fol. 13. R. De Musica fol. 8. written in the year 1618. S. Explicatio machinarum, quarum ope, parvis cum viribus, magna tolli possunt onera. 6. pag. T. Epistolarum ad varios fol. 262. in 4o. V-Epistol. ad Serenissimam Principissam Bohemiae 19. fol. in 4o. and two in 80. X. De doctrina Principi∣orum suorum, in 14. leaves, but in some things varying from
the Treatise published of that Subject. Y. Tractatus de Geometria. Z. De responsionibus ad Ob∣jectiones quasdam, &c. in 14 several leafes. These are is Manuscripts.
Here follow those works of his that were published in French and Latine. Methode de bien conduire la raison, pour trouver la verite dans les sciences. 16. 7. 4. Be∣sides, la Dioptrique les Meteores & la Geometrie, which are es∣says of that method, Printed at Leyden, and sold by John le Maire. Renati Descartes meditationes de prima Philosophia, in which God's existencie, & the immor∣tality of the Soul is demon∣strated;
at Paris, by Michael Soly in S. Jame's street, at the sign of the Phoenix, Anno 1641. in 80. It contains six meditations, and answers to some objections; He also dedicates his Opus Theologicum to Gassendus, prin∣ted at Paris. Renati Descartes meditationes de prima Philosophia. In which God's existencie, & the distin∣ction between the soul and body of man are demonstrated; to which are several objections made by learned men against those demonstrations of God and the Soul, with the Author's answer thereunto. The second
edition, with the Addition of seven objections never before made publick, at Amsterdam, by Lewis Elzevir, Anno 1642. in 24. with the Epistle of Father Dinet the Jesuite, in which he answers many objecti∣ons made by a certain person. Renati Descartes Principia Philosophiae, dedicated to Eli∣zabeth eldest daughter of Fre∣derick King of Bohemia, Count Palatine, and Elector of the sacred Roman Empire, Printed at Amsterdam, for Lewis El∣zevir, Anno 1644. It contains four parts; to which are an∣nexed his Specimina Philoso∣phiae,
seu dissertatio de metho∣do rectae regendae rationis & veritatis investigandae. His Dioptrice and Meteora transla∣ted out of French, perus'd and corrected by the Author. Les Passions de l' Ame, par Rene Descartes, at Amsterdam, by Lewis Elzevir, An. 1650, in 8. In this Treatise there are three parts; it was published by Monsieur Degmont, who adds the Epistle he writ to him concerning that Subject. Clauberg quotes his Medita∣tiones, Objectiones, Responsiones, & Epistolae ad Dinetum, Voe∣tium;
the third Edition, by Elzevit, Anno 1650. Geometria a Renato Des∣cartes 1537. published in French, and now with the notes of Florimond'de Beaume Coun∣fellour to the French King in the Court at Blois, turn'd into Latine, and illustrated with a Comment; by the labour and industry of the Mathema∣ticks in that University, Printed for John Maire, at Leyden, An. 1640. in quarto. This Treatise of Geometry, with his Specimina Philoso∣phiae Descartes, published in
French without a name to it; but it being earnestly desired by many persons who were ig∣norant in the French Tongue, Schelten translated it into La∣tine and published it. Renati Descartes Musicae compendium. Trajecti ad Rhe∣num, Printed by Gilbert a Zull and Theodorus ab Ackersdijck, Anno 1650. in quarto. Les Meditations Metaphysi∣ques de Rene Descartes, touch∣ant la Premiere Philosophie. In which God's Existencie, and the real distinction between the Soul and the Body of man,
are demonstrated, translated out of the Authours Latin, into French, by Monsieur le D. D. L. N. S. and Les objections faits contre ces Meditations par diverses per∣sonnes Doctes, avec les respon∣ces del' Autheur; Translated by M. B. L. R. Printed at Paris, and sold by the Widdow of John Camusat and Peter le Petit; as also La responce au recueil de ses principales Instacnes. This Translation was by a great Lord.
Books composed concerning Des∣cartes his Philosophie, either approving, or disapproving thereof. Nova Renati Descartes sa∣pientiae, fusiore quam ante∣hac, methodo detecta, by Lentulus. De Philosophia Cartesiana amplectenda, ambigendi impel∣lentes causas initio suae novae sapientiae, in octavo by Clauberg, who relates and confutes them. De methodus Carthesi∣anae consideratione Theo∣logica, by James Revius,
Dr. in Divinity and President of the Colledge of the most Il∣lustrious States of Holland and Westfriesland. Abstersio Calumniarum. By the same Authour. Statera Philosophiae Car∣thesianae, by the same person. Defensio Carthesiana adver∣sus Revium Theologum Lei∣densem, & Cyriacum Lentu∣lum Professorem Here bornen∣sem, by John Cla uberg professor in the publick Ʋniversity of Teutoburg upon the Rhine; pars prior exoterica, in qua Renati Cartesii dissertatio de methodo vindicatur, simul il∣lustria Carthesiana Logica &
Philosophica Specimina exhi∣bentur; at Amsterdam, by Lewis Elzevir, 1641. 6. La Philosophie Divisce en¦toutes ses parties, Establi∣sur des Principes evidens, & expliquee en Tables & Dis∣cours ou particuliers, ou tires∣des anciens & des nouve∣auk Autheurs, & principale∣ment des Peripateticiens, & de Descartes, Compos'd by James de Roure at Paris, and sold by Thomas Jolly, Anno 1654. in 12. Abstersio macularum Renati Descartes. Notae & Sermo extempora∣neus, three Books heretofore made concerning Cartesius in
Holland, where many rare things are discourst of, concerning him. Disquisitio Metaphysica, seu dubitationes & instantiae ad∣versus Renati Cartesii Meta∣physicam & Responsa. Printed at Amsterdam by John Bleau, Anno 1649, in quarto; Dedica∣ted to Serberius. Considerations sur le Traite des Monsieur Descartes des passions de l'Ame, By N. Papin Dr. in Physick, Printed at Paris, sold by Simon Piget, in the rue St. Jaques a la Syrene, Anno 1652, in octavo. Where be expiati∣ates in the praise of Descartes. Brevis replicatio reposita brevi explicationi ment is hu∣manae, seu animae rationis do∣mini
Henrici Regii Med. ac Phil. Ultrajectini notis Cartesii in programma ejusdem argu∣menti firmandis, veritatique magis illustrandae; By Tobias Andreas A. L. M. Greek and Latin Professor in the Ʋniversi∣ty of the States of Groenig and Oulandia, Printed at Amster∣dam, by Lew is Elzevir. an. 1653. Henrici Regii Ultrajectini Philosophiae naturalis editio secunda, priore multa locuple∣tior & emendatior, Published at Amsterdam, by Lew is Elze∣vir, 1654. Specimina Philosophiae Carte∣sianae, by Dan. Lipstorp Lubeker, to which is added by the same Au∣thour Copernicus Redivivus, at
Leyden, by John and Daniel El∣zevir. Anno 1653. Physique expliquee suivant le sentiment des amiens & des nouveaux Philosophes, & Principalement de Descartes by James de Roure, the se∣cond Edition printed at Paris, by Thomas Jolly. Anno 1654. Monsieur de Clercelier will suddenly publish his Epistles translated by Monsieur Picot, as also his Objections he hath put in another Language. Mon∣sieur Hollenc, a Dutchman, hath many of his Epistles with their Answers. Francis Schoten, Pro∣fessor of the Mathematicks at Leyden, in his Epistle to the Reader, stiles him a most No∣ble
and incomparable Person. These Verses are deserved∣ly placed upon his Effigies. Talis erat vultu Naturae filius unus. Qui mente in matris viscera pandit iter, Assignansque suis quaevis mira∣cula causis, Miraculum in reliquum solus in orbe fuit. Here's Natur's Darling in Effigie, Who reach't his Mothers se∣crets by his brains, The nat'ral cause of wonders shews, whilst He The only wonder of the world remains.
He had an admirable me∣thod peculiar to himself, which he made use of; and by which he examin'd all Propositions; first whether they were possible, and then by the same method he taught the solution of them; which is judg'd to be con∣tained in his Geometry. I shall not attempt the relation of the Elegies be∣stowed upon him, because they are infinite; it shall suf∣fice if I affirm that he was deservedly applauded by all
Authors that writ of him; among whom John Clauberg extols his modesty and other qualifications in a Speech. Henry More, a Learned Eng∣lishman, in his judgement of his dissertations speaks thus of him. In your method by a certain elegant and sportive kind of modesty, you manifest your self a man of such parts that nothing can be phansied or desired more pleasant or amia∣ble then your virtuous incli∣nation, and natural dispositi∣on, nothing more noble or ge∣nerous.
Gassendus himself could not avoid writing to him thus. To the famous Renatus Des-car∣tes; Renowned Sir, Our friend Mersenus made me happy, when he communicated those your sublime meditations concern∣ing the first Philosophy; for the excellencie of the argument, the readiness of the wit, and the perspicuity of the stile was wonderfully taking; therefore I doe freely rejoyce on your behalf, that you should so nobly and successfully attempt
to advance the bounds of Learning, and facilitate those things that were counted the most absttuse in all former Ages. A certain Divine objecting against his meditations expres∣seth himself thus; Truly, as far as I can per∣ceive, Monsieur Descartes is a man of such admirable wit and great modesty, that Mae∣vius himself could not but fall in love with him, if he were present, We thought it not imper∣tinent to insert the Opinion of some persons concerning the
Place of Descartes his Nativi∣ty; which is, that he was not born in the very Castle Eral∣dum, but at Tours, near that Castle. Marcus Lurius Boxhornius Historiographer in the Ʋni∣versity of Leyden upon the death of Descartes. To Renatus Descartes that nocle Frenchman Sieur de Perron. WHO knowing how much we are ignorant of, and that the greatest part
of what we know not, and that most people are ignorant of those things they boast and presume to understand, and that by this means such things are taught and delivered which must be unlearned; though it seem'd good to him to doubt of those hitherto received opi∣nions of Philosophers; that doubting he might find out a plain way to wisdom both for himself and others; who re∣stored the Philosophy that was aequaevous to Nature; and so consequently that which was as true as ancient; and brought the same out of that filthy servitude wherewith it
had been enslav'd for many Ages, and as it were ma∣numitted it; who by his wit and experiments survey∣ing the Universal Nature of things, and making a dili∣gent and serious inspection into her closest cabinet coun∣sels, was not satisfied with those things that were ancient, for their antiquity; nor did those that were modern dissa∣tisfy by reason of their novelty for he was sensible that what is now old was once new, and what is now new will in pro∣cess of time become old, but as he found them either true or false; therefore a new and
true way of Philosophizing was set up, which will continue, and in time grow old; the famous Peter Chaunt, Ambassadour from the Most Christian King to Chri∣stina, the Most Noble and Learned Queen of Swedeland, erected this Monument with that of Marble. The same Authors Epitaph. Qui sibi demeruit totum Cartesi∣us orbem, Extremum fati transigit ille diem. Avia cui veterum visa est sapi∣entia, veram Praetulit antiquae, praeposuit∣que novam.
Sunt imitatores servum pecus, hunc venerare, Naturam agnosces hoc praee∣unte ducem. Here lies Descartes who deserv'd to have A world, intombed in a single Grave. To him old Learning crabbed seem'd, the true He did preferr to th' old, pro∣pos'd the new; They are dull that Ape him, doe you reverence pay To him that taught, that nature leads the way.
These verses were annexed by Christian Hugenius, to the Effigies of Descartes, lively represented by Francis Schoten. Primus inaccessum qui per tot se∣cula verum Eruit e terris longae ealiginis umbras, Mysta sagax. Natura, tuus sic cernitur orbi Cartesius: Voluit sacros in ima∣gine vultus Jungere victurae artificis pia dex∣tera famae;
Omnia ut aspicerent quem saeculo nulla tacebunt. Truth that lay shrowded in the veil of night For many Ages, he first brought to light: Thus Nature, thy Interpreter, we see Cartes; and th' Artist strives by skill that he May match his Statue to his long-liv'd fame; To let all see each Age pro∣claims his Name.
Thus the great Descartes liv'd and died, after four moneths residence in Swedeland; where, in that small tract of time, he had so ingratiated him∣self in the favour of the Queen, that, as Daniel Lipstorp, Profes∣sor of Philosophy at Lubeck, af∣firms, she did condescend to water his arme with her tears; he left us wonderful praises of him, and proves that he was accounted chief among those persons that were eminent above other men; and that Phi∣losophy was beholding to the same Descartes for a new birth; and relates many things con∣cerning
his life, viz. that his Father was a noble person of Poictiers, and liv'd a private life at the Town of Limonum in that country, a long time; and that afterwards he was made Lord President in the chief Court of Kenes in the Dutchy of Britany, who died whilst Descartes was in the Low Coun∣tryes. He goes on farther; that he made his Compendium Musicae when he was twenty years of age. He gain'd Ʋreter, and Becman Moderator of the Col∣ledge of Dort, and a most Fa∣mous Philosopher and Mathe∣matician, as his friends and ad∣mirers, soon after he had solv'd
those Propositions in his Method which were thought impossible for all persons. But before he betook himself to his retiring place, he had seen the Military Discipline of France, the Low Countryes, Denmark, Germany and Italy. At Ʋlme he saluted John Faulhabertus a Fa∣mous Mathematician, and when he had clear'd unto him many knotty difficulties in the Mathe∣maticks, as also to Peter Roten of Norimberg a Mathematician, he soon gain'd the love of all the learned Men there. Then he visited the more Northern parts of Germany, and saw Pomerania, the Marquisate of
Brandenburgh, Megapolis, Holsa∣tia, Denmark, and from thence went to Holland; afterwards he went to Italy through the Ne∣therlands, and then arrived in France, and resided three years at Paris. There he was acquain∣ted with Monsieur Claudius My∣dorgius a Parisian Senator, and Treasurer of France; Florimond de Beaune a Senator in the Court of Parliament at Blois, John Baptista Morinus Mathe∣matical Professor, &c. Then leaving Paris, as also his Brothers, Sisters, &c. He came to his Philosophical Re∣tirement at Egmond, where he continued some time; then he
was at Endegest, then at Amster∣dam, then at Leward in West∣frizeland, then at Daventry, then again in a little village near Harlem, then again at Harder∣wick, then at Ʋtrecht in Hol∣land, then at Leyden; but he most frequently liv'd in villa∣ges, where he compos'd his books in this subsequent order; his Dissertation concerning Method, his Dioptricks and Meteorologicks: then his Geo∣metry, upon which Treatise Florimond de Beaune and Fran∣cis Schoten made Annotations; then he compiled his Meditati∣ons, and his Principles of Phi∣losophy; he also made his Tra∣ctate
of Man, of the Generati∣on of Animals, and his Geome∣trical Analysis, which will spee∣dily be published: as also a small Treatise concerning Me∣chanicks, which with two E∣pistles to the most Serene Prin∣cess Elizabeth, I have delive∣red to the Printer, that they may be made publick. Among his friends and ad∣mirers are to be reckoned C. Salmasius, S. Maresius, Abraham Heidan, Professors in Divinity; Adrian Herebord, James Golins, John de Raey a Physitian, Godfrey ab Hastrecht a noble Leodicensian, Cornelius Heegland a noble Dutchman, Monsieur Picot a noble
Frenchman, Monsieur Chilot the Mathematician, and an innume∣rable number of other persons. That we may also lay some stone to adorn the Tomb of Des∣cartes, take this Epitaph of him. The Epitaph of Descartes. Siste gradum, Viator; hic enim in parvulo isto Sarcophago vir latet, quem totus vix olim orbis continere potuerat; ingenio enim suo omnes antiquos super avit Philosophos. Is fuit qui Natu∣rae velum, quo se ab hominum conspectu retrahebat, solus amo∣vit, quique rebus antiquis, novi∣tatem,
obscuris lucem, & novis authoritatem dedit: sed immodi∣cis brevis sit aetas, & rara se∣nectus, nobis subito ereptus est; senex enim ante aetatem profunda sua et universali eruditione cum esset, mors illum pro vero sene in aetatis suae flore sustulit. Lacry∣mis tuis dignus fuit profecto quisquis es, praesertim si literariae Reipublicae membrum existas: erat enim Doctorum ornamen∣tum, Philosophorum gemma, Mathematicorum Corona. Homi∣numque omnium Decus; virtu∣tes omnes in illo tanquam Gra∣tiae conjunctae manibus erant; a∣deo ut dubitasses quaenam ea∣rum in eo magis emineret, ut sol
inter astra minuta, vel Luna inter ignes minores, per totum orbem effulsit. Cumque non sibi, sed aliis natus esset, unicuique fere Nationi per aliquod tempus sese ostendit, ut eas grata sua prae∣sentia erudieret. Lugeant ergo omnes immaturum ejus obitum, ejusque exemplo caeteri Philosophi filo Cartesiano quod in suis nobis reliquit seriptis e rerum Naturae Labyrinthis sese extrlca∣re tentent, ut tanquam Pygmaei Gigantis illius humeris insisten∣tes aliquid, si possibile sit, ulteri∣us conspicere valeant; ad ho∣minum omnium, praecipue Litera∣torum, utilitatem, propriamque suam laudem, nostri semper Au∣thoris
laudes decantantes, quod viam ad abstrusiora penetranda iis monstraverit, quodque veri∣tatis in profundo delitescentes detegendi amore eremos longis∣simo tempore coluerit, ut tan∣dem scientia satiati quantum a∣pud homines licet, cum illo ad Beatorum sedes conscendere va∣leant.
Now, Courteous Reader, you have the promis'd Epitome of the Life of Descartes, and of all things that could possi∣bly come to our knowledge concerning him; may you enjoy it with all the satisfa∣ction imaginable; and if we find that this is acceptable, it will be an encouragement to us to offer unto you some∣thing more perfect.
Addition. Cornelius ab Hogeland de∣dicated his Cogitationes de Existentia Dei, & Animae Spi∣ritualitate, &c. to Monsieur Descartes. FINIS.
Observations out of a French Epistle of Descartes, to Fa∣ther Marinus Mersenus. THe reason why I am of o∣pinion that some certain portions of the most subtile parts of the blood are convey∣ed to the stomach and inte∣stines through the Arteries to help digestion, is, first, be∣cause I have observ'd that the saliva or spittle, which when we eat, or have a desire thereunto, and have only an imaginative faculty, comes to the mouth in such abundance, proceeds not only from the kernels or Glan∣dules
arising from the root of the tongue (or probably pro∣ceeds only to the throat (un∣less it be transferr'd to the mouth of the vessels by the as∣sistance of the tongue) but from the Arteries arising from the gums: for I have made so clear an experiment hereof, that beyond all dispute the same work is performed by these Arteries which are carri∣ed to the Intestines and Ven∣tricle; since we see that pur∣gative medicines do draw the largest quantity of humours from the whole body to the In∣testines, and we know no other passage (in my apprehension)
to those humours; for the veins are obstructed by a thou∣sand valves, as may be expe∣rimented if both in the mesen∣terium of a live Dog be tied, the Arteries between the Inte∣stines and the Ligature will swell, and no farther; and the venae lacteae as well as the other veins do the contrary. But those Sanguinal parts which enter into the stomach cannot retain it's reddish colour, no more then the saliva (which helps the digestion of food whilest masticated in the mouth) nor of tears or sweat which are by the same means separated from the blood, pas∣sing
through the extremities of the Arteries; for this redness proceeds from its more vis∣cous parts, which I judge are of irregular forms, and re∣semble twigs which mutually embrace and intersect one a∣nother; and this is the reason they cannot possibly make their way through such narrow pas∣sages, but only those that are most subtile, which I phancy to resemble needles that pierce the narrowest holes; and the faculty of their segregation is sufficiently and experimental∣ly manifested in extravasated blood; for we see that after Phlebotomy the serous matter
of the blood in the Porringer separates it self, and is clear; whereas the remainder which is red or black is congeal'd. As to the cause of Chylificati∣on in the veins, I know no o∣ther but that which causeth the Intestines to lye out of the bel∣ly when wounded with a sword, viz. the compression of the cuticles or other particles which contain them; and be∣sides, the more fluid parts of that Chyle are capable of this penetration by their own weight without compression: like water which passeth from coagulated milk or curds, through the holes of the vessel
into which it is put by their own natural agitation; for I conceive that every part of any liquor is in perpetual motion; and farther, the action of the muscles doth very much con∣duce hereunto, in regard that it causeth the parts of the Chyle from that part of the holes where it finds a passage, to enter into the venae lacteae as well as the other veins; for I make no difference between them, but only this, that their juice is white, because they are accompanied with none of the Arteries; but the others red, because intermixed with the blood flowing from the Ar-
Nor do I only reckon the pe∣ctoral muscles, those of the Ab∣domen and Diaphragm in the number of muscles, but almost all the whole substance of the Intestines and Ventricle; and I have made this observation in the dissection of live Dogs, that their Intestines have a regular motion, nearly resembling that of respiration. But this mo∣tion of the muscles is not so ab∣solutely necessary, as the moti∣on of the sieve is to expel the dust, because then the parts of the Chyle have a voluntary mo∣tion of their own, which the o∣ther hath not. And this compa∣rison of the searse or sieve doth
please me extraordinarily, and seems very proper for the ex∣plaining of the various separa∣tions of the blood which are made in the Cystis fellea, the Reins, and other parts of the body, the Spleen only excep∣ted; for I do not judge that the melancholique humour there∣in is conveyed thither by the means of this separation; but I rather think that the blood gains this quality in the spleen it self. For some Serses are made to separate the dust from the grain that is round in shape; others, in which Oats and not Rye are sifted; others on the contrary are made for
Rye, and not for Oats, and that according to the largeness and figure of their holes; and by this means I am of opinion that those small ductus by which the Choler passeth to its Cystis, are of a different forth from those by which the serum is transmitted to the Reins, &c. And as to that clammy sub∣stance, or filthy matter which is sometimes found in U∣rine; that generally flows from the Reins, or such parts as are subject thereunto; and if it happen that it proceeds from the superiour parts, the reason of that may be gathe∣red from hence, that it pro∣ceeds
from more penetrative parts then those by which the blood is dyed with a red colour; because they pene∣trate a place, which passages the other could not permeate; for by what means can we imagine that the blood should be impe∣ded, but that it may flow through such passages as are large enough for it's recepti∣on. This Noble Extract out of Descartes contains many rare modern opinions in Anatomy, which possibly may prove ad∣vantageous, if truly and equal∣ly balanced.
The Abstract of another Epistle to the same person, Anno. 1632. I Am not so rude, but that I desire all persons should think well of me, yet I had ra∣ther they should not at all make mention of me, for I am more fearful then desirous of fame; and do imagine that she always by one means or other impairs the fruition of the lea∣sure and liberty of those that are famous: Both which I so perfectly enjoy, and so high∣ly esteem, that I think there is no Monarch in the World
whose Treasury is so richly stor'd as to enable him to pur∣chase them of me: Yet all this shall not obstruct my perfect∣ing of that little Treatise which I have begun; but I shall de∣sire you to conceal this, that I may have the liberty of laying it aside; and this I do at va∣cant hours, because I take much more delight in forming my own judgment, then in publishing any of my own conceptions, of what Nature soever they be. Now I am in∣tent both upon Chymistry and Anatomy, & daily increase my knowledge in some particular or other, in which the turning
over of Volumes left me dis∣satisfied. Out of another Epistle, to the same person. I Cannot but admire that you should freeze water with water, and not with Ice; since the experiment is a thing so faisible, that it is almost im∣possible to erre in the attempt, and I my self have effected it above a hundred times. True it is, that a sufficient and large quantity of Oyl, Ice, or Snow, is necessarily requisite, but Snow is better than Ice, be∣cause it will better incorporate
with the Salt, and the quanti¦ty thereof must also be grea about a third or fourth part o the quantity of Snow, and th Vessel which contains the fresh water used in this mixtur must be buried, and remain i the ground till it be almost al melted; and the water wil freeze as soon as the Snow i melted. He saith also, that 'tis not the water which hinders the light from penetrating to the bot¦tom of the Sea; or passing through a very thick glass, the glass it self; but the impuri∣ties that are intermixed in them, which are not transpa∣rent.
He farther adds, that Sea wa∣ter is not so salt in havens, on shores, and neer the poles, as in other places. The Abstract of another Epistle to the forementioned Mer∣senus. YOu desire to know of me the reason why a long Bow, or any other Bow, lose∣eth it's force if it stand long bent; the cause is easily found out by my principles; for the pores which I call Ellypti∣cal at first, do sensibly by de∣grees grow to be round in form, by reason of those small
particles of subtile matter have a constant inward influence upon them. This subtile mat∣ter hinders us from throwing a stone, or raising our bodies to a prodigious height; for were it not for this matter which makes all heavy bodies tend downwards, a stone would mount up to the Firmament when thrown upwards; and when we by a leap or jump raise our selves from the ground, we should ascend without falling down again. And a little after. That which makes us rise
when we leap, is only the re∣verberation of our strength, whereby we beat the earth be∣fore we raise our selves from the ground: now this strength being consumed, we must of necessity fall down again; nor is it possible that we should continue hovering in the air, unless we could, with so much activity beat the air with our feet and arms, that it could not so suddenly recede as it doth, which is requisite to the rai∣sing of our bodies higher, and is the course that birds make use of in their flight. And Farther. But I am not so destitute of
Books as you imagine; for I have still the summary of St. Thomas, and a Bible which I brought with me from France: Besides, he entreats him not to discover the place of his Resi∣dence, because he desires lit∣tle or no company. He adds further in another place; I rejoyce to hear that Monsr. Morier hath some hope of perfecting his Work con∣cerning Prospectives; but I only confide in Monsieur de Beanne; and if he succeed not in his Enterprize, I my self will make an essay. He saith also; If that subtil matter with which the earth is
environ'd, should not turn a∣bout, no body could be pon∣derous; and if it took its com∣pass about the Moon, all things would tend towards the Moon, &c. This subtil matter which is in our bodies, doth not con∣tinue there a moment, but de∣parts from them, and a new matter perpetually enters; and 'tis true, that that matter doth not immediately invigorate our motions, but our animal spirits, which are contained in the nerves, and are as it were agitated in those passages by this subtil matter. As also; I do not at all won∣der how small bullets should
be found inclosed in stones, but admire that they were not converted into stones. He afterwards fully informs him in many particulars, and then proceeds: If it be true that the Magnet (as you in∣form me in your writings) de∣clines now less from England than formerly, this indeed is a thing worthy our strict ob∣servation; whether this mu∣tation appears to be done by degrees, or otherwaies. This Epistle was penn'd in the year 1639. in the close thereof.
The Abstract of another Epistle to the same Person, bearing date in the Moneth of March, Anno 1641. Amsterdam. I Am glad that Monsr. Picot hath relished my Meta-phy∣sicks; for you know, there is more joy in Heaven for the conversion of one sinner, than a thousand just persons that persevere. Out of another Epistle to the said Father Mersenus, from Ende∣gest, bearing date the 20th. of Octob. 1642. THere are several waies of preventing the offensive
smoaking of chimneys, accor∣ding to the various causes of the smoak; and the most usu∣al occasion is, that the Cham∣bers for the most part do not receive a sufficient quantity of air from without, to supply the place of the smoak that goes out of the room; for 'tis ob∣servable, that the fire, by its vi∣olence, expells a great quan∣tity of air with those small par∣ticles of wood, which inter∣mixing with the air, causeth the smoak, as the grosser parts of the wood make ashes; and since there can be no vacuum in Nature, it necessarily follows, that there must be a constant
access of fresh air into the Chamber, and that in as large a quantity as the smoak that goes out; as may be seen in Chymical furnaces, at the bot∣tome whereof there is a hole which receives a great part of the wind wherewith the fire is kindled, which wind is nothing else but air expell'd from the place which the smoak, pro∣ceeding from the fire, tends to: so that when a Chamber is close shut, the smoak must needs flye about it, that is, that the smoak which is caused by the fire must fill the chamber, because the air of the chamber tends only towards the fire;
and the usual remedy in such cases is, to open the door, or windoors; but because this is somewhat incommodious, it may be avoided by making holes behind the chimney, which are opposite to the fire, or behind the bed-stead. Out of another Letter to the same Person, dated at Amsterdam, May, 1643. I Return you thanks for the secret of Father Grandami∣cus, about the making of a Nee∣dle without declination: in∣deed, I am apt to believe that it declines less than others do, but yet not altogether without any declination.
Also, The Experiment of the weight which inclines from the South to the North, is Very ob∣servable, and agrees very much with my observation concern∣ing the Flux and re-Flux of the Sea; but I would fain know how many feet long the threed was, to which the weight was fastned, that I might thereby understand whether I could try that Experiment here; for I judge it to be of a very great length: I would also be sensi∣ble of the time when it vergeth towards the South or North; if my conjecture deceive me not, that must happen when the Moon approacheth near
our Meridian, or withdraws from it. The Extract of another Letter, dated at Endegest, Decemb. 17th. 1642. VOetius his Treatise against me, entituled, The Carte∣fian Philosophy, is in the Press; but I will give a concise An∣swer to that large Volume; and so they shall be both published together. I am pleas'd to receive an account of you, concerning what you writ to me about. He is a person very curious, & skill'd in abundance of those petty Chymical secrets which
are carried about by such kind of men. If he had proceeded at the same rate whilst he was with me, he could not but have un∣derstood many things, as pro∣bably now he doth: but you are sensible that I do not at all value those kind of secrets; that which I much esteem him for, is, that he is well skill'd in the manual operation of such things as are prescribed to him, and is very ingenious. He pro∣fers his service to me, but I would not have him come at present, because I will not em∣ploy my self about Experi∣ments, till I have completed my Philosophy for the Press. But if
at any time afterwards he is at liberty, and cannot dispose of himself to better advantage, I should be satisfied, if he would be with me; yet I must beg of you not to acquaint him here∣with; for many things may fall out in the interim, which might hinder him, and I would not, ut in calculo suo falleretur, that he should be frustrated of his expectations, as most Al∣chymists are; but if you un∣derstand his condition, and course of life, you may, if you please, acquaint me therewith. I suppose Bressiclus, the Gratia∣nopolitan, is the person he speaks of, a Chymical Physi∣tian,
who being a great Admi∣rer of his Philosophy, visited him, and cohabited with him a long time, in order to the try∣ing of Experiments, he being a most ingenious and excellent Artist. The Abstract of another Epistle. I Was overjoy'd when you did inform me that a Brass∣plate did weigh no more when hot, than cold; for that is a principal thing in your expe∣riment concerning the Aeoli∣pile; and beyond all dispute, now, this being granted, with∣out doubt, that which encrea∣seth
its weight four or five grains, when it is heated, is on∣ly the rarefaction of the air therein contained, and by this method of weighing the air is found out. Also, If two bodies be thrown up on high, the Air resists the lighter body, which is the rea∣son it cannot mount so high as the other body. Likewise, The reason why a pair of Bellows, when opened, are fill'd with air is, because the air, when you move them to blow, is crowded out of that place which the lower part of the bellows receives, being lif∣ted up; and because that air
can find no room for it self in any other part of the World, therefore it retires again into the Bellows. I thought it not amiss to in∣sert here some scattered pieces, which are found in his French Epistles; that the opinion of so Eminent and Exemplary a Person, concerning the vari∣ous and curious Arcana of Na∣ture, might not be buried in Oblivion. FINIS.
