B3990 11670546 48050
Medicinal Experiments: OR, A COLLECTION OF Choice and Safe Remedies, FOR The most part Simple, and easily. Prepared: Useful in Fami∣lies, and very Serviceable to Coun∣try People. By the Honourable R. BOYLE, Esq; Fellow of the Royal Society. To which is annexed a Catalogue of his Theological and Philosophical Books and Tracts. The Second Edition. London: Printed for Sam. Smith, at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's Church∣yard. 1693. Price
THE PREFACE OF The Publisher. THese Receipts, taken out of a large Colle∣ction, as consisting of a few safe Ingredients, commonly to be found at easie Rates in most places, were sent to a learned Physician beyond Sea:
To whom they were a wel∣come Present, and answer'd, without doubt, the Ends he had in desiring them. That excellent Person, to whom these choice Prescripti∣ons are owing, did permit a few Copies of them to be Prin∣ted, and was pleased to put them in the Hands of some of his Friends, provided, as there was occasion, they would make Tryal of them, and faithsully report the Success. Divers of those, who on these Conditions had receiv∣ed so great a Favour, held themselves obliged to enquire for Persons affected with any
of the Maladies against which the said Medicines were pre∣scribed; and, upon many Ex∣periments carefully made, ha∣ving found, that frequently they have relieved those who used them, and sometimes strangely outdone Expecta∣tion; they addressed them∣selves with much Importunity to the Noble Author, to suffer Things, which were of such general Benefit, and so easily to be procured by the Poor, to be made more publick. And at length he hath been prevailed with not only to al∣low the former Receipts, which but few had seen, to be Re∣printed,
but hath, out of his rich Treasury, stored us with a fresh Collection, which, as in Number it exceeds what we had before, so in Quality and Virtue it falls not short of it. And if what here, with such an honest and kind De∣sign is offered to the Publick, be but candidly and favoura∣bly receiv'd, we may still hope for more Blessings of this sort from him, who has not only a constant Will and great Abi∣lity to do good, but hath, per∣haps, obliged the Age as much as any private Person in it.
The Author's PREFACE. THE following Prescri∣ptions are a part of a Collection of Receipts and Pro∣cesses, that from Time to Time have been recommended to me by the Experience of others, or approv'd by my own: Receipts that being Parable or Cheap, may easily be made servicable to poor Country People.
For Medicines so Simple, and for the most part so Cheap, I have found all of them to be good in their kind: And though I think most of them safer than many other Medicines that are in great Request, yet I do not pre∣tend that these should play the Part of Medicines and Physi∣cians too; but that they may be usefully employed by one who knows how to administer them discreetly. I distinguish them into three Classes or Orders, annexing to the Title of each particular Me∣dicine one of the Three first Let∣ters of the Alphabet; whereof A is the Mark of a Remedy of
the highest Classis of these, Re∣commended as very considerable and efficatious in its kind. B, Denotes a secondor inferior sort, but yet to be valuable for their good Operations. C, belongs to those Remedies that are of the lowest Order, tho' good enough not to be dispised. Those Receipts, which were my own, are expressed in my own Terms; so also those which I received from others by word of Mouth: But them which were imparted to me in Writing, though I my self would not have worded them, as they did that I had them from, yet I often∣times made a Scruple to Correct
or Alter their Expressions, tho' not suitable to the Current Style of the Formularies of Receipts, being more concern'd that the Meaning should be close kept to, than the Style rectified.
THE TABLE OF DISEASES. Note, The Number answers to the Page. A. AGues. Pag. 4, 13, 25, 74 Amulet against Agues. 13 Amulet against Cramps. 15 Acidities to Cure. 19 After-Birth to bring away. 21 Appetite to restore. 21 Antimonial Remedy for Leprosies and Fevers. 54
Antimonial Infusion. 56 Apoplexy to prevent. 65 Arthritick Pains. 71 Apoplectick Fits. 78 B. Bloody-Flux. Pag. 7 Bowels to Strengthen. 14 Blood to stanch. 16 Blood to Sweeten. 19 Brest Ʋlcerated. 23 Broken Belly. 33, 40 Black Jaundice. 44 Burns. 84 C. Coughs. Pag. 1, 32 Convulsions. 9, 20 Consumptions. 12 Child to bring away. 14 Cramp. 15 Contusions. 28, 29
Cutis Excoriated. 30 Continual Fevers. 51, 52, 54, 79 Chilblains. 53 Colick. 55, 62, 78, 85 Childbearing to be cleansed after. 57 Cancer not broken. 67 Colds. 69 Childrens Jaundice. 70 Chin Cough. 74 D. Dysentery. Pag. 7, 18, 59, 68 Diseases from Obstruction. 38 Difficulty of Hearing. 39 Drink for continual Fevers. 51, 52 Drink for the Scurvy. 64 Diuretick Medicine. 64 Decoction of Quick-Silver. 80 E. Evil. Pag. 7 Eyes to Cure. 20
Excoriations. 30 External Piles. 63 Experiment for a Weak Sight. 73 External Remedy for Fevers. 79 F. Fits of the Stone. Pag. 8 Fluxes sharp. 18, 26, 37, 59 Films to clear. 20 Fits of Agues. 4, 13, 25 Fits of the Gout. 40 Fits of the Mother. 50 Fevers continual. 51, 52, 54, 79 Falling Sickness. 75 Fits Apoplectick. 78 Fits strain. 83 G. Gripings. Pag. 26 Gout. 40, 50, 71 Gums to Strengthen. 69
H. Hemorrhoids. Pag. 10, 17, 27, 63, 84 Heart Burning. 34 Hearing difficult. 39 Hoarsness on a Cold. 69 Heat in the Eyes. 72 Heat of the Stomach. 87 I. Jaundice Yellow. Pag. 5, 6, 70 Inflammations of Ʋlcers 31 Jaundice Black. 44 Itch to cure. 58 Internal Piles. 63 Issue raw to make. 86 K Kings Evil. Pag. 7 Kings Evil cured with Lime Water, &c. 82
L. Lime Water to make. Pag. 11 Lime Water for Obstructions. 12 Legs Inflamed and Ʋlcerated. 31 Loosness. 37 Leprosie. 54 Lungs Stuffed. 74 Lime Water for the Kings Evil. 82 M Medicine for the Stone. Pag. 49, 76 Mother Fits. 50 Medicine for a fresh Strain. 52 Medicine to cleanse the Womb. 57 Medicine for a sore Throat. 60, 66, 77 Medicine for the Colick. 62 Medicine for a Cancer. 67 N Nitre, a Medicine of it for the Colick. Pag. 85
O. Obstructions. Pag. 12, 38 Outward Contusions. 28, 29 Oil of Turpentine mixt with Oint∣ment of Tobacco, and Balls of Sulphur for the Piles. 84 P. Pains of the Stone. Pag. 2 Pain of the Teeth. 4 Piles. 10, 17, 27, 63, 84 Pains. 31, 50, 71 Plaister to discuss Tumours. 43 Plaister to strengthen the Joynts. 50 Pleurisie. 68 Prolapsus Ʋteri. 71 Q. Quick-Silver prepared against Worms. 80
R. Rheumes. Pag. 1, 32, 68 Ruptures. 33, 40 Resent Strain. 35 Remedy for Chilblains. 53 Remedies for Fluxes. 7, 18, 26, 59 S. Stone. Pag. 2, 8, 49, 76 Sharpness of Ʋrine. 3 Strengthen the Bowels. 14 Stanching Blood. 16 Stomach to Strengthen. 21 Strain. 34, 35, 37, 52, 83, 85 Strengthning Plaister. 31 Sores. 41 Sore Throat. 60, 66, 86 Sharp Humours. 62 Scurvy. 64 Strengthen the Gums. 69 Syrup for Rheums. 68
Sharp Humours in the Eyes. 72 Sight Weak. 73 Stomach heat. 87 Stomachical Tincture. 88 T. Tooth Ach. Pag. 4, 32 Tertian Ague. 13, 74 Tumours. 17 Tickling Rheum. 32 Teeth to keep Sound. 32 Tumours to discuss and ripen. 43 Throat Sore. 60, 66, 77, 86 Teeth to make firm. 69 U. Ʋrine Sharp. Pag. 3 Ʋlcers of the Brest. 23 Ʋlcers. 41 Uteri Prolapsus. 71 Ʋrine stopt. 76
W. Women in Labour. Pag. 14 Wounds bleeding. 16. Weakness of the Joynts. 37 Water for Ʋlcers. 41 Womb to cleanse. 57 Wash for the Itch. 58 Weak Sight. 73 Worms in Children. 80 Whitloe to Cure. 81 Y. Yellow Jaundice. Pag. 5
DECAD I. I. For Coughs, especially such as proceed from thin Rheums. TAke of choice Oliba∣num,B finely powder'd, from one Scruple to half a Dram, and mix carefully with it an equal weight of Sugar-candy, (white or brown,) or, in want of that, of fine Sugar; and let the Patient take it at Bed∣time in the Pap of an Apple, or some other proper Additament, for
several nights together: If it be found needful, it may be taken at any other time, when the Stomach is empty. II. To give Ease in the Pains of the Stone, even that of the Bladder. TAke the transparent SparrA that grows upon the Veins of Lead-ore, and having reduc'd it to fine Powder, give from half a Dram to a whole Dram of it at a time, in a moderate Draught of some convenient Vehicle. N. B. Though there be (at least in most of our English Mines) two Tegu∣ments, as it were, of the Veins of Lead, that grow close together;
yet that which the Diggers name Cawk, which is white and opacous, is not the Medicine I mean, but the Transparent, or at least Semi-Diaphanous; which easily breaks into smooth Fragments, and in the Fire cleaves into several pieces, that are wont to be smooth, and prettily shap'd. III For Sharpness of Ʋrine. TAke of the dry stuff thatB divides the Lobes of the Kernels of Walnuts, beat them to Powder, and of this give about half a Dram at a time, in a draught of White-wine, or Posset-drink made with it, or in any other convenient Liquor.
IV. To Appease the Violent Pains of the Tooth-ach. MAke up a Scruple of Pil∣lulaeB Mastichinae, and half a Grain of Laudanum, into two or three Pills for the Patient to take at Bed-time. V. For Agues. TAke Salt of Card. Benedict.A and Salt of Wormwood ana 15 Grains, Tartar Vitriolate half a Scruple, mix them, and give them
in a few Spoonfuls of Rhenish∣wine, or of some other convenient Vehicle, either before the Fit, or at some other time when the Sto∣mach is empty. VI. For the Yellow-Jaundice. TAke an Ounce of Castle Soap,B (the Elder the better,) slice it thin, put it into a Pint of Small∣beer cold, set it on the Fire, let it boil gently half away, after boil∣ing some time, scum it once; then strain it through a small Sieve, warm it, and drink it all in a mor∣ning, fasting; take a small Lump of Sugar after it, and fast two or three hours: The Party may walk about his Business, and eat his ac∣customed
Meals: If at any time he drinks Wine, let it be White∣wine. N. B. If he be far gone in the Distemper; two or three days after, he may take it once or twice more, and no oftner. Refrain all other Medicines: It will keep a Week or longer. VII. For the Jaundice. TAke two or three Ounces ofB Semen Cannabis (Hempseed) and boil them till the Seeds (some of them) begin to burst, and a lit∣tle longer, in a sufficient quantity of New Milk, to make one good Draught; which the Patient is to take warm, renewing it, if need be, for some days together.
VIII. For the Dysentery. TAke Pigs-Dung, dry it, andB burn it to grey (not white) Ashes; of these give about half a Dram for a Dose, Drinking after them about three Spoonfuls of Wine-Vinegar. IX. For the Kings Evil. TAke Cuttle-bone uncalcin'd,B and having scrap'd off the out-side or colour'd part, dry the white part; and of this, finely
powder'd, give half a Dram for a Dose in Aqua Malvae. X. A Safe and Easie Medicine in Fits of the Stone. TAke Sack, or, in want ofB that, Claret-wine, and by shaking, or otherwise, mix with it, as well as you can, an equal quan∣tity of Oyl of Walnuts; and of this Mixture give from 4 or 6 to 8 or 10 Ounces at a time as a Glyster.
DECAD II. I. For Convulsions, especially in Children. TAke Earth-worms, washB them well in White∣wine to cleanse them, but so as that they may not die in the Wine: Then, upon hollow Tiles, or between them, dry the Worms with a moderate heat, and no further than that they may be conveniently reduc'd to Pow∣der; to one Ounce of which add
a pretty number of Grains of Am∣bergrise, both to perfume the Pow∣der, (whose scent of it self is rank) and to make the Medicine more Efficacious. The Dose is from one Dram to a Dram and half in any convenient Vehicle. II. For the Pyles. TAke the Powder of Earth∣wormsB prepared as in the former Receipt, (but leaving out the Ambergrise,) and incorporate it exactly with as much Hens∣grease, as will serve to make it up into an Oyntment. Apply this to the Part affected, whose Pains it usually much and safely mitigates.
III. To make Lime-water Ʋse∣ful in divers Distempers. TAke one Pound of goodC Quick-lime, and slake it in a Gallon of warm Water, and let it stand 'till all that will subside be settled at the bottom, and (Sepa∣ration being made,) the Water swim clear at the top: (At which time it will often happen, that a kind of thin and brittle Substance, almost like Ice, will cover the Surface of the Liquor:) As soon as the Wa∣ter is thus sufficiently impregna∣ted, delay not to pour it off wari∣ly, and keep it very well stopp'd for Use.
IV. A Lime-water for Obstru∣ctions and Consumptions. TAke a Gallon of Lime-waterB made as above, and infuse in it cold, Sassafras, Liquorice, and Anyseeds, of each four Ounces, ad∣ding thereto half a Pound of choice Currans, or the like quantity of slic'd Raisins of the Sun: The Dose of this compound Lime-water is four or five Ounces, to be taken twice a day.
V. An Amulet against Agues, especially Tertian. TAke a handful of Groundsel,B shred and cut it small, put it into a square Paper Bag of about four Inces every way, pricking that side that is to be next the Skin, full of large holes; and cover it with some Sarcenet or fine Linnen, that nothing may fall out. Let the Patient wear this upon the Pit of his Stomach, renewing it two hours be∣fore every Fit.
VI. For Women in Labour to bring away the Child. TAke about one Dram ofB choice Myrrh, and having reduc'd it to fine Powder, let the Patient take it in a Draught of Rhenish-wine or Sack; or, if you would have the Liquor less active, White-wine, Posset-drink, or some other temperate Vehicle. VII. For Strengthening the Bowels. TAke Cloves or Chives (notB Bulbs) of Garlick, and let the Patient from time to time
swallow one or two, without chew∣ing. VIII. An Amulet against the Cramp. TAke the Root of Mechoacan,A and having reduc'd it to Pouder, fill with this Pouder a lit∣tle square Bag or Sacket of Sarcenet, or some such slight Stuff; which Bag is to be about three Inches square, and to be hung by a String about the Patient's Neck, so as that it may reach to the Pit of the Sto∣mach, and immediately touch the Skin.
IX. For Stanching of Blood, especially in Wounds. TAke those round MushroomsA that Botanists call Crepitus Lupi, (in English Puff-balls▪) when they are full ripe (which is in Au∣tumn); and breaking them warily, save carefully the Pouder that will fly up, and the rest that remains in their Cavities: And strew this Pouder all over the Part affected, binding it on, or proceeding fur∣ther, if need be, according to Art.
X. For the Tumors and Pains of the Hemorrhoides, not too much inflamed. LET the Patient dip his Fin∣gerB in Balsam of Sulphur, made with Oyl of Turpentine, and with his Finger so besmeared anoint the Tumors, whether ex∣ternal or internal, once or twice a day.
DECAD III. I. For the Dysentery and other sharp Fluxes. TAke the Stalks andA Leaves of the Herb call'd in Latin, Coniza Media (in English, Flea-bane▪) dry it gently, till it be reducible to Pouder; of this Pouder give about one Dram at a time, twice or thrice a day, in any convenient Vehicle; or else incorporate it in Conserve of Red Roses▪
II. To Sweeten the Blood, and Cure divers Distempers caused by its Acidity. TAke Coral, the clearest andB reddest you can get; re∣duce it (by exactly grinding it on a Porphory, or Marble Stone,) to an impalpable Pouder. Of this Magistery made without Acids, give the Patient once or twice a day (as need shall require,) a large Dose, viz. ordinarily about one Dram at a time, or from two Scruples to five. N. B. Let him long continue the Use of it.
III. To clear the Eyes, even from Filmes. TAke Paracelsus's Zibethum Oc∣cidentaleA (viz. human Dung) of a good Colour and Consistence, dry it slowly till it be pulverable: Then reduce it into an impalpable Pouder; which is to be blown once, twice, or thrice a day, as occasion shall require into the Pa∣tients Eyes. IV. For Convulsions in Children. GIve the Patient from 2, 3,A or 4, to 5, 6, or 7, Grains, according to the Child's Age, of the true Volatile Salt of Amber, in
any proper Vehicle. N. B. 'Tis not near so Efficacious in full grown Persons. V. To bring away the After-birth. GIve about 30 Drops, or anyB Number between 25 and 35, of good Essential (as Chi∣mists call it,) Oyl of Juniper, in a good Draught of any convenient Vehicle. VI. To strengthen the Stomach, and help the want of Appetite. MAke the Roots of GentianB (sound and not superannu∣ated,) pulverable, with no more waste of their moisture than is ne∣cessary.
Reduce these to Pouder; of which let the Patient take from 12 or 15 Grains to double that quantity (or more if need be,) twice or thrice a day. N. B. It may be taken on an empty Sto∣mach, or, if that cannot conveni∣ently be done, at Meal-times. To correct the Bitterness, one may add to it pouder'd Sugar, or make it up with some fit Conserve, or mix it with a Syrup. It is very good, not only for want of Appetite, but for Obstructions. And I (R. B.) have usefully given it in Vertigi∣nous Affections of the Brain, and to lessen, if not quite take away, the Fits of Agues, and even Quar∣tans. But in this last Case the Dose must be considerably augmen∣ted. One may also, if one pleases, instead of the Pouder, give the Extract drawn with fair Water, and for those that like that form, made
up into Pills with a sufficient quan∣tity of pouder'd Tumerick, or the like proper Additament; to which I have sometimes added some Grains of Salt of Wormwood with good Success, in Fluxes that proceed∣ed from Crudities and Indigestion. Where the Winter-Season or the Patients cold Constitution invite, or the Medicine is to be long kept, I chuse rather to make the Extract with Wine moderately strong, than with Water. VII. For Ʋlcers in the Breast, and elsewhere. TAke Millepedes, (in EnglishA by some called Wood-lice, by others Sows,) and having wash'd them clean with a little White∣wine, and dry'd them with a Lin∣nen
Cloth, beat them very well in a Glass or Marble Mortar (for they ought not to be touch'd with any thing of Metal) and give the first time as much Juice, as you can by strong Expression obtain from five or six of them. This Juice may be given in small Ale or White-wine, in which the next time you may give as much as can be squeez'd out of Eight or Nine Millepedes; and so you may conti∣nue, increasing the number that you employ of them by two or three at a time, till it amount to twenty five or thirty; and if need be, to forty or more, for one ta∣king. And note, that if upon the Pounding of these Insects, you find the Mass they afford too dry, as it now and then happens; you may dilute it with a little White-wine or Ale, to be well agitated with it, that being penitrated, and so
softned, with the Liquor, the Mass may the better part with its Juice. VIII. For taking off the Fits of Agues. TAke good common BrimstoneB (not Flores Sulphuris,) and having reduc'd them, by passing them through a very fine Sieve, to the subtilest Pouder you can; give of this Pouder one Dram and half or two Drams, either made up in∣to a Bolus with a little good Honey, or else in any appropriated Vehi∣cle; let it be given at the usual times, and reiterated once or twice, if need be, especially if the Fits should return.
IX. For Fluxes, especially ac∣companied with Gripings. TAke of Crude Lapis Calami∣narisA finely pouder'd two Scruples, of White Chalk one Scru∣ple, mix them exactly, and give them in a spoonful or two of New Milk twice, or, if the case be ur∣gent, thrice a day.
X. For the Pains of the Piles. TAke of Myrrh, Olibanum, andB common Frankincense, of each alike quantity; having pou∣der'd them, mix them very well, and let the Patient receive the Fume of this Mixture, cast upon a Chaf∣sen-dish with Embers, in a Close∣stool, for about a quarter of an hour, (less or more, as he needs it, and is able to bear it.)
DECAD IV. I. For an Outward Contusion. APply to the Part affe∣cted,C skim'd or puri∣fy'd Honey, spread up∣on Cap-paper, to be kept on with some convenient Plai∣ster, or the like Bandage, and shifted once or twice a day.
II. Another for the same. BEat Aloes Succotrina (or elseB Hepatica,) to fine Pouder; then pour on it as much Rose-wa∣ter as you guess may dissolve a great part of it. This done, stir them well for a while, and when the Mixture is setled, pour off the Liquor, and in it dip Linnen Rags, which being applied to the Part af∣fected, will soon stick to it, and seldom need be remov'd till the Pa∣tient be reliev'd; and then to get them off, the Rags must be well wetted with warm water, which will soften and loosen the adhering Aloes.
III. For a slighter Excoriation. MElt Mutton-Suet taken fromB about the Kidneys, and freed from its superfluous Fibres or Strings, and to about two Ounces of this add little by little about 16 or 18 Drops (sometimes 8 or 10 may serve) of Oyl (not Aethereal Spirit) of Turpentine; spread this Mixture on a Linnen Cloth, and by binding or otherwise, keep it upon the Part affected. IV. For an Excoriation, when the true Cutis is affected. TAke Prunella (in EnglishB Self-heal,) and having pounded it very well in a Marble
or Glass Mortar, (not one of Me∣tal,) apply it to the Part affected, renewing it but seldom, and not without need. V. To take off the Pain and In∣flammation of Ʋlcers in the Legs and elsewhere. IN a Quart of Water boilB about so much White-bread, as in ordinary years may be found in a Halfpenny-loaf; then add to it two Ounces of good Sheeps Suet cut very small; and when that is boil'd a little, add to it one Ounce of fine∣ly pouder'd Rosin, and a little well searc'd Brimstone: Of these make a Cataplasm, which is to be kept con∣stantly on the Part affected, and shif∣ted once or twice a day, as need shall require.
VI. For a Cough, especially ac∣company'd with a Tickling Rheum. TAke equal Parts of finelyB pouder'd Olibanum and Ve∣nice Treacle, incorporate them ex∣actly, and of this Mass form Pills of what bigness you please. Of these let the Patient take about half a Dram at Bed-time, or, if need be, one Scruple, (or more,) twice a day. VII. To prevent the Tooth-ach, and keep the Teeth sound. LEL the Patient frequentlyB rub his Teeth moderately with the Ashes that remain in To∣bacco-pipes,
after the rest of the Bo∣dy hath been consum'd in Smoak; sometimes after washing (if need be,) his Mouth with fair Water not too cold. VIII. For a Rupture, especially in a Child or young Person. TAke of that Geranium orA Cranes-bill that is common∣ly called Columbinum, reduce the Root and Leaves to fine Pouder, and of this let the Patient take about half a Spoonful Night and Morning for three or four Weeks together, washing it down each time with some Spoonfuls of Red Wine.
IX. For the Heart-burning as they call it. TAke from 15 or 20, to 30B or 40, Grains of Crabs∣eyes, (known commonly in the Shops by the Name of Lapides Can∣ororum,) reduc'd to very fine Pou∣der, and either take it alone, or in any convenient Conserve or Syrup. 'Tis for the most part best to take this Medicine when the Stomach is empty. X. For a Strain. TAke the strongest VinegarB you can get, and boil in it a convenient quantity of Wheat-Bran,
till you have brought it to the consistence of a Poultess. Ap∣ply this as early as may be to the Part affected, and renew it when it begins to grow dry.
DECAD V. I. For a Recent Strain. TAKE Worm-wood andB pound it very well in a Mortar of Stone or Glass; then put to it as much of the Whites of Eggs, beaten to Wa∣ter, as may serve to make it up into such a Consistence, as may be applied like a Poultess to the Part affected.
II. A Strengthening Plaister af∣ter a Strain, or when there is any Weakness in the Joynt. MELT down togetherB and incorporate very well, two parts of Diapalma, and one part of Emplastrum ad Herniam; spread this Mixture, (but not very thick,) upon Leather, and lay it to the Joynt to be strengthen∣ed. III. For Loosenesses. BOil a convenient quantityC of Cork in Spring-water, till the Liquor taste strong thereof: Of this Decoction let the Patient
drink a moderate Draught from time to time, till he finds himself sufficiently reliev'd by it. IV. For Obstructions, and di∣vers Diseases proceeding thence. LET the Patient drink, everyB Morning fasting, a mode∣rate Draught of his own Ʋrine new∣ly made, and (if it can convenient∣ly be,) whil'st 'tis yet warm; for∣bearing Food for an hour or two af∣ter it.
V. For difficulty of Hearing, from a cold Cause. OUT of a Bulbe or Root ofB Garlick, chuse a Chive of a convenient Bigness; then having pass'd a fine piece of Thread or Silk through one end of it, that thereby it may be pull'd out at pleasure, crush it a little between your Fingers, and having anointed it all over with Oyl of Bitter (or in want of that, Sweet) Almonds, put it into the Cavity of the Patients Ear at Bed-time, and draw it out the next Morning, stopping the Ear afterwards with Black Wooll; but if need require, this Operation is to be reiterated with fresh Gar∣lick for some days successively.
VI. For Ruptures in the Belly, especially in Children. HAving well cleans'd theA Roots of Sigillum Salamo∣nis, scrape one Ounce of them in∣to a Quart of Broth, and let the Patient take a Mess, or a Porrin∣ger full of it for his Break-fast; or else give half a Dram or two Scru∣ples of the Pouder of it at a time, in any convenient Vehicle. VII. To give Check to Fits of the Gout, and in some mea∣sure to prevent them. TAke three Ounces of Sarsa∣parillaB slic'd and cut thin▪ to these add an equal weight of
Raisins of the Sun, rubb'd very clean, but not broken: Put both these Ingredients into three Quarts of Spring water, and let the Ves∣sel stand in a moderate heat, that the Liquor may simper for many hours, yet without bursting most part of the Raisins; keep this De∣coction, well stop'd, and let the Pa∣tient use it for his only Drink, till he need it no longer. VIII. A Water for Ʋlcers and Sores. TAke a Solution of Vene∣tianB Sublimate, and having made with very good Quick lime as strong a Lime-water as you can, (so that, if it be possible, it may bear an Egg,) drop this upon the dissolv'd Sublimate, till it will pre∣cipitate
no more reddish stuff at all; (which will not so soon be done as one that hath not try'd will imagin:) As soon as you per∣ceive that the Liquors act no lon∣ger visibly upon one another, pour the Mixture into a Filter of Cap-Paper, which retaining the Orange∣colour'd Precipitate, will transmit an indifferently clear Liquor: Which is to be in a Glass Viol kept stopp'd for its proper Use; namely, that the Part affected may be there∣with wash'd from time to time, and, if need be, kept covered with double Linnen Cloths wetted in the same Liquor.
IX. A Plaister to Discuss Tu∣mours, or Ripen them if it cannot Discuss them. TAke of Yellow Wax, Fran∣kincense,B and Rosin, of each four Ounces, or a sufficient quan∣tity, melt them together gently, and being strain'd, make up the Mass into a Roll for Use.
X. For the Black Jaundice it self. TAke a Spoonful of Honey,A boil it gently, and scum it, till it come to a good Consistence; then add of Wheat-flower and Saf∣fron (reduced to a Pouder,) as much of each as you may take up upon the point of a Knife; and having mix'd all well, put it over the Coals again, until it lose its Smell: Afterwards you may put it into a little Stone or Earthen Pot, and keep it for Use; which is, that the Patient take the quan∣tity of a Pea, and anoint the Na∣vil, and fill the Cavity thereof with it; repeating the Application
for some days together, when the Stomach is empty, and abstain∣ing from Meat and Drink about two hours after the Medicine is us'd. The End of the First Part.
Medicinal Experiments: OR, A COLLECTION OF Choice Remedies, FOR The most part Simple, and Easily Prepared. The latter Five DECADS being A SECOND PART. By the Honourable R. BOYLE, Fellow of the Royal Society. LONDON: Printed for Sam. Smith, at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's Church-yard. 1693.
DECAD VI. I. A parable Medicine for the Stone. TAke of the Seed of Flix∣weed,B and give of it about as much as will lie upon a Shilling, either whole or grosly bruis`d, in any convenient Vehicle.
II. For Fits of the Mother. DIssolve store of Sea-Salt inB the best Wine Vinegar, and in this dip a soft Linnen Cloth, which being folded so as to make 3 or 4 Doubles, is to be applied somewhat warm to the Soles of the Patient's Feet, and kept on till the Fit be over. III. A Choice Plaister to Streng∣then the Joynts after the Gout, and hasten the going off of the Pain. TAke of Paracelsus and Dia∣palmaA ana, melt them and incorporate them exactly to∣gether,
and spread the mixture ve∣ry thin upon fine Leather, to be us'd as a Plaister to the Part affe∣cted. IV. A very good Drink in con∣tinual Fevers. MAke a Decoction of theA Leaves of Rue in fair Wa∣ter, till the Liquor tast pretty strong of the Plant: This, being strain'd, is to be made somewhat Palatable with Liquorice, or a little Sugar, or Aromatic Body: To half a Pint of this add about 10 Drops of Spirit (not Oyl)) of Vitriol: Let the Patient use this for his ordinary Drink.
V. A good Drink to be fre∣quently used in Fevers, espe∣cially continual Ones. GIve, in half a Pint of someA small convenient Drink, half an Ounce of Harts-horn, burnt to great whiteness; which is to be a little boyled in the Liquor; and this, thus alter'd, is to be given from time to time. VI. An easie Medicine for a fresh Strain. MAke up the Clay, withB which the Bungs of Bar∣rels are wont to be stopp'd; with as much Vinegar as will bring it to
the Consistence of an indifferently stiff Cataplasm: Then warm it a little, and apply it to the Part affected. VII. A Remedy much used for Chilblains. TAke a Turnep, roast it wellC under the Embers, and beat it to a Poultice; then apply it very hot to the Part affected; and keep it on (if need be,) for 3 or 4 days, in that time shifting it twice or thrice, if occasion re∣quire.
VIII. A Simple Antimonial Re∣medy, that has often done much Good even in the Le∣prosie, and all continual Fe∣vers. TAke Crude Antimony, wellA chosen and pouder'd; of this give about one, two, or three Scruples Morning and Evening, according to the Age of the Pati∣ent, in a little Syrup of Clove-Gilly-Flowers, or any such Vehicle, or else mix'd with fine Sugar, enough to make it somewhat Palatable. This may be continued for 4 or 5 Months, if need require; and if the first Dose prove Beneficial to the Patient, in Cases not urgent, a Scruple or half a Dram may
serve the Turn, nor need the Ex∣hibition be continued for so long a time. IX. For the Cholick, and divers other Distempers. TAke four or five Balls ofB fresh Stone-horse Dung, and let them steep for about a quarter of an Hour (or less,) in a Pint of White-wine, in a Vessel well stopp'd that the Liquor may be richly im∣pregnated with the more volatile and subtil Parts of the Dung; strain this, and give of it from a quarter to half a Pint, or some Ounces more at a time; the Patient having a Care not to take Cold after it.
X. An often Experimented An∣timonial Infusion. TAke one Ounce of pouder'dB Antimony; tied up in a lit∣tle Bag of clean Linnen, and hang it in a Gallon of Beer or Ale that is brought from the Brew-house, and is yet scarce fit to be drawn out, much less to be drank. Of this Liquor, when 'tis ripe, let the Pa∣tient make use for his ordinary Drink; only having a Care, that if by Age or Accident it be perceiv∣ed to grow sour, that Vessel then be left off, for fear, lest the Acidi∣ty of the Liquor, corroding the An∣timony, might make it vomitive.
DECAD VII. I. An easie Medicine to cleanse the Womb, especially after Child-bearing. TAke a large white Onyon, ofB about four Ounces in weight, if you can get so big a one, and boyl it in about a Pint of Wa∣ter, with any thing fit to make a ve∣ry thin Broth, till a third part or more of the Liquor be consumed: Of this Broth, which may be made a little palatable with Nutmeg, &c. the Patient is to take six or eight Ounces twice or thrice a day.
II. An Experienced Wash that quickly cures the Itch. TAke strong Quicklime oneA Pound, and put to a Gal∣lon of Spring-Water, let them lie together for some hours, and then warily pour off the clear, filter the rest, and take two Ounces of Quick-Silver, ty'd up in a Linnen Bag, and hang it in the Liquor, and boil it for half an hour or more; then pour off the cleer Liquor once more, and wash the Hands only with it twice, or at most thrice, a day.
III. A Remedy often us'd, with Success, in Fluxes, and even Dysenteries. TAke fresh Roots of Bistort,B cut them into thin Slices, and moisten them well with fair Water and Wine, to make them more soft and Succulent; then press out the Juice as strongly as you can. And of this give about three or four Spoonfuls, mingled with half a Dozen Spoonfuls, or somewhat more, of Red Wine, or some other convenient Liquor.
IV. A good Medicine for a sore Throat. TAke the White of a New-laidB Egg, and by beating it, re∣duce it into Water; and with this Water mix diligently so much Con∣serve of Red Roses as will reduce it to a soft Mass; Whereof the Pati∣ent is to let a little Bit at a time melt leisurely in his Mouth. V. A choice Medicine for a sore Throat. TAke a piece of greasie Lin∣nenA Cloth, of such a big∣ness, as that, being doubled, it may make a Bag in form of a Stay,
to reach from one side of the Throat to the other, and contain as much Matter, as may make it of the thickness of an Inch or more: This Bag being fill'd with common Salt is to be heated throughly, and apply'd to the Part affected as warm as the Patient can conveni∣ently indure; and within 2 hours after, or when it begins to grow too cold; another like it and well heated, is to be substituted in its room; and whil'st this is cooling, the other may be heated and made ready for use: So that the Part af∣fected may be always kept in a con∣siderable degree of warmth, for about 48 hours, if the Remedy be so long needed.
VI. An often experienc'd Medicine for the Cholick, especially produced by sharp Humors. TAke a Quart of Claret, andA put into the Vessel about two Ounces of Nettle-seeds, stop the Bottle, and keep it in boiling Wa∣ter, till the Water has made three or four walms, to assist the Wines Impregnation with the finer part of the Seeds: Of this Liquor let the Patient take a small Draught once or twice a day.
VII. To appease the Pain of the Haemorrhoids, whether In∣ternal or External. TAke two Parts of Flowers ofB Sulphur, and one part of Sugar very finely pouder'd, mix them exactly together, and make them up with a sufficient Quantity of a Mucilage of Gum Tragacarth into Lozenges, of about a Dram a piece: Of which you may give one at a time, thrice in a day, or if need be, 4 or 5 times.
VIII. To make an excellent Drink for the Scurvy. TAke two handfuls of WaterA Trefoil, and let it work in about 8 Gallons of Wort, instead of Hops, or of Small Ale or Wort, made for it: And let the Patient use it for all, or for a great part of his ordinary Drink. IX. To make an easie Diuretick. PEel off the Inner Skin of anC Egg-shell, then beat the Shell to a very fine Pouder: Give about a Scruple of it at a time in any convenient Vehicle.
X. A Powerful Application to prevent and check the Apo∣plexy. MAke an Issue at the Meet∣ingA of the Sutures, and keep it open for a good while; but if the Case will not admit delay, clap on a good Cupping-Glass, with∣out Scarification, or with it, as need shall require, upon the same Con∣course of the Sutures.
DECAD VIII▪ I. A Choice Medicine for a sore Throat. TAke Housleek, and havingA lightly beaten it in a Glass or Stone Mortar, press out the Juice hard between two Plates; to this Juice put almost an equal Quantity of Virgin-Honey, mix them well, and add to the mixture a little Burnt Allum, as much as is requisite to give it a discernable Alluminous Taste: Let the Patient
take this from time to time, with a Liquorish Stick, or some such Thing. II. An Approv'd Medicine for a Cancer not broken. TAke Dulcify'd Colcothar, andB with Cream, or Whites of Eggs beaten to a Water, bring it to the Consistence of a Cataplasm; which ought to be made large, and spread about the thickness of half a Crown, and applied warm to the part affected▪ shifting it at least once a day.
III. To make a very good Syrup for thin Rheums. TAke Syrup of Jujubes, SyrupA of Dryed Roses, and Syrup of Corn Poppy Flowers, of each alike quantity, mix and use them as the necessity of the Sick requires. IV. For the Dysentery and Pleurisie. GRate to fine Pouder theB dry'd Pizzel of a Stagg, and give of it as much as will lie upon a Shilling, or thereabouts, once or twice a day, in any conve∣nient Vehicle.
V. To Strengthen the Gums, and make the Teeth grow firm. TAke Catechu, Terra Japonica,B or Japonian Earth, and dis∣solve as much as you can of it in a Pint of Claret, or Red Wine; then Decant the Liquor warily from the subsiding Faeces, and let the Patient now and then wash his Mouth with it, especially at Bed time. VI. For a Hoarsness upon a Cold. TAke three Ounces of HyssopB Water, sweeten it with
Sugar-Candy; then beat well into it the Yolk of one Egg, and Drink it at a Draught. VII. A Choice Medicine for the Jaundice in Children. TAke half an Ounce ofA choice Rhubarb made into Pouder; incorporate with it ex∣actly by long beating, two Hand∣fuls of well chosen, and cleans'd Currans. Of this Electuary let the Patient take every Morning about the quantity of a Nutmeg, for seve∣ral days together.
VIII. A rare Medicine to take away Gouty, and other Ar∣thritick Pains. TAke highly rectify'd Spirit ofA Mans Ʋrine, and anoint the Part with it, the Cold being just taken off, once or twice the first day; and no longer, unless the Pain continue. IX. For a Prolapsus Uteri. APply to the Patients NavelB a pretty large Cupping-Glass; but let it not stay on too long, not above a quarter of an hour, for fear of injuring the part
it covers, especially the Navel-String. X. To allay heat in the Eyes, proceeding from sharp Hu∣mours. BEat the White of an EggB into a Water, in which dissolve a pretty quantity of Re∣fined Loaf-Sugar, and then drop some of it into the Patients Eye.
DECAD IX. I. An Experienc'd Medicine for Strengthening a Weak Sight. TAke of Eye Bright, sweetB Fennel Seeds, and fine Su∣gar, all reduc'd to Pouder, of each an Ounce, Nutmeg also pulveriz'd, one Dram▪ (at most;) mix these very well together, and take of the Composition from a Dram to two or more, from time to time.
II. An often try'd Medicine for Tertian Agues. TAke Crude Allum and Nut∣megB finely scrap'd, of each about half a Dram, mix the Pou∣ders well together, and with about six Grains of Saffron; Give this in two or three Spoonfuls of White-Wine Vinegar at the usual time. III. For Stuffings of the Lungs, and the Chin Cough. MAke Syrup of Penny Royal,B or of Ground Ivy, mo∣derately Tart with Oil of Vitriol;
and of this let the Patient take very leisurely about a quarter of a Spoon∣ful from time to time. IV▪ For the Falling Sickness in Children. TAke half a Dram of choiceB Amber, finely pouder'd, and give it for six or seven Weeks together, once a day, when the Stomach is empty, in about four Ounces of good White-Wine.
V. An approv'd Medicine to drive the Stone, and cure Suppression of Ʋrine, pro∣ceeding from it. TAke the Roots of Wild Gar∣lick,A (by some Country People called Crow Garlick) wipe them very clean, stamp them very well in a Mortar of Stone or Glass, and strain out the Juice; with which make a moderate Draught of good White-Wine considerably strong, and let the Patient take it once or twice a day.
VI. An Experienc'd Medicine for Sore Throats. TAke of Scabious Water sixA Ounces, of Wine Vinegar a small Spoonful, of Mustard Seed beaten, and of Honey, of each a Spoonful; stir and shake them very well together; and then filter the mixture and keep it for Use.
VII. An often experienced Ex∣ternal Remedy in Apoplectick Fits. FIx a Cupping-Glass (withoutA Scarification) to the Nape of the Neck, and another to each of the Shoulders, and let them stick on, a competent time. VIII. An easie but approv'd Medicine for the Cholick. TAke about half a Dram ofB Mastich, and mix it with the Yolk of a new laid Egg, and give it the Patient once or twice a day.
IX. To appease the heat of Feavers by an External Remedy. APply to the Soles of theC Feet a mixture, or thin Cataplasm made of the Leaves of Tobacco, fit to be cut to fill a Pipe with, beaten up with as much of the Freshest Currans you can get, as will bring the Tobacco to the Con∣sistence of a Poultis.
X. The Medicine that is in such Request in Italy against the Worms in Children. INfuse one Dram of clean Quick∣silverB all Night in about two Ounces of the Water of Goats Rue, distill'd the common way in a cold Still: And afterwards strain and filter it, to sever it from all Dregs that may happen in the making it. This quantity is given for one Dose.
DECAD X. I. A Choice Medicine for a Whitloe. TAke Shell Snails, and beatA the pulpy part of them very well, with a convenient quan∣tity of fine chopt Parsly, which is to be applied warm to the affected part, and shifted two or three times a day.
II. A Simple but Ʋseful Lime-Water, good for the Kings E∣vil, and divers other Cases. TAke half a Pound of goodB Quick-Lime, and put it into one Gallon of Spring-Water, and infuse it for Twenty four Hours; then decant the Liquor, and let the Patient Drink a good Draught of it two or three times a day, or he may use it for his or∣dinary Drink; this Infusion may be coloured with Saffron, or Red Sanders; and if need be to make it stronger, add more Lime, and warm the Water and keep it well stopt.
III. An Excellent Medicine for a fresh Strain. TAke four Ounces of BeanA Flower, two Ounces of Wine Vinegar; of these make a Cataplasm to be applied a little warm to the part affected; but if this should prove something too sharp, (as in some Cases it may) then take two Drams of Litharg, and boil it a little in the Vinegar; before you put it to the Bean-Flower.
IV. For the Pyles. TAke Balsam of Sulphur madeA with Oil of Turpentine, Oint∣ment of Tobacco, equal Parts, In∣corporate them well, and Anoint the grieved place therewith. V. For a Burn. MIngle Lime Water withB Linseed Oyl, by beating them together with a Spoon, and with a Feather dress the Burn seve∣ral times a day.
VI. For a fresh Strain. BOil Bran in Wine Vinegar toA the consistency of a Poul∣tis, apply it warm, and renew the Poultis once in twelve hours, for two or three times. VII. An experienced Medicine for the Cholick. TAke good Nitre one Ounce,A and rub it well in a clean Mortar of Glass or Stone, then grind with it half a Scruple or more of fine Saffron, and of this mixture give about half a Dram for a Dose in three or four Ounces of Cold Spring Water.
VIII. To make an Issue raw, that begins to heal up. TAke of Lapis Infernalis oneB Ounce, of Crown Soap an Ounce and half, Chalk finely pou∣der'd six Drams, mix them all to∣gether carefully, and keep them close stopt, except when you mean to use them. IX. For a Sore Throat. MAke a Plaister of Para∣celsus,A three or four Fin∣gers broad, and length enough to reach almost from one Ear to the other, and apply it to the part af∣fected, so that it may touch the Throat as much as may be.
X. For heat about the Orifice of the Stomach. MAke a Syrup with theB Juice of House Leek and Sugar, and give about one Spoon∣ful of it from time to time.
A Stomachical Tincture. TAke Agrimony, two Drams,A small Centory Tops one Dram, Coriander Seeds bruised one Scruple, Sassafras Shavings and Bark, one Dram, Gentian Root half a Dram, Zedoary Root ten Grains; pour up∣on these three quarters of a Pint of boiling Spring Water, cover it, and let it steep twelve hours, then Strain it, and put it in a Bottle; then drop a drop of Oil of Cinna∣mon, upon a lump of Sugar, and put it into the Liquor. The Dose is three Spoonfuls twice a day, an hour or two before Meals. THE END.
A CATALOGUE OF THE Philosophical Books and Tracts, Written by the Honourable ROBERT BOYLE Esq; Together with the ORDER or TIME Wherein each of them hath been Publish'd respectively. To which is added, A CATALOGUE Of the THEOLOGICAL BOOKS, Written by the same Author. LONDON: Printed for Sam. Smith, at the Sign of the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's Church-yard. 1693.
Advertisements of the Publisher. I. Many Ingenious Persons, especially Strangers, having pressingly endeavour'd to procure a Ca∣talogue of the Honourable Mr. Boyle's Wri∣tings; and the Author himself being not at leisure to draw one up; 'twas thought it might be some Satisfaction to those Inquirers, if I publish'd the following List, as it was drawn out, for his own use, of the Philosophical Transactions, as well as the Printed Vo∣lumes, by an Ingenious French Physician, studious of the Authors Writings, some of which he Translated and Printed in his own Language. II. The Letter L affixt in the Margin, denotes the Book related to, to have been Translated, and Publish'd in the Latin Tongue also. Se∣veral of the rest having likewise been Tran∣slated into Latin, but not yet Published. III. Those that have an Asterisk prefix'd to them came forth without the Authors Name, tho' 'tis not doubted but they are His. IV. Such as have this Mark ☞ prefix'd to them, are Sold by Samuel Smith at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's Church-yard. V. Divers of those mentioned as drawn out of the Transactions, did probably come abroad in Latin; some of the Transactions them∣selves having been published in that Lan∣guage.
A Catalogue of the Philosophical Books and Tracts. NEW Experiments Physico Mechanical,I. touching the Spring and Weight of the☜ Air, and its Effects, (made for the most part in a new Pneumatical Engine) written by way of Letter to the Right Honourable Charles Lord Viscount of Dungarvan, Eldest Son to the Earl of Cork, by the Honourable Robert Boyle Esq; A Defence of the Doctrine, touching the Spring and Weight of the Air, propos'd byL the Author in his New Physico-Mechantoal Experiments; against the Objections of Fran∣ciscus Linus, wherewith the Objectors Funicu∣lar Hypothesis is also examin'd. An Examen of Mr. Tho. Hobbes's Dialogus Physicus de Naturâ Aeris, as far as it concerns the Authors Book of New Experiments, tou∣ching the Spring of the Air; with an Appen∣dix touching Mr. Hobbes's Doctrine of Flui∣dity and Firmness. These three together in a Volume in 4 to, being a Second Edition; The First at Ox∣ford 1662, had been publish'd Anno 1660. The two others at London 1662, had been publish'd, Anno 1661. The Sceptical Chymist, &c. 1661.
Physiological Essays, or Tentamina, Writ∣tenL and Collected upon divers Times and☞ Occasions, with an History of Fluidity and Firmness, in 4 to. 1662. An Experimental History of Colours be∣gun, 8vo. 1663.L Some Considerations touching the Useful∣ness☞ of Experimental Natural Phylosophy, propos'd in a Familiar Discourse to a Friend, by way of Invitation to the Study of it: A Second Edition, 4to. Oxford, 1664. The first had been publish'd 1663. Of the Usefulness of Natural Philosophy, the Second Part; The first Section, of its Usefulness to Physick, with an Appendix to this First Section of the Second Part, 4to. 1669. Of the Usefulness of Experimental Natural Philosophy, &c. the Second Tome, contain∣ing the latter Section of the Second Part, 4to, Oxford, 1671. The First Volume of these three Books, contains Five Essays. The First, Of the Usefulness, &c. Princi∣pally as it relates to the Mind of Man. The Second, A Continuation of the for∣mer. The Third, A further Continuation. The Fourth, A requisite Digression con∣cerning those, who would exclude the Deity from intermedling with Matter. In the Fifth, The Discourse, interrupted by the late Digression, is resum'd and con∣cluded.
The Second Volume contains likewise five Essays. The first, Of the Usefulness, &c. As to the Physiological part of Physick.. The second, As to the Pathological part of Physick. The third, As to the Semeiotical part of Physick. The fourth, As to the Hygieinal part of Physick. The fifth, As to the Therapeutical part of Physick, in 20 Chapters. The Third Volume contains six Essays. The first, General Considerations about the Means, whereby Experimental Phyloso∣phy may become useful to Human Life. The second, Of the Usefulness of Mathe∣maticks to Natural Phylosophy. The third, Of the Usefulness of Mechani∣cal Disciplines to Natural Phylosophy. The fourth, That the Goods of Mankind may be much increased by the Naturalists in∣sight into Trades, with an Appendix. The fifth, Of doing by Physical Knowledge, what is wont to require Manual Skill. The sixth, Of Mens great Ignorance of the Uses of Natural Things. An experimental History of Cold, and some☜ Discourses concerning New Thermometrical Experiments, and Thoughts about the Do∣ctrine of Antiperistasis; with An Examen of Mr. Hobbes's Doctrine touching Cold, a second Edition, Quarto, 1665.
Attempts of a way to convey Liquors imme∣diately into the Mass of Blood, communicated in the Philosophical Transactions of Decem∣ber the 4th, 1665. Observations and Experiments upon the Barometer or Ballance of Air, invented, di∣tected and begun, Anno 1659, communi∣cated to Dr. Beal that continued them, and mentioned in the Transactions of February the 12th, and March the 12th, 1666. Hydrostatical Paradoxes made out by newL Experiments▪ for the most part Physical and easie, occasion'd by Monsieur Paschal's Tract of the Equilibrium of Liquors, and of the Weight of the Air, 1666. An account of an Earthquuke near Oxford, and the Con comitants thereof, communica∣ted in the Philosophical Transactions of April 2d, 1666. New Observations and Directions about the Barometer in the same. General Heads for a Natural History of a Country, great or small, communicated in the same. The Origine of Forms and Qualities illu∣stratedL by Considerations and Experiments, in two Parts, 8vo, 1666. A way of preserving Birds, taken out of the Egg, and other small Eaetus's, commu∣nicated in the Philosophical Transactions of May the 7th, 1666. An Account of a new kind of Baroscope, which may be called Statical, and of some advantages and conveniences it hath above
the Mercurial, communicated in the Philoso∣phical Transactions of July the 2d, 1666. A new Frigorific Experiment, shewing how a considerable degree of Cold may be suddenly produced, without the help of Snow, Ice, Hail, Wind or Nitre, and that at any time of the year, communicated in the Philosophical Trasnactions of July the 18th. 1666. Tryals proposed to Dr. Lower for the im∣provement of transfusing Blood out of one live Animal into another, communicated in the Philosophical Transactions of February the 11th, 1666. Free Considerations about Subordinate Forms, being an Appendix to the Origine of Forms and Qualities published last year, and reprinted with this, 1667, in 8o. A Letter to the Author of the Philoso∣phical Transactions, giving an Information of some Experiments which he had made himself several years ago, by injecting acid Liquors into Blood, upon the occasion of those communicated by Signior▪ Fracassari, in a Letter written from Oxford, October the 19th, 1667. New Experiments concerning the Relati∣on between Light and Air, (in shining Wood and Fish) in a Letter from Oxford to the Publisher of the Philosophical Trans∣actions of January the 6th, 1668. A Continuation of the same Letter in the Philosophical Transactions of February the 10th, 1668.
A Continuation of New Experiments, Phy∣sico-Mechanical, touching the Spring and Weight of the Air, and their Effects; The first part. With a Discourse of the Atmospheres of Consistent Bodies, Oxford, 1669. An Invention for estimating the Weight of Water with ordinary Ballances and Weights, in the Phylosophical Transactions of August the 16th, 1669. Certain Philosophical Essays and other Tracts, a second Edition; with a DiscourseL about the Absolute rest of Bodies, Quarto, London 1669. The first Edition had been published Anno 1662. New Pneumatical Experiments about Re∣spiration, upon Ducks, Vipers, Frogs, &c. communicated in the Philosophical Transa∣ctions of August 8. 1670. A Continuation of the same Experiments in the Philosophical Transactions of SeptemberL the 12th, 1670. Tracts: About the Cosmical Qualities of Things: The Temperature of the Subter∣raneal and Submarine Regions, and the bot∣tom of the Sea; together with an Introducti∣on to the History of particular Qualities, 8vo.L Oxford, 1670. Tracts: A Discovery of the admirable Rarefaction of the Air (even without Heat:) New Observations about the duration of the Spring of the Air. New Experiments touching the condensation of the Air by meer Cold, and its compression without Mechanical En∣gines,
and the admirably differing extentions of the same Quantity of Air, rarified and compressed, Quarto, London, 1670. An Essay about the Origine and VirtuesL of Gems, Quarto, London, 1672.☜ Some Observations about shining Flesh, both of Veal, and Pullet, and that without any sensible Putrefaction in those Bodies, communicated by way of Letter to the Pub∣lisher of the Philosophical Transactions, in the Transactions of December, the 16th, 1672. A new Experiment concerning an Effect of the varying Weight of the Atmosphere upon some Bodies in the Water, the De∣scription whereof was presented to the Lord Broncker, Anno 1671. Suggesting a Con∣jecture, that the Alterations of the very Weight of the Air, may have considerable Operations, even upon Mens Sickness or Health, communicated in the Philosophical Transactions of February the 24th, 1673. Tracts: Containing new Experiments, touching the Relation between Flame and Air, and about Explosions. An Hydrosta∣tical Discourse, occasioned by some Objecti∣ons of Dr. Henry Moor, &c. to which is an∣nexed an Hydrostatical Letter about a way of weighing Water in Water: New Experi∣ments of the positive, or relative, Levity of Bodies under Water: Of the Air-Spring on Bodies under Water, and about the differing Pressure of heavy Solids and Fluids, Octavo, London, 1672, 1691.
Essays of the strange Subtilty, great Effi∣cacy,L and determinate nature of Effluviums; to which are annexed new Experiments to make the parts of Fire and Flame, Stable and Ponderable, with Experiments about arrest∣ing and weighing of Igneous Corpuscles; and a Discovery of the perviousness of Glass to ponderable parts of Flame, Octavo, London, 1673. A Letter of September the 13th, 1673. concerning Ambergreece, and its being a Vegetable Production, mentioned in the Philosophical Transactions of October, the 8th, 1673. Tracts: Observations about the SaltnessL of the Sea: An Account of the Statical Hy∣roscope, and its Uses, together with an Ap∣pendix about the force of the Air's Moisture, and a Fragment about the Natural and Pre∣ternatural state of Bodies. To all which is premised a Sceptical Dialogue about the po∣sitive or privative Nature of Cold, Octavo, London, 1674, 1691. A Discourse about the Excellency andL Grounds of the Mechanical Hypothesis, oc∣casionally proposed to a Friend, annexed to another, Entituled, The Excellency of Theo∣logy, compared with Natural Philosophy, Octa∣vo, London, 1674. An Account of the two sorts of Helmon∣tian Laudanum, together with the way of the Noble Baron F. M. Van Helmont (Son to the famous John Baptista) of preparing his Laudanum, communicated in the Philo∣sophical
Transactions of October the 26th. 1674. Tracts: Containing, 1. Suspicions aboutL some hidden Qualities of the Air, with an☜ Appendix touching Coelestial Magnets, and some other particulars. 2. Animadversions upon Mr. Hobbes's Problemata de Vacuo. 3. A Discourse of the Cause of Attraction by Suction, Octavo, London, 1674, 1691. Some Physico-Theological Considerations about the possibility of the Resurrection, an∣nexed to a Discourse, Entituled, The Recon∣ciliableness of Reason and Religion, Octavo, London, 1674/5. A Conjecture concerning the Bladders of Air, that are found in Fishes, communicated by A. J. and illustrated by an Experiment, suggested by the Author in the Philosophi∣cal Transactions of April the 26th, 1675. A new Essay Instrument, invented and described by the Author, together with the Uses thereof, in 3 Parts. The first shews the Occasion of making it, and the Hydrostatical Principles 'tis founded on. The second describes the Construction of the Instrument. The third represents the Uses; which, as relating to Metals, are 1. To discover whether a proposed Guinea be true or Counterfeit. 2. To examine divers other Gold Coins, and particularly half Guinea's.
3. To examine the new English Crown pieces of Silver. 4. To estimate the Goodness of Tin and Pewter. 5. To estimate Alloys of Gold and Silver, and some other Metalline Mixtures. All this maketh up the Philosophical Transactions of June 21. 1675. Ten new Experiments about the weaken'd Spring, and some unobserved Effects of the Air, where occur not only several Trials to discover; whether the Spring of the Air, as it may divers ways be increased, so may not by other ways than Cold, or Dilation be weakened, but also some odd Experiments to shew the Change of Colours producible in some Solutions and Precipitations by the Operation of the Air, communicated in the Philosophical Transactions of December 27th, 1675. An Experimental Discourse of Quicksilver, growing hot with Gold, English and Latin, communicated in the Philosophical Transacti∣ons of February 21. 1676. Experiments, Notes. &c. about the Me∣chanicalL Origin or Production of divers☞ particular Qualities, amongst which, is in∣serted a Discourse of the Imperfections of the Chymists Doctrine of Qualities, together with some Reflections upon the Hypothesis of Alcali and Acidum, Octavo, London, 1676, 1690. This Discourse comprehends Notes, &c. about the Mechanical Origine and Producti∣on of Cold.
Of Heat. Of Tasts. Of Odours. Of Volatility. Of Fixtness. Of Corrosiveness. Of Corrosibility. Of Chymical Precipitation. Of Magnetical Qualities. Of Electricity. New Experiments about the superficial Figures of Fluids, especially of Liquors con∣tiguous to other Liquors: likely to conduct much to the Physical Theory of the grand System of the World, communicated in the Philosophical Transactions of January, the 29th, 167 6/7 A continuation of the same Experiments in the Philosophical Transactions in February the 167 6/7. The Sceptical Chymist, or Chymico-Phy∣sical☜ Paradoxes, touching the Experiments whereby Vulgar Spagyrists are wont to en∣deavour to evince their Salt, Sulphur and Mercury to be the true Principles of Things, to which in this second Edition are subjoyn∣ed divers Experiments and Notes about the Producibleness of Chymical Principles, Octa∣vo Oxford, 1680, 1690. A second Continuation of new Experi∣mentL Physico-Mechanical, in which, various☜ Experiments, touching the Spring of the Air, either compressed or artificial, are con∣tain'd, with a Description of new Engines to persorm them, 1680.
The Aerial Noctiluca, or some new Phoe∣nomena,L and a Process of factitious Self-shi∣ning☞ Substance, Octavo, London. The Glaical or Icy Noctiluca, with a Chy∣micalL Paradox founded on new Experiments,☞ whence it may be made probable, that Chy∣mical Principles may be converted one into another, Octavo, London, 1680. Memorials for the Natural History of Hu∣manL Blood, especially the Spirit of that Li∣quor,☞ London, 1684 Experiments and Considerations about theL Porosity of Bodies, in Two Essays: The☞ former of the Porousness of Animal Bodies; The other of the Porousness of solid Bodies, Octavo, London, 1684. Short Memoirs for the Natural Experi∣mental☞ History of Mineral Waters, Octavo, 1685. An Historical Account of a strangely Self-moving Liquor, communicated in the Philosophical Transactions of November, the 26th, 1685. Of the Reconcileablness of Specifick Me∣dicines,L to the Corpuscular Philosophy, to☞ which is annexed a Discourse about the Ad∣vantages of the use of simple Medicines, pro∣pos'd by way of Invitation to it, Octavo, London, 1685. An Essay of the great Effects of Languid and unheeded Motion. To which is an∣nex'd☞ an Experimental Discourse of some un∣heeded Causes of the Salubrity and Insalu∣brity of the Air and its Effect, Octavo, Lon∣don, 1685, 1690.
A free Inquiry into the vulgarly receiv'd* L Notion of Nature, in an Essay address'd to☜ a Friend, Octavo, London, 168 5/6. A Disquisition about the Final Causes of* Natural Things. With an Appendix of some☜ Uncommon Observations about vitiated Sight, Octavo, London, 1688. Medicina Hydrostatica: Or, Hydrostaticks,☜ applied to the Materia Medica, shewing, How by the Weight that divers Bodies us'd in Physick, have in Water; one may disco∣ver, whether they be Genuine or Adulterate. To which is subjoin'd, a previous Hydro∣statical way of estimating Ores, Octavo, Lon∣don, 1690. Experimenta & Observationεs Physicae;☜ wherein are briefly treated of several Sub∣jects relating to Natural Philosophy in an Experimental way; to which is added, a small Collection of strange Reports, in two Parts, Octavo, London, 1691. Medicinal Experiments: Or, a Collection☜ of Choice Remedies, for the most part sim∣ple and easily prepared, Twelves, London, 1692. Price 1 s.
Advertisements. Because among those that willingly read the Author's Writings, there are some that re∣lish those most, (as most suitable to their Genius, addicted to Religious Studies) that Treat of Matters relating to Divinity: The Publisher thinks fit to gratifie them with a Catalogue of those Theological Books that pass for Mr. Boyle's, because they were as∣cribed to him, and never positively disown'd by him; tho' such of them as are mark'd with an Asterisk, come abroad without ha∣ving his Name prefixt to them. SEraphic Love, five or six times Printed, but first Published in the Year 1660. Octavo. Considerations about the Stile of the☞ Scripture, whereof the first Edition wasL Publish'd in the Year 1662. in English, and afterwards turn'd into, and several times Printed in Latin, Octavo. Occasional Reflections on several Subjects,* with a Preliminary Discourse of the way of☞ meditating there Exemplified; First Pub∣lish'd in the Year 1665. and afterwards turn'd into Latin, but not yet Printed in that Language, Octavo. Of the Excellency of the Study of Theo∣logy,* compared with that of Natural Philo∣sophy.☞ Printed in the Year 1674. Octavo.
Considerations about the Reconcileable∣ness* of Reason and Religion. To which is☜ annex'd a Discourse about the Possibility of the Resurrection. Printed in the Year 1675. Octavo. A Treatise of Things above Reason. To* which are annex'd some Advices about Things that are said to transcend Reason. Printed in the Year 1681. in English, and afterwards Translated into Latin, but not yet Printed in that Language, Octavo. Of the Veneration that Man's Intellect* L owes to God. Printed in the Year 1685.☜ * The Martyrdom of Theodora, and of Di∣dymus, London, 1687.☜ The Christian Vertuoso: Shewing, That☜ by being addicted to Experimental Philoso∣phy, a Man is rather assisted, than indispo∣sed, to be a good Christian. The First Part; To which are subjoin'd, 1. A Discourse about the Distinction, that represents some Things as above Reason, but not contrary to Reason. 2. The first Chapters of a Dis∣course, Entituled, Greatness of Mind pro∣moted by Christianity, Octavo, London, 1690.
A Catalogue of new Physick Books Printed for Sam. Smith, at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's Church-Yard. PHarmacopoeia Bateara. Quâ nonginta Cir∣citer Pharmaca, plerâ{que} omnia è. Praxi Ge∣orgii Batei Regi Carolo secundo Medici Prima∣rii excerpta, ordine alphabetico concisè exhi∣bentur. Quorum Nonnulla in Laboritorio Pub∣lico Pharmacopoeano Lond. fideliter parantur Venalia: At{que} in usu sunt hodierno apud Medicos Londinenses. Editio Altera Priori multò Locu∣pletior: Cum viribus ac dosibus annexis. Huic accesserunt Arcana Goddardiana ex Autographo Authoris desumpta. Item ad Calcem Orthoto∣nia Medicorum Observata: Insuper & tabula Poso∣logica Dosibus Pharmacorum accommodata. Cum Indice Morborum, Curationum, &c. Curâ J. S. Pharmacopoei Lond. In Twelves. 1691. Praxeos Mavernianae in Morbis internis Prae∣cipue Gravioribus & Chronicis Syntagma ex Ad∣versariis, Consiliis ac Epistolis ejus, summâ Curâ ac Diligentiâ concinnatum. Londini. In Oct. 1690. Phthisiologia seu Exercitationes de Phthisi Tri∣bus Libris comprehenae. Totumque Opus va∣riis Historiis illustratum. Autore Richardo Morton, Med. D. & Regii Collegii Medicor. Lond. Socio. Londini. In Octavo. 1689.
Osteologia Na, or some New Observations of the Bones, and the Parts belonging to them, with the manner of their Accretion, and Nutri∣tion, communicated to the Royal Society in se∣veral Discourses. I. Of the Membrane, Nature, Constituent Parts, and Internal Structure of the Bones. II. Of Accretion, and Nutrition, as al∣so of the Affections of the Bones in the Rickers, and of Venereal Nodes. III. Of the Medulla, or Marrow. IV. Of the Mucilaginous Glands, with the Etiology or Explication of the Causes of a Rheumatism, and the Gout, and the man∣ner how they are produced. To which is added, A Fifth Discourse of the Cartilages. By Clopton Havers, M. D. Fellow of the Royal Society. London. In Octavo. 1691. Synopsis Methodica Sirpium Britannicarum, in quatum Notae generum Characteristicae tradun∣tur, tum Species singulae breviter describuntur: Ducentae quinquaginta plus minus novae Species partim suis locis inseruntur, partim in Appen∣dice seorsim exhientur. Cum Indice & Virium Epitome. Auctore Joanne Raio è Soceitae Regia. Londini. In Octavo. 1690. Pharmacopoeiae Collegii Regalis Londini Re∣media Omnia succinctè descripta, at{que} serie al∣phabeticâ ita digesta, ut singula promptius pri∣mo intuitu investigare possit, Editio Altera Priori Castigatior & Auctior: Huic Annexus est Catalogus Simplicium tum locupletior tum com∣pendiosor quàm antehâc editus; Accedit in Calce. Manuale ad forum nec non Pinax posographicus, Curâ Ja. Shipton, Pharmacop. Lond. In Twelves 1689.
Richardi Morton, M. D. II PETOAOTIA, seu de Morbis Universalibus Acutis. Octavo. Lond. 1692. Gualt. Harris, M. D. De Morbis Acutis In∣fantum. Octavo. Lond. 1689. The Wisdom of God manifested in the Works of the Creation. In two Parts, viz. The Hea∣venly Bodies, Elements, Meteors, Fossils, Ve∣getables, Animals, (Beasts, Birds, Fishes, and Insects,) Of the Admirable Structure of the Bodies of Men and other Animals, and of their Generation, &c. Miscellaneous Discourses concerning the Disso∣lution and Changes of the World. Wherein the Primitive Chaos and Creation, the General Deluge, the Universal Conflagration and Future State are largely Discussed and Examined. Both Written by John Ray, Fellow of the Royal So∣ciety. In Octavo▪ London, 1692. The Duty of Apprentices and Servants. Con∣taining, 1. The Parents Duty, how to Educate their Children, that they may be sit to be em∣ployed and trusted. 2. The Servants Duty to∣wards God, their Masters, and themselves. With suitable Prayers and Directions for the Worthy Receiving of the Holy Sacrament. By Richard Lucas, D. D. Vicar of St. Stephen's Coleman∣street. London, 1692. The Plain Man's Guide to Heaven. Contain∣ing, 1. His Duty towards God. 2. Towards his Neighbour; with proper Prayers, Meditati∣tions, and Ejaculations. Designed chiefly for the Country-man, Tradesman, Labourer, and such like. London, 1692. THE END.
Imprimatur, May 3. 1693. Robert Southwell. P. R. S.
Medicinal Experiments: OR, A COLLECTION OF Choice and Safe Remedies, For the most part Simple, and easily prepared: Useful in Families, and very Serviceble to Country People. By the Honourable R. BOYLE, Esq; Fellow of the Royal Society. The Second Volume. CONTAINING About Three Hundred Receipts, Published from the Author's Original Manuscripts, and by him Recommended to the Care of his Executors, and to be perused by some of his Learned Friends. Together with a large Preface, written by the Author's own Hand. London: Printed for S. Smith, and B. Walford, at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's Church-Yard. 1693.
THE Author's PREFACE. THough Physick be not my Profession, yet I hope this small Collection of Receipts will not incur the Censure of Equi∣table and Charitable Persons, tho' divers of them are professed Phy∣sicians, since as I was induc'd to what I had done by the Dictates of Phi∣lanthropy and Christianity, so I was warranted by great Examples, both in Ancient Times, and in ours. Of the former sort, I might take no∣tice of several of the old Philoso∣phers, such as Democritus, Pythago∣ras, to which some add Aristotle; and even divers Monarchs and great Men of those Times; such as
Jubar, King of Mauritania; another King, Nechepsos, cited by Galen De simpl. Medic. Facultatibus, lib. ix. Titulo Jaspis Viridis. Ac nonnulli quoque annulis inserunt, Scal∣puntque in eo draco∣nem radios habentem: Velut Rex Nehespos memoriae rodidit in sexto & decimo libro., Cato, Pliny, &c. And of the second sort, not only by the last Age, and the first part of our own, but by very late Times, and in a Neigh∣bouring Nation, whose Customs we are wont sufficiently to esteem and imitate, we may be furnish'd with Examples to our present pur∣pose. For the French King him∣self, who has rais'd the Majesty of a Crown'd Head so high, did not think it beneath the Grandeur of so great a Monarch to Order the Publication of the English Remedy, as the French called the Peruvian Bark, which at a great Rate he Purchased from Talbor, an English Emperick, Famous for his many and speedy Cures of Quartans, and
other Agues. By the Authority of the same Prince, who has been a great Encourager of divers parts of Learning, there has been some Years since setled at Paris a Society or Assembly of Physicians, Chirur∣geons, and others, whose main Bu∣siness is to keep Correspondency in several Parts, and receive Informa∣tions of the Novelties that occur about Diseases, and impart to the Publick such as they shall think worthy and seasonable; which Com∣munications consist not only of new Discoveries, odd Cases, Spe∣culations, and Observations, but of Receipts and Processes of Remedies, Printed for the most part in French, the common Language of the Peo∣ple. Divers of which Remedies, have upon Tryal been found useful, as well in England as in France. There has been also lately in that Kingdom a Book Printed more than once, that makes yet more for my
purpose. For there has been pub∣lish'd in the French Tongue a large Collection of Receipts, for almost all Diseases, plac'd in Alphabetical Order; and thô these Receipts are Circumstantially delivered in the Mother-Tongue of the People, yet they came not forth without the License or Authority of the Faculty of Physick, and were (at least the first Tome) so well receiv'd and approv'd, that in divers places the respective Bishops authorized them by their Publick Approbation, and recommended them upon the Ac∣count receiv'd, or the good Effects they had produc'd both to the o∣ther Charitable Persons, and to the Curates (or Parish Priests) in their Diocesses. In complying with the desires of many, and with the Dictates of Philanthropy, I hope I may procure my Medicinal Receipts and Pro∣cesses the more favourable Recep∣tion,
if I shew that I might justly have a peculiar and personal Re∣pugnancy to this Work. For ma∣ny may think it strange, as I my self have been prone to do, that I should presume to recommend Me∣dicines to others, who for divers▪ Years have been so infirm and sickly my self. And some 'tis like will upbraid me with Medicoe Cura¦teipsum. But on this occasion, I may represent, that being the thir∣teenth or fourteenth Child of a Mother, that was not above 42 or 43 Years old when she dyed of a Consumption, 'tis no wonder I have not inherited a robust, or healthy Constitution. Many also have said, in my Excuse, as they think, that I brought my self to so much sick∣liness by over-much Study. But I must add, that thô both the sore∣mentioned Causes concur'd, yet I impute my infirm Condition more to a third, than to both together.
For the grand Original of the Mis∣chiefs that have for many Years af∣flicted me, was a fall from an un∣ruly Horse into a deep place, by which I was so bruised, that I feel the bad Effects of it to this day. For this Mischance happening in Ireland, and I being forc'd to take a long Journey, before I was well recovered, the bad Weather I met with, and the as bad Accommoda∣tion in Irish Inns, and the mistake of an unskilful or drunken Guide, who made me wander almost all Night upon some Wild Mountains, put me into a Fever and a Dropsie, (viz. an Anasarca:) For a com∣pleat Cure of which I past into England, and came to London; but in so unlucky a time, that an ill∣condition'd Fever rag'd there, and seiz'd on me among many others; and thô through God's goodness, I at length recovered, yet left me exceeding weak for a great while
after; and then for a farewel, it cast me into a violent Quotidian or double Tertian Ague, with a sense of decay in my Eyes, which during my long Sickness I had exercis'd too much upon Critical Books stuft with Hebrew, and other Eastern Characters: I will not urge that divers have wondred that a Person in such bad Circumstances has by the help of Care and Medicines (for they forget what ought to be ascrib'd to God) should be able to hold out so long against them. But this after the foregoing Relation may well be said, that it need be no great wonder, if after such a train of Mischiefs, which was succeeded by a Scorbutick Cholick that struck into my Limbs, and de∣prived me of the use of my Hands and Feet for many Months, I have not enjoy'd much Health, notwith∣standing my being acquainted with several Choice Medicines; especially
since divers of these I dare not use, because by long sitting, when I had the Palsie, I got the Stone, voiding some large ones (as well as making bloody Water) and by that Disease so great a tenderness in my Kidneys, that I can bear no Diureticks, thô of the milder sort, and that I am forc'd to forbear several Remedies for my other Distempers, that I know to be good ones, and among them divers, that by God's Blessing, I have successfully try'd on others. This short Narrative may, I hope, suffice to shew that my Personal Maladies and Sickliness cannot rightly infer the inefficacy of the Medicines I impart or recommend, and if it shew That, it will do all that was aim'd at by this Repre∣sentation. If some Receipts or Processes (for I hope they will not be many) should happen to be met with in the following Collection, that may
be also found either in some Printed Book or other, 'tis hop'd an indul∣gent Reader will either excuse or pardon that Venial fault, especially if we consider, First, That neither Physick nor Chymistry being my Profession, I did not think my self oblig'd to peruse any store of Me∣dicinal Books, and therefore may well be suppos'd to be unacquainted with a great many of them, much more with many of their Receipts and Processes. And indeed I find by some of the later Printed Cata∣logues of Books written about the Physicians Art, that there is a mul∣titude of them, which when I wrote, I had never seen, or perhaps so much as heard of. Secondly, That 'tis so usual for Authors, especially that Write either Systems or Collections, to set down store of Prescriptions dictated by their Conjectures, not their Tryals, and yet without giving a distinct Character of almost any
of them in particular: That if I had met there with some of the same that I am speaking of, I should not have selected them from a great number of other undistinguish'd ones; and 'tis easie to observe that there is a great deal of difference betwixt being told by an Author that many things, and among the rest, but not before them, this or that Drug, Receipt is good for such a Disease, and to have particular notice given of it, and not only to be confirm'd that 'tis good, but to be told how good it is, and possibly also that it may be usefully em∣ploy'd in other Distempers besides those for which 'tis prescrib'd in the Printed Book. The most of these Receipts are intended chiefly for the use of those that live in the Country, in Places where Physicians are scarce if at all to be had, especially by Poor Peo∣ple. And because very frequently
a Labouring-Man, or a Handicrafts Man, or some Tradesman has a whole Family depending upon him, being maintain'd by his Pains and Industry, and yet is disabled to help himself and them, not by any In∣ternal Disease, but by External, and often-times Accidental Maladies; such as Bruises, Strains, Cuts, Tu∣mors, Aches, Burns, and the like, I have been careful to furnish this final Collection with a pretty num∣ber of good Receipts, obtain'd most of them from able Surgeons and Practitioners for those External Ac∣cidents, that those poor Upholders of Families, who cannot find or Fee a Surgeon or a Doctor, may be cheaply reliev'd without either of them.
The INDEX. A. APoplexy Page 1. Aches 2. 122 Ach or Strain 2 Ach Scorbutical 2, 3. 3, 4 Aches and pricking pains 5 Anasarca ibid. Agues 6, 7. 7. 9 Aguish Distempers 7 Ague Plaister 8 Agues Tertian 10 Ague Quartan 11 Acidities in the Stomach 12 Asthma 12, 13. 41 Anodyne Clyster 89 Arthritick Pains 95. 122 Affections of the Nerves 120 Aloetick Pills 121 B. BReathing difficult 14 Breasts flaggy 16 Bruise 16, 17. 141 Blood to stanch 18, 18. 21, 22 Blood extravasated 20 Burns 22, 23, 24, 25, 25 Burns and Scalds 24 Blisters to draw 26, 27, 28
Breast affected with Cold Page 33 Bloody-flux 49. 49. 81, 82, 83, 83, 84. 86. 178 Blood-shot Eye 54. 56. 59 Biting of Mad Dogs 119 Biting of Vipers 177 Balsam for Wounds 179 Bloody Water 188 C. COnvulsive Asthma 13. 41 Cholick Scorbutick 15 Contusion 16. 31 Coagulated Blood 17 Costiveness 29. 41 Cancer in the Breast 29 Chilblains 31 Consumption 32. 35 Colds 33 Coughs 34, 34, 35, 36, 36 Corns 37, 38, 38, 39 Convulsive Fits 39, 40 Convulsions 42. 79 Cholick 42, 43, 43, 44, 44, 45, 46, 47. 149 Cramp 47, 48 Contusion of the Eye 52. 60. 73. 136 Clouded Eyes 68 Clyster Anodyne 89 Children Griped 90 Contractures 117. 130
Courses stopt Page 172 Cuts and Wounds 183 Clyster for Fluxes 190 D. DRopsie Anasarca 5 Distemper Aguish 7 Difficulty of Breathing 14 Drink for Cholicks 43 Dropsie 48 Dysentery 49. 49. 81, 82, 83. 83, 84. 86. 178 Digestive 50 Diabetes 51. 172 Diarrhoea 51 Defluxions on the Eyes 65, 66, 69, 72 Drink for Fevers 80, 81 Drink to correct sharp Humors 101 Dulness of Hearing 102 Drink for the sight 137 Drink for the Stone 145 E. EXtravasated Blood 20 Expectoration 36 Eye contused 52. 60. 73 Eye Blood-shot 54. 59 Eye-sight to preserve 55. 74. 134. 138. 186 Eye-Water 56. 58. 62. 64. 67. 67. 70. 76. 135. 138. 186 Erysipelas 57 Eye Medicament 60
Eye-lids pained Page 63 Eye clouded 68 Eye Rheumatick 65, 66. 69. 72 Eye-Plaister 72 Electuary for the sight 74 Epilepsie 77. 79. 191 Elixir Salutis 78 Excoriation 133 F. FLaggy Breasts 16 Fits of the Mother 44 Flux bloody 49. 49. 81, 82, 83, 84. 86 Flux common 51. 83, 84. 86. 190. 192 Films in the Eyes 64. 75 Falling-sickness 77. 79. 191 Fevers 80 Flux of the Whites 84 Fundament falling 87 French Pox 123 G. GAngreen 88 Griping of the Guts 89 Gripes 90. 139 Gargle 91. 91 Gout 93, 94, 95, 96. 99. 122 Gunpowder to remove 134 Gravel 145 Gums Scorbutick 156 Gonorrhoea 92, 93. 98
H. HEart-burnings Page 12 Hysterical Vapours 40 Hydropsie 48 Humor in the Eye 52. 58 Hurts in the Eye 61. 77 Head pouder 100 Hearing hurt 102 Haemorrhoids 102, 103, 103, 104, 104, 105, 106, 106, 107, 107, 108, 109, 109, 110. 121 Hollow aching Tooth 153 Humor of the Kings-Evil to correct 189 I. INcontinency of Urine 51 Itch in Hands, &c. 111. 167 Jaundies Yellow 112, 112, 113, 114 K. KIngs-Evil 115. 189, 190. Kidneys pained 115 Kidneys stopped 116 L. LOoseness 51 Laxation of a Part 123 Liquor for Ulcers and Wounds 175 Lime-Water to make 188 M. MOther-Fits 44 Milk to increase 117, 118
Mad Dogs Biting Page 119 Marks of Gunpowder to remove 134 Mouth sore 168 Menses stopt 172 N. NUrses Milk to increase 117, 118 Nerves affected 120 O. OLD Aches 2 Ophthalmick Water 55 Ophthalmia 56. 59. 74 Oyntment for the Gout 94 Obstinate Tumor of the Knee 161 P. PRicking pains 5 Plaister for Agues 8 Plaister for Corns 37, 38, 38, 39 Pain in the Side 5. 46 Pearl in the Eye 54 Pain in the Eye-lids 63 Pericarpium 68 Phlyctena in the Eye 71 Plaister for the Eyes 72 Piles 102, 103, 103, 104, 104, 105, 106, 106, 107, 107, 108, 109, 109, 110. 121 Pains Scorbutick 116. 122 Pills of Aloes 121
Palsie Page 124, 125, 126 Pimples in the Eye-lids 127 Pleurisy 127, 128 Pouder for the sight 136 Pissing Blood 188 Q. QUartan Ague 11 R. REcent Burn 24, 25 Redness of Eyes 64, 66 Running of the Reins 92, 93, 98 Running Gout 97 Rheumatism 125. 130 Rest to cause 131 Recent Strain 141, 141, 143, 143, 144 Retention of Urine 171, 171 S. SCorbutical Aches 2, 3, 3, 4 Strain 2 Sides pained 5. 46 Scorbutick Cholick 15 Stanching Blood 18, 18, 19. 21, 22 Styptick Water 19. 21, 22 Scalding 24, 25 Specifick for Cholicks 44, 44 Solution of continuity in the Eye 61 Sight to strengthen 55. 74. 134. 138. 186 Scorbutick Gout 97
Sharp Humors Page 101 Specifick for the Jaundies 113 Scorbutick Pains 116. 122 Small Pox 129 Scurvy 132. 157 Skin rough 133 Stomach to strengthen 139, 139 Stomach-Plaister 140 Strains 141, 141. 143, 143, 144 Stone 144, 145, 145, 146, 147, 147, 148, 149, 150, 192 Sore Throat 162, 162, 163, 164, 164, 165, 165, 166 T. TErtian Ague 10. 10 Tumor in the Eye 71 Tooth-ach 150, 151, 152, 152, 153. 158 Teeth to fasten 154, 154. 155, 156. 156, 157, 157. 158, 158 Tumors to ripen 159 Tumors in the Throat 160 Tumor of the Knee 161 Throat sore 162, 162, 163, 164, 164, 165, 165, 166 Tettars 167 Thrush in Children 168 Tenesmus 169 Terms stopt 172
V. VApours Hysterical Page 40 Urine sharp 170. 172 Urine stopt 171, 171. 173, 173, 174 Urine running away 172 Vomiting 175 Ulcers 175, 176, 176 Vipers biting 177 Voiding Blood 178 W. WRist-Plaister for Agues 8. 68 Womens Breasts flaggy 16 Water Ophthalmick 55, 56. 58. 62. 64. 67, 67. 70. 76. 135. 138. 186 Whites in Women 84. 185 Weakness in the Hands 125 Wounds 175. 179, 179. 183 Wound Drink 180 Worms in Children 184 Ulcer of the Womb 185 Whitloe 187 Warts 187
A COLLECTION OF Choice Remedies. The Second Volume. A. 1. A Powerful Remedy in Apo∣plectick Fits. TAke the Herb Mastick, and distil by an Alembick with a Copper Body an Essential Oyl, of which with such a Pipe or Quill
that one end may be open'd and stopt at pleasure, (the other still remaining open) blow up some drops, first into one of the Patient's Nostrils, and a while after into the other. 2. A good Plaister for Aches, especially Scorbutical. SPread thinly upon Slinck or ve∣ry fine Kids-Leather the Em∣plastrum de Mucilaginibus, and let it lye upon the aching Part as long as there is need. 3. For an Old Ach or Strain. TAke of Lucatella's Balsam one Ounce, of Oyl of Turpen∣tine one Dram, incorporate them very well with a gentle heat, and
anoint the Part affected therewith, wearing on it a piece of unwash'd Flannen besmear'd with the same Oyntment. 4. For Scorbutick Aches, espe∣cially about the Share-bone. TAke two parts of Palm-Oyl, and one of Oyl of Camo∣mile, (to which if you please you may add a little Oyntment of Elder) mix these exactly, and anoint the Part affected. 5. A Powerful Remedy for Scorbutick Aches. TAke to one Ounce of Oyl of Turpentine, one Dram or two of the Volatile Salt of Harts-horn,
or as much as being well ground with it in a Mortar of Glass or Marble, will bring it to the con∣sistence of a kind of Oyntment, with which, the cold being taken off, the Part affected is to be light∣ly anointed. 6. A very easie Medicine for light Scorbutick Aches or Pains. ANoint the pained Part from time to time with fasting-spittle; and if you will have the Medicine a little stronger, the Patient may put Roch Allom to the bigness of a small Pea into his mouth, before he employs his Spittle.
7. For Aches and pricking Pains in the Sides and else∣where. WIth a sufficient quantity of clean Sulphur finely pou∣der'd, mix diligently as much Ve∣nice-Treacle as will bring it to a consistence for Pills. Of this Mix∣ture you may give the quantity of a Pistol-bullet twice, or at most, thrice a day, drinking any conve∣nient Liquor after it. 8. An Experienc'd Medicine for an Anasarca, or General Dropsie of the whole Body. FRY freshly-gather'd Rue with Oyl of Walnuts, till it be∣come
fit to be applyed hot as a Ca∣taplasm or Pultice to the Navil; and keep it on that part for some hours, renewing it once or twice a day, if need require. 9. An External Medicine of∣ten successfully try'd for A∣gues. TAke 5, 7, or 9 (for 'tis pre∣tended it must be an odd Number) of the Roots of Rib∣wort, and having made them clean, put them into a little Bag of Sars∣net or fine Linnen, and let the Pa∣tient wear it upon the nape of his Neck, renewing it within 2, 3, or 4 days if need require.
10. A try'd Remedy for Agues. TAke of the Bark of Sassafras-Root, and of Virginian Snake∣weed, both in pouder, of each 10 Grains, and with half a Dram, or two Scruples of Mithridate or Venice-Treacle, or as much as will give it a due consistence, make a Bolus to be taken at the usual hours. 11. A Choice Medicine for Aguish Distempers. TAke of Salt of Wormwood 15 Grains, Crabs-eyes, or Pouder of Crabs Claws simple 8 or 10 Grains; mix these well, and give them in two or three Spoon∣fuls of some Cordial Water.
12. An Excellent Wrist-Plai∣ster for Agues. TAke Wax, and spread it to about the thickness of a Crown Piece of Silver, and of a convenient breadth and length to make an entire Wrist-Plaister; up∣this spread and display as well as you can the Leaves of the tops of Rue, not yet fully open'd by time, so that they may cover the whole Plaister as well as you can make them do it. Then apply this Em∣plaster, and let it lye on for seve∣ral days consecutively.
13. An often-try'd Medicine for Agues. TAke Ribwort, gather the leaves as near the Root as you can in a dry Morning, wipe them clean, but do not wash them; then dry them carefully, till you may re∣duce them to Pouder: Of this Pou∣der give from one Dram to two at most, mixt with one Dram of Con∣serve of Roses, or the Crumbs of White-bread, or the Yolk of an Egg or two. N. B. You may before you dry the Leaves, distil a Water out of some of them, and make an Extract out of others with Spirit of Wine, or which is better, with Spi∣rit of Dew. They are both good for the same Disease that the Pou∣der is. The Dose of the Water is one Ounce, or an Ounce and half
at the usual times. And that of the Extract about one Dram in some Ounces of White-wine. 14. An Excellent Medicine for Agues, especially Tertians. GIve as much of well-condition'd Virginian Snake-Root reduc'd to fine Pouder, as will lye upon a Shilling, in a Cup of Sherry just before the beginning of the cold Fit, repeating it once or twice if it need to be us'd oftner. 15. For a Tertian Ague. TAke of the Root of Angelica grated, or otherwise made into Pouder, and give of it from half a Dram to a Dram in any convenient Vehicle at the usual
times (viz. about two hours be∣fore the Cold Fit.) 16. A Medicine with which a Quartan was cur'd, that could not be cured with the Jesuits Bark. TAke one Dram of the black tips of Crabs Claws, and having reduc'd them to exceeding fine Pou∣der, let the Patient take it in any convenient Vehicle or Conserve, twice or thrice, as he would take the Cortex, without intermitting any day.
17. An easie Remedy, which long continued does much de∣stroy Acidities, or Heart∣burnings in the Stomach. TAke half a Dram at least of fine∣ly pouder'd red Corral, and give it from time to time in any convenient Vehicle, till the Patient be reliev'd. 18. A very often try'd Reme∣dy for the Asthma. TAke Soap-boilers Lees (made with Pot-Ashes and Quick∣lime) one part, Spirit of Wine rectify'd two parts; set them in Digestion, (to unite them well) and then add some drops (at di∣scretion)
of Chymical Oyl of Car∣raways, and if you please, of Ani∣seeds too. The Dose in younger Persons is about 10 drops, in elder ones, from half a Dram to one Dram in some convenient Vehicle. 19. An Excellent Medicine for a dry or Covulsive Asthma. TAke choice Saffron, reduce it (by rubbing it in a Stone or Glass Mortar) to a kind of Pouder, and with any convenient Mixture give 8 or 10 Grains of it in the form of Pills at Bed-time.
B. 20. An Experienc'd Remedy for Difficulty of Breathing. TAke of choice Castoreum dry'd enough to be pouder'd, 2, 3, or at most 4 Grains, mix this with 10 or 11 Grains of Gasgoin's Pou∣der reduc'd to very fine Pouder; mix up these with some little Sy∣rup or Conserve, and when the Pa∣tient has taken it, let him wash it down with the Mixture, consisting of five Drams of Pennyroyal-wa∣ter, and half a Dram, or at most two Drams of Briony-Water Com∣pound.
21. An Approved Medicine for Inveterate Scorbutick Cho∣licks, and Pains of the Bowels. TAke English Barley, and having well wash'd it, boil it in a suf∣ficient quantity of fresh Spring∣water till it be just ready to burst: Then pour off the clear upon the yellow part of the Rinds of Lem∣mons, freshly cut off from the white part, and put them into a Bottle, which being carefully stopt, the Liquor is to be kept so for use, which is, that the Patient make it his constant Drink.
22. To reduce flagy Breasts to a good shape and consistence. TAke green Hemlock well bruis'd, and reduc'd to a kind of Cata∣plasm or Pultise, which is to be ap∣ply'd (the Cold being first taken off) to the Parts 'tis to work up∣on, and to be kept on till it hath perform'd what was intended, shift∣ing it once a day. 23. An easie, but useful Reme∣dy for a fresh Bruise or Con∣tusion. TAke fresh Butter and Parsley, of each a sufficient quantity, and having chopt the Herb, mix it very well with the Butter, to the con∣sistence
of a Cataplasm, (which is to be apply'd warm) to the newly bruised Part. 24. For Coagulated Blood, or a Bruise. TAke black soft Soap, and with a sufficient quantity of soft Crumbs of white-bread very well mixt with it, make a Paste, which is to be laid on the Part with a linnen Rag, and kept bound upon it for some hours, that it may have time to resolve the congealed Blood, and bring the contused Part from a livid to a red colour, which will much hasten and facilitate the re∣storing it to its former state.
25. To stanch Blood falling from the Nose, by a Simple held in ones hand. LET the Patient hold Knot∣grass and Solomon's Seal in his hand till it grow warm there, or longer if need be. 26. An Excellent Remedy to stanch Blood in any part of the Body. TAke Plantane-water two Ounces, Barley-Cinnamon-water, six Drams, Spirit of Vinegar one Ounce, Dragons-blood half a Dram, Sy∣rup of Myrtles five Drams; mix and make a Julep, of which let the Patient take three spoonfuls every hour.
27. The Styptick Water for stopping of Blood in any part of the Body. TAke one Pound of Excellent Quick-lime, and put it into a clear Earthen Pot, pour upon it five or six Pounds of Fountain-Water, cover the Pot close, and let it lye to infuse about an hour without touching it, then after stir it with a stick for a little time; then let it lye as before for 24 hours, some∣times stirring it, in the end you shall let it settle to a Sediment, the Water being very clear above, pour it off by inclination without stir∣ring: Take of this Water one Pound, which being put into a Vial, you shall add to it a Dram and half of Sublimate finely pouder'd, then shake very well all together,
so that the Pouder may dissolve, and be of an Orange colour, or more reddish than yellow, and in the end clear and limpid, because the red Powder will praecipitate to the bottom. Your Water being clarify'd, you must separate the Water from the Grounds into ano∣ther Vessel, without troubling the Sediments; and to the Water you shall add one Dram of Oyl of Vi∣triol, and an Ounce of Saccharum Saturni. Shake all together, that they may mix the better, after∣wards let all settle, and pour off the clear Water, and keep it for your use. 28. A Choice Medicine to re∣solve extravasated Blood. GRate or Rasp the Root of Bur∣dock, and spreading the pou∣der
upon a Linnen Cloath, bind it quite round the Part affected, re∣newing it twice a day. 29. To make an Excellent Styp∣tick for stanching of Blood. TAke Hungarian Vitriol, Allom, of each half a Pound, Phlegm of Vitriol ten Pounds: Boyl to a dissolution of the Vitriol and Al∣lom; being cold, filter it through brown Paper, and if any Crystals shoot, separate the Liquor from them, adding to each Pound one Ounce of Oyl of Vitriol. Dip Cloaths into this Liquor, and ap∣ply them to the Part affected.
30. An often try'd Styptick to stanch Blood, especially in Wounds. TAke Colcothar as it comes out of the Retort, and having pou∣der'd it, roll Tents of Lint in it, and apply them to the Orifices of the greater Vessels, and employ other usual means to compress the Vessel upon the Tent, and to fill the Cavity of the Wound, partly with Colcothar too. 31. A very often Experienc'd Remedy for Burns. TAke two parts of Oyl of Wal∣nuts, and one of Honey, mix them well together over a gentle
Fire, and when they are thorowly incorporated, dip a Feather in the Mixture, and anoint therewith the Part affected, so as the Oyntment may touch it immediately, and then strew on it some Pouder of Cete∣rarch, or Spleen-wort, and keep the Part quiet, and defend it from the Air. 32. An easie Medicine, and common enough, but useful against Burns. TAke Onions, and beat them into a soft Mass, and apply them as speedily as you can to the Part af∣fected, and keep them on it, till they begin to grow dryish, and then if need be, shift them, and ap∣ply fresh ones.
33. For a Recent Burn. TAke Onions a sufficient quantity, and beat them very well with common Salt finely pouder'd into a Mash, that may be applyed as a Cataplasm (the Cold being first ta∣ken off) to the Part affected, and renewing it, if need be, till the im∣pression of the Fire be taken out. 34. An Excellent Oyntment for Burns and Scaldings. TAke of the inner Rind of Elder-Tree, and of fresh Sheeps dung, without any adhering straws or foulness, of each one Handful, and with fresh Butter or Oyl make thereof an Oyntment, to be apply∣ed as is usual in such Distempers.
35. An easie and approv'd Re∣medy for Burns, especially Recent ones. TAke a sufficient quantity of Adders-Tongue, and boil it softly in Linseed-Oyl till the Li∣quor be strongly impregnated with the Herb, then strain it, and keep it stopt for use. 36. An Excellent Oyntment for Burns and Scaldings. TAke of Saccharum Saturni half a Dram, of the sharp∣est Vinegar four Ounces, make a solution of the former in the lat∣ter, and add to this Solution drop by drop (often stirring or shaking
them together) as much Oyl of Elder as will serve to reduce the Mixture into the form of a Nutri∣tum or Oyntment. 37. A slow but innocent way of making Blisters without Cantharides. TAke Crows-foot, and putting to a handful of it about half a spoonful of Mustard; beat them very well together to the consist∣ence of a Poultise, put this to the thickness of ones little Finger into the cover of a Box, cut shallow, and of about the breadth of the Palm of ones Hand (tho' this co∣ver be less necessary than conveni∣ent) and cutting a hole of the wide∣ness of the Box in a Plaister of Dia∣palma or the like, to make it stick, you must apply it to the Part, and
let it lye on 12 or 14 hours, because it works as well more slowly than Cantharides, as more safely and in∣nocently. 38. A good Medicine to raise Blisters. TAke Cantharides reduc'd into Pouder, and upon half an Ounce of this put two or three Ounces of good Spirit of Wine, let them lye together four or five days, that the Spirit may acquire a good Tincture, then filter it, and dip into it a piece of Linnen Cloath 6, 7, or 8 times double, and of the figure and largeness that you desire. This Cloath being through∣ly wetted and cover'd with a Me∣lilot Plaister, or one of Diachylum, or some other that will stick, to keep it on, must be applyed to the
Part. At the end of five or six hours you may take off your Plai∣ster, and the Linnen Cloath, and find your work done. 39. To raise a Blister without Cantharides. THE Seed of Clemmatis Pe∣regrina being bound hard upon any part, will in an hour, or at most two, have an Operation, like that of another Vesicatory, as far as its contact reaches.
C. 40. An Ʋseful Medicine for Costiveness. TAke Virgin. Honey a suffici∣ent quantity, and mix ex∣actly with it as much finely pou∣der'd Cremor Tartari as will suffice to bring it to the consistence of a somewhat soft Electuary, of which the Patient may take upon the point of a Knife the bigness of an Al∣mond (more or less) as upon tryal you shall see cause. 41. For a Cancer in the Breast. TAke of the Warts that grow on the hinder Legs of a (Stone) Horse, dry them gently,
till you can reduce them to a Pou∣der, of which you may give half a Dram for a Dose in any conve∣nient Vehicle. 42. A Potent Medicine for Contusions, and divers o∣ther Affections. TAke Alcohole of Wine, and dis∣solve in it as much pure Cam∣phire as you easily can, and keep it very close stopt, till you have occasion to use it. Then moisten thorowly with it some thin pieces of Linnen or fine Flannel, and ap∣ply them luke-warm; and likewise you may with a rag dipt in it ap∣ply it to the Eye-lids, having a care that none of it get into the Eye it self, since there it would cause great smart. It may also be very use∣fully
apply'd to Burns, and yet more to Contusions. 43. A try'd Medicine for Chil∣blanes. TAke pretty thick Parings freshly cut off from Turnips, and hold them to the fire till they be very crisp, then apply them to the un∣broken Tumors or Blisters, as hot as the Patient can endure it, and keep them on a competent time, and put on new if need require. They will cause the peccant Mat∣ter to transpire, or otherwise waste without breaking the Blisters.
44. To make a very Nourish∣ing Aliment, that hath re∣cover'd divers in Consum∣ptions. TAke 8 or 10 Craw-fishes, (or, if they be not of the larger size, a dozen) boil them (after the blackest Gut or String is taken out) in Barley-water, till they be∣come very red, then take them out, and beat them long, Shells and all, in a Marble or Glass Morter, to a soft Mash, and in a Press strongly squeeze out the Juice; which may be given either alone, or mixt with about an equal part of Chicken-Broth, or some such convenient Alimental Liquor.
45. A Vulgar but often Ap∣prov'd Medicine for a Cold, especially that affects the Breast. TAke a Sheet, or half a Sheet pro re nata of brown Paper, of as even a Texture as you can get, and anoint it over evenly and very well with the eldest Tallow, or Candle-grease you can procure, so that the Paper may be thorowly penetrated by it. Then cover it thinly with Nutmeg, as you were to rub the Spice upon a Toast, and clap it warm to the Pit of the Sto∣mach, that it may reach a good way both above it and beneath it.
46. An Experienc'd Medicine for Coughs. BOil good Turnips in Water, and having exprest the Juice, mix with it as much finely pouder'd Sugar-candy as will bring it into a kind of a Syrup, of which let the Patient swallow a little as slowly as he can from time to time. 47. A good Medicine for Asth∣matick Coughs. TAke two Ounces of Oyl of sweet Almonds freshly drawn, and put them upon one Dram of Flowers of Brimstone, keep them for a fortnight in Digestion in a moderate heat, and then decant off the Oyl, or pass it through a clean
Linnen Rag to keep back the Brim∣stone: Of this Liquor give a spoon∣ful or two at a time. 48. An easie Medicine, which cur'd not long since a Gen∣tlewoman that had taken much Physick for a Con∣sumptive Cough. TAke 8, 10, or 12 well chosen Raisins of the Sun, and having slit them open, take out the little Kernels, and stuff the Raisins with the tops or small tender Leaves of Rue; and let the Patient take them either as they are, or in the form of a Bolus or the like, pretty early in the Morning, fasting after them two or three hours at least, if he cannot conveniently fast till Noon.
49. A Potent Medicine (for those that can bear it) to ripen Coughs, and hasten the Expectoration of Phlegm. TAke Onions, cut them into slices, and fry them with fresh Butter, as if you were to eat them, then take them out of the Frying Pan, and boyl them in New Milk, till it be well impregnated with them, and they be made tender: Of this Mixture let the Patient take a mo∣derate quantity from time to time. 50. An Excellent Remedy for a Cough. TAke of Virgin-Honey two Ounces, of red Roses wa∣rily
dry'd and finely pouder'd half an Ounce, of choice Sulphur ve∣ry well sifted two Drams, of good Benjamin reduc'd to fine Pouder one Dram. Beat and mix all these very well, and of this let the Pa∣tient take the Mixture from time to time. 51. A Plaister to prevent Corns. TAke yellow Bees-wax 4 Ounces, Verdigrise exactly pouder'd and sifted one Ounce, the Caput Mortuum of the Scull of a Man one Dram: Incorporate them well with boiling them a little, and make thereof a Plaister according to Art.
52. An Effectual Plaister for softning and loosening Corns. SPread a Plaister of Gum Ammo∣niacum (not too thick) with∣out being dissolv'd in Vinegar, and applying it to the Part affected, let it lye on, till it have sufficiently done the designed work of Emo∣lition. 53. A Powerful (but smart) Remedy for Corns. EVaporate the strongly exprest Juice of Radishes to the con∣sistence of a soft Plaister, to be ap∣plyed to the Part affected, and shifted as often as it grows dry. N. B. 'Twill sometimes smart for
a while at first, but afterwards 'twill do its work. 54. A good Remedy for Corns of the Feet. TAke the Yeast of Beer (not Ale) and spreading it upon a Linnen Rag, or other Cloath, ap∣ply it to the Part affected, renew∣ing it once a day. 55. An Excellent Remedy that has cur'd many Children of Convulsive Fits. TAke two or three drops of (Chymical) Oyl of Rose∣mary, and put it into half an Ounce of Sack in an Ounce Bottle, stop the Vial, and let it be well shak'd
to make a whitish Mixture of the Liquors just before you give it. Or else in a half-pint Bottle or Vial, put four Ounces of Sack, or some appropriated Liquor, and drop into it forty drops of the foremention'd Oyl; and when-ever you are to give the Medicine, shake the Vial well stopt, and presently give of the whitish Mixture a Child's little spoonful. 56. A successful Medicine for Convulsive Fits, and Hy∣sterical Vapours (as they call them) or Fits of the Mother. TAke the Liver of a Hare, (if it hath been hunted, it may be the better) and hang it up in a dry place till it be somewhat fry∣able,
having a care that it putrifie not; of this reduced to Pouder let the Patient take two or three Scru∣ples at a time in any convenient Vehicle. 57. An Excellent Medicine for dry or Convulsive Asthma's, and also for Costiveness. GIve at Bed-time 8 or 10 Grains of choice Saffron pulveriz'd grosly in a little Syrup or Conserve, as of Violets, &c. to embody it with.
58. An Excellent Mixture for Fits of the Cholick, and some kinds of Convulsions. TAke one Ounce of Flowers of Sulphur, and as much Sugar∣candy, grind them very well to∣gether in a Glass or Stone Mortar, and upon this quantity drop thirty drops of Oyl of Carraway-seeds, as much of Oyl of Orange, and as much of the Oyl of Aniseeds: Incorporate these well, and of the Mixture give about 20 or 30 grains for a Dose.
59. An incomparable Medicine for the Cholick. THE yellow Peel of Oranges, being reduc'd to Pouder, give from half a Dram to two Scruples of it in any convenient Vehicle. 60. To make a good Purging Drink for the Cholick. TAke two Ounces of Rhubarb, four Ounces of Gentian, and a quart of good Aniseed-water, let the Roots infuse along in it, and give the Patient about two spoon∣fuls at a time as often as need re∣quires.
61. An almost Specifick Reme∣dy for a Fit of the Cholick. TAke about half a Dram of ex∣press'd Oyl of Nutmegs (usu∣ally sold in the Shops for East-In∣dian Oyl of Mace.) Dissolve this in some spoonfuls of good Wine, which the Patient is to take as hot as conveniently he can. 62. An uncommon, but try'd Remedy for Cholicks, (with∣out much Matter) and good in Fits of the Mother. TAke good Ginger dry, and in∣stead of poudering it, cut it into as thin slices as you easily can: With these fill a Tobacco-pipe, and
take the smoak as you would that of Tobacco. Do this twice, thrice, or four times a day, but especially at Bed-time, and in the Morning. 63. An Excellent Medicine for Convulsive Cholicks. TAke of the Volatile Salt of Pi∣geons-dung two or three Grains, or somewhat more (not exceeding five or six in all) mix these with a Scruple or half a Dram of the same Dung crude, but well and slowly dry'd, and finely pouder'd. Give this Mixture for one Dose in some spoonfuls of any convenient Ve∣hicle.
64. For the Cholick, or Pains in the Sides. TAke two Balls of fresh Horse∣dung, and infuse them for 12 hours (if haste require, 3 or 4 may serve the turn) in good White∣wine in a close Vessel; then strain the Liquor, and let the Patient take five or six Ounces of it at a time. 65. For the Cholick. BOyl about one Ounce of the Seeds of the black stinging Nettles in about a quart or more of good Claret-Wine; then strain the Decoction, and give of it a Wine-glass full at a time, two or three times a day, or as often as need requires.
66. An Excellent Medicine for the Cholick. TAke of Doctor Stephens's Water half a Pint, Plague-water half a Pint, Juniper-Berry-water half a Pint, Pouder of Rhubarb 2 Ounces; mingle these together, shake the Bottle when you take any of it, and take about four spoonfuls at a time. 67. For the Cramp. TAke the Leaves of Rosemary, chop them very small, and sew them so in fine Linnen or Sarsnet, as to make a kind of Garter of them, to be tyed about the Patient's bare Leg.
68. To take off the Pain of the Cramp. TAke of the Oyntment of Popu∣leon two parts, Oyl of Spike one part; mix them, and with the Mixture anoint well or chafe the Part affected. D. 69. A Remedy, by which an Hydropical Merchant was cur'd. GIve about half a Dram or two Scruples for a Dose of yellow transparent Amber twice or thrice a day in any convenient Vehicle.
70. An Experienc'd Medicine for a Dysentery, or Bloody∣flux. GIve about three Ounces of the Juice of Ground-Ivy, mixt with one Ounce of the Juice of Plantane, once or twice a day. 71. For to stop a Dysentery, or Bloody-flux. USE the Pouder of Crepitus Lupi, or Fuss-balls, made up with some Conserve of Roses, or other convenient Additament in∣to Pills. Of this Mixture give in Dysenteriâ, as much at a time, as contains from about a Scruple, to about half a Dram of the Pouder.
72. An easie, but very often try'd Digestive, to be used instead of Basilicum. TAke two Ounces of good Ve∣nice Turpentine, and incor∣porate very well with it the Yolks of two fresh Eggs, and then add to it (at discretion) a little Spirit of Wine; with this dress the Part Morning and Evening, laying it on thicker, if the Part be near some Nerve, or other dryer Part, and less thick if it be fleshy or moist.
73. A good Medicine for In∣continency of Ʋrine, and the beginning a Diabetes. CUT off the Necks of well blown Sheeps-Bladders, of the remaining Membranes put up pretty store one over another into a cover'd Pot, where being dry'd gently, and yet sufficiently, in a Baker's Oven, take them out, and pulverize them well. The Dose is as much as will lye upon a large Groat, or small Sixpence. 74. For a Diarrhoea, Loosness, or Flux of the Belly. MIX up 15 Grains, or if the Distemper be but slight, 10 Grains, of pouder'd Rhubarb
with half a Dram of Diascordium, and let the Patient take it either going to Bed, or early in the Morn∣ing after his first sleep. E. 75. For a Contusion of the Eye. TAke the Crumb of Whitebread, and diligently incorporate with black soft Soap as much of it as will make a somewhat soft Paste; and then with your Thumbs make a little Cake (as it were) of it, and apply to the bruised Part, the Eye being first shut, and bind it so, that it may lye on for some hours, or a day if need be. But this ought to be used with Caution.
76. An Excellent Medicine for clammy Humors of the Eyes. TAke New Milk, and let it stand till it hath got a little Cream upon it, then let the Patient when he is in Bed, take up with his Fin∣ger a little of the Cream (and not of Milk) and shutting his Eye∣lids, besmear his Eyes with it, ha∣ving a care that very little or none get into his Eyes, because it would make them smart; let this Cream lye on till the next Morning, and in case the Patient chance to wake in the Night, he may, if he finds cause, lay on a little more, and wash all off in the Morning.
77. A somewhat sharp but of∣ten try'd Medicine to take off the Pearl on the Eye. TAke of the Juice of Celandine, and mix with it about an equal part of pure Honey; and of this Mixture employ a drop, or at most two, at a time, letting it fall upon the Part affected Morning and Evening. 78. An easie Remedy for a Re∣cently Blood-shot Eye. TAke a rotten Apple, and as ma∣ny tops of Wormwood, as being well beaten together with it will make a Mass of the consistence of a Cataplasm; warm this a little,
and put a sufficient quantity of it into a thin and clean Linnen Rag, and let the Patient keep it upon the Part affected all Night, the next Morning wash it off with some red Rose-water, or the like Liquor. 79. To make a choice Opthal∣mick Water to preserve the Eyes and Sight. TAke of the distill'd Water of Rue, Celandine, and Vervain, of each one Ounce; mix them, and infuse in them two Drams of Cro∣cus Metallorum exquisitely ground for a Week or Ten days; then ve∣ry carefully filter the Infusion, that none of the Atoms of Pouder pass thorow with the Liquor. Of this let fall into the Eye a drop or two, Morning and Evening, having a care not to shake the Glass, when
you employ the Liquor, lest some unheeded dust may have escap'd the filter, and be rais'd. 80. For a slight Opthalmia, or Blood-shot Eye. SHake half a Dram of diligently prepar'd Tutty into an Ounce of red Rose-water, and drop it of∣ten into the Eye. 81. An Experienc'd Eye-water for an Inflammation and Tu∣mor of the Eye. TAke of prepar'd Tutty half an Ounce, the Water of white Roses and of Frogs Spawn, and al∣so of the best Canary Wine (not distill'd) of each two Ounces, of
Aqua Mirabilis half an Ounce: Mix these well, and drop a very lit∣tle at a time into the Patient's Eyes. 82. An odd and often try'd Medicine for an Eresipalas. TAke the Blood of a hunted Hare whilst 'tis yet warm, and drench thorowly in it clean Linnen Rags, which are to be dry'd in the Wind or free Air, and then kept in a dry place for use: Lay a good piece of Linnen thus stain'd upon the Part affected, and either by binding it on, or covering it with some silken or other Cloath, whose edges have some sticking Plaister, keep it from falling off, and renew it from day to day, if there be need. N. B. If it grow too stiff with long keep∣ing, you may soften it with a little sprinkling of fair Water.
83. An experienc'd Water for sharp and slimy Humors in the Eyes and Eye-lids. TAke of prepar'd Tutty half an Ounce, prepar'd Coral and Pearl of each half a Scruple, Tro∣chisci-Albi Ras. five or six Grains, Red Rose-water, and Succory-wa∣ter, of each an Ounce and half; mix them well, and if you will have the Medicine stronger, you may put three or four Grains of Aloes into it.
84. A Choice Remedy for an Opthalmia, or Blood-shot Eyes. TAke of the Juice of Housleek two parts, Daisies and Ground-Ivy of each one part; mix these Juices together, and to about two spoonfuls of the Mixture, put five or six drops of clarify'd Honey: Let the Juices depurate themselves by residence, and then in some small Silver Vessel clarifie them, and of this Mixture let fall a drop or two into the Eye three or four times a day. N. B. But if the Inflamma∣tion be not so great, but there is more need of Abstersion, use more of the Juice of Ground-Ivy, and less of that of Housleek.
85. For a light Stroke or Con∣tusion of the Eye. TAke two Ounces of Bettony∣water, and three drops of cla∣rify'd Honey, mix them well to∣gether, and drop them into the Eye three or four times a day; the Composition must be made fresh every second and third day. 86. A Potent but smarting Me∣dicine for things growing on the Eye. TAke white Paper, and let it flame away upon a clean Pewter Plat∣ter, till there remain so much Oyl behind as you think you shall need; blow off the Cinders of the Papers,
and with a little of your Spittle mixt by your Finger with the Oyl, make up a kind of Oyntment; which being taken up with a Fea∣ther, is to be apply'd once or twice a day, as need shall require, (and as the Patient can well bear) to the affected Eye: Which course is to be continu'd till the Cure be compleated. 87. For Hurts that make a Solu∣tion of Continuity in the Eye. TAke two Ounces of Celandine-Water, and put to it 2, 3, or 4 drops of good clarify'd Honey, enough to give the Water a faint tast: With this dress the Eye at least twice (if not thrice) a day. But the Mixture must be made fresh once in two or three days, or else it will grow sourish.
88. An Excellent and very of∣ten try'd Eye-Water, espe∣cially for outward Affections of the Eye. TAke of Plantane-leaves 4 Ounces, and of Strawberry-leaves as much; Digest these for 24 hours in a Pound of good White-wine. Then distil them to dryness in a Glass Head and Body in a Balneo Mariae. The Liquor that is thus obtain'd put into a very clean Brass (not Copper) Vessel, and let it stand there for some hours, till it have acquir'd a manifest, but not a very deep blew Tincture, and then put to it (when pour'd on) an equal weight of White Rose-Water distill'd after the common way: Shake these together, and let fall one drop into the Internal
corner of the Eye, the Patient stoop∣ing backward, and shutting his Eye-lids for a Minute or two, that the Water may disperse on the Eye, and that the quickness of the Li∣quor, which may make him weep, may the less prejudice him. 89. To make a Ʋseful Medi∣cine for Pain or Itching in the Eye-lids, or on that ac∣count in the Eyes. TAke half a spoonful of French Barley (after the first Water it was put into over the Fire is cast away) and boyl it softly for a lit∣tle while in a Pint of Spring-water, seasonably putting to it a good Pu∣gil of dry'd Damask Rose-leaves. (N. B. Sometimes you may add if you please a few Red Rose-leaves, or Melilot-flowers, or both.) With
this Liquor foment the Part with a soft Sponge for a pretty while, in the Morning, and at Night, having a care that it be apply'd pretty hot, or at least warm. 90. To make an Excellent Eye-Water for Redness and light Films, &c. upon the Eye. MAke some Lime-Water, by pouring a Gallon of Scald∣ing-hot Water upon a Pound, or somewhat more of Quicklime; stir them together, and after some hours decant warily that which is clear. And to a Pound of this Water put half an Ounce (and no more) of choice Verdigrise pulveriz'd: And in a very moderate heat extract a Tincture of a fine, but somewhat dilute, Saphirine colour, (but it ought not to be too deep.) Decant
this very warily, and let a drop or two of it at a time fall into the Eye, as often as need requires. 91. An Excellent Remedy to stop a violent Defluxion on the Eye. TAke red Sage and Rue, of each one handful, a spoonful of fine Wheat-flower, and the white of a new-laid Egg beaten to Water, mix these very well, and spread them upon very thin Leather or black Silk, and apply it to the Temples; 'tis to be about the bigness of a Sil∣ver Crown at least.
92. An Excellent Remedy for Red Eyes, made such by a defluxion of a hot or sharp Humor. TAke of the tops of Rosemary about one Dram, and beat them up with one or two Ounces of rot∣ten Pearmains or Pippins, or if those cannot be had, with the like weight of the soft part of the same Apples that are sound. And when by ex∣quisite beating, you have reduc'd these things to a Cataplasm, apply them, the cold being first taken off, to the Part affected, binding it there∣upon, and letting it lye all Night.
93. An Eye-Water. TAke House Snails, and beat them in their Shells, and stratifie them with about an equal quantity of Juice of Celandine; draw off the Water in a cold or Pewter Still (such as is us'd for Rose-Water) and keep the Liquor that will come over close stopt for your use. 94. The Lady Fitz-harding's Eye-Water, which lately cur'd an almost blind Person, whose Eyes look'd like Glass. Lady Fitz-harding's Eye-water. TAke three spoonfuls of White Rose-Water, as much Eye-bright
Water, and as much sifted White Sugar-candy as will lye on a Three∣pence, and the same quantity of fine Aloes sifted and put to the Wa∣ter, and shak'd together, and drop a few drops every Night going to Bed. 95. A Pericarpium, or Wrist-Plaister, that often-times frees the Patients from flying Clouds in the Eyes, and sometimes lesser specks, spe∣cially if Recent. TAke of Rue, Camomile, Hem∣lock, each half a handful, of Bay-Salt two spoonfuls, one or two Ounces of Leaven; Incorpo∣rate these well together, and make thereof Pericarpia, to be apply'd to the Patient's Wrists, and kept
on, till growing dry, they become troublesom. 96. An Excellent Medicine for hot Defluxions on the Eyes. TAke of prepar'd Tutty half an Ounce, White Rose-water and Frogs spawn-water carefully drawn in very good Canary Wine, of each two Ounces, of Aqua Mirabilis half an Ounce; mix these well toge∣ther, and let fall two or three drops into the Patient's Eye (especially at Bed-time.)
97. An easie but useful Eye-Water to keep the Eye cool and moderately dry. TAke to two Ounces of Succory∣water half a Dram of prepar'd Tutty, shake them well, and keep them together for use. 98. An often try'd Pericarpi∣um, or Wrist-Plaister for Defluxions and Fumes in the Eyes. TAke Rue, Camomile, Hemlock, Wormwood, of each half a handful, Bay-Salt pulveriz'd about two spoonfuls, sour Dough about an Ounce; mix all these together very diligently, moistning them
from time to time with Elder-Vi∣negar, to a consistence fit for Pe∣ricarpia, one of which is to be ap∣ply'd to the Wrist of that side on which the Part affected is, and to be renewed, if there be occasion. 99. For a Phlyctena or little Tumor in the Carneous Tu∣nicle of the Eye. TAke the Decoction of Mucila∣ges that is proper for Phlyctaea's, and dress the Eye from time to time, to ripen the Tumor: Then open it with a Lancet, and squeeze out all the Matter; and lastly, cleanse and heal the Part with Ho∣ney. N. B. But when the Tumor is beginning, or not great, you may, in want of the Decoction of Mu∣cilages, dress the Eye with the Mixture of equal parts of the Wa∣ter
of Melilot, Camomile, and Be∣tony. 100. A Plaister to strengthen the Eyes, and stop Deflu∣xions on them. TAke of Frankincense 2 Ounces, Olibanum and Mastich, each half a Dram; mix these well, and re∣duce them into fine Pouder, of which a convenient quantity is to be melted and spread upon black Ribbon, or some such thing, with a hot Knife or Spatula, and so presently apply'd to the Temples.
101. An often Experienc'd Me∣dicine for little Strokes or Contusions of the Eye. TAke Betony-water three Ounces, and five drops of clarify'd Ho∣ney, mix them, and drop a little of the Mixture from time to time into the Patient's Eye. N. B. Take Succory-water, Crumbs of White-bread, a little Saffron, and sometimes a little Honey, for sharp Humors in the Eye lids, and burns or small specks (of the Eye) four Grains of Roman Vitriol to four Ounces of Water, of either Rose∣water, Succory-water, or Fennel∣water, &c.
102. A good Electuary to strengthen the Sight. TAke Conserve of Borrage and Betony of each an Ounce and half, Venice-Treacle two Drams, Species Dionisi, Diarrhodon abbatis, Diatrion Santalon, of each half a Dram, Tartar Vitriolate a Scruple, Diacorallion a Dram and half, Oyl of Fennel seven drops, Syrup of Violets and Coral, of each a suf∣ficient quantity; mix and make an Electuary. 103. A Choice Medicine for an Opthalmia Sicca. TAke of the Leaves of Fennel, Hyssop, Celandine, Betony, and Carduus, of each half a hand∣ful,
or a whole handful; of Lin∣seeds, Quince-seeds, Fenugreek, and Flea-wort, of each half a Dram, of French Barley one Ounce: Boyl all these a little in two quarts of fair Water, and half a Pint of White-Wine. Let the Patient hold his Head (well fitted with a Napkin for the purpose) over the Fumes for about a quarter of an hour. 104. For a Film, or other such thing growing in the Eye. TAke of Crude Roch-Allom two parts, Turmerick one part, and refin'd Sugar three parts. Pulverize each of these separately, then mix them exactly, and wari∣ly blow it into the Patient's Eye from time to time, as need shall require.
105. To make an Excellent as well as Famous Eye-Water. TAke Celandine (the whole Plant except the Root) and having shred it or chopt it a little, put it into a Retort, and distil it in Balneo. When all the Liquor is come over, empty the Vessel, and put in as much of the fresh Plant, and distil the Liquor from it to make it more strong of the Plant. Put this Liquor once more upon new or fresh Celandine, and distil in Bal∣neo as before; and keep this well∣impregnated Water close stopt. 'Tis to be outwardly us'd in the Dose of 2, 3, or 4 drops at a time.
106. A Medicine for Hurts in the Eye. TAke Succory-Water and crumbs of White-bread, enough to bring it almost to a consistence; then add a little Saffron to tinge and quicken it, and sometimes also you may put to it a little Honey, to make it more cleansing and healing. Apply it (if need be) with Plagets of Flax to the Part affected. 107. A Remedy that hath cured the Epilepsie. GIve daily half a Dram at a time of choice and very fine∣ly pouder'd Amber in any conve∣nient Vehicle for about six Weeks together.
108. Elixir Salutis. TAke of the Seeds of Anise, Sweet Fennel, Coriander, and Parsley, of each two Ounces; of Liquorish scrap'd, wash'd, and bruis'd, and choice Leaves of Senna, of each likewise two Ounces; of Raisins of the Sun, rub'd clean and bruis'd one Pound; of Elecampane-Roots and Guajacum Wood, of each one Ounce. Mix these Ingredients, and pour on them two quarts of Aqua Vitae, or English Spirits (for Brandy is too hot a Liquor.) Let these infuse to∣gether 48 hours. Then put them all into a hair Bag, and press them strongly in an Apothecary's Press, and if there be need, pass what is strain'd, through an Hippocras-bag after the Liquor is setled. Keep this in Bottles well stop'd in a cool
place, and give of it two or three spoonfuls at a time, in the Morning fasting, and if need require, at Bed∣time. 109. An Experienc'd Remedy for Convulsions and Epi∣lepsies in Children. TAke about half a Dram, or from one Scruple to two, or somewhat more, of well chosen, and very finely pouder'd Amber, Native Cinnabar 10 Grains; mix them, and of this sweetned with some pouder'd Sugar, or other fit thing that may give it a relish; let the Patient take twice a day (at least for most days) during six Weeks, unless he fully recovers be∣fore that time. And however, he is to take it for two or three days
before each New and Full Moon, for some Months successively. F. 110. An Excellent Drink in Fevers, even Malignant. TAke a quart of Spring Water, and having given it a walm or two, put to it one Ounce at least of Harts-horn, calcin'd to per∣fect whiteness, and when the Mix∣ture is cold, put to it three Ounces of Syrup made of the Juice of Lemons, shake this Mixture; when you will use it, shake it well, and let the Patient take of it a mode∣rate draught several times in the Day and Night.
111. An Ʋseful Drink in Fe∣verish Distempers. IN a Pint and a half of clear Posset-drink, boyl about one Ounce of cleans'd Roots of Dan∣delion, or Piss-a-beds, cut or slic'd very small, till near half a Pint be wasted, and then strain it, and let the Patient take half a Pint, or the whole quantity if he can, at a time. 112. An Excellent Remedy for Dysenterical Fluxes. TAke good Venice Turpentine, and with a very gentle heat evaporate so much of it, that when 'tis cold, it may be but little short of Coagulation. This yet sost, but
not fluid Substance, incorporate with fine Sugar, enough to make it up into Pills, whereof give in the Morning fasting as many as will amount from a Scruple to half a Dram or two Scruples, or a whole Dram of the Turpentine, besides the Sugar. 113. An uncommon, but Ex∣perienc'd Remedy for Dy∣senterical Fluxes. TAke the Bone of the Thigh of a hang'd Man perhaps another may serve, but this was still made use of) Calcine it to whiteness, and ha∣ving purg'd the Patient with an An∣timonial Medicine, give him one Dram of this white Pouder for one Dose, in some good Cordial, whether Conserve or Liquor.
114. For the Dysentery, and Fluxes caused by sharp Hu∣mors. TAke from half a Dram to one Dram of Merourius Dulcis, and as much either of fine Sugar or Sugar-candy, and with some Pur∣gative or other, let the Patient take it once a day, with care, that none of it remain in his Mouth, or stick in his Throat. 115. An often try'd Medicine for Fluxes of the Belly, thô Bloody ones. GIve for a Dose in any conve∣nient Vehicle as much pou∣der'd or grated Pizzle of a Hart or
Deer as will lye upon an ordinary Half-Crown Piece. 116. An Effectual Medicine for Dysenterical and other Fluxes. TAke of a Hare the Skin, Liver, Gall, and all the Parts, except the Muscles, and having dry'd them so far (and no further) as that they may be conveniently reduc'd to Pouder. Give of this Pouder from about two Scruples to one Dram, in any convenient Vehicle. 117. An Experienc'd Remedy for sharp Fluxes of the Belly. TAke a pint of new Milk, and dissolve in it two Ounces of
Loaf-Sugar, and at length about the bigness of a Walnut of good Mithridate; give this Mixture mo∣derately warm for a Clyster, to be reiterated if there be occasion. 118. To stop Fluxes and Whites. FOR Fluxes you may in divers cases give the Patient from time to time a moderate quantity of a Decoction of half an Ounce of Ising-glass, in about a pint of new Milk.
119. An easie Medicine for Fluxes, especially those caus'd by sharp Humors. INstead of Butter take well-con∣dition'd Oyl-Olive, and tho∣rowly drench therewith a good Toast, and let the Patient eat it. 120. For a Bloody-Flux. TAke half an Ounce of London-Treacle, an Ounce, or an Ounce and half of Conserve of red Roses, mix them together with some Sy∣rup of Clove▪Gilly-Flowers, or Sy∣rup of Citrons, and keep them thus mix'd in a Pot cover'd for your use. Take of this about the quantity of a Walnut at Night, and in the Morn∣ing for two days, fasting two hours
before and after, intermit then a day, and take it again in the like manner. 121. A try'd Medicine for the falling down of the Fun∣dament. TAke some Ginger, and having carelesly slic'd it, put it in a little Pan, heat it by clear and well kindled Coals, and let the Patient receive the Fume of it, cast on by little and little in a kind of Close∣stool, or some equivalent Seat, where the lower part of his Body may be well cover'd for about half a quar∣ter of an hour at a time.
G. 122. A Medicine for a light incipient Gangreen. AFter having lightly scarify'd the Part affected, apply as hot as the Patient can well bear it, a Cataplasm made of strong Brandy, and the Pith or Crumb of White∣bread, shifting it three or four times a day, or somewhat oftner, if need be. N. B. Some use Turneps boyl'd, and made Unctuous with a little fresh Hogs-lard to resolve the hard Tumors of Womens Brests.
123. A Choice Anodyne Clyster. TAke Marsh-Mallow Roots half an Ounce, Leaves of the same, Mallows, Mullein, of each one handful, Camomile▪Flowers two Pu∣gils: Boyl them in a sufficient quan∣tity of Water to ten Ounces, and dissolve therein Goats-suet 2 Ounces, Yolks of two Eggs, and Oyl of Camomile an Ounce and half: Mix and make a Clyster for easing Pain. 124. A slight but often try'd Medicine for the Griping of the Guts. TAke about a quarter of a Pint of Brandy, and having made a Toast of Bread (not too fine and
white) throw it in very hot into the Liquor, and as soon as 'tis thorowly drencht let the Patient take it out, and eat it hot; and this may be repeated, if there be need, two or three times a day. 125. An often try'd Remedy for the Gripes in little Chil∣dren. TAke of Oyl of Nutmegs, and of Wormwood, of each a like quantity, mingle them well, and with the Mixture a little warm'd anoint the Patient's Navil, and the Pit of the Stomach.
126. To make an Excellent Gargle. TAke six Ounces of Scabious-Water, one spoonful of Mu∣stard, one spoonful of Honey, and one spoonful of Vinegar; grind all these very well together in a Mar∣ble or Glass Mortar, till you have reduc'd them to a liquid Mixture, which is to be used as a Gargle. 127. A Choice Gargle for a sore Throat. TO four Ounces of Plantane-Water add three or four spoonfuls of Red Rose-water, and mix very well with these the White of an Egg beaten to a Glair, or Wa∣ter; sweeten this Mixture with a
small spoonful of white Sugar-candy, or in want of that, as much very fine Loaf-Sugar. Let the Patient Gargle this as often as need re∣quires. 128. An Experienc'd Medicine for a Gonorrhoea. TAke two Ounces of ripe Lau∣rel-Berries, and infuse them for a day in a quart of good White-Wine: Of this let the Patient drink about two or three spoonfuls twice a day for a pretty while together; only once in three days (or there∣abouts) intermitting, that he may take some gentle Purging Medi∣cine.
129. For a Gonorrhoea. TAke choice Mastich a sufficient quantity, and having very finely beaten and searc'd it, take about half an Ounce of it at a time in the Yolk of a new-laid Egg, washing it down, if it be thought needful, in any convenient Li∣quor. 130. An Excellent Remedy to take off the Pains of the Gout. TAke Minium or Red-Lead ground fine half a Pound, Oyl of Earth∣worms one Pound, or a sufficient quantity: Boyl them to the con∣sistency of a hard or solid Empla∣ster, without burning: Afterwards
add of Camphire two Ounces, dissolved in Oyl of Earth-worms, so much as may make the Empla∣ster of a just consistency. 131. An Excellent Oyntment in the Gout. TAke Barbadoes Tar, and Palm-Oyl, of each a like quantity, melt them together in no more fire than is needful to make them incor∣porate well; with this Mixture warm, the Part is to be anointed and warily chafed. 132. A slight but effectual Me∣dicine to appease Gouty Pains. TAke Linseed well condition'd, and with a little Water beat them in a Marble or Glass Mortar,
rubbing them very well, that the Medullary part may be separated in some measure from the Husk, and may make the Water conside∣rably white. In this Liquor dip clean Rags, and when they are thorowly wetted, apply them some∣what warm to the Part affected, shifting them if need be once in an hour, or at most in two. 133. A speedy Remedy to take off Arthritick or Gout-Pains. TAke good Spirit of Sal Armoniac, and with a Feather dipt in it moisten gently all the Part, or Parts affected.
134. A Medicine that almost presently appeases the Pains of the Gout. TAke of black Soap four Ounces, choice Wood-soot finely sifted about a Dram and half, and add to these about half the Yolk of an Egg: Incorporate them diligently together, and spreading the Mix∣ture somewhat thin, apply it (the cold being first taken off) by way of Cataplasm to the Part affected.
135. A homely but often try'd Medicine to appease the Pains of Scorbutical Run∣ning Gouts. TAke Earth-worms cleans'd, and having fill'd an earthen Pot with them, and luted on a cover very well, set it into an Oven with a batch of Bread, and let it stand there till the Oven be cold. Then take out the Pot, and having re∣mov'd the cover, you will find the Matter turn'd into a gross Liquor ill scented. Strain this with ex∣pression, and keep it stopt for use, which is, to rub therewith the Part affected with a warm hand once or twice a day. N. B. If the smell be offensive, you may put to it a few drops of Oyl of Rhodium, or some other Odoriferous one, to Correct it.
136. An Excellent Remedy for the Gonorrhoea. TAke of choice Amber, and of Mastich, both reduc'd to very fine Pouder, and very well mixt, equal parts, and of this Mixture give half a Dram at a time in a proper Vehicle, or in a draught of Chocolate. Continue this for three Weeks, or a Month, if need require, purging the day before you begin to take it, and once every Week afterwards, especially when you leave off the use of the Pouder.
137. To appease the Pain of the Gout, and by degrees lessen the Fits. TAke one part of Spirit of Sal Armoniac, and three parts of Spirit of Wine, neither of them too well rectify'd: Shake them to∣gether, (and if you please digest them a while) and having dipt old but clean Linnen Rags in the Mix∣ture, apply them to the Part af∣fected, shifting them now and then, as need shall require.
H. 138. To make an Excellent Ce∣phalick or Head-Pouder, good also for the Eyes. TAke the Leaves or Flowers of Betony, Marjoram, and Da∣mask Roses, also the Flowers of Sage and Rosemary, all at discretion. To these add the Pouder of Lignum Aloes, and some Seeds of Nigella Romana. Reduce all these to Pou∣der, to be us'd as a Hair-pouder, when the Patient goes to Bed.
139. An useful Drink, to be frequently employ'd to Cor∣rect Sharp Humors. TAke two Ounces of choice Bar∣ley (English or French) well wash'd from its Dust and Sordes: Boyl this in a quart or more of Spring-water till the Grains begin to burst. Then strain the Deco∣ction through a clean Cloath, and let the Patient use it at Meals and other times, for his ordinary Drink.
140. An experienc'd Medicine for Dulness of Hearing, and Hysterical Affections. THE Juice of red Onions is Ex∣cellent for Diseases of the Ears, and for a Deafness in its beginning. N. B. Briony-Roots also wonderful∣ly prevail against all Affections of the Womb. 141. An Experienc'd Medicine for the Pain of the Haemor∣rhoids. TAke the sole of an Old Shooe, worn by some Man that walks much, cut it in pieces, and burn it, not to white or gray Ashes, but to a fryable and tender Coal; reduce
this to impalpable Pouder, and then with a sufficient quantity of unsalted Lard make it into an Unguent, wherewith the Part affected is to be anointed from time to time. 142. For the Haemorrhoids. MAke a Suppository of Hogs-Lard or Bacon, or instead of that employ Goose-grease made up into the same form. 143. For the Haemorrhoids. IN the Yolk of an Egg, or a lit∣tle of some convenient Syrup or Conserve, give from half a Dram to two Scruples or one Dram, or somewhat more of Flower of Brim∣stone, once, or if the case be urgent, twice a day. The Pouder may be
also given in Milk, to those that like it better than sweet Vehicles. 144. A Choice Internal Remedy for Painful Haemorrhoids. TAke about two Scruples of choice Sulphur vive, and mix it with a little Sugar to make it relish, and give that Dose once, or at most twice a day. 145. A very choice Medicine for the Pain and Tumors of the Haemorrhoids. TAke fresh Leeks (the whole Plant) shred them small, and fry them well with fresh Butter, till they be fit to be brought to the consistence of a Cataplasm or Poul∣tise,
that is to be apply'd very war to the Part affected, and to be re∣newed from time to time, as need shall require. 146. An Ʋseful Medicine for the Pain of the Haemorrhoids. MAke up Flower of Brimstone and an equal weight or a double of fine Sugar, with a Solu∣tion of Gum Dragon, into Tabulets that may weigh about a Dram a piece; of those that contain the most Sulphur you may give one twice a day, but of the other sort much oftner, if need require.
147. A choice Remedy for the Pain of the Haemorrhoids. TAke Album Graecum, or white Dogs-turd, reduc'd to an impal∣pable Pouder, mix it up with a suf∣ficient quantity of Goose-grease, and by grinding it well in a Leaden Mortar, reduce it to a black Oynt∣ment, to be apply'd moderately warm to the Part affected. 148. An Experienc'd Remedy for unbroken Haemorrhoids. TAke calcin'd Oyster-shells, and incorporate them with as much Honey as will make up the Pouder into an Oyntment, with which the Part affected is to be tenderly a∣nointed from time to time.
149. For the Haemorrhoids, a very successful try'd Medi∣cine. TAke Maiden Leeks (as some call those that grow without having been transplanted) and casting a∣way the green part, make of the bulbous part and a sufficient quan∣tity of whole Oatmeal a Caudle, whereof let the Patient eat plenti∣fully. 150. A Choice Drink for the Pain of the Haemorrhoids. TAke Yarrow, and boyl a hand∣ful of it in about a Pint and a half of Posset-drink, in a cover'd Vessel, till it be strong of the Plant;
and of this Decoction let the Pa∣tient drink pretty plentifully from time to time. 151. An Excellent Remedy for the Pain of the Haemorrhoids. TAke of Mastick, Olibanum, Aloes, and Myrrh, of each a like quan∣tity, pouder and mix them very well, then lay or strew a sufficient quantity of this upon a Pledget of Lint or Cotton, moistened through∣ly with Spirit of Wine over a few well kindled Coals, that the Pouder may melt, and be clapt hot to the Pit of the Stomach, or the Navel.
152. A Medicine for the Pains of the Haemorrhoids. TAke a quart, or at least a pint of New Milk, and boil it well for a while, and then taking it off the Fire, presently put it into a Close-stool in some open mouth'd Vessel, and let the Patient sit over the Fume of it. 153. An Excellent Medicine to appease the Pains of the Haemorrhoids. TAke two fresh Eggs, and roast them pretty hard, then peel off the Shells and mince them. To these add two Pippins, the core be∣ing first taken out, that must
be roasted to pap; mix these, and incorporate them very well with the Eggs, reducing all to a kind of Cataplasm, which is to be apply'd very warm, if not very hot, to the Part affected, and to be renewed if need be. 154. A Choice Medicine for the Pains of the Haemorrhoids. TAke half a Dram of good Flower of Brimstone, and boyl it a little in New Milk, and let the Pa∣tient take fasting in the Morning both the Liquor and the Pouder for many days successively. And if need be, the like Dose may be ta∣ken between four and five in the Afternoon. Also one may make up the like quantity of Flores with a little fine Sugar and Gum Tragacanth into Tablets or Lozenges, to be ta∣ken
instead of the Pouder and Milk. I. 155. An Experienc'd Liquor to Cure the Itch in the Hands or Face, without Mercury or Sulphur. TAke a handful of the Roots of Elecampane, and as much of sharp-pointed Dock, shred them small, and boyl them in two quarts of Spring-water till the consumption of a pint. Then strain the Liquor, and with it let the Patient wash his hands or other parts affected once (or at most) twice a day.
156. An Experienc'd Magne∣tical Cure of the Yellow-Jaundies. TAke the Gall-Bladder of a Sheep, and near the top, without emp∣tying the Liquor, make a small hole, at which put in two or three drops of the Patient's warm Urine; then tye up the upper part of the Bladder, and hang it in the free Air till it dry up, &c. 157. A homely but not ineffe∣ctual Medicine for the Yel∣low-Jaundies. GIve about half a Dram of the white part of Hens-dung dry'd and mixt with a little Sugar, in a few spoonfuls of White-wine.
158. A Medicine almost Spe∣cifick for the Yellow-Jaun∣dies. TAke of clean filings of Steel a sufficient quantity, and to make them grind the better, mix with them some Loaf-Sugar; grind them long with great exactness, for in that consists the chief Secret of this Medicine. Of this impalpable Pouder give about half a Dram for a Dose (besides the Sugar;) and if need be, give it twice or thrice a day, in any convenient Vehicle.
159. A Specifick Remedy for the Yellow-Jaundies. TAke one part of good Saffron dry'd, enough to be rub'd in a Glass Mortar into Pouder, and incorporate it well with four parts of choice Turmerick. In the mean time take a handful of fresh Sheeps∣dung, and let it steep in about a quart of strong Ale in a moderate heat, till the Liquor be fully im∣pregnated with the Vertue of the Dung. Then strain it lightly thrô a Linnen Cloath, into a pint of it, or as large a draught within the limit as the Patient can well take, give about half a Dram of the fore∣mention'd mixt Pouder. This do in the Morning fasting, aud in the Evening about Bed-time, giving al∣so another Dose the Morning after the first.
K. 160. The great Medicine of a Famous Emperick for the Kings-Evil. GIve for a good while together a pretty strong Decoction of Devils-bit. 161. To mitigate Pains in the Kidneys. TAke Oyl of Scorpions, and Oyl of Bees-wax, of each a like quantity; mix them well, and with this Mixture moderatly warm, a∣noint the pained Kidney.
162. An Effectual Remedy for stoppage in the Kidneys. GIve in any convenient Liquor about a dozen Grains of Salt of Amber for a Dose. L. 163. A Pleasant Medicine to appease Scorbutick Pains in the Limbs. TAke liquid Styrax, spread it thin upon Slinck, or some very fine Kids-Leather, and keep it upon the Part affected till it dry up of it self, or till the Patient has no more need of it.
164. An Experienc'd thô simple Medicine for a Contracture produc'd by keeping of Limbs too long in an undue Po∣sture. ANoint well once or twice a day the Part affected with Dogs-grease, chafing it in with a warm hand, and keeping the Part warm afterwards. M. 165. A good Medicine to in∣increase Milk to those that give Suck. MAke Pottage with Lentils (which many distinguish not from Vetches) and let the Patient use freely of it.
166. Another Medicine to in∣crease Milk in Nurses. TAke Earth-worms, wash them well, freeing them carefully from their Excrements, and from all adhering Earth and Filth. Then dry them so as they may not stink, and yet be pulverable. Of these, reduc'd to Poúder, give half a Dram or two Scruples for a Dose, in Wine or any other proper Vehicle.
167. A Remedy, by which many Dogs bitten by a Mad-Dog, have been all of them pre∣serv'd this Year from run∣ning Mad. TAke three Plants (i. e. Roots and Leaves) of that Herb which is called Rose-Plantane, or by some Star-Plantane, and having chopt it small with a convenient quantity of Butter, let the bitten Dog take it the first day; the se∣cond day give him five Plants or∣der'd as before, and the next day seven.
N. 168. A good Remedy for divers Affections of the Genus Ner∣vosum, or Nervous System. TAke of the fresh Roots of the Male Piony one Ounce, of the Seeds of the same Plant two Drams, and with a sufficient quantity of the Syrup of Piony, or some Conserve of the like Nature, beat them up into an Electuary, (which is best done not long before you mean to make use of it) of which the Pa∣tient may take the quantity of a small Nutmeg or more if need be twice a day, and if occasion re∣quires it, thrice.
P. 169. Aloetick Pills, that do scarce at all occasion the Piles. TAke of the Frankfort Angelick Pills, and give of them from one Scruple or half a Dram to two Scruples or more, for a Dose. 170. A Medicine for the Pain and Tumors of the Piles. TAke the Patient's own Urine moderately warm, and with Rags dipt in it foment for a while the Parts affected, and then anoint them with Ʋnguent Populeon. This do if need be three or four times a day, and if the Tumors be internal, you may then inject a little of the foremention'd Urine.
171. An Excellent Remedy for Scorbutick and other Pains in the Limbs. TAke red and unsophisticated Oyl of Peter, and anoint there∣with from time to time the Part affected. 172. An easie but Excellent Poultise to appease Pains and Aches, even Arthritick or Gout-Pains. TAke Onions, and boyl or stew them in Water till they be soft enough to make a Poultise, then drain away the Water and beat them, and having spread them to a good thickness upon a Linnen
Cloath, apply them as hot as the Patient can well bear, let him keep them on all Night. 173. To strengthen a Part weakened by a Sub-laxation. SPread Emplastrum Divinum up∣on soft Leather, and apply it, keeping it on for some time. 174. A somewhat rough Eme∣tick, by which the French-Pox has been often cur'd. TAke good Mercury Sublimate, and Mithridate or Venice-Treacle, of each one Ounce, mix them together, and put them into a quart of Spring-Water; set them in Balneo to dissolve in a close Ves∣sel; and of this Liquor well setled,
let the Patient take about half a spoonful, or if need be a spoonful, but never above a spoonful and a half, in four Ounces of small Ale warm, fasting in the Morning, and once in the Afternoon or Evening, the Stomach being empty. Every se∣cond day intermit, and give a gentle Purge. 175. A Choice Medicine for the Palsie. TAke Sarsaparilla a Pound and half, Bark of Guajacum, China in Chips, of each 2 Ounces and a half: Boyl all in six Pints of Water to a consumption of a third part: At the end add Raisins of the Sun stoned four Ounces, Liquorish bruised one Dram, fat Figs number twelve, boyl and strain it. Of this let the Diseased drink warm, as their ordinary Drink.
176. For weakness in the hands, arising from the Palsie, or an ill-cur'd Rheumatism. TAke the tops of Rosemary, and bruising them a little, make them up into a Ball of the bigness of a small Orange, or a large Walnut with the green Husk on. Let the Patient often roll one of these Balls between his hands, and for divers hours in a day grasp one of them in the hand affected, that it may grow hot there, and transmit its Effluvia into the part. Continue this course as long as the Distemper requires.
177. A Choice External Re∣medy for Paralitick Affections. MAke a strong Decoction of Rosemary-Leaves (or Flow∣ers if the Season afford them) and let the Patient hold the Part affe∣cted for a good while at a time in the Liquor kept very warm. If after several tryals this Medicine prove not effectual enough, take ten drops of Oyl of Worms, and mix with it well four or five drops of Oyl of Turpentine; and with this Mixture well warm'd anoint the Part from time to time; or else let the Patient keep the Part for a good while together, for more than once or twice if need require, in warm Rain-water (to dissolve the Scorbutick Salts.)
178. To take off little Pimples or grating inequalities with∣in the Eye-lids. TAke one spoonful of Eye∣bright-Water, one spoonful of Plantane-Water, and half a spoon∣ful of good Red Rose-Water; mix these, and put to them about 15 Grains of choice Tutty finely pre∣par'd; shake them together, and then let the Pouder fall to the bot∣tom, and with the clear Liquor moisten the Eye several times in a day, if it be found needful. 179. For the Pleurisy. CUT green Broom-tops short, and fill therewith a Skillet or Pipkin of a pint and a half; then
fill it up with Ale, boyl it softly till it be wasted to two or three spoon∣fuls, it will look black like Treacle, and be thick. When 'tis enough and cold, add as much Mithridate as a Nutmeg, and mingle it well, and give it the Party warm in Bed, and let him sweat three hours or more after it, by adding some Cloaths. If it help not at first, repeat it next day, or the second not to fail. 180. An Experienc'd (and by some good Authors Excellent) Medicine for the Pleurisy. TAke as many fresh Balls of Stone-Horse Dung, as the Horse in good case may disburden himself of at one time; cover these, whilst they are warm, with good White-wine; let them stand a little to act on one another, and then
press out gently through a clean Linnen Cloath as much Liquor or Juice as the Mixture will readily afford; and of this (somewhat warm) give a moderate draught, from time to time; as need shall re∣quire. 181. A very often Experienc'd Medicine for the Small-Pox (especially in Children.). TAke the little Balls of fresh Sheeps-düng, and having freed them from straws and dust, and other things forrain to them, put an handful of them thus cleans'd into a quart of good White-wine, and in a Vessel well stopt, let them infuse in a moderate heat for a Night, or till the Liquor be well impreg∣nated with the taste and colour of them. Strain this Infusion, and give
of it warm about a spoonful at a time, once in two or three hours, or oftner if need require. N. B. In case of Necessity, the Infusion may be much sooner made, by putting into the Wine a greater proportion of the Sheeps-dung. R. 182. A Successful Remedy for a kind of Rheumatism, and a Contracture of the Limbs that followed upon it. TAke the inward Bark (that which grows next the Wood) of an Elder-Tree, cut or tear it in∣to small bits, and with them loosely plac'd fill about a third part of a Bottle. Then pour in as much small Ale or Beer as will fill up the remain∣ing part of the Vessel, stop it well till
the Liquor be strong of the Infu∣sion. And of this let the Patient drink a good draught once or twice a day, or if he can well bear it, let him use it as a Diet-drink. 183. An approv'd outward Me∣dicine to cause Rest without Opiates. TAke of Rose-Water 8 Ounces, good Wine 4 Ounces, strong Vinegar 2 Ounces; mix these well, and having warm'd stupes in them, foment therewith the Part affected, laying them on but moderatly warm, but taking them off when they begin to grow cold: This fo∣menting may last between a quarter and half an hour before the Patient should compose himself to Rest.
S. 184. A Choice and diversify'd Medicine for the Scurvy. FRom the freshly gather'd tops of Firr a little bruis'd, abstract Spirit of Wine, or at least good Nants Brandy, and with this Liquor draw a deep Tincture from other fresh tops, of which Tincture re∣duce some part into an Extract, whereof to form Pills; keep these, the Tincture and the impregnated Liquor apart, to be employ'd se∣parately or conjoyntly as occasion may require.
185. For an Excoriation, and for preternatural Tenderness of any part of the Skin. TAke Ʋnguentum Diapompholigos, and spread it thinly upon Lint, which must be apply'd to the Part affected, and kept on by a Bandage or some sticking Plaister. 186. To take off the heat and roughness of the Skin, espe∣cially on the Lips. ANoint the Part affected with fresh (or at least not too stale) Cream.
187. To take out the marks of Gun-pouder shot into the Skin of the Face, or else∣where. TAke fresh Cow-dung, and having warm'd it a little, apply it as a thin Poultise to the part affected, renewing it from time to time as occasion shall require. 188. An Excellent Medicine to strengthen a weak Sight. TAke Eye-bright, Penny-royal, Rue, Celandine, Lovage, Saxi∣frage, of each half a handful, Blew∣bottle-Flowers, Fennel-seeds, Parsley∣seeds, of each half a Dram, Grains of Paradice one Dram, Hyssop,
Organy, Willow-leaves, each half an Ounce, Galingal three Drams, Gin∣ger half a Dram, Cinnamon one Dram, Sugar half an Ounce. Let them be finely pouder'd, and very well mixt together. Take of this Pouder one Scruple or half a Dram every day with your Dinner. 189. A distilled Water for strengthening the Sight. TAke Rosemary-Flowers, Sage, Betony, Rue, and Succory, of each one handful. Infuse these in two quarts of good Sack, distil them in a Copper Alembick. The Dose is a moderate spoonful.
190. A Choice Medicine, which I have several times used for a light Stroke or Contusion of the Eye. PUT to two Ounces of Car∣duus-Water, or that of Betony, three or four drops of Honey, use it every three hours. (But have a care not to keep it above a day or two, lest it grow sour.) 191. A much commended Pou∣der to strengthen the Sight. POuder of Eye-bright 1 Ounce, ordinary Fennel-seed in Pou∣der half an Ounce, Pouder of Nut∣megs half a quarter of an Ounce, double refin'd Sugar two Ounces.
All these being finely pouder'd and sifted, are to be mixt together, and taken as much as will lye on a Shil∣ling at a time, as often as you please. The Pouder is to be taken dry, and kept in a Box close shut in some dry place. This has done great Cures in dimness of Sight, and Rheums in the Eyes. 192. To make a Drink to be taken like Tea for strength∣ening the Sight. TO a quart of Water ready to boyl, put in half a handful of Eye-bright, and then let the Liquor boyl but one walm or two, before you take it off to drink it instead of Tea.
193. A rare Water to strengthen the Sight. TAke Clary, and distil it in a cold Still; and of the Water, let the Patient take every Morning, and if need be, every Night going to Bed, from two or three spoon∣fuls to six, either alone, or sweetned with a little Sugar; let him also with the same Water unsweeten'd▪ bath or wash the Parts affected in the Morning, and at Bed-time; and if need be, once or twice more every day.
194. An Excellent External Medicine to strengthen the Stomach. TAke Wormood, Mint, and Mug∣wort, and by beating them well in a stone or glass Mortar, make a Cataplasm, to be apply'd some∣what warm to the Stomach, and kept upon it for a pretty while. 195. An often try'd Remedy to strengthen the Stomach, and also to take off Griping Pains in or near it. ('Tis good also for Colds.) TAke Emplastrum Stomachum of the London Dispensatory, and drop upon it five or six drops of
Oyl of Cinnamon, rubbing it well over with your finger, and so ap∣ply it to the Patient's Stomach, and after three or four days, or as soon as it grows dry, remove it, and ha∣ving scrap'd the Plaister, and warm'd it on the wrong side, let fall some drops of the Oyl of Cinnamon up∣on it, or more drops of the Cor∣dial Spirit, and apply it again. 196. An Excellent Plaister to strengthen the Stomach and Chest. TAke of Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Cloves, and Mace, of each a sufficient quantity, pouder them well, and strew some of the Pou∣der all over the bottom of a Deal Box of a convenient length and breadth, and fit it with a cover to shut close, upon this Pouder lay a
piece of clean Flannel well dry'd, and strew it over thinly with some of the same Pouder; then lay on another piece of the like Flannel of the same Dimensions with the for∣mer, and upon that likewise if need be a little more Pouder. This done, shut the Box till the time of use, and then take out one of the pieces of Flannel, and having lightly dusted off the Pouder, lay it on the Patient's Brest, Stomach, and Belly, and let it lye on there for some days. When you perceive its Ver∣tue begins to languish, you must substitute for it the other piece of Flannel, and put the first in the Box to receive new Vertue, and so pro∣ceed alternatively as long as you need the Medicine, adding now and then some fresh Pouder, if Ne∣cessity require. Note, That each piece of Flannel ought to be long and large enough to cover the Brest, and to reach from about the Paps to the Navel, or lower.
197. For a Recent Strain. TAke a pint or more of Claret-Wine, and boyl in it for a lit∣tle while, in a close Vessel, about a handful of Red Rose-leaves, till the Liquor be strong of the Plant. In this well heated dip a piece of Linnen or Flannel, and wringing out the moisture, double it, and ap∣ply it hot to the Part affected, using a Fillet, or some such thing to keep it on. 198. My Lord Bacon's Expe∣rienc'd Medicine for a Recent Strain or Bruise. TAke a good handful of fresh Wormwood, and boyl it in a sufficient quantity of strong Ale to
the softness of a Poultise, then take it off the fire, and when you apply it, which you should do whilst 'tis very hot, put to it a spoonful or two of good common Brandy. 199. A Choice Plaister for a Recent Strain. TAke equal parts of the Plaisters called Diapalma and Oxycroce∣um, and make of them a com∣pounded Plaister, to be spread up∣on thin Leather, and apply'd to the Part affected, and to be renewed, if need be, twice a day. 200. An approv'd Medicine for a Recent Strain. APply seasonably a Cataplasm made of Bran boyl'd in good
Vinegar till it be soft enough to make a Poultise. 201. A slight but choice Re∣medy for a Recent Strain. TAke two spoonfuls of Vinegar, and beat into it very well the white of an Egg, and spreading it upon Flax or Tow, apply it to, and keep it on the Part affected. 202. A Parable but Excellent Medicine in the Fit of the Stone. TAke somewhat less than a hand∣ful of red Chick-Pease, or Ci∣cers, and boyl them softly in a quart of Spring-water till the Liquor be red, and well impregnated with the
Seeds: Strain this Decoction and sweeten it with Syrup of Marsh-Mallows, out of which all the stron∣ger Diureticks are left. 203. For the Stone. TAke a quarter or half a pint of simple Arsmart-Water, sweeten it with a little Sugar or some con∣venient Syrup, and Aromatize it with a little Nutmeg scrap'd, and give this Mixture for one Dose. 204. For the Stone and Gra∣vel in the Reins and Blad∣der. TAke equal weights of common Daucus-seeds, and of Burdock∣seed, and having mixt these toge∣ther, put one Ounce of the Mix∣ture
to a Gallon of small Ale, and let the Patient use it as a constant Drink. 205. A good Liquor to use as Drink in a long Fit of the Stone. MAke Posset-drink of three or four parts at most of Milk, and one of White-Wine. Into two quarts of Posset-drink scrape or thinly slice a Nutmeg and a half, or two Nutmegs; add a little Juice of Lemon to your Palate, and if you please sweeten it a little with Syrup of Marsh-Mallows. Take of this Drink a pretty quantity at a time, and use it often in a day.
206. A good Medicine for the Stone. TAke a pint or a quart of Ale, somewhat new, sweeten it with pure Honey, and boyl it to the consumption of about one half, skimming it well from time to time. Then dissolve in it the Yolk of a new-laid Egg; and let the Patient drink a good draught of this Mix∣ture once or twice a day, till he find relief thereby. 207. A Choice Medicine in an actual Fit of the Stone. TAke the Decoction made accord∣ing to the London Dispensatory for the Syrup of Marsh-Mallows, with this difference, That to the
same quantity of Water, you must take but half the quantities of each of the Ingredients. Let this cor∣rected Decoction be well clarify'd, and let the Patient take of it warm 6, 8, or 10 Ounces at a draught, from time to time, as need shall require. 208. The Stone, and the Cure. Taken out of the History of the Barbadoes, written by Rich. Lygon, Gent. p. 118, 119. AFter the stoppage of Urine more than fourteen days, the fol∣lowing Medicine did not only break, but brought away all the Stones and Gravel. And about three Weeks after, the like Pains returning, the same Medicine did the like effect
within ten hours after the taking thereof. Take the Pizzle of a green Tur∣tle (or Tortoise) which lives in the Sea, dry it with a moderate heat; pound it in a Mortar to Pou∣der, and take of this as much as will lye upon a Shilling, in Beer, Ale, White-Wine, or the like; and in a very short time it will do the Cure. These are to be had easily, both at the Charibee and Lucaick Islands, where these Fishes abound. 209. A good Medicine in Pains of the Stone, or Cholick. TAke half a pint of good Sal∣let-Oyl, and as much good Sack, (or if that cannot be had, good Claret Wine) shake them ve∣ry well together, and give them moderately warm for a Clyster.
210. To expel the Stone in a Fit. TAke Crabs-Eyes pouder'd, and dissolve a large proportion of them in good White-wine Vine∣gar, and of this Drink let the Pa∣tient take from two spoonfuls to five or six at a time. T. 211. An almost Specifick Re∣medy for the Tooth-ach. INto a quart of red Wine (or at least of Claret) put one Dram of Allom, and another of Acorns, a Dram and half of Galls, and half a handful of good dry'd Rose-leaves. Boyl this to the Consumption of
near half, and then take it from the fire and strain it, and dissolve in it a Dram and a half of Acacia cut into small bits, and with this Li∣quor a little hot, you must wash the Part several times in a day. 212. An uncommon, but not unuseful Remedy for the Tooth-ach. LET the Patient lye on the Ear that is opposite to the Part affected, and into the other Ear drop two or three drops of the freshly exprest Juice of Rue a little warm, and stop the Ear lightly with fine black Wool or Cotton.
213. An odd but very Succes∣ful External Remedy for the Tooth-ach. IN the declining of the Moon in August, take the Fruit called Hipps, viz. those of the Wild Bry∣ar, with all the Fuzey stuff that grows upon it, and lapping it up in a piece of thin Sarcenet, tye it upon the Arm that is on the same side with the Part affected, and keep it on as long as there is need. 214. For the Tooth-ach. TAke a handful of Red Sage, and a handful of Clary, shred them small and beat them, sprinkle them with May Dew; then strain out the Juice, put it in a Glass Bottle,
and set it in the Sun in a Window, and when you use it put three drops into a Spoon and heat it over a Candle blood warm, and drop it into the Ear, and let them eat a Crust of Bread, wet either in Broth or Posset, and chew it upon the Teeth that ake. 215. An Approved Medicine for an aking Tooth that is hollow. TAke two parts of common Pep∣per ground to fine Pouder, and mix exactly with it one part of Su∣gar moderately fine over a gentle heat; form these into a small Pill of a shape and bigness fit for your purpose, and when your Stuff grows cold 'twill harden, and may be ap∣ply'd when you please to the Part affected.
216. An Excellent Remedy to fasten Teeth. TAke of burnt Allom, Acorns, of each one Dram, Galls a Dram and half, Red Roses half a handful. Beat all these together, and make them boyl in about a quart of good Red Wine, to the consumption of about a fourth part. Then strain the Decoction, and dis∣solve in the transmitted Liquor of good Acatia cut into very small bits half a Dram. With this De∣coction the Mouth is to be washt several times in a day. 217. To fasten the Teeth. PUT Mastick finely pouder'd upon the end of an Handker∣chief,
rub your Teeth therewith twice or thrice in a day, and chew Mastick often. Also boyl Pome∣granate-flowers with Mint or Ma∣stick in Red or Claret Wine, Gargle or wash your Mouth often with it. 218. A Medicine prescrib'd to a great Prince (Charles the First) to fasten the Teeth. TAke a pint of Spring-water, and put to it four Ounces of Brandy; let the Patient wash his Mouth with the Mixture of these every Morning, and twice or thrice a day besides; and let him in the Morning, roul for a little while, a bit of Roch-Allom to and fro in his Mouth.
219. A good Astringent Li∣quor to fasten the Teeth. TO four Ounces of Claret-Wine, or some other conve∣nient Menstruum, you may put to dissolve about four Drams of Terra Japonica. 220. An Excellent Medicine to fasten the Teeth in Scorbu∣tick Gums. TAke of Choice Bole-Armoni∣ack two Drams, choice Myrrh (not lucid) one Dram, Roch-Al∣lom crude half a Dram, Claret-Wine one Pint. Boyl these softly a little while together, and let the Patient use twice, thrice (or if need be ostner) in a day.
221. To fasten Teeth, made loose by the Scurvy. ANoint the Parts affected with Oleum Myrrhae made by De∣liquium with Whites of Eggs boyl'd hard. 222. A Lotion to fasten the Teeth. IN a quart of Spring-water De∣coct for a while one Ounce of the best Terra Japanica reduc'd to gross Pouder. And then having filter'd the Decoction, keep it stopt for use.
223. A good Astringent Li∣quor to fasten loose Teeth. IN a Pint of Red Wine infuse a∣bout half an Ounce of Terra Ja∣panica, till as much as will be dis∣solv'd be taken up by the Liquor. Decant it from the Faeces (if there be need) and keep it well stopt for use. 224. An useful Liquor to fa∣sten the Teeth, and prevent the Tooth-ach. TO a Pint of Spring-water put half an Ounce of clean Sal Armoniack, and with the Solution of this Salt, let the Patient wash his Mouth from time to time.
225. To make an Excellent Poultise to ripen Tumors. TAke eight Ounces of (fat) Figs, two Ounces of white Lilly-Roots, and two Ounces of Bean-Flower (or Meal:) Boyl these to∣gether in Water, and reduce them to the consistence of a Poultise; which is to be spread to a good thickness, and laid warm enough upon the Part, and shifted as often as it begins to grow dry.
226. An Excellent Medicine to relieve those that are trou∣bled with Tumors in the Throat, and some other Parts. TO a quart of New Milk put a handful of Mallow-leaves, with as much of the Leaves of Solanum, or Nightshade, shred them small, let them boyl, till the Herbs be ten∣der as if they were to be eaten. Then put into the Milk as much Crumbs of White-bread, as being stirred well with the other Ingredi∣ents, will bring all to the consistence of a Poultise. This is to be spread upon a Stay for the Throat, or some other thing fit to be apply'd to any other Part affected, and is to be laid on as hot as the Patient can well endure it, and when it begins to
grow cold, it is to be succeeded by fresh made very hot, and so long as the case shall require. 227. A Medicine that lately cur'd an Obstinate Tumor of the Knee, that had baf∣fled some Chirurgeons. TAke a green Colewort-Leaf with red Veins or Streaks, and ha∣ving cut the Ribs flat and almost level to the rest of the Leaf, bruise it with the haft of a Knife, or some such thing, apply it to the Part af∣fected, renewing it once or twice a day.
228. A Powerful and Expe∣rienc'd Topick for a Sore Throat. TAke two new-laid Eggs roasted moderately hard, and the Pap of two well-roasted Pippins; beat them well together, and add to them as much Cruds of Posset made with Ale. Having incorpo∣rated them all very well, apply the Mixture very warm to the Part af∣fected, shifting it if need be once in five or six hours. 229. An Approved Remedy for a Sore Throat. TAke Verjuice of Grapes one Ounce, good Honey half an
Ounce, crude Allom about a Dram and half, and Sea-Salt half a Dram; Pouder the Salts finely, and incor∣porate them very well with the Li∣quors into the form of a kind of Liniment. In this dip a long Fea∣ther, or a piece of Rag tyed about the end of a slender Stick (as of Liquorish) and with it touch the Part affected three, four, or five times: between each, two times gargling with a Mixture of Plan∣tane-water, and some red Rose-water. 230. A Choice External Re∣medy for Sore Throats. TAke Millepedes, Sows or Hogs-Lice alive, and sew them up between the foldings of a piece of Linnen, and apply them to the Throat in the form of a Stay, which is to be kept on all Night.
231. An easie but try'd Reme∣dy for a Sore Throat. TAke Bay-Salt dry'd, and having pounded it, put it into the folds of a Rag in a sufficient quantity to make a Stay to be ty'd about the Throat, and apply it over night as hot as the Patient can conveniently▪ endure it. 232. A Choice Remedy for a Sore Throat, especially if enflam'd. TAke a little handful of the Leaves of common Mallows, and eight or ten good Figs; boyl these about a quarter of an hour in a Pint of New Milk, and let the Patient use it very hot and often.
233. A homely but Experienc'd Medicine for a Sore Throat. TAke about one Dram of Album Graecum, or white Dogs-turd burnt to perfect whiteness, and with about one Ounce of Honey of Roses, or clarify'd Honey, make thereof a Linctus to be very slowly let down the Throat. 234. A homely but Experienc'd Remedy for a Sore Throat. INto the Leg of a worsted Stock∣ing that has been long worn next to the Flesh, put in a sufficient quan∣tity of good Sea-Salt exactly dry'd, or else decrepitated, and this Salt being put in warm, if not hot, the
Stocking is to be ty'd about the Patient's Neck, and kept on all Night. And if by the next Day the Distemper be not remov'd, you may apply fresh Salt (in the pro∣portion) in the same Stocking as before, the Night following. 235. A try'd Medicine for a Sore Throat, caused by Acid Humors in the Internal Parts of it. TAke half a handful of the Leaves of common Mallows, and boyl them in about a Pint of New Milk near half an hour; then let it run through a clean Cloath, and let the Patient use it a little warm three or four times a day as a Gargle, or else let him use it by holding it in his Mouth, and letting some drops slowly slide down his Throat.
236. An often Experienc'd Re∣medy for Tettars, and the Itch. TAke Flowers of Sulphur, finely pouder'd, Ginger, and burnt Al∣lom, each alike, save, that of the Allom there must be somewhat less. Incorporate these with as much fresh Butter (without any Salt) as will bring them to the consistence of an Oyntment; with this anoint the Part affected at Bed-time, as hot as the Patient can well endure it, and let it lye on all Night, wash it off in the Morning with Celandine-wa∣ter well heated; and whilst you continue the use of this Medicine, take daily some Cordial, to keep the noxious Humour from being driven inwards. This will not fail to do the Work.
237. A Choice Medicine for a Thrush in Young Children, or a Sore Mouth. TAke an Egg, and put out the Meat, then fill it with the Juice of Red Sage, and set it on hot Em∣bers till it boyl; then skim it whilst any skum doth rise. Then take as much Allom beaten as the bigness of a Pea or Bean, and half a spoon∣ful of Honey, and let this be put in the Egg and boyl it a little, and so take it off; and when 'tis cold, rub the Child's Mouth as oft as you see cause.
238. An almost Specifick Re∣medy for a Tenesmus. MIX Balsam of Sulphur made with Oyl of Turpentine with Linseed-Oyl, or some other convenient Oyl, till the Balsam be thereby so far allay'd, that the Pa∣tient may well endure it; and then let him dip his Finger in it, and make use of it as a small Supposi∣tory two or three times, or if need be, oftner in a day.
U. 239. An Excellent Emulsion to be used in sharpness of Urine, especially caused by Blister∣ing Plaisters. TAke Mallows two handfuls, Gum Arabick two Drams, Barley-water a sufficient quantity; boyl all to a quart, to which add sweet Almonds blanch'd one Ounce, of the four great cold Seeds, of each two Drams. Make an Emulsion, strain, and add two Ounces of Sy∣rup of Marsh-Mallows, of which drink at pleasure.
240. A Powerful Medicine for stoppage of Urine. FRY Chervil with a sufficient quantity of Oyl of Walnuts, and apply a Cataplasm made of it very hot to the Navel (and if need be, to the Os Pubis) or Share-bone. 241. For a Retention of Urine. TAke Chervil, and with fresh Hogs-Lard fry it well, and lay it very hot upon the Patient's Navel and all the adjacent Parts, shifting it, if there be need, once or twice.
242. An useful Pouder for such as cannot hold their Urine. TAke Root of the Male Piony, Yellow Amber, Red Coral, and choice Gum Arabick, of each a sufficient quantity: Reduce them to fine Pouder, mix them well, and let the Patient take of this Mixture from 10 to 20 Grains twice a day. 243. An easie Medicine for sharpness of Urine, and for Obstruction of the Menses, and their flowing too much, if the Distempers be not ob∣stinate. GIve about half. an Ounce at a time of the newly exprest
Juice of Ground-Ivy in any conve∣nient Vehicle. 244. An Old Lithotomist's Me∣dicine for Suppression of U∣rine, (given me by himself.) GIve from about 50 Grains to one Dram for a Dose of the Pulvis Hollandi, and if the Neces∣sity be very urgent, you may give from one Dram to four Scruples, or a Dram and half, not neglect∣ing in the mean while other proper Remedies. 245. For Suppression of Urine. GIve about a spoonful at a time of bruised Mustard-seed in any convenient Vehicle.
246. A try'd Medicine for a Suppression of Urine that is not very Obstinate. DIssolve half an Ounce of choice Castile-Soap in half a Pint of White-wine, or some appropriated Liquor; pass the Solution through a Woollen Filter, that the more greasie parts may rest behind, and the Liquor pass more clear; put to this five or six Grains of Saffron: Divide it into two Doses, whereof one is to be given some few hours after the other, if the first do not Operate well.
247. A speedy Remedy for Fits of Vomiting. TAke a large Nutmeg, grate off one half of it, and toast the flat side of the other, till the Oily part begin to ouze or sweat out, then clap it to the Pit of the Patient's Stomach as hot as he can well endure it, and let him keep it on whilst it continues warm, and then if need be put on another. 248. To make an Astringent Liquor, of great use in Ul∣cers and (some) Wounds. BOyl two Drams of choice Ca∣techu, or Japan Earth, in a quart of Spring-waster; pour off the clear, and with it by Injection
or otherwise dress the Ulcers or Wounds. 249. For Outward Ulcers. TAke the green Bark of Oak, and chop it altogether, both inside and outside, into very small pieces. Upon these pour good Lime-water freshly made, and let them infuse in it till the Liquor has acquir'd a deep Tincture. With this dress the Ulcer once, and if need require, twice a day. 250. The Famous Scotch Em∣perical Medicine for a Stub∣born Ulcer. BUrn to Ashes, but not too much, the gross stalks on which the red Colewort (not Cabbage)
grows, and with any fit Additament make thereof a Cataplasm to be ap∣ply'd to the Ulcer, and shift it at reasonable distances of time. 251. A Remedy against the Bitings of Vipers, and o∣ther Venomous Creatures. AS soon as ever one is bitten (for if the Poyson be diffus'd through the Mass of Blood, the Ex∣periment may not succeed) a hot Iron may be held as near the Wound as the Patient can possibly endure, till it has, as they speak, drawn out all the Poyson, which will some∣times adhere like a yellowish Spot to the surface of the Iron.
252. Medicines against Void∣ing of Blood out of several Parts. TAke two Drams of Henbane∣seed, and the like weight of white Poppy-seed; beat them up with an Ounce of Conserve of Red Roses, of which give to the quan∣tity of a Nutmeg or Walnut. Or, Take the express'd Juice of twelve handfuls of Plantane-Leaves, and six Ounces of fresh Comfrey-Roots, well beaten together with a convenient quantity of fine Sugar. These two Medicines have wonder∣ful Effects to stop Bleeding.
W. 253. A Simple but Powerful Remedy for fresh Wounds. TAke the Juice of Celandine, and dress with it Recent Wounds and Cuts, instead of a Balsam. 254. To make a Simple, but Excellent Balsam to stanch the Blood of fresh Wounds newly made, and to heal them speedily. TAke good Venice-Turpentine, and in a Limbeck, or some o∣ther convenient Vessel distil off a good part of it with a very mode∣rate Fire, till there remains a thick Substance, yet not like Colophony,
but of a Liquid and Balsamick con∣sistence. What you have distill'd off set aside for other uses, for the remaining Substance is what we now seek for, and is to be apply'd as a Balsam both per se, and with Pla∣gets and other helps. 255. An Excellent Wound-Drink. TAke Harts-tongue, Liverwort, Wood-Bugle, Wood-Sage, Wood-Betony, Southernwood, Wormwood, Alehoof, Bugloss, Scabious, Rib∣wort, White-bottles, Mugwort, Com∣frey, Mints, Agrimony, Strawberry and Violet-leaves, Cinquefoil, Daisie-Leaves, Roots, and Flowers, Wild Hony-suckles, Wild Angelica, Avens, Plantane, Clowns Wound-wort, Haw∣thorn-buds, Oak-buds, and Bramble∣buds.
Gather these Herbs in May, or as many as can then be had; the Buds in March as soon as ever they put forth, before they come to Leaves; measure them, and take equal quan∣tities of them, and dry them seve∣rally in the shade, and when through∣ly dryed put them up in Bags, and so keep them for use. How to make the Drink. Take one Gallon of Spring-wa∣ter, one Pottle of the best White∣wine, add to this two good hand∣fuls of all the Herbs, mingled well together being dryed, but if green, then one good handful of each. Boyl them in a Pipkin or Iron Pot to the consumption of the half; then strain it out, and put to the Liquor a quart of Honey, and let it boyl again, and skim it, and when it's cold, put it up into Bottles stopt very close, then let the Patient
drink thereof Morning and Even∣ing about a quarter of a Pint at a time (some use only three spoon∣fuls at a time) fasting after taking of it one hour or two. Observe, the Liverwort is ever best to be put in green. If you make use of this for any Sore, or Ulcer in the Body, lay any Searcloath or Plaister to it, of Ʋnguentum Apostol. or Minium, or such like, as they use for Wounds in the Body, or a Plaister of Honey and Wax. This Drink is effectual for Sores old or new, Womens Breasts, pu∣trified Bones, causing them to scale; 'tis good for any Ach in the Sto∣mach, for the Kings-Evil it hath cured, also caused Bullets in the Flesh to come out, having long con∣tinued there. Sir Jo. Mince was healed by drinking of this, being wounded through the Loyns.
256. A quick Remedy for a small and fresh Cut, or Wound. LET the Patient speedily plunge the hurt Part into Brandy, and keep it there for a while, till the Pain, which will be excited, be ex∣tinguish'd, or much abated: Or if the Part be unfit for this Operation, the Liquor may be apply'd to it immediately with a soft Sponge, &c.
257. A good Vehicle for divers Remedies, and that 'tis it self useful against the Jaundies, and Worms in Chil∣dren. THE distill'd Water of the Husks of Walnuts is a very good Ve∣hicle in divers Diseases, particular∣ly in Jaundies; 'tis a Cordial, and exceeding proper to be mixt with Julaps in Fevers. 'Tis also an ex∣cellent Antiverminary, or Medicine against the Worms, especially for Children.
258. A Powerful Medicine for White Fluors, (and the like Distempers.) TAke a Pottle of Ale, and shred into it two Ounces of white Ichthyocolla (Isinglass,) and in a loosely stopt Vessel, let the Liquor simper till about half is wasted; strain the rest, and give of it two or three Ounces at a time once or twice a day, as need shall require. 259. A tryed Medicine for an Ulcus Uteri. TAke of true and choice Bitumen Judaicum, or Asphaltum, and having reduc'd it to very fine Pou∣der, let the Patient take of it about
a Dram at a time in any proper Ve∣hicle, once or twice a day. 260. An Excellent Water to preserve the Sight. TO half an Ounce of Celandine-Water, and two Drams of Suc∣cory-Water, mixt together, put two or three drops of clarify'd Honey, and shake them all together when you are to use them. Of this Wa∣ter let fall a drop or two into the Eye once or twice a day. It will not keep above three or four days, especially in Summer, and there∣fore must be often renewed.
261. A try'd Medicine for a Whitloe. TAke House Snails and beat them, shells and all, in a Stone or Wooden Mortar, so long till they be reduc'd to the Consistence of a Cataplasm; which apply somewhat warm to the Part affected, and keep it on for 16 or 24 hours, re∣newing it then if need be. 262. A powerfully Dissolving Oyntment for Warts, and divers Tumors. TAke May-Butter, and having melted it in a moderate heat, mix with it very diligently, but by little and little, as much Oyl of Tar∣tar
per deleq. as will give it a sen∣sible, but not a considerably strong taste. 263. An Experienced Remedy for Bloody Water. TAke Waters of the black Al∣der, of Mallows, of each three Ounces, Syrup of Comfrey one Ounce: mix them, and let the Patient take four spoonfuls imme∣diate; and four or five times a day. 264. To make a well Experi∣mented Lime- Water. TAke fresh Quick-lime 2 Pound, on which pour two Gallons of Water boyling hot; when they have stood together about 24 hours,
pour off the clear, and into one Gallon of this, put of Anniseeds, Liquorish, and Sassafrass thinly slic'd, of each four Ounces. Let them infuse for 24 or 48 hours in a cover'd Vessel; then take a pound and a half of Smirna Raisins (which some call great blew Currans) wash'd and stamp'd. Let these in∣fuse for a few hours, and then pass the whole Mixture first through a Sieve, and then through a woollen Bag. The Dose is about a quar∣ter of a pint▪ warm twice a day. 265. An Experienc'd Medicine to Correct the peccant Humor in the Kings-Evil. TAke half an Ounce of Cuttle-Bone dry'd till it may be finely pouder'd. Give this to the Patient for one Dose.
266. An Excellent and often∣try'd Clyster in Fluxes, espe∣cially in sharp Humors, and some other Distempers of the Bowels. IN a Quart of New Milk boyl soft∣ly two small spoonfuls of grosly pouder'd Rice till it be brought to the consistence of Cream, then dis∣solve in it two Ounces of our Suet of Sheeps-Kidneys, and having strain'd it to keep back the Fibres, give it at once for a Lavement. 267. A Cure for Scrophula's, and the Kings-Evil. TAke a handful of Paronychia fo∣lio rutaceo, call'd Rue Whitlow∣grass,
and by some, Felon-wort, boyl it every Morning in a quart of small Beer, strain it, and drink it for your ordinary Drink. It wastes the pec∣cant Humor, appeases the Pains, dis∣cusses the unbroken Tumors, and heals the broken ones. 268. Against Epilepsies, or the Falling-Sickness. TAke of the Pouder of the true Misseltoe of the Oak as much as will lye upon a Sixpence, early in the Morning, in Black Cherry-water, for some days near the Full Moon.
269. A Simple Remedy for the Stone. TAke Persicaria, or Arsmart, as much as you please, Distil it in a common Rose-water Still, and give some spoonfuls of it in or be∣fore the Fits. 270. An Excellent Remedy a∣gainst Fluxes. TAke unsalted Butter, boyl it gently till a pretty part be con∣sum'd, skimming it diligently from time to time, whilst it stands over the Fire: Of this Butter melted give now and then a considerable quan∣tity, as the Patient is able to bear it. This Medicine was very Successful in Ireland. FINIS.
