B5550 11719854 48337
THE LIFE and DEATH OF Mr. BADMAN, PRESENTED To the WORLD in a FAMILIAR DIALOGUE Between Mr. WISEMAN, And Mr. ATTENTIVE. By JOHN BƲNYAN, the Author of the Pilgrims Progress. LONDON, Printed by J. A. for Nath. Ponder at the Peacock in the Poultrey, neer the Church. 1680.
THE AUTHOR TO THE READER. Courteous Reader, AS I was considering with my self, what I had written concerning the Progress of the Pilgrim from this World to Glory; and how it had been acceptable to many in this Nation: It came again into my mind to write, as then, of him that was going to Heaven, so now, of the Life and Death of the Vngodly, and of their travel from this world to Hell. The which in this I have done, and have put it, as thou seest, under the Name and Title of Mr. Badman, a Name very pro∣per for such a Subject: I have also put it into the form of a Dialogue, that I might with more ease to my self, and pleasure to the Rea∣der, perform the work. And although, as I said, I have put it forth
in this method, yet have I as little as may be, gone out of the road of mine own observation of things. Yea, I think I may truly say, that to the best of my remembrance, all the things that here I discourse of, I mean as to matter of fact, have been acted upon the stage of this World, even many times before mine eyes. Here therefore, courteous Reader, I present thee with the Life and Death of Mr. Badman indeed: Yea, I do trace him in his Life, from his Childhood to his Death; that thou mayest, as in a Glass, behold with thine own eyes, the steps that take hold of Hell; and also discern, while thou art reading of Mr. Badmans Death, whether thou thy self art treading in his path thereto. And let me entreat thee to forbear Quirking and Mocking, for that I say Mr. Badman is dead; but rather gravely enquire concerning thy self by the Word, whether thou art one of his Linage or no: For Mr. Badman has left many of his Relations behind him; yea, the very World is overspread with his Kindred. True, some of his Relations, as he, are gone to their place, and long home, but thousands of thousands are left behind; as Brothers, Sisters, Cousens, Nephews, besides innumerable of his Friends and Associates. I may say, and yet speak nothing but too much truth in so saying, that there is scarce
a Fellowship, a Community, or Fraternity of men in the World, but some of Mr. Badmans Relations are there: yea rarely can we find a Family or Houshold in a Town, where he has not left behind him either Brother, Nephew or Friend. The Butt therefore, that at this time I shoot at, is wide; and 'twill be as impossible for this Book to go into several Families, and not to arrest some, as for the Kings Messenger to rush into an house full of Traitors, and find none but honest men there. I cannot but think that this shot will light upon many, since our fields are so full of this Game; but how many it will kill to Mr. Bad∣mans course, and make alive to the Pilgrims Progress, that is not in me to determine; this secret is with the Lord our God only, and he alone knows to whom he will bless it to so good and so blessed and end. However, I have put fire to the Pan, and doubt not but the report will quickly be heard. I told you before, that Mr. Badman had left many of his Friends and Relations behind him, but if I survive them (as that's a great question to me) I may also write of their lives: However, whether my life be longer or shorter, this is my Prayer at present, that God will stir up Witnesses against them, that may either convert or confound them; for wherever they
live, and roll in their wickedness, they are the Pest and Plague of that Countrey. England shakes and totters already, by rea∣son of the burden that Mr. Badman and his Friends have wickedly laid upon it: Yea, our Earth reels and staggereth to and fro like a Drunkard, the transgression thereof is heavy upon it. Courteous Reader, I will treat thee now, even at the Door and Threshold of this house, but only with this Intelligence, that Mr. Bad∣man lies dead within. Be pleased therefore (if thy leisure will serve thee) to enter in, and behold the state in which he is laid, betwixt his Death-bed and the Grave. He is not buried as yet, nor doth he stink, as is designed he shall, before he lies down in oblivion. Now as others have had their Funerals solemnized, according to their Greatness and Grandure in the world, so likewise Mr. Bad∣man, (forasmuch as he deserveth not to go down to his grave with silence) has his Fune∣ral state according to his deserts. Four things are usual at great mens Fune∣rals, which we will take leave, and I hope without offence, to allude to, in the Funeral of Mr. Badman. First, They are sometimes, when dead, pre∣sented to their Friends, by their compleatly wrought Images, as lively as by cunning mens
hands they can be; that the remembrance of them may be renewed to their survivors, the remembrance of them and their deeds: And this I have endeavoured to answer in my dis∣course of Mr. Badman; and therefore I have drawn him forth in his featours and actions from his Childhood to his Gray hairs. Here therefore thou hast him lively set forth as in Cutts; both as to the minority, flower, and se∣niority of his Age, together with those actions of his life, that he was most capable of doing, in, and under those present circumstances of time, place, strength; and the opportunities that did attend him in these. Secondly, There is also usual at great mens Funerals, those Badges and Scutcheons of their honour, that they have received from their Ancestors, or have been thought worthy of for the deeds and exploits they have done in their life: And here Mr. Badman has his, but such as vary from all men of worth, but so much the more agreeing with the merit of his doings: They all have descended in state, he only as an abominable branch. His deserts are the deserts of sin, and therefore the Scutcheons of honour that he has, are only that he died without Honour, and at his end be∣came a fool. Thou shalt not be joyned with them in burial.—The seed of evil doers shall never be renowned.
The Funeral pomp therefore of Mr. Badman, is to wear upon his Hearse the Badges of a disho∣nourable and wicked life; since his bones are full of the sins of his Youth, which shall lye down, as Job sayes, in the dust with him: nor is it fit that any should be his Attendants, now at his death, but such as with him conspired against their own souls in their life; persons whose transgressions have made them infamous to all 2that have or shall know what they have done. Some notice therefore I have also here in this little discourse given the Reader, of them who were his Confederates in his life, and At∣tendants at his death; with a hint, either of some high Villany committed by them, as also of those Judgments that have overtaken and fallen upon them from the just and revenging hand of God. All which are things either fully known by me, as being eye and car-witness thereto, or that I have received from such hands, whose relation as to this, I am bound to believe. And that the Reader may know them from other things and passages herein con∣tained, I have pointed at them in the Mrgent, as with a finger thus: ☞ Thirdly, the Funerals of persons of Quality have been solemnized with some suitable Ser∣mon at the time and place of their Burial; but that I am not come to as yet, having got no further than to Mr. Badmans death: but for
as much as he must be buried, after he hath stunk out his time before his beholders, I doubt not but some such that we read are appointed to be at the burial of Gog, will do this work in my stead; such as shall leave him neither skin nor bone above ground, but shall set a sign by it till the briers have buried it in the Val∣ly of Hamon-gog, Ezek. 39. Forthly, At Funerals there does use to be Mourning and lamentation, but hre also Mr. Badman differs from others; his Familiars cannot lament his departure, for they have not sence of his damnable state; they rather ring him, and sing him to Hell in the sleep of death, in which he goes thither. Good men count him no loss to the world, his place can well be with∣out him, his loss is only his own, and 'tis too late for him to recover that dammage or loss by a Sea of bloody tears, could he shed them. Yea, God has said, he will laugh at his de∣struction, who then shall lament for him, say∣ing, Ah! my brother. He was but a stinking Weed in his life; nor was he better at all in his death: such may well be thrown over the wall without sorrow, when once God has plucked them up by the roots in his wrath. Reader, If thou art of the race, linge, stook or fraternity of Mr. Badman, I tell thee ∣fore thou readest this Book, thou wilt neither brook the Author nor it, because he hath writ.
of Mr. Badman as he has. For he that con∣demneth the wicked that die so, passeth also the sentence upon the wicked that live. I there∣fore expect neither credit of, nor countenance from thee, for this Narration of thy kinsmans life. For thy old love to thy Friend, his wayes, doings, &c. will stir up in thee enmity rather, in thy very heart, against me. I shall there∣fore incline to think of thee, that thou wilt rent, burn, or throw it away in contempt: yea and wish also, that for writing so notorious a truth, some mischief may befall me. I look also to be loaded by thee with disdain, scorn and contempt; yea that thou shouldest railing∣ly and vilifyingly say, I lye, and am a bespat∣terer of honest mens lives and deaths. For Mr. Badman, when himself was alive, could not abide to be counted a Knave (though his actions told all that went by, that indeed he was such an one:) How then should his bre∣thren, that survive him, and that tread in his very steps, approve of the sentence that by this. Rook is pronounced against him? Will they not rather imitate Corah, Dathan, and Abiram's friends, even rail at me for condemning him, as they did at Moses for doing execution? I know 'tis ill pudling in the Cockatrices den, and that they run hazards that hunt the Wild-Boar. The man also that writeth Mr.
Badmans life, had need be fenced with a Coat of Mail, and with the Staffe of a Spear, for that his surviving friends will know what he doth: but I have adventured to do it, and to play, at this time, at the hole of these Asps; if they bite, they bite; if they sting, they sting. Christ sends his Lambs in the midst of Wolves, not to do like them, but to suffer by them for bearing plain testimony against their bad deeds: But had one not need to walk with a Guard, and to have a Sentinel stand at ones door for this? Verily, the flesh would be glad of such help; yea, a spiritual man, could he tell how to get it. Acts 23. But I am stript naked of these, and yet am commanded to be faithful in my servicce for Christ. Well then, I have spoken what I have spoken, and now come on me what will, Job 13. 13. True, the Text sayes, Rebuke a scorner, and he will hate thee; and that, He that reproveth a wicked man, getteth himself a Blot and Shame; but what then? Open rebuke is better than se∣cret love; and he that receives it, shall find it so afterwards. So then, whether Mr. Badmans friends shall rage or laugh at what I have writ, I know that the better end of the staffe is mine. My endeavour is to stop an hellish Course of Life, and to save a soul from death, (Jam. 5.) and if for so doing, I meet with envy from
them, from whom in reason I should have thanks, I must remember the man in the dream, that cut his way through his armed enemies, and so got into the beauteous Palace; I must, I say, remember him, and do my self likewise. Yet four things I will propound to the con∣sideration of Mr. Badmans friends, before I turn my back upon them. 1. Suppose that there be an Hell in very deed, not that I do question it, any more than I do whether there be a Sun to shine; but I suppose it for argument sake, with Mr. Bad∣mans friends; I say, suppose there be an Hell, and that too, such an one as the Scripture speaks of, one at the remotest distance from God and Life eternall, one where the Worm of a guilty Conscience never dyes, and where the fire of the Wrath of God is not quenched. Suppose, I say, that there is such an Hell, prepared of God (as there is indeed) for the body and soul of the ungodly World after this life, to be tormented in: I say, do but with thy self suppose it, and then tell me, Is it not pre∣pared for thee, thou being a wicked man? Let thy conscience speak, I say, is it not pre∣pared for thee, thou being an ungodly man? And dost thou think, wast thou there now, that thou art able to wrestle with the judgment of God? Why then do the fallen Angels tremble there? thy hands cannot be strong, nor can
thy heart endure, in that day when God shall deal with thee: Ezek. 22. 14. 2. Suppose that some one that is now a soul in Hell for sin, was permitted to come hither again to dwelt; and that they had a grant also, that upon amendment of life, next time they dye, to change that place for Heaven and Glory; what sayest thou, O wicked man? would such an one (thinkest thou) run again into the same course of life as before, and venture the damnation that for sin he had already been in? Would he choose again to lead that cursed life that afresh would kindle the flames of Hell upon him, and that would bind him up under the heavy wrath of God? O! he would not, he would not; the sixteenth of Luke in∣sinuates it: yea Reason it self, awake, would abhorr it, and tremble at such a thought. 2. Suppose again, that thou that livest and rollest in thy sin, and that as yet hast known nothing but the pleasure thereof, shouldst be by an Angel conveyed to some place where with convenience, from thence thou mightest have a view of Heaven and Hell; of the Joyes of the one, and the torments of the other; I say, suppose that from thence thou mightest have such a view thereof, as would convince thy reason, that both Heaven and Hell, are such realities as by the Word they are de∣clared to be; wouldest thou (thinkest thou)
when brought to thy home again, chuse to thy self thy former life, to wit, to return to thy folly again? No; if belief of what thou sawest, remained with thee, thou wouldest eat. Fire and Brimstone first. 4. I will propound again. Suppose that there was amongst us such a Law, (and such a Magistrate to inflict the penalty,) That for every open wickedness committed by thee, so much of thy flesh should with burning Pinoers be plucked from thy Bones: Wouldest thou then go on in thy open way of Lying, Swearing, Drinking and Whoring, as thou with delight doest now? Surely, surely, No: The fear of the punish∣ment would make thee forbear; yea, would make thee tremble, even then when thy lusts were powerfull, to think what a punishment thou wast sure to sustain, so soon as the plea∣sure was over. But Oh! the folly, the mad∣ness, the desperate madness that is in the hearts of Mr. Badmans friends, who in despite of the threatnings of an holy and sin revenging God, and of the outcries and warnings of all good men; yea, that will in despite of the groans and torments of those that are now in Hell for sin, (Luk. 16. 24. 28.) go on in a sinfull course of life; yea, though every sin is also a step of descent, down to that infer∣nal Cave. O how true is that saying of Solo∣mon, The heart of the sons of men is full of
evil, and madness is in their heart while they live, and after that they go to the dead, Ec∣cles. 9. 3. To the dead! that is, to the dead in Hell, to the damned dead; the place to which those that have dyed Bad men are gone, and that those that live Bad men are like to go to, when a little more sin, like stollen waters, hath been imbibed by their sinful souls. That which has made me publish this Book is, 1. For that wickedness like a flood is like to drown our English world: it begins already to be above the tops of mountains; it has al∣most swallowed up all; our Youth, our Middle age, Old age, and all, are almost carried away of this flood. O Debauchery, Debauchery, what hast thou done in England! Thou hast corrupted our Young men, and hast made our Old men beasts; thou hast deflowered our Vir∣gins, and hast made Matrons Bawds. Thou hast made our earth to reel to and fro like a drunkard; 'tis in danger to be removed like a Cottage, yea, it is, because transgression is so heavy upon it, like to fall and rise no more, Isa. 24. 20. O! that I could mourn for England, and for the sins that are committed therein, even while I see that without repentance, the men of Gods wrath are about to deal with us, each having his slaughtering weapon in his hand: (Ezek 9. 1, 2.) Well, I have written, and
by Gods assistance shall pray, that this flood may abate in England: and could I but see the tops of the Mountains above it, I should think that these waters were abating. 2. It is the duty of those that can, to cry out against this deadly plague, yea, to lift up their voice as with a Trumpet against it; that men may be awakened about it, slye from it, as from that which is the greatest of evils. Sin pull'd Angels out of Heaven, pulls men down to Hell, and overthroweth Kingdoms. Who, that sees an house on fire, will not give the Allarum to them that dwell therein? who that sees the Land invaded, will not set the Beacons on a flame? Who, that sees the De∣vils, as roaring Lyons continually devouring souls, will not make an Out-cry? But above all, when we see sin, sinful sin, a swallowing up a Nation, sinking of a Nation, and bring∣ing its Inhabitants to temporal, spiritual, and eternal ruine, shall we not cry out, and cry, They are drunk, but not with Wine; they stagger, but not with strong drink; they are intoxicated with the deadly poyson of sin, which will, if its malignity be not by wholsom means allayed, bring Soul and Body, and Estate, and Countrey, and all, to ruin and destruction? 3. In and by this my Out-cry, I shall deliver my self from the ruins of them that perish: for a man can do no more in this matter, I mean a
man in my capacity, than to detect and condemn the wickedness, warn the evil doer of the Judg∣ment, and fly therefrom my self. But Oh! that I might not only deliver my self! Oh that many would hear, and turn at this my cry, from sin! that they may be secured from the death and Judgment that attend it. Why I have handled the matter in this me∣thod, is best known to my self: and why I have concealed most of the Names of the persons whose sins or punishments I here and there in this Book make relation of, is, 1. For that neither the sins nor Judgments were all alike open; the sins of some, were com∣mitted, and the Judgments executed for them only in a corner. Not to say that I could not learn some of their names; for could I, I should not have made them publick, for this reason. 2. Because I would not provoke those of their Relations that survive them; I would not justly provoke them, and yet, as I think, I should, should I have intailed their punishment to their sins, and both to their names, and so have turned hem into the world. 3. Nor would I lay them under disgrace and ontempt, which would, as I think, unavoidably ave happened unto them had I withall insert∣d their Names. As for those whose Names I mention, their rimes or Judgments were manifest; publick al∣most
as any thing of that nature that happeneth to mortal men. Such therefore have published their own-shame by their sin, and God, his anger, by taking of open vengeance. As Job sayes, God has strook them as wic∣ked men in the open sight of others, Job 34 26. So that I cannot conceive, since their si and Judgment was so conspicuous, that my ad∣monishing the world thereof, should turn to their detriment: For the publishing of these things are, so far as Relation is concerned, intende for remembrancers: That they may also be think themselves, repent and turn to God, the Judgments for their sins should prove here ditary. For the God of Heaven hath threatne to visit the iniquity of the fathers upon th children, if they hate him, to the third an fourth generation, Exod. 20. 5. Nebuchadnezzars punishment for his pri being open, (for he was for his sin, driven fro his Kingly dignity, and from among men too, eat grass like an Ox, and to company with th beasts,) Daniel did not stick to tell Belshazz his son to his face thereof; nor to publish that it might be read and remembred by the gnerations to come. The same may be said Judas and Ananias, &c. for their sin and pnishment were known to all the dwellers at Jesalem, Acts 1. Chap. 5. Nor is it a sign but of desperate impetence
and hardness of heart, when the offspring or relations of those who have fallen by open, fear∣full and prodigious Judgments, for their sin, shall overlook, forget, pass by, or take no no∣tice of such high outgoings of God against them and their house. Thus Daniel aggravates Bel∣shazzars crime, for that he hardened his heart in pride, though he knew that for that very sin and transgression, his father was brought down from his height, and made to be a companion for Asses. And thou his son, O Belshazzar, sayes he, hast not humbled thy heart, though thou knewest all this. Dan. 5. A home re∣proof indeed, but home is most fit for an open and a continued-in transgression. Let those then that are the Offspring or rela∣tions of such, who by their own sin, and the dreadfull Judgments of God, are made to become a sign, (Deut. 16. 9, 10.) having been swept, as dung, from off the face of the earth, beware, lest when Judgment knocks at their door, for their sins, as it did before at the door of their Pregenitors, it falls also with as heavy a stroak as on them that went before them: Lest, I say, they in that day, instead of finding mercy, find for their high, daring, and Judgment-affronting∣sins, Judgment without mercy. To conclude, let those that would not dye Mr. Badmans death, take heed of Mr. Badmans wayes: for his wayes bring to his end; Wic∣kedness
will not deliver him that is given to it though they should cloak all with a Profession o Religion. If it was a transgression of Old, for a ma to wear a Womans Apparel, surely it is a transgression now for a sinner to wear a Christia Profession for a Cloak. Wolves in Sheeps Cloath∣ing swarm in England this day: Wolves bot as to Doctrine, and as to Practice too. Som men make a Profession, I doubt, on purpose that they may twist themselves into a Trade; and thence into an Estate; yea, and if need be, into an Estate Kuavishly, by the ruins of their Neighbour: let such take heed, for those that d such things have the greater damnation. Christian, make thy Profession shine by a Con∣versation according to the Gospel: Or else thou wilt damnifie Religion, bring scandal to thy Bre∣thren, and give offence to the Enemies; and 'twould be better that a Millstone was hanged about thy neck, and that thou, as so adorned, wast cast into the bottom of the Sea, than so to do. Christian, a Profession according to the Gospel, is, in these dayes, a rare thing; seek then after it, put it on, and keep it without spot; and (as becomes thee) white, and clean, and thou shalt be a rare Christian. The Prophecy of the last times is, that pro∣fessing men (for so I understand the Text) shall
be, many of them, base; (2 Tim. 3.) but con∣tinue thou in the things that thou hast learned, not of wanton men, not of licentious times, but of the Word and Doctrine of God, that is ac∣cording to Godliness; and thou shalt walk with Christ in white. Now God Almighty give his people Grace, not to hate or malign Sinners, nor yet to choose any of their wayes, but to keep themselves pure from the blood of all men, by speaking and doing according to that Name and those Rules that they profess to know, and love; for Jesus Christs sake. John Bunyan.
Books lately Printed for and Sold by Na∣thaniel Ponder at the Peacock in the Poultrey, neer the Church. BIblia Sacra, sive Testamentum Vetus, a Im. Tremellio & Fr. Junio ex Hebrae Latinè redditum. Et Testamentum Novum Theod. Beza è Graeco in Latinum versum. Ar∣gumentis Capitum additi versibúsque singuli distinctis, & seorsum expressis. 12o. , Or, A Declaration of the Glo∣rious Mystery of the Person of Christ, God and Man. With the Infinite Wisdom, Love and Power of God in the contrivance and con∣stitution thereof. As also of the Ground and Reasons of his Incarnation, the nature o his Ministry in Heaven, the present State o the Church above thereon, and the Use of Person in Religion. With an Account and Vindication of the Honour, Worship, Faith Love, and Obedience due unto him, in and from the Church. By John Owen, D. D. Divine Breathings: or a Manual of practi∣cal Contemplations, in one Century: Tend∣ing to promote Gospel-Principles, and good Conversation in Christ. Comprizin brief many of those great Truths that are to known and practised by a Christian. By T.
Youth's Comedy, or the Souls Tryals and Triumph: a Dramatick Poem. With Di∣vers Meditations intermixt upon several Sub∣jects. Set forth to help and encourage those that are seeking a Heavenly Country. By the Author of Youth's Tragedy. A Treatise of the Fear of God: shewing what it is, and how distinguished from that which is not so. Also Whence it comes. Who has it. What are the Effects. And What the Priviledges of those that have it in their hearts. By John Bunyan. The Tragical History of Jetzer: Or, a Faithful Narrative of the Feigned Visions, Counterfeit Revelations, and false Miracles of the Dominican Fathers of the Covent of Bern in Switzerland, to Propagate their Superstiti∣ons. For which Horrid Impieties, the Prior, Sub-Prior, Lecturer, and Receiver of the said Covent were Burnt at a Stake, Anno Dom. 1509. Collected From the Records of the said City by the Care of Sir William Waller, Knight. Translated from his French Copy by an Impartial Pen, and now made Pub∣lick for the Information of English Protestants, who may hence learn, that  will stick at no  which may Adiunce their Designs, nor at any Perries that may Con∣ceal them. With an Epistle, wherein are some soft and gentle Reflections upon the Lying
Dying Speeches of the Jesuites lately Executed at Tyburn. The Second Edition. The Pilgrims Progress from this World to that which is to come: Delivered in the Si∣militude of a Dream. By John Bunyan. This fourth Impression hath the Authors Picture and many Additions. There is now in the Press, and will be suddenly published, An Exposition on the 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10th, Chapters on the Hebrews▪ Being a Third Volume. By John Owen, D. D. ERRATA. PAge 127. line 8. for amated read amazed, p. 149. l. 15. for herhaps r. perhaps, p. 162. l. 3, & 4. for diaaolical r. di∣bolical, p. 287. l. 9. for, for r. so, p. 304. for reputation r. re∣pentance.
THE LIFE and DEATH OF Mr. BADMAN, Presented to the World in a Familiar DIALOGUE Betwixt Mr. WISEMAN, And, Mr. ATTENTIVE. Wiseman. GOOD morrow my good Neighbour, Mr. Attentive; whither are you walking so early this morning? methinks you look as if you were concerned about something more than ordi∣nary. Have you lost any of your Cattel, or what is the matter? Attentive. Good Sir, Good morrow to you, I have not as yet lost ought, but yet you give a right ghess of me, for I am, as you say, concerned in my heart, but 'tis because of the badness of the times. And Sir, you, as all our
Neighbours know, are a very observ∣ing man, pray therefore what do you think of them? Wise. Why? I think, as you say, to wit, that they are bad times, and bad they will be, untill men are better: for they are bad men that make bad times; if men therefore would mend, so would the times. 'Tis a folly to look for good dayes, so long as sin is so high, and those that study its nourishment so many. God bring it down, and those that nourish it to Repentance, and then my good Neighbour, you will be concerned, not as you are now: Now you are concerned because times are so bad; but then you will be so, cause times are so good: Now you are concerned so as to be perplexed, but then you will be con∣cerned so as to lift up your voice with shouting; for I dare say, could you see such dayes they would make you shout. Atten. Ai, so they would, such times I have prayed for, such times I have longed for: but I fear they'l be worse before they be better. Wise. Make no Conclusions, man:
for he that hath the hearts of men in his hand, can change them from worse to better, and so bad times into good. God give long life to them that are good, and especially to those of them that are capable of doing him service in the world. The Ornament and Beauty of this lower World, next to God and his Won∣ders, are the men that spangle and shine in godliness. Now as Mr. Wiseman said this, he gave a great sigh. Atten. Amen. Amen. But why, good Sir, do you sigh so deeply? is it for ought else than that for the which as you have perceived, I my self am concerned? Wise. I am concerned with you, for the badness of the times; but that was not the cause of that sigh, of the which, as I see, you take no∣tice. I sighed at the remembrance of the death of that man for whom the Bell tolled at our Town yester∣day. Atten. Why? I trow, Mr. Good∣man your Neighbour is not dead. In∣deed I did hear that he had been sick. Wise. No, no, it is not he. Had
it been he, I could not but have been concerned, but yet not as I am concerned now. If he had died, I should only have been concerned for that the world had lost a Light: but the man that I am concerned for now, was oue that never was good, therefore such an one who is not dead only, but damned. He died that he might die, he went from Life to Death, and then from Death to Death, from Death Natural to death Eternal. And as he spake this, the water stood in his eyes. Atten. Indeed, to goe from a death-bed to Hell is a fearful thing to think on. But good Neighbour Wiseman, he pleased to tell me who this man was, and why you conclude him so miserable in his death? Wise. Well, if you can stay, I will tell you who he was, and why I conclude thus concerning him. Atten. My leisure will admit me to stay, and I am willing to hear you out. And I pray God your discourse may take hold on my heart, that I may be bettered thereby. So they agreed to sit down under a tree: Then Mr. Wiseman proceeded as followeth.
Wise. The man that I mean, is one Mr. Badman; he has lived in our Town a great while, and now, as I said, he is dead. But the rea∣son of my being so concerned at his death, is, not for that he was at all related to me, or for that any good conditions died with him, for he was far from them, but for that, as I greatly fear, he hath, as was hinted before, died two deaths at once. Atten. I perceive what you mean by two deaths at once; and to speak truth, 'tis a fearfull thing thus to have ground to think of any: for although the death of  ungodly and sinners is laid to heart but of few, yet to die in such a state, is more dreadful and fearful than any man can imagine. Indeed if a man had no Soul, if his state was not truely Immortal, the matter would not be so much; but for a man to be so disposed of by his Maker, as to be appointed a sensible being for ever, and for him too to fall into the hands of revenging Justice, that will be always, to the utmost extremity that his sin deserveth, punisbing of him
in the dismal dungeon of Hell, this must needs be unutterably sad, and lamentable. Wise. There is no man, I think, that is sensible of the worth of one Soul, but must, when he hears of the death of unconverted men, he stricken with sorrow and grief: be∣cause, as you said well, that mans state is such, that he has a sensible being for ever. For 'tis sense that makes punishment heavy. But yet sense is not all that the Damned have, they have sense and reason too; so then, as Sense receiveth punishment with sorrow because it feels, and bleeds under the same, so by Rea∣son, and the exercise thereof, in the midst of torment, all present Af∣fliction is aggravated, and that three manner of wayes: 1. Reason will consider thus with himself; For what am I thus tor∣mented? and will easily find 'tis for nothing but that base and filthy thing, Sin; and now will Vexation be mixed with Punishment, and that will greatly heighten the Af∣fliction. 2. Reason will consider thus with
himself. How long must this be my state? And will soon return to him∣self this Answer: This must be my state for ever and ever. Now this will greatly increase the torment. 3. Reason will consider thus with himself; What have I lost more than present ease and quiet by my sins that I have committed? And will quickly return himself this an∣swer: I have lost Communion with God, Christ, Saints and Angels, and a share in Heaven and eternal Life: And this also must needs grea∣ten the misery of poor damned souls. And this is the case of Mr. Badman. Atten. I feel my heart even shake at the thoughts of coming into such a state. Hell! who knows that is yet alive, what the torments of Hell are? This word Hell gives a very dreadful sound. Wise. , so it does in the ears of him that has a tender Conscience. But if, as you say, and that truly, the very Name of Hell, is so dread∣ful, what is the Place it self, and what are the Punishments that are there inflicted, and that without the
least intermission, upon the Souls of damned men, for ever and ever. Atten. Well, but passing this; my leisure will admit me to stay, and therefore pray tell me what it is that makes you think that Mr. Badman is gone to Hell. Wise. I will tell you. But first do you know which of the Badmans I mean? Atten. Why was there more of them thn one? Wise. O, yes, a great many, both Brothers and Sisters, and yet all of them the Children of a godly Pa∣rent, the more a great deal is the pity. Atten. Which of them therefore was it that died. Wise. The eldest, old in years, and old in sin; but the sinner that dies an hundred years old shall be ac∣cursed. Atten. Well, but what makes you think he is gone to Hell? Wise. His wicked life, and fear∣ful death, specially since the Man∣ner of his death was so correspond∣ing with his life. Atten. Pray let me know the man∣ner
of his death, if your self did per∣fectly know it. Wise. I was there when he died: But I desire not to see another such man (while I live) die in such sort as he did. Atten. Pray therefore let me hear it. Wise. You say you have leisure and can stay, and therefore, if you please, we will discourse even or∣derly of him. First, we will begin with his Life, and then proceed to his Death: Because a relation of the first may the more affect you, when you shall hear of the second. Atten. Did you then so well know his Life? Wise. I knew him of a Child. I was a man, when he was but a boy, and I made special observation of him from first to last. Atten. Pray then let me hear from you an account of his Life; but be as brief as you can, for I long to hear of the manner of his death. Wise. I will endeavour to an∣swer your desires, and first, I will tell you, that from a Child he was very bad: his very beginning was
ominous, and presaged that no good end, was, in likelyhood, to follow thereupon. There were several sins that he was given to, when but a little one, that manifested him to be notoriously infected with Orgi∣nal corruption; for I dare say he learned none of them of his Father or Mother; nor was he admitted to go much abroad among other Children, that were vile, to learn to sin of them: Nay, contrariwise, if at any time he did get abroad amongst others, he would be as the Inventer of bad words, and an ex∣ample in bad actions. To them all he used to be, as we say, the Ring∣leader, and Master-sinner from a Childe. Atten. This was a bad Beginning indeed, and did demonstrate that he was, as you say, polluted, very much polluted with Original Corruption. For to speak my mind freely, I do confess, that it is mine opinion, that Children come polluted with sin into the World, and that oft-times the sins of their youth,Original sin is the root of Actual transgressi∣ons. especially while they are very young, are rather by ver∣tue of Indwelling sin, than by exam∣ples
that are set before them by others. Not but that they learn to sin by ex∣ample too, but Example is not the root, but rather the Temptation un∣to wickedness. The root is sin with∣in;Mark. 7. for from within, out of the heart of man proccedeth sin. Wise. I am glad to hear that you are of this opinion, and to confirm what you have said by a few hints from the Word.Job. 11. 12▪ Man in his birth is compared to an Ass, (an unclean Beast) and to a wretched Infant inEzek. 16. its blood: besides, all the first-born of old that were offered unto the Lord,Exod. 12. 13. were to be redeemed at the age of a month,Chap. 34. 20. and that was be∣fore they were sinners by imitati∣on. The Scripture also affirmeth, that by the sin of one,Rom. 5. Judgement came upon all; and renders this rea∣son, for that all have sinned: nor is that Objection worth a rush, That Christ by his death hath taken away Original Sin. First, Because it is Scriptureless. Secondly, Because it makes them incapable of Salvation by Christ; for none but those that in their own Persons are sinners, are to have Salvation by him. Many
other things might be added, but between persons so well agreed as you and I are, these may suffice at present: but when an Antagonist comes to deal with us about this matter, then we have for him often other strong Arguments, if he be an Antagonist worth the taking notice of. Atten. But, as was hinted before, he used to be the Ring-leading Sinner, or the Master of mischief among other children; yet these are but Generals; pray therefore tell me in Particular which were the sins of his Childhood. Wise. I will so. When he was but a Child, he was so addicted to addicted to Lying from a child. Lying, that his Parents scarce knew when to believe he spake true; yea, he would invent; tell, and stand to the Lyes that he in∣vented and told, and that with such an audacious face, that one might even read in his very countenance the symptoms of an hard and despe∣rate heart this way. Atten. This was an ill beginning indeed, and argueth that he began to harden himself in sin betimes. For a lye cannot be knowingly told and stood
in, (and I perceive that this was his manner of way in Lying) but he must as it were force his own heart unto it. Yea, he must make his A Lie knowingly told demon∣strates that the heart is desperately hard. heart hard, and bold to doe it: Yea, he must be arrived to an ex∣ceeding pitch of▪ wickedness thus to doe, since all this he did against that good education, that before you seem∣ed to hint, he had from his Father and Mother. Wise. The want of good Edu∣cation, as you have intimated, is many times a cause why Children doe so easily, so soon, become bad; especially when there is not only a want of that, but bad Examples enough, as, the more is the pity, there is in many Families; by ver∣tue of which poor Children are trained up in Sin, and nursed there∣in for the Devil and Hell. But it was otherwise with Mr. Badman, for to my knowledge, this his way of Lying, was a great grief to his Parents, for their hearts were much dejected at this beginning of their Son; nor did there want Counsel and Correction from them to him, if that would have made him better,
He wanted not to be told, in my hearing,The Lyers portion. and that over and over and over,Rev. 21. 8. 27. That all Lyars should have their part in the Lake that burns with fire and brimstone;Chap. 22. 15. and that whosoever loveth and maketh a lye, should not have any part in the new and heavenly Jerusalem: But all availed nothing with him; when a fit, or an occasion to lie, came upon him, he would invent, tell, and stand to his Lie (as steadfastly as if it had been the biggest of truths,) that he told, and that with that har∣dening of his heart and face, that it would be to those that stood by, a wonder. Nay, and this he would doe when under the rod of correcti∣on which is appointed by God for Parents to use, that thereby they might keep their Children from Hell.Prov. 22. 15. Atten. Truly it was,Chap. 2. 13, 14. as I said, a bad beginning, he served the Devil betimes; yea he became a Nurse one of hisJoh. 8. 44. Brts, for a spirit of Ly∣ing is the Devils Brat,The De∣vils Brat. for he Liar and the Father of it. Wise. Right, he is the Father of it indeed. A Lie is begot by the
Devil, as the Father, and is brought forth by the wicked heart, as the Mother: wherefore another Scrip∣ture also saith,Acts 5. 3, 4. Why hath Satan fil∣led thy heart to lye, &c. Yea, he calleth the heart that is big with a lye, an heart that hath Conceived, that is, by the Devil. Why hast thou conceived this thing in thy heart, thou hast not lied unto men, but unto God. True, his lye was a lye of the high∣est nature, but every lye hath the The Fa∣ther and Mother of a Lie. same Father and Mother is had the lie last spoken of. For he is a lier, and the Father of it. A lie then is the Brat of Hell, and it cannot Mark. be in the heart before the person has committed a kind of spiritual Adultery with the Devil. That Soul therefore that telleth a known lie, has lien with, and conceived it by lying with the Devil, the only Father of lies. For a lie has only one Father and Mother, the Devil and the Heart. No marvel there∣fore if the hearts that hatch and bring forth Lies, be so much of complexion with the Devil. Yea, no marvel though God and Christ have so bent their Word against
lyers: a lyer is weded to the De∣vil himself. Atten. It seems a marvellous thing in mine eyes, that since a lye is the Off∣spring of the devill, and since a lye brings the soul to the very den of De∣vils, to wit, the dark dungeon of hell; that men should be so desperately wic∣ked as to accustom themselves to s horrible a thing. Wise. It seems also marvellous to me, specially when I observe for how little a matter some men will study, contrive, make and tell a lye. You shall have some that will lye it over and over, and that for a penySome will tell a Lie for a Peny profit. pro∣fit. Yea, lye and stand in it, although they know that they lye: yea, you shall have some men that will not stick to tell lye after lye, though themselves get nothing thereby; They will tell lyes in their ordinary discourse with their Neighbours, also their News, their Jests, and their Tales must needs be adored with lyes; or else they seem to bear no good sound to the ear, nor shew much to the fancie of him to whom they are told. But alas, what will these lyers doe, when, for their lyes
they shall be tumbled down into hell, to that Devil that did beget those lyes in their heart, and so be tormented by fire and brimstone, with him, and that for ever and ever, for their lyes? Atten. Can you not give one some example of Gods Judgements upon lyers, that one may tell them to lyers when one hears them lye, if perhaps they may by the hearing thereof, be made afraid, and ashamed to lye. Wise. Examples! why,An Exam∣ple for Ly∣ers. Saphi∣a and his wife are examples enough to put a stop, one would think, to a spirit addicted thereto, for they both were stricken down dead for tell∣ing a lye,Acts 5. and that by God himself, n the midst of a company of people. But if Gods threatning of Liers with Hell-fire, and with the loss of the Kingdom of Heaven, will not pre∣ail with them to leave off to lie nd make lies, it cannot be ima∣ined that a relation of temporal udgements that have swept liers ut of the World heretofore, should so it. Now, as I said, this Lying was one of the first sins that Mr. Bad∣man was addicted to, and he could
make them and tell them fear∣fully. Atten. I am sorry to hear this of him, and so much the more because, as I fear, this sin did not reign in himA Spirit of Lying ac∣companyed with other sins. alone; for usually one that is accustomed to lying, is also accustom∣ed to other evils besides, and if it were not so also with Mr. Badman, it would be indeed a wonder. Wise. You say true, the lier is a Captive slave of more than the spirit of lying: and therefore this Mr. Badman, as he was a lier from a Child, so he was also much given toBadman given to pilfer. pilfer and steal, so that what he could, as we say, handsomly lay his hands on, that was counted his own, whether they were the things of his fellow Children; or if he could lay hold of any thing at a Neighbours house, he would take it away; you must understand me of Trifles; for being yet but a Child▪ he attempted no great matter, espe∣cially at first. But yet as he grew up in strength and ripeness of wit so he attempted to pilfer and stea things still of more value than a first. He took at last great pleasure
in robbing of Gardens and Or∣chards; and as he grew up, to steal Pullen from the Neighbourhood: Yea, what was hisBadman would rob his Father. Fathers, could not escape his fingers, all was Fish that came to his Net, so hardened, at last, was he in this mischief also. Atten. You make me wonder more and more. What, play the Thief too! What play the Thief so soon! He could not but know, though he was but a Child, that what he took from others, was none of his own. Besides, if his Father was a good man, as you say, it could not be, but he must also hear from him, that to steal was to transgress the Law of God, and so to run the hazard of eternal Dam∣nation. Wise. His Father was not want∣ing to use the means to reclaim him, often urging, as I have been told, that saying in the Law of Mo∣ses, Thou shalt not steal:Exod. 20. 15. And also that,Zech. 5. 3. This is the Curse that goeth forth over the face of the whole earth, for every one that stealeth shall be cut off, &c. The light of Nature also, though he was little, must needs shew him that what he
took from others, was not his own, and that he would not willingly have been served so himself. But all was to no purpose, let Father and Conscience say what they would to him, he would go on, he was re∣solved to go on in his wickedness. Atten. But his Father would, a you intimate, sometimes rebuke him for his wickedness; pray how would he carry it then? Wise. How! why,Jer. 2. 26. like to a Thief that is found. He would stand How Bad∣man did use to carry it when his Fa∣ther used to chide him for his sins. gloating, and hanging down his head in a sullen, pouching manner, (a body might read, as we use to say, the picture of Ill-luck in his face,) and when his Father did de∣mand his answer to such questions concerning his Villany, he would grumble and mutter at him, and that should be all he could get. Atten. But you said that he would also rob his Father, methinks that was an unnatural thing. Wise. Natural or unnatural, all is one to a Thief. Besides, you must think that he had likewise Compa∣nions to whom he was, for the wic∣kedness that he saw in them, more
Badman more firmly knit to his Compani∣ons than either to Father or Mother. firmly knit, than either to Father or Mother. Yea, and what had he cared if Father and Mother and died for grief for him. Their death would have been, as he would have counted, great release and liberty to him: For the truth is, they and their counsel was his Bondage; yea, and if I forget not, I have heard some say, that when he was, at times, among his Companions, he would greatlyBadman would re∣joyce to think that his Parents death were at hand. rejoyce to think that his Parents were old, and could not live long, and then, quoth he, I shall be mine own man, to do what I list without their controul. Atten. Then it seems he counted that robbing of his Parents was no crime. Wise. None at all, and therefore he fell directly under that Sentence, Whoso robbeth his Father or his Mo∣ther,Prov. 28. 24. and saith it is no transgression, the same is the companion of a de∣stroyer. And for that he set so light by them as to their Persons and Counsels, 'twas a sign that at pre∣sent he was of a very abominable spirit,1 Sam. 2. 25. and that some Judgement waited to take hold of him in time to come.
Atten. But can you imagin what it was, I mean, in his conceit (for I speak not now of the suggestions of Satan, by which doubtless he was put on to do these things,) I say what it should be in his conceit, that should make him think that this his manner of pilfering and stealing was not great matter. Wise. It was, for that, the things that he stole, were small; to rob Orchards, and Gardens, and to steal Pullen, and the like, these he count∣ed Badman counted his thieving no great mat∣ter. Tricks of Youth, nor would he be beat out of it by all that his Friends could say. They would tell him that he must not covet, or de∣sire, (and yet to desire, is less than to take) even any thing, the least thing that was his Neighbours, and that if he did, it would be a trans∣gression of the Law; but all was one to him: what through the wic∣ked Talk of his Companions, and the delusion of his own corrupt heart, he would go on in his pil∣fering course, and where he thought himself secure, would talk of, and laught at it when he had done. Atten. Well, I heard a man once,
when he was upon the Ladder with the Rope about his Neck,☞ confess (when ready to be turned off by the Hangman) that that which had brought him to that end, was his ac∣customing of himself, when young, to pifer and steal small things. To my best remembrance he told us, that he began the trade of a Thief by steal∣ing of Pins and Points, and there∣fore did forewarn all the Youth, that then were gathered together to see him die, to take heed of beginning, though but with little sins, because by tampering at first with little ones, way is made for the commission of bigger. Wise. Since you are entred upon Storyes,The Story of old Tod. I also will tell you one, the which, though I heard it not with mine own Ears, yet my Au∣thor I dare believe:Young Thieves take notice. It is concern∣ing one old Tod, that was hanged about Twenty years agoe, or more, at Hartford, for being a Thief. The Story is this: At a Summer Assizes holden at Hartfort, while the Judge was sit∣ting upon the Bench, comes this old Tod into the Court, cloathed in
a green Suit, with his Leathern Gir∣dle in his hand, his Bosom open, and all on a dung sweat, as if he had run for his Life; and being come in, he spake aloud as follows: Old Tod began his wa to the Gallows by robbing of Orchards and the like. My Lord, said he, Here is the veryest Rogue that breaths upon the face of the earth. I have been a Thief from a Child: When I was but a little one, I gave my self to rob Orchards, and to do other such like wicked things, and I have continued a Thief ever since. My Lord, there has not been a Robbery committed thus many years, within so many miles of this place, but I have either been at it, or privy to it. The Judge thought the fellow was mad, but after some conference with some of the Justices, they a∣greed to Indict him; and so they did of several felonious Actions; to all which he heartily confessed Guil∣ty, and so was hanged with his Wife at the same time. Atten. This is a remarkable Story indeed, and you think it is a true one. Wise. It is not only remarkable, but pat to our purpose. This Thief,
like Mr. Badman, began his Trade betimes; he began too where Mr. Badman began, even at robbing of Orchards, and other such things, which brought him▪ as you may perceive, from sin to sin, till at last it brought him to the publick shame of sin, which is the Gallows. As for the truth of this Story, the Relator told me that he was at the same time himself in the Court, and stood within less than two yards of old Tod, when he heard him aloud to utter the words. Atten. These two sins of lying and stealing were a bad sign of an evil end. Wise. So they were, and yet Mr. Badman came not to his end like old Tod; Though I fear, to as bad, nay, worse than was that death of the Gallows, though less discerned by spectators; but more of that by and by. But you talk of these two sins as if these were all that Mr. Badman was addicted to in is Youth: Alas, alas, he swarmed with sins, even as a Begger does with Ver∣min, and that when he was but a Boy.
Atten. Why what other sins was he addicted to, I mean while he was but a Child? Wise. You need not ask, to what other sins was he, but to what other sins was he not addicted, that is, of such as suited with his Age: for a man may safely say, that nothing that was vile came amiss to him; if he was but capable to do it. Indeed some sins there be that Childhood knows not how to be tampering with; but I speak of sins that he was capable of committing, of which I will nominate two or three more. And, First, He could not endure the Badman could not abide the Lords Day. Lords Day, because of the Ho∣liness that did attend it; the begin∣ning of that Day was to him as if he was going to Prison, (except he could get out from his Father and Mother, and lurk in by-holes a∣mong his Companions, untill holy Duties were over.) Reading the Scriptures, hearing Sermons, godly Conference, repeating of Sermons, and Prayer, were things that he could not away with; and there∣fore if his Father on such days
(as often he did, though sometimes notwithstanding his diligence, he would be sure to give him the slip) did keep him strictly to the obser∣vation of the day, he would plain∣ly shew by all carriages that he was highly discontent therewith: he would sleep at Duties, would talk vainly with his Brothers, and as it were, think every godly opportu∣nity seven times as long as it was, grudging till it was over. Atten. This his abhorring of that day, was not, I think, for the sake of the day it self: for as it is a day, it is nothing else but as other days of the Week: But I suppose that the Why Ra∣man could not abide the Lords Day. reason of his loathing of it, was, for that God hath put sanctity and holiness upon it; also because it is the day above all the days of the week that ought to be spent in holy De∣votion, in remembrance of our Lords Resurrection from the dead. Wise. Yes, 'twas therefore, that he was such an enemy to it, even because more restraint was laid up∣on him on that day, from his own ways, than were possible should be laid upon him on all others.
Atten. Doth not God by institu∣ting of a day unto holy Duties, make great proof how the hearts and incli∣nations of poor people do stand to Ho∣liness of heart, and a Conversation in doly duties? Wise. God proves the heart what it is, by instituting of the Lords day, and set∣ting it apart  his ser∣vice. Yes doubtless; and a man shall shew his Heart and his Life what they are, more by one Lords-day, than by all the days of the week besides: And the reason is, because on the Lords-day there is a special restraint laid upon men as to Thoughts and Life, more than upon other days of the week be∣sides. Also, men are enjoyned on that day to a stricter performance of holy Duties, and restraint of worldly business, than upon other days they are; wherefore, if their hearts incline not naturally to good, now they will shew it, now they will appear what they are. The Lords Day is a kind of an Emblem of the heavenly Sabbath above, and it makes manifest how the heart to the perpetuity of Holi∣ than to be found in a does. ys a man may be in
and out of holy Duties, and all in a quarter of an hour; but now, the Lords Day is, as it were, a day that enjoyns to one perpetual Duty of Holiness:Gen. 2. 2. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day,Exod. 31. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17 (which by Christ is not abrogated,Mar. 16. 1. but changed,Acts▪ 20. 7. into the First of the week,1 Cor. 16. 1, 2.) not as it was given in particular to the Jews,Mar. 2. 27, 2. but as it was sanctified by him from the Beginning of the world;Revel. 1. 10. and therefore is a greater proof of the frame and temper of a mans heart, and does more make manifest to what he is inclined, than doth his other performance of Duties: Therefore God puts great difference between them that truly call (and walk in) this day as holy, and count it Honourable,Isa. 5. 8, 13. upon the account that now they have an op∣portunity to shew how they delight to honour him;Chap. 56. 2. in that they have, not only an Hour, but a whole Day to shew it in: I say, he puts great difference between these, and that other sort that say,Amos▪ 8. 5. When will the Sabbath be gone, that we may be at our worldly business. The first he calleth a Blessed man, but brandeth
the other for an unsanctified world∣ling. And indeed, to delight our selves in Gods service upon his Holy days, gives a better proof of a sanctified Nature, than to grudge at the com∣ing, and to be weary of the holy duties of such dayes, as Mr. Bad∣man did. Atten. There may be something in what you say, for he that cannot abide to keep one day holy to God, to be sure he hath given a sufficient proof that he is an unsanctified man; and as such, what should he do in Heaven? that being the place where a perpetual Sabath is to be kept to God;Heb. 4. 9. I say, to be kept for ever and ever. And for ought I know, one reason why one day in se∣ven, hath been by our Lord, t apart unto holy Duties for men, may be to give them conviction that there is enmity in the hearts of sinners to the God of Heaven, for he that hateth Holiness, hateth God himself. They pretend to love God, and yet love not a holy day, and yet love not to spend that day in one continued act of holiness to the Lord: They had as good say nothing as to call him Lord, Lord, and yet not doe the things that
he says. And this Mr. Badman was such an one: he could not abide this day, nor any of the Duties of it. Indeed, when he could get from his Friends, and soHow Bad∣man did use to spend the Lords Day. spend it in all manner of idleness and profaneness, then he would be pleased well enough: but what was this but a turning the day into night, or other than taking an opportunity at Gods forbidding, to follow our Callings, to solace and sa∣tisfie our lusts and delights of the flesh. I take the liberty to speak thus of Mr. Badman, upon a confidence of what you, Sir, have said of him, is true. Wise. You needed not to have made that Apology for your cen∣suring of Mr. Badman, for all that knew him, will confirm what you said of him to be true. He could not abide either that day, or any thing else that had the stamp or image of God upon it. Sin, sin, and to do the thing that was naught, was that which he delighted in, and that from a little Child. Atten. I must say again, I am sorry to hear it, and that for his own sake, and also for the sake of his Relations,
who must needs be broken to pieces with such doings as these: For, for these things sake comes the wrath of God upon the Children of disobedience:phes. 5. 6. and doubtless he must be gone to Hell, if he died without Repentance; and to beget a Child for Hell, is sad for Parents to think on. Wise. Of his Dying, as I told you, I will give you a Relation anon, but now we are upon his Life, and upon the Manner of his Life in his Childhood, even of the sins that attended him then, some of which I have mentioned already; and indeed I have mentioned but some, for yet there are more to follow, and those not at all inferiour to what you have already heard. Atten. Pray what were they? Wise. Why he was greatly given, and that while a Lad, to grievous Badman given to Swearing and Cursing. Swearing and Cursing: yea, he then made no more of Swearing and Cursing, than I do of telling my fingers. Yea, he would do it with∣out provocation thereto. He count∣ed it a glory to Swear and Curse, and it was as natural to him, as to eat and drink and sleep.
Atten. Oh! what a young Villain was this! here is, as the Apostle says, a yielding of Members as instru∣ments of unrighteousness unto sin,Rom. 6. 13. in∣deed! This is proceeding from evil to evil with a witness; This argueth that he was a black-mouthed young Wretch indeed. Wise. He was so; and yet, as I told you, he counted, above all, this kind of sinning, to beSwearing and Cursing a badge of Mr. Bad∣mans ho∣nour. a Badge of his Honour: He reckoned himself a mans Fellow when he had learnt to Swear and Curse boldly. Atten. I am perswaded▪ that many do think, as you have said, that to Swear, is a thing that does bravely become them, and that it is the best way for a man, when he would put authority, or terrour into his words, to stuff them full of the sin of Swearing. Wise. You say right, else, as I am perswaded, men would not so usually belch out their blasphe∣mous Oaths, as they do: they take a pride in it; they think that to swear is Gentleman-like; and ha∣ving once accustomed themselves unto it, they hardly leave▪ it all the days of their lives.
Atten. Well but now we are upon it, pray shew meDifference etwixt Swearing and Cursing. the difference between Swearing and Cursing; for there is a difference, is there not? Wise. Yes: There is a difference between Swearing and Cursing. Swearing, vain swearing, such as young Badman accustomed himself unto. Now vain and sinful swear∣ing, What swearing is. Is a light and wicked calling of God, &c. to witness to our vain and foolish attesting of things, and those things are of two sorts. 1. Things that we swear, are, or shall be done. 2. Things so sworn to, true or false. 1. Things, that we swear, are, or shall be done. Thou swearest thou hast done such a thing, that such a thing is so, or shall be so; for it is no matter which of these it is that men swear about, if it be done lightly and wickedly, and groundlesly, it is vain, because it is a sin against the Third Commande∣ment,Exod. 0. 7. which says, Thou shalt not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain. For this is a vain using of that Holy and Sacred Name, and o
a sin for which, without sound Re∣pentance, there is not, nor can be rightly expected, forgiveness. Atten. Then it seems, though as to the matter of fact, a man swears truely, yet if he sweareth lightly and groundlesly, his Oath is evil, and he by it, under sin. Wise. Yes; a man may say, A man may sin in swearing to a truth. The Lord liveth,Jer. 5. 2. and that is true, and yet in so saying, swear falsly; because he sweareth vainly, need∣lesly, and without a ground. To swear groundedly and necessarily, (which then a man does, when he swears as being called thereto of God,) that is tolerated by the Word: but this was none of Mr. Badmans swearing, and therefore that which now we are not con∣cerned about. Atten. I perceive, by the Prophet, that a man may sin in swearing to a Truth: They therefore must needs most horribly sin, that swear to con∣firm their Jests and Lies; and as they think, the better to beautifie their foolish talking. Wise. They sin with an high hand; for they presume to ima∣gine,
He that swears to a Lie, con∣cludes that God is as wicked as himself. that God is as wicked as themselves, to wit, that he is an Avoucher of Lies to be true. For, as I said before, to swear, is to call God to witness; and to swear to a Lie, is to call God to witness that that Lie is true. This therefore must needs offend; for it puts the highest affront upon the Holiness and Righte∣ousness of God,Zech. . 3. therefore his wrath must sweep them away. This kind of Swearing is put in with lying,Jer. 7. . and killing,Hos. 4. , 3. and stealing, and com∣mitting Adultery; and therefore must not go unpunished: For if God will not hold him guiltless that taketh his Name in vain, which a man may doe when he swears to a truth, (as I have shewed before,) how can it be imagined, that he should hold such guiltless, who, by Swearing, will appeal to God, if Lies be not true, or that swear out of their frantick and Bedlam mad∣ness. It would grieve and provoke a sober man to wrath, if one should swear to a notorious lye, and avouch that that man would attest it for a truth; and yet thus do men deal with the holy God: They tell their Jest∣ings,
Tales and Lies, and then swear by God that they are true. Now this kind of Swearing was as common with young Badman, as it was to eat when he was an hungred, or to go to bed when it was night. Atten. I have often mused in my mind, what it should be that should make men so common in the use of the sin of Swearing, since those that be wise, will believe them never the ooner for that. Wise. It cannot be any thing that is good, you may be sure; because the thing it self is abominable: Six Causes of vain Swearing. 1. Therefore it must be from the promptings of the spirit of the Devil within them. 2. Also it flows some∣times from hellish Rage, when the tongue hath set on fire of Hell even the whole course of nature.Jam. 3. 6, 7, 8, 9. 3. But commonly Swearing flows from that daring Boldness that biddeth de∣fiance to the Law that forbids it. 4. Swearers think also that by their belching of their blasphemous Oaths out of their black and polluted mouths, they shew themselves the more valiant men: 5. And imagine also, that by these outrageous kind
of villianies, they shall conquer those that at such a time they have to do with, and make them believe their lyes to be true: 6. They also swear frequently to get Gain thereby, and when they meet with fools, they overcome them this way. But if I might give advice in this matter, no Buyer should lay out one farthing with him that is a common Swearer in his Calling; especially with such an Oath-master that endeavoureth to swear away his commodity to ano∣ther, and that would swear his Chapmans money into his own poc∣ket. Atten. All these causes of Swearing, so far as I can perceive, flow from the same Root as doe the Oaths them∣selves, even from a hardened and desperate heart. But pray shew me no how wicked cursing is to be distin∣guished from this kind of swearing. Wise: How Curs∣ing is di∣stinguished from Swear∣ing. Swearing, as I said, hath immediately to do with the Name of God, and it calls upon him to be witness to the truth of what is said: That is, if they that swear, swear by him. Some indeed swear by Idols, as by the Mass, by our Lady,
by Saints, Beasts, Birds, and other creatures; but the usual way of our profane ones in England, is to swear by God, Christ, Faith, and the like: But however, or by whatever they swear, Cursing is distinguished from Swearing thus. Of Cursing, what it is. To Curse, to Curse profanely, it is to sentence another or our self, for, or to evil: or to wish that some evil might happen to the person or thing under the Curse, unjustly. It is to sentence for, or to evil, (that is, without a cause): Thus Shimei cursed David: He sentenced him for and to evil unjustly, when he said to him, Come out,2 Sam. 16. 6, 7, 8. come out thou bloody man, and thou man of Belial. The Lord hath returned upon thee all the blood of the house of Saul, in whose stead thou hast reigned, and the Lord hath delivered the kingdom into the hand of Absalom thy son: and behold thou art taken in thy mischief, because thou art a bloody man. This David calls a grievous Curse.1 King. 2. 8. And behold, saith he to Solomon his Son, thou hast with thee Shimei a Ben∣jmite, which cursed me with a grievous curse in the day when I went to Maha∣naim.
But what was this Curse? Why, Eirst, It was a wrong sentence past pon David; Shimei called him Bloody man, man of Belial, when he was not. Secondly, He senten∣ced him to the evil that at present was upon him, for being a bloody man, (that is, against the house of Saul,) when that present evil over∣took David, for quite another thing. And we may thus apply it to the How the profane ones of our times Curse. profane ones of our times, who in their rage and envy, have little else in their mouths but a sentence against their Neighbour for, and to evil unjustly. How common is it with many, when they are but a little offended with one, to cry, Hang him, Damn him, Rogue! This is both a sentencing of him for, and to evil, and is in it self a grievous Curse. 2. The other kind of Cursing, is to wish that some evil might happen to, and overtake this or that person or thing: And this kind of Cursing, Job counted a grievous sin. I have not suffered (says he) my mouth to sin,Job 30. 31. by wishing a curse to his soul; or con∣sequently,
to Body or Estate. This then is a wicked cursing, to wish that evil might either befall another or our selves: And this kind of cursing young Badman accustomed himself unto. 1. He would wish that evil might befall others;Badmans way of Cursing. he would wish their Necks broken, or that their Brains were out, or that the Pox, or Plague was upon them, and the like: All which is a devilish kind of cursing, and is become one of the common sins of our age. 2. He would also as often wish a Curse to himself, saying, Would I might be hanged, or burned, or that the Devil might fetch me, if it be not so, or the like. We count theThe Dam∣me Blade. Damme Blades to be great Swearers; but when in their hellish fury they say, God-damme me, God perish me, or the like, they rather curse than swear; yea, curse them∣selves, and that with a Wish that Damnation might light upon them∣selves; which wish and Curse of theirs, in a little time, they will see accomplished upon them, even in Hell-sire, if they repent them not of their sins.
Atten. But did this young Badman accustom himself to such silthy kind of language? Wise. I think I may say, that nothing was more frequent in his mouth, and that upon the least pro∣vocation.Badman would curse his Father, &c. Yea he was so versed in such kind of language, that neither Father, nor Mother, nor Brother, nor Sister, nor Servant, no nor the very Cattel that his Father had, could escape these Curses of his. I say, that even the bruit Beasts when he drove them, or rid upon them, if they pleased not his humour, they must be sure to partake of his curse.Badman would curse his Fathers Cattel. He would wish their Necks broke, their Legs broke, their Guts out, or that the Devil might fetch them, or the like: and no marvel, for he that it so hardy to wish damnation, or other bad curses to himself, or dearest re∣lations; will not stick to wish evil to the silly Beast, in his madness. Atten. Well, I see still that th Badman was a desperate villain. But pray, Sir, since you have gone thus far, now shew me whence this evil of cursing ariseth, and also what dis∣honour it bringeth to God; for
easily discern that it doth bring dam∣nation to the soul. Wise. This evil of Cursing ariseth,Job 15. in general,Eccles. 7. 22. from the desperate wic∣kedness of the heart, but particular∣ly from, auses of Cursing. 1. Evic, which is, as I apprehend, the leading sin to Witch∣craft. 2. It also ariseth from Pride which was the sin of the fallen Angels; 3. It ariseth too from Scorn and con∣tempt of others: 4. But for a man to curse himself, must needs arise from desperate Madness. TheThe dis∣nour i brings to God. dishonour that it bringeth to God, is this. It taketh away from him his Authority, in whose power it is onely, to Bless and Curse; not to Curse wickedly, as Mr. Badman, but justly, and righteously, giving by his Curse, to those that are wicked, the due Reward of their deeds. Besides, these wicked men, in their wicked cursing of their Neigh∣bour, &c.Jam. 3. 9. do even Curse God him∣self in his handy work. Man is Gods Image, and to curse wickedly the Image of God, is to curse God him∣self. Therefore as when men wic∣kedly swear, they rend, and are
Gods Name, and make him, as much as in them lies, the avoucher and ap∣prover of all their wickedness; so he that curseth and condemneth in this sort his Neighbour, or that wish∣eth him evil, curseth, condemneth, and wisheth evil to the Image of God, and consequently judgeth and condemneth God himself. Suppose that a man should say with his mouth, I wish that the Kings Picture was burned; would not this mans so saying, nder him as an Enemy to the Person of the King? Even so it is with them that, by cursing, wish evil to their neighbour, or to themselves, they contemn the Image, even the Image of God himself. Atten. But do you think that the men that do thus, do think that they do so vilely, so abominably? Wise. The question is not what men do believe concerning their sin, but what Gods Word says of it: If Gods Word says that Swearing and Cursing are sins, though men should count them for Vertues, their re∣ward will be a reward for sin, to wit, the damnation of the soul.
ToSwearing and Cursing are sins a∣gainst the light of Nature. curse another, and to swear vainly and falsly, are sins against the Light of Nature. 1. To Curse is so, because, who∣so curseth another, knows, that at the same time he would not be so served himself. 2. To Swear also, is a sin against the same Law: for Nature will tell me, that I should not lie, and there∣fore much less Swear to confirm it. Yea,Gen. 31. the Heathens have looked upon Swearing to be a solemn Or∣dinance of God, and therefore not to be lightly or vainly used by men, though to confirm a matter of truth. Atten. But I wonder, since Curse∣ing and Swearing are such evils in the eyes of God, that he doth not make some Examples to others, for their committing such wickedness. Wise. Alas! so he has, a thou∣sand times twice told, as may be easily gathered by any observing people in every Age and Countrey. I could present you with several my self; but waving the abundance that might be mentioned, I will here present you withExamples of Gods a∣ger against them that Swear and Curse. two, One
was that dreadful Judgment of God upon one N. P.☞ at Wimbleton in Surrey; who, after a horrible si of Swearing at, and Cursing of some persons that did not please him, sud∣denly fell sick, and in little time died raving, cursing and swearing. But above all take that dreadful Story of Dorothy Mately an Inha∣bitant of Asbover in the County of Darby. This Dorothy Mately,☜ faith the Relator, was noted by the people of the Town to be a great Swearer, and Curser, and Lier, and Thief; (just like Mr. Badman.) And the labour that she did usually follow, was to wash the Rubbish that came forth of the Lead Mines, and there to get sparks of Lead-Ore; and her usual way of asserting of things, was with these kind of Imprecations: I would I might sink into the cart if it be not so, or I would God woul make the earth open and swallow up. Now upon the 23. of March, 1660. this Dorothy was washing of Ore upon the top of a steep Hill, about a quarter of a mile from As∣over, and was there taxed by a La
for taking of two single Pence out of his Pocket, (for he had laid his Breeches by, and was at work in his Drawers;) but she violently de∣nyed it, wishing, That the ground might swallow her up if she had them: She also used the same wicked words on several other occasions that day. Now one George Hodgkinson of Ashover, a man of good report there, came accidentally by where this Dorothy was, and stood still a while to talk with her, as she was washing her Ore; there stood also a little Child by her Tub-side, and another a distance from her, calling aloud to her to come away; where∣fore the said George took the Girle by the hand to lead her away to her that called her: But behold, they had not gone above ten yards from Dorothy, but they heard her crying out for help; so looking back, he saw the Woman, and her Tub, and Sive, twirling round, and sinking into the ground. Then said the man, Pray to God to pardon thy sin, for thou art never like to be seen alive any longer. So she and her Tub
twirled round, and round, till they sunk about three yards into the Earth, and then for a while staid. Then she called for help again, thinking, as she said, that she should stay there. Now the man though greatly amazed, did begin to think which way to help her, but imme∣diately a great stone which appeared in the Earth, fell upon her head, and brake her Skull, and then the Earth fell in upon her and covered her She was afterwards digged up, and found about four yards within ground, with the Boys two single Pence in her pocket, but her Tb and Sive could not be found. Atten. You bring to my mind a sad story,☞ the which I will relate unto you. The thing is this; About a bow-sho from where I once dwelt, there was a blind Ale-house, and the man that kept it had a Son whose name was Edward. This Edward was, as it were, an half-fool, both in his words, and manner of behaviour. To this blind Ale-house certain jovi compa∣nions would once or twice a week come, and this Ned, (for so they called him his Father would entertain his
guests withall; to wit, by calling for him to make them sport by his foo∣lish words and gestures. So when these boon blades came to this mans house, the Father would call for Ned: Ned therefore would come forth; and the villain was devilishly addicted to cursing, yea to cursing his Father and Mother, and any one else that did cross him. And because (though he was an half-fool) he saw that his practice was pleasing, he would do it with the more audaciousness. Well, when these brave fellows did come at their times to this Tippling-house (as they call it) to fuddle and make merry, then must Ned be called out; and because his Father was best acquainted with Ned, and best knew how to provoke him, therefore He would usually ask him such questions, or command him such business, as would be sure to provoke him indeed. Then would be (after his foolish man∣ner) Curse his Father most bitterly; at which the old man would laugh, (and so would the rest of the guests, as at that which pleased them best) still continuing to ask, that Ned still might be provoked to curse, that they
might still be provoked to laugh. This was the mirth with which the old man did use to entertain his guests. The curses wherewith this Ned did use to curse his father, and at which the old man would laugh, were these, and such like: The Devil take you; The Devil fetch you: He would also wish him Plagues and Destructions many. Well, so it came to pass, through the righteous Judgement of God, that Neds Wishes and Curses were in a lit∣tle time fulfilled upon his Father; for not many months passed between them after this manner, but the Devil did indeed take him, possess him, and also in few days carried him out of this world by death; I say, Satan did take him and possess him: I mean, so it was judged by those that knew him, and had to do with him in that his lamen∣table-condition. He could feel him like a live thing goe up and down in his body, but when tormenting time was come (as he had often tormenting its) then he would lye like an hard in the soft place of his chest, (I mean, I saw it so,) and so would rent and tare him, and make him roar til he died away.
I told you before, that I was an ear and eye witness of what I here say; and so I was. I have heard Ned in his Roguery, cursing his Father, and his Father laughing thereat most hear∣ily; still provoking of Ned to curse, that his mirth might be encreased. I saw his Father also, when he was pos∣sessed, I saw him in one of his fits, and saw his flesh (as 'twas thought) by the Devil, gathered up on an heap, about the bigness of half an Egge; to the unutterable torture and afflicton of the old man. There was also one Freeman, (who was more than an ordinary Doctor) sent for, to cast our this Devil; and I was there when he attempted to do it: The manner where∣of was this. They had the possessed into an out-room, and laid him on his belly upon a Form, with his head hang∣ing ouer the Forms end; then they bound him down thereto: which done, they set a pan of Coals under his and put something therein which great smoak; by this means ( said) to fetch out the Death. There therefore they kept the he was st thered in the  out of
him; at which Freeman was some∣what abashed, the man greatly af∣flicted, and I made to go away won∣dering and fearing. In a little time therefore that which possessed the man, carried him out of the World, accor∣ding to the cursed Wishes of his Son. And this was the end of this hellish mirth. Wise. These were all sad Judge∣ments. Atten. These were dreadful Judg∣ments indeed. Wise. Ai, and they look like the Threatning of that Text, (though chiefly it concerned Judas,) As he loved cursing,Psal. 109. 17, 18. so let it come unto him; as he delighted not in blessing, so let it be far from him. As he cloathed himself with cursing as with a garment, so let it come into his bowels like water, and as oyl into his bones. Atten. It is a fearful thing for Youth to be trained up in a way of Cursing and Swearing. Wise. Trained up in them! that I cannot say Mr. Badman was, for his Father hath oft-times in my hearing, bewailed the badness of
his Children, and of this naughty Boy in particular. I believe that the wickedness of his Children made him (in the thoughts of it) goe ma∣ny a Night with heavy heart to bed, and with as heavy an one to rise in the Morning. But all was one to his graceless Son, neither wholsom counsel, nor fatherly sorrow, would make him mend his Manners. A grievous thing to bring up Children wickedly. There are some indeed that do train up their Children to swear, curse, lye and steal, and great is the misery of such poor Children whose hard hap it is to be ushered into the world by, and to be under the tuition too of such ungodly Parents. It had been better for such Parents, had they not begat them, and better for such Children had they not been born. O! methinks for a Father or a Mother to train up a Child in that very way that leadeth to Hell and Damnation, what thing so hor∣rible! But Mr. Badman was not by his Parents so brought up. Atten. But methinks, since this Young Badman would not be ruled at home, his Father should have tryed what good could have been done of him.
abroad, by putting him out to some man of his acquaintance, that he knew to be able to command him, and to keep him pretty hard to some employ: So should he, at least, have been pre∣vented of time to do those wickednesses that could dot be done without time to do them in. Wise. Alas, his Father did so,Badman put to be an Apprentic. he put him out betimes to one of his own Acquaintance, and entreated him of all love, that he would take care of his Son, and keep him from extravagant wayes. His Trade also was honest and commodious; he had besides a full Employ therein, so that this young Badman had no vacant seasons nor idle hours yield∣ed him by his Calling, therein to take opportunities to do Badly: but all was one to him, as he had begun to be vile in his Fathers house, even so he continued to be when he was in the house of his Master. Atten. I have known some Chil∣dren, who though they have been very Bad at home, yet have altered much when they have been put out abroad; especially when they have fallen into a
Family, where the Governours there∣of have made conscience of maintain∣ing of the Worship and Service of God therein; but perhaps that might be wanting in Mr. Badmans Masters house. Wise. Indeed some Children do greatly mend, when put under other mens Roofs; but, as I said, this naughty boy did not so; nor did his badness continue, because he want∣ed a Master that both could and did correct it: For hisYoung Badmans Master, and his qualifi∣cations. Master was a very good man, a very de∣vout person; one that frequented the best Soul-means, that set up the Worship of God in his Family, and also that walked himself thereafter. He was also a man very meek and merciful, one that did never over∣drive young Badman in business, nor that kept him at it at unseasonable hours. Atten. Say you so! This is rare: I for my part can see but few that can parallel, in these things, with Mr. Badmans Master. Wise. Nor I neither, (yet Mr. Badman had such an one;) for, for the most part,A bad Ma∣ster, a bad∣thing. Master are now a
days such as mind nothing but their worldly concerns, and if Apprenti∣ces do but answer their commands therein, Soul and Religion may go whither they will. Yea, I much fear, that there have been many towardly Lads put out by their parents to such Masters, that have quite undone them as to the next world. Atten. The more is the pity. But pray, now you have touched upon this subject, shew me how many wayes a Master may be the ruin of his poor Apprentice. Wise. Nay, I cannot tell you of all the wayes, yet some of them I will mention. Suppose then that a towardly Lad be put to be an Apprentice with one that is reputed to be a Godly man, yet that Lad may be ruined many wayes; that is, if his Master be not circumspect in all things that respect both God and man, and that before his Apprentice. 1.How many ways a Ma∣ster may be the uin of an Appren∣e. If he be not moderate in the use of his Apprentice; if he drives him beyond his strength; if he holds him to work at unseasonable hours; if he will not allow him conve∣nient
time to read the Word, to Pray, &c. This is the way to de∣stroy him; that is, in those ten∣der beginings of good thoughts, and good beginnings about spiritual things. 2. If he suffers his house to be scattered with profane and wicked Books, such as stir up to lust, to wan∣tonness, such as teach idle, wanton, lascivious discourse, and such as has a tendency to provoke to profane drollery and Jesting; and lastly, such as tend to corrupt, and pervert the Doctrine of Faith and Holiness. All these things will eat as doth a canker, and will quickly spoil, in Youth, &c. those good beginnings that may be putting forth themselves in them. 3. If there be a mixture of Ser∣vants, that is, if some very bad be in the same place, that's a way also to undo such tender Lads; for they that are bad and sordid Servants, will be often (and they have an opportunity too, to be) distilling and fomenting of their profane and wicked words and tricks before them, and these will easily stick in
the flesh and minds of Youth, to the corrupting of them. 4. If the Master have one Guise for abroad, and another for home; that is, if his Religion hangs by in his house as his Cloak does, and he be seldom in it, except he be a∣broad; this, young beginners will take notice of, and stumble at. We say, Hedges have eyes, and little Pitchers have ears; and indeed, Children are great observers of what old∣ fol doe. Children make a greater inspe∣ction into the Lives of Fathers, Masters, &c. than oft-times they are aware of: And therefore should Masters be carefull, else they may soon destroy good beginnings in their Servants. 5. If the Master be unconscio∣nable in his Dealing, and trades with lying words; or if bad Com∣modities be avouched to be good, or if he seeks after unreasonable gain, or the like; his servant sees it, and it is enough to undo him. Elis Sons being bd before the con∣gregation,1 Sam. 2. made Man despise the sacrifices of the Lord. But these things by the y, only they may serve for a hint to Masters
to take heed that they take not Ap∣prentices to destroy their Souls. But young Badman had none of these hinderances;Badman had all ad∣vantages to be good, but continued Badman still. His father took care, and provided well for him, as to this: He had a good Master, he wanted not good Books, nor good Instruction, nor good Sermons, nor good Examples, no nor good fellow-Servants neither: but all would not doe. Atten. 'Tis a wonder, that in such a Family, amidst so many spiritual helps, nothing should take hold of his heart! What! not good Books, nor good Instructions, nor good Sermons, nor good Examples, nor good fellow-Servants, nor nothing do him good! Wise. You talk, he minded none of these things; nay, all these were All good things abo∣minable to Badman. abominable to him. 1. For good Books, they might lie in his Masters house till they rot∣ted for him, he would not regard to look into them; but, contrary∣wise, would get all the bad and abo∣minable Books that he could, as Romances, and books full of , evn such as imme∣diately t set all sleshly lusts
on fire. True, he durst not be known to have any of these, to his Master; therefore would he never let them be seen by him, but would keep them in close places, and per∣use them at such times, as yielded him fit opportunities thereto. 2. For good Instruction, he liked that, much as he liked good books; his care was to hear but little there∣of, and to forget what he heard as soon as 'twas spoken. Yea, I have heard some that knew him then, say, that one might evidently discern by the shew of his countenance and gestures, that good counsel was to him likeGood counsel to Badman lie Little-ease. little-ease, even a conti∣nual torment to him; nor did he ever count himself at liberty, but when farthest off of wholsom words. He would hate them that rebuked him,Prov. 9. 8. and count them his deadly ene∣mies.Chap. 15. 12. 3. For good Example; which was frequently set him by his Ma∣ster, both in Religious and Civil matters; these, young Badman would laugh at, and would also make a by∣word of them, when he came in place where he with safety could.
4. His Master indeed would make him go with him to Sermons, and that where he thought the best Preachers were, but this ungodly young man, what shall I say, was (I think) a Master of Art in all mischief; he had these wicked ways to hinder himself of hearing, let the Preacher thunder never so loud. 1.How Bad∣man used to behave himself at Sermons. His way was, when come into the place of hearing, to sit down in some corner, and then to fall fast asleep. 2. Or else to fix his adulterous eyes upon some beautifull Object that was in the place, and so all Sermon-while, therewith be feed∣ing of his fleshly lusts. 3. Or, if he could get near to some that he had observed would fit his humour, he would be whispering, gigling, and playing with them, till such time as Sermon was done. Atten. Why! he was grown to a prodigious height of wickedness. Wise. He was so, and that which aggravates all, was, this was his practice as soon as he was come to his Master, he was as ready at all these things, as if he had, before he
came to his Master, served an Ap∣prentiship to learn them. Atten. There could not but be ad∣ded (as you relate them) Rebellion to his sin. Methinks it is as if he had said, I will not hear, I will not re∣gard, I will not mind good, I will not mind, I will not turn, I will not be converted. Wise. You say true, and I know not to whom more fitly to compare him,The depe∣rate words of one H. S. who once was my Companion He was own brother to Ned, of whom you read before. than to that man,☞ who when I my self rebuked him for his wic∣kedness, in this great huff replied; What would the Devil do for com∣pany, if it was not for such as I. Atten. Why did you ever hear any man say so. Wise. Yes, that I did; and this young Badman was as like him, as an Egg is like an Egg. Alas! the Scripture makes mention of many that by their actions speak the same.Job 21. 14. They say unto God, Ie∣part from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways; Again, They refuse to hearken,Zech. 1. 11, 12, 13. and pull away their shoulder, and stop their ears; yea, they make their  hard as an Ada∣mant-stone, lest they should hear the
Law, and the words that the Lord of Host hath sent. What are all these but such as Badman, and such as the young man but now men∣tioned? That young man was my Play-fellow when I was solacing my self in my sins: I may make men∣tion of him to my shame; but he has a great many fellows. Atten. Young Badman was like him indeed, and he trod his steps, as if his wickedness had been his very Copy; I mean, as to his desperateness: fr had he not been a desperate one, he would never have made you such a reply, when you was rebuking of him for his sin. But when did you give him such a rebuke? Wise. A while after God had parted him and I, by Calling of me (as I hope) by his Grace, still leav∣ing him in his sins; and so far as I could ever gather, as he lived, so he died, even as Mr. Badman did: but we will leave him, and return again to our discourse. Atten. H, poor obstinate sinners! doe they think that God cannot be even with them? Wise. I do not know, what they
think, but I know that God hath said,Zech. 7. 13. That as He cried, and they would not hear, so they shall crie, and I will not hear, saith the Lord. Doubtless there is a time a coming, when Mr. Badman will crie for this. Atten. But I wonder that he should be so expert in wickedness, so son! alas, he was but a Stripling, I sup∣pose he was, as yet, not Twenty. Wise. No, nor Eighteen neither: but (as with Ishmael,Gen. 21. 9, 10. and with the Children that mocked the Prophet)2 King. 2. 23, 24. the seeds of sin did put forth them∣selves betimes in him. Atten. Well, he was as wicked a young man as commonly one shall hear of. Wise. You will say so, when you know all. Atten. All, I think here is a great▪ All; but if there is more behind, pray let us hear it. Wise. Why, then I will tell you, that he had not been with his Master much above a year and a half, but he cameBadmans Acquain∣tance. acquainted with three young Villains (who here shall be nameless,) that taught him to adde
to his sin, much of like kind; and he as aptly received their Instructi∣ons. One of them was chiefly given to Uncleanness, another to Drun∣kenness; and the third to Purloin∣ing, or stealing from his Master. Atten. Alas poor Wretch, he was bad enough before, but these, I sup∣pose, made him much worse. Wise. That they made him worse you may be sure of, for they taught him to be an Arch, a chief one in all their wayes. Atten. It was an ill hap that he ever came acquinted with them. Wise. You must rather word it thus.A Sign of Gods Anger. It was the Judgement of God that he did; that is, he came acquainted with them, through the anger of God. He had a good Master, and before him a good Fa∣ther: By these he had good coun∣sel given him for Months and Years together; but his heart was set upon mischief, he loved wickedness more than to do good, even untill his Iniquity came to be hateful; therefore, from the anger of God it was, that these companions of his, and he, did at last so acquaint to∣gether.
Sayes Paul, They did not like to retain God in their knowledge; and what follows?Rom. 1. 28. wherefore, God gave them over, or up to their own hearts lusts. And again, As for such as turn aside to their own crooked wayes,Psal. 125. . the Lord shall lead them forth with the workers of iniquity. This therefore was Gods hand upon him; that he might be destroyed, be damned;2 Thess. 2. 10, 11, 12. because he received not the love of the Truth that he might be saved. He chose his Delusions and Deluders for him, even the company of base men,Prov, 12. 20. of Fools, that he might be destroyed. Atten. I cannot but think indeed,The Devils Decoys. that it is a Great Judgment of God for a man to be given up to the com∣pany of vile men; for what are such but the Devils * Decoyes, even those by whom he drawes the simple into his Net? A Whoremaster, a Drunk∣ard, a Thiefe, what are they but the Devils baits, by which he catcheth others? Wise. You say right; but this young Badman was no simple one, if by simple, you mean one in∣structed; for he had often good coun∣sel
given him: but if by simple, you mean, him that is a Fool as to the true Knowledge of, and Faith in Christ, then he was a simple one indeed: for he chose death, rather than life, and to live in continual opposition to God, rather than to be Reconciled unto him; accor∣ding to that saying of the wise man; The fooles hated knowledge,Prov. 1. 29. and did not choose the Fear of the Lord: and what Judgement more dreadfull can a fool be given up to, than to be delivered into the hands of such men, that have skill to do nothing, but to ipen sin, and hasten its finishing unto damnation? And therefore men should be afraid of offending God, because he can in this manner pu∣nish them for their sins.☜ I knew a man that once was, as I thought, hopefully awakened about his Con∣dition; yea, I knew two that were so awakened; but in time they be∣gan to draw back, and to incline again to their lusts; wherefore, God gave them up to the compa∣ny of three or four men, that in less than three years time brought them roundly to the Gallows,This was done at Bedord. where
they were hanged like Dogs, be∣cause they refused to live like ho∣nest men. Atten. But such men do not be∣lieve, that thus to be given up of God, is in Judgement and anger; they rather take it to be their liberty, and do count it their happiness; they are glad that their Cord is loosed, and that the reins are in their neck; they are glad that they may sin with∣out controul, and that they may choose such company as can make them more expert in an evil way. Wise. Their Judgement is there∣fore so much the greater, because thereto is added blindness of Mind, and hardness of Heart in a wicked way. They are turned up to the way of Death, but must not see to what place they are going: They must go as the Ox to the slaughter, and as the Fool to the Correction of the Stocks,Prov. 7. 12, 13. till a Dart strikes through their Liver, not knowing that it is for their life. This, I say, makes their Judgement double, they are given up of God, for a while to sport themselves with that which will assuredly make them mourn atProv. 5. 11.
last, when their flesh and their body is consumed. These are those that Peter speaks of, that shall utterly perish in their own corruptions; these, I say,2 Pet. 2. 12, 13. who count it pleasure to ryot in the day-time, and that sport themselves with their own deceivings, are, as natural bruit beasts, made to be taken and destroyed. Atten. Well, but I pray now con∣cerning these three Villains that were young Badmans companions: Tell me more particularly how he carried it then. Wise. How he carried it! why, he did as they. I intimated so much before, when I said, they made him an arch, a chief one in their ways. First, He became a Frequenter of Badman becomes a frequenter of Taverns. Taverns and Tippling-houses, and would stay there untill he was even as drunk as a Beast. And if it was so, that he could not get out by day, he would, be sure, get out by night. Yea, he became so common a Drunkard, at last, that he was ta∣ken notice of to be a Drunkard even by all. Atten. This was Swinish, for Drunkenness is so beastly a sin, a sin
so much against Nature, that I won∣der that any that have but the ap∣pearance of Men, can give up them∣selves to so beastly (yea, worse tha beastly) a thing. Wise. ☞ It is a Swinish vanity in∣deed. A Story for a Drunk∣ard. I will tell you another Sto∣ry. There was a Gentleman that had a Drunkard to be his , and coming home one night much abuld with Beer, his Ma∣ster saw it. Well (quoth his Master within himself,) I will let thee a∣lone to night, but to morrow morn∣ing I will convince thee that thou art worse than a Beast, by the beha∣viour of my Horse. So when morn∣ing was come, he bids his man goe and water his Horse, and so he did; but coming up to his Master, he commands him to water him again▪ so the fellow rid into the water the second time, but his masters horse would now drink no more, so the fellow came up and and told his Ma∣ster. Then said his Master, drunken lot, thou art far worse tha my Horse, he will drink but to sa∣tisfie nature, but thou wilt drink to the abuse of nature; he will drink
but to refresh himself, but thou to thy hurt and dammage; He will drink, that he may be more service∣able to his Master, but thou, till thou art uncapable of serving either God or Man. O thou Beast, how much art thou worse than the horse that thou ridest on. Atten. Truly I think that his Ma∣ster served him right; for in doing as he did, he shewed him plainly, as he said, that he had not so much govern∣ment of himself as his horse had of him∣self, and consequently that his beast did live more according to the Law of his nature by far, than did his man. But pray go on with what you have further to say. Wise. Why, I say, that there are Four evils ttend ∣kenness. four things, which if they were well considered, would make drunken∣ness to be abhorred in the thoughts of the Children of men. 1. It greatly rendeth to impove∣rish and beggar a man.Pov. 2. 2, 21. The Drunk∣ard, says Solomon, shall come to po∣verty. Many that have begun the world with Plenty, have gone out of it in Rags, through drunkenness. Yea, many Children that have been
born to good Estates, have yet been brought to a Flail & a Rake, through this beastly sin of their Parents. 2. This sin of Drunkenness, it bringeth upon the Body, many, great, and incurable Diseases, by which Men do in little time come to their end, and none can help them. So,Eccles. 7. 17. because they are overmuch wic∣ked, therefore they dye before their time. 3. Drunkenness, is a sin that is often times attended with abun∣dance of other evils. Who hath woe? Who hath sorrow?Prov. 23. 29, 3. Who hath conten∣tion? Who hath babblings? Who hath wounds without cause? Who hath redness of the eyes? They that tarry long at the Wine, they that go to seek mixt wine. That is, the Drunkard. 4. By Drunkennnes, Men do often times shorten their dayes; goe out of the Ale-house drunk, and break their Necks before they come home. Instances not a few might be given of this, but this is so mani∣fest, a man need say nothing. Atten. The fifth evil the worst. But that which is worse than all is,1 Cor. 6. 10. it also prepares men for everlasting burnings.
Wise. Yea, and it so stupifies and besotts the soul, that a man that is far gone in Drunkenness, is hardly ever recovered to God. Tell me, when did you see an old drunkard converted? No, no, such an one will sleep till he dies, though he sleeps on the top of aProv. 23. 34, 35. Mast, let his dangers be never so great, and Death and damnation never so near, he will not be awaked out of his sleep. So that if a man have any respect either to Credit, Health, Life or Salvation, he will not be a drunken man. But the truth is, where this sin gets the upper hand, men are, as I said be∣fore, so intoxicated and bewitched with the seeming pleasures, and sweetness thereof; that they have neither heart nor mind to think of that which is better in it self; and would, if imbraced, do them good. Atten. You said that drunkenness tends to poverty, yet some make them∣selves rich by drunken bargains. Wise. An Ob∣jection an∣swered. I said so, because the Word says so. And as to some mens getting thereby, that is indeed but rare, and base: yea, and base will be the end of such gettings. The
Word of God is against such wayes, and the curse of God will be the end of such doings. An Inheritance may sometimes thus be hastily gotten at the beginning, but the end there∣of shall not be blessed. Hark what the Prophet saith;Habak. 2. 9, 10, 11, 12. Ver. 5, 15. Wo to him that covereth an evil covetousness, that he may set his nest on high. Whether he makes drunkenness, or ought else, the engine and decoy to get it; for that man doth but consult the shame of his own house, the spoiling of his family, and the damnation of his Soul; for that which he getteth by working of iniquity, is but a getting by the devices of Hell; Therefore he can be no gainer neither for him∣self or family, that gains by an evil course. But this was one of the sins that Mr. Badman was addicted to af∣ter he came acquainted with these three fellows, nor could all that his Master could do break him of this Beastly sin. Atten. But where, since he was but an Apprentice, could be get Mo∣ney to follow this practice, for drun∣kenness, as you have intimated, is a very costly sin.
Wise. His MasterBadmans Masters  paid for is drun∣kenness. paid for all. For, (as I told you before) as he learned of these three Villains to be a Beastly Drunkard; so he learned of them to pilfer and steal from his Master. Sometimes he would fell off his Masters Goods, but keep the Money, that is when he could; also sometimes he would beguile his Master by taking out of his Cash∣box: and when he could do neither of these, he would convey away of his Masters wares, what he thought would be least missed, and send or carry them to such and such houses, where he knew they would be laid up to his use, and then appoint set times there, to meet and make mer∣ry with these fellowes. Atten. This, was as bad, nay, I think, worse than the former; for by thus doing, he did, not only run him∣self under the wrath of God, but has endangered the undoing of his Master and his Familie. Wise. Sins go not alone, but fol∣low one the other as do the links of a Chain; he that will be a drunkard, must have money either of his own, or of some other mans; either of his
Fathers, Mothers, Masters, or at the high-way, or some way. Atten. I fear that many an honest man is undone by such kind of ser∣vants. Wise. I am of the same mind with you, butA Caution for Masters. this should make the dealer the more wary what kind of Servants he keeps, and what kind of Apprentices he takes. It should also teach him to look well to his Shop himself, also to take strict account of all things that are bought and sold by his Servants. The Masters neglect herein may embolden his servant to be bad, and may bring him too in short time to rags and a morsel of Bread. Atten. I am afraid that there is uch of this kind of pilfering among servants in these bad dayes of ours. Wise. Now, while it is in my mind,☞ I will tell you a story. When I was in prison, there came a woman to me that was under a great deal of trouble. So I asked her (she being a stranger to me) what she had to say to me. She said, she was afraid she should be damned. I asked her the cause of those fears. She told me
that she had sometime since lived with a Shop-keeper at Wellingborough, and had robbed his box in the Shop several times of Money, to the value of more than now I will say; and pray, says she, tell me what I shall do. I told her, I would have her go to her Master, and make him satisfaction: She said, she was afraid; I asked her why? She said, she doubted he would hang her. I told her, that I would intercede for her life, and would make use of other friends too to do the like; But she told me, she durst not venture that. Well, said I, shall I send to your Master, while you abide out of sight, and make your peace with him, before he sees you; and with that, I asked her her Masters name. But all that she said in answer to this, was, Pray let it alone till I come to you again. So away she went, and neither told me her Masters Name, nor her own: This is about ten or twelve years since, and I never saw her again. I tell you this story for this cause; to confirm your fears, that such kind of servants too many there be; and that God makes them sometimes
like old Tod, of whom mention was made before, (through the terrors that he layes upon them) to betray themselves. I could tell you of another,☞ that came to me with a like relation con∣cerning her self, and the robbing of her Mistress; but at this time let this suffice. Atten. But what was that other Villain addicted to, I mean, young Bad∣mans third companion? Wise. Badmans third com∣panion ad∣dicted to Uncleanness. Uncleanness. I told you before, but it seems you forgot. Atten. Right, it was Vncleanness. Vncleanness is also a filthy sin. Wise. It is so; and yet it is one of the most reigning sins in our day. Atten. So they say, and that too among those that one would think had more wit, even among the great ones. Wise. The more is the pity: for usually Examples that are set by them that are great and chief, Sins of great men dangerous. spread sooner, and more univer∣sally, then do the sins of other men; yea, and when such men are at the head in transgressing, sin walks with a bold face through the Land. As
Jeremiah saith of the Prophets, so may it be said of such, From them is profaneness gone forth into all the land; that is, with bold and auda∣cious face, Jer. 23. 15. Atten. But pray let us return a∣gain to Mr. Badman and his compa∣nions. You say one of them was very vile in the commission of Vnclean∣ness. Wise. Yes, so I say; not but that he was a Drunkard and also Thiev∣ish, but he was most arch in this sin of Uncleanness: This Roguery was his Master-piece, for he was a Ringleader to them all in the beast∣ly sin of Whoredom. He was also best acquainted with such houses where they were, and so could rea¦dily lead the rest of his Gang unto them. The Strumpets also, because they knew this young Villain, would at first discover themselves in all their whorish pranks to those that he brought with him. Atten. That is a deadly thing: I mean, it is a deadly thing to young men, when such beastly queans, shall, with words and carriages that are openly tempting, discover them∣selves
unto them; It is hard for such to escape their Snare. Wise. That is true, therefore the Wise mans counsel is the best:Prov. 5. 8. Come not near the door of her house; for they are (as you say) very tempting, as is seen by her in the Proverbs. I looked (says the Wise man) through my casement,Chap. 7. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. and behold among the simple ones, I discerned a young man void of understanding, passing through the streets near her corner, and he went the way to her house: In the twilight, in the evening, in the black and dark night. And behold, there met him a Woman with the attire of an hariot, and subtle of heart; (Signs of a whoe. she is loud and stubborn, her feet abide not in her house. Now she is without, now she is in the street, and lieth in wait at every corner.) So she caught him, and kiss'd him, and with an impu∣dent face said unto him: I have peace-offerings with me; this day have I payed my vows. Therefore came I forth to meet thee, diligently to seek thy face, and I have found thee. I have decked my bed with coverings of Tapestry, with carved works, with fine Linnen of Aegypt:
I have perfumed my bed with Myrrhe, Aloes, and Cinnamon; come let us take our fill of love untill the Morning, let us solace our selves with loves. Here was a bold Beast: And indeed, the very eyes, hands, words and ways of such, are all snares and bands to youthful, lustful fellows: And with these was young Badman great∣ly snared. Atten. This sin of Vncleanness is mightily cried out against both by Moses,The sin of  agains. the Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles; and yet, as we see, for all that, how men run headlong to it! Wise. You have said the truth, and I will adde, that God, to hold men back from so filthy a sin, has set such a stamp of his Indignation upon it, and commanded such evil effects to follow it, that were not they that use it bereft of all Fear of God, and love to their own health, they could not but stop and be a∣fraid to commit it. For, besides the eternal Damnation that doth at∣tend such in the next world, (for these have no Inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ and of God
Ephes. 5.) the evil effects thereof in this world are dreadfull. Atten. Pray shew me some of them, that as occasion offereth it self, I may shew them to others for their good. Wise. So I will.What evs attend this sin. 1. It bring∣eth a man (as was said of the sin be∣fore) to want and poverty; for by means of a Whorish woman, a man is brought to a piece of bread.Prov. 6. 26. The rea∣son is, for that an Whore will not yield without hire; and men when the Devil and Lust is in them, and God and his Fear far away from them, will not stick, so they may accomplish their desire, to lay their Signet,Gen. 39. 8. their Bracelets, and their Stuff to pledge, rather than miss of the fulfilling of their lusts. 2. Again, by this sin men diminish their strength, and bring upon themselves, even upon the Body, a multitude of Diseases. This King Lemuel's Mother warned him of. What my Son,Prov. 3 . said the, and what the son of my omb, and wt the Son of my Vows: Give not thy strength unto women, nor thy ways to that which destroy∣ Kins. This sin is destructive to
the Body. Give me leave to tell you another story.A Story for uncle in persons to take notice of. I have heard of a great man that was a very un∣clean person,☜ and he had lived so long in that sin, that he had almost lost his sight. So his Physicians were sent for, to whom he told his Disease; but they told him, that they could do him no good, unless he would forbear his Women. Nay then, said he, farewell sweet Sight. Whence observe, that this sin, as I said, is destructive to the Body; and also, that some men be so in love therewith, that they will have it, though it destroy their body. Atten. Paul says also, that he that sins this sin, sins against his own Body. But what of that? he that will run the hazard of eternal Dam∣nation of his Soul, but he will commit this sin, will for it run the hazard of destroying his Body. If young Bad∣man feared not the Damnation of his Soul, do you think that the conside∣ration of impairing of his Body, would have  him there from? Wise. You say true. But yet, methinks, there are still such bad effects follow, often, upon the com∣mission
of it, that if men would con∣sider them, it would put, at least, a stop to their career therein. Atten. What other evil effects at∣tends this sin. Wise. Outward shame and dis∣grace, and that in these particulars:More ev attend ts . First, There often follows this foul sin, the Foul Disease, now called by us the Pox. A disease so nauseous and stinking, so infections to the whole body (and so intailed to this sin) that hardly are any common with unclean Women, but they have more or less a touch of it to their shame. Atten. That is a foul disease in∣deed:☞ I knew a man once that rotted away with it; and another that had his Nose eaten off, and his Mouth almost quite sewed up thereby. Wise. It is a Disease, that where it is, it commonly declares, that the cause thereof is Uncleanness. It declares to all that behold such a man, that he is an odious, a beastly, unclean person. This is that strange punishment that Job speaks of, that is appointed to seize on these work∣ers of Iniquity.
Atten. Then it seems you think that the strange punishment that Job there speaks of, should be the foul disease. Wise. I have thought so indeed, and that for this reason: We see that this Disease is entailed as I may say, to this most beastly sin, nor is there any disease so entailed to any other sin, as this to this. That this is the sin to which the strange Punishment is entailed, you will easily perceive when you read the Text. I made a covenant with mine eyes, said Job, why should I think upon a Maid? For what por∣tion is there (for that sin) from above, and what Inheritance of the Almighty from on high? And then he answers himself; Is not destruction to the wicked, and a strange punishment to the workers of iniquity? This strange Punishment is the Pox. Also I think that this foul Disease is that which Solomon intends, when he saith, (speaking of this unclean and beastly creature)Prov. 6. 33. A wound and dishonour shall he get, and his re∣proach shall not be turned away. A Punishment  calls it, a Wound
and Dishonour, Solomon calls it; and they both do set it as a Remark upon this sin; Job calling it a strange punishment, and Solomon a reproach that shall not be turned away from them that are common in it. Atten. What other things follow upon the commission of this beastly sin? Wise. Why, often-times it is attended with Murder, with the murder of the Babe begotten on the defiled bed. How common it is for the Bastard-getter and Bastard-bearer, to consent together to mur∣der their Children, will be better known at the day of Judgement; yet something is manifest now. ☞ I will tell you another story. An ancient man, one of mine acquain∣tance, a man of good credit in our Countrey, had a Mother that was a Midwise: who was mostly imploy∣ed in laying great persons. To this womans house, upon a time, comes a brave young Gallant on horse∣back, to fetch her to lay a young Lady. So she addresses herself to go with him; wherefore, he takes her up behind him, and away they
ride in the night. Now they had not rid far, but the Gentleman litt off his horse, and taking the old Midwife in his arms from the horse, turned round with her several times, and then set her up again; then he got up, and away they went till they came at a stately house, into which he had her, and so into a Chamber where the young Lady was in her pas: He then bid the Midwife do her Office, and she de∣manded help, but he drew out his Sword and told her, if she did not make speed to do her Office with∣out, she must look for nothing but death. Well, to be short, this old Midwife laid the young Lady, and a fine sweet. Babe she had; Now there was made in a Room hard by, a very great Fire: so the Gentle∣man took up the Babe, went and drew the coals from the stock, cast the Child in, and covered it up, and there was an end of that. So when the Midwife had done her work, he paid her well for her pains, but shut her up in a dark room all day, and when night came, took her up behind him again, and carried her away,
till she came almost at home; then he turned her round, and round, as he did before, aud had her to her house, set her down, bid her Fare∣well, and away he went: And she could never tell who it was. This Story the Midwifes son, who was a Minister, told me; and also protested that his mother told it him for a truth. Atten. Murder doth often follow indeed, as that which is the fruit of this sin: but sometimes God brings even these Adulterers, and Adulte∣resses to shameful ends. I heard of ☞ one (I think, a Doctor of Physick) and his Whore, who had had three or four Bastards betwixt them, and had murdered them all, but at last themselves were hanged for it, in or near to Colchester. It came out after this manner: The Whore was so af∣flicted in her conscience about it, that she could not be quiet untill she had made it known: Thus God many times makes the actors of wickedness their own accusers, and brings them by their own tongues to condigne punish∣ment for their own sins. Wise. There has been many such
instances, but we will let that pass. I was once in the presence of a Wo∣man, a married woman, that lay sick of the sickness whereof she died; and being smitten in her con∣science for the sin of Uncleanness, which she had often committed with other men, I heard her (as she lay upon her Bed) cry out thus:☜ I am a Whore, and all my Children are Bastards: And I must go to Hell for my sin; and look, there stands the Devil at my beds feet to receive my Soul when I die. Atten. These are sad storyes, tell no more of them now, but if you please shew me yet some other of the evil ef∣fects of this beastly sin. Wise. This sin is such a snare to the Soul, that unless a miracle of Grace prevents, it unavoidably pe∣rishes in the enchanting and be∣witching pleasures of it. This is manifest by these, and such like Texts. The Adulteress will hunt for the precious life.Prov. 6. 26. Whoso committeth adul∣tery with a woman, lacketh under∣standing,Chap. 23. 27. and he that doth it destroys his own soul. An Whore is a deep
ditch,Prov. 2. 18, 19. and a strange woman is a narrow pit. Her house inclines to death, and her pathes unto the dead. None that go in unto her return a∣gain, neither take they hold of the path of life.Chap. 7. 2, 26, 27. She hath cast down many wounded; yea many strong men have been slain by her, her house is the way to Hell, going down to the Cham∣bers of Death. Atten. These are dreadful sayings, and do shew the dreadful state of those that are guilty of this sin. Wise. Verily so they doe. But yet that which makes the whole more dreadful, is, That men are given up to this sin, because they are abhorred of God, and because abhorred, therefore they shall fall into the commission of it; and shall live there. The mouth (that is, the flattering Lips) of a strange woman is a deep pit,Prov. 22. 14. the abhorred of the Lord shall fall therein. Therefore it saith again of such, that they have none Inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ and of God.Ephes. 5. 5. Atten. Put all together, and it is a dreadful thing to live and die in this transgression.
Wise. True. But suppose, that in∣stead of all these Judgments, this sin had attending of it all the felicities of this life, and no bitterness, shame, or disgrace mixed with it, yet one hour in Hell will spoil all. O! this Hell, Hell-fire, Damnation in Hell, it is such an inconceivable pu∣nishment, that were it but throughly believed, it would nip this sin, with others, in the head. But here is the mischief, those that give up them∣selves to these things, do so harden themselves in Unbelief and Atheism about the things, the punishments that God hath threatned to inflict upon the committers of them, that at last they arrive to, almost, an absolute and firm belief that there is no Judg∣ment to come hereafter: Else they would not, they could not, no not attempt to commit this sin, by such abominable language as some do. I heard of one that should say to his Miss, when he tempted her to the committing of this sin, If thou ☜ wilt venture thy Body,Desperate words. I will venture my Soul. And I my self heard ano∣ther say, when he was tempting of a Maid to commit uncleanness with
him, (it was in Olivers dayes) That if she did prove with Child, he would tell her how she might escape punishment, (and that was then somewhat severe,) Say (saith he) when you come before the Judge, ☜ That you are with Child by the Holy Ghost. I heard him say thus, and it greatly afflicted me; I had a mind to have accused him for it before some Magistrate; but he was a great man, and I was poor, and young: so I let it alone, but it troubled me very much. Atten. 'Twas the most horrible thing that ever I heard in my life. But how far off are these men from that Spirit and Grace that dwelt in Joseph! Wise. Right; when Joseph's Mi∣stress tempted him,Gen. 39. 10. yea tempted him daily;Of chaste Joseph. yea, she laid hold on him, and said with her Whores forehead, Come lie with me, but he refused: He hearkned not to lie with her, or to be with her. Mr. Badman would have taken the op∣portunity. And a little to comment upon this of Joseph.
1. Here is a Miss, a great Miss, the Wife of the Captain of the Guard, some beautiful Dame, I'le warrant you. 2. Here is a Miss won, and in her whorish Affections come over to Joseph, without his speaking of a word. 3. Here is her unclean Desire made known; Come lie with me, said she. 4. Here was a fit opportunity. There was none of the men of the house there within. 5. Joseph was a young man, full of strength, and therefore the more in danger to be taken. 6. This was to him, a Tempta∣tion, from her, that lasted days. 7. And yet Joseph refused, 1. Her daily Temptation; 2. Her daily Solicitation: 3. Her daily Provo∣cation, heartily, violently and con∣stantly. For when she caught him by the Garment, saying, Lie with me, he left his Garment in her hand, and gat him out. Ay, and although contempt, treachery, slander, accu∣sation, imprisonment, and danger of death followed, (for an Whore ca∣reth
not what mischief she does, when she cannot have her end) yet Joseph will not defile himself, sin against God, and hazard his own eternal salvation. Atten. Blessed Joseph! I would thou hadst more fellows! Wise. Mr. Badman has more fel∣lows than Joseph, else there would not be so many Whores as there are: For though I doubt not but that that Sex is bad enough this way, yet I verily believe that many of them are made Whores at first by the flatteries of Badmans fellows. Alas!Many are made whores by promises of Marri∣age, &c. there is many a woman plun∣ged into this sin at first even by pro∣mises of Marriage. I say, by these promises they are flattered, yea, forced into a consenting to these Villanies, and so being in, and growing hardened in their hearts, they at last give themselves up, even as wicked men do, to act this kind of wickedness with greediness. But Joseph you see, was of another mind, for the Fear of God was in him. I will, before I leave this, tell you here two notable storyes; and I
wish Mr. Badmans companions may hear of them. They are found in Clarks Looking-glass for Sinners; and are these. Mr. Cleaver (says Mr. Clark) re∣ports of one whom he knew,Clarks Looking-glass for Sinners, Chap. 2. Pag. 12. that had committed the act of Uncleanness, whereupon he fell into such horror of Conscience that he hanged him∣self; leaving it thus written in a pa∣per. Indeed, (saith he) I acknow∣ledge it to be utterly unlawful for a man to kill himself, but I am bound to act the Magistrates part, because the punishment of this sin is death. Clark doth also in the same page make mention of two more, who as they were committing Adultery in London, were immediately struck dead with fire from Heaven, in the very Act. Their bodyes were so found, half burnt up, and sending out a most loathsom savour. Atten. These are not able storyes in∣deed. Wise. So they are, and I suppose they are as true as notable. Atten. Well, but I wonder, if young Badmans Master knew him to be such a Wretch, that he would suf∣fer him in his house.
Wise. They liked one another even asBadman and his Ma∣ster at her one another. fire and water doe. Young Badmans wayes were odious to his Master, and his Masters wayes were such as young Badman could not endure. Thus in these two, was fulfilled that saying of the Holy Ghost:Prov. 23. 27. An unjust man is an abomi∣nation to the just, and he that is up∣right in the way is abomination to the wicked. The good mans wayes, Mr. Bad∣man could not abide, nor could the good man abide the bad wayes of his base Apprentice. Yet would his Master, if he could, have kept him, and also have learnt him his trade. Atten. If he could! why he might, if he would, might he not? Wise. Alas,Young Bd∣man  a∣way  Mter. Badman ran away from him once and twice, and would not at all be ruled. So the next time he did run away from him, he did let him go indeed. For he gave him no occasion to run away, except it was by holding of him as much as he could (and that he could do but lit∣tle) to good and honest rules of life. And had it been ones own case, one should have let him go. For what
should a man do, that had either regard to his own Peace, his Chil∣drens Good, or the preservation of the rest of his servants from evil, but let him go? Had he staid, the house of Correction had been most fit for him, but thither his Master was loth to send him, because of the love that he bore to his Father. An house of correction, I say, had been the fittest place for him, but his Master let him go. Atten. He ran away, you say, but whither did he run? Wise. Why,He gets a new Master like himself. to one of his own trade, and also like himself. Thus the wicked joyned hand in hand, and there he served out his time. Atten. Then, sure, he had his hearts desire, when he was with one so like himself. Wise. Yes. So he had, but God gave it him in his anger. Atten. How do you mean? Wise. I mean as before,A sign of God anger upon young Badman. that for a wicked man to be by the Providence of God, turned out of a good mans doors, into a wicked mans house to dwell, is a sign of the Anger of God. For God by this, and such Judge∣ments,
says thus to such an one: Thou wicked one, thou lovest not me, my wayes, nor my people; Thou castest my Law and good Counsel behinde thy back: Come, I will dispose of thee in my wrath; thou shalt be turned over to the ungodly, thou shalt be put to school to the Devil, I will leave thee to sink and swim in sin, till I shall visit thee with Death and Judgment. This was therefore another Judg∣ment that did come upon this young Badman. Atten. You have said the truth, for God by such a Judgment as this, in ef∣fect says so indeed; for he takes them out of the hand of the just, and binds them up in the hand of the wicked, and whither they then shall be carried, a man may easily imagin. Wise. It is one of the saddest to∣kens of Gods anger that happens toDemonstra∣tion of Gods anger to∣wards him. such kind of persons: And that for several reasons. 1. Such an one, by this Judg∣ment, is put out out of the way, and from under the means which ordina∣rily are made use of to do good to the soul.Gen. 18. 18, 19. For a Family where God∣liness is professed, and practised, is
Gods Ordinance, the place which he has appointed to teach young ones the way and fear of God. Now to be put out of such a Family into a bad, a wicked one, as Mr. Badman was, must needs be in Judgment, and a sign of the anger of God. For in ungodly Families men learn to forget God, to hate goodness, and to estrange themselves from the wayes of those that are good. 2. In Bad Families, they have continually fresh Examples, and also incitements to evil, and fresh encou∣ragements to it too. Yea moreover, in such places evil is commended, praised, well-spoken of, and they that do it, are applauded; and this, to be sure, is a drowning Judge∣ment. 3. Such places are the very haunts and Walks of the infernal Spirits, who are continually poysoning the Cogitations and Minds of one or other in such Families, that they may be able to poyson others. Therefore observe it, usually in wicked Fami∣lies, some one, or two, are more arch for wickedness then are any other that are there. Now such
are Satans Conduit-pipes; for by them he conveighs of the spawn of Hell, through their being crafty in wickedness, into the Ears and Souls of their Companions. Yea, and when they have once conceived wickedness, they travel with it, as doth a woman with Child, till they have brought it forth; Behold, he travelleth with iniquity,Psal. 7. 14. and hath con∣ceived mischief, and brought forth falshood. Some men, as here is in∣timated in the Text, and as was hinted also before, have a kind of mystical, but hellish copulation with the Devil, who is the Father, and their Soul the Mother of sin and wic∣kedness; and they, so soon as they have conceived by him,Jam. 1. 15. finish, by bringing forth sin, both it, and their own damnation. Atten. to put their Children in∣to . How much then doth it concern those Parents that love their Children, to see, that if they go from them, they be put into such Families as be good, that they may learn there be times to eschew evil, and to follow that which is good? Wise. It doth concern them in∣deed; and it doth also concern
themMasters should also beware what Servants they enter∣tain. that take Children into their Families, to take heed what Chil∣dren they receive. For a man may soon by a bad Boy, be dammaged both in his Name, Estate, and Fa∣mily, and also hindred in his Peace and peaceable pursuit after God and godliness; I say, by one such Ver∣min as a wicked and filthy Appren∣tice. Atten. True, for one Sinner de∣stroyeth much good, and a poor man is better than a Lier. But many times a man cannot help it; for such as at the beginning promise very fair, are by a little time proved to be very Rogues, like young Badman. Wise. That is true also, but when a man has done the best he can to help it, he may with the more con∣fidence expect the Blessing of God to follow, or he shall have the more peace, if things go contrary to his desire. Atten. Well, but did Mr. Bad∣man and his Master agree so well? I mean his last Master, since they were Birds of a Feather, I mean, since they were so well met for wic∣kedness.
Wise. This second Master,Young Bad∣man and his second Ma∣ster cannot agree. was, as before I told you, bad enough, but yet he would often fall out with young Badman his Servant, and chide, yea and sometimes beat him too, for his naughty doings. Atten. What! for all he was so bad himself! This is like the Pro∣verb, The Devil corrects Vice. Wise. I will assure you, 'tis as I say. For you must know, that Badmans wayes suited not with his Masters gains. Could he have done as the Damsel that we read of Acts 16.* Acts 16. 16 did, to wit, fill his Masters Purse with his badness, he had certainly been his White-boy, but it was not so with young Badman; and there∣fore, though his Master and he did suit well enough in the main, yet in this and that point they differed. Reasons of their disa∣greeing. Young Badman was for neglect∣ing of his Masters business, for going to the Whore-house, for beguiling of his Master, for attempting to de∣bauch his Daughters, and the like: No marvel then if they disagreed in these points. Not so much for that his Master had an antipathy a∣gainst the fact it self, for he could
do so when he was an Apprentice; but for that his servant by his sin made spoil of his Commodities, &c. and so damnified his Master. Had (as I said before) young Badmans wickedness, had only a tendency to his Masters advantage; as could he have sworn, lied, cou∣sened, cheated, and defrauded custo∣mers for his Master, (and indeed sometimes he did so) but had that been all that he had done, he had not had, no not a wry word from his Master: But this was not al∣ways Mr. Badmans way. Atten. That was well brought in, even the Maid that we read of in the Acts, and the distinction was as clear betwixt the wickedness, and wickedness of servants. Wise. Alas! men that are wic∣ked themselves, yet greatly hate it in others, not simply because it is wickedness, but because it oppo∣seth their interest. Do you think that that Maids master would have been troubled at the loss of her, if he had not lost, with her, his gain: No, I'le warrant you; she might have gone to the Devil for him:
But when her master saw that the hope of his gain was gone,Acts 16. 17, 18, 19, 20. then, then he fell to persecuting Paul. But Mr. Badmans master did sometimes lose by Mr. Badmans sins, and then Bad∣man and his master were at odds. Atten. Alas poor Badman! Then it seems thou couldest not at all times please thy like. Wise. No, he could not, and the reason I have told you. Atten. But do not bad Masters condemn themselves in condemning the badness of their servants. Wise. Yes;Ro. 14. 22. in that they condemn that in another which they either have,Bad Masters condemn themselves when they for badness beat their Bad ser∣vants. or do allow in themselves. And the time will come, when that very sentence that hath gone out of their own mouths against the sins of others, themselves living and taking pleasure in the same, shall return with violence upon their own pates. The Lord pronounced Judgment against Baasha,1 King 16. 7. as for all his evils in general, so for this in special, because he was like the house of Jeroboam, and yet killed him. This is Mr. Bad∣mans Masters case, he is like his man, and yet he beats him. He is like
his man, and yet he rails at him for being bad. Atten. But why did not young Bad∣man run away from this Master, as he ran away from the other? Wise. He did not.Why young Badman did not run a∣way from this Master though he did beat him. And if I be not mistaken, the reason why, was this. There was Godliness in the house of the first, and that young Badman could not endure. For fare, for lodging, for work, and time, he had better, and more by this Ma∣sters allowance, than ever he had by his last; but all this would not con∣tent, because Godliness was promo∣ted there. He could not abide this praying, this reading of Scriptures, and hearing, and repeating of Ser∣mons: he could not abide to be told of his transgressions in a sober and Godly manner. Atten. There is a great deal in the Manner of reproof, wicked men both can, and cannot abide to hear their transgressions spoken against. Wise. There is a great deal of dif∣ference indeed.Why Bad∣man could hear his last Masters re∣proof ter than he could the first. This last Master of Mr. Badmans, would tell Mr. Bad∣man of his sins in Mr. Badmans own dialect; he would swear, and
curse, and damn, when he told him of his sins, and this he could bear better, than to be told of them after a godly sort. Besides, that last Master would, when his passions and rage was over, laugh at and make mer∣ry with the sins of his servant Bad∣man: And that would please young Badman well. Nothing offended Badman but blows, and those he had but few of now, because he was pret∣ty well grown up. For the most part when his Master did rage and swear, he would give him Oath for Oath, and Curse for Curse, at least secret∣ly, let him go on as long as he would. Atten. This was hellish living. Wise. 'Twas hellish living indeed:By what means Bad∣man  com∣pleated in his wicked¦ness. And a man might say, that with this Master, young Badman com∣pleated himself yet more and more in wickedness, as well as in his trade: for by that he came out of his time, what with his own inclination to sin, what with his acquaintance with his three companions, and what with this last Master, and the wickedness he saw in him; he became a sinner in grain. I think he had a Bastard laid
to his charge before he came out of his time. Atten. Well,Badman out of his time. but it seems he did live to come out of his time, but what did he then? Wise. Why, he went home to his Father, and he like a loving and tender-hearted Father received him into his house. Atten. And how did he carry it there? Wise. Why,He goes home to his Father. the reason why he went home, was, for Money to set up for himself, he staied but a little at home, but that little while that he did stay,He refrains himself for Money. he refrained himself as well he could, and did not so much disco∣ver himself to be base, for fear his Father should take distaste, and so should refuse, or for a while forbear to give him money. Yet even then he would have his times, and companions, and the fill of his lusts with them, but he used to blind all with this, he was glad to see his old acquaintance, and they as glad to see him, and he could not in civility but accomodate them with a bottle or two of Wine, or a dozen or two of Drink.
Atten. And did the old man give him money to set up with? Wise. Yes, above two hundred pounds. Atten. Therein, I think, the old man was out. Had I been his Father, I would have held him a little at slaves-end, till I had had far better proof of his manners to be good; (for I perceive that his Father did know what a naughty boy he had been, both by what he used to do at home, and be∣causeSeverity what it in∣ines to. he changed a good Master for a bad, &c.) He should not therefore have given him money so soon. What if he had pinched a little, and gone to Journey-work for a time, that he might have known what a penny was, by his earning of it? Then, in all pro∣bability, he had known better how to have spent it: Yea, and by that time perhaps, have better considered with himself, how to have lived in the world. Ay, and who knows but he might have come to himself with the Prodigal, and have asked God and his Father forgiveness for the villanies that he had committed against them. Wise. If his Father could also have blessed this manner of dealing to
him, and have made it effectual for the ends that you have propounded; then I should have thought as you. But alas, alas, you talk as if you never knew,We are bet∣ter at giving then taking good Coun∣sel. or had at this present forgot what the bowels and compassions of a Father are. Why did you not serve your own son so? But 'tis evi∣dent enough, that we are better at giving good counsel to others, than we are at taking good counsel our selves. But mine honest neighbour, suppose that Mr. Badmans Father had done as you say, and by so do∣ing had driven his son to ill courses, what had he bettered either himself or his son in so doing? Atten. That's true, but it doth not follow, that if the Father had done as I said, the son would have done as you suppose.This is to be considered. But if he had done as you have supposed, what had he done worse than what he hath done alrea∣dy? Wise. He had done bad enough, thats' true. But suppose his Father had given him no Money, and sup∣pose that young Badman had taken a pett thereat, and in an anger had gone beyond Sea, and his Father
had neither seen him, nor heard of him more. Or suppose that of a mad and headstrong stomach he had gone to the High-way for money, and so had brought himself to the Gallows, and his Father and Family to great contempt, or if by so doing he had not brought himself to that end, yet he had added to all his wickedness, such and such evils besides: And what comfort could his Father have had in this? Besides, when his Father had done for him what he could, with desire to make him an honest man, he would then, whether his son had proved honest or no, have laid down his head with far more peace, than if he had taken your Counsel. Atten. Nay I think I should not a been forward to have given advice in the cause; but truly you have given me such an account of his villanies, that the hearing thereof has made me angry with him. Wise. In an angry mood we may soon out-shoot ourselves, but poor wretch, as he is, he is gone to his place. But, as I said, when a good Father hath done what he can
for a bad Child, and that Child shall prove never the better, he will lie down with far more peace, than if through severity, he had driven him to inconveniencies. I remember that I have heard of a good woman, that had (as this old man) a bad and ungodlyA good woman and her bad son. son, and she prayed for him, counselled him, and carried it Motherly to him for several years together; but still he remained bad. At last, upon a time, after she had been at prayer, as she was wont, for his conversion, she comes to him, and thus, or to this effect, begins again to admonish him. Son, said she, Thou hast been and art a wicked Child, thou hast cost me many a prayer and tear, and yet thou remainest wicked. Well, I have done my duty, I have done what I can to save thee; now I am satisfied, that if I shall see thee damned at the day of Judgment, I shall be so far off from being grieved for thee, that I shall rejoyce to hear the sentence of thy damnation at that day: And it con∣verted him. I tell you, that if Parents carry it lovingly towards their Children,
mixing their Mercies with loving Rebukes, and their loving Rebukes with Fatherly and Motherly Com∣passions, they are more likely to save their Children, than by being churlish and severe toward them: but if they do not save them, if their mercy doth them no good, yet it will greatly ease them at the day of death, to consider; I have done by love as much as I could, to save and deliver my child from Hell. Atten. Well I yield. But pray let us return again to Mr. Badman: You say, that his Father gave him a piece of money that he might set up for himself. Wise. Yes, his Father did give him a piece of money,Mr. Badman sets up for himself, and quickly runs to the lands end. and he did set up, and almost as soon set down a∣gain: for he was not long set up, but by his ill managing of his matters at home, together with his extrava∣gant expences abroad, he was got so far into debt, and had so little in his shop to pay, that he was hard put to it to keep himself out of prison. But when his Creditors understood that he was about to marry, and in a fair way to get a rich Wife, they
said among themselves, We will not be hasty with him, if he gets a rich Wife he will pay us all. Atten. But how could he so quickly run out, for I perceive 'twas in little time, by what you say? Wise. 'Twas in little time indeed, I think he was not above two years and an half in doing of it: but the reason is apparent;The reason of his runing out. for he being a wild young man, and now having the bridle loose before him, and be∣ing wholly subjected to his lusts and vices, he gave himself up to the way of his heart, and to the sight of his eye, forgetting that for all these things God will bring him to Judgment;Eccle. 11, 9. and he that doth thus, you may be sure, shall not be able long to stand on his leggs. Besides, he had now an addition ofNew com∣panions. new companions; companions you must think, most like himself in Manners, and so such that cared not who sunk, if they themselves might swim. These would often be haunting of him, and of his shop too when he was absent. They would commonly egg him to the Ale-house, but yet make him Jack∣pay-for-all;
They would be borrow∣ing also money of him, but take no care to pay again, except it was with more of their company, which also he liked very well; and so his poverty came like one that travelleth, and his want like an armed man. But all the while they studied his temper;Mr. Bad∣mans tem∣per. he loved to be flattered, praised and commended for Wit, Manhood and Personage; and this was like stroking him over the face. Thus they Collogued with him, and got yet more and more into him, and so (like Horse-leaches) they drew away that little that his father had given him, and brought him quickly down, almost to dwell next dore to the begger. Atten. Then was the saying of the wise man fulfilled,Pro 29. 3. He that keepeth company wth harlots,Chap. 13. 20. and a companion of fools, shall be destroyed. Wise. Ay, and that too, A com∣panion of riotous persons shameth his father;Pro. 28. 7. For he, poor man, had both grief and shame, to see how his son (now at his own hand) be haved himself in the enjoyment of those good things, in and under the
lawfull use of which he might have lived to Gods glory, his own com∣fort, and credit among his neigh∣bours. But he that followeth vain persons,Pro. 28. 29. shall have poverty enough. The way that he took, led him di∣rectly into this condition; for who can expect other things of one that follows such courses? Besides, when he was in his Shop, he could not a∣bide to be doing; He was naturally given to Idleness: He loved to live high, but his hands refused to labour; and what else can the end of such an one be, but that which the wise man saith?Pro. 23. 21. The Drunkard and the Glut∣ton shall come to poverty, and drowsi∣ness shall cloath a man with rags. Atten. But now, methinks, when he was brought thus low, he should have considered the hand of God that was gone out against him, and should have smote upon the breast, and have returned. Wise. Consideration,His Behavi∣our under his decays. good con∣sideration was far from him, he was as stout and proud now, as ever in all his life, and was as high too in the pursuit of his sin, as when he was in the midst of his fulness; only
he went now like a tyred Jade, the Devil had rid him almost off of his leggs. Atten. Well, but what did he do when all was almost gone? Wise. Two things were now his play.How he co∣vered his de∣cayes. 1. He bore all in hand by Swearing, and Cracking and Lying, that he was as well to pass, as he was the first day he set up for him∣self, yea that he had rather got than lost; and he had at his beck some of his Companions that would swear to confirm it as fast as he. Atten. This was double wickedness, 'twas a sin to say it, and another to swear it. Wise. That's true, but what evil is that that he will not doe, that is left of God, as I believe Mr. Bad∣man was? Atten. And what was the other thing? Wise. Why,Badman is for a rich Wife. that which I hinted before, he was for looking out for a rich Wife: and now I am come to some more of his invented, devi∣sed, designed, and abominable Ro∣guery, such that will yet declare him to be a most desperate sinner.
The thing was this: A Wife he wanted, or rather Money; for as for a woman, he could have Whores enow at his whistle. But, as I said, he wanted Money, and that must be got by a Wife,Badman has a godly Maid in his eye. or no way; nor could he so easily get a Wife nei∣ther, except he became an Artist at the way of dissembling; nor would dissembling do among that people that could dissemble as well as he.He seeks to get her, why, and how. But there dwelt a Maid not far from him, that was both godly, and one that had a good Portion, but how to get her, there lay all the craft. Well,He calls his Companions together, and they advise him how to get her. he calls a Council of some of his most trusty and cun∣ning Companions, and breaks his mind to them; to wit, that he had a mind to marry: and he also told them to whom; But, said he, how shall I accomplish my end, she is Religious, and I am not? Then one of them made reply, saying, Since she is Religious, you must pre∣tend to be so likewise, and that for some time before you go to her: Mark therefore whither she goes daily to hear, and do you go thither also; but there you must be sure to
behave your self soberly, and make as if you liked the Word wonder∣ful well; stand also where she may see you, and when you come home, be sure that you walk the street very soberly, and go within sight of her: This done for a while, then go to her, and first talk of how sorry you are for your sins, and shew great love to the Religion that she is of; still speaking well of her Preachers and of her godly acquaintance, be∣wailing your hard hap, that it was not your lot to be acquainted with her and her fellow-Professors sooner; and this is the way to get her. Also you must write down Sermons, talk of Scriptures, and protest that you came a wooing to her, only because she is Godly, and because you should count it your greatest happiness if you might but have such an one: As for her Money, slight it, it will be never the further off, that's the way to come soonest at it, for she will be jealous at first that you come for her Money; you know what she has, but make not a word about it. Do this, and you shall see if you do not intangle the Lass.
Thus was the snare laid for this poor honest Maid, and she was quick∣ly catched in his pit. Atten. Why, did he take this coun∣sel? Wise. Did he!Badman goes to the Damosel as his Counsel advised him yes, and after a while, went as boldly to her, and that under a Vizzard of Religion, as if he had been for Honesty and Godliness, one of the most sincere and upright-hearted in England. He observed all his points, and fol∣lowed the advice of his Counsel∣lers, and quickly obtained her too; for natural parts he had, he was tall, and fair, and had plain, but very good Cloaths on his back; and his Religion was the more easily at∣tained; for he had seen something in the house of his Father, and first Master, and so could the more rea∣dily put himself into the Form and Shew thereof. So he appointed his day,Badmans comple∣ment, his lying com∣plement. and went to her, as that he might easily do, for she had neither father nor mother to oppose. Well, when he was come, and had given her a civil Comple∣ment, to let her understand why he was come, then he began and told
her, That he had found in his heart a great deal of love to her Person; and that, of all the Damosels in the world he had pitched upon her, if she thought fit, to make her his beloved wife. The reasons, as he told her, why he had pitched upon her were, her Religious and personal Excellen∣cies; and therefore intreated her to take his condition into her tender and loving consideration. As for the world, quoth he, I have a very good trade, and can maintain my self and Family well, while my wife sits still on her seat; I have got thus, and thus much already, and feel money come in every day, but that is not the thing that I aim at, 'tis an honest and godly Wife. Then he would present her with a good Book or two, pretend∣ing how much good he had got by them himself. He would also be often speaking well of godly Mini∣sters, especially of those that he per∣ceived she liked, and loved most. Be∣sides, he would be often telling of her, what a godly Father he had, and what a new man he was also become himself; and thus did this treacherous Dealer, deal with this honest and
good Girl, to her great grief and sor∣row, as afterward you shall hear. Atten. But had the maid no friend to looke after her? Wise. Her Father and Mother were dead, and that he knew well enough, and so she was the more easily overcome by his naughty ly∣ing tongue. But if she had never so many friends,Neglect of Counsel a∣bout mar∣riage dan∣gerous she might have been beguiled by him. It is too much the custom of young people now, to think themselves wise enough to make their own Choyce, and that they need not ask counsel of those that are older and also wiser then they: but this is a great fault in them, and many of them have paid dear for it. Well, to be short, in little time Mr. Badman obtains his desire, gets this honest Girl and her money,Badman ob∣tains his de∣sire, is mar∣ried, &c. is married to her, brings her home, makes a Feast, entertains her royally, but her Portion must pay for all. Atten. This was wonderfull deceit∣full doings, a man shall seldom hear of the like. Wise. By this his doing, he shew∣ed how little he feared God, and
what little dread he had of his Judg∣ments. For all this carriage,His carriage judged un∣godly and wicked. and all these words were by him preme∣ditated evil, he knew he lyed he knew he dissembled; yea, he knew that he made use of the name of God, of Religion, good Men, and good Books, but as a stalking-Horse, thereby the better to catch his game. In all this his glorious pretense of Re∣ligion, he was but a glorious painted Hypocrite, and hypocrisie is the highest sin that a poor carnal wretch can attain unto; it is also a sin that most dareth God, and that also bringeth the greater damnation. Now was he a whited Wall, now was he a painted Sepulchre;Mat. 23. now was he a grave that appeared not; for this poor honest,The erat aertion that quickly happened to Badmens wife. godly Damosel, little thought that both her peace, and comfort, and estate, and liberty, and person, and all, were going to her burial, when she was going to be married to Mr. Badman; And yet so it was, she enjoyed her self but little afterwards; she was as if she was dead and buried, to what she enjoyed before. Atten. Certainly some wonderfull
Judgment of God must attend and overtake such wicked men as these. Wise. You may be sure that they shall have Judgment to the full, for all these things, when the day of Judgment is come. But as for Judg∣ment upon them in this life, it doth not alwayes come, no not upon those that are worthy thereof. They that tempt God are delivered,Mala. 3. 15. and they that work wickedness are set up:Expectation of Judg∣ment is for such things. But they are reserved to the day of wrath, and then for their wickedness, God will repay them to their faces. The wicked is reser∣ved to the day of destruction,Job. 21. 30, 31, 32. they shall be brought forth to the day of wrath; who shall declare his way to his face? and who shall repay him what he hath done? yet shall he be brought to the grave, and remain in the tomb. That is, ordinarily they escape Gods hand in this life, save only a few Examples are made, that others may be cautioned, and take warn∣ing thereby: But at the day of Judgment they must be rebuked for their evil with the lashes of devour∣ing fire. Atten. Can you give me no examples
of Gods wrath upon men that have acted this tragical wicked deed of Mr. Badman. Wise. Yes; Hamor and Shechem,An example of Gods ang∣er on such as have heretofore committed this sin of Mr. Bad∣man. and all the men of their City, for at∣tempting to make God and Religi∣on the stalking-Horse to get Jacobs daughters to wife, were together slain with the edge of the sword. A Judgment of God upon them,Gen. 34. no doubt, for their dissembling in that matter. All manner of lying and dissembling is dreadfull, but to make God and Religion a Dis∣guise, therewith to blind thy Dissi∣mulation from others eyes, is high∣ly provoking to the Divine Ma∣jesty. I knew one that dwelt not far off from our Town,☞ that got him a wife as Mr. Badman got his; but he did not enjoy her long: for one night as he was riding home (from his com∣panions, where he had been at a neighbouring Town) his horse threw him to the ground, where he was found dead at break of day; fright∣fully and lamentably mangled with his fall, and besmeared with his own blood.
Atten. Well, but pray return a∣gain to Mr. Badman, how did he car∣ry it to his wife, after he was married to her? Wise. Nay, let us take things a∣long as we go. He had not been married but a little while, but his Creditors came upon him for their money:After Bad∣man is mar∣ried, his Creditors come upon him, and his wives Portion pays for that which his whores were feast∣ed with be∣fore he was married. He deferred them a little while, but at last things were come to that point, that pay he must, or must do worse; so he appointed them a time, and they came for their money, and he payed them down with her money before her eyes, for those goods that he had profusely spent among his Whores long before, (besides the portion that his Father gave him) to the va∣lue of two hundred pounds. Atten. This beginning was bad; but what shall I say? 'twas like Mr. Badman himself. Poor woman, this was but a bad beginning for her, I fear it filled her with trouble enough, as I think such a beginning would have done, one, perhaps much stron∣ger than she. Wise. Trouble, ay, you may be sure of it, but now 'twas too late to
repent, she should have looked bet∣ter to her self,Now she reaps the Fruits of her unadvised∣ness. when being wary would have done her good; her harms may be an advantage to others, that will learn to take heed thereby; but for her self, she must take what follows, even such a life now as Mr. Badman her Husband will lead her, and that will be bad enough. Atten. This beginning was bad, and yet I fear it was but the begin∣ning of bad. Wise. You may be sure,Now Bad∣man has got him a wise by Religion, he hangs it by as a thing out of use, and enter∣tains his old Compani∣ons. that it was but the beginning of badness, for other evils came on apace; as for instance: it was but a little while after he was married, but he hangs his Religion upon the hedge, or rather dealt with it as men deal with their old Cloths, who cast them off, or leave them to others to wear, for his part he would be Religions no longer. Now therefore he had pulled off his Vizzard, and began to shew himself in his old shape, a base, wic∣ked, debauched fellow, (and now the poor woman saw that she was betrayed indeed;) now also his old
Companions begin to flock about him, and to haunt his house and Shop as formerly: And who with them but Mr. Badman? and who with him again but they? Now those good people that used to company with his Wife,He drives good com∣pany from his wife. began to be amated and discouraged; also he would frown and gloat upon them, as if he abhorred the ap∣pearance of them: so that in little time he drove all good company from her, and made her st solitary by her self.He goes to his Whores. He also began now to go out a nights to those Drabs who were his Familiars before, with whom he would stay somtimes till midnight, and sometimes till almost morning, and then would come home as drunk as a Swine; and this was the course of Mr. Badman. Now, when he came home in this case, if his wife did but speak a word to him, about where he had been, and why he had so abused himself,He rails at his wife. though her words were spo∣ken in never so much meekness and love, then she was Whore, and Bitch, and Jade; and 'twas well if she miss'd his fingers and heels.
Sometimes also he would bring his Puncks home to his house, and wo be to his wife when they were gone, if she did not entertain them with all varieties possible, and also carry it lovingly to them. Thus this good woman was made by Badman her Husband, to possess nothing but disappointments as to all that he had promised her, or that she hoped to have at his hands. But that that added pressing weight to all her sorrow,He seeks to force his wife from her Religi∣on. was, that, as he had cast away all Religion himself, so he attempted, if possible, to make her do so too. He would not suffer her to go out to the Preach∣ing of the Word of Christ, nor to the rest of his Appointments, for the health and salvation of her Soul: he would now taunt at,He mocks at her Preach∣ers. and reflecting∣ly speak of her Preachers; and would receive, yea raise scandals of them, to her very great grief and affliction. Now she scarce durst go to an honest Neighbours house, or have a good Book in her hand; specially when he had his companions in his house, or had got a little drink in
his head. He would also, when he perceived that she was dejected, speak tauntingly,He mocks his wife in her dejecti∣ons. and mockingly to her in the presence of his Compa∣nions, calling of her his Religious Wife, his demure Dame, and the like; also he would make a sport of her among his wanton ones a∣broad. If she did ask him (as sometimes she would) to let her go out to a Sermon,He refuses to let her go out to good com∣pany. he would in a currish man∣ner reply, Keep at home, keep at home, and look to your business, we cannot live by hearing of Sermons. If she still urged that he would let her goe, then he would say to her, Goe if you dare. He would also charge her with giving of what he had to her Ministers, when, vile wretch, he had spent it on his vain Companions before. This was the life that Mr. Bad∣mans good wife lived, within few months after he had married her. Atten. This was a disappointment indeed. Wise. A disappointment indeed, as ever, I think, poor woman had. One would think that the Knave.
might a little let her have had her will, since it was nothing but to be honest, and since she brought him so sweet, so lumping a Portion, for she brought hundreds into his house: I say, one would think he should have let her had her own will a little, since she desired it only in the Service and Worship of God: but could she win him to grant her that? no,She gets out sometimes by stealth. not a bit if it would have saved her life. True, sometimes she would steal out when he was from home, on a Journey, or among his drunken companions, but with all privacy imaginable, and, poor woman, this advantage she had, she carried it so to all her Neigh∣bours, that, though many of them were but carnal, yet they would not betray her, or tell of her going out to the Word, if they saw it, but would rather endeavour to hide it from Mr. Badman himself. Atten. This carriage of his to her, was enough to break her heart. Wise. It was enough to do it in∣deed, yea it did effectually do it. It killed her in time, yea it was all the time a killing of her. She would
often-times when she sate by her self,Her repen∣tance and complaint. thus mournfully bewail her condition: Wo is me that I sojourn in Meshech,Psal. 120. and that I dwell in the tents of Kedar; my soul hath long time dwelt with him that hateth peace. O what shall be given unto thee, thou deceitful tongue? or what shall be done unto thee, thou false tongue? I am a Woman grieved in spirit, my Husband has bought me and sold me for his lusts: 'Twas not me, but my Money that he wanted: O that he had had it, so I had had my liberty! This she said, not of comtempt of his Person, but of his Conditions, and because she saw that by his hy∣pocritical tongue, he had brought her not only almost to beggery, but robbed her of the Word of God. Atten. It is a deadly thing,The evil of being une∣qually yoak∣ed together. I see, to be unequally yoaked with Vnpe∣lievers. If this woman had had good Husband, h happlly might they have lived together! Such  one would have prayed for her, her, and also would have encouraged her in the Faith, and ways of God: But now poor crur, instead of this, there is nothing but the quite contra∣ry.
Wise. It is a deadly thing indeed, and therefore, by the Word of God his people are forbid to be joyned in marriage with them.Cor. 6. 13. Be not, saith it, unequally yoaked together with un∣believers; for what fellowship hath righteousness with unrighteousness? and what communion hath light with darkness? And what Concord hath Christ with Belial? or what part hath he that believeth with an Infidel? And what agreement hath the Tem∣ple of God with Idols? There can be no agreement where such Match∣es are made, even God himself hath declared the contrary, from the be∣ginning of the world. I (says he) will put enmity betwixt thee and the woman,Gen. 3. 15. betwixt thy seed and her seed. Therefore he saith in another place, they can mix no better than Iron and Clay.Deut. 2. 43. I say, they cannot agree, they cannot be one, and therefore they should be aware at first, and not lightly receive such into their affections. God has often made such Matches bitter, especially to his own. Such matches are, as God said of Elic's Sons that were spared, to con∣sume the eyes, and to grieve the heart.
Oh the wailing, and lamentation that they have made that have been thus yoaked, especially if they were such as would be so yoaked, against their light, and good counsel to the contrary. Atten. Alas! he deluded her with his tongue, and feigned reformation. Wise. Well,Good coun∣sel to those godly mai that are to marry. well; she should have gone more warily to work: what if she had acquainted some of her best, most knowing, and godly friends therewith? what if she had engaged a Godly Minister or two to have talked with Mr. Badman? Also, what if she had laid wait round about him, to espie if he was not otherwise behind her back than he was before her face? And besides, I verily think (since in the multitude of Counsellors there is safety) that if she had acquainted the Congregation with it, and desired them to spend some time in prayer to God about it, and if she must have had him, to have received him as to his godli∣ness, upon the Judgment of others, rather than her own, (she knowing them to be Godly and Judicious, and unbiassed men) she had had
more peace all her life after; than to trust to her own poor, raw, wo∣manish Judgment, as she did. Love is blind, and will see nothing amiss, where others may see an hundred faults. Therefore I say, she should not have trusted to her own thoughts in the matter of his Goodness. As to his Person, there she was fittest to judge, because she was to be the person pleased, but as to his Godliness, there the Word was the fittest Judge, and they that could best understand it, because God was therein to be pleased. I wishA caution to young Maidens. that all young Maidens will take heed of being beguiled with flattering words, with feigning and lying speech∣es, and take the best way to pre∣serve themselves from being bought and sold by wicked men, as she was; lest they repent with her, when (as to this) repentance will do them no good, but for their unad∣visedness goe sorrowing to their graves. Atten. Well, things are past with this poor woman, and cannot be call∣ed back, let othersLet Mr. Badmans wife be your . beware, y her fortunes, lest they also fall into her distress.
Wise. That is the thing that I say, let them take heed, lest for their unadvisedness they smart, as this poor woman has done. And ah! methinks, that they that yet are single persons, and that are tempted to marry to such as Mr. Badman; would, to inform, and warn them∣selves in this matter, before they intangle themselves, but goe to some that already are in the snare, and ask them how it is with them, as to the suitable, or unsuita∣bleness of their marriage, and desire their advice. Surely they would ring such a peal in their ears about the uneqality, unsuitableness, disad∣vantages, and disquietments, and sins that attend such marriages, that would make them beware as long as they live. But the bird in the air, knows not the notes of the bird in the snare, untill she comes thither her self: Besides, to make up such marriages, Satan, and carnal Rea∣son, and Lust, or at least Inconside∣rateness, has the chiefest hand; and where these things bear sway, de∣signs, though never so destructive, will goe headlong on: and there∣fore
I fear, that but little warning will be taken by young Girls, at Mr. Badmans wives affliction. Atten. But are there no disswasive arguments to lay before such, to prevent their future misery. Wise. Yes: There is the Law of God, that forbiddeth marriage with unbelievers. These kind of mar∣riages also are condemned even by irrational creatures. 1. It is forbid∣den by the Law of God both in the Old Testament and in the New. 1. In the Old.Deut. 7. 4, 5. Thou shalt not make Marriages with them; Thy daughter thou shalt not give unto his son, nor his daughter shalt thou take unto thy son, Deut. 7. 4, 5. 2. In the New Testament it is forbidden.1 Cor. 7. 39. Be not unequally yoaked together with unbe∣lievers;2 Cor. 6. 14, 15, 16. Let them marry to whom they will,Rules for those that are to mar∣ry. only in the Lord. Here now is a prohibition, plainly forbidding the Believer to marry with the Unbeliever, therefore they should not do it. Again, these un∣warrantable Marriages, are, as I may so say, condemned by irratio∣nal creatures, who will not couple but with their own sort: Will the
Sheep couple with a Dog, the Par∣tridge with a Crow, or the Feasant with an Owl? No, they will strictly tye up themselves to those of their own sort only: Yea, it sets all the world a wondring, when they see or hear the contrary. Man only is most subject to wink at, and allow of these unlawful mixtures of men and women; Because man only is a sinful Beast, a sinful Bird, there∣fore he, above all, will take upon him by rebellious actions to answer, or rather to oppose and violate the Law of his God and Creator; nor shall these, or other Interogatories, [What fellowship? what concord? what agreement? what communion can there be in such Marriages?] be counted of weight, or thought worth the answering by him. But further.If you love your Sous take heed. The dangers that such do commonly run themselves into, should be to others a disswasive argument to stop them from doing the like: for besides the distresses of Mr. Badmans wife, many that have had very hopefull beginnings for heaven, have by vertue of the mis∣chiefs that have attended these un∣lawfull
marriages, miserably and fearfully miscarried. Soon after such marriages, Conviction (the first step toward heaven) hath ceased; Pray∣er (the next step toward Hea∣ven) hath ceased; Hungrings and thirstings after salvation (another step towards the Kingdom of Hea∣ven) have ceased. In a word, such marriages have estranged them from the Word, from their godly and faithful Friends, and have brought them again into carnal company, among carnal Friends, and also into carnal Delights, where, and with whom they have in conclusion both sinfully abode, and miserably pe∣rished. And this is one reason why God hath forbidden this kind of unequal marriages. For they, saith he, mean∣ing the ungodly, will turn away thy son from following me,Deut. 7. that they may serve other Gods, so will the anger of the Lord be kindled against you, and destroy you suddenly. Now mark, there were some in Israel, that would, notwithstanding this prohi∣bition, venture to marry to the Hea∣thens and Unbelievers: But what
followed? They served their Idols, they sacrificed their Sons and their Daughters unto Devils. Thus were they defiled with their own works, and went a whoring with their own Inventions: Therefore was the wrath of the Lord kindled against his people,Psal. 106. 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40. insomuch that he ab∣horred his own Inheritance. Atten. But let's return again to Mr. Badman; had be any Children by his wife? Wise. Yes, seven. Atten. I doubt they were but badly brought up. Wise. One of them loved its Mo∣ther dearly,Badmans Children that he had by this good womn. and would constantly harken to her voice. Now that Child she had the opportunity to in∣struct in the Principles of Christian Religion, and it became a very gracious child. But that child Mr. Badman could not abide, he would seldom afford it a pleasant word, but would scowl and frown upon it, speak churlishly and doggedly to it, and though as to Nature it was the most feeble of the seven, yet it oftenest felt the weight of its Fa∣thers fingers. Three of his Children
did directly follow his steps, and began to be as vile as (in his youth) he was himself. The other that re∣mained became a kind of mungrel Professors, not so bad as their Fa∣ther, nor so good as their Mother, but were betwixt them both. They had their Mothers Notions, and their Fathers Actions, and were much like those that you read of in the Book of Nehemiah;Nehem. 13. 24. These children spake half in the speech of Ashdod, and could not speak in the Jews language, but according to the language of each people. Atten. What you say in this mat∣ter, is observable, and if I take not my mark amiss, it often happeneth after this manner where such unlaw∣ful Marriages are contracted. Wise. It sometimes doth so,How the un∣godly Fa∣ther and godly M∣ther doe strive for the Children that God doth give them. and the reason, with respect to their Parents, is this: Where the one of the Parents is godly, and the other ungodly and vile, (though they can agree in begetting of Children, yet) they strive for their Children when they are born. The godly Parent strives for the child, and by Pray∣ers, Counsel and good Examples,
labours to make it holy in body and soul, and so fit for the Kingdom of Heaven; but the 'ungodly would have it like himself, wicked and base and sinful; and so they both give instructions accordingly: in∣structions did I say? yea, and Ex∣amples too, according to their minds. Thus the godly, as Hannah, is pre∣senting her Samuel unto the Lord: but the ungodly, like them that went before them, are for offering their Children to Moloch, to an Idol, to sin, to the Devil, and to Hell. Thus one harkeneth to the Law of their Mother, and is preserved from destruction, but as for the other, as their Fathers did, so do they. Thus did Mr. Badman and his wife part some of their Children betwixt them; but as for the other three that were as 'twere Mungrels, be∣twixt both, they were like unto those that you read of in Kings, They feared the Lord,2 King. 17. but served their own Idols. They had, as I said, their Mothers Notions, and I will adde, Profession too; but their Fa∣thers Lusts, and something of his Life. Now their Father did not like
them, because they had their Mo∣thers tongue; and the Mother did not like them because they had still their Fathers heart and life; nor were they indeed fit company for good or bad. The Good would not trust them because they were bad, the Bad would not trust them because they were good, viz. The good would not trust them because they were bad in their Lives, and the bad would not trust them be∣cause they were good in their Words: So they were forced with Esau to joyn in affinity with Ish∣mad; to wit, to look out a people that were Hypocrites like them∣selves, and with them they matcht, and lived and died. Atten. Poor woman, she could not but have much perplexity. Wise. Yea, and poor Children, that ever they were sent into the world as the fruit of the loyns, and under the government of such a father as Mr. Badman. Atten. You say right, for such children, lye, almost under all man∣ner of disadvantages: but we must say nothing, because this also is the sove∣raign Will of God.
Wise. We may not by any means object against God: yet we may talk of the advantages, and dis∣advantages that Children have by having for their Parents such as are either Godly, or the contary. Atten. You say right, we may so, and pray now, since we are about it, speak something in brief unto it, that is, unto this; What advantage those Children have above others, that have for their Parents such as indeed are Godly. Wise. So I will,The advan∣tages that Children have, whose Parents are both godly. only I must first premise these two or three things. 1. They have not the advantage of Election for their fathers sakes. 2. They are born, as others, the children of wrath, though they come of Godly Parents. 3. Grace comes not unto them as an Inheritance, because they have Godly Parents. These things pre∣mised I shall now proceed. 1. The children of Godly Parents are the children of many Prayers: they are prayed for before, and Prayed for after they are born, and the Prayer of a godly Father and godly Mother doth much.
2. They have the advantage of what restraint is possible, from what evils their Parents see them in∣clinable to, and that is a second mer∣cy. 3. They have the advantage of Godly instruction, and of being told which be, and which be not the right ways of the Lord. 4. They have also those ways commended unto them, and spoken well of in their hearing, that are good. 5. Such are also, what may be, kept out of evil company, from evil Books, and from being taught the way of Swearing, Lying, and the like, as Sabbath-breaking, and moc∣king at good men, and good things, and this is a very great mercy. 6. They have also the benefit of a godly life set before them doctrinal∣ly by their Parents, and that doctrine backt with a godly and holy exam∣ple: and all these are very great ad∣vantages. Now all these advantages,The disad∣vantages that the Children of ungodly Pa∣rent have. the children of ungodly Parents want; and so are more in danger of being carried away with the error of the
wicked. For ungodly Parents nei∣ther Pray for their Children, nor do, nor can they heartily instruct them; they do not after a godly manner restrain them from evil, nor do they keep them from evil company. They are not grieved at, nor yet do they forewarn their children to be∣ware of such evil actions that are a∣bomination to God, and to all good men. They let their children break the Sabbath, swear, lye, be wicked and vain. They commend not to their children an holy life, nor set a good example before their eyes. No, they do in all things contrary: Estranging of their children what they can, from the love of God and all good men, so soon as they are born. Therefore it is a very great Judgment of God upon children to be the Offspring of base and ungod∣ly men.Job. 30. 8. Atten. Well, but before we leave Mr. Badmans wife and children, I have a mind, if you please, to enquire a little more after one thing, the which I am sure you can satisfie me in. Wise. What is that?
Atten. You said a while ago, that this Mr. Badman would not suffer his wife to go out to hear such godly Ministers as she liked, but said if she did, she had as good never come home any more. Did he often carry it thus to her? Wise. He did say so, he did often say so. This I told you then, and had also then told you more, but that other things put me out. Atten. Well said, pray therefore now go on. Wise. So I will. Upon a time, she was on a Lords day for going to hear a Sermon, and Mr. Badman was unwilling she should: but she at that time, as it seems, did put on more courage than she was wont; and therefore, after she had spent upon him, a great many fair words and entreaties,A contest betwixt Mr. Badman and his wife. if perhaps she might have prevailed by them, but all to no purpose at all: At last she said she would go, and rendred this reason for it; I have an Husband, but also a God; my God has com∣manded me, and that upon pain of damnation, to be a continual Wor∣shipper of him, and that in the way
of his own Apppointments: I have an Husband, but also a Soul, and my Soul ought to be more unto me, than all the world besides. This soul of mine I will look after, care for, and (if I can) provide it an Heaven for its habitation. You are command∣ed to love me,Ephes. 5. 28. as you love your own body, and so do I love you; but I tell you true, I preferr my Soul before all the world, and its Salvation I will seek. At this,With what weapons Badman did deal with his wife. first, he gave her an ugly wish, and then fell into a fearfull rage, and sware moreover that if she did go, he would make both her, and all her damnable Brotherhood (for so he was pleased to call them) to repent their coming thither. Atten. But what should be mean by that? Wise. You may easily guess what he meant: he meant, he would turn Informer, and so either weary out those that she loved, from meet∣ing together to Worship God; or make them pay dearly for their so doing; the which if he did, he knew it would vex every vein of her ten∣der heart.
Atten. But do you think Mr. Bad∣man would have been so base? Wise. Truly he had malice, and enmity enough in his heart to do it, onely he was a Tradesman; also he knew that he must live by his neigh∣bours, and so he had that little wit in his anger, that he refrained him∣self, and did it not. But, as I said, he had malice and envy enough in his heart to have made him to do it,Mr. Bad∣mans heart discovered as to its en∣mity against the friends of his wife. only he thought it would worst him in his trade: yet these three things he would be doing. 1. He would be putting of others on to molest and abuse her friends. 2. He would be glad when he heard that any mischief befell them. 3. And would laught at her, when he saw her troubled for them. And now I have told you Mr. Badmans way as to this. Atten. But was he not afraid of the Judgments of God, that did fly a∣bout at that time? Wise. He regarded not the Judg∣ment nor Mercy of God, for had he at all done that, he could not have done as he did. But what Judgments do you mean?
Atten. Such Judgments, that if Mr Badman himself had taken but so∣ber notice of, they might have made him a hung down his ears. Wise. Why, have you heard of any such persons that the Judgments of God have overtaken. Atten. Yes, and so, I believe, have you too, though you make so strange about it. Wise. I have so indeed, to my astonishment and wonder. Atten. Pray therefore, if you please, tell me what it is, as to this, that you know; and then, herhaps, I may also say something to you of the same. Wise. In our Town there was one W. S.Mark. a man of a very wicked life;☜ and he, when there seemed to be countenance given to it, would needs turn Informer. Well, so he did, and was as diligent in his business as most of them could be; he would watch a nights, climb Trees, and range the Woods a days, if possible, to find out the Meeters, for then they were forced to meet in the Fields: yea, he would curse them bitterly, and swear most fearfully what he would do to them when he found
them. Well, after he had gone on like a Bedlam in his course a while, and had done some mischiefs to the people, he was stricken by the hand of God, and that in this manner. 1. Although he had his tongue na∣turally at will, now he was taken with a faultering in his speech, and could not for weeks together speak otherwise, than just like a man that was drunk. 2. Then he was taken with a drauling, or slabbering at his mouth, which slabber sometimes would hang at his mouth well nigh half way down to the ground. 3. Then he had such a weakness in the back sinews of his Neck, that oft times he could not look up be∣fore him, unless he clapped his hand hard upon his forehead, and held up his head that way, by strength of hand. 4. After this his speech went quite away, and he could speak no more than a Swine or a Bear. Therefore, like one of them, he would gruntle and make an ugly noyse, according as he was offended, or pleased, or would have any thing done, &c.
In this posture he continued for the space of half a year, or thereabouts, all the while otherwise well, and could go about his business, save once that he had a fall from the Bell as it hangs in our Steeple, which 'twas a wonder it did not kill him: But after that he also walked about, till God had made him a sufficient spectacle of his Judgment for his sin, and then on a sudden he was stricken and dyed miserably: and so there was an end of him and his doings. I will tell you of another.☜ About four miles from St. Neots, there was a Gentleman had a man, and he would needs be an Informer, and a lusty young man he was. Well, an Informer he was, and did much distress some people, and had per∣fected his Informations so effectually against some, that there was no∣thing further to do, but for the Con∣stables to make distress on the peo∣ple, that he might have the Money or Goods; and as I heard, he ha∣stened them much to do it. Now while he was in the heat of his work, as he stood one day by the Fire-side, he had (it should seem) a mind to a
Sop in the Pan, (for the Spit was then at the fire,) so he went to make him one; but behold, a Dog (some say his own Dog) took distaste at something, and bit his Master by the Leg; the which bite, notwith∣standing all the means that was used to cure him, turned (as was said) to a Gangrene; however, that wound was his death, and that a dreadful one too: for my Relator said, that he lay in such a condi∣tion by this bite, (as the beginning) till his flesh rotted from off him be∣fore he went out of the world. But what need I instance in particu∣lar persons, when the Judgement of God against this kind of people was made manifest, I think I may say, if not in all, yet in most of the Counties in England where such poor Creatures were. But I would, if it had been the will of God, that neither I nor any body else, could tell you more of these Stories: True stories, that are neither Lye, nor Romance. Atten. Well, I also heard of both these my self, and of more too, as re∣markable in their kind as these, if
I had any list to tell them; but let us leave those that are behind to others, or to the coming of Christ, who then will justifie or condemn them as the merit of their work shall re∣quire; or if they repented, and found mercy, I shall be glad when I know it, for I wish not a curse to the Soul of mine Enemy. Wise. There can be no pleasure in the telling of such stories, though to hear of them may do us a plea∣sure: They may put us in mind that there is a God that judgeth in the earth, and that doth not alwayes forget nor deferre to hear the Crye of the destitute; They also carry along with them both Caution and Counsel to those that are the survi∣vers of such. Let us tremble at the Judgements of God, and be afraid of sinning against him, and it shall be our protection. It shall go well with them that fear God, that fear before him. Atten. Well Sir, as you have in∣timated, so I think we have in this place spoken enough about these kind of men; if you please, let us return again to Mr. Badman himself, if
you have any more to say of him. Wise. More! we have yet scarce throughly begun with Any thing that we have said. All the particu∣lars are in themselves so full of bad∣ness, that we have rather only look∣ed in them, than indeed said any thing to them: but we will pass them, and proceed. You have heard of the sins of his Youth, of his Ap∣prentiship, and how he set up, and married, and what a life he hath led his wife; and now I will tell you some more of his pranks.New dis∣course of Mr. Badman. He had the very knack of Knavery; had he, as I said before, been bound to serve an Apprentiship to all these things, he could not have been more cunning, he could not have been more artificial at it. Atten. Nor perhaps so artificially neither. For as none can teach Good∣ness like to God himself, so concern∣ing Sin and Knavery, none can teach a man it like the Devil, to whom, as I perceive, Mr. Badman went to School from his Childhood to the end of his life. But pray Sir, make a be∣ginning. Wise. Well so I will. You may
remember that I told you what a condition he was in for Money be∣fore he did marry, and how he got a rich Wife, with whose Money he paid his debts: Now when he had paid his debts, he having some Moneys left, he sets up again as briskly as ever, keeps a great Shop, drives a great Trade, and runs a∣gain a great way into debt;Mr. Badman plays a new prank. but now not into the debt of one or two, but into the debt of many, so that at last he came to owe some thousands; and thus he went on a good while. And to pursue his ends the better, he began now to study to please all men, and to suit him∣self to any company; he could now be as they, say as they, that is, if he listed; and then he would list, when he perceived that by so doing, he might either make them his Customers or Creditors for his Com∣modities. If he dealt with honest men, (as with some honest men he did) then he would be as they; talk as they, seem to be sober as they, talk of Justice and Religion as they, and against Debauchery as they; yea, and would too seem to
shew a dislike of them that said, did, or were otherwise than honest. Again, when he did light among those that were bad, then he would be as they, but yet more close and cautiously, except he were sure of his company: Then he would carry it openly, be as they; say, Damn 'em and Sink 'em, as they. If they rail∣ed on Good men, so could he; if they railed on Religion, so could he:Mr. Bad∣mans per∣fection. if they talked beastly, vainly, idlely, so would he; if they were for drinking, swearing, whoring, or any the like Villanies, so was he. This was now the path he trod in, and could do all artificially, as any man alive. And now he thought himself a perfect man, he thought he was always a Boy till now. What think you now of Mr. Bad∣man? Atten. Think! why, I think he was an Atheist: For no man but an Atheist can do this. I say, it cannot be, but that the man that is such as this Mr. Badman, must be a rank and stinking Atheist; for he that believes that there is either God or Devil, Heaven or Hell, or Death, and Judg∣ment
after, cannot doe as Mr. Bad∣man did; I mean, if he could do these things without reluctancy and check of Conscience; yea, if he had not sor∣row and remorse for such abominable sins as these. Wise. Nay, he was so far off from reluctancies and remorse of Con∣science for these things, that he count∣ed them the excellency of his Attain∣ments, the quintessence of his Wit, his rare and singular vertues, such as but few besides himself could be the Masters of. Therefore, as for those that made boggle and stop at things, and that could not in Con∣science, and for fear of Death and Judgement, do such things as he; he would call them Fools and Nod∣dies, and charge them for being frighted with the talk of unseen Bug∣bears; and would encourage them, if they would be men indeed, to la∣bour after the attainment of this his excellent art. He would often-times please himself with the thoughts of what he could do in this matter, saying within himself;How Mr. Badman came to en∣joy himself. I can be re∣ligious, and irreligious, I can be any thing, or nothing; I can swear,
and speak against swearing; I can lye, and speak against lying; I can drink, wench, be unclean, and de∣fraud, and not be troubled for it: Now I enjoy my self, and am Ma∣ster of mine own wayes, and not they of me. This I have attained with much study, great care, and more pains. But this his talk should be only with himself, to his wife, who he knew durst not divulge it; or among his Intimates, to whom he knew he might say any thing. Atten. Did I call him before an Atheist? I may call him now a Devil, or a man possessed with one, if not with many. I think that there can∣not be found in every corner such an one as this.2 Chron. 28. 22. True, it is said of King Ahaz, that he sinned more and more; and of Ahab,1 King 21. 25. that he sold himself to work wickedness; and of the men of Sodom,Gen. 13. 1. that they were sinners exceed∣ingly before the Lord. Wise. An Atheist he was no doubt, if there be such a thing as an Atheist in the world, but for all his brags of perfection and security in his wic∣kedness,Job. 21. 1. I believe that at times God did let down fire from Heaven into
his Conscience. True, I believe he would quickly put it out again, and grow more desperate and wicked af∣terward, but this also turned to his destruction, as afterward you may hear. But I am not of your mind, to think that there are but few such in the world; except you mean as to the Degree of wickedness unto which he had attained. For other∣wise, no doubt,There are abundance like Mr. Badman. there is abundance of such as he: men of the same mind, of the same principles, and of the same conscience too, to put them into practice. Yea, I believe that there are many that are endeavour∣ing to attain to the same pitch of wickedness; and all them are such as he, in the Judgment of the Law; nor will their want of hellish wit to attain thereto, excuse them at the day of Judgment. You know that in all Science, some are more arch than some; and so it is in the art, as well as in the practice of wick∣edness: some are two fold, and some seven-fold more the children of Hell than others, (and yet all the children of Hell,) else they would all be Ma∣sters,
and none scholars in the school of wickedness. But there must be Masters, and there must be Learners; Mr. Badman was a master in this art, and therefore it follows that he must be an arch and chief one in that my∣stery. Atten. You are in the right, for I perceive that some men, though they desire it, cannot be so arch in the practice thereof as others, but are (as I suppose they call them) fools and dun∣ces to the rest, their heads and capa∣cities will not serve them to act and do so wickedly. But Mr. Badman wanted not a wicked head to contrive, as well as a wicked heart to do his wickedness. Wise. True, but yet I say, such men shall at the day of Judgment, be judged, not only for what they are, but also for what they would be.Pro. 24. 9. For if the thought of foolishness is sin, doubtless the desire of foolish∣ness is more sin: and if the desire be more, the endeavour after it must needs be more and more.He that would be bad is bad. He then that is not an artificial Atheist and Transgressor, yet if he desires to be so, if he endeavoureth to be so,
he shall be Judged and condemned to Hell for such an one. For the Law Judgeth men, as I said, accor∣ding to what they would be.Matt. 5. 29. He that looketh upon a woman to lust after her, hath committed adultery with her already in his heart. By the same rule, he that would steal, doth steal; he that would cheat, doth cheat; he that would swear, doth swear; and he that would commit adultery, doth do so. For God Judgeth men according to the working of their minds, and saith;Pro. 23. 7. As he thinketh, so is he. That is, so is he in his heart,Mat. 5. in his intentions, in his de∣sires, in his endeavours;Rom. 7. 7. and Gods Law, I say, lays hold of the desires, intentions and endeavours, even as it lays hold of the act of wickedness it self. A man then that desires to be as bad as Mr. Badman, (and desires to be so wicked have many in their hearts) though he never at∣tains to that proficiency in wicked∣ness as he, shall yet be Judged for as bad a man as he, because 'twas in his desires to be such a wicked one. Atten. Bu this height of wicked∣ness
in Mr. Badman, will not yet out of my mind. This hard, despe∣rate, or what shall I call it, diaba∣bolicall frame of heart, was in him a foundation, a groundwork to all acts and deeds that were evil. Wise. The heart, and the despe∣rate wickedness of it, is the foundati∣on and ground-work of all. Atheism, professed and practicall,A bad heart makes a bad man. spring both out of the heart, yea and all manner of evils besides. For they be not bad deeds that make a bad man, but he is already a bad man that doth bad deeds. A man must be wicked before he can do wickedness.1 Sam. 24. 13. Wic∣kedness proceedeth from the wicked. 'Tis an evil tree that bears evil fruit,Mat. 7. 16, 17, 18. men gather no grapes of thorns; the heart therefore must be evil, before the man can do evil, and good before the man doth good. Atten. Now I see the reason why Mr. Badman was so base, as to get a Wife by dissimulation, and to abuse her so like a Villain when he had got her, it was because he was before by a wicked heart prepared to act wic∣kedness. Wise. You may be sure of it; for
from within, out of the heart of man proceedeth evil thoughts, Adul∣teries,Mar. 7. 20, 21, 22, 23. Fornications, Murders, Thefts, Coveteousness, Wickedness, Deceit, Lasciviousness, an evil Eye, Blas∣phemy, Pride, Foolishness. All these things come from within, and defile a man. And a man, as his naughty mind inclines him, makes use of these, or any of these, to gratifie his lust, to promote his designs, to revenge his malice, to enrich, or to wallow himself in the foolish plea∣sures and pastimes of this life: And all these did Mr. Badman do, even to the utmost, if either opportunity, or purse, or perfidiousness, would help him to the obtaining of his pur∣pose. Atten. Purse! Why he could not but have Purse to do almost what he would, having married a wife with so much money. Wise. Hold you there; some of Mr. Badmans sins were costly, as his drinking, and whoring, and keep∣ing other bad company; though he was a man that had ways too many to get money, as well as ways too many to spend it.
Atten. Had he then such a good Trade, for all he was such a bad man? or was his Calling so gainfull to him, as alwayes to keep his Purses belly full, though he was himself a great spender? Wise. No: It was not his Trade that did it, though he had a pretty trade too. He had another way to get Money, and that by hatfulls and pocketfulls at a time. Atten. Why I trow he was no High∣way man, was he? Wise. I will be sparing in my speech as to that, though some have muttered as if he could ride out now and then, about no body but himself knew what, over night, and come home all dirty and weary next morning. But that is not the thing I aim at. Atten. Pray let me know it, if you think it convenient that I should. Wise. I will tell you: It was this, he had an art to Break, and get hat∣fulls of money by breaking. Atten. But what do you mean by Mr. Badmans Breaking?Mr. Badman had an art to break, and to get mo∣ney that way. you speak mystically, do you not? Wise. No, no, I speak plainly.
Or, if you will have it in plainer lan∣guage, 'tis this: When Mr. Badman had swaggered and whored away most of his wifes portion, he began to feel that he could not much longer stand upon his legs in this course of life, and keep up his Trade and Re∣pute (such as he had) in the world; but by the new Engine of Break∣ing. Wherefore, upon a time, he gives a great, and suddenHow he ma∣naged things in order to his breaking. rush into several mens debts, to the va∣lue of about four or five thousand pound, driving at the same time a very great trade, by selling many things for less than they cost him, to get him custom, therewith to blind his Creditors eyes. His Creditors therefore seeing that he had a great employ, and dreaming that it must needs at length turn to a very good account to them, trusted him freely without mistrust, and so did others too, to the value of what was men∣tioned before. Well, when Mr. Bad∣man had well feathered his Nest with other mens goods and money, after a little timeHe breaks. he breaks. And by and by it is noysed abroad that Mr. Badman had shut up Shop, was gone,
and could trade no longer. Now, by that time his breaking was come to his Creditors ears, he had by Craft and Knavery made so sure of what he had, that his Creditors could not touch a penny. Well, when he had done, he sends his mournfull su∣gered letters to his Creditors, to let them understand what had happened unto him, and desired them not to be severe with him;Mr. Bad∣mans suger words to his Creditors. for he bore towards all men an honest mind, and would pay so far as he was able. Now he sends his letters by a man Badmans friend. confederate with him, who could make both the worst, and best of Mr. Badmans case: The best for Mr. Badman, and the worst for his Credi∣tors. So when he comes to them, he both bemoans them, and condoles Mr. Badmans condition: Telling of them, that without a speedy bring∣ing of things to a conclusion, Mr. Badman would be able to make them no satisfaction, but at present he both could, and would, and that to the utmost of his power: and to that end, he desired that they would come over to him. Well, his Credi∣tors appoint him a time, and come
over; and he, mean while, autho∣rizes another to treat with them, but will not be seen himself, unless it was on a Sunday, lest they should snap him with a Writ. So his de∣puted friend treats with them about their concern with Mr. Badman, first telling them of the great care that Mr. Badman took to satisfie them and all men for whatsoever he ought, as far as in him lay, and, how little he thought a while since to be in this low condition. He pleaded also the greatness of his Charge, the greatness of Taxes, the Badness of the times, and the great Losses that he had by many of his custo∣mers, some of which died in his debt, others were run away, and for many that were alive, he never expected a farthing from them. Yet nevertheless he would shew him∣self an honest man, and would pay as far as he was able; and if they were willing to come to terms, he would make a composition with them, (for he was not able to pay them all.)What Mr. Badman propounds to his Credi∣tors. The Creditors asked what he would give? 'Twas replyed, Half a crown in the pound. At this they
began to huff, and he to renew his complaint and entreaty; but the Cre∣ditors would not hear, and so for that time their meeting without success broke up. But after his Creditors were in cool blood, and admitting of second thoughts, and fearing lest delays should make them lose all, they admit of a second debate, come together again, and by many words, and great ado,They at last agree, and Mr. Badman gains by breaking, they obtained five shillings i'th' pound. So the money was produced, Releases and Dis∣charges drawn, signed, and sealed, Books crossed, and all things confir∣med; and then Mr. Badman can put his head out a dores again, and be a better man than when he shut up Shop, by several thousands of pounds. Atten. And did he do thus in∣deed? Wise. Yes, once, and again. I think he brake twice or thrice. Atten. And did he do it before he had need to do it? Wise. Need! What do you mean by need? there is no need at any time for a man to play the knave. He did it of a wicked mind, to de∣fraud
and beguile his Creditors:There is no plea for his dishonesty. he had wherewithall of his Father, and also by his Wife, to have lived upon, with lawfull labour, like an honest man. He had also when he made this wicked Break (though he had been a profuse and prodigal spen∣der) to have paid his creditors their own to a farthing. But had he done so, he had not done like himself, like Mr. Badman; had he, I say, dealt like an honest man, he had then gone out of Mr. Badmans road. He did it therefore of a dishonest mind, and to a wicked end; to wit, that he might have wherewithall, howsoever unlawfully gotten, to follow his Cups and Queans, and to live in the full swinge of his lusts, even as he did be∣fore. Atten. Why this was a meer Cheat. Wise. It was a cheat indeed. This way of breaking, it is nothing else but a more neat way of Thieving, of picking of pockets, of breaking open of shops, and of taking from men what one has nothing to do with. But though it seem easie, it is hard to learn, no man that has
conscience to God or man, can ever be his Crafts Master in this Hel∣lish art. Atten. Oh! Sirs! what a wicked man was this! Wise. A wicked man indeed. By this art he could tell how to make men send their goods to his shop, and then be glad to take a penny for that for which he had promised be∣fore it came thither, to give them a Groat: I say, he could make them glad to take a Crown for a pounds worth, and a thousand for that for which he had promised before to give them four thousand pounds. Atten. This arguet that Mr. Badman had but little conscience. Wise. This argued that Mr. Bad∣man had No Conscience at all; for Conscience, the least spark of a good Conscience cannot endure this. Atten. Before we go any further in Mr. Badmans matters, let me de∣sire you, if you please, to give me an answer to these two questions.An answer to two questions. 1. What do you find in the Word of God against such a practice, as this of Mr. Badmans is? 2. What would you have a man
do that is in his Creditors debt, and can neither pay him what he owes him, nor go on in a trade any longer? Wise. I will answer you as well as I can. And first to the first of your questions: To wit,1. Qestion, What I find in the Word of God against such a practice, as this of Mr. Badmans is. Answ. The Word of God doth forbid this wickedness; and to make it the more odious in our eyes, it joyns it with Theft and Robbery: Thou shalt not,Levit. 19. 13. says God, defraud thy neighbour, nor rob him. Thou shalt not defraud, that is, deceive or be∣guile. Now thus to break, is to defraud, deceive and beguile; which is, as you see, forbidden by the God of Heaven: Thou shalt not defraud thy neighbour, nor rob him. It is a kind of theft and robbery, thus to defraud, and beguile. It is a wilely robbing of his shop,The hai∣nousnes of this sin. and picking of his poc∣ket: a thing odious to Reason and Conscience, and contrary to the Law of nature. It is a designed piece of wickedness, and therefore a double sin. A man cannot do this great wickedness on a sudden, and
through a violent assault of Satan. He that will commit this sin, must have time to deliberate, that by in∣vention he may make it formidable, and that with lies and high dis∣simulations. He that commits this wickedness, must first hatch it upon his bed, beat his head about it, and lay his plot strong: So that to the compleating of such a wicked∣ness, there must be adjoyned many sins, and they too, must go hand in hand untill it be compleated. But what saith the Scripture?1. Thess. 4. 6.fair war∣ning. Let no man go beyond, and defraud his Bro∣ther in any, matter, because the Lord is the avenger of all such. But this kind of Breaking is a going beyond my Brother; This is a compassing of him about that I may catch him in my net; and as I said, an art to rob my Brother, and to pick his pocket, and that with his consent. Which doth not therefore mitigate, but so much the more greaten and make odious the offence. For men that are thus wilily abused cannot help themselves, they are taken in a deceitfull net. But God will here concern himself, he will be the aven∣ger,
he will be the avenger of all such either here or in another world. And this, the Apostle testifies a∣gain, where he saith;Colos. 3. 25. But he that doth wrong, shall recieve for the wrong that he hath done, Fair war∣ning again. and there is no re∣spect of persons. That is, there is no man, be he what he will, if he will be guilty of this sin, of going beyond, of beguiling of, and doing wrong to his Brother, but God will call him to an account for it, and will pay him with vengeance for it too; for there is no respect for persons. I might add, that this sin of wrong∣ing, of going beyond, and defrand∣ing of my Neighbour, it is like that first prank that the Devil plaid with our first Parents, (as the Altar that Vriah built for Ahaz, was taken from the fashion of that that stood at Damascus,He that de∣signedly commits this sin is like the Devil. to be the very pattern of it.) The Serpent beguiled me, says Eve; Mr. Badman beguiles his Cre∣ditors. The Serpent beguiled Eve with lying promises of gain; and so did Mr. Badman beguile his Credi∣tors. The Serpent said one thing and meant another, when he begui∣led Eve; and so did Mr. Badman
when he beguiled his Creditors. That man therefore that doth thus deceive and beguile his neighbour, imitateth the Devil; he taketh his examples from him, and not from God, the Word, or good men: and this did Mr. Badman. And now to your second question: To wit,2 Question. What I would have a man do, that is in his Creditors debt, and that can neither pay him, nor go on in a trade any longer? Answ. First of all: If this be his case, and he knows it, let him not run one penny further in his Creditors debt. For that cannot be done with good conscience. He that knowes he cannot pay, and yet will run into debt; does knowingly wrong and defraud his neighbour, and falls under that sentence of the Word of God,How those that are Bckrupts  deal with their consciencies. The wicked borrow∣eth and payeth not again. Yea worse, he borrows though at the very same time he knows that he cannot pay a∣gain. He doth also craftily take away what is his Neighbours. That is therefore the first thing that I would propound to such: Let him not run any further into his Creditors debt.
Secondly,Good ad∣vice. After this, let him con∣sider, how, and by what means he was brought into such a condition, that he could not pay his just debts. To wit, whether it was by his own remisness in his Calling, by living too high in Dyet or Apparel, by lend∣ing too lavishingly that which was none of his own, to his loss; or whe∣ther by the immediate hand and Judgment of God. If by searching, he findes, that this is come upon him through re∣misness in his Calling, Extravagancies in his Family, or the like; let him labour for a sence of his sin and wic∣kedness, for he has sinned against the Lord: First, in his being sloth∣full in business,Rom. 12. 11. 1 Tim. 5. 8. and in not providing, to wit, of his own, by the sweat of his brows, or other honest ways, for those of his own house. And se∣condly, in being lavishing in Dyet and Apparel in the Family, or in lending to others that which was none of his own. This cannot be done with good conscience: it is both against reason and nature, and therefore must be a sin against God. I say therefore, if thus this debtor
hath done, if ever he would live quietly in conscience, and comforta∣bly in his condition for the future, let him humble himself before God, and repent of this his wickedness. For he that is slothfull in his work,Pro. 18. 9. is brother to him that is a great waster. To be slothfull and a waster too, is to be as it were a double sinner. But again, as this man should en∣quire into these things, so he should also into this. How came I into this way of dealing in which I have now miscarried? is it a way that my Pa∣rents brought me up in, put me Ap∣prentice to, or that by providence I was first thrust into? or is it a way into which I have twisted my self, as not being contented with my first lot, that by God and my Pa∣rents I was cast into? This ought duly to be considered.Good coun∣ again. And if upon search, a man shall find that he is out of the place and Calling into which he was put by his Pa∣rents, or the Providence of God, and has miscarried in a new way, that through pride and dislike of his first state he has chose rather to embrace; his miscarriage is his
sin, the fruit of his Pride, and a token of the Judgment of God upon him for his leaving of his first state. And for this he ought, as for the former, to be humble and penitent before the Lord. But if by search, he finds,How to find that thy de∣cay came by the Judge∣ment of God, or by thy mis∣carriage. that his poverty came by none of these; if by honest search, he finds it so, and can say with good conscience, I went not out of my place and state in which God by his providence had put me; but have abode with God in the calling wherein I was called, and have wrought hard, and fared meanly, been civilly apparelled, and have not directly, nor indirectly made away with my Creditors goods: Then has his fall come upon him by the imme∣diate hand of God, whether by visi∣ble or invisible wayes. For some∣times it comes by visible wayes, to wit, by Fire, by Thieves, by loss of Cattel, or the wickedness of sinful dealers, &c. And sometimes by means invisible, and then no man knows how; we only see things are going, but cannot see by what way they go. Well, Now suppose that a man, by an immediate hand of
God is brought to a morsel of Bread, what must he do now?Another question. I answer: His surest way is still to think, that this is the fruit of some sin, though possibly not sin in the management of his calling, yet of some other sin. God casteth away the substance of the wicked.Pro. 10. 3. There∣fore let him still humble himself be∣fore his God,1 Pet. 5. 6. because his hand is upon him, and say, What sin is this, for which this hand of God is upon me? and let him be diligent to find it out, for some sin is the cause of this Judgment;L. 3. 33. for God doth not willingly afflict nor grieve the chil∣dren of men. Either the heart is too much set upon the world, or Re∣ligion is too much neglected in thy Family, or some thing. There is a Snake in the grass, a Worm in the gourd; some sin in thy bosom, for the sake of which God doth thus deal with thee. Thirdly,Good advice again. This thus done, let that man again consider thus with him∣self: Perhaps God is now changing of my Condition and state in the world; he has let me live in fashion, in ulness, and abundance of worldly
glory, and I did not to his glory improve, as I should, that his good dispensation to me. But when I lived in full and fat pasture, I did there lift up the heel:Deut. 32. 15. Therefore he will now turn me into hard Com∣mons, that with leanness, and hunger, and meanness, and want, I may spend the rest of my days. But let him do this without murmering, and repining; let him do it in a godly manner, submitting himself to the Judgment of God.James 1. 9 10. Let the rich re∣joyce in that he is made low. This is duty, and it may be privi∣ledg to those that are under this hand of God. And for thy encouragement to this hard work, (for this is a hard work) consider of these four things. 1. This is right lying down under Gods hand,Consider four things. and the way to be exal∣ted in Gods time: when God would have Job embrace the Dunghill, he embraces it,Job. 1. 2. Chap. 2. 8. and says, The Lord giveth, and the Lord hath taken a∣way, blessed be the name of the Lord. 2. Consider, That there are bles∣sings also that attend a low condition, more than all the world are aware
of. A poor condition has preven∣ting mercy attending of it. The poor, because they are poor, are not capable of sinning against God as the rich man does. 3. The Poor can more clearly see himself preserved by the provi∣dence of God than the rich,Psal. 49. 6. for he trusteth in the abundance of his riches. 4. It may be God has made thee poor,Jam. 2. 5. because he would make thee rich. Hearken my beloved brethren, hath not God chosen the poor of this world, rich in Faith, and heirs of a Kingdom which God hath promised to them that love him? I am perswaded, if men upon whom this hand of God is, would thus quietly lye down, and humble themselves under it, they would find more peace, yea, more blessing of God attending them in it, than the most of men are aware of. But this is an hard Chapter, and there∣fore I do not expect that many should either read it with pleasure, or desire to take my counsel. Having thus spoken to the Bro∣ken man, with reference to his own
self; I will now speak to him as he stands related to his Creditors. In the next place therefore, let him fall upon the mostHonest dealing with Creditors. honest way of dealing with his Creditors, and that I think must be this. First, Let him timely make them acquainted with his condition, and also do to them these three things. 1. Let him heartily, and unfeigned∣ly ask them forgiveness for the wrong that he has done them. 2. Let him proffer them all, and the whole all that ever he has in the world; let him hide nothing, let him strip himself to his raiment for them; let him not keep a Ring, a Spoon, or any thing from them. 3. If none of these two will sa∣tisfie them, let him proffer them his Body, to be at their dispose, to wit, either to abide imprisonment their pleasure, or to be at their service, till by labour and travel he hath made them such amends as they in reason think fit, (only reserving something for the succour of his poor and di∣stressed Family out of his labour, which in Reason, and Conscience, and Nature, he is bound also to take
care of:) Thus shall he make them what amends he is able, for the Wrong that he hath done them in wasting and spending of their Estates. By thus doing, he submits him∣self to Gods rod, commits himself to the dispose of his Providence; yea, by thus doing, he casteth the lot of his present and future condition into the lap of his Creditors, and leaves the whole dispose thereof to the Lord,Pro. 16. 33. even as he shall order and incline their hearrs to do with him. And let that be either to forgive him; or to take that which he hath for satisfaction; or to lay his body under affliction, this way or that, according to Law; can he, I say, thus leave the whole dispose to God, let the issue be what it will, that man shall have peace in his mind afterward. And the comforts of that state, (which will be comforts that attend Equity, Justice, and Duty,) will be more unto him, be∣cause more according to Godliness, than can be the comforts that are the fruits of Injustice, Fraudulency, and Deceit. Besides, this is the
way to engage God to favour him by the sentence of his Creditors; (for He can intreat them to use him kindly,)Jer. 15. 10, 11. and he will do it when his ways are pleasing in his sight: When a mans ways please the Lord,Pro. 16. 7. his ene∣mies shall be at peace with him; And surely, for a man to seek to make restitution for wrongs done, to the utmost of his power, by what he is, has, and enjoys in this world, is the best way, in that capacity, and with reference to that thing, that a man can at this time be found active in. But he that doth otherwise, abides in his sin, refuses to be disposed of by the Providence of God, chuseth an high Estate, though not attained in Gods way; when Gods Will is, that he should descend into a low one: yea, he desperately saith in his heart and actions, I will be mine own chooser, and that in mine own way, whatever happens or follows thereupon. Atten. You have said well, in my mind. But suppose now, that Mr. Badman was here, could he not ob∣ject as to what you have said, saying,
Go and teach your Brethren, that are Professors, this lesson, for they, as I am, are guilty of Breaking; yea I am apt to think, of that which you call my Knavish way of breaking;A heavy blot upon Religion. to wit, of breaking before they have need to break. But if not so, yet they are guilty of neglect in their Calling, of living higher, both in Fare and Apparrel, than their Trade or In∣come will maintain. Besides, that they do break, all the world very well knowes, and that they have the art to plead for a composition, is very well known to men; and that it is usual with them, to bide their Lin∣nen, their Plate, their Jewels, and ('tis to be thought, sometimes Money and Goods besides,) is as common as four eggs a penny. And thus they be∣guile men, debauch their consciencies, sin against their Profession, and make, 'tis to be feared, their lusts in all this, and the fulfilling of them, their end, I say, if Mr. Badman was here to ob∣ject thus unto you, what would be your reply? Wise. What! Why I would say, I hope no Good man, no man of good conscience, no man that either fear∣feareth
God, regardeth the credit of Religion, the peace of Gods people, or the salvation of his own soul, will do thus. Professors, such perhaps there may be, and who, upon earth can help it? Jades there be of all co∣lours. If Knaves will make profession their cloak to be vile, who can help it? If men will profess, and make their profession a stalking-Horse to beguile their neighbours of their estates, as Mr. Badman him∣self did, when he beguiled her that now is with sorrow his wife, who can help it? The Churches of old were pestered with such, and there∣fore no marvel if these perilous diffi∣cult times be so. But mark how the Apostle words it:1 Cor. 6. 8, 9, 10. Nay you do wrong and defraud,2 Tim. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. and that your Brethren: Know you not, that the un∣righteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not deceived, neither Fornicator, nor Idolaters, nor Adul∣terers, nor Effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with Mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drun∣kards, nor Revilers, nor Extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God. None of these shall be saved in this state, nor shall profession deli∣ver
them from the censure of the Godly, when they shall be manifest such to be. But their profession we cannot help: How can we help it, if men should ascribe to them∣selves the title of Holy ones, Godly ones, Zealous one, Self-denying ones, or any other such glorious title? and while they thus call themselves, they should be the veryest Rogues for all evil, sin, and villany imaginable, who could help it? True, they are a scandal to Religion, a grief to the honest hearted, an offence to the world, and a stumbling stone to the weak, and these offences have come, do come, and will come, do what all the world can; but wo be to them through whom they come;Matt. 18. 6, 7, 8. let such professors therefore be disowned by all true Christians, and let them be reckoned among those base men of the world which by such actions they most resemble: They are Mr. Badmans Kindred. Let such be  men. For they are a shame to Religi∣on, I say there slithy, rob-Shop, pick-pocket men, they are a shame to Religion, and religious men should be ashamed of them. God puts
such an one among the Fools of the world, therefore let not Christians put them among those that are wise for heaven.Jer. 17. 11. As the Partridge sitteth on eggs, and hatcheth them not, so he that getteth riches and not by right, shall leave them in the midst of his dayes, and at his end shall be a fool. And the man under consideration is one of these, and therefore must look to fall by this Judgment. A professor! and practice such villianies as these! such an one is not worthy to bear that name any longer. We may say to such as the Prophet spake to their like, to wit, to the rebellious that were in the house of Israel.Ezek. 20. 38, 39. Goe ye, serve every man his Idols:—If ye will not hear∣ken to the Law and Testament of God, to lead your lives thereafter: but pollute Gods holy name no more with your Gifts, and with your Idols. Goe professors, Goe; leave off profession, unless you will lead your lives according to your profession. Better never profess, than to make profession a stalking-horse to sin, Deceit, to the Devil, and Hell. The ground and rules of Religion
allow not any such thing: Receive us, says the Apostle,2 Cor. 7. 2. we have wronged no man, we have corrupted no man, we have defrauded no man. Intima∣ting, that those that are guilty of wronging, corrupting or defrauding of any, should not be admitted to the fellowship of Saints, no nor into the common catalogue of Bre∣thren with them. Nor can men with all their Rheto∣rick, and Eloquent speaking pove themselves sit for the Kingdom of Heaven,Mar. 10. 19. or men of good consci∣ence on earth. O that godly plea of Samuel: Behold here I am, says he,1 Sam. 12. 3. witness against me, before the Lord, and before his Anointed, whose Oxe have I taken, or whose Ass have I taken, or whom have I defrauded, whom have I oppressed, &c? This was to do like a man of good con∣science indeed. And in this his Ap∣peal, he was so Justified in the con∣sciencies of the whole Congregation, that they could not but with one voice, as with one mouth, break out joyntly and say,Ver. 4. Thou hast not defrauded us, nor oppressed us. A Professor, and defraud, away
with him! a Professor should not owe any man any thing, but love. A professor should provide things, not of other mens, but of his own, of his own honest getting, and that not onely in the sight of God, but of all men; that he may adorn the Do∣ctrine of God our Saviour in all things. Atten. A question. But suppose God should blow upon a Professor in his Estate, and Calling, and he should be run out before he is aware, must he be account∣ed to be like Mr. Badman, and lie un∣der the same reproach as he? Wise. An answer. No: If he hath dutifully done what he could to avoid it. It is possible for a Ship to sink at sea, not∣withstanding the most faithfull endea∣vour of the most skilful Pilot under Heaven. And thus, as I suppose, it was with the Prophet that left his wife in debt to the hazarding the slavery of her children by the Credi∣tors.2 King. 4. 1, 2. He was no profuse man, nor one that was given to defraud, for the Text says he feared God; yet, as I said, he was run out more than she could pay. If God would blow upon a man,
who can help it? and he will do so sometimes,Hag. 1. 9. because he will change dispensations with men,God does sometimes blow upon his own peo∣ple. How they should doe at that time. and be∣cause he will trye their Graces. Yea, also because he will overthrow the wicked with his Judgments; and all these things are seen in Job. But then the consideration of this, should bid men have a care that they be honest, lest this comes upon them for their sin: It should also bid them beware of launching further into the world, than in an honest way by or∣dinary means they can Godlily make their retreat; for the further in, the greater fall. It should also teach them, to begg of God his bles∣sing upon their endeavours, their honest and lawfull endeavours. And it should put them upon a diligent looking to their steps, that if in their going they should hear the Ice crack, they may timely goe back again. These things considered, and due∣ly put in practice, if God will blow upon a man, then let him be con∣tent, and with Job embrace the dunghill; let him give unto all their dues, and not fight against the Pro∣vidence
of God, (but humble himself rather under his mighty hand,) which comes to strip him naked and bare: for he that doth otherwise, fights against God; and declares that he is a stranger to that of Paul;Philip. 4. 12. I know both how to be abased, and I know how to abound; every where, in all things, I am instructed both to be full, and to be hungry, both to abound, and to suffer need. Atten. But Mr. Badman would not, I believe, have put this difference 'twixt things feigned, and those that fall of necessity. Wise. If he will not, God will, Conscience will; and that not thine own only, but the Consciences of all those that have seen the way, and that have known the truth of the con∣dition of such an one. Atten. Well: Let us at this time leave this matter, and return again to Mr. Badman. Wise. With all my heart will I proceed to give you a relation of what is yet behind of his Life, in order to our discourse of his Death. Atten. But pray do it with as much brevity as you can.
Wise. Why? are you a weary of my relating of things? Atten. No. But it pleases me to hear a great deal in few words. Wise. I profess not my self an artist that way, but yet as briefly as I can, I will pass through what of his Life is behind; and again I shall begin with his fraudulent dealing (as before I have shewed with his Cre∣ditors, so now) with his Customers, and those that he had otherwise to deal withall. He dealt by deceitfull Weights and Measures.Mo of Mr.  dealing  and . He kept weights to buy by, and weights to sell by; measures to buy by, and measures to sell by: those he bought by were too big, those he sold by were too little. Besides, he could use a thing called slight of hand, if he had to do with other mens weights and measures, and by that means make them whether he did buy or sell, yea though his Customer or Chapman looked on, turn to his own advan∣tage. Moreover, he had the art to mis∣reckon men in their Accounts
whether by weight, or measure, or money, and would often do it to his worldly advantage, and their loss: What say you to Mr. Badman now? And if a question was made of his faithfull dealing, he had his servants ready, that to his purpose he had brought up, that would avouch and swear to his Book, or word: this was Mr. Badmans practice; What think you of Mr. Badman now? Atten. Think! Why I can think no other but that he was a man left to himself, a naughty man; for these, as his other, were naughty things; if the tree, as indeed it may, ought to be judged, what it is by its fruits; then Mr. Badman must needs be a bad Tree. But pray, for my further satisfaction, shew me now by the Word of God, the evil of this his practice: and first of his using false Weights and Measures. Wise. The evil of that! why the evil of that appears to every eye: the Heathens, that live like Beasts and Bruits in many things, do a∣bominate and abhorr such wicked∣ness as this. Let a man but look upon
these things as he goes by, and he shall see enough in them from the light of nature to make him loath so base a practice; although Mr. Bad∣man loved it. Atten. But shew me something out of the Word against it, will you? Wise. I will willingly do it. And first we will look into the Old Testa∣ment:Levit. 19. 35, 36. You shall, saith God there, do no unrighteousness in Judgment, in mete-yard, in weights or in measures, a just Ballance, a just Weight, a just Ephah, and a just Hin shall you have.Of Just weights and measures. This is the Law of God, and that which all men according to the Law of the land ought to obey. So a∣gain:Ezek. 45. 10. Ye shall have just Ballances, and a just Ephah, &c. Now having shewed you the Law, I will also shew you how God takes swerving therefrom.Pro. 20. 23. A false Bal∣lance is not good;Chap. 11. 1. a false Ballance is an abomination to the Lord.The evil of deceitful Ballances, Weights and Measures. Some have just Weights but false Ballan∣ces, and by vertue of those false Bal∣lances, by their just Weights, they deceive the Countrey: Wherefore, God first of all commands that the Ballance be made Just: A just Bal∣lance
shalt thou have. Else they may be, yea are, decievers, notwith∣standing their just weights. Now, having commanded that men have a just Ballance, and testi∣fying that a false one is an abominati∣on to the Lord, he proceedeth also unto weight and measure. Thou shalt not have in thy bag di∣vers weights, a great and a small; that is one to buy by, and another to sell by,Deut. 25. 13, 14, 15, 16. as Mr. Badman had. Thou shalt not have in thy house divers measures, a great and a small, (and these had Mr. Badman also) but thou shalt have a perfect and a just weight; a perfect and a just measure shalt thou have, that thy days may be lengthen∣ed in the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee. For all that do such things, (that is, that use false Weights and Measures) and all that do unrighteously are abomination to the Lord. See now both how plentiful, and how punctual the Scripture is in this matter. But per∣haps it may be objected, that all this is old Law, and therefore hath no∣thing to do with us under the New Testament. (Not that I think
you, neighbour, will object thus:) Well, to this foolish objection, let us make an Answer. First, he that makes this objection, if he doth it to overthrow the authority of those Texts,The Old and New Law com∣mands all men to be honest and upright in their weights and mea∣sures. discovereth that himself is first cousen to Mr. Badman: For a Just man is willing to speak re∣verently of those commands. That man therefore hath, I doubt, but little conscience, if any at all that is good, that thus objecteth against the Text: but let us look into the New Testament, and there we shall see how Christ confirmeth the same: Where he commandeth that men make to others good measure, in∣cluding also that they make good weight; telling such that doe thus, or those that do it not, that they may be encouraged to do it;Luke 6. 8. Good measure, pressed down, shaken together, and running over, shall men give into your bosom; for with the same measure that ye mete withall, it shall be measured to you again: To wit, both from God and man. For as God will shew his indignation against the false man, by taking away even that he hath, so he will deliver up the
false man to the Oppressor, and the Extortioner shall catch from him, as well as he hath catched from his neighbour; therefore another Scrip∣ture saith, When thou shalt cease to deal treacherously, they shall deal trea∣cherously with thee. That the New Testament also, hath an inspection into mens Trading, yea even with their weights and measures, is evi∣dent from these general exhortations. Defraud not;Pat Scrip∣tures for our purpose. lye not one to another; let no man goe beyond his brother in any matter, for God is the avenger of all such: whatsoever you do, do it heartily, as unto the Lord, doing all in his name, to his glory; and the like. All these injunctions and command∣ments do respect our life and con∣versation among men, with refe∣rence to our dealing, trading, and so consequently they forbid false, de∣ceitful, yea all doings that are cor∣rupt. Having thus in a word or two shewed you,Where false weights and measures are to be found. that these things are bad; I will next, for the conviction of those that use them, shew you, where God saith they are to be found.
1. They are not to be found in the house of the good and godly man,1. With evil doers. for he, as his God, abhorrs them; but they are to be found in the house of evil doers,Mic. 6. 12. such as Mr. Badmans is. Are there, saith the Prophet, yet the treasures of wicked∣ness in the house of the wicked, and the scant measure that is abomination? Are they there yet, notwithstand∣ing Gods forbidding, notwithstand∣ing Gods tokens of anger against those that do such things? O how loth is a wicked man to let goe a sweet, a gainful sin, when he hath hold of it! They hold fast deceit, they refuse to let it goe. 2.2. With the  and Oppres∣sors. These deceitful Weights and Measures are not to be found in the house of the Mercifull, but in the house of the Cruel; in the house of them that love to oppress.Eos. 12. 7. The Ballances of deceit are in his hand, he loveth to oppress. He is given to oppression and cruelty, therefore he useth such wicked things in his calling. Yea he is a very cheat, and as was hinted before, concerning Mr. Badmans breaking, so I say now, concerning his using these deceitful
weights and measures, it is as bad, as base, as to take a purse, or pick a pocket; for it is a plain robbery, it takes away from a man that which is his own, even the price of his money. 3.3. With such as would swal∣lo up the poor. The deceitful Weights and Measures are not to be found in the house of such as relieve the belly, and that cover the loyns of the poor, but of such as indeed would swallow them up.Amos 8. 4, 5, 6, 7. Hear ye this, ye that swallow up the needy, and that make the poor of the land to fail, saying, When will the new Moon be gone that we may sell corn, and the Sabbath that we may set forth Wheat, making the Ephah small and the Sheckle great, (making the Measure small, and the Price great) and falsifying the Ballances by deceit, that ye may buy the poor for silver, and the needy for a pair of shooes, and sell the refuse of the Wheat. The Lord hath sworn by the exellencie of Jacob, surely I will not forget any of their works. So detestable and vile a thing is this in the sight of God. 4. God abominates the thoughts of calling of those that use false
weights and measures, by any o∣ther term than,4. With impure ones. that they be Im∣pure ones, or the like: Shall I count them pure (saith he) with the bag of deceitful weights?M 6. 11. no by no means, they are impure ones, their hands are defiled, deceitful gain is in their houses, they have gotten what they have by coveting an evil Cove∣tousness, and therefore must and shall be counted among the im∣pure, among the wicked of the world. Thus you see how full and plain the Word of God is, against this sin, and them that use it. And there∣fore Mr. Badman, for that he used by these things thus to rook and cheat his neighbours, is rightly re∣jected from having his Name in, and among the catalogue of the godly. Atten. But I am perswaded, that the using of these things, and the do∣ing by them thus deceitfully, is not counted so great an evil by some. Wise. Whether it be counted an evil or a vertue, by men, it mat∣tereth not; you see by the Scrip∣tures, the Judgment of God upon
it. It was not counted an evil by Mr. Badman, nor is it by any that still are treading in his steps. But, I say, 'tis no matter how men esteem of things, let us adhere to the Judgment of God. And the rather, because when we our selves have done weighing and measuring to others, then God will weigh and measure both us and our actions. And when he doth so, as he will do shortly, then wo be to him to whom, and of whose actions it shall be thus said by him:Dut. 5. 27. Tekel, Thou art weighed in the Ballances, and art found wanting. God will then recompense their evil of de∣ceiving upon their own head, when he shall shut them out of his pre∣sence, favour, and kingdom, for ever and ever. Atten. But 'tis a wonder, that since Mr. Badmans common practice was to do thus, that some one or more did not find him out, and blame him for this his wickedness. Wise. For the generality of peo∣ple, he went away clever with his Knavery. For what with his Bal∣lance, his false Ballance, and good
weight, and what with his slight of hand to boot, he beguiled, some∣times a little, and sometimes more, most that he had to deal with: Be∣sides, those that use this naughty trade, are either such as blind men with a shew of Religion, or by he∣ctoring the buyer out by words. I must confess Mr. Badman was not so arch at the first;How Mr. Badman did cheat, and hide his cheating. that is, to do it by shew of Religion; for now he began to grow threadbare, (though some of his brethren are arch enough this way, yea and of his sisters too, for I told you at first that there was a great many of them, and never a one of them good:) but for hecto∣ring, for swearing, for lying, if these things would make weight and measure, they should not be wanting to Mr. Badmans Custo∣mers. Atten. Then it seems he kept good Weights, and a bad Ballance; well that was better than that both should be bad. Wise. Not at all. There lay the depth of his deceit: For if any at any time found fault, that he used them hardly, and that they wanted
their weight of things; he would reply:Good Weights and a bad Ballance a deep piece of Knavery. Why did you not see them weighed? will you not believe your own eyes: If you question my weights, pray carry them whether you will, I will maintain them to be good and just. The same he would say of his scales. So he blinded, all, by his Ballance. Atten. This is cunning indeed: but as you say, there must be also some∣thing done or said, to blind therewith, and this I perceive Mr. Badman had. Wise. Yes. He had many ways to blind, but he was never clever at it, by making a shew of Religion, (though he cheated his wife there∣with:) for he was, especially by those that dwelt near him, too well known to do that, though he would bungle at it as well as he could. But there are some that are arch vil∣lains this way; they shall to view live a whole life Religiously, and yet shall be guilty of these most horrible sins: And yet Religion in it self is never the worse, nor yet the true professors of it. But as Luther says, In the name of God begins all mischief.
For Hypocrites have no other way to bring their evils to maturity, but by using and mixing the Name of God and Religion therewith. Thus they become whited Walls;Mat. 23. for by this white,A cloak of Religion to blind Mr. Chats Kna∣very. the white of Religion, the dirt of their actions is hid. Thus also they become graves that appear not, and they that goe over them, (that have to do with them) are not aware of them, but suffer them∣selves to be deluded by them. Yea, if there shall, as there will some∣times, rise a doubt in the heart of the buyer about the weight and measure he should have, why, he suffereth his very sences to be also deluded, by recalling of his Chap∣mans Religion to mind, and thinks verily that not his good chapman but himself is out; for he dreams not that his chapman can deceive. But if the buyer shall find it out, and shall make it apparent, that he is beguiled; then shall he be healed by having amends made, and per∣haps fault shall be laid upon ser∣vants, &c. and so Master Cheat shall stand for a right honest man in the eye of his Customer, though
the next time he shall pick his pocket again. SomeSome plead Custom to cheat. plead Custom for their Cheat, as if that could acquit them before the Tribunal of God: And others say, it came to them for so much, and therefore another must take it for so much, though there is wanting both as to weight and mea∣sure: but in all these things there are Juggles; or if not, such must know, Deut. 16. 20. That that which is altogather just, they must doe. Suppose that I be cheated my self with a brass half-Crown, must I therefore cheat ano∣ther therewith? if this be bad in the whole, it is also bad in the parts. Therefore however thou art dealt withall in thy buying, yet thou must deal justly in selling, or thou sinnest against thy soul, and art be∣come as Mr. Badman. And know, that a pretence to custom is nothing worth. 'Tis not custom, but good conscience that will help at Gods Tribunal. Atten. But I am perswaded, that that which is gotten by men this way, doth them but little good. Wise. I am of your mind for that,
but this is not considered by those thus minded. For if they can get it, though they get, as we say, the Devil and all, by their getting, yet they are content, and count that their getting is much. Little good! Why do you think they consider that? No: no more than they consider what they shall doe in the Judgment, at the day of God Almighty,They get nothing that en and cheat. for their wrong get∣ting of what they get, and that is just nothing at all. But to give you a more direct answer. This kind of getting, is so far off from doing them little good, that it doth them no good at all; because thereby they lose their own souls;Mar. 9. What shall it profit a man if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? He loseth then, he loseth greatly that getteth after this fashion. This is the man that is penny-wise and pound-foolish; this is he that loseth his good Sheep for a half pennyworth of tarr; that loseth a soul for a little of the world. And then what doth he get thereby, but loss and dammage? Thus he get∣teth, or rather loseth about the world
to come: But what doth he get in this world,Prov. 10. 3. more than travel and sorrow,Jer. 15. 13. vexation of spirit,Chap. 17. 3. and dis∣appointment? Men aim at blessed∣ness in getting, I mean, at temporal blessedness; but the man that thus getteth, shall not have that. For though an Inheritance after this man∣ner may be hastily gotten at the be∣ginning, yet the end thereof shall not be blessed. They gather it in∣deed, and think to keep it too, but what says Solomon? God casteth it away. The Lord will not suffer the soul of the righteous to famish, but he casteth away the substance of the wicked. The time, as I said, that they do enjoy it, it shall doe them no good at all; but long to be sure they must not have it. For God will either take it away in their life time, or else in the generation following, according to that of Job: He, the wicked, may prepare it,Job 27. 17. but the just sall put it on, and the innocent shall divide the silver. Consider that also that is written in the Proverbs: A good man leav∣eth an Inheritance to his childrens
children, and the wealth of the sin∣ner is laid up for the just.Pro. 13. 22. What then doth he get thereby, that get∣teth by dishonest means? why he getteth Sin and Wrath, Hell and Damnation; and now tell me how much he doth get. This, I say, is his getting; so that as David says, we may be bold to say too: I beheld the wicked in great prosperity, and presently I cursed his habitation: for it cannot prosper with him. Fluster and huff, and make a doe for a while he may, but God hath determined that both he and it shall melt like grease, and any ob∣serving man may see it so. Behold, the unrighteous man in a way of Injustice getteth much, and load∣eth himself with thick Clay, but anon it withereth, it decayeth, and even he, or the Generation following decline, and return to beggery. And this Mr. Badman, notwith∣standing his cunning and crafty tricks to get money, did dye, no body can tell whether worth a far∣thing or no. Atten. He had all the bad tricks,
I think, that it was possible for a man to have, to get money; one would think that he should a been rich. Wise. You reckon too fast,More of Mr. Badmans Bad tricks. if you count these all his bad tricks to get money: For he had more be∣sides. If his customers were in his Books (as it should goe hard but he would have them there; at least, if he thought he could make any advan∣tage of them,) then, then would he be sure to impose upon them his worst, even very bad Comodity, yet set down for it the price that the best was sold at: like those that sold the Refuse Wheat, or the worst of the wheat; making the Sheckle great,Amos 8. yet hoisting up the price: This was Mr. Badmans way.Another art to cheat withall. He would sell goods that cost him not the best price by far, for as much as he sold his best of all for. He had also a trick to mingle his comodity, that that which was bad might goe off with the less mistrust. Besides, if his customers at any time paid him money, let them look to themselves, and to their Ac∣quitances, for he would usually at∣tempt
to call for that payment again, specially if he thought that there was hopes of making a prize thereby, and then to be sure if they could not produce good and sufficient ground of the payment, a hundred to one but they payed it again. Some∣times the honest Chapman would appeal to his servants for proof of the payment of money, but they were trained up by him to say after his mind, right or wrong: so that, relief that way, he could get none. Atten. It is a bad, yea an abomi∣nable thing for a man to have such servants. For by such means a poor customer may be undone and not know how to help himself. Alas! if the master be so unconscionable, as I per∣cieve Mr. Badman was, to call for his money twice, and if his servant will swear that it is a due debt, where is any help for such a man? he must sink, there is no remedy. Wise. This is very bad, but this has been a practice, and that hun∣dreds of years agoe.Zeph. 1. 9. But what saith the Word of God? I will pu∣ish all those that leap upon the
threshold,Servants, observe these words. which fill their masters houses with violence and deceit. Mr. Badman also had this art; could he get a man at advantage, that is, if his chapman durst not go from him, or if the comodity he wanted could not for the present be conveniently had elsewhere; Then let him look to himself, he would surely make his purse-strings crack; he would exact upon him without any pity or conscience. Atten. That was Extortion, was it not? I pray let me hear your Judg∣men of Extortion, what it is, and when committed? Wise. Extortion is a screwing from men more than by the Law of God or men is right;Of Extor∣tion. and it is committed sometimes by them in Office, about Fees, Rewards, and the like: but 'tis most commonly committed by men of Trade, who without all con∣science, when they have the advan∣tage, will make a prey of their neighbour. And thus was Mr. Badman an Extortioner; for al∣though he did not exact, and force away, as Bailiss and Carks have used to doe; yet he had his oppor∣tunities,
and such cruelty to make use of them, that he would often, in his way, be Extorting, and forcing of money out of his Neighbours pocket. For every man that makes a prey of his advantage upon his neighbours necessities, to force from him more than in reason and con∣science, according to the present prizes of things such comodity is worth; may very well be called an Extortioner, and Judged for one that hath No inheritance in the King∣dom of God.1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Atten. Well, this Badman was a sd wretch. Wise. Thus you have often said before. But now we are in discourse of this, give me leave a little to goe on. We have a great many people in the Countrey too that live all their dayes in the practice, and so under the guilt of Extortion: people, alas! that think scorn to be so accounted. As for Example:Who are Ex∣torioners. There is a poor body that dwells, we will suppose, so many miles from the Market; and this man wants a Bushel of Grist, a pound of Butter, or a Cheese for himself, his wife and poor chil∣dren:
But dwelling so far from the Market, if he goes thither, he shall lose his dayes work, which will be eight pence or ten pence dammage to him, and that is something to a poor man. So he goeth to one of his Masters or Dames for what he wanteth, and asks them to help him with such a thing: Yes, say they, you may have it; but withall they will give him a gripe, perhaps make him pay as much (or more) for it at home, as they can get when they have carryed it five miles to a Market, yea and that too for the Refuse of their Com∣modity. But in this the Women are especially faulty, in the sale of their Butter and Cheese, &c. Now this is a kind of Extortion, it is a making a prey of the necessity of the poor, it is a grinding of their faces, a buying and selling of them. But above all, your Hucksters,Hucksters. that buy up the poor mans Victuals by whole-sale, and sell it to him a∣gain for unreasonable gains, by re∣tale, and as we call it, by piece∣meal; they are got into a way,
after a stingeing rate, to play their game upon such by Extortion: I mean such who buy up Butter, Cheese, Eggs, Bacon, &c. by whole sale, and sell it again (as they call it) by penny worths, two penny worths, a half penny worth, or the like, to the poor, all the week after the mar∣ket is past. These, though I will not con∣demn them all, do, many of them, bite and pinch the poor by this kind of evil dealing.Pro. 22. 16, 22. These destroy the poor because he is poor, and that is a grievious sin. He that op∣presseth the poor to increase his riches, and that giveth to the rich, shall sure∣ly come to want. Therefore he saith again, Rob not the poor because he is poor, neither oppress the afflicted in the gate; for the Lord will plead their cause, and spoil the soul of them that spoile them. Oh that he that gripeth and grind∣eth the face of the poor, would take notice of these two Scriptures! Here is threatned the destruction of the Estate, yea and of the Soul too, of them that oppress the poor. Their Soul we shall better see where,
and in what condition that is in, when the day of Doom is come; but for the Estates of such, they usually quickly moulter; and that sometimes all men, and sometimes no man knows how. Besides,Deut. 23. 19. these are Usurers, yea they take usury for victuals, which thing the Lord has forbidden. And be∣cause they cannot so well do it on the Market-day, therefore they do it, as I said, when the market is over; for then the poor falls into their mouths, and are necessitated to have, as they can, for their need, and they are resolved they shall pay soundly for it. Perhaps some will find fault for my medling thus with other folks matters, and for my thus pry∣ing into the secrets of their iniquity. But to such I would say, since such actions are evil, 'tis time they were hissed out of the world. For all that doe such things, offend against God, wrong their neighbour, and like Mr. Badman doe provoke God to Judg∣ment. God knows, there is abun∣dance of deceit in the world! Wise. Deceit! Aie, but I have not told you the thousandth part of it;
nor is it my business now to rake to the bottom of that dunghill: what would you say, if I should anatomize some of those vile wretches called Pawn-Brokers, that lend Money and Goods to poor people, who are by necessity forced to such an incon∣venience; and will make, by one trick or other, the Interest of what they so lend, amount to thirty, for∣ty, yea sometimes fifty pound by the year; notwithstanding the Prin∣cipal is secured by a susficient pawn; which they will keep too at last, if they can find any shift to cheat the wretched borrower. Atten. Say! Why such Miscreants are the pest and Vermin of the Com∣mon-wealth, not fit for the society of men; but methinks by some of those things you Discoursed before, you seem to import that it is not lawful for a man to make the best of his own. Wise. If by making the best, you mean,Whether it be lawful for a man to make the best of his own. to sell for as much as by hook or crook he can get for his comodity;Proved in negative by 8 reasons then I say, it is not law∣ful. And if I should say the contra∣ry, I should justifie Mr. Badman
and all the rest of that Gang: but that I never shall doe, for the Word of God condemns them. But that it is not lawful for a man at all times, to sell his commodity for as much as he can, I prove by these reasons. First, If it be lawful for me al∣way to sell my commodity as dear, or for as much as I can, then 'tis law∣ful for me to lay aside in my deal∣ing with others, good conscience, to them, and to God: but it is not lawful for me, in my dealing with others, to lay aside good consci∣ence, &c. Therefore it is not law∣ful for me always to sell my commo∣dity as dear, or for as much as I can. ThatGood con∣science must be used in selling. it is not lawful to lay a∣side good conscience in our deal∣ings, has already been proved in the former part of our discourse: but that a man must lay it aside that will sell his commodity always as dear or for as much as he can, is plain∣ly manifest thus. 1.We must not  a prey of our . He that will (as is mentioned afore) sell his commodity as dear as he can, must sometimes make a prey of the ignorance of his chap∣man:
but that he cannot doe with a good conscience (for that is to overreach, and to goe beyond my chapman, and is forbidden, 1 Thess. 4. 6.) Therefore he that will sell his commodity, as afore, as dear, or for as much as he can, must of necessity lay aside good conscience. 2. He that will sell his commodity always as dear as he can,Nor of his Neighbours . must needs, sometimes make a prey of his neigh∣bours necessity; but that he cannot doe with a good conscience, (for that is to goe beyond and defraud his neighbour, contrary to 1 Thess. 4. 6.) Therefore he that will sell his commodity, as afore, as dear, or for as much as he can, must needs cast off and lay aside a good conscience. 3. He that will (as afore) sell his commodity as dear,Nor of his . or for as much as he can, must, if need be, make a prey of his neighbours fondness; but that a man cannot doe with a good , for that is still a going beyond him, contrary to 1 Thess. 4. .) Therefore, he that will sell his commodity as dear, or for as much as he can must needs cast off, and lay aside good conscience.
The same also may be said for buying;We must use good conscience in buying. no man may always buy as cheap as he can, but must also use good conscience in buying; The which he can by no means use and keep, if he buyes always as cheap as he can, and that for the reasons ur∣ged before. For such will make a prey of the ignorance, necessity, and fondness of their chapman, the which they cannot doe with a good con∣science. When Abraham would buy a Burying place of the Sons of Heth, thus he said unto them. Intreat for me to Ephron the son of Zohar, that he may give me the cave of Mach∣pelah, which he hath, in the end of his field. For as much as it is worth shall be give it me.Gen. 23. 8, 9, Gen. 23. 8, 9. He would not have it under foot, he scorned it, he abhored it: It stood not with his Religion, Cre∣dit, nor Conscience. So also when David, would buy a field of Ornon the Jebusite: Thus he said unto him: Grant me the place of the threshing∣floor,1 Crhon. 21, 22. 24. that I may build an Altar there unto the Lord. Thou shalt give it me for the full price. He also, as Abra∣ham,
made conscience of this kind of dealing: he would not lie at catch to go beyond, no not the Jebusite, but will give him his full price for his field. For he knew that there was wickedness, as in selling too dear so in buying too cheap, therefore he would not do it. There ought therefore to be good conscience used, as in selling, so in buying; for 'tis also unlawful for a man to goe beyond or to defraud his neighbour in buying; yea 'tis un∣lawful to doe it in any matter, and God will plentifully avenge that wrong: as I also before have fore∣warned and testified. See also the Levit. 25. 14. text in the margent. But, Secondly, if it be lawful for me al∣ways to sell my commodity as dear,Charity must be used in our deal∣ings. or for as much as I can, then it is lawful for me to deal with my neigh∣bour without the use of * charity: but it is not lawful for me to lay a∣side, or to deal with my neighbour without the use of charity, therefore it is not lawful for me always to sell my commodity to my neighbour for as much as I can. A man in dealing should as really design his Neigh∣bours
good, profit, and advantage, as his own: For this is to exer∣cise Charity in his dealing. That I should thus use, or ex∣ercise charity towards my Neigh∣bour in my buying and selling, &c. with him, is evident from the gene∣ral command: [Let all your things be done in charity:]1 Cor. 16. 14. But that a man cannot live in the exercise of chatity, that selleth, as afore, as dear, or that buyeth as cheap as he can, is evident by these reasons. 1. He that sells his commodity as dear, or for as much money (al∣ways) as he can, seeks himself, and himself only; (but charity seek∣eth nor her own,1 Cor. 13. nor her own only:) So then, he that seeks himself, and himself onely, as he that sells (as afore) as dear as he can, does; maketh not use of, nor doth he exercise charity, in his so deal∣ing. 2. He that selleth his commodity (always) for as much as  get, hardeneth his heart against all reaso∣nable entreaties of the buyer. But he that doth so, cannot exercise charity in his dealing; therefore it is
not lawful for a man to sell his com∣modity, as afore, as dear as he can. Thirdly, If it be lawful for me to sell my commodity, as afore, as dear as I can, then there can be no sin in my Trading,Ephes. 4. 25. how unreasonably so∣ever I manage my calling, whether by Lying,There may be and is sin in trading. Swearing, Cursing, Cheat∣ing; for all this is but to sell my com∣modity as dear as I can: but that there is sin in these, is evident, therefore I may not sell my commo∣dity always as dear as I can. Fourthly, He that sells, as afore, as dear as he can, offereth violence to the law of Nature: for that saith, Doe unto all men,Matt. 7. 12. even as ye would that they should doe unto you.A man in trading must not offer vio∣lence to the Law of na∣ure. Now, was the Seller a Buyer, he would not that he of whom he buyes, should sell him always as dear as he can; therefore he should not sell so himself,Jo. 37. 7. when it is his lot to sell, and others to buy of him. Fifthly,We must not abuse the  we have in the know∣ledge of earthly things. He that selleth, as afore, as dear as he can, makes use of that instruction, that God hath not given to others, but sealed up in his hand, to abuse his Law, and to wrong his neighbour withall: which indeed is
contrary to God. God hath given thee more skill, more knowledge and understanding in thy commodity than he hath given to him that would buy of thee. But what! canst thou think, that God has given thee this, that thou mightest thereby make a prey of thy neighbour? that thou mightest thereby goe beyond and beguile thy neighbour? No, verily; but he hath given thee it, for his help; that thou mightest in this, be eyes to the blind, and save thy neighbour from that dammage, that his ignorance, or necessity, or fond∣ness would betray him into the hands of. Sixthly, In all that a man does,1 Cor. 10. 1 An eye  the glory  God in all we should have. he should have an eye to the glory of God, but that he cannot have that sells his commodity always for as much as he can, for the reasons urged before. Seventhly, All that a man does, he should doe in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ; that is, as being commanded,Colo. 3. 1 and authorized to doe it by him: but he that selleth al∣ways as dear as he can, cannot so much as pretend to this, without
horrid blaspheming of that Name, because commanded by him to doe otherwise. Eightly, and lastly, In all that a man does, he should have an eye to the day of Judgment, and to the con∣sideration of how his actions will be esteemed of in that day.Acts. 24. 15, 16. Therefore there is not any man can or ought to sell always as dear as he can: un∣less he will, yea he must say, in so doing, I will run the hazard of the tryal of that day, If thou sell ought unto thy neighbour,Levit. 25. 14. or buyest ought of thy neighbour, ye shall not oppress one another. Atten. But why doe you put in those cautionary words? They must not sell [always] as dear, nor buy [always] as cheap as they can: doe you not thereby intimate that a man may sometimes do so? Wise. I doe indeed intimate that somtimes the seller may sell as dear, and the buyer buy as cheap as he can; but this is allowable only in these cases: When he that sells is a Knave, and lays aside all good con∣science in selling; or when e buyer is a Knave, and layes aside all good
conscience in buying. If the buyer therefore lights of a Knave, or if the seller lights of a Knave, then let them look to themselves: but yet so, as not to lay aside conscience, because he that thou dealest with doth so: but how vile or base soever the chap∣man is, do thou keep thy commodi∣ty at a reasonable price: or if thou buyest, offer reasoable gain for the thing thou wouldest have: and if this will not do with the buyer or seller, then seek thee a more honest chapman: If thou objectest, But I have not skil to know when a penny∣worth is before me: Get some that have more skill than thy self in that affair, and let them in that matter dispose of thy money. But if there were no Knaves in the world, these objections need not be made. And thus, my very good neigh∣bour, have I given you a few of my reasons, why a man that hath it, should not always sell too dear, nor buy as cheap as he can: but should use good Conscience to God, and Charity to his Neighbour in both: Atten. But were some men hexe, to
hear you, I believe they would laugh you to scorn. Wise. I question not that at all, for so,Badman used to laugh at them that told him of his faults. Mr. Badman used to doe, when any man told him of his faults: he used to think himself wiser than any, and would count, as I have hinted before, that he was not ar∣rived to a manly spirit that did stick or boggle at any wickedness. But let Mr. Badman and his fellowes laugh, I will bear it, and still give them good counsel. But I will re∣member also, for my further re∣lief and comfort, that thus they that were covetous of old, served the Son of God himself. 14, 15. ap. 6. 25. It is their time to laugh now, that they may mourn in time to come. And, I say again, when they have laughed out their laugh; He that useth not good conscience to God, and chari∣ty to his neighbour, in buying and selling, dwells next dore to an Infidel, and is near of kito Mr. Badman. Atten. Well, but what will you say to this question? (you know that there is no settled price set by God upon any Commodity that is bought or sold under the Sun; but all things  that
we buy and sell, do ebbe and slow, as to price, like the Tide:) How (then) shall a man of a tender con∣science doe, neither to wrong the seller, buyer, nor himself, in buying and sell∣ing of commodities? Wise. This Question is thoughtAn answers. to be frivolous by all that are of Mr. Badmans way; 'tis also difficult in it self: yet I will endeavour to shape you an Answer, and that first to the matter of the question; to wit, How a Tradesman should, in Trading, keep a good conscience; (A buyer or seller either.) Secondly, How he should prepare himself to this work, and live in the practice of it. For the first:Preparati¦ons to be a good dealer. He must observe what hath been said before, to wit, he must have conscience to God, charity to his neighbour; and I will add, much moderation in dealing. Let him therefore keep within the bounds of the affirmative of those eight reasons that before were urg∣ed to prove, that men ought not in their Dealing, but to do Justly and mercifully 'twixt man and, man; and then there will be no great fear of wronging the seller, buyer, or himself.
But particularly to prepare, or in∣struct a man to this work: 1. Let the Tradesman or others consider, that there is not that in great Gettings, and in abundance, which the most of men do suppose: For all that a man has over and above what serves for his present necessity and supply, serves only to seed the lusts of the eye.ccle. 5. 10, 11. For what good is there to the owners thereof, save the beholding of them with their eyes?1 Tim. 6. 7, 8, 9. Men also, many times, in getting of riches, get therewith a snare to their soul: But few get good by getting of them. But this consideration, Mr. Badman could not abide. 2. Consider, that the getting of wealth dishonestly (as he does, that getteth it without good conscience and charity to his neighbour,) is a great offender against God. Hence he says,Ezek. 2. 13. I have smitten mine hands at thy dishonest gain, which thou hast made. It is a manner of speech that shews anger in the very making of mention of the Crime. There∣fore, 3. Consider, that a little honestly
gotten, though it may yield thee but a dinner of herbs at a time, will yield more peace therewith, than will a stalled Ox, ill gotten.Pro. 15. 17. Better is a little with righteousness,Chap. 16. 8. than great revenues without right.1 Sam. 2. 5. 4. Be thou confident,Pro. 5. 21. that Gods eyes are upon all thy wayes, and that he podereth all thy goings, and also that he marks them, writes them down, and seals them up in a bag,Job. 14. 17. against the time to come. 5. Be thou sure that thou remem∣brest, that thou knowest not the day of thy death. Remember also, that when death comes, God will give thy substance, for the which thou hast laboured, and for the which perhaps thou hast hazarded thy soul, to one, thou knowest not who, nor whether he shall be a wise man or a fool. And then,Eccles. 5. 13, 14, 15. what profit hath he that laboureth for the wind? Besides, thou shalt have nothing that thou mayest so much as carry away in thine hand. Guilt shall goe with thee, if thou hast got it dis∣honestly, and they also to whom thou shalt leave it, shall receive it to their hurt.
These things duly considered, and made use of by thee to the preparing of thy heart to thy calling of buying or selling; I come in the next place to shew thee how thou shouldest live in the practick part of this art. Art thou to buy or sell? 1. If thou sellest, do not com∣mend; if thou buyest, do not dis∣praise, any otherwise, but to give the thing that thou hast to do with, its just value and worth; for thou canst not do otherwise knowingly, but of a covetous and wicked mind. Wherefore else are comodities over∣valued by the Seller, and also under∣valued by the Buyer.Prov. 2 14. It is naught, it is naught, says the buyer, but when he hath got his bargain he boasteth there∣of. What hath this man done now but lyed in the dispraising of his bar∣gain? and why did he dispraise it, but of a covetous mind, to wrong and beguile the seller? 2. Art thou a seller, and do things grow dear? set not thy hand to help, or hold them up higher; this cannot be done without wickedness nei∣ther; for this is a making of the sheekle great:Am, 8. . Art thou a buyer, and
do things grow dear? use no cunning or deceitful language to pull them down: for that cannot be done but wickedly too. What then shall we do? will you say. Why I answer: Leave things to the providence of God, and do thou with moderation submit to his hand. But since, when they are growing dear, the hand that upholds the price, is, for the time, more strong than that which would pull it down; That being the hand of the seller, who loveth to have it dear, specially if it shall rise in his hand: therefore I say, do thou take heed, and have not a hand in it. The which thou mayest have to thine own and thy neighbours hurt, these three ways: 1. By crying out scaroity, scarcity, beyond the truth and state of things: especially take heed of doing of this by way of a prognostick for time to come. I was forA Judgment of God. 2 King. 7. this for which he was trodden to death in the gate of Samaria, that you read of in the book of Kings. This sin has a double evil in it. 1. It belieth the present blessing of God amongst us: and, 2. It undervalueth the riches of his
goodness, which can make all good things to abound towards us. 2. This wicked thing may be done by hoading up, when the hun∣ger and Necessity of the poor calls for it. Now that God may shew his dislike against this, he doth, as it were, license the people to curse such an hoarder up.Pro. 11. 26. He that with∣holdeth corn, the people shall curse him, but blessing shall be upon the head of him that selleth it. 3. But if things will rise, do thou be grieved; Be also moderate in all thy sellings, and be sure let the poor have a pennyworth, and sell thy Corn to those in necessity: Which then thou wilt do, when thou shew∣est mercy to the poor in thy selling to him, and when thou for his sake, because he is poor, undersellest the market. This is to buy and sell with good conscience; thy buyer thou wrongest not, thy Conscience thou wrongest not,Isa. 58. 6, 7, 8. thy self thou wrongest not, for God will surely recompense thee. I have spoken concerning Corn, but thy duty is, to let thy moderation in all things be known unto all men,Philip. 4. 5. the Lord is at hand.
Atten. Well, Sir, now I have heard enough of Mr. Badmans naughtiness, pray now proceed to his Death. Wise. Why Sir, the Sun is not so low, we have yet three hours to night. Atten. Nay; I am not in any great hast, but I thought you had even now done with his Life. Wise. Done! no, I have yet much more to say. Atten. Then he has much more wickedness than I thought he had. Wise. That may be.Mr Badman a very proud man. But let us proceed: This Mr. Badman, added to all his wickedness this, He was a very proud man, a Very proud man. He was exceeding proud and haugh∣ty in mind; He looked, that what he said, ought not, must not be con∣tradicted or opposed. He counted himself as wise as the wisest in the Countrey, as good as the best, and as beautiful as he that had most of it. He took great delight in praising of himself, and as much in the praises that others gave him. He could not abide that any should think themselves above him, or that their wit or personage should by
others be set before his.Of pride in eneral. He had scarce a fellowly carriage for his equals. But for those that were of an inferior ranck, he would look over them in great contempt. And if at any time he had any remote oc∣casion of having to do with them, he would shew great height, and a very domineering spirit. So that in this it may be said that Solomon gave a characteristical note of him, when he said:Pro. 21. 24. Proud and haughty scorner i his name, who dealeth in proud wrath. He never thought his Dyet well enough dressed, his Cloathes fine enough made, or his Praise e∣nough refined. Atten. This Pride, is a sin that sticks as close to nature I think, as most sins. There is Vncleanness and Pride, I know not of any two gross sins that stick closer to men then they. They have, as I may call it, an inte∣rest in Nature; it likes them because they most suit its lusts and fancies: and therefore no marvel though Mr. Badman was tainted with pride, since he had so wickedly given up himself to work all iniquity with greediness. Wise. You say right; Pride, is
a sin that sticks close to Nature, and is one of the first follies wherein it shews it self to be polluted.Pride sticks cloe to na∣ture. For even in Childhood, even in little children, Pride will first of all shew it self; it is a hasty, an early appear∣ance of the sin of the soul. It, as I may say, is that corruption that strives for predominancy in the heart, and therefore usually comes out first. But though children are so incident to it, yet methinks those of more years, should be ashamed thereof. I might at the first have begun with Mr. Badmans Pride, only I think it is not the Pride in Infancy, that begins to make a difference be∣twixt one and another, as did, and do those wherewith I began my relation of his life: therefore I passed it over, but now, since he had no more consideration of himself, and of his vile and sinful state, but to be proud when come to years; I have taken the occasion in this place to make mention of his pride. Atten. But pray, if you can re∣member them, tell me of some places of Scripture that speak against pride. I the rather desire this, because that
pride is now a reigning sin, and I hap∣pen sometimes to fall into the company of them that in my conscience are proud, very much, and I have a mind also to tell them of their sin; now when I tell them of it, unless I bring Gods word too, I doubt they will laugh me to scorn. Wise. Laugh you to scorn! the Proud man will laugh you to scorn, bring to him what Text you can, except God shall smite him in his conscience by the Word: Mr. Bad∣man did use to serve them so that did use to tell him of his: and besides, when you have said what you can, they will tell you they are not proud, and that you are rather the proud man, else you would not judge, nor so malapertly meddle with other mens matters as you do. Ne∣vertheless, since you desire it, I will mention two or three texts: They are these.Pro. 8. 13. Pride and arrogancy do I hate.Chap. 29. 23. A mans pride shall bring him low. And he shall bring down their pride.Isa. 25. 11. And all the proud, and all that do wickedly shall be as stubble,Mal. 4. 1. and the day that comes shall burn them up. This last, is a dreadful Text; it is enough to make a proud man
shake: God, saith he, will make the proud ones as stubble; that is, as fuel for the fire, and the day that cometh shall be like a burning oven, and that day shall burn them up, saith the Lord. But Mr. Badman could never abide to hear pride spoken against, nor that any should say of him, He is a proud man. Atten. What should be the reason of that? Wise. He did not tell me the rea∣son;Proud men do not love to b called proud. but I suppose it to be that which is common to all vile persons. They love this Vice, but care not to bear its name. The Drunkard loves the sin, but loves not to be called a drun∣kard. The Thief loveth to steal, but cannot abide to be called a thief, the whore loveth to commit unclean∣ness, but loveth not to be called a Whore: And so Mr. Badman loved to be proud, but could not abide to be called a proud man. The sweet of sin, is desirable to polluted and cor∣rupted man, but the name thereof, is a blot in his Scutcheon. Atten. 'Tis true that you have said: but pray how many sorts of pride are there?
Wise. There are two sorts of Pride;Two sorts of pride. Pride of Spirit, and Pride of Body. The first of these is thus made mention of in the Scriptures.Pro. 16. 5 Every one that is proud in heart is abominati∣onChp. 21. 4. to the Lord.Eccle. . 8. A high look, and a proud heart, and the plowing of the wicked is sin. The patient in spirit is better than the proud in spirit. Bodi∣ly pride these Scriptures mention. In that day the Lord shall take away the bravery of their tinckling orna∣ments about their feet, and their cauls, and their round tires like the Moon, the chains, and the bracelets, and the mussters, the bonnets, and the or∣naments of the legs, and the headbands, and the tablets, and the ear-rings, the rings,Isa. . 17. 18, 1, 20, 21, 22. and the Nose-jewels: The changable suits of Apparell, and the mantles, and the wimples, and the crisping pins, the glasses, and the sine linnen, and the hoods and the vails. By these expressions it is e∣vident that there is Pride of Body, as well as Pride of Spirit, and that both are sin, and so abominable to the Lord. But these Texts Mr. Badman could never abide to read, they were to him as Mcaiah was to
Ahab, they never spake good of him, but evil. Atten. I suppose that it was notWicked men do hate that word that reproves their vice. Mr. Badmans case alone even to ma∣ligne those Texts that speak against their vices: For I believe, that most ungodly men, (where the Scriptures are) have a secret antipathy against those Words of God that do most plain∣ly and fully rebuke them for their sins. Wise. That is out of doubt, and by that antipathy, they shew, that sin and Satan are more welcome to them than are the wholsome in∣structions of life and godliness. Atten. Well, but not to goe off from our discourse of Mr. Badman. You say he was proud: but will you shew me now some symptoms of one that is proud? Wise. Yes,Signes of a proud man in general. that I will: And first I will shew you some symptoms of Pride of Heart. Pride of heart, is seen by outward things, as Pride of Body in general, is a sign of pride of heart; for all proud gestures of the body slow from Pride of heart:Pro. 32. 13. therefore Solomon saith; There is a generation, O how lofty are their eyes,
and their eye-lids are lifted up: And again;Pro. 17. 19. There is that exalteth their gate, their going. Now these lof∣ty eyes,Mar. 7. and this exalting of the gate, is a sign of a Proud heart: for both these actions come from the heart: for out of the heart comes Pride, in all the visible appearances of it.In particu∣lar. But more particularly: 1. Heart Pride is discovered by a stretched out Neck, and by min∣cing as they go. For the wicked, the Proud, have a proud Neck, a proud Foot, a proud Tongue, by which this their going is exalted. This is that which makes them look scornfully, speak ruggedly, and car∣ry it huffingly among their Neigh∣bours. 2. A proud heart, is a persecuting one:Psal. 1. 2. The wicked through his pride doth persecute the poor. 3. A prayerless man is a proud man.Psal. 10. 4. 4. A contentions man is a proud man.Pro. 1. 10. 5. The disdainful man is a proud man.Psal. 11. 51. 6. The man that oppresses his neighbour is a proud man.Ver. 122.
7. He that hearkeneth not to Gods Word with reverence and fear,Jer. 13. 17. is a proud man. 8. And he that calls the proud hap∣py,Chap. 43. 2. is,Mal. 3. 15. be sure, a proud man. All these are proud in heart, and this their pride of heart doth thus discover it self. As to bodilyOf outward pride. pride, it is discove∣red, that is, something of it, by all the particulars mentioned before; for though they are said to be sym∣ptoms of pride of heart, yet they are symptoms of that pride, by their shewing of themselves in the Body. You know diseases that are within, are seen oft-times by outward and visible Signs, yet by them very signs even the outside is defiled also. So all those visible signs of heart∣pride, are signs of bodily pride also. But to come to more outward signs: The putting on of Gold,1 Tim. 2. 1. and Pearls,1 Pet. 3. 3, 4, 5. and costly array; the pleat∣ing of the hair, the following of fashions, the seeking by gestures to imitate the proud, either by speech, looks, dresses, goings, or other fools baubles, (of which at this time the world is full) all these,
and many more, are signs, as of a proud heart, so of bodily pride al∣so. But Mr. Badman would not allow,Mr. Badman was not for having pride called pride. by any means, that this should be called Pride, but rather neatness, hand∣sonmess, comeliness, cleanliness, &c. neither would he allow that follow∣ing of fashions was any thing else, but because he would not be proud, singular, and esteemed fantastical by his neighbours. Atten. But I have been told, that when some have been rebuked for their pride, they have turned it again upon the brotherhood of those by whom they have been rebuked: saying, Physician heal thy Friends, look at home, among your Brotherhood, even among the wisest of you, and see if you your selves be clear, even you profes∣sors: for who is prouder than you professors? searcesly the Devil him∣self. Wise. My heart akes at this an∣swer, because there is too much cause for it. This very Answer would Mr. Badman give his wife, when she (as she would some∣times) reproved him for his pride:
We shall have, says he, great amend∣ments in living now, for the De∣vil is turned a corrector of vice: For no sin reigneth more in the world, quoth he, than pride among pro∣fessors. And who can contradict him? let us give the Devil his due, the thing is too apparent for any man to deny. And I doubt not but the same answer is ready in the mouths of Mr. Badmans friends; for they may and do see pride display it self in the Apparel and carriages of professors; one may say, almost as much, as among any people in the Land, the more is the pity. Ay, and I fear that even their Extravagancies in this, hath hardened the heart of many a one, as I perceive it did somewhat the heart of Mr. Badman himself. For mine own part, I have seen many my self, and those Church-members too, so deckt and bedaub∣ed with their Fangles and Toyes, and that when they have been at the solemn Appointments of God, in the way of his Worship, that I have wondred with what face such paint∣ed persons could sit in the place
where they were without swound∣ing. But certainly the holiness of God, and also the pollution of them∣selves by sin, must needs be very far out of the minds of such peo∣ple, what profession soever they make. I have read of an Whores fore∣head,Jer. . 3. and I have read of christian∣shamefacedness;1 Tim. 2. 9. I have read of cost∣ly array,1 Pet. 3. 1, 2, 3. and of that which becom∣eth women professing Godliness,Jer. 23. 15. with good works; but if I might speak, I know what I know, and could say, and yet do no wrong, that which would make some pro∣fessors stink in their places; but now I forbear. Atten. Sir, you seem to be great∣ly concerned at this, but what if I shall say more? it is whispered, that some good Ministers have countenan∣ced their people in their light and wanton. Apparrel, yea have pleaded for their Gold, and Pearls, and costly array, &c. Wise. I know not what they have pleaded for, but 'tis easily seen that they tolerate, or at least wise, wink and connive at such things, both in
their Wives and Children. And so from the Prophets of Jerusalem is pro∣faneness gone forth into all the land. Ezra. 9. 2. And when the hand of the Rulers are chief in a trespass, who can keep their people from being drowned in that trespass? Atten. This is a lamentation, and must stand for a lamentation. Wise. So it is, and so it must.Pride in pro∣feors a shame and stumbling-block to the world. And I will add, it is a shame, it is a reproach, it is a stumbling-block to the blind; for though men be as blind as Mr. Badman himself, yet they can see the foolish lightness that must needs be the bottom of all these apish and wanton extra∣vagancies. But many have their excuses ready; to wit, their Pa∣rents, their Husbands, and their breeding calls for it, and the like: yea, the examples of good people prompt them to it: but all these will be but the Spiders webb, when the thunder of the Word of the great God shall rattle from Heaven against them, as it will at Death or Judgment; but I wish it might do it before. But alas! these excuses are but bare pretences, these proud
ones love to have it so. I once talked with a Maid, by way of re∣proof, for her fond and gaudy gar∣ment. But she told me,☞ The Tailor would wake it so: when alas, poor proud Girle, she gave order to the Taylor so to make it. Many make Parents, and Husbands, and Tay∣lors, &c. the Blind to others, but their naughty hearts, and their giving of way thereto, that is the original cause of all these evils. Atten. Now you are speaking of the cause of pride,Why pride is in such request. pray shew me yet fur∣ther why pride is now so much in re∣quest? Wise. I will shew you what I think are the reasons of it.1 Reason. 1. The first is, Because such per∣sons are led by their own hearts,Mar. 7. 22, 23. ra∣ther than by the Word of God. I told you before, that the original fountain of pride is the heart. For out of the heart comes pride; it is therefore because they are led by their hearts,Obad. 3. which naturally tends to lift them up in pride. This pride of heart, tempts them, and by its de∣ceits overcometh them; yea it doth put a bewitching vertue into their
Peacocks feathers, and then they are swallowed up with the vanity of them. 2. Another reason why professors are so proud, (for those we are talk∣ing of now) is because they are more apt to take example by those that are of the World, than they are to take example of those that are Saints indeed. Pride is of the world. For all that is of the world,1 Joh. 2. 16. the lusts of the slesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, are not of the Father but of the world. Of the world there∣fore Professors learn to be proud. But they should not take them for example. It will be objected, No, nor your saints neither, for you are as proud as others: Well, let them take shame that are guilty. But when I say, professors should take example for their life by those that are saints indeed, I mean as Peter says: They should take example of those that were in old time, the saints; for saints of old time were the best, therefore to these he directeth us for our patrern.1 Pet. 3. 1, 3, 4, 5. Let the wives con∣versation be chast, and also coupled with fear. Whose adorning, saith Pe∣ter,
let it not be that outward adorning, of pleating the hair, and of wearing of gold, or of putting on of Apparel: but let it be the hidden man of the heart, in that which is not corrupti∣ble, even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God of great price. For after this manner, in the old time, the holy women also who trusted in God, adorn∣ed themselves, being in subjection to their own husband.3 Reason. 3. Another reason is, Because they have forgotten the pollution of their Nature. For the remembrance of that, must needs keep us humble, and being kept humble, we shall be at a distance from pride. The proud and the humble are set in op∣position; (God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace to the humble.) And can it be imagined, that a sensi∣ble Christian should be a proud one; sence of baseness tends to lay us low, not to list us up with pride; not with pride of Heart, nor pride of Life: But when a man begins to forget what he is, then he, if ever, begins to be proud. Methinks it is one of the most
senceless and ridiculous things in the world, that a man should be proud of that which is given him on purpose to cover the shame of his nakedness with. 4. Persons that are proud,4 Reason. have gotten God and his Holiness out of their sight. If God was before them, as he is behind their back; And if they saw him in his holiness, as he sees them in their sins and shame, they would take but little pleasure in their apisn Knacks. The Holiness of God makes the Angels cover their faces,Isa. 6. crumbles Christians, when they behold it, into dust and ashes: and as his Majesty is, such is his Word; Therefore they abuse it, that bring it to countenance pride. Lastly,5 Reason. But what can be the end of those that are proud, in the deck∣ing of themselves after their antick manner? why are they for going with their Bulls-foretops, with their naked shoulders, and Paps hanging out like a Cows bag? why are they for painting their faces, for stretch∣ing out their necks, and for putting of themselves into all the Formalities
which proud Fancy leads them to? Is it because they would honour God? because they would adorn the Gospel? because they would beautifie Religion, and make sinners to fall in love with their own salva∣tion? No, no. It is rather to please their lusts, to satisfie their wild and extravagant fancies; and I wish none doth it to stir up lust in others, to the end they may commit unclean∣ness with them. I believe, what∣ever is their end, this is one of the great designes of the Devil: and I believe also, that Satan has drawn more into the sin of uncleanness, by the spangling shew of fine cloaths, than he could possibly have drawn unto it, without them. I wonder what it was, that of old was called the Attire of an Harlot: certainly it could not be more bewitching and tempting than are the garments of many professors this day. Atten. I like what you say very well, and I wish that all the proud Dames in England that profess, were within the reach and sound of your words. Wise. What I have said, I be∣lieve
is true; but as for the proud Dames in England that profess, they have Moses and the Prophets, and if they will not hear them, how then can we hope that they should receive good by such a dull sounding Rams∣horn as I am? However, I have said my mind, and now if you will, we will proceed to some other of Mr. Badmans doings. Atten. No:The evil ef∣fects of the sin of Pride. pray before you shew me any thing else of Mr. Badman, shew me yet more particularly the evil effects of this sin of Pride. Wise. With all my heart, I will answer your request. 1. Then: 'Tis pride that makes poor Man so like the Devil in Hell,1 Evil effect. that he cannot in it be known to be the Image and similitude of God. The Angels when they became De∣vils,1 Tim. 3. 6. 'twas through their being lifted or puffed up with pride. 'Tis pride also that lifteth or puffeth up the heart of the sinner, and so makes him to bear the very image of the Devil. 2. Pride makes a man so odious in the sight of God,2 Evil effect. that he shall not, must not come nigh his Ma∣jesty.
Though the Lord be high,Psal. 138. 9. yet hath he respect to the lowly, but the proud he knows afar off. Pride sets God and the Soul at a distrance; pride will not let a man come nigh God, nor God will not let a proud man come nigh unto him: Now this is a dreadful thing. 3. As pride sets, Evil effect. so it keeps God and the Soul at a distance. God re∣sisteth the proud; resists, that is, he opposes him, he thrusts him from him, he contemneth his person and all his performances. Come in to Gods Ordinances, the proud man may; but come into his presence, have communion with him,a. 4. 6. or bles∣sing from him, he shall not. For the high God doth resist him. 4. The Word saith,4 Evil effect. that The Lord will destroy the House of the proud.Pro. 16. 25. He will destroy his House; it may be understood, he will destroy him and his. So he destroyed proud Pha∣raoh, so he destroyed proud Corah, and many others. 5. Pride,5 Evil effect. where it comes, and is entertained, is a certain forerunner of some Judgment that is not far behind.Pro. 11. 2. When pride goes before,
shame and destruction will follow after.Prov. 16. 8. When pride cometh, then com∣eth shame. Pride goeth before de∣struction, and a haughty spirit before a fall. 6. Persisting in pride makes the6 Evil ef∣fect. condition of a poor man as remedi∣less as is that of the Devils them∣selves.1 Tim. 3. 6. And this I fear was Mr. Badmans condition, and that was the reason that he died so as he did; as I shall shew you anon. But what need I thus talk of the particular actions,A general character of Mr. Bad∣man. or rather prodi∣gious sins of Mr. Badman, when his whole Life and all his actions, went as it were to the making up one massie body of sin? Instead of believing that there was a God, his Mouth, his Life and Actions decla∣red, that he believed no such thing. His transgression said within my heart,Psal. 36. 1. that there was no fear of God before his eyes.A brief rela∣tion of Mr. Badmans ways. Instead of honouring of God, and of giving glory to him for any of his Mercies, or under any of his good Providences towards him (for God is good to all, and lets his Sun shine, and his Rain fall
upon the unthankful and unholy,) he would ascribe the glory to other causes. If they were Mercies, he would ascribe them (if the open face of the providence did not give him the lye) to his own wit, labour, care, industry, cunning, or the like: if they were Crosses, he would ascribe them, or count them the off∣spring of Fortune, ill Luck, Chance, the ill mannagement of matters, the ill will of neighbours, or to his wifes being Religious, and spending, as he called it, too much time in Reading, Praying, or, the like. I was not in his way to acknowledge God, (that is, graciously) or his hand in things. But,Isa. 26. 10. as the Prophet saith; Let fa∣vour be shewed to the wicked, yet will he not learn righteousness. And again, They returned not to him that smote them,Isa. 9. 13. nor did they seek the Lord of hosts. This was Mr. Badmans temper,Isa. 26. 11. neither Mercies nor Judg∣ment would make him seek the Lord. Nay, as another Scripture sayes,Psal. 29. 5. he would not see the works of God, nor regard the operati∣ons of his hands either in mercies or in Judgments. But further, when
by Providence he has been cast un∣der the best Means for his soul, (for, as was shewed before, he having had a good master, and before him a good father, and after all a good wife, and being sometimes upon a Journey, and cast under the hearing of a good Sermon, as he would sometimes for novelties sake go to hear a good Preacher;Pro. 17. 6.) he was always without heart to make use thereof:Isa. 26. 10. In this land of righteous∣ness he would deal unjustly, and would not behold the majesty of the Lord. Instead of reverencing the Word,Mr. Bad∣mans judg∣ment of the Scriptures. when he heard it preached, read, or discoursed of, he would sleep, talk of other Business, or else ob∣ject against the authority, harmo∣ny, and wisdom of the Scriptures. Saying, How do you know them to be the Word of God? how do you know that these sayings are true? The Scriptures, he would say, were as a Nose of Wax, and a man may turn them whithersoever he lists: one Scripture says one thing, and another sayes the quite contrary; Besides, they make mention of a thousand
imposibilities; they are the cause of all dissensions and discords that are in the Land: Therefore you may (would he say) still think what you will, but in my mind they are best at ease that have least to do with them. Instead of loving and honouring of them that did bear in their Fore∣heads the Name,Good men Mr. Bad∣mans lon. and in their Lives the Image of Christ, they should be his Song, the matter of his Jests, and the objects of his slanders. He would either make a mock at their sober deportment, their gracious lan∣guage, quiet behaviour, or else de∣sperately swear that they did all in deceit and hypocrisie. He would endeavour to render godly men as odious and contemptable as he could; any lyes that were made by any, to their disgrace, those he would avouch for truth, and would not endure to be controlled.Psal. 5. 19. 20. He was much like those that the prophet speaks of, that would sit and slander his mothers son; yea, he would speak reproachfully of his wife, though his conscience told him, and many would testifie, that she was a
very vertuous woman. He would also raise slanders of his wives friends himself, affirming that their doctrine tended to lasciviousness, and that in their assemblies they acted and did unbeseeming men and women, that they committed uncleanness, &c. He was much like those that affir∣med the Apostle should say,Rom. 3. 7, 8. Let us do evil that good may come: Or like those of whom it is thus written; Report,Jer. 23. 10. say they, and we will report it. And if he could get any thing by the end that had scandal in it, if it did but touch professors, how false∣ly soever reported; Oh! then he would glory, laugh, and be glad, and lay it upon the whole party: Saying, Hang them Rogues, there is not a barrel better Herring of all the holy Brotherhood of them: Like to like, quoth the Devil to the Colli∣er, this is your precise Crew. And then he would send all home with a curse. Atten. If those that make professi∣on of Religion be wise, Mr. Bad∣mans watchings and words will make them the more wary and careful in all things.
Wise. You say true.When the wicked watch, Gods peo∣ple should be wary. For when we see men do watch for our halting, and rejoyce to see us stumble and fall, it should make us so much abundance the more careful. I do think it was as delightful to Mr. Badman to hear, raise, and tell lies, and lying stories of them that fear the Lord, as it was for him to go to bed when a weary. But we will at this time let these things pass. For as he was in these things bad enough, so he added to these, many more the like. He was anBadman an angry, envious man. angry, wra full, en∣vious man, a man that knew not what meekness or gentleness meant, nor did he desire to learn. His na∣tural temper was to be surly, huffie, and rugged, and worse; and he so gave way to his temper, as to this, that it brought him to be furious and outrageous in all things, specially against goodness it self, and against other things too, when he was dis∣pleased. Atten. Solomon saith,Pro. 14. 16. He is a fool that rageth. Wise. He doth so; and sayes moreover,Eccle. 7. 9. That anger rests in the bo∣som
of fools. And truly, if it be a sign of a Fool to have anger rest in his bosom, then was Mr. Badman, notwithstanding the conceit that he had of his own abilities, a Fool of no small size. Atten. Fools are mostly most wise in their own eyes. Wise. True. But I was a saying, that if it be a sign that a man is a Fool, when Anger rests in his bo∣som; Then what is it a sign of, think you, when Malice and Envy rests there? For to my knowledge Mr. Badman was as malicious and as en∣vious a man as commonly you can hear of. Atten. Certainly,Whence En∣vy flows. malice and envy flow from pride and arrogancy, and they again from ignorance, and ig∣norance from the Devil; And I thought, that since you spake of the pride of Mr. Badman before, we should have something of these before we had done. Wise. Envy flows from Igno∣rance indeed. And this Mr. Bad∣man was so envious an one, where he set against, that he would swell with it, as a Toad, as we say,
swells with poyson. He whom he maligned, might at any time even read envy in his face wherever he met with him, or in whatever he had to do with him. His envy was so rank and strong, that if it at any time turned its head against a man, it would hardly ever be pulled in again: He would watch over that man to do him mischief, as the Cat watches over the Mouse to destroy it; yea, he would wait seven years, but he would have an opportunity to hurt him, and when he had it, he would make him feel the weight of his Envy. Envy is a devilish thing, the Scri∣pture intimates that none can stand before it.Pro. 27. 3, 4. A stone is heavy, and the sand weighty, but a fools wrath is heavier than them both. Wrath is cruel,Envie the worst of the four. and anger is outrageous, but who can stand before envy? This Envy, for the foulness of it, is reckoned among the foulest Vil∣lanies that are,Gal. 5. 19, 2 as adultery, mur∣der, drunkenness, revellings, witch∣crafts, heresies, seditions, &c. Yea, it is so malignant a corruption, that
it rots the very bones of him in whom it dwells.Pro. 14. 30. A sound heart is life to the flesh, but envy the rotten∣ness of the hones. Atten. This envy is the very Fa∣ther and Mother of a great many hideous and prodigious wickednesses: I say, it is the veryEnvy is the father and mother of a many wickednesses. Father and Mother of them; it both begets them, and also nourishes them up, till they come to their cursed matu∣rity in the bosom of him that enter∣tains them. Wise. You have given it a very right description, in calling of it the Father and Mother of a great many other prodigious wickednesses: for it is so venomous and vile a thing, that it puts the whole course of Nature out of order, and makes it fit for nothing but confusion, and a hold for every evil thing.Jam. 3. 14, 15. For where envy and strife is, there is confusion, and every evil work. Wherefore, I say, you have rightly called it, The very Father and Mother of a great many other sins. And now for our further edification, I will reckon up some of the births of Envy.Some of the births of Envy. 1. Envy, as I told you before, it
rotteth the very bones of him that entertains it. And, 2. As you have also hinted, it is heavier than a Stone, than Sand; yea, and I will add, It falls like a Mill-stone upon the head. There∣fore, 3. It kills him that throws it, and him at whom it is thrown. Envy slayeth the silly one.Job. 5. 2. That is, him in whom it resides, and him who is its object. 4. 'Twas that also that slew Je∣susMatt. 27. 18. Christ himself;Mar. 15. 10. for his adver∣saries persecuted him through their envy. 5. Envy was that by vertue of which Joseph was sold by his Bre∣threnActs. 7. 9. into Egypt. 6. 'Tis envy that hath the handIsa. 11. 13. in making of variance among Gods Saints. 7. 'Tis envy in the hearts of Sin∣ners,Acts 13. 14. that stirres them up to thrust Gods Ministers out of their coasts. 8. What shall I say? 'Tis envy that is the very Nursery of whisper∣ings, debates, backbitings, slanders, reproaches, murders, &c. 'Tis not possible to repeat all the
particular fruits of this sinfull root. Therefore, it is no marvel that Mr. Badman was such an ill natured man, for the great roots of all manner of wickedness were in him, unmorti∣fied, unmaimed, untouched. Atten. But it isA rare thing.  a rare case, even this of Mr. Badman, that he should never in all his life be touched with remorse for his ill-spent life. Wise. Remorse, I cannot say he ever had, if by remorse you mean repentance for his evils.Mr. Bad∣man under some trou∣ble of mind. Yet twice I remember he was under some trouble of mind about his conditi∣on: Once when he broke his legg as he came home drunk from the Ale-house; and another time when he fell sick, and thought he should die: Besides these two times, I do not remember any more. Atten. Did he break his legg then? Wise. Yes: Once, as he came home drunk from the Ale-house. Atten. Pray how did he break it? Wise. Why upon a time he was at an Ale-house,Mr. Badman brake his legg. that wicked house, about two or three miles from
home, and having there drank hard the greatest part of the day, when night was come, he would stay no longer, but calls for his horse, gets up, and like a Mad-man (as drun∣ken persons usually ride) away he goes, as hard as horse could lay legs to the ground. Thus he rid, till coming to a dirty place, where his horse flouncing in, fell, threw his master, and with his fall broke his legg: so there he lay. But you would not think how heHe swears. swore at first. But after a while, he come∣ing to himself, and feeling by his pain, and the uselesness of his legg, what case he was in, and also fear∣ing that this bout might be his death; he began to crie out after the man∣ner of such;He prays. Lord help me, Lord have mercy upon me, good God deliver me, and the like. So there he lay, till some came by, who took him up, carried him home, where he lay for some time, before he could go abroad again. Atten. And then, you say, he called upon God. Wise. He cryed out in his pain, and would say, O God, and O Lord,
help me: but whether it was that his sin might be pardoned, and his soul saved, or whether to be rid of his pain, I will not positively deter∣mine; though I fear it was but for the last;It has no good effect upon him. because, when his pain was gone, and he had got hopes of mend∣ing, even before he could go abroad, he cast off prayer, and began his old game; to wit, to be as bad as he was before. He then would send for his old campanions; his Sluts also would come to his house to see him, and with them he would be, as well as he could for his lame leg, as vicious as they could be for their hearts. Atten. 'Twas a wonder he did not break his neck. Wise. His neck had gone instead of his leg, but that God was long-suffering towards him; he had deser∣ved it ten thousand times over. There have been many, as I have heard, and as I have hinted to you before, that have taken their Hor∣ses when drunk, as he; but they have gone from the pot to the grave; for they have broken their necks 'twixt the Ale-house and home. One ☜ hard by us also drunk himself dead;
he drank, and dyed in his drink. Atten. 'Tis a sad thing to dye drunk. Wise. So it is: But yet I won∣der thar no more do so. For con∣sidering the hainousness of that sin, and with how many other sins it is accompanied,How many sins do ac∣company drunkenness. as with oaths, blas∣phemies, lyes, revellings, whore∣ings, brawlings, &c. it is a wonder to me, that any that live in that sin should escape such a blow from hea∣ven that should tumble them into their graves. Besides, when I con∣sider also how, when they are as drunk as beasts, they, without all fear of danger, will ride like Bed∣lams and mad men, even as if they did dare God to meddle with them if he durst, for their being drunk I say, I wonder that he doth not withdraw his protecting providen∣ces from them, and leave them to those Dangers and Destructions that by their sin they have deserved, and that by their Bedlam madness they would rush themelves into: only I consider again, that he has appointed a day wherein he will reckon with them,Ats 1. 30, 31, 3. and doth alo
commonly make Examples of some, to shew that he takes notice of their sin, abhorrs their way, and will count with them for it at the set time. Atten. It is worthy of our remark, to take notice how God, to shew his dislike of the sins of men, strikes some of them down with a blow; as the breaking of Mr. Badmans legg, for doubtless that was a stroak from hea∣ven. Wise. It is worth our remark in∣deed. It was an open stroak, it fell upon him while he was in the height of his sin: And it looks much like to that in Job;Job 34. 24, 25, 26. Therefore he knoweth their works, and over∣turneth them in the night, so that they are destroyed. He striketh them as wicked men in the open sight of others: Or as the Margent reads it, in the place of beholders. He layes them with his stroak in the place of beholders. There was Mr. Badman laid, his stroak was taken notice of by every one: his broken legg was at this time the Town-talk.An open . Mr. Badman has broken his legg, sayes one: How did he break it? sayes
another: As he came home drunk from such an Ale-house, said a third; A Judgment of God upon him, said a fourth. This his sin, his shame, and punishment, are all made conspicuous to all that are about him. I will here tell you another story or two. I have read in Mr. Clark's Look∣ing-glasspag. 41. for Sinners; That upon a time, a certain drunken fellow boast∣ed in his Cups, that there was nei∣ther Heaven nor Hell; also he said, He believed, that man had no Soul, and that for his own part, he would sell his soul to any that would buy it. Then did one of his companions buy it of him for a cup of Wine; and presently the Devil in mans shape bought it of that man again at the the same price; and so in the pre∣sence of them all laid hold on this Soul-seller, and carried him away through the Air, so that he was ne∣ver more heard of. In pag. 148. he tells us also: That there was one at Salisbury, in the midst of his health drinking and ca∣rousing in a Tavern; and he drank a health to the Devil, saying, That
if the Devil would not come and pledge him, he would not believe that there was either God or Devil. Whereupon his companions stricken with fear, hastened out of the room: and presently after, hearing a hide∣ous noise, and smelling a stinking savour, the Vintner ran up into the chamber; and coming in, he missed his Guest, and found the win∣dow broken, the Iron barr in it bowed, and all bloody: But the man was never heard of after∣wards. Again, in pag. 149. he tells us of a Bailiff of Hedly: Who upon a Lords Day being drunk at Melford, got upon his horse, to ride through the streets, saying, That his horse would carry him to the Devil: and presently his hore threw him, and broke his neck. These things are worse than the breaking of Mr. Badmans Leg, and should be a cau∣tion to all of his friends that are living, lest they also fall by their sin into these sad Judgements of God. But, as I said, Mr. Badman quickly forgot all, his conscience
was choaked, before his legg was healed. And therefore, before he was well of the fruit of one sin, he tempts God to send another Judg∣ment to seize upon him: And so he did quickly after. For not many months after his legg was well, he had a very dangerous fit of sickness,Mr. Badman fallen sick. insomuch that now he began to think he must dye in very deed. Atten. Well, and what did he think and do then? Wise. He thought he must go to Hell;His consci∣ence is wounded. this I know, for he could not forbear but say so. To my best remembrance, he lay crying out all one night for fear, and at times he would so tremble, that he would make the very bed shake under him.He cryes out in his sickness. But, Oh! how the thoughts of Death, of Hell-fire, and of eternal Judgment, did then wrack his conscience. Fear might be seen in his face, and in his tossings to and fro: It might also be heard in his words, and be understood by his heavy groans. He would often cry, I am undone, I am undone; my vile life has undone me. Atten. Then his former atheisti∣cal
thoughts and principles, were too weak now to support him from the fears of eternal damnation. Wise. Aie! they were too weak indeed. They may serve to stifle conscience, when a man is in the midst of his prosperity, and to har∣den the heart against all good coun∣sel when a man is left of God, and given up to his reprobate mind: His A∣theism will not help him now. But alas, atheistical thoughts, Noti∣ons and Opinions, must shrink and melt away, when God sends, yea comes with sickness to visit the soul of such a sinner for his sin. There was a man dwelt abour 12 miles off from us, that had so trained up him∣self in his atheistical Notions, that at last he attempted to write a book against Jesus Christ, and against the divine Authority of the Scriptures. (But I think it was not printed:) Well, after many days God struck him with sickness, whereof he dyed. So, being sick, and musing upon his former doings, the Book that he had written came into his mind, and with it such a sence of his evil in writing of it, that it tore his Con∣science as a Lyon would tare a Kid.
He lay therefore upon his death-bed in sad case,A dreadful example of Gods anger. and much affliction of conscience: some of my friends also went to see him; and as they were in his chamber one day, he hastily called for Pen Ink and Paper, which when it was given him, he took it and writ to this purpose. I, such an one, in such a Town, must goe to Hell-fire, for writing a Book against Jesus Christ, and against the Holy Scriptures:☞ And would also have leaped out of the window of his house to have killed himself, but was by them prevented of that: so he dyed in his bed, such a death as it was. 'Twill be well if others take warning by him. Atten. This is a remarkable sto∣ry. Wise. 'Tis as true as remarka∣ble; I had it from them that I dare believe, who also themselves were eye and ear witnesses; and also that catcht him in their arms, and saved him when he would have leaped out of his chamber-window, to have destroyed himself. Atten. Well, you have told me what were Mr. Badmans thoughts
(now, being sick) of his condition; pray tell me also what he then did when he was sick? Wise. Did! he did many things, which I am sure he never thought to have done, and which, to be sure, was not looked for of his wife and children. In this fit of sickness,What Mr. Badman did more when he was sick. his Thoughts were quite altered about his wife; I say his Thoughts, so far as could be judged by his words and carriages to her. For now she was his good wife, his godly wife, his honest wife, his duck, and dear, and all. Now he told her, that she had the best of it, she having a good Life to stand by her, while his debaucheries and ungodly Life did always stare him in the face. Now he told her, the counsel that she often gave him, was good; though he was so bad as not to take it. Now he would hear her talk to him,Great alte∣ration made in Mr. Bad∣man. and he would lie sighing by her while she so did. Now he would bid her pray for him, that he might be delivered from Hell. He would also now consent, that some of her good Ministers might
come to him to comfort him; and he would seem to shew them kind∣ness when they came, for he would treat them kindly with words, and hearken diligently to what they said, only he did not care that they should talk much of his ill spent life, because his conscience was clogged with that already; he cared not now to see his old companions, the thoughts of them was a torment to him: and now he would speak kind∣ly to that child of his that took after its mothers steps, though he could not at all abide it before. He also desired the prayers of good people, that God of his mercy would spare him a little longer, promising that if God would but let him recover this once, what a new, what a penitent man he would be toward God, and what a loving husband he would be to his wife: what liberty he would give her, yea how he would goe with her him∣self to hear her Ministers, and how they should go hand in hand in the way to heaven together. Atten. Here was a fine shew of things; I'le warrant you, his wife was glad for this.
Wise. His wife! Aie,The Town∣talk of Mr. Badmans change. and a many good people besides: it was noysed all over the Town, what a great change there was wrought upon Mr. Bad∣man; how sorry he was for his sins, how he began to love his wife, how he desired good men should pray to God to spare him; and what pro∣mises he now made to God in his sickness, that if ever he should raise him from his sick bed to health again, what a new penitent man he would be towards God, and what a loving husband to his good wife. Well, ministers prayed, and good people rejoyced, thinking verily that they now had gotten a man from the Devil; nay, some of the weaker sort did not stick to say that God had began a work of Grace in his heart;His wife is comforted. and his wife, poor wo∣man, you cannot think how apt she was to believe it so; she rejoyced, and she hoped as she would have it. But, alas! alas! in little time things all proved otherwise. After he had kept his Bed a while,Mr. Badman recovers and returns to his old course. his distemper began to abate, and he to feel himself better, so
he in little time was so finely mend∣ed, that he could walk about the house, and also obtained a very fine stomach to his food: and now did his wife and her good friends stand gaping, to see Mr. Badman fulfill his promise of becoming new to∣wards God, and loving to his wife: but the contrary only shewed it self. For so soon as ever he had hopes of mending, and found that his strength began to renew, his trou∣ble began to goe off his heart, and he grew as great a stranger to his frights and fears, as if he had never had them. But verily, I am apt to think, that one reason of his no more re∣garding, or remembring of his sick-bed fears, and of being no bet∣ter for them, was, some words that the Doctor that supplied him with Physick said to him when he was mending. For as soon as Mr. Bad∣man began to mend, the Doctor comes and sits him down by him in his house, and there fell into dis∣course with him about the nature of his disease; and among other things they talked of Badmans trouble,
and how he would cry out, trem∣ble, and express his fears of going to Hell when his sickness lay pretty hard upon him. To which the Doctor replyed:Ignorant physicians kill souls while they cure bodyes. That those fears and Out-cries did arise from the height of his distemper, for that dis∣ease was often attended with lightness of the head, by reason the sick party could not sleep, and for that the va∣pours disturbed the brain: But you see Sir, quoth he, that so soon as you got sleep and betook your self to rest, you quickly mended, and your head settled, and so those frenzies left you. And was it so indeed, thought Mr. Badman; was my troubles, only the effects of my distemper, and because ill vapours got up into my brain? Then surely, since my Physi∣cian was my Saviour, my Lust again shall be my God. So he never minded Religion more, but betook him again to the world, his lusts and wicked companions: And there was an end of Mr. Badmans Conver∣sion. Atten. I thought, (as you told me of him) that this would be the result of
the whole; for I discerned by your re∣lating of things, that the true sym∣ptoms of conversion were wanting in him, and that those that appeared to be any thing like them, were only such as the reprobates may have, Wise. You say right, for there wanted in him, when he was most sensible, a sence of the pollution of his Nature;Gen. 4. 12. 14. he only had guilt for his sinful actions, the which Cain,Exo. 9. 27. and Pharaoh,1 Sam. 1. 4. and Saul, and Judas, those reprobates,Matt. 27. 3, 4, 5. have had before him. Besides, the great things that he desi∣red,The true symptoms of conversi∣on wanting in all Mr. Badmans sence of sin and desires of mercy. were, to be delivered from going to Hell, (and who would willingly?) and that his life might be lengthened in this world. We find not by all that he said or did, that Jesus Christ the Saviour was desired by him, from a sence of his need of his Righteousness to cloath him, and of his Spirit to sanctifie him. His own strength was whole in him, he saw nothing of the treachery of his own heart; for had he, he would never have been so free to make pro∣mises to God of amendment. He would rather have been afraid, that
if he had mended, he should have turned with the dog to his vomit, and have begged prayers of Saints, and assistance from heaven upon that ac∣count, that he might have been kept from doing so. 'Tis true he did beg prayers of good people,Exo. 19. 28. and so did Pharaoh of Moses and Aaron,Ats 8. 24. and Simon Magus of Simon Peter, His mind also seemed to be turn∣ed to his wife and child; but alas! 'twas rather from conviction that God had given him concerning their happy estate over his, than for that he had any true love to the work of God that was in them. True, some shews of kindness he seemed to have for them, and so had rich Dives, when in Hell,Luk. 16. 27, 28. to his five brethren that were yet in the world; yea he had such love, as to wish them in Heaven, that they might not come thither to be tormented. Atten. Sick-bed Repentance is sel∣dom good for anything. Wise. Osick-bed repentance, and that it is to be sus∣pected. You say true, it is very rarely good for any thing indeed. Death is unwelcom to Nature, and usually when sickness and death visit
the sinner; the first taking of him by the shoulder, and the second standing at the Bed-chamber door to receive him; then the sinner be∣gins to look about him, and to be∣think with himself, These will have me away before God; and I know that my Life has not been as it should, how shall I do to appear before God! Or if it be more the sence of the punishment, and the place of the punishment of sinners, that also is starting to a desiled con∣science, now rouzed by deaths lum∣bring at the door. And hence usually is sick-bed Re∣pentance, and the matter of it: To wit, to be saved from Hell, and from Death, and that God will re∣store again to health till they mend; concluding that it is in their power to mend, as is evident by their large and lavishing promises to do it. I have known many, that, when they have been sick, have had large measures of this kind of Repentance, and while it has lasted, the noyse and sound thereof, has made the Town to ring again: but alas! how
long has it lasted? oft-times scarce so long as untill the party now sick has been well. It has passed away like a mist or a vapour, it has been a thing of no continuance. But this kind of Repentance is by God com∣pared to the howling of a dog. And they have not cried unto me with their heart,Hos. 7. 14 when they howled upon their bed. Atten. Yet one may see,A sign of the despe∣rateness of mans heart. by this, the desperateness of mans heart: for what is it but desperate wickedness, to make promise to God of amendment, if he will but spare them; and yet so soon as they are recovered (or quick∣ly after,) fall to sin as they did be∣fore, and never to regard their pro∣mise more. Wise. It is a sign of desperateness indeed;Deut. 1. 34, 35. yea, of desperate mad∣ness. For surely, they must needs think, that God took notice of their promise, that he heard the words that they spake, and that he hath laid them up against the time to come; and will then bring out, and testifie to their faces, that they flattered him with their mouth, and lyed unto him with their tongue, when they lay
sick,Psal. 78. 34, 35, 36, 37. to their thinking, upon their death-bed, and promised him that if he would recover them they would repent and amend their ways. But thus, as I have told you, Mr. Bad∣man did. He made great promises that he would be a New man, that he would leave his sins, and become a Convert, that he would love, &c. his godly wife, &c. Yea many fine words had Mr. Badman in his sickness, but no good actions when he was well. Atten. And how did his good wife take it, when she saw that he had no Amendment, but that he re∣turned with the Dog to his vomit, to his old courses again? Wise. Why itMr. Bad∣mans wis hart is bro∣ken. broke her heart, it was a worse disappointment to her than the cheat that he gave her in marriage: At least she laid it more to heart, and could not so well grapple with it. You must think that she had put up many a prayer to God for him before, even all the time that he had carried it so badly to her, and now when he was so arighted in his sickness, and so desi∣red that he might live and med,
poor woman, she thought that the time was come for God to answer her prayers; nay, she did not let with gladness, to whisper it out amongst her Friends, that 'twas so: but when she saw her self disappoint∣ed by her husbands turning Rebel again, she could not stand up under it, but falls into a languishing di∣stemper, and in a few weeks gave up the Ghost. Atten. Pray how did she dye? Wise. Die! she dyed bravely; full of comfort of the faith of her Interest in Christ, and by him, of the world to come: she had many brave Expressions in her sickness, and gave to those that came to visit her many signs of her salvation; the thoughts of the Grave, but specially of her Rising again, were sweet thoughts to her. She would long for Death, because she knew it would be her Friend. She be∣haved her self like to some that were making of them ready to go meet their Bridegroom.Her Christian speech. Now, said she, I am going to rest from my sorrows, my sighs, my tears, my mournings and complaints: I have
heretofore longed to be among the Saints, but might by no means be suffered to goe, but now I am go∣ing, (and no man can stop me) to the great Meeting,Heb. 12. 22, 23, 24. to the gene∣ral Assembly, and Church of the first-born which are written in Hea∣ven.Her talk to her friends. There I shall have my hearts desire; there I shall worship with∣out Temptation or other impedi∣ment; there I shall see the face of my Jesus, whom I have loved, whom I have served, and who now, I know, will save my soul. I have prayed often for my husband, that he might be converted, but there has been no answer of God in that matter; Are my prayers lost? are they forgotten? are they thrown over the barr? No; they are hang∣ed upon the horns of the golden Altar, and I must have the benefit of them my self, that moment that I shall enter into the gates, in at which the righteous Nation that keepeth truth shall enter: I say, I shall have the benefit of them. I can say as holy David; I say, I can say of my husband, as he could of his enemies.Psal.  13. As for me, when they were
sick my cloathing was of sack-cloth, I humbled my soul with fasting, and my prayer returned into my bosom. My prayers are not lost, my tears are yet in Gods bottle; I would have had a Crown, and Glory for my husband, and for those of my children that follow his steps; but so far as I can see yet, I must rest in the hope of having all my self. Atten. Did she talk thus open∣ly? Wise. No; this she spake but to one or two of her most intimate acquaintance, who were permit∣ted to come and see her, when she lay languishing upon her death∣bed. Atten. Well, but pray go on in your relation, this is good: I am glad to hear it, this is as a cordial to my heart while we sit thus talking under this tree. Wise. When she drew near her end,Her call to her husband. she called for her husband, and when he was come to her, she told him, That now he and she must part, and said she, God knows, and thou shalt know, that I have
been a loving, faithful Wife unto thee; my prayers have been many for thee; and as for all the abuses that I have received at thy hand, those I freely and heartily forgive, and still shall pray for thy conver∣sion, even as long as I breathe in this world. But husband, I am going thither, where no bad man shall come, and if thou dost not con∣vert, thou wilt never see me more with comfort; let not my plain words offend thee: I am thy dy∣ing wife, and of my faithfulness to thee, would leave this Exhortati∣on with thee: Break off thy sins, fly to God for mercy while mercies gate stands open; remember, that the day is coming, when thou, though now lusty and well, must lye at the gates of death, as I do: And what wilt thou then do, if thou shalt be found with a naked soul, to meet with the Cherubims with their fla∣ming swords? yea, what wilt thou then do, if Death and Hell shall come to visit thee, and thou in thy sins, and under the Curse of the Law? Atten. This was honest and plain:
but what said Mr. Badman to her? Wise. He did what he could to divert her talk,He diverts her dis∣course. by throwing in other things; he also shewed some kind of pity to her now, and would ask her, What she would have? and with various kind of words put her out of her talk; for when she see that she was not regarded, she fetcht a deep sigh, and lay still. So he went down, and then she called for her Children, and began to talk to them.Her speech to her chil∣dren that were rude. And first she spake to those that were rude, and told them the danger of dying before they had grace in their hearts. She told them also, that Death might be nearer them than they were aware of; and bid them look, when they went through the Church-yard again, if there was not little graves there. And, ah children, said she, will it not be dreadful to you, if we only shall meet at the day of Judgment, and then part again, and never see each other more? And with that she wept, the Chil∣dren (also) wept; so she held on her discourse: Children, said she,
I am going from you,Rev. 7. 16. I am going to Jesus Christ, and with him there is neither sorrow,Chap. 21. 3, 4. nor sighing, nor pain, nor tears, nor death. Thi∣ther would I have you go also, but I can neither carry you, nor fetch you thither; but if you shall turn from your sins to God, and shall beg mercy at his hands by Jesus Christ, you shall follow me, and shall, when you dye, come to the place where I am going, that blessed place of Rest: and then we shall be for ever together, beholding the face of our Redeemer, to our mutual and eternal joy. So she bid them remember the words of a dying mother when she was cold in her grave, and themselves were hot in their sins, if perhaps her words might put check to their vice, and that they might remember and turn to God. Then they all went down; but herHer  to her dr∣ling. Darling, to wit, the child that she had most love for, because it followed her ways. So she addressed her self to that. Come to me, said she, my sweet child, thou art the child of my joy: I have lived to
see thee a Servant of God; thou shalt have eternal life. I, my sweet heart, shall goe before, and thou shalt follow after;Heb. 3. 14. if thou shalt hold the beginning of thy confidence stedfast to the end. When I am gone, do thou still remember my words, love thy Bible, follow my Ministers, deny ungodliness still, and if trou∣blous times shall come, set an high∣er price upon Christ, his Word and Wayes, and the testimony of a good conscience, than upon all the world besides. Carry it kindly and dutifully to thy Father, but choose none of his ways. If thou mayest, goe to service, choose that, rather than to stay at home; but then be sure to choose a service where thou mayest be helped forwards in the way to heaven; and that thou may∣est have such a service, speak to my Minister, he will help thee, if possible, to such an one. I would have thee also, my dear child, to love thy Brothers and Si∣sters, but learn none of their naughty tricks.Ephes. 5. 11. Have no fellowship with the unfruitfull works of darkness, but rather reprove them. Thou hast
Grace, they have none: do thou therefore beautifie the way of sal∣vation before their eyes, by a godly life and conformable conver∣sation to the revealed will of God, that thy Brothers and Sisters may see and be the more pleased with the good wayes of the Lord. If thou shalt live to marry, take heed of being served as I was; that is, of being beguiled with fair words, and the flatteries of a lying tongue. But first be sure of godli∣ness. Yea, as sure as it is possible for one to be in this world: trust not thine own eyes, nor thine own Judgment; I mean as to that per∣sons godliness that thou art invited to marry. Ask counsel of good men, and do nothing therein, if he lives, without my Ministers advice. I have also my self desired him to look after thee. Thus she talked to her children, and gave them counsel, and after she had talked to this a little longer, she kiss'd it, and bid it go down. Well, in short, her time drew on, and the day that she must die. So sheHer death died with a soul full of
Grace, an heart full of comfort, and by her death ended a life full of trouble. Her husband made a Funerall for her, perhaps because he was glad he was rid of her, but we will leave that to be manifest at Judgment. Atten. This Woman died well: And now we are talking of the dy∣ing of Christians, I will tell you a story of one that died some time since in our Town. The man was a godly old Puritan, for so the godly were call∣ed in time past. This man after a long, and godly life, fell sick, of the sickness whereof he died. And as he lay drawing on, the woman that looked to him thought she heard Musick, and that the sweetest that ever she heard in her life, which also continued untill he gave up the Ghost: now when his soul departed from him,☜ the Musick seemed to withdraw and to go further and further off from the house, and so it went untill the sound was quite gone out of hear∣ing. Wise. What do you think that might be? Atten. For ought I know, the me∣lodious
Notes of Angels, that were sent of God to fetch him to Hea∣ven. Wise. I cannot say but that God goes out of his Ordinary Road with us poor mortals sometimes. I cannot say this of this woman, but yet she had better musick in her heart than sounded in this womans ears. Atten. I believe so; but pray tell me, did any of her other children hear∣ken to her words, so as to be better∣ed in their souls thereby? Wise. One of them did,One of her children con∣verted by her dying words. and be∣came a very hopefull young man: but for the rest I can say no∣thing. Atten. And what did Badman do after his wife was dead? Wise. Why even as he did be∣fore, he scarce mourned a fort∣night for her, and his mourning then was, I doubt, more in fashion than in heart. Atten. Would he not sometimes talk of his Wife, when she was dead? Wise. Yes, when the fit took him, and could commend her too
extremely; saying, she was a good, godly, vertuous woman. But this is not a thing to be wondred at: It is common with wicked men, to hate Gods Servants while alive, and to commend them when they are dead. So served the Pharisees the Pro∣phets:Mat. 23. Those of the Prophets that were dead, they commended; and those of them that were alive they condemned. Atten. But did not Mr. Badman marry again quickly? Wise. No,Mr. Bad∣mans base language. not a good while af∣ter: and when he was asked the reason, he would make this slighty answer, Who would keep a Cow of their own, that can have a quart of milk for a penny? Meaning, Who would be at the charge to have a Wife, that can have a Whore when he listeth? So villanous, so abomi∣nable did he continue after the death of his wife. Yet at last there was one was too hard for him. For, getting of him to her upon a time,He marryes again, and how he got this last wife. and making of him sufficiently drunk, she was so cunning as to get a promise of marriage of him, and so held him to it, and forced him
to marry her.What she was, and how they lived. And she, as the saying is, was as good as he, at all his vile and ranting tricks: she had her com∣panions as well as he had his, and she would meet them too at the Tavern and Ale-house, more com∣monly than he was aware of. To be plain, she was a very Whore, and had as great resort came to her, where time and place was appoint∣ed, as any of them all. Aie, and he smelt it too, but could not tell how to help it. For if he began to talk, she could lay in his dish the whores that she knew he haunted, and she could fit him also with cur∣sing and swearing, for she would give him Oath for Oath, and Curse for Curse. Atten. What kind of Oaths would she have? Wise. Why damn her, and sink her, and the like. Atten. These are provoking things. Wise. So they are: but God doth not altogether let such things goe unpunished in this life. Something of this I have shewed you already, and will here give you one or two Instances more.
There lived, saith one, in the year 1551. in a City of Savoy,Clarks Looking-Glass. a man who was a monstrous Curser and Swear∣er, and though he was often admo∣nished and blamed for it, yet would he by no means mend his manners. At length a great plague happening in the City, he withdrew himself into a Garden, where being again admonished to give over his wic∣kedness, he hardned his heart more, Swearing, Blaspheming God, and giving himself to the Devil: And immediately the Devil snatched him up suddenly, his wife and kins∣woman looking on, and carried him quite away. The Magistrates ad∣vertised hereof, went to the place and examined the Woman, who justified the truth of it. Also at Oster in the Dutchy of Magalapole, (saith Mr. Clark) a wicked Woman, used in her cursing to give her self body and soul to the Devil, and being reproved for it, still continued the same; till (being at a Wedding-Feast) the Devil came in person, and carried her up into the Air, with most horrible outcries and roarings: And in that sort carried
her round about the Town, that the Inhabitants were ready to dye for fear: And by and by he tore her in four pieces, leaving her four quar∣ters in four several high-wayes; and then brought her Bowels to the Marriage-feast, and threw them upon the Table before the Maior of the Town, saying, Behold, these dishes of meat belong to thee, whom the like destruction waiteth for, if thou dost not amend thy wicked life. Atten. Though God forbears to deal thus with all men that thus rend and tare his Name, and that immedi∣ate Judgments do not overtake them; yet he makes their lives by other Judgments bitter to them, does he not? Wise. Yes, yes. And for proof, I need goe no further than to this Badman and his wife; for their rail∣ing, and cursing, and swearing ended not in words: They would fight and fly at each other, and that like Cats and Dogs. But it must be look∣ed upon as the hand and Judgment of God upon him for his villany; he had an honest woman before, but
she would not serve his turn, and therefore God took her away, and gave him one as bad as himself. Thus that measure that he me∣ted to his first wife, this last did mete to him again. And this is a punishment, wherewith sometimes God will punish wicked men. So said Amos to Amaziah: Thy wife shall be an Harlot in the City.Amo. 7. 16, 17. With this last wife Mr. Badman lived a pretty while; but, as I told you be∣fore, in a most sad and hellish manner. And now he would bewail his first wifes death: not of love that he had to her Godliness, for that he could never abide, but for that she used alwayes to keep home, where∣as this would goe abroad; his first wife was also honest, and true to that Relation, but this last was a Whore of her Body: The first wo∣man loved to keep things together, but this last would whirl them about as well as he: The first would be silent when he chid, and would take it patiently when he abused her, but this would give him word for word, blow for blow, curse for curse; so that now Mr. Badman
had met with his match:He is pu∣nished in his last wife for his bad car∣riages to∣wards his first. God had a mind to make him see the baseness of his own life, in the wickedness of his wives.He is not at all the better. But all would not do with Mr. Badman, he would be Mr. Badman still: This Judgment did not work any reformation upon him, no, not to God nor man. Atten. I warrant you that Mr. Badman thought when his wife was dead, that next time he would match far better. Wise. What he thought I can∣not tell, but he could not hope for it in this match. For here he knew himself to be catcht, he knew that he was by this woman intangled, and would therefore have gone back again, but could not. He knew her, I say, to be a Whore before, and therefore could not promise himself a happy life with her. For he or she that will not be true to their own soul, will neither be true to husband nor wife. And he knew that she was not true to her own soul, and therefore could not expect she should be true to him: but Solomon says, An whore is a deep pit, and Mr. Badman found it true. For when she had caught
him in her pit, she would never leave him till she had got him to pro∣mise her Marriage; and when she had taken him so for, she forced him to marry indeed: And after that, they lived that life that I have told you. Atten. But did not the neighbours take notice of this alteration that Mr. Badman had made? Wise. Yes;None did pity him for his sor∣row, but▪ looked upon it as a just reward. and many of his Neighbours, yea, many of those that were carnal said, 'Tis a righte∣ous Judgment of God upon him, for his abusive carriage and language to his other wife: for they were all convinced that she was a vertu∣ous woman, and that he, vile wretch, had killed her, I will not say, with, but with the want of kindness. Atten. And how long I pray did they live thus together? Wise. Some fourteen or sixteen years,Badman and this last wife part as poor as Howlets. even untill (though she also brought somthing with her) they had sinned all away, and parted as poor as Howlets. And, in reason, how could it be otherwise? he would have his way, and she would have hers; he a∣mong his companions, and she among hers; he with his Whores, and she with
her Rogues; and so they brought their Noble to Nine-pence. Atten. Pray of what disease did Mr. Badman die, for now I per∣cieve we are come up to his death? Wise. I cannot so properly say that he died of one disease,Mr. Bad∣mans sick∣ness and dis∣eases of which he died. for there were many that had consented, and laid their heads together to bring him to his end. He was dropsical, he was consumptive, he was surfeited, was gouty, and, as some say, he had a tang of the Pox in his bowels. Yet the Captain of all these men of death that came against him to take him away, was the Consumption, for 'twas that that brought him down to the grave. Atten. Although I will not say, but the best men may die of a consump∣tion, a dropsie, or a fufeit; yea, that these may meet upon a man to end him: yet I will say again, that many times these diseases come through mans inordinate use of things. Much drinking brings dropsies, consumpti∣ons, surfeits, and many other diseas∣es; and I doubt, that Mr. Badmans death did come by his abuse of himself in the use of lawfull and unlawfull
things. I ground this my sentence upon that report of his life that you at large have given me. Wise. I think verily that you need not call back your sentence; for 'tis thought by many, that by his Cups and his Queans he brought himself to this his destruction: he was not an old man when he dyed, nor was he naturally very feeble, but strong, and of a healthy com∣plexion: Yet, as I said, he moul∣tered away, and went, when he set a going, rotten to his Grave. And that which made him stink when he was dead, I mean, that made him stink in his Name and Fame, was, that he died with a spice of the foul disease upon him: A man whose life was full of sin, and whose death was without repentance. Atten. These were blemishes suf∣ficient to make him stink indeed. Wise. They were so, and they did do it. No man could speak well of him when he was gone. Badmans name stinks when he is dead. His Name rotted above ground, as his Carkass rotted under. And this is according to the saying of the wise man:Pro. 10. 7. The memory of the
just is blessed, but the name of the wic∣ked shall rot. This Text, in both the parts of it, was fulfilled upon him and the woman that he married first. For her Name still did flourish, though she had been dead almost seventeen years; but his began to stink and rot, before he had been buried seventeen dayes. Atten. That man that dieth with a lif full of sin, and with an heart void f repentance, although he should die of the most Golden disease (if there were any that might be so call∣ed) I will warrant him his Name shall stink, and that in Heaven and Earth. Wise. You say true; and there∣fore doth the name of Cain, Pharoah, Saul, Judas, and the Pharisees, though dead thousands of years agoe, sink as fresh in the nostrils of the world as if they were but new∣ly dead. Atten. I do fully acquiesce with you in this. But,Tht Mr. dman dies  is proved. Sir, since you have charged him with dying impenitent, pray let me see how you will prove it: not that I altogether doubt it, be∣cause
you have affirmed it, but yet I love to have proof for what men say in such weighty matters. Wise. When I said, he died with∣out repentance, I meant, so far as those that knew him, could judge, when they compared his Life, the Word, and his Death together. Atten. Well said, they went the right way to find out whether he had, that is, did manifest that he had repentance or no. Now then shew me how they did prove he had none? Wise. So I will: And first, this was urged to prove it.1 Proof that he died im∣penitent. He had not in all the time of his sickness, a sight and sence of his sins, but was as se∣cure, and as much at quiet, as if he had never sinned in all his life. Atten. I must needs confess that this is a sign he had none. For how can a man repent of that of which he hath neither sight nor sence? But 'tis strange that he had neither sight nor sence of sin now, when he had such a sight and sence of his evil be∣fore: I mean when he was sick be∣fore.
Wise. He was, as I said, as secure now, as if he had been as sinless as an Angel; though all men knew what a sinner he was, for he carried his Sins in his Forehead. His debauched Life was read and known of all men; but his Reputation was read and known of no man; for, as I said, he had none. And for ought I know, the reason why he had no sence of his sins now, was because he pro∣fited not by that sence that he had of them before. He liked not to retain that knowledge of God then, that caused his sins to come to re∣membrance: Therefore God gave him up now to a reprobate mind, to hardness and stupidity of Spirit; and so was that Scripture fulfilled upon him,Isa. 6. He hath blinded their eyes. And that, Let their eyes be darkned that they may not see.Ro. 11. Oh! for a man to live in sin, and to goe out of the world without Repen∣tance for it, is the saddest Judge∣ment that can overtake a man. Atten. But, Sir, although both you and I have consented thatNo sence of sin, no repentance, proved. with∣out a sight and sence of sin there can be do Repentance, yet that is but
our bare Say-so; let us therefore now see if by the Scripture we can make it good. Wise. That is easily done. The three thousand that were converted, (Acts the second,) repented not,Acts 2. till they had sight and sence of their sins: Paul repented not till he had sight and sence of his sins:Chap. 9. the Jailor re∣pented not till he had sight d sence of his sins:Chap. 16. nor could the. For of what should a man repent? The Answer is, of Sin. What is it to Repent of sin? The answer is,Psal. 38. 18. To be sorry for it, to turn from it. But how can a man be sorry for it, that has neither sight nor sence of it. Da∣vid did, not only commit sins, but abode impenitent for them, untill Nathan the Prophet was sent from God to give him a sight and sence of them;2 Sam. 12. and then, but not till then, he indeed repented of them. Job, in order to his Repentance, cries unto God, Shew me wherefore thou contendest with me.Job 10. 2. And again, That which I see not teach thou me,Chap. 34. 32. I have born chastisement, I will not offend any more: That is, not in what I know, for I will repent of it; nor
yet in what I know not, when thou shalt shew me it. Also Ephraims Repentance was after he was turned to the sight and sence of his sins,Jer. 31. 18, 19, 20. and after he was instructed about the evil of them. Atten. These are good testimonies of this truth, and doe (if matter of fact, with which Mr. Badman is charged, b true,) prove indeed that he did not repent, but as he lived, so he dyed in his sin:Job 20. 11. For without Repentance a man is sure to dye in his sin; for they will lie down in the dust with him, rise at the Judgement with him, hang about his Neck like Cords and Chains when he standeth at the Barre of Gods Tribunal,Pov. 5. 22. and goe with him too, when he goes away from the Judgment-seat, with a De∣part from me ye cursed into everlast∣ing fire,Matt. 25. prepared for the Devil and his Angels; and there shall fret and gnaw his Conscience,Isa. 66. 21. because they will be to him a neer-dying worm.Mar. 9. 44. Wise. You say well, and I will add a word or two more to what I have said: Repentance, as it is
not produced without a sight and sence of sin, so every sight and sence of sin cannot produce it: I mean, every sight and sence of sinEvery sight and sence of sin cannot pro∣duce repen∣tance. can∣not produce that Repentance, that is Repentance unto salvation; repen∣tance never to be repented of. For it is yet fresh before us, that Mr. Badman had a sight and sence of sin, in that fit of sickness that he had before, but it dyed without procu∣ring any such godly fruit; as was manifest by his so soon returning with the Dog to his Vomit. Many people think also that Repentance stands in Confession of sin only, but they are very much mistaken▪ For Repentance, as was said before, is a being sorry for, and a turning from transgression to God by Je∣sus Christ. Now, if this be true, that every sight and sence of sin will not produce Repentance, then Re∣pentance cannot be produced there where there is no sight and sence of sin. That every sight and sence of sin will not produce repentance, to wit, the godly repentance that we are speaking of, is manifest in Cain, Pharaoh, Saul and Judas, who all of
them had sence, great sence of sin, but none of them repentance unto life. Now I conclude, that Mr. Badman did die impenitent, and so a death most miserable. Atten. But pray now, before we conclude our discourse of Mr. Bad∣man, give me another proof of his dying in his sins. Wise. Another proof is this. He did not desire a sight and sence of sins,2 proof that he died im∣penitent. that he might have repentance for them. Did I say he did not desire it, I will add, he greatly desired to remain in his security: and that I shall prove by that which follows. First, He could not endure that any man, now, should talk to him of his sinfull life, and yet that was the way to beget a sight and sence of sin, and so of repentance from it, in his soul. But, I say, he could not endure such discourse. Those men that did offer to talk unto him of his ill-spent Life, they were as little welcome to him in the time of his last sickness,1 King. 21. 17. 18, 19, 20, 21. as was Elijah when he went to meet with Ahab, as he went down to take possession of Naboths Vineyard. Hast thou
found me, said Ahab, O mine enemy? So would Mr. Badman say in his heart to and of those that thus did come to him, though indeed they came even of love, to convince him of his evil life, that he might have repented thereof, and have obtained mercy. Atten. Did good men then goe to see him in his last sickness? Wise. Yes: Those that were his first wifes acquaintance, they went to see him, and to talk with, and to him, if perhaps he might now, at last, bethink himself, and cry to God for mercy. Atten. They did well to try now at last if they could save his soul from Hell: But pray how can you tell that he did not care for the company of such? Wise. Because of the differing Carriage that he had for them, from what he had when his old car∣nal companions came to see him: When his old Campanions came to see him, he would stir up him∣self as much as he could both by words and looks, to signifie they were welcome to him; he would
also talk with them freely, and look pleasantly upon them, though the talk of such could be none other but such as David said, carnal men would offer to him, when they came to visit him in his sickness: If he comes to see me,Psal. 41. 6. says he, he speaketh vanity, his heart gathereth iniquity to it self. But these kind of talks, I say, Mr. Badman better brooked, than he did the company of better men. But I will more particularly give you a CharacterHow Bad∣man carried it to good men when they came to visit him in his last sickness. of his carriage to good men (and good talk) when they came to see him. 1. When they were come, he would seem to fail in his spirits at the sight of them. 2. He would not care to answer them to any of those questions that they would at times put to him, to feel what sence he had of sin, death, Hell, and Judgment: But would either say nothing, or answer them by way of evasion, or else by telling of them he was so weak and spent that he could not speak much. 3. He would never shew for∣wardness to speak to, or talk with
them, but was glad when they held their tongues. He would ask them no question about his state and ano∣ther world, or how he should es∣cape that damnation that he had de∣served. 4. He had got a haunt at last to bid his wife and keeper, when these good people attempted to come to see him, to tell them that he was a∣sleep or inclining to sleep, or so weak for want thereof, that he could not abide any noyse. And so they would serve them time after time, till at last they were discouraged from coming to see him any more. 5. He was so hardned, now, in this time of his sickness, that he would talk, when his companions came unto him, to the disparagement of those good men (and of their good doctrine too) that of love did come to see him, and that did labour to convert him. 6. When these good men went away from him, he would never say, Pray when will you be pleas∣ed to come again, for I have a de∣sire to more of your company, and
to hear more of your good instructi∣on? No not a word of that, but when they were going would scarce bid them drink, or say, Thank you for your good company, and good in∣struction. 7. His talk in his sickness with his companions, would be of the World, as Trades, Houses, Lands, great Men, great Titles, great pla∣ces, outward Prosperity, or out∣ward Adversity, or some such carnal thing. By all which I conclude, that he did not desire a sence and sight of his sin, that he might repent and be saved. Atten. It must needs be so as you say, if these things be true that you have asserted of him. And I do the rather believe them, because I think you dare not tell a lie of the dead. Wise. I was one of them that went to him, and that beheld his carriage and manner of way, and this is a true relation of it that I have given you. Atten. I am satisfied. But pray if you can, shew me now by the Word,
what sentence of God doth pass upon such men? Wise. Why, the man that is thus averse to repentance, that desires not tohear of his sins, that he might repent and be saved; is said to be a man that saith unto God,Job. 21. 14. Depart from me, for I desire not the knowledge of thy wayes. He is a man that sayes in his heart and with his actions, I have loved strangers,Jer. 2. 25. (sins) and after them I will goe. He is a man that shuts his eyes,Zech. 7. 11, 12. stops his ears, and that turneth his spirit against God.Acts. . 26, 27. Yea he is the man that is at enmity with God, and that abhorres him with his soul. Atten. What other signe can you give me that Mr. Badman died with∣out repentance? Wise. Why,3 Proof that he died im∣penitent. he did never hearti∣ly cry to God for mercy all the time of his affliction. True, when sinking fits, stitches, or pains took hold upon him, then he would say as other carnal men use to do, Lord help me, Lord strengthen me, Lord deliver me, and the like: But to cry to God for mercy, that he did not, but lay, as I hinted
before, as if he never had sin∣ned. Atten. That is another bad sign indeed; for crying to God for mercy, is one of the first signs of repentance. When Paul lay repenting of his sin, upon his bed, the Holy Ghost said of him,Acts 9. 11. Behold he prayes. But he that hath not the first signs of repen∣tance, 'tis a sign he hath none of the other, and so indeed none at all. I do not say, but there may be cry∣ing, where there may be no sign of repentance. They cryed, says David, to the Lord,Psal. 18. 41. but he answered them not; but that he would have done, if their cry had been the fruit of repen∣tance. But, I say, if men may cry and yet have no repentance, be sure, they have none, that cry not at all. It is said in Job,Job 36. 13. They cry not when he bindeth them; that is, because they have no repentance; no repentance, no cryes; false repentance, false cryes; true repentance, true cryes. Wise. I know that it is as possible for a man to forbear crying that hath repentance, as it is for a man to forbear groaning that feeleth dead∣ly pain. He that looketh into the
Book of Psalms, (where repen∣tance is most lively set forth even in its true and proper effects,) shall there find, that crying, strong crying, hearty crying, great crying, and uncessant crying, hath been the fruits of repentance: (But none of this had this Mr. Badman, there∣fore he dyed in his sins.) That Crying is an inseparable effect of repentance, is seen in these Scriptures.Psal. 51. 1. Have mercy upon me, O God, according to the multitude of thy tender mercies, blot out my trans∣gressions. O Lord, rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chasten me in thy hot displeasure.Psal. 6, 1, 2, 3, 4. Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am weak. O Lord, heal me for my bones are vexed. My soul is also vexed, but thou, O Lord, how long: Return, O Lord, deliver my soul: O save me for thy mercies sake:Psal. 38. O Lord, rebuke me not in thy wrath, neither chasten me in thy hot displea∣sure; for thine arrows stick fast in me, and thy hand presseth me sore. There is no soundness in my flesh, because of thine anger, neither is there any rest in my bones, because of my sin. For mine iniquities are gone over mine head,
as an heavy burthen, they are too heavy for me. My wounds stink and are cor∣rupt; because of my foolishness. I am troubled, I am bowed down greatly, I goe mourning all the day long. My loyns are filled with a loathsom disease, and there is no soundness in my flesh. I am feeble, and sore broken, I have roared by reason of the disquietness of my heart. I might give you a great number more of the holy sayings of good men, whereby they express how they were, what they felt, and whether they cryed or no, when repentance was wrought in them. Alas, alas, it is as possible for a man, when the pangs of Guilt are upon him to forbear praying, as it is for a wo∣man when pangs of travel are upon her to forbear crying. If all the world should tell me that such a man hath repentance, yet if he is not a praying man, I should not be per∣swaded to believe it. Atten. I know no reason why you should: for there is nothing can de∣monstrate that such a man hath it. But pray Sir, what other sign have you, by which you can prove that Mr.
Badman died in his sins, and so in a state of damnation? Wise. I have this to prove it.4 Proof that he died im∣penitent. Those who were his old sinfull com∣panions in the time of his health, were those whose company and carnal talk he most delighted in, in the time of his sickness. I did occa∣sionally hint this before, but now I make it an argument of his want of grace: for where there is indeed a work of Grace in the heart, that work doth not only change the heart, thoughts and desires, but the conversation also; yea conversation and company too. When Paul had a work of grace in his soul, he assayed to Joyn himself to the Disciples. He was for his old companions in their abominations no longer: he was now a Disciple,Acts. 9. 26. 28. and was for the company of Disciples. And he was with them coming in and going out in Jerusalem. Atten. I thought something when I heard you make mention of it before. Thought I, this is a shrewd sign that he had not grace in his heart. Birds of a feather, thought I, will flock together▪ If this man was one of Gods childen, he would heard with Gods children,
his delight would be with, and in the company of Gods children. As David said,Psal. 119. 63. I am a companion of all them that fear thee, and of them that keep thy precepts. Wise. You say well, for what fel∣lowship hath he that believeth with an Infidel? And although it be true, that all that joyn to the godly are not godly, yet they that shall inwardly choose the company of the ungodly and open profane, rather than the company of the godly, as Mr. Bad∣man did; surely are not godly men, but profane. He was, as I told you, out of his element, when good men did come to visit him, but then he was where he would be, when he had his vain companions about him. Alas! grace, as I said, altereth all, heart, life, company, and all; for by it the heart and man is made new: and a new heart, a new man, must have objects of delight that are new, and like himself:2 Cor. . 17. Old things are passed away; Why? For all things are be∣come new. Now if all things are become new, to wit, heart, mind, thoughts, desires, and delights, it followeth by consequence that the
company must be answerable: hence it is said, That they that believed were together;Acts. 4. 32, 33. that they went to their own company;Chap. 2. 44, 45, 46, 47. that they were added to the Church; that they were of one heart and of one soul; and the like. Now if it be objected, that Mr. Badman was sick, and so could not goe to the godly, yet he had a tongue in his head, and could, had he had an heart, have spoken to some to call or send for the godly to come to him. Yea, he would have done so; yea the company of all others, speci∣ally his fellow sinners, would, even in every appearance of them before him, have been a burden and a grief unto him. His heart and affection standing bent to good, good com∣panions would have suited him best. But his Companions were his old Associates, his delight was in them, therefore his heart and soul were yet ungodly. Atten. Pray how was he when he drew near his end? for I perceive that what you say of him now, hath reference to him, and to his actions, at the beginning of his sickness? Then he could endure company, and much
talk; besides, perhaps then he thought he should recover and not die, as after∣wards he had cause to think, when he was quite wasted with pining sickness, when he was at the graves mouth. But how was he, I say, when he was (as we say) at the graves mouth, within a step of death? when he saw, and knew, and could not but know, that shortly he must dye, and appear before the Judgment of God? Wise. WhyHow Mr. Badman was wen ear his End. there was not any other alteration in him, than what was made by his disease upon his body: sickness, you know, will alter the body, also pains and stitches will make men groan; but for his mind, he had no alteration there. His mind was the same, his heart was the same. He was the self-same Mr. Badman still: not onely in Name but Conditions, and that to the very day of his death: yea, so fr as could be gathered to the very moment in which he died. Atten. Pray how was he in his death? was Death strong upon him? or did he dye with ase, quietly? Wise. As quietly as a Lamb. There seemed▪ not to b in it,
to standers by, so much as a strong struggle of Nature: and as for his Mind, it seemed to be wholly at quiet. But pray why do you ask me this question? Atten. Not for mine own sake, but for others. For there is such The opini∣on of the Ignoront about his manner of dying. an opinion as this among the igno∣rant: That if a man dies, as they call it, like a Lamb, that is, quietly, and without that consternation of mind that others shew in their death, they conclude, and that beyond all doubt, that such an one is gone to Heaven, and is certainly escaped the wrath to come. Wise. There is no Judgment to be made by a quiet death, of the Eternal state of him that so dieth. Suppose one man should die quietly, another should die suddenly, and a third should die under-great con∣sternation of spirit; no man can Judge of their eternall condition by the manner of any of these kinds of deaths. He that dies quietly, suddenly, or under consternation of spirit, may goe to Heaven, or may goe to Hell; no man can tell whe∣ther a man goes, by any such manner
of death. TheHow we must judge whether men dye well or no. Judgment therefore that we make of the eternall con∣dition of a man, must be gathered from another consideration: To wit, Did the man die in his sins? did he die in unbelief? did he die before he was born again? then he is gone to the Devil and hell, though he died never so quietly. Again, Was the man a good man? had he faith and holiness? was he a lover and a Worshipper of God by Christ, accor∣ding to his Word? Then he is gone to God and Heaven, how suddenly, or in what consternation of mind soever he died: But Mr. Badman was naught, his life was evil, his wayes were evil; evil to his end: he therefore went to Hell and to the Devil, how quietly soever he died. Indeed there is, in some cases, a Judgment to be made of a mans eternal condition by the manner of the death he dieth.When we may judge of a mans eternal state by the man∣ner of his death. As suppose now a man should murder himself, or live a wicked life, and after that die in utter despair; these men with∣out doubt do both of them goe to Hell. And here I will take an occa∣sion
to speak of two of Mr. Bad∣mans Brethren, (for you know I told you before that he had Brethren,) and of the manner of their death. One of them killed himself, and the other after a wicked life died in utter despair. Now I should not be afraid to conclude of both these, that they went by, and through their death to hell. Atten. Pray tell me concerning the first, how he made away him∣self? Wise. Why, he took a knife and cut his own Throat, and immediately gave up the Ghost and died. Now what can we judge of such a mans condition; since the Scripture saith, No murderer hath eternall life, &c. but that it must be concluded, that such an one is gone to Hell. He was a murderer, a Self-murderer; and he is the worst murderer, one that slays his own body and soul: nor doe we find mention made of any but cursed ones that doe such kind of deeds. I say, no mention made in holy Writ of any others, but such, that murder themselves. And this is a sore Judgment of
God upon men, when God shall; for the sins of such, give them up to be their own Executioners, or rather to execute his Judgment and Anger upon themselves. And let me earnestly give this Caution to sinners. Take heed, Sirs, break off your sins, lest God serves you as he served Mr. Bad∣mans Brother: That is, lest he gives you up to be your own Murderers. Atten. Now you talk of this. I did once know a man,☞ a Barber, that took his own Raisor, and cut his own Throat, and then put his head out of his Chamber-window, to shew the neigh∣bours what he had done, and after a little while died. Wise. I can tell you a more dread∣full thing than this:☞ I mean as to the of doing the fact. There was about twelve years since, a man that lived at Brafield by Northamp∣to, (named John Cox) that mur∣dered himself; the manner of his doing of it was thus. He was a poor man, and had for some time been sick (and the time of his sick∣ness was about the beginning of ay-time) and taking too many thoughts how he should live after∣wards,
if he lost his present season of work, he fell into deep despair about the world, and cryed out to his wife the morning before he kill∣ed himelf, saying, We are undone. But quickly after, he desired his wife to depart the room, Because, said he, I will see if I can get any rest; so she went out: but he in∣stead of sleeping, quickly took his Raisor, and therewith cut up a great hole in his side, out of which he pulled, and cut off some of his guts, and threw them, with the blood up and down the Chamber. But this not speeding of him so soon as he desired, he took the same Rai∣sor and therewith cut his own throat. His wife then hearing of him sigh and fetch his wind short, came again into the room to him, and seeing what he had done, she ran out and called in some Neighbours, who came to him▪ where he lay in a bloody manner, frightfull to be∣hold. Then said one of them to him, Ah! John, what have you done? are you not sorry for what you have done? He answered roughly, 'Tis too late to be sorry. Then said the
same person to him again, Ah! John, pray to God to forgive thee this bloody act of thine. At the hear∣ing of which Exhortation, he seem∣ed much offended, and in angry man∣ner said, Pray! and with that flung himself away to the wall, and so after a few gasps died desperately. When he had turned him of his back, to the wall, the blood ran out of his belly as out of a boul, and soaked quite through the bed to the boards, and through the chinks to the boards it ran pouring down to the ground. Some said, that when the neighbours came to see him, he lay roaping with his hand in his bowels, reach∣ing upward, as was thought, that he might have pulled or cut out his heart. 'Twas said also, that some of his Liver had been by him torn out and cast upon the boards, and that many of his guts hung out of the bed on the side thereof. But I can∣not confirm all particulars; but the general of the story, with these cir∣cumstances above mentioned, is true; I had it from a sober and credi∣ble person, who himself was one that saw him in this bloody state,
and that talked with him, as was hinted before. Many other such dreadful things might be told you, but these are e∣nough, and too many too, if God in his wisdom had thought necessary to prevent them. Atten. This is a dreadful Story: and I would to God that it might be a warning to others to instruct them to fear before God, and pray, lest he gives them up to doe as John Cox hath done. For surely self-murderers cannot go to Heaven: and therefore, as you have said, he that dieth by his own hands, is certainly gone to Hell. But speak a word or two of the other man you mentioned. Wise. What? of a wicked man dying in Despair? Atten. Yes, of a wicked man dying in despair. Wise. Well then:Of dying in Despair. This Mr. Badmans other Brother was a very wicked man, both in Heart and Life; I say in Heart, because he was so in Life, nor could any thing reclaim him; neither good Men, good Books, good Examples, nor Gods Judgements. Well, after he
had lived a great while in his sins, God smote with a sickness of which he died. Now in his sickness his Conscience began to be awakened, and he began to roar out of his ill-spent Life, insomuch that the Town began to ring of him. Now when it was noysed about, many of the Neighbours came to see him, and to read by him, as is the common way with some; but all that they could doe, could not abate his ter∣ror, but he would lie in his Bedgnashing of his teeth,☞ and wring∣ing of his wrists, concluding upon the Damnation of his Soul, and in that horror and despair he dyed; not calling upon God; but distrust∣ing in his Mercy, and Blaspheming of his Name. Atten. This brings to my mind man that a Friend of mine told me of. He had been a wicked liver; whn he came to die, he fell into de∣spair, and having concluded that God had no mercy for him, he addressed himself to the Devil for favour,☞ say∣ing, Good Devil be good unto me. Wise. This is almost like Saul, who being forsaken of God, went
to the Witch of Endor, and so to the Devil for help. But alas, should I set my self to collect these dread∣ful Stories, it would be easie in little time to present you with hun∣dreds of them: But I will conclude as I began; They that are their own Murderers, or that die in De∣spair, after they have lived a life of wickedness, do surely go to Hell. And here I would put in a Cau∣tion: Every one that dieth under consternation of spirit; that is, un∣der amazement and great fear, do not therefore die in Despair: For a good man may have this for his bands in his death,Psal. 73. 4. and yet go to Heaven and Glory. For, as I said before, He that is a good man, a man that hath Faith ad Holiness, a lover and Worshipper of God by Christ, according to his Word, may die in consternation of spirit: for Satan will not be wanting to assault good men upon their death-bed, but they are secured by the Word and Power of God; yea, and are also helped, though with much ago∣ny of spirit, to exercise themselves in Faith and Prayer, the which he
that dieth in Despair, can by no means doe. But let us return to Mr. Badman, and enter further Discourse of the manner of his Death. Atten. I think you and I are both of a mind; for just now I was think∣ing to call you back to him also. And pray now, since it is your own mo∣tion to return again to him, let us discourse a little more of his quiet and still death. Wise. With all my heart.Further dis∣course of Mr. Bad∣mans death. You know we were speaking before of the manner of Mr. Badmans death: How that he dyed very stilly and quietly; upon which you made ob∣servation, that the common people conclude, that if a man dyes quietly, and as they call it, like a Lamb, he is certainly gone to Heaven: when alas, if a wicked man dyes quietly, if a man that has all his dayes lived in notorious sin, dyeth quietly; his quiet dying is so far off from being a sign of his being saved, that it is an uncontrollable proof of his dam∣nation. This was Mr. Badmans case, he lived wickedly even to the last, and then went quietly out of the
world: therefore Mr. Badman is gone to Hell. Att. Well, but since you are upon it, and also so confident in it, to wit, that a man that lives a wicked life till he dyes, and then dyes quietly, is gone to Hell; let me see what shew of proof you have for this your opinion. Wise. My first argument is drawn from the Necessity of repentance:He that af∣ter a sinfull life dies qui∣etly, that is, without re∣pentance, goes to Hell. No man can be saved except he repents, nor can he repent that sees not, that knows not that he is a sinner, and he that knows himself to be a sinner,1 Proof. will, I will warrant him, be molest∣ed for the time by that knowledge. This, as it is testified by all the Scrip∣tures, so it is testified by Christian experience. He that knows him∣self to be a sinner, is molested, espe∣cially if that knowledge comes not to him untill he is cast upon his death-bed; molested, I say, before he can dye quietly. Yea, he is mo∣lested, dejected and cast down, he is also made to cry out, to hunger and thirst after mercy by Christ, and if at all he shall indeed come to dye quietly, I mean with that quietness that is begotten by Faith and Hope
in Gods mercy (to the which Mr. Badman and his brethren were utter strangers,) his quietness is distin∣guished by all Judicious observers, by what wnt before it, by what it flows from, and also by what is the fruit thereof. I must confess I am no admirer of sick-bed repentance, for I think verily it is seldomSick-bed repentance seldom good for any thing. good for any thing: but I say, he that hath lived in sin and profaneness all his dayes, as Mr. Badman did, and yet shall dye quietly, that is, without repentance steps in 'twixt his life and death, he is assuredly gone to Hell, and is damned. Atten. This does look like an argu∣ment indeed; for Repentance must come, or else we must goe to Hell-fire: and if a lewd liver shall (I mean that so continues till the day of his death,) yet goe out of the world quietly, 'tis a sign that he dyed▪ without repen∣tance, and so a sign that he is dam∣ned. Wise. I am satisfied in it, for my part, and that from the Necessity, and Nature of repentance. It is ne∣cessary, because God calls for it, and
will not pardon sin without it: Ex∣cept ye repent ye shall all likewise pe∣rish.Luke 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. This is that which God hath said, and he will prove but a fool-hardy man that shall yet think to goe to Heaven and glory without it. Repent, for the Ax is laid to the root of the tree, every tree therefore that bringeth not forth good fruit, (but no good fruit can be where there is not sound repentance) shall be hewn down, and cast into the fire. This was Mr. Badmans case, he had at∣tending of him a sinfull life, and that to the very last, and yet dyed qui∣etly, that is, without repentance; he is gone to Hell and is damned. For the Nature of repentance, I have touched upon that already, and shewed, that it never was where a quiet death is the immediate compa∣nion of a sinfull life; and therefore Mr. Badman is gone to Hell. Secondly,2 Proof. My second argument is drawn from that blessed Word of Christ, While the strong man armed keeps the house, his goods are in peace, till a stronger than he comes: but the strong man armed kept Mr. Bad∣mans house, that is, his heart, and
soul, and body, for he went from a sinfull life quietly out of this world: the stronger did not disturb by inter∣cepting with sound repentance, be∣twixt his sinful life and his quiet death: Therefore Mr. Badman is gone to Hell. The strong man armed is the Devil, and quietness is his security. The Devil never fears losing of the sinner, if he can but keep him quiet: can he but keep him quiet in a sin∣full life, and quiet in his death, he is his own. Therefore he saith, his goods are in peace; that is, out of dan∣ger. There is no fear of the Devils losing such a soul, I say, because Christ, who is the best Judge in this matter, saith, his goods are in peace, in quiet, and out of danger. Atten. This is a good one too; for doubtless,Peace in a sinfull stte is a sign of damnation. peace and quiet with sin, is one of the greatest signs of a dam∣nable state. Wise. So it is. Therefore, when God would shew the greatness of his anger against sin and sinners in one word, he saith, They are joyned to Idols,Hos. 4. 17. let them alone. Let them alone, that is, disturb them not; let them
goe on without controll; let the Devil enjoy them peaceably, let him carry them out of the world uncon∣verted quietly. This is one of the sorest of Judgments, and bespeaketh the burning anger of God against sin∣full men. See also when you come home, the fourteenth Verse of the Chapter last mentioned in the Mar∣gent: I will not punish your daugh∣ters when they commit Whoredom. I will let them alone, they shall live and dye in their sins. But, Thirdly,3 Proof. My third argument is drawn from that saying of Christ: He hath blinded their eyes,Joh. 12. 40. and har∣dened their hearts; that they should not see with their eyes, nor understand with their hearts, and be converted, and I should heal them. There are three things that I will take notice of from these words. 1. The first is, That there can be no conversion to God where the eye is darkned, and the heart hardened. The eye must first be made to see, and the heart to break and relent under and for sin, or else there can be no conversion. He hath blinded their eyes, and hardned their hearts,
lest they should see, and understand and (So) be converted. And this was clearly Mr. Badmans case, he lived a wicked life, and also died with his eyes shut, and heart hardened, as is manifest, in that a sinful life was joyned with a quiet death; and all for that he should not be converted, but partake of the fruit of his sinfull life in Hell fire. 2. The second thing that I take notice of from these words is, That this is a dispensation and manifesta∣tion of Gods anger against a man for his sin. When God is angry with men, I mean, when he is so an∣gry with them, this among many is one of the Judgments that he giveth them up unto, to wit, to blindness of mind, and hardness of heart, which he also suffereth to accompany them till they enter in at the gates of death. And then, and there, and not short of then and there, their eyes come to be opened. Hence it is said of the rich man mentioned in Luke, He dy∣ed, and in Hell he lift up his eyes:Luk. 16. 22. Implying that he did not lift them up before: He neither saw what he had
done, nor whither he was going, till he came to the place of execution, even into Hell. He died asleep in his soul; he dyed besotted, stupified, and so consequently for quietness, like a Child or Lamb, even as Mr. Badman did: this was a sign of Gods anger; he had a mind to damn him for his sins, and therefore would not let him see nor have an heart to repent for them, lest he should con∣vert, and his damnation, which God had appointed, should be frustrate: lest they should be converted, and I should heal them. 3. The third thing that I take no∣tice of from hence, is, That a sinfull life and a quiet death annexed to it, is the ready, the open, the beaten, the common high-way to Hell: there is no surer sign of Damnation, than for a man to dye quietly after a sin∣full life. I do not say that all wicked men, that are molested at their death with a sence of sin and fears of Hell, do therefore goe to Heaven, (for some are also made to see, and are left to despair (not converted by see∣ing) that they might go roaring out of this world to their place:) But I
say, there is no surer sign of a mans Damnation, than to dye quietly after a sinful life; than to sin, and dye with his eyes shut; than to sin, and dye with an heart that cannot repent.Rom. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. He hath blinded their eyes and hardened their heart, that they should not see with their eyes, nor understand with their heart;Acts 28. 26, 27. (no, not so long as they are in this world) lest they should see with their eyes, and understand with their heart, and should be converted, and I should heal them. God has a Judgment for wicked men; God will be even with wic∣ked men:2 Pet. 2. God knows how to re∣serve the ungodly to the day of Judgment to be punished: And this is one of his wayes by which he doth it. Thus it was with Mr. Bad∣man. 4. Fourthly,4 Proof. It is said in the Book of Psalms, concerning the wicked, There is no bnds in their death,Psal. 73. 4, 5, 6. but their strength is firm. By no bands, he means no troubles, no gracious chastisements, no such corrections for sin as fall to be the Lot of Gods people for theirs; yea, that many
times falls to be theirs, at the time of their death. Therefore he adds concerning the wicked, They are not troubled (then) like other men, nei∣ther are they plagued like other men; but go as securely out of the world, as if they had never sinned against God, and put their own souls into danger of damnation. There is no band in their death. They seem to go unbound, and set at liberty, out of this world, though they have lived notoriously wicked all their dayes in it. The Prisoner that is to dye at the Gallows for his wickedness, must first have his Irons knock't off his legs; so he seems to goe most at liberty, when indeed he is going to be executed for his transgressions. Wicked men also have no bands in their death, they seem to be more at liberty when they are even at the Wind-up of their sinfull life, than at any time besides. Hence you shall have them boast of their Faith and Hope in Gods Mercy, when they lye upon their death-bed; yea, you shall have them speak as confidently of their salvation, as if they had served God
all their dayes: when the truth is, the bottom of this their boasting is, be∣cause they have no bands in their death. Their sin and base life comes not into their mind to correct them, and bring them to repentance; but pre∣sumptuous thoughts, and an hope and faith of the Spiders (the Devils) making,Job 8. 13, 14. possesseth their soul, to their own eternal undoing. Hence wicked mens hope, is said to dye, not before, but with them; they give up the Ghost together. And thus did Mr. Badman. His sins and his hope went with him to the Gate, but there his hope left him, because it dyed there; but his sins went in with him, to be a worm to gnaw him in his conscience for ever and ever. The opinion therefore of the com∣mon people concerning this kind of dying, isA frivolous opinion. frivolous and vain; for Mr. Badman died like a Lamb, or as they call it, like a Chrisom child, qui∣etly and without fear. I speak not this with reference to the strugling of na∣ture with death, but as to the strug∣ling of the conscience with the Judg∣ment
of God. I know that Nature will struggle with death. I have seen a Dog and Sheep dye hardly: And thus may a wicked man doe, be∣cause there is an antipathy betwixt nature and death. But even while, even then, when Death and Nature are strugling for mastery, the soul, the conscience, may be as besotted, as benummed, as senceless and igno∣rant of its miserable state, as the block or bed on which the sick lyes: And thus they may dye like a Chri∣som child in shew, but indeed like one who by the Judgment of God is bound over to eternal damnation; and that also by the same Judgment is kept from seeing what they are, and whither they are going, till they plunge down among the flames. And as it is a very great Judg∣ment of God on wicked men that so dye, (for it cuts them off from all possibility of repentance, and so of salvation)When a wicked man dyes in  quietly, it is a Judg∣ment of God upon his wied beholder. so it is as great a Judg∣ment upon those that are their com∣panions that survive them. For by the manner of their death, they dy∣ing so quietly, so like unto chrisom
children, as they call it, they are hardened, and take courage to go on in their course. For comparing their life with their death, their sinful cursed lives with their child-like, Lamb-like death, they think that all is well, that no damnation is happened to them; Though they lived like Devils incar∣nate, yet they dyed like harmless ones. There was no whirl-wind, no tempest, no band, nor plague in their death: They dyed as quietly as the most godly of them all, and had as great faith and hope of salvation, and would talk as boldly of salvati∣on as if they had assurance of it. But as was their hope in life, so was their death: Their hope was with∣out tryal, because it was none of Gods working, and their death was without molestation, because so was the Judgment of God concern∣ing them. But I say, at this their survivers take heart to tread their steps, and to continue to live in the breach of the Law of God; yea they carry it stateli∣ly in their villanies; for so it follows in the Psalm. There is no ands in
their death, but their strength is firm, &c.Ver. 6. Therefore pride compasseth them (the survivors) about as a chain, violence covereth them as a garment. Therefore they take courage to do evil, therefore they pride them∣selves in their iniquity. Therefore, Wherefore? Why, because their fellows died, after they had lived long in a most profane and wicked life, as quietly and as like to Lambs, as if they had been innocent. Yea, they are bold, by seeing this, to conclude, that God, either does not, or will not take notice of their sins.Ver. 8. 9, 10, 11. They speak wickedly, they speak loftily. They speak wicked∣ly of sin, for that they make it bet∣ter than by the Word it is pronoun∣ced to be. They speak wickedly concerning oppression, that they commend, and count it a prudent act. They also speak loftily: They set their mouth against the Heavens, &c. And they say, How doth God know, and is there knowledge in the most High? And all this, so far as I can see, ariseth in their hearts from the beholding of the quiet and lamb-like death of their companions.
Behold these are the ungodly that prosper in the world,Vers. 12. (that is, by wic∣ked ways) they increase in riches. This therefore is a great Judg∣ment of God, both upon that man that dyeth in his sins, and also upon his companion that beholdeth him so to dye. He sinneth, he dyeth in his sins, and yet dyeth quietly. What shall his companion say to this? What Judgment shall he make how God will deal with him, by be∣holding the lamb-like death of his companion? Be sure, he cannot, as from such a sight say, Wo be to me, for Judgment is before him: He cannot gather, that sin is a dreadful and a bitter thing, by the child∣like death of Mr. Badman. But must rather, if he judgeth according to what he sees, or according to his corrupted reason, conclude with the wicked ones of old, That every one that doth evil,. 2. 17. is good in the sight of the Lord, and he delighteth in them; or where is the God of Judgment? Yea, this is enough to puzzle the wisest man. David himself was put to a stand, by beholding the quiet death of ungodly men. Verily, sayes
he, I have cleansed my heart in vain, and have washed my hands in innocency. Psal. 73. 13. They, to appearance fare better by far than I: Their eyes stand out with fatness, they have more than heart can wish; But all the day long have I been plagued, and chastned every morning. This, I say, made David wonder, yea, and Job and Jeremiah too: But he goeth into the Sanctuary, and then he understands their end, nor could he understand it before. I went into the Sanctuary of God: What place was that? why there where he might enquire of God, and by him be resolved of this matter: Then, says he, understood I their end. Then I saw, that thou hast set them in slippery places, and that thou castest them down to destruction. Castest them down, that is, suddenly, or as the next words say, As in a moment they are utterly consumed with terrors: which terrors did not cease them on their sick-bed, for they had no bands in their death. The terrors therefore ceased them there, where also they are holden in them for ever. This he found out, I say, but not without great painfulness, grief and pricking in his reins: so deep, so hard and so difficult did he find it, rightly to come to a determination in this matter. And indeed, this is a deep Judgment of God towards ungodly sinners; it is enough to stag∣ger
a whole world, only the Godly that are in the world have a Sanctuary to go to, where the Oracle and Word of God is, by which his Judgements, and a reason of many of them are made known to, and understood by them. Atten. Indeed this is a staggering dispensa∣tion. It is full of the wisdom and anger of God. And I believe, as you have said, that it is full of Judgment to the world. Who would have imagined, that had not known Mr. Badman, and yet had seen him die, but that he had been a man of an holy life and conversation, since he died so stilly, so quietly, so like a Lamb or Chrisom child? Would they not, I say, have concluded, that he was a righteous man? or that if they ha known him and his life, yet to see him die  quietly, would they not have conclu∣ded tt he had made his peace with God? Nay furer, if some had known that he had died in his sins, and yet that he died so like a Lamb, would they not have concluded, that either God doth not know our sins, or that he likes them; or that he wants power, or will, or heart, or skill to punish them; since Mr. Badman himself went from a sinfull life so quietly, so peaceably, and so like a Lamb as he did? Wise. Without controversie, this is an heavy judgment of God upon wicked men; (Job. 21. 23.) one goes to Hell in peace, another goes to Hell in trouble; one goes to Hell being sent thither
by his own hands; another goes to Hell, be∣ing sent thither by the hand of his companion; one goes thither with his eyes shut, and another goes thither with his eyes open; one goes thither roaring, and another goes thi∣ther boasting of Heaven and Happiness all the way he goes: One goes thither like Mr. Badman himself, and others go thither as did his Brethren. But above all, Mr. Bad∣mans death, as to the manner of dying, is the fullest of Snares and Traps to wicked men; therefore they that die as he, are the greatest stumble to the world: They goe, and goe, they go on peaceably from Youth to old Age, and thence to the Grave, and so to Hell, without noyse: They goe as an Ox to the slaughter, and as a fool to the cor∣rection of the Stocks; that is, both sencelesly and securely. O! but being come at the gates of Hell! O! but when they see those gates set open for them: O! but when they see that that is their home, and that they must go in thither, then their peace and quietness flies away for ever: Then they roar like Lions, yell like Dragons, howl like Dogs, and tremble at their Judgment, as do the Devils themselves. Oh! when they see they must shoot the Gulf and Throat of Hell! when they shall see that Hell hath shut her ghastly Jaws upon them! when they shall
open their eyes, and find themselves within the belly and bowels of Hell! then they will mourn, and weep, and hack, and gnash their teeth for pain. But this must not be (or if it must, yet very rarely) till they are gone out of the sight and hearing of those mortals whom they do leave behind them alive in the world. Atten. Well, my good Neighbour Wiseman, I perceive that the Sun grows low, and that you have come to a conclusion with Mr. Badmans Life and Death; and therefore I will take my leave of you. Only first, let me tell you, I am glad that I have met with you to day, and that our hap was to full in with Mr. Badmans state. I also thank you for your freedom with me, in granting of me your reply to all my que∣stions: I would only beg your Prayers, that God will give me much grace, that I may neither live nor die as did Mr. Badman. Wise. My good Neighbour Attentive, I wish your welfare in Soul and Body; and if ought that I have said of Mr. Badmans Life and Death, may be of benefit unto you, I shall be heartily glad; only I desire you to thank God for it, and to pray heartily for me, that I with you may be kept by the Power of God through Faith unto Salvation. Atten. Amen. Farewell. Wise. I wish you heartily Farewell. FINIS.
