C3463 15578557 103866
C R DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms By the King. A PROCLAMATION For the Discovery and Apprehending all Popish Priests and Jesuits. CHARLES R. WHereas it is most Notorious and Evident, That a great number of Popish Priests and Iesuits are at this time secretly disguised, and lurking within this Realm, where they do not onely endeavour to Pervert His Majesties Subjects from the true Protestant Religion, to Romish Superstition, but do also contrive and set on foot divers Traiterous Plots and Designs against His Majesty, His Government, and the Protestant Religion by Law Esta∣blished: The Kings most Excellent Majesty (upon the Humble Petition of the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses now in Parliament Assembled) for the better Discovery and Apprehending of such Popish Priests and Iesuits, Doth by this His Royal Proclamation strictly Charge and Command all His Iudges, Iustices of the Peace, Magistrates, Officers, and other His Loyal Subjects within this His Realm of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, That they do use their utmost Care and Endeavour to Discover, Apprehend, and Commit, or cause to be Committed to safe Custody, in or∣der to their Tryal, all Popish Priests, and Iesuits (Except John Huddleston, Who was signally instrumental in His Majesties Escape after the Fight at Worcester, and such Foreign Popish Priests or Iesuits as by Contract of Marriage are to attend the Person of His Royal Consort the Queen (the Names of whom shall be signified under Her Great Seal, and such Signification Inrolled in His Majesties Court of Kings Bench) and except such Foreign Popish Priests and Ie∣suits who are by the Law of Nations to attend Foreign Ambassadours.) And for the greater Encouragement to such of His Majesties Loyal Subjects as shall Discover and Apprehend any Popish Priest or Iesuit (Except before excepted) His Majesty is hereby Graciously pleased to pro∣mise to him or them who shall Discover and Apprehend, or cause to be Apprehended, any such Po∣pish Priest or Iesuit, the Reward of Twenty pounds, which shall be immediately paid upon such Discovery and Apprehension, and due Proof thereof. Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Twentieth day of November, 1678. In the Thirtieth year of Our Reign. God save the King. LONDON, Printed by John Bill, Christopher Barker, Thomas Newcomb, and Henry Hills, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1678.
