C4919 9318064 42741
AN EXACT ABRIDGMENT IN ENGLISH, Of the eleven Books of Reports of the Learned Sir Edward Coke, Knight, late Lord Chiefe Justice of ENG∣LAND, and of the Councel of Estate to His Majestie, King JAMES. Composed by the Judiciou, Sir Thomas Ireland, Knight, late of Grayes Inne, and an Ancient Reader of that Honou∣rable SOCIETIE. Wherein is briefly contained the very substance and marrow of all those Reports, together with the Resolutions on every CASE. Also a perfect Table for the finding of the Names of all those Cases, and the principall mat∣ters therein contained. Very usefull for all men, especially the Students and Practi∣sers of that Honourable Profession. Brevitas Memoriae Amica. LONDON, Printed by M. Simmons, for Matthew Walbancke, at Grayes Inne Gate, and H. Twyford in Vine-court in the Middle Temple, 1650.
To the Reader. Gentle Reader. THE Abridger of these Reports was not onely a Learned Lawyer, but also was very conversant with the Au∣thor of them: For my part, I was onely entreated by many Friends to view and correct the Copy from the Presse: If any faults be,
you may blame the Prin∣ter. If I should commend the Original work, I should disparage the Author, who all learned Lawyers know, that never any man wrote like him: and for the excel∣lency of this Abridgement, it hath in it the very pith and substance of the Re∣ports at large, and so I rest. It is an abuse that the lawes & u∣sages of the Realm with their Causes, are not written, whereby they may be knowne, so that they may be under∣stood of all. Mirrour Justice, fol. 225.
An exact Table of all the Cases in each severall Book. The First Booke of the Lord Coke. LOrd Buckhursts Case Pelhams Case fol. 1 Porters Case. fol. 2 Altonwoods Case, Capels Case, Archers Case, fol. 3 Bredons Case, fol. 4 Corbets Case, fol. 5 Shelleyes Case, fol. 6 Albaines Case, fol. 7 Chudleighs Case, fol. 8 Anne Mayowes Case, fol. 11 The Rector of Chedingtons Case, fol. 12 Digges Case, fol. 14 Mildmayes Case, fol. 16 The second Booke of the Lord Coke. MAnsers Case, fol. 19 Goddards Case Thoroughgoods Case fol. 20
Wisemans Case fol. 21 Lanes Case fol. 22 Baldwins Case fol. 23 Case of Bankrupts fol. 24 Bettisworths Case fol. 24 Doddingtons Case fol. 25 Sir Rowland Heywards Case fol. 26 Bishop of Winchesters Case fol. 29 Arch-Bishop of Canterburies Case fol. 31 Sir Hugh Cholmleyes Case fol. 33 Buckleyes Case fol. 34 Beckwiths Case fol. 36 Winningtons Case fol. 37 Westcots Case fol. 38 Tookers Case fol. 39 Lord Cromwels Case fol. 40 Binghams Case fol. 45 The Third Booke of the Lord Coke. THe Marquesse of Win∣chesters Case fol. 49 Copledikes Case fol. 53 Heydons Case fol. 54 Borastons Case fol. 56 Left out, Dowties Cass, and Sir Willam Harberts Case. Walkers Case fol. 58 Butler and Bakers Case fol. 61 Ratclifts Case fol. 68
Bontons Case fol. 71 Sir George Browns Case fol. 72 Rigewaies Case fol. 73 Lincoln Colledg Case fol. 74 Pennants Case fol. 77 Westbies Case fol. 80 Deane and Chapter of Norwich's Case, fol. 81 Fermors Case fol. 83 Twines Case fol. 86 The Case of Fines. fol. 89 The Fourth Book of the Lord Coke. VErnons Case fol. 95 Bevils Case fol. 98 Actions of Slander, the Lord Cromwels Case. fol. 101 Cutler and Dixons Case fol. 102 Sir Richard Buckley, and Woods Case fol. 103 Stanhop, and Blyths Case fol. 104 Hext, Justice of Peace against Yeomans, fol. 104 Birchleyes Case fol. 105 Weaver, and Caridens Case. fol. 105 Stukley, and Bulheads Case. fol. 106 Snagg, and Gees Case. fol. 106 Baton, and Allens Case. fol. 106 Anne Davies Case, fol. 106 Jeames Case, fol. 107 Oxford and his wife against Crosse. fol. 108 Sir G. Gerrard, Master of the Rolls against
Mary Dickinson. fol. 108 Barhams Case, fol. 109 Britteridges Case, fol. 110 Palmer, and Thorps Case, fol. 111 Coppi-hold Cases, fol. 111 Brownes Case, fol. 111 Rivets Case, fol. 113 Deale and Rigdens Case, fol. 113 Bullock, and Dibleyes Case, fol. 113 Gravenor, and Teds Case. fol. 114 Fitch, and Huckleyes Case, fol. 114 Clark, and Pennifathers Case, fol. 114 P. 26. of the Queene. fol. 115 Rous and Arters Case, fol. 116 Murrell, and Smyths Case, fol. 116 Kite and Queintons Case, fol. 117 Melwich and Luters Case, fol. 118 Neales Case, fol. 120 Clifton and Molineux Case, fol. 120 Taverner, and Cromwels Case, fol. 120 Hubbard and Hamonds Case, fol. 121 Westwick, and Wyars Case, fol. 122 Bunting, and Lepingwels Case, fol. 123 Downes, and Hollakins Case, fol. 124 Harm, and Sayes Case, fol. 125 Shaw and Tompsons Case, fol. 126 Hoe, and Taylors Case, fol. 126 Frenches Case, fol. 127 Foyston, and Crachrodes Case, fol. 128
Myttons Case fol. 129 Bozouns Case fol. 130 Terringhams Case fol. 132 Cases of Appeales and Indictments. Brookes Case, fol. 135 Wetherell and Darly's Case fol. 135 Youngs Case Walkers Case Heydons Case fol. 136 Hume against Ogle. Hudson and Lees Case Syers Case fol. 138 Bibiths Case Vauexs Case fol. 139 Wrote and Wigges Case fol. 140 Waits Case fol. 142 Hill 30. of the Queene Ognels Case fol. 143 Rawlins Case fol. 145 Wardens & Commonal∣ty of Sadlers Case fol. 148 Forse and Hemblings Case fol. 149 Harlakendens Case fol. 150 Fulwoods Case fol. 152 Hindes Case fol. 154 Boroughes Case Palmers Case Hollands Case fol. 156
Case of Corporations. fol. 157 Digbies case, fol. 158 Nokes case, Sir Andrew Corbets case, fol. 159 Southcots case, fol. 160 Luttreles case, fol. 161 Druries case, fol. 162 Slades case, fol. 163 Adams, and Lamberts case, fol. 164 Actons case, fol. 166 Dumpors case, fol. 167 Bustards case, fol. 168 Beverleys case, fol. 169 The Fifth Booke. CLaytons case, Elmers case, fol. 171 Jewels case, Lord Mountioyes case, fol. 172 Justice Windhams case, Brudenels case, fol. 173 Hensteads case, Ives case, fol. 174 Saunders case, Rosses case, fol. 175 Countesse of Salops case, fol. 176 Case of Ecclesiasticall persons, Covenants, &c. concerning Leasees, Assurances, &c. fol. 177
Slingsbyes case, Rosewels case, fol. 180 Higginbottoms case, Stiles case, Sir Anthony Mayns case, fol. 181 Laughters case, Hallings case, Matthewsons case, fol. 182 Lambs case, Broughtons case, fol. 183 Deane and Chapter of Windsors case, Sir Thomas Palmers case, fol. 184 Earl of Rutlands case, fol. 185 Cases of Executors Russels case, Middletons case, Harrisons case, fol. 188 Piggots case, Princes case, fol. 189 Caulters case, Hargraves case, Pettifers case, fol. 190 Robinsons case, Reades case, fol. 191 Ployters case, fol. 192 Walcots case, Baynhams case, Gardiners case, Bishops case, fol. 193
Teys case, fol. 194 Dormers case, Rowlands case, fol. 195 Countesse of Rutlands case, Godwels Case, Nichols case, Bohuns case, fol. 196 Freemans case, Gages case, Cookes case, fol. 197 Franklins case. Gilbert Littletons case, Drywoods case, fol. 198 Vaughans case, Wyrrels case, Biggens case, fol. 199 Halls case, Pages case, fol. 200 Knights case, fol. 201 Specots case, fol. 202 Fosters case, fol. 203 Gooches case, fol. 204 Sparries case, Case of By-Lawes, Chamberlain of Londons case, fol. 205 Clerks case, Jeffrayes case, fol. 206 Lord Cheneys case, Cases of Usury. fol. 208
Buttons case, Claytons case, fol. 208 Hoes case, St. Johns case, fol. 209 Williams case, Case of Orphanes of London. Wymarks case, fol. 210 Cliftons case, fol. 211 Pilkintons case, Earl of Pembrooks case, Pagets case, fol. 212 Boothes case, fol. 213 Samons case, Grayes case, Fitz Herberts case, fol. 214 Fords case, Case of of customs, Snellings case, fol. 215 Case of Market Overt, Perimans case, Sir Henery Knevits case fol. 216 Pennrins case, Cases of Executions. Blumfields case, fol. 217 Garnons case, fol. 218 Frosts case, fol. 219 Hoes case, fol. 220 Semaynes case, fol. 221 Barwicks case, fol. 223
Goodalls case, Countesse of Northumberl. case, Buries case, fol. 224 Flowers case, Rookes case, fol. 225 Penruddocks case, fol. 226 Windsors case, Hungats case, fol. 227 Bakers case, Boulstons case, fol. 228 Aldens case, Sir Henry Constables case, fol. 229 Foxleyes case, fol. 230 Malaries case, Wades case, fol. 232 Foliambs case, Olands case, Pynners case, fol. 233 Edriches case, fol. 234 Whelpdales case Longs case, fol. 235 Saffins case, De libellis, Famosis, fol. 236 Palmers case, Caudreys case, fol. 237 The Sixth Booke. BReuertons case, fol. 239 Markals case, fol. 240 Sir John Molins case, fol. 241
Wheelers case, Ferrers case, fol. 242 Spencers case, fol. 243 Gentlemans case, Morrices case, Cases of Pardon, fol. 244 Arundels case, fol. 245 Treports case, Edens case, Colyers case, fol. 246 Wildes case, Sir Edward Cleers case, fol. 247 Packmans case, fol. 248 Gregories case, Michelborns case, fol. 249 Butler and Goodalls case, Ambrosia Gorges case, fol. 250 Marquesse of Winchester his case, Reades case, Helyars case, fol. 251 Ruddocks case, Sharps case, fol. 252 The case of Souldiers, Vicont Mountagues case, fol. 353 Greenes case, fol. 254 Boothies case, Fitz Willams case, fol. 255 Bishop of Baths case, fol. 256 Dean and Chapter of Worcesters case, fol. 257
Bellamyes case, Henery Finches case, fol. 257 Sir Anthony Mildmay, Blakes case, fol. 258 Higgins case, Dowdales case, fol. 259 Boswels case, fol. 260 Countesse of Rutlands case, fol. 261 Lord Chandows case, Bredimans case, fol. 262 Gatewards case, fol. 263 Catesbies case, fol. 264 Sir Moyle Finches case, fol. 265 Lord Darcies case, fol. 266 Burrels case, Sir Drue Druries case, fol. 267 Sir Gorge Cursons case, fol. 268 Bullens case, Lord Abergavennies case, Sir Edward Phittons case, fol. 269 The Seventh Booke. CAlvins case, fol. 271 Bulwers case, fol. 273 Sir Miles Corbets case, fol. 274 Gendils case, fol. 275 Milbornes case, Earle of Bedfords case, Oghtreds case, fol. 276
Englefields case, fol. 277 Case of Swannes. fol. 279 Sir Thomas Cecills case, Lord Andersons case, fol. 280 Butts case, fol. 281 Cases of Quare Impedit. Halls case, fol. 282 Sir Hugh Portmans case Baskervills case, fol. 283 Mauds case, Discontinuance of processe by the death of the Queen. fol. 284 Case of a Fine levied by the King. fol. 285 Nevils case, Penall Statutes, fol. 286 Lillingtons case, Bedels case, fol. 287 Beresfoeds case, Kenns case, fol. 288 The Eighth Booke. THe Princes case, fol. 291 Calyes case, Paynes case, fol. 293 Barretry, Greysleyes case, fol. 294 Whittinghams case, fol. 295 Jehu Webbs case, fol. 296 Sims case, fol. 297
Roger, Earl of Rutlands case, fol. 298 Beechers case, fol. 299 Swaines case, Sir William Fosters case, fol. 300 Lovedayes case, Crogates case, fol. 301 Trollops case, fol. 302 Whitlocks case, Greenlyes case, fol. 303 Lord Staffords case, fol. 305 Wiat Weilds case, fol. 306 Vinyors case, Sir Richard Pexals case, fol. 307 Buckmers case, fol. 308 Frauncis case, fol. 309 Foxes case, fol. 310 Mannings case, fol. 311 Baspoles case, Sir Richard Lechfords case, fol. 312 Talbots case, fol. 313 Doctor Bonhams case, fol. 314 Case of the City of London, Case of Thetford Schoole, fol. 316 Turnors case, fol. 317 Shiplyes case, Sir John Nedhams case, fol. 318 Sir Francis Barringtons case, fol. 319 Doctor Druries case, fol. 320 Davenports case, The Six Carpenters case, fol. 321
Edwards Althams case, fol. 323 Arthur Blackamores case, fol. 324 Cases in the court of wards, Myghts case, fol. 326 Digbies case, Earl of Cumberlands case, Paris Stoughters case, fol. 327 Toursons case, Sir Gerard Fleetwods case, fol. 328 Hales case, Sir Henry Constables case, fol. 329 Virgill Parkers case, fol. 336 The Ninth Booke. DOwmans case, fol. 331 Anna Beddingfields case, fol. 332 Case of Avowry, fol. 333 The Abbot of Strata Marcella his case, fol. 334 Bucknals case, Henslowes case, fol. 336 Earle of Shrewsburies case, fol. 339 Hickmots case, fol. 340 Batens case, fol. 341 The Poulters case, Aldreds case, fol. 342 Lambs case, fol. 343 Bradshawes case, Mackallies case, fol. 344 Peacocks case, fol. 346 Doctor Husse case, fol. 347
Combs case, fol. 348 Petoes case, fol. 349 Agnes Gores case, Coneys case, fol. 351 Pinchons case, fol. 352 Banes case, fol. 354 Sir George Reynels case, fol. 355 Podgers case, fol. 356 Treshams case, fol. 357 Marys case, fol. 358 Lord Sanchars case, fol. 359 Cases in the Court of wards, Lawes case, fol. 360 Floyers case, fol. 362 Sondayes case, Quicks case, fol. 363 Bewleys case, Holts case, fol. 364 Menes case, fol. 365 Ascoughs case, fol. 366 Thorogoods case, fol. 367 Beaumonts case, fol. 368 The Tenth Book. THe case of Suttons Hospitall. fol. 371 Portingtons case, fol. 374 Lampets case, fol. 375 Case of the Chancellor, Masters, & Scholars of the University of Oxford. fol. 378 Bishop of Salisburies case, fol. 379
Whistlers Case Church-wardens Case of St. Saviours in Southwark. fol. 381 The Case of the Marshalsea in false impri∣sonment, fol. 382 Loveis Case, in Ejectione ferme, fol. 384 Doctar Leyfields Case. fol. 387 Seymors Case, fol. 389 Bewfages Case fol. 391 Denbawds Case in Error, fol. 396 Lofields case in debt upon bond, fol. 397 Legats Case fol. 398 Pilfolds Case fol. 399 Cheyneyes Case. fol. 400 Case of the Major and Burgesse of Lin, fol. 401 Cluns Case, fol. 402 Osborns Case, fol. 403 Read and Redmans case, fol. 404 Richard Smiths Case, fol. 405 Cases upon the Commissions of Sewers. Case of Chester Mille, Keighleys case, fol. 406 The Case of the Isle of Elie, fol. 407 Scroops Case, fol. 409 The Eleventh Book. THe Lord Delawares case, fol. 411 Auditor Curles case fol. 412 Sir John Heydons case, fol. 413 Priddle and Nappers case, fol. 414
Doctor Grants Case fol. 416 Sir Henry Nevils case, fol. 417 Doctor Ayrays Case fol. 417 Henry Harpurs case, fol. 418 Henry Pigots case, fol. 420 Alexand. Poulters case, fol. 420 Metcalfes case. fol. 423 Richard Godfreyes case fol. 425 Richard Lifords case fol. 426 The Taylors of Ipswich case, fol. 428 Edward Savels case fol. 429 Benthams case fol. 429 Doctor Fosters case fol. 429 Magdalen Colledge case. fol. 432 Lewis Bowles case fol. 34 The Case of Monopolies fol. 436 The Earle of Devonsh. case fol. 437 James Bagges case fol. 438
THE FIRST BOOK. The Lord Buckhursts Case, 40. El. fo. 1. IF a man for him and his heires, do warrant Land to one and his heires; this is a ge∣nerall warrantie, because there is not a re∣straint against any particular person in certeine. Vpon a Feoffement without warranty, the Feoffee shall have all the Charters, which comprize warran∣ty, and others, though they be not given to him, be∣cause hee is to defend the Title at his perill. Upon a Feoffement with warranty, without expresse grant, the Feoffee shall not have any Charters, which serve for to deraigne the warranty paramount. Also the Feoffer shall have all Charters, which serve for main∣tenance of the Title, but the Feoffee shall have all which maintaine the possession, as Court Rolls, and which are concomitant and incident to the posses∣sion. If A. be seized of a Segniorie, rent, advowson, or other thing that lyeth in grant, and grant the same o∣ver unto B. with warranty, and B. grant that to C. with warranty; In this case C. shall have the first deed although B. be bound to warrantie, for without that he cannot make any Defence against A. or any claim∣ing by him. Pelhams Case, 32. El. fo. 14. A Tenant for life, the remainder in Taile the re∣mainder in fee, bargaines and sells the Land to
one, who before the Statute of 14. El. ca. 8. suffers a recoverie, in which A. is vouched, and voucheth over, and he in remainder enters, and the entry is adjudg∣ed lawfull; for the Recovery is a Forfeiture, and the remainder may enter, for it is the common Assurance; As if Tenant for life had levied a Fine, &c. and suing of execution, doth not toll the entry of the remain∣der, and a Writ of error was sued, and the plaintiffe release the errors. Porters Case, 35. El. fo. 22. 32. H. 8. P. devised a house to his wife and her heires, upon condition, that she by advise, &c. with all convenient speed, after his death should assure it, &c. for maintenance of a Free School, &c. for ever, and dyes, 32. H. 8. the wife enters, and 3. E. 6. lea∣ses to A. for yeares, the heire of P. enters, and his en∣try adjudged lawfull; because 23. H. 8. extends not to good uses, nor doth it make the conveyance voyd, or give entry, but makes the use voyd; and admit the use voyd, yet the condition is not, for Counsell may devise, &c. as to have a Corporation by Pattent, and licence to assure, and therefore the wife ought to have performed it. Any man at this day may give Lands, Tenements, or hereditaments to any person or persons, for the finding of a Preacher, maintenance of a Schoole, maimed Soulders, poore people, reparation of Chur∣ches, High-wayes, Bridges, marriage of poore maids, or any other charitable uses. But it is good policy in every such Feoffment or estate, to reserve to the Fe∣offor and his heires any small rent, or to expresse some small summe of money for the consideration of the cause before recited.
Altonwoods Case, 42. Eliz. fo. 41. H. 8. seised of an estate Taile to him, and the heires males of his body, and of a Fee expectant, grants in Taile, and dyes without issue male; adjud∣ed that the grant is voyd; for the King had an estate Taile in possession, by which he might grant a lawfull estate for his own life; and a Fee, by which he might grant an estate Taile by speciall recitall. And these words (ex speciali gratia, &c.) shall not produce a strainable construction against the rules of Law, or in deceptionem regis. Capells Case, 23. Eliz. fo. 62. A Tenant in Taile, the remainder to B. in Taile. B. grants a rent charge, A. suffers a common reco∣very, and dyes without issue, the grantee distraines, the Alienee of A. brings a Replevin; adjudged for the alienee by all the Justices of England that a com∣mon recoverie against a Tenant in Tayle, shall binde not onely the remainder, and all Leases, charges, &c. granted or made by him in remainder, but also the Reversion, and all Leases, charges, &c. granted by him in reversion. Archers Case, 39. 40. Eliz. fo. 66. LAnd was devised to the Father for life, the re∣mainder to the next heire male of the Father, and to the heires males of his body; the devisor dyes, the Father infeoffes J. S. with warranty. First it was resolved by Anderson and Walmeslowe et tot. Cur. that the Father had but onely an estate for life, for that he had an expresse estate for life demised unto him,
and the remainder is limitted to his next heire male in the singular number, and his right heire male may not enter for the forfeiture in his life, for he cannot be heire so long as he liveth. Secondly, It was resol∣ved that the remainder to his right heire is a good re∣mainder, although he cannot have a right heire du∣ring his life, but it sufficeth that it vesteth eo instanti, that the particular estate determineth, Dyer. 14. Eliz. fo. 309. Thirdly, it was resolved which was the prin∣cipall poynt in this case, per tot. Curiam, that by the Feoffment of the Tenant for life, the remainder was destroyed, for every contingent remainder ought to vest, either during the particular estate, or at the least eo instanti that the particular estate determineth; for if the particular estate be ended or determined in Deed or in Law before the contingency fall, the re∣mainder is voyd. And in this case, by the Feoffment of the Father, his estate for life was determined by condition in Law, which cannot be revived by any possibilitie; for this cause the contingent remainder is voyd, for by the Feoffment no right of the particu∣lar estate remaineth; and the better opinion was, that the warranty bindes the remainder, though in Abeyance. Bredons Case, 39, 40. Eliz: Fol. 76. TEnant for life, and the remainder in Taile, joyne in a fine Come ceo, &c. to A. who renders a Rent charge of 40. l. a yeare, to Tenant for life, the re∣mainder dies without issue, the second remainder in taile enters. Tenant for life, distraines for the Rent; adjudged he may, and that the rent remaines, after the death of Tenant in taile without issue, during the life of Tenant for life; the fine was no discon∣tinuance, for every one gave that which he might
lawfully give, and tis no forfeiture by Tenant for life, for the Law construes this. First, to be a grant of him in remainder; and after, the grant of Tenant for life, Ʋt res magis valeat, &c. If Tenant for life, and the first remainder in Taile, make a feoffement, tis no discontinuance, though the first remainder in taile dies without issue, nor is it a forfeiture, but the feoffee shall hold it during the life of Tenant for life; but if it be without deed, then tis a surrender of Te∣nant for life, and the feoffement of the remainder, Ʋt res magis valeat, &c. Corbets Case, 42. Eliz: Fol. 84. of Perpetuities. C. Covenants to stand seised to the use of himselfe for life, and after to the use of A. his Eldest Son, and the Heires Males of his body, the remainder to the use of B. his second Son, and the Heires Males of his Body, &c. And if A. or his issue, &c. shall at∣tempt, &c. to alien, &c. by which any estate shall be barred, &c. that after such attempt, and before any act executed, the use and Estate of him so attempt∣ing, &c. shall cease onely as to him so attempting, in the same degree as if he were naturally dead, and not otherwise, and that then it shall be immediately to such persons, to whom it should come by the intent of the Indenture, &c. C. dyes, A. suffers a recovery, B. enters, &c. adjudged he could not, for this pro∣viso is repugnant, impossible, and against Law; for the death of Tenant in taile, is not a cesser of the E∣state taile, but death without issue Males; and by this reason the issue should have it in the life of the Father, &c. And for every discent &c. Death, na∣turall or civill, is requisite, and tis not materiall, though Tenant in taile had no issue at the time of the breach, for twas repugnant at the beginning; and
the estate taile doth not commence, by the having of issue, and a gift in taile upon condition, that if the Donee dyes, his estate shall cease, is a void condition. Also the proviso is void for the incertainty, as a gift to two, Et haeredibus, is voide though a Warranty be made to them and their Heirs, & in Jermine & Arscotts Case, the like proviso was adjudg'd voide: for be the proviso a condition or a limitation, the intire estate ought to be defeated by it, and an Estate in Land cannot cease for part, and continue for the residue, nor cease for one person, and continue for another, nor cease for a time and revive after. The like judge∣ment was betwixt Chomly and Humble, but the Par∣liament, or Law, may make an estate voide, as to one, and good to another, as Tenant in speciall taile, levies a fine, the issue is barred not the wife, so a re∣lease by the demandant, to the vouchee is good, not by a stranger, so, if an Executor surrender a tearme, to one respect tis extinct, to another tis assetts, &c. And uses are within the Statute De donis, though it speakes onely of Lands and Tenements, and there shall be a Possessio fratris, &c. of them, for they are guided by the Rules of the common Law. Richill in the time of R. 2. and Thirning in the time of H. 4. Justices, intended for to make a perpetuity, but could not. Shelleyes Case, 23. Eliz: Fol. 94. EDward Shelley leased for yeares, and after Cove∣nanted to suffer a recovery, which should be to the use of himselfe, and after to the use of A. for 24. yeares, and after to the Heires Males of the body of the said E S. and the Heires Males of the said Heires Males, &c. E. S. dyes 9 of Octob. the first day of the Terme, in the morning, betwixt five and six a clock, the recovery passes the same day, and an Habere faci∣as
seisinam awarded, the recovery was executed the 19 of Octob. 4 Decemb. the Wife of the Eldest Son (before dead) of E. S. was delivered of a Son, na∣med Henry, Richard, the second Son of E. S. entered, and made a Lease, &c. Henry entred upon the Lessee, who brought an Eject firmae, and Judgement was given for the Defendant, and twas resolved, that if Tenant in taile suffer a common recovery, and dye before execution, that execution may be sued a∣gainst the issue, for the intended recompence, in fa∣vour of the common assurance, resolved that the re∣vertion in judgement of Law is not in the recover∣or before execution sued, for the judgement is, Quod recuperet seisinam, which cannot be executed till entry, or claime, as 'tis of a Common, &c. granted upon condition; for when a man may enter, or claime, the Law will not put things in him, till entry or claime. The third and great point resolved, was that the Uncle is in, as by discent, though he shall not have his age, nor be in ward. 1. Because the recovery being the Originall act, had its Essence in the life of E. S. to which the execution hath retros∣pect. 2. Because the use might have vested in E. S. if he were in life. 3. Neither the recoverors by their entry, nor the Sheriffe by making execution may make an Inheritance to whom they please. 4. Because the Uncle claimed the use by the reco∣very and Indenture, and by words of limitation, not purchase. Albanies Case, 28. Eliz: Fo. 111. A By Indenture infeoffed B. of two Acres, to the use of A. for life, the remainder in taile to C. the remainder in fee to D. with a proviso, if E. dye with∣out issue, that A. at any time by indenture sealed, &c.
in the presence of foure, &c. may alter, &c. any use, &c. A. of the one acre, infeoffes F. and for the other Acre, A. by Indenture renounces, surrenders, releas∣es, &c. to B. C. and D. the said power, condition, authority, &c. E. dyes without issue, A. by Inden∣ture in presence of foure, revokes the first uses, and limits new, resolved that by the feoffement, the po∣wer to revoke, as to limit new uses, was extinct, and by Wray chiefe Justice, the future power may be re∣leased, as a condition subsequent, though the per∣formance or breach cannot be done without an act precedent, but as to this poynt, the Court did not give their resolution: but the whole Court agreed, that if the power had beene present, (as tis usuall) this might be extinct to any one, who hath a free hold in possession, reversion or remainder. 'Twas moved (if the future power could not be released) whether it might be defeated by the words of defea∣sance, both being executory; and 'twas said that in all cases, when any thing executory is created by a deed, that the same thing, by consent of all parties to the creation, by their deed may be nullified, as a warranty, recognizance, rents, charge annuities, co∣venant, &c. And of the same opinion was Wray chiefe Justice, and the whole Court, and judgement given according. Chudleighs Case, Or the Case of perpetuities, Fo. 120. SIr Richard Chudleigh was seised in fee of the Man∣nor of D. and had issue foure Sonnes, A. B. C. D. and 26o Aprill, the third and fourth of Phillip and Mary, infeoffed E. F, &c. in fee, to the use of him∣selfe and his Heires of the body of G. then Wife of H. and after to the use of the performance of his
Will, for ten yeares immediately after his death, and after to the use of the feoffes, and their Heires, during the life of A. the Eldest Sonne, the remainder to the use of the first issue Male of the body of A. and the Heires of the body of the first issue Male, and so to the second issue Male, the remainder to the use of B. the second Sonne, and the Heires of his body, the remainder to C. &c. the remainder to D. &c the remainder to the right Heires of himselfe Sir Richard Chudley, died without issue of the body of G. 1o of the Queene the feoffees (C. living) by deed in∣feoffed, A. in fee, without consideration, he having notice of the first uses. A. hath issue a Sonne, na∣med S. and after I. and after infeoffes Sir I. C. with warranty, S. died without issue, &c. I. enters, &c. agreed, by all the Justices and Barons but two, that the feoffement made by the feoffees (which had an Estate for life) devests all the estates, and the fu∣ture contingent uses also; and though A. had notice of the first use, 'tis not materiall, because the ancient uses were devested, and this new estate cannot be Subject to the ancient uses, which rose out of the ancient estate, agreed that 27 H. 8. doth not extend to destroy uses, otherwise then by execution, and transferring the possession to them, agreed by the most that 27. H. 8. doth not transferre the possession to any use, but onely to uses In esse, which doth ap∣peare by the Statute, for there ought to be a person In esse, seised, and also a use In esse, for if there be onely a possibility of a use, there cannot be an exe∣cution of the possession to the use: the Statute sayes, That the estate shall be out of the feoffees, and that the estate shall be in such person which hath the use. So that no E∣state of the feoffees shall be transferred in abeyance; and upon this twas concluded, that contingent uses, or in possibility, may be destroyed or discontinued, be∣fore
that they come In esse, as they might at common Law; so the remainders limitted in use here, shall follow the rule and reason of Estates executed in possession by the common law, and if the estate for life here had beene determined by death, before the birth of the Sonne, the remainder in future should be voide, though the Sonne were borne after, for a re∣mainder ought to vest during the particular estate, or Eo instanti, when it ends. And twas holden by all, that if the contingent use here, had come In esse, without alteration of the estate of the Land, it should be executed by the Statute of 27. H. 8. Also it was holden by most, that 27. H. 8. against the expresse Letter of it, shall not be taken by equity, because, by preservation of contingent uses mischeives in∣tended to be prevented, shall be preserved and great∣er introduced. Popham chiefe Justice said, that by 27. H. 8. some uses in esse are executed presently, uses in futuro agreeable to Law, are executed if they come In esse, in due time, but uses not agreeable to Law are extirpated, for the intention of the Statute, was, to restore the ancient common Law. Five other points adjudged, besides the principall matter. 1. When Tenant for life (the remainder being in taile to A.) infeoffes the reversioner, tis a forfeiture, for it devests the estate in remainder; so if there be Tenant in taile, the remainder in taile, ctc. and the diversity is, when the privity and estate, is sole and immediate, when not. 2. If A. hath issue B. and C. infants, and a lease is made to A. for life, the remain∣der to B. in taile, the remainder to C. in taile. A is diseised, and releases to the disseisor with warranty, and dyes, this discends upon B. within age, B. dyes, the warranty discends upon C. within age, C. comes to full age, and three yeares after enters, his entry is lawfull, for he might enter in the life of his Ance∣stor,
and if he doth not enter, yet the warranty shall not binde him, otherwise it is, when he is put to acti∣on, and Caveat, that after his full age, he doth not suffer a discent before entry. 3. If a disseisor, &c. who hath a defeasible title in a Mannor, grant a vo∣luntary estate by Coppy (being forfeited, or es∣cheated to him) this grant shall not binde him that hath right, after a recontinuance of the Mannor, but admittances, which a disseisor, &c. makes to Coppy holds, are good, for they are in a manner judiciall acts, and shall binde the disseisee. 4. That an estate made to one and his Heires, during the life of B. is but an Estate for life, upon which a remainder may depend. 5. That an Estate made to A. and his Heires of the body of Jane S. is an Estate taile against the opinion of Ascugh 20. H. 6. 36. Anne Maiowes Case, 35. Eliz. fo. 146. FEeoffor and Feoffee upon condition, by Deed joyne in a grant of a rent charge to C. the condi∣tion is broken, the Feeoffor reenters, the grantee di∣straines, the Feoffor brings a Replevin. Resolved, that the rent remaines; to the objection, that 'tis the grant of the Feoffee, and the confirmation onely of the Feoffor, and a confirmation cannot make a con∣ditionall estate absolute, nor alter the quality of it, except it inlarge it: as if a Feoffor confirme the estate of the Feoffee upon condition, before the condition broken, it doth not make it absolute. Answered, and agreed by the Court, that there is a diversity, when the estate of him, to whom the confirmation is made, is upon an expresse condition; there the confirmati∣on doth not toll the condition; but if such feoffee in∣feoffe another without condition, there a confirmati∣on to the second feoffee extincts the condition. Fe∣offee
upon condition grants a rent in fee; the feoffor confirmes it to him and his heires, and after enters for condition broken, yet the rent remaines, and by Littleton every fee simple land may be charged one way or other, Concurrentibus his, &c. and the case 11. H. 7. is all one with our case, and here 'tis the stron∣ger, because the grant and confirmation were by the same Deed, so that the rent was never subject to any condition. The Rector of Chedingtons case, 40. Eliz. fo. 153. 2. E. 6. the Rector of Ched. demised the Rectory to El Elderker for fourescore yeares, if she should live so long; and if she dyed, within the said terme, or alie∣ned, that then her estate should cease, and then by the same Indenture demises the premises to R. E. for so many yeares, as shall remaine unexpired after the death, or alienation of El. for the residue of the terme of fourescore yeares, if he shall live so long, without alienation, &c. And if he dye, or alien within the said terme, then his estate shall cease; and then by the same Indenture he grants the premisses to W. for so many yeares of the said terme of fourescore yeares, as remaine, if he lives without alienation, and if W. dyes, or aliens within the said terme, that his estate shall cease, and then he grants, &c. during so many of the fourescore yeares, which shall be unexpired to T. his executors and assignes, which Indenture, and estate, was confirmed by the Patron and Ordinary; the Re∣ctor dyes, T. dyes, W. dyes, and 17. Eliz. Ellerker dyes, after R. enters, and dyes, 18. Eliz. the executor of T. enters, and assignes to J. S. the Successor of the Rector enters, and Leases to B. who upon ouster, brought an Ej. Firmae. Resolved for the Plaintiffe, and that the Lease to T. is voyd. Argued for T. that his
demise was good, and a difference taken betwixt ter∣minum annorum, and tempus annorum, as in this case of the demise to T. during so many yeares of the foure∣score yeares, &c. not of the terme of fourescore yeares, if a Lease be made for 21. yeares, and after another Lease, to commence from the end and expiration of the said terme of yeares, and after the first Lease is surrendered, the second terme shall commence pre∣sently, not so, if it were from the end of the said 21. yeares. Resolved that the demises to R. and W. are voyd, because the terme that El. had, was sub modo, if she should so long live, which is determined by her death, ergo, no residue can remaine to R. and W. and so 'twas adjudged between Greene and Edwards, and the Court agreed the diversity betwixt the demises to R. and W. and the demise to T. 'twas argued that the demise to T. was voyd. 1. Because that the Les∣sor had not power for to contract for the land during the fourescore yeares, for he had but a possibility to have the land againe during the fourescore yeares, viz. if El. dyed, which possibility cannot be demised, but the Court delivered no opinion to this poynt. 2. That the Lease to T. was voyd, for the incertain∣ty, how many yeares should be behinde, at the death of El. a termor grants to B. so many yeares as shall be behinde tempore mortis suae, 'tis voyd. Locrofts case ad∣judged, a man possessed of a terme of 90. yeares, upon marriage of his Sonne, demised the land to his Sonne for 70. yeares, to commence after his death, the Les∣sor dyes, the lease was adjudged good, because here he demised the land for 70. yeares, which is certaine, in which, this differs from 7. E. 6. which diversity was agreed by the whole Court. 3. That 'twas voyd, be∣cause, he dyed in the life of El. so that the incertainty, cannot be reduced to a certainty in his life time, and so cannot rest in the executors, a lease to one for so
many yeares as his Executors shall name, is voyd. Note, a diversity betwixt a covenant and agreement, which is perfect, and certaine, though it takes effect in possession, upon a future matter precedent; and a covenant and agreement incertaine, which is to be re∣duced to a certainty by matter ex post facto, for in the first case, the estate is bound presently, in the other not, which was agreed by the Court. 4. It was mo∣ved, if T. had been in life, the demise could not rest in him; T. dyed before R. or W. and R. survived El. and by the expresse condition precedent, R. could not take, except El. dyed within the terme, and W. could not take, except R. dyed within the terme, and this is as much as to say, that if R. dyes before El. and T. cannot take, except W. dye in the life of El. and R. survived El. So that both precedent contingencies faile, viz. the death of R. and W. in the life of El. and though the demise to R. and W. are voyd, yet the limitation precedent (viz. the death of R. and W. in the life of El.) to the demise to T. is not voyd, for his interest may depend upon both the contingen∣cies, for so was the intention of the parties, and this was affirmed by the whole Court, by Popham Chiefe Justice. The Lease to T. was voyd for another cause, for it cannot commence upon a contingent, which de∣pends upon another contingent, as here the demise to T. depends upon the contingent annexed to the demise, made to W. and the demise to W. depends upon a contingency annexed to the demise to R. Digges Case, 42. Eliz. fo. 173. C. Digges was seised of the land in question, and other lands in fee, and by Indenture 6. Maij. 10. of the Queene covenanted (in consideration of marriage betwixt him and his wife, and for the ad∣vancement
of T. their Sonne, and for two hundred pounds paid to him before marriage) that he and his heires would stand seised to the use of himselfe for life, and after to T. in taile, and after to the use of himselfe in taile; with a proviso (for the considerati∣ons aforesaid, &c.) that it should be lawfull for him, at any time during his life, with consent of certaine persons, by Indenture to be Inrolled in any of the Kings Courts, to revoke any of the uses, or estates, and for to limit new uses. 6. Maij. 12. of the Queene C. by consent, &c. by Indenture inrolled in the Chancery, revoked the uses and estates aforesaid, in part of the land, and limitted the use of it to him and his heires; after, 20. Sept. 13. of the Queene, by In∣denture with consent, &c. inrolled in Banck. M. 13. & 14. of the Queene, declared that for the payment of his debts, that from the time of the inrollment of this Deed in Chancery, all the uses in the first Inden∣ture should be voyd, and that the land should be to the use of himselfe in fee: after, C. 26. Octob. 14. of the Queene by Indenture covenanted for to levie a Fine of all his land, part of which should be to the use of himselfe and his wife, and his heires; which Fine was levied the same terme, after the Indenture dated 20. Sept. was inrolled in Chancery, after C. enters, and makes his claime: and whether C. dyed seised in fee of the land mentioned in the Deed of Revocation of 20. Sept. was the question. Adjudged, 1. that C. D. might revoke part at one time, part at another, till he hath revoked all; but he can revoke the same part but once, except that he hath a new power, &c. to uses newly limitted; for these words (at any time) amount to (from time to time, &c.) 2, That where the revocation is to be by Deed Indented to be in∣rolled, this is as much as to say, as by Deed Indented and inrolled, and till inrollment no revocation shall
be, for otherwise perchance none shall be inrolled. 3. That 'twas no perfect revocation by the Indenture of 20. Sept. till the Deed were inrolled in the Chan∣cery; for though that the proviso of revocation in the first Indenture shall be satisfied with an inrollment, in any of the Kings Courts, yet for that the Indenture of revocation it selfe, limits the revocation to take effect, after the inrollment in Chancery, it ought to be so. 4. That the Fine levied before the inrollment in Chancery (which was before the revocation) hath extinct the power; see Albaines case before adjudged, and Popham Chiefe Justice said, that without question such a power might be released, for 'tis not meerely collaterall, but savours and tastes of the estate of the land, which all the Court agreed. 5. If the Fine had not been, the auncient uses were determined, with∣out entry or claime, because he himselfe was tenant for life of the land, and the act of revocation is as strong as claime; and this point was agreed in the Earle of Salops case. 6. By the same conveyance that the auncient uses are revoked, others may be rai∣sed, without claime, or other act, and the Law adjud∣ges a priority of operation, Whites case adjudged ac∣cording. Maildmayes Case, 24. Eliz. fo. 175. A Use cannot be raised by any covenant, proviso, or bargaine, &c. upon a generall consideration, and therefore if a man by Deed indented and inrolled, &c. for divers good causes & considerations; bargaine and sell his Land to another, and his heires nihil operatur inde, for no use shall be raised upon such generall con∣siderations, for it doth not appeare to the Court, that the bargain or had quid pro quo. But the bargainee may averre, that money or other valuable consideration
was paid or given, if in truth it was so, and the bar∣gaine and sale is good. It was resolved that when uses are raised by cove∣nant in the consideration of advancement of any of his bloud, and after in the same Indenture a Proviso that the Covenantor may make Leases for yeares, &c. that the Covenantor in this case may not make Lea∣ses for yeares to his sonne, daughter, or any of his bloud, much lesse to any other person, because that the power to make Leases for yeares was voyd, when the Indenture was sealed and delivered. For the co∣venant upon this generall consideration will not raise any use, and no particular averment in this case may be taken; but if the uses be limitted upon a recove∣rie, fine, or feoffment, there needeth not any consi∣deration to raise any of the uses. Resolved, that the words (other consideration) cannot comprise any con∣sideration expressed in the Indenture before the pro∣viso, for (other) ought to be in quality, nature, and person, different, and advancement of his daughter is a consideration mentioned before. Anthonie Mildmay brought an action of the case against Roger Standish, for saying that Lands were lawfully assured to John Talbott for 1600. yeares, and that he was lawfully possessed of the same tearme; whereas in truth the said Lands were not lawfully assured for the said tearme, nor the said John Talbott was lawfully possessed of the interest thereof And so for slaunder∣ing of the title by speaking of the words, Mildmay brought an action. Standish justified the words, and shewed the title of Talbott, and it was adjudged that the action was maintaineable and good, although that Talbott had a limitation of the Land by will, which was
the reason that Standish (being a man not learned in the Lawes) affirmed the words, yet because he tooke upon him the notice of the Law, and medled in a matter that did not concerne him, Judgement was gi∣ven for Mildmay; Et ignorantia juris non excusat.
THE SECOND BOOK. Of Sir Edward Cooke, Lord, &c. Mansers Case, 26. Eliz. fo. 3. IF a man be unlearned and cannot read, and be bound to doe an act of sealing assurances, writings, &c. upon tender, &c. he is not bound to seale and de∣liver any such writing, if there be not some ready which may read the Deed if the party so require it, and in the same language and tongue that he understandeth. Ignorantia duplex est facti & juris, and ignorance in reading, or of the lan∣guage. Quae sunt ignorantia facti, may excuse, but igno∣rantia juris non excusat, and if it be read unto him, he may not have a reasonable time to shew it to his Councell learned, to see whether it agree with his bond or covenant; for he must seale it at his perill, or if the same be truly expounded to him, it is good enough. But if it be read amisse, or declared contrary to what it is, and thereby the illiterated man is decei∣ved, he may very well plead non est factum; For the Law saith, it is not his Deed; and so it was adjud∣ged in Throughgoods case, being the third case in this second Booke. Resolved, that if a man be bound that a stranger shall doe an act, in such case he takes upon him, that he shall doe it at his perill; for he which is bound, takes more upon him for a stranger, then for himselfe, in many cases. If a man plead, that he hath
kept a man indemnified, &c. he ought to shew how, otherwise, where he pleads in the negative, Non fuit damnificatus. Goddards Case, 26. El. fo. 4. AN obligation dated the fourth of Aprill Anno 24. El. and delivered as the Deed of the partie 30. July An. 23. El. adjudged the Deed of the partie; for though the plaintiffe in pleading, cannot alledge the delivery before the Date, because he is estopped, yet a Jury which are sworne to speake the truth, shall not be estopped. The Date of a Deed is not the sub∣stance of the Deed. For if it want date, or have an impossible Date, as the 30. February, the Deed is good. For there are three things of the essence or substance of a Deed (viz.) writing in paper or parchment, sealing, and delivery. And if it have these three, al∣though it want, In Cujus rei testimonium Sigillum su∣um apposuit, &c. yet the Deed is good; and when a Deed is delivered, it takes effect by the delivery, not by the date. Throughgoods Case. 26. Eliz. fo. 9. REsolved, that 'tis not materiall, whether the par∣ty to whom the Deed is made, or another, by his procurement; or a Stranger of his owne head, reades the writing in other words, then the writing is, so that he that seales it, be a lay man, and (without covin in him) deceived, and the pleading of it is alwayes ge∣nerall, without shewing by whom 'twas read; and A. shall voyde an obligation to B. by pleading that he did it y menace of C. Resolved, that such a lay-man is not bound to deliver a Deed, if no body be present that can reade it, in such language as he can under∣stand,
and if it be read in other words, it shall not binde him, and 'tis at the perill of him to whom 'tis made, that the very effect and purport of it be decla∣red, if it be required, but if he doe not request it, he shall be bound by it, though it be made contrary to his meaning. Resolved, that it shall not binde, if the effect be declared in other words, then it is, as if the Deed had been read in other words. Two Justices, a Feoffement of two acres, is read as of one, it shall not binde; see Mansers case before. Wisemans Case, 27. Eliz. fo. 15. TEnant in tayle of certaine Lands, the remainder to another in Fee, he in remainder by Deed in∣dented and inrolled in consideration of bloud, &c. as for other good considerations, doth covenant to stand seized of the said Lands to the use of himselfe, and of the heires males of his body. And for default thereof, to the use of the Queene, her heires and suc∣cessors. After the Tenant in tayle in possession suf∣fereth a common recoverie with voucher. And whe∣ther it was a barre to the issue in tayle was the que∣stion; And it was adjudged that the issue in tayle was barred, for good considerations are too general to raise any use, without speciall averment, that valuable or other good consideration was given. Resolved, that the Land should continue in his name and bloud, is not a consideration to raise a use to the Queene, though the limitation to her, were, for the preserva∣tion of the tayle against discontinuances and barres, for there wants quid pro quo. Resolved, if he had said in consideration, that the Queene is the head of the weale publique, and hath the care and charge, as well to preserve peace, as for to repell hostility, yet 'tis no good consideration, for Kings ex officio ought to go∣verne
their Subjects in tranquillity, which is implyed in the word (King.) And admit the consideration had been sufficient to raise a use to the Queene, yet that would not preserve the estate tayle by force of the Act 34. H. 8. for no estate tayle is preserved by the said Act, except the same estate tayle be of the creation or provision of the King, and not where the estate tayle is given or created of a common person without provision of the King, as may appeare by the preamble of the Act. Resolved, that before the Sta∣tute of 34. H. 8. a common recovery barred a tayle created by the King. Lanes Case, 29. Eliz. fo. 16. THe Queene seised of a Mannor in right of her Crowne, by her Steward granted coppie-hold Lands, parcell thereof, to one by coppie, according to the custome in Fee. And after the Queene under the Exchequer Seale made a Lease of the same Lands to another for 21. yeares, who granted the same Tearme to the coppie-holder, and after the Queene reciting the Lease for yeares, granted the reversion thereof in Fee, the Tearme of 21. yeares expired. The Patentee of the reversion entreth upon the cop∣pie-holder, and the entrie was adjudged good. Re∣solved, that the Lease under the Exchequer Seale was good, by the usage there, for the course of every Court, is as a law, of which the common law takes notice, without alledging of it in pleading; and eve∣ry Court at Westminster is bound to take notice of the Customes of other Courts, otherwise of Courts in the Countrey: and the order of Exchequer is to make Leases by (Committimus such land.) Resolved, that the estate of the Coppie-holder was determined by the acceptance of the Lease for yeares; And so it was
adjudged against the Coppie-holder, for notwith∣standing that the Coppie-holders estate is taken to be but an estate at will, yet the custome hath so esta∣blished the estate of the Coppieholder, that he is not removeable at the will of the Lord, so long as he per∣formes his customes and services: and by the same reason the Lord cannot determine his interest, by any act that he can doe. And so it hath been adjudged many times. And the aceptance of this Lease was the proper act of the Coppie-holder. Resolved, that by the severance of the free-hold from the Mannor, the Coppiehold estate is not extinguished. Baldwyns Case, 31. Eliz. fo. 23. THings which lye in grant, and take their essence and effect by delivery of a Deed, without other ceremony, as rent or common out of Lands, &c. by the premisses of the Deed to one and his heires, ha∣bendum to the grantee for yeares or life, this habendum is repugnant to the premisses, for the Fee passeth by the premises by the delivery of the Deed, and there∣fore the habendum is voyd. And when a man giveth Lands by Deed in Fee by the premisses, habendum to the Lessee for life, there the habendum is voyd, and when livery is made, the effect of the Deed shall be taken the most strongly against the Feoffor, and the best for the Feoffee. When a ceremony is requisite to the perfection of an estate in the premisses limitted, and to the estate limitted in the habendum, no ceremony is requisite but onely the delivery of the Deed, although the ha∣bendum be of meaner estate then the premisses, the habendum shall stand good and qualifie the generali∣tie of the premisses, as a Fee granted in the premis∣ses, habendum for yeares, it is for yeares, and no inhe∣ritance.
Note; There is a diversity betwixt the estate implied in the premisses, and expressed; as if A. grant a rent to B. this is an estate for life, but if the habendum be for yeares, this is good, and qualifies the implication of the premisses. Case of Bankrupts, 31. Eliz fo. 25. REsolved, that a grant or assignement of goods, by a Bankrupt, after the Commission awarded, which is matter of Record, of which every one ought to take notice, and though to a Creditor, in satisfaction of his debt, is voyd, and that a sale of such goods, by the Commissioners, is good. Which sale, by the Statute of 13. of the Queene, ought to be equall, to every one rate, and rate like, according to the quantity, &c. And the Court resolved, that the proviso in the said Sta∣tute, concerning gifts bona fide, doth not make any gift good, but excludes them out of the penalty, &c. Commissioners may sell, by Deed, without Inrollment, and though they have not seene the goods; agreed, that the distribution ought to be severall, not joynt, for the one debt, may be greater then the other, and in this case the Jury found, that the Commissioners sold the goods to three Creditors joyntly, but fur∣ther; that the Bankrupt was indebted to them in 273. pounds, which shall be intended a joynt debt, and so good. Resolved, that the act giveth benefit to such as will come, and not to them that refuse; & vigilantibus, & non dormientibus, jura subveniunt; and every Creditor may take notice of the Commission, being matter of Record. Bettisworths Case, 33. Eliz. in communi Banco. fo. 31. A Lease for yeares was made of one Messuage, one Close called Raynolds, and of divers other Lands
in Dale, and afterwards (the Lessee being in the house) the Lessor entred into the same Close, and maketh a Feoffment of the Messuage, and of the Lands therewith demised, and maketh livery in the same Close, and afterwards the Lessee reentreth into the said Close. And if this was a good Feoffment, and livery of seison of the said Close, (the Lessee nor any for him being in the said Close) was the questi∣on. And it was adjudged that the livery and seison was voyd, as well for the Close as for the Messuage; and the other Land therewith demised; For the Pos∣session of the Messuage, which is his Castle, is a good possession of the Lands therewith demised, and it matters not, whether livery be made on the Land within view of the house, or not. When a man ma∣keth a feoffment of a Messuage cum pertinentii, he de∣parteth with nothing thereby, but that which is par∣cell of the house, as buildings, curtelage, and gar∣dens. If a Lessee for yeares makes a Lease for a certaine Tearme of any parcell, and so divides the possession thereof from the residue (if of this parcell so seve∣red) Liverie be made, the possession in the residue by the first lessee, is not any impediment to the liverie of this parcell, otherwise if a Lessee make a Lease, at will of any parcell, there his possession of the residue shall hinder the liverie made in this par∣cell, and with this judgement agreed all the other Justices, and Serjeants of Serjeants Inne in Fleete-streete. Doddingtons Case, 27. Eliz. fo. 32. KIng H. 8. Ex certa scientia, &c. granted to A. for 300l. Omnia illa Messuagia in tenura Johannis Browne, Scituate in Well, nuper prioratini de W. Spectant'.
And in truth the Lands lie in D. in this Case 'twas resolved that the grant was voide by the Common Law, as well in case of a common person, as the King, because the grant is generall, and is restrained to one certaine Village, and the grantee shall not have any Lands out of that Village, to which the generallity of the grant is referred, for this Pronoune Illa, hath his necessary reference as well to the Towne, as well as to the Tenure of I. B. for if eyther the one or the other faile, the grant is voide. And so it was adjudged, Per tot. cur. de Banco Regis. Resolved also, that this grant was not holpen by the Statute of 34. H. 8. For no grants are holpen by this Statute, nor by any act of confirmation, but such as comprehend convenient certainty. 1. Quia generale nihil certum implicat. And here no Tenements are mentioned, to be granted, because the generall grant being in∣tire, was referred to a falsity, and therefore it cannot be said that the Towne was misnamed, and great in∣convenience would follow, if, &c. for the King should be deceived, but the Statute helpes when there is a convenient certainty, as a Mannor, Farme, Land, knowne by a certaine name, or containing so many Acres, &c. So that it may appeare what things the King intended to passe. Note, tis the most sure way, for the Pattentee to expresse as much as he can in certainty, before the generall words. SIR Rowland Heywards Case, In cur Wardor 37. Eliz. fo. 35. SIr Rowland Heyward seised of a Mannor in Demeans, and rents, in consideration of money, doth de∣mise, grant, Bargaine, and sell to A. the said Man∣nours, Lands, Tenements, and the reversions
and remainders with all Rents reserved upon any de∣mise, to have and to hold to A. and his asignes after the death of the Lessor for seaventeene yeares, ren∣dring a rose, the Indenture was inrolled, and after the Lessor by Indenture doth Covenant with B. to stand seised of the premises, to the use of himselfe and the Heires of his body, and no attornment was made to A. The Question was, What passed to A? and it was resolved by Popham and Anderson chiefe Justices, and the Court, that A. may have his electi∣on, eyther to take the same by demise, at the com∣mon Law, or by bargaine and Sale, Per Statutum 27. H. 8. without attornment, for it was one entire de∣mise, and bargaine of one Mannor without any fraction or division thereof, and this election remain∣eth to A. and his Executors and assignes, for here is not Election, to claime one of two severall things by one Title, but to claime one thing by one of the two severall Titles, for where the things are severall, no∣thing passeth before Election, and the Election must precede; but when one thing passeth, the Election of the Title may be subsequent. For if I. have 3 Horses, and doe give to you one of them, the pro∣perty comenceth by Election, and must be made in the life of the Parties. The Bi: of Sarum had a great wood of 1000 Acres, called Brerewood, and infeoffed another of one House, and seaventeene Acres, parcell of the Wood, and made Liverie in the Wood House; nothing passeth of the Wood before Election and the Heire of the feof∣fee may not make Election. Bullocks Case, 10. Eliz. Dyer. In case where election is given of two several things, he which is the primer Agent, and that ought to doe the first act, shall have alwayes the Election. As if
a man grant a Rent of twenty Shillings or a Robe, the Grantor shall have the Election for he is the primer Agent, eyther by paying the one or delivering the other. If a man make a Lease rendring twenty shil∣lings or a Robe, the Lessee shall have the Election, Causa qua supra, but if I give unto you one of my Horses in my Stable, there you shall have the Electi∣on, for you are the Primer Agent, by taking or seising one of them, and so of twenty trees in my Wood. Note for Elections these diversities. 1. When nothing passes to the grantee, &c. before Election, there it ought to be made, in the life of the Parties; but when the Estate passes presently, &c. the Gran∣tee, &c his Heire or Executor may elect. 2. When the same thing passes and the Donee, &c. hath Electi∣on, in what manner, &c. he will take it, the Donee, Heire, or Executor may elect. 3. When Election is given to severall persons, the first shall stand. 4. When Election is given of two severall things, he which ought to doe the first Act, shall have Electi∣on. 5. When the thing granted is annuall, and to have continuance, there the Election remaines to the Grantor (in case, where the Law gives him E∣lection) as well after the day as before, otherwise tis when the thing is to be performed, Ʋnica vice. 6. The feoffee, &c. by his act may forfeit his Electi∣on; as if A. infeoffe B. of two Acres, Habendum, the one for life, the other in Taile, and hee before E∣lection makes a feoffement of both; here the feof∣for shall enter in which he pleases, for the wrong of the feoffee. 7. Though the Lessees here enter generally, yet they may Elect after; so, if one be Executor, and Devisee of a terme, and enters gene∣rally, &c. and after the Lessees, in the principall case, made Election, for to take by bargaine and Sale, and had the Rents.
The Bishop of Winchesters Case, 38. El. fo. 43. In a prohibition. REsolved, that at common Law, none had capaci∣ty to take Tythes but spirituall persons, or Per∣sona mixta, as the King, and regularly no meere Lay man was capable of them (except in speciall Cases) for he could not sue for them in Court Christian and regularly, a lay man had no remedy for them, till 32 H. 8. A Lay-Man may be discharged of Tythes, at the common Law, by grant or by compo∣sition, but not by prescription, for it is commonly said in our Law-Books, that a lay man may prescribe, In modo decimandi, but not In non decimando. And the reason is, because he is not (except in speciall Ca∣ses) capable of Tythes at the common Law, before the Statute of 32. H. 8. Cap. 7. And therefore with∣out speciall matter shewing, it shall not be intend∣ed that he hath any Lawfull discharge, and in favour of the Holy Church (although it may have a law∣full comencement) the Law will not suffer this prescription In non decimando, to put it to the Tryall of lay men, which sooner will straine their conscience for their private benefit, then render to the Church the duty which belongeth to it. A spirituall person that was capable of Tythes at the common Law in pernancy may prescribe to be discharged of Tythes generally, or to have a portion of Tythes in the Land of another. Before the Counsell of Lateran, every man might give his tythes to any spirituall person that he would; and if the Lands of the Bishop were discharged in his hands absolutely by prescription, the demising it to a lay man cannot make it chargeable, and the Bi∣shop might reserve the greater Rent.
And in discharge of Tythes, the Judges of our Law doe know, that the Ecclesiasticall Judges will not allow any such allegation, and therefore a Traverse, Abs{que} hoc quod judices placitum, &c. recusarunt, is insuf∣ficient for the refusall is not materiall, for the party might have a prohibition, before any plea pleaded by him, but in some Cases, the refusall is traversa∣ble, as twas adjudgd in Morris and Eatons Case, where twas pleaded that the plaintiffe did not read the Ar∣ticles, &c. and that the Ecclesiasticall Judge refu∣sed this Plea; But the truth is, a man may prescribe that hee and all others whose estate he hath in the mannor of D. time out of remembrance, have paid to the parson of C. for the time being, one certaine pension yearly, for the maintenance of Divine ser∣vice there, in contentation of all Tythes, renewing, or happening within the same Mannor, and prescribe in respect of the pension payd, &c. to have all the Tythes within, &c. and this was adjudgd good in Banco Regis, Mich. 39. Et. 40. El. Rotulo 199. And that a lay-person may sue for the Tythes, &c. For at the beginning it shall be intended, that the Lord was seised of the whole Mannor, before any tenancy was derived out of the same, and then by compositi∣on or other lawfull meanes, the Lord had all the Tythes within the Mannor, for the said Pension pay∣ing to the parson, and the Law intends it was for Di∣vine service, Et pro bono Ecclesiae, the reason of whch intendment is the continuall usage, time out of re∣membrance. And upon such speciall matter, a man might have Tythes as appurtenant to a Mannor, for he prescribes in a Que estate in the Mannor, and there∣fore cannot have them in grosse, but twas adjudged Winscombs Case in a prohibition, that a man cannot prescribe generally in him, and all those, &c. to have Tythes appurtenant to a Mannor, without speciall
matter shewne, because Tythes are due Jure divino. The Arch-Bishop of Canterburies Case, 38. Of the Queene, fo. 46. A Religious house in M. was given to E. 6. by the Statute of 1. E. 6. a Rectory which was impropri∣ated to it, was granted to the Arch-Bishop of Cantur∣bury, who leased to the Defendant, and Land within M. parcell of the said Colledge, came to the Lord Cobham, and from him to the Plaintiffe, who shewes, that the Master of the Colledge was seised of the said Land, and Rectorie, Simul & semel, as well at the mak∣ing of 31. H 8. as of 1. E. 6. Resolved, that this Colledge came to the King by 1. E. 6. onely, for when 31. H. 8. speakes of dissolution, renouncing, relinquishing, forfeiture, giving up (which are inferior meanes by which, &c.) or by any other meanes, cannot be in∣tended of an act of Parliament, which is the highest manner of conveyance that can be, and the makers would have placed this in the beginning if they had intended it. Bishops are not included within 13 of the Queene, which begins with Colledges, Deanes, and Chapters, &c. Also 1. E. 6. Enacts, that all Colledges by this Parliament shall be in actuall pos∣session of the King, which last act being of as high nature, as the first, it cannot come to the King by 31. H. 8. and it was never pleaded, that of Colled∣ges which came by 1. E. 6. the King was seised Vigore of the Statute of 31. H. 8. Resolved, that neither the Act, nor the meaning of 31. H. 8. extends to other Colledges then to those, which came to the King by 31. H. 8. for it should be absurd, that a Branch of the act of 31. H. 8. should extend to a future Act of which the makers of 31. without a spirit of pro∣phecy could not have foreknowledge: and the Act
of 31. concludes, in as large manner as the late Ab∣bots, &c. which late, as it hath been agreed, extends onely to those to be dissolved by 31. Resolved, (ad∣mitting that the Colledge had come to the King by 31. H. 8.) that such a generall allegation of unity of possession, of the Rectory, and the Land with it, was not sufficient, for no unity shall be sufficient, but law∣full and perpetuall unity of possession, time out of minde, as 'twas adjudged in Knightly and Spencers case; and that the generall allegation of the plaintiffe, that the Master of the Colledge at the making of 1. E. 6. held the Land discharged, is not good, without shew∣ing how, either by prescription, composition, or other lawfull meanes, as 'tis adjudged in the Bishop of Win∣chesters case; otherwise, if the Land had come by 31. then by force of the said branch of discharge, such generall allegation had been good. Resolved, that no Ecclesiasticall house, except religious, was within the Statute of 31. H. 8. Resolved, that though 1. E. 6. saith, that the King shall have the lands of Colledges in as ample and large manner as the said Priests, &c. en∣joyed the same: yet these generall words doe not discharge the land of any tythes for they doe not issue out of the land; for a Prior had tythes against his own Feoffment of the Mannor, and 'tis no good cause of prohibition, to alledge unity of possession in a Col∣ledge, which came to the King by 1. E. 6. as 'tis up∣on 31. H. 8. in Abbyes, &c. For the Statute of 1. E. 6. hath no such clause of discharge of payment of tythes as 31. hath, and therefore such perpetuall unity will not serve upon 1. E. 6. So 'twas likewise resolved be∣twixt Greene and Buffkin.
Sir Hugh Cholmleys case, 39. of the Queene. fo. 50. TEnant in Taile, the remainder in taile, the re∣mainder bargaines and sells the Land and all his estate to J. S. to have for the life of Tenant in taile, the remainder to the Queene, &c. upon condition that the estate shall be voyd upon tender of 10. l. Tenant in taile suffers a Recovery, to the use of him∣selfe and his heires, after the remainder tenders the ten pounds, &c. Resolved, the remainder to the Queene was voyd. 1. Because the grantee, for life of tenant in taile, tooke nothing, for 'tis a voyd grant, for the grantee shall never have any benefit by it, but such a grant of a reversion were good, for he shall have the services; but a lease for life of J. S. the re∣mainder to J. H. for life of J. S. is good, for this may take effect, by forfeiture of tenant for life; and re∣mainder dicitur, quasi terra remanens, which cannot be here, and the remainder must take effect when the particular estate ends, & vana est illa potentia, quae nun∣quam venit in actum. And the possibility for tenant in taile to enter in Religion, shall not make the remain∣der good, because 'tis remote, and it ought to be a common, & propinqua possibilitas, which shall make the remainder good, as death, coverture, dying without issue; remainder to a Corporation, which is not in esse, is voyd, though such be erected during the par∣ticular estate. 2. Because the Law will never adjudge a grant good, by reason of such a forraine possibility, for, 'tis potentia remotissima & vana, and by intendment, nunquam venit in actum. 3. Because the remainder be∣ing tenant in taile, granted all his estate for the life of tenant in taile, so that there is no remainder left in the grantor, but in such case, the estate taile is in abeyance. Blithmans case. 35. of the Queene agreed,
tenant in taile covenants to stand seised to the use of himselfe for life, and after to his eldest Sonne in taile, the remainder to the Sonne is voyd; for when he had limitted the use to himselfe for his owne life, 'twas as much as he could limit by Law. Resolved, (admit∣ting the remainder good to the Queene) that the common Recoverie, hath barred the estate of the first grantee, and so the condition during his life; for 'tis out of the Statute of 34. H. 8. being not of the gift of the Queene, &c. as Wisemans case is before adjudged. A revertioner upon an estate taile, grants upon con∣dition, a Recovery barres the reversion, and conditi∣on, and as Capels case is before adjudged, if the rever∣sionor, or he in remainder grant a Lease, &c. and te∣nant in taile suffers a recovery, the possession shall ne∣ver be subject to such charges. Resolved, that the pay∣ment to the first grantee, cannot devest the remain∣der out of the Queene. 1. Because the condition during the life of the first grantee, was discharged. 2. Because, he that takes benefit of a condition, ought to have the intire estate, with which he depar∣ted, which cannot be here, for the estate of the first grantee, was barred by the recovery. 3. The tender to the first grantee, was to the intent, for to revest his estate; which cannot be, because, 'twas barred, and therefore the payment cannot devest the remainder out of the Queene. Buckleys Case, 40. Eliz. in Communi Banc. fo. 55. TEnant for life, the remainder in Fee, tenant for life maketh a Lease for foure yeares in March 20. El. the Lessee entreth tenant for life, granteth the tene∣ments aforesaid to C. to hold from the feast of Saint John Baptist next ensuing for life, after the said Feast,
the tenant for yeares attornes, the yeares expire, C. enters, and maketh a Lease at will to D. to whom the tenant for life levieth a Fine, he in remainder in Fee entereth and maketh a Lease to Buckler the tenant at will, entreth upon him, and Buckler the plaintiffe bringeth an ejectione firmae, and judgement was given for the plaintiffe. In this case divers things were re∣solved First, that the grant to C. was voyd, for the Law maketh construction upon the whole grant, and an estate of Free-hold may not commence in futuro. The office of the premisses of a Writing (viz.) Feoffment, Lease, &c. is to expresse the grantor the grantee, and the thing granted. And the office of the habendum is to limit the estate; so that the generall implication of the estate, which should passe by the premisses, is alwayes controlled and qualified by the habendum; as a Lease to two, habendum to the one for life, the remainder to the other for life, here the generall implication of joyntenancy is altered, and the habendum is not contrary to the premisses, for in the premisses no certaine estate is passed, and the grant being voyd at the beginning, the attornement after Midsommer, shall not make the reversion to passe. For quod ab initio non valet, tractu temporis non convalescet. Resolved, that when the grantee entered, by co∣lour of this voyd grant, he was a disseisor; but when the grant is good at commencement, but is to have its perfection, by an act subsequent, as livery, or at∣tornement, and the grantee enters before the per∣fection, &c. he is not a disseisor, but a tenant at will. And if the Fine had been levied, to the disseisor, come ceo, &c. He which had the right of the remainder, might enter for a forfeiture, for a right of a particular estate may be forfeited, and entry given to him, who
hath but a right. Resolved, the Fine being levied to tenant at will, 'tis a forfeiture, and he which hath the right of the remainder, may enter, and the tenant for life, and at will, shall be estopped to say, quod partes Finis nihil habuerunt, and of such estoppells, which are by matter of Record, and trench to the dis-inheri∣tance of those in reversion, &c. they shall take ad∣vantage, though strangers to the Record (for they are privies in estate.) A disseisee levieth a Fine to a stranger, the disseisor shall hould the Land in this case for ever, for the disseisee against his owne Fine may not claime the Lands, and the counsee may not en∣ter, for the right which the conusor had, may not be transferred to him, but by the Fine the right is ex∣tinct, whereof the disseisor may take advantage. Beckwithes Case, 27. Eliz. fo. 56. IF the husband and the wife levie a fine of Lands, whereof they are seised in right of the wife, and the husband solely declare the use of the fine, this de∣claration shall binde the wife, if her disascent doe not appeare, although her assent to the limitation of the uses doe not appeare, for it shall be intended (if the contrary doe not appeare) that she joyned with him, also in the declaration of the uses of the fine. But if the husband declare one use, and the wife ano∣ther use, they are both voyd; the declaration of the use, insues the ownership of the land; for the one (viz.) the wife is not sui juris sed sub potestate viri, and hath the estate of the Land, and the husband is sui juris, and hath not the estate; and if a fine be re∣versed by nonage of the wife, all the estate shall be restored to the wife presently; for all the estate pas∣sed from her by the fine, and so it was adjudged Banco regis, in Worseleys case.
Resolved, that though the variance of the limitati∣on, be onely in one estate, and they agree in all the other, yet all is voyd. But if two joynt tenants, or two having severall estates, vary, 'tis good, for every of their parts, and shall be directed by their interests; but if the variance had been in limitation of part of the land, and they had agreed in the use, it should be voyd for that part, and good for the residue. Note, That though the husband might dispose of the land during coverture, yet, for the cause aforesaid, his declaration was voyd. If A. tenant for life, and B. in reversion or remain∣der, both levie a fine together, generally the use shall be to A. for life, the reversion or remainder to B. in fee, for either of them grants that which lawfully he may grant, and either of them shall have the use, which the Law vesteth in them, according to the estate, which they would convey over. Winningtons case, 40. of the Queene. fo. 59. W. Infeoffed B. upon condition, to regive to the Feoffor for life, the remainder to J. Sonne and heire of the Feoffor, the Feoffor enters, and takes the profits, without agreement, or contradiction of the Feoffee, and leases to D for 21. yeares, and yet con∣tinues possession, the Feoffee acknowledges a Statute to J. the Feoffor makes a feoffement, to the use of himselfe for life, the remainder to his second Sonne in taile, &c. and dyes, the Feoffee enters, and in∣feoffes the Sonne and heire, upon which the second Sonne enters, &c. Resolved, that though the intenti∣on was, that the Feoffee should make an estate to him for his life, when he hath entered without agreement of the Feoffee, 'tis a disseisin, and the rather, because, as owner of the land, he tooke upon him to make a
Lease for yeares. Resolved, that by the Lease by In∣denture, he hath dispensed with the condition, during the terme. Resolved, that when the Feoffor disseises the Feoffee upon condition, and the Feoffee acknow∣ledges a Statute, &c. This is no disability, to cause the Feoffor to enter, for the right of the Feoffee, is not subject to the Statute, but when the Feoffee in pos∣session takes a wife, grants a rent, or acknowledges a Statute, the land is presently subject, &c. And though upon entry he may be disabled, yet, till then he is not, because the wife may dye, or the Statute be re∣leased, and then he may enter, and performe the con∣dition; and the Feoffor by his feoffement hath ex∣tinct the condition, so that the Feoffee may enter, and when he hath infeoffed the eldest Sonne, he hath done well. Westcots Case in Communi Banco. 41. El. fo. 60. IF a man make an estate to three, and to the heires of one of them; one of them in this case hath Fee simple, and yet the joynt estate continues, for it is all one estate, created at one time, and therefore the Fee simple cannot drowne the joynture, which taketh ef∣fect with creation of the remainder in fee; but when three joyntenants are for life, and after one of them purchase the Fee, or else the Fee discends to him, there the Fee simple doth drowne the estate for life, for the estate for life was in esse before. Note, by this resolution, if tenant for life grant his estate to him in the reversion, and a stranger, 'tis a surrender for the moity, and the benefit of survivor not regarded; so the doubt in 7. H. 6. well resolved. Resolved, upon view of three presidents, that judge∣ment should be given for the plaintiffe, upon a de∣mise made by husband and wife, without alledging it to be by Deed.
Tookers Case, 43. Eliz. fo. 66. IOhn Arundell seised of Lands in Fee, maketh a Lease thereof to A. and B. for their lives, and after grants the reversion to C. for his life, to which grant A. doth atturne being joynt tenant with B. and after A. by his Deed doth surrender to C. all his estate, title, and interest, &c. and then dyeth; C. entereth claim∣ing to hold in common with B. and whether his en∣tree was lawfull, or no, was the question, and judge∣ment was given, that it was lawfull, for the attorne∣ment of the one tenant for life, shall vest the entire reversion in the grantee, because the estate of the joynt Lessees is entire, and every joynt tenant is sei∣sed per my, & pro tout', and by consequence the rever∣sion, which is dependent and expectant upon this e∣state is entire also, and the atturnement of the one joyntenant is the atturnement of both. Attourne∣ment is a lawfull act: if one joyntenant assigne Dower, 'tis good. Also, the attornement passes no interest from him that attournes, but perfects the grant of another. And if one joyntenant give seisure of rent that shall binde the other, but in a quid juris clamat, or quem redditum reddit, or per quae servitia, one joyntenant shall not be permitted to attourne without his companion, for doing of prejudice to his companion. By Popham one joynt-tenant, may pre∣judice another in the personalty, but not in the real∣ty; if one take all the profits, or release a personall action, the other hath no remedy, because of the pri∣vity and trust betweene them, and the folly imputed to him, to joyne with such a companion. Note, if a tenant have notice of the grant by a stran∣ger, and doe give his assent thereunto, it is a good atturnement, although it be in the absence of the
grantee, but disagreement, ought to be to the party himselfe, or doe atturne for any part, it is good for the whole, for the intent of an atturnement is but onely an assent to perfect the grant of another, and he which atturnes cannot apportion, divide, or alter the grant. Lord Cromwells case. 40. of the Queene. fo. 70. BLunt bargained, &c. the Mannor of Alexton, to which the Advowson of A. was appendant, by Indenture, to have, as after in the same Indenture is mentioned, and B. covenanted to suffer a common Recovery, to the use of Andrewes and his heires, ren∣dring 42. pounds per annum to B. and his heires, with a nomine poenae. And further, 'twas covenanted, and agreed, as well, for the assurance of the Mannor to A. as of the rent to B. that B. should levie a Fine, &c. to A. and his heires, and A. by the same Fine, should render a rent of 42. pounds per annum, &c Provided alwayes, that A. by Deed, should give the Advowson, &c. to B. during his life, and if it did not become voyd, during his life, one turne to his executors, &c. And further, 'twas covenanted, and agreed, that all assurances afterwards to be made, should be to the use of this Indenture, &c. after a recovery was had, and after B. and A. levie a Fine to Perkins, and he renders a rent of 42. pounds to B. and the Mannor with the Advowson to A. A. dyes, without granting the Advowson, and B. did not request it, B. enters for condition broken, and by Indenture inrolled, bar∣gained, &c. to the Lord Cromwell, by which he ente∣red, and upon the reentry of the Sonne and heire of A. brought an Assise. In this Case is shewed when this word (proviso) or (provided) maketh a condition, and when not,
which upon long debate was judged by all the Justi∣ces of England. It was adjudged that the Law hath not appointed any place in a deed or instrument, proper or particu∣lar to a condition, but in what place it pleaseth the parties, and this word (proviso or provided) is as apt a word to make an estate conditionall, as Sub conditione, or any other word of condition, but not∣withstanding when this word proviso maketh an E∣state or interest conditionall, three things are to be observed. First that the proviso doe not depend up∣on another sentence nor participate thereof, but stand originally of it selfe. Secondly, that the proviso be the word of the bargainor, Feoffor, Donor, Lessor, &c. Thirdly, that it be compulsory to enforce the bar∣ganee, Feoffee, Donee, Lessee, &c. to doe an act, and where these concurre, it was resolved, that it was a condition, in what place soever it be placed, for Cujus est dare ejus est disponere. And although words of Covenant be contained in the same clause of the proviso it selfe, yet (the proviso being in judgement of Law a word of condition) it shall not loose his force, and so it hath beene judged, In Symson et Titterell, 26. El. Serjeant Bendlowes demysed to Titterell certaine Lands in Essex, for forty yeares, provided alwayes, and it is Covenanted and agreed betweene the said Parties, That the Lessee, &c. should not alien, and this was adjudged a condition, by force of the proviso, and a Covenant also, by force of th'other words. Also it was adjudged in Banco Regis 36. El. betweene the Earle of Pembrooke, Plain∣tiffe, and Sir Henry Barkely Defendant. The Earle granted the Office of the Lievtenant-ship of the West part of the Forrest of Fronslewood, in Com. Somerset, to Sir Mawrice Barkely, Father of the said
Sir Henry in Taile; provided alwayes and the said Sir Mawrice Barkeley for him, &c. doth Covenant to, and with the said Earle, that neyther he the said Earle nor any of his Heires Males, &c. shall cut downe any Wood growing upon any part of the pre∣mises. And it was resolved by all the Justices of England, upon argument before them at Serjants Inne, that although the proviso was coupled with the expresse Covenant of the Grantee, and every condi∣tion ought to be created by the words of the Gran∣tor, Donor, Feoffor, &c. yet in judgement of Law, this word (provided) was a condition created by the Grantor, although all the residue of the sent∣ence be the words of the Grantee, for (proviso) being an apt word of a condition, the same sentence containeth the words of the Grantor, purporting a condition, and the words of the Grantee compre∣hending a Covenant. This word (proviso) when it dependeth upon another sentence, or hath reference to another part of the deed, doth not make a condition, but a quali∣fication or limitation of the sentence or part of the deed, to which it is referred. As in a Lease without impeachment of wast, provided that he shall not doe voluntary wast, grant of a Rent charge, provided that the Grantee shall not charge the Grantor, &c. Re∣solved, that B. shall have the Rent, notwithstanding that before the Reddendum, the use in Fee was vested by the recovery in A. and notwithstanding 'twas ob∣jected, that the Rent ought to be limitted out of the Estate of the Recoverors, for 27 H. 8. hath an ex∣presse clause, Where diverse be seised, to the intent, that one shall have an annuall Rent, the same person be adjudged in possession, and seisin of the same rent, as if a sufficient grant had beene made, and so here the intent, being that B. should have the Rent, con∣struction
shall be made, Ʋt res magis valeat quam pere∣at. Resolved, that the fine leavyed by B. and A. to P. hath not extinct the condition (and this was the great doubt of the Case) 1. Because by the gene∣rall Covenant 'tis declared, that all assurances after∣wards to be made, should be to the uses and intents in the same Indenture, and to no other; and the Indenture intends that the condition should be saved as the Lord releases all his right in the Land, saving his Rent. Putnams Case, 4. 5. P. and M. Dyer: Feoffement of a Mannor rendring Rent, and a reen∣try, and a Covenant by any Indenture to Leavy a fine, which should be to the uses and intents of the first Indenture, and to no other use, which was leavy∣ed according, with the usuall words of release of all his right, yet, resolved that neither the Rent, nor the condition was destroyed, and 23. of the Queene, Tussers Case, a rent reserved by a fine before, was not destroyed by a common recovery, and generall entry into warranty, and 34. of the Queene in Clever and Childs Case, adjudged according to Putnams Case: for the same reason twas adjudged in this Case, 14. of the Queene, for the Advouson of Alexton, for, Modus et conventio vincunt legem, and Covenant and a∣greement of the parties hath power. First, to raise a use. Secondly, to declare uses upon fines, recove∣ries, &c. Thirdly, for to preserve Rents and condi∣tions, and for to direct recoveries, fines, &c. and the saving may be contained in another deed, delivered at the same time. And these common assurances, as fines, and recoveries, are to be construed, according to the intent and common usage, without prying in∣to them with Eagles eyes. Also, here the Bargaine, &c. recovery, &c, fine. &c. though made at severall times, yet, all by mutuall agreement, are but one as∣surance, and tend for to perfect a bargaine, &c. and
therefore the one shall not destroy the other, resol∣ved, that except in speciall cases a fine, Sur grant & render, cannot be averred by word to another use, then is in the fine, feoffement, &c. yet in some cases, it may be ruled in part by averrement, by word, when the originall contract is by deed; but a man may by word averre another consideration, which stands with the consideration expressed, but not against it: Reade the Booke at large for this purpose. Resolved, that by the death of A. the condition was broken, for when the Feoffee or Grantee is to doe an act to the Feoffor, &c. upon condition, and no time is limitted, regularly, the Feoffee may doe it at any time during his life. If the Feoffor or Gran∣tor doe not hasten the same by request, and upon request and day or time limitted, the Feoffee or Grantee ought to doe it accordingly: and if no re∣quest be made, and the Feoffee or Grantee that ought to performe the condition dye, the condition is broken. Yet, this generall rule admits an excepti∣on, for, here in case of an advowson, he hath not time during his life, though no request be made, but upon contingency, to wit, if no avoydance fall∣in the meane time, for if the Grantee stay till the avoydance fall Ipso facto, the condition is broken, for B. cannot have all the presentations during his life, which was the effect of the grant, and the Advowson is come into another plight then twas. But where the day is certaine for the performance, and the party dye before, the condition is discharged, be∣cause the performance is become impossible by the Act of God, and therefore when a day certaine is ap∣pointed, tis good that the Heire of the feoffee be named in the condition. Another diversity was also agreed, when tis to be performed to a stranger, he ought to request the stranger in convenient time
for to limit a time when it shall be done, but if it be to the Feoffor himselfe, he ought not to performe it, before request. Another diversity was taken by some, when the feoffee dyes, and when the feoffor dyes, for in the one case the condition is broken, in the other not. Binghams Case, 43. of the Queene, fo. 91. R. Bingham the Grandfather held the Mannor of B. M. of Sir Jo: Horseley, as of his Mannor of H. and levyed a fine to the use of him, and his Wife for life, and after of R. the Father, his Sonne and Heire, in taile, and after to the right Heires of the Grand father, R. the Father dyed, the remainder in taile discended to R. his Sonne within age. Sir I. H. suffered a re∣covery of the Mannor of H. to the use of himselfe and his Wife, in taile, and after to Sir R. H. his Sonne and Heire in taile, after to the Heires of Sir I. Sir I. and his Wife dyed without issue, Sir R. enters, R. B. the Grandfather, dyes, by which the reversion in Fee discended to R. B. the Wife of Robert dyes, R. with∣in age enters and Leases, &c. Resolved, that the use limitted to the right Heires of the Grandfather, upon the fine, is a reversion in the Grandfather, expectant upon the taile, not a Remainder, so twas resolved in Fenwick and Mitfords Case, and so twas resolved in the Earle of Bedfords Case. Resolved, that Sir R. H. shall not have the ward of the Land, for the reversion in Fee is holden of him, and not the Taile; though both discend from the same Ancestor, for the taile cannot be drowned, and if Tenant in taile grant o∣ver the reversion, he shall hold the Taile of his Gran∣tee, and though the Seigniory of the taile be suspend∣ed, yet the Donee hath two distinct estates, and the reversion is as a Mesne, betwixt the Donee and the
Lord, and the Lord is not defeated; for the Law gives no wardship in such cases, and if it were admit∣ted, that by the unity of Tenure, betwixt the Donee and reversion, twas determined, yet nothing shall be holden of the Lord, but the reversion, and in some cases, the Donee in taile shall hold of no body, as a gift in taile, the remainder to the King. Resolved, if the Grandfather were Tenant for life, the remain∣der to the Father in taile, the remainder to the Fa∣ther in fee, the Father dyes, his Heire within age, and Sir I. H. grants the Seigniory to Sir R. H. and the Grandfather dyes, that Sir R. H. shall not have the ward of the Heire because R. the Father did not hold of him nor any of his Ancestors, the day of his death, nor the Taile was not within the see and Seignory of Sir Ra. or any of his Ancestors, at the death of R. the Father; and the Writ saith, Praecipe, &c. Eo quod terram illam de eo tenuit, die quo obijt. And though that during the life of Tenant for life, the Heire of the remainder shall not be in ward, be∣cause Tenant for life, is Tenant to the Lord, yet the death of Tenant for life is not the cause of ward, but the removing of an impediment, as in Paget and Ca∣ries Case, Tenant for life commits wast, and after Te∣nant for life in remainder dyes, he in remainder in fee shall have wast. Twas said, when two accidents are required to the consummation of a thing, and the one happens in the time of one, and the other in the time of another, neither the one nor the other shall have benefit by it; as the Tenant ceases for a yeare, the Lord grants his seigniory, and then the Tenant ceases for another yeare, neither shall have a Cessavit, which was agreed. So Lacies Case. Trin. 25. of the Queene, who gave a mortall wound upon the sea, of which the party dyed upon the Land, yet he was discharged, because the stroake was upon the Sea,
the death upon the Land, so that neither the Admi∣rall nor a Jury, can inquire of it: and twas said, when diverse accidents are required to the consum∣mation of a thing, the Law more respects the Origi∣nall cause, then any other. A man presents to a Church in time of Warre, notwithstanding the party be in∣stituted and inducted, Tempore pacis, all is voyd. So the Law more respects the death of him in the re∣mainder, the Originall cause of wardship, then the death of Tenant for life, which is but Causa sine qua non, and rather a removing of an impediment, then a cause, so twas resolved that neyther the one, nor the other shall have the ward. Resolved, that Sir Ra. should not have the third part of the Land, by 32. & 34. H. 8. for though R. the Grandfather had limit∣ted the use to the Father, which is within the Sta∣tute, yet when R. the Father dyes, in the life of the Grandfather, the Statute extends no further, for the Heire of the Father, who is in by discent, shall be in ward by the common Law, not by the Statute, and if the Statute should extend to the Son and Heire of him in remainder, by the same reason it should ex∣tend to all the Heires of him in remainder, In infini∣tum.
THE THIRD BOOK. The Marques of Winchesters Case. 25. of the Queene. fo. 1. LIonell Norris and Anne Mills were seised of the Mannor of M. and to the heires of the body of L. a common Recovery is had against L. (without naming Anne) H. Norris being in remainder in taile, is executed for Treason, and 'tis enacted that he shall forfeit Mannors, &c. uses, possessions, offices, rights, conditions, and all other hereditaments, L. dyed without issue, Anne dyed, the Queene brought error against the Marques of Winchester, heire of the survivor of the recoverors, the error was, that the originall Writt of entry wants, the defendant pleaded, that 14. of the Queene, shee gave and restored to the Lord Norris, Sonne and heire of H. Norris, the Mannor ex speciali gratia, &c. and all her right, estate, title, claime, &c. Resolved, that the Record was well removed by the Writt of Error, which was for to remove the re∣covery of the Mannor of M. in M. cum pertinentiis, and the Recovery was of the Mannor of M. cum pertinentiis. Resolved, that this Writt of Error, was not given to the King by any of the words of the Statute of 28. H. 8. because the terrtenant is in by title, and the en∣try of the person attainted taken away; and such a right, for which the party hath no remedy, but by action, is a thing consists in privity, which cannot Es∣cheate, nor be forfeited by the common law; and
this word (right) in the Act, shall be satisfied with a right of entry, and 'twas observed by the Court, that by no Act of attainder, a right of action was ever gi∣ven. Note, a diversitie betwixt inheritances, and chat∣tells; for Obligations, Statutes, Recognisances, &c. are forfeited by attainder or Outlawry. By the Court, if L. had made a Feoffement without warranty, this had been a discontinuance of the moity, for the joyn∣ture was severed. Resolved, that H. N. had no right to a moity of the Mannor, for though the recovery were erronious (for 'twas agreed, 'twas not void) yet the recovery being in force, the remainder hath no right, for the intended recompence, if tenant in taile suffers an erronious recovery, and disseise the recove∣ror, and dye, his issue shall not be remitted, for the taile is barred, as long as the recovery stands in force; and the Court agreed, that neither an action without a right, with a discent, shall make a Remitter, as in the principall case, nor a right without an acti∣on, for a man shall never be remitted, but when an action lyes, if the right and possession were in severall persons. Resolved, for the one moity, the Recovery shall be a barre to the taile, and remainder, for, though that as well L. as the vouchee might have abated the Writt, because, Anne was joyntly seised, not named, yet, when the vouchee, without demanding any Line, enters generally into warranty, and admits the Writt good, and L. recovers in value, which shall inure ac∣cording to his estate, with the remainder over, 'tis barred, for by the recovery against L. the joynture was severed, but, for the other moity, the recovery was not a barre to the taile, or remainder, because, for that L. was not tenant to the Praecipe; but the recovery is by Estoppell onely. Agreed, that H. N. at the time of the attainder, was not intitled to have error, yet, 'twas agreed, that the remainder upon a
taile shall have error, upon a judgement given against tenant in taile, for when W. 2. inables the donor for to limit a remainder over upon the taile, all actions which the common Law gave to privies in estate are by the same Act, as incident, given also; as a reversi∣on, or a remainder, shall have Error upon a judgement given against tenant for life, though not privie by aide voucher, or receiver. But agreed, that by the com∣mon Law, Error doth not lye by, &c during the life of tenant for life, except he were privy to the first Re∣cord by aide, voucher, or receiver, for remedy where∣of 9. R. 2. ca'. 3. was made, which gives an attaint or error, during life, upon which Statute the Court re∣solved, 1. that though the Statute speakes onely of reversions, yet remainders are within the purview, 2. That a reversion expectant upon a taile, is out, for the Statute enumerates these foure estates; Life, Do∣wor, Courtesie, and Tenant in taile after possibility, which declares their intentions to exclude reversions upon tailes, and this upon great reason, for the taile by possibility, may continue for ever, and here L. sur∣vived H. N. and so his possibility of error destroyed, and no word of the Act, extends to give a possibili∣ty. Resolved, admitting the Writ of Error had been given to the Queene, that by this generall grant of the Queene, it did not passe; for a common person cannot grant it, and therefore it ought to passe by Prerogative, and ought to have precise words: adjud∣ged in Cromers case. 8. of the Queene; the Queene ha∣ving a right of a disseisee attainted, grants de speciali gratia, &c. all lands, &c. The right doth not passe, without speciall recitall, and words. Owen and Mor∣gans case, Trin. 27. of the Queene; Baron and Feme are seised, and to the heires of the body of the hus∣band, a recovery is had against the Baron sole, with∣out naming of the wife, and after the wife dyed.
Resolved, that though the wife were not party to the Writ, nor the Conisance (for the estate of the husband and wife, was by render upon a Fine levied by the husband) and though it does appeare within the same Record, that she was a stranger, yet the ren∣der to her is voidable onely. Resolved, that this re∣covery against the husband onely, shall not binde the remainder, for betwixt husband and wife, there are no moities, and the husband hath no power to sever the joynture, or dispose any part, and he, during the life of the wife, is not seised by force of the taile: and he can, by no Act, execute any part; so the Praecipe being brought against him onely, the recompence cannot enure to the taile, or remainder, for, to all, it cannot, for the wife hath a joynt estate in possession, and for a moity it cannot, for there are no moities, and the remainder depends upon the entire estate, and recompence recovered by the husband onely, cannot inure to him, who hath a remainder depending upon the undevided estate of the husband and wife, and the joyn-tenancy cannot be severed by the judgement against the husband onely, and though the husband hath all the inheritance, yet, because, by no possibility, it can be executed, 'tis all one, as if the husband had a remainder depending upon an estate for life, and then a common recovery shall not binde, because, not tenant to the Praecipe, nor seised by force of the taile, but tooke effect by Estoppell onely. The issue may say, his auncestor was not te∣nant tempore brevis, and though here the husband sur∣vived the wife, this is not materiall, for the Law ad∣judges as 'twas then.
Copledikes Case, 44. of the Queene. fo. 5. C. And his wife were seised, and to the heires males of the body of the husband, the husband levies a Fine to A. B. recovers in a Writ of entry a∣gainst A. who vouches the husband onely (the wife living) who vouches the common vouchee. Resolved, that this recovery shall binde the remainder, for here was a lawfull tenant to the Praecipe, and though the husband were onely vouched, and not his wife, who had a joynt estate with him, yet the husband coming in as vouchee, he came in, in privity of the estate taile, and not of another estate, and the recovery in value gives recompence to the taile, which the hus∣band had, and to the remainder. A. tenant in taile, the remainder to B. the remainder to C. the remain∣der to D. A. makes a Feoffement, the feoffee suffers a recovery, B. is vouched, and he vouches the com∣mon vouchee; A. is not bound, but B. and all the remainders are, for though the remainders are discon∣tinued, and cannot be remitted, till the taile be re∣continued, yet in a common recovery, which is the common assurance, he which comes in as vouchee, shall be in judgement of Law, in privity of the estate, which he ever had, though the precedent estate, upon which the estate of the vouchee depends, be discon∣tinued, so, here the husband shall be said in of the taile, and 'tis the stronger, because the estate of the wife was put to a right, so, that the husband came in as sole tenant in taile, and not joyntly with his wife, because, she is not vouchee, and he cannot be in of another estate, because, once he had a taile, but had they had a joynt estate to them, and the heires of their two bodies, he being onely vouched, it might be doubted, whether the taile should be barred, be∣cause
the wife had a joynt inheritance with him. 8. of the Queene. Dyer, Knivetons case. A Praecipe is brought against tenant for life, and the remainder in taile, they vouch over, it shall not binde the taile, for the remainder is not tenant to the Praecipe, and the land is recovered against the tenant for life onely, and re∣compence shall not goe to the remainder, and the re∣mainder was never seised by force of the taile, and so 'twas adjudged in Leach and Coles case. 41. of the Queene. Heydons case. 26. of the Queene. fo. 7. THe Gardians and Cannons Regular of the late Colledge of O. seised of the Mannor of O. granted a Coppihold to Father and Sonne for their lives, &c. and after they leased it to H. for fourescore yeares, rendring the ancient Rent, and after surrendred their Colledge. Resolved, that the lease to H. was voyd (the Coppi-hold for life continuing) by the Statute of 31. H. 8. For Coppihold is an estate for life, and the Statute saith (of which any estate or interest for life, &c.) at the making of such grant had continu∣ance: reade the Booke at large, where you have ad∣mirable rules, for true interpretation of all Statutes. Resolved, when a Parliament alters the service, te∣nure, interest of the land, &c. in prejudice of the Lord, custome, or tenant, the generall words shall not extend to Coppi-holds; as the Statute of W. 2. de donis conditionalibus, doth not extend to them, for if the Statute should alter the estate, this should also alter the tenure, for the donee ought to hold of the donor, and to doe such services (without speciall re∣servation) as his donor did to the Lord, and the in∣tent of the act was not to extend to such base estates, which were taken then but tenants at will, and the
Statute saith, Voluntas donatoris observetur in carta, &c. So that which shall be intailed, ought to be such an hereditament, which may be given by Charter, and great part of the land within the Realme being gran∣ted by Coppy, it would be inconvenient, that Coppi-holds should be intailed, yet, neither Fine, nor Reco∣very should barre them, so that the owner cannot (without making a forfeiture, by assent of the Lord, and a new grant) dispose of it for payment of debts, advancement of his wife, or younger issues, wherefore the Statute doth not extend to them by Manwood, Ch'. Baron, which the Court agreed. But 'twas ob∣jected; that the Custome and the Statute coopera∣ting, might make a taile, as if by a custome, a remain∣der had been limitted over, and injoyed, and plaints in nature of a Formedon in discender brought, and the land recovered by it; so neither the custome without the Statute, nor the Statute without the custome, can make a taile. And Littleton saith, that if a custome hath been, that lands, &c. have been granted, &c. or in taile, &c. & paulo post, that a Formedon in discen∣der lyes of all tenements, which Writ was not at com∣mon law. Manwood answered, if the Statute doth not extend to them, without question, the custome can∣not, for before the Statute, all estates of inheritance were fee simple, and no custome can commence af∣ter the Statute, for this being made 13. E. 1. is made within time of memory; and Littleton is to be intend∣ed of a fee simple conditionall, for he knew well that no custome could commence after the Statute of W. 2. as appeares in his booke 2. ca. 10. and 34. H. 6. and a Formedon in discender, in speciall cases, lay at the common Law. And by the Court, another Act made at the same time, which gives an Elegit, extends not to Coppiholds, for the reason aforesaid; but other Statutes made at the same time extend to them, as
ca'. 3. which gives a Cui in vita & receite, and ca'. 4. which gives to the particular tenant, a Quod ei defor∣ceat. Resolved, that though 'twas not found, that the said rents were the usuall rents accustomed to be reserved within 20. yeares before, yet, because 'twas found, that the accustomed rent was reserved, and a custome goes to all times before, it shall be so intend∣ed, without shewing the contrary, and judgement was enterd for the Queene. The common Law is founded upon the perfection of reason, and not according to any private and sud∣den conceite or opinion. Borastons Case. 29. of the Queene. fo. 19. B. Devised land for eight yeares, and after to his executors, to performe his will, till H. his young∣est Sonne come to the age of 21. yeares, and when H. comes to 21. yeares, then, that he shall have to him and his heires, H. dyed at the age of 9. yeares. Objected, that till H. attaines to 21. yeares, the land descends to the heire, and, for that he never attained to 21. yeares, this remaines in the heire, and the in∣tent appeares by the words, that he should not have, till he come to 21. yeares, and this ought to precede the commencement of the remainder, and if land were leased till H. comes to 21. yeares (H. then be∣ing of 9. yeares) 'tis no absolute lease for 12. yeares, for if H dye before 21. the lease shall be determined, which the Court agreed. 'Twas also said, that when the particular estate, which should support the re∣mainder, may determine before the remainder can commence, there the remainder doth not vest pre∣sently, but depends in contingency. If one make a Lease to A. for life, and after the death of B. the remainder to another in Fee, this re∣mainder
depends upon contingency, for if A. dye before B. the remainder is voyd. A Lease is made to A. for life, the remainder to B. for life, and if B. dye before A. the remainder to C. for life; this is a good remainder upon contingency. If A. survive B. which case is all one with the common Case, which is many times agreed on in our Books, a lease is made to one for life, the remainder to the right Heires of I. S. this remainder is good upon contingency, (viz.) If the Lessee for life survive I. S. otherwise not, and by the same reason, if a man have issue a Son of 9 yeares of age, maketh a Lease untill the Sonne shall accom∣plish his full age, the remainder to another in Fee, as in this case, nothing vesteth in him in remainder presently, Quod fuit concessum per tot. Cur. vide. Chudleyes Case, Libr. 10. Answered, that in Wills the intent of the devisor is to be considered; for, when the devisor in his life by apt words, by good advise, might have made his Will sufficient in Law, there, though he makes it in disordered manner, and in barbarous and unapt words, the Law will order those words, which want order, according to his intent, as in Wellock and Ha∣monds Case, Coppy-holder in Borough, English devi∣ses, to his Eldest Son, paying 40. shillings within, &c. to every of his other Sonnes, &c. surrenders accord∣ing, and dyes, the Eldest Son did not pay within, &c. the youngest enters, and adjudged lawfull; and resolved, First, That he had a fee, for the recompence and consideration, though it be not to the value, makes a fee in construction of a will. Secondly, That though paying in a Will, makes a condition, yet, here 'tis a limittation; otherwise it would discend upon the Eldest Son, who is to take advantage of it, and then it should be at his pleasure for to pay, or not, and
therefore it shall be, as if he had devised to the El∣dest Quous{que} he failes in payment. So here the de∣visor hath computed, what profits of his Land, du∣ring the nonage of his Son, will suffice for payment of his Debts, &c. and that he did not intend that the tearme of the Executors should end by death of H. for so his Debts should remaine unsatisfied, and his Will unperformed, and therefore the Law sayth, it shall be construed, that the Executors shall have till H. should have come to 21 yeares of age, and there∣fore the Executors have a terme for twelve yeares, which the Court agreed. And though (when) and (then) are Adverbes of time, yet, when they referre to a thing which must of necessity happen, they make no contingency, and tis certaine, that H. did accom∣plish, or might have accomplished the age of 21 yeares, and here, if the tearme should be ended by death, the remainder should be voyd; and the Court agreed, that in Wilis, and grants, the remainder ought to vest in possession, Eo instanti, the particular estate ends; but, here the Terme did not end, &c. Walkers Case, 29. Eliz. in Banco regis. WAlker Leased certaine Lands to Harries for yeares, the Lessee assigned all his interest to another, Walker brought an action of Debt against Harries, for Rent arreare after the assignement, and if the action be maintainable or not, was the Questi∣on, and upon great deliberation and conference with others, it was adjudged per Wray chiefe Justice, Sir Thomas Gawdy, and Tot. Cur. that the Action did lye, and was maintainable in the argument, whereof ma∣ny things were resolved. If a man Lease a stock of Cattle or other goods, rendering a Rent at severall dayes, he shall not have
an Action of Debt untill all the dayes be expi∣red. Likewise, if a man make an obligation or other contract to pay severall summes of money at severall dayes, he shall not have an action of Debt, untill all the dayes be expired, for these are personall con∣tracts and not reall, but in case of a Lease for yeares, which is a reall contract, the Lessor shall have an acti∣on of Debt after every day. By the Court, Debt doth well lye in this case, a∣gainst the Lessee, there are three privities. 1. In re∣spect of the estate onely. 2. Of contract onely. 3. Of estate and contract together. The first betweene the Grantee of the reversion, or Lord by escheate, and the Lessee, so betwixt the Lessor and the As∣signee of the Lessee; the second betwixt the Lessor and the Lessee (as here) for, notwithstanding the assignement, and the privity of estate removed by the act of the Lessee himselfe the privity of contract remaines. First, because the Lessee himselfe cannot prevent the Lessor of his remedy; but when the Lessor grants his reversion against his owne grant, he shall not have remedy, because the Rent is incident to the reversi∣on. Secondly, the Lessee might grant it to a poore man, not able to manure the Land, or for malice, will suffer it to lye fresh, so the Lessor shall be with∣out remedy, if Debt should not lye against the first Lessee. Thirdly, there is privity of contract and estate to∣gether, as betwixt the Lessor and the Lessee. If a Tenant in Dower, or Tenant by curtesy, as∣signe over their estate, yet the privity of the action remaineth betweene the Heire and them, and he shall have an action of wast against them for wast done,
after the assignement, but if the Heire grant over his reversion, then the privity of the action is de∣stroyed, and the Grantee may not have any Action of wast, but onely against the assignee, for betweene them is a privity of Estate, and betweene the Gran∣tee and the Tenant in Dower, &c is no privity at all. If a lessor enter for condition broken, or if a lessee surrender to the lessor, yet the lessor may have an action of Debt, for arrerages due before the conditi∣on broken, or the surrender, and this is in respect of the contract betweene the lessor and the lessee. 36. of the Queene, Ʋngle and Glovers Case adjudged, the lessee assignes his interest, the lessor bargaines, &c. the reversion, the bargainee shall not have Debt a∣gainst the lessee, but agreed, that the lessor himselfe might. 37. Eliz. in Banco regis, Int. Overton et Siddall. Two points were resolved. First, if an Executor of a Les∣see for yeares, assigne over his interest that an Action of Debt doth not lye against him for Rent due after the Assignement. If a Lessee for yeares assigne over his interest and dye, the Executor shall not be char∣ged for rent due after his death, for by the death of the Lessee, the personall privity of the contract (as to the Action of Debt in both these cases were de∣termined; 40. of the Queene, Brome and Hores Case. A. Lessee of three acres rendring Rent, assignes one to B. the Lessor suffers a recovery to the use of C. in fee, who brought Debt against the first Lessee, adjudged it lyes, for the Lessee assigned his interest, but for part, for the privity of Estate remaines because he assigned but part. 41. of the Queene Marrow and Turpins Case, in Debt against two administrators, up∣on a Lease made to their Testator, the Defendants plead, that before the tren areare, the one of them had assigned all his interest to I. S. of which the Plaintiffe
had notice, and accepted the Rent by the hands of the assignee, due after the assignement, and before that this rent now demanded was due, the Plaintiffe demurred and adjudged against him, because the pri∣vity of the contract was determined by the death of the Lessee, and therefore after the assignement made by the administrator, Debt doth not lye for rent due after the assignement. Also it was said, that if a Lessee assigne over his terme, the Lessor may charge the Lessee or his Assignee at his Election. And if the Lessor accept the rent of the assignee, he hath deter∣mined his Election, and shall not have an action af∣ter against the Lessee, for rent due after the assigne∣ment, no more then a Lord having received the Rent of the Feoffee, shall avow upon the Feoffor after∣wards. Butler and Bakers Case, 33. and 34. of the Queene fo. 25. W. B. and his Wife seised of the mannor of H. (by an Estate made to them during cover∣ture for the joynture of the Wife) in taile, holden In Capite, and W. seised of Land in F. both which a∣mount to a third part of all his Lands; and also of the Mannor of T. In capite, which amounts to two parts; W. devises T. to his Wife, upon condition, that shee should take no former joynture, and dyed, the Wife in pays refused H. the question was, whither the Will were good for the intire Mannor of T. or but for part, by the Statutes of 32. and 34. H 8. Re∣solved, that at common Law if a gift be to a Husband and Wife in taile, &c. the Husband dyes, the Wife cannot devest the free hold by any verball Waiver, or disagreement in pays; as if she say before entry, that shee will never agree to it, shee may enter when shee
pleases; so, if shee saith, (reciting her estate) that shee assents, &c. to the said estate, yet afterwards shee may waive it in a Court of record; but if shee enters into the Land, and takes the profits, though shee saith nothing, tis a good agreement in Law, for the Law more respects acts without words, then words without acts, and a freehold shall not be so easily de∣vested to the intent that the Tenant to the Praecipe, should be the better knowne. But as an act in Pays may amount to an agreement, so it may amount to a disagreement, but, this is alwayes of one and the same thing, if the Tenant by deed infeoffe the Lord, and a stranger and maketh livery to the Lord, if the Lord dissagree' by word, tis worth nothing, and if he enters generally, and takes the profits, tis an agree∣ment, but if he distraines for his Seigniory, tis a dis∣sagreement, yet in some cases, a claime by words shall direct the entry to be an agreement to one Estate, and a disagreement to another, &c. See the Booke at large, but a man may devest the property of goods and Chattells, or an obligation sealed to him, by dis∣agreement In pays. Resolved, that though the estate was created by way of use, which use, before the Statute, might have beene waived in Pays, yet, now the Statute hath so incorporated the use and possession of the Land, that it cannot be waived In pays, more then an Estate created by feoffment, &c. yet twas here resolved, That the refusall In pays to have H. and the entry, and agreement to T. was a good agreement to the one, and disagreement to the other. And this by 27. H. 8. ca'. 10. If any Woman hath Lands, &c. assu∣red after Marriage, &c. after the death of the Hus∣band, She may refuse her joynture, and take her Dower, &c. And upon these words the Court agreed, That a Wo∣man might refuse her Joynture In pays, and be in∣dowed
by consent or Writ. The great doubt was, if by this refusall of H. by operation of Law, it doth discend immediatly to the Heire after the death of the Devisor; for to satisfie the Statute which saith, The King shall take for his third part such Mannors &c. as shall discend, &c. immediatly after the death of the devi∣sor. Resolved, First, Upon the reason of the common Law, the refusall shall not have such relation that the devise shall be good, for the intire Mannor of T. for a relation is a fiction of Law, to make a nullity of a thing Ab initio, to one certaine intent, which in truth had being, and that Propter necessitatem, ut res magis valeat, quam pereat. 11. E. 3. The Law will make a nullity Ab initio, that the Wife shall have dower, but not as to a collaterall intent, as if the reversion were granted of the Lands which the Husband and Wife held in taile, and the Wife for to have Dower dissa∣grees, yet the grant is good, for shee may be endow∣ed though the grant stand; and Relatio est fictio juris, et intenta ad unum: And though relations aide acts in Law, as Dower, yet twill never aide the acts of the party, to avoyd them by relation, as a man infeoffes an Infant, or Feme covert, and after gives, &c. or de∣vises the Land, or any thing out of it, the Infant or Husband disagrees, this shall have relation betwixt the parties, that the Infant or Husband, shall not be charged in damages, but shall not make the voyd de∣vise, &c. good. A Lease for life, the remainder to the King, the King grants his remainder, the deed is in-rolled, it shall have relation to make this passe Ab ini∣tio, to the King, not to make the voyd pattent good. And as relations extend onely to the same thing, and the same intent, so, also to the same parties, not for to prejudice a Stranger, feoffement of a Mannor, and a long time after livery, the Tenants attourne, this
shall have relation, to make the services passe Ab initio or otherwise they could never passe, nor be parcell of the Mannor, but not for to charge the Tenants for the arrerages in the meane time. So here, the refusall shall relate as to the mannor, of H. onely, not to T. and to the wife onely, but not to prejudice the Heire (upon whom part of the Mannor of T. dis∣cended) to make the devise good for the third part, which was voide at the time of the death: For, Omne testamentum morte consummatum est, and as it was at the death, so it shall remaine. Resolved, that after the Statute of 27. H. 8. and before the Statute of 32 H. 8. the Mannor of T. was not devisable, and there∣fore when the devisor hath not pursued the Authori∣ty; which the Acts of 32. & 34. H. 8. gives, twas voide for part. The first branch he hath not pursued, which saith, (That all, &c. having a sole estate in fee simple, in any Mannors, &c. shall have full and free liberty, &c. to dis∣pose by his last will in writing, as much of, &c. as shall a∣mount to the cleere yearely value of two parts in three to be divided) For he had not the Mannor of H. for his Wife had it joyntly with him. See many excellent Cases in the Booke at large, adjudged upon this word (Having) in the Statutes, the Initium of a Will ought to be full and perfect, which is the writing, and therefore, if the devisor command one to write his Will, and he devises white Acre to A. and his Heires, and black Acre to B. and his Heires, and dyes, before the devise to B. is written, yet the devise to A. is good. But if he devises to A. &c. upon condition, and he writes the devise, and the Testator dyes before the Writing of the condition, tis voyd, for in the one case, the devises are severall, and the one is perfect, in the other Case tis maimed, and imperfect, for the intire devise, was not fully put in writing, so twas re∣solved
in the Case at Barre, that neither the com∣mencement nor the end of the Will was full or per∣fect, for at the time of writing of it, and at the death of the devisor, he had no power in respect of the joynt estate in H. to dispose all the Mannor of T. which amounts to the value of two parts of all. Also, upon the first Branch he ought to have a sole estate, and here his Wife is joyntly seised with him, and shee cannot disagree during coverture. The Statute gives liberty to him, for to devise two parts by will, but this is to be intended of such Land, which he might convey by act executed, but, here by reason of the undivided estate of the Wife, he cannot dis∣pose it but during coverture. Also, the third part of cleere yearly value is saved to the King, and the intent of the Statute was, that the King shall have the equall benefit at least for his third part, as the devisee hath for two parts, but here the devisee had two parts ab∣solutely, and the King but a possibility, Viz. If the Wife would disagree which is at her pleasure, and this Statute hath been constru'd, that equality should be observed. A man which held three Mannors of three Lords, could not devise two of them, but two parts of every one; upon these words (Cleere yearly value) 'twas said that of Inheritances, which are not of any yearly value, some are devisable, some not, as, Bona et catalla felonum, fugit, or utlagat. Fines, amercia∣ments, within such a Mannor or Towne, these can∣not be devised, nor left to discend, but a Leete, Waife, or Stray, or other hereditament appendant, or appur∣tenant to a Mannor, passe by devise of the Mannor with th'appurtenances as incidents, and the Statute had no intent for to dismember these things, which by lawfull prescription had beene united. But if a hundred, with goods of Fellons, Outlaws, Fines, A∣merciaments,
returne of Writts, and such other casu∣all hereditaments, within the same hundred, have beene accustomably demised for a yearely rent, they may be devised within the purview of the said Act. 'Twas said upon the words of the Statute, which says, that he may devise a rent common, &c. Out of two parts, that a devise of a rent of the full value out of all is voyd, but out of two parts 'tis good. And 'twas ob∣served, that upon 32. H. 8. a devile of all his land, had beene good for two parts, as adjudged in Ʋntons Case, for Land is severable, but a rent is a thing in∣tire, and 34. H. 8. onely gives authority for to devise it. The second branch which speakes of division, can∣not be satisfied, for, during his life, he himselfe could not (Set it out) and after his death, it survives to the Wife. The third and fourth branch is not satisfi∣ed in this word (immediatly) for till disagreement, without question the Mannor of H. survived to the Wife, and if an Office had beene found before disa∣greement, without doubt, the Queene should have a third part of the Mannor of T. and the devise being voyd at the death of the devisor, & the third part law∣fully vested in the Heire by discent, it cannot be made good and devested by a subsequent disagreement. Littleton, discent to the Heire of Tenant by the cour∣tesy of a disseissoresse, doth not take away entry, for the Heire comes not in immediatly, & 'twas agreed if a man devises two acres holden by Knights service, and a reversion upon a Lease for life discends to the heire, this is no immediate discent within the Statute, but the third part of the two ought to discend; see many excellent Cases of devises adjudged upon the Statute.
Another good Case of relations, Jennings and Braggs Case, a disseisee makes an Indenture purporting a Lease for yeares, and delivers it to a stranger, out of the Land, as an Escroule, and commands him for to enter, and deliver this as his deed, to the Lessee, who doth it, and adjudged a good Lease, and this diversi∣ty agreed. First, When the person at the first delivery hath not ability, to make the contract, and before the se∣cond delivery hath, 'tis voyd, as an Infant, and a Fème covert; otherwise, when at first delivery, the person hath ability, but cannot perfect it, till an impediment removed, which is done before the second delivery, there 'tis good, as at Barre. Resolved, secondly, that to some intent the second delivery shall have relation to the former, by fiction of Law, Ʋt res magis valeat quam pereat, as if a Feme sole deliver a Lease as an escroule, and after takes Husband or dyes, yet by the second delivery 'tis a good deed Ab initio; and to some intent Ʋt res magis valeat, &c. it shall not relate, yet in truth, the se∣cond delivery hath all its force by the first, and is but an execution, and consummation of the former, as at Barre, for if it should relate to the first delivery, then it would avoyd the lease, for it should be made by one, who was out of possession, & fictio legis inique ope∣ratur alicui damnum vel injuriam. Thirdly, 'twas resolved that as to collaterall acts, that there shall be no relation Omninò, as if the Obli∣gee release before the second delivery, such release is voyd.
Ratcliffes case. 34. of the Queene. fo. 37. A. Feme sole devises Socage land to the sonne of her daughter in taile, the remainder to two Sisters of the devisee, and to the heires of their two bodies, by equall portions to be divided, the remain∣der in fee to the Mother of the daughters, and dyes, the sonne dyes without issue; Martha one of the daughters dwelling in her Mothers house (daughter of the devisor) within the age of 16. and above 14. departed at the second houre in the night, with the consent of the husband of her Mother (in whose house she was) 8. miles, and there married E. R. the issue was, whether E.R. the Mother, had the custody of the said M. at the time of the contract, and marri∣age aforesaid, for if she had, then the land of M. was lost by the Statute of 4. and 5. P. and M. ca'. 8. Resolved, that there were two manners of custo∣dies, or Gardianships, the one by the common law, the other by the Statute; at common Law foure manner of Gardians, viz Gardian in Chivalry, Socage, Nature, by Nurture. The first two are fully described in our Bookes; but great controversie was at barre, for Gardian by Nature; Some held, that the Father onely shall have the custody of his sonne and heire apparent, within age, not the Mother, Grandfather, &c. Also, that the Father shall not have the custody of his daughter and heire, for it ought to be such an heire, as shall continue sole and apparent heire; as the Father shall not have the custody of the youngest sonne, in Borough English, for tenure in Chivalry. Others affirme, that not onely the Father, but every auncestor male or female, shall have the custody of his heire apparent, male or female. Trespas quare  consanguinium & haeredem of the plaintiffe, cujus mari∣tagium
ad ipsum pertinet, &c. rapuit, &c. lyes. The Mo∣ther (though she had no land) brought ravishment of ward of J. her Sonne and heire, against the grand∣father, who had land that might descend. By the Court, both erre; for 'tis true, that every auncestor shall have trespas, or ravishment of ward against a stranger, for his heire male or female, and the Writ shall say, Cujus maritagium ad ipsum pertinet, and good reason, for the establishment of his house consists up∣on providing of a convenient marriage for his heire apparant, and it matters not, of what age such heire is, but such action lyes not against gardian in chivalry, by any of his auncestors but the Father. So the Court resolved here, the Mother could not be gar∣dian in Socage, if the land had descended to the daughter, nor by nurture, because she was above 14. but the common Law gives remedy against a Stran∣ger, as aforesaid. Resolved, here the Mother shall have the custody within the provision of the Act, which hath ordained two new manners of custodies. 1. By reason of nature. 2. By assignation; the first, the Father, after his death the Mother; the second, by assignation of the Father, by his will, or any act in his life. See the Booke at large for the exposition of this Statute. Resolved, that the assent of the husband was not materiall, for the Statute hath annexed the custody, to the person of the Mother, jure naturae, which is in∣seperable, and by marriage cannot be transferred to the husband, the Father shall not forfeit the ward∣ship by outlawry, nor shall his Executors have it. Resolved, though she departed out of the house sixe houres before the contract, yet, in judgement of Law, the Mother had the custody at the time of the contract; for, 'tis inseperably annexed to the person of the Mother.
Resolved, that by this devise, the two daughters wete tenants in common in taile, by these words (equally to be divided) though they never make par∣tition in facto, and so it hath been often adjudged. Resolved, that the husband and wife damsell, had good title upon this verdict, against the other daugh∣ter; for, by these words (to the next of kin, to whom the inheritance should, &c. come after her decease during the life of such person, who shall so contract, &c.) it seemes the daughter shall not have the forfeiture, for though she be of the blood, yet, if M. dye, her issue shall have the land, if without issue, the Mother in the remain∣der. To the objection, that the Mother cannot have it, for she is not of the blood of the daughter, but econ∣tra. Father, or Mother, are not next, to whom ad∣ministration shall be granted; and land shall escheate, rather then it shall goe to Father, or Mother. Resolved often against 5. E. 6. that the Father, or Mother, are next to whom administration may be granted, and Littleton says that the Father is neerer of blood, then the Uncle, and therefore the Father shall have a remainder limitted to the next of blood of the Sonne, but he shall not have an inheritance by dis∣cent, from the Sonne, for a Maxime prohibits it. And 'twas said at barre, if he in reversion had been bro∣ther of the halfe blood, he might have entered, as Proximus de sanguine, yet none of the halfe blood could inherit. See the Booke at large, where is ex∣cellent learning of discents; as also the learning of Possessio fratris, &c. Resolved by the Court, that it doth not come in question, who shall enter for the forfeiture by the Statute, for the issue was joyned up∣on a collaterall point, whether the Mother had the custody at the time of the contract; and the finding of the Jury is not materiall, and therefore, though the
Plaintiffe (who was lessee of the husband of the dam∣sell, as appeared) had good title against the defen∣dant, being lessee of the husband of the other Sister, yet, because the issue was found against him, judge∣ment was given Quod nihil capiat, &c. Boytons case, 35. Eliz. in Banco regis. fo. 43. A Writ of cap: ad satisfaciendum is retornable at West∣minster die Lunae prox post Crastin. Animarū, the par∣tie is arrested, the Sheriffe is not bound to bring the prisoner in recta Linea, from the place where he was arrested, or from the Countie. But if he have the prisoner in Court at the day of the returne (being ne∣ver out of his custody in the meane season) it is good; But if a Sheriffe or a Bayliffe assent that one who is in execution, and under their custody, to goe out of the Gaole for a time, and then to returne, yet although he returne at the time, it is an escape. And so it is likewise if a Sheriffe suffer him to goe with a Bayliffe or a Keeper, for the Sheriffe ought to have him in ar∣cta custodia, & the Statute of Westminster 2. cap. 11. says, Quod carceri manucipentur in ferris. So as the Sheriffe may keepe him in yron and fetters, to the intent, that they may sooner satisfie their Creditors. The Sheriffe upon a Habeas corpus for one in execution may bring the partie what way he will, so as he have his bodie at the day, according to the Writ; If one in execution escape out of the Gaole, and fly into another Countie, the Sheriffe upon fresh suite, taketh him again before any action brought against the She∣riffe, the Judges have adjudged this no escape; and if one in execution escape, de son tort. and be taken a∣gaine, he shall never have an audita querela, because a man shall not take advantage of his own wrong.
Sir George Brownes case. 36. of the Queene. fo. 50. ISsue in speciall taile, the remainder to himselfe in fee, in the life of his Mother, tenant in speciall taile, levies a Fine (in truth, with Proclamations, though they were not found) to Sir G. B. the Mother (living the Sonne) leased for three lives, which was not warranted by 32. H. 8. upon which Sir G. B entered. Resolved, that the lease for three lives, though without warranty, was within 11. H. 7. which saith, (discontinue, alien, release, or confirme with warranty) for, the intent of the Statute, was, to prohibit not onely every barre, but every manner of discontinu∣ance, which puts the heire to his reall action; and be∣cause a release, or confirmation, is no discontinuance without warranty; the warranty referres to them, to make them equivalent to an estate which passeth by livery. Note, the title of the Act (Discontinuance of right, or estate) also in the Act 'tis said, If no such dis∣continuance, warranty, nor recovery had been; so that dis∣continuance stands in equall degree with warranty. Resolved, that if the issue had granted his remain∣der in fee onely, and not barred his taile, he might have entered by the words of the Act, for the forfei∣ture, which saith, Every person to whom the interest, &c. title, or inheritance, after the decease of the woman should appertaine, may enter and enjoy, &c. As if no such discon∣tinuance had been made, and if no such had been, the land should discend to the issue. Resolved, that in this case, Sir G. B. shall enter, for if no discontinuance had been, he should injoy it a∣gainst Anthony the issue, and all the heires of his body, though the Fine be levied in the life of the auncestor, for 32. H. 8. says, In any wise intailed to the person so le∣vying
the Fine, or to any of his auncestors; and though it worke, part by conveyance, part by conclusion, yet' the taile being extinct by the Fine, Sir G. B. in re∣mainder shall enter. The same Law in this case, though the Fine were without Proclamations, for the issue against his Fine cannot enter; but the entry of the conusee is lawfull. Anderson said, where 'twas invented (to make an evasion out of this Act) that a woman should accept a Fine come ceo, &c. and render for a thousand yeares, pretending this not within the words (discontinue, alien, release with warranty, &c.) that this was an alienation within the intent of the Act, or otherwise the Statute should serve for nothing, and so it hath been resol∣ved. Rigewaies Case. 36. El. in Banco regis. fol. 52. IT was resolved pro tot. Cur. although the prisoner in execution escape out of view, yet if fresh suite be made, and he be taken againe in recenti insecutione, he shall be in execution, otherwise at the turning of a corner, or by entring into a house, or other meanes, the prisoner may be out of view; And although he fly into another Countie, yet because the escape was of his own wrong, where∣of he may not take advantage, the Sheriffe upon fresh suite may take him there, and he shall be in executi∣on. But if the Plaintiffe bring his action against the Sheriffe upon the escape, before that the Sheriffe take him, or if the Sheriffe doe not make fresh suite, yet in both these cases the Sheriffe may take him and keepe him in his custody, untill he make agreement with him, or he may have an action of the case, for his wrongfull escape. And although the defendant be taken upon a cap: ad satisfaciendum, and escape, yet if
the Writ be not returned and filed, the Plaintiffe may have a new cap: ad satisfaciendum against him, and take him againe, and he shall not take advantage of his owne wrong. But if the Plaintiffe will, he may charge the Sheriffe with the escape, if he did not take him againe in fresh suite before the action brought, and when the prisoner escapes of his owne wrong, and be taken againe, he shall never have an audita querela against the Sheriffe. But it is otherwise if he escape with the consent of the Gaoler, then he may not take him againe, and if he doe, then he may have an audita querela. Resolved, that the barre was insufficient, for the plaintiffe counted of an escape in London, and the de∣fendant justifies the retaking in Devonshire, so that the escape at London was not answered; but the plaintiffe not denying the fresh suite, but by Protestation rely∣ing upon this that he was out of view, 'twas adjudged against him, but if he had demurred upon the barre, he should have had judgement. Resolved, that after Demurrer, there shall not be a Repleader, for the parties by mutuall consent, have put themselves upon the judgement of the Court, and therefore without their consent, they cannot re∣pleade, and so severall times adjudged. Lincolne Colledge case. 37. & 38. of the Queene. fo. 59. HUsband seised to him and to his wife for life, and to the heires of the body of the husband, dyed, the issue, in the life of the wife, then tenant of the freehold (for so the pleading was) which shall be in∣tended by disseisin, for no surrender, or forfeiture was alledged. 4. H. 8. Suffered a recovery, with single voucher, by agreement, that the recoverors should infeoffe L, &c. to divers uses, and that the wife should
release to them with warranty, which was done ac∣cording, 11. H. 8. The wife dyed, after the issue dy∣ed, after his issue in the third degree entered; the question was, whether the collaterall warranty should binde; the recovery did not come in question, for by the pleading it shall be intended, that he was seised by other title, then by the taile, so the single voucher not materiall. Resolved, that though the first branch of the Sta∣tute of 11. H. 7. says, that the warranty shall be voyd, yet the clause following (and that it shall be lawfull, &c. to enter) being annexed to the first, expounds the generality of it, and though he to whom the in∣terest, &c. after the death of the wife appertaines, may avoyde it by entry, yet, 'tis in force against all others; and so the Judges have expounded other Statutes. 8. H. 6. All Outlawries shall be voyd, ex∣cept a Capias be awarded against the party, in the County, where, &c. yet this ought to be avoyded by error. The Statute of 1. of the Queene ordaines that all grants, &c. by a Bishop, in other manner then &c. shall be utterly voyd; but 32. & 33. of the Queene, betwixt Sale and the Bishop of C. and L. a grant of a next avoydance of a Church (not warranted, &c.) was not voydable against the Bishop himselfe, but onely against his Successors. And with this resoluti∣on agrees 27. H. 8. upon the same Statute of 11. H. 7. Resolved, that this warranty was out of the intent of the Act, which onely restraines warranty, which prejudices the heire in taile, or those in remainder, but when the warranty, &c. of the wife, is but for to perfect and corroborate the estate assured by the issue himselfe, &c. 'tis not restrained by the Act, for it shall be intended to the benefit of the heire, which is the reason, that a common recovery is not restrained
by W. 2. for the intended recompence; and if the wife and the issue had joyned in a Fine, this had bar∣red the taile; so, if the wife had surrendered, the issue might have suffered a recovery. H. 39. of the Queene, the case was, that the younger Sonne tenant in taile by devise, was vouched in a recovery suffered, by a woman tenant for life, by the same devise, and this was to the use of the vouchee and his heires, who dy∣ed; and 'twas adjudged that the Sister of the vou∣chee, by the intire bloud shall have it, not the elder brother, & that the recovery was not within 14 of the Queene, though suffered by tenant for life; and the Statute says, that it shall be utterly voyd; for 'twas not the intent, that the Act should extend to a reco∣very, in which he in remainder in taile was vouched, who had an estate that might continue for ever, and had the power to docke all the remainders; so here, this Statute doth not extend to this warranty, be∣cause, &c. Resolved, when the first issue disables himselfe, for to take advantage of the forfeiture, and dyes, his issue shall never take benefit of it, because, he was not in rerum natura, nor had the immediate interest at the time; and this was Sir George Brownes case before, where the issue in taile in the life of his Mother, te∣nant in speciall taile, levied a Fine, without procla∣mations; and here, if error were in the recovery, the warranty barres him of his action, because he himselfe by his own act, hath barred his entry. But here if the wife had released, &c. after the death of the issue, his issue might have avoyed the warranty. Note, (Reader) it seemes to me, if in such case a woman levies a Fine, or suffers a recovery, though the daughter enters, or not, and though she joynes in the Fine, or is vouched in the recovery, or by any other act disables her selfe, yet the Sonne borne after
shall take advantage of it; for entry upon this Act of 11. H. 7. is not like entry upon the Statute of 6. R. 2. ca'. 6. For there the daughter by expresse words, hath it as a perquisite, but upon 11. H. 7. per formam doni. Resolved, if tenant in taile, in of another estate, suffer a common recovery, and a collaterall auncestor releases with warranty to the recoveror, after the re∣coveror makes a Feoffement to uses, which are exe∣cuted by the Statute of 27. H. 8. and the auncestor dyes, though the estate be transferred in the post, be∣fore the discent of the warranty, yet, it shall binde, and the terr-tenants shall Rebutt. See excellent learning upon this point, where an estate transferred in the post, before discent of the warranty, shall binde, where not, and where there shall be Rebutter in such case, where not. Pennants case. 38. of the Queene. fo. 64. LEase for yeares upon condition, that the lessee shall not assigne, &c. without assent of the lessor, he assignes, &c. the lessor not having notice of the as∣signement, accepts the rent due after; and enters; it was adjudged for the lessor his entry lawfull; for that the condition being collaterall, the breach whereof may be so secretly contrived, that it is not possible for the lessor to have notice thereof, and no∣tice in this case is materiall and issuable; for other∣wise the lessee might take advantage of his owne fraud. But if a man make a Lease for yeares, ren∣dring rent upon condition, if the rent be not paid to reenter. In this case if the Lessor demand the rent, and the same is not paid, if after he accept the rent (before the reentry made) due at another day, he hath dispensed with the condition, for there the con∣dition
is annexed to the rent, and he (having made demand of the rent) well knew the condition was broken; but although in this case, that he accept the rent, due at that day, for which he made the demand, yet he may reenter, for as well before, as after his reentree, he may have an action of debt, for the rent upon the contract between the Lessor and the Lessee. If the Lessor distraine for the rent, for which the demand was made, he hath affirmed the Lease; for after the determination of the Lease, he may not di∣straine for rent. It was also resolved, that as well in case of the con∣dition annexed to the rent, as in case of a condition annexed to any collaterall act, if the conclusion of the condition be, that then the Lease for yeares shall be voyd, there no acceptance of the rent due at any day after the breach of the condition will make the voyd Lease good. Resolved, that as a voidable Lease cannot be affir∣med by word, for money, &c. so the acceptance of a rent which is not In esse, nor due to him which ac∣cepts it, doth not affirme the Lease as a gift to a Hus∣band and Wife, and to the Heires of the body of the Husband, the Husband dyes, the issue accepts the rent of the Lessee of the Husband, during the life of the Wife, the Wife dyes, yet the issue shall avoyd the Lease, for no rent was due. And there is a diversity betweene a Lease for life, and for yeares, in case of a lease for life, though the conclusion of the condition be, that it shall be voyd, yet acceptance of a rent due after the breach, shall affirme it, for the freehold being created by livery, cannot be determined before entry. If the successor accept the rent upon a Lease for yeares of a Parson, Vicar, Prebend, 'tis worth nothing, for 'tis voyd by
death, otherwise of a Lease for life. But if the suc∣cessor of a Bishop, Abbot, or Prior, accept the rent upon a Lease for yeares, he shall never avoyd it, for 'twas voydable onely. Note (Reader) it seemes to me, if upon a Lease for life, the Lessor accepts the same rent which was demanded, he hath affirmed the Lease, for he cannot accept it, as due upon any contract, as upon a Lease for yeares, for when he accepts it, he cannot have an action of Debt for it, but his remedy was by Assise, if he had seisin or by distresse, but after reentry he may have an action of Debt. If he that hath a rent service, or rent charge, ac∣cepts the rent due at the last day, and therfore makes an acquittance, all the arrerages due before, are thereby discharged, and so it hath beene adjudged, In Hopkins & Mortons Case 10. El. Dyer. A man is not bound to pay an annuity without an Acquittance, but a rent service, or rent charge he is. If the Lord accepts the rent or service of the Feof∣fee, he loses the arrerages in the time of the Feoffor, though he makes no acquittance, for, after such ac∣ceptance, he shall not avow upon the Feoffor at all, nor upon the Feoffee, but for the arrerages which incurred in his time; otherwise, where the Feoffor dyes, and there is such an acceptance. But accep∣tance of rent or service by the hands of the Feoffee, shall not barre the Lord of reliefe due after, for that is no service, if it were, Debt would not lye for it. 'Twas said, if the Lord accepts services by the hands of the Heire, infeoffed within age by collusi∣on, he loses the wardship. But against this 'twas ob∣jected. First, because the Lord upon tender of the arrerages, and notice is compellable to avow upon him. Secondly, he cannot be concluded before ti∣tle
accrued. Answered, the Lord is not compella∣ble &c. for he may shew the collusion, and avow upon the Feoffor, and by acceptance, the Lord waives the benefit of the Statute, purges the collu∣sion, and loses the wardship. Westbyes Case, 40. Eliz. In Banco Regis, Fol. 71. WEstby brought an action of Debt against Skyn∣ner and Catcher Sheriffes of London, for an es∣cape. One Buston was in execution, and in their cu∣stody, at the Suite of one Dighton, and at the Plain∣tiffes Suite and at the end of their yeare, the Sheriffs deliver'd the body of Buston (amongst others) un∣to the new Sheriffes by Indenture, wherein the exe∣cution at the Suite of Dighton, was mentioned, but the execution at the Suite of Westby was omitted, and Buston still continued in the Gaole, and if the De∣fendants should be charged in this Case, with the es∣cape, was the Question? And it was adjudged, that they should be charg'd, for although he was within the walls of the Prison, yet that was an escape in Law, as to the Plaintiffe. And it was resolved, that Eo in∣stanti, that the ancient Sheriffes, delivered their Pri∣soners to the new Sheriffes, the escape began as to the Plaintiffe. Note hereby, that the Law judgeth one that re∣maines in the Gaole to have escaped, and it was re∣solved, that the ancient Sheriffes ought to give notice to the new Sheriffes of all executions that they have against any, that are in their custody, and it was also resolved, untill the Prisoners be delivered to the new Sheriffes, they remaine in the custody of the old Sheriffes. Notwithstanding the new Letters Patents, the Writ of discharge, and the Writ of delivery. And 'twas resolved, that if the old Sheriffe die before a new
one be made, the new Sheriff at his owne perill ought to take notice of all executions against any of the Pri∣soners; and this is for necessity, and if one in Exe∣cution breake the Gaole betweene the death of the old Sheriff, and the making of the new, this is no es∣cape, but when the Sheriff is dead, all the Prisoners are in the custody of the Law untill the new Sheriff be made; and although no fresh Suite be made after, they may be taken in Execution, in what place soever they come in. Deane and Chapter of Norwich Case, 40. and 41. of the Queene. fo. 73. H. 8. Anno. 30. translated the Priory and Covent of the Cathedrall Church of the holy Trinity of Norwich, into the Deane and Chapter, &c. and dis∣charged them by their speciall names, Tam de habitu quam de regula; ipsos{que} decanum & Capitulum, perpetuis temporibus duraturis corporavit, and granted them all the Mannors, &c. which of late belonged to the Pri∣ory, and granted that they should be the Deane and Chapter of the Bishop of Norwich, and his Successors, after 2. E. 6: the Deane and Chapter surrendered to the King their Church and possessions, and he incor∣porated them by the name of the Deane and Chapter, Sanctae & individuae, Trinitatis Norw' ex fundatione, E. 6. And regranted them their Church and Possessions, by the name of the Deane, &c. omitting Ex fundatione Regis. E. 6. Objected, that Herbert heretofore Bishop of Nor∣wich, was Founder, and being not party to the transla∣tion, 'tis voyd. Answered, the King was Founder, as appeares by many Records, and by the Foundation; but, admit the Bishop Founder, yet the translation was good:
for the Pope might have discharged a Monke of his profession, and therefore the King may doe it, by the Statute of 25. H. 8. And this translation is no pre∣judice to the Founder, for he remaines Founder, and nothing is altered but the rule and profession; and rhis Prior was eligible. 11. of the Queene. Dyer. Corbets case, proves this very translation good, and by judge∣ment of Parliament, 33. H. 8. such translations are good. All Chapters were Monkes, and notwithstand∣ing their translation into Prebends, or Cannons, the Advowson remaines as before; But admit the translati∣on voyd, yet, 'tis good by the Statute of 35. of the Queene; see the Booke at large. Objected, when they surrendered to E. 6. and he regranted to them, by the mis-naming of the Corpo∣ration, for (ex fundatione Regis. E. 6.) was omitted, the grant was voyd, and nothing passed, for the name of the Founder is parcell of the Corporation. Answered, notwithstanding the surrender of their Church, their Corporation continues, and they re∣maine the Chapter of the Bishop; though there can∣not be a Gardian of a Chappell, when the Chappell and all the possessions are aliened. In Christian policy 'twas thought necessary (for that the Church could not be without Sects and Heresies) that every Bishop should be assisted with a Counsell; viz. a Deane and Chapter. 1. To consult with them in deciding of dif∣ficult Controversies of Religion, to which purpose eve∣ry Bishop habet Cathedram. 2. To consent to every grant the Bishop shall make to binde his successors; for the Law did not judge it reasonable, to repose such confidence in him alone: at first all the possessions were to the Bishop, after a certaine portion was as∣signed to the Chapter, therefore the Chapter was, be∣fore they had any possessions, and of common right, the Bishop is Patron of all the Prebends, because their
possessions were derived from him, so that so long as the Bishopricke continues, the Deane and Chapter (being his Counsell) remaines, though they have no possessions, as at first they were, when the Bishopricke consisted all of spiritualty. The Prior and Friers Carmi∣lites had not any possessions nor place. And 32. H. 8. Fitz. held if an Abbot or Prior and covent, sell their possessions, yet their Corporation remains. All Bishop∣ricks were of the Foundation of the Kings of England, and anciently Donative by them; but, by grants of the Kings, became after Eligible by their Chapter; where∣fore, if by their surrender, their Corporation should be dissolved: three inconveniences would follow. First, to the Bishop, for his assistance in the Episcopall function. Secondly, to the Bishop and others, touch∣ing the confirmation of Grants. Thirdly, to all the Church, for how should the Bishop be chosen? Resolved, First, if there were any imperfection in the Translation the Statute of 35. of the Queene hath made it good. Secondly, that the Act of 1. E. 6. hath made it good, though the Corporation were gone by the sur∣render, and the misnamer materiall. Holden by the Justices and Lord Keeper, that the ancient corporation remaines, notwithstanding the surrender. Fermors Case, 44. of the Queene, fo. 77. SMith Lessee for yeares of a House, and Tenant at will of Land, and Tenant by coppy of other Land within the Mannor of S. to Fermor, leased all for life to I. S. and also seised of other Land there in Fee, levyed a fine with Proclamations of all Messuages, and Lands (which comprehends all those leases, and also his inheritance) by covin, to dissinherit his les∣sor,
and after the fine, alwayes continues in possession, and payes the severall rents to F. The lessee for life, dyes, the yeares expire, S. claimes the inheritance. Resolved, that the Lord of the Mannor was not barred by the said fine. 1. The makers of the Statute of 4. H. 7. never intended that a fine levyed by Te∣nant at will, yeares or Coppy, which pretend no In∣heritance nor title to it, but intend the disherison of the Lord, &c. should barre them of their inheri∣tance, and where the Statute sayth (That Fines ought to be of greatest strength to avoyd strife and debate.) This Feoffement and fine by the Lessee shall be the cause of strife where none was before. 2. The Statute doth not intend, that those who of themselves without such fraud, could not levy a fine to barre those which had the freehold and inheritance, should be inabled to levy a fine by making of an estate to another, by practise and fraud. 3. If doubt be conceived upon an act of Parliament, 'tis to be construed by the rea∣son of the common Law, and that so abhorres fraud, and covin, that all acts, as well judiciall, as others, and which of themselves are lawfull and just, yet being mixt with fraud and deceit, are tortious and illegall. If a Woman intituled to have Dower (which is fa∣voured in Law) by covin, causes a stranger to dis∣seise the terretenant, to the intent to bring Dower a∣gainst him, and recovers accordingly, 'tis all voyd. So if a Feme covert, or Infant (much favoured in Law) of covin, causes another to disseise the discon∣tinuee, and infeoffe them; they are not remitted. Sale in Market overt shall not binde, if the Vendee had notice that the property was to another, or if the Sale be by covin; the Law hath ordained the common Bench as a Market overt, for assurance of Land by fine; for it sayth, Finis finem litibus imponit, yet co∣vin shall avoyd them: A Vacat was made in Banco of
a recovery had by covin, 33 & 34. of the Queene ad∣judged, where Tenant for life levyed a fine with Pro∣clamations, and five yeares passed, and he dyed, that the Lessor shall have five yeares after his death, for though the Statute saves the right which First shall grow, and the right first accrued to the Lessor, by the forfeiture, yet because the Lessor by covin of the Les∣see, might be barred, for he expected not to enter, till after the death of the Lessee, 'tis no barre, and namely, when the Lessee hath Land of Inheritance in the same Towne, (as in this case) so, 'twas agreed in the same case, if the Feoffee of the Lessee for life hath Lands in the same Towne, and levys a fine, &c. the Lessor shall have five yeares after the death of the Les∣see, for he knew not of what land the fine was levy∣ed (not being party to the Indenture or agreement) &c. So, the Judges have construed the act against the Letter, for Salvation of the Inheritance of him in re∣version. And 'twas said, if the Feoffee of a Lessee for yeares, who made a feoffement by practise, hath Land in the same Ville, and levy a fine, and the Lessee payes the rent to the Lessor, it shall not binde, and in the principall case, the payment of the rent after the fine, makes the fraud apparant, for by this the Lessor was secure, and not cause of any doubt of fraud. But 'twas resolved, if the Bargainee or Feoffee of A. perceiving that C. hath right, levies a fine, or takes a fine of a Stranger, to the intent, to barre C. this fine levyed by consent shall binde, for nothing was done in this, that was not lawfull, and the intent of the act was to avoyd strife. So, if A. (pretending title) disseise B. and to the intent to barre the disseis∣see, levies a fine, for the desseisor, Venit tanquam in arena, and 'tis not possible but the disseisee had know∣ledge of it, and if he doth not enter, 'tis his folly. But in the case at barre, every one will presume that the
fine is levyed of his owne Land, because that he might lawfully doe; and though this conteines more a∣cres, then his owne Land, this is usuall almost in all fines; and the covin of the Lessee is the cause of non-claime of the Lessor, and a man shall not take advan∣tage of his owne covin; and here the fraud is the more odious, because of the great trust, viz. Fealty. To the objection, that it should be mischievous to a∣voyd fines, upon such nude averments; 'twas an∣swered, that it should be a greater mischiefe, princi∣pally, if fines levyed by such covin, should binde. And an averrment of fraud may be taken by the Statute of 27. of the Queene, against a fine leavyed to secret uses, by fraud, for to deceive Purchasors. So by the Statute of 13. of the Queene, an averrment may be taken, against a fine levyed upon an usurious con∣tract. Twynes Case, 44. Eliz: in Cam. Stel. fo. 80. IN an Information per Cooke Atturney Generall a∣gainst Twyne of Hampshire, for contriving and pub∣lishing of a fraudulent Deed made of goods. The case upon the Statute 13. Eliz. ca. 5. was thus; Pierce was indebted unto Twyne, in 400. l. and to one C. in 200. l. C. brought an action of Debt against Pierce (and hang∣ing the Writ) Pierce being possessed of goods and Chattells to the value of 300. l. in secret made a deed of all his goods and Chattells to Twyne in satisfaction of his Debt, & yet Pierce continued in possession of the same, & some of them he sold, and his Sheepe he mark∣ed with his owne marke; & after, C. had judgement, & a Fier. fac. to the Sheriff, & by vertue thereof Bayliffs came to make execution of the goods, and divers per∣sons by the commandement of Twyne, with force re∣sisted them, claiming them to be the goods of Twyne by vertue of the same deed, and whether this deed was
fraudulent or no, was the Question? and 'twas resol∣ved by Sir Thomas Egerton Keeper of the Great Seale of England, and by the chiefe Justices, Popham and Anderson, and all the Court of Star-chamber, that this deed was fraudulent and within the Statute of 13. El. And in this Case divers things were resolved. First, That this Deed had the markes of fraud, it was generall, and without exception of his apparell, or any thing of necessitie, for dolosus versatur in genera∣libus. Secondly, The Donor continueth in the possession. Thirdly, It was made in secret, Et dona clandestina semper sunt suspiciosa. Fourthly, it was made hanging the Writ. Fifthly, there was trust betweene the parties, for the Donor was in possession and used them, and fraud is alwayes apparelled with trust, and trust is the cover of fraud. Sixthly, it was contained in the deed that it was honesty, truely and bona fide, Et clausulae inconsuetae sem∣per juducunt suspitionem, and it was resolved although it was a due debt to Twyne, and a good consideration of the deed, yet it was not within the proviso of the said Act of 13. Eliz. By which it is provided that the said Act doth not extend to any estate or interest in Lands, &c. goods and chattells made upon good considera∣tion, and Bona fide, for although it be upon good and true consideration, yet it is not Bona fide, for no deed shall be deemed to be made Bona fide within the said proviso that is accompanied with any trust, for the proviso saith upon good consideration, and Bona fide, so as good consideration doth not serve, if it be not al∣so Bona fide. Therefore (good Reader) if any deed be made to thee in satisfaction of any debt, by one that is in∣debted unto others also. First, let it be in publick
manner before Neighbours. Secondly, valued-by good men to a true value. Thirdly, take them out of the possession of the Donor presently, for continuance of possession in the Donor is a marke of trust. There are two considerations (Viz.) Considera∣tion of blood or nature, and valuable consideration. And if one that is indebted to five severall persons every one 20. l. in consideration of naturall affection, doth give all his goods unto his Sonne or Cosen. The intention of the Statute was, that the considera∣tion in this case should be valuable, for equity requires that this deed that defeates others, shall be made of as high a consideration, as the things are, that are so defeated thereby, for it is to be presumed, that the Father if he had not beene indebted unto others, would not dispossesse himselfe of all his goods, and sub∣ject himselfe to his Cradle. And therefore it shall be intended that it was to defeate his Creditors. And if a consideration of nature or blood, should be a good consideration within this proviso, the Statute would serve for little or nothing, and no creditor should be sure of his Debt. A feoffment made solely in consideration of nature or blood, shall not take away the use raysed upon va∣luable consideration, but it shall take away a use rai∣sed in consideration of nature, for both considerations are in Equali jure, and of the same nature. Many men marvaile the reason that so many acts and Statutes are dayly made: this Verse answereth. Queritur ut crèscunt tot magna volumina legis. In promptu causa crescit in orbe dolus. And because fraud abounds in these dayes, more then in former times, it was resolved, that all Statutes made against fraud, shall be liberally expounded, for to
suppresse the fraud, and according to this, see severall resolutions in the Booke at large. It was resolved, that no purchasor may avoyd a pre∣cedent conveyance made by fraud, but he that is a purchasor for money or other valuable consideration paid, for consideration of blood is a good considerati∣on, but not such a consideration as is intended by the Statute, 27. El. ca: 4. for valuable consideration is one∣ly good consideration by the same act. Anderson chiefe Justice of the common banck said, That a man who is of small capacity and not able to governe his Lands, that discends unto him, and being disposed to ryot and disorder, by the mediation of his friends, by open Act conveyes his Lands to them, upon trust and confi∣dence, that he shall take the profits for his maintai∣nance, and that he shall have no power to wast or con∣sume them. And after, he being seduced by deceit∣full and covetous persons bargained for small summes, his Lands of great value, this bargaine although it were for money was holden to be out of this Statute, for this act was made against all fraud and deceit, and shall not ayd any purchasor that commeth not to the Lands for good considerations lawfully without fraud or de∣ceit. And in this case Twyne was convicted of fraud, and he, and all the others of a ryot. Resolutions. P. 44. of the Queene upon the Statutes of Fines. fo. 84. A. Tenant for life, the remainder to B. in taile, the remainder to B. and his heires, B. levies a Fine, hath issue, and dyes, before all the Proclamations pas∣sed, the issue then beyond the Sea, the Proclamati∣ons are made, the issue retournes, and upon the land claimes the remainder. Resolved, that the estate which passed, was not de∣termined
by the death of tenant in taile; so, if tenant in taile of a rent, Advowson, Tythes, Common, &c. grants by Deed, and dyes; for if the issue brings a Formedon for the rent, he makes the grant voidable, if he distraines, or claimes it upon the land, he by this determines his election. And there is no diversity, betwixt tenant in taile of a rent, &c. and tenant in taile of a reversion, or a remainder upon an estate for life, though in the first case, the issue may have a Formedon presently after the death of tenant in taile. Holden by Popham, and divers other Justices, that the Statute of 32. H. 8. hath inforced the case, that the estate which passes by the Fine of tenant in taile, shall not be determined by his death, for by this 'tis pro∣vided that Fines levied of any lands, &c. intailed, im∣mediatly after the Fine ingrossed, and Proclamations made, shall be a barre, if the Fine cannot be a barre without continuance, the Statute hath provided, that the estate shall continue, for it provides for all neces∣sary incidents to the perfection, and consummation of it. Every Fine shall be intended with Proclamations, for 'tis most beneficiall for the conusee, and all Fines being the generall assurance of land are levied accor∣ding. Resolved, that though by the death of tenant in taile, a right of the estate taile descends to the issue, for that the tenant in taile dyed before all the Proclamations passed, yet, when they are passed, without claime, this right is barred by the Statute of 32. H. 8. Resolved, by all the Judges and Barons (but three) that the issue (in this case) being heire and privy, can∣not, by any claime, save the right of the taile, which is descended to him, but that after the Proclamations, he shall be barred; for, 'tis provided (that every Fine af∣ter the ingrossing of it, and Proclamation had and made, shall be a finall end, and conclude as well privies as stran∣gers.)
And if no saving had been, all strangers had been barred also, and all the exceptions extend onely to Strangers, but the issue is privy. To the objection; if by the equity of the Statutes, the issue cannot claime, &c. to what purpose are the Proclamations with such solemnities? Answered, 32. H. 8. being an Act of explanaiton of 4. H. 7. as to the Fine by tenant in taile, shall not be taken by any strained construction against the let∣ter, for then 'tis requisite to have a new Act of expla∣nation, upon the explanation, & sic in infinitum. By 4. H. 7. every one hath liberty to pursue a Fine accord∣ing to the said Act, viz. with proclamations, &c. or without (as at common Law) and therefore the Act of 32. H. 8. of necessitie prescribes that Proclamations shall be made according to 4. H. 7. to distinguish it from a Fine at common Law, and not to inable the is∣sue for to make claime, for this should be against the expresse intent of the Act, in the preamble, and pur∣view. Also it should be very inconvenient, if, when such Fine is levied, for a valuable consideration, ad∣vancement of his issues, or payment of his debts, and he dyes before Proclamations, that all should be a∣voyded by the claime of the heire, when the conusee could not have better assurance, by Recovery, for that he was not tenant to the Praecipe. See the Booke at large, in what case the issue in taile may averre seisin in a Stranger, & quod partes Finis nihil habuerunt, what not. Objected, 1. 'tis provided by the Statute de donis, &c. that as to the issue, Finis ipso jure sit nullus. 2. That the Statute of 27. E. 1. extends not to the heires in taile, as 8. H. 4. is, for the issue is not bound by any Record, which inures by way of Estoppell. 3. 27. E. 1. speakes De finibus ritè levatis, and when there wants seisin (which is the essence of a Fine) 'tis not ritè levatus, 46. E. 3. that 'tis a good plea.
Answered, the Statute de donis, &c. was made 13. E. 1. and the Statute of Fines 27. in which the issue is not excepted, therefore he is bound, and according there is a good opinion, 8. H. 4. To the second, though the issue was not barred of his right before, 4. H. 7. yet he was estopped to say, Quod partes Finis nihil habuerunt. To the third, Finis ritè levatus, is intended in due forme of Law, which it may be, though it be onely by way of conclusion, for the same Act ousts the parties from such averment, and 46. E. 3. is to be intended of a collaterall auncestor, from whom the heire doth not claime the Land, and then the averment is good. In Conisbies case 'twas resolved, upon a Fine levied to tenant in taile in remainder, by tenant for life, and a grant and render of a rent, that this was not within the Statutes of 4. H. 7. or 32. H. 8. for the Fine was not of the land it selfe which was intailed, but of the rent newly created out of the land. And in the Lord Zouches case 'twas resolved, that 4. H. 7. and 32. H. 8. doe extend to Fines levied by conclusion, and shall binde, though partes, &c. nihil habuerunt; as if tenant in taile makes a Feoffement, or be disseised, and levies a Fine, for the Statute says, (All Fines of any lands, &c. in any wise intailed to the person so levying, or to any of his auncestors) and in 4. H. 7. the exception, Quod partes, &c. is saved to all persons not party, nor privy to the said Fine, and the issue in taile is privy, for he claimes as heire by discent, and if such Fine shall barre, where the tenant in taile had nothing, though the issue enter after the death of the auncestor, before all the Procla∣mations passe; a fortiori here, when tenant in taile, at the time was seised of an estate, though 'twere in re∣version. See Archers case, where a Fine shall barre the issue, where the Father had onely a possibility at the time of the Fine levied.
Purslowes case, 32. of the Queene, tenant in taile le∣vies a Fine, Term. P. & T. and dyed in August next, his daughter (being heire to the taile) and her husband brought a Formedon, and, pending the plea, the Pro∣clamations passed, and 'twas agreed by the Court, that the tenant shall plead the Fine, and the Procla∣mations which passed pending the Writ, & shall barre the demandant, yet, there the issue did all that might be done; for the conveyance is the Fine, and the Pro∣clamations, are but a short repetition of the Fine; out of this, foure things are to be observed. 1. Though af∣ter the Fine, a right descends to the issue, yet, after Proclamations, the right is barred. 2. Though he pur∣sues a Formedon, yet after Proclamations, he is barred; ergo, in the principall case he is barred, notwithstand∣ing his entry or claime in pays. 3. When tenant in taile levies a Fine, and dyes, before Proclamations, the is∣sue is not within any of the savings, for then the bring∣ing of a Formedon should avoyd the barre. 4. The Pro∣clamations serve for no purpose, but to distinguish the Fine, from a Fine at the common Law. Trin. 4. of the Queene Bendlowes tenant in taile, disseised the discon∣tinuee, and levied a Fine, and tooke an estate by ren∣der, the discontinuee enters, and claimes, before all the proclamations passed, and avoides the estate, after the proclamations passe, tenant in taile continues his pos∣session, and dyes within the yeare, after the entry and claime. Resolved, that the issue was not Remitted, but barred by 32. H. 8. Though the estate was avoyded, before all the Proclamations passed. Resolved, though the issue be beyond the Sea, yet, because he is privy, &c. he is bound, as if he he were within age, covert, or non compos. Which was agreed by all the Justices: Ergo, the claime of the issue is not materiall, and if Infancy, &c. should avoyde the Fine, no man should be assured of land conveyed.
THE FOURTH BOOK. Vernons Case. 14. & 15. of the Queene. fo. 1. IN Dower, the tenant shews that the hus∣band made a Feoffement of other Land, to the use of himselfe for life, and after to the use of the demandant for life, &c. and averres, that the said estate was for her Joynture, &c. and that the demandant hath entered, &c. and agreed to the estate; the demandant shews that the estate was upon condition, for to performe the will of the hus∣band, and that divers things were to be performed in it, judgement if the tenant shall be admitted, &c. Resolved, that at Common Law, a right or title to a Freehold, cannot be barred by acceptance of a col∣laterall satisfaction, or recompence. As if a disseisor of the Mannor of P. gives to the disseisee the Mannor of S. in satisfaction of all his right, &c. And therefore 'tis said in our Bookes, that an accord with satisfacti∣on is a good plea in a personall action, where damages are to be recovered, not in a reall; and therefore no barre in Dower; but Dower ad ostium Ecclesiae, or ex assensu patris, concludes her, if she enters after, &c. for the Law allowes them, &c. to be Dowers in Law. Before 27. most lands were in use, and because wives were not dowable of the use, estates were made by the Feoffees, to the husband and his wife, before, or
after the marriage for life, &c. for a competent pro∣vision for the wife; then 27. transferred the possessi∣on to the use, and if further provision had not been, the wives should have their dowers and joyntures also; and therefore those branches were made in the same Statute of 27. Resolved, that the Feoffement to the use of him∣selfe for life, the remainder to his wife for life, for the joynture of the wife, is within 27. for though that five estates onely are expressed. 1. To the husband and wife, and the heires of the husband. 2. &c. to the heires of their two bodies. 3. Of the body of one of them. 4. For their lives. 5. To the husband and wife for life of the wife, yet, many other estates are with∣in the Act, for these are put for example, not to ex∣clude others: But resolved, that no estate is a joyn∣ture, except it takes beginning presently after the death of the husband; for so, are all the examples: and therefore to himselfe for life, the remainder to B. for life, the remainder to his wife, &c. is not with∣in the Statute, &c. And therefore though the wife enter and takes the profits, she shall have Dower. An estate to one and his wife, and the heires males of their two bodies, adjudged a good joynture, yet none of the five estates mentioned; an estate made to a woman for life, before marriage, adjudged a good joynture. Resolved, though the estate here were upon con∣dition, and though Dower (in place of which the joynture comes) were absolute, yet because an estate for life upon condition, is an estate for life, 'tis with∣in the words, and the intent of the Act, if the wife ac∣cept it, &c. Resolved, that a wife cannot waive a joynture made before the coverture, as she may a joynture made af∣ter; and this by the Proviso (if any woman hath lands,
&c. assured after marriage for her life, &c. after death of the husband she hath liberty to refuse, &c.) and therefore the intent of the Statute, was, that she should not refuse a joynture made before, and land conveyed for part of her joynture, or in satisfacti∣on of part of her Dower, is no barre of any part, for the incertainty; for the Statute says, for the joynture of the wifes, and not for part of the joynture. Resolved, that though the estate of the wife be up∣on an expresse condition, for to performe the will, which imports a consideration of making the estate, yet, it may be averred for joynture, for the one con∣sideration well stands with the other, and though it be not expressed in the Deed, yet, it may be averred: and the case is the stronger, because the averment is given by the words of the Act. And a Fee simple to the wife, in satisfaction of her Dower, is a joynture within the equity of 27. for the reasons aforesaid, as also because 'tis within the expresse words (for terme of life, or otherwise) for all estates as beneficiall, or more, are within, by this word otherwise in joynture, af∣ter judgement was given against the demandant. A devise to a wife for life, in taile, &c. for her joyn∣ture, is a good joynture within 27. as 'twas resolved in Leake and Randalls case. Otherwise, where a man devises to his wife for life, &c. generally, this cannot be averred to be for joynture, and therefore no barre of Dower. 1. Because a devise imports a consideration in it selfe, and shall be taken as a benevolence. 2. All the will for land by 32. & 34. H. 8. ought to be in writing, and no averrement ought to be taken out of the will, which cannot be collected by the words within; an estate before marriage is within the equi∣ty of the Statute; so an estate by devise, which takes effect after the marriage dissolved is within 27.
Bevills Case. 27. & 28. of the Queene. fo. 8. TEnant by Homage, Fealty, and Escuage, and suite to Court twice a yeare; the Lord was seised of the Fealty onely by the hands of the tenant. Resol∣ved, that seisin of Fealty, was a seisin of all the said services; for when the tenant doth fealty, he takes a corporall oath, that he shall be faithfull and true to the Lord, and shall beare him faith of the tenements, which he claimes to hold of him, and that he will lawfully doe the customes and services, &c. And though Homage be more honourable, and the most humble service, that a Freeholder can doe to his Lord, yet, Fealty is the more sacred service, for this is done upon oath, not the other. And the words (shall be faithfull, and true) are also parcell of Ho∣mage; and Seisin of any part of any service, is a Sei∣sin of the whole, and the Law, for this reason, so re∣spects these services, that no distresse for them, shall be excessive, and though distresse be so often, that the tenant cannot manure his land, he shall not have an Assise, as for rent, or other profits. Resolved, that seisin of a superior service, is a seisin of all inferior services incident to it, as a seisin of es∣cuage, of homage and fealty, homage of fealty, rent of fealty, where the Seigniory is by fealty, and rent. Resolved that doing of homage, is a seisin of all servi∣ces inferior and superior, because he takes upon him∣selfe to doe all services. Resolved, that seisin of rent or suite, or of other annuall service, is seisin of escu∣age, homage, fealty, ward, releife, heriot service, service for to cover the hall of the chiefe house of the Mannor, for to impale the Parke of the Lord or such casuall services, which perchance will not fall in sixty yeares, but seisin of one annuall service is not
seisin of another annuall service, as rent, of suite nor of worke dayes, for 'tis the folly of the Lord, that he attained not seisin, and it should be mischeivous to the tenant, for perhaps in ancient time the worke dayes are discharged, which now cannot be shewne. Note (Reader) all this is to be intended of a seis∣in in Law, for seisin of fealty here, is no actuall seisin of homage, nor of suite, nor fealty of rent, but seisin of any part of a service, is an actuall seisin of all to have an Assise. And as to make a vowry seisin in Law suffices; but for an Assise actuall seisin is requisite; so in a Writ of right of Land. See the Booke at large, and there, where ancient seisin to an estate altered, or changed from one person to another, shall be suf∣ficient where not. Resolved, that seisin in Law was sufficient to make an avowry within the letter, and the intent of the Sta∣tute of 32. H. 8. for the intent was to limit a time, within which, seisin ought to be had, not to exclude any seisin, which was a lawfull seisin by the common Law, which appeares by the Preamble. Also, the former acts of limitation as W. 1. ca'. 38. W. 2. ca'. 2. doe not exclude a seisin sufficient at common Law. And the Statute saith (Actuall possession, or seisin) which (Seisin) is eyther actuall or in Law. Resolved, that the act doth not extend to such a rent or service, which by common possibility cannot happen within sixty yeares, as homage, fealty, for the tenant may live beyond, or to cover the Hall, or to goe in Warre, so of a Formedon in Discender, for tenant in taile may live sixty yeares, after discontinuance, and though In facto he dyes, and the issue doth not pursue his Formedon, yet, he may have it at any time, and the seisin of the donee was not traversable, so of homage and other casuall services, though the Lord might have had seisin. So, if the Lord release to the
tenant, so long as I. S. hath heires of his body, though sixty yeares passe, yet he may distraine, for Impotentia excusat legem, and there may be a tenure by homage, &c. and yet never done, as if the Land be conveyed to a Maior, &c. or other Corporation aggregate of many, they hold by fealty, yet they cannot doe it. A Writ of Escheate, Cessavit, Rescous, are not within the Act, for in them the seisin is not traversable, but the tenure, and in the Escheate and Cessavit, they de∣mand the Land and can lay no seisin, and the Act ex∣tends onely to those Writs where the demandant or his Ancestors might have had seisin. So, Note, Land shall escheate, though there be no seisin of the servi∣ces, within the time of limitation, for the Seigniory remaines, though seisin wants; so if the tenant cesse, and the Land be not overt, and sufficient to his di∣stresse the Lord shall have a Cessavit though he wants seisin of the services. Resolved, if nothing be arreare and the Lord distraines, the tenant may make res∣cous, or if he be so often distrained, that he cannot manure his Land, he may have an Assise, De souent distres, but for such tortious distresse where nothing is arreare, the tenant shall not have Trespasse, Vi & armis, against the Lord, for this is prohibited by the Statute of Marleb ca' 3. See the Booke at large in what case an incroachment of more rent by the Lord then he ought to have, shall be avoyded, in what not. Resolved, that though a man hath beene out of possession of Land by sixty yeares, yet if his entry be not taken away, he may enter, and bring any possessory action of his owne possession, for the first clause doth not barre any right, but prohibits that none shall have a Writ of right, &c. of the possession of his ance∣stors, &c. but onely of a seisin within sixty yeares; the first and second clause extend onely to seisin aun∣cestrell;
the third to an action of his owne possessi∣on, not to entry, the fourth to avowry, the fifth to a Formedon, &c. Note (Reader) out of this, that when the tenant hath done homage and fealty, which the Lord may inforce him to doe, this shall be a seisin of all other services, as to avowry, though the Lord nor those by whom he claimes had seisin within sixty yeares. Actions of Slaunder. The Lord Cromwells Case, 20o of the Queene, fo. 12. THe Lord Cromwell brought an Action De Scandalis magnatum, against D. Viccar, Tam pro domina regina, quam pro seipso, upon the Statute of 2. R. 2. ca' 5. The Defendant said to the Plaintiffe, It is no marvell though you like not of me, for you like of those that maintaine sedi∣tion against the Queenes proceedings, the Defendant ju∣stifies specially, that he being Viccar of N. the Plain∣tiffe procured I. T. and I. H. for to preach there, who in their Sermons inveyed against the Booke of com∣mon prayer, and affirmed it to be superstitious; upon which the Viccar inhibited them, for they had not li∣cense nor authority to preach, yet, they proceeded by the incouragement of the Plaintiffe; & the Plain∣tiffe said to the Defendant, Thou art a false Varlet I like not of thee, to whom the Defendant said, It is no marvaile though you like not of me, for you like of those (innuendo, the aforesaid I. T. and I. H.) that main∣taine sedition (Innuendo seditiosam illam doctrinam) against the Queenes proceedings. Resolved in this case, that the Statute aforesaid concerning the King, the Judges Ex officio, ought to take notice of it, as they ought of all Statutes that concerne him.
Resolved, that the justification is good, for in case of slaunder, the sence of the words is to be taken, which may appeare by the occasion of speech. Sensus verborum ex causa dicendi accipiendus est, et sermones sem∣per accipiendi sunt secundum subjectam materiam. And here the sence of the words appeares, and his mean∣ing in speaking them, and that he did not intend any publique or violent sedition, as the word of it selfe imports; and God defend, that the words of one by a strict and grammaticall construction, should be ta∣ken contrary to the manifest intent; as in an Action for calling the Plaintiffe murderer, 'tis a good justifi∣cation that the Plaintiffe confessing that he had kil∣led diverse Haires with Engines, the Defendant said, Thou art a Murderer, and the Defendant shall not be put to a generall issue, when he confesses the words and shewes that they are not actionable, as in main∣tainance the Defendant may justifie lawfull maintein∣ance, whereupon the Plaintiffe replyed that the De∣fendant, dixit, &c. Verba praedict. de iniuria sua propria abs{que} tali causa, upon this they were at issue, and after agreed. Cutler and Dixons Case, 27. and 28. of the Queene, fo. 14. IF one exhibite certaine Articles to a Justice of peace, against one, declaring divers great abuses and misdemeanours, &c. to the intent to bind him to the good behaviour, In this case the party accused shall not have any action upon the case, for it is in pursuite of ordinary justice, and if such actions were permitted, none would complayne for feare of infi∣nite vexation.
Sir Richard Buckley and Woods Case, 33. and 34. of the Queene, fo. 14. WOod exhibited a Bill in the Starrechamber a∣gainst Sir R. B. and charged him with divers matters examinable there, and with other matters not determinable there, as that he was a maintainer of Pyrates and Murtherers, and a procurer of Pyra∣cies, upon which Sir R. B. brought this action, &c. Resolved that no action lyes for matter examinable there, though 'twas meerely false, because that 'twas in course of justice. Resolved, that an action lyes for these words, not examinable there, for 'tis not done in course of Ju∣stice, and great inconvenience would follow, if mat∣ters may be inserted in Bills exhibited in so high and honourable a Court in Slaunder of the parties, and they cannot answer there for their purgation, nor have their action for purging themselves of the crimes, and recover damages for the wrong, but that the said Bill shall remaine alwayes of record to their infamy, and here no murther or piracy can be punish∣ed upon any Bill exhibited in English, but he ought to have beene indicted, and therefore he hath not onely mistaken the Court, but also the nature of ex∣hibiting the Bill, hath not appearance of any ordina∣ry course of justice, but no action lyes upon an ap∣peale of murder, returnable in the Common Bench, for though the Writ is not returned before compe∣tent Judges, who may doe justice, yet 'tis in nature of a lawfull Suite, namely, by Writ of appeale, where∣fore judgement was given for the Plaintiffe. And in a Writ of error in the Chequer Chamber brought by Wood, 'twas resolved that Sir R. B. might have had a good action, but here, because the action was not up∣on
the Bill exhibited at Westminster, but because he said in the County of S. that his Bill was true, In au∣ditu quamplurimorum, without expressing the said mat∣ters in particular, so that it was not any Slaunder, judgement was reversed. Stanhopp and Bliths Case, 27. of the Queene, fo. 15. MAster Stanhopp (who was a surveyor of the Dut∣chy and had divers Offices and was a justice of peace) Hath but one Mannor, and that he hath gotten by swearing, and forswearing. Resolved, that the action doth not lye, for they are too generall and words which charge any one, in an action in which damages shall be recovered, ought to have convenient certain∣ty; and he doth not charge the Plaintiffe with swea∣ring, &c. and he may recover a Mannor by swearing, &c. yet not procuring or assenting to it. Resolved, if one charge another that he hath forsworne him∣selfe, no action lyes. First, because he may be for∣sworne in usuall communication, Quia benignior sen∣sus in verbis generalibus seu dubijs est praeferenda. Se∣condly, it is an usuall word of passion, and choller as also to call another a Villaine, a Rogue, or Varlet, these and such like will not mayntaine Action, Boni judicis interest, lites derimere. But if one say to ano∣ther, that he is perjured, or that he hath forsworne himselfe in such a Court, &c. For these words an Action will lye. Hext Justice of Peace against Yeomans. 27. of the Queene. fo. 15. FOr my ground in H. Hext seekes my life, and if I could finde one J. H. I doe not doubt, but within two dayes, to arrest Hext for suspicion of felony. Adjudged, that no
action lyes for the first words; 1. Because, he may seeke his life lawfully upon just cause, and his land may be holden of him. 2. 'Tis too generall, and the Law inflicts no punishment for seeking of his life; but adjudged that the action lyes for the last words; for, for suspicion of felony, he shall be imprisoned, and his life in question. Birchleys case. 27. & 28. of the Queene. fo. 16. THe Defendant said to B. (Clerke of the Kings Bench, and sworne to deale duely without cor∣ruption) you are well knowne to be a corrupt man, and to deale corruptly. Adjudged that the action lyes; 1. Be∣cause the words Ex causa dicendi, imply that he hath dealt corruptly in his profession, Et sermo relatus ad personam intelligi debet de conditione personae. 1. This tou∣ches the Plaintiffe in his oath; 2. The words Scanda∣lize him in the duty of his profession, by which he gets his living. Skinner of London said, that Manwood was a corrupt Judge; adjudged actionable. Resolved in this case, that if the precedent parlance had beene, that B. was a usurer, or executor of another, and would not performe the will, and upon this the De∣fendant had spoken the words following, no action would lye. Weaver and Caridens case. 37. of the Queene. fo. 16. AAjudged, that no action lyes, for saying that the Plaintiffe was detected for perjury in the Starre∣chamber, for an honest man may be detected, but not convicted.
Stuckley and Bulheads case. 44. and 45. of the Queene. fo. 16. ADjudged, that an action lyes for saying, Master St. (he was a Justice of peace) covereth and hi∣deth felonies, and is not worthy to be a Justice of peace; for this is against his oath, and his office, and a good cause to put him out of Commission, and for that he may be indicted and fined. Snagg and Gees case. 39. of the Queene. fo. 16. THou hast killed my wife, and art a traytor. Adjudged that the action will not lye, for the wife was in life, as appeared in the Declaration, and so the words vaine and no scandall, otherwise if shee had beene dead. Eaton and Allens case. 40. of the Queene. fo. 16. HE is a brabler and a quarreller, for he gave his Cham∣pion counsell to make a Deed of gift of his goods to kill me, and then to fly out of the Country, but God preserved me. Resolved, that the action will not lye, for the purpose without act is not punishable and though he may be punished for such conspiracy in the Star-chamber, yet, this is by the absolute power of the Court, not by ordinary course of Law. Observe well this case, and the cause and reason of this Judgement. Anne Davies case. 35. of the Queene. fo. 16. THe Defendant said to B. (a Suitor to the Plaintiffe, and with whom there was neare an agreement of marriage) I know Davies daughter well, she did dwell in
Cheapside, and a Grocer did get her with childe; and the Plaintiffe declared, that by reason thereof, the said B. refused to take her to wife. Resolved, the action lyes, for a woman is punisha∣ble for a Bastard by 18. of the Queene, ca. 3. And though that fornication, &c. is not examinable by our Law, because done in secret, and uncomely openly to be examined, yet the having a Bastard is apparant, and examinable by the said Act. Resolved, if the Plaintiffe had been charged with nude incontinency onely, the action lyes, for the ground of the action is temporall, viz. the defeating of her advancement in marriage. By Popham an action lyes, for saying that a woman, Inholder, had a great infectious disease, by which shee loses her guests. Banister and Banisters case. 25. of the Queene. Resol∣ved, that an action lyes, for saying to the sonne and heire, that he was a Bastard, for this tends to his dis∣inherison; but resolved, if the Defendant pretend that the Plaintiffe is a Bastard, and he himselfe right heire, no action lyes, and this the Defendant may shew by way of barre. Jeames case. 41. & 42. of the Queene. fo. 17. THe Defendant said to B. Hang him (innuendo prae∣dict. J:) he is full of the pox (innuendo the French pox) &c. Resolved, two things are requisite to have an action for slander 1. That the person scandalized be certaine. 2. That the scandall be apparent by the words themselves. And therefore if a man says, that one of the servants of B. is a notorious felon or tray∣tor, an action lyes not (if he have more servants) and (innuendo) cannot make it certain. So, I know one neare about B. that is a notorious thiefe. But if two speake of B. and the one says, he is a notorious thiefe, an action
lyes, and B. may reduce this to a certainty by (in∣nuendo praedict. B.) for the office of an (innuendo) is for to designe the person that was named in cer∣taine before, and in effect, stands in place of (praed.) but (innuendo) cannot make that certaine, which was incertain before, and subject to a deceivable con∣jecture. But if one says to B. Thou art a traytor, an acti∣on lyes, for constat de persona. So here, when two speake of the Plaintiffe, and one says, Hang him; there (innu∣endo) will denote the person, but (innuendo) can∣not extend for to make the intent to be the French pox, by imagination, which is not apparent by the precedent words; and the words themselves shall be taken in mitiori sensu. Oxford and his wife against Crosse. 41. of the Queene. fo. 18. THe Plaintiffes brought an action in London, for cal∣ling the wife of the plaintiffe whore; the defen∣dant removed this out of London by habeas corpus, a Procedendo was prayed, because the action was main∣tainable in London, though not at common Law; de∣nied by the Court, for such custome to maintaine an action for brabling words, is against Law. Sir G. Gerrard Master of the Rolls against Mary Dickinson. 32. & 33. of the Queene. fo. 18. THe Plaintiffe counts that he was in communicati∣on with R. E. for to demise to him the Mannor, &c. The Defendant said (Praemissorum non ignara) I have a lease of 90 yeares of the Mannor, and then shew∣ed and published a Demise made by the Lord Audley, grandfather of the Lord A from whom the plaintiffe claimes, where in truth the defendant knew this to
be counterfeit, by reason of which, &c. R. E. did not proceed, &c. The Defendant pleaded, Quod talis In∣dentura (qualis in the count) came to his hands by trover, and traversed, that he knew of the forgery. Resolved, if the defendant affirme and publish that the plaintiffe had not right, but that she her selfe had, no action lyes, though she hath no right, because she pretends title, for if an action should lye, how could any one claime, or sue, or seeke counsell for any land? Banisters case before resolved according, and therefore 'twas here resolved, that no action lyes for saying, I have a Lease, &c. though it be false. And though it appeares by the barre, that she had not title, but is a Stranger, yet, because the matter in the count doth not maintaine the action, the barre shall not make it good. Resolved, that there was other matter in the count sufficient to maintaine the action, viz. that the De∣fendant knew of the communication, and that the Lease was forged, and yet published it, by which, the Plaintiffe lost his bargaine. Resolved, that the barre was insufficient, for the knowing of the Defendant of forgery, is not traversa∣ble; as in an action, for that the Dogge of the Defen∣dant had bit the beasts of the Plaintiffe, Ipse sciens ca∣nem suum ad mordendas oves consuetum. (Sciens) is not traversable, but it ought to be proved upon the gene∣rall issue, for (sciens) is not a direct allegation, nor alledged in any place. And talis indentura, qualis, is no direct answer to the Indenture mentioned in the count, for talis, non est eadem, and no simile est idem. Barhams case. 44. & 45. of the Queene. fo. 20. MAster Barham did burne my barne (innuendo a barne with corne) with his own hands, and none but he.
Moved in arrest of judgement that the words were not actionable, for 'tis not felony to burne a barne, if it be not parcell of a mansion house, or full of corne; and in such case agitur civilitèr, not criminalitèr, & ver∣ba accipienda sunt in mitiori sensu. And the (innuendo) will not serve, when the words are not slanderous. Britteridges case. 44. & 45. of the Queene. fo. 19. B. Is a perjured old knave, and that is to be proved by a stake parting the land of A. and B. Resolved, that the action lyes for the first words. And adjective words will maintaine an action, when they presume an act committed (as here) or when they scandalize a man in his office, or function, or trade, by which he acquires his living. Philips, Batchelor of Divinity, brought an action against B. for saying; Thou hast made a seditious Sermon, and moved the people to sedition this day; adjudged the action lyes, because, though the first part of the words were meerely adjective, they scan∣dalized him in his function. So, if a man says to a Merchant, that he is a bankruptly knave, or a bankrupt knave, as 'twas adjudged in Mittons case; or that he will be a bankrupt within two dayes; but an action lyes not when these adjective words import not an act done, but an inclination, which doth not scandall him in his function, &c. Resolved, in the case at barre, that upon all the words together, no action lyes, for the last words ex∣plaine his intent to be, of no judiciall perjury. And 'tis not possible that a stake can prove a man perju∣red; as it hath been adjudged; Thou art a thiefe, for thou hast stollen my apples out of my Orchard; or robbed my hop-ground. Dobbins and Francklins case. 43. &. 44. of the Queene. But if the counsell of the Plaintiffe had dis∣closed the truth of the case in the count, an action
would lye, for in truth, there was a controversie be∣twixt two, whether the stake stood upon the land of the one, or the other, or as an indifferent boundary, and the Plaintiffe was deposed in an action for this, as a witnesse; and by the pretence of the Defendant, had perjured himselfe in his Deposition. Palmer and Thorpes case. 25. of the Queene. fo. 20. touching defamations in the Ecclesiasticall Court. REsolved, that such defamation ought to have three incidents. 1. That the matter be meerely spiritu∣all and determinable in the Ecclesiasticall Court, as for calling Heretique, Schismatique, advowterer, for∣nicator. 2. It ought to concerne matter meerely spi∣rituall onely, for if it concerne any thing determina∣ble at common Law, the Ecclesiasticall Judge shall not have conusance of it. See for this 22. E. 4. 20. the Abbot of St. Albanes case. 3. Though the thing be meerely spirituall, yet he which is defamed cannot sue there for amends, or damages, but the suite there ought to be onely for punishment of the offender, Pro salute animae. For this, see Articulis cleri, & circum∣spectè agatis, and Fitz: 51, 52, 53. But the Plaintiffe shall recover costs there, and there if the Defendant, to redeeme his pennance, agree to pay a certaine summe, the party may sue for this there, and no Pro∣hibition lyes. Copy-hold Cases. Brownes case. 23. & 24. of the Queene. fo. 21. COpy-holder in fee, by licence, leases for yeares, and dyes, the eldest Sonne dyes before admit∣tance,
adjudged that the daughter of the intire blood shall have it, not the younger sonne. Resolved, though a Copy-holder, in judgement of Law, hath but an e∣state at will, yet, custome hath so established and fix∣ed his estate, that by the custome of the Mannor 'tis descendable to his heires, and is not meerely ad vo∣luntatem Domini, but, &c. secundum consuetudinem mane∣rij; so the custome is the soule and life of Copy-holds. See the booke at large, of what antiquity Copy-holds are, and some generall learning concerning them. Resolved, when custome hath created such inheri∣tances, the Law shall direct the descent according to the Maximes and rules of the common Law, as inci∣dent to every estate descendable. When uses had gained a reputation of inheritances, the Law directed the descent, and of them there shall be a possessio fra∣tris. But resolved, that such customary inheritances shall not have any collaterall qualities, which doe not concerne descent of inheritance, which other inheri∣tances have; and therefore they shall not be assets to the heire, upon an obligation, nor there shall not be Dower, nor tenancy by the Curtesie, nor a descent shall toll entry, &c. For, as without custome, they cannot descend, so without custome, they cannot have a collaterall quality; for Copy-holders have inheri∣tances secundum quid, viz. to descend to the heires, and not to be determined by the will of the Lord, not simplicitèr, to a collaterall quality. Resolved, that the heire, before admittance, may take the profits, and may surrender to the use of ano∣ther, before admittance; but this shall not prejudice the Lord for his Fine upon the descent, and he is a tenant by Copy of Court-roll, for the roll made to his auncestor belongs to him, and admittance of te∣nant for life shall serve for the remainder, yet, it shall not prejudice the Lord for his Fine. And though
'twas objected, that every admittance amounts to a grant, and so may be pleaded, and therefore nothing vests before admittance, yet, 'twas resolved, that, as after admittance, the heire may in pleading alledge this as a grant, and this to avoyde inconveniences (for, if he should be compelled to shew the first grant, it was before time of memory, and so not pleadable, or if within memory, then the custome failes) yet, he may alledge the admittance of his auncestor, as a grant, and shew the descent to him, and that he en∣terd, and this without admittance, but he cannot plead, that his Father was seised, &c. by Copy, &c. and dyed seised, and that this descended, &c. For in truth, 'tis but a particular estate at will in judgement of Law, though descendable by custome. Ryvets case. 24. of the Queene. fo. 22. A Greed, that a husband shall not be tenant by the Curtesie of a Copy-hold, without speciall cu∣stome. Deale and Rigdens case. 36. of the Queene. fo. 23. ADjudged, that if a recovery be in plaint, in nature of a reall action, against tenant in taile (admit∣ting Copy-hold may be intailed) that this is a discon∣tinuance, for, in as much as plaints are warranted by custome, 'tis incident, that it should make a discon∣tinuance. The like judgement was between Clun and Pease. Bullock and Dibleys case. 35. of the Queene. fo. 23. REsolved, that a surrender by the husband is no dis∣continuance to the wife, nor her heires. And if a
Copy-holder for life surrender to the use of another in fee, this is no forfeiture, for it doth not passe by livery. And Copy-holders have not such quality, without speciall custome; so also adjudged in severall cases. Gravenus and Teds case. 35. of the Queene. fo. 23. REsolved, that the descent of a Copyhold, doth not toll entry; and that where the custome was, that he may grant in fee simple, that he may, by the same custome, grant to a man and the heires of his body; for be it a fee simple conditionall, or a taile, 'tis with∣in the custome, so, of a grant for life, or yeares, for fee simple includes them. Fitch and Huckleys case. 36. of the Queene. fo. 23. REsolved, that admittance of a Copyholder for life, is an admittance of him in remainder, but not to prejudice the Lord for his Fine. And that upon a sur∣render, to the use of himselfe for life, and after to the use of his last will, that the fee remaines in the Copy-holder, not in the Lord. Clarke and Pennifathers case. 26. of the Queene. of. 23. REsolved, that the heire of a Copyholder may en∣ter, and have trespas, before admission, and if the heire (as the principall case was) dye before admis∣sion, his heire may take the profits, and have trespas. And Wray said, that 'twas adjudged, that there shall be possessio fratris of it. Resolved, that where H. 8. granted a Mannor to the Queene for life, that the Queene was a sole person exempted by common law, and may make a lease or grant, without the King, and
may plead, and be impleaded: and that 32. H. 8. is but a declaration of the common Law. Adjudged, that a grant of a Copyhold in fee, es∣cheated to her, by the Queene tenant for life, bindes the King, his heires and successors, for she was domina pro tempore, and the custome of the Mannor bindes the King. And that every one, who hath a lawfull interest in a Mannor, &c. though but at will, may grant Co∣pyholds escheated, &c. rendring the auncient rent, customes, and services, and this shall binde the Lord, for, he is dominus pro tempore. For, a Copyholder de∣rives not his interest out of the estate of the Lord onely, but out of the custome, and the grantee is in by that, without regard to the estate or person of the grantor; and therefore such a grant by the husband shall binde the wife; so, of Infants, non compos mentis, Bishop, Prebend, Parson, shall binde for ever, for the custome is, that the tenements are parcell of the Mannor, and demised, and demisable, &c. But the Lord must have a lawfull estate; for, if a disseisor, or Feoffee of a disseisor, &c. makes such grants, this shall not binde him that hath right, after a recontinuance of the Mannor; but admittances by such upon a sur∣render, or of the heire shall binde, &c. for they are lawfull, & quodam modo judiciall acts, which to doe, he may be compelled in a Court of equity. P. 26. of the Queene. fo 24. ADjudged, if a Lord takes wife, and a Copyholder for life (according to the custome) dyes, and the Lord regrants for lives, and dyes, that the wife in Dower, shall not avoyde these grants, for though the grant were after the title of Dower, yet, the custome was before. If a Feoffee upon condition, makes a vo∣luntary grant, the condition is broken, the Feoffor reenters, the grant shall stand.
Rous and Arters case. 29. of the Queene. fo. 24. ADjudged, that if tenant pur auter vie of a Mannor, after the death of cestuy que vie, continues in, and holds Courts, and makes voluntary grants, this shall not binde the lessor (otherwise of admittances upon surrenders, or descents) for he was tenant at suffe∣rance, who hath no lawfull interest, and a Writ of en∣try ad terminum qui praeteriit lyes against him, and so he is a deforceor. Murrell and Smiths case. 33. and 34. of the Queene. fo. 24. THe Queene grants a Copyhold in fee, and after grants the inheritance of the Copyhold to a stranger; the Copyholder devises to M. and after sur∣renders to the use of his will. Resolved, that custome hath so established the estate of a Copyholder, that by severance of the inheritance of the Copyhold, from the Mannor, the Copyhold is not destroyed, for, being the Lord himselfe could not ouste the Co∣piholder, no more can another claiming in by him. Objected that every Copyhold ought to be parcell of the Mannor; and to be demised, or demisable, time out of memory. Resolved, that because once this had both the incidents aforesaid, and its perfection, the severance made by the Lord, shall not destroy it. Resolved, that notwithstanding the surrender, and devise, the Copyhold descended to the heire, for af∣ter the severance of the inheritance, from the Man∣nor, the surrender was utterly voyd, for, the land was not parcell of the Mannor at the time, and the devise onely cannot transferre such a customary estate, but it ought to be by surrender into the hands of the Lord, &c.
Resolved, that after severance, the Copyholder shall pay his rent to the Feoffee, and shall pay, and do other services which are due, without admittance, or holding of a Court, as to plough the demeanes of the Lord, Heriot, &c. but suite of Court, and Fine up∣on alienation or admittance, are gone, for now the land cannot be aliened, for, though the Copyholder hath some benefit by the severance, as appeares be∣fore, so he hath great prejudice, for now he cannot surrender, or alien his estate, nor the Feoffee cannot make an admittance, for he is not dominus pro tempore. Resolved, that such forfeitures remaine, as were be∣fore the severance, as Feoffement, lease, wast, denier of rent; So, if the land were of the nature of Borough English, or Gavelkind, and other customes which run with the land remaine. And 'twas said that such Co∣pyholder hath, no other meanes to alien, but by De∣cree in Chancery against him and his heires, but, by this, the interest of the land is not bound, but the person onely. Kite and Queintons case. 31. of the Queene. fo. 25. COpyholder in fee surrenders out of Court, by the custome, to the hands of certaine Copyhold te∣nants, to the use of another and his heires, upon cer∣taine condition, at the next Court, the surrender was presented, but the condition omitted, he, to whose use, &c. dyes, the Lord admits his heire, he that made the surrender releases to the heire being in possession, and after enters. Resolved, that the presentment of the surrender was voyde, for that the condition was omitted, for, the surrender that the Copiholder made, was not pre∣sented, but if the surrender & the condition had been presented, and the Steward in entring of it, omits the
condition, upon sufficient proofe of it, the surrender shall not be avoyded, but the roll amended, for the roll doth not conclude the party for to plead, or give in evidence the truth of the matter. Resolved, if a Copyholder be ousted by wrong, a release by him to the disseisor, doth not transferre his right, because, he hath not any customary estate, up∣on which the release of the customary right may in∣ure; and this should be prejudiciall to the Lord, for, by this, he shall lose his Fine and services; but a re∣lease made to him which is admitted by the Lord, and in possession, is good; and a release of a customa∣ry right may inure to him, and the Lord not prejudi∣ced, and the release shall inure by way of extinguish∣ment. And Littleton speaks of an alienation by surren∣der onely, which ought to be into the hands of the Lord; but a release cannot be done to the Lord, and Littleton says, He which claimes a Copihold by surren∣der, hath no other evidence, but he which claimes an extinguishment of a right, may have it by release, by Deed; and 'tis no perill to purchasors, for if the Co∣piholder in possession sels it, he will shew the release, and he which is out of possession cannot sell, till he hath regained the possession, & caveat emptor. By Wray, if he which hath a pretensed title, &c. to a Copihold, bargaines, &c. this is within 32. H. 8. for the Statute says (any right or title) and great part of the land within the Realme is in Copy, and therefore the in∣tention was to include them, to avoyde maintenance and champerty. Melwich and Luters case. 30. of the Queene. fo. 26. REsolved, that the lessee of a copiholder for a yeare, shall maintaine an Ej'. Firmae, for his terme being warranted by Law, by force of the generall custome
of the Realme, 'tis reason that he should have remedy by Ej'. Firmae. And this is a speedy course against a Stranger. Resolved, that the Copiholds are not de∣stroyed, by severance of the inheritance of them from the Mannor, but remaine in force. So Murrels case before adjudged. Resolved, that when the Lord of a Mannor having many ancient Copiholds in a Towne, grants the inhe∣ritance of all the Copiholds, the grantee may hold a Court for the customary tenants, and accept surren∣ders, and make admittances, and grants; for every Mannor which consists of Freeholders, and Copihol∣ders, comprehends in effect two severall Courts, the one, the Court Baron, for Freeholders, and in this, the Suitors, viz. the Freeholders are Judges, and the other Court for the Copiholders, and in this, the Ste∣ward, or the Lord himselfe is Judge; and though this is not a Mannor in Law, because it wants Freehol∣ders, yet, the grantee, may hold such Court, as afore∣said, for Copiholders onely, as the grantor himselfe might. So, if all the Freeholds escheate, or the Lord releases the tenure, and services, yet, he may hold a customary Court for the Copiholds. Note (Reader) though the Lord, by his own act, cannot make, of one and the same Mannor at common Law, divers seve∣rall Mannors, consisting of Demeanes and Freehol∣ders, yet, he may make a customary Mannor of Copi∣holders. Resolved, that the Lord himselfe may make a grant, or admittance, of a Copiholder, out of the Mannor; at what place he pleases; but, if the Steward, at any Court, holden out of the Mannor shall make grants, or admittances, they are voyd.
Neales case. 37. of the Queene. fo. 26. ADjudged, that where the Lord of a Mannor demi∣ses all his lands, granted by Copy, for two thou∣sand yeares, that the lessee may hold Courts for Co∣piholders (as Melwiches case is before) and 'twas said so to be resolved in C. Hattons case. Note (Reader) a good diversity, where the number of the Copihol∣ders may support the custome, and a singular case of a Copiholder (as in Murrels case before) in which case, the Lord doth not grant tacitly any customary Court. Clifton and Molineux case. 27. & 28. of the Queene. fo. 27. REsolved, if a Steward hold Court out of the Man∣ner, all grants and admittances there made, are voyd, for, the Court ought to be holden within the Mannor, not out of the jurisdiction of it (as Melwich case is before) but, resolved that by custome, the Court may be holden out of the Mannor, and grants, &c. shall be good, as Abbots, &c. used for to hold Courts at one Mannor, for divers severall Mannors. Resolved, that if a woman Copiholder for life, takes husband, who commits wast, and dyes, the Copihold is forfeited, otherwise, if a stranger does wast, with∣out the assent of the husband. Taverner and Cromwells Case, 26 of the Queene, fo. 27. REsolved, if a copiholder, seised of three severall copiholds, of three severall acres, makes wast in part of one, &c. all that is forfeited, but not the o∣thers, for though they are all in one hand, yet every one is severally holden, and a severall condition in
Law annexed, and the severall conditions follow the severall tenures. So, resolved, if the coppyholder surrender them to the use of A. and the Lord admits A. Tenendum per antiqua servitia inde prius debita & de∣jure consueta; and A. makes a forfeiture in one, he shall forfeite that onely, for, the Tenendum (red dendo singula singulis) continues the severall tenures, so that 'tis not materiall, if the copiholds are in one, or seve∣rall copies. So if diverse severall copiholds escheate to the Lord, & he grants them Tenendum per antiqua ser∣vitia, they shall be severally holden as they were be∣fore, though he grants them to one man. Resolved, that when he to whose use a surrender is made, is admitted, he is in by him that surrendered, and in a plaint in the nature of an entry in the Per, shall be supposed in by him, for the Lord is but an in∣strument to make the admittance, and his charge shall not binde him that is admitted. So (Reader) where before 'tis said, that by the forfeiture of the Husband, all the estate of the Wife shall be forfeited, 'tis to be intended, all the copihold under the same tenures. Hubbard and Hamonds Case, 42. and 43. of the Queene. fo. 27. REsolved, that if the fines of copiholders upon ad∣mittances, be incertaine, the Lord cannot exact excessive and unreasonable fines, if he does, the co∣piholder may deny to pay it, without forfeiture, and it shall be determined before the Judges, upon a De∣murrer, or evidence upon proofe of the value of the Land what fine was reasonable to be demanded; for if it should be otherwise, great part of the Copy-holds should be destroyed at the will of the Lord, and so was Hodesons Case adjudged. Resolved, if the Lord assesse a reasonable fine, and
require the Copy-holder to pay it, he is not bound to pay it presently, because he could not know what the Lord would assesse, & nemo tenetur divinare, and he shall have a convenient time to pay it, if the Lord limits no time, otherwise of a fine certaine. Resolved, if a Copy-holder hath severall Copy-holds, by severall services, the Lord ought to assesse and demand fines severally for every parcell, and the tenant may refuse to pay his fiine for one, and forfeit that onely, and every severall tenure hath severall conditions in law tacitely annexed to it. So, if all the severall Copy-holds are surrendered to the use of another, and the Lord admits him, Tenendum per anti∣qua servitia, &c. the tenures are severall and fines se∣verall. Taverners ca'. before. Resolved, that no fine is due to the Lord till admittance, for admittance is the cause of the fine, and if after the tenant deny to pay it, 'tis a forfeiture. Bacon and Flatmans Case, and Sands Case so resolved. Westwick and Wyers Case, 43. of the Queene, fo. 28. A Woman Copy-holder in Fee, surrenders to the use of W. her Sonne in fee, and at the next Court, the entry was, Ad hanc curiam venit, W. and I uxor ejus, & ceperunt, &c. W. dyed, I. his Wife sur∣vived, and surrendered to the use of I. S. in fee. Re∣solved when the Lord hath the Copy-hold by surren∣der, to the use of another, he hath but a customary power, to make admitance, Secundum formam & ef∣fectum sursum redditionis; and 'tis not like to the Feof∣fee at common Law, and though the Lord grant this by Copy to another, 'tis without warrant, and notwithstanding he might make an admittance, ac∣cording to the surrender, and he which is admitted shall be in by him that surrendered (as Taverners
Case is before) and the Court agreed, if the Lord grant to Cestuy que use, and a stranger, all shall inure to Cestuy que use, or if he admits him upon condition, the condition is voyd. As Executors agree that the legatory and I. S. shall have, &c. or, that the legato∣ry shall have upon condition, the legatory shall have onely and absolutely, for, after the assent of the Ex∣ecutors, he is in by the Devisee. And 'twas said, that 'twas adjudg'd in Buntings Case, that where the Lord admits one to hold to him and his Heires, (where the surrender was for life onely) that he hath but for life. Resolved that without speciall cu∣stome, or other speciall matter, the admittance shall inure onely to the Husband; and judgement was given according. Buntang and Lepingwells Case, 27. and 28. of the Queene. fo. 29. REsolved, that though T. who was Husband of the Wife, De facto was not party to the Libell (for I. S. Libelled against the Wife, without naming her Husband, for a divorse, upon a precontract betwixt him and the Wife) nor the sentence in the Spiritu∣all Court, which dissolved the Marriage betwixt him and his Wife, yet the sentence against the Wife one∣ly, being but declaratory shall binde the Husband De facto, and for that the conusance of the right of Mar∣riages belongs to the spirituall Court, and they have given sentence in it, the Judges of the common Law, (though it be against the reason of the Law) shall give faith and credence to their proceedings and sentences, as consonant to the Law of holy Church; for, Cuilibet in sua arte perito est credendum. So, 'twas adjudg'd that the Plaintiffe (borne in the second Marriage) was legitimate.
Resolved, when a Copyholder surrenders to the Lord, to the use of his Wife and his younger Sonne, without limitting any estate, they have for life onely, for, as well estates as discents, shall be directed by the rules of Law, as necessary consequents upon the cu∣stome, except there be a speciall custome within the Mannor, that Sibi, & suis, or Sibi, & assignatis, may create an estate of inheritance. And 'twas observ'd, that the Estates limitted upon surrenders, are always annexed to the estates of him to whom the surrender is made, and alwayes the surrender to the Lord is ge∣nerall, without limitation of any estate. Resolved, that when the Lord admits Cestuy que use, for life, the reversion is in him that surrendered, not in the Lord, for he is but an instrument. Resolved, that a man may surrender to the use of his Wife, though that Cestuy que use, is in by him that surrendered, because the Husband did not doe this immediatly to the Wife, but by a second meanes, Viz. By surrender to the Lord, and by admittance of the Lord. Resolved, that when B. surrendered out of Court, and before that 'twas presented in Court, he dyes, yet after, being presented according to the custome, 'tis good, otherwise, if it had not beene presented ac∣cording to custome; so, if the Tenants in whose hands, &c. dyes, yet if it be proved, 'tis good enough; so Queintons Case before, if Cestuy que use, &c. dyes, before admittance, his Heires shall be admitted. Downe and Hopkins Case, 36. of the Queene. fo. 29. REsolved, that where the custome of a Mannor was, to grant Coppies for one, two, or three lives, that a grant to a Woman during her viduity, is within the custome, for 'tis an estate for life, but every grant for
life is not Durante viduitate, issue was, whether the custome was, that the Wife of a Copy-holder after the death of the Husband, should have for life, and 'twas given in evidence, that she should have during her viduity, and adjudged that the evidence did not maintaine such custome, for 'tis a lesse estate then for life. But in the principall Case, 'tis a greater e∣state which is warranted by the custome, and there∣fore a lesse is within it (according to Graveners Case before) 'Twas said, that a Lord may retaine a Ste∣ward by word, to hold Courts, &c. as a Bayliffe, and this retainer shall serve till he be discharged. Harris and Jayes Case, 41. of the Queene. fo. 30. REsolved, that a Lord may retaine one to be Stew∣ard of his Mannor, and to hold Courts by word, as in the Case before. Resolved, that where a Copy-hold escheates by attainder of felony of a Copy-hold∣er of the Queene, that the Steward may grant it over, Ex officio, without speciall warrant, for the custome warrants the Steward to grant it, and this shall binde the Queene and her Heires, &c. But yet his duty is before to informe the Lord, Treasurer, Chancellor, or Barons of the Exchequer, or any of them, for his better direction. Resolved, that the Auditor or Receiver of the Queene hath no power to retaine a Steward to hold courts, &c. But it behooves that the Steward (who makes such voluntary grants upon escheats, or forfei∣tures to be good) to have Letters Pattents of the Stewardship of the same Mannor. And 'twas said, that 'twas adjudged in the Lady Holcrofts Case, that where one was retained generally by word, to be Steward of a Mannor, and to hold Courts, that he may take surrenders of customary te∣nants out of Court.
Shaw and Thompsons Case, 33. of the Queene. fo. 30. REsolved, that a Woman shall not be indowed of Copy-hold without speciall custome, and that when a Woman is to be indowed by custome, she shall have all incidents to Dower, and shall recover damages by the Statute of Merton, because her Hus∣band dyed seised, and therefore the recovery of da∣mage of 50. l. in the Court of the Mannor, was allow∣ed, though this exceeded 40 s. Resolved, that no Action of Debt lyes for these damages at common Law, for upon such judgement no error or false judgement lyes, but the remedy is, in the Court of the Mannor, or Chancery. Fenner Justice, said, That he had seene a Record. 36. H. 8. where the Lord by Petition to him, had for certaine errors in the proceeding, reversed such a judgement, and upon this, the Defendant maintained an Audita quaerela, to be restored to the damages recovered a∣gainst him. See 14. H. 4. cited before in Brownes Case. And 7. E 4. 29. Hoe and Taylors Case, 37. of the Queene. fo. 30. REsolved, that Underwood growing upon parcell of the Mannor, may by custome, be granted by Copy of Court roll; and 'tis a thing of perpetuity, to which a custome may extend, for after every cut∣ting the underwood growes, Ex stipitibus. So, 'twas resolved that Herbage, or any profit of any parcell of the Mannor may, by custome, be granted by Copy; and 'twas said, that a faire appendant to the Mannor of C. in S. is granted by Copy, and this explaines the reason of the first pillar in Murrels Case.
Frenches Case, 18. &. 19. of the Queene. fo. 31. REsolved, if the Lord Lease for yeares, life, or make any other estate, by deed, or without deed, of Copy-hold Land forfeited, escheated, &c. to him, that this Land can never be granted againe by Copy, for the custome is destroyed, for during these estates, the Land was not demised, nor demisable by Coppy. So, if the Lord make a feoffement, and enter for con∣dition broken; but if the Lord keepe it in his hands a long time, or leases it at will, he, his heires or as∣signes, may regrant it. So, if the interruption be tortious, as by disseisin, and discent, false verdict or erroneous judgement: for, Non valet impedimentum, quod de jure non sortitur effectum, & quod contra legem fit, pro infecto habetur. But if it be extended upon a Sta∣tute, or recognizance acknowledged by the Lord, or if the Wife of the Lord hath this Land assigned to her in Dower, though these impediments are by act in Law, yet for that the interruptions are lawfull, the Land cannot be after granted by Copy. If a Copy-holder accept a Lease for yeares of the Lord, of his Copy-hold, 'tis destroyed for ever. If a Co∣py-holder take a Lease for yeares of the Mannor, his Copy-hold hath not continuance, Hides Case adjudg∣ed, 17. of the Queene, But there 'twas resolved, that such Lessee might regrant the Copy to whom he would, for the Land was alwayes demised or demisa∣ble. If a Coppy-hold be surrendered to the Lessee, his Executors or assignes may regrant it. If a Copy-hold escheate to the Lord, his alienee by fine, feoffe∣ment, &c. may regrant it.
Foiston and Crachroodes Case, 29. and 30, of the Queene. fo. 31. ADjudged, that where a Copy-holder in pleading al∣ledges, Quod infra Man. praed talis habetur nec non a to∣to tempore cujus, &c. habebatur consuetudo, Viz. quod qui∣libet tenentes praedictorum tenement. vocat. C. have used to have common, in such a place parcell of the Man∣nor, and that he is a Copy-holder of the said Tene∣ment, that this custome, as well for the matter as the forme, was good; for the Copy-holder cannot pre∣scribe in his owne name, for the exility and basenes of his estate, and if he had claimed common in the soile of another, he ought to prescribe in the name of the Lord, Viz. That the Lord, and all his ancestors, and all those whose estate, &c. have had common in such a place, for him, and his Tenants at will; but when he claimes this in the soile of the Lord, he can∣not prescribe in the name of the Lord, for the Lord cannot prescribe to have common, &c. in his owne soile, and therefore he ought to alledge, that within the Mannor there is such a custome. Note, a good diversity betweene a prescription which is personall, and alwayes made in the name of a certaine person, or his auncestors, or those whose estate, &c. and a custome which is locall and allead∣ged in no person, but that within the Mannor, there is such a custome, this shall serve for those who can∣not prescribe in their owne name, nor in the name of any person certaine, as the Inhabitants of a Towne. Also, the allegation of a custome, shall serve, when 'tis referred to a thing insensible, Viz. that all such Lands are devisable. And, for that in the principall case, the custome may have a lawfull commencement, that one copy-holder onely shall have common, esto∣vers,
or other profit in the land of the Lord and that in many Mannors; some Copiholders have common in one wast of the Mannor, and others, in another se∣verally, so that the custome cannot be applied to all, and because, that all the other Copiholds may be de∣termined and extinct, 'twas adjudged, the custome was well alledged. So, to have common of estovers in the wood of his Lord parcell of the Mannor, &c. was adjudged good, 10. of the Queene, as 'twas said. Myttons case, 26. Eliz. QUeene Elizabeth by Letters Patents did grant the office of the Clerkship of the County Court of Somerset to Mytton, with all fees, &c. for life. Arthur Hopton Esquire, Sheriffe of the same Shire interrupted him, because it was incident to his office. Mytton com∣plained to the Lords of the Councell, and it was re∣ferred to the two chiefe Justices, Wray and Anderson. And after many arguments concerning the validity of the grant, and conference had with all the other Ju∣stices. It was resolved by all the Justices, Nullo contra∣dicente aut reluctante, that the said Letters Patents were voyd: And their reasons were, that the office of the Sheriffe was an ancient office before the Conquest, and of great trust and authoritie, for the King com∣mitteth unto him Custodiam Comitatus; And though the King may determine the office ad beneplacitum, yet, he cannot determine this in part, as for one Towne, or Hundred, nor abridge him of any incident to his office; for the office is entire, and ought to continue so without any fraction, or diminution with∣out by Parliament, and the County Court, and the entring of all proceedings therein, are incident to the Sheriffes office, &c. And though 'twas granted when
the office of the Sheriffe was voyd, yet, the new She∣riffe shall avoyde it; as Scroges case, in the time of va∣cation of the office of the Chiefe Justice of the Common Bench, Queene Mary granted the office of the Exi∣genter of London; resolved, that the next Chiefe Ju∣stice shall avoyd it, for 'twas incident to his office. Also in all Writs directed to the Sheriffe concern∣ing the County Court, the King says, in comitatu tuo, and in retourne of exigents made by him, he says, ad comitatum meum tent. &c. and the style of the Court proves it, and by the Statute of 33. H. 8. the Sheriffe of Denbigh shall keepe his Shire Court at, &c. In a false judgement 'tis said, in pleno com' tuo recordari facias, &c. and in a precept of Tolt, 'tis said, summoneas, &c. quod sit ad comitatum meum. And it should be very incon∣venient, that another should have the custody of the entries, and Rolls of Court, which may be imbesilled, and the Sheriffe responsable for them. And it was resolved that the custody of all the Gaoles within e∣very County belongs to the Sheriffe by right, and are annexed and incident by the Law to the Sheriffes of∣fice, vid. stat. An. 14o. E. 3. ca. 10. Bozouns case. 26. & 27. of the Queene. fo. 34. A. Portion of tythes in L. appertained to the Re∣ctory of G. which was presentable; and the Queene was seised of the Rectory of L. jure coronae, which was appropriated to the Monastery of W. and grants to B. ex gratia speciali, &c. totam illam portionem decimarum, &c. in L. &c. Cum omnibus alijs decimis suis quibuscun{que} in L. tunc, vel nuper in occupatione J. C. and that the pattents shall be of force non obstante aliquibus defectibus in non nominando, male recitando, &c. alicujus occupatoris. And J. C. never had any tythes in L. Resolved, that (in the occupation of J. C, referres
to all the sentence; and not onely to (cum omnibus alijs decimis, &c.) 1 Because (illam) demonstrates fully, that there ought to be words subsequent, to ex∣plaine and reduce in certainty what portion, by the intention of the Queene, should passe, viz. that which was in the occupation of J. C. and 'tis not satisfied till it be come to the full end of the sentence. 2. This conjunction (cum omnibus alijs, &c.) couples the last words to the former, and makes the words subsequent to referre to all the sentence. 3. If all the tythes in L. of the said Rectory should passe, the addition of the occupation of J. C. should be vaine, & maledicta ex∣positio, &c. Resolved, that by grant of (portionem decimarum, &c.) the tythes parcell of the Rectory of L. doe not passe, for (portion) properly signifies a part or portion in grosse, divided, and not parcell of the Rectory, and the Queene had not any portion in grosse, but all were parcell of the Rectory; And (ex gratia speciala, &c.) shall not extend by any strained constructiō, to make a thing passe, against the intention of the Queene ex∣pressed in her grant, and against the apt, proper, and usuall signification of the words of his grant. Resolved, that because J. C. had not any tythes there, nothing passes, for admit that a portion should be taken for a part, then the effect of the grant is, to∣tam illam portionem decimarum in occupatione J. C. and in truth, he never had any part, nothing (without que∣stion) passes, in case of a common person, a fortiori, not in the case of the Queene. As to the point, when a clause of Non obstante shall make the grant of the Queene, good, when not. Resolved, when the King by the common Law can∣not in any manner make a grant, there a Non obstante of the common Law, will not make the grant good, against the reason of the common Law; as the King
grants a protection in an Assise, or Quare Impedit, not∣withstanding any Law to the contrary, 'tis voyd, for protection lyes not in these cases, for the losse which may come to the parties, by such great delay. But when the King may lawfully make a grant, but the common Law requires, that he be so instructed, that he be not deceived, there a Non obstante supplies it, and makes the grant good. As the King having made a lease for life, or yeares, grants the land, Non obstante, that it be in lease for life, yeares, &c. or if he grants the land, and further grants the reversion of it, de∣pending upon an estate for life, yeares, &c. 'tis good. See the booke at large. Resolved, when the words are not sufficient, ex vi termini, to passe the thing granted, but the grant is voyd, there a Non obstante will not serve, as in the principall case; and the Pattents, were not holpen by 18. of the Queene. ca'. 2. for Pattents of concealement are expressely excepted out of the Act. Terringhams case. 27. El. in banco regis. fo. 36. REsolved, that prescription doth not make a thing appendant, except the thing which is appendant agree in quality and nature to the thing unto which it should be appendant, as a thing incorporate, as an advowson to a thing corporate, as a Mannor, or as a thing corporate, as Lands, to a thing incorporate as an office, these may be appendant, but every thing incorporate may not be appendant to a thing corpo∣rate, as common of turbary may not be appendant to Land, but to a Messuage or house, as it is holden 5. ass 9. for the thing which is appendant ought to ac∣cord with the nature and quality of the thing to which it is appendant, and turves ought to be ex∣pended in a Messuage.
The commencement of common appendant by the ancient Law, was in this manner, (viz.) When a Lord of a Mannor infeoffed another of arrable Lands, to hould of him in Soccage, (id est) per servicium socae the Feoffee ad maintenand' servicium socae had com∣mon in the wasts of the Lord for his necessary beasts that did plowe and ayre his Lands, and this common, is of common right, and commenceth by operation of the Law, and in favour of tillage, and therefore it needeth not to prescribe in that, for so it is houlden 4. H. 6. & 22. H. 6. as one ought if it were against common right. But it is onely appendant to the an∣cient arrable Lands, and onely for oxen, horses, kyne, and sheepe, &c. And because it is against the nature of common appendant to be appendant to meadowe or pasture, and because that here, the prescription was to have common time out of minde to a house, meadow, and pasture, as well as to arrable, by which it appeares to the Court, that there hath been a house, meadow, and pasture, time out of minde, 'twas resolved that this common was appurtenant, not ap∣pendant. But if of latter times, men have builded upon some part of such arrable Lands, and some part thereof is imployed to meadow and pasture; and this for maintenance of tillage (the originall cause of com∣mon) the common remaines appendant, and it shall be intended in respect of the continuall usage of the common for beasts leavant and couchant upon such lands, that at the beginning all was arrable. But in pleading he ought to prescribe that the same is ap∣pendant to Land, for though terra dicitur a terrendo, quia vomere territur, yet (terra) includes all, and is arrable, though converted to meadow, &c. For it may be plowed. A man may prescribe to have common appendant to his Mannor, for all the demeanes shall be intended
arrable; at least, in construction of Law (redd'. sin∣gula singulis) it shall be appendant to such demeanes which are ancient arrable, &c. And when a man claimes common appendant to his Mannor, no incon∣gruity appeares of his own shewing, as here. So com∣mon may be appendant to a Carve of land, which may containe pasture, meadow, and wood, but it shall be applyed to that, which agrees with the nature of the common. Resolved, that common appendant may be appor∣tioned, because 'tis of common right; for if a com∣moner purchase part of the Lands, in which he hath common, yet the common shall be apportioned, as well as if the Lord purchase parcell, of the tenancy the rent shall be apportioned. And if A. a commoner enfeoffe B. of parcell of his ancient Lands, the com∣mon shall be apportioned, and B. shall have common pro rata. And 'twas agreed, that such common which is admeasurable, remaines after severance of part of the land, to which, &c. But here, for that the com∣mon was appurtenant, 'twas adjudged, that by the purchase, all was extinct, for 'twas against common right; for, by the act of the parties, it cannot be in esse for part, and extinct for part. 'Twas said that pertinens is the Latine word as well for appurtenant as appendant, and therefore subjecta materia, and the circumstances ought to direct the Court to adjudge the common, appurtenant, or ap∣pendant. Resolved, that unity of possession of the intire land, to which, &c and of the intire land in which, &c. extinguishes the common appendant. By Wray, chiefe Justice common for vicinage, is not appendant, but, for that it ought to be by prescription, 'tis resembled to common appendant, but common appurtenant, or in grosse, may commence at this day, by grant, or
prescription; and by him, the one may inclose com∣mon for vicinage, against the other: as hath been ad∣judged in Smith and Redmans case. Resolved, that a man may chase out beasts that doe him trespasse, with a small dog, and shall not be compelled to di∣straine them damage feasant. Cases of Appeales and Indictments. Brookes case. 28. of the Queene. fo. 39. REsolved, that in an appeale of Burglary, 'twas an insufficient count that the defendant domum, &c. fel & burgaliter fregit, for it ought to be burgla∣, or burgulariter, which is vox artis, as murdravit, it, which cannot be otherwise expressed. Resolved, if the count had been sufficient, he be∣ing icted once, should not be againe impeached; but here he was discharged upon the insufficient count By Wray, Chiefe Justice, if, upon accident, a man and all his family are out of the house, and one, in the interim, breakes the house, and commits felo∣ny; 'tis burglary, for the indictment is, domum man∣sionalem fregit; and so 'twas resolved, 38. of the Queene, where a man hath two mansion houses, & servants in both, and in the night when the servants are out, &c. the house is broken, 'tis burglary. Wetherell and Darlys case. 35. of the Queene. fo. 40. IN an appeale of murder, the Defendant was found guilty of homicide, and had his Clergy, after in∣dicted and arraigned for murther, pleaded this con∣viction; Resolved, that 'tis a good barre at common Law, and restrained by no Statute; the reason is, be∣cause
the life of a man, shall not be brought twice in question for the same offence. Youngs case. 38. of the Queene. fo. 40. AN Indictment that dedit unam plagam mortalem cir∣citer pectus, is insufficient, for 'tis incertaine whe∣ther it be in the necke, arme, or belly; and Indict∣ments ought to be certaine, and shew in what part the wound is, and the profundity and latitude, that it may appeare to the Court to be mortall, and one of the wounds incertainly alledged, makes the whole Indictment insufficient. 'Twas said, that the indict¦ment ought to have been, that if the party had  dyed of the first stroke, that he dyed of the other, and this is the common course. Upon a suddaine affray, if the Constable or any of his assistants in suppressing it, be killed, 'tis murder in Law, though the murderer knew not the party killed, for the Law adjudges it murder, and that he had ma∣lice prepense, for that he opposed him against justice So, in case of a Sheriffe, or any of his Bayliffs or Offi∣cers in execution of processe; so, of a Watchman. Walkers case. 41. of the Queene. fo. 41. REsolved, that an indictment of murder (upon which the party was outlawed) that he stroke the dead in sinistra parte ventris circa umbelicum, was good, for si∣nistra parte, was sufficient, and the other superfluous, but in Youngs before, there was no certainty before the circiter. Heydens case. 28. of the Queene. fo. 41. EXceptions to the indictment, 1. Because 'twas ta∣ken before B. Coronatore in Com'. praed'. and doth
not say, de com'. praed. Resolved, it shall be so taken by reasonable intendment, and the Writ de coronatore eli∣gendo, is, quia A. B. nuper unus Coronator' in Com'. tuo diem clausit, &c. and so 'tis taken in Willoughbyes case in Plodon. 2 because he doth not say, that E. S. (dead) fuit in pace Dei & dominae reginae: Resolved, that they are only words of forme, to amplifie the hainousnesse of the offence, not of substance, and perchance he was not in peace. 3. Because he doth not say, felonicè nor ex malitia sua praecogita dedit, &c. Resolved, that the word (et) couples the sentences together, so that these words (felonicè & ex malitia, &c.) and tunc & ibidem makes it cleare. 4. The profundity of the wound is not shewne; Resolved, it cannot be here; for all the panne of the knee was cut off. 5. 'Tis said, tempore feloniae praed'. & murdredi, where it should be murdri, Resolved, the first words were sufficient, and then murdredum being a word insensible is superflu∣ous, and shall not hurt. 6. The wound was the fourth of August, the death the nineteenth of December, and the indictment is that T M &c. tempore feloniae & murdredi praed'. viz. 4. Augusti felonicè fuer'. praesen∣tes &c. auxiliantes, &c. 'Twas objected, that the death hath relation to the stroke; Resolved, that indict∣ments have been often adjudged insufficient, when the stroke is one day, the death another, and the Ju∣ry conclude the death to be done the first day; But, here it ought to have been, that they were praesentes & auxiliantes, &c. ad feloniam & murd'. praed'. and re∣lation, which is a fiction, shall make no man a felon. And Wray said, that without question, the yeare of bringing the appeale, shall be accounted from the death, not from the stroke.
Hume against Ogle 32. & 33. of the Queene. fo. 42. ADjudged, that the count (that the defendant gave the stroke the 27. of September at D. in the Coun∣ty of N. and that her husband of the same stroke at D. &c. dyed, and so the said defendant murdered him at D. aforesaid) 'twas repugnant and insufficient, for, as it cannot be said, that he murdered him the first day (as Heydons case is before) so neither at the place where the stroke was, but where he dyed. Hudson and Lees case. 31. of the Queene. fo. 43. IN an appeale, H. counted that the defendant, &c. felonicè maimed him in his left hand, the defen∣dant pleaded, that before, &c the plaintiffe recove∣red in Trespas for the same battery and wounding 200. l. and satisfaction acknowledged. Resolved,  the barre is good, for where the plaintiffe is to reco∣ver damage onely (as in this case of the appeale  shall not be twice satisfied for the same thing, nem debet bis puniri pro uno delicto. And here the wounding in the first action includes the mayhem, & more, and the defendant hath averred that the wounding in the first action, and the mayhem here is one. Syers case. 32. of the Queene. fo. 43. REsolved, if the principall be pardoned, or hath his Clergy, the accessory cannot be arraigned, for 'tis a Maxime, Ʋbi factum nullum, ibi fortia nulla, & ubi non est principalis, non potest esse accessorius, and none can be principall before it be so adjudged by Law, viz. by judgement upon verdict, or confession, or by Out∣lawry; and it suffises not, that in truth, he be princi∣pall;
and the acceptance of pardon, or prayer of Clergy, is an argument, but no judgement in Law, that he is guilty. But, if the principall, after attain∣der, be pardoned, or hath his Clergy, the accessory shall be arraigned for it appeares judicially that there was a principall. Bibithes case. 39. of the Queene. fo. 43. REsolved, that where the principall was found guil∣ty of man-slaughter, and not guilty of murder, and had his Clergy, the accessory shall be discharged, for till judgement, it doth not appeare judicially, that there was a principall. So, if the principall, upon his arraignment, confesses the felony, & before judge∣ment obteines pardon, or hath Clergy. Resolved, that there cannot be an accessory before the fact, in man-slaughter, for 'tis upon a suddaine affray; and if pre∣meditated, 'tis murder. Vauxes case. 33. of the Queene. fo. 44. REsolved, that where a man was indicted for poy∣soning another, perswading him that the potion mixt with Cantharides would cause him to have issue by his wife, the indictment (nesciens praed'. potum cum veneno fore mixtum, sed fidem adhibens praed'. persuasioni dict'. W. V. recepit, & bibit) was insufficient, for 'tis not expressed that he received the poyson, for (vene∣num praed') wants, and the words after (immediatè post receptionem veneni praed'.) are not sufficient to maintaine an indictment, which ought to be certaine, and not by implication. Resolved, that Vaux, who perswaded, was a princi∣pall murderer, though he was not present at the re∣ceit of the poyson, and here he cannot be accessory,
for there is no principall; and if any one had procu∣red V. to doe it, he had been accessory before, which note, a speciall case, where principall and accessory both are absent at the time of the felony. Resolved, that (auter foits acquite) here is no plea, for, he was discharged upon an arraignement upon this insufficient indictment, and the former acquittall, or conviction, ought to be lawfull, and the Maxime is, That the life of a man shall not be twice in jeo∣pardy for one offence, but here his life was not in jeopardy. So, if a man be convicted by verdict, or confession, upon an insufficient indictment, and no judgement given, he may be againe indicted and ar∣raigned, for the law wants its end; but, if upon such insufficient indictment, the felon hath judgement quod suspendatur per collum, and so attainted (which is the end of the Law) he cannot be indicted againe, &c. till this judgement be reversed; and upon such acquittall no conspiracy lyes. Wrote and Wigges case. 33. & 34 of the Queene. fo. 45. THe defendant in an appeale of murder pleads that auter foits, by inquisition taken before the Coro∣nor of the Queenes houshold, and B. one of the Co∣ronors of M. he was indicted of Manslaughter, which inquisition was certified to N. at the Goale delivery, and the defendant upon this was arraigned, confessed the felony, and had his Clergy, and it appeares the arraignement, &c. was after the purchase of the Writ of appeale, and before the retourne. Resolved, that auter foits convict of man-slaughter, and Clergy, is a good barre in an appeale of murder, as 'twas adjudged in Holcrofts case. In which it was likewise resolved, that an inquisition taken before B. Coronor of the houshold, &c. and one of the Coro∣nors
of M. is well taken, and within the Statute of articuli super chartas; though the Statute requires two persons; for the intent of the Act was performed, and the mischiefe recited avoyded, for though the Court removes, yet, he may proceed as Coronor of the County. Resolved also upon the Statute of 3. H 7. ca'. 1. that this case was out of the Statute; for if the de∣fendant had his Clergy, the appeale lyes not, a fortio∣ri, when he is convicted onely, and prayes his Cler∣gy; and the Act of the Court to be advised as to the allowance of Clergy, (so the case was) shall not pre∣judice the party in case of life: And 'twas resolved, that attaint of murder in the Act, extends to a person convicted by confession, or verdict, as to a person at∣taint, for he which is attainted, is convicted and more. And Agnes Gainsfords case adjudged, that where 3. H. 7. is, That the wife, or heire of him so slaine shall have ap∣peale, that the heire of a woman, &c. shall have it a∣gainst him, who was acquitted of the same murder. So resolved here, an indictment and conviction, or acquittance of manslaughter, is a barre to an indict∣ment of the same death, for all is the same felony, though the circumstance alter it. Resolved, that at common law, the Coronor of the houshold had an exempt jurisdiction within the Verge, and the Coronor of the County could not meddle, as appeares by Articuli super Chartas; and Swifts case adjudged where a Coronor of the County tooke an inquisition within the Verge, 'twas avoyded by plea, the one cannot meddle within the power of the other. But Justices of the Kings Bench, of oyer and terminer, &c. may inquire, heare, and determine all murders, &c. within the Verge, for their authority is generall, through all the County: so resolved in Holcrofts case.
Resolved, that the indictment was insufficient, for it doth not appeare that D (where the stroke and death was) was within the Verge, and though in truth, it were within, yet, it ought to be found by the oath of the indictors, and cannot be supplied by nude a∣verrement, and it shall not be voyd & coram non ju∣dice, as to the Coronor of the houshold, and good be∣fore the Coronor of the County, for the Record is intire, and taken intirely before them, &c. And the defendant in his plea hath averred, that D. was within the Verge, so the Coronor of the County could not take the indictment onely. Resolved, for that the indictment (upon which he was convicted) was insufficient, that he may be new∣ly indicted, &c. for his life never was in jeopardy. Resolved, that where the stroke was one day, the death another, the conclusion ought to be, that he was murdered the day of his death, otherwise 'tis nought, for 'twas not murder before: and 'twas re∣solved, that the finding of the stroke, and the death, were not sufficient of it selfe, without conclusion; and so T. W murdered the said R. W. Resolved, that though the conviction were pending the appeale, yet if it had been lawfull, and before that the de∣fendant was compelled to plead, it had been a good barre. Waits case. 45. of the Queene. fo. 47. REsolved, that where a woman brought seaven se∣verall appeales against severall persons, as princi∣palls, all ought to abate, but the first, for all the prin∣cipalls and the accessories before the murder and af∣ter, and before the Writ purchased, against whom the plaintiffe will bring an appeale, ought to be named in the Writ: for if all make default, except one, yet,
the plaintiffe ought to count against all, therefore he ought to bring the appeale against all. And the de∣fendant shall not have damages by the Statute of W. 2. for it is out of it, because the Writ abated. And the Statute of Magna Charta says (appellum) in the singu∣lar number. Hill'. 30. of the Queene. fo. 48. AN indictment upon 8. H. 6. was quashed, Quia fuit inquisitio capta ad sessionem pacis in Com'. S. tent'. die Martis, & die Mercurij; though the sessions may indure two or three dayes, yet, the Record ought to mention, that they were holden at a day certaine; as also for that the Statute was misrecited in a point materiall. Note, because misrecitall is fatall, the sure way is, to draw the indictment with conclusion con∣tra formam statuti, and with no recitall of the Act. Ognels case. 29. of the Queene. fo. 48. AN Executor possessed of a grange, consisting of di∣vers parcels, demises all the grange (except H.) to A. for 23. yeares, and H. to F. for 23. yeares, and grants all the residue of his terme in the intire grange to A. & F. B. the revertion or grants a rent charge in fee, out of all his lands, &c. called. C. grange quondam in tenura B. (the testator) and now in tenura & occu∣patione de A. The rent is areare, the intire terme ex∣pires, the reversionor makes a Feoffement, the gran∣tee dyes, the Feoffee leases at will, the Executors di∣straine for arrearages. Resolved, that at common law, in some case debt lyes for arrearages of an Annuity in fee, though it continues; as if a Parson, or Prebend resigne, or dyes, because the Parson is chargeable; otherwise of a rent
service, charge, or secke, when the Freehold conti∣nues; and for a rent there is a diversity, when a rent in fee is extinct by the act of the party, and when of the Law, and when particular estates expire: see the booke at large But 'twas resolved in the case at barre, that the arrerages due in the life of the grantee, were lost at common Law. Resolved, that H. was not char∣ged with the rent, for though it be parcell of the grange, and A. and F. have the reversion of the terme, and so it may be said in their tenure, yet, for that A. then had not H. in his occupation, 'tis not charged. Resolved, that the lessee at will is chargeable by 32. H. 8. ca'. 37. for where things are due in right, and become remedilesse by the act of God, the Par∣liament which gives remedy for this, shall be favou∣rably construed, and extend to advance the remedy proportionably to the defect of the Law, according to the mind of the makers, and therefore the Feoffee of the Feoffee in infinitum shall be charged, for, other∣wise the Statute shall be in vaine, &c. Resolved, if the grantee in fee, or for life of a rent service, or charge, (after 'tis arreare) grants over, the tenant attournes, the grantor dyes, his Executors are not within the Statute, for by the grant the arrera∣ges are lost, and were not due to the testator tempore mortis, as the Statute speakes; and after the grant the testator could not distraine for the arrerages; and the act gives remedy onely, where the arrerages are due, and become remedilesse by the act of God. Sharpe and Pooles case, 17. of the Queene; a rent was granted to a woman for life, 'tis arreare, she takes husband, 'tis arreare, the wife dyes, the husband brings debt against the heire being terrtenant, for all arrerages: Resolved, that for the arrerages before the marriage he had no remedy at common Law, but for the other he had debt.
Objected, that the husband shall not have the ar∣rerages due before by this Statute; 1. Because at common Law the Executors of the wife may have an action for them, and the Statute gives remedy, when Executors cannot have an action, and doth not intend to toll the remedy from the common Law. 2. The branch says (due in the wives life) so the arrerages ought to incurre, when she is his wife. Resolved to the contrary, for the Statute says (due and unpaid in the wives life) and the common Law gives remedy for the arrerages of an estate for life incurred in the life of the wife, and therefore the Statute did not in∣tend to extend to these arrerages, but to the arrera∣ges due before, for, Verba accipienda sunt cum effectu. Resolved, that a Feme covert cannot make an Ex∣ecutor without assent of her husband, and the admi∣nistration of her goods of right belong to the hus∣band. And the Statute in naming the woman (wife) intends noely to describe and designe the condition of the womaln, not to imply that the arrerages ought to incurre during coverture. Rawlins case 29. & 30. of the Queene. fo. 52. A. Possessed of a house for thirty yeares (except a Stable of which B. was possessed for two yeares) granted all his interest to C and demised the Stable to B. for sixe yeares by Indenture after the end of the two yeares; C. redemises all to A. for twenty one yeares, rendring twenty pounds per an∣num, and to pay a Fine of twenty five pounds, upon condition for to reenter for non payment of the rent, or Fine; before the day of payment, A. redemises the Stable to C. for ten yeares, the rent was behinde, the Fine was not paid, C. enters not into the Stable, nor B. attournes.
Resolved, that where the verdict was entered three termes past, and in the Roll the demise to B. for six yeares was not enterd to be by Indenture, that the Roll shall be mended, because the note of the speci∣all verdict, which the Jury exhibited to the Court, remaining with the Secondary, purports that the Ju∣ry found the demise prout; by which it doth appeare to the Court, that the demise was shewne in evi∣dence, and reference made by the note to it; and so 'twas in Gomersalls case. Resolved, though the condition is of two parts in the dis-junctive, for non-payment of rent, or of the summe in grosse, yet, if A. had redemised any part of the house to C. and C. enters, by which the rent is suspended, that all the condition as well for the col∣laterall summe, as for the rent is also suspended, be∣cause the condition is intire, and cannot be divided by the act of the parties. Resolved, that if A. had re∣demised any part to C. though C. never enters, the rent is suspended, and though a stranger occupy it. Resolved, that the lease by A. to B. for six yeares, though he had nothing at the time, was good by con∣clusion by the Indenture, and when C. redemised all to A. then was the interest bound with this conclusi∣on, then when A. redemises to C. the Stable, C. is also concluded, for all parties and privies in estate or interest are bound by the Estoppell; then the case is no other, but that A. demises for six yeares the Stable to B and after demises to C. for twenty yeares (which is a good Lease in reversion for fourteene yeares) this is no suspension of the rent, or conditi∣on, for 'tis no grant of the reversion, but a future in∣terest in reversion, no terme, but an interest of a terme, as the pleading is, and notwithstanding such grant, the reversion is in the grantor, without at∣turnement, and he shall have the rent upon the first
lease, but if there be an atturnement, the reversion passes, and suspension will follow. And therefore 'twas agreed, if a man leases for twenty one yeares rendring rent, and a reentry, the lessee leases to the lessor for six yeares, to commence two yeares after, the rent is arreare, and by this he shall defeate the future interest vested in him. Resolved, that this Estoppell being found by ver∣dict, the Court ought to judge upon all the speciall matter, according to Law, and because they are sworne ad veritatem dicendam, they did well to finde the truth of the case, and leave it to the Court; by Wray chiefe Justice in Pledalls case the Jury was at∣tainted, for not finding such a lease by conclusion, intending  they (being sworne ad veritatem di∣cend'.)  not bound to finde it; for the Court held that the interest of the land as to parties and privies was bound, and no conclusion shall be by such Indenture, after the terme ended, by Wray. Resolved, if lessee for twenty yeares, leases for two yeares rendring rent, and grants all his terme and interest, if the lessee attournes, the reversion pas∣ses, and if no attournement be, yet the interest in re∣version passes, for the grant of a man shall not be ad∣judged voyd, if, to any intent, it may take effect. Resolved, if lessee for twenty yeares of a house, leases part for two yeares, and after leases to another all for ten yeares, rendring rent, so that it inures as a Lease in reversion for part, that the rent shall issue out of all, and of the interest of the terme, though it be not any estate that may be surrendred, and though it be conjoyned with land in possession. Error was brought upon this judgement, and this error assigned; for that R. the plaintiffe was an In∣fant, and was admitted by his Gardian, and no Re∣cord made of it, as 'tis used in Banco, but onely reci∣ted
in the Count, J. R. per A. B. gardianum suum (ad hoc per curiam specialiter admissum) queritur. Which was disallowed by all the Justices, upon search and view of many presidents, which make a Law in this Court, yet some presidents were as in Banco. Note (Reader) according to the opinion of Wray 'twas resolved in Londons case, that if a man takes a lease by Indenture, of his own land, this is an Estop∣pell but during the terme, and then both parts of the Indenture belong to the lessor. Wardens and Commonalty of Sadlers case. 30. of the Queene. fo. 54. BY Mandamus 'twas found before B. Myor of Lon∣don, Escheator of the City, and th inquisition was returned in Chancery, that T. C. held of the King, &c. and dyed seised without heire, the War∣dens, &c. shewed their right that R. M. was seised in fee, and devised to them in fee, and that they were seised till by C. disseised, and shew the custome of London, that a Citizen and Freeman may devise in Mortmaine, and averred that R. M. was, &c. Tempore mortis; and upon this, great question was, whither a Monstrans de droit lyes, or it ought to be by Pe∣tition. See the Case at large for this Learning, Bere∣block and Redes Case was cited to be adjudg'd, if A. be bound in a recognizance, Statute, &c. and after a recovery in Debt is had against him, and he dyes, his Executors ought first to pay the Debt upon the Recovery, though it be puny to the Sta∣tute, &c. for though both be Records, yet the judge∣ment in the Court upon judiciall and ordinary pro∣ceeding is more notorious and conspicuous, and of more high and eminent degree then a Statute, &c. taken in private, by the consent of Parties.
Forse and Hemblings Case. 37. Eliz. in com. Banc fo. 60. ALice Allen seised of certaine Messuages in Fee maketh her will in Writing, and thereby de∣miseth that if James Amynd doth survive her, that then she doth demise and bequeatheth the same messuage to him and his Heires. And afterwards the said Alice did Intermarry with the said James, and during her coverture, she said often the said James should never have the said Messuage by her said Will; Alice dyed without issue, and James survived, and the Question was, whither the Will was countermanded by the said Marriage, or not, and if not, whither by the words of revocation after the Marriage, was a Countermand and it was adjudged upon great de∣liberation, that the taking of a Husband, and the coverture at the time of her death, was a counter∣mand of the Will. For the making of a Will is but an inception thereof, and it doth not take any effect untill the death of the Devisor. For, Omne testa∣mentum morte consummatum est, & voluntas est ambula∣toria us{que} extremum vitae exitum. And it should be against the nature of a Will, to be so absolute, that he that made the same, being of sane memory, may not countermand the same. And therefore the ta∣king of her Husband, being her owne proper act, doth amount to a countermand in Law: Also 'twas said, that after Marriage all the will of the Wife in judgement of Law, is subject to the will of her Hus∣band, and a Feme Covert hath no Will, and there∣fore the Countermand after Marriage was of no force, Quod fuit concessum per tot. Cur.
Harlakendens Case, 31. El. In banco regis. fo. 62. THe Earle of Oxford leased to A. B. and C. (ex∣cept the Trees) for 21. yeares, C. assigned to D. the Earle sells the Trees to A. B. and D. they leased to E. and after sell the Trees, the Vendee cuts them, the Lessee brings Trespasse. When a man maketh a Lease for life or yeares, the Lessee hath but onely a speciall interest or property in the Trees being Timber, as things annexed to the Land, but if the Lessee or another severs them, the pro∣perty and interest of the Lessee is determined and the Lessor may take them, as things which were par∣cell of his Inheritance. It was also resolved that this clause (without impeachment of wast) doth not give to the Tenant for life, any greater interest in the Trees, then he had by the demise of the Land, but onely that it will serve, that he shall not be impeached in any action of Wast, or to recover damages or the place wasted. This is adjudg∣ed otherwise by all the Judges of England, in Lewes Bowles Case, in the 11. Report. It was also resolved that if an House fall by tempest or other act of God, the Lessee for life or yeares hath a speciall interest to take Timber to reedifie the same, if he will. But if the Lessee suffer the House to fall, or take it downe, the Lessor may take his Timber as parcell of his Inheritance, and the interest of the Lessee is determined, and he may have wast, and treble damages. Resolved, that the Lessee by the grant had an ab∣solute property in the Trees, so that by the Lease of the Land, they did not passe, and he hath not equall ownership in both, and it should be a prejudice to
him if they should be joyned to the Land, for then he could not cut, during the terme, without wast, and after he shall not have them, and the Lessor shall not have them against his owne act And here A. B. and D. were Tenants in common of the Land, and joyntenants of the Trees, and so their interest of se∣verall qualities, and therefore cannot be a union be∣twixt them, but upon a feoffement, if the Feoffor accept the Trees, they are in property divided, though, In facto, they remaine annexed to the Land, for it is not felony to cut them, &c. and if the Feof∣for grants them to the Feoffee, they are reunited in property, as well as De facto, and the Heire shall have them, not the Executors, for the feoffee hath an ab∣solute ownership in both, and it is more benefit to him that they are reunited. It was resolved, That if Tymber Trees be blowne downe with the winde, the Lessor shall have them, for they are parcell of his inheritance, and not the Tenants for life, or yeares, but if they be Dotards without any Timber in them, the Tenant shall have them. It was adjudged that wast may be committed in glasse in the Windowes, for it is parcell of the house, and discends as parcell of the inheritance to the Heire, and the Executors shall not have them al∣though the Lessee put the glasse in the Windowes at his owne cost, and if he take them away, he shall be punished in wast. And 42. Eliz. in com. Banco. It was resolved that Wainscote, whither it be annex∣ed to the house by the Lessor or the Lessee, is parcell of the House, and there is no difference in Law, whi∣ther it be fixed with great Nailes or little Nailes, or Screws or Irons put through the Walls, for if it be fixed by any wayes or meanes to the house or Posts, or Walls thereof, the Lessee may not remove it, but
he is punishable in an action of wast. For it is par∣cell of the house, and by Lease or grant of the house in the same Mannor (as Sealing or Plaistering) it shall passe as parcell thereof. Fulwoods Case, 33. of the Queene. fo. 64. C. Acknowledged a recognizance of 250. li. to the Chamberlaine of London, and his Successors, after acknowledges a Statute of 200. li. before the Recorder of London, and Major of the Staple to A. after A. sues Execution by Liberate, but it doth not appeare that it was ever returned, after the Succes∣sours of the Chamberlaine, sue Execution, by pre∣cept to the Serjeant of the Mase in nature of an Ele∣git, and hath a moyty, C. dyes his Wife recovers Dower, and had this house assigned for her third part, she dyes, the Chamberlaine assignes to Fulwood after A. assignes also to F. after the Heire of C. de∣mises to B. &c. Resolved, that the Successors of the Chamberlain-shall have this recognizance, though a body solee for that the Corporation was by custome to diverse; purposes, for Orphanage, for the recognizance was acknowledged for Orphanage money, and the same custome inables the Successors to take such an Obli∣gation, &c. otherwise of a Bishop, Parson, &c. and that the Execution by the Serjeant of the Mase, was good, notwithstanding the Statute of W. 2. ca'. 18. which saith, Vic'. liberet ei medietatem, &c. By rea∣sonable extent, to wit, by inquisition of honest men, and the Sheriffe is sworne, and the Serjeant is not sworne to take the Jury, &c. For the Statute ex∣tends to every other immediate officer, to any Court of the King of record, &c. Resolved, that execu∣tion of the Elegit was good enough, without suing a
Scire facias against A. being in by matter of Record; bu 'twas said, if the Sheriffe had returned the for∣mer execution, he ought to have a Scire facias; by the Court, if the Sheriffe makes execution, 'tis good. Resolved, that the Verdict was good, which finds, that C. acknowledged a recognizance before the Maior, though not said secundum formam Statuti. nor, per scriptum suum obligatorium, for being the trover of lay People, it shall be intended according to the Sta∣tute. Resolved, that the Conusee cannot have aide of the Statute of 32. H. 8. ca'. 5. for which, see the Booke at large. Resolved, that if a man be bound in two Statutes, and the latter Statute be first extended, and deliver∣ed in execution for a longer time, and a greater sum then the first was, yet when the first Statute is satis∣fied, and his interest lawfully determined, the se∣cond Conusee shall have the Land againe, by force of the first extent. It was resolved Per tot. Cur. that the execution of a liberate is good, although the Writ be not returned, and so of a Capias ad satisfacien∣dum, and an Habere fac'. sec.' seisinam, and other writs of execution. And that the Conusee shall hold the Land, not onely untill he be satisfied for damages for detayning of the Debt, and costs of Suite, but also for his reasonable Labours and expences, looke the words of the execution; and being in by mat∣ter of record, the conusor must bring his Scir. fac. but in Case of an elegit, the Conusor after satisfacti∣on may enter, for there is no costs and damages, but the meere Debt. Hyndes Case, in com. Banco. 33. Eliz. fo. 70. WIlliam Hawe seised of certaine Lands by deed, indented demised the same to Robert Ger∣rard
for 16. yeares, who assigned over to Elizabeth Hynd William Hawe afterwards by bargaine and sale in consideration of money due, sould the reversion to one Libb, and before the same was inrolled, the said William Hawe, leavyed a fine to Libb, and his Heires, &c. and after the leavying of the fine the said Indenture of bargaine and sale was inroled with∣in six Moneths, according to the forme of the Sta∣tute, and Elizabeth Hynd the Tenant, did not atturne. The question was, Whither the Conusee of the fine after the said Indenture inrolled, Shall be in by the fine and by the bargaine, and sale? for if he shall be adjudged to be in by the fine, no action of wast lyeth, for default of atturnement, and if he shall be in by the Indenture inrolled, then there needeth no atturnment. And it was resolved, Per tot. Cur. that when Hawe by deed indented did bargaine, and sell the reversion to Libb, and his Heires, and before the inrollment leavyed a fine to Libb, and his Heires, and after the Deed is inrolled, (within six moneths) that the Conusee shall be in by the Fine, and not by the Deed inrolled, for the Fee simple passeth by the fine to the Conusee and his heires, and after the inroll∣ment of the deed may not divest and turne the e∣state out of himselfe, which was absolutely establish∣ed in him by the fine, for when the common Law and the Statute Law concurre, the common Law shall be preferred. And it is true, that the inroll∣ment shall have relation to the delivery of the Deed. But that is onely to avoyd estates, or charges made of the same thing by the bargainor, to strangers after the delivery of the Deed, and before the inrollment, but not to divest any estate lawfully setled in the in∣terim, in the bargainee. The Records are so high and sacred that they im∣port in themselves inviolable verity, which if any
man dare to gainsay, the Law doth attribute so great honor, to them, that they shal be tryedonely by them∣selves, and not by the Countrey, and if averrement against a Record should be permitted, then the ef∣fect and validity of the record should be tryed by the Country, which is against the rule of the Law, Nul∣lum iniquum est in jure presumendum. Yet, resolved in this Case, that the Lessee shall be admitted to a∣verre that the Deed was inrolled, after the Fine, and not before, because it stands with the Record, and doth not impugne any thing within the Record, and great inconvenience would follow, if such averre∣ment should not be admitted. Boroughes Case, 38. Eliz. In Banco Regis. fo. 72. REsolved, that the rent reserved upon a demise ought to be demanded, if the Lessee will take advantage of a condition for non payment of the same, and the demand to be made at the place limit∣ted for the payment of the rent, although there be no words of demand in the demise, and although it be out of the Land demised, but in the Kings Case it is otherwise. Prerogativa Regis, for there the rent upon a reentry reserved ought to be tendered; and in such Case, the Pattentee of the King, shall demand the rent upon the Land. Resolved, if the Queene leases rendering rent, without limitting any place, or to whose hands, the Lessee may pay it at the Exchequer, or to the Bay∣liffes or Receivers of the Queene, and when shee so appoints it by expresse words, 'tis no more then the Law appointed, and though the words be (Ad re∣ceptum scacc'. apud Westm.) it needs not that the re∣ceite be holden at Westminster, the Law would have implied that. And when a common person ap∣points
no place, the Law appoynts the payment up∣on the Land. Palmers Case, 39. Eliz. in Banco regis, fo. 74. THe Sheriff by vertue of a Fier. Faci. may sell a Lease of the Defendant, and in his Writing the true commencement and terme of the Lease must be expressed, or else, if he selleth all the interest that the defendant hath in the Lands, he needeth not to make any mention in the returne, but gene∣rally Quod fieri fecit de bonis & catallis, &c. But an inquisition found that the Debtor of the King was possessed. Pro termino quorundam annorum, &c. 'twas void, for a terme cannot be extended without shew∣ing the certainty of the commencement, for after the Debt satisfied, he is to have the remainder. Resolved, for that the case at Barre was an exe∣cution by Elegit, which ought to be made by in∣quisition; the sale here was voyd, for the terme was mistaken in the inquisition, and so mistaken was apprised by the inquisition, and the Sheriffe cannot sell any terme, but that onely which was apprised by the Jurors. Hollands Case, 39. of the Queene. fo. 75. REsolved, that before 21. H. 8. ca'. 13. if he which had a benefice with cure, accept another with cure, the first is void, but this was no avoyd∣ance by the common Law, but by constitution of the Pope, of which the Patron might take notice if he would, and present, without deprivation, but be∣cause the avoydance accrued by the Ecclessiasticall Law, no Lapse incurred without notice, as upon a deprivation, or resignation; so, that the Church was
voyd for the benefit of the Patron, not for his dis∣advantage; But now, if the first benefice be of the value of 8. l. per annum, the Patron at his perill ought to present, for to an avoydance by Parliament, every one is party, but if not of 8. l. 'tis voyd by the ec∣clesiasticall Law, of which he needs not take notice. Resolved, that 21. H. 8. is such a generall Act, of which the Judges Ex officio (though it be not plead∣ed) ought to take notice. See the Booke at large upon this Learning, what act shall be said a generall act? Of which the Judges are bound to take notice, what not? The Case of Corporations, 40. and 41. of the Queene. fo. 77. REsolved, that where diverse Citties, &c. are in∣corporated by the name of Mayor and commu∣nalty, Mayor and Burgesses, &c. and in the Char∣ters 'tis prescribed that the Mayors, Bayliffs, &c. should be chosen by communalty and Burgesses &c. which is as much as to say, as by all the Burgesses, or all the communalty; that yet the ancient and usuall Election, by a certaine selected number of the prin∣cipall, of the communalty, &c. (Commonly call'd the Common-Councell) and not by all of the com∣munalty or so many of them as will come to the E∣lection, was good in Law, and warranted by their Charter; for, in every Charter they have power given to them, to make Lawes, Ordinances, and constitutions, for the better government and ordering of their Citties and Boroughes: by force of which, and to avoyd popular confusion, they, by their common assent have instituted, &c. that the electi∣on shall be by such a select number. And though this ordinance cannot be now shewne, yet, it shall
be presumed that such ordinance and constitution was made at first. Digbyes Case, 41. Eliz. fo. 78. IT was adjudged, that when a man hath a bene∣fice with cure, above 8. l. and afterwards taketh a∣nother with cure, and is presented and instituted, and before induction procure the Letters of dispen∣sation, that this dispensation commeth too late, for by the institution, Ecclia plena & consulta existit, a∣gainst all persons but the King, for every rectory consisteth upon spirituallty and temporallty. And as to the spiritualty, Viz. Cura animarum, hee is com∣pleat Parson by the institution, for when the Bishop upon examination had, admitteth him able; then he doth institute him, and saith, Jnstituo te ad tale bene∣ficium & habere curam animarum, of such a Parish, & ac∣cipe curam tuam, &c. Vide 33. H. 6.13. But touching the temporallties as the Glebe Lands, &c. hee hath no freehold in them, untill induction, for by the gene∣rall councell of Lateran. Anno. Dom. 1215. it ap∣peareth that by the acceptance of two benefices the first is voyd. Aperto jure, for upon this Councell are our Bookes in this case founded. And 'twas resol∣ved, that this was an acceptance of a benefice. Cum cura, within the Statute of 21. H. 8. Institution is an acceptance by our Law; and 'twas lately adjud∣ged that if before induction, the Clerke be inducted to another, the first is void by 21. H. 8. which saith, (Accept and take another) and for that now the a∣voidance is declared by 21. H. 8 he is bound to take notice, but till after induction, &c.
Nokes case, 41. Eliz. fo. 80. A Man maketh a Lease by these words. (Viz.) Demise, &c. Grant, &c. and Covenants that the Lessee shall injoy without eviction, by the Les∣sor or any claiming under him, and was bound to performe all covenants, &c. the Lessee assignes his terme, a stranger enters upon the Assignee, and re∣covers in an Ej firmae, after ouster, the first Lessee brings Debt. This is a covenant in Law, and the as∣signee shall have a writ of covenant 9. Eliz. 257. Dyer. And if a man be bound by obligation to per∣forme all covenants, grants, &c. This doth extend as well to covenants in Law, as to Covenants in Fact. Resolved, though the recovery were by verdict, yet he ought to shew that the Plaintiffe in this re∣covery had an elder Title, for otherwise the Cove∣nant in Law is not broken. It was holden that an expresse Covenant doth qualify the generallity of the Covenant in Law, and restraineth that by the mutuall consent of both parties, but a warranty in Law, and an expresse warranty, the party may choose whither he will have, for this word Dedi importeth a warranty. Sir Andrew Corbets Case, 41. and 42 of the Queen fo. 81. A Devises Land to B. &c. to have, &c. till 800. l. shall be paid by them of the profits to marry his Daughters, and dyes, the Heire conceales the Will, takes all the profits, and dyes, the will is found by office, the Devisee enters, and hath leavyed 640. l. and imployes it accordingly; whither the profits ta∣ken
by the Heire shall be parcell of the 800. l. was the Question. Resolved, that the words (shall be leavyed) shall be construed (shall or might be leavyed) and so 'twas holden of a Lease or limittation of a use, o∣therwise, he which is to leavy the Summe, by defer∣ring to doe it, may exclude the reversioner for ever: see the Booke at large. Resolved, when the heire or reversioner, &c. enters, and expulses him, to whom the Land is limitted, he hath election to recover the Mesne profits, in an action, or reentry, and retainer, till he leavyes the inteir Summe, and the other shall not have advantage of his owne wrong, and if a stran∣ger had entered, and occupied, the Devisee ought to have taken notice at his perill, for Vigilantibus & non, &c. and none is bound to give notice, but here the Heire himselfe concealed the will, and the De∣visee had no remedy, for the Mesne profits after the death of the heire. Resolved that a Gardian shall not ouste Tenant for life, nor yeares of the Tenement. Resolved, that admitting the Gardian shall ouste Tenant for yeares yet he shall not hold over, because his terme is certaine in the commencement, conti∣nuance, and end; otherwise of Tenant by Elegit, Statute, &c. they shall hold over, because the terme is uncertaine. Southcots Case, 43. Eliz. in banco regis. fo. 83. IF A. doe deliver goods to B. for to keepe, the goods be purloyned away, yet B. shall be charged in a Writ of detinue. For, to keepe, and to keepe safely is all one, but if B. doe take them to keepe as his owne goods, he shall not be charged with them. And if A. doe pledge or Guage goods unto B. in
this Case B. shall not answer for them, if they be purloyned, for he had some property in them, and not a custody onely, but a ferryman a common In∣keeper, or a Carrier, which taketh hyre, they ought to keepe the goods safely, and they shall not be dis∣charged, if they be stollen or purloyned. But a Fa∣ctor or a Servant (although he have wages) doing his indeavour, shall not be charged. Luttreles Case, 43. Eliz. in banco regis. fo. 86. IF a man have estovers eyther by grant or prescrip∣tion to his house, although he alter the Rooms, and Chambers in his House, it seemeth that the al∣teration of the qualities, so as it be not of the house it selfe, and without making new Chimnyes, by which, no prejudice accrewes to the owners of the Wood, is not any destruction of the prescription, and though he make new Chimnyes, or make a new addition to his old house, he shall not loose his pre∣scription thereby, but he may imploy or spend any of his new estovers in the Chimnyes, or in that part newly added. It was also resolved, that if a House or Milne doe fal, or be taken downe by the act of the owner, or by wrong of another, yet for that the per∣durable part, which includes all, doth remaine, which is the Land, whereupon the Fabrick is built, he may reedifie the same againe without any Losse of his apendant or apurtenant, but it ought to be upon the same place which was the Foundation of the old House, for as it did support, and in judge∣ment of Law included the ancient house when it was standing, so it supports and includes the new house, so as it is in a manner a continuance of the an∣cient house. Diverse Tenants doe hold of another, as of his
Mannor by fealty and suite to the Lords Milne, the Lord doth alien his Milne with the suite of his Te∣nants, and after, the vendor dyeth, and his Sonne entereth and buildeth a new Milne upon the other part of his demeane, he shall have the suite to his owne Milne, which the Vendee had before, for the suite belongeth to him that hath the Mannor, for no man may have suite to his milne, by reason of a Tenure, If it be not of Corne growing upon the Lands, within the Seigniory or Mannor, and the Lord may erect a new Milne within any part of the Mannor, and the Tenure is due to the same, and not to any particular Milne. Druries Case, 43. Eliz. Error in Banco Regis. fo. 84. A Countesse being a Widdow retaineth three Chaplaines, he who is last reteined, is not capa∣ble of a dispensation, for the Statue of 21. H. 8. c. 13. is executed by reteining of two, and the retein∣ing of the third, shall not devest the capacity, which was in the first two, but if the reteiner had beene at one time, he who is first promoted, shall be first preferred, because in Aequali jure, &c. 2. Resolved, if the two first die, the third is not capable of dis∣pensation without a new reteiner, because he was reteined at the common Law, and not according to the Statute, Quod ab initio non valet, &c. As if the Sonne and Heire of a Baron reteineth a Chaplaine and giveth him Letters under his Seale, and after the Father dyeth. And it was said, that the said Act shall be taken strictly; as if a Baron be made Gar∣dian of the 5. parts, he shall reteine no more Chap∣lains then before, and if a Baron retaine two Chap∣laines who are promoted, he cannot discharge them, and reteine others, during their lives.
Slades Case, 44. Eliz. fo. 92. IT was resolved that every contract executory im∣ports in it selfe an assumpsit. For when one doth agree to pay money, or to deliver any thing, by that he doth assume and promise to pay or to deliver the things, and therefore when he selleth any goods to another, and agreeth to deliver them at a day to come, and the other in consideration thereof agre∣eth to pay so much money, at such a day; in this case both parties may have an Action of Debt, or Action upon the case, upon the assumpsit, for the mutuall executory agreement of both parties, im∣port in themselves as well a reciprocall Action upon the Case, as an action of debt and a recovery or barr in an action of debt, is a good Barre in an action up∣on the Case, brought upon the same contract, and so likewise in an Action upon the Case, a recovery or Barre, in the same, is a good plea in an Action of Debt, upon the same contract. The Defendant in an Action of the Case upon the assumpsit may not wage his Law, as he may doe in an action of Debt. If a Summe of money be promised in Marriage, to be paid at severall dayes, an Action upon the as∣sumpsit lyeth for non payment of the first, although no Action of Debt lyeth, untill all the dayes be past, Multitudo errantium non parit errori patrocinium, and if the Debtor of the King sueth by Quo minus, in the Exchequor, the defendant shall not have his Law for the benefit of the King.
Adams and Lamberts Case, 44. and 45. Eliz. in banco Regis, in Ejectione firmae. fo. 104. UPon consideration of the Statute of 1 E. 6. cap. 14. it was resolved. 1. That if one demise to any of his Kindred, to superstitious uses, although he limit them to pay certaine Summes of money to the said uses, yet these Lands are given to the King, for it shall not be in∣tended to be upon other consideration, but that which they at that time conceived to be the service of God, which is the most worthy consideration, and the reason wherefore the demise was made to his Friends was, because he imposed more trust in them then others, therefore the persons shall not be re∣garded. 2. A demise of an estate for life, or in taile is within this Statute by equity, although that the Statute saith, To have continuance for ever, for the in∣tent of the Statute was, to tolle such uses, and regar∣deth not the time of their continuance. 2. An estate taile may continue for ever, and so was the intent of the devisor in this case, that the uses should continue for ever, for he limits his heire to doe it. 3. Without this construction the Statute should be defrauded. 3. The Statute giveth to the King, Lands given for the finding of a Priest, and giving of Lands upon condition to find a Priest, is within the Statute, for this is more compulsory then the other. 4. All the Land is given to the King, but not by the first Branch, for that extends onely to law∣full Chanteries, or those who have countenance of lawfull comencement, but not to such who are with∣out any colour of lawfull comencement: as if they
were founded by license of the Pope, this chantry is without colour of lawfull comencement or founda∣tion: also if Lands be given to the finding of a chan∣tery without Corporation, this is out of the said Branch. Neither by the second Branch, for that giveth the Lands belonging to such Colledges to the King, without which, he shall have onely the Scites; but by the third Branch; for this extends to finding of a Priest without Corporation. But 'twas objected, that the Land was not given to the finding of a Priest, for he had but a pension out of it, and the Statute is, that the King shall have in as large, &c. as the Priest had it. 2. Here is a good use li∣mitted, six pence by the Weeke to six poore men, and although it be Ad orandum, &c. this is not within, for it is out of the Statute, except that Ori∣sons be to be performed in publique. For answer to these, these differences were taken. 1. If one give 20. li. per annum, for the finding of a Priest, and limit to the Preist 10. li. per annum all is given to the King, for the residue shall be intended for the find∣ing of necessaries: otherwise it is, if a condition be annexed to the gift, to give 10. l. per annum to a Priest, there the King shall have but 10. li. 2. Land of 20. l. per an. is given to find a Priest, with 10. l. thereof, and that the other ten pound shall be to the Poore, the King shall have but ten pound, but if it be for finding of a Preist, and main∣tainance of Poore Men, without limitting how much the Priest shal have, the King shall have the Land for otherwise he shall have nothing. 3. If Land of 20. l. is given for finding Sallary for a Priest with 10. l. of it, and also a good use is limitted, there the King shall have but ten pound, although that other neces∣saries are to be found for the Priest, because a good use in certaine shall be preferred before a superstiti∣ous
incertaine use; but if nothing in certaine be li∣mitted to the Preist, the King shall have the Land. 4. If Land be given to find a Priest the King shall have it, but if a Priest have but a stipend, the King shall have but the stipend. 5. When a certaine summe is limitted to a Priest, and other good uses are also limitted, which depend upon the superstiti∣ous use, all is given to the King. 6. If all the uses be superstitious, of what certainty soever they are, the land is given to the King, otherwise it is, if there be any good use, and as to that which was objected, that the King shall have no more then the Priest. It was answered, that that extends to the 1.2. and 4. Branches, and not to the third, for otherwise the King should never have the land it selfe, for this was never used to be limitted to the Priest himselfe. And although that these Orisons are to be made out of any Church, yet it is within the Statute, for the words Church or Chappell, extend to Lamps and lights, and not to prayers. 2. The Statute speakes of an anniversary, &c or other like thing, and this is a like thing, but in the Case at Barre, if he had said that his Friends should have the residue of the profits of the Land, this had saved the Land. Actons Case, 45. Eliz, com. banco in a Quare impe∣rit. fo. 117. A Noble Woman reteineth a Chaplaine who pur∣chaseth a dispensation, she taketh a Husband, the Chaplaine is promoted to another benefice then that which he had before the reteiner, his first be∣nefice is not voyd. It was Objected that the Statute speakes of du∣ches, &c. being Widdowes or Married under the de∣gree of a Baron, and for that, when she Marrieth a∣bove
the degree she is out of the Statute, and 'tis not sufficient that she be within the Statute at the time of the reteiner, but she ought to be so also at the time of the promotion. It was answered, that all which the Statute re∣quires at the time of the reteiner, is, that she be a Noble Woman, Married under the degree of a Ba∣ton, or a Widdow, and to be noble at the time of the promotion; therefore a noble Woman Married above that degree cannot reteine, or if at the time of the promotion she be not noble, as if her Earle be attainted, and although that Baron and Feme have but one body, yet they have two souls, wherefore it is not inconvenient that they should have severall Chaplaines, and the reason for which the said provi∣sion was made for a noble Woman who marrieth an ignoble Husband was not to exclude those who married Nobles, but because such Femes are in Law ignoble (except they be noble by descent) and without such provision shall be out of the Statute: Baron reteineth a Chaplaine and dyeth, the Chap∣laine may reteine both the benefices, but he shall be punished for non residency, without suing a non obstante. Dumpors Case, 45. Eliz. banco regis in Trespas. fo. 119. A Man maketh a Lease, provided that the Lessee or his assignes shall not alien the premises with∣out speciall license of the Lessor, &c. The Lessor giveth license to the Lessee to alien the same, or a∣ny part thereof, &c. in this Case the Lessee may a∣lien and his assignes, Ad infinitum without any more license, and the proviso is determined.
The Lord Stafford made a Lease to three persons, upon condition that they, nor any of them should alien, without the consent of the Lessor, and after one of them did alien with his consent, and after the other two did alien without license, and it was adjudged 28. Eliz. that in this case, the condition being determined, as to one person, by the license of the Lessor, it was determined in all, for when the Lessee alieneth any part of the residue, the Lessor may not enter into any part aliened with license, and therefore the condition being determined in part, is determined in all, for the condition being entire, may not be apportioned, and 16. Eliz. Dyer. 334. fuit deny per Popham Chiefe Justice, Vide lit. 80. b. & 4. and 5. Ph. and M. Dyer. 152. Bustards Case, 1. Jac. fo. 121. IN every lawfull exchange of Land, this word Ex∣cambium imports in it selfe Tacite, a condition and a warranty, and the other a Voucher and recom∣pence, and all in respect of reciprocall considerati∣on, the one land being given in exchange for the o∣ther, but that is a speciall warranty, for upon the voucher he shall not recover other Lands in value, but those onely which were given in Exchange, and this warranty followes onely in privity, for none may vouch by force thereof, but the parties to the Exchange, and their heires and no assignes. If A give in Exchange three acres of Land to B. for other three acres, and after one Acre is evicted from B. in this Case all the exchange is defeated, and B. may enter into all his Lands.
Beverleys Case. de non compos mentis in banco regis. 1. Jac. fo. 123. EVery act that a man De non compos mentis doth, eyther concerning his Lands life or goods, ey∣ther done in Court of record or out of Court of re∣cord, all acts that he doth in any Court of record ey∣ther concerning his Lands or goods shall bind him∣selfe and all others for ever, and those acts which he doth out of Court of record, shall binde himselfe during life, and in some Cases shall binde all others for ever, so as the party himselfe shall not be admit∣ted to stultifie himself or disable himself, but an ideot a nativitate may not make Feoffment, Gift, Lease, or Release, but it may be avoyded, during his Life, by office at the Kings suite, which shall have relation, a tempore Nativitatis, to avoyd all acts done by him, and after his death, the King shall deliver his Lands Rectis Haeredibus. foure manner of men, de non com∣pos mentis 1. An ideot or foole naturally. 2. One which was of good and perfect memory, and by the visitation of God hath lost the same. 3. Lunaticus, qui gaudet lucidis intervallis, who somtimes is of good and perfect memory, and some other times Non compos mentis. 4. He that is so by his owne act as a Drun∣kard. All acts, which a Lunatick during the time of his Lunacy doth, and all acts which a mad man doth, who once was of perfect memory, and by the act of God, hath lost his understanding, are equivalent to the act done by an Ideot, but the act which a man doth, Qui Gaudet lucidis intervallis, at such time as he is of good and perfect memory, shall binde him and are good. And a Drunkard who for the time of his Drunkenesse is Non compos mentis, yet his drunken∣nesse
shall not extenuate his act or offence, but doth aggravate his offence, and doth not derogate from the act, which he doth, during the time of his drun∣kennesse, and that as well touching his Life, Lands, and goods, as any other thing that concernes him. The King shall have the custody of the Land, goods, Chattells, &c. of one non compos mentis, to the use of him, his Wife, Children, and Family, a man non compos mentis, shall not loose his life for felony or murder, for no felony or murder can be committed, without a felonious intent and purpose, and he is deprived of reason, understanding, and intentions. Dicta est fellonia quia fieri debet felleo animo, & furio∣sus non intelligit quid agit, & animo & ratione caret & non mulum distat a brutis, as Bracton saith, and stultus dicitur a stupore. The End of the Fourth Booke.
THE FIFTH BOOK. Claytons Case, 37. Eliz. in Com. Banco. fo. 1. AN Indenture of demise dated 26. May, 25. Eliz. to hold for three yeares from henceforth, it was delivered at foure a clock in the afternoone, of the twen∣tieth of June after. The Question was, when the Lease should begin, from henceforth shall be taken the day of the delivery inclusive idefi, from the making or delivery. Traditio loqui facit cartam, this Lease must end the nineteenth of June, in the third yeare after. The day of the delivery is parcell of the tearme, but a Die confeccionis, or a Die datus, the terme beginneth the day after the date, from the date, and from the day of the date is all one, because that in judgement of Law, the date includes all the day of the date, &c. Elmers Case, 30. Eliz. Banco Regis. fo. 2. 1. REsolved, that the Statute of 1. El. is a private act, whereof the Court shall not take notice without pleading of it. 2. Whereas the Bishop ousted his Lessee, for yeares, and made a Lease for three lives, this is voidable by the successor; for, first, the Statute giveth him power to make a Lease
for twenty one yeares, or three lives, and therefore cannot make both. 2. Lessee for lives shall have the rent reserved upon the Lease for yeares, and shall not pay rent to the Bishop, untill the terme de∣termined, and so hospitality will decay in the meane time, and where 32. H. 8. ca'. 8. provided that the old Lease be surrendered before the making of a new, illusory surrender upon condition is not with∣in the act, but judgement given against the Plain∣tiffe for not pleading of the said act of 1. Eliz. Jewells Case, 30. Eliz. banco regis. fo. 3. LEase of a faire reservaing rent, is not within the Statute of 1. Eliz. for although the rent be due by reason of the contract, yet it is not incident to the reversion, and 'tis also without remedy by assise or distresse. Lord Mountjoyes Case. 31. & 32. El. banco regis. fol. 3. TEnant in tayle according to the Statute, with power to make Leases, &c. reserving the anci∣ent rent, maketh a Lease of two distinct farmes, re∣erving the ancient rents in one summe, out of both sthe farmes, this is a new rent, and not the accusto∣med rent, and if he reserve a lesser rent (during his life, and after his death) then the ancient rent, the Lease is not good. If Tenant in tayle be seised of three acres of Land, every one of them of equall annuall value, and all have beene demised for 3. shil. per annum, in this case he may not demise one of them for 12. d. per annum, or two of them for 2. shil. per annum, and so Pro rata.
Justice Windams Case, fo. 31. & 32. Eliza. Banco Regis, in a Writ of Error. fo. 7 A Man leaseth S. for 10. yeares, and C. for 20. yeares, and both to another for 40. yeares, after the end of the said severall demises, ten yeares ex∣pire, the last Lessee enters into S. and upon ouster brings trespasse and recovereth, for the joynt words of the parties shall be taken, Respective, and the leases shall commence severally, upon the severall determination of the said leases. Joynt words shall be taken severally. 1. In respect of the severall in∣terest of the grantors, as if two Tenants in common grant a rent charge. 2. In respect of the severall interest of the grantees, as a joynt warranty to two severall Tenants. 3. In respect that the grant can∣not commence at one time, as a remainder limitted to the right heires of I. S. and I. N. 4. In respect of the incapacity of the grantees, to take joyntly. 5. Ratione subjectae materiae, as rent granted to two copartners for equality of partition. 6. Ne res de∣struatur, & ut evitetur absurdum, as in Cessavit, the te∣nure is alleadged by homage, fealty, and rent, and quod in faciendo servitia praedicta cessavit, it shall be con∣strued to such services onely, as of which a man may cease. Brudenells Case, 34. Eliz. banco regis. fo. 9. IF a lease be made to A. during the life of B. and C. without saying, during the life of the survivor of them, if one of them die, yet the estate is not de∣termined. But A. shall have the land, during the life of the survivor; for if a man make a lease of Land to two persons, during their lives, they assigne
over their estate, now the assignee hath estate for life of them too, and if one dye, he shall have the land, during the life of the Survivor. Note, two diversities thone a limitation in this Case aforesaid, th'other a condition, for if a man demyse Land for 100. yeares if A. and B. live so long, in this case, if th'one of them dye the Lease is determined, for the Lease is con∣ditionall, and not Determinable by limmitation of estate, and the life of a man is collaterall to the Lease, which is but onely a Chattle. If an admini∣strator have judgement and dye, his Executors can∣not sue execution of that judgement, but he that shall be subject to the payment of the Debts of the first intestate, and that are not the Executors of the administrator. vide 26. H. 8. fo. 7. Hensteads Case. 36. & 37. Eliz. com. banco. fo. 10. A Feme lessor or lessee at will taketh Husband, the will is not determined, for it may be prejudiciall to the Husband to have it determined: So, if one of the Lessees, or Lessors at will dye, but in case where one of the joynt Lessees at will dyeth, nothing surviveth but the others shall pay all the rent. Jues Case, 39, & 40. Eliz. com. banco. fo. 11. I. Leaseth a Mannor to S. for thirty yeares, except∣ing Woode and underwood growing upon it, and after Leased to him the Woode for 62. yeares, with∣out impeachment of wast, and leaseth to him the Mannor for thirty yeares, after expiration of the first thirty yeares, thirty yeares expire, S. maketh wast, I bringeth an action of wast. 1. Resolved, by the exception of Wood, and Underwood, the soile is ex∣cepted, and the woods growing, &c. are of abun∣dance.
2. The Wood remaines parcell of the Man∣nor, because the Lessor had the intire freehold, o∣therwise if he had leased for life with such an excep∣tion, so if one lease a Mannor excepting the advow∣son for life, the advowson is in grosse for life, but if he grant the advowson for life, it remaines appen∣dant. 3. By the acceptance of the third lease, the said Lease of the Wood for 62. yeares, was present∣ly surrendered, because the Lessee hath affirmed the Lessor to be able to Lease. Saunders Case, fo. 12.41. Eliz. com. banco. In an Action of wast. IF a man have Land, in part whereof there is a Co∣le-myne appearing, and he demise the Land to a∣nother for life or yeares, the Lessee may dig for cole, &c. And the reason is, for that the Myne is open at the time of the demyse, &c. and when he demyseth all his Lands, it shall be intended, that his meaning was, that all the profit of the Land should passe, &c. but if the Myne be not open, but within the Bowels of the Earth, at the time of the demise, 'tis other∣wise. Also if a man have in his Lands, hidden or un∣knowne Mynes, and Lease the same Lands and all Mynes therein, the Lessee may dig for them. Rosses case, 41. & 42. Eliz. A Lease is made to A. and his Assignes, for his life, and the life of B. and C. this is a Lease for three lives, and the Survivor of them.
Countesse de Salops Case. fo. 13.42, & 43. Eliz. banco regis. SHe brought an action of the Case against Cromp∣ton, and declared, that shee demised to him a House at will, Et quod ille tam negligenter & improvide custodivit ignemsuum quod domus illa combusta fuit. the de∣fendant pleaded, Non culpa, and it was found not guil∣ty. And 'twas adjudged, that for the permissive wast, no Action lyeth against the opinion of Brooke, in Title wast, 52. And the reason of this judgement was, for that at the common Law no remedy lyeth, for wast, either voluntary or permissive, against the Lessee for life or yeares, because the Lessee hath in∣terest in the Land by the act of the Lessor, and it was his folly to make such a Lease, and not to restraine him by Covenant, condition, &c. And by the same reason Tenant at will shall not be punished for per∣missive wast: But if Tenant at will commit volun∣tary wast, as pulling downe of houses, cutting of Trees, a generall action of trespasse lyeth against him, for that these doe amount to the determinati∣on of the will, without the entry of the Lessor: but it was agreed, that in some Cases where there is confidence put in the party, an action of the Case lyeth for negligence, although the Defendant com∣meth to the possession by the act of the Plaintiffe, as, 12. E. 4.13. If one doe commit his Horse to one to keepe safely, the Defendant Equum illum tam negli∣genter custodivit quod ob defectum bonae custodiae interijt, an action upon the Case, lyeth for this Breach of trust, also 2. H. 7.11. If my Shepheard which I trust with my Sheepe, and by his negligence they be drowned or otherwise perish, an action upon the case lyeth against him; but in this case at the Barre,
there was a demise at will made to the Defendant, and no confidence repos'd in him, wherefore it was ordered, that the Plaintiffe should not recover by her Bill. Case of Ecclesiasticall Persons. 43. Eliz. fo. 14. In the High Court of Parliament. AT a Parliament holden in this Michaelmasterme, it was resolved by the two chiefe Justices, Po∣pham and Anderson, and diverse other Justices Assi∣stants, to the Lord of the Parliament, in the upper House, that Leases made to the Queene, by Colled∣ges Deans, and Chapters, or any other, having spiri∣tuall or Ecclesiasticall Livings, against the provisi∣on of the Act, 13. Eliz. ca'. 10. are restrained by the same Act, as well as Leases made to common persons, for they are disabled by Parliament to make estates, the King being the head of the Common∣wealth may not be an Instrument to defeate the pro∣vision of an Act of Parliament made, Pro bono publi∣co. For though the Queene by the common Law, had ability to take it, yet insomuch the Parliament had dissabled them to make states, estates made to the Queene against the Act, are voyd. Covenants, &c. Concerning Leas∣es, Assurances, &c. Spencers Case. 25. Eliz. fo. 16. Banco Regis. A Lessee doth Covenant for himselfe, his Exe∣cutors, and Administrators, with the Lessor,
that he, his Executors or Assignes shall build a Brick Wall upon parcell of the Land demised, &c. after∣wards the Lessee assignes over his tearme to B. in this Case B. is not bound to build the Wall. When the Covenant extends to a thing In esse, parcell of the demise, then the thing to be done by force of the Covenant, is, Quodammodo, annexed and appurtenant to the thing demised, and shall run with the Land, and binde the Assignee, although he be not bound by expresse Covenant. But when the Covenant extends to a thing which had not essence, at the time of the demise made, that cannot be ap∣purtenant, or annexed to a thing which had not es∣sence. As if a Lessee Covenant to repaire the hous∣ses to him, demised during the tearme, this is par∣cel of the contract, &c. and shall bind the Assignee, although he be not bound expresly by the Cove∣nant. But in this Case, the Covenant concernes a thing which had not essence at the time of the de∣mise, but to be made after, and therefore it shall binde the Covenantor, his Executors and admini∣strators, and not the assignee, for the Law will not annexe the Covenant to a thing which had not es∣sence. It was resolved in this Case, if the Lessee had Covenanted for him and his assignes, &c. that in as much as it was to be builded upon the thing demi∣sed, it should binde the assignee, by expresse words. Also, if a warranty be to one, his Heires and as∣signes by expresse words, the assignee shall take be∣nefite thereof, and have a Warrantia cartae. But although the Covenant be for him and his Assignes, yet if the thing to be done be meerly col∣laterall to the Land demised, and doe not concerne the same, the Assignee shall not be charged as if the Lessee Covenant for him and his Assignes to build a house upon the Land of the Lessor, which is not par∣cell
of the demise, or to pay any collaterall Summe of money to the Lessor, or to a stranger, this shall not binde the Assignee. Also in a case of goods, as Sheepe, Chattell, &c. there is not any privity or reversion in the Assignee, but meerely a thing in a∣ction in the personalty, which cannot binde any but the Covenantor, his Executors or administrators, which doe represent him. The same Law is, if a man demise Lands for yeares with a stock of Cattle, or Summe of money rendring rent, and the Lessee Covenants for him, his Executors, Administrators, and Assignes to deliver the Stock of Cattle, or the Summe of money, at the end of the Terme, yet the Assignee shall not be charged with the Covenant. This word (Concessi) or (Demisi) imports a Covenant, and if an Assignee of a Lessee be evicted, he may have a Writ of Covenant, so shall Tenant by Statute, or Elegit of a Terme, or he to whom the Lease is sould by force of any Execution, &c. If a man grant to a Lessee for yeares, that he shall have so many estovers, as shall serve to repaire his House, or that he shall burne within his House, or such like during the Tearme, that is appurtenant to the Land, and shall run with the same as a thing appurtenant, in whose hands soever the same com∣meth. Assignee of an Assignee, Executors of an Assignee, ASSIGNES of Executors, or Administra∣tors of every Assignee, may have Action of Cove∣nant, for all are comprised within this word (As∣signees) for the same right that was in the Testa∣tor, or intestate shall goe to the Executors or admi∣nistrators. It was resolved, That the Act of 32. H. 8. c. 24. extendeth onely to Covenants which touch the thing demised, and not to collaterall Covenants
Slingsbyes Case, 29. Eliz. fo. 18. Ʋpon error, in the Exchequer Chamber. IF any party Covenantor in a Tripertite Indenture breake Covenant, all the rest of the parties, Co∣venantees, are to maintaine the Action, notwith∣standing the words of the Covenant, are Et ad & cum quolibet eoum. But if a man demise to A black A∣cre, to B. white acre, to C. greene Acre, and Co∣venant with them, and every of them, in this Case, in respect of the severall interest by these words, And every of them, the Covenant is made severall, but if the demise be made to them joyntly, then these words in the Covenant (And every of them) are made voyd. A man cannot binde himselfe to three, and to e∣very of them, to make that joynt or severall at the Election of severall persons, for one selfe same cause, for the Court will be in doubt for which of them to give judgement It was resolved, that an interest cannot be grant∣ed joyntly and severally, as if a man grant, Prox im∣am advocationem, or make a Lease for Terme of yeares of Land to two joyntly and severally, these words se∣verally are voyd, and they are joyntenants; but a power and authority may be joyntly and severally, as to make livery, or to sell, for they have no inte∣rest or Action, but are as servants to others. And judgement was reversed. Rosewells Case, 35. Eliz. fo. 19. BArgainor of Land covenanteth to make to the Bargainee such assurance as his Councell shall advise, the Bargainee himselfe cannot devise it, al∣though
he be Learned in the Law, for then it would be no good plea to say, Quod consilium non dedit advi∣samentum. Higginbottoms Case, 35. Eliz. Banco regis, fo. 19. A Parson assumeth to I. S. to make him such an e∣state in a Rectory, as the Counsell of the said I. S. shall devise, the Counsell shall be given to I. S. and he shall notifie it to the Parson. Stiles Case, 38. Eliz. Banco regis, fo. 20. A Charter with the words Haec indentura, without a manuall Act of indenting of the paper or parch∣ment, is not an Indenture. Sir Anthony Maynes Case, 38. Eliz. fo. 20. Error in Banco regis. SIr A. M. Leaseth to S. for twenty one yeares, and bindeth himselfe to make a new Lease unto him, upon surrender of the old; and Leaseth to another for 80. yeares by fine. Scott the first Lessee bring∣eth debt, and had judgement. If you be bound to enfeoffee one in the Mannor of D. before such a Feast, if you make a Feoffement to another of this Mannor, before the same Feast, you have forfeited the obligation, although that you purchase the Land againe, before the said Feast, because that you were once disabled to make the feoffement. If a man Lease a Mannor for yeares, and the Les∣see covenanteth to uphold the Houses, and to leave the same Mannor in as good an estate as he found it, and during the terme, the Lessee maketh wast in Houses, and cutting of Tymber, &c. the Lessor may
have a Writ of Covenant before the end of the Tearme, for cutting the Timber, for it was impossi∣ble that the Covenant should be performed after, for the Timber, but otherwise of the Houses, Fitz Na. br. fo. 145 K. It was also resolved, that if a man seised of Lands in Fee covenant to infeoffee I. S. upon request, and after he maketh a feoffement of the same to a Stranger, in this Case I. S. may have an Action of Covenant without request. Laughters Case, 37. Eliz. fo. 21. Banco regis WHere a condition of an obligation consisteth upon two parts in the disjunctive, and both possible at the time of the obligation made, and after one of them becomes impossible, by the Act of God, the obligor is not bound to performe the other part, for the condition is made for the benefite of the obligor, and shall be taken most beneficiall for him, and he had an Election eyther to performe the one, or the other, for the saving of his Obligation, but now, Impotentia excusat legem. Hallings Case. 38. Eliz. Com. banco. fo. 22. ONe Covenanteth to make an estate in Fee at the costs of the Covenantee, the Covenantor is to doe the first Act, Idest to Notifie what assu∣rance he will make, that the Covenantee may know what summe to tender. Mathewsons Case, 39 Eliz. fo. 23. Com. banco. SEverall persons make severall Covenants in one Indenture, or Writing, the Seale of one of them is broken away, that shall not avoyd the Covenant
of the rest, but onely the Covenant of him, whose Seale is so debrused, or defaced. Vide, Piggots Case, in the 11th Report, because severall Cove∣nants, otherwise if joynt. Lambes case, 41. Eliz. fo. 23. com. banco. A. Is bound unto B. to give unto B. such a release, &c. before the 22. day of October next, as by the Judge of the Prerogative Court is thought fit. In this Case A. must procure the Judge to doe it, or devise it, for the Judge is a stranger to the con∣dition, and the condition is for the benefite of the Obligor, and he hath taken upon him to performe the same at his perill, but it is otherwise if the Obli∣gee or his Councell should devise it. Broughtons case, 43. Eliz. fo. 24. Banco regis. IN an Action of Debt by Broughton Plaintiffe against Pretty, upon an Obligation, with condition, where the Plaintiffe was bound in an obligation of 200. l. for the Defendant, for the payment of 100. l. to C. if therefore the Defendant should save and keepe harmlesse the said Broughton, from all Suites, quar∣rells, and Demands, touching the said Obligation, &c. that then the Obligation to be void, &c. at the day of payment of the 100. l. the Plaintiffe com∣meth to the place where the 100 l. ought to be paid, and perceiving there not any person present to pay the 100. l. for the Defendant, Broughton to save the penalty of the Obligation, paid the money to C. and brought his Action upon the Counter-bond, and it was adjudged that the Plaintiffe should recover; for the payment of the 100. l. is damage and harme. And it is not necessary, whither the
Plaintiff was arrested or sued, &c. Terror of suite, (so as he dare not goe about his businesse) is Dam∣nification, although he be not arrested. Deane & Chapter de Winsors Case, 44. Eliz. fo. 24. Banco regis. A Man Leased a House by Indenture for yeares; the Lessee Covenants and grants for him and his Executors with the Lessor, to repaire the house at all times necessary, the Lessee Assignes over, and the Assignee suffereth the house to decay, the Lessor brought an Action of Covenant against the Assignee, and it was adjudged per Popham, and all the Court, that the Action lyeth although the Lessee had not Covenanted for his Assignes, because in respect thereof the rent is the lesse, which is, for the bene∣fite of the Assignee, Qui sentit commodum sentire debet & onus. If a man grant one Estovers to repaire his house, this is appurtenant to the house, Fitz H. nat. br. 181.28. H. 8.28. Sir Thomas Palmers Case, 43. El. fo. 24. banco regis. SIr Thomas Palmer seised in Fee of a great Wood. Did bargaine and sell to one Cornford, and his Assignes 600. cords of Wood, to be taken by As∣signement of Sir Thomas, Cornford assignes his interest to one Basset, and afterward Sir Thomas sells to one Maynard such quantity of Wood as will make 4000. cords at Election of the Vendee; and afterwards Sir Thomas assignes to Basset 600. cords of Wood, to be taken by him, who doth fall the same, and May∣nard did take them away, and converted them, &c. an Action upon the case was brought by Basset, and iudgement was given for him, for Corneford had an
interest which he might assigne over, and not a thing in action or a possibility, for it was resolved, if Sir Thomas did not assigne them to Cornford upon re∣quest, Cornford might take them without assignment, for the Grantor cannot by his owne act or default eyther subvert or derogate from his owne grant. Therefore it ensueth, that Cornford had an interest that he might assigne over. If A. have a house and Land, and reasonable estovers in the Woods of ano∣ther, by view and livery of the Bayliffe, &c. if A. take estovers without view or livery, &c. he is a tres∣passor, although he take lesse then he ought to have by livery. But if A. demand his estovers and the Owner or his Bayliffe will not deliver to him, he may have an Assize. 2. If the Assignement were voyd, yet the Defendant cannot take Trees cut by ano∣ther, but out of the residue of the Wood. The Earle of Rutlands case, 2. Ja. fo. 25. banco regis. EDward Earle of Rutland seised of the Mannor of Eykering, by Indenure dated 10. March. Anno. 21. El. for augmentation of the joynture of Issabell his Countesse, did Covenant with Sir Gilb. Gerrard, and Thomas Houlcroft his Brother, that before the end of Trinity terme, then next following, he would assure by fine, or other conveyance, the said Man∣nor to the said Sir Gilb. Gerrard, and Thomas in Fee, which syne or other conveyance, should be to the use of the said Earle, and Issabell his Wife, and the Heires of the said Earle, which Indenture was ac∣knowledged and inrolled in the Chancery, the 28. of the same Moneth of March, by another Indenture betweene the said Earle on the one part, and the Lord Burleigh on the other part, and Sir Gilb. Ger. and others on the same part, for the advancement of the
Heires Males, of the said Earle, the Earle did cove∣nant, &c. to convey the said Mannor amongst others, to the said Lord Burgleigh, Sir Gilb. Gerrard, and o∣thers, or to any of them, before the Feast of the Annunciation of our Lady next ensuing, which As∣surance should be to the use of the said Earle Edward and the Heires, Males of his body, and for want of such issue, to the use of the Heires Males of Thomas Earle of Rutland, with divers remainders over, and in the same Indenture, the said Earle Edward, did Co∣venant, &c. to stand seised to the uses contained in the second Indenture. No fine or other assurance was leavyed or made by the said Earle Edward, be∣fore the end of Trinity Tearme. Afterwards, (Viz.) 17. Septemb. next follow∣ing, the said Earle Edward, acknowledged a note of a fine of the said Mannor of Eikering, onely to Sir Gilb. Gerrard, and Thomas Ho: and the Heires of Sir Gilb. And the 18. day of the said Moneth acknow∣ledged another ote of a fine of the said Mannor of Eckering, amongst many other Mannors mentioned in the later Indenture to the Lord Burghley, Sir Gil. Gerrard, and other parties to the later Indenture, and both fines were entered in Octabis Mich. next after. And it was proved by diverse testimonies, that the said Earle Edward, as well before the In∣dentures as after the fine leavyed, said, that the said Countesse should have the Mannor of Eckering. And it was resolved, by Popham chiefe Justice, and all the Court. First, although the Indenture being made for declaring of uses of a subsequent fine, recovery or o∣ther conveyance, to certaine persons, and within a certaine time, and to certaine uses, yet they are but onely directory, and doe not binde the estate or in∣erest of the Land, yet if the fine, recovery, or other
assurance be persued according to the Indenture, there cannot be any averrment made against the In∣dentures taken in this Case; that after the making of the Indentures, and before the assurance by mu∣tuall agreement of the parties, was concluded and agreed, that the assurance should be to other uses, but if other agreement or limitation of uses, be made by writing or by other matter of as high, or higher nature, then the later agreement should stand, for every contract or agreement ought to be dissolved by matter of as high nature as the first was. Nil tamconveniens est naturali aequitati quam unum quodq: dissolui eo ligamine quo ligatum est. Also, it was very inconvenient, that matters in writing should be controuled by averrment of par∣ties, to be proved by incertaine testimony of slip∣pery memory, and should be perillous to purchasors, Farmers, &c. 2. It was resolved, that if the forme of the Inden∣tures be not pursued (as for quantity of Land, the time within which the fine should be leavyed, &c.) Averrment without writing may be taken, that the fine, &c, was to other use, then was contained in the Indenture, by reason of a new agreement subsequent which in this case, may be as well by word as writing. 3. It was resolved, that although the indentures be not pursued, in circumstance of time, quantity, person, &c. yet if no other meanes new agreement be proved the fine, &c. in judgement of Law shall be to the use named in the Indenture. The fines can∣not be directed by both the Indentures although perhaps it was the meaning of the parties, because the directions and declarations of the first Indenturs were controuled and frustrated by the said second Indentures.
Cases of Executors. Russells Case, 26. Eliz. fo. 27. banco regis. A Release by an Infant Executor, under the Age of 21. yeares, is no bar, but upon payment or sa∣tisfaction to an Infant Executor, he may acquite and discharge the Debt, for so much as he receiveth: All things that he doth according to the Office and duty of an Executor, shall binde him, an Executor may release before probate of Testament, for al∣though he may not have an Action, yet the Interest of the Action is in Law in him at the time of the re∣lease. Middletons Case, 1. Ja. in com. banco. fo. 28. IT was adjudged betweene Middleton and Rymot, that an Executor before probate may release acti∣on, although that before the probate, he may not have action for the right of the Action is in him: but if A. release, and after take administration that shall not barr him, for the right of the Action, was not in him at the time of the release. Two Executors prove the Testament, the third refuseth, yet he may release Littlet. 117. if one be bound to pay a summe of money at a day to come, a release of actions before the day is a Bar, and yet before the day he could have no action. Harrisons Case, 40. Eliz. fo. 28. com. banco. IT was adjudged, that a judgement upon Debt due by obligation, shall be paid before a Statute
made for performance of Covenants, which are things in contingency, and in future, or other Sta∣tutes or recognizances for Debt vide Sadlers Case in the Fourth Booke, although the judgement be after the acknowledgment of the Statute. Piggots Case, 40. Eliz. com. banco. fo. 29. ONe bringeth Debt as administrator, Durante mi∣nore aetate, of one whhom he averr'd to be with∣in age, and he doth not say, that he was within the age of 17. yeares, and the Plaintiffe was barred, be∣cause at that age the Administration ceaseth. Princes Case, 41, & 42. Eliz. com. banco. fo. 29. AN Infant is made Executor, Administration duran∣te minori etate, may be committed to the Mo∣ther or other Friend of the Infant, which shall cease and be voyd, when the Infant is at the age of 17. yeares, and this administrator may not sell any goods of the Decest, unlesse it be for necessity of pay∣ment of Debts, for he hath his Office of administra∣tor, Pro bono & commodo Infantis, and not for his pre∣judice, also he cannot assent to pay legacies unlesse there be assents to pay Debts, &c. and if it be a Wo∣man under the age of 17. yeares, and take a Husband of full age, the Administration ceaseth. Where one hath goods solely, in an inferior Dio∣ces, yet the Metropolitan of that Province, pretend∣ing that he had Bona notabilia, in diverse Diocesses committed the Administration, &c. this Administra∣tion is not voyd, but voidable by sentence, because the Metropolitan hath Jurisdiction in all places within his Province, but if the ordinary of one Dio∣cesse commit the administration of goods, when the
party hath Bona notabilia, in diverse Diocesse this ad∣ministration is meerly voyd, as well for his goods within the Diocesse as without, vide, Vere & Jeffrays Case, 22. Eliz. in banck le roy, there cited and so ad∣judged. Caulters Cose, fo. 30. 40. & 41. Eliz. banco regis. AN Executor in his owne wrong ought not to retaine goods in his owne hands to satisfie his owne just Debt, for every Creditor by such meanes when the goods be not sufficient, would strive to make himselfe Executor, De son tort, to satisfie himselfe, and barr others, &c. And it is not reason∣able that one should take advantage of his owne wrong, Non facies malum, ut inde fiat bonum, & melius est omnia mala pati quod malo consentire. It is also cleere, that all lawfull acts, that such an Executor doth, or disseisor or an abator, &c. are good. Hargraves Case, 41. and 42. Eliz. banco regis. fo. 31. LEssor bringeth Debt against the Administrator of the Lessee for yeares, for rent due after the Administration committed in the Debet, and so it ought to be, because he himselfe tooke the profits, and nothing is assets in his hands, but the profits, besides the rent, but in all Actions brought by Exe∣cutors (as Executors) the Writ shall be alwaies in the Detinet tantum, although the duty accrew in their owne time. Pettifers Case, 45. Eliz. banco regis. fo. 32. UPon a fieri facias de bonis, testatoris the She∣riffe returneth Nulla bona, a Writ issueth to
the Sheriffe to inquire by inquest, if the Executors have wasted, and how much who returneth that they have, and judgement given against them, De bonis pro∣prijs, they bring error in redditione Executionis, and the Execution was reversed, for the course is, upon Nulla bona, to have a speciall Fieri Facias to make Execu∣tion De bonis proprijs, if they have wasted, and if the Sheriffe so doth, where they have not wasted, they have remedy against him: but if he taketh an inquest, and returneth it, although it be false, there is no remedy against the Sheriffe, or any other. Robinsons Case, 1. Jac, com. banco. fo. 32. EXecutor brings Debt as Administrator, and is barred by Plea, that he is Executor, he may bring Debt, as Executor, for he was barred, as to the Action of the Writ, to have Debt as Administra∣tor, but not to the Action. Reades Case, fo. 33. 2. Jac. com. banco. WHen a man dyeth intestate, and a strange per∣son taketh the goods of the intestate, and u∣seth them, or sells them; this maketh him an Exe∣cutor of his owne wrong, for when none assumeth to be Executor, nor takes Letters of administration, there the using of the goods is sufficient to charge one as Executor, De son torte, for those to whom the Deceast was indebted unto have not any other in this case, against whom they may bring their actions, for recovery of their Debts. When an Executor is made, and he proveth the Testament, or assumeth upon him the charge, and doth administer, in this case, if a stranger take any of the goods, and claime them for his owne, this doth not make him an Exe∣cutor
of his owne wrong, because there is another lawfull Executor. A lawfull Executor shall not be charged, but with the goods that come to his hands, after that he as∣sumes upon him the charge of the Will, &c. but if another man first take the goods, &c. before the lawfull Executor hath assumed the Execution, or proved the Testament, in this case, he may be char∣ged, as an Executor of his owne wrong. Constructeon of the Statutes of Jeofails, &c. Amendment of Records, Fines, Recoveries, &c. Playters Case, 25. & 26. Eliz. Banco regis. fo. 34. THe Defendant was found guilty in trespasse Quare clausum fregit & pisces suos cepit, and damages as∣sessed intirely; it was moved in arrest of judgement, because in the Count, neither the nature nor the number of Fishes was shewed. It was answered by the Plaintiffe, That the Defendant is found guilty to damages, and so Non refert, of what nature or num∣ber they are. 2. That the Fishes themselves are not to be recovered but damages for them, therefore no need to shew the certainty. 3. All the dama∣ges shall be intended to be given for the close bro∣ken, which is laid in the Declaration. 4. It is mat∣ter of forme, ayded by the Statute of 18. Eliz cap. 14. But judgement was stayd, for the Office of the Declaration is to reduce the Writ to certainty, for otherwise upon such a generall Issue, if the Jury give a false Verdict, they cannot be attainted, and damages shall be intended to be given for all, be∣cause
they are intire, but if they had beene severed, the Plaintiffe shall recover for so much as is well pleaded, and this is matter of substance, and not of forme, because it is no default of the Clerke, but of the Plaintiffe, and therefore not aided by the Sta∣tute. Walcots Case, 30. Eliz. banco regis. fo. 36. DEbt was brought against Baron and Feme, in the Detinet tantum, upon an Obligation by the Feme before Marriage; it ought to be in the Debet, and Detinet because the Baron had the goods of the wife in his owne right, and for that reason debt is brought against the Heire in the Debet, and this is matter of substance, and point of the Action, not remedied by the Statute of 18. Eliz. c. 14. Baynehams Case, 30. Eliz. in Scaccar, fo. 36. AN Ejectione firmae of Lands in A. B. and C. tryed for the Plaintiffe by a Visne out of A. onely, this is insufficient, and not remedied by any Statute. Gardiners Case, 21. Eliz. Banco regis. fo. 37. 23. Jurors are returned, 12. appeare and finde for the Plaintiffe, this is remedied by 18. Elizabeth, cap. 14. Bishops Case, 34. Eliz. banco regis, fo. 37. VAriance is betweene the Writ and count in name, the Plaintiffe recovers, the Defendant bringeth Error, the Writ was remov'd into the Kings Bench, and the judgement was reversed, because the Statute
remedieth where there is no Originall, but not where the Originall is vitious, and although it were remo∣ved after pleading, &c. yet because the fault ap∣peared to the Court, the judgement was reversed. Teys Case, 34. Eliz. Banco regis fo. 38. BAron and Feme levy a fine to one who grants and renders to them two, and to the Heires of the Baron, and after renders part to the Feme in taile, the remainder over, the Heire of the Husband brings a Writ of Error, and assignes for error the said Variance. 1. Resolved, that there needeth not a precise forme in render upon a fine, but it shall be in this case construed, as a grant by Charter, for it is but a grant of record. 2. There are five parts of a fine. 1. The Originall. 2. The License to accord, for which the Kings Silver is due, and ought to be entered upon the Writ of Covenant, and the summe, and he who payeth it, that is, he in whom the fee reposeth, the Plea, and betwixt whom, &c. and the Land ought to be men∣tioned. 3. The concord, which is the substance of the fine, for if upon that, the Kings silver be paid, al∣though the party dye, the fine is good. 4. The Note, which is many times taken for the Concord. And lastly, the Foote of the fine, after delivery of the Indentures of the fine, the fine is said to be ingrossed. 3. The Conusor shall not assigne error in the ren∣der, because it is to his advantage, and none shall as∣signe Error, except it be to his disadvantage.
Dormers Case, 35. Eliz. Banco regis. fo. 40. A Common recovery is had in a Writ of Entry, in the Post de uno annuali redditu sive pensione quatuor marcarum, and of an advowson, whereupon a Writ of Error is brought. 1. Because every Praecipe ought to be certaine, but here it is in the Disjunctive. 2. A Writ of entry in the Post lyeth not of an ad∣vowson: But judgement was affirmed, and thereby 'twas resolved. 1. That a common recovery is not like to other recoveries, for it may be averred to an use. 2. It is by mutuall consent, & consensus tollit errorem. 3. A Writ of entry in the Post lyeth of an advowson common, &c. to suffer a common re∣covery and not otherwise, for no other assurance can be had to barre the remainders. 2. The demand of the rent is good, for one of two things is not demanded, but one thing by two names, for rent and pension are Synonima, and the rather here, because it is said to issue out of Land, which a Pension properly cannot. 3. Common re∣coveries are so usuall, that the Court shall take no∣tice that they are common recoveries. Rowlands Case, 35. Eliz. Banco regis. fo. 41. A Pannell of a Jury is annexed to the Venire facias without returne, this is vicious and not remedi∣ed by 18. Eliz. cap. 14. for that remedieth insuffici∣ent returnes, but not where no returne.
The Countesse of Rutlands Case, 36. Eliz. fo. 42. RObert Moore is returned upon the Venire facias, but in the panell before the Justices of Nisi pri∣us, and in the Postea he was named Robert Mawre; if it appeare that Moore is his right name, and that it is he who was sworne, it is good, for by the common Law this was a discontinuance against all the Jurors, and discontinuances are ayded by the Statute, other∣wise if he were misnamed in the Venire facias, and had his right name in the Panell and Postea. Codwells Case, 36. Eliz. Banco regis. fo. 42. A Juror who gave verdict, was misnam'd in the Venire facias, and had his right name in the Distringas, and Postea, and for that the judgement was arrested. Nicholls Case, 38. Eliz. Banco regis. fo. 43. C. Brings Debt upon a single Bill against N. who pleaded Payment without Acquittance, which was found for the Plaintiffe, although issue was joyned upon a point not materiall, yet after Verdict this is aided by 32. H. 8. and 18. Eliz. Bohuns Case, 39. Eliz. fo, 43. A Fine was levyed of a Mannor, and other Lands, to the value of twenty Marks per annum, so that the Kings silver is 40 s which was paid, but in en∣tering of it upon the Writ of Covenant, the Mannor was omitted, and thereupon error was brought; but after that, the transcript of the fine was remov'd into the Kings Bench, the Judges of the common
place amended the Record because it appeares to them that the Kings silver was payd for the Mannor, and where the Writ of Covenant was, Dede meipso, for, Teste meipso, they amended that also, and certifi∣ed it into the Kings Bench upon dimunution, and al∣lowed. Freemans Case, fo. 45. 41. Eliz. Banco regis. IN an original Writ &c. Quod nullus faciat vastum ven∣ditionem et destrictionem, where it should be destructio∣nem, the fault was onely in one Letter, the Court resolved upon good Consideration, that it was mat∣ter of substance: for Destrictio is a Latine word, and altereth the sence of the Statute; and matter of Substance in an Originall Writ is not remedied, but matter of forme onely, Vide Statute 32. H. 8. ca. 30. & 18. Eliz. ca. 14. If an Originall at this day want forme, or containe false Latine, or vary from the Register in matter of forme, after Verdict no judgement shall be stayed or reversed. But if it want substance, although it be the misprision of the Clerke, this is not remedied by any Statute. Gages Case, 41. Eliz. Banco regis. fo. 45. A Writ of Covenant to levy a fine, boare Date af∣ter the returne, this is amendable because a common assurance, but in other actions, no amend∣ment, &c. Cookes Case, 41. Eliz. com. banco. fo. 46. A Common recovery of the Mannor of Isfeild, by the name of Iffeld, is amendable, because it ap∣peared
to the Court, by collaterall things, shewed unto them that Isfield was intended to passe. Cases of Pardons. Francklyns Case, 36. Eliz. fo. 46. In the Starr-Chamber. A Bill was exhibited for a Ryot in the Starre-Chamber, five yeares before the generall Par∣don 35. Eliz. and it was resolved, that the Kings fine was excepted, but not the corporall Punish∣ment, but if it were exhibited within foure yeares, all shall be accepted. In this Case, the Kings at∣tourney may proceede for the fine. Guilbert Littletons Case, 39. Eliz. fo. 47. Starre-Chamber. A Bill exhibited in the Starre-Chamber before the Parliament 35. Eliz. and returned after, this is excepted out of the generall pardon, for it was de∣pending before the returne, but if an Originall Writ issueth out of the Chancery, returnable in the com∣mon place, this is not depending before the returne, because out of another Court, but after the returne, it shall be said depending by relation, from the day of the Teste: and if the Tenant alien before the re∣turne, and after the Teste, this shall be said an aliena∣tion, pending the Writ. Drywoods Case, 42. Eliz. Starre Chamber. fo. 48. A Bill in the Starre-Chamber more then foure yeares, and within 8. yeares, before the Parlia∣ment
in 39. Eliz. the Plaintiffe dyeth before the ge∣nerall pardon, this is pardoned, for this doth not de∣pend now, and the words remaining to be prosecu∣ted, shall be intended for the party, and not for the Kings Atturney. Vaughans Case, 40. Eliz. Banco regis. fo. 49. A Writ of entry in the Quibus, depends in Wales, before the generall Pardon, and after the De∣mandant had judgement, but the Tenant was not a∣merced. 1. Resolved, the Amercement is pardo∣ned, because the Torte was pardoned, which together with the delay was the ground thereof. 2. The Statutes of Jeofailes extend to Wales, because it is made parcell of England, by the Act of 27. H. 8. Wyrrells Case, 41. Eliz. In the Exchequer, fo. 49. THe Queene brings debt upon an Obligation made by the Defendant, to one who was Outlawed, the Defendant pleads the generall Pardon; and al∣though that Debts due to the Queene are excepted, yet Debts Originally due to the Subject, and after came to the Queene, are not excepted, also the ge∣netall pardon is to be taken beneficially, for the sub∣ject, and most strong against the King. Biggens case, 41. Eliz. Banco regis, fo. 50. THe King may pardon burning in the hand, where the Defendant is found guilty of Man-slaugh∣ter, and hath his Clergy in an appeale. 1. Because it is but to notifie to the Judges, that he hath once had his Clergy, and that he shall not have it againe, by the Statute of 4. H. 7. c. 13. 2. Because it is
no part of the judgement, and the party shall goe at large, although he be not burned by good constru∣ction of the Statute of 18. Eliz. c. 7. which provi∣deth, that after Clergy allowed and Burning, he shall goe at large, for otherwise, when he is pardo∣ned, he shall be imprisoned for ever. In the Starre-Chamber, the King may Pardon corporall punish∣ment for forgery, &c. but not if attainted at the common Law in an Action of forgery of false deeds. Halls Case, 2. Jacobi. com. banco. fo. 51. A. C. Libelled, for defamation in the Court Chri∣stian against H. and had sentence and costs tax∣ed at a day to be paid, H. sueth an appeale, and ob∣taines a Pardon from the King, and brings a prohi∣bition. 1. Resolved, all Suites in the Court Christian, Pro salute animae, or reformatione morum, are for the King as suits in the Starr-chamber, & he may pardon them before or after the Suite comenced, but he cannot Pardon, where the party sueth for a thing in which he had interest, as Tythes. 2. All proceedings in the Court Christian Ex officio, are for the King, and he may pardon them. 3. Although the suite may be pardoned, yet he cannot pardon the costs which are taxed. 4. Although the sentence by the ap∣peale is suspended to many purposes, yet untill re∣versall, the party had interest in the costs, not par∣donable, and after a consultation was granted for the costs. Pages case. 30. Eliz. in the Exchequer. fol. 52. I. Demiseth to his wife who is an Alien, and before the death of the Testator indenized, the date of the Letters Patents is corrupted, so that they bore
date after his death, shee obtaines an exemplificati∣on, by Commission under the Exchequer Seale, it is found that she was an alien, and an Information is brought against her, and she pleads the exemplifica∣tion. 1. Resol. This office is voyde, for every office of Intitling, as this is, ought to be by Commission under the Great Seale; but an office of Instruction may be under the Exchequer Seale: 2. It appeared not, what authority the Commissioners had, but In∣quisitio capta virtute Cujusdam Commissionis, &c. 2. That the Exemplification was pleadable by the Statute of 13. Eliz. c. 6. which extends to all Patents whatsoe∣ver without any restraint: An Exemplification, and an Inspeximus, as an Innotescimus and a Vidimus are all one: A Constat cannot be had without Affidavit, and it is when Letters are casually lost: An Innotesci∣mus, or a Vidimus, are alwayes of a Charter of Feoff∣ment, or other Instrument, not of Record. Knights case. 31. Eliz. Communi Banco. fol. 54. THe Prior of St. John of Je: 29. H. 8. Leased divers houses, reserving 5. li. 10. s. 11. d. per annum at the foure usuall feasts in L. viz. for one house 3. li. 11. d. and so severally of the others, with condition of re∣entry for non payment, and after surrenders to H. 8. who in Anno 36. grants one house to the lessee, and another in fee, the lessee dyeth; It is found by In∣quisition in the Com'. of Mid'. by Commission under the Exchequer Seale, that 37. s. 5. d. parcell of the said rent was arreare at M. for a quarter of a yeare, before the returne of the office or seisure the King grants the residue of the houses to one who leaseth to the Plaintiffe, who upon entry of the Executors of the first lessee brings Trespas, and the Court being divided, it was argued in the Exchequer Chamber by all the Judges.
1. Resol. This is an intire Lease, and the viz. is but a declaration of the severall values of the houses, and no severance of the reservation, but by apt words divers parcells may be severally leased by one de∣mise, and severall rents reserved. 2. Admitting them severall rents, yet the condition is intire, and in case of a common person by severance of any part of the reversion, will be extinct. 3. This being in case of the King his patentee of part shall not take advan∣tage of the condition, but the King himselfe may, and the Patentee to whom he grants the residue, al∣though the Lease originally made by a Subject. 4. Although it be found that more was arreare then was reserved quarterly, yet it sufficeth that the office had matter of substance, and the Jury in M. may finde which are the usuall feasts in L. 5. The grant after office and before the returne of it is good, and by entry without other seisure the Lease is voyde. 6. This office under the Exchequer Seale is sufficient to intitle the King to a Chattell. Specots case. 32. Eliz. Banco Regis in Error. fol. 57. S. & sa feme bring a Qu: impedit against the Bi∣shop of E. and declare that J. A. was seised of a Mannor, to which an advowson was appendant, and demised it to the feme for life, and they presented D. W. who dyed, and so it belongs to them to pre∣sent; the defendant pleads that the plaintiffe pre∣sented one who is schismaticus inveteratus, whereof he gave notice to the plaintiffe: It was adjudged for the plaintiffe, in the Common place, and Error brought thereupon. 1. Error. Because no presentment alledged in J. A. but over ruled for the presentment of the plain∣tiffe, is sufficient for themselves. 2. The Bishop
ought not to shew any particular schisme, for the Court of the King cannot judge of it, but the Bishop is Judge: also it is cause to remove a Coroner, quia minus Idoneus: It was answered that he ought to shew the heresie in certaine, and although the Bishop is Judge, yet because his Act is not of Record, it is tra∣versable, and although it belongs not to the Kings Court to judge of Heresies, yet the generall cause of suite being in their conusance, they shall determine of it by advise of Divines, and the cause of removing a Coroner is not traversable. 3. The Bishop is twice amerced, and a man can be amerced but once to∣wards one man, &c. It was answered, that he was but once amerced; for the Judgement in the Kings Bench was but a rehersall of the former, yet admit∣ting the second Judgement thereby voyde; never∣thelesse the first Judgement is good by the Common Law without damages, Quod fuit concessum per totam Curiam. Fostar. 32. El. in Banco le roy. fol. 59. IT was resolved that the Constable having a war∣rant to bring one coram aliquo Justiciar'. &c. it is at the election of the Officer to bring the party so attached to what Justice he will; For it is greater reason to give the election to the Officer, who (in presumption of Law) is a person indifferent, and sworne to execute his Office duly then to the Delin∣quent Wray chiefe Justice said, that a Justice of Peace may make his warrant to bring the party be∣fore himselfe, and it is good and sufficient in Law; for it is most like, that he hath the best knowledge of the matter, and therefore most fit to doe Justice in that matter: upon refusall to finde surety the Con∣stable may commit him without a new warrant.
Gooches case. 32. El. in banco le roy. fol. 60. WRay chiefe Justice said, that if A. make a frau∣dulent conveyance of his Lands to deceive a purchasor against the Statute of 27. El. and conti∣nueth in possession, and is reputed as owner; B en∣tereth in communication with A. for the purchase, and by accident B. hath notice of this fraudulent conveyance, Notwithstanding he concludes with A. and takes his assurance. In this case B. shall avoide the said fraudulent conveyance by the said Act, not∣withstanding the notice, for the Act by expresse words hath made the fraudulent conveyance voyde, as to the purchasor. And for as much as that is with∣in the expresse provision of the Statute, it ought to be taken and expounded in suppression of fraud. Resolved, that fraud may be given in Evidence, be∣cause the estate is voyde by the Act of 13. Eliz. and fraud is hatched in secret, in arbore cava & opaca. And according to this opinion, it was resolved Per tot' Cur' in communi banco Pasche 3o. Jac. where one Bullock had made a fraudulent estate of his Lands within the Statute of 27. El. to A. B. and C. and af∣ter offred to sell the same to one Standen, and before the assurance by Bullock, Standen had notice thereof, and notwithstanding proceeded, and tooke the assu∣rance from Bullock, Standen avoyded the former assu∣rance of fraud by the said act, for the notice of the purchasor cannot make that good, which an Act of Parliament hath made voyde as to him. And it is true, Quod non decipitur qui scit se decipi. But in this case the purchasor is not deceived; for the fraudulent conveyance whereof he had notice is made voyde, (as to him) by the Statute, and therefore he knew it could not hurt him.
Sparries case. 33. Eliz. in Scaccar. fol. 61. IN action of Trover and convertion, the defendant pleads that there is another action depending in the Kings Bench for the same Trover, and good; for in actions which comprehend no certeinty, as as∣size or trespas, this is no plea before a Count, be∣cause thereby it is made certeine, and then it is a good plea, and not before: but in this action and debt and detinue, it is a good plea at the first, be∣cause they are certeine: that an action is depending in an inferiour Court is no plea. Cases of By-Lawes. Chamberlaine de Londons case. 32. El. in Banco le roy. fol. 66. THe Inhabitants of a village without any custome, may make Ordinances or By-Lawes for repara∣tion of the Church, or of high-wayes, or any such thing, which is for the publicke weale generally; and in this case the consent of the greater part shall binde all without any custome, vide 44. E. 3.19. But if it be for their owne private profit for that Towne, as for their well ordering of their common of pasture, or such like, then without custome they cannot make by-Lawes. And if it be a custome, yet the greater part shall not binde all, if it be not war∣ranted by the custome; for as custome hath created them, so they ought to be warranted by the custome, 8. E. 2. tit. ass. As pontage, murage, Tolle, and such like, as appeareth in 13. H. 4.14. In which cases the summes for reparations of the Bridge walls, &c. ought to be so reasonable, that the Subject may have more benefit thereby then charge.
Clerks case. 38. Eliz in communi banco. fol. 64. KIng Edward 6. did incorporate the Towne of St. Albones, and granted them to make Lawes and Ordinances, &c. The Tearme was kept there, and the Major, &c. by assent of the plaintiffe, assessed every Inhabitant for the charges in erecting of the Courts there, and if any did refuse to pay, &c. to be imprisoned, &c. the plaintiffe being Burges refused to pay, &c. and the Major justified, &c and it was ad∣judged no plea, &c. For this Ordinance is against Magna Charta, ca. 29. Nullus liber homo imprisonetur, which act hath been confirmed divers times (viz.) thirty times, and the assent of the plaintiffe cannot alter the Law in this case. But it was resolved that the Major, &c. might inflict reasonable penaltie, but not imprisonment, which penaltie ought to be Levi∣ed by Distresse; for which offence an action of Debt lyeth, and the plaintiffe in this case had judgement. Jeffrays case Michaelis 31, 32. en Bank le Roy. fol. 66. WIlliam Jeffray Gent. brought a prohibition a∣gainst Abraham Kenshley and Thomas Forster, Churchwardens of Haylesham in Com' Sussex, for that they sued him in Court Christian before Doctor Dru∣ry for certaine money imposed upon him without his assent, for repaire of the Church; That the Church-wardens with the assent of the greatest part of the Parishioners, juxta quantitatem & qualitatem possessio∣num & reddit' infra dict' parochiam existent. Deter∣mined and agreed to make a taxation for repaire of the said Church, and that notice of such assembly was given in the Church, at which day the Church-wardens and greater part of the Parish, which were
there assembled, made a taxation (viz.) every oc∣cupier of Land for every acre 4. d. &c. Geffray dwelt in another Parish, and declared that the Parishio∣ners of every Parish ought to repaire their Church, and not the Church of another Parish. Cooke of coun∣cell with the defendant demurred in Law, and after many arguments a Writ of consultation was granted. And it was resolved, that the Court Christian hath conusans de reparatione corporis sive navis Ecclesiae: Brit∣ton who writ in 5. E. 1. And in the Statute of Circumspecte agatis, but in Rebus manifestis errat qui authoritates legum allegat quia perspicuè vera non sunt probanda. It was also resolved, that although Geffray did dwell in another Parish, yet for that he had Lands in the said Parish, in his pro∣per possession, he is in the Law Parochianus de Hayle∣sham. But it was resolved, that where there was a Far∣mor of the same Lands, the Lessor that receiveth the rent shall not be charged, but the Inhabitant is the Parishioner, and the receipte of the rent doth not make the Lessor a Parishioner. Diverse of the civill Lawyers certified the Court, that the Church Wardens and a greater part of the Parishioners (upon a generall warning) assembled, may make a Taxation by their Law, and the same shall not charge the Land, but the Person in respect of the Land, for equality and indifferency, and this was the first leading case that was adjudg'd & repor∣ted in Our Bookes touching these matters, and many causes after were adjudged thus, and now it is ge∣nerally received for Law.
The Lord Cheneys Case. 33. Eliz. In cur. wardo. fol. 68. IN a devise of Lands by writing, an averment out of the will, shall not be received for a Will con∣cerning Lands, &c. ought to be in Writing, and not by any averrment out of the same; otherwise it were great inconvenience that not any might know by the written words of the will, what construction to make, if it might be controuled by collaterall a∣verrment out of the will. Cases of Ʋsury. Burtons Case, 34. Eliz. banco regis. fo. 69. A. Lends to T. W. 100. l. 7. July 21. Eliz. in consideration of which, T. W. grants to him a rent charge of 20. l. per annum, the first payment to be at the Nativity, 1580. upon condition of payment of the said 100. l. this is out of the Statute of Usury, for he had a 100. l. for a yeare and a quarter, without consideration, and if he pay it within this Time, A. shall not have the rent, so that he was not assured of any consideration: But if it were agreed betweene them that the 100. l. shall not be payd, this is within the meaning of the Statute. A Demurrer is a confession of all such matters in fact onely as are well and sufficiently pleaded. Claytons Case. 37. Eliz. Com'. Banco. fol. 70. THirty pound was lent for halfe a yeare to have for it thirty-three pound, if the sonne of the
obligee be then in life, if not 27. pound. this is with∣in the intent of the Statute of Usury: Ʋsura dicitur ab usu & aere, quasi usuaera, (1.) usus aeris; Et usura est commodum certum, quod propter usum rei mutuatae recipi∣tur: Glanvile. lib. 7. cap. 16. Hoes Case, 34. Eliz. fo. 70. A Duty certaine upon a condition subsequent may be released, before the day of the performance of the condition, but a dutie uncertaine at the first, and upon condition precedent to be made certaine after, this in the meane time is but onely a meere possibilitie, and therefore cannot be released. And it was adjudged 4. El. in communi Banco, that by a re∣lease of all actions, suites, and quarrels, a covenant before breach of it is not released thereby. But by a release of covenants, the covenantor is discharged before the breach, vide Litt'. 170. A release in the time of vacation to the Patron dischargeth an annuitie, wherewith the Parson is charged in respect of the parsonage, and a warranty may be released before suite, because he may have a warrantia chartae. St. Johns case. 34. El. Banco Regis. fol. 71. DAggs, Pistolls, &c. are within the Statute of 33. H. 8. ca'. 6. the same Statute doth prohibite Crosse-bowes, and under the same name stone-bowes are forbidden; for if a small alteration or addition should defeat the penaltie of the act, the Statute should be of small effect. And it was resolved, that the Sheriffe, or any of his Officers, for the better exe∣cution of Justice, may carry handguns or other wea∣pons invasive or defensive, and not restreined by the
generall prohibition of the said act, vide 3o. H. 7. fo. 1. Williams case. 37. Eliz. Banco Regis. fol. 72. ONe man shall not have an action of the case for common Nusans made in the high way, because it is a common Nusans, and it is not reason, that any particular person should have an action, for then eve∣ry particular person might have an action for the same, and so thereby one might be punished an hun∣dred times for one cause. But if any particular per∣son have more particular damage then another, hee may have a particular action upon the case for this particular injury, & for common Nusances, which are equall to all the Kings people; the common Law hath appointed other Courts (viz.) Leets, &c. A prescription to doe divine service in a Chappell for the Lord and his tenants is remediable onely in the Court Christian; but for the Lord and his private fa∣mily, an action of the case lyeth for the Lord onely. Case of Orphanes of London. 35. El. Banco Regis. fol. 73. IF any Orphane of London sue for goods, &c. in the Court Christian, or of Requests, a prohibition ly∣eth, because their government by their custome be∣longs to the Major of L. So, if a Will be proved in the Court Christian, the probate whereof belongeth to the Lord of a Mannor. Wymarkes case. 36. Eliz. Banco Regis. fol. 74. PLaintiffe in an Ejectione firmae, counts of a Lease of R. S. the defendant pleads in barre an Inden∣ture of bargaine and sale (and sheweth it) by the said R. S. to E. W. who was seised untill disseised by R.
S. who leased to the plaintiffe, and he as servant to E. W. enters; Three Termes after the plaintiffe re∣plies, that the bargaine and sale was upon condition, which was broken, and the bargainor entred and lea∣sed to him, and did not shew forth the deed of bar∣gaine and sale: Judgement given for the defendant. 1. Resol. When a Deed is shewed to the Court, it remaineth in the Court all the Terme in Judgement of Law, because the Terme is but one day in Law, and this as well to strangers as parties, to take ad∣vantage thereof without shewing, but at the end of the Terme it shall be delivered to the party, if it be not denied, for then it shall remaine in Court to be damned, if it be found not his Deed. 2. The Course in the Kings Bench is, that Impar∣lances to plead in barre are entred, but not Impar∣lances to Reply or rejoyne, so that the Replication here, although it be three Termes after the Barre, yet it shall be intended here the same Terme, and so he shall not need to shew the Deed. Cliftons case. 35. Eliz. fol. 75. IF a woman tenant for life take an husband which committeth wast, and after the wife dyeth the husband is dispunishable of and for such wast; for the Writ is Quare cum de communi consilio, &c. provi∣sum sit quod non liceat alicui vastum venditionem seu de∣structionem facere de terris, &c. sibi demissis ad terminum vitae vel annorum, &c. And in this case the husband hath not any estate for life in this Land; but the wife hath estate for life, and the husband but onely an estate in her right, and so he is not within the Act.
Pilkintons case. 43. Eliz. in banco le Roy. fo. 76. IT was resolved, Per tot' Cur', that when a distresse is taken for damage fesant, that the party may tender amends untill the beasts be impounded; but after they be in the pound, they are in the custody of the Law, and then the tender cometh too late. It was also resolved, that tender of amends to the Bayliffe or servant that taketh them, will not serve; for he cannot deliver the distresse once taken, no more then change the avoury of his Master, or de∣mand rent upon a condition of reentry. The Earle of Pembrookes case, 36. El. Banco Regis. fol. 76. WHere the defendant sheweth a Deed to the Court, the plaintiffe may pray it to be entred in haec verba the same Terme, but not after. Pagetts case. 35. El. in communi banco. fol. 76. IT was resolved, that if tenant for life, the remainder for life, the remainder in fee, if tenant for life ma∣keth wast in trees, and after he in remainder for life dye, an action of wast is maintainable, for the wast done in the life of him in remainder for life, because it was to the disinheritance of him in remainder in fee. And now the impediment (which was the meane estate for life) is taken away. Et remoto im∣pedimento emergit actio; It was resolved, that when the trees are cut downe, the property thereof belongeth to him in remainder in fee. And where it is said in some Bookes, That he in remainder or reversion in fee, shall not have an action of wast, it is to be inten∣ded, during the continuance of the meane remain∣der.
And in other Bookes is said in this case, that an action of wast doth lie, it is intended after the death of him in remainder for life. Boothes case. 36. Eliz. in communi Banco. fol. 77. GEeorge Booth brought an action of wast against Skevington, and declared that Sir William Booth demised for yeares to Ensor, who assigned to Skeving∣ton. The defendant pleaded an assignement to Eli∣zabeth Cave, before which assignement no wast was made; the plaintiffe replyed, and shewed the Sta∣tute 11. H. 6. ca. 5. and that the grant to Elizabeth Cave was made to the intent he should not know against whom to bring his action, and averred, that Skevington did take the profits; the defendant re∣joyned that Elizabeth Cave granted her estate to A. who demised to the defendant at will, and traversed the fraud, &c. the plaintiffe demurred, it was resol∣ved, that every assignee of every Lessee mediatly or immediatly is within the said act; for the Statute was made to suppresse fraud, and deceipt, and therefore it should be taken most beneficially. Secondly, that he in remainder is within the said act, as well as he in reversion. Thirdly, the intent of fraud aforesaid, is not traversable, but the taking of the profits, which is a thing notorious, whereof the Country may have knowledge. In a formedon the tenant pleaded, Non tenure, the demandant said, that he made a Feoff∣ment to persons unknowne, to defraud him of his tenancy, and to keepe the profits, the pernancy of the profits, and not the Feoffment is traversable.
Samons case. 36. Eliz. Banco Regis. fol. 77. THe plaintiffe and defendant referred all contro∣versies to the Arbitrement of J. S. who did arbi∣trate that the defendant shall enter into an obligati∣on to the plaintiffe, that the plaintiffe and his wife shall injoy certeine lands which he had not done; this is voyde for the incerteinty of what summe the obligation shall be, for the award ought to be cer∣teine, like a Judgement: Also the award was voyde as to the feme, for she was a stranger to the submission. Grayes case. 37. Eliz. Banco Regis. fol. 78. Replevin. THe plaintiffe intitles himselfe in barre to the a∣vowry to Common, &c. which was traversed, the Jury found that every, &c. time of minde have used to pay for the Common a henne and five egges; the plaintiffe had Judgement, for he needs not shew more then makes for him, for this is not Modus Com∣muniae, paying so much, nor parcell of the issue, but a collaterall recompence to be paid for the Common, for which the Terretenant had remedy, but if the Terretenant had no remedy, then the Commoner shall have the Common sub modo, and may be distur∣bed by the Terretenant. Fitz-Herberts case. 37. Eliz. Banco Regis. fol. 79. THe father tenant for life, the remainder to the sonne in taile, leaseth for yeares to A. to the in∣tent to barre the sonne, A. infeoffeth J. S. to whom the father releaseth with warranty, and dyeth, this doth not barre the sonne, for although that the dis∣seisin which is made by the feoffment, precedes the
warranty, yet because it was to that intent, the Law will adjudge upon the intire act, and so a warranty by disseisin. 2. Although the disseisin was made to the father, yet because he consented unto it, the warran∣ty commenceth by disseisin; but if the father had made a feoffment in fee and dyed; this shall binde the sonne, if it be with warranty. Foordes case. 37. Eliz. Com'. Banco. fol. 81. A Prebend leaseth for 70. an. Patron Deane and Chapter confirme dimissionem praedictam in forma praedicta fact'. for 51. yeares & non ultra; this is a con∣firmation for all the Terme; for when they confirme dimissionem, &c. for 51. yeares, it is repugnant, but if they had recited the Lease, and confirmed the land for 51. yeares, this had been good, for they have an authority, coupled with an interest, otherwise if one∣ly a bare authority: but by what words soever they confirme a lease for life, or a gift in taile for part, this is a confirmation of all, because they are intire; so if the estate of the disseisor, or his lessee for life be confirmed for an houre, yet all is confirmed. Cases of Customes. Snellings case. 37. Eliz. Com'. Banco. fol. 82. S. Brings Debt upon an Obligation against an Ad∣ministrator, who pleads there is a custome in L. that an Administrator shall pay debts upon contract to a Citizen, as well as upon Obligation, and that J. S. upon a Contract had recovered; and good. 1. Re∣sol. Although that debt is given against an Admini∣strator by the Statute of 31. E. 3. yet because they
were charged as Executors before, so that onely the name is changed, the custome generally alledged is good. 2. The ordinary by taking the goods was chargeable at the Common Law. 3. This custome bindeth strangers. The case of Markett overt. 38. Eliz. fo. 83. SHopps in L. are Marketts overt for things to be sold there by the trade of the owner, therefore if plate be sold there in a Scriveners shop, the property is not altered, otherwise if in a Goldsmiths shop, if he who passeth in the street may see it. Nota, the rea∣son of this case extends to all Marketts overt in England. Perimans case. 41. Eliz. Com. Banco. fol. 84. IT is a good Custome of a mannor that all sales of lands within that mannor be presented at the Court of the Mannor. Obj. What remedy if the Ste∣ward will not accept the presentment. Resp. What remedy if the Clerke will not Inrolle a deede of bar∣gaine and sale, and therefore Caveat Emptor. 2. Obj. That Interest is by the feoffment vested in the fe∣offee, which shall not be devested by the Custome. Resp. That livery was ordained to give notice, and a Custome which addeth more solemnity and notice is good. Sir Henry Knivets case 38. Eliz. Banco Regis. fol. 85. TEnant for life, the remainder in fee, leaseth for yeares, the Termor is ousted, the disseisor leaseth for yeares, his lessee sowes the land, tenant for life dyes, he in the remainder enters, J. S. takes the
Corne, he in remainder brings Trespas. The right of the Corne is not in the plaintiffe or defendant, but in the lessee for yeares of lessee for life, but the lessee of the disseisor had right against the plaintiffe by reason of the possession: and for that if he had plead∣ed that he had entred to take the Corne, this had been good, but because he pleaded Non culp the plaintiffe had judgement for the Entry, and was bar∣red for the residue. Penrins case. 38. Eliz. Banco Regis. fol. 85. W. P. Brings a Quod ei deforceat in nature of a Writt of Right in Wales, and after the mise joyned is nonsute, Judgement finall is given, he brings the like Writt, and the first Judgement is pleaded in barre, the demandant demurres, and ad∣judged against him, and he brings Error. 1. Although by the Statute of 12. E. 1. Triall of right in Wales shall be by Common Jury, yet Judgement finall shall be given. 2. Erroneous Judgement finall in right shall binde untill it be reversed. 3. Judgement finall shall not be given upon default of the Tenant in a Writt of right, but a Petit Cape shall issue, for perad∣venture he may save his default. Cases of Executions. Blumfeilds Case, in banco le roy. 39. Eliz. fo. 86. TWo men were bound joyntly and severally in an Obligation, the one was sued condemned, and taken in Execution, and after, the other was sued, condemned, and taken in Execution, and after, the first escaped, and the other brought an Audita quaere∣la;
and although the Plaintiffe might have his A∣ction against the Sheriffe upon the escape, yet un∣till he be satisfied indeed, the other cannot have his Audita quaerela, for if the Defendant be sued by one Writ or severall Proces, although the entry be, Quod unica fiat executio. This is to be understood, of one Execution with satisfaction, for he may have three bodies in Execution. In communi banco inter Lyna∣cre & Rodes Case, Hill. 33. Eliz. It was adjudged, that notwithstanding the Conusor in a Statute Sta∣ple was taken and escaped, yet his goods and Lands upon the same Statute, may be extended, for the Escape, and the Action which the Plaintiffe might have against the Sheriffe, is not a satisfaction of the Debt. And if so, the Conusor be taken and dye in Execution, the Conusee shall have Execution of his goods and Lands. And it was adjudged, 24. Eliz. int. Joanes & Williams, that where two men were con∣demned in a Debt, and the one taken and dyed in Execution, yet the taking of the other was lawfull, and then it was resolved, Per. tot. Cur. that if a De∣fendant dye in Execution, yet the Plaintiffe may have a new Execution by Elegit, or Fieri facias, &c. The Execution of the body is an Execution, but not a satisfaction, as appeareth in 4. H. 7. 8. and 33. H. 6. 47. in Hillaryes Case adjudged, but a gage for the Debt, for the words of the Writ are, Capias I. S. Ita quod habeas corpus ejus coram Justic. nostris, &c. ad sa∣tisfaciendum G. L. de debito & damnis, &c. and so his body is taken to the intent he should satisfie, and when the Defendant hath paid the money, he shall be discharged out of Prison. Garnons Case, 40. Eliz. fo. 88. LAyton recovered against Wallwyn, in an Action of Debt, and Outlawed the Defendant after judge∣ment,
and sued a Cap. Ʋtlag. and delivered the same to Garnon the Sheriffe, who did take the Party, and before the returne of the Writ, the Defendant esca∣ped: and thus it was resolved, that if one at the common Law have judgement in an Action of Debt, and after judgement Outlaw the Defendant, then the Plaintiffe is at the end of the Suite, for any pro∣cesse to be sued in his name. Yet if the Defendant be taken by Ʋtlary, at the Suite of the King, no La∣ches being in the Plaintiffe, in continuance of his Processe, he shall be in Execution for the Plaintiffe, if he will, for reason requireth, that if the King shall have benefite by the Suite of the party. So the Plaintiffe shall have benefite by the Suite of the King, if judgement in error be affirmed within the yeare, a Capias or Fieri facias, lyeth without any Scire facias, although in another Court. Frosts Case, In communi banco. 41. Eliz. fo. 89. FRost recovered Debt and damages against B. who was Outlawed after judgement, and a Cap. Ʋt∣lagatum, delivered to the Sheriffe of London, Laborne a Serjeant arrested the said B. in Fleete-streete, Ad re∣spondendum, A. Laborne kept B. in his House, and then Frost came to Laborne with the Sheriffes Warrant, to Arrest B. upon the said Cap. Ʋtlagat. the which to doe, Laborne refused, and afterwards the Sheriffe suffered the said B. to goe at large, and upon this matter, Frost brought his Action upon the case a∣gainst the Sheriffe, and supposed that the Sheriffe did arrest the said B. by vertue of the said Cap. Ʋtla∣gat and that he suffered him to goe at large, and the Defendant pleaded, Non permisit eum ire ad lar∣gum. The Jury found all the said speciall matter, and judgement was given for the Plaintiffe. For,
first it was resolved, That when a man is in custody of the Sheriffe by Processe of the Law, and after another Writ is delivered unto him to apprehend the body of him who is in his custody, immediately he is in his custody by force of the second writ, by judgement of Law although he make no actuall ar∣rest of him, for to what purpose should he arrest the party that is already in his custody, Et lex non preci∣pit inutilia quia inutilis labor stultus, & the words of the writ are, not onely Capias, &c. but also Salvo custodi∣as, &c. Ita quod habeas corpus coram, &c. and so he ought safely to keepe him, Vide 7. H. 4. 30. And the Defendant ought not to be discharged. untill he had found surety to satisfie the Plaintiffe by 5. E. 3. cap. 12. Hoes Case, 42. Eliz. fo. 89. In the Exchequer. EXecution of a writ of Execution, as well at the Suite of a common person, as at the Kings suite, is good without returne of the writ, for if a man be arrested upon a Cap. ad satisfaciendum, the Executi∣on is good, although the Sheriffe doe not returne the writ, and so in all writs of Execution, where the Sheriffe doth onely execute the same as Cap ad satis∣faciendum, habere fac. seisinam vel. possessionem Fieri Facias Liberat. If the Execution be duely made, it is good, but if Cap. in Processe be not returned, the Arrest is not lawfull, for there the intent of the writ is, to bring the party to answer the Plaintiffe, and in case of an Elegit, for there the extent is to be made by Inquest, and not by the Sheriffe onely; and the writ ought to be returned, otherwise it is of none effect. In this case it was resolved, that when one hath a power of revocation, yet if he suffer any thing to be lawfully executed, as touching that, he cannot
make any revocation: as if a man make a Letter of Attourney to another, to doe any thing, before Ex∣ecution he may revoke it, but after Execution law∣fully done it cannot be revoked; if one to whom another is indebted, be Outlawed, and he that oweth the money, payeth it to the King, and the Outlary is after reversed, yet the Creditor shall recover his Debt against the party, if the goods of an Outlawed person be sold by the Sheriffe upon a cap. utlagat' & af∣ter the Outlary is reversed by Error, the Defen∣dant shall have restitution of his goods, for the She∣riffe or Escheator, is not compellable to sell the goods, but he may keepe them, to the use of the King, agreeing to the Booke, 20. Eliz. Dyer. 363. but if a Sheriffe by vertue of a Fieri facias, sell the goods, and after the judgement be reversed by er∣ror, the Defendant shall not have restitution of the goods, but the value of them, for which they were sould. And the reason is, the Sheriffe is compella∣ble to Levy the Debt of the goods of the Defen∣dant, and therefore great reason that the Sale should stand. Semaynes case, 2. Jac. fo. 91. Banco regis. THat the House of every man is to him as his Ca∣stle, and Fortresse, as well for his defence a∣gainst injuries and violence, as for his repose; that if a man kill another in his defence or permisfortune, without any intent, yet it is felony, and he should loose his goods and Chattells, for the great regard that the Law hath to the life of a man. But if Theeves come to the House of a man to rob or mur∣ther, and the owner or his servant kill any of the Theeves, in defence of him or his House, this is not felony, neyther shall he loose any thing; any man
may assemble his Neighbours or friends to Guard his House against violence, but he may not assemble them to goe with him to the Market or abroad, to safe-gaurd him against violence, and the reason of all this, is, Domus sua cui{que} est tutissimum refugium. It is resolved, that when any House is recovered by any reall Action, or by Ejectione firmae, the Sheriffe may breake the House, and deliver seisin or possession. It was also resolved, that in all cases where the King is party, the Sheriffe may breake the House (if the Doores be shut) and make Execution of his Writ, but before he breake the House, he ought to signi∣fie the cause of his comming, and make request to have the Doores opened. West. 1. ca. 17. which Act is but an affirmance of the common Law, but if the Officer breake the House when he might have the Doores opened, he is a Trespassor, 41 Ass. pl. 35. For fellony, or suspition of fellony, the Officer may breake open the Doore; in all Cases where the Door is open, the Sheriffe may enter, and make Executi∣on of his writ either for body or goods, at the suite of a subject, or the Lord may distraine for his rent. But it was resolved, that the Sheriffe at the Suite of a com∣mon person (upon request made to open the Doors and denyall thereof) ought not to breake open the Doore or the House, to Execute any processe at the Suite of any Subject, or to execute a Fieri facias, be∣ing a Writ of Execution, but he is a Trespassor, yet if he doe Execution in the House, it is good in the Law, being done, it was also resolved, that the house of a man is not a Castle or defence for any other person but for the owner, his Family and goods, and not to protect another, that flyeth into the same, or the goods of another, for then the Sheriffe upon re∣quest and denyall, may breake the House, and doe Execution. And this is proved by the Statute of
West. 1. ca. 17. whereby is declared, that the She∣riffe may breake the House or the Castle to make re∣plevin, when the goods of another that he hath de∣strayned, are conveyed away, to prevent the owner, but in this case the Sheriffe must demand the goods first Barwicks Case, 39. Eliz. in Exchequer. fo. 93. THe Queene 28. Die Julij, Anno. 26. demised the Mannor of Sutton, to Humfrey Barwicktenend. sibi a die confectionis. It was resolved that the same 28. day of July, is excluded, and the demise began the 29. of July. It was also resolved, that an estate of freehold cannot commence In futuro, but ought to take effect presently in possession, Reversion, or Remainder. A Lease for yeares may commence in future, but not a Lease for life, and the reason is, for that a Lease for yeares may be made without livery and seisin, but an estate of freehold may not be made without livery, eyther in deed or in Law, and therefore when a man maketh a Lease for Life, to commence at a day to come, he cannot make a pre∣sent Livery to a future estate, and therefore in this case nothing passeth, and it is all one whither it com∣menceth at a day to come, or yeares to come, for the distance of the times doth not make alteration in this Case, but in the case of two joynt Lessees, the Livery made to one is good in the name of both, for they have an interest in the Land, before their en∣try, and livery to one in the name of both, maketh an actuall possession in both, which is sufficient to support the remainder to a third person in Fee, Vide, Claytons' Case, in the Fifth Booke, Lycense to occupy Land for one yeare, is a Lease for one yeare. 5. H. 7. 1. in consideration of a former demise to
be surrendered, which was false and void, is a void consideration, as to the Queene. Goodalls case. 40. El. Banco Regis. fol. 95. COnditions for payment of money touching inhe∣ritance, ought to be truly performed, and not co∣venous, if they concerne a third person. The Law doth not finde an assignee in Law where there is an assignee in fact. Expressum facit cessare tacitum; affir∣med in the Exchequer chamber upon Error there brought. Countesse of Northumberlands case. 40. El. Commu∣ni Banco. fol. 97. FItton and the Countesse of Northumberland his wife, Sir Thomas Cecill, Knight, and Dorothie his wife, William Cornewalleys, and Lucy his wife, and the Lady Davers, Daughters and heires of the Lord Latimer, brought a (Quare impedit) against Hall, who plead∣ed a release of William Cornewalleys, pendente breve, and it was adjudged that this should but goe in barre onely against William Cornewalleys and his wife, and the Writt should stand for others, and all shall vest in the others, because intire, and in the realty, pre∣sentment of the lessor and lessee is not double, for the lessors onely traversable. Buries case. 40. El. in communi banco. fol. 98. BEtween Whebster and Burie in Ejectione firmae, a speciall verdict was given upon divorce between Burie and his wife, causa frigiditatis, and that his wife for three yeares after the marriage, Remansit virgo intacta propter perpetuam impotentiam generationes in vi∣ro,
& quod vir fuit inaptus ad generandum; and in this speciall verdict, all the examinations of the Witnes∣ses, upon which the Judge in the spirituall Court was moved to give his sentence, by which the perpetuall disabilitie of Bury ad generandum was manifest, were reade; and by which it was pretended, that the issue which he had by a second wife was illegitimate, and this was the doubt of the Jury. And it was adjudged, that the issue of the second wife was lawfull, for it is cleare that by the Divorce (causa frigiditatis) the marriage is dissolved a vinculo matrimonij, and by con∣sequence, either of them might marry after, then ad∣mitting that the second marriage was avoydable, yet it remained a marriage untill it was dissolved, and by consequence, the issue that is borne during the co∣verture, (if no divorce be in the life of the parties) is lawfull, Et homo potest esse habilis & inhabilis diver∣sis temporibus, and Judgement affirmed in Error. Flowers case. 41. El. Banco Regis. fol. 99. AN indictment of perjury upon 5o. El. for giving false evidence to the great Inquest, is not with∣in the Statute, for it must be in matter depending in suite by Bill, Writt, action, or information, vide le Statut. Plus peccat author quam actor. Rookes case. 40. Eliz. fol. 99. THat the Commissioners in the Cōmission of Sewers ought to tax all which are in damage, or in dan∣ger of damage, for non-repaire of the Bancks, and not onely him, which hath the Land next adjoyning to the River. The Commission is grounded upon the Statute 6. H. 6. cap. 5. for if the Law were other∣wise, great inconvenience might follow, for it might
be, that the rage and force of the water might be such, that the value of the Land adjoyning would not serve to amend the Bancks, and therefore the Statute would have all in perill, and which take commoditie by the making of the Bancks to be contributory; for qui sentit commodum sentire debet & onus & ipsae leges cupiunt, ut jure regantur. And notwithstanding by the words of the Commis∣sion authoritie is given to the Commissioners, to doe according to their discretions; yet their proceedings ought to be limitted and bounded with the rule of the Law, and reason. For discretion is a knowledge or understanding to discerne betweene right and falshood, truth and wrong, shadowes and substances, equity and colourable glosses and pretences, and not to doe according to their wills and private affection; For a learned Man saith; Talis discretio discretionem confundit. Penruddocks case. 40. Eliz. fol. 100. IN a quod permittat betweene Clarke assignee of Tho∣mas Chichley, plaintiffe, and Ed: Penruddock and Mary his wife defendants, assignee of one John Cock, for that Cock 2o. 8bris 1o. Mariae erected upon his free∣hold a house in St. Johns streete so neere the Curte∣lage of an house of Thomas Chichley, that Domus illa super pendet, Anglice, doth overhang magnam partem vi∣delicet 3. pedes curtilagij the plaintiffe, sic quod aquae pluvi∣ales de eadem domo decedentes solum ejusdem curtilagij con∣terunt & magnopere ac indies magis magis{que} consumunt & Devastant, ac ea ratione curtilag' praed. quolibet pluviale tempore humectat'. & inundat. existit, quod praedictus Hen∣ricus Clarke inhabitans in eodem Messuagio nullum profi∣cuum seu easiamentum de eodem curtilagio percipere possit, ad necumentum liberi tenuenti praed'. &c. And it was re∣solved,
that the distilling of the waters in the time of the Feoffee or assignee is a new wrong; and this Writ lyeth after request of amendment, but not be∣fore, but it lyeth against him that did the wrong without request, and the action good, &c. Windsors case. 41. Eliz. fol. 102. IN a quare impedit by Windsor against the Archbishop of Canterbury for the Church of Buscott in the County of Bark: It was adjudged that if two have ti∣tle to present by turne, and the one present, who is admitted, instituted, and inducted, and afterwards is deprived for Crime, Heresie, &c. yet that Patron should not present againe, but that shall serve for his turne. So likewise if he present a meere Laicus, which was admitted, instituted, and induced, al∣though it be declared by sentence, that he was inca∣pable, and therefore voyd ab initio, yet because the Church was full untill the sentence declaratory be pronounced, yet that shall serve for his Turne. But when the admission and institution are meerely void, then that shall not serve for one Turne, as if a pre∣sentee be once admitted, instituted, and inducted, but hath not subscribed to the Articles, &c. accord∣ing to the Statute of 13. El. by which in this case the admission, institution, and induction are voyde, 23. El. Dier pl'. ult'. acc. Hungatts case. 43. El. Com. Banco. fol. 103. HƲngatt brought an action of debt upon an Obli∣gation against Mese and Smith, the condition was to performe an award between the plaintiffe on the one partie, and the defendants on the other; Ita quod arbitrium praed fiat & deliberetur utrique partium
praed. before such a day, the arbitrament before the day was delivered to the plaintiffe, and to Mese, but not to Smith, Judgement was given against the plain∣tiffe. It was resolved, that if two be of one partie, and two of another, and the words are, Ita quod deli∣ber. utri{que} partium, That the delivery of the arbitra∣ment to one of the one part, and another of the o∣ther partie is not sufficient; For the partie is to be intended of the whole partie, for one is as well with∣in the penaltie and danger of the Obligation as the other; and uter{que} is taken sometime Discretive, some∣times Collective, Secundum subjectam materiam; but here it is taken Collective. Bakers case. 42. Eliz. fol. 104. IF a plaintiffe in evidence shew any matter in wri∣ting or record, or any sentence in the Ecclesiasti∣call Court, whereupon Law doth arise, and the de∣fendant offer to demurre in Law upon the same, the plaintiffe cannot refuse to joyne, or wave his evi∣dence, and so on the other partie, and the reason is for that matter in Law, shall not be put in the mouth of Lay-men; but the King in this case is at libertie. Boulstons case. 40. El. in communi Banco. fol. 104. IT was adjudged that if a man make Cony-bor∣rowes in his owne Land, and the Conies encrease to so great a number, that they destroy his Neigh∣bours ground adjoyning; The Neighbours may not have an action of the case; for presently when the Coneys come into his Neighbours ground hee may kill them, because they are ferae naturae. And in this case it was resolved, that none may newly erect a Dove-house, but the Lord of a Mannor, and if any
doe, he may be punished in the Leete; But no acti∣on of the case lyeth for any particular man, for the infinitnesse of actions that might be brought. And of this opinion touching the new erecting of a Dove-cote, was Sir Roger Manwood, chiefe Baron, and the Barons of the Exchequer in the Exchequer cham∣ber. Aldens case. 43. Eliz. Com. Banco. fol. 105. AUncient demise is a good plea in an Ejectione firmae, although it is not in trespas, because by intendement the freehold may come in debate, and the interest of the Land is bound; auncient demesne is extendable upon a Statute by Elegit, but in an as∣sise by tenant by Elegit, auncient demesne is a good plea. 22. Ass. Pl. 45. Sir Henry Constables case. 43. El. in banco le roy. fo. 106. NOthing shall be said Wreccum maris, but such goods onely, which are cast or left upon the Land by the Sea: Flotsam maris, is when a Ship is drowned, or otherwise perish, and the goods flote upon the Sea; Jetsam maris, is when a Ship is in pe∣rill of drowning, and for disburthening thereof, the goods are cast into the Sea, and after notwithstand∣ing the Ship perish. Lagan vel potius Ligan, is when the goods so cast out of the Ship, and the Ship pe∣rish, and such goods are so ponderous that they sinke to the bottome, and the marriners to the intent to finde them, binde thereunto a Boy or a Corke, or o∣ther such thing to finde them againe; Et dicitur Li∣gan a Ligando, and none of these words which are cal∣led Flotsam, Jetsam, or Ligan, are called wreck, so long as they remaine in or upon the Sea; But if any
of them be cast upon the Land by the Sea, then it is said to be wreck, and by the Statute 15. R. 2. ca. 3. the Lord Admirall shall not have conusance or juris∣diction of wreck of Sea; but of the other three hee hath; for wreck is when the goods are cast upon the Land, and so within some County, whereof the Com∣mon Law may take conusance; But the other three are upon the Sea, Magis proprie dici poterit wreccum, si Navis frangatur & ex qua nullus vivus evasit, & max∣ime si dominus rerum subversus fuerit, & quicquid inde ad terram venerit erit domini regis; wreck may by pre∣scription belong to the Lord of a Mannor. It was re∣solved also, that the soyle upon which the Sea doth flow and reflow, scil. Between the high water marke, and the low water marke may be parcell of the Man∣nor of a Subject 16. El. Dier. And it was resolved, that when the Sea doth flow, ad plenitudinem maris, the high Admirall shall have jurisdiction of every thing done upon the water, between the high water marke, and the low water marke, as felony, &c. No proofe is allowable by the Law, but the verdict of twelve men; part of the goods were wreck, and part not, & damage assessed intirely, ergo Judgement given for the defendant. The King shall have flotsam upon the Sea, because within the ligeance of the King. Foxleys case. 43. El. Banco Regis. fol. 109. IT was resolved, if a Felon steale any goods, and leave them in a Mannor, or Towne, or in his house, or in the house of another, or hide them in the earth, or any other secret place, and afterwards fly, these goods are not forfeited, nor waife goods in the Law, for waife is where a felon in pursuite, waveth or lea∣veth the goods, or for feare to be taken thinking that pursuite was or is made, having the goods with him in
his possession flyeth away, and leaveth the goods. In these cases the goods shalbe said waved in Law; But if he had not the goods wth him, when he did fly being pursued, or for feare of being apprehended, the goods are not waved, nor forfeited, but the owner may take them againe when he will, without any fresh suite. But if the Felon in his flying wave them, the goods are forfeited by the Common Law; If the Felon up∣on fresh suite be not attaint, at the suite of the owner of the goods. And the reason that wave is given to the King, is for default of the owner, that he doth not make fresh suite after, for to apprehend the fe∣lon. Wherefore the Law doth impose the penaltie on the owner. Bona fugitivorum are the proper goods of him that flyeth away for felony; But it is to be observed, that if a man fly for felony, his goods are not forfeited, untill they be found by indictment or otherwise law∣fully found of record upon his acquitall, that he fled for the felony, they cannot be claimed by prescripti∣on, because that things forfeited by matter of re∣cord, cannot be claimed by prescription. But waife, stray, treasure trove, wreck of the Sea, &c. which things may be gained by usage without mat∣ter of record, there a man may prescribe to have Bo∣na & catalla felonum: in some cases bona & catalla felonum shall be forfeited by conviction, and some∣times without conviction, but alwayes when any for∣feiture is of any goods of felons, it ought to appeare of record, and that is the cause that such goods can∣not be claimed by prescription. Deodanda, are goods which cause the death of a man by misadventure, and are not forfeited, untill they be found of record, & therefore cannot be clai∣med by prescription, & the Jury that presents or finds the death, ought to finde and apprise the Deodandum
also, omnia quae movent ad mortem sunt deodanda; Bona & catalla in exigendo positorum, are when any be appea∣led or indicted of felony, and he withdraw or absent himselfe, for so long time as an exigent is awarded against him for his absenting (which is a flying away in Law) he shall forfeite all his goods and chattells which he had at the time of the exigent, and after be found not guiltie, 22. Lib. Ass. Looke the Statute 21. H. 8. ca. 11. concerning goods waved, and for re∣stitution, &c. Mallaryes case. 43. Eliz. fol. 111. REndring rent to one and his heires, and to one or his heires, are all one; But a Feoffment tenendum to one or his heires is but during the life of the Feoffee; Nemo potest plus juris in alium transferre quam ipse habet: this case consisteth much upon atturne∣ments. vide le case. Wades case. 43. Eliz. in Communi Banco. fo. 114. A Man was bound to pay 250. li. Legal. monet. Angliae, on a day certaine, the last time of the day, that so much money can be numbred is the best time, so that it be before the setting of the Sunne, and the most convenient time by Law, that both parties may meete: five shillings in Spanish money, and two pi∣stolets in gold were tendered. It was resolved that the Spanish silver was lawfull money of England by Proclamation in tempore Philippi & Mariae, and so French Crownes; for the King by his Prerogative and Proclamation may make any forreigne coyne lawfull money of England: That if a man tender more then he is bound to pay, it is good, Omne majus con∣tinet in se minus, That the tendring of 250. li. in bags
without shewing or numbering the same is good ten∣der, if the truth be that there was so much, vide Win∣ters case, if there be any counterfeit money in the same, yet if the partie then accept the same, he can∣not compell the partie to change it, or if it be a rent, or for non-payment a reentree, yet the once accep∣tance is good, and the lessor may not reenter. Foliambes Case, 43. Eliz. fo. 115. IN a writ of Estrepement, the Sheriffe may resist them that will make wast, or cut downe Trees, and if he cannot otherwise, he may Imprison them, and may make warrants to others, and he may take Posse comitatus for his aide. A writ of Estrepement ly∣eth in an Action of wast, as well before judgement as after. Olands Case, 44. Eliz. Banco regis. fo. 116. A Feme Copy holder Durante viduitate, sowes the Land, and taketh Husband, the Lord shall have the Corne, for although her estate was incertaine, yet it was determined by her owne act; so if Lessee at will sowe the Land, and determine the will, but if Baron and Feme are Lessees during the coverture, and the Baron sowe the Land, and they are after Divorsed, Causa praecontractus, the Baron shall have the Emblements, because this is the Act of the Court. Pynnells Case, 44. Eliz. fo. 117. com. banco. PYnnell brought an Action of Debt upon an Obli∣gation against Cole, of 16. l. for payment of 8. l. 10. s. on the 11. of Nov. 1600. The Defendant
pleaded, that at the instance of the Plaintiffe before the sayd day he paid him 5. l 10. s. and it was re∣solved by all the Court, that the payment of a les∣ser summe in satisfaction of a greater summe, cannot be satisfaction for all, so that by no possibility a mea∣ner summe may satisfie the Plaintiffe of a greater; but the Gift of an Horse, Cowe, Robe, &c. in satis∣faction is good. But in this case it was resolved, That the pay∣ment of a parcell, and acceptance thereof before the day, in satisfaction of all, is a good satisfaction, in re∣spect of the circumstance of time; for paradventure, parcell of that before the day, may be more bene∣ficiall unto him then the whose summe of money at the day, and the value of satisfaction is not materiall, for if I be bound to pay you 10. l. at Westminster, and you request me to pay 5. l. at Yorke, and you will accept the same in full satisfaction of the 10. l. this is a good satisfaction in respect of the place, but in this case, the Plaintiffe had judgement for the in∣sufficient pleading, for he did not pleade that he had paid 5. l. 10 s in full satisfaction, (as by Law he ought) but pleaded the payment of part generally, and the Plaintiffe accepted the same in full satisfacti∣on, and alwayes the manner of the tender, and of the payment shall be directed by him that maketh the tender and payment, and not by him that ac∣cepteth it. Edriches Case, 1. Jacobi. com. banco. fo. 118. A Rent charge is granted to B. for the life of C. the Grantor leaseth for life to D. the remain∣der in Fee to E. C. and D. dyes, B. distraines E. for all arreares, this is good by the Statute of 32. H. 8. cap. 37.
Whelpdales Case, 2. Jacobi. com. banco. fo. 119. IN Debt brought against one joint Obligor the De∣fendant pleads Non est factum, adjudged for the Plaintiffe. 1. Resolved, he may pleade in abatement of the Writ, but not Non est factum, for every one is obliged in the intirety, therefore if Debt be brought against both, and one is outlawed, the other who appeares shall be charged with all. 2. If a Deede be avoidable by plea he shall not pleade, Non est factum. 3. If a Deede be made voyd by Statute he shall not pleade Non est factum, but shall avoide it by plea, but if a deede by matter Ex post facto, become not his deede, he may pleade Non est factum, as if one deliver a deede to deliver over to I. S. who refuseth, &c. Longs Case, 2. Jacobi banco regis. fo. 120. EXception to the Inditement of Murder, the In∣ditement was taken, Infra libertatem villae de C. and C. where the Torte is done, is not said to be within the Liberty. Response, that to Inditements certainty to a certaine intent in generall sufficeth, and not to every particular intent, for that is, Nimia subtilitas, and it shall be intended, that the Ville of C. is within the liberty of C. the Indictment is, Quod dedit vulnus super anteriorem partem corporis subter mamil∣lam, where it should be Mammillam. Resolved, that false Latine shall not quash an Indictment, if the word be sensible, and these two words are good La∣tine, also this is superfluous, for Super anteriorem par∣tem corporis, is sufficient, and shall be intended the Trunke betwixt the Neck and Thighs. 3. Vulnus,
where it should be Plaga, over-ruled because Synoni∣ma. 4. Le depthe is not shewed, it was said, that it did penetrate all his body, whereby it appeareth that it was mortall. 5. It is said, that the wound did penetrate his body, and not the Bullet, this is significant enough. 6. Percussit wanteth, and for this cause the Indictment was quashed, for in all ca∣ses of death this ought to be except in case of poy∣soning, and for this last error the Outlary was rever∣sed, and H. D. was discharged. Saffins Case, 3. Jacob. fo. 123. com. banco. A Man maketh a Lease for yeares to commence after the end or determination of a former Lease. In esse. The first Lease endeth, the second Lessee doth not enter, but he in reversion entereth, and maketh a Feoffement, and levyeth a fine with Proclamations, and five yeares passe without entry, or claime of the second Lessee. If this fine be a Bar, was the Question, and it was resolved to be a Bar, for the Statute of 4. H. 7. c. 24. speakes of interest, and a Lease for yeares is an interest within the Sta∣tute, so o tenant by Elegit, &c. De Libellis famosis 3. Jac. fo. 125. A Libell may be made as well against a private man as against a Magistrate, Non refert, whither the Libell be true, or whither the party be of good fame, or ill fame, for it inciteth all the same Family, Kindred, or Society to revenge, and so tendeth by consequence to the effusion of blood. It was resol∣ved in the Starre-Chamber, 44. Eliz. Hallywoods Case, that if any finde a Libell, and would preserve himselfe out of danger, if it be against a private man,
the finder may eyther burne it, or presently deliver it to a Magistrate, but if it concerne a Magistrate or publick person, then he ought to give it to a Magi∣strate. A Libell may be as well by words, Verbis aut cantilenis, as Writings, and by Pictures or Igno∣minious Signes, as Gallowes, &c. The Punishment is by Indictment, as in the Starre-Chamber. Palmers Case, 8. Jac. fo. 126. banco regis. THe Gardian in Chivalry shall have the single va∣lue of the Marriage of the Heire without ten∣der, otherwise the Heire may defeate the Lord by Marriage, or goe beyond the Sea, and so prevent the Lord of any tender, if it were requisite. Caudreyes Case, 33. Eliz. in Trespasse. THe Jury found the Statute of 1. Eliz. cap. 1. and cap 2. and that the Plaintiffe was deprived for Preaching against the Booke of Common Prayer; by the Bishop of London, una cum assensu, &c. Resolv. 1, The deprivation was good for the first offence, because the Act of 1. Eliz. for uniformity of Common Prayer doth not abrogate 1. Eliz. for Ecclesiasticall Jurisdiction without negative words, and by an expresse proviso the Jurisdiction of the Bishop is saved. Resolv. 2. That sentence given by the Bishop by assent of his Collegues, ought to be allowed by our Law. Resolv. 3. The Commissioners shall be intended Subjects borne, &c. Stabitur praesumptionj, &c. Also it is found that the King authorized them, Secundum formam Statuti. Resolv. 4. The Act of 1. Eliz. for Ecclesiasticall
Jurisdiction was onely declaratory, for the King be∣ing an absolute Monarch, and head of the body po∣litick, had plenary power to minister justice to his Subjects in Causes Ecclesiasticall and temporall. See Circumspecte agatis. 13. E. 1. and Articulj Clerj. 9. E. 2. Reges sacro oleo uncti sunt spiritualis jurisdictionis ca∣paces See there diverse judgements, Lawes, and Acts of Parliament, cited to prove the Kings supre∣macy in Causes Ecclesiasticall. The End of the Fifth Booke.
THE SIXTH BOOK. Where Services intire shall be Ap∣portioned. Bruertons Case, 36. Eliz. In the Court of Wards. Fol. 1. LORD and Tenant of three Acres, by Homage, Fealty, a hawke and Suite of Court, the Tenant makes a Feoffe∣ment of one Acre, the Feoffee by the common Law shall hold by all in∣tire services, annuall and casuall, and the Statute of Quia emptores Terrarum, doth not ex∣tend to intire services, but by the Statute of Marlebr. c. 9. the Feoffees shall make but one Suite, and he who doth it shall have Contribution against the others, if they are severally infeoffed, otherwise if jointly. 2. Intire services shall be multiplied by the Act of the Tenant, and extinct by the Act of the Lord, as if he purchase part. 3. By Act of the Lord intire service for his private benefite is extinct, otherwise if it be for the publick good, for works of Charity, Devotion, or administra∣tion of Justice. 4. If part comes to the Lord by act in Law, yet
the intire service remaines, except in Case where Contribution is to be made, for the Lord shall not contribute. 5. If part comes to the Lord by Act in Law, and of himselfe as by recovery in a Cessavit, all the in∣tire services are gone. Where the Paroll shall demurre for the nonage of the Demandant, and where the Tenant shall have his Age. Markals case, 35. Eliz. com. banco. fo. 3. IN a Formedon in the remainder by an Infant of a remainder limitted to his Father, and his heirs, the tenant cannot pray, that the parol may demur, but in a Formedon in the reverter he may: In acti∣ons auncestrell, the Tenant may pray that the parol may demurre, because a right onely discends to the Infant, and the Law will not suffer him to sue, for feare that he may loose for want of understanding; but in possessory Actions he cannot, because then e∣very one will put Infants out of possession, and it would be mischevious if they should not regaine their possession untill full age: So it is in all Writs, where the cause of action happens in the time of the Infant. And as to Actions auncestrell, they are of two sorts. Droiturell and possessory, the first is, where a right onely discends from the Auncestor, and the Infant ought to lay the explees in the Aunce∣stor, and there the Tenant (without plea pleaded) may pray that the paroll may demurre, but if the Auncestor were never in possession (as in this case he was not) and the Infant himselfe is the first in
whom it vests there (without plea pleaded) hee shall not pray that the Parol may demurre: but if a right discend from an auncester who was in possessi∣on, although the Action doth not discend, the Te∣nant may pray that the parol may demurre, as if Non compos mentis alien and dye: In actions auncestrell possessory, the parol shall not demurre without plea: but if at the common Law the Tenant had pleaded a feoffement of the auncestor, then he may pray, &c. but the Statute of Gloucester, cap. 2. aideth that, in writs of Cosinage, Besaiell, and aiell, but this extends not to other actions, in a Formedon in the discend∣er, where an Infant recovers, but a limitted estate the Parol shall not demurre without plea, in an Assize, or assize of Mortdauncester, the Parol shall not demurr because the Jury is to appeare the first day, and try all things. The Statute of Westm. 1. cap. 46. Age is taken a∣way in entry upon disseisin, where fresh suite is made, but an Infant shall have his age in all reall Actions, where he is in by discent, and the Action is not foun∣ded upon his owne wrong, except in Nuper obijt, and Partitione facienda, where both are in possession or attaint, for the mischiefe of the death of the Petty Jury. The Statute of West. 2. cap. 40. Ousteth the age of the Vouchee in cuj. in vita. and Sur cuj. in vita, although that the Tenant will answer, if the parol ought to demurre, yet the Court ought to award that the parol shall demurre. Sir John Molyns Case, 40. Eliz. in Scaccar. fo. 5. KIng Edward the third, Lord, Abbot of Westmin∣ster, Mesne, and C. Tenant. C is attainted of Treason, the King grants to Sir Jo. Mo. Tenendum de nobis & álijs capitalibus dominis feodi illius per servitia,
&c. the Mesnalty is revived. Obj. 1. That the te∣nure shall be Per servitia inde debita, at which time no service was due to the Mesne. 2. An expresse te∣nure of the King is limitted, and it cannot be im∣mediatly holden but of one. To the first it was an∣swered, that there are sufficient words to renew the Mesnalty, because the intention of the King, ap∣peares to be so, and it is reasonable, that the Mesne who offended not, should not suffer losse. 2. It shall be holden imediatly of the Abbot, and me∣diatly of the King. Wheelers Case, 43. Eliz. in Scaccario. fo. 6. THe King grants Land Tenendum by a Rose, Pro omnibus servitijs, this is Socage in chiefe, and the tenure shall be by fealty and a Rose, and (Pro omnibus) is to be intended of other services which the Law doth not implie. Resolutions and Diversities when a barre in one action shall be a barre in another. Ferrers Case. 41. Eliz. Com. Banco. fol. 7. IF one be barred by plea to the Writte, hee may have the same Writte againe; if by plea to the acti∣on of the Writte he may have his right action: If the plea be to the action, and he be barred by Judge∣ment upon demurrer, confession, or verdict, in per∣sonall actions it is a barre for ever, and in reall acti∣ons he is put to a Writte of higher nature, as barre in assize barreth one in Entry in nature of an assize, but he may have an assize of Mortdaumester, &c. But barre is not perpetuall if those who are barred
have not the meere right, therefore the heire in taile who is barred shall have the same action, so of the successor of a Parson, if he doth not pray in ayde of the Patron and Ordinary: He who lost by default be∣fore the Statute of Westminster 2. cap. 4. was put to a Writte of right, and if he could not have this Writte, he was without remedy: In case where a Writte of Entry in the post lyeth now, no remedy was before the Statute of Marlebridge, cap. 29. but a Writte of right. See there divers inconveniences which insue upon the breach or alteration of the auncient and fundamentall rules of the Common Law: Interest Reipublicae ut sit finis litium. Where a Writte shall be brought by Journeys accounts. Spencers case. 45. Eliz. Com. Banco. fol. 9. IF a formedon abate for undue summons, the de∣mandant may have another by Journeys accompts. 1. Resol. If a Writte abate by default of the deman∣dant himselfe, he shall not have another Writte by Journeys accompts, otherwise it is if by default of the Clerke or Sheriffe as in this case: If a Writte a∣bate for nontenure of all, he shall not have, &c. but if a Praecipe abate for non-tenure of parcell, he shall have another; so if it abate for joyntenancy of part of the demandant he shall not have a new Writte, be∣cause he had notice, otherwise it is of the part of the tenant: And this Writte shall be alwayes betwixt the parties to the first Writte, and of the same quan∣tity of acres: A Judiciall Writte shall never be sued by Journeys accompts, because it shall never abate for forme. 2. The second Writte is quasi, a continu∣ance
of the first Writte, therefore all pleas which re∣late to the purchase of the Writte shall be pleaded from the purchase of the first Writte, and costs of the first Writte shall be recovered. 32. E. 3. Journeys accompts. 16. 15. dayes were allowed. Jentlemans case. 25. Eliz. concerning Judges of Courts. fol. 11 IN the Hundred Courts the Sutors are Judges, in the Court of Pypowders, the Steward is Judge; In a Leet, the Steward is Judge; In a Court Baron, the Sutors which are by the common Law are Judges, Rex sectatoribus Curiae, &c. Vobis mandamus, &c. ad ju∣dicium reddendum, &c. procedatis: but in Redisseisin the Sheriffe is Judge, by the Statute of Merton. cap. 3. and in the Tourne. Morrices case. 27. Eliz. Com. Banco. fol. 12. IT was adjudged, that after the act of 28. H. 8. ca. 1. although joyntenants be compellable to make par∣tition by Writte, as well as Copartners, yet they may not make partition by words, as Copartners may doe by the common Law. If two joyntenants make par∣tition by Writte, the warranty remaineth, otherwise it is if it be by deed by Consent. Cases of pardon. 29. Eliz. fol. 13. BƲrton Parson of Isbock in Leic: was deprived Anno 12. El. for committing Adulterie, and after by the generall pardon 2. Apr. 13. El. the offence of a∣dulterie (int. alia) was pardoned, before the 14. of February then last past. And it was said, that before the pardon, that crimen adulterij praed. transivit in rem
judicatam, and therefore the sentence should remaine in force; And therefore untill the sentence were re∣versed the deprivation was in force. But it was resol∣ved, that Burton by vertue of the said pardon is be∣come Parson againe, without any sentence declaring the said deprivation to be voyde; For by the pardon the adultery which was the cause of the sentence is discharged, and by consequence, all that which did stand or depend upon the same foundation is also discharged, vide 20. El. Dier A. was bound in a Statute of 20. li. to B. B. sued Execution, and the Lands of A. were delivered in Execution, and after B. maketh Defeasance to A. by Indenture, that if A. doe pay to B. 8. li. at a certaine day, that then the Statute to be voyde; And it was adjudged that although the Statute was executed, yet the Defeasance of the Statute was sufficient in Law to defeate as well the Statute, as the Execution thereof; For the Statute is the foundation of all, and if that be defeated, all that is builded on the same, shall be defeated also. 20. ass. pla. 7. Burglary was excepted out of the generall pardon of 28. Eliz. by that the attainder of burglary is excepted, for the offence remaines after judgement, and is the founda∣tion of it. Arundells case. 36. Eliz. Banco Regis. fol. 14. AN Inditement of murther in King-streete in W. and the visne from W. and it was vitious, for it ought to be from the most certaine place, that is the Parish, for W. being a Citie it shall be intended that it is greater then the Parish, and therefore a new Venire facias was awarded.
Treports case. 36. El. Banco Regis. fol. 14. A. Tenant for life, remainder in fee to B. both by Deed indented, joyne in a Lease to Treport; the question was, whether the same shall be adjudged in Law, the Lease of both of them or not; And it was resolved, that it was the Lease of A. during his life, and the confirmation of B. And after the death of A. it was the Lease of B. and the confirmation of A. and because the plaintiffe had declared of a joynt demise of A. and B. it was adjudged against the plain∣tiffe in an Ejectione firmae. If tenant for life, and he in remainder joyne in a Lease, rendring rent, tenant for life shall have the rent during his life. Edens case. 37. Eliz. Banco Regis. fol. 15. RIens passa by Letters patents shall be tryed where the Land is, & not where the patent beares date, for the Patent is not traversed, but the effect of the issue is, whether the Queene had the said Land to grant or not. Colyers case. 37. Eliz. Com. Banco. fol. 16. ONe demiseth to his daughter for life, and after to his brother, paying 20. s. to J. S. the bro∣ther had fee for the summe to be paid by him, for otherwise he may pay the 20. s. and die without sa∣tisfaction; but if the payment be to be made out of the profits of the Land, he shall have but for life, for there he can be at no prejudice.
Wyldes case. 41. Eliz. Banco Regis. fol. 16. A Man deviseth Lands to the husband and the wife, and to the children of their bodies; The questi∣on was, whether they have an estate for life, or an inheritance in taile. And it was resolved, that if they had children at the time of the Demise made, then they had but an estate for life; But if they had no children, then they had an estate of inheritance in taile. Sir Edward Cleeres case. 42. Eliz. fol. 17. A Man is seized of three acres of Land houlden in Capite, and maketh a Feoffment in Fee of two of them, to the use of his wife for her life; and after maketh a feoffment by Deed of the third acre, to the use of such persons, and of such estate and estates as he should limitt and appoint by his last Will in wri∣ting; And afterwards by his last Will in writing, hee Devised the said third acre to one in fee; and if this Devise was good for all the third acre, or not, or for two parts thereof, or voyd for all, was the question; And it was adjudged, that the Devise was good; For the Feoffor by his last Will limitted the estates ac∣cording to his power, reserved to him upon the Fe∣offment, the estates should take effect by force of the Feoffment, and the use is directed by the Will; So as in this case the Will is onely directory; But if he declared his Will by writing without any reference to his authoritie or power, as owner of the Land, and to limitt no use according to his power. In this case the Land being houlden in capite, the Devise is good for two parts, and voyd for the third part. If a man make a Feoffment in Fee of Lands in capite, to
the use of his last Will, although he Devise the Land with reference to the Feoffment, yet the Will is voyd for a third part; for a Feoffment to the use of his last Will, and to the use of him, and his heires is all one. In this case when the partie had conveyed two parts to the use of his wife, by his act executed hee cannot as owner of the Land Devise any part of the residue by his Will, and therefore because he hath not an election, as in the case put before, whether to limit according to his power, or Devise the same as owner of the Land, (for in the case at Barre as ow∣ner of the Land, (having conveyed two parts to the use of his wife,) he cannot make any Devise.) The Devise of necessitie must inure to a limitation of the use, otherwise the Devise should be altogether voyd. Packmans case. 37. Eliz. Banco Regis. fol. 18. WIlson brought an action upon the case upon a trover against Packman. The case was thus; A man dyed intestate, and the Ordinary committed the administration to a stranger, and after the next of kindred of the Decedent sued out a Citatiō in the Court Christian, to have it repealed, and (pendente lite) the administrator to defeate the plaintiffe selleth the goods of the decedent to the defendant, and after the Letters of administration were revoked by sen∣tence, and the first sentence anulled and made voyd, and the administration granted to the plaintiffe. And it was resolved, that the action did not lie; and in this case the diversitie was houlden, betweene a suite by Citation, for to countermand or revoke the for∣mer administration, and an appeale, which is alwayes a reversing of a former sentence; for an appeale doth suspend the former sentence, otherwise of a Citation.
And in this case because the first administrator had the absolute propertie of the goods in him, without question he may sell them to whom he will, and al∣though the administration be revoked afterwards, yet that cannot defeat the Sale. But if the sale or gift be by covine, it is voyd against Creditors by the Statute of 13. El. but it is good against a second ad∣ministrator. And if an administrator wast the goods, and afterwards the administration is granted to ano∣ther, yet every debtor shall charge him in debt. An administration may be granted upon condition, and whatsoever the administrator doth before the condi∣tion broken, is good. Gregories case. 38. El. Banco Regis. fol. 20. VErba aequivoca & in dubio posita, intelliguntur in dignio∣ri & potentiori sensu, secundum excellentiam, as if the speech be or writing of J. S. generally it shall be in∣tended of the father, where the father and sonne are both of a name; and if it be of two Brothers both of a name, it shall be intended of the eldest, for these are more worthy; so where the Statute of 4. & 5. Phil. & Ma. speaketh in any Court of Record it shall be intended of the foure Courts at Westminster, be∣cause the Kings Attorney is attendant there. Michelbornes case. 38. Eliz. Banco Regis. fol. 21. THe Court of Marshalsea, doth onely hould plea of actions of trespasse, within the verge, if the one of the parties be of the Kings houshold, and in contracts and Covenants, where both parties are of the Kings houshold, and of none other actions, nor persons, by the Act of Articuli super Chartas. 28. E. 1.
Butler & Goodalls case. 40. El. Banco Regis. fol. 21 IT was resolved upon the Statute of 21. H. 8. that a Parson of a Church ought to stay and be Com∣morant upon his Rectorie (viz.) upon the Parson∣age-house, and not in any other house, although it be within the Parish, but lawfull imprisonment without covine, is a good excuse of non-residence: also if there be no Parsonage-house, for impotentia excusat Legem; also sicknesse without fraud, if the patient remove by advice of his Councell in Physicke bona fide, for better aire, and recovery of his health. Ambrosia Gorges case. 40. El. fol. 22. in Cur. Wardorum. IT was resolved, that the Father shall have the Wardship of his Daughter and heire apparent, so long as shee continueth his heire apparent; But when the Father hath issue a sonne, then shee shall be in ward to the Queene; for then he is heire apparant, and not the Daughter. Ambrosia was daughter of Sir Arthur Gorge by Douglas, Daughter and heire of Vi∣count Bindon, and was married to Francis Gorge, which Francis dyed, when Ambrosia was of ten yeares of age. It was resolved also that the Queene not∣withstanding the said marriage, should have the Wardship of the said Ambrosia; for it was not a com∣pleat marriage, because to every marriage there ought to be a consent; For consensus non concubitus fa∣cis matrimonium, & consentire non possunt ante annos nubi∣les; And upon conference had with the Civilians, it was agreed after such a marriage, if the husband and the wife marry again, it shall not be counted Bigamie And 30. E. 1. tit. Gard. 156. if the ancestor marry his heire infra annos nubiles, and dye, the Lord shall
recover the body of the Infant, because the heire may disagree; It was agreed that the grandfather shall not have the wardship of the sonne within age, the father being dead in his life time. Marquesse of Winchester his case. 41. Eliz. fol. 23. in Banco Regis. BY the Law it is not sufficient, that the testator be of memory (when he makes his Will,) to an∣swer to ordinary and usuall questions, but he ought to have a disposing memory, so as he is able to make disposition of his Lands with understanding and rea∣son. And this is such a memory, which is called safe and perfect memory, otherwise a Prohibition lyeth at the common Law generally, to stay all the pro∣ceedings in the spirituall Court, as the probate of the Will, &c. untill this Suggestion be tryed at the com∣mon Law. Reades Case, 42. Eliz. banco regis. fo. 24. IN trespasse the Defendant makes Title, for that A. W. was seised in fee, and leased to him, the Plain∣tiffe maketh title by discent, and traverseth the Lease and good, for it may be true, that A. W. was seised, and yet that a discent was cast to the Plain∣tiffe, therefore the Lease is most materiall to be tra∣versed. Helyars Case, 41. Eliz. banco regis. fo. 24. IN a Replevin the Defendant avoweth by grant of a terme by I. A. to S. from whom he claimeth, the Plaintiffe pleads in barre that I. A. married T. who by a former deed granted the terme to the plaintiffe,
and traverseth the grant made to S. and vitious, for he who claimeth by the first assignement shall not traverse the second, but he who claimes by the se∣cond shall traverse the first. But the first Feoffee shall traverse the last feoffment, and the last feoffee shall not traverse the first feoffement, because fee may be gained by disseisin after the first feoffement, but a Lease for yeares caanot. Ruddocks case, 41. Eliz. banco regis, fo. 25. IN replevyn against six the Plaintiffe recovers, the Defendants bring error, the Plaintiffe pleads the release of one of them not good: Where diverse are to recover a personall thing, the release or default of one barres all, but not where they are to discharge themselves of a personalty, if they are compelled to joyne, as in error and attaint, otherwise in Outlary, because not compellable to joyne, for where they are to discharge themselves, they have no joynt in∣terest, and although they shall have their damages againe, it shall be intended that they paid them of their severall goods, otherwise it may be doubted, if Execution had beene made of goods, which they have joyntly. Sharps case, 42. Eliz. fo. 26. com. banco. IF a man make a feoffement in Fee, or a Lease for life, and say to the Feoffee (being eyther on the Lands of within the view) Enter into this Land and enjoy the same, according to this deed, &c. this is a good livery, but the delivery of the deede upon the Lands without any further ceremony or saying, doth not amount to a livery. Throughgoods Case. 9. Jacob, in the nineth Booke. The actuall delivery of
a Writing, sealed to the party without any words, is a good livery, but not a livery of seisin, although the Party be upon the ground. If I deliver a deede unto the feoffee or Lessee of the Messuage, mentioned in the deede in the name of seisin of the said Messuage, and of all the Lands, tenements, &c. in the same contained, or other such like words, without any ceremony, or act done, this is a good seisin. The Case of Souldiers. 43. Eliz. fo. 27. THe Statutes of 7. H. 7. cap. 1. and 3. H. 8. cap. 5. against Souldiers who run away, are acts perpetuall, for the word King includeth all his suc∣cession, and a gift to the King inureth to his Succes∣sors. Vicount Mountagues Case, 43. Eliz. in Scaccar. fol. 27. VIcount M. with License of the K. suffers a recove∣ry to B. and D. to uses with power of revoca∣tion and limitting of new, and revokes and limits new uses, the King shall have no fine for aliena∣tion. 1. Resolved, if the King doth license to alien to one, and alienation is made to the use of another, the King shall not have a fine, for although that the King was not informed of his Tenant, yet the use is executed by the Statute of 27. H. 8. which can doe no wrong, and the proviso in the Statute, that a fine shall be paid for executing of uses, is to be intended of uses raised by Covenant, or declared upon a Fine, Feoffement, &c. when no License of alienation is obtained.
2. Although that by revocation, and new limit∣tation of uses, the tenant of the King be altered, yet no fine is due, because all ariseth out of the estate of B. and D. which was made with License. Greenes Case, 44. Eliz. banco regis. fol. 29. TEnant for life, of a Mannor to which an advow∣son is appendant, the remainder in Fee to I. S. presenteth one, who at the suite of the Tenant for life is deprived for not reading the Articles; but no notice is given to the Patron, the Queene by lapse presents the Defendant, Tenant for life, and his in∣cumbent die, he in the remainder presents the Plain∣tiffe Greene who recovereth. 1. Resolv. Although the Patron were party to the Suite, and so had notice, yet lapse shall not in∣curre without notice given by the ordinary, as the Statute speakes, and the notice ought to be speciall, that he did not reade the Articles, and therefore was deprived, and generall notice is not sufficient. 2. The Church is voyd, Ipso facto, by the Statute of 13. Eliz. without deprivation. 3. If the Queene present Ratione Lapsus, where shee is Patron, this is voyd, A fortiori, when shee had no title at all. 4. The Patron is not put to a Quare impedit, by presenting him who read not the Articles, nor by Collation, but by Collation of him who had right to Collate, the Patron is put out of possession. 5. The Queene may be put out of possession of an advowson, because it is transitory, but shee cannot be put to a Writ of right of advowson, for none can gaine the Inheritance from her by wrong.
Boothies Case, 3. Jacobi. com. banco. fol. 30. THe condition of an Obligation, is, to deliver an Obligation to the Obligee, and to acknowledge satisfaction, it must be done in convenient time, for acts transitory to be done to the Obligee, although a place be appointed, shall be done in convenient time, and acts of their nature locall, ought to be performed in convenient time, if concurrence of the Obligor and Obligee be not requisite: Also here the delivery of the bond being transitory, and the acknowleding satisfaction such an act as may be per∣formed in the absence of the Obligee, they ought to be done in convenient time, without request: but if the Act be locall, and their concurrence necessary, the Obligor had time, during his Life, if not hasten∣ed by request: If the concurrence of the Obligor and a stranger be necessary, it ought to be done in convenient time, if concurrence of the Obligee and a stranger, it ought to be hastened by request: And alwaies, if the Act to be done is not for the benefit of the Obligee, but a labour to the Obligor, or a stranger, there he had time during his Life. Fitz-Williams Case, 2. Jacobi. banco regis. fol. 32. BAron and Feme Tenants for life, and to the heires of the body of the Baron, the Baron sole is vouched, in a common recovery, the taile is barred. Copledicks Case, 3. Report. 2. Resol. If Tenant in taile suffer a recovery to his owne use, the remainder to his wife with diverse remainders over, with power of revocation and limittation of new uses by any such writing, he revoketh all the remainders except that to his Wife, and by the same deede limits new uses;
this is good, for by any such writing shal be intend∣ed the same or any such, and it may be by the same deede, for, first it takes effect as a revocation. 2. By limittation of new uses, and there are not more in∣stances then one in it. See there Leaper & Wroths Case, cited 30. El. to prove, that powers whereby the in∣terest of Strangers shall be changed, shall be taken strictly, as a power to make leases for twenty one yeares, he cannot make a Lease for 21. yeares, to commence in Futuro. The Bishop of Bathes Case. 3. Jacobi. com. banco. fo. 34. THe B. 18. H. 8. Leaseth to E. and R. for sixty yeares, proviso, if they dye within the terme, that the B. and his Successors shall reenter. E. dyes, the B. dyes, the Successor Leases to C. Cum post sive per mortem &c. praedict. R. acciderit vacare, for sixty yeares with confirmation. R. dyeth: Resolv. every Lease ought to have a certaine beginning, and the continuance ought also to be certaine, eyther by expresse number of yeares, or by reference to an ex∣presse certeinty, or where a Lease may be reduced to a certeinty by matter, Ex post facto. Agreed, the second Lease vests presently in poynt of interest, to take effect in possession at the end of the first Terme, if by none of the accidents the first Lease become voyd in the meane time, and then the Lease shall commence at the first accident which doth happen, and the Lessee hath no Election.
The Deane and Chapter of Worcesters Case. 3. Ja∣cobi. fo. 37. THe D. and Ch. seised of a Mannor in Fee, in which were Copy-holds grantable for three lives, for 8. s. 8. d payable quarterly, and herriota∣ble, grant a copy-hold for the Life of three, reser∣ving the old rent halfe yearely, this is not voyd by 13. Eliz. cap. 1. Resolved, the grant of a copy-hold for the life of 3. is good, for although there may be an occupancy, yet it is not inconvenient, for an occupant shall be punished in wast. 2. Grant of a Copy-hold is a demise by the intent of the Sta∣tute, for in Law it is a Lease at will. 3. The omissi∣on of Herriot doth not make it voyd, because the annuall rent is reserved. 4. It is sufficient that the yearely rent be reserved twice in the yeare, for the Statute saith, yearly, which maketh a difference be∣tweene this Case, and the Lord Mountjoyes Case, in the fifth Report. Bellamyes case, 3. Jacobi. com. banco. fol. 38. A Lease upon condition, that the Lessee shall not alien without License, Assignee of the Lessee pleads that the Assignement was with License, and shewed not forth the Deede of License. 1. Because he did not claime by it. 2. Because the License was, Ex provisione hominis, and not Ex institutione legis. 3. Because it was executed and good. Henry Finches Case, 3. Jacobi. banco regis. fol. 39. A Grant of a rent charge out of diverse Mannors, &c. in the Parishes of E. and W. Aut alibi dictis
marerijs spectantur, and out of Lands, which is not par∣cell of any of the Mannors, these are not charged with the distresse, for, Alibi doth not charge more Land then is parcell of those Mannors, but all par∣cells of the said Mannors out of the said Parishes. Sir Anthony Mildmayes Case, 3. Jacob. banco regis. fol. 40. 1. REsolved, a perpetuity is against the rules and pollicy of the common Law. 2. It is impos∣sible that an estate tayle shall cease, before that Te∣nant in taile dyes without issue, and an estate cannot be made to continue as to one, and determine as to another except by Statute. 3. A gift in taile upon condition that he shall not suffer a common recove∣ry, is voyd, because he had power by the Law. 4. It is a voyd saying, that his estate shall cease, if he goe about, &c. for, Non officit conatus nisi sequatur effectus. Also, many ambiguities will arise thereupon because the Law doth not define it, and it is so uncertaine, that is not traversable. Blakes Case, 3. Jacobi. com. banco. fo. 43. AN accord with satisfaction is a good barre in a Writ of Covenant, because the duty accrueth not meerly by the deede, but by a torte subsequent, together with the deed, and it is a good barre in an attaint, because this is not founded upon the record onely, but upon the false Oath also: In all cases where an arbitrament is a good Plea, an accord with satisfaction is also, and so generally in all Actions where damages onely are to be recovered.
Higgins Case, 3. Jacob. com. banco. fo. 44. IF a man have judgement upon an Obligation, so long as this judgement is in force, he may not have a new action upon the same Obligation. For, Interest reipublicae ut sit finis litium & infinitum in jure re∣probatur. A Statute Staple is but an Obligation re∣corded, and one Obligation cannot drowne another, although they be both for one Debt, and the Obligee may choose upon whither he will bring his Action. 11. H. 4. and 2. Jac. Sir William Cornewalles Case, and Branthwaytes Case, and in every judgement, the De∣fendant is amerced, and so he shall be amerced, in In∣finitum. Dowdales Case, 3. Jac. com. banco. fol. 46. IN Debt against an Executor, the Defendant pleads, fully administred, the Plaintiffe saith, that he hath assets at E. the Jury found assets in Ire∣land. 1. Resol. when the place is materiall the poynt in issue cannot be found in another place. 2. Where the place is named but for conformity assets may be found in another County. 3. In a generall issue, the Jury shall finde all materiall locall things in ano∣ther County. 4. The Jury by a meane shall trie locall things in another County, as a release in a forreigne County, the Jurors shall assesse damages for the pro∣fits of the Land in the other County. Multa concedun∣tur per obliquum quae non, &c. but in case of felony, the Tryall shall be where the offence was done. 5. The finding of assets is the substance, and that it is in Ire∣land is surplusage: A thing done beyond the Sea
shall be tryed here, if the foundation of the Action be here. Boswells Case. 3. Jac. banco regis, fol. 48. IN a Quare impedit, judgement was given, to remove the incumbent of the Queene, not party to the Writ who was presented, pending the Writ. Resolv. That by the common Law, by admission and insti∣tution, the Usurpor gaines the inheritance of the ad∣vowson, without regard of the nonage of the Patron, because he is in by judiciall act, and the Bishop shall be supposed not to doe wrong to the Patron, and the incumbent shall not be disturbed to excercise his function, but the King shall have a Quare impedit at the common Law. Collation doth not put him who hath right to present, out of possession, but if one have right to Collate it doth, an infant by the Act of W. 2. c. 5. shall have a Quare impedit, if a man usurp upon an infant who had a Mannor, to which, &c. by discent, who at full age infeoffeth B. the Church voideth, &c. by the usurpation the infant was out of possession, and his right passed not, and seems the In∣fant is without remedy: If a Clerke commeth in by course of Law, this gaineth not the inheritance a∣gainst the right Patron who was not party to the writ. The King shall not recover damages by this Statute, for he is not within the first branch, Si tem∣pus semestre transierit, nor within the second Branch, for that depends upon the first, yet he shall count to damages. An incumbent shall not be moved if he be not named in the writ, and if he be not admitted, &c. pending the writ, and lapse shall not incurre if the Bishop be named in the Writ, otherwise if he be not: If he who is presented pending the Writ be in by rightfull Patron or not, yet he who recovereth in
a Quare impedit, shall have a generall Writ to the Bi∣shop, which he must execute of necessity, and after that, the parties may try their titles as the Law shall determine. Countesse of Rutlands Case. in the Starre-Chamber. 3. Jacobi. fo. 52. THat the person of a Countesse or a Baronesse may not be arrested for Debt or trespasse, for al∣though in respect of their Sex they may not sit in the Parliament, yet they are Peers of the Realme, and shall be tryed by their Peers, Stat. 20. H. 6. Peers of the Realme may not be sworne in any in∣quest; a Countesse in Marrying with a Husband, doth loose her Name of a Countesse. If a Baronesse. &c. by Marriage, marry againe un∣der the Nobility, shee looseth her dignity, but if she be Noble by Birth, or descent, yet whomsoever she Marryeth, she remaineth Noble; for Birth-right is Character intelebilis, and that which is gained by Marriage, may also be lost by Marriage. A Sheriffe ought not to dispute the Authority of Courts, but he ought to Execute the Writs to him directed, for thereunto be they Sworne. Serjeant at Mace upon a cap. ad satisfaciendum, came to the the said Countesse in Cheapside, being in her Coach, and touched her body with the Mace, and said, I ar∣rest you Madame at the Suite of S. and those were all the words that were us'd, & therupon compell'd the Coach man to carry her unto the Counter-gate in Woodstreete, and the Sheriffe tooke her into his house. In this Case it was resolved, that the Sheriffe, Bay∣liffe, &c. upon the Arrest ought to shew at whose suite, out of what Court, for what cause it is, and when the processe is returnable, and that this generall Arrest
of the Countesse cannot be said, that it was by force of the said Writ of Execution, and that this Arrest was of the Serjeants owne head, without warrant, and against Law, and that the said Countesse was falsly imprisoned, but she remained in the Sheriffes custody 7. or 8. dayes, untill shee paid the Debt, but because the Arrest was by a fained Action, entered in the Counter, the Serjeants were sentenced. The Lord Chandos case. 4. Jacobi. fol. 55. THe King grants to B. in taile, and in considerati∣on of the surrender of the Letters Patents by force, whereof the King is seised in fee, granteth to him and his wife, and to the heires of B. the reversi∣on passeth, for the recitall that the King was seised in fee, was but the Collection of the King, and no part of the consideration or suggestion of the party; And when the King grants land in posse, if he had but a reversion this shall passe, for he is not de∣ceived because lesse passes then he intended. Bredimans case. 4. Jacobi. Com. Banco. fol. 56. A Man deviseth a rent for life out of a Mannor, and he deviseth the Mannor for yeares, the ter∣mor enters, and pays the rent, after the Terme, the devisee brings an assize against the Terretenant. Resol. Payment by lessee for yeares of the rent gi∣veth no seisin to have an assize. 1. In respect of the imbecillity of his estate. 2. He cannot give seisin because he had not seisin, and therefore a Pracipe lyeth not against him because he cannot render sei∣sin; but he may take seisin to the use of him in the freehold: A disseisor may give seisin of a rent secke, because he hath a freehold, and it is lawfull. 3. A
rent secke is caecus & siccus, therefore it behoveth the first payment (which giveth life unto it) shall be made by a Tenant of the freehold, and in this case being created by devise an Annuity lyeth not there∣upon, otherwise if it be by grant: and Tenant of the freehold ought to attorne to a grant of such a rent over, therefore he shall give seisin: But seisin by a Bailiffe is good, if seisin were had before within sixty yeares, and seisin given by Tenant at will is good, but it ought to be pleaded as payment by the lessor himselfe. If the King hath rent out of a ville to be paid by all the Inhabitants, seisin alledged in gene∣rall without naming any is good. Gatewards case. 4. Jac. in Com. Banco. fol. 59. TO claime common ratione Commorantiae & residen. in villa de B. is not good; for no man may have interest ommon in respect of a Messuage, where∣in he hath no interest; For custome should alwayes extend to that which hath certenty and continuance, and without question tenant in fee simple ought to prescribe in his owne name, and tenant for life or yeares, by elegit at will, &c. in the name of him that hath the Fee, and he that hath no interest cannot have any common, and none that hath any interest, although it be but at will, and ought to have com∣mon, but by good pleading he may enjoy the same. No improvement might be made in any wasts, if this custome (viz.) in respect of habitation and Comorance) should be allowed, for tenants for life or yeares at will, by elegit, by Statute, &c. of the houses of the Lord, should have common in the wasts of the Lord, if this prescription were allowed, which were inconvenient: A Custome that every Inhabitant in B. shall have a way over such grounds, either to
the Church, or Markett, &c. is a good custome, for that is onely easement, and no profit, and a way or passage may well sequi personam; The Lord cannot claime common in his owne soyle. A diversitie was taken and agreed upon between a prescription and a custome, a prescription is alwayes alledged in the person, and a custome ought alwayes to be alledged in the Land, for every prescription ought to have by common intendment a lawful com∣mencement, but otherwise of a custome, for that ought to be reasonable, and ex certa causa rationabili usitata, as Littleton saith; But it needeth not to have intendment of a lawfull commencement, as custome to have Land Devisable, or of the nature of Gavel∣kinde, or Borough English. These and such like cu∣stomes are reasonable, but by common intendment, these cannot have lawfull commencement, by grant, or act, or agreement, but onely by Parliament; and the custome in the case at barre was repugnant, for it was alledged that the Custome of the Towne was, that every Inhabitant had used to have common within a place in the Towne of H. which was another Towne. Catesbyes Case. 4o. Jac. fol. 61. SIx moneths being halfe a yeare (semestre) is gi∣ven to the Patron of an advowson to present, and according to the Kalander and not after 28. dayes to a Moneth; and the Statute saith, Si tempus semestre non transierit adjudicentur damna ad valorem, &c. per dimi∣dium anni; and being ambiguous, it shall be construed for the benefit of the Patron.
Sir Moyle Finches case. 4. Jac. Com. Banco. fol. 63. THe Lady M. tenant for life of the Mannor of B. the remainder in fee to the Lady Finch, shee and S. her husband and D. levyed a fine to one of the de∣mesnes, who grants and renders to D. for 50. yeares, the reversion to S. and his wife and her heires, with proviso in the Deedes which directed the fine that the reversioner shall enter and hould Courts; And it was averred that this was knowne by the name of the Mannor of B. D. maketh his sonne of three yeares of age executor, and administration was committed to R. T. S. and his wife levy a fine of all the lands of the wife in K. except the Mannor of B. to the use of the feme for life, the remainder to Sir M. F. R. T. demiseth to P. L. for ten yeares, Dame M. dyeth, P. L. entreth, by vertue of a power of revocation and limitation of new uses, S. with the assent of the Lady F. his wife limitteth the uses to one who oust∣eth P. L. and maketh a feoffment to the use of the La: F. for life, the remainder to H. F. in taile, P. L. reenters, Dame F. dyeth, H. F. for rent arreare di∣straineth. 1. Resol. By the grant and render of the demesnes the Mannor is destroyed, because in an instant the services and demesnes are severed by act of the par∣ty; but otherwise it is, if by act in Law, as upon par∣tition; so it is of an advowson appendant, &c. and upon partition many Mannors may be made of one, but not by the act of the party. 2. B. is excepted by the name of a Mannor. 1. Because the intent of the parties is so. 2. Exception of misnosmer shall not be favoured in Law. 3. It is sufficient in Law in many cases, that a thing be reputed as it is named, as if a remainder be limitted to a Bastard by the
name of sonne of J. S. and as to that was objected, that this reputation is not time out of minde, this needs not, if it be of convenient time as this was, for it was a Mannor revera before to levy a fine, and continue the name after, so that this reputation is stronger having such a ground, and reputation ser∣veth in Writts amicable, although not in adversarie. 3. The lease made by the administrator durante minori aetate, is good, because the administration is generall, and not speciall to the benefit of the In∣fant, but howsoever this is good during the admini∣stration. 4. P L. in the life of the Lady M. had but inte∣resse Termini, so that attornement cannot be in his life, but after the death of the La. Mo. by entry of the lessee the reversion is in S. and his wife without attornement, because attornement needs not, be∣cause the reversion is setled, and he hath no meanes to compell, &c. otherwise it is where an attornement may be had: and although that P.L. lessee of a lessee of part cannot make an expresse attornement, yet his reentry shall be an attornement in Law, so he who hath interesse termini, may make a surrender in Law, but no expresse surrender, and a man of non-sane memory may make an attornement in Law, but not an expresse attornement. The Lord Darcies Case. 4. Jacobi Com. Banco. fol. 70. TEnder is not necessary to have the single value of the heire male or female; but the heire female shall not forfeit the double value, because the Statute of Merton is si se mavitaverit at the age of 14. yeares, &c. at which time the heire female is out of Ward: and where by the Statute of Westm. 1. cap. 22. it is provided that the Lord shal have two yeares to make
a Tender, it giveth not the double value, but if he waive the two yeares, he shall have the value with∣out Tender; quia de mero Jure, &c. Burrells case. 5. Jac. Com. Banco. fol. 72. IF the father make a lease by fraud and dyes, the sonne sells the land knowing or not knowing of it, the vendee shall avoyd it. 2. If the father makes a lease to the sonne, who assigneth it over by fraud, the father dyes, the sonne sells the land, the vendee shall avoyd it. Sir Drue Druries case. 5. Jac. Cur. Wardor. fol. 73. E. 1. granted to the Towne of Y. Quod omnes de villa oriundi licet terras, &c. extra libertatem villae, &c. te nuerint in Capite, se maritare possint juxta libertates villae praedictae: R. D. dyed seised of a house parcell of a Monasterie, dissolved in the time of H. 8. houlden in Capite, the King grants the wardship of his sonne to the plaintiffe, and makes the Ward Knight, the plain∣tiffe brings a valore Maritagij. The Charter doth not discharge the defendant; 1. Because it is juxta libertates villae praedict'. and the liberties are not shewed. 2. This Charter cannot ex∣tend to a Tenure created in the time of H. 8. 3. It is not shewed that the defendant was borne within the Towne. 1. Resol. If the heire in Ward be made a Knight he is out of Ward for his body, because by intend∣ment he is able to doe Knights service, otherwise if made a Nobleman. 2. By the death of the tenant the value of the marriage is vested in the Lord, and cannot be deve∣sted by Knighthood, &c.
3. If he be Knighted in the life of his auncestor, he shall not be in Ward at all. 4. If making of the heire in ward Knight shall de∣vest the value, it will be prejudiciall to the Subject, and to the King, for none will buy their Wardships. 5. After Tender and refusall if the heire be made Knight, and marry, he shall not forfeite the double value, because he is out of Ward, but immediatly the Lord shall have a Writte de valore maritagij. This was the last Case that Sir John Popham chiefe Justice of England, &c. ever Argued. Sir George Cursons case. 7. Jac. Cur. Wardor. fol. 75. SIr W. L. seised of a reversion expectant upon taile (made to his sonne) of land in Capite, Covenants to stand seised to the use of his neece, the sonne dy∣eth, the King shall not have primier seisin. 1. Resol. It was Collusion apparent within the Statute of Marlebr. cap. 6. to infeoffe the heire appa∣rent; and if he infeoffe others upon Collusion aver∣rable; but no averrement shall be where the re∣mainder or reversion is left in a stranger, or upon a Devise. 2. Or otherwise to dispose in the Statute of 32. H. 8. have relation to wills onely, for before the Statute every man might dispose of his lands by act executed. 3. The Clause in the said Statute which saveth pri∣mier seisin to the King, hath relation onely to acts executed, for the King shall have without that pri∣mier seisin of the third part not devised, but without that he shall not have it of any part conveyed by act executed. 4. If the grandfather convey land to the sonne living the father, this is out of the Statute, otherwise
if the father be dead: and so a gift to a Collaterall Kinsman, who is not heire apparent, is out of the Statute, for none will (by intendment) disinherit his heire to defeate the King of the Wardship, or primer seisin, and so is the experience of the Court of Wards. Bullens case. 5. Jacobi Com. Banco. fol. 77. THe Lord may have a certeine summe pro certo le∣tae, for it shall be intended it was granted at the first by purchase of the Leete for the ease of the Te∣nants, and in consideration of the Lords claiming of it at his owne costs every Eyre: The issue was if the plaintiffe was a chiefe pledge, and by speciall verdict he was found a Resiant, and certified by the chiefe pledges to be a chiefe pledge, and was amerced for his default. It seemeth he was not, Sed materia prae∣dicta consopita fuit in arbitrio. See 30. E. 3.23. of franke pledges. Lord Abergavenies case. Com. Banco. fol. 78. A Judgement in an action of Debt is had against a joyntenant for life, who afterwards releaseth to his companion all the right, &c. yet that moytie is liable to the Judgement, and so it is of a rent charge during the life of the Releasor. Sir Edward Phyttons case. Com. Banco. fol. 79. EXecutors may take benefit of the Kings generall pardon, by which is enacted that all Subjects of the King, their heires, Successors, Executors and Ad∣ministrators, shall be acquitted and discharged of all offences, contempts, &c. and that shall be expound∣ed
most beneficially for the Subject. And further doth give and grant all goods, Chattells, Debts, &c. forfeited; And prohibiteth any Clerke to make out any Writte, &c. Provided that every Clerke may make forth cap. ut. at the suite of the plaintiffe against persons outlawed, to the intent to compell them to answer; and that the partie shall sue forth a scir. fac. before the pardon in that behalfe shall be allowed; which is as much to say, having regard onely to the plaintiffe; But in regard of the King, it is an abso∣lute pardon, and grant of his goods, and he is a per∣son inabled against the King but not against the par∣tie plaintiffe. And every person by himselfe, or his Atturney, may plead this act for discharge: Execu∣tors shall have restitution upon the Statute 21. H. 8. Also Administrators shall have a Writt of error upon the Statute 27. El as was adjudged in the Lord Mor∣dants case, 36. El. And yet these Statutes speake one∣ly of the partie, and not of the Executors or Admi∣nistrators, & because no Writt can be against Execu∣tors, they may plead it without Processe. The End of the Sixth Booke.
THE SEAVENTH BOOK. Postnati. Calvins case. 6. Jacobi Banco Regis. fol. 1. R. C. By his gardian bringeth an assize, the defendants say, the plaintiffe ought not to be answered Quia est alienigena natus 5o. Novembris Anno Domini Regis Angliae, &c. tertio apud. E. infra. regnum Scotiae ac infra ligeanciam Domini Regis Regni sui S. ac extra ligeanciam Regni sui Angl. &c. the plaintiffe de∣murreth. The Case was Adjourned into the Exchequer Chamber, and was argued by two Justices every day, and by the Chancellour, and resolved by the Chan∣cellour, and all the Justices (except Walmesley and Foster) that the plaintiffe ought to be answered. For these six demonstrative Conclusions drawne from the Law of Nature, the Law of the Land, Rea∣sons of State, and Authorities of Records and Booke Cases. 1 Every one that is an Alien by birth, may be, or might have been an Enemy by accident, but C. could never be an Enemy by any accident whatsoe∣ver; ergo, no Alien by birth. 2. Whosoever are borne under one naturall lige∣ance, due by the Law  nature to one Soveraigne,
are naturall borne Subjects; But C. was borne under one, &c. ergo, a naturall borne Subject. 3. Whosoever is borne within the Kings protecti∣on, is no Alien; But C. was borne under, &c, ergo, he is no Alien. 4. Every stranger borne, must at his birth be ei∣ther amicus or inimicus; but C. at his birth could nei∣ther be amicus, nor inimicus, because he was subditus, ergo, no stranger borne. 5. Whatsoever is due by the Law of man, may be altered, but naturall legeance of the Subject to the Soveraigne cannot be altered; ergo, not due by mans Law. Lastly, whosoever at his birth cannot be an alien to the King of E. cannot be an alien to any of his Subjects of E. but C. at his birth could be no alien to the King of E. Ergo, he cannot be an alien to any of the Subjects of E. the Maior and Minor both be Propositiones perspicuè verae, and although Alienigena di∣citur ab aliena gente: yet that is all one, as Alienae li∣geantiae, and arguments drawne from Etymologie are feeble, for Saepenemero ubi proprietas verborum attenditur sensus veritatis amittitur, yet when they agree with Law, Judges may use them for Ornament, and dverse inconveniences would follow, if the Plea against the Plaintiffe should be allowed: For first, it maketh le∣geance locall, wereupon should follow, first that le∣geance which is universall, should be confined within locall limits. 2. That the Subject should not be bound to serve the King in Peace or in Warre out of those bounds. 3. It should illegitimate many, which were borne in Gascayne, Guyan, Normandy, &c. and diverse others of his Majesties Dominions whilst the same were in actuall obedience. And lastly, this strange and new devised Plea inclineth too much to countenance that dangerous and desperate error of
the Spencers. (viz.) That Homage and Oath of le∣geance, was more by reason of the Kings Crowne, (that is, of his politique capacity) then by reason of the person of the King, which was condemned by two Parliaments, one in the Reigne of E. 2. called, Exilium Hugonis le Spencer, and the other in 1. E. 3. cap. 1. No one Opinion in all our Bookes is against this judgement: The Lord Chancellour and 12. of the Judges, concurred in one opinion herein, and not in any remembrance so Honourable, and Intelli∣gent an Auditory as was at this Case. Bulwers Case, 27. Eliz. fol. 1. H. H. recovered against the Plaintiffe in the com∣mon place, and dyeth the Defendant in the name of H. Outlawed the Plaintiffe who brings an Action of the Case in N. where the first Action was brought, and recovered, for there was the visible tor∣te; when matter in one Cunty dependeth upon matter in another County, the Plaintiffe may choose in which County to bring his Action (except that the Defendant upon generall issue pleaded, may be prejudiced of his Triall,) as if two conspire in one County, to Endite one in another County and doe it, an Action may be brought in either, but if he be in∣dited, but not by them, there it shall be brought where the conspiracy was. If Manasse be made in E. whereby my Tenants recede into L. an Action shall be brought in E. if an action be founded upon two things, materiall and traversable in two severall Counties an action may be brought in any of them. An Annuity granted in one County to be paid in a∣nother, the Action shall be brought where the grant was, he who is robbed may have an appeale of felo∣ny, in every County where the goods came, but of
robbery where the fact was done onely: A lease for yeares in one County of Land, in another, Debt shall be brought, where the Lease was made, and wast where the Land lyeth, every Action which concer∣neth the life of a man shall be brought where the offence is committed: Every issue which ariseth up∣on an Action in which Land shall be recovered, shall be brought where the Land lyeth, as in right of ward of Land or body, or intrusion of ward, and forfeiture of Marriage, & Valore maritagij, and Quare impedit, but ravishment of ward, where the ravishment was, and a Quare non admisit where the refusall was, before the Statute of 7. R. 2. c. 10. an Action for Land in di∣verse Counties, or for common in one County ap∣pendant to Land in another County, shall be brought by severall Writs in both Counties, but now, In con∣finio comitatuum: a per quae servitia shall be brought where the note of the fine is levyed. Sir Miles Corbets case. 27. Eliz. in Scaccario. fol. 5. REsol: That the speciall manner of Common in Norf: called Shacke, to be taken in arrable land af∣ter harvest untill sowing begin is good. Resol. also if in D. there are fifty acres, and in S. 100.l. who ought to intercommon for vicinage, D. cannot put in more in their Common then it will depasture, and so to escape reciprocally, for the originall cause of this Common was onely to prevent suits in Champian Countries.
Cases upon the Statute of 13. E. 1. of Winchester upon hue and cry. Sendills case. 27. Eliz. in Com. Banco. fol. 6. A Robbery for which the Hundred must answer by force of the said Statute, is to be done o∣penly, so as the Country may take notice thereof themselves; but a Robbery done secretly in the house, the Country cannot take notice thereof, for every one may keepe his house as strong as he will at his perill; For it was adjudged in Ashpoles case, that the partie robbed, needed not to give notice thereof to the Country; For it may be that the partie rob∣bed was bound or maimed, &c. so as he could not make hue and cry to give notice. A robbery was done in January presently after the Sunne setting during day-light; and it was adjudged, that the Hundred should answer for the same; for it was a con∣venient time for men to travell, or to be about their businesse. One was killed in the Evening and esca∣ped, and by the common Law the Towne was amer∣ced, for that was accounted in Law parcell of the day, and not of the night But by the Statute 27. El. ca. 13. none shall have action upon the said Statute, except the partie robbed so soone as he may give no∣tice of the same to any of the Inhabitants of any Village, Towne, or Hamlet, next to the place where the robbery was done, and if they in pursuite appre∣hend any of the offenders, that will excuse the Towne.
Mibornes case. 29. Eliz. in Com. Banco. fol. 6. A Robbery was done in the morning ante lucem, the Hundred shall not be charged, Cum quis felo∣nicè occisus fuit per diem, nisi felocaptus fuit tota villata illa amercietur. The Earle of Bedfords Case. 29. Eliz. fol. 7. 1. REsol. If tenant in taile make a voydable lease for yeares, and dyeth, his heire in ward to the King, or other Lord, the Lord shall avoyde this lease; but if an infant make a feoffment, the Lord by Es∣cheate shall not avoyde it, but a gardian shall, be∣cause he doth it in right of the infant. 2. This avoidance is but during the interest of the Lord, for afterwards the heire may make it good: But if he who hath a particular estate avoideth an act in all, after his Interest determined it shall not be made good: as if a feme be indowed of an appropria∣tion, and her clerke inducted, the appropriation is defeated for ever; so if a feme Covert (as a feme sole) levy a fine, and the Baron enters, and dyeth, the Consee shall not have the land, for the estate is wholly defeated. Ʋghtreds Case. 33. Eliz. fol. 9. THe M. of W. granted the Captainship of a Fort to the plaintiffe, and for exercising of the said of∣fice, and for finding a Master Gunner, and six Souldi∣ers, granted to him an Annuity of 32. li. per annum, the plaintiffe brings an Annuity. 1. Except. It doth not appeare by the Count that the M. had power to grant this office, Non alloca∣tur.
2. The plaintiffe doth not averre the exercising of the said office; Non allocatur; for if he had not used it, that shall come in on the other part, because this is a condition subsequent, and not precedent; but if one be to have a thing in consideration of an act to be done by him, there he must shew the performance, because that amounts to a condition precedent, as in debt for salarie, but if each party had equall remedy, one for the money, and the other for the act to be done, there the Count shall be without shewing the performance, as if one Covenant to serve, &c. and the other Covenants to give money, &c. But although that an interest vested is to be devested by non fea∣sance, if it appeare to the Court that an action is not maintainable without the doing of it, there the do∣ing of it must be averred; as if an Abbot sole grants an annuity to J. S. Pro Consilio, &c. in action brought against the successor, he must averre that he had gi∣ven Counsell, &c. to the use of the House, otherwise if against the grantor. Englefields case. 34. Eliz. in Scaccario. fol. 11. SIr F. E. covenanted to stand seised to the use of himselfe for life, the remainder to his Nephew, Proviso that it shall be voyde upon tender of a Ring by him, after he was attainted of Treason, and all his inheritances forfeited by Statute; the Queene leaseth to the defendant for forty yeares, by Statute it was inacted that every one who had a patent of land of a person attainted, shall exhibit it into the Exchequer within two yeares to be Inrolled, one authorized by Letters patents in the name of the Queene tenders the Ring in the life of Sir Fr. the Queene bringeth Intrusion. 1. Resol. When the Q. tenant pur auter vie leaseth
for yeares, this is good without recitall of her estate, for it is lesse then her estate, as if she grant Totum sta∣tum suum, for there is no torte, and she is not de∣ceived. 2. That this condition is given to the Q. but ob∣ject. 1. That it was inseparable from Sir Fr. for his in∣tent was the substance of it, and his intent cannot be transferred over. 2. Naturall affection is made the Judge whether the Nephew deserve that the use shall be revoked, and in so much that naturall affection cannot be transferred, no more can this condition which was created by naturall affection, and naturall affection determineth the estate. 3. Although the benefit of this collaterall condition be given to the Q. the performance is not: As to the first and se∣cond; It was answered, that the condition is onely the substance, and all the residue is but a flourish, and that is not an inseparable condition, for any one may tender a Ring as well as he. As to the third; The performance is given to the Q. as incident to the Condition. 4. It was objected, that the estate of Sir Fr. was not subject to the condition, because he was not pos∣sessed by limitation of use, and by 27. H. 8. but he was seised of his auncient inheritance, ergo, the lease shall not be avoyded in the life of Sir Fr. It was an∣swered, that Sir Fr. was seised by limitation of use, and that the lease shall be avoyded. 5. It was objected, that the Q. having made this lease, being seised pur auter vie, by her owne act she shall not defeate it after: It was answered, that the Q. shall avoyde it, for her grant shall not inure to two intents; 1. to make the lease, &c. 2. to suspend the condition, and when the Q had two rights, she shall not loose both without speciall words. 6. It was objected, that this tender ought to be
found by office, because matter in paijs, and if it be false the party hath no remedy, because the certificat is not traversable: It was answered that Certificats which informe the Q. of her title are traversable, but Certificats which are in nature of Trialls are not: also by the Tender the uses are determined, and by the attainder, and the act of 33. H. 8. the land is ve∣sted in the Q. 7. It was objected, that the conveyance was voyd, because it was not inrolled within two yeares, as the Statute requires, and so Sir Fr. was seised in fee, and the lease unavoydable It was answered that it was tendred in the Exchequer to be inrolled within two yeares, which is all the Statute requireth; the forfei∣ture was established by a speciall act, 35. Eliz. The Case of Swannes, 34. Eliz. fol. 15. A Game of Swannes in a common River are seised into the Queenes hands upon office found, I. Y. pleads that Abbas, &c. gavisi fuerunt totoproficuo omnium cignorum in aestuaria praedict. indificantium, and makes her selfe title to them, & prayeth an ouster Le manie: All White Swannes in a common River who have gained their naturall liberty, may be seised for the King, because they are Volatilia regalia, but a Subject may have them in his owne River, and if they escape into a common River, he may take them againe, upon fresh persuite, Cignets shall be divided betweene the owners, of the Swannes equally, but upon the Thames the owner of the Land shall have the third by the custome: whosoever hath a Swan-marke must have it by grant of the King, or prescription, and he may grant it over, and he ought to have freehold of five Marks per annum, by the Statute of 22. E. 4. c. 6. A man may prescribe to have Wyld Swannes, but not
as here, but that the Abbot, &c. have used to take of them to their owne use, and therefore adjudged a∣gainst I. Y. A Swanne may be an estray, and so can∣not any other fowle. Sir Thomas Cecils Case, 40. Eliz. in Scaccario. fol. 18. SIr T. C. entered into an obligation to the Queene to performe Covenants, and shewed in the Ex∣chequer-Chamber matter of equity to discharge him of the said Debt, according to the Statute of 33. H. 8. c. 39. 1. Resol. that Branch of the Statute which giveth liberty to the Subject to plead matter in equity in barre of Debt due unto the King, extendeth to Debts due at the common Law, as well as by this Statute, because this Statute gives more speedy remedy for them, and so within the purview thereof, and so the other proviso of equall charging of Lands Subject to Deb. ts of the King is generall. 2. The Court of Exchequer-Chamber in this case may decree upon English bill, although that Processe be in the Exchequer at the common Law, because to that purpose they are as one Court. 3. An obligation to performe Covenants after Breach of them is within the Statute. The Lord Andersons Case, 41. Eliz. in Scaccar. fo. 21. TEnant in taile is bound by recognizance to I. S. who is attainted, Tenant in taile dyes, his issue aliens Bona fide, the King shall not extend these Lands by the Statute. 33. H. 8. c. 39. 1. Before that Statue the King could not extend Lands in the hands of the issue in taile for the Debt
of his auncestor, because he was bound by W. 2. De Donis. 2. By that Statute Lands are extendable in the hands of the issue in taile, for Debt due to the King by judgement, recognizance, obligation, or other specialty, and other cases are out of the Statute. 3. The Alienee Bona fide, is not within the Statute, because favoured as a purchasor, and he is a stranger to the Debt, and comes in upon good consideration, and benefit is given against the issue in taile, which was not before. 4. Debts due to a Subject, and forfeited to the King, are not within the Statute, for they are not due originally to the King by any of the said foure wayes mentioned in the Act. Butts Case, 42. Eliz. in com. banco. fo. 23. A. Seised of black acre in fee, and of white acre for yeares, grants a rent charge to B. for life with distresse in both, B. distreines, and avowes in white a∣cre, and good. 1. Resol. white acre is charged during the terme and life of B. 2. All the rent issueth out of black acre, for as an estate of freehold it cannot issue out of white acre, nor as freehold out of black acre, and a chattell out of white acre, because intire, it cannot be construed to be two rents contrary to the intent of the parties, and therefore an acceptance of a Lease of white acre doth not suspend it, and in an assize, black acre one∣ly shall be put in view. 3. Although the rent issueth onely out of black acre, yet white acre is charged with a distresse. If a rent be granted out of three acres with clause of distresse in one, this is a rent seck for all, yet the gran∣tee
shall distreine in the third acre for it, so if a rent be granted to two with clause of distresse to one of them, but a rent may be seck, and charge at severall times, and therefore if a rent be granted in fee with distresse for life, it is a rent charge for life, and seck after, but if the Clause of distresse be for yeares, it is a rent seck for all, because the freehold is seck. The avowry was insufficient. 1. Because he said the rent issued out of white acre, where it issued out of black acre, and although the Plaintiffe had disclo∣sed the truth in his plea in barre, this doth not salve the matter in substance vitious in the avowry. 2. He deriveth the rent but of white acre, Virtute cujus, he was seised for life, which is repugnant to have a free∣hold out of a Chattell, and so judgement given a∣gainst him for insufficient pleading. Cases of Quare Impedit. Halls Case, 31. Eliz. fo. 25. A Quare impedit against the Bishop, and incumbent, without naming the Patron, the writ shall abate. 1. It is not reason the Patron shall loose his Patron∣age, without being named, in case where he may be named, as here. 2. The incumbent at the common Law could not pleade to the Patronage, and there∣fore it is no reason that he who cannot pleade be na∣med, and he who can, omitted, but now the incum∣bent may pleade to the patronage by the Statute of 25. E. 3. cap. 7. which inableth the possessor to coun∣terpleade the title of the King, and by equity against a common person, in the one case after induction, in the other after institution: But in case where the Patronage shall not be recovered, or that the Patron
cannot be named, as in the Kings Case, a Quare impe∣dit shall be against the incumbent sole, or against him and the ordinary, so if a Bishop disturbe and die, it shall be against the incumbent sole, if a Patron be named and die, if the writ shall not abate he shall be out of possession, and if it shall abate, the torte shall not be punished, but if the Patron be put out of pos∣session, he hath remedy by writ of right, and if it shall abate, the Plaintiffe is without remedy, therefore the writ shall stand. Sir Hugh Portmans Case, 40. Eliz. fol. 27. IF the Plaintiffe in a Quare impedit, after appearance be non-suite, or discontinue or be made a Knight, pending the writ, this is peremptory, because it is his owne act, otherwise if the writ abate for default of forme, or by misnosmer, for this may be the default of the Clerke. Baskervills Case, 27. Eliz. fo. 28. TItle devolveth to the King to present by lapse, the Patron presents one who dyeth, the King hath lost the presentation, for he having the first presenta∣tion, he shall not have the second: otherwise the King may suffer Strangers to present one after ano∣ther, and take his turne when he pleaseth, and by that meanes the Patron shall be in a manner disinhe∣rited; and the Statute of Praerogativa Regis, nullum tempus occurit Regi, is to be intended when the King hath a permanent Title, and not transitory, when time is the substance of his Title.
Maunds Case, 43. Eliz. fo. 28. IN case of a reentry for non-payment of rent, or when any summe, Nomine penae, is to be forfeite, in both the cases demand ought to be made precisely on the day, a convenient time before the setting of the Sunne, in the one case in respect of a condition, and in the other in respect of the penalty; but in case of a distresse, he that hath the rent may demand the same at what time pleaseth him, for no Losse or penalty insueth thereupon, but onely a remedy to come by his rent, and if demand be made any time after the day, and before the distresse, it sufficeth. Discontinuance of Processe, &c. by the Death of the Queene. Trin.  Ja∣cobi fol. 29. UPon a generall resummons the originall, and the issue are revived, and not the meane processed or Voucher, nor Garnishment, but all the Processe is re∣vived upon a speciall resummons, but not in ayde prayer, or if a Verdict be given, and the King dieth before the day in banck, because there summons ly∣eth not, therefore he shall not have resummons, but in case of Verdict, he for whom it is given may have his judgement upon Scire facias But now, by the Statute of 1. E. 6. an action, suite, bill, or plaint, shall not be discontinued, if they are returned, other∣wise if not, because the Statute saith, Depending. If one deliver an appeale to the Sheriffe within the yeare, and the King dyeth, for necessity the Plaintiffe shall have a Certiorari, and reattachment: so if a for∣medon
be brought within a yeare against the pernor of the profits; offices of Sheriffes, not being of in∣heritance or by Charter, are determined by the death of the King. Suites depending in inferiour Courts are out of the Statute; if the King dye after infor∣mation preferred by him, all the proceeding is lost, but the information shall stand. 1. Because this is a record for the King, which shall not abate. 2. Be∣cause informations upon certeine Statutes are to be preferred within certeine time, but if the King bring an originall and dye, this is lost, if one plead to an In∣dictment, and the King dye, he shall plead De novo, but if he be convicted, judgement may be given in the time of another King, by the said Statute, and no Case of a Fine levyed by the King, tenant in taile, fo. 32 Michaelmas. 2. Jacobi. A Fine levyed by the King, tenant in taile by gift of his auncestor who was a subject, barreth the taile. 1. It is reason, that as the King is bound by the Statute of W. 2. De donis, that he should have be∣nefit of the Acts of 4. H. 7. & 32. H. 8. 2. A ge∣nerall Statute bindeth the King of Lands discended from an auncestor a Subject, but not where it dis∣cends from an auncestor who was King, except in spe∣ciall cases. 3. The issues of the King at the time of the levying of the fine are subjects therefore within the Statute, and it seemd to them that there ought to be Letters Patents to give power to the Conisee to enter into the Land.
Nevills Case, 2. Jacobi fo. 33. THe dignity of an Earle intailed is forfeitable for treason. 1. Resolved, this is within the Statute of W. 2. De donis, and experience is to give dignities in taile, with remainders over, also, this was an of∣fice anciently, and offices may be intailed. 2. A dig∣nity may be forfeited at the common Law, by a con∣dition in Law, for the Office of Earle was, Ad consulen∣dum Regem tempore pacis, & defendendum Regem tempore belli; therefore he forfeits it when he takes Councell, and Armes against him. 3. If it were not forfeited by the common Law, yet it is by 26. H. 8. cap. 13. by this word Hereditament, and the words use or pos∣session which are added, are to shew, that every He∣reditament shall be forfeited: at the common Law, Donee in taile had Potestatem alienandi post prolem suscitatam, but if hee reteine the Land him∣selfe, he hath no absolute fee, for none shall inherit but the heire, Per formam doni, so it is now in case of annuity, and other things out of the Statute. Penall Statutes, 2. Ja. fo. 36. WHen a Statute is made by Parliament, the King cannot give the penalty, benefit or dispensa∣tion of the same to any Subject, but the King may make a Non obstante, to dispense with any perticular person, that he shall not incurre the penalty of a Sta∣ture, and the King after a forfeiture or penalty of a Statute by judgement and recovery may grant the same to any of his Subjects, by way of reward; and all the Judges of England subscribed to this, the 8. Day of November. 1604.
Lillingstons Case, 5. Jacobi. fo. 38. TEnant in fee grants a rent charge, proviso, that the person of the grantor shall not be charged, the grantee acknowledgeth a recognizance according to 23. H. 8. and after releaseth to the grantor, the co∣nisee sueth an extent, and brings debt against the grantor Terretenant. 1. Resolved, the rent is ex∣tendable, for notwithstanding the release it is In esse as to the Conisee, and cannot be discharged by the act of the Conisor, also, the extent relateth to the judgement, at which time it was extendable. See the Lord Aburgavenies Case, in the sixth Report. 2. Debt lyeth not so long as the extent indureth, for so long the rent hath continuance, although that by the release the freehold be determined: if a rent charge be granted for life with proviso, as above-said, if the rent be determined, debt lyeth against the grantor, because he had no other remedy. Bedels Case, 5. Jacobi. fo. 40. R. B. Covenants in consideration of paternall love, &c. to stand seised to the use of himselfe for life, the remainder to his Wife for life, the remainder o∣ver. 1. Resolv. although the consideration in the deed runneth not to the Wife, yet another conside∣ration may be averred, which stands with the Deed. The limittation of an use to the Wife importeth a consideration in it selfe, so if it be to any of his blood, but if he Covenant in consideration of a 100. l. to stand seised to the use of his Sonne, nothing passeth untill inrollment, Quia expressum facit cessare tacitum.
Beresfords Case, 5. Jacobi. fo. 41. AN use is limitted to A B. and of the heires Males of the said A. lawfully begotten, this is fee taile, not∣withstanding the words (of the Body) be wanting, and that lawfully begotten, are implied, for no heire shall inherit who is not lawfully begotten. Resolved, that to create an inheritance the word Heires is ne∣cessary, but the words De corpore are not necessary to make an estate taile, if there be words which Tanta∣mount, and here the sence according to the intent of the Donor, is of or by the said A. lawfully begot∣ten. A gift to a man & haeredibus de se exeuntibus, or Haeredibus suis de prima uxore sua, are estates taile. Kenns Case, 4. Jacobi fo. 42. C. K. had issue by E. S. M. K. and they are di∣vorced, and the Marriage sentenced void, C. K. marrieth F. they have issue E. K. C. dyeth, E. K. is found by office to be Heire, M. and W. her Baron preferre a bill, in the Court of wards to tra∣verse the Office to which the Committees of the wardship answer, one of the Committees dyeth, M. and W. sue a Bill of Reviver, and M. having issue E. dyeth. E. her issue, and R. her Baron, bring a new Bill of Reviver. 1. Resolved, so long as the sentence stands in force, the issue of the first feme is a Bastard, because the spirituall Judge hath jurisdiction thereof, and our Law giveth faith unto it: Sentence of divorse may be repealed after the death of the parties, but no divorse can be after their dearh, for that will Ba∣stardise the issue, and the Court of the King hath tri∣all
of it originally, not being hindered by any Sen∣tence. 2. The Plaintiffe shall not have a traverse without an office found for her, for the King being sure of wardship shall not be ousted by one, before that he be sure to have benefit by him, and 2. E. 6. cap 8. doth not extend to give a traverse without office, but if by two offices two are found Heires, whereof one is within age, by that Statute the other may traverse immediatly. 3. A bill of reviver upon a bill of reviver shall not be suffered, for the infinitnesse, no more then a Writ by Journeys accompts. By all, the last bill was ab∣surd, which prayeth, that the first bill be revived, be∣cause M. was dead, but it ought to be, that her Heire may traverse. The End of the Seaventh Booke.
THE EIGHTH BOOK. The Princes Case, 3. Jacobi. in Chancery. fo. 1. THE Queene, 37. Eliz. grants three Man∣nors parcell of the Duchee of C. to H. L. and G. M. the King (at the suppli∣cation of the Prince) brings a Scire fa∣cias against the said H. L. and S.H. to make Livery to the Prince by force of the Statute of 11. E. 3. H. L. pleads, Null tielum recorde, S. H. pleads the Patents with a Non obstante. 32. H. 8. whereby these Mannors were made parcell, of, &c. and the Act of Confirmation, 43. Eliz. As to the plea of H. L. the Atturney sheweth an Inspeximus, and demurreth upon the plea of the other two who joyne, and as Amici curiae repeate part of the Statute of 1. H. 7. touching the Duchie, H. L. demurreth. 1. Resolv. the Charter of creation of the Prince, Duke of C. 11. E. 3. is an Act of Parliament, for such a limittation to the first-begotten Son is void with∣out Statute, for if Grandfather King, the Father Duke, and Sonne be, if the King dyes, the Father is King, and the Son Duke, by the said Statute, against the rules of Law. 2. The Lands cannot be so annexed to the Duchie that they cannot be severed without Statute. 3. The estate is limitted to cease when the King hath no first begotten Son, and to revive when he hath,
which cannot be without Statute. 4. It should be absurd, that six being then created Earles, that their creation should be firme, and the Creation of the Prince void. 5. In the Charter there is De communi consilio Prae∣latorum, &c. and in the end, Per ipsum Regem & to∣tum concilium in Parliamento; such an Act as begin∣neth Rex Statuit, and alwayes reputed for a Statute shall not be drawne in question, but if it be Rex ex assensu, the Commons or Lords omitting the other part, it is voide. 2. The said Charter having the force of a Statute, is good, without aid of any other Statute, and although the King in his Scire facias, recite another Act for ths surplus, the writ shall not abate. 3. The Prince had the Dukedome in Fee, for it is an inheritance, because, 21. E. 3. 41. the Princesse was indowed, and it is no estate taile be∣cause it is not limitted of what body it shall come, but onely that they shall be Heires to the black Prince. 4. Against a generall Statute Nul tiel re∣corde shall not be pleaded, for although it be lost, yet the Judges ought to take notice of it, and this is such an one which concernes the Prince, and the Statute of confirmations doth not extend unto it. 1. Be∣cause this hath a speciall relation to certeine defects, as Misnosiner, &c. 2. Patents are made good onely against the King, saving the right of others, there∣fore the Princes right is saved: In a Scire facias the King or Prince may reply, but the most formall way is, for the Attourney to replie, as here he did: No Sonne of the King but his first begotten, shall be Duke of C. although he be Heire apparent to the Crowne.
Calyes Case, 26. Eliz. Banco regis. fo. 32. 1. REsolved, that to maintaine an action against an Inkeeper for goods lost, &c. it ought to be a common June. 2. He ought to be a Passenger, therefore a Neighbour shall not. 3. An inholder shall not answer for any thing, but that which is Infra hospitium, therefore if a Passenger require that his Horse be put to grasse, the inholder shall not answer if he be stollen, otherwise if he require it not. 4. There ought to be a default in the Inholder or his Servants, therefore if a Guest bring one with him who stealeth the goods, the Inholder shall not be charged; otherwise, if the Hostler appoint one with him in his Chamber who doth it. But an inholder shall not be charged, if he require the Guest to put his goods in a Chamber, and he leaves them in the Court, but it is no excuse to the Inholder that he de∣livered the Key of the Chamber to the Guest, or that no goods were delivered to him. 5. The Host∣ler shall answer for Charters if they be stollen, but not if a Guest be beaten, and all this appeares by the Writ, and the words of it. Paynes Case, 29. Eliz. com. banco. fo. 34. A Feme, Tenant in taile taketh Baron, and hath issue who is heard to cry, and dyeth, the Feme dyeth without issue, the Husband shall be Tenant by the courtesie, for although the state of the Feme be determined, yet it is Tacite, implied in the guift, that every Husband of a Feme inheritable to the said e∣state, shall have the Land for his life, after the death of the Feme, if he be intitled to be Tenant by the courtesie. If a Feme be delivered of a Monster, this
doth not intitle the Husband to be Tenant by the curtesie, otherwise it is, if the issue had humane shape, but is blemished: if a Feme be ripped, and the is∣sue taken out of her Wombe, the Baron shall not be Tenant by the curtesie, otherwise it is, if the issue which they had dyes, and Lands discends after. A man shall not be Tenant by the courtesie, but where his issue may inherit as heire to the Feme, therefore he shall not be of a possession in Law, because there he makes title from the auncester of the Feme, and not from the Feme. Barretry, 30. Eliz. fol. 36. A common Barretor is a common maintainer of Suites or quarrells, in Courts or in the Coun∣trey: As first, in disturbance of the peace. Second∣ly, in taking and keeping of possession, with force or deceite. Thirdly, by false calumniation and sowing of Quarrells, but to indite him of it, it ought not to be, that he hath done so twice or thrice, but that he is a common doer of them. Grieslies Case, 30. Eliz. com. banco. fo. 38. BY the custome, one is chosen in a Leete to be Constable, who refuseth, and departeth out of the Court, the Steward imposeth a Fine of 5. l. upon him, for which the Bailiffes of the Lord distreine, and he brings a replevin. 1. Resolved, every Judge of record may assesse a reasonable fine upon any man who makes contempt or disturbance to the Court, but a Judge who is not of record cannot. 2. This fine heeds not to be afferred, because the Statute of Mag. Ch. speakes of Amerciaments, and
not of Fines, for a fine is imposed by the Court, and an Amerciament by the Jury: therefore the Judge∣ment in an Amerciament is generall, Quod sit in mi∣sericordia, and after upon estreits directed to the Cor∣oners they are afferred, and the Statute is, that a Noble man shall be Amerced by his Peers, which is not used at this day, because it is reduced to a cer∣teinty, (Viz.) A Duke to 10. l. and others to 5. l. but an Amerciament of an Officer of the Court, or he who hath execution of Writs shall be afferred by the Court, so of any who is Judge as Suitors: If a Juror appeare, and is adjourned to a day, of which he makes default, this shall be inquired by his Compa∣nions, for he shall be fined to the value of his Land, per annum, which the Court cannot know. 3. A distresse may be taken for a fine without cu∣stome, or for an Amerciament which is lesse. Whittinghams Case, 45. Eliz. fo. 42. IT was resolved, that if there be Lord and Tenant an Infant, and the Infant make a feoffement in fee, and execute the same by livery of seisin by his owne hands, and after dye without heires, in this case the Lord shall not have the benefit of the escheate, and the Feoffement is unavoidable. There be three manner of privities, (Viz.) pri∣vity in blood. 2. Privity in estate. 3. Privity in Law. Privities in blood, as heires in blood, privity in estate as joyntenants. Baron and Feme, Donor, and Donee, Lessor and Lessee, &c. privities in Law as Lord by escheate, Lord of a Villaine, &c. If a Lessee for life make a Lease for yeares, and af∣ter enter into the Land, and make wast, and the Les∣sor recover in an Action of wast against the Lessee for life, he shall avoid the Lease for yeares, made before
the wast committed. But if a Lessee for life make a Lease for yeares, and after enter and make a feoffe∣ment in fee, the Lessor shall not avoid the Lease for yeares; and so, if a Tenant make a Lease for yeares, and after is attainted of felony, or dyeth without heire, the Lord by escheate shall not avoide the tearme. But because the feoffement in the case at barre was executed by Letter of Attourney, it was resolved to be void, and the Land escheated to the Queene. Jehu Webbes Case, 6. Jacobi. com. banco. fo. 45. THe King grants the office of the Kings Tennis, plaies at W. to one, who being disseised brings an assize. The Patent shall have a reasonable construction, not onely when the King himselfe playes, but when any of his Houshould. As if a Commission be made to take Singing-Boys in a Cathedrall-Church for the Kings Chappell, those that Sing there for their plea∣sure, cannot be taken, but such as get their living by it. There were but two manner of assizes at the common Law, assizes De libero tenemento, and, De communia pasturae, but for no other common, but for this onely there is a Writ in the Register. But the Statute of W. 2. c. 25. giveth it, De proficuo in certo loco capiendo in lieu of a Quod permittat, and although that there offices amongst other things are named, yet an assize lay of an office at the common Law, and although that no Tenant for life may have a Quod permittat, yet an assize did lye for him, but that is to be understood of an office of profit, for it lyeth not of an office of charge: Originall Writs made by Sta∣tute cannot be altered without Statute: In an assize of a new office, it ought to be shewed, what profit
belongs to it, but not for an ancient office, because that is sufficiently knowne. Syms Case, 6. Jacobi. fo. 51. TEnant in taile levyeth a fine with warranty, and dyeth, the warranty discends upon the issue of him in the remainder, inheritable to the taile, and another, the issue in taile brings a formedon, and is barred for all, for the warranty is intire, and barreth every one upon whom it discends, of all his right: as if one seised of three acres maketh a feoffement of one with warranty, and dyes, having issue two Daughters who make partition, the Mother purcha∣seth the part of one, & brings dower against the feof∣fee who Vouches the Daughters, shee shall recover all the other acre of the other Daughter, if Tenant by the curtesie make a feoffement with warranty, and dyes, and his Sonne heire of the Feme recovers, and assets discends after, the feoffee shall have a Scire facias, to have the Land first recovered, by the Statute of Glouc. c. 3. but if assets descend to the Heire in taile, bound with a lyneall warranty, after recovery in for∣medon, the Feoffee shall have a Scire facias, to have the assets, for otherwise if the recoverer alien the as∣sets, the issue of him will recover the Land in taile a∣gaine; but in these cases the discontinuee ought to confesse the title of the Demandant, and pray, that if assets descend after, they may discend unto him, for if he plead a warranty and assets, this is peremp∣tory unto him, if it be found that assets did not dis∣cend; for the Statute is, that a Scire facias shall issue out of the rolls of the Justices, and in this case there is no ground for the Scire facias in the Record, but in this case if the issue in taile pleads no assets, and as∣sets are found, but not to the value, the tenant shall
have a Scire facias to recover the assets discended af∣ter, for that false plea of the Vouchee. Warranty and estoppell discend upon the heire generall, and warranty barreth although that he upon whom it discends, claimeth not by him that made it, but so doth not an estoppell, but estoppells with recom∣pence binde the right of one who claimeth not by him that made it. Roger, Earle of Rutlands Case, 6. Jacobi fo. 55. THe King grants the pannage and herbage of a Park to M. for life, and reciting this, grants it to the Earle of Rutland for his life. 1. Resolved, the King hath three manner of inhe∣ritances. 1. Some which he cannot excercise him∣selfe, and cannot grant them in reversion or remain∣der, as Corodies and Churches of which he is Pa∣tron. 2. Others which he cannot excercise him∣selfe, but may grant them in reversion or remainder, as offices. 3. Others which he may excercise him∣selfe, and may grant as Lands, Houses, &c. 2. The King here is not deceived, for when he reciteth here that M. had for life, and grants for life, this inureth, as by Law it may, that is as a grant in reversion. 3. In this case the grant to the Earle shall com∣mence after the determination of the estate of M. and if the King grants Land to one and his Heires, Habendum to him and his Assignes, it is good, and the Habendum shall be rejected for the honour of the King. See the Lord Chandos case in the sixth Booke, and when a Charter of the King may be taken to two intents good, in many cases it shall be taken to such intent as is most beneficiall for the King, but if it may be taken to one intent good, and to another
void, then for the honour of the King, and benefit of the Subject, then it shall be taken so that it may take effect. Beechers Case, 6. Jacobi. fo. 58. B. Plaintiffe in Debt, Se retraxit by attourney, and by the judgement is not amerced, he brings er∣or. 1. Resolved, a Retraxit ought to be in proper person, for at the common Law every one who ap∣peared ought to come in proper person and make his attorney after, by license of the Court, but if it be without writ, he cannot without a writ of Attornato fa∣ciendo: In cases where one may make an attourney, but for contempt is bound to appeare in person, if he ap∣peare by attourney, this is not error, because the court may dispens with the contempt, otherwise where he cannot appeare by Law by attorney, as here, for if he appeare by attourny, this is error. 2. B. ought to be amerced if upon a Nonsuite, a Fortiori upon a Retraxit, and although it is for his advantage, yet he may assigne it for error, because the judgement is not perfect, and because it is for the advantage of the King, and it shall not be amended because the act of the Court. 3. Where one disclaimes he shall not have a Writ of error, because he hath confessed that he had no right, otherwise it is upon a Retraxit, for this is but a barre of the action, à fortiori here, where it wat void, done by an attourney, a Retraxit ought to be when the party is supposed to be present, there∣fore it shall not be when he imparleth.
Swaynes Case. 6. Jac. fo. 63. 1. REsolved, the King grants a Mannor for life ex∣cept Timber Trees, the Lessees grant copy∣hold, the Grantees may shrowde Timber Trees be∣cause they come in by custome, Paramount the excep∣tion. 2. If Copyholders prescribe to take profit in any part of the Mannor, if the Lord aliens it, a Copy-holder admitted after shall have it, because he is in paramount the severance, but he shall prescribe and plead specially, that is, untill such a time, (Viz.) Before the severance Talis habebatur, &c. consuetudo, &c. and then shew the severance. Sir William Fosters Case, 6. Jac. fo. 64. C. F made a feoffement 4. E. 6. reserving a rent charge, which rent descends to T. F. who dyes intestate, his administrators avow for it, and alleadge no seisin within 40 yeares, yet good, for the Statute of 32. H. 8. c. 3. that none shall avow for rent if he had not seisin within 40. yeares, is to be intended when it was necessary to alledge, as upon rent be∣twixt very Lord and Tenant, for this may be had by incroachment, and perhaps the comencement of the Seigniory was before time of memory, but where rent is by deede or reservation, as here, or upon an estate taile, the seisin is not materiall, for the deed or reservation is the Title and incroachment shall not hurt, and they shall not have a Ne injuste vexes, but shall avoide it in an avowry, and Magna Charta c. 10. Quod nullus distringatur ad faciendum majus serviti∣um, &c. doth not extend to donee in taile, Lessee for life, &c. but is intended betweene very Lord and very Tenant.
Lovedayes Case, 6. Ja. fo. 65. IF a Jury who appeareth to try a certaine issue, give a verdict which is accepted, be it perfect or im∣perfect, they are discharged, and shall not trie the same issue, upon a new Nisi prius, but a Venire facias de novo shall issue, otherwise it is of the Recognitors of an assize, they shall trie all the issue, because they are not to trie any certeine issue, and because they come in upon an Originall, the Court will not award a new Originall, but the Plaintiffe shall have a Certi∣ficate of assize to trie the imperfections, the Plaintiffe sueth a Venire facias against diverse, the Sheriffe re∣turneth no Writ, the Plaintiffe shall not have seve∣rall Venire facias after, for he cannot vary from the first. Crogates Case, 6. Jacobi. fo. 66. THe Defendant pleads in barre to trespasse that the B. of N. leased by Copy to W. M. to which co∣pyhold there is common in B. and justifieth as Ser∣vant to the said W. the Plaintiffe replies, De injuria sua propria, &c. this is an insufficient replication, for, De injuria, &c. hath reference to all the plea in barre, and not to the Commandement, Ergo, if the Defen∣dant in false Imprisonment justifie, for that a Capias was awarded to the Sheriffe, who made a warrant to him to take the Plaintiffe; De injuria, &c. is no plea, because it referreth to all, and so Record shall be tri∣ed by Jury, but he shall traverse the Warrant, which is matter in fact, but this had beene a good plea, if the proceeding be in a Court, which is not of Re∣cord. 2. De injuria, &c. is to be pleaded, where the plea is matter of excuse, and not where he claims
an interest in his owne right, or in the right of his Master, for there he shall traverse the Commande∣ment. 3. Where authority is derived from the Plaintiffe himselfe, or is given by Law, as to fee if wast, the Plaintiffe ought to answer to it, although no interest be claimed, and he shall not plead De in∣juria, &c. 4. If this plea be admitted here, all parts of the plea in barre shall be tried, and the issue will be full of multiplicity. Trollop Case, 6. Jacobi. fo. 68. THe Defendant in error pleads excommunication, &c. and sheweth the Certificat of the Vicar ge∣nerall, de D. the words of which were, Ʋniversis cle∣ricis & literatis per totam diocesim D. the Plaintiffe pleads the generall pardon 3. Jac. 1. Resolved, the officiall cannot certifie excom∣munication, for none shall doe that, but he to whom the Court may Write to assoile the party, as the Bi∣shop and Chancellour of C. or O. and for that, if a Bishop certifie and dye Before the returne of the Writ, it shall not be received, but the Successor shal doe it, and one Bishop shall not certifie an Excom∣munication made by a Bishop in another Court, but a Bishop after Election before Consecration may, and so may the Vicar generall, if it appeare that the Bishop is in Remotis agendis. 2. The Certificat is insufficient because by the particular direction to the Clerks of D. the Kings Court and all others are ex∣cluded, and so a protection in one Court serveth not in another, and Excommunication is such a thing, as the Court of the King hath conusance, and therefore the Suite and the Cause are to be expressed in the Certificat, that the Kings Court may judge of the sufficiency, and if it be insufficient (as if a Bishop
certifie an excommunication made by himselfe in his owne Cause) the Court may write to absolve him. If the Certificat had beene good, the point was, whither the generall pardon dischargeth an ex∣communication or not. Whitlocks Case, 6. Jacobi. fo. 69. A Revertioner upon an estate for life levys a fine to the use of himselfe, untill Marriage of his Sonne, and then to the use of himselfe for life, with power to make Leases, so that they exceede not 21. yeares, or three lives reserving the ancient rent, the remainder to his Sonne in fee, the Sonne is Marry∣ed, the Father maketh a Lease for 99. yeares, if two shall so long live, reserving rent to him, his heires, and the reversioners, this is a good Lease. 1. Resolved, he had pursued his authority, for if he had a perticular power to make Leases for 21. yeares. or three lives, he cannot make leases deter∣minable upon lives, but having a generall power to make Leases, so that they doe not exceede 21. years, or three lives, he may. 2. The rent reserved goeth to the Sonne, although that he who reserved it had but for life, because the Lease for yeares hath no being out of the Lease for Life, but out of the Fee, and in judgement of Law preceedeth both in construction upon the limita∣tion of uses, but the most safe way here had beene to reserve the rent generally, and lest it to the distri∣bution of the Law. Greenelyes Case, 7. Jacobi. fo. 71. BAron and Feme, Tenants in speciall taile, the Ba∣ron infeoffeth P. G. and dieth, the Feme dyes,
the Sonne enters, and Leaseth to the Plaintiffe. 1. Resolved, if Baron joyntenant in speciall taile with his Wife, had made a Feoffement, or had beene dis∣seissed, at the common ley, and dyed, and the Feme before entry dyed, this is a discontinuance to the Sonne, because he cannot enter as Heire to both, but if the Feme enter, the discontinuance is pur∣ged. 2. The estate which the Feme had jointly with her Baron is within the purviewe of the Statute of 32. H. 8. c. 28. That no fine levyed by the Baron sole of Lands of the Feme shall hurt her, and with∣in the Statute of West. 2. c. 3. 3. The entry of the Sonne is lawfull, although he claimes not as heire to the Feme, as the Statute speakes, but as heire to both, because he is within these words, or to such as have right by the death of such Wife, and this is to be intended of discontinu∣ances made by the Baron, and not of a rightfull barre of the issue, for they cannot avoide it, and the Sta∣tute is that they may enter, which they cannot doe where they are barred: and if the Feme enter with∣in 5. yeares, as shee may after a Fine levyed by the Baron, this doth not take away the future barre of the issue, and if shee enter not within 5. yeares, shee also is barred: Baron, tenant in taile, the remainder to the Feme in taile makes a feoffement, the Feme may enter after his death, by this Statute, but if the Baron suffer a recovery she shall not enter, in the Case at barre the son may have a Formedon at the common Law, and where before this Statute a Cuj in vita, or Sur cuj in vita did lye, entry is given by this Statute, and not otherwise.
The Lord Staffords Case, 7. Jacobi. fo. 73. THe Queene revertioner upon an estate taile grants the revertion to T. T. in taile upon con∣dition, is to have Praedictam reversionem in fee, the condition is performed, the Lord Stafford Tenant in taile levyeth a fine, his issue is barred. 1. Resolved, that a condition of accruer may be annexed to a thing which lyeth in grant, and to an estate taile, as if Lessee for life be the remainder for life, with con∣dition of accruer to the first, this is good, and yet no Merger of estate. 4. things are requisit to an accruer. 1. A particular estate as the Foundation, Ergo, a Lease at will shall not be. 2. The estate ought to continue in the Grantee untill accruer, therefore if the Grantee alien and repurchase the con∣dition is Tolled, but Quaere if the Tenant alien upon condition which is broken, if the fee shall accrew, but grantee may grant part of his estate, as if Lessee for life make a Lease for yeares, he may performe the condition after, so may Tenant in speciall taile, after he is become tenant in taile after possibility, &c. so may the surviving jointenant, and the heire of Tenant in taile. An instant is sufficient to support an accruer, as if the condition be, if the Lessee be ousted, Eo instante, that the ouster is the fee accru∣eth, but if Lessee for yeares accept a confirmation for life, the condition is gone: but it is not necessary, that the estate of the grantor or Lessor continue, be∣cause by his owne act he shall not defeate his grant. 3. It ought to vest at the time of the condition performed or never, and for that, rather that it shall not vest at this time by performance of the conditi∣on, the fee without office or other ceremony shall be devested out of the King, 4. It is necessary that the particular estate and the condition be in one
deede, or two deeds delivered at the same time, for in Law they are but one grant, and by the condition performed, he had fee from the delivery. Resolved, Praedict. reversionem signifies the rever∣sion which the Queene had. Viz. That which de∣pends upon both the estates taile, and so was the in∣tent, also shee granted. Omnia praemissa, which maketh it cleere. Resolved also, that these words Will and Declare, doe amount to a grant, and are so used in Patents of Liberties, and things to take effect in Fu∣turo. Tenant in taile, the remainder in taile, the re∣mainder to the King, Tenant in taile suffers a reco∣very, this doth not barre the remainder in taile, be∣cause the issue in raile is not barred, and therefore the revertions and remainders in taile are preserved by the Statute of 34. H. 8. c. 20. Lastly, Resolved, if the reversion in fee had re∣mained in the Crowne, that the fine levyed by Ed: Lord Stafford the Father, had not barred the Lord that now is. Notlyes Case, 31. Eliz. com. banco. Wiat Wields Case, 7. Jacobi. 78. W. W. seised of Land, to which he had com∣mon appurtenant, aliens 5. acres to one who in replevin counts that he and those, whose e∣state he had in the said 5. acres, have had common there, &c. and good. 1. Resolved, although by purchase of part of the Land in which, &c. the com∣mon appurtenant is destroyed in all, yet it is not so by alienation of part of the Land to which, but all re∣maines without damage to the Tenant of the Land. 2. That the pleading of it was sufficient.
Vinyors Case, 7. Jacobi. fo. 80. ONe was bound to stand to the award of W. R. and revokes the submission, the Obligee brings Debt. 1. Resolved, the Countermand is good, for an authority Countermandable by the Law, cannot by any way be made irrevocable. 2. Although that the Plaintiffe doth not show, that the Defen∣dant had given notice to the arbitrator, yet it is good because this is implied, for without notice the revo∣cation is void. 3. The Obligation by the Coun∣termand is forfeited, because he doth not stand to, &c. when he Countermands it. 2. By his owne act he had made the condition impossible, Ergo, the Obligation is single, if one bindes himselfe to give License to carry Wood, &c. for a certaine time, if he give it, and disturbe him the Obligation is for∣feited. Sir Richard Pexhalls Case, 7. Jacobi. fo. 83. SIr R. P. seised of Lands, part whereof is houlden in Capite, deviseth 100. Sheepe, 10. Bullocks, and 10. l. quarterly, to one with clause of distresse, and that the Grantee shall hold his Courts for his life, for rent arreare for 2. yeares, the grantee avoweth. 1. Resolved, a devise of rent out of all is good, and taketh effect out of two parts, and as to the third is void. 2 The grantee shall have an estate for life in rent, and so he shall if it be granted by Deede, also by the Intent of the Devisor it appeares, that the Grantee shall hold Courts, and have 10. l. per annum, for his wages, and quarterly here had relation to rent onely, because the word Et, disjoyneth it from Sheep and Bullocks, and judgement given for the Avow∣ant.
Buckmers Case, 7. Jac. fo. 86. T. B. gave a House in Gavellkinde to M. his Eldest Daughter in taile, the remainder of one Moity to J. a second Daughter in taile, the remainder of the other Moity to K. a third Daughter in taile, with crosse remainders to J. and K. M. discontinueth and dyeth without issue, J. dyeth without issue, K. dy∣eth, and her issue brings a Formedon in the remain∣der, and good, although severall remainders, for they depend upon one estate, and commence by gift at one time: In actions reall, in which title is ex∣pressed, a man shall not have one Writ for Lands, to which he had severall Titles, as in escheate, cessavit, Writ of Mesne, &c. but he may have a Writ of ward of Land onely, although it be by severall Tenures, nor one formedon upon two distinct gifts, where the foundation is severall, but he shall have it if there be one gift, although it take effect at severall times, be∣cause the foundation was joynt and single, as upon a gift in taile, to Brother and Sister, who dye with∣out issue, or if the Brother dye without issue, and the Sister dye having issue, who dyes without issue, he to whom the remainder limitted shall have one for∣medon although it vest at severall times, so in an e∣state taile to Father and Sonne, and so here: In actions reall, founded upon Torte, a man shall have one Writ to recover Lands, to which he had severall Titles, as in an assize, a Writ of entry, &c. but in a Writ of entry upon disseisin made to my Mother, and her Sister Coperceners, because there title is in the Writ, it appeareth he ought to have severall acti∣ons; but in personall actions, one may comprehend severall torts, and causes of actions, as trespasse for trespasse made at severall dayes and places, wast up∣on
severall Leases, and so of Debt. Nota, if a remain∣der be executed, issue in remainder shall not have a formedon in remainder, but in the discender, and Count of an immediate gift, but if there be a Lease for life to one, the remainder in taile to A. the re∣mainder in taile to B. A. dyes without issue, if B. be chased to his formedon, he shall not count of an im∣mediate remainder, but shall shew the first remain∣der to A. and that he is dead without issue. 2. In for∣medon in the remainder or reverter, omission of issue inheritable in the pedigree of the demandant, abates the Writ, but not upon the part of the perticular Tenant. 3. The Demandant must make mention of the Sonne who survived the Father, to which Son the Land discended, but was not seised by force of the taile, but he shall name him Sonne, but not heire. 4. The Demandant in a formedon in the Discender must make himselfe heire to him that was last seised, and he to the Donee. Note here, because K. was never seised, the Writ shall say Remanere, not descen∣dere, and the Writ was, Remansit jus, because a dis∣continuance, otherwise it should be Tenementa reman∣serunt. Fraunces Case, 7. Jac. fo. 89. THe Plaintiffe pleads in barre of avowry, that R. F. devised to I. his Sonne, who leased to him, the avowant replyeth, that after the devise, R. F. made a Feoffement to the use of the said I. upon condition, that he shall suffer his Executors to take away his goods, and the estate limitted to him was for sixty yeares, if he should so long live, with diverse remain∣ders over, and that after the death of F. I. hindered the Executors, to carry away the goods, whereupon T. in remainder entered, and judgement given for the Plaintiffe.
1. Resolv. Although the condition be taken strictly, the uses to I. onely, and to his Heires, are onely avoided by it. 2. A disturbance by paroll is no Breach of the condition, and because the avow∣ant did not shew a speciall disturbance, his replicati∣on was void. 3. I. ought to have notice of the con∣dition being a Stranger to it, or otherwise he cannot breake it, as a Copy-holder shall not forfeite for de∣nyall of rent, to him to whose use a Mannor is trans∣ferred before notice, but he who bindes himselfe to doe any thing must take notice at his perill, because he hath taken it upon him. 4. Although that the Title which the Plaintiffe had made in barre to the avowry, be destroyed, yet he shall have judge∣ment, because his count is good, and another Title (that is to have the Land for sixty yeares, by force of the uses declared upon the feoffement) is given unto him by the Replication; although that the title which he made for himselfe be destroyed, yet the Court must adjudge upon all the record, and judgement was entered for him accordingly. Edward Foxes Case, 7. Jacobi. fo. 93. A Revertioner upon a Lease for life, the remain∣der for life in consideration of 50. l. demiseth, granteth, &c. his reversion for 99. yeares rendering rent, this is a bargaine and sale, and there needs no attornement, for the words of bargaine and sale are not necessary if there are words which tantamount, as if at the common Law one had sould his Land, an use had beene raised to the Vendee, because their in∣tent so appeared, so here, but if it appeare that their intent was to passe it at the common Law, as if a Let∣ter of Attorney be made to make livery, the use had not risen, and here appeareth their intent to passe it
as a bargaine and sale, because rent is reserved pre∣sently, therefore it is reason that he shall have the rents of the particular Tenants presently, which can∣not be if it passe not by bargaine and sale, and inroll∣ment is not necessary, because a tearme for yeares onely passeth in this case, and o freehold. See Sir Rowland Heywards Case, 2. Report. fo. 35. Matthew Mannings Case, 7. Jacobi. fo. 94. LEssee for yeares is bound in 200. Markes to W. C. and deviseth to his Wife for life, and after her death to M. M and makes his Wife Executrix, who agrees and dyeth intestate. M. M. enters, and takes administration of the goods, not admini∣stred. W. C. brings Debt against him Resolved, that M. M. takes by Executory devise, and not as a remainder, and the estate limmitted to him in con∣struction, precedeth the limittation to the Wife, as if he had devised, that if the Wife die within the terme, that then M. M. shall have the residue, and also devised it to his Wife for life. 2. This case is most strong, because a Chattell which may vest and revest at pleasure of the Devisor, without mischiefe to the Praecipe. 2. A devise of the Terme, and Occu∣pation thereof, all one (Viz.) So many yeares as the Feme shall live, the remainder to M. M. 4. After the Executrix had agreed, the first devisee cannot barre the Executory devise. 5. A man may devise an estate, which he cannot convey by act executed as to his Executors, untill his Debts shall be paid, the remainder over, they have a Chattell determina∣ble, upon payment of the Debts, which cannot be at the common Law. If a Sheriffe sell a Terme upon a Fieri facias, and judgement is reversed, the sale shall stand, otherwise none will buy any thing upon Exe∣cution,
and judgement was given for the Plaintiffe, and affirmed in Error. Baspoles Case, 7. Jac. fo. 97. F. And B. put themselves in Arbitrament for all demands, Suites, so as the aforesaid award be delivered in Writing, &c. at the Feast of Saint James, the Arbitrator awards that B. shall pay 22. l. to F. B. refuseth to pay, F. brings Debt upon the bond to stand to the award, and good: 1. Resolved, that the award was of both parts, for the one was to pay money, and the other to discharge the Debt. 2. Re∣solved, that whereas the Plaintiffe saith, that the a∣ward was made De premissis, which untill the contra∣ry be shewed shall be intended of all: when the sub∣mission is generall, an award of part is good, for o∣therwise the parties may conceale one thing, and make the award void; but if it be of diverse things in speciall, Ita quod arbitrium fiat de premissis, an award of part is voyd, but good without such conclusion, so if two of one part, and one of the other part, sub∣mit themselves, arbitrament betweene one of the one part, and another of the other part is good. Sir Richard Lechfords Case, fo. 99. TEnant by copy in fee, (where there is a custome that the heire after the death of his auncestor, within three Courts and Proclamations made, shall be barred if he claimed not) dyes, his heire beyond the Seas untill three Courts and Proclamations passe, and returnes and claimeth to be admitted, he is not barred no more then by Non-claime upon a fine, Ergo, this custome shall be construed, if he be with∣in the realm of full age, &c. but if he goe over the seas
after the death of his auncestor, he shall be barred, as in case of a fine. 2. Resolved, although he was not in the Kings service, this is not to the purpose, because by intendment he cannot have notice; But a Mulier puisne, over the Seas shall be barred, by the dying, seised of the Bastard Eigne, for the right of the Mulier is barred, and the Bastard is made Mulier, al∣though that a discent of the disseisor of a rent or thing which lyeth in grant barreth not the disseisee, yet if a Bastard eigne, dye seised of it, this barres the Mulier. If two Daughters, whereof one is a Bastard, eigne, enters and dyes, before or after partition, the Mulier is barred: Otherwise, if two Daughters, and one of them had no collour of partition, if Bastard eigne dye in the life of his Father, having issue, who enters after the death of the Father, and dyeth sei∣sed, having issue. Quaere, if the Mulier be barred, mulier is barred by discent, before entry of the Sonne of the Bastard, eigne, as if issue be in Ventre sa mere, or the Wife of the Bastard indowed. John Talbots Case, 7. Jaco. in Second deliverance fo. 102. LOrd and Tenant by Homage, Fealty, and Herriot service of 50. acres, the Tenant infeoffeth the Lord of three acres, and after infeoffeth the Plain∣tiffs father of three other acres, parcell, &c. who di∣eth, the Lord distreineth for Herriot, the Plaintiffe brings replevin, and good. 1. All intire services to render an intire Chattell of profit, or pleasure, by a∣lienation of part shall be multiplied, and by purchase of part by the Lord, extinct. 2. Personall services for the publique good, which are intire, as Chivalry, Homage, and Fealty, shall be multiplyed, and not extinct. 3. Other personall services, as Butler, Sew∣er,
&c. shall not be multiplied, but shall be exinct. So of a personall office, and mannuall labour. 2. There is no diversity betweene an intire Chattell be it an∣nuall or not, as if it be to render a Horse every five yeare by purchase of part, it shall be extinct. 3. If the Father of the Plaintiffe had been first infeoffed, and then the Lord, the Herriot had remained, be∣cause there the Father of the Plaintiffe, held by a severall Herriot before the Lord was infeoffed. 4. But Herriot custome, by purchase of part is not extinct. Doctor Bonhams Case, 7. Jacobi. fo. 114. THe President and Censors of the Colledge of Physitians in L. by colour of Letters Patents of H. 8. and the Statutes of 14. H. 8. and 1. Mar. fined and Imprisoned Doctor Bonham, for practising of Physicke in L without their allowance, (the fine to be paid to them,) and also for contempt made to the Colledge, whereupon he brings false imprison∣ment, and adjudged for the Plaintiffe. 1. Whither a Doctor of one University or other, be within the act. 2. Admitting that he is, whither he be within the ex∣ception in 14. H. 8. Justice Daniell held, that such a Doctor was not within the body of the Act, and if he were, yet he is within the Exception, but Warbur∣ton econtra, for both points: Cooke spake not to them, but they all agreed that the Action was maintainable for two other points. 1. Whither the Censors have power to fine and imprison. 2. Admitting that if they have pursued it. The Censors have no power in this case to imprison the Defendant, for they have no power to punish by fine and Imprisonment, those who practise without their
license, but those practisers who misadminister physick. 1. Because the clause that none shall practise with∣out their License, and the clause which giveth to them the said power, are distinct clauses. 2. The first clause imposeth another penalty, and 5. l. every moneth that he practiseth, but leaveth the evill administration of Physick to be punished, by the Colledge, because this is uncerteine. 3. To make one punishable by the first Branch, he ought to practise by a moneth, otherwise it is by the second. 4. By this way they shall be both Judges and par∣ties in one cause. 5. If Doctor B. shall be punished by 5. l. by the moneth, and also at their pleasure, he will be often punished for one offence. 2. Admitting that they had power, yet they have not pursued it. 1. Because the President, who hath no power, joyned with them. 2. The fine was imposed for not appearing before the President and Censors, and the President had no power. 3. Halfe of the fine belongs to the King, and here all is to be paid to them. 4. The Impri∣sonment ought to be presently, as upon the Statute of W. 2. cap. 12. 5. their authority being by Patent and Statute, their proceedings ought not to be by Paroll, and the rather, because they claime authori∣ty to fine and imprison. 6. It shall be taken strict, because against the li∣berty of the Subject, therefore before 1. Mar. the Gaoler was not bound to receive them, and this doth not inlarge their power, but that the Gaoler shall forfeite double the Amerciament, if he refuse. Admitting the replication void, although that the Colledge demurre upon it, yet the Plaintiffe shall have judgement, because in the barre, the Defen∣dants have shewed that they have imprisoned him
without cause, for upon all the pleading, it appea∣reth, that he had cause of action; but if a barre be insufficient, and by the replication it appeares, that the Plaintiffe had no cause of Action, he shall not have judgement: a Count may be made good by barre, and a barre by replication in matters of cir∣cumstance but not of substance. See there seaven things observed by Cooke, for the better direction of the President and Comminalty of the said Colledge hereafter. The Case of the City of London, 7. Jac. fol. 121. IT is a good custome within a Citty that a Forreinor within the said Citty shall not sell things by re∣taile, and it is good also upon paine of 5. l. but it is not good by Charter, therefore Citties which are in∣corporate within time of memory cannot have such priviledges without Parliament: so of a custome, that goods forreigne bought and forreigne sould, shall be forfeited: So one may prescribe to have a Bake-house in a Towne, and that no other shall have one there, and the Statutes which provide that every one may sell in retaile, or in grosse, extend onely to Merchands, aliens and demisens, who export and import things vendible. Three inconveniences by confluence of people to London, &c. The Case of Thetford Schoole, fol. 130. 8. Jac. LAnds of the yearely value of 35. l. in ao 9. El. was devised by the will of Thomas Fulmerston, to certeine persons and their Heires for maintainance of a Preacher, four dayes in the yeare, of the Master and Usher of a free Grammar-Schoole, and foure poore People, Viz. Two men and two women, and
the Defendant delayed to accept a Release to de∣fraud the Plaintiffe: adjudged for the Plaintiffe. 1. Although that two recoveries are without covin, yet the composition so operates, that nothing shall be accounted administred, but onely so much as he hath paid by composition, and the converting of any part to his owne use, and the deferring to accept a Release, is against the office of an Executor, and shall not aide him. 2. The barre is insufficient be∣cause he hath not shewed that the Court of C. had power to hold plea of debt. 2. Because he hath not shewed that the Testator was bound in an Obli∣gation, and if it were onely upon contract, the admi∣nistrators were not chargable in Debt. 3. Be the replication evill yet because the Barre is insufficient, the Plaintiffe shall have judgement, because he had not shewed any thing against himselfe, but if it ap∣peare by the replication that he had no cause of A∣ction he shall be barred. Mary Shipleys Case, 8. Jac. fol. 134. AN action of Debt against an Executor of 200. l. the Defendant pleaded, Plene administravit, the Plaintiffe replies, that the Executor had assets, the Jury found assets to the value of 172. l. judgement was given to recover the whole Debt of 200. l. and damages, and costs of the goods of the Testator. S. &c. Et si non, then the damages of the proper goods of the Defendant. Sir John Nedhams Case, 8. Jacobi, Communi Banco, fol. 135. IN debt as administratrix upon administration com∣mitted by the Bishop of R. the Defendant pleads
administration committed unto him by the Deane and Chapter of C. sede vacante, because the Intestate had bona notabilia, &c. the Plaintiffe replyes that that administration was repealed: adi. for the Plaintiffe. 1. Resol. Because it is not shewed that the Inte∣state had bona notabilia, &c. it shall be intended that he had not, and yet the administration is not voyde, but voydable. 2. Before the repeale of administration commit∣ted by the Metropolitan, the inferior Ordinary may commit administration, because this is by the re∣peale declared voyd, ab initio, and an administration is but an authority which may well commence in futuro. 3. The committing of administration to the ob∣ligor hath not extinguished the bebt, because it is in anothers right, otherwise it is, if the obligee him∣self make the Obligor his executor, because this is his owne act, De bonis defuncti trina dispositio. 1. Ne∣cessitatis, ut funeralia. 2, Ʋtilitatis, that every one shall be payd in due order. 3. Voluntatis, as Legacies. Sir Francis Barringtons Case, 8. Jacobi, Communi Banco, fol. 136. THe Lord R. granted wood within a Forrest. in which the Plaintiffe had common, which grant is confirmed by Statute, the grantee cuts wood, and inclose it, the commoner shall loose his common for seven yeares. 1. Resol. The grantee had an inheritance to take in another soyle, and the soyle is to the Lord R. 2. Although the grantee had not the inheritance, yet the Statute extends to him, and he may inclose, for the Statute is, or any other person to whom wood is sould, 3. 22. E. 4. cap. 7. extends to wood which
one had in severalty, and not where another had common there; for at the common Law, one who had wood in a Forrest cannot incloser against a com∣moner, but if it be his severall wood, he might in∣close, parvo fossato, &c. for three yeares. 4. The sayd Statute is as a conveyance betweene the King and his Subjects, which taketh not away the right of third persons, as the commoner here is. 5. In the sayd Statute there is a clause that hee may inclose without suing to the King, or other ow∣ner, so that power is given against them, and not a∣gainst a commoner. Beasts of Forrest are Hart, Hinde, Hare, wilde Boare, and Wolfe: of chase, Buck, Doe, Fox, Martin, and Roe. 6. By the Statute of 35. H. 8. cap. 17. he is bar∣red of his common, which provideth that no Beasts shall be suffered to come there for seven yeares. 7. The Statutes which concerne Forrests are ge∣nerall, because they concerne the King, and the Court shall take notice of them. Doctor Druries Case, 8. Jacob. fol. 141. DOctor Drury recovers against B. who is outlawed, and taken by Capias ut-legatum, and escapeth, the Utlary is reversed, Doctor Drury sueth execution, B. brings an Audita quaerela, adjudged that it lyeth not. It was resolved that if A. be in execution at the suit of B. upon an erroneous judgement, and after escape, and after the judgement is reversed by a Writ of error, the action against the Sheriffe is extinct, for hee may plead Nul tiel record: But untill it be re∣versed, it remaines in force, be it never so errone∣ous; and if the partie have judgement and execu∣tion upon the escape against the Sheriffe or Goaler, and after the first judgement is reversed, yet for as
much as judgement upon this collaterall thing is ex∣ecuted it shall remaine in force, notwithstanding the reversall of the first, 7. H. 6. 4. Yet it seemeth to me, he may have remedy by Audita quaerela, for that the ground and cause of the collaterall action is dis∣proved by the reversall of the first judgement, a dif∣ference betweene meane acts, compulsatory, and vo∣luntary, and betweene a recovery by eigne title, and reversall of a recovery. Davenports Case, 8. Jacobi, fol, 144. TEnant for yeares of an advowson granteth proxi∣mam advocationem & donationem, si eadem Ecclesia contingerit vacua fore durante termino, &c. And after∣ward surrenders his terme, yet if the prochein avoi∣dance be within the tearme, the grant is good, for yeares cannot determine, but the effluxion of time, and the Law implyes this limitation, if the Church doe come voyd, during the tearme: For expressio eorum quae tacite insunt nihil operatur: Likewise if a lessee for yeares grant a rent charge, and after surrender, yet for the benefit of the grantee the tearme hath con∣tinuance, although in rei veritate, it is determined, and the grantor himselfe shall not derogate from his owne grant to make it voyd at his pleasure. The six Carpenters Case, 8. Jacobi, fol. 146. IT was resolved when entry, authority, or license, is given to any by the Law, and he abuse the same, in this case hee shall be a trespassor ab initio: But where entry, authority, or license, is given by the party and he abuse the same, there he shall be pu∣nished for this abuse, but he shall not be sayd to be a trespassor ab initio; and the diversity is this, because
the Law doth judge by the act subsequent, quo animo, or to what intent hee enters, acta exteriora judicant interiora secreta: But when the partie giveth au∣thority, &c. to doe a thing, he cannot for any sub∣sequent cause punish the same. 1. The Law doth give authority of entry into a common Inn, Taverne, &c. 2. To a Lord to enter and distreine. 3. To an owner of the soyle to enter and distreine dammage feasant. 4. To him in reversion to view if waste be com∣mitted. 5. To a commoner to enter into his Land to view his Cattell, &c. But if hee that enters into an Inn, &c. doe tres∣passe, or take any thing away, or if the Lord that di∣streines for rent, or owner for dammage feasant, la∣bour, or kill the distresse, or he that enters to view wast, bruse the house, or stay there all night, or if a commoner sell Tymber; in these cases and such like, the Law judgeth that hee entred for the same purpose; and therefore the act that doth demon∣strate this, is, to be a trespasse, and he shall be a trespassor ab initio: It was resolved, that the non-seasons, or not doing of a thing is not any trepasse, where the Law giveth license or authority to enter, (viz.) to deny to pay for Wine in a Taverne, is not a trespasse, but the Taverner may have an action of debt, 12 E. 4.8. If a Taylor overvalue the ma∣king of a Garment, and the necessaries thereunto, he shall not have an action of debt for his owne va∣lues, unlesse it be specially agreed upon before, but he may detaine the Garment, untill he be payd or satisfied; and if the party sue for the same: the Jury shall set downe the value, and the Taylor shall have no more, but be barred for the rest: Likewise
an Ostler may deteine an Horse, &c. Tender of suf∣ficient amends for dammage fesant befor the distresse taken, is good, and the taking of a distresse afterwards is wrong; tender after the taking of a distresse, and before the impounding, maketh the detaining wrong, but not the taking; but tender after the impoun∣ding commeth too late, for then the cause is put to the tryall of the Law. Edward Althams Case, 8. Jacobi, fol. 159. In dower and pleaded, N. Seised in fee of Lands in W. and G. deviseth the Lands in G. to his younger Son for life; it was agreed betweene the eldest Son and the Widow of T. N. that shee should release her dower in W. shee releaseth unto him, omnes actiones demand. &c. necnon omnem dotem & titulum dotis, &c. de aliquibus terris in W, both the Sons dye, shee brings dowre of the Lands in G. and judgement given for the de∣mandant. 1. Resol. A release of all actions to him in the re∣version barreth not dowre, because shee had no cause of action against him, but against the tenant of the free hold, but a release of all her right to him in the reversion extinguisheth dowre, for a release of right beareth actions, but a release of actions barreth not a right, if there be other meane to come to it; o∣therwise not, as if the disseisee release all actions to the heire of the disseisor, the right is extinct, other∣wise it is if the release be to the disseisor, and a discent after, or if the release be to the lessee for life of the heire; a release of all actions reall and personall is no barr in a Writ of errour, but a release of a Writ of errour is; a release of actions is no barr to have execution; if he be not put to a Scire facias,
a release of a thing due before the time of payment thereof, is good: Quaerela is more then an action, for by that the cause of action is released; by release of suites, executions are barred, for none shall have execution without suite for it, so it is of all duties; but a release de quaerelis infectis, in that case barreth not dowre; by release of titles dowre is barred; and by release of demands, which is the most ample release of all. 2. The collaterall agreement is not of any force or effect, but generall words ought to be qualified by apt words contained in the same Deed as in this case, mihi contingent per mortem dicti T. viri mei de ali∣quibus terris in W. &c. and so extends not to any Lands in G. but restraineth the generall words to the Lands in W. onely: Quando carta continet generalem clausulam, posteaque descendit ad verba specialia, quae clau∣suae generali sunt consentaneae, interpretanda est carta se∣cundum verba specialia: As if a man grants a rent in manerio de D. precipiendum, in 100. Acres parcel there∣of with clause of distresse in the 100 Acres, the rent shall issue out of the 100. Acres onely. Arthur Blackamores Case. 8. Jacobi, fol. 156. THe Defendant is named Gent. in the originall Writ, but by negligence of the Cursitor hee is outlawed by the name of Knight; this is amenda∣ble at the common Law, but in case of the King, de∣fault of the Court was amendable at the Common Law, as erroneous entrance of the continuance, es∣soyne, &c. and any part of the Record the same Terme; and therefore diverse Statutes of amend∣ments were made, one of the last whereof was 8. H. 6. cap. 12. which was more large, and extends to processe, and to seven other things, to Records, Pleas,
Parolls, Warrants of Attorney, to Writs originall and judiciall,, Pannels, and Returnes; that is, where it was the misprision of the Clerke, and onely the default of the Clerke by negligence is amendable, but not by his nescience; as if an action be brought against executors in the debet and detinet, or if it be false Latine, but if a word which is not Latine be written for a Latine word, this is amendable, as Ima∣ginavit, for Imaginatus est: In a Writ of trespasse a∣gainst diverse, if it abate for default against one, it shall abate against all, but if it be for matter in fact onely, as for misnaming one Defendant, it shall abate onely against him; omission or addition which doth not alter the forme is amendable, as if Dei gratia be omitted: Voluntary or negligent keeping of Records by the Clerke is amendable by other parts of the Re∣cord, or by exemplification: Count or plea in barr, &c. which wanteth substance, shall not be amended in another Terme, but default in the colour (be∣cause this is the default of the Clerke) shall be; a Record shall be amended in another Terme by the paper Booke, and a thing apparent to be the fault of the Clerke, shall be amended in another Terme, as rien luydoit. de hoc, &c. & predictus defend. pro quaerent. Nisi prius shall be amended by this Statute, if power be given to the Justices to proceed, otherwise not, as if issue joyned in the Record be mistaken in the Nisi prius, it shall not be amended, but misprision of dammages shall be, because this is not materiall to the issue, and it is the default of the Clerke: War∣rant of attorney, and returnes are amendable by this Statute, but if there be none at all, it is out of the Statute; and because this Statute leaveth many ca∣ses without remedy, the Statutes of 32. H. 8. cap. 30. and 18. Eliz. cap. 14. were made: Ten misprisions as yet not remedied.
1. Variance materiall betweene the originall and the Count. 2. Want of substance in the originall, or Count. 3. Insufficient tryalls. 4. If a Coroner returnes the Jury where the She∣riffe ought. 5. Lack of name of the Sheriffe to the returne. 6. Where no returne is indorced upon the Venire facias. 7. When one who is not returned, giveth a Ver∣dict. 8. Pleas of the Crowne. 9. If it appeare to the Court that he who hath a Verdict had no cause of action. 10. Errour in Law. Cases in the Court of Wardes. Myghts Case, 7. Jacobi. fol. 163. 1. REsolved, if J. M. purchase Lands to him, and an Infant in fee, it cannot be averred that this was to take away the wardship, because he never was sole Tenant to the King. 2. No feoffement that I. M. can make of his moi∣ty, can be aver'd to be by collusion, &c. because with∣out feoffement no wardship shall be, and also the Statute speakes of sole seisin. 3. A feoffement to the wife or younger Child can∣not be averred to be by covin, &c. upon constructi∣on of the Statute of 32. & 34. H. 8. where collusi∣on cannot be averred by the Statute of Marlebridge, it cannot be now to seize all the Land, but it may be for the third part which belongs to the King: If a third part be left to the King, no averrement of
covin may be for the other two parts, the Father makes a feoffement to diverse uses, the remainder to his second Sonne and dyeth, his Eldest Sonne dyes, the second Sonne shall not be in ward by aver∣ment of covin. Digbies Case, 7. Jacobi. fo. 165. TEnant of the King conveys his Lands to the use of himselfe for life, the remainder to his Sonne and Heire in taile, and after is attainted of Treason, the King shall have no wardship of any part of the Land by 32. & 34. H. 8. because there is no Heire, and livery must be sued in the name of the Heire, but the King shall have wardship in such a case before 26. H. 8. because there was an Heire. The Earle of Cumberlands Case, 7. Jacobi. fol. 166. E. 2. granted the Castle and Mannor of S. in taile to R. C. H. 6. granted the reversion to T. C. if the taile be good, if not, he grants it in possession, this is good one way or other, and so are many Pa∣tents from time to time. Paris Stoughters Case, 7. Jacobi. fol. 168. BY Mandamus it was found that P. S. dyed seised 40. El. and held of the Queen in common socage, 7. Jacobi. a Melius inquirendum was awarded, whither he held of the King by common socage, or in chival∣ry, and it is found that he held of the Queene by chivalry. This Writ of Melius, &c. is repugnant, and giveth no authority to find this office, because a Tenure cannot be of the King, in the time of Queene Elizabeth, and therefore a new Writ shall be award∣ed,
but if the first Melius be good, no other shall issue. 1. For avoiding Infinitnesse. 2. A Diem clausit, &c. shall not issue upon a Diem, &c. Nor Mandamus upon a Mandamus, so a Melius, &c. shall not issue upon a Melius. 3. If an Office be found a∣gainst a Subject, he shall have a traverse, and if upon that it be found against him, he hath no remedie: So the King shall have but one office, and a Melius, and no more, although that a Tenure be found of two Subjects, or one hath an Ouster le maine, the King shall not reseise without a Scire facias. Toursons Case, 8. Jacobi. fol. 170. IF Tenant of the King commit Fellony Ao 1. Jaco. and after is attainted Ao 3. for the same, and af∣ter in Ao 4. all is found by office. Now this office shall have relation to the time of the Fellony, to a∣void all meane alienations and incumbrencies, but for the meane profits it shall have relation to the time of the Attendor for their the Kings Title ap∣peared of Record, and the like Law is of an Ideot. But in case of a ward within age, the King shall have the meane profits from the death of the Auncestor, because he hath it by reason of his Seigniory, and he looseth the rent and services in the meane time; the difference is, when the King seiseth jure protectio∣nis regae, or Nomine destrictionis, and when Ratione Pri∣oris recti seu tituli. Sir Gerrard Fleetewoods Case, 8. Jacobi. fol. 171. SIr William Fleetewood receiver of the Revennues of the Court of Wards, in Anno. 35. Eliz. was pos∣sessed of a Messuage and certaine Lands in Harrow in Com: Mid: for a tearme of yeares, in Anno. 36. Eliz.
he became Receiver generall, and was bound in 20. Obligations of 200. l. a peece to make true account &c. And after upon severall accounts he became in∣debted in great Summes of money to the Queene, and being so indebted in consideration of 1100. l. did bargaine and sell the said Lease to James Pember∣ton, which by meane conveyance came to Sir Gertard Fleetwood. Question, Whither this Lease, &c. was extendable and lyable to the Kings Debt, &c. and it was resolved, that the said sale of the tearme was good against the King, because the tearme was but a Chattell, and the sale of Chattells after judgement, Bona fide, is good, but not after Execution awarded. And Cooke Chiefe Justice, said, that a Receiver or other accomptant which is indebted, shall not be in worse case then a Fellon or a Traytor, that may after Fellony or Treason, and before conviction, sell, Bona fide, for his sustenance, &c. his Chattells, eyther reall or personall. Hales Case, 8. Jacobi. fol. 172. THe Heire Ward comes to full age, and tenders his livery, and bargaines and sells, and dyes, the interest of the King is determined, and the Bar∣gainee shall not answer for the meane profits, for the Heire had done all that he could doe, and no default in him, otherwise if he had not tendered it. Sir Henry Constables Case, 8. Jacobi. fol. 173. THe Sonne of the Tenant of the King is made a Knight in the life of his Father, the Father dyes, the Sonne within age tenders his livery, by that, the meane profits are saved, and the King shall not have the rates within age.
Virgill Parkers Case, 8. Jacobi. fol. 173. VIrgill Parker seised of the Mannor of Fushell in fee, houlden of the King in Chivalry of his Dutchie of Lancaster, maketh a feoffement of the one halfe to the use of himselfe for life, and after to the use of Mary Coney (whom he intended to Marry) for her life for her joynture, and after he Married her, and then Leased the other halfe to I. C. for yeares, for payment of his Debts and Legacies, and dyed, his Heire within age. Question, whither the King should have the third part out of the Mannor so Leased onely, or out of the whole; and it was resolved, that it shall be out of the whole Mannor, although the e∣state of the Wife was precedent, that is, equally out of both parts. The End of the Eighth Booke.
THE NINETH BOOK. Dowmans Case, 28. Eliz. Communi Banco. fol. 7. An Assize pleaded. THe Defendant in an Assize makes Title by a recovery, suffered by P. V. to cer∣taine uses, the Plaintiffe confesseth the recovery, and saith, That it was to the use of the said P. in fee, and traverseth that it was to the uses mentioned by the Defendant, the Jury found that it was suffered as the Defendant had alleadged, and that by Indenture subsequent, the intent of the parties was declared by them to be as the Defendant had alleadged, adjudg'd for the Defendants. 1. Resolved, that this subsequent Indenture di∣rects the uses of the precedent recovery by estop∣pell against the Recoveree, and his Heires, and al∣though that it be granted, that a deede is requisit to the priviledge without impeachment of wast, yet the estate without deede is good: No averrment can be taken that the recovery was to other uses then are mentioned in a precedent indenture, otherwise in an Indenture subsequent, because, if uses were declared by a precedent indenture, no Declaration after, shall devest them: So if P. V. had charged the Land, and
then had made such a Declaration, this shall not de∣vest estates of grantees, &c. but no declaration, being the uses by Declaration subsequent, be devested. 2. In all actions betweene all persons, and in all issues the Jury may give a Verdict at large, and the Statute of W. 2. cap. 30. which giveth it in Assize, is but an affirmance of the Common Law, but a Jury cannot find a thing impertinent to the issue. The death of Sir James Dyer Chiefe Justice of the Common Pleas, with an ample and memorable En∣comium of him by Sir Edward Cooke, &c. Vivit post funera virtus. Anna Bedingfeilds Case, 28. Eliz fol. 15. In dower. A Common essoyne is allowable in dowre, and the Statute of 12. E. 2. is to be intended of an es∣soyne in the Kings service, for the Statute saith in prorogation of the right which is properly this es∣soyne which is for a yeare and a day. 2. If tenant of the King dyeth seized of diverse Mannors, and it is found by office that he dyed seized of one, in dowre brought against the Heire of full age he sueth a Circumspecti agatis, this extends not to more then is in the Office, for this Writ is in the na∣ture of an ayde praier, and the King hath no right to seise more then is in the Office, and as to this Mannor it was objected, that it shall be allowed as well as if the Heire be within age, for in this Case, by the Sta∣tute of Praerogat. Regis cap. 4. that the Feme may be indowed in Chancery: It was answered, that by the Statute of Bigamis. cap. 4. ayde shall not be granted of the King in that Case, and therefore before the Statute of Praerogat. the King nor other Lord could not indow the Feme, if the Heire were of full age, because he is not then Gardian, and the Statute of
Praerogat. giveth power to the King to indow the Wife in such case, if shee will, and not otherwise: Where the Heire pleads to Dower, detinue of Char∣ters, they ought to concerne the same Land, and this Plea is to be allowed, because the Feme who deteineth Chartars is not worthy to have Dower, and also for the privity which is betweene the Heire and her. 2. The Heire ought to shew the certeinty of the Charters, or that they were in a Chest. 3. None but the Heire himselfe shall have this plea, nor the Heire himselfe, if he commeth in by purchase, or if the Feme had them by his delivery, nor if he comes in as Vouchee having no Lands in the same County, or as Tenant by resceite, because in these Cases he cannot pleade as he ought, that he is ready to render Dower. 4. A Gardian shall not pleade it, because the Char∣ters doe not belong unto him, but he may pleade, detinue of the Ward, and if be be not restored unto him unmarried, the Feme shall loose her Dower, and after, the Tenant waived this plea, and pleaded, Ʋnques accouple, in loyall Matrimony, and the Bishop of N. certified, that they were lawfully married where upon the Demandant had judgement. Case of Avowry, fol. 20. IF there be Lord and Tenant by fealty, and rent, and the Tenant make a Lease for yeares, and the Lessee hath done his fealty and paid his rent conti∣nually, and yet the Lord distreineth the Beasts of the Lessee for the rent, and avowed upon a meere stran∣ger as upon his very Tenant. Question, whither the Lessee be without remedy, for it is a position in Law, that a stranger to the a∣vowry
shall not plead, but Hors de son fee, &c. But it was resolved, that the Lessee shall be releeved, and he must alledge, that the Lessor is seised of the Tenancy, &c. and the Lord shall be compelled to a∣vow upon the Tenant, and the false avowry of the Lord upon a stranger, which is not very Tenant, shall not hurt the Lessee against the verity of the Case, Quia veritas nihil veretur nisi abscondi. If one come to distreine for damage Fesant, and seeth the Beasts, and the owner chase them out, the party may not distreine them, damage feasant but is put to his Action of Trespasse, for the beasts must be damage feasant, at the time of the distresse taken, he who distreines for services upon fresh suite may avow upon the Land by the equity of 21. H. 8. c. 19. if the Lord distreine when no rent is arreare, the Te∣nant or Lessee may make rescons, and so releive him∣selfe. The Abbot of Strata Mercella his Case, 34. Eliz. fol. 23. IN a Quo warranto for claiming Waifes, &c. and Fellons goods, &c. the Defendant pleaded as to the Fellons goods, that the Abbot of S. M. Licite habuit & gavisus fuit them untill the Abbey was gran∣ted to the King by 27. H. 8. and pleads also, 32. H. 8. c. 20. of reviving of priviledges, of Abbies, and that the K. granted a Mannor parcell of the Abbey, & tot talia & tanta privilegia, as the late A. had to one by whom he claimed by feoffement, and pleaded not the feoffement by deede: Judgement against the Defendant, for the Queene it was said, that the Char∣ter of the Defendant was void. 1. Because it appeares not what estate the Abbot had.
2. Because the Defendant claimeth Catalla felonum appendant to a Mannor, because he pleaded a feoffe∣ment of the Mannor, and had not pleaded it by deed, without which, the priviledges doe not passe. To the first the Court answered, that it shall be intended a seisin in fee untill the contrary be shewed. To the second no resolution, but it was resolved, that if the K. grant a Mannor, & bona & catalla felo∣num dicto Manerio spectant. these passe, although they cannot be appendant. But for the third exception, judgement was given against the Defendant: In this Case foure things wor∣thy of consideration. 1. What ancient franchises ought to have allow∣ance, as to that, some may be claimed by prescrip∣tion without record, and some by record onely, and a Charter of the latter shall not be allowed, if it be before time of memory, if it be not allowed within time of memory, as allowance in Eyre, or confirmation by the K. but usage will not serve, and no more shall be allowed then are confirmed: Ob∣scure words in these ancient Charters shall be con∣strued according to ancient usage, and not according to usage at this day. 2. A man may prescribe in Franchises lying in poynt of Charter, with aide of allowance in Eyre without shewing the Originall Charter. 3. If a Patent of priviledges whereby they are granted in fee referre to a grant made before to one for life onely, this is good, for the relation is to the quality, and not to the quantity of the estate. See there what trialls shall be allowed by Law, such pri∣viledges as are ancient flowers of the Crowne, as, Bona & catalla felonum fugitivorum, &c. if these come againe to the K. they are merged in the Crowne, but not those which were erected and created by the K.
as Faires, Markets, Parkes, Warren, and the like. Bucknalls Case, 42. Eliz. Com. banco. fol. 33. IF the Lord avow for other services then the Te∣nure is traversable, if for more services of the same nature, the seisin is traversable, for he may incroach, and it cannot be avoided in an avowry, if it be not for an outragious distresse, but seisin binds not in Ne injuste vexes, Cessavit, Assize, Rescons, or Trespasse, but in them he shall traverse the Tenure, but issue in taile, successor of a Bishop, &c. shall avoide seisin in an avowry, and every one may, that can shew a deed of the tenure, but none shall have a Contraformam feoffamenti, but the feoffee or his Heires, and incroach∣ment hurteth not, where there is no Tenure, and if an incroachment be of payment at more dayes if they agree in the Sum, it doth not prejudice. Seisin in an avowry is not traversable generally as never seised of the services, because by that meanes he leaveth no remedy to the Lord by avowry, but in such a Case he shall disclaime or pleade out of his fee, and so traverse the Tenure: He who denyeth seisin after the limittation, must first acknowledge a Te∣nure, that the Lord may have his Writ of Customes, and Services, as if the Avowry be for rent, fealty, and suite. Henslowes Case, 42. Eliz fol. 36. AN Action of Debt was brought against Gage and others as Executors, one of the Executors re∣fused before the ordinary the probate, and the rest of the Executors proved the Testament, it was ad∣judged, that notwithstanding that refusall, he may administer the will afterwards at his pleasure, for
when many are named Executors, and some of them refuse, and other some prove the Testament, those which refused may afterwards administer, notwith∣standing the refusall before the Ordinary, but if all refuse before the Ordinary, and the Ordinary com∣mit the administration to another, then they cannot prove at any time, and the Executor that proveth the will ought to name every other of the Executors that refused in every action for recovery of Debts of the Testator, and they may release the debts, du∣ties, &c. and they which refused may have an Acti∣on by survivor, and after that Executors have admi∣nistred, and have once taken upon them the charge of the Executor-ship, they cannot refuse at any time after. It is holden in 2. R. 3. tit. testament. 4. that it is but of late times that the Church had the probate of Testaments in this Land, for 'twas given by an act, &c. and in all other Nations it is not so, but in Eng∣land, and in many places of England, the Stewards in their Courts Baron, have probate of Testaments in their temporall Courts at this day. Lynwood who was Deane of the Arches and writ in Anno. Dom. 1422. did confesse the probate of Te∣staments to belong to the Ordinaries De consuetudine Angliae & non de communi jure, and that in other Realms the Ordinaries have not so, and in another place he affirmeth that the power of the Bishop in probate of Testaments, is, Per consensum regni & suorum procerum ab antiquo. And I have seene a Booke in Latine, published, 1573. by the Reverend Father Mat∣thew Parker, Arch Bishop of Canterbury, who was ve∣ry Learned in matters of Antiquity, in these words, Rex Angliae olim erat consiliorum Ecclesiasti orum praeses, vindex temeritatis romanae, propugnator Religi nis, nec ul∣lam habebant Episcopi authoritatem praetam eam quam à rege
acceptam referebant, jus testamenta probandi non habebant administrationis potestatem cui{que} delegare non poterant. It was resolved by Littleton, Newton, and Danby, in 7. E 4. 14. that if all the Executors refuse before the Or∣dinary, they may prove the Testament afterwards, but I think this is before the Ordinary hath commit∣ted the administration, for afterwards they cannot, The Executors have their Title by their Testament; which is temporall. But to the suing of Actions in the Kings Courts, the Judges will not admit the Executors for to sue, except that they shew the Testament proved, under the seale of the Ordi∣nary duely, but alwayes the Kings Courts have used to allow the probate of any of the Executors to ina∣ble them all to sue actions, but the probate of the Testament doth not give to them any interest or Title, eyther to the things in action or possession, for they have all their title and interest by the Te∣stament, and not by the Probate. Power to grant administrations was granted to the Ordinary, by the act of 31. Ed. 3. ca. 11. for before that time, when a man died intestate, the King who is, Parens patriae, was accustomed by his Ministers to seize his goods, to the intent they might be preser∣ved, and bestowed for the Buriall of the dead, for payment of his debts, for advancement of his Wife and Children (if he had any) otherwise to his Kin∣dred as appeareth in Rot. Claus. de 7. H. 3. in ib. bona intestatorum capi solebant in manus regis, &c. And af∣ter this care and trust was committed to the Ordi∣naries, and it was resolved. Per totam Cur. M. 8. and 9. Eliz. Dyer. that the Ordinary himselfe hath not a∣ny authority to sell any goods of the intestate, al∣though they be in danger of perishing, neither can he release any debt due unto the intestate, by a statute, in Ao 31. Ed. 3. ca. 11. the Ordinary shall depute the
next and most lawfull friends of the dead person in∣testate to administer his goods. And the Statute in Ao 21. H. 8. ca. 5. is, that the Ordinary shall grant the administration to the widdow of the same person so deceast, or to the next of his Kin, or to both, as by the discretion of the Ordinary shall be thought good, &c. Reade this latter Statute, to whom administrations shall be granted. The Earle of Shrewsburies Case, 8. Jacobi, fol. 46. 1. REsolved, that the grant of the Stewardship of the Mannors of M. and B. without naming the County, in which, &c. is good, as if the K. grants all the Lands of priors, aliens, without naming the County, but the party in pleading must name the County, and upon Non concessit pleaded, it will ap∣peare by the evidence, and by circumstances, what Mannor was granted: but if he had demanded oyer, and demurred, it will be adjudged against him, for it is matter in fact, and the acts of confirmations ex∣tend not where the County is omitted, but where the County is misnamed. 2. The grant from a day past is good, and the in∣tent was, that the Earle shall have the fees from that day, but if that cannot be, it shall be good for the time to come. 3. The Earle had no power to make Deputies, for three offices passe by these Letters Patents seve∣rally, whereof this is the middle, and to the first power is annexed to make Deputies, but not to the second; the words are Habendum offic. praed. (with such a contraction) To that the Court answered, that this Habendum shall have relation to this office, for it is intended, that the Earle shall excercise this
base office by Deputy, for if a Sheriffe shall doe it, a Fortiori, an Earle. 2. Admitting that he cannot make a Deputy, this Non user is no cause of forfeiture, for true it is, when an office toucheth administrati∣on of Justice, Non user, without request, is cause of forfeiture, but if he be not bound to exercise it with∣out request, otherwise it is as here, he is not bound by the Letters Patents to hold Courts untill he be required: if an office be private and not for admini∣stration of Justice, Non user, without damage or re∣quest is no forfeiture. 4. Resolved, that the Writ and count were good, although they were Vi & armis, and the difference is betweene Non feasans, or neg∣ligence, and mis-feasance, that may be Vi & armis, therefore if one bring an Action upon the Case, Quare vi & armis, he hindered men from comming to his Fayre, which is Causa causans, whereby he lost his toll, which is, Causa causata, and the point of the Acti∣on, this is good. 5. The office not being meino∣rable, it is in his election to have an Action of the Case, or an assize, otherwise it is of Land. See five Exceptions taken, to the Verdict: Falsa Orthographia, Non vitiat concessionem, and the difference is betweene Writs and Grants: Ille numerus & sensus abbreviatio∣num accipiendus est, ut concessio non sit in anis, and judge∣ment was given for the Earle of R. Hickmots Case, 8 Jacobi. Com. banco. fol. 52. IN Debt upon an Obligation, the Defendant pleads a release, which is in these words, The Obligee confesseth himselfe to be discharged of all bonds, &c. and that he will deliver all but one bond, whereup∣on the action is brought, which was made by the Plaintiffe and another. 1. Resol. These words that the Obligee confes∣seth
himselfe to be discharged of all bonds, is a release and amounteth to that that the bonds are dischar∣ged. 2. The exception extends to all the premises, and not onely to the delivery. 3. The Plaintiffe by confessing that the Obligati∣on was made by another, and the Defendant against whom onely he brought the Action, had abated his owne Writ, and after the Plaintiffe was Non-suited. Batens Case, 8. Jacobi. fol. 53. A Quod permittat to abate a House levyed, Ad nocu∣mentum liberi tenementi, I. P. and now of the Plaintiffe, and Counts, that the House of the Defen∣dant doth juttie over the House of the Plaintiffe, and judgement given for the Plaintiffe. 1. Resolved, the Plaintiffe needs not shew how he had the estate of I. P. 2. The Writ is, Ad nocumentum liberi tenementi. I.P. and now of the Plaintiffe, and counts to the Nusans of the Plaintiffe onely, it is good for the levying in the time of I. P. imployeth a Nusans to him, and he must shew a Nusans to himselfe to maintaine the a∣ction. 3. If it appeare to the Court, that the Nusans is to the damage of the Plaintiffe, he needs not shew it specially, as if the House of the Defendant hangeth over the House of the Plaintiffe, as here, for it ap∣peareth that the light was stopped, and that the raine discended: Quod constat clare, non debes Verifi∣care, and the Plaintiffe may abate the Nusans if he will: the Statute of Westm. 2. c. 24. which giveth the Quod permittat against the alienee of him who levyed the Nusans extends not to the alienee of the alienee.
The Poulters Case, fol. 55. IF one were taken for the death of a man, he was not bailable at the Common Law, without a Writ De Odio & acia, which serveth not if he be appealed or indicted. 2. If he be found not guilty upon the said Writ, he was not bailable without a Writ, De ponendo in ballivum. 3. A Writ of conspiracy lyeth not before acquittall, but the conspirators may be in∣dicted or censured in the Starre-Chamber. Confe∣dracies punishable by Law before Execution, ought to have 4. incidents. 1. They must be declared by some manner of pro∣secution, as was in this Case. 2. They ought to be malicious and for revenge. 3. They ought to be false against an innocent. 4. They ought to be out of Court voluntarily. Aldreds Case, 8. Jacobi. fol. 57. WHen a man hath lawfull profit by prescription of time, whereof the memory of man is not to the contrary, other custome of the like time also, cannot take the former away, for the one custome is as ancient as the other. As if a man have a way o∣ver the Lands of B. to his freehold Land by prescrip∣tion of time, B cannot alledge prescription or cu∣stome to stop the said way, for it may be, that before the time of memory the owner of the said Lands had granted such away without any stopping, and so the prescription might have a lawfull beginning. 29. Eliz. Banco regis. Thomas Brand prescribed time out of memory to have the light of 7. Windowes towards a peece of Land of Thomas Mosely, in the Citty of York, but
Mosely erected a new building upon the said peece of Land, so neere, &c. as the light of the Windowes were stopped. Brand brought his action on the Case, and judgement was given for the Plaintiffe, for it might be that before the time of memory, the ow∣ner of that peece of Land did grant License to the owner of the Messuage, to have the said 7. Windowes without stopping them, and so the prescription might have a lawfull beginning. If a man have a watercourse to his House for neces∣sary uses, if a Glover make a Lime-pit for Calf-skins so neere the said Course, that the corruption doth corrupt the same, an Action of the Case lyeth. 13. H. 7. 26. 6. Likewise a man shall not make or erect a Swyne-sty so neere his Neighbours House, as to an∣noy him with the contagion thereof. John Lambs Case, 8. Jacobi. Starre-Chamber. fol. 59. IT was resolved, that every one that shall be convi∣cted in case of Libelling, ought to be eyther a con∣triver of the Libell, or a procurer of the contriver, or a malicious publisher thereof, knowing it to be a Li∣bell; For if one read a Libell or heare the same read, it is no publication, for before he heare or read the same, he cannot know the same to be a Libell, or if he read or heare the same, and laugh thereat, this is no publication; but if after he hath read or heard the same read, he repeate the same or any part there∣of in the hearing of others, or if he write a Coppy thereof, and doe not publish the same to others, this is no publication of the Libell, but it is good for him after he hath so written the same, to deliver it to a Magistrate, for then the act subsequent doth declare his intention precedent.
Robert Bradshawes Case, 10. Jacobi. fol. 60. LEssor for six yeares during the life of R. Covenants that he had power to make this Lease, the Lessee brings Covenant, and sheweth not that R. was in life, nor what person had right, and yet good: because if R. were not in life at the time of the Lease made, the Lease was absolute, if he died after, yet the Acti∣on lyeth, and he needs not shew who had right, for he had pursued the words of the Covenant, and it lyeth not properly in his notice. Mackallies Case, In killing of a Serjeant, &c. 9. Jacobi. fol. 65. FIve exceptions to the Indictment. 1. The Arrest was in the night, betweene five and six of the Clock, in November, at the suite of a Subject, which being tortious, the killing of the Ser∣jeant is but Man-slaughter. Non alloc. 1. Because the Arrest may be at the Suite of a Subject in the night. 2. Although that betweene five and six in November be in the night, yet the Court is not bound to take notice of it, without the shewing of the party, as in case of Burglary. 2. The Sunday is not Dies juridicus, therefore the arrest that wast made upon it was Tortious, &c. Resol. that judiciall acts shall not be done this day, but ministeriall may for necessity. 3. The Indictment is in Computat in parochia S. M. in W. emitting the Ward, yet good, as if one name the Towne, he is not bound to say in what Hundered it is, 4. and 5 the precept was to arrest him, Infra liberiates L. and the arrest was in L. yet good, be∣cause the Liberties of L. includes the City of L. it
selfe. 1. Exception to the verdict, that the Indict∣ment and the Verdict vary, for the Indictment is, that the arrest was by precept and by Verdict, it is found that it was by custome without precept. Answered, that the precept is but circumstance, and varience in it is not materiall, having found the substance, as if the Indictment be, that he killed him with a Dag∣gar, and it is found that it was with a Sword, so if he be indicted of murder, and it is found man-slaughter, this is good; for Ex malitia is but circumstance. 2. The Indictment may be generall, Ex malitia, &c. because the Law imployeth malice, and so the pre∣cept not materiall. 2. The custome is not good, to arrest one without summons: it is good, and if the processe be erroneous, yet killing of him who did ex∣ecute it, is murder, because he is not to dispute whe∣ther it be good or not, and if any officer in doing his office be slaine, this is murder, and in such a case an officer is not bound to flie to the Wall, as another is. 3. The Arrest cannot be before the plaint entered of record before the Sheriffe. Resp. it may by the custome after entry of it in the Porters Booke. 4. The Serjeant ought to shew at whose Suite the Arrest is, and in what Court, and for what cause, true it is, if the party submit himselfe, but here he was killed before he could speake, and if they kill him before the Arrest, knowing that he came for that purpose, this is murder. 5. It is not found that the killing was fellony. Resp. It is sufficient for the Jurors, to find the killing, which is the substance, and leave it to the Judge∣ment of the Court if it be fellony. 6. The Serjeant did not shew his Mace: He ought not. 1. Because he was commonly knowne. 2. The party arrested is to obey at his perill, and
if shewing of the Mace be requisite, it will be a war∣ning to the party to flie. 7. The arrest ought to be upon request after the plaint entered: the request may be before or after. 8. The verdict is repugnant, for they find that the plaint was entered of record, 17. Nov. and after they found that it was 19. Nov. this is more strong a∣gainst the Prisoners, because the entry was before the Arrest. 18. Nov. 9. The Plaint is without forme, this is not to the purpose, for it is but a remembrance to draw the count by at large after. And Mackalley and the other prisoners were Executed at Tyborne. Peacocks Case, 9. Jacobi. in Camera Stellata fol. 70. SIr George Reynell Plaintiffe, Richard Peacock and o∣thers Defendants, J.H. J.B. Commissioners to examine Peacock upon Interr. and Peacock being exa∣mined would have declared all the truth, but J.H. a Commissioner for the Plaintiffe, held him strictly to the Interr. so as the truth could not appeare: and this was holden by the Lord Chancellour and the two Chiefe Justices, the Chiefe Baron, and all the Court of Starre-Chamber, a great Misdemeanour, &c. as the Statute of Exceter saith, Per quod institia & veritas suffocantur, and Commissioners to examine ought to be indifferent, and by all meanes to express the Truth. And they are not bound strictly to the Letter of the Interr. but to every thing also, that a∣riseth necessarily for manifestation of the truth. Also the said J. H. when he was in Examination of Pea∣cock, went forth of the place to the Plaintiffe, being in another Roome, and had secret conference with him: And it was holden by all the Court, that a Commissioner, before publication of the depositions,
ought not to discover to any of the parties the matter thereof, nor after that he beginneth to examine In∣terr. to conferre with the parties, to take new in∣structions to examine further then he knew before: and if he did, they were great misdemeanours, and punishable by Fine and Imprisonment, for if such things should be suffered, perjury would abound. I. H. was put forth of the Commission of the Peace, and the Attourney generall was required to prefer an In∣formation against him, for the said misdemeanours. Doctor Husseys Case, 9. Jacobi. fol. 71. IN Ravishment of Ward against a Feme Covert, and others, they were found guilty, and the Baron, Non culp: and the Age of the Infant above sixteene, and Married: Foster and Warberton, a Feme Covert is within the Statute, because the Action lay at the common Law, and the Statute gives but greater pu∣nishment, and so shee is within the Statute of Merton, cap. 6. De Malefactoribus in parcis, of forcible entry, and redesseissin, Cooke and Walmsley to the contrary: the Statute of Westm 2. c. 35. hath made these alterations, this extends to Heires Females, which the Statute of Merton did not. 2. It extends to Heires Ravished after yeares of consent, so doth not the Statute of Merton. 3. It extends to the Clergy, the Statute of M. doth not. 4. M. giveth a light of Ward, this giveth ravishment of Ward. 5. This giveth more speedy processe, and the death of the Plaintiffe or Defendant abateth not the Writ. 6. It giveth greater punishment. 2. A Feme Covert is not within this Statute, for it is Si haeredem maritave∣rit, & satisfacere non potuerit abjuret regnum, or be per∣petually imprisoned, and because the Law disableth the Feme to satisfy, shee shall not therefore be exi∣led,
nor perpetually imprisoned, and the Baron be∣ing innocent shall not be punished, for the punish∣ment is personall, and he shall not have judgement at the Common Law, the Action being brought up∣on the Statute, nor judgement upon the Statute where the Action is brought at the Common Law. 3. The Verdict is insufficient, because no Case, is within the Statute, except the Ravishor marry the Infant, so that if the Infant Marry himselfe, or be Married by another, it is out of the Statute, and the Verdict found that he was Married, and did not say by whom. 4. Damages shall be recovered upon this Statute, and where the Statute saith, that he shall be banished, or perpetually imprisoned, the E∣lection is in the Court, Combes Case, 9. Jacobi. fol. 75. Ʋpon a speciall Verdict. A Copy-holder in fee (where there is no custome to that purpose) maketh two his Attorneys, to surrender to the use of I. N. in fee, they in Court shew the Letter of Attorney, and by the said Let∣ter of Attorney surrender. 1. Resolved, surrender by Letter of Attorney is good, for a surrender may be by the common Law without custome, and may be by Attorney as inci∣dent to it: If one have a bare authority, coupled with a confidence, he cannot doe it by Attorney, as Executors cannot sell by Attorney, but if he had authority to dispose, as owner of the Land, he may, as Cestuy que use, by the Statute of 1. R. 3. but if one had particular personall power to dispose, as owner of the Land, he cannot doe it by Attorney, as if Lessee for life had power to make Leases for 21. yeares: There are personall things which cannot be done by Attorney, as homage, Fealty, beating his
Villeine: admittance of him to whose use the surren∣der is made, may be by Attorney if the Lord will, and yet he may upon the admittance compell the Tenant to doe fealty, A fortiori here: and other∣wise it would be a mischiefe, for it may be he is be∣yond the Sea, or sick, and cannot be present, to sur∣render for payment of his debts or preferment of his Children, but if a custome be, that an Infant may make a feoffement at 15. yeares, he cannot doe it by attorney. 2. The Attorneys have pursued their authority, although they have not done it in the name of the Authorizor, for they did shew the Letter of Attor∣ney, and surrendered by authority thereof, which is all one, but if it be to make a Lease by Indenture, this shall be in the name of him who gave the autho∣rity, but Executors must sell Land in their owne name, for necessity, and yet the Vendee is in by the Devisor. Henry Peytoes Case, 9. Jacobi. Com. banco. IT was resolved, Per tot. curiam, that accord in all Actions, wherein is supposed the Tort to be made (Vi & armis) where cap. and the exigent lyeth at the Common Law, is a good plea, as in Trespasse, and Ejectione firmae, detinue of Charters, house, or o∣ther goods, for where the certainty is to be recove∣red an Action is a good plea, when the condition in a Deede by the Originall contracts of the parties, is to pay money, yet by accord and agreement betweene the parties, any other thing may be given in satis∣faction of the money, Res per pecuniam estimatur & non pecuniae per rem. And in this sense the saying is true, Quod pecuniae obediunt omnia.
Every Accord ought to be plaine, perfect, and com∣pleat, for if diverse things are to be observed and performed by the accord, the performance of part is not sufficient 17. E. 4. 2. & 6. H. 7. 10. Pl. com. 5. If a man be bound in an Obligation, in one hun∣dred Quarters of Wheate, upon condition to pay 58. Quarters, he cannot give money or other thing in satisfaction thereof, because the contract Originally was not for money, but for a collaterall thing. Also, if the things to be performed be at a day to come, tender and refusall is not sufficient without actuall satisfaction and acceptance. If a man be bound in a Statute, Recognizance, or Obligation, and after a defeasance is made to pay a lesse Summe, now this Summe in the defeasance is collaterall, and therefore if the Obligor render the same at the day, and it be refused, the Obligee shall loose the same for ever, as is holden in 33. H. 6. fol. 2. and yet in this Case, the obligor by accord be∣tweene the parties may give any Horse or other thing in satisfaction of the money in the defeasance, for the Contract originally was for money. But if a man by Contract or assumpsit without Deede be to deliver an Horse, or to build an House, or to doe any collaterall thing, money may be paid by accord, in satisfaction of such contract, for as a contract in con∣sideration may commence by word, so by accord, by words for any valuable consideration, the same may be dissolved.
Agnes Gores Case, 9. Jacobi. fol 81. WHerein was resolved, that if A. put poyson in∣to a Pot, to the intent to poyson B. and set the same in a place where he supposeth B. will come, and drinke thereof, and by accident one C. unto whom A. had no malice, commeth, and of his owne will, taketh the Pot, and drinketh thereof, of which poyson he dyeth, this is murther in A. for the Law coupleth the event with the intention, and the end with the cause. But if one prepare Rats-Bane to kill Rats or Mice, and lay the same in certaine hid∣den places to this purpose, and with no ill intent, and another person finding the same doth eat thereof and dyeth, this is no Fellony. But when one prepa∣reth poison with a Fellonious intent to kill any rea∣sonable Creature, whatsoever reasonable Creature is killed thereby, he that had the fellonious intent shall be punished. Resolved by all the Justices of England. Coneys Case, 9. Jacobi. fol. 84. in banco. THe Lord of a Mannor, and Tenant within the age of 21. yeares by Fealty and rent, the Lord in∣feoffeth a Stranger; to which feoffement the Tenant attourneth. Question, whither the attournement of an Infant will binde him to the payment of the servi∣ces or not, and by Cooke, Walmsley, Warberton, and Fo∣ster, it shall binde, for he is compellable in a Per quae servitia, and shall not have his age, but he may avoide any prejudice thereby at his full age: and if a fine here had beene levyed, he had beene compellable: and the rather because it is but a bare assent.
Pinchons Case, 9. Jacobi. fol. 86. IT was adjudged, that an Action of the Case, will lye against Executors, for a Debt due by the Te∣stator upon a simple contract. An Action upon as∣sumpsit, made by the Testator, was maintainable, against the Executors, upon a contract for Corne. Norwood & Reades Case, plow: com. 181. Debts upon simple contracts ought to be paid be∣fore Legacies, and reasonable part of the goods of the Wife or Infant, which proveth that they still re∣maine; the Spirituall Court doth give remedy for payment of Legacies; and the reason of all this is, for that the Testator in his life time, upon his action of the case upon the assumpsit, might not wage his Law, as he might have done upon his action of debt; for no action is maintainable against Executors, where the Testator might have waged his Law in his life time: If a Prisoner doe eate and drinke with his Goaler, and dye, the Goaler shall have an action of debt against his Executors, for the meate and drinke of the Testator; and the reason is, for that in this case the Testator might not wage his Law, as is ad∣judged, 27. H. 6. fol. 46. in Thomas Bodulgates Case, and the reason that no wager of Law in this Case is, because that every Goaler ought to keep his Prisoner in salva & arcta custodia, and thereby the Goaler is in a manner compelled to finde Victualls for his pri∣soners, and therefore the Prisoner may not wage his Law; but if A. contract with B. for his commons for a moneth, &c. there, in an action of debt brought against A. he may wage Law. If a Victualer, or common Innkeeper bring an a∣ction of debt for victualls delivered to his Guest, the Guest may wage his Law; for the Victualler, or Host,
is not compellable to deliver Victualls untill he be paid for them in hand, 10. H. 7, 8. in Anno. 4. H. 6. R. G. brought an Action of Debt for 10. Markes a∣gainst Thomas Timberhull, and others, Executors of William Webb, and declared that the Testator had de∣tein'd the Plaintiffe to be with him for a yeare in the Art of Limming of Books, paying per annum 10. Markes: And Martin did hold opinion, that the A∣ction was not maintainable against Executors, and he tooke diversity between this Case of a Limmer, and of a common Labourer, for the Labourer may be com∣pelled in spight of his head to serve, and his wage is put in certeinty by the Statute, and it is no reason the Servant should loose his wages by the death of their Master, whom he was bound by the Law to serve, but in case of a Limmer he is not bound by the Law to serve, & so when he makes a Covenant it is his owne Act and folly, and not the Act of the Law, for he might have taken a specialty, and the opinion of Martin in this Case, is good Law: But the true reason of this diversity, is, because that in this Case of the common Labourer, the Testator might not wage his Law as he might against the Lymmer, and this appeareth in 11. H. 6. fol. 48. where the Gardi∣an of Freres Minors in Coventry, brought an Action of Debt against John Burton of Coventry, Executor of John Goate, and declared that the said John Goate re∣tain'd at Coventry, Frere John Bredon, a Brother of the said House by License of the said Gardian, to Sing for him Masses for one whole yeare, and to say Saint Gregories Trentalls in the next yeare after, and shewed in certainty upon what services Saint Gregories Tren∣tall did consist, taking for this, xl.s. per annum, and within foure dayes John Goate dyed, and the Defen∣dant his Executor, and the said John Burton, granted to the said Frere to pay him the said Summe, for
doing the said services according to the Reteinor of the Testator, which Divine services the Frere did per∣forme according to the reteinor, and all his wages were Arr. And in this Case the diversity was taken, that a Labourer may have an Action of Debt against Executors, without specialty, because that he may be compelled to serve by the Statute, and the Te∣stator shall not wage his Law in this Case. But the Priest or Frere is not bound to Sing Masses, by the Law, against his will. And in every Case where the Testator might have waged his Law, the Action is not maintainable against his Executors without spe∣cialty, for Executors may not wage the Law, upon the contract of another. In 2. H. 4. fol. 16. Lawr. Saint Martin retained one for Tearme of his life, in the time of peace and Warres for 100 s. per annum, which service hee (as his Servant) did doe for two yeares, for which he brought his Action of Debt a∣gainst John Belton, and others, Executors of the said Lawr. And judgement was given against the Plain∣tiffe, for the reason, and upon the same diversity, as is aforesaid; an Assumpsit without specialty is no more personall then a Covenant by specialty, and therefore dyeth not with the person. William Banes Case, in banco regis, 9. Jacobi. fol. 93. UPon an Action of Assumpsit against Executors, the Plaintiffe needeth not to averr, that the Exe∣cutors have assets in their hands, of the goods of the Testator, to the value of the said Debt, for it shall be intended Prima facie, that they have Assets, for the Law doth presume, that the Testator will not leave a greater charge upon his Executors, then he will leave benefit to discharge. If a Stranger doe say unto a man to whom a Debt is owing, I pray ou forbeare your Debt, and doe not sue
the Partie untill Michaelmas, &c. and then I will pay you the Debt. This is a good consideration, although it be no benefit to him that made the promise for it; It is a damage to the Creditor to forbeare his Suite or debt, hee may have his Action of assumpsit against such a Stran-ger after the day. Sir George Reynells Case, 9. Jacobi. fol. 95. In Chancery. IT was found by Office, by Commission under the great Seale, That the Marshall of the Kings Bench had committed diverse Forfeitures of his Of∣fice, by suffering voluntary escapes of Prisoners; That Office, and such like may not be granted for yeares, because it is an Office of trust, and personall, and he must continually attend, and be Sworne in Court. Two matters of record amount to an Office, as in the Case of Sir John Savage, who was Sheriffe of the County of Worcester for life, by Letters Patents under the Great Seale, and was Indicted of two voluntary escapes of Fellons: and the King may seize his Of∣fice into his owne hands, without suing forth any Scire facias, 5. Mar. Dyer. The Abbot of Saint Al∣bones, had a Gaole, and detained Prisoners therein, and because he would not be at charges to sue forth a Commission for the Gaole delivery, the King caused his Franchise and Liberty thereof to be seised into his owne hands. The Abbey of Crowland had a Gaole and Prisoners, and for that hee once deteined men that were quit of Fellony, the King reseised the Gaole for ever. If a man grant an Office to another for life, or for yeares, and he will not doe his Office, or otherwise misuse his Office, the Grantor may reseize the said Office. 39. H. 6. fo. 34.
If a Gaoler commit voluntary escapes, or permit them, this is a forfeiture of his Office, Cooke, Lib. 9. in the Countee of Salops Case. The King may grant the custody of the Gaole to one in fee, and also to the Sheriffe of a County, to one, and his Heires, which estate in fee simple, includes all other estates, and it is true, that these grants may be made by Law, for in these Cases, there is not any intermission, for presently after the death of the An∣cestor the Office discends to the Heire. 2. This Office cannot be forfeited by Outlary, as if it were granted for yeares, it might; grants of these Offices in fee, or for life, have beene allowed, and approved, but such grants for yeares were never allowed or approved, Et periculosum existimo quod bono∣rum virorum non comprobatur exemplo: He that hath the custody of the Gaole, whither by right or wrong, shall be charged with escapes of Prisoners untill he be actually removed. Margaret Podgers Case, 10. Jacobi. fol. 104. I. P. Copy-holder for life, the remainder for life, the Lord bargained and sould, and levyed a fine to I. P. this discended to M. P. who levyed a fine, five yeares passe without claime of them in remain∣der, adjudged no barre. 1. Resolved, that Copy-hold estates are within 4. H. 7. by the word Interest, but if the Fine be by co∣vin, this barreth not the issue, if Lessee for yeares, or Copy-holder be ousted, the Lord shall not have five yeares after a fine levyed by the disseissor, after their estate determined, because he may presently have an assize, otherwise where Lessor for life is ousted: A meer Stranger cannot enter to avoyd a fine with∣out Commandement, or assent of the party who hath
right, but a Gardian in socage, or Lessor for life, or Lord of a Copyholder, may, for the privity betweene them, and the Infant or Lessees. 2. A Fine barreth not any by Non-claime who is not put to a right, therefore here they in remain∣der are not barred, because the bargaine and sale, and Fine to the Tenant in possession putteth them not to a right. 1. Because it is a lawfull act. 2. Tenant in possession devesteth not the remain∣der by acceptance, as if Lessee for life accept a fine, Corne ceo, although it be a forfeiture. 3. Because he is in by 27. H. 8. of uses which doth no wrong. 3. After the bargaine and sale he in the next re∣mainder shall not enter, for by the custome his estate was to commence after the death of the Tenant in possession, so if Tenant in possession forfeite, the Lord and not he in remainder shall enter, but thereby without a speciall custome the remainder is not de∣stroyed: If a Copy-holder in fee surrenders to the use of one for life, no more passeth then serveth the estate limitted, and he shall pay no fine for admit∣tance after the death of Tenant for life: It seemed to the Chiefe Justice, that if the Lord here had char∣ged the Land, I. P. shall not hold it charged, for the estates in remainder preserve him from incumbran∣ces of the Lord. Meriel Treshams Case, 10. Jacobi. Communi Ban∣co. fol. 108. AN Administratrix, Defendant in Debt pleads that the Testator and his Sonne acknowledged a re∣cognizance to the King, of a hundred pound, and a∣nother of 800.l. to B. and another of a 1000.l. to
M. and diverse others, over and about which she had not assets, and after said she had not sufficient assets, the Plaintiffe replieth; that the recognizance to B. was for payment of 400. l. which is paid, and the o∣ther to M. is to performe Covenants, whereof none is broken, and the recognizance remaineth in force by Covin of the Defendant. 1. Resolved, that the barre is insufficient, for shee first confesseth that shee had sufficient assets to pay the said recognizances, and after denyeth it. 2. She saith she had assets, but not sufficient, this is too generall, but shee must confesse how much she had, because she had knowledge thereof. 3. The pleading by the Plaintiffe, that the Obli∣gation was made to performe Covenants, is good, without more certainty, because he is a Stranger. 4. The generall allegation of Covin is good, with∣out shewing of refusall to release, &c. and fraud may be in one onely, also the barre is insufficient, because the intestate was bound in the recognizances, with a∣nother, and the Defendant had not averred, that the other had not satisfied them. Robert Marys Case, 10. Jacobi. fol. 111. A Commoner being Copy-holder brings an A∣ction of the Case, for putting Beasts into the Common, whereby he lost his Common, the Jury found, that the Defendant did not put in the Beasts, but they of themselves depastured there. 1. The Jury have found the substance of the issue for the Plaintiffe, the depasturing there, and it is not materiall if he put them not there. 2. This Action lyeth, for the Commoner, for he may distreine damage feasant, and it may be, that with strong hand he is hindered to distreine, and so
if he shall not have this Action he is remedilesse. 2. A Commoner who had freehold in the common shall have an Assize, Ergo, a Copy-holder shall have this Action. 3. The wrong ought to be so great, that the Com∣moner loose his Common, as a Master shall not have an Action for beating his Servant without losse of his Service, and it appeareth not to the Court that there are more Commoners then he, and if there be, yet an Action lyeth, because each had private damage, and it is not like to a common Nusans, which shall be punished onely in a Leete, if there be not speciall damage, but be the Trespasse never so little, the Lord may have an Action of Trespasse. The Lord Sanchars Case, 10. Jacobi. fol. 117. For procuring the Murther of John Tur∣nor, Mr. of Defence. 1. REsolv. That a Baron of Scotland shall be tried by Commons of England. 2. The Indictment of the accessory in one County to a Fellony in another County, by the Statute of 2. E. 6. c. 24. shall recite, that the fellony was done in the other County, for an Indictment is no direct affirmation of the fact. 3. The Justices of the Kings Bench are within these words of the Statute, Justices of Gaole-delivery, or Oyer and Terminer, for they are the supreame Judges of Gaole-delivery. 4. The Lord Sanchar cannot be in the Terme-time Arraigned in Midd. before Justices of Oyer and Termi∣ner, because Justices of Oyer and Terminer shall not sit in the same County where the Kings Bench is, but the principalls were Arraigned in L. in the Terme-time,
because this is another County. 5. There needs not be 15. dayes for the returne of the Venire facias, upon an Indictment in the same County where the Kings Bench is, otherwise in ano∣ther County. 6. Because there is no direct proofe that the Lord S. commanded one of the principalls, but that he as∣sociated himselfe to one who was commanded, the best way is to arraigne him as accessory, to him whom he commanded, but if he be Indicted as accessory to two, and found accessory to one of them, this is good. The word Appeale in the Statute of W. 1. c. 14. is to be intended generally, (Viz.) By Indictment, by Writ or Bill, &c. and attainders is to be intended upon any such accusation, Ergo, if upon any such ac∣cusation the principall be attainted erroneously, the accessory may be arraigned, because the attainder is good, untill it be reversed, but if the Accessory be Hanged, and after the Attainder against the principall is reversed, the Heire of the Accessory shall be resto∣red to all which his Father lost, either by entry or Action: By 5. H. 4. cap. 10. none shall be impriso∣ned by Justices of Peace, but in the Common Gaole; whereby it appeares that Justices of Peace offend, who commit Fellons to the Counters in L. and other Prisons, which are not Common Gaoles. Cases in the Court of Wards. Anthony Lowes Case, 7. Jacobi. fol. 122. A. L. Tenant of 59. Acres, parcell of the Mannor of A. by chivalry, and Suite of Court to B. whereof A. was parcell, and both A. and B. were
parcell of the Duchie of L. out of the County Pala∣tine holden formerly of the King in Chivalry, in Ca∣pite, and of another House there, holden of A. by fealty, and rent, H. 8. grants the rent by release to him and confirmeth his estate in the said Lands by fealty onely, and grants to him the Mannor of A. Tenendum by fealty and rent: It was Objected, that when the King grants the Seigniory to his Tenant, the ancient Seigniory is extinct, and a new one that is best for the King created, (Viz.) Chivalry. 2. When he extinguisheth services parcell of the Man∣nor of A. this shall be holden as the Mannor of A. is, that is by Chivalry. But resolved, that the 59. acres and house, shall be holden by fealty onely, and as to the said Obje∣ction the release of the King doth not extinguish ser∣vice, which is inseparable to a Tenure that is fealty, but all others are gone, and true it is, when the K. grants, and expresseth no tenure it shall be by Chi∣valry, but when the Land moveth from a Subject, and the Tenure is changed, the new Tenure shall be as neere the ancient as may be, as Feoffee of Tenant in Frankalmoigne, shall hold by fealty onely, and here, although they grant the services, yet he limits the grantee to doe fealty. A Knights fee is not to be taken according to the quantity, but the value of the Land, as 20. l. per annum, and a Hide of Land, is as much as a Plough can Plough in a yeare; Re∣liefe is the fourth part of the annuall value that is of a Knight; five pound, of a Baron, a 100. Markes, of an Earle, 100.l. of a Marques, 200. Markes, of a Duke 200.l. The Eldest Sonne of E. 3. called the black Prince, was the first Duke in England, and Ro∣bert, Earle of Oxford, in the Raigne of R. 2. was the first Marques, and the Lord Beaumont was the first Viscount created by K. H. 6.
Floyers Case, 8. Jacobi, fol. 125. BAron and Feme seized of Lands holden in Chi∣valry in right of the Feme in Fee, levy a Fine to one who grants and renders to them and the heires of the Baron, and levy another Fine to their use for life, the remainder to their three Sons in taile, one after another, the remainder in fee to the heires of the Baron; the K. shall have neither wardship of bo∣dy nor Land. 1. Resol. That is out of the Statute of 32. H. 8. cap. 2. if he who had the fee dye, &c. in respect the estate by the first Fine did not continue, and this al∣though both the Conveyances are voluntary. 2. The King shall not have wardship of the third part, because it is not for advancement of the Wife, for in the first Fine the Land moved from her, and shee had no more by the second Fine then by the first. 3. In regard the particuler estate is out of the Statute, no wardship accrueth to the King, by ad∣vancement of him in the remainder; but if a rever∣tioner upon an estate for life, convey it to the use of his Wife, this will give wardship of the body of the heire, for he in revertion is tenant; if a Lease for life be the remainder to two, and to the heires of one, he who hath the fee dyeth, his heire shall not be in ward; if the heire of one joyntenant, who had the fee dye of full age (living the tenant for life) his heire shall not be in ward, although he be with∣in age by that Statute, because he is not immediate heire.
Sondayes Case, 8. Jacobi, fol. 127. M. S. deviseth to his Wife for life, the remainder to W. S. and if he shall have issue, that then his issue shall have it, the remainder to S. the re∣mainder to T. &c. Totidem verbis, upon condition that if any of them, or this heires of their bodies, goe about to alien, that he in the next remainder to enter after the death of M. W. and S. T. suffereth a common recovery to his owne use in fee, he in the next remainder enters. 1. Resol. Every one of the Sonnes hath an estate taile. 1. These words if he dye without issue Male, are sufficient to create an estate taile. 2. The ge∣nerall clause, if any of his Sons, or heires of his bo∣dy doe it, maketh it manifest. 3. The condition proveth it, for they cannot alien if they have but for life, for this would be a forfeiture. 2. The restraint of tenant in taile, to suffer a com∣mon recovery is voyd: See Mildmayes Case in the sixth Book. Quicks Case, 9. Jacobi, fol. 129. THe King Lord, I. N. and Tho. Q. mesnes of a Mannor which they hold in common in Capite, and tenant of three Acres holden in Chivalry, T. Q. maketh a feoffment of his moity to the use of him∣selfe for life, the remainder to I. Q. his Son in taile, the tenant infeoffeth I. Q. who infeoffeth T. Q. to defraud I. N. of the wardship of his Sonne within age, and dyes, I. N. seiseth the Son, T. Q. dyeth, the King shall not have wardship of the body, and moity of the three Acres. 1. Resol. By the death of I. Q. it was a Chattell
vested in I. N. and the King had but a possibility to have it, if T. Q. dye during the minority of the ward, which possibility shall not devest the wardship out of I. N. 2. When the tenant infeoffeth a stranger to de∣fraud the Lord of wardship, the Lord shall not have ravishment of ward, before recovery of the Land in a right of ward, and although the title of I. N. be but in action, yet it shall not be devested by a des∣cent after: See the Statute of 34. H. 8. in Case of collusion. Bewleys Case, 9. Jacobi, fol. 130. THe King Lord, mesne by Socage, and tenant, the tenant is attainted of Treason, the King grants to one tenendum by Chivalry and Rent, and to doe his services to other Lords, the tenant shall hold by Socage of the mesne, and he by Socage of the King, because the intent of the King was to revive the mesnalty, which cannot be by any other way, and the reviving of the ancient tenure shall be in construction preferred before the reservation of a new; and the honour of the King shall be preferred before his profit, and there was no default in the mesne. Thomas Holts Case, 9. Jacobi, fol. 131. GRandfather tenant in Chivalry in Capite, Father, and Son, the Grandfather conveyeth part of his Lands to the use of the Father and his Wife, the re∣mainder to the Son in taile, &c. the remainder to the right heires of the Grandfather, and conveys o∣ther Lands to his younger Children for life, with di∣verse
remainders over, and dyeth, the Father ten∣ders livery, and before he sueth it, dyeth. 1. Resol. By the death of the Father before live∣ry sued, and after tender, the King loseth the primer seisin, but not meane rates, if any be due. 2. The Son shall not pay primer seisin, nor sue li∣very, because the Father and not he, was within the Statute of 32. H. 8. 3. If the King had had one primer seisin, he shall not have another of the Lands conveyed to the younger Children, but that ought to be an effectuall seisin; Ergo, here because the King had not the effect of the primer seisin of the Father, he shall have primer seisin of the Lands con∣veyed to the younger Children, as if hee had the grant of a prochein avoidance and presents, and his Clerk dyeth before Induction, he shall present again, and before the Statute of Donis: If tenant in taile the revertion to the King had aliened post prolem sus∣citatam, with warranty which descends upon the King it is no barr without assets, the effect of the war∣ranty. 4. The King shall not have primer seisin in regard of a secke revertion which descends to the Son, o∣therwise if a rent be reserved, the King may have that for a yeare: So note, for a fruitlesse revertion there shall be wardship, but no primer seisin. Matthew Menes Case, 9. Jacobi, fol. 133. TEnant of the King of a Messuage in Capite, who holds other Gavelkinde Land, deviseth all to his 4. Sons equally: 1. Whether the King shall have a third part of the Messuage onely: 2. Whether out of the part of the heire onely; because Praerogativa Regis, cap. 1. Rex habebit, &c. De quocunque tenuerint, &c. is intended, if the Land descend to the same
heire to whom the Land holden did discende. 1. Resolved if no Will had beene made, the King shall not have the Lands, holden of others in socage, but when by the Will, (to which he is inabled by the Statute) he deviseth it to his Sonnes, there the sa∣ving in 32. H. 8. giveth to the King ward and primer seisin; So if Lands in chivalry, devisable by custome, are devised to the Feme, although the devisee be good, for all without aide of the Statute, yet the King shall have a wardship of a third part. 2. The King shall have his third part out of all their Estates equally. Ascoughs Case, 9. Jacobi. fol. 134. THe King Lord, Mesne in Capite, and Tenant in socage, the Mesne grants to the use of himselfe for life, the remainder to the Tenant in taile, if the remainder suspends the Mesnalty during the life of the Mesne. Resolved, that during his life the Mesnalty is not suspended. 1. Not as to the Mesne, because he re∣maineth Tenant to the Lord, nor by reason of the re∣mainder for the avoding of Fractions, otherwise if the remainder be liimitted in fee, for then he hath as high an estate in the Mesnalty, as in the Tenancy, and this can never be revived, and otherwise a Seigni∣ory in fee shall issue out of a Mesnalty for life, and there will be Lord and Tenant in fee, and Mesne for life: but if the Lord Grant his Seigniory for yeares, the remainder for life to the Tenant, the Mesnalty is suspended: A Mesnalty or Seigniory cannot be suspended in part, and in esse, for part by the Act of the party, but they may by act of Law, or of a third party: As if the Lord take a Lease of part of the Tenancy, all the Seigniory is suspended; but
if a Gardian indow the Feme the Seigniory is in esse, for that part, and suspended for the residue: If two Coparceners are of a Seigniory, and one commeth to the Tenancy by defeasible Title, the other shall di∣straine for the moity of the Seigniory, and the Act of the Coparcener shall not prejudice her. There are foure manner of Avowries. 1. Upon his very Tenant. 2. Upon his very Tenant by the manner, where the Tenant had but a particular estate. 3. Upon his Tenant by the manner when the Lord had but a particular estate. 4 Upon the matter in the Land, as within his fee, but the Lord hath liberty to Avow according to the Common Law. Thoroughgoods Case, 9. Jacobi. fol. 136. TEnant in fee infeoffeth one by Deed indented, and delivereth it upon the Land, in the name of seisin, this is good, and hath a double operation at one instant, Viz. to deliver the Writing as a Deed, and to deliver seisin of the Land according to the Deede. 1. Resolved, this is his Deed although he doth not say so, but delivers it in the name of seisin, for de∣livery is good without any words: if one deliver a Deed to one as an escrow, to be his Deed upon per∣formance of conditions, this is his Deed presently, otherwise if he deliver it to a stranger: so words are good without actuall delivery, as if he saith, take it like to a livery within view. If the Obligee deliver the Obligation to the Obligor, to redeliver, the Ob∣ligor may retaine it, for the words to redeliver are void. 2. Delivery of the deede upon the Land, amount∣eth
not to livery and seisin, but it doth, if delivered in the name of seisin, so of any other thing, or if he saith, I deliver you seisin, without delivering any thing, this is good also. Beaumonts Case, 10. Jacobi. fol. 138. I. B. and E. his Wife, Tenants in speciall Taile, the remainder to the Heires of the Baron, I. B. levies a Fine to K. E. 6. who grants to the Earle of H. in fee, I. B. dyeth, E. enters, the Earle of H. confirmes her estate, to have to her, and the Heires of the bo∣dy of I. B. E. dyeth seised, having issue F. B. who accepts a fine, Sur conusans de droit tantum, with Pro∣clamations, and dyes, having issue Sir H. and I. Sir H. in Ward to the K. after full age, and before livery, Covenanteth to stand seised to the use of himselfe, and his heires Males of his body, and dyes, having is∣sue onely a Daughter in Ward, whether shee or I. B. shall have the Land, &c. 1. Resolved, that E. had an estate taile, and the Statute of 4. H. 7. c. 24. which inableth the Baron to barre the issue, saveth the right of the Feme if shee enter, or, &c. and one may have an estate taile which cannot discend, as if the Sonne in the life of the Father levyeth a fine, the Father remaineth Te∣nant in taile still, although it cannot discend, and E. here hath an estate taile so long as shee liveth, or the Heires in taile remaine. 2. The Confirmation is void, for he who did con∣firme had but a possibility, which passeth not by the confirmation, and if he had a reversion in fee, yet it should be void. 1. Because the taile which the Feme had was confirmed, which cannot descend. 2. The confirmation doth not add a descendible
quallity, where he who should have it is disabled to receive by discent. 3. This would in effect repeale 4. H. 7. & 32. H. 8. two of the principall Pillars of the Law. 4. & 5. If Tenant in Dower grants her estate, there is a discendible quality in the Heire, to bring wast against Tenant in Dower, and although the Heire confirme her estate for life, and after shee as∣signeth it to I. S. who committeth wast, yet the acti∣on of wast is maintainable against her, Pari ratione, in the Case at Barre, in regard the confirmation doth not inlarge the estate of E. it cannot add unto it a discendible quallity. 6. There are but three manner of Confirmations, Viz. Perficiens, Crescens, aut diminuens, and the Confir∣mation in this Case, is none of them: and if E. had no power to levy a fine or suffer recovery, the rea∣son is, because she cannot barre that which was bar∣red before by her Husband, but this point was not now in Question. The End of the Ninth Booke.
THE TENTH BOOK. The Case of Suttons Hospitall, Baxter Plaintiffe, Sutton and Law Defen∣dants, in Trespasse, in the Kings Bench, and adjourned into the Ex∣chequer Chamber; and judgemet given against the Plaintiffe. 1. Obj. BY the Parliament 7. Jacobi. the Hospitall was Founded at H. in Essex, Ergo, the incorporation made after by the Kings Letters Patents, is void, and the Char∣terhouse is not given by the said Statute because S. purchased it after. 2. Sutton who had License to Found an Hospitall before the Foundation, dyed. 3. The K. cannot name the House and Lands of S. to be an Hospitall, because in Alieno solo. 4. Every Corporation ought to have a place cer∣taine, but here the License is to found an Hospitall at, or in the Charterhouse, Ergo, before that S. had made it certaine, there was no incorporation, also the place of Corporation ought to be certaine by
Meates and Bounds, and a place knowne will not serve. 5. The King intended to make an incorporation presently, which cannot be before that S. name a Master. 6. Governors cannot be, untill there be poore in the Hospitall, Ergo, S. calleth it in his Will his in∣tended Hospitall. 7. The Foundation cannot be without the words, Fundo, erigo, &c. and before such Foundation, a Stranger cannot give Lands unto it. 8. The Master was named at will, where he ought to be for life, and have freehold in the Lands, also the Hospitall must be Founded before a Master be named. 9. The bargaine and sale made by S. is void. 1. Because the Money paid by the Governours in their private capacity, shall not inure to them in their politick capacity. 2. The Habendum is to them upon trust, which cannot be in a Corporation. 3. Because as before no Hospitall was Founded. 10. The King cannot make Governours of a thing not in Esse. To the first it was answered, that the Letters Pa∣tents recite the preamble of the Act whereby, and in many parts of the Act it appeareth that the incorpo∣ration was to be In futuro, when it shall be erected, and the Statute doth not give any Lands unto it, but power to give without License of alienation and mortmaine, and it appeareth by the Letters Patents that the erection precedes the License. 2. The License is to him, his Heires, Executors, &c. at any time hereafter, and the words of incor¦poration are in the present, and so the incorporation precedeth the execution of this License.
3. Although the King gave the name, yet S. de∣vised it, and assented to it, and the K. did it at his Suite. 4. The K. makes an Hospitall of all the premises, so that it is certaine, and as to that which was said, that a place uncertaine cannot be an Hospitall; It was answered, that a Mannor may be, which is more uncertaine then the Charterhouse. To the essence of a Corporation five things are requisite. 1. Law∣full authority to incorporate, and that may be foure wayes by the common Law, as the King himselfe by authority of Parliament, by the K. Chartar, and by prescription. 2. The persons either naturall or po∣liticall. 3. A name by which, &c. 4. A place. 5. Words sufficient, but not restrained to a strict forme. 5. A Corporation may be without head, as if the K. incorporate a Towne, and give to them power to choose a Maior, they are a Corporation before Ele∣ction. 6. It is a sufficient incorporation that there be an Hospitall potestate, for the Temple was a Corpo∣ration in the time of H. 1. and yet was not built till H. 2. time, but here the House was built before. 7. The first Donor is in Law the Founder, and when the K. giveth a name, and designes the place and the persons, the Founder hath nothing to doe but the Donation; but if the K. leaveth the nomi∣nation to the party, there many times, although not of necessity he useth the words Fundo erigo, &c. But in truth the incorporation is made by the K. Chartar, and the Founder is but an instrument. 8. The Master may be at will, for by the Letters Patents S. had power to name one at his will and pleasure. 9. The money paid by some of the Governours in
their private Capacity is good, but the payment was as Governours, and so they are acquitted. 2. A rent was reserved, which is a good consideration. 3. A bargaine and sale may be upon confidence and trust. 10. They may plead that they are seised In jure in∣corporationis, although then it be not In esse. In An∣swer to the presidents, some are Explanatory, some Nugatory, Ex consuetudine clericorum. Sir Thomas Fleming Chiefe Justice of England, be∣came sick, whereof he after died, so that he never argued the Case: See there his severall advance∣ments and commendations. Mary Portingtons Case, 11. Jacobi. fol. 35. AFter many things said concerning Perpetuities, in this Case it was said, that a recovery in value, barreth an estate taile, although no recompence be had, because it is by judgement, as if issue in taile be barred in a formedon, by warranty and assets, but if the issue before judgement given, alien the assets, his issue shall recover the Land in taile, if Tenant in taile suffer a recovery, and die before Execution the issue is barred: It is absurd that one may barre one of going about to suffer a recovery, when he cannot bare the recovery it selfe, but if such a condition had beene good, a Feme Covert by that shall not loose her Land, for she shall not loose her Land by any conclusion without examination upon Writ in Court, and if shee acknowledge a recognizance, this is void, although it be with her Husband, because there is no Writ to examine her, if an Infant levy a fine, this is voidable, and shall be tried by inspection, but a fine levyed by a Feme Covert is void, if the Husband en∣ter, otherwise not.
Jennings Case, 38. ElIz. Banco regis. fol. 43. Tenant for life suffers a common recovery, in which he in remainder in taile is vouched, who dyeth, the reversion in fee is barred. 1. Resolved, that at the common Law a recovery against Tenant for life, upon a true warranty, and recovery in value binds him in the remainder. 2. No Statute was made to provide for him, who had a reversion or remainder upon an estate taile, and the Statute of W. 2. c. 3. which giveth receite to a revertioner upon default of him who holds Per do∣num, is to be intended of Tenant after possibility of issue extinct, and 32. H. 8. c. 31. provides onely for a reversion or remainder upon a Lease for life. 3. There have beene diverse evasions out of the Statute of 32. H. 8. as if Lessee for life Lease for yeares to one who infeoffeth one who in recovery Vouches Lessee for life, this was out of the Statute, because the Lessor and Lessee were put to a right, whereupon 14. Eliz. c. 8. was made. 4. 14. Eliz. extends not where Lessee for life vouched him in remainder in taile, because it is in the power of him in remainder to dock the reversion, &c. and the course is, that Tenant in taile bargaines and sells to one who suffers a recovery, in which, Te∣nant in taile is Vouched, and yet the bargainee had but for life: judgement affirmed in Error. Lampets Case, 10. Jacobi. fol. 46. LEssee for 5000. yeares deviseth for life to one whom he makes Executor, the remainder to his Sister, and the Heires of her body, and dyes, the Si∣ster taketh Husband, they release to the Executor,
who demiseth for ten yeares to the Defendant, the Baron dyes, the Executor dyes, the Feme takes ano∣ther Baron who demise to the Plaintiffe, judgement against the Plaintiffe. 1. Resolved, a devise of the use of a Tearme to one for life, the remainder to another for life is good, as an Executory devise. 2. A devise of the tearme it selfe in such manner is good. 3. The first Devisee cannot barre him who had the Executory devise. 4. Assent of the Executor to the first devise, is an assent for all. 5. If such a devise be made to the Executor, and he enter, generally he shall have it as Executor. 6. Such an Executory devise cannot be granted over. 7. Such an Executory devise may be extinguished by release to the first devisee. Object. That the first devisee had all the interest in him, and the other but a possibility, which cannot be released, as if Conisee of a Statute release his right in the Land, yet he may sue Execution. It was answered, that a thing in Action cannot be granted to a Stranger, neither by the Act of the par∣ty nor of Law, but it may be released to the Terre∣tenant, and here to him who had the present interest, 1. Because as it may be easily created, being a Chat∣tell, so it may be easily determined. 2. Every right as well present as future, by joyning all who have in∣terest one way or other may be extinguished; so if the Executor and the Sister here, had joined in an assignement, this had beene good. 3. When many things are requisite to the perfection of any thing, the Law respects the Originall Act, and here the fun∣damentall acts were the devise, death of the devisor,
the assent of the Executor, and death of the first de∣visee, and shee hath a right that may be released, and the death of the Executor is but a meanes to bring it into possession; as a Feme Covert barreth her selfe of Dower by joyning in a Fine with her Hus∣band, but if the Baron sole levy a fine, and dyeth, and five yeares passe, the Feme is not bound; so if Tenant in ancient demesne levy a fine, he had possi∣bility to have the Land againe, if the Lord bring a Writ of desceit, but he may release that possibility; but such a possibility as may be released, ought to be Propinqua, and not Remota, and it is more then a common possibility that an Executor will dye before 5000. yeares, and the person who releaseth it ought to have it in certeine, therefore if a remainder be limitted to the right Heires of I. S. his Eldest Sonne cannot release it, because he is not certeine whither he shall be Heire at the death of his Father, so if a Lease be made to Baron and Feme, the remainder to the survivor of them for 21. yeares, the Baron cannot grant this Tearme. 4. This by her death goeth to her Executors, therefore it may be extinguished by her, if the disseissee release all actions to the disseissor, who dyes, the disseissee shall have a Writ of entry against his Heire, or if Bailor release all Actions to the Bailee, he shall have adetinue against his Execu∣tors. 5. It is a present Legacy, although the interest be In futuro, and therefore the Legacy may be discharged, and consequently the interest it selfe; For, Qui de∣struit medium destruit finem, and this may be before as∣sent of the Executor. 6. Otherwise there would be a perpetuity of Chattells. 2. By this release the Executor had a perfect e∣state for 5000. yeares absolutely. 3. The request and acceptance of the release by the Executor amounteth to an agreement.
The Case of the Chancellour, Masters, and Schollers of the Ʋniversity of Oxford, 11. Jacobi, fol. 53. THe Statute of 3. Jacobi, giveth presentments of Churches, which belong to Recusants, convicted to the Chancellour and Schollers of O. and makes grants of such Recusants void: One indicted of re∣cusancy grants a prochein avoidance, and is after convicted, the Church becommeth voyd, the Chan∣cellour, Masters, and Schollers, bring a Quare impedit, and averr that he remained a Recusant. 1. Resol. The grant of the next avoydance be∣twixt the Indictment and conviction, is void, for the Statute is, that a Recusant convicted shall be disabled, &c. from the time of the Session of the Parliament, so a grant of the next avoidance by an Abbot before surrender, and after the Statute of 31 H. 8. cap. 13. of Monasteries is void; so if an Officer of the King purchase Land, and alien it, and become indebted to the King, this Land is lyable to the debt. 2. Covine shall not be presumed if it be not aver∣red, and if the Jury finde that Covine was to one in∣tent, that shall not be taken to another intent, there∣fore because it is not sayd that this grant was by Co∣vine, it shall not be intended. 3. Although the Statute giveth the avoydances to the Chancellour, and Schollers of O. yet they may bring a Quare impedit, in the name of their Corpora∣tion, and the misnaming of the Corporation doth not avoyd the act when it appeareth what Corpora∣tion is intended. 2. It was pleaded that the Statute giveth it to the Chancellour, Master, and Schollers, and the Defen∣dant had demurred upon it. 3. This being a private act, it shall be taken as it is pleaded.
4. The University must shew that the Grantor was a Recusant, convicted at the time of the avoydance, but not that he continued so, because it is a Chattell vested in them, which shall not be devested by his conformity after. Judgement for the Plaintiffs. The Bishop of Salisburies Case, 11. Jacobi, fol. 58. THe Defendant in a second deliverance, pleads a grant of the Bishop of S. to E. G. and himselfe of the office of Surveiorship of his Mannors, with a rent charge of twenty Nobles per annum, with confir∣mation of the Deane and Chapter, and that it is An∣tiquum officium, used to be granted in such manner to such person and persons as the Bishop and his Prede∣cessors shall please: The Plaintiffe pleads the Sta∣tute of 1. Eliz. and that the sayd Office hath not beene used to be granted, but for the life of one, whereby the grant is voyd, Et hoc paratus est verifica∣re: It was excepted to the Barr, that the avowant had pleaded that the Bishop and his Predecessors have used to grant the said Office to such person or persons, &c. And the Plaintiffe pleads in barr, that it had not been used to be granted but for one life, and concludeth, & hoc paratus est, &c. where it ought to have been, quod inquiratur per, &c. yet it is good, because the avowry is in the disjunctive. 2. It is not averred that the Bishop is dead, and if he be not, the grant is good during his life; it is good, for it appeareth by the words nuper Episcopum, that he was dead, or removed exceptions to the avow∣ry, that to say this is an ancient Office is too generall, because hee made title to the Office it selfe, but it had been good if he had claimed another thing, by reason of the Office, and the exception holden good: It was objected that this grant was out of the Statute
of 1. Eliz. because no parcell of the possessions of the Bishoprick, as the Statute speaketh. 2. Such things are restrained by the Statute where∣of a rent may be reserved. 3. If it had been an Office, parcell of the Bishop∣rick which the Bishop might exercise, this had been within the Statute, but this is not so. 4. If it be restrained for two lives, then also for one life: But it was Resolved, that the sayd grant for two lives was voyd against the successor by the Sta∣tute of 1. Eliz. 1. Resol. This grant had been good at the Com∣mon Law, by confirmation of the Deane and Chap∣ter. 2. The Act of 32. H. 8. cap. 28. inableth the Bi∣shop to make a Lease for 21. yeares, or three lives, observing the limitations of the Statute without the Deane and Chapter. 3. The Statute of 1. Eliz. restraineth the Bishop to grant any parcell of his possessions, or any thing belonging to his Bishoprick, but for 21. yeares, or three lives, &c. but against the Bishop himselfe it is good, and this Office may be sayd belonging to his Bishoprick, because he had an inheritance in the dis∣position of it, and the intent of the Statute was to avoyd diminutions and dilapidations, therefore a grant of such an ancient Office of service and neces∣sity for one life, as was accustomed, is out of the Statute, but more then that he cannot doe, because it is not of necessity; and the death of one of them in the life of the Bishop is not to the purpose, for the grant was voyd against the successor, and it shall not be made good by accident after. 4. Such a grant for one life, without confirmation of the Deane and Chapter is voyd, because it is out of the Statute of 1. Eliz. and resolved also, that al∣though
the Bishoprick be new, yet a grant of a ne∣cessary Office, with a reasonable Fee (of which the Court shall judge) bindeth the successor. Nota, Where there was a clause in 1. Eliz. that Bishops may grant to the Queene, &c. 1. Jacobi. by Parliament restraineth them, and after Judgement was given for the Plaintiffs. Whistlers Case, 10. Jacobi. fol. 62. Ʋpon a speciall Verdict. BEfore the Statute of Praerogativa Regis. cap. 15. by the grant of the King of a Mannor, all appen∣dants (without naming them) passe, and the Sta∣tute excepteth Knights Fees, Advowsons, and In∣dowments, but all other appendants now passe with∣out naming them, and so doe Advowsons passe in case of restitution, for the Statute speaketh of Grants, and in Grants also, without expresse mention by the words Adeo plené & integré, &c. See other good mat∣ter there, touching this Subject. The Church Wardens Case of Saint Saviours in South∣wark. fol. 66. QUeene Elizabeth leased the rectory to the Church-Wardens of St S. for 21. yeares, and after leased to them for 50. yeares, in consideration of the pay∣ment of 20. l. and surrender of the Letters Patents by the Church-Wardens, Modo habentes & ad presens possidentes, and the speciall Verdict found, that they paid the 20. l. and that they delivered the Charter in Court to be cancell'd, and that they paid the Fees, but that no Vacat was made, yet the grant is good, for it appeares that the intent was not to make a sur∣render in deed, because he saith, Modo possidentes, but
a surrender in Law by acceptance of the second Let∣ters Patents, and although a Corporation cannot make a surrender in deed, yet they may make a sur∣render in Law. 2. Although an actuall surrender is requisit, they have done all, which belongs to them by delivery of the Chartar, and payment of the fees, and the Can∣celling belongs to the Court. 3. Although it was recited that 20. l. was paid, yet it needs not to be found, for it is but in the personalty, and is affirmed by the King to be paid, and is also ex∣ecuted: See Barwicks Case, 5. Report, 93. The Case of the Marshalsea, 10. Jacobi. fol. 68. In false Imprisonment. AN Action upon the Case, upon an assumpsit is brought in the Marshalsea, whereas no party was of the Kings House, the Plaintiffe recovered, the De∣fendants arrested the Plaintiffe by a precept, in the nature of a Capias ad satisfaciendum, and he brings false Imprisonment, and judgement given against the Defendants. 1. Resolved, the Steward and Marshall at the Common Law hath two Authorities: One generall, as Vicegerents of the Chiefe Justice, in his absence, within the Verge: Another, as Judges of the Mar∣shalsea. This last was limitted to Debt and Cove∣nant, where both are of the House, and to trespasse, Vi & armis, where one is, but not if it concerne Land, and because they have the generall authority at will, and the other for life, they draw many cases to the Marshalsea which ought to be in other Courts: Their Jurisdiction by Fleta, Lib. 2. cap. 2. Infra metas hospitij continentes 12. Leucas in circuitu. And the Statute of 13. R. 2. c. 3. limits the 12. miles to be accounted about the Kings Tonnell.
2. The reasons wherefore this speciall authority was given them, were, 1. Because the Suite there, is by Bill, by reason of their Priviledge, which cannot be elsewhere. 2. In respect of the necessity of attendance of the Kings Servants. 3. If Strangers shall be suffered to sue there, one Carman would sue another Carman there, In aula Re∣gis, which were undecent, but the generall authority vanished by the Act of 28. E. 1. c. 5. which Ordai∣ned, that the Chancellour and Justices of the King should follow him, therefore in Praesentia Majoris ces∣sat, &c. and about 4. E. 3. the Court of K. Bench be∣came Resident. 3. The Statute of Articuli super Chartas, is as much as an explanation of the great Charter, and the Char∣ter of the Forrest, and not introductory of a new Law, and the third Chapter of that act explaines the Ju∣risdiction of the Marshalsea, as before, and if he hold plea, otherwise a prohibition lyeth, and the party shall have an Action upon the Case as a consequent upon the Statute. 4. That part of the Statute which giveth them Ju∣risdiction in trespasse, shall be intended trespasse, Vi & armis. 5. This action lyeth against the Defendants, be∣cause the Court had not Jurisdiction, and so have not done it by command of the Judge, otherwise if the Court had Jurisdiction, but proceedeth Inverso ordine, or erroneously, as if a Capias be awarded, against an Earle, &c. one who is Indicted before Justices of the Peace, cannot approve. 1. Because he cannot assigne a Coroner. 2. Because it is out of their Com∣mission, if a Court Leete be holden at another day then it ought to be, the proceeding is Coram non judi∣ce, otherwise it is of a Court Baron, 6. R. 2. Action
upon the Statute Plac. ultimo, in the point, that judgement in the Marshalsea, when none of the par∣ties is of the K. house, may be avoided by plea with∣out any Writ of Error, which proveth that it is void. Leonard Loveis Case, 11. Jacobi. fol. 78. In ejectio∣ne firmae, for 8. acres. &c. L. L. seised of diverse Mannors in socage and in chivalry, In Capite, maketh a feoffement to di∣verse uses, in an Indenture precedent, whereby he limits to himselfe for life, without impeachment of wast, and to the use of his Lessees and devisees, the remainder to his second Sonne in taile, &c. the re∣version to himselfe with power of revocation, after he purchaseth 8. acres in socage, and revoketh, as to certaine Mannors holden in socage, and deviseth them and the 8. acres to his Eldest Sonne, and the heires, Males of his body for 500. yeares, provided that if he alien otherwise then for yeares determinable, up∣on the deaths of three persons or lesse number, ren∣dring the old rent, or die without issue Male, then to his second Sonne in taile, with proviso to make Lea∣ses according to 32. H. 8. onely, L.L. dyeth, the Eldest Sonne enters into the 8. acres, and dyeth, leaving one Daughter who Marrieth R.D. who enters into the 8. acres, &c. second Sonne dyeth, having L. L. who enters upon R. D. and leaseth to the Plaintiffe, who enters, upon whom the Defendant enters, and eje∣cteth, &c. and if the entry of L L. the Lessor was congeable or not, was the Question, and it was ad∣judged that his entry was not lawfull, and judgement was given against the Plaintiffe, in this Case diverse points resolved, some at the common Law, and some upon 32, and 34. H. 8. of Wills.
1. Resolv. if a man seised of three acres of equall value, one holden in Capite, and giveth that and one of the other to his younger Sonne in taile, he cannot devise any part of the third Acre, because he had executed his power, and if he purchase other Land in socage, he can devise but two parts of that by rea∣son of his reversion in Capite, expectant upon the e∣state taile. Object. that the K. was once satisfied of the wardship by the Statute, in respect of the Acre hol∣den and the reversion thereupon shall not hinder the devise of Land, purchased after. 2. The statute doth not regard this seck reversi∣on, but inheritances of annuall value. Resp. To the first, that this reversion shall hinder the devise, by the words of the Statute, for he had a reversion of Lands holden, but although the Statute saith, that he may alien two parts, by act executed or will, if he alien to one of the three uses by act executed, he may devise the reversion, for the Statute is to be in∣tended of an intire Alienation, and where the Statute saith in reversion or remainder, it is to be intended, that the devisor be seised of such a remainder which drawes wardship. To the second it was answered, that things which of their nature are seck are out of the Statute, but not things which of their nature are of annuall va∣lue, but are not of value in respect of some Lease or gift, Abs{que} abliquo inde reddendo, and therefore seck re∣versions are devisable by the said Statutes; but if they be not, yet they shall hinder the devises of o∣ther Lands: To make one able to devise by those Statutes the time of Having, Holding, and disposing, must concurre, and therefore if a grant to the second Sonne here, had beene in fee, although with power of revocation, the devise had been good, because he
had no Lands In Capite, at the time of the devise, if the Father conveyeth his Land to the use of his younger Sonne, the eldest being within age, after the death of his Father, he shall be in ward although nothing discend: A true Child, and not in reputati∣on is within the Statute, and if the Sonne pur∣chase Land Bona fide, of his Father, this is out of the Statute, because it is not for his advancement; If Tenant in socage devise, and after purchase Land in Chivalry, the devise is void for a third part, but if Te∣nant in Chivalry and socage devise all, and after aliens the Land holden, this is good. To make division, that the King shall have a third part holden, the Lands shall be taken according to their value at the time of the death of the Devisor. The time of pro∣vision that a third part must discend, needs not con∣curre with the time of alienation, but it is sufficient that he had it at the time of his death. The estate to any of the three purposes ought to continue to the time of death, and the Tenure must till after death, to make it within the Statute, and the estate also of Lands holden, ought to continue after death, therefore if Tenant in taile, in Capite devise socage Land, and dye without issue, this is good, so privity must continue after death, therefore if he who made the conveyance be attainted, this is out of the Sta∣tute: The uses to the second Sonne are in contin∣gency, and not executed by 27. H. 8. by the power to make Leases, and devise reserved to the feoffor, and therefore the fee is in the feoffor in the meane time, so that having disposed of it, and being seised of it, he cannot devise the Land purchased after. It was Objected, that the Statute saith, lawfully executed in his life, but here no use was to be exe∣cuted in the second Sonne untill after his death. It was Answered, that after his death the uses
were derived out of the feoffement, and so are as it were executed in his life. It was holden by the Chiefe Justice, that the re∣mainder to the second Sonne is contingent, in regard no alienation is found to be made by the Eldest, and if there had been, then it would be repugnant, that after alienation the Land should remaine to the se∣cond Sonne, and so Quacunq, via data, the remain∣der (as this Case is) cannot vest in him, but this point was not resolved by the Court. 2. The revo∣cation is good, although the Indenture precedeth the feoffement, and that the uses are in contingency, and that the revocation is but in part, and the Chiefe Justice held, that the Eldest Sonne had but a terme determinable, and the second an estate taile; But in this, the Kings Bench and Common pleas differ in Opinion, and that if Lands be devised to one and the Heires of his body for 500. yeares, the Executors shall have it, and not the Heire, and the devisee may alien it, for it cannot be intailed, and so in Peacocks Case, 28. Eliz. Banco Regis, was it resolved. Doctor Leyfields Case, 8. Jacobi. fol. 88. in Trespasse. IN Trespasse for Corne taken at O. C. the Defen∣dant pleads that Q. Eliz. granted the Rectory of O. C. to C. P. (without shewing the Letters Pa∣tents) who demised to G. P. for 8. yeares, if the said C. P. so long live, and that he, as servant of G. P. tooke the Corne, and avers the life of C. the Plain∣tiffe demurreth, because the plea amounteth to the generall issue, and it was adjudged in the K. Bench that the barre was insufficient, because the Defen∣dant shewed not the Letters Patents, and Error was brought in the Exchequer-Chamber, because the plea amounts to the generall issue, because the De∣fendant
gave no colour, wherein judgement ought not to be given against the Defendant, but onely to answer over. 2. Because he is not bound to shew the Letters Patents. It was answered, that colour shall not be given, for colour shall not be given where the plea goeth to the barre of the right, for it would be in vaine to give colour of right, and to barre him if he had right, as if a collaterall warranty, fine, Statute be pleaded, or if he claimes by a waife, otherwise where he pleads a discent, for this doth not barre the right, but the possession; he who claimes by sale in a Market overt, shall not give colour if he pleads generally, but if he pleads that I. S. was possessed, as of his owne goods, and sold them in a Market overt, or waived them, there he shall give colour, because he confesseth no interest in the Plaintiffe. 2. If the Defendant claimes by the Plaintiffe, he shall not give colour. 3. If the plea be to the Writ, or action of the Writ, no colour shall be given. 4. Colour shall not be given in case of Tithes, for to whomsoever the Lands belong, the Tithes be∣long to the Parson. 1. Colour ought to be a doubt to the Laygents. 2. It must have continuance. 3. It must be such a colour that if it be effectuall, will maintaine the Action. 4. It ought to be given by the first conveyance. 2. Resolved, Lessee for yeares of Lessee for life of the K. must shew the Letters Patents, for he who is privy in estate or interest, or who justifieth in right of a Party or privy, although he claime but part, must shew the first deed, and the reason that deeds are shewed to the Court, is, that the Judges and Ju∣ry
(that which respectively to them belongs) shall judge of the sufficiency thereof, therefore a deed shall not be suffered to be given in evidence, by Wit∣nesses, or Copy except it be burned or some such in∣convenience, but a Copy of a record is good evi∣dence: if a release be made to Tenant for life, this inureth to the reversioner, yet he cannot pleade it without shewing, a Fortiori, here because the Lessee may contract with the Lessor, to suffer him to have the deed to shew, but Strangers who claime not the thing granted, nor interest out of it, need not to shew the deed, otherwise if he claimes the thing granted, or interest out of it; Ergo, the second grantee of a rent charge must shew the first grant, but he who claimes as Gardian, or meerly by the Law, without privity or power of providing the deed need not to shew it: But Tenant by the courtesie must shew it, because the deed was in his power living the Wife, otherwise of Tenant by Statute. &c. 3. The not shewing of the deed is matter of sub∣stance, therefore judgement shall be given against the Plaintiffe in the Writ of Error, although it was not shewed as Cause of Demurrer. And judgement was affirmed. Nota, when a plea amounts to a generall issue, if the Plaintiffe demurre specially, upon 27. Eliz. and the Defendant joyne, judgement shall be given for the Plaintiffe. Edward Seymors Case, 10. Jacobi. fol. 95. THe Lord Cheyny Tenant in taile, the remainder in taile to I. C. the reversion to the Lord C. bargaines and sells, and levyes a fine to the bargainee, with warranty to him and his Heires, the bargainee nfeoffeth the Lord S. who infeoffeth E. S. I. C.
dyes, having issue T. the Lord C. dyeth without issue, Edward, Lord S. leaseth to the Plaintiffe, the Defen∣dant by the command of T. ejected him; and judge∣ment was given for the Defendant, and affirmed in Error. 1. Resolved, the bargainee had an estate discendi∣ble, during the life of the bargainor (whereof his Wife shall have Dower) and also the reversion in fee expectant upon the remainder in taile. 2. The fine after bargaine and sale, is not discon∣tinuance of the remainder, for this operates upon the estate passed by bargaine and sale, and corroborateth that and maketh it determinable onely, upon the death of the bargainor without issue, otherwise if the fine had preceded the bargaine and sale. 3. It was Objected that the feoffement of the bar∣gainee displaceth the remainder, so that the warranty which discends upon him, barreth him: But resolv. that the warranty doth not bind him. 1. Because it was annexed to an estate determina∣ble by the death of Tenant in taile, without issue, and to the reversion in fee, granted by bargaine and sale, and fine, and not to the remainder in taile, and the Conisee by his owne Act cannot make it to ex∣tend any further, therefore the estate taile being de∣termined, the warranty ceaseth. 2. A warranty barreth not an estate, which is not displaced at the time of the warranty annexed, as if the Father maketh a feoffement of Land (out of which his Sonne hath a rent) with warranty, this binds not the Sonne as to the rent. 3. The feoffement was lawfull because he had fee, therefore he cannot make discontinuance. 4. A warranty cannot enlarge an estate, the re∣mainder in taile to I. C. was not discontinued, for the feoffor was not then seised by force of the taile.
5. A collaterall warranty may be given in evi∣dence, if it be not pleaded, for although it giveth not a right, yet it barreth anothers right, and the rather in an Ejectione firmae, and other personall actions, be∣cause in them it cannot be pleaded by way of barre. Note, there are some Titles to which a warranty extendeth not, as in case of Mortgage, Mortmaine, consent to a Ravishor, for in these cases no Action ly∣eth, in which Voucher or Rebutter, can be, neither shall a discent take away an entry. Bewfages Case, 10, Jacobi. Common Pleas. fol. 99. THe Sheriffe upon a Fieri facias executed, did take an Obligation of the Defendant to pay the mo∣ney in Court, at the returne of the Writ, and this was adjudged good, notwithstanding the Statute of 23. H. 6. Before this Statute the Sheriffe could not let any person to baile which was taken, Ad respondend. as may appeare, Fitz. Na. br. 25. a & b. and in 34. Eliz. in Debt by Dawson Sheriffe of B. against Burnam upon an Obligation, the Defendant pleaded the Sta∣tute 23. H. 6. and shewed, that one K. recovered Debt and damages against him, and pursued one Writ of Fieri facias against him, directed to the She∣riffe of B. and that he made the Obligation to the Plaintiffe, for the Execution, and that the Obligation was void by the Statute, whereupon the Plaintiffe de∣murred, and it was resolved. First that the Obligation was not within the Sta∣tute, because that the Statute extended onely to such Obligations which any who is in their ward did make unto him. Secondly, that the same Obligation was not void at the Common Law, whereupon the Plaintiffe had judgment, and another judgement 28 El. Inter Burwey
& Kett, upon an Obligation, taken by the Sheriffe, Pro solutione pecuniae debitae dominae reginae, upon extent out of the Exchequer. Now it is said in the later clause of the Act, that if any of the Sheriffs or other Officers or Ministers a∣foresaid, take any Obligation in other forme, by co∣lour of their Offices, that it should be void, &c. There are two manner of formes, (Viz.) Forma verbalis & forma legalis, for Verbalis stands upon the Letters and Sillables of the Act, Forma legalis, is Forma essentialis, and stands upon the substance of the thing to be done, and upon the sence of the Statute, Quia notitia ramorum hujus Statuti, non in sermonum folijs sed in ra∣tionis radice posita est, and according to this distinction this Branch of this Statute is to be expounded, and therefore in 37. H. 6. 1. If the Sheriffe take a single Obligation of one in his ward that was bailable, this was void, for this Obligation wants essentiall forme, prescribed by the Statute; for the condition pre∣scribes the fault, which is part of the substance. And there Moyle said, that if the Sheriffe let one to Baile or Mainprise, that is excepted in the Statute, and not mainpernable, and take a simple Obligation, that the same is void, Quod alij Justiciarij concesserunt, for by the exception it appeareth, that it was not the intention of the Statute, that such should be let to Baile, and therefore the Obligation is taken in another sence then the Statute intends. And it seemeth to me, that as well in the same Case of 37. H. 6. as in the princi∣pall Case of Dive and Manningham, plow. 67. the Obli∣gation which hath the condition to save the Sheriffe harmelesse (when the Sheriffe against the Law let∣teth one to Baile who is not Baileable) is against the Law, and void by the Common Law. And with this accordeth William Wishams Case, 15. Eliz. Dyer. 324. & in 7. E. 4. One was in custody of the Sheriffe
by force of a Capias, upon an Indictment of the Tres∣passe, and the party maketh the Obligation to ano∣ther, by the direction of the Sheriffe, upon this con∣dition, as the Statute prescribes for the suerty of the Sheriffe, &c. and there it is holden that the Obligati∣on is void, because the Statute prescribes, that the Obligation shall be made to the Sheriffe, and that is part of the essentiall forme; and so, if the Sheriffe add to the condition, that he shall be kept harme∣lesse against the King and the Plaintiffe, &c. this is void, so if a Gaoler or a Sheriffe take an Obligation of the person, with condition to be true Prisoner or to pay for his meat and drinke. So if the Sheriffe add any other thing to the matter prescribed by the Statute, as to pay such a Sum of money for a Horse, &c. This condition maketh all the Obligation void, for it is taken in another forme (touching the sub∣stance of the matter,) then is prescribed by the Sta∣tute, but in Pasche 27. Eliz. in the Kings Bench, in an Action of Debt brought by Sir William Drury, late Sheriffe of Suffolke, upon an Obligation of 20. l. against A. B. it appeared that the Defendant was solely bound in the same, and with condition, that one Moore who the Sheriffe had arrested upon a Latitat, should appeare in person at the day contained in the Writ, the Defendant pleaded the Statute, 23. H. 6. and that the obligation was made in other forme then is mentioned in the Statute, whereupon the Plain∣tiffe demurred in Law, and it was Objected that there were 3. variances from the Statute. (Viz.) one in the Obligation, and two in the condition. First, in the Obligation, for that there was but one surety, and the Statute prescribes reasonable surety of sufficient per∣sons in the Plurall number, having sufficient within the said County, &c. in which case there ought to be
two Sureties at the least, and the Plurall number cannot be satisfied with the Singular number, and so contrary to the words of the Statute. And so was the Opinion of Mountegue Chiefe Justice of the com∣mon Place in the Case of Dive and Manningham. Also, in the condition that the Prisoner should appeare in person, where the words of the Statute are, that he should appeare (generally) without these words (in person.) 2. That he should appeare at the day, &c. Ad res∣pondendum, where these words Ad respondendum are more then the Statute prescribes, and therefore the Obligation is void, &c. but it was resolved by Sir Christopher Wray, Sir Thomas Gaudy, and all the Court, that the Obligation was not void, by the said Act. For to the first; The words reasonable surety of sufficient persons are added for the surety of the Sheriffe, and therefore if he will but take one surety, be it at his perill, for he shall be amerced if the Defendants appeare not; and therefore the Sta∣tute doth not make void the Obligation in this Case, for the same Branch that requires the forme, requires also that the Obligation shall be made to the Sheriffe himselfe, by the name of his Office, and that the Pri∣soners should appeare, in which clause no mention is made of the sureties, so as the intent of the Act was, that in so much as it was at the perill of the Sheriffe to leave to his discretion, to take one or more for his indemnity, and although the sureties have not suffi∣cient within the same County as the Statute menti∣oneth, yet the Obligation is good: For these words of the Act, (as to this point) are more for councell or direction of the Sheriffe, then for precept or con∣straint to him, and that for the safety of the Sheriffe, for if the Defendant cannot find two sufficient per∣sons, having sufficient within the same County, the
Sheriffe is not bound to let him to Baile, and this re∣solution agreeth with the ancient rule, Quilibet potest reminutiare juri per se introducto. And as concerning the second Additions to the condition of the said Ob∣ligation, more then is in the Statute. It was resolved, that true it is there is a Verball difference of the forme prescribed by the Statute, but not in the substance and effect, for he that is so letten to Baile, ought to appeare in person, for so much is implyed in the words of the Act, (shall ap∣peare) and by the common Law, every Tenant or Defendant ought to appeare in propper person, and with this accordeth Fitz. Na. br. 25. and he that ought to appeare, ought to appeare Ad respondend. & parum differunt quae re concordant & est ipsorum legistlato∣rum tanquam viva vox rebus & non verbis legem imponere; vide Dier. 21. Eliz. 364. where the condition was in the conjunctive (appeare and answer) and yet the obligation good, 27. Eliz. in Darby & Hethcot, if a Gaoler or Sheriffe for ease or inlargement of any Prisoner, take promise to save him harmelesse, that although the Statute speaketh onely of Obligations with condition, yet it is an equall mischiefe. And Wray Chiefe Justice said, that the Statute should serve for small or nothing, if the premises should not be taken to be within the Statute, and the latter clause is generall. (Viz.) If the Sheriffe take any Obligation in the other forme, that it shall be void, and within the equity of these words, (any Obliga∣tion,) an assumpsit is comprehended; for the anci∣ent Verses are, Verba ligant homines, taurorum cornua bones, Cornu bos capitur, voce ligatur homo. Quando verba Statuti sunt specialia, ratio autem genera∣lis,
generaliter Statutum est intelligendum: It was said, that the Assumpsit did not bind the Prisoner at the common Law, because the consideration was against the Law, vide Dyer. 19. Eliz. Oneleys Case. Alfridus Denbawds Case, 10. Jacobi. fol. 102. In Error. ONe Jury onely appeared at the Assizes to try an Issue in Trespasse, a Tales de circumstantibus is a∣warded at the Prayer of the Plaintiffe; the title of which, was, Nomina decem Talium, and verdict and judgement was given against the Defendant, who brings Error. It was Objected, 1. That the judgement was er∣roneous, for the Title being Nomina 10. Talium, the Sheriffe cannot returne 11. 2. Because the Statute speaketh with those per∣sons that were before impannelled, which cannot be satisfied, where one onely appeareth, as the Statute of Westm. 2. c. 11. is not satisfied with one Auditor, so of the Statute of Merton. c 3. of Redisseisin: It was resolved, that the Tales was well awarded, for the Statute shall be taken beneficially in favour of spee∣dy Trialls, and the title is the misprision of the She∣tiffe, which shall be amended. The time of granting the Tales is when so many of the Jurors make default, that the inquest cannot be taken; if two of the principall pannell appea∣re, and at the Prayer of the Plaintffe 12. de Circum∣stant. are returned, and then the two principalls are withdrawne, now the triall shall be all by the 12. de circumstant. but the Lord Dyer made a Quaere of that, if one of the Jurors die before Verdict be given, a Tales shall be granted, he who is meerly a Defen∣dant cannot pray a Tales untill default be made by
the Plaintiffe, the number ought to be under the number in the principall pannell, except in an ap∣peale, because there the Defendant may challenge peremptorily: the number shall be diminished in every new Tales, and they ought to be of the same quality with the former, as if the principall pannell were Per medietatem linguae, so shall the Tales be: Justi∣ces of Assize shall not award a Tales, de circumstantibus in an Assize for the Statute of 35. H. 8. c. 6. spea∣keth where the Triall is Habeas corpora, distringas, or Nisi prius, for an Assize cannot be taken by Nisi prius, but must be taken in the proper County; and after, by advice of all the Justices of the common place, and Barons of the Exchequer, the judgement was affirmed. Humphrey Lofields Case, 10. Jacobi, fol. 106. In debt upon Bond. D. Leased for a yeare to H. L. and if the parties shall please to renue the terme at the end of that yeare, that he shall have for three yeares, ren∣dring 40 l. per annum, H. L. bindeth himselfe to performe Covenants, and faileth of payment of 20 l. at Christmas Quarter, D. bringeth debt: It was re∣solved for the Plaintiffe. It was objected against the action. 1. That the reservation was upon a contingency, if the terme shall revive. 2. Because the reservation is durante termino prae∣dicto (Viz.) the last terme. 3. The reservation shall be taken strictly, because the words of the Lessor. But it was resolved that the reservation extendeth to the first yeare, for the proper place of a reserva∣tion is after the limitation of the estate; as if a
Lease be made with diverse remainders over, reser∣ving Rent, this goeth to all; and although the se∣cond terme be in contingency, yet the first is cer∣taine, and Termino praedicto, signifieth both the termes for it is Nomen collectivum, and the reservation shall be taken reasonably, according to the intent of the parties. Tenant in taile of an Acre in borough En∣glish, and of another by the Common Law, by an Oxe, dyeth, having issue two Sons, the service shall not be increased: And Increase is onely betweene very Lord, and very Tenant, for there may be an in∣creaser, but not where there is a reservation; or if the Seigniory be by Deed, and services are reserved within time of memory, for he shall have no more then he himselfe reserved: In the Case at Barre in respect the obligation was forfeited, the Court mo∣ved the Plaintiffe to take his arrerages, costs, and damages, with which he was contented, and so no judgement was given. Arthur Legats Case, in subversion of pestilent Patents of theevish Concealors, 10. Jacobi, fol. 109. in Commu∣ni Banco. THe King, ex certa scientia, &c. grants fifteene A∣cres as concealed, which were parcell of a Man∣nor of the profits, whereof the King was answered: Nothing passeth. 1. Resol. If the King were answered of the old Rent of the Mannor, and the Fermors, &c. suffer one to intrude in part, this is not concealed. 2. The grant is voyd; for quae quidem, &c. is the suggestion of the party. 2. This is a clause of restraint, and nothing pas∣seth which is not concealed. 3. The King did not intend to diminish his Reve∣nue,
which will be if the grant be good. 4. The clause, quae quidem hath a double conjun∣ctive, concelata & detenta, and Land cannot be de∣tained from the King. 3. Ex mero motu, &c. aydeth it not. 4. If the Officers of the King may by matter of Record, have notice of putting the Land in charge in Court of Record, and doe it not, yet this is not concealed, and if the clause quae quidem be added for more certainty, the grant shall not be vicious by it, if it be false, as if a Mannor be granted, quod quidem, was in the tenure of I. S. where it was not, this is good: If one substract, or take the Kings Rents, this is not concealed, for the King may charge him as Baily, and the Law will make a privity: See the Statute of 4. H. 4 cap. 4. called in the Rolle Brang∣wyn, in English, White Crow. And it was sayd that Perpetuities, Monopolies, and Patents of conceale∣ment, were borne under one unfortunate constella∣tion, for as soone as they came in question, judge∣ment was ever given against them, and none ever for them, and they have all two inseperable qualities (Viz.) to be troublesome and fruitlesse. Robert Pilfolds Case, 10. Jacobi, fol. 115. THe Plaintiffe in trespasse, counts to damages of 40 l. and at the Nisi prius, the Jury assessed for damages 49 l. and 20 s. costs, at the day in banke, hee released 9 l. parcell of the damages, and had judgement of 40 l. and 10 l. for costs de incremento, the defendant brings error, because the damages and costs surmount the summ in the Count; but judge∣ment was affirmed; for in reall actions before the Statute of Glocester, 6. E. 1. cap. 1. no damages were recoverable, but in personall actions and mixt they
were, and by that Statute a man shall have costs in all cases where he recovers damages (Viz.) before, or by the same Statute; therefore if after this da∣mages are given where they were not at the Com∣mon Law, costs shall not be recovered, as in a Quare impedit, but if a Statute after this give double or treble damages, where damages and costs were by the common Law; there the Plaintiffe shall recover the damages increased, and costs also; but in waste against tenant for life, costs shall not be recovered, for although that this Statute was at the same Parlia∣ment, yet it was an act of Creation, and therefore no costs: And true it is, that damages include costs, in a generall sense, but in the count it is taken for damages, before the action brought in a relative sig∣nification; therefore expensae litis may be added to it; although he count not of them, as a man shall doe in reall actions without counting of them, be∣cause he shall recover them pending the Writ, In en∣trie sur disseisin, the Plaintiffe shall recover damages from the disseisin to the Writ of Inquiry, &c. and if the issue be tryable by verdict, &c. to the verdict, but in a Praecipe of Rent of his owne possession hee shall recover all arreares to the judgement: Judge∣ment affirmed by all. Cheyneyes Case, 10. Jacobi, fol. 118. IN a Valore maritagij, issue is joyned upon the te∣nure, and found for the Plaintiffe, but the Jury did not inquire of the value: Adjudged the verdict is insufficient, and shall not be supplyed by a Writ of Inquiry. 1. In this Writ three things are to be recovered, the value, damages, and costs, and although the issue be joyned upon the tenure; yet as a consequent
upon the issue, and their charge they ought to inqure of the value, if they finde for the Plaintiffe, as in an Assize, if issue be joyned upon a release, and found for the Plaintiffe, yet the recognitors must inquire of the seisin and disseisin, and this defect shall not be supplyed with a Writ of inquiry, because then the Defendant would be prevented of his Writ of attaint: But if the Court ought to inquire of things whereof no attaint lyeth, this being but of Office, it may be supplyed by a Writ of inquiry, as the foure points in a Quare impedit (Viz. De plenitudine, ex cu∣jus praesentatione, si tempus semestre transierit, and the value of the Church per annum: and in the case at Barr by the rule of the Court, a new Venire facias was awarded. The Case of the Maior and Burgesses of Lynn Regis, touching misnaming of Corporations, 11. Jacobi, fol. 122. Communi Banco. H. 8. in the 29. yeare of his Reigne, did incorpo∣rate that Towne by the name of Majoris & Bur∣gensium burgi domini Regis de Lynn Regis, and one made an Obligation to them by the name of Maior and Burgesses of Lynn Regis, omitting these words, Burgi Regis; this is good, because it is the same name in substance, and doth not vary in materiall words, and though it be not Idem nomen sillabis, yet it is Re & sensu; for Burgesses that implyes it is a Burrough, for Burroughs and Burgesses are conjugata, and by Lynn Regis, it appeares that it is Burgus suus (i.) Regis, a fortiori, because there is no other Corporation of the same name. Apices juris, non sunt jura; there may be a difference betweene ancient Corporations, and new; for ancient Corporations may by usage have severall names; and the Maior and Burgesses (not∣withstanding
Non est factum, pleaded) had judgment to recover. William Cluns Case, 11. Jacobi, fol. 127. Banco Regis. A Lease for yeares, if the Lessor should so long live, rendring Rent at the foure Feasts, or with∣in thirteen weeks after, after one of the Feasts the Lessor dyeth, and before the thirteene weekes be past, the Executor brings debt against the Lessee, and the Defendant demurreth upon the Count, and it was adjudged a good demurrer, and that the action did not lye. 1. Because the disjun&ive is added for the benefit of the Lessee; and the first day was but for volun∣tary payment, but the legall time of payment was the end of the thirteene weeks, before which when the Lessor dyeth, the Lessee is discharged by act of God for that Quarter; if Lessee before the day, pay the Rent, this is voluntary and not satisfactory, but it is good to give seisin; if payment be in the morn∣ing, and the Lessor dyeth at noon, this is voluntary and satisfactory against the heire, but not against the King: Payment the last instant of the day is satis∣factory, and after the day it is coercive and satis∣factory. 2. When the first day is past, it is as if the Rent had been onely reserved the second day, for the ele∣ction is good. 3. The rent is to he payd out of the profits of the Land; Ergo, in regard of time it shall not be ap∣portioned; and if the Lessor dye betwixt the first day and the last day, his heire, and not the Execu∣tor shall have the rent, because it was not then due; if a man lease for yeares, rendring Rent at M. or within a moneth after, with a condition of re-entry,
and the Lessee tenders it at the last instant of M. the Lessor shall not re-enter upon demand the last day of the moneth, because the Lessee had liberty to pay it then; and the difference was taken betwixt the sayd disjunctive Reservation, and when the re∣servation is at a certaine Feast, and a condition is added, that if it be arrere by the space of a moneth after the Feast, that then the Lessor, &c. there the Lessee for salvation of his Lease, cannot tender it at the last instant of the Feast, because he had no such liberty as in the other Case: A Lease for yeares ren∣dring Rent at M. or within twelve dayes after, upon condition to re-enter if it be arreare by the space of twelve dayes after any of the sayd Feasts, or dayes, the Lessee shall have twenty foure dayes in safegard of his Lease after the Feast of M. and in the Case at Barr judgement given, Quod quaerens nil capiat per billam. James Osbornes Case, 11. Jacobi, fol. 130. Banco Regis. IN an action upon the Case, for that the Plaintiffe had bought of the Defendant diverse goods, which he refused to deliver, whereof one was unum fulchrum lecti, Anglice, a Feild Bedstead with a Testerne, and Curtaines of Saye, the Plaintiffe recovers, and da∣mages assessed intirely, where none ought to be given for the Testerne, &c. for Fulchrum signifieth a Bed∣stead onely; upon errour brought therefore, judge∣ment was affirmed, for one thing onely is here put in issue, for the other things are not alleadged Positive, sed expositive, and are nugation, but when two things are put in issue, or Obliqué, inquired of by the Jury, there it is not good; and it shall not be intended that damages were given for that onely for which the
action was brought, but in an action upon the Case for words spoken at one time, whereof some are a∣ctionable and some not, there damages may be asses∣sed intirely, and shall be intended to be given for the words actionable onely. 1. Because the Plaintiffe must declare as the words were. 2. Because the words not actionable aggravate the damages, otherwise if spoken at severall times; but here damages shall be intended to be for that which is actionable onely, and the rest, as if never alleadg∣ed: and in Writs or Pleas English words are not ad∣mitted by 36. E. 3. cap. 15. except they be parcell of a name, as Jo. in the Hall. 2. words which passe under the name of Latine, are, 1. Good Grammaticall Latine. 2. Words significant in Law, and not in Grammar. 3. Incongruous Latine, which doth not vitiate a Plea, or Grant, nor judiciall Writ. 4. Words insensible having no countenance of Latine, and are rejected; but fained words as Vel∣netum; Stapedia, &c. are good. Read, and Redmans Case, 10. Jacobi, fol. 134. THe Defendant in debt brought by two Executors, pleads the death of him who was summoned and severed. Resolved, The Writ shall not abate; if two pur∣chase an originall reall action, and one dyeth pen∣ding the Writ, this shall abate in all, as in case of joyntenants, or parceners, where one dyeth having issue or no issue, because that shee may have a Writ for the whole, and shall not recover a moity, and one shall not recover upon a false reall Writ, or unapt for his Case, in respect hee may have an apt Writ, al∣though
it happen after by act of God; but if two purchase a judicial Writ. and one is summoned, and se∣vered, and dyes without issue, the Writ shal not abate; the same law where jointenants, but if the Coparcener had issue, then it shall abate: If one of the Plain∣tiffs after summons and severance marryeth, this shall not abate the Writ. In personall and mixt actions, although an intire Chattell be demanded, the death of one after summons and severance doth not abate the Writ; as in a Writ of ward of the body: In a Quare impedit without severance, &c. If one dye the Writ shall not abate, because thereby the other should be dis-inherited, as upon plenarty and sixe moneths passed; but without question, if one of the Plaintiffes in a Quare impedit be severed and dye, the Writ shall not abate; where the Plaintiffes are one∣ly to discharge themselves, the Writ shall not abate by the death of one of the Plaintiffs or Defendants, and therefore there the Non-suite of one, is not the Non-suite of the other; but otherwise it is in a Writ of Error: Note, summons and severance is be∣fore apparance, and Non-suite after apparance, where the severance is without Proces. Richard Smiths Case, 10. Jacobi, fol. 135. R. S. brings a Quare impedit praesentare ad medieta∣tem Ecclesiae, and adjudged the Writ was good. 1. None shall have such a Quare impedit, but when there are two severall Patrons: And 2. Incumbents of the Church; therefore if two present by turne the Quare impedit must be praesentare ad Ecclesiam: when the Register giveth a Writ for the whole, this is a good warrant to bring it of any part, if the case will warrant it; but it seemed to the Chiefe Justice that in the Case at Barr, the Writ might have been
ood, Praesentare ad Ecclesiam, for as to him it is one Church. Cases upon the Commissions of Sewers, 7. Jacobi. The Case of Chester Mill upon the River of Dee, fol. 137. ADjudged that the Statute of Magna Charta omnes Kidelli deponantur, extends only to open Weares for taking of Fish; and that Commissioners of Sew∣ers cannot subvert a Causey, &c. erected before the time of E. 1. but by the Satutes of 25. E 3. cap. 4. and 1. H. 4. cap. 12. if they be inhaunced, they ought to be amended by abatement of the inhaunce∣ment; and the Causey in question was erected before the time of E. 1. and never since inhaunced, and therefore out of all the sayd Statutes. Keighleys Case, 7. Jacobi, Communi Banco, fol. 139. IT was Resolved, that if one be bound by prescrip∣tion to keep a Wall contra fluxum maris, and the wall is subverted by a suddaine inundation of waters, salt or sweet, by the Statute of 23. H. 8. cap. 5. the Commissioners have power to taxe all equally who have damage by such surrounding, for no default was in the party; so if the wall be in inevitable dan∣ger, but if it be through his neglect, each one may have his action upon the Case against him, and if the danger be not inevitable, hee onely shall be charged. 2. Resol. By the sayd Statute, the Commissioners are not bound to observe the customes of Romney
Marsh, but where such customes are in any places within their Commission. 3. According to your wisedomes and discretions in the sayd Act are to be interpreted according to law and Justice, for every Judge or Commissioner ought to have duos sales, salem sapientiae ne sit insipidus, & salem conscientiae ne sit diabolus: and discretion is scire per legem quid sit justum: and every of their Or∣dinances ought to consist upon foure causes. 1. The materiall cause, and that is the substance. 2. The formall cause, and that is the manner. 3. The efficient cause, that is their authority. 4. The finall cause, and that is for the publique good. The Case of the Isle of Elie, 7. Jacobi. fol. 141. THe Commissioners of Sewers decreed that a new River shall be cut out of Owse, seven miles with∣in the maine soyle of the Isle, and for the doing thereof, and for the effecting thereof, taxed diverse Townes in the County of C. out of the Isle general∣ly; that is, so much upon every Towne. 2. questions. 1. If the Commissioners have power to make such a new River? 2. If such a generall taxe be lawfull? By the Common Law the King ought to defend the Realme, as well against the Sea, as Enemies, and to provide that the Subjects may have safe passage over Bridges, and high wayes, and therefore if the Walls of the Sea, or Gutters be not scoured, he ought to award a Commission, to inquire of such defaults as by the Register amongst the Commissions of Oyer and Terminer. See there a president, 44. E. 3. for repa∣ration of ancient Sewers, &c. or making them new, but the Statute of 6. H. 6. cap. 5. and divers others,
for making new Walls, &c. were onely temporary, and that power is omitted in the Act of 23. H. 8. c. 5. which is made perpetuall by 3. E. 6. cap. 8. and so the Commission in this point insueth the Commis∣sion which was at the Common Law: Therefore it was resolved, that the Commissioners in this Case could not make the sayd new River, because their Commission extends onely to the reparation and new making of ancient Walls, Gutters, &c. And it would be hard to give power to Commissioners to try new inventions to charge the Countrey, which may never take effect: And it appeareth by the Register, 252. that a new River ought not to be made, and the old stopped, without an Ad quod damnum, and the Kings license; yet when a new Sewer is to be made, any small alteration for the publique good of such a place may be made; so of an ancient Wall against the rage of the water, in case of inevitable necessity, but if by timely reparation that perill may be avoided, no other ought to be made: Si assuetis mederi possis nova non sunt tentanda: but if new inventions appeare profi∣table, contribution must be voluntary, and not by compulsion; and in 3. Jacobi Popham, Ch. Justice preferred a Bill in Parliament to make a new River in that Isle, but it was rejected. 2. Resolved, None ought to be taxed, but he who may have damage by the default, or profit by the reformation; also the assessement must be according to the quantity of their Lands, and number of Acres, and according to the rate of every mans profit and portion, and the taxation in generall was not warran∣ted, but it ought to have been in particular upon e∣very owner or possessor, observing the sayd qualities. Some Statutes of Sewers are in defendendo & reparan∣do Wallias, &c. Some in destruendo & amovendo nocu∣menta, and some touching both.
In the Court of Wards. Scroops Case, 10. Jacobi, fol. 143. N. S. made a Feoffment to diverse uses, with power of revocation by Indenture, and after by another Indenture (observing all incident cir∣cumstances prescribed) the Feoffor covenanteth to stand seized to severall other uses. 1. Resol. This inureth to a revocation. 2. To raise new uses: And so it was resolved in the Kings Bench, betweene Frampton and Frampton, Tr 2. Jacobi. Quia non refert an quis intentionem suam declaret verbis, an rebus ipsis vel factis, and when he limits new uses, he signifieth his purpose to deter∣mine the uses before. The End of the Tenth Booke.
THE ELEAVENTH BOOK. The Lord de la Wares Case, 39. Eliz. in Parliament, fol. 1. THOMAS la Ware great Grandfather of the now Lord in 3. H. 8. was summon∣ed to the Parliament by Writ, and by 3. E. 6. it was enacted, that William the Father of the now Lord Thomas, shall be disabled to claime any dignity, during his life, notwithstanding W. was called to Parliament by Q. Elizabeth, and sat as Puisne Lord, and dyed, and Thomas now Lord, sued in Parliament to the Q. to be restored to the place of his Great-Grandfather, that is, betwixt the Lord Barkly, and the Lord Willoughby of Eresby; and resolved, that he should be restored, for his Fathers disability was not absolute by attain∣der, but onely temporary and personall, during his life, and the acceptance of the new Dignity shall not hurt the Petitioner, the Father being then disabled, and an Esquire onely, so that when the old and new Dignity descend together, the old shall be preferred: which resolutions by the Judges, was well approved of by the Lords Committees, and after confirmed by the Queene.
Auditor Curles Case, 7. Jacobi. fol. 2. QUeene Elizabeth grants Officium unius Auditorum Curiae Wardorum, to W. T. and W. C. for life; & eorum diutius viventi, the K. grants it in reversion to I. C. & I. T. I. C. dyeth, the K. grants it in re∣version to R. P. W. T. dyeth. 1. Resolved, the grant of the Office Ʋnjus audi∣torum, &c. is good to two, and the survivor of them, for, 32. H. 8. c. 46. maketh the two Auditors one Officer, and the word Ʋnjus is not numerative, but denoteth the unity of the Office. 2. In such a grant the words & eorum diutius vi∣venti, are not void, for otherwise by the death of one of them, the interest of both would be ended; but now the survivor remaines auditor, and another shall be added to him, and till another is added to him, his voice in Court is suspended, because by the Statute there must be two, so if the K. grant by a Patent to one, and by another to another, this is good, and untill the second is added the first hath no voice in Court. 3. The Nomination of Auditors ought to be un∣der the Great Seale. 4. This Office cannot be granted in reversion. 1. Because it is judiciall, and one cannot be Judge in futuro, and perhaps he was sufficient at the time of the grant, but not when it takes effect. 2. Although it be in part judiciall, and in part ministeriall, yet it is intire, and although ministeriall Offices may be granted in futuro, yet this cannot, be∣cause it is inseparably judiciall also, for the K. cannot grant the judiciall part to one or two, and the mini∣steriall to others. 3. If the grant be good, as to the ministeriall part
yet it shall not take effect now, because one of the an∣cient Officers is living, and if he should exercise the ministeriall part, with the survivor, there would be three Offices. 5. He who surviveth remaines Auditor, yet had no voice in Court, untill the King add another to him. 6. The grant to P. is void. 1. Because in reversion. 2. Because it reciteth a void grant to I. C. and I. T. as good, and so the K. is deceived in his grant. Sir John Heydons Case, 10. Jacobi. fol. 5. SIr J. H. brings trespasse against F. C. T. C. & I. C. F. C. appeareth, against whom the Plaintiffe de∣clareth, with Simul cum, &c. who pleads Non culp. so doth T. C. which issues were tried severally, and the issue betweene the Plaintiffe and F. C. was first tried, and damages assessed to 200. l. and the other against T. C. 50. l. I. C. appeares, and confesseth the Action, a Writ of inquiry of damages is awarded, but none issued, judgement for the Plaintiffe, and affirmed in Error. 1. Resolved, in trespasse against diverse who plead Non cul. or severall Pleas which are found in all for the Plaintiffe, damages shall not be assessed severally, although one did more wrong then another, because the trespasse is intire, and the Act of one, is the Act of all, but if they be found guilty at severall times, they may, and if the Plaintiffe confesse the trespasse to be at severall times, the Writ shall abate. 2. If two trespassors pleade severally, both shall be bound with the damages taxed by the first Jury, and the other shall have an attaint although he be a Stranger to the issue, because he is privy to the
charge; if one of them after appearance make de∣fault, a Writ of inquiry shall be awarded to save a discontinuance, but none shall issue, because he shall be contributory to the damages taxed by the Jury, who tryed the other issue, and the other shall not be charged in damages assessed, upon a Writ whereup∣on he can have no attaint, but if the other issue be found against the Plaintiffe, then it shall issue. 3. Although there was a discontinuance against I. C. because in the common place, where the Action was brought, there is no continuance after a Writ of inquiry, (otherwise it is in the Kings Bench) yet it is aided by the Statute of 32. H. 8. c. 30. 4. If two Juries give a Verdict at one time the Plaintiffe shall have judgement, De melioribus damnis, if he will; but fiat nisi unica executio, in trespasse a∣gainst diverse who plead severall pleas triable by the same Jury, if the Jury sever the damages, all is viti∣ous. Priddle and Nappers Case, 10. Jacobi. fol. 8. THe Plaintiffe in a prohibition declareth, that the Prior of M. was seised of 22. acres, and of a re∣ctory time out of mind, &c. untill the dissolution, &c. and so, for all that time held them discharged of Tithes, and conveys the said 22. acres from the King, to himselfe, and that the Defendant Proprietarius rectoriae praedict. sued the Plaintiffe for Tithes, the De∣fendant traverseth the prescription of discharge; the Jury found that the Prior, time out of, &c. was sei∣sed of the said 22. acres, and of the advowson of the Rectory, and did appropriate it by License, 20. H. 8. the Incumbent then being living, who dyeth, and that the Prior held it united to the dissolution: judgement for the Plaintiffe.
1. Resolved, although that every Church parochi∣all is supposed to be presentative, yet the Plaintiffe may plead, that the Prior, &c. time out of, &c. were Rectors of it, for this amounts to so much, that it was impropriated, but he needs not shew how, because before time of memory, but the conclusion of the prescription of unity. Viz. Ratione cujus, he was dis∣charged of tithes, was not good, for Land is not dis∣charged of Tithes by unity, but of payment of them, notwithstanding the mistaking of the conclusion doth not vitiate the Count when the cause to have a prohibition, is good. 2. The plea of the Defendant to have a prohibiti∣on, is not good, because he traverseth the conclusion, Viz. The prescription of discharge, where he ought to traverse the prescription of unity, for the conclu∣sion is not traversable, and because it is matter in Law. 3. The issue is not well joyned. 1. The matter of discharge, is by reason of dis∣charge by the Statute, and the issue is by discharge at the common Law. 2. In every issue there must be an affirmative and a negative, but here is no affirmative, for the conclu∣sion is no affirmative, but an inference. 4. The impropriation is sufficient, although the License were generall, and the incumbent living, for it shall be construed in such a speciall sence, that it may take effect, and the License is alwayes gene∣rall, for the incumbent may dye or resigne, before the impropriation. 5. Admitting the impropriation void it had not beene made good by 35. Eliz. c. 3. for this settles in the K. all possessions of Abbeys with qualification, notwithstanding any defect in any surrender, &c. which intitleth the K. and this defect is not within
this qualification, but if the impropriation had been good by reputation, and so used, this had beene given by the Statutes of 27. & 31. H. 8. 6. If the Jury found matter to barre the Plain∣tiffe, this is not to be regarded, because an attaint lyeth not, nor the Witnesses punished for perjury, that matter not being materiall, to the issue. 7. Resolved, that perpetuall unity untill the disso∣lution is by the Statute, Prima facie, a discharge of payment of Tithes, except that the Fermors have paid Tithes, and such an unity ought to be Justa, aequalis, that is, fee in one, and other, Perpetua & li∣bera, but if the Abbey were founded within time of memory, he cannot at all, and here it appeareth that the impropriation was made in 20. H. 8. so that it appeareth to the Court, that before that the 20. a∣cres were charged with Tythes, for of common right all Lands ought to pay Tithes; therefore the Chiefe Justice concluded, that the said 20. acres (as this Case is) were chargeable with Tythes, but in regard the information is good, and the plea Pro con∣sultatione habenda, altogether insufficient, and the Ver∣dict impertinent to the issue, they would not grant a consultation. Doctor Grants Case, 11. Jacobi. Communi Banco. fol. 15. In a prohibition. 1. REsolved, it is a good prescription that every In∣habitant in a Parish, have paid 2. s. in the pound, of the value of their houses, per annum, in Lieu of Tithes, because it may have a lawfull comence∣ment, for it may be, that this was so time out of mind for the Lands, whereupon the Houses were built, as a Modus decimandi.
2. That the Parson may sue for it in the Court Christian, for that it is in the nature of Tithes; and every ancient City and Borough, had for the most part such a custome for their Houses, for the maintai∣nance of their Parson, and obvensions include oblati∣ons, rents, or other revennues, and after, a consulta∣tion was granted. Sir Henry Nevills Case, 11. Jacobi. fol. 17. IT was resolved, that a customary Mannor may be holden of another Mannor, and there may be Lord, Mesne, and Tenant of it, and such a customary Lord may hold Courts, and grant Coppies, and such a Mannor shall passe by surrender and admit∣tance, and fines shall be paid upon alienation or dis∣cent, and if it be forfeited, the Lord shall have the services as anexed to the Mannor, so if Tenant at will, &c. admit Copy-holders reserving rent, this shall goe with the Mannor, after the will determined; and so note, a difference betweene reservations at the common Law, and by the custome of the Man∣nor. And it was said, that the Mannor of Aylesham in Norfolke, is holden by Copy, and others in diverse other places: And judgement was affirmed in Er∣ror. Doctor Ayrayes Case, 11. Jacobi. fol. 18. 14. E 3. the K. Lycensed R. de E. to Found in Oxford a Hall, sub nomine aulae Scholarium Reginae de Oxo∣nio, in the exemplification 8. Jac. it was, Sub nomine aulae Reginae de Oxonio, they present to the Church by the name of praeposit. Coll. Reginae in Ʋniversitat, Oxonio & socir & Schollar. ejusdem, the incumbent deviseth the Rectory, and they by the name of prae∣posit.
Socior & Scholar Aulae vel Collegij reginae in Ʋni∣versitate Oxonii, confirme the demise; and notwith∣standing these variances it was adjudged, that as well the confirmation as the presentation was good; and the sole doubtfull variance is, that it was Aulae Reginae, where it ought to be Aulae Scholarium Reginae, but good, for the true name of the Colledge is so, for the word Scholarium is not necessary, but once, and if it be taken in construction to come after Aulae, the provost will be the sole Corporation, by the name of praeposit. Aulae Scholar. reginae, Ergo, it doth precede in good construction. Also, the Founder named it so, and so it hath beene alwayes taken, and if there be a small variance, this is not to the purpose, if it be so described that another cannot be meant, as a gift Omnibusfilijs I.S. or filiae I.S. when there is but one, or if Richerus Abbot of W. grant by the name of Richardus; Nil facit error nominis cum de corpore constat, and this was the ancient and constant Opinion in Case of Corpo∣rations. See the Case of the Major and Burgesses of Lin, in the tenth Booke. Henry Harpurs Case, 12. Jacobi, fol. 23. IN ejectione firme upon a Lease to J. W. in unam ca∣pellam, and Land in W. in the Parish of B. and Tithes, without shewing the certainty of them, the Visne was from B. the Case was. Sir H. B. seized of G. of the value of 30 l. per annum, and of N. of the annuall value of 18 l. in capite, covenanted to stand seized to the use of him and his Wife in taile, with remainders in taile, the reversion to himselfe, and after purchaseth Lands in Socage, and deviseth them to be sould by his Executors, the matter in Law re∣solved, but no judgement given, because diverse ex∣ceptions taken, &c. 1. Resol. That if tenant of the King in capite con∣veyes
his Land to one of the uses, &c. and after pur∣chase Socage, he may devise all the Socage. 2. A seck revertion upon an estate taile shall hin∣der the devise of Socage Land for a third part. 3. Although the reversion in fee continue in him, yet he may devise two parts of the Socage, and all if he had granted the reversion over. 4. Although he had exercised his power in ma∣king a Joynture of more then two parts, yet if the reversion in fee had not hindred, he might have de∣vised all the Socage purchased after, howsoever the devise is good for two parts; for the reasons repor∣ted in Loveyes Case. 5. Although the consideration of advancing his Wife and their issues, extends not to the Brothers, yet the use is well raised to them, because the Law implyeth a consideration, and it is not to the pur∣pose that they are found Brothers, because it appear∣eth in the Deed. 6. For the Mannor of G. the estate tayle vanish∣eth by the death of Sir H. without issue male, and therefore that estate is no cause to restraine the de∣vise for any part, but the reversion in fee is for a third part: So resolved that the Plaintiffe shall have judgement for two parts. Exceptions to the count and Visne. 1. The Ejectione firmae is of Tithes, without shew∣ing the kinds of them; Ergo, not good, for a cer∣taine judgement and execution cannot be made. 2. It may be it is in a modus decimandi, for which an Eje∣ctione firmae lyeth not. 2. Capella is demanded, which ought to be deman∣ded by the name of a house. 3. The Venire facias is not well awarded, for it appeares that there are two B. one a Ville, the other a Parish, and W. a Ville in the Parish of B. and the
Tithes are alleadged to be in W. in parochia de B. so the Visne must be out of B. and W. because there is the most certainty; so that by reason of these ex∣ceptions, no Judgement was entred, but it was sayd that the Court of Wards, where a Bill depends for this matter, will take order for the possession accor∣dingly. Henry Pigots Case, 12. Jacobi, fol. 26. B. W. brings debt upon Obligation made to him when he was Sheriffe, omitting the name of his Office, but it was after interlined by a stranger, the Defendant pleads Non est factum, without Oyer of the Deed, and judgement was given for the Plaintiffe. 1. When a Deed is rased, the Obligor may plead Non est factum. 2. If a Deed be rased by the Obligee himselfe in a place not materiall, it is voyd, but not if done by a stranger, except in a place materiall, and here it was in a place not materiall, because it appeareth not to the Court that he was Sheriffe. If a Deed consist of diverse parts, whereof one doth not depend up∣on the other, and some of them are against Law, the Deed is good in part, but if any of them be rased it is voyd in all, so if the Seale of one be debru∣sed, all is voyd: See Matthewsons Case in the fifth Booke. Alexander Powlters Case, 12. Jacobi, fol. 29. In∣dictment. A. P. felleo animo, burned a House in New-market, whereby the greatest part of that Towne was burned. Resol. He shall not have his Clergy, for this was
felony by the Common Law, and so haynous, that he was not replevishable, no more then for Treason, as appeares by Westminst. 1, cap. 15. but he shall have his Clergy at the Common Law; for impediments to have Clergy, were first disability to be a member of holy Church, as a blind man, or woman. 2. Heresie. 3. Infidelity, as a Saracen or Jew, but a man ex∣communicated, or outlawed, shall have it. 5. Confession before the Statute of Articuli Cleri, cap. 15. because he cannot make his purgation. 6. High Treason, or petty Treason before 25. E. 3. cap. 4. So of Sacriledge, and of insidiatores viarum, & depopulatores agrorum: See the Statute of 4. H. 4. cap. 2. but the Statute of 23. H. 8. cap. 1. taketh away Clergy where one is found guilty of burning of Houses, but that is to be intended by verdict or con∣fession; for if hee stand mute, or challenge more then he ought, or be outlawed, these are out of the Statute, or if he commit Burglary, and not Robbery, he shall have his Clergy; by 25. H. 8. cap. 3. hee who is found guilty of any of the sayd offences shall loose his Clergy; and if he stand mute, or challenge above his number, but that extends to the princi∣pall onely in case of indictment, and not to the ac∣cessory before the fact, nor to appeales or approve∣ments, nor to outlary; but these two Statutes were taken away by 1. E. 6. cap. 12. but 25. H. 8. was revived by 5. & 6. E. 6. cap. 10. Obj. That the sayd Statute was not revived in all, but as to stealing of Goods in one County, and fly∣ing into another, for so is the stile of the Act. 2. If it be revived, this takes not away Clergy, where one is found guilty by Verdict; but the Sta∣tute of 23. H. 8. which is not revived. But it was Reolved that the intire Act is revived.
1. Although the Statute of 5. E. 6. reciteth these offences solely, and reviveth the Act as to Clergy, touching such offences, that shall be intended such in mischeife; so Westminster, 2. cap. 5. is expounded touching Infants having advowsons, whether they be in ward or not; and the stile is not to the purpose, for many Statutes are of greater extent then the stile, as 27. H. 8. of uses concerning Joyntures; yet the preamble is of transferring uses into posses∣sion, also otherwise these words and every clause, &c. shall be surplusage, if it extend not to all the Act, for there is but one clause in it which concerneth the offences in 5. & 6. E. 6. also it is that every Article concerning Clergy as to such offences shall be revi∣ved, and there is but one which concernes these of∣fences; and many times penall Statutes are taken by Equity, as 8. H. 6. cap. 12. ordaineth that the imbezelling, or withdrawing a Record, whereby a Judgement may be reversed, shall be Felony, and by Equity, making of a badd Judgement good, is Felo∣ny; so 25. E. 3. for killing of a Master, extends to the Mistris. 2. 25. H. 8. takes away Clergy, where one is found guiltie by Verdict; because it takes away if he stand mute, or challenge, &c. in like manner as if he were guilty after the Lawes of the Land, which are affir∣mative words: And 4. & 5. Phil. & Mary, cap. 4. takes away Clergy from the accessory before, which they would not have done if they had not thought that it was taken away from the principall by the o∣ther Act. By 18. Eliz. cap. 7. Clergy is taken away in case of Burglary, where hee is found guilty by Verdict, confession, or Outlary; but if he be indi∣cted at the Common Law, and stand mute, or chal∣lenge over, &c. he shall have it, and not if hee be indicted by 23. H. 8. or 5. E. 6. of Burglary, and
put them who were in the House in feare with Rob∣bery, or upon 1. E. 6. without Robbery: 4. & 5. Phil. & Mary, takes away Clergy where one is ac∣cessory before to a Robbery in a dwelling House; Ergo, before that such an accessory shall have it: Breaking of a House in the night without Robbery, is no Burglarie, and if he doth robb he shall have his Clergy, if none were put in feare, or that any of the Family (and not a Stranger) be not in another part of the House; but this was before 39. Eliz. cap. 15. whereby clergy is taken away without putting any feare, if he rob any man of above the value of five shillings. Accessory before in robbing a House in the day is ousted of Clergy by 4. & 5. Phi. & Mary. Ac∣cessory in robbing a Booth in the night or day, or out House upon 39. Eliz. shall have his Clergy: No∣ta, Although a Statute takes away Clergy from the principall, yet the accessory before or after, shall have it; and where by statute for any offence a man is ousted of his Clergy, the indictment must containe the offence, with the circumstances in the Statute: Dyer, 99. and 183. And A. P. was ordered to be hanged in Chaines, &c. Metcalfs Case, 12. Jacobi, fol. 38. In Accompt. IUdgement is given against M. Quod computet & ideo in misericordia quia prius non computavit; and before finall Judgement, Error is brought. 1. Resol. It lyeth not: 1. Because the Writ of Er∣ror saith, Si juditium inde redditum sit, which shall be intended of the principall Judgement, as the Feast of St. M. shall be intended the principall Feast, and the Feme shall be received upon default of her Ba∣ron
after judgement of admeasurement before the principall judgement. 2. It shall be intended an intire judgement, ther∣fore in an action against two, if one plead to the issue, and the other confesseth, and judgement given against him, he shall not have error before the Plea determined against the other, for otherwise there would be a failer of right: for the Kings Bench can∣not proceed upon the Record, nor the Common place, because it is removed. 3. The first judgement is not ad grave damnum, for by that he looseth nothing, but judgement of the arrearages and damages is the end of the originall. 4. This is not properly a Judgement, but an A∣ward of the Court, as ouster of ayde, in partitione facienda, an awarde quod partitio fiat, &c. which are but interlocutory, and not definitive. 5. They have day by the Roll untill the last judg∣ment; but if a Felon dye after the exigent awarded, and before attainder, a Writ of Error lyeth for ne∣cessity, for otherwise his goods are forfeited by a∣warding of the exigent without remedy; if diverse are sued by severall Praecipes, and Judgement given against one, he shall have error before judgement given against the other, and if error be in the ori∣ginall, the tenor onely shall be certified, for other∣wise the Court cannot proceede against the o∣thers. 2. It was Resolved, That the Record is not re∣moved, because untill finall Judgement be given, the Chiefe Justice of the Common place hath no authority to send it, and they may proceed, not∣withstanding the Roll be marked Mittitur.
Richard Godfreys Case, 12. Jacobi. fol. 42. TWelve chiefe pledges according to the custome of the Mannor, to present at the Leet that eve∣ry one of themselves ought to pay for themselves 10 s. pro certo letae, the Stewart imposeth a Fine of 6 l. upon them, the Lord distreineth for the Fine, and certainty of Leet, one of the pledges brings Replevin, and judgement was given for the Plain∣tiffe. 1. Resol. The Fine is not well assessed, for it ought to be severall, and not joynt as it is, because the offence is severall, and although that the offence be joynt, yet the Fine shall be severall as in disseisin and trespasse: But for the incertainty of the per∣sons and infinitenesse of the number many may be fined together, as a Towne for the escape of a Fe∣lon; and the reasonablenesse and excessivenesse of the Fine shall be determined by the Judges: Ex∣cessus in re qualibet jure reprobatur communi, as exces∣sive distresse, excessive ayde, and excessive amercia∣ment, are against the Common Law. 2. If the Fine be imposed erroneously, it may be avoyded by Plea, for he had no other remedy. 3. The Lord cannot distraine, pro certo Letae, with∣out prescription, because it is against common right, but he may for a Fine or amercement; but for an amercement in a Court Baron the Lord must pre∣scribe; a Fine because it is assessed by the Court, needs not to be affered, but an amercement must be affered by the Countrey. 4, Admitting that he may distraine pro certo Letae, he shall have a returne, although hee had not cause to distraine for the Fine, for where one brings an A∣ction for two things, and it will not lie for one of
them, it shall abate onely for that if he cannot have a better action for it, but if he may it shall abate for the whole; as in a Formedon of Land, and of an ad∣vowson, the Writ shall stand for the Land; so if a man avow for diverse Rents arreare, and it appeareth that parcell is not yet due, yet the avowry is good for the residue; but if a man bring a Writ of En∣try in nature of an Assize of two Acres, where it ap∣peareth that for one Acre he ought to have a Writ of Entry in the per, there all shall abate, for this ex∣tends not to the action, but to the Writ onely. Richard Lifords Case, 12. Jacobi, fol, 46. IN trespasse the Defendant pleads that J. L. was seized in fee, and demised to T. S. and M. P. (ex∣cepting Trees above twenty one yeares growth) if not decayed for their lives, and covenanted to stand seized de tenementis predictis cum pertinentijs superius dimissis, to the use of R. L. in taile, &c. and the De∣fendant as Servant to the sayd R. L. entered and sold Trees; and Judgement was given against the Plaintiffe. 1. Resol. That the Trees notwithstanding the ex∣ception, remaine parcell of the inheritance, and are not Chattels, but shall descend to the Heire, for the Law doth not favour severance of the Trees from the Land, therefore if one bargaine and sell Land, upon which there are Trees, they shall not passe without inrolement. 2. If there had not been such an exception, the generall interest of them is in the Lessor; and the Lessee had but a particular interest in them, and the Lessor may sell them without license of the Lessee, to take effect after the Lease determined, and tithes shall not be payd for them because they are parcell
of the inheritance: 2. By the exception of them, the soile is not excepted, but onely so much as su∣staineth the Tree, and if he by licence of the lessee root them up, the lessee shall have the soile, but by exception of Wood, the Land it selfe is excepted; if an Acre, or an advowson be severed from the Man∣nor by exception upon a Lease for life, it shall not be parcell of the Mannor againe; otherwise of trees for they were not severed in facto, because they grow out of the Land. 3. A thing in possession cannot be parcell of a reversion upon an estate for life, but Trees which grow out of the Land, and Fish or Deer in the Land may, and shall passe with it. 4. In this Case by grant of the reversion generally, or of the Tenements the Trees passe, for the inheri∣tance of all the Land passeth, and thereby the Trees annexed to it; the disseisee by his entry shall have the Corne upon the ground, as well as the Grasse, by relation of continuance of possession, but this relation is not of effect to have a trespasse against a∣ny, but the first disseisor; for in fictione juris semper aequitas existit, and the emblements shall be recovered in damages. 5. In the Case at Barr by exception of the Trees power is reserved to the lessor, or his servants, to en∣ter and show the Trees to the Vendee: Cuicunque a∣liquis quid concedit, concedere videtur & id, &c. 6. The plea in Barr is insufficient, for he showeth that there was another joyntenant for life not na∣med in the Writ, and demands Judgement if action which is an unapt conclusion. 2. The Plea is double, one to the Writ, another to the Action. 3. He pleads the entry of the lessees for life, which is surplusage.
4. Hee averreth not that the Trees which were sold were nor Dotards which are excluded out of the exception, but that they, de jure pertinebant to R. L. which is not formall: but upon all the matter there appeared sufficient cause to give Judgement against the Plaintiffe, and therefore by the rule of the Court, Quaerens nil capiat per billam. The Case of the Taylors of Cloaths, &c. of Ipswich, 12. Jacobi, fol. 53. THe Taylors of I. make an Ordinance that none shall exercise the Trade in I. if he have not been an Apprentice for seven yeares, and if hee doe not appeare before them to be approved, upon forfeiture of five Marks, and for breach of it, bring debt; the Defendant pleads that he was reteined by A. P. to be a domestick Servant, and that he made Garments by his command. 1. Resol. At the Common Law none may be pro∣hibited to exercise any Trade, although he hath ne∣ver been an Apprentice, and be ignorant; but if he misdoe any thing, an action of the Case lyeth. 2. This Ordinance for so much as is not prohibited by the Statute of 5. Eliz. is against Law, for after seven yeares Apprentiship he may exercise his Trade without allowance of any. 3. The Statute of 5. Eliz. doth not prohibite the private exercise of any Trade in a Family, therefore this is out of the said Ordinance. 4. The Statute of 19. H. 7. cap. 7. doth not cor∣roborate any Ordinance against Law, if it be allowed, but the allowance dischargeth the penalty of 40 l. for putting in use any ordinances which are against the Prerogative of the King, or the common profit of the people; and Judgement was given, Quod querentes nil caperent per billam.
Edward Savells Case, 12. Jacobi. fol. 55. AN Ejectione firmae lyeth not of a Close, but it must be of a certaine number of Acres, and the na∣ture of them must be shewed: A Writ shall not a∣bate for want of order. Viz. Of a House before Land, &c. and judgement was stayed. Benthams Case, 12. Jacobi. fol. 56. IF damages or costs are omitted, or not well assess∣ed by the Jury, if the Plaintiffe release them, he may have his judgement, and it shall not for that be reversed: Insufficient assessement of damages, and no assessing is all one. Doctor Fosters Case, concerning Recusants. 12. Ja∣cobi. fol. 56. AN Information was preferred against a Recusant, by an Informer, Tam pro domino rege quam pro se∣ipso, before the recusant was convicted for 220. l. that is, 20. l. a Moneth for a 11. Moneths absence from the Church, &c. And judgement given against the Defendant. 1. Resolved, that he may be convicted (to satis∣fie the Statute of 23. Eliz. in this same Suite, and convicted shall be taken for attainted, for he shall forfeit nothing before judgement. 2. The Branch of distribution in the Act of 23. Eliz. extendeth as well to the clause of penalty for recusancy, as to that of hearing or saying Masses, for it is all one to say, shall forfeite, and shall forfeite to the King. 2. Diverse acts of Parliament give the penalty to
the King, and yet after make a distribution thereof to another who will sue, as 3. H. 6. cap. 3. & 3. H. 7.3. 3. He against whom judgement is given, upon demurrer or default, or otherwise, is convicted, with∣in the Statute, for he is attainted, which implieth it, for it is so found by the Judges: so by the Statute of 8. H. 6. treble damages are given where a disseisin is found to be with force, this extends to a judgement by Nihil dicit, or default. 4. The Statute of 28. Eliz. doth not take away the Statute of 23. which giveth liberty to the infor∣mer, &c. for, 1. It is made for more speedy execution of it. 2. It doth not alter the suite of the party, but of the King and leaveth the Informer as he was be∣fore. 3. The Act of 28. giveth not the penalty to any new person, for it was given to the K. by 23. Eliz. 4. The Statute of 28. extends onely to Indict∣ments, and toucheth not informations. 5. The Defendant is not within 28. Eliz. if he be not convicted at the suite of the K. Ergo, this is left as before. 6. Because the Statute is in the affirmative, and they may stand together, but the Statute of 28. alters the Statute of 23, in this, that it confineth Suites a∣gainst Recusants in the K. Bench, or Assizes, &c. which clause extends as well to the suite of the infor∣mer, as of the Queene, and the Statute of 35. Eliz. and 3. Jacobi. inlarge the Jurisdiction, as to Suites of the K. and touch not the suite of the party. 5. The Statute of 35. taketh not away the Action popular given by 23. for it was made to give more speedy remedy, and not to take it away, a feme Co∣vert is within the Statute of 23. and 1. Eliz. but be∣fore
the Statute 35. Eliz. if a Feme Covert had been indicted of recusancy, the forfeiture should not have been levyed of the goods of the Husband, because he was not party thereunto; otherwise in an Infor∣mation or Debt brought by the informer; and in that that the Statute of 35. is, that the K. shall re∣cover all the paines, &c. in such sort, &c. this alters the remedy onely, as to the Queene, for now shee may proceede by action, as for recovery of any other Debt by the Common Law, in such manner as 1. H. 7. c. 1. giveth a Formedon against Parnor of the pro∣fits, &c. also 35. Eliz. is in the affirmative, and al∣though it giveth the penalty of 20. l. by the Moneth, yet it taketh not away 1. Eliz. which giveth 12. d. for every Sonday and Holy day, and where this Statute saith, that the conviction shall be in the K. B. or at the Assizes, yet the Justices of Peace and others au∣thorized by 23. may take Indictments: The Sta∣tute of 3. Jacobi. inflicteth Imprisonment upon a feme Covert, yet it taketh not away the forfeiture before: where a new person is designed by a new Statute, this taketh away the ancient Statute if they cannot stand together, and although there are exclusive words concerning Courts, yet the Court of K. Bench is not excluded, because it is Coram Rege. 6. A Recusant may pleade Auterfoits convict. or o∣ther collaterall barre,, as pardon, submission, &c. out of the Indictment, for 3. Jacobi. c. 4. extends onely to defects, within the Indictment or other pro∣ceedings; and the informer cannot charge any who is convicted before at the suite of the Queene, upon 23. or 35. Eliz. or 3. Jacobi, and upon 23. the Infor∣mer must sue within a yeare and a day. Nota if after a popular action comenced the K. At∣torney will not prosecute, the Informer may for his part, and condemnation or acquittall at his suite, is a
barre against the K. and all others, yet the K. may pardon it before an Action commenced, and if the in∣former die, the Attorney may prosecute the suite, and the Information shall serve for the King. The Case of the Maisters and Fellowes of Magdalen Colledge in Cambridge, 13. Jacobi. fol. 66. DOctor K. Master of M. Colledge, and the Fellows 17. Eliz. grant to the Queene, reserving rent, upon condition to grant over, which is done accord∣ingly, the Jury find 13. Eliz. of Deanes and Chap∣ters, and 18. Eliz of Confirmations, a fine with Pro∣clamations is levyed, and five yeares passe: Doctor K. dyeth, the successor accepts the rent, and within five yeares after his Election enters, and he and the Fellowes demise to the Defendant. And judge∣ment given for the Defendant. 1. Resolved, the Master and Fellowes are restrai∣ned by the Statute of 13. Eliz. to grant to the Queen for the Q. is a Parson within the letter of the Statute, and if he should be exempted, this should be by con∣struction of Law, which cannot be. 1. Because a generall Statute for maintainance of Religion and good literature and releife of the poore, binds the K. although he be not named: and it ap∣peareth by the Statute of 1. Eliz. that the K. is in∣cluded within the words Person or Persons, for there he is exempted. 2. Because the Statute is made to suppresse a tort, therefore the Statute of Donis binds him. 3. A Statute made to performe the intent of the Donor binds the K. without being named, as the Sta∣tute of Donis. 4. The Master and Fellowes are disabled to grant, therefore the K. cannot purchase of them.
5. The intent is to be observed, which was to con∣vey by the Queene to a Subject, and so to make her an instrument of wrong, as one who holdeth of the Bishop grants to the Queene to regrant to a Corpora∣tion by Covin, to take away the Seigniory of the Bi∣shop by extinguishment, and to make an evasion out of the Statute of Mortmaine, this Patent shall be re∣pealed Jure regio, so here: and this Act extends to a Corporation not incorporate by such names as are in the Statute 2. The Statute of 18. Eliz. c. 2. doth not confirme this grant, for it is out of the words of the Statutes, because it is not made upon consideration, and here the reversion of the rent is not considered, because the Queene was to grant it before the rent be due; 2. grants to the E. may be void or voidable. 1. In respect of the Grantor, as if an infant grant unto him. 2. In respect of the thing granted, as if a Founder∣ship be granted. 3. In respect of the estate, as taile. 4. In respect of the grant, if it agree not with the rules of Law. 5. In respect of omission of any circumstance, as Inrollment, this Statute aideth not grants of the first sort, for it doth not inable persons disabled by the Law to grant, as here, nor of the second sort, but con∣firmeth grants of Tenant in taile, because he was a∣ble to grant, but aides not grants of the fourth sort: For, Quae malo sunt inchoata principio vix est, &c. but it aideth grants of the fifth sort 3. At the time of the said Statute this grant need∣ed no confirmation, because Doctor K. the Master was living. 3. The fine and Non-claime doth not barre them. 1. Because although it was not a conveyance made
by them, yet it was suffered by them within the words of the Statute. 2. Doctor K. nor any in his time, cannot make his claime, and claime was made within 5. yeares after his death. 4. Acceptance of the rent doth not barre them, because it is a body agregate of many, and accep∣tance by the Master sole, doth not barre all, and the rather being without deed: And judgement given, Quod querens nil caperet per billam. Lewis Bowles Case, 13. Jacobi. fol. 79. in Trover and Conversion. T.B. Covenants to stand seised to the use of him∣selfe and his Wife for life, without impeach∣ment of wast, the remainder to their first, second, and third Sonne, successively in taile, the remainder to the heires of their two bodies, the remainder over, they have issue I. T. B. dyes, the issue dyes, the Winde bloweth downe a Barne, parcell of &c. and the Tim∣ber in the Count mentioned, was parcell of that Barne, the Feme carryeth the Timber out of the Mannor, he in remainder assignes by fine to the Plain∣tiffe, the Feme dyeth, the Plaintiffe brings an Action of trover and conversion against the Executors of the Feme; and judgement given against the Plain∣tiffe. 1. Resolved, untill the birth of the issue, T. B. and his Wife have an estate taile executed, but after this it is divided and they have for life, the remainder to the issue in taile. 2. Tenant in taile after possibility had a greater e∣state as to the quallity, then Tenant for life: There∣fore, 1. He shall not be punished for wast.
2. He shall not be compelled to attorne. 3. He shall not have aide. 4. Upon his alienation a Consimili casu, lyeth not. 5. After his death intrusion lyeth not. 6. He may joine the mise upon the meere right. 7. He shall not be named in an Action for, or a∣gainst him Tenant for life, but not as to the quanti∣ty, therefore his feoffement is a forfeiture, resceit ly∣eth upon his default, and exchange by him, and Te∣nant for life is good. 3. The Feme is not Tenant in taile after possibi∣lity, &c. for this must be a remainder of an estate taile by act of God, and not by limitation of the party: and although she be Tenant in taile after pos∣sibility of the remainder, this doth not extinguish the estate for life, because it is not a greater estate. 4. She shall have the priviledges of Tenant in taile, after possibility, for the inheritance which was in her, and because she is Tenant in taile after possi∣bility of the remainder, although she cannot claime it in possession. 5. If Tenant for life or yeares cut Trees, or pro∣strate Houses, the Lessor shall have the Trees and Tymber, for the Lessee had them onely as things an∣nexed to the Land, and he shall not have a greater interest by his tortious severance, but he shall have a speciall interest in the Tymber blowne downe, to build againe withall. 6. The Law giveth many priviledges to a Mansion house. 7. The Lessee without impeachment of wast shall have Trees which he cuts, for without impeachment of wast, is as much as without demand for wast done, otherwise it is, if it be without impeachment, &c. by Writ of wast. 8. The priviledge of without impeachment of wast
is annexed to the estate, therefore if he accept a con∣firmation of a greater estate, or assigne over, it is gone. 9. If Trees are blowne downe with the wind, the Lessee without impeachment of wast shall have them; therefore judgement given, Quod querens nil caperet per billam. The Case of Monopolies, 44. Eliz. fol. 84. THe Queene grants to one of the Privy Chamber, the sole making and importation of Cards, this grant is void. 1. The grant of making of Cards is void: For, 1. All Trades are for the publique good, for the excercise of Youth in labour, and therefore it cannot be appropriated to one solely. 2. A Monopoly had three incidents against the weale publique. 1. Raising of the price. 2. The Commodity is not so well made. 3. The impouerishing of poore Artificers. 3. The Q. is deceived in her grant, because she thought it to be for the publique good: It prohibits them who have skill to make Cards, and giveth Li∣cense to one of the privy Chamber who had not skill, and the K. cannot suppresse Cardplaying, because it is not Malum in se, and no Trade may be prohibited but by Parliament. 2. The License of importation of Cards is void, being without limmitation or stint, for the Q. may dispence with the Statute of 3. E. 4. c. 4. which doth prohibit it, but that ought to be with limittation. Nota, The K. that now is in a Booke, Printed, 1610. hath Published, that Monopolies are against Law, and commanded no Sutor to presume to move
him for the granting of them: But admitting the grant good in the Case at barre, the Plaintiffes sole remedy had beene that which 3. E. 4. in such case giveth, and that ought to be pursued; and judge∣ment entered, Quod querens nil caperet per billam. The Earle of Devonshires Case, 4. Jacobi. fol. 89. THe King reciting that decayed Munition belongs to the Master of the Ordnance, grants it unto him who sells it, and dyeth, his Executors are charge∣able to the K. 1. Resolved, this cannot be claimed as fees of the Office, because it was erected but in 35. H. 8. 2. The grant is void, because it was upon a sug∣gestion, that it was due to him. 3. Although the Testator claimes them to his owne use, yet he shall be accountable to the K. for the Law will make a privity, as if any man taketh the K. goods, he shall be charged in an Accompt, for the K. is not bound to charge any man as receivor, but generally, and otherwise the King may loose them by his death, and although the Kings goods came not to the hands of the Testator, yet he shall be charged if he were a meanes of the Kings damage and preju∣dice. In Sir W. M. Case it was resolved, That no Offi∣cer of the K. can dispose of any part of the K. trea∣sure, for the profit or honour of the K. without war∣rant under the great or privy Seale, and after the Ex∣ecutors satisfied the K. for the said Munition.
James Baggs Case, 13. Jacobi. Banco regis. fol. 93. In restitution. 1. REsolved, that to the Kings Bench authority be∣longs not onely to correct errors in judiciall proceedings, but other errors and misdemeanours ex∣trajuditiall, tending to the Breach of the peace, or oppression of the Subject. 2. Causes of disfranchisement of a Cittizen ought to be acts against his duty and Oath, but words a∣gainst a Chiefe Magistrate are not, but may be of the good behaviour, and so of an attempt without an act done. 2. A Cittizen cannot be disfranchised without Chartar or prescription, if he be not convicted by due course of Law, as if he be attainted of forgery, perju∣ry, or conspiracy at the Kings suite, or of any other crime whereby he becometh infamous. 3. If a Cittizen is disfranchised and hath a Writ of restitution, and they returne sufficient cause, which is false, a Writ to restore him shall not be awarded, but he may have a speciall Action upon the Case. 4. Such a returne ought to be certeine, because the party cannot have an answer unto it; and after the Court awarded a Writ to restore the said I B. and so he was accordingly. FINIS.
These two Cases (being acci∣dentally Omitted) should have come in in the beginning of the Third Report. THE THIRD BOOKE. Dowties Case, 26. Eliz. An information in the Ex∣chequer, fol. 9. THe Duke of N. seised in fee of 5 Messuages in St. S. Parish in H in the tenure of W. G. bargaines and sells his Tenements in the Parish of St. A. in H. in the occuporation of W.G. and is attainted and Ex∣ecuted, Queene Elizabeth grants them to I. F. if con∣cealed, the Defendant D. claimeth under that Pa∣tent, against whom the Attorney informeth, &c. And Judgement was given for the Queene. 1. Resolved, nothing passeth by the bargaine and sale because the first certeinty was false, otherwise it is, if the first certeinty be true, and the second false, so the Bargainee was a disseisseresse. 2. These Lands were not in the Q. by the Statute of 33. H. 8. c. 20. without Scire facias or seisure, be∣cause the words of the Statute, that Lands shall be in the K. without Office, shall be construed, as if an Office had beene found: And Lands of a Disseissee attainted, shall not be in the K. by Office without Scire facias, or seisure, also all possessions, &c. are sa∣ved by the said Act, as if it had not beene made.
3. That the Q. having but a right it doth not passe by the grant of the said five Messuages; and after, a speciall Office was found, and a Scire facias brought against the Terretenant, and judgement given, and the Tenements seised into the Q. hands, and she by new Letters granted them to S. and his Heires, who peaceably injoyed them. Sir William Harberts Case, 26. Eliz. In the Exche∣quer, in Error, fol. 11. M. H. acknowledged a Recognizance of 3000. l. to the K. and dyed, a Scire facias issued against his Executors, & haeredes terrarum, &c. The Sheriffe returned, that he had no Executors within his Bayli∣wick, and further, that Scire fecit. W. H. militi, filio & haeredi dicti. M H. W. H. maketh default, and judgement is given against him generally, and he bringeth Error, but upon his Petition to the Queene, he was admitted to Compound with her. 1. Resolved at the common Law (except in spe∣ciall Cases) neither Land nor body were lyable to Execution in Debt or damages recovered, but Exe∣cution was to be done by Fieri facias; or Levari facias of his Goods and Chattells, and profits growing upon his Land, but in debt brought against one, as heire, his Land was liable to Execution, because the Plaintiffe had no other remedy, for the goods belong to the Executors, but the body, goods, and Lands of the K. Debtor or accomptant were ever liable to Execution, but such Levari facias or Fieri facias, ought to have beene sued within the yeare, or otherwise he was cha∣sed to his Writ of Debt, and now by Westm. 2. c. 45. he may have a Scire facias, and by the 18o Chapter of that Statute, an Elegi is given of the moity of the Land, which was the first Act that subjected Land to
Execution for Debt or Recognizance, and by the Statute of 13. E. 1. de Mercatoribus 27. E. 3. c. 9. & 23. H. 8. c. 6. In Statute Merchant, and Statute Sta∣ple all the Lands of the Conusor at the day of ac∣knowledgement shall be extended, into whose hands soever they shall after come: But in all Actions Vi & armis, where a Capias lyeth in Processe, there after judgement a capias ad satisfaciendum lyeth, & the K. shall have a Capias pro fine, and in such cases the Law (the preserver of peace) subjecteth the body to Imprison∣ment, and by Marlebridge, c. 23. West. 2. c. 11. a Ca∣pias was given in an accompt, the proces before be∣ing a distresse infinite, and by 25. E. 3. c. 17. the same proces given in Debt, as in account, for before this Act the body was not liable to Execution, for Debt as aforesaid. 2. If Land of the heire be seised in Execution, upon a recognizance of his auncestor, he shall not have contribution against a purchasor of his Aunce∣stor, although he come in without consideration, and although the Heire be not charged as Heire, but part∣ly as Terretenant; but one purchasor shall have con∣tribution against another purchasor, and one Heire against another Heire, because they are in Aequali jure, and therefore the Writ here which issued against the Heires, without naming the purchasor is good, al∣though he be charged as Terretenant: The Heire shall have an Audita quaerela, as well as the Conusor himselfe before Execution sued, and a Supersedeas, but a Stranger shall not: If diverse acknowledge a recognizance, the charge doth not survive, and the Land of one shall not be put in Execution, but all their Lands equally: so if two are bound to warran∣ty, both, or their Heires, and the survivor, and the Heire of the other shall be jointly vouched, and the Land of both shall be rendered in value. But if Ba∣ron
and Feme, and the Heires of the Feme are bound to warranty, and the Feme dye, the Land of the Ba∣ron may be solely taken in Execution, because there are no Moities betweene Baron and Feme: So that when Land shall be charged by any Lien, the charge ought to be equall, but in a Lien personall, otherwise it is, as if two are bound in an Obligation, there the charge shall survive: But a Purchasor, Bona fide, before any Action brought, shall not be subject to any charge. And three Errors were moved in the re∣cord. 1. The Scire facias was Haerediterrarum, &c. which is improper, for he is not Heire to the Land, but to his auncestor. 2. The Writ is Scire facias haeredi terrarum, &c. and the Retorne is, Scire fecit W. H. militi haeredi prae∣dicti M. and every Retorne must answer the point of the Writ. 3. The judgement is generall against Sir W. H. where it ought to be speciall, for otherwise his owne Land shall be liable, where, by the Law, the Land onely, which came to him by his Father, ought to be charged, and he is charged as Terrtenant as aforesaid, but these poynts were not resolved by the Court. Nota, the new Writ of Error, after entry of the first was not brought, Quod coram vobis residet, because the Record is not removed out of the keeping of him who had the custody thereof before.
A Perfect Table of the Principall matters contain∣ed in every Case in this Booke. WHAT words doe make a generall warranty, and to whom the cu∣stody of evidences doth belong Page 1 Tenant for life commeth in as Vouchee in a common recovery, it is a forfei∣ture Page 1, 2 23. H. 8. Extends not to suppresse good uses, the conveyance good, and the bad use void, any man may give Lands to Charitable uses Page 2 Touching the Exposition of the Kings grants, and how the words Ex speciali gratia, mero motu, &c. therein shall be construed Page 3 A common Recovery by Tenant in taile binds them in remainder and reversion, and all Lea∣ses and charges granted by them ib. A feoffement by Tenant for life destroyeth a con∣tingent remainder Page 4
Conusee of Tenant for life, and him in remain∣der in taile, renders a rent to Tenant for life, it is good during his life ib. Tenant for life, and he in remainder in taile, infeoffe I. S. it is no discontinuance or for∣feiture, otherwise if without deede Page 5 Perpetuities are against Law, but the Parliament or Law may make an estate as to one, and good to another Page 5, 6 Tenant in taile suffers a recovery, and dyes be∣fore Execution, it may be sued against the is∣su, and when a man may enter or claime, the Law will not put things in him till entry, or claime Page 7 A man may be in by discent, and yet not have his ge ib. A future power of revocation may be released Page 8 When any thing Executory is created, by consent of all it may be voided Page 8 A feoffement by feoffees devesteth all future uses contingent Page 9 27. H. 8. Transferreth the possession to uses onely In esse ib. When a remainder ought to vest ib. 27. H. 8. Of uses shall not be taken by equity ib. A diversity when Tenant for life infeoffeth the reversioner mediate, and when imediate, there it is no forfeiture ib. A disseissor may make admittances, but not volun∣tary
grants Page 11 A difference when a confirmation is made to one that is in upon an expresse condition, and when not, there the estate is absolute ib. Every fee simple may be charged one way or other Page 12 A difference betweene Terminus annorum, & Tempus annorum Page 13 A Termor grants to B. so many yeares as shall be behind Tempore mortis suae, it is void, o∣therwise if for a certeine number of yeares ib. A lease cannot comence upon a double contingen∣cy Page 14 He who hath a power of revocation may doe it, part at one time and part at another time, till he hath revoked all Page 15 By the same conveyance the old uses may be revo∣ked, and new raised Page 16 Ʋpon what conveyances uses may be raised upon a generall consideration Page 16, 17 An Action of the Case lyeth, for disparaging the Plaintiffes Title unto Lands Page 17 THE SECOND BOOKE. AN illiterate man is not bound to seale a Deed without hearing the same read, and Ig∣norantia facti may excuse, but Ignorantia juris doth not Page 19
If a man plead that he hath kept I. S. indemnifi∣ed he must shew how, but not if he pleads in the negative Page 19, 20 The Date of a Deed is not of the substance there∣of Page 20 If a Deed be made by Menace it is avoidable by Plea ib. If it be read in other words then it is, it bindeth not Page 21 But if he require it not to be read, it shall bind him ib. Touching considerations to raise an use Page 21 Where an estate taile is barrable, notwithstanding 34. H. 8. Page 22 A Lease by the Q. under the Exchequer Seale is good ib. What Act doth extinguish a Copy-hold Page 23 Things which lye in grant are effectuall by deli∣very of the Deed, without other ceremony ib. Where the Habendum in a Deed is void, and where voidable ib. A sale by the Bankrupt after a Commission awar∣ded is void Page 24 13. Eliz. giveth benefit to such onely as comes in ib. The possession of the House is a good possession of the Lands also Page 25 What passeth by this word, Cum pertinentijs ib.
Where by a Deed Lands are granted Scituate in one place, and they lye in another, what pas∣seth thereby ib. Where the Act of 34. H. 8. aideth a voidable grant Page 26 A. demiseth, bargaines and sells to B. upon con∣sideration for yeares, and no Attornement to B. what passeth to him. Page 27 Much learning of Elections ib. What Persons capable of Tithes at the Common Law Page 29 Where a man may prescribe to have Tithes ap∣purtenant to a Mannor Page 30 Where a Religious House or Colledge is given to the K. by 1. E. 6. Page 31 Where a perpetuall unity dischargeth Tythes by 31 H. 8. or 1. E. 6. Page 32 Where a possibility shall make a grant good Page 33 Where a Tender upon a condition shall devest an estate Page 34 An estate of freehold cannot commence in Futu∣ro Page 35 The Office of the premisses, and Habendum ib. Where the Husband solely may declare the use of a fine of his Wifes Land, and when it shall bind her, and when not Page 36 Where a Variance in the Declaration avoideth all Page 37 What act of the feoffor dispenseth with a conditi∣on Page 38
Where a feoffee is disabled to performe a condi∣tion ib. An estate made to three, and to the Heires of one, the jointure continueth ib. A demise made by Baron and Feme without say∣ing by Deed ib. Attornement of one Tenant for life to the grantee is good Page 39 Where one jointenant may prejudice another ib. In what clauses this word Proviso maketh a con∣dition Page 40 By a fine levyed, a condition is not extinct, much good matter Page 43 Common assurances construed favourably ib. Where another use may be averred upon a fine up∣on grant and render, or another consideration then is expressed Page 44 When a request is necessary, and in what cases ib. The remainder to the right Heires of the Coni∣sor is a reversion Page 45 Where a Donee in taile shall hold of no body Page 46 A man wounded upon the Sea, dyes upon the Land, unpunishable ib. The Law respects the Originall Act Page 47 THE THIRD BOOKE. WHere a Writ of Error, or right of Acti∣on is given to the King by 28. H. 8. Page 49 A diversity betweene inheritances, and Chattells personall Page 50 Neither an Action without a Right, nor a right without an Action shall make Remitter ib. A reversion upon an estate taile, is out of the Sta∣tute of 9. R. 2. c. 3. Page 51 Where a grant from the Q. ought to haue precise words ib. A render to the Wife onely voidable, where shee is not party Page 52 The Husband onely vouched, where it barreth the remainder Page 53 A recovery against Tenant for life, and he in re∣mainder in taile, shall not bind the taile Page 54 A grant of a Copy-hold for life, is within 31. H. 8. of Monasteries ib. Excellent Rules for interpretation of all Statutes ib. What Statutes extend to Copy-holders, and what not ib. Whether West. 2. c. 1. extends to Copy-holds Page 55 Where the rents shall be intended to be the old rents Page 56 If the particular estate may determine before the
remainder can comence, what is become of it ib. In VVills the intent of the Devisor must be con∣sidered Page 57 Paying in a VVill where it is a condition, and where a limittation ib. VVhere Debt lyeth for rent before the last day of payment Page 58 Three sorts of privities Page 59 Lessee assigneth, Bargainee of the reversion shall not have Debt against the Lessee, but the Les∣sor might Page 60 An Executor of a Termor not liable to Debt af∣ter Assignement ib. The Lessor may charge the Lessee or his Assignee Page 61 VVhere an estate may be waved in pays at the common Law, and where by the Statute of 27 H. 8. of Ʋses Page 61, 62 Much notable Learning, upon the Statutes of 32. & 34. H. 8. of VVills, and of Relations, and what inheritances are devisable Page 63, 64. &c. VVhere the second delivery of a Deed, shall relate to the former Page 67 The severall sorts of custodies and Gardians Page 68 VVho shall have the custody of the Heire appa∣rent, an infant Page 68, 69 The Mother shall have the custody, &c. within 4, & 5. Phil. & Mar. c. 8. Jure naturae Page 69 Equally to be divided in a VVill, and their con∣struction Page 70
Excellent Learning of discents, and of Possessio fratris ib. The Sheriffe is not bound to bring a prisoner, in Recta lina Page 71 VVhat Act is an escape, and how prevented by the Sheriffe ib. A lease for three lives by a fine where within 11. H. 7. c. 20. Page 72 VVhat person may take advantage by entry with∣in that Act ib. A VVoman accepts a fine, and renders back for 1000. yeares, it is within that Statute Page 73 A prisoner taken againe in Recenti insecutio∣ne, is in Execution againe Page 73 An Action will lye against the Sheriffe before he be retaken ib. And after he is taken, he shall be in prison againe ib. After a demurrer there shall be no repleader Page 74 Issue, Tenant in taile suffers a recovery, the Mo∣ther releaseth with warranty, this is not with∣in 11. H. 7. Page 74, 75 Otherwise if the Wife had released after the death of the issue Page 76 An estate transferred in the Post before the war∣ranty discend Page 77 The Lessor having cause of entry, but no notice accepts rent ib. The Lessor may have debt after a reentry Page 78
A Lease for yeares is not made good by accep∣tance, if the condition be to be void, othewise of a Lease for life ib. Acceptance and an acquittance barreth all for∣mer arrerages Page 79 A rent must be paid without an acquittance, but not an annuity ib. The Heire is infeoffed by collusion within age, the Lord accepteth services, he looseth the wardship ib. The Law adjudgeth an escape, although the par∣ty be in prison Page 80 Ʋntill the prisoners be delivered to the Sheriffe, they are in the custody of the old, but if the old dye, the new must take notice Page 81 If a prisoner breake Gaole in such Case, before the new be made, this is no escape, for they are in custody of Law ib. A Translation by the K. of a priory into a Deane and Chapter, is good by 25. H. 8. Page 82 Notwithstanding a surrender of their Church, the Corporation remaineth ib. The Deane and Chapter, are to assist the Bishop in two things ib. The Bishop is Patron of all Prebends of common right ib. Originally all Bishopricks were donative by the King ib. If by their surrender to the King, the Corporati∣on
should be dissolved, three inconveniences would follow Page 83 A fine levyed by covin, by a Copy-holder, barreth not the Lord Page 84 All acts mixt with fraud, are tortious and ille∣gall ib. The Judges have construed the Act against the Letter for Salvation of the inheritance of the reversioner Page 85 An averrment of fraud may be taken by 27. Eliz. and so upon 13. Eliz. an averrement may be against a fine, upon an usurious contract Page 86 Six Markes of fraud, within 13. Eliz. c. 5. Page 87 The Deed must be upon good consideration, and Bona fide ib. Directions to make a Deed, by one that is indebted unto others Page 87, 88 A consideration of nature is not good within this Statute Page 88 Statutes against fraud, shall be liberally expound∣ed to suppresse it ib. None but a purchasor for money, without fraud, shall avoid a faudulent Deed Page 89 The issue in taile is barred after Proclamations made, although he claime Page 90 Quod partes finis nihil habuerunt, where it is a good plea Page 92 To what purposes the proclamations serve Page 93 Though the issue be beyond the Seas, yet he is
bound, because privy, &c. ib. THE FOURTH BOOKE. VVHere a right to a freehold cannot be barred by acceptance of a collaterall satisfaction Page 95 Wherefore those Branches touching jointures in 27. H. 8. were made Page 96 No estate a good jointure, except it take effect pre∣sently after his death ib. An estate for life upon condition, is a good join∣ture ib. Where a jointure may be waived ib. Where a dvise to the Wife for life, or in taile, &c. is a good jointure Page 97 Seisin of fealty, is a seisin of all other services Page 98 No distresse excessive for homage, fealty, escuage, &c. ib. Seisin of a superior service is seisin of all inferior services incident ib. Doing of homage is a seisin of all services inferi∣or and superior ib. Seisin of one annuall service is not seisin of ano∣ther Page 98, 99 Seisin in Law sufficient to make avowry within 32. H. 8. Page 99 To what services that act doth not extend ib. Writs of Escheate, Cessavit, and rescons, are
not within that act Page 100 If a distresse be, and nothing arreare, the tenant may rescue, but he shall not have Trespasse, Vi & armis, against the Lord ib. See the Booke at large, where an incroachment is avoidable ib. If a man hath beene out of possession sixty yeares, if his entry be not taken away, he may enter, and bring any possessory Action ib. Actions of Slaunder. The Judges must take notice of all statutes which touch the King Page 101 Articles of the good behaviour exhibited against I. S. are no cause for him to bring an Action upon the Case Page 102 A Bill in the Starre-Chamber for Causes exami∣nable there, no cause of action, otherwise if not examinable there Page 103 No action lyeth upon an appeale of Murder, re∣turnable in the Common Bench Page 103 To say to one, that he is perjured, an Action will lye Page 104 Sermo relatus ad personam intelligi debet de conditione personae Page 105 Two things requisite to have an Action for Slaun∣der Page 107 Where an Action will lye for Slaundering a mans Title Page 108, 109
Verba accipienda sunt in mitiori sensu Page 110 Three things incidents to a Defamation in the Ecclesiasticall Court Page 111 Copy-hold Cases. When custome hath created such inheritances, their discent shall be according to the rules of Law, but not to have collaterall qualities Page 112 The heire before admittance, may take the profits and surrender ib. Admittance of a Copy-holder for life, inureth to him in remainder, but not to prejudice the Lord of his fine Page 114 The heire before admittance may have Trespas ib. One who hath no title maketh voluntary grants, they bind not, but otherwise it is of admit∣tances upon surrenders or discents Page 116 Quid operatur by severance of the inheritance, of the Copy-hold from the Mannor Page 116, 117 A release to a disseisor of Copy-hold, where it is good Page 118 A Copy-hold is within 32. H. 8. of maintainance and Champerty ib. Copy-holder for a yeare may maintaine an Eje∣ctione firmae ib. Every Mannor comprehends in effect two seve∣rall Courts Page 119 The Lord may admit out of the Mannor, but not the Steward ib.
The Lord cannot exact unreasonable fines Page 121 If the Tenant deny to pay his fine, it is a forfei∣ture Page 122 Sentence against the Wife shall bind the Hus∣band, De facto Page 123 A man may surrender to the use of his Wife Page 124 The Lord may retaine a Steward by Parol Page 125 What things are grantable by Copy Page 126 What acts are destructions of Copyholds Page 127 How a custome ought by a Copy-hold to be al∣leadged Page 128 What things are incident to the Office of Sheriffe Page 129, 130 Touching Exposition of the Q grant, and where a Non obstante aideth Page 131 What things may he appendant to others Page 132 The Originanall of Common appendant, by the Common Law Page 133 That it is apportionable Page 134 See many excellent Cases of Appeales, and In∣dictments, and much good matter thereupon, from Folio. 135. to 143. Touching arrerages of rents, and the remedy gi∣ven for them by 32. H. 8. c. 37. Page 144 The Roll amended according to the speciall ver∣dict Page 146 VVhere a condition or rent shall be suspended ib. The Jury must find matters of estoppell Page 147 An infant admitted by Gardian, and no record
made of it, yet good Page 148 Debt upon a puisne judgement must be paid before Statutes, &c. ib. Marriage is a countermand of a VVill Page 149 Touching a Lease for life or yeares of Land, whereon Trees are growing, and what proper∣ty the Lessee hath in them, and of Timber Trees blowne downe with the wind, and wast committed in VVindowes, VVainscot, &c. Page 150, 151 Touching a recognizance, acknowledged before the Chamberlaine of London, and of Execu∣tion thereupon by Elegit Page 152, 153 How long the Conisee shall hold the Land Page 153 Concerning Deeds inrolled, and levying of fines of Land, the Common Law preferred before the Statute Law, the excellency and antiqui∣ty of Records Page 154, 155 Rent must be demanded at the place limitted, al∣though out of the Land, before advantage of a condition taken Page 155 Ʋpon a Lease by the Q it must be paid at the Exchequer ib. By vertue of a Fieri facias, the Sheriffe may sell a Lease, but the beginning and ending must be expressed Page 156 If the first benefice be of 8. l. per annum, upon acceptance of another with cure, the Patron must take notice upon 21. H. 8. c. 13. Page 157
Touching Corporations, and their Elections and Ordinances ib. The effect of institution, and also of induction, and of Letters of dispensation Page 158 Touching Covenants and warranties in Law, and when broken Page 159 Touching Strangers occupying Lands without no∣tice of the Devisee Page 160 Goods delivered to one to keep or carry, and they are purloyned Page 160, 161 Estovers appendant to a house, by grant or pre∣scription, and when destroyed, and of suite to the Lords Milne Page 161, 162 Touching reteining of Chaplaines by a Countesse, within 21. H. 8. c. 13. Page 162 Of Contracts executory, and Actions of the case, upon Assumpsit, and wager of Law Page 163 An ample and exact explanation of 1. E. 6. c. 14. of Chanteries Page 164, 165 Touching reteining Chaplaines and dispensations Page 166, 167 That the Lessee shall not alien without License, and where a condition may be apportioned Page 167 Concerning Exchanges, and what the word Ex∣cambium imports, and of the warranty thereunto annexed, and the nature of it Page 168 Arts done by a man Non compos mentis, some binde himselfe, and some others, and how ma∣ny sorts of them Page 169
THE FIFTH BOOKE. A Lease to begin from henceforth, and deli∣vered after, when it beginneth Page 171 What power the Bishop hath to make Leases, by the private act of 1. Eliz. ib. A Lease of a Faire, rendring rent, is void by 1. Eliz. Page 172 What rent shall be said to be the true and ancient rent ib. Joint words taken severally in six respects Page 173 A Lease to A. during the life of B. and C. how long it lasteth ib. Therein is a difference betweene a limittation, and condition Page 174 An Administrator hath judgement, and dyes, who shall sue execution thereupon ib. By what act an estate at will is determined ib. By exception of Wood the soile is excepted ib. Acceptance of a new Lease is a surrender of the first Page 175 If the Lessee of Lands may dig for Coles ib. A Lease to A. for his life, and the life of B. and C. when it endeth ib. No Action of wast for permissive wast Page 176 Where there is a confidence, an Action of the Case for negligence ib. Leases made to the Q. by Colledges, Deanes, &c.
are restrained by 13. Eliz Page 177 When a Covenant extends to a thing In esse of the demise, it shall bind the Assignee, otherwise when to a thing not in essence Page 178 If the thing to be done be meerly collaterall, the assignee shall not be charged Page 178 Concessi or demisi import a Covenant Page 179 If any Covenantor breake the Covenant, all the Covenantees must joine, otherwise when seve∣rall interests passe Page 180 A diversity betweene a power and an authority ib. The Covenantee himselfe, cannot devise the as∣surance ib. The Counsell must be given to the Purchasor Page 181 An Indenture void without a manuall act of in∣denting ib. Where a Condition or Covenant once broken, may be salved after Page 181 A condition of two parts, and both possible, and one becometh impossible Page 182 An estate to be made at the costs of the Covenan∣tee, the Covenantor must doe the first act (i.) give notice what assurance he will have ib. The Seale of one Covenantor is broken, it is void against him onely Page 182, 183 A. is bound to give such a release, as by the Judge of, &c A. must procure him Page 183 Terror of Suite is a damification upon a Counter∣bond ib.
An action for reparations lyeth against the as∣signee Page 184 What interest is assignable over Page 185 Where an Indenture precedent to declare uses, is only directory Page 186 Where an averment may be against a matter in writing Page 187 Cases of Executors. Where a release by an Infant Executor is a barre Page 188 An Executor may release before probate, but not have an action ib. A judgement for Debt shall be paid before a Sta∣tute Page 188, 189 Administration during minority ceaseth at 17. yeares of age Page 189 Such an administration may not sell goods, but for necessity ib. Where an administration is void, and where voi∣dable ib. Where an Executor of his owne wrong may re∣taine goods Page 190 An action against an Executor, or by him where it must be in the Debet, and where in the De∣tinet tantum ib. What retorne the Sheriffe must make upon a De∣vastavit Page 191
Administrator brings Debt barred, because Exe∣cutor ib. What act maketh a man Executor of his owne wrong ib. Constructions of the Statutes of Jeofails, &c. Amendment of Records, Fines, &c. In Trespasse, the nature of the Fishes must be shewed Page 192 Where a Debt against Baron & Feme must be in the Debet Page 193 An ejectment of Lands, out of A. B. and C. tried by a visne out of A. onely, it is insufficient ib. 23. Jurors are returned, and 12. appeare, and find for the Plaintiffe, it is good ib. Variance betweene the Writ and Count is not aided by 18. Eliz. ib. Five parts of a fine, and where the Conisor may assigne Error Page 194 A common recovery not like other assurances, more favoured Page 195 A pannell is annexed to the Venire facias, with∣out returne, not good ib. A difference where a man is misnamed in the Ve∣nire, and where in the pannell Page 196 Issue joined upon a point not materiall, aided by the Statute ib.
An amendment good, after the transcript remo∣ved Page 196, 197 Error in the Originall matter of Substance Page 197 A writ of Covenant upon a fine, dated after the returne, is there amendable, but not in other actions ib. A common recovery taken by intendment Page 197, 198 Cases of Pardons. When a Writ shall be said to be depending Page 198 VVhere an Amerciament is pardoned, the Sta∣tutes of Jeofailes extend to VVALES Page 199 Debts to the Q are excepted, but not Originally due to the Subject ib. VVhere the K. may pardon corporall punishment Page 200 The K. may pardon the Suite in the Court Chri∣stian, but not costs ib. An Office of intitling (but not of Instruction) may be under the great Seale Page 201 VVhere the rents are severall and where joint, and where the Patentee of part, may take ad∣vantage of a condition Page 202 A grant after Office, and before the retorne is good ib. The Bishop must shew the cause of refusing a Clerke Page 203 The Constable may bring an Offendor to what Justice he will ib.
Ʋpon refusall to find surety, the Constable may commit him ib. Where a man shall avoid a fraudulent deed by 27. Eliz. Page 204 The Defendant pleads another Action depen∣ding for the same Page 205 Cases of By-laws. Where the Inhabitants of a Towne may make By-laws, and where the consent of the greater part shall bind all ib. Who are liable towards the repaires of a Church Page 207 Against a devise of Lands by writing, no averr∣ment can be received Page 208 Cases of Usury. What manner of contract is Ʋsury Page 208, 209 A demurrer is a confession of all matters in fact, well pleaded Page 208 What things may be released before the day Page 209 Daggs, Pistolls, &c. are within the Statute of 33. H. 8. c. 6. ib. The Sheriffe or his officers may carry Weapons invasive or defensive ib. One man cannot have an Action for a common nusance Page 210 If an Orphan sue for goods in the Court Christian, a prohibition lyeth ib. A Deed shewed in Court, remaineth there all that Terme Page 211
In the K. B. imparlances in barre are entered, but not to reply ib. The Wife, Tenant for life dyes, the Baron is not liable for wast ib. When amends may be tendered after a distresse, but not after impounding, tender to the Bailiffe is not good Page 212 The Plaintiffe may pray a Deed to be entered, In haec verba, the same Tearme, but not after ib. An action of wast lies, after the death of him in remainder for life ib. Every assignee of every Lessee, mediate, or im∣mediate, is within 11. H. 6. c. 5. Page 213 An award must be certaine, and binds none but parties Page 214 A prescription for common, where it is good ib. Where a warrāty comenceth by disseissin Page 214, 215 A confirmation of the Land, and of the terme, a diversity Page 215 Cases of Customes. Where a custome binds Strangers Page 216 Where property is altered by sale in a Market O∣vert ib. A custome which addeth more solemnity to the Law, is good ib. Who shall have the Corne upon the ground Page 216, 217 Where judgement finall shall be given in Wales Page 217
Cases of Executions. One in execution escapeth, yet the other is liable Page 218 VVhere the Defendant is in Execution for the King, he shall be also for the Plaintiffe Page 219 If a Man be in custody, and another VVrit com∣meth to the Sheriffe, he is in custody of force of the second VVrit also Page 220 A judiciall VVrit needs no returne, but not so of an Elegit ib. VVhere restitution shall be after reversall of Outlarly, or judgement Page 221 VVhere the Sheriffe may breake the House to make Execution Page 222 That a House is not a defence of Strangers ib. A false consideration is void, as to the Queene Page 223, 224 The Law findeth not an assignee in Law, where one in Fact Page 224 Foure bring a Quare impedit, and one releaseth, it barreth onely him ib. After a Divorce issue by the second Husband le∣gitimate Page 225 False evidence to the Grand Inquest is not within 5 Eliz. ib. Commissioners of Sewers must tax all who are in danger ib.
A Quod permittat for a Nusance where it ly∣eth without request Page 226, 227 And where against a Feoffee or assignee Page 227 Two have Title to present by turne, one presents I. S. who is deprived, or Merè laicus, it is a turne, not if the admission be void ib. Ʋterque taken sometimes discretive, sometimes collective Page 228 The Plaintiffe cannot refuse to joine in demurrer, but the King may ib. A man cannot have an Action for damage by Coines ib. None may erect a Dovehouse, but the Lord of a Mannor ib. Ancient demesne is a good plea in Ejectione sir∣mae, not in Trespasse Page 229 Excellent diversity of Learning touching Wrecke ib. When the high Admirall shall have jurisdiction Page 230 Plentifull matter touching goods wayved, goods of Fellons, Deodands, &c. Page 231 What things may be gained by usage, without matter of Record ib. Rendring rent to one and his heires, and to one or his heires, is all one Page 232 The King by his Proclamation may make for∣reigne Coine currant ib.
A Tender of money in bagges is a good tender, Page 233 In a writ of Estrepement the Sheriffe may take posse com. ib. Estrepement lyeth in wast as well before judgment as after, ib. Feme Copiholder, durante viduitate soweth the Lord shall have it, ib. Payment of parcell before the day, is satisfaction for all, Page 234 Grantee of a remainder liable for arreares of a rent charge, ib. Debt against one joint obligor, hee cannot plead Non est factum. Page 235 But hee may, if the deed become void by matter, Ex-post facto, ib. In Indictments certainty to a certaine in generall is good, ib. False Latine shall not quash an Indictment, ib. In Indictments of death, Percussit must be, ex∣cept in case of poisoning, Page 236 A lense for yeares is an interest within 4 H. 7. c. 25. ib. A libell may be as well against a private man, as a Magistrate, ib. Non refert, whether it be true, or the party of good fame, ib. If a man finde a Libell, advise how to
to preserve himselfe, Page 237 Gardian in chivalrie shall have the single value of the marriage without Tender. ib. The great Case, De jure regis Ecclesiastico up∣on the Statutes of 1 Eliz. c. 1. p. 2. Touching a Deprivation by the Bishop, and the Kings su∣premacy in Causes Ecclesiasticall. Page 237, 238 THE SIXTH BOOKE. VVHere services shall be multiplyed, ap∣portioned, or extinct. Page 239 Where the parole shall demurre for nonage of the demandant, and where the Tenant shall have his age, much good learning, Page 240 The King grants the tenancy by attainder, the mesnalty is revived, Page 241 The K. grants land Tenendum by a rose pro omnibus, &c. what Tenure. Page 242 Resolutions and Diversities, when a barre in one action shall be a barre in another. ib. Where a Writt shall be brought by Journeyes ac∣counts. Page 243 Who are Judges in Inferiour Courts. Page 244 Jointenants cannot make partition by words after 28. H. 8. c. 1. ib. A Parson deprived for Adultery, which is pardo∣ned, he is restored. Page 245 A Visne must be from the most certain place, ib. Tenant for life, and hee in remainder joyne in a lease, how it inureth. Page 246
Riens passa tryed where the land is, not where the patent dated, ib. A devise to his brother paying 20. s. he hath fee, ib. A devise to Baron and Feme and their children, what estate it is, Page 247 Where the will is directory, and where declaratory without reference to power, ib. A diversity betweene a suite by Citation, and an Appeale, Page 248 If a Statute speaks in any Court of Record, it shall be intended, of the foure Courts of Westminst. propter excellentiam, Page 249 Of what actions the Marshalsea holdeth plea, ib. A Parson must be resident, and what is a good ex∣cuse of it, Page 250 Where the Father shall have the wardship of his daughter, ib. If the daughter be marryed, infra annos nubi∣biles, and the Baron dye, yet she may be in warde to the Queen, ib. By the law the Testator must have a disposing me∣mory, Page 251 Where the lease and not the seisin must be tra∣versed, ib. He who claimeth by the first assignment shall not traverse the second, Page 252 Where the Release of one Plaintiffe barreth the rest, ib.
VVhat act shall amount to a livery of seisin ib. The word King includeth all his Successors Page 253 Where the King shall have a fine for alienation ib Where Lapse shall not incur without notice Page 254 If the Q. present Ratione lapsus where she is Patron, it is void ib. Acts transitory and locall must be done in conveni∣ent time Page 255 Where they must be hastened by request ib. What is a good revocation of uses Page 256 Every Lease must have a certaine beginning and continuance ib. Grant of a Copy-hold for three lives by Deane and Chapter good by 13. Eliz. Page 257 Where an Assignee may plead a Deed of License without shewing ib. The Construction of Alibi in a grant of rent charge Page 258 A condition of an intaile, not to suffer a recovery, is void ib. Where an accord with satisfaction is a good plea ib. So long as judgement in Debt is in force, no new action lyeth Page 259 When the place is materiall, the issue cannot be found elsewhere ib. Where a thing done beyond the Sea is triable here Page 259, 260
Where the Ʋsurpor gaineth the inheritance a∣gainst an Infant Page 260 Where collation putteth a man out of possession ib. An Incumbent shall not be moved, if not named in the VVrit ib. A Peere cannot be Arrested for Debt Page 261 A difference betweene nobility by discent, and by Marriage ib. The duty of the Officer upon an arrest ib. The K. grant good if he be not deceived Page 262 Payment of rent by a Termor giveth no seisin to have an Assize ib. In the Kings Case, generall alleadging of seisin is good Page 263 To claime common Ratione commorantiae, is not good ib. Tenant for life or yeares, must prescribe in his name, who hath fee ib. A custome for every inhabitant to have a way, is good ib. The difference betweene a prescription, and a cu∣stome Page 264 Six Moneths given to present, according to the Kalender ib. By grant and render of the Demesnes, the Mannor is destroyed Page 265 But otherwise it is, if by act in Law, as upon par∣tition ib.
Who may surrender, and where it is requisit Page 266 The heire Female, shall not forfeite the donable value ib. Where the purchasor shall avoid a Lease by fraud Page 267 If the Heire be Knighted in the life of his Aun∣cestor; no wardship Page 268 Where the Heire shall forfeite the double value ib. VVhat shall be collusion within Marlebridge, c. 6. ib. Excellent Resolutions upon 32. H. 8. of VVills ib. The Lord may have a certeine summe, Pro certo letae Page 269 Judgement in Debt against a jointenant, who releaseth to his Companion, that Moity is li∣able to the Judgement ib. Executors (though not named) are within di∣verse Statutes Page 270 THE SEAVENTH BOOKE. SIx demonstrative conclusions resolved, why Calvin the Postnatus ought to be answered Page 271 VVhere the Plaintiffe may choose in what County to bring his Action. Page 273 The Common in Norfolke, called Shack, is good Page 274
Cases upon the Statute of 13. E. 1. of VVinchi∣ster, for Hue and Cry, and what alteration is made therein by 27. Eliz. c. 13. Page 275 VVhat acts a Gardian shall avoid, but not the Lord by escheate Page 276 If one be to have a thing in consideration of an act to be done by him, he must shew the perfor∣mance of it Page 277 The Q Tenant, Pur auter vie, leaseth for yeares, good without recitall Page 278 VVhat conditions are given to the Q ib. VVhat kind of Certificats are traversable Page 279 All wild Swannes in a Common River may be seised for the K. ib. A Swan-marke must be by grant of the K. or pre∣scription ib. And he must have five Marks per annum, by 22. E. 4. c. 6. ib. To what Debts the Statute of 33. H. 8. c. 39. extendeth Page 280 Processe in one Court, and decree in another, Bond for Covenants is within it ib. In what Cases Lands are extendable by the K. within 33. H. 8. Page 281 VVhat debts are not within that Statute ib. A rent issueth out of one acre, and the other liable to the distresse ib. A rent may be seck and charge at severall times Page 282
Cases of Quare impedit. VVhere a Quare impedit may be without na∣ming the Patron Page 282 283 If the Plaintiffe in a Q. I. after appearance be Non-suite, where it is peremptory and where not Page 283 VVhen the King hath a transitory title onely, it may be lost ib. VVhere a demand of rent must be made precisely on the day Page 284 Discontinuance of Proces, and what is revived by generall resummons, and what by speciall ib. VVhat fine levyed by the King barreth the taile Page 285 VVhat Statutes bind the King ib. A dignity may be intailed and forfeited Page 286 The King cannot grant the penalty of a Statute to a Subject ib. A rent extinct shall be in esse to some purposes Page 287 A consideration may be averred, which stands with the Deed ib. VVhere an estate taile may be with the words (Of the body of) Page 288 The sentence of Divorce being in force, the issue before is a Bastard Page 288 Such sentence may be repealed after death of the parties ib. One Bill of reviver upon another not sufferable Page 289
THE EIGHTH BOOKE. THe Charter of Creation of the Prince, Duke of C. 11 E. 3. is an act of Parliament Page 291 The grant to the Patentees is not aided by the Sta∣tute of Confirmations Page 292 Five things requisit to maintaine an Action a∣gainst an Inkeeper for Goods lost Page 293 VVhere the Husband shall be Tenant by the cour∣tesie ib. VVho shall be said a common Barretor Page 294 VVho may assesse a fine for a contempt, and what remedy for it Page 294, 295 VVho shall avoid a feoffement by an Infant Page 295 Three manner of Privities ib. Lessor for life shall avoid a Lease for yeares, made by Tenant for life ib. There were but two manner of Assizes at the Common Law Page 296 In an assize of a new Office, the profit thereof must be shewed Page 296, 297 A warranty is intire, and barreth all upon whom it discends Page 297 Good matter upon the Statute of Glouc. c. 3. ib. The King hath three manner of inheritances grantable in him Page 298 VVhen the Kings Charter shall be taken to two intents good, how it shall be expounded ib. A Retraxit must be in proper person, and where one may appeare by Attorney Page 299
No writ of Errour lyeth after disclaimer, it doth after Retraxit, ib. The copiholder commeth in by custome paramount, Page 300 Where seisin of a rent needeth not to be alleadged within forty yeares, ib. If the Jury try an Issue, they shall not try it again by new nisi prius. Page 301 Where de Injuria sua propria is a good plea, and where not, Page 301, 302 Who may certifie excommunication, and when it rightly done, ib. VVhen a power to make leases for 21. yeares, or 3. lives rendring the ancient rent, is well pur∣sued, Page 303 Baron and Feme tenants in speciall taile, she is within 32. H. 8. c. 28. Page 304 To what things a condition of accruer may be an∣nexed, Page 305 Foure things requisite to an accruer, ib. By purchase of part of the land in which, &c. common appurtenant destroyed, Page 306 An authority is countermandable, but then the bond is forfeited, Page 307 A devise of rent out of all the Capite land is good, out of 2. parts, ib. VVhere one formedome lyeth upon two distinct gifts, Page 308 In actions reall founded upon tort, one writ lyeth
upon severall Titles, ib. In personall actions one may comprehend severall torts, ib. The demaundant must make himselfe heire to the party last seized, Page 309 A disturbance by parol is no breach of a condition, Page 310 VVhere the Plaintiffe shall have judgement, al∣though his title destroyed, ib. VVhat words with consideration amount to a bar∣gaine and sale, ib. An Inrollment not necessary where a chattell only passeth, Page 311 VVhere a will inureth by way of executory de∣vise. ib. A man may devise an estate, which he cannot doe by act executed, ib. What shall be said a good awarde, Page 312 Where the heire of a copy-holder beyond the seas shall be barred, &c. ib. Mulier prisne over the seas barred by the death of bastard eigne, Page 313 What manner of services multiplyed, and what extinct, ib. Herriot custome by purchase of part is not extinct, Page 314 What power the Censors of Physicians Colledge have, ib. Where a count may be made good by the barre, and
that by Replication. Page 316 Many things good by custome, which cannot be by Charter, ib. The improvement shall be employed to the former charitable uses, Page 317 Nothing accompted administred but the money paid by Composition, Page 318 Where the plaintiffe shall have judgement, the Replication being evill, ib. Fully administred pleaded, the Jury find assets for part, what judgement, ib. The force of a Repeale, and where the ordinary may commit administration, Page 319 A difference where obligor is made administrator, and where executor, ib. A commoner in a forrest, where he may enclose within the stat. of 22. E. 4. c. 7. ib. If A. be in execution upon an erroneous judge∣ment, and escape, and the judgement is rever∣sed, the action against the Sheriffe is gone, Page 320 But if judgement and execution be against the Sheriffe before that, it shall stand good against him, ib. Tenant for yeares grants the next avoidance, and surrenders how it worketh, Page 321 Where a man abusing his License, hee shall be Trespasser ab initio, ib. Tender of sufficient amends for damage feasant, when good, Page 322
What is barred by a Release of dictions, Quar∣rells, Suites, &c. ib. What Errors in a Record are amendable, much good matter Page 324, 325 See there ten Misprisions not yet remedied Page 326 Cases in the Court of Wards. Where Collusion may be averred to defraud the King of Wardship ib. The King shall have no wardship, where there is no heire Page 327 Where a Patent shall he good Quacun{que} via da∣ta ib. If the first Melius inquirendum be good, no other shall issue Page 328 To what severall times an Office shall have rela∣tion ib. A sale of Chattells after judgement Bona, is good, not after Execution Page 329 A Bargaine and Sale by the heire after livery ten∣dered, is good ib. The Heire Knighted in the Life of the Father, who dyeth, the Heire tenders livery, the mean rates are saved ib. Where the King shall have his third part out of the whole Page 330
THE NINTH BOOKE. WHere a subsequent Indenture may di∣rect uses in a precedent recovery Page 331 Where an averrment of other uses may be made ib. A common essoyne is allowable in Dower Page 332 In a Writ of Dower who may plead deteinment of Chartars Page 333 The Beasts of the Termor are distreined, and an avowry made upon a meere Stranger, what remedy for the Termor Page 334 No distresse for damage feasant, if the Cattell be chased out ib. What ancient Franchises ought to have allowance Page 335 What priviledges are extinct, if they returne to the Crowne ib. Where the Tenure, and where the seisin is tra∣versable Page 336 A difference when one Executor refuseth, and when all doe Page 337 They can bring no actions before probate Page 338 What power the Ordinary hath over the goods of the intestate ib. See 21. H. 8. c. 5. touching granting administra∣tions Page 339 The grant of the Stewardship of the Mannor of D. good, without naming the County where it lyeth ib.
Where such a Grantee may make a Deputy with∣out expresse power Page 339 Where Non user is a forfeiture of an Office Page 340 What Writs, Vi & armis, are good, Causa cau∣sans, and Causa causata ib. What words amount to a Release Page 341 If it appeare, that the Nusans is to the damage of the Plaintiffe, he needs not shew it, he may a∣bate the Nusans if he will ib. Westm. 2. c. 24. extends not to the Alienee of the alienee ib. How conspirators may be punished before acqui∣tall Page 342 Conspiracies punishable before Execution must have foure incidents ib. What Act shall be said to be a Nusans, as a Lime∣pit, &c. Page 343 What things requisite to convict a man of Libel∣ling ib. A man needs not to shew that which lyeth not pro∣perly in his notice Page 344 Much noteable matter touching Indictments, and a Serjeants duty Page 344, &c. Commissioners to examine witnesses, are not bound strictly to the Letter Page 346 What the duty of a Commissioner is, and how he must demeane himselfe Page 347 Whither a Feme Covert be within the S
of Westm. 2. c. 35. ib. What Marriage is within that Statute Page 348 A surrender made by a Copy-holder by Letter of Attorney is good ib. What authorities may be Executed by Attorney ib. VVhere the Act must be done in the name of the authorizor Page 349 VVhere an accord is a good plea, and what is re∣quisite thereunto Page 349, 350 VVhat Act shall be adjudged murder, Ex eventu Page 351 VVhere an Attornement shall bind an Infant ib. An action of the Case lyeth against Executors for the Testators Debt Page 352 VVhere a man may wage his Law Page 353 VVhat words shall be adjudged a good considera∣tion Page 354 VVhat Offices grantable for yeares, and by what Acts Offices may be forfeited, and where the King may seise without Scire facias Page 355, 356 Copy-hold estates are within 4. H. 7. of fines Page 356 Disseissor of Copy-hold levyes a fine, what time the Lord hath ib. VVho may enter without command to avoid a fine Page 356, 357 A plea by an administratrix of fully administred,
must be certeine Page 358 VVhere an Allegation generally of Covin, is good ib. A commoner Copy-holder may have an Action of the Case for the losse of his Common, so he may distreine damage feasant ib. A Baron of Scotland shall be tried by Commons of England Page 359 See the diverse Resolutions of difficulties arising upon the Indictment of the Lord Sanchar, and others Page 359, 360 Cases in the Court of Wards. The Kings release doth not extinguish a service inseparable Page 361 VVhen the Land moveth from a Subject, and the Tenure is changed, the new Tenure shall be as neere the ancient as may be ib. VVhere the particular estate is out of 32. H. 8. no wardship accrueth to the King, by advance∣ment of him in remainder, otherwise of a re∣version, for he is Tenant Page 362 VVhat words are sufficient to create an estate taile Page 363 The Kings possibility shall not devest a VVardship vested Page 364 The reviving of an ancient Tenure preferred be∣fore the reservation of a new ib. By death of the father before livery sued, & after tender
The King looseth primer seisin, but no meane rates Page 365 Of a fruitlesse reversion, a wardship, but not pri∣mer seisin ib. Where the saving in 32. H. 8. giveth ward and primer seisin Page 366 A Mensnalty cannot be suspended in part, and in esse for part by the act of the party, but it may by Act of Law, or a third person ib. There are foure manner of Avowries Page 367 What Act is a good delivery of a Deed, or of sei∣sin of Land ib. One may have an estate taile which cannot dis∣cend Page 368 Three manner of Confirmations Page 369 THE TENTH BOOKE. WHat things requisite to the Founding of an Hospitall, see at large Page 371 An estate taile barred by recovery in value with∣out recompence Page 374 A Feme Covert shall not loose her Land by any conclusion, without examination upon a Writ in Court. ib. Tenant for life suffers a recovery, and he in re∣mainder in taile is vouched, the reversion in fee is barred Page 375 The devise of a terme to one for life, the re∣mainder to another for life, is good, as an Executory devise Page 376
The first Devisee cannot barre him who hath the Executory devise ib. Assent to the first devise is an assent for all ib. Such an executory devise not grantable over ib. but it may be extinguished by release to the first Devisee ib. Qui destruit medium destruit finem Page 377 If a Recusant grant the next avoidance before conviction, it is void by 3. Jacobi. for he is disabled from the beginning of the Session, &c. Page 378 Covin shall not be presumed, if it be not aver∣red ib. A private Act shall be taken as it is Pleaded ib. What grants of Offices by a Bishop are void by 1. Eliz. except for twenty one yeares, or three lives, and what Circumstances requisite Page 380 Praerogativa Regis, c. 15. excepts Knights fees, and advowsons and indowments, all other appendants now passe by grants, and so doe they in Case of Restitution Page 381 A Corporation aggregate may make a surrender in Law, not in Deed Page 382 The Jurisdiction of the Marshalsea, and the rea∣sons thereof Page 382, 383 About 4. E. 3. the Court of Kings Bench became resident Page 383
A good diversity where the Court hath Jurisdi∣ction, but proceed, In verso ordine, and where they have not Jurisdiction, there all they doe is Coram non judice, and void Page 383, 384 Diverse abstruse points resolved, some at the com∣mon Law, and severall upon the Statutes of 32. & 34 H. 8. of wills Page 385, 386 VVhat Colour is, and where it must be given Page 388 VVhere a privy interest, although he claime but part must shew the first Deed, except he claim meerly by Law Page 388, 389 VVhere a man may have a freehold discendible Page 390 A warranty barres no estate which is not displa∣ced, at the time of &c. ib. A warranty cannot inlarge an estate, where it may be given in evidence Page 391 VVhat Obligations made to Sheriffes are within the Statute of 23. H. 6. Page 391 Forma verbalis, & Forma legalis, or Essen∣tialis Page 392, 393 The time of granting a Tales, and when it is well granted Page 396, 397 The proper place of a reservation is after limi∣tation of the estate Page 397 Increase of services is betweene very Lord, and very Tenant Page 398 VVhen Lands shall be said to be concealed from the K. 398, 399
A man shall have costs in all cases where hee re∣cover dammages Page 400 Where a man shall recover damages and costs also, ib. Where to the writ of Inquiry, and to the verdict, and judgement, ib. Where insufficient verdict may be supplyed by a writ of Inquiry, and where it cannot, a good difference, Page 401 A difference between auncient Corporations, and new, in matter of Misnosmer, Apices Juris, non sunt Jura, Page 401, 402 Which is the legall time of payment of Rent, Page 402 If payment be in the morning, and the lessor dye at noone, this is satisfactory against the heire but not against the King, ib. Where the lessee shall hold rent free for a quar∣ter, Page 402 Where Damages may be assessed intirely, and where not, Page 403, 404 What words passe under the name of Latine, Page 404 Where by death of one of the Plaintiffes after summons and severance the writ abateth, di∣vers good diversities, Page 404, 405 A Qu. impedit praesentare ad medietatem Ec∣clesiae, where good, ib.
Cases upon the Commissions of Sewers. Where the Commissioners may subvert a Cawsey, and where not, Page 406 If a wall be subverted by a sodaine inundation, the Commissioners may taxe all equally who have damage thereby, ib. Otherwise if it come by neglect of him who ought to doe it, ib. If the Commissioners have power to make a new River, and a generall taxe, so much upon eve∣ry Towne for doing thereof, Page 407 What is a good revocation of old uses, and limita∣tion of new. Page 409 THE ELEVENTH BOOK. A Difference between a disability absolute, and temporary, or personall, Page 411 The grant of the office of Auditor to two is good, Page 412 What offices grantable in reversion, ib. Where the Jurors may assesse damages severally, Page 413 Where one shall have an attaint that is a stranger to the issue, ib. Where a writ of Enquiry shall issue, Page 414 The plaintiffe shall have judgement, de meliori∣bus damnis, ib.
The conclusion of a plea is not traversable, Page 415 In every issue there must be an affirmative, and a negative, ib. The Impropriation sufficient in the life of the In∣cumbent, ib. VVhere the witnesses are not punishable for per∣jury Page 416 Perpetuall unity a discharge, and what requisite thereunto. ib. VVhat prescription for tithes of houses is good, ib. A customary Mannor may be holden of another Mannor. Page 417 VVhat variance in the name of a Corporation doth vitiate. Page 418 VVhat devise of socage by tenant is Capite is good. Page 419 An Ejectione firmae of tithes without shewing their kinds, not good. ib. If a deed be rased, the obligor may plead Non est factum. Page 420 A diversity where it is rased by the obligee him∣selfe, and where by another. ib. VVhere Clergy allowable at the Common law, and where at this day, copious and excellent matter, Page 421 VVhere an Errour lyeth not before the finall Judgement. Page 423
A fine by the Stewart of a Mannor where it is well assessed. Page 425 VVhere the Lord may destreine for it without prescription. ib. VVhere an action shall abate in part, and where for the whole. Page 426 Notwithstanding the exception trees remaine par∣cell of the Inheritance. ib. A thing in possession cannot be parcell of a reversi∣on upon an estate for life. Page 427 None may be prohibited by the common law to use any trade. Page 428 An ordinance by a Corporation against law, is void. ib. How an Ejectione firmae must be brought, Page 429 Although the dammages are not well assessed, yet the Plaintiffe may have judgement. ib. Much variety of Learning touching Recusancy, and upon the severall Statutes concerning them, Page 429, 430 Master and Fellowes of a Colledge restrained to grant by 13. Eliz. what statutes doe binde the King. Page 432 Some grants to the King void, and some voi∣dable. Page 433 VVhere acceptance of Rent doth barre, and where not. Page 434 Tenant in taile after possibility of &c. hath a
greater estate in quality, then tenant for life not in quantity. Page 434, 435 VVhat priviledges belong to his estate. Page 435 A lease without impeachment of wast, what pas∣seth thereby. ib. A monopoly is against law, and hath three inci∣dents against the weale publique. Page 436 What fees belong to the office of Master of the Ordnance. Page 427 In the Kings Case the law maketh a privity to be accomptable. ib. For what causes a Citizen may be disfranchised. Page 438 The 3. Book, fol. 9. Dowties Case. A Difference where the first certainty is false in a grant, and where the first is true, and the second false. Page 439 Where lands are in the Q. by 33. H. 8. c. 20. without seisure. ib. Fol. 11. Sir William Harberts Case. What remedy for debts at the common law, and when the body and lands became liable there∣unto. Page 440, 44
In all actions, vi et armis, the body was subject unto Imprisonment, and so for debt at the Kings suite. Page 441 The heirs of the conisser shall not have contribu∣tion against a purchasor. ib. Changes reall doe not survive, but personall doe. Page 442 Three Errours there moved, but not resolved. ib. FINIS.
