C6049 12259515 57793
ΣΤΡΑΤΟΛΟΓΙΑ OR THE HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH CIVIL VVARRS, In English Verse. Containing a brief Account of all Fights, most Skirmishes, Stratagems and Sieges in ENGLAND. From the very first Originall of our late Warres, till the Martyrdome of King Charles the First of blessed Memory. By an Eye-Witnesse of many of them. A. C. Alta sedent Civiles vulnera Dextrae. LONDON, Printed, for Joseph Cranford, at the Castle and Lyon in St. Pauls Church-yard. 1660
TO THE Right Honourable AND Truly Noble CONYERS DARCY, Lord Darcy, Meynell and Conyers. THrice noble Sir, pardon this bold addresse, In that my soaring Muse pitch'd on no lesse A Patronage, than your Renouned Name. Imboldned hereto was I, 'cause your Fame Recorded is amongst those Hero's; who The Royall Cause maintain'd against a Foe Under pretences specious that Rebell'd. VVhen (yet a Boy) your Colours I beheld And Regiment so gallant by you rais'd Even by my Infant-Muse your worth was prais'd,
An Actor on this Bloody Scene you were, And an eye-witnesse of most Fields fought here That blood you lost your valour may declare; Your judgement this, that no pretence (though fair) Your intellect could blind; your Faithfulness In that you fought, till that of Souldiers lesse, Under your tattered Colours did appear, Then Cinquefoils in your honours Colours were. Wounds you receiv'd, and much of blood did lose, VVhilst on the field, your life you did expose To do your Soveraign service. Sure that blood Expended in a cause Royally good Your Honour is; your wounds then chains of gold, Are Ornaments more glorious to behold. Your sufferings since the VVarres who hath not known? You paid both for your Souldiers, and your own Loyalty, nor would your brave mind submit To composition, till much mov'd to it, By your most vertuous Lady's prayers and tears, Your name the last in that black Roll appears. (Except the martyr'd Slingby's) none there are, Of all your Honour'd House engag'd in VVarre Against your King: these things induc'd my Muse, You (as the fittest person) Sir to chuse, To patronize these her first rude Essayes. Let not oblivion cancel the due praise (It's the Debenters we are like to have) Of all those Sons of Mars, and Souldiers brave.
That for their Soveraign fought and suffer'd too, In this they live, whilst this doth live by you. Your Honours most humble and most devoted in all service AN. COOPER.
THE EPISTLE TO THE READER, EXpect not, Reader, this Book should impart, The Flourishes of Rhethorick, or of Art; Such polite Strains do not indeed become The Camp; nor suit the Trumpet or the Drum. The more refined Muses have with Mars No intercourse, Society, commerce. Blunt Language doth in truth the best declare, The dreadful fury of our Civil Warre. Rage, blood, and death, each Page herein they show Of Cities, Castles, Towns, the overthrow. Rapine, and plunder, all those sad effects, Wherewith a Civil Warre a Land infects.
☞ When first for Oxford, fully there intent, To study learned Sciences I went. Instead of Logicke, Physicke, School-converse, I did attend the armed Troops of Mars. Instead of Books, I Sword, Horse, Pistols bought, And on the Field I for Degrees then fought. My years had not amounted full eighteen, Till I on Field, wounded three times had been. Three times in sieges close had been immur'd, Three times imprisonments restraint indur'd. In those sad times these Verses rude were writ, For Poesie a season most unfit. Yet is my subject high: the Hystory true, Presented in this Book unto thy view. Well-nigh each Skirmish, Stratagem, Siege, fight, In these late Warres, we here present to sight. And if thou shalt accept these first Essayes, Shortly perchance we may in smoother Layes The second part of our sad Annals sing, Till the blest Restauration of our King. Who like the Sun after a dismal night, Of sad oppression, did restore both light And glory to these Nations ruinous, Whose Rising and illustrious shine on us. Lighted these Lines out from Oblivion's Cell, To which they were condemn'd, the world to tell, That though the Royal Party was Captiv'd, The best of Kings, of his blest life depriv'd,
Yet Oceans of Loyall blood was shed, Before bold Traytors this accomplished. But strange that we were beat, lest it be thought, Ʋpon great disadvantages we fought; The Parliament the Navy had procur'd: With them to side, all Armouries secur'd And Magazines, usurped the Kings Lands, Customes, Revenues, Rents into their hands, With Arms, and Coyn their men they could recruit, When ours of both indeed were destitute. But I transgresse the bounds of my intent, And thee from reading these our Warres, prevent. A. C.
THE ENGLISH CIVIL VVARRS. BOOK I. The Contents. See first a good, then a bad Parliament, The fatal causes of our discontent, The two Scotch expeditions; causes why, Ireland's Rebellion, Strafford's Tragedy, London tumultuous: The Kings brave intents Ireland for to releive; Hotham prevents, By Hulls denyall; which the King to take Forces combines: Meldrum on them doth make Two Sallies bold: Some Royalists are slain, The King for York from Hull retreats again. A noble Persons councell, some releife Contributes to the King, opprest with grief. SEE! where our English three Estates do sit, In Parliament: a Councel onely fit,
Our Nation to secure from bold abuse, To legal forme, injustice to reduce, To deleate bad; just laws to procreate, Publick assignes to guide and regulate, To act what may conduce to the renown, Both of the State, Religion, and the Crown; Englands Epitomie; representation, My Muse invites, excites to admiration! Thy noble Senate, Rome, my wonder was, Till this high Court their lustre did surpasse, As fair as Cynthia that pale Queene of night, Out-shined is, by Phoebus glorious light: If admiration did thy thoughts transport, From Rome's Terrestrial to Heavens glorious Court, Much more, Fulgentius, might thy ravish'd minde From this to Heaven's a quick transition finde, ☞ But what malignity, vitious excesse Is this, a Parliament cannot redresse, The body politick symptomes presents, That all these State-Physitians discontents, A dolorous Corasive we must indure, These sad distempered Nations to recure: Whilst head and members do indeed agree, A Parliament's a Soveraigne remedy To cure distempers, but if these discent, Each seemes to move out of their element; And such a motion must in the conclusion, (Being irregular) induce confusion.
The hands of food, the belly did deprive, (As in the fable) but how long survive? Those most ingrateful members, by and by, They with the dying belly also dye. Our Army's sad miscarriages must bee At Cades, Rochel, and the Isle of Rhes, All charg'd upon the King; when as the State Themselves made those designes unfortunate, By not allowing to his Majesty, Such supplements of Coin, and Souldiery, To mannage those most excellent designes, Unto some purpose: when the State declines The King to second, who can then expect, That brave attempts, should have a wish'd effect? Ship-monys, Poles, Taxes, Monopolies, Illegal Pressures, frequent subsidies, They charge the King to have without consent, Impos'd on us, out of his Parliament. But could our Royal Navies mannag'd bee, Commerce maintain'd; our Seas from Pyracy Be kept secure, and all out of no thing? Crows are not killed with an empty sling, Or may not Kings? when as the exigent Of state requires, without a Parliament, Impose such monies, without all abuse, Upon their subjects, for such Soveraign use? If not, then farewell Crown, and Royalty, Who would not rather a Plebeian bee?
But peace, as yet these things seem'd to represse, Which did prepose a vulgar happinesse, Till Vengeance eminent, Celestial Ire, Enflam'd three kingdomes in the fatal fire Of Warre: for blood these raging flames to quench Bright English Swords, brave English veines must drench Nothing but blood, dolorous Phlebotomie, Can cure poor England of this Lethargie, Hot was the Zeal (too hot for to be good) That must be quench'd with so much Christian blood. ☞ The King now presseth a Conformity, In Scotland, to our English Liturgy, Intent all his three Kingdomes to combine, In Uniformity of Discipline, Holding that Prelacy doth most agree, Both with the Scriptures and Antiquity; For in our English Sphere even then did shine, Such Prelates Orthodox, truely Divine, Whose learned works like blossoms redolent, Sweetly respire, an odoriferous sent; And if my genius real truth inspire, Their worths ensuing ages shall admire. That the Kings Order might acceptance finde, Some Scottish Bishops also are design'd For Privy Councellors: But detestation Of Prelacy posses'd the Scottish Nation, Shall their Presbytery now be substituted? To Prelacy the cause not pre-disputed?
This Dagon ne're their Altars shall infest, Their combin'd Synods boldly do Protest, This Liturgy much Popery did comprize, And did the Romish Missals sympathize, Boldly (though falsely) do the Scots relate, And with our Bishops thus expostulate, Shall Romish Missals have their tolleration? And Scotch Presbytery totall extirpation, Papists, than Calvinists lesse odious be, Rome, than Geneva to proud Prelacy. In audience of their Commons, Kirk, Estates, The King a Scotish Bishop imperates At Edenborough this Book for to repeat, ☞ With zealous fury: Furious zeal repleat. The Scots avow their general disaffections, By barbarous tumults; furious insurrections, Had not the Bishop's heels been his redresse, He sure had dy'd in that tumultuous presse. And that their zeal rebellious might appear, They rise in Armes, then covenant and swear Presbytery to defend, even with their blood: When as his Majesty this understood, (With this affront so high, who could dispence?) He vengeance doth avow in consequence, Upon the Rebells Prelacy disdaining, And this his Liturgies non-entertaining. Then to defend himself, and them to fright Into subjection, rather than to fight.
The King doth a defensive Army raise, Yet both by messages and wise delayes, Their furious zeal the King thought to allay, And their Ring-leaders curbe some other way, Then by the dint of Sword: but the more milde They finde the King, the Scots grow far more wilde Impudent, fierce, seditious, arrogant! What can induce such Zealots to recant? But England's ease, and peace here terminates, Recluded are those Iron-Temple Gates, Of Janus; angry Jove by frequent Thunder, Foretold those discontents that rent asunder This Monarchy: Hell's impious furies rage, Prodigious blazing-Comets, Starres, presage, England's sad fate, Arm'd Chivalry appear, Pransing upon the Clouds in full carrear, And huge Battalions of Arm'd Infantry, Marshal'd on the Etherial Canopy Of Heaven; with beating Drums, Colours displai'd And roaring Cannons, seeme for to invade Each other: Tragedy, Murther, Blood, Dearth, Declare Heaven's vengeance to rebellious Earth; Abortive, monsterous births of every kind, Are to presage the rage of Heaven design'd, Sea-monsters with innumerable swarmes Of Fishes; bids England now prepare for Armes, All Creatures our sad destinies disclose, Sounding Alarm's unto our future woes,
But though Pandora from her Box do vent, All the curs'd Symptomes of dire discontent. To England her ensuing miseries, Though Heaven, sea, land, and all things trumpetise Yet all cannot extract a just remorse, From England, her lov'd sins, for to divorce, Mens hearts obdure, impure, impenitent, Impious, Seditious, proud, malevolent, No Rethorick from such crimes can men perswade Ruine-portending Judgements to evade. ☞ Now Beat our English Drums, for Volunteers Royal Commissions, to our Nobles, Peers, Are given, to raise great forces in all parts, Kings oft mens hands command, when not their hearts To York in April these Commanders bring, This gallant Army to attend the King, Who there designes them Scotland to invade And Arundel's their Captain-General made. ☞ For Scotland now it's no time to recant, They vow for to maintain their Covenant Against the King, National devastation, Kirk-Disciplines intended alteration, Against proud Prelates, and the Kings design They now profess they did, and will combine, That their rebellion might it self discry Yet further; these their Frontiers Fortify, Leavy more Forces to defend their Land, Which Alexander Lesley doth command,
And to prevent the entrance of the King, Lesley to Kelsay doth his forces bring, From York with display'd Colours, beating Drums, To Barwick now the English Army comes, Where first the prospect of the Scots white Tents, Bold opposition to the King presents. For Carlile are design'd some Regiments; Whose in-rodes Lesley's vigillance prevents; Having a party there in readinesse, All such attempts expected to represse, Finding the Scots to fight thus resolute, With words, not Swords, the cause they'l now dis∣pute Our Grandees courage this doth much abate, No hopes Presbytery, to Episcopate. The River Tweed these Armies did divide, Who in their Quarters quietly recide, For some few months, and then strong Obligations Of Peace, concluded are betwixt the Nations. Both Armies to retreat and be disbanded, Are by the Generals of both parts commanded; ☞ But while the King for London's retrograde, The Scots their faithlesse faith again betray'd, And in their words an odium is discry'd, Unto that League confirm'd, pre-ratifi'd. Nor would the Scots their Forces now disband, But sleight the League, the Peace, the King's Com∣mand So much for their own ends, and by-respects, Scots faith upon advantages reflects.
New Articles they feigne wherein the King, So low in condiscentions they do bring, As never Monarch would (though quite subdu'd) On such dishonourable rearms conclude. Which when the King receiv'd, and read, said hee, Because my Forces all disbanded bee Will they abuse mee thus; can they pretend That wee, to these base tearms would condiscend? No said the King: London to'th' Tower is sent, Who did these forged Articles present; All Copies of which forg'd Pacification, The common Hangman burns; new preparation For Scotland's made: The King with new supplies Edenborough and Dun-Brittan fortifies, Those Scottish Merchants that in England Trade, Their Covenant for to abjure are made. The King having his Army new recruted, His Captain-general Strafford is deputed, The Scots their march For England do direct, Strafford's advance at Barwick to expect, His Excellence now in the North arriv'd, This was the first designe by him contriv'd, That Holland should passe Tweed, and there discry The Scotish Camp, number, Artillery, Who their Vant-guard on Dunsian hills espyes, Back with his Troopes for England then he flies, As though his Lordship with a panick fear, Had been surpriz'd to see the Scots so near,
The Scots their Camp dislodge, march thorow Tweed The English Force retreat, and do receed, The Scot Northumber-land; Strafford's design Is to fight Lesley on the banks of Tine; The Scots for Newburne streight direct their course Discover, Charge, and Rout the English Horse, After which running Charge, flying dispute, Through Tine, the Scot imboldned, makes pursute, After our English dispers'd Regiments, Rumours of Conquests are of large extents, New-Castle is deserted, whose wide Barrs, Stand open to the Scottish Conquerers, The Newcastilians can the Scots allow, In prospect of their walls to randevow, Their Drums they beat, their Colours they display, Their Trumpets sound; the Tryumphs of that day To celebrate; with Scottish Levites sweet, Thy ecchoing walls, New-Castle they do greet, The Army drawn to a form circular, The General in the mid'st 'gan to declare, In Scottish Rhethorick; learned Oratory; This speech ensuing, to augment their glory. ☞ Fellows in Armes, brave martialists combin'd England to conquer; Men by fate design'd, For better Climes then Scotland can afford, Fair England, England, on your hearts record, As your debenters for past misery, As your reward for future gallantry,
Each Loune shall have a Lady for his prize, Each Loune and Clowne England will Gentelize, Your Bonnets shall be chang'd to Beavers brave, For louzy gray, of Scarlet Cloaks yee's have, For Broangs, my Rooges, ye shall ha Boots most neat For Plads, bra Lads, ye shall ha Sutes compleat, For Cottages of Sods, Halls of square stone, And Lord it bravely, rule the roast alone, See, these wide gates, do our approach expect, As though they did our conquering Troops affect, Wee shall get riches, honours, Englands goods, View these bra Towns, fields fertle, christal floods Our Scottish Frith, equallity disclaims, To Northern Tine, much more to Southern Thames. Here are some Lads the Germaine wars ha seen, And in those sharpe encounters parties been, Who can as well, even as my sell record, Those sad vastations by the furious Sword, This English warr's a Theater for play, Face but the Louns, they'l span their gates away. This first Encounter doth good fate presage, The vanquish'd scarce with victors will engage. Hermaphrodites, virago's feminine, Cannot dispence with Martial Discipline, English effeminate, Pudding-fed Lads, Ken not the muckle worth obscur'd in Plads, Warres, vigills, Famins, tumults, frights, alarms, Will scar the Louns from dalliance, Ladies armes,
The muckle hardlinesse that warres comprize, Will soon these English Louns anatomize. Fresh-water Souldiers, milk-sops cannot fight, Our very looks them daunt; shroudly affright, On then, let's prosecute our conquering Fates, Delay breeds danger: Cow-hearts animates, Warres practise courage breeds, exempts dismay, Though now they quake to hear our Muskets play. ☞ From Bishoprick our Forces make recession, Now wholly yeelded to the Scots possession, In general our Grandees the Warres decline, As private favorites of the Scots design, But future blood-shed, ruine to prevent, Both Armys to a treaty now consent, First they conclude for two months, Armes cessa∣tion To pay the Scots the prefix'd times duration; North-humber, Dure-holme, Carlile, Westmore-Land Are all resign'd unto the Scot's command, For Winter-Quarters; Private wrongs, abuse Must not infringe the pre-concluded Truce, During the Peace in England. Merchandize, By sea and land the Scots may exercize, But Souldiers without Order, leave expresse, Must not from Quarters, wander or digresse. Thus rests the Armys, and thus Warres surce ase, Better than Warre, (though just) is impious Peace This may encourage others to Rebell, When as the Scots rewarded are so well;
The Scottish League, by this time, doth expire Paid, and reduc'd, their forces home retire; London the King incontinent forsakes, And into Scotland streight himself betakes, Not one auspicious look these Scots would cast, Upon their King, as he their Armies pas'd. Yet the Kings presence, in the Scottish State, Did their tumultuous madnesse much abate. ☞ Whilst here the King resides Ireland Rebels, And puts in practise those Hell-stamped spells, Plots Jesuitical: by barbarous death, Poor Protestants for to deprive of breath, Inhumane Tyrannies, deadly perswasions, Licentious rage, bloody insinuations, Infused are by numerous distribution, Into the Multitude, in execution; These bloody Plots to put joyntly conjur'd, To such attempts, Romes Locusts are inur'd; Two hundred thousand Protestants there dye, As sacrifices to Romes Tyranny, A Prologue to that Tragedy whose rage, Must be enacted on our English Stage. Phoebus th'Autumnal Equinoctial Line, Towards the Pole Antartick did decline, The sable Queen of the black-mantled night, Had fill'd her Semi-globe with borrowed light, And now to Thetis lap precipitate, Darknesse gave way these facts to perpetrate,
Darknesse, the works of darknesse to contrive, Gave way: yet did poor Protestants deprive Of all resistance; whom by multitudes, That mid-night in the night of death includes, Murther, death, rapine, barbarous butchery, A confus'd, dismal, hideous mid-night-cry, Did fill th' affrighted slumbering peoples ears; Fire from the burning Villages appears, With it's aspiring flames daring the sky, Whole familys of naked people flie Thinking those scorching flames for to prevent, Meet death, in the contrary Element, And are by thousands into waters forc'd, Whose souls and bodyes soon are there divorc'd, ☞ Whilst man and wife, securely arme in arme, Lye flumbering, clear devoid of thoughts of harm, A confus'd noyse them both doth terrifie, Listning, at length, they plainly do discry, The pitious plaints of poor injured wights, This from their sleep (though last) them both af∣frights, Up starts the man, opening the Casement wide, The Country round about on fire he spi'd, The naked people that came running by, Cry'd, Neighbour rise, flye for your life, oh! flye, This unsuspected, dismal accident, Dismaies them both, but see! incontinent, The Rebells break up doors, the house they fire, And sacrifice to their infernal Ire
The suppliant peoples lives: they violate The wife in sight of her now dying Mate, They dye their skins in blood, by barbarous power Their Maids and Virgins chaste they do deflower, Before their Mothers eyes, shame bids conceal, Those Barbarisms acted by their Popish zeal, For what they act, for what blood they expend, Commission from the King, the Rogues pretend, And when the Irish work's done, they professe, By force to London for to make accesse. To guard the King from Scotland to White-hall, And tame that Juncto Puritanicall. ☞ But this was an officious Popish lye, Those jealousies to widen, multiply, That were betwixt the King and Parliament, The King did such compliance, scorne resent; And would have queld (though with his bloods ex∣pence, This proud rebellion; Irish insolence. Thy wings (my Muse) though bloody, elevate, The Irish Sea, thou now must transvolate, Wash not thy plumes; thy bloody plumes may bee A Symptome of poor Irelands misery, And may extract remorse from hearts of stone, To hear thy queremonious plaints, and moan, Relief to grief, pray England distribute, What's Irelands now, may once be Englands sute. To London streight my dolorous Muse now flies. But few with Irelands grief there Sympathize,
For bold Petitions, by a multitude Of people barbarous, factious, savage, rude, Are brought each day into the Parliament, Faction, disorder, tumult, discontent Fills every place: Strafford, and Laud accus'd Of Treason are; the King himself abus'd, Aspers'd, injur'd, each of his words and deeds, Wrested, misconstru'd and from hence proceeds These jealousies, surmises, fears, that ring, In Vulgar ears, fomented 'gainst the King, By Canniballs, who Monarchy resent, Anarchy for to introduce intent. Hence Pamphlets, Scandals, base Libells flye, Plum'd with abuse of Royal Majesty, Because the King was moderate, gentle, meek, Like Aesop's Frogs, these his deposal seek; And may a Storke dominion o're them bear, That to a King so good; perfideous were. Few Straffords admired parts could imitate, The reason why, most him did emulate; This noble person, an ignoble crew, With Justice, Justice, in their mouth pursue, And prosecute to death; The King doth signe The fatal Bill, (though much he did decline) To passe his Royal (here scarce his) consent, And Strafford dyes for an expediment Of State: In Strafford was the King o'rethrown, With Strafford's ruine, he subscrib'd his own,
☞ Pym, Hamden, Hollis, Hasleridge and Stroad With scandals most injurious, daily load The King: whom when of Treason he accuses, The House to try them legally refuses; Can injur'd Majesty be pacifi'd, When his demands (so legal,) are deny'd, For then the King with his sole Guard attended, Came to the House, thought to have apprehended The Traitors; but alas, the Kings intent, Their absence purposely, did then prevent. All these are bad presages to suspect, That some did Monarchy now dis-affect, Such Symptomes have a dismal reference, Into their thoughts inward malevolence. Distempers will work out their malady, Depress'd but not oppress'd, such thoughts may be, Like furious winds seeking their rage to vent, Which in the concaves of the earth are pent, Having at length all obstacles extruded, Whereby their force impetuous was included, Rush out with too audacious insolence, And by their uncontrouled violence, Do curle the Oceans billows, bow the Woods, Blow from their Channels the dispersed floods, Untile the houses, Sacrilegiously, From Churches rent their leaden Cannopy, Jove scorning to obey, if Jove withstand, Till Aeolus do their retreat command,
Thus thoughts most turbulent till now supprest, Enforce their way from many a factious breast: Boldly their malice 'gainst the King they vent, Ambitious of eruption and extent. Conscience and councel must to power give way, To teach the Crown, the Gown now to obey, The peoples priviledges to dissolve, In Warre and Blood, this Nation to involve. Their Wills as laws on England to enforce; Unto the Sword our Statists take recourse. What stratagems had long time been projected, Come to their birth, and must be now effected. Forces they raise, yet under this pretence, The House to Guard, to be their own defence. And Essex o're their new Militia bands, By Order from the House, in chief commands. ☞ At this (high time) London the King forsakes, And unto York his journey streight he takes; From whence he certifies the Parliament, That his resolves for Ireland were intent, His presence would be a most Soveraign spell, The Rebells minds to charme, their force to quell: To his victorious Ensignes he doth vow, To make the proudest of such traitors bow: And in pursuance of such high intents, He in the North will raise some Regiments, Which from Hulls Magazine all Arm'd must be For Ireland, to attend his Majesty.
☞ 'Twas not the King then (as some him bely) That did obstruct from Ireland that supply, That might those Rebels Armies have subdu'd, And tam'd that Savage, Popish multitude. To York the Northern Gentry summon'd are, To whom the King his purpose doth declare, Commanding their attendance, most obey, With these the King for Hull streight takes his way Who to the gates with this Traine makes address, ☞ But Hotham there denys his King accesse. Requesting him not to demand what hee, Cannot now grant without disloyalty To th' Parliament: The King soon makes reply, Our entrance, good Sir John, do not deny, I shall passe by, this your affront to mee, And our admission shall excuse, when wee To th' Parliament our next addresse shall make; With Hotham this milde Rhetorick will not take: Wherefore the King him stubborn Traitor calls, And vows hee'l hang him up upon those walls, That his example may a terrour bee, To all such haughty traiterous rogues, as he. Like to a stream whose shoure augmented force. Scornes obstacles that may retard his course, And with his swelling waters potent Tyde, O're banks and all retards doth bravely glide, Rowls down huge stones, eradicates each tree That to his feircer current lets may bee,
So angers Tyde in the Kings minde swel'd high, That him Hulls entrance Hotham should deny, Especially he griev'd for Irelands grief, By this depriv'd of his resolv'd relief. Hotham, he Traitor doth proclaim, then make Warlick provision Hull by force to take, Yet first complaints unto the Parliament, Of this most bold affront the King had sent, Wherein he Hothams Treason did decry, Whom with his Act, the States do justifie. This more incens'd the King, shall Hotham bee In his rebellion countenanc'd, and hee Expos'd to such affronts? he doth professe By dint of Sword these wrongs for to redresse. ☞ His Proclamations through each county fly, Plum'd with complaints of injur'd Majesty, His loyal Subjects all to animate, With him to joyne, these wrongs to vindicate. The gentry to contribute these, request Assistance to their wronged Kings behest, That his intents both just and real are, For Laws, Religion, Rights, he doth declare. These proclamations many gallants Court To York, now for Commissions to resort; Wherein short time no despicable force Convened is, of Armed Foot and Horse. But while the King pursues this Martial game, The State, his Acts Illegal do Proclaim,
Prohibiting all men in any wise, For to abet the Kings known enterprize. Thus Proclamations, Proclamations thwart, Commands oppose Commands, Art crosseth Art, The King commands, the State forbid to Arme, Who do the King, who not the State, from harme Vow to secure; Traitors both parts declare, Who do their mandates crosse, opponents are. What County can pretend immunity, From Proclamations vain Logomachy, The States bid Arme for them; the King says no, What shall the perplext dubious Vulgar do? If Arme you must, to void neutrality, 'Tis but your duty, aid his Majesty; Let not their vain pretences you dis-swade, Still their pretext Rebells Religion made. Whilst these transactions are in agitation, The King for Hulls Siedge, makes strong preparation Whither from York his march he now doth take Hotham knows well, his life lyes at the stake, Therefore his rusty Cannons he doth clense, Putting the Town in posture of defence, Brasse-Pieces mount, the stoutest Townsmen Arms Promising reparation of all harmes Sustain'd in Hulls assistance: By and by, The Centinels the Kings approach descry, Th' Allarum's given: Hotham doth then decree, That all the water-sluces drawn shall bee,
The Country's drown'd, men, walls, and Seas com∣bine, To frustrate this his Majesties design. ☞ Meldrum a Souldier of no small repute, But yet a Scot, the Parliament depute, Hotham's assistant; who a party takes, Of the most hardy Townsmen, and out-makes A sudden sally, where the King he beats, Who with some loss, to Beverly retreats; But not long after this, the Parliament A party strong for Hull, from London sent: Meldrum incourag'd by this new supply, Will of a second bout, the fortune try: His choicest men hee soon together calls, And issuing out, on the Kings Leagure falls, Whereof some scores, in their new trenches dy, The rest in haste (disordered much) do fly; A hot pursuit after whom Meldrum makes, At Aulaby, the Kings Magazin hee takes; Some barns, and houses, there this Scotch Knight fires And then for Hull, his worship, back retires. ☞ The King perceiving all attempts in vain, Against the Town of Hull, for York again Retreats: But O! who can his thoughts express? How can hee now (though milde) passion suppress? What shall hee do? what will bee the event Of these beginings, thus malevolent? Reflects, his looks no reverential awe Upon Spectators? Dare his Subjects draw
Their Swords against their Prince: shall he dispence Further with their Rebellious insolence? ☞ But whilest the King is in this self-dispute, A Noble person did him thus salute: By Traitors shall your patience be abus'd, Your commands sleighted; your demands refus'd? Courage take Sir, Divine and humane laws, Loudly proclaim the justice of your cause, See what a train of Lords do here attend, In your behalf, their dearest blood to spend. the Parliament us Traitors doth proclaim, Because to your assistance thus we came, And though they speak not out, their acts declare, They are intent upon you for to Warre. Why raise they Armies? what is your intent, Us and your self to such a Parliament Thus to expose? our Swords must us defend, Or farewell life and fortunes, Strafford's end Wee may expect: Traitors let's them declare, And make provision for defensive Warre, A thousand lives who would not rather lose, Then see such Rebels you and yours depose? To see rapacious Harpies ruinate, This flourish of our peace, Religion, State, Are you so credulous these not to fear, When Treason 'tis, to you for to adhere? Review the Actions of those Monarches brave, That as your Predecessors Reigned have,
See how the proudest of their foes did quake, Even at their frowns, which did whole Kingdomes shake, Whose very names, their Subjects did adore, Reputing them not men, but somewhat more. Then such Heroicks courage now assume, Let Traitors know they do too much presume Upon your Lenity; Sir, make them fear, And know the Lion in your armes can tear. ☞ At this the London Juncto Parliament Traitours proclaimed are; The King's intent Is for the South-west parts to take his way, Posting before Commissions of Array, Commanding quick attendance from all those In Arms, that would not bee reputed foes. Newcastle's General for the North design'd, Whose influence on those parts, soon combin'd An Army Gallant: Thus to Civil War Fully resolved, now both parties are. But so my Muse, with Morpheus power possest, Take's Leave (would England could do so) to rest. Finis Libri Primi.
THE ENGLISH CIVIL VVARRS. BOOK II. The Contents. A short dis-swasive from this Civil Warr, The King sets up his Standard: doth declare Of his defensive Arms, the Innocence, Londons Zeal, for the Parliaments pretence; Essex his Force to Coventry doth bring, Worcester Fight: The Battail at Edge-hill. ROuze up brave Martial Muse, prepare for fight, Let Mars desist the Cyprian Courts delight; Bellona's Trumpets cals our Troops to field; Pallas advanceth, arm'd with Spear and Shield. Combates, not Councels, Muse, thou must rehearse, Warr, Blood, and Death, are subjects of my Verse. England, O England! do not thou distain, This flourish of thy Peace with Blood: refrain
These Civil Wars, whose sad effects wee see, In self-divided, ruin'd Germany. Did Scotland tremble? did the Irish flee? Was France once Tributary unto thee? Renowned England, did victorious Fame, From India, unto India, post thy name? From cold Arcturus, to th' Antartick Sands; Thy admiration, England, fill'd all Lands: Whilst Providence, and valour, forreign foes Vanquish'd:shall home-bred discord, work thy woes No Councell, nor yet Rhetorick can asswage, Uncivil Civil Warrs, tumultuous rage. The furious Sword, scorns to obey the Gown; Some with the State, some with the imperial Crown Take part; known Ensigns, Ensigns, do defie, And English blood; Englands Cross red must die. If Warr wee must? why do wee not assay, On Asian ground our Colours to display? Mahomet's dam'd Impostures to expell, To their curs'd Author, down to Pluto's cell; Why do wee not out of the Seginor's hand, Regain our Title to the Holy-Land? What, might wee not, with lesser bloods expence, Have quel'd the Turkes aspiring insolence; Raz'd Constantinople's world-commanding Towers, With her Seraglio, Aegypt might bee ours. And all the treasures of the spacious East, By our victorious Armies bee possest.
As that brave Tartar, lets our Force ingage, Bajacet-like into an Iron cage; Earths greatest Monarch's captiv'd power to bring, Or let's advance against the Spanish King. His Eighty eight's Armado's curs'd designe, To vindicate our Forces let's combine, Heaven can but grosper such a brave attempt; Heaven that from Spain's Invasion did exempt This Island, for to bee Spain's dreadfull scourge, Till all those Martyrs bloods shee shall disgorge: Suck'd in by inquisition-Butchery; Or let's goe set the inslav'd Indians free: Sail thither may wee, with the tide and flood Of vengeance-crying murthered Indians blood. Why march wee not to curbe that Prelates pride? Whose Scarlet vestments in the blood are died Of Martyr'd Christians? doubtless wee may fear, His influence is too too powerfull here. These sad incitements to this Civil Warr, Hatch'd surely by his Romish Locusts are. That Sweed Heroick to his high renown, Vow'd to devest him of his triple-Crown: And from his chair-infallible, by force, That Beast so much admir'd for to divorce; And but that death, too cruel did prevent, Doubtless hee had accomplish'd his intent. England, O England! Civil Wars decline, And prosecute that noble Sweeds designe:
Hoise up thy Sailes for the Italian shore, The airy Alpes, resolve for to march o're. Fall down like Thunder into Italy, Th' affrighted-Scarlet Conclave let's make flye; And these high Walls, wherein the Beast doth trust, Let's rase and level with that bloody dust Whereon they stand; in blood they founded were, Ruddy with blood, their cement doth appear; Rape, Superstition, Fraud, Idolatry, Polythism, Murther, Theft, Theomachy, Hypocrisie, Pride, Witchcraft, Fornication, Adultery, Sodoms-lov'd-Abomination, Are their curs'd Superstructures; Powers divine, Except propitious, unto this designe Vengeance divine, our Cannons best will bee, Upon those Walls, t' inforce a Battery; Needs must wee conquer in so just a Warr, Where foes design'd by Heaven to ruine are. ☞ Reason should with the wise bee Prevalent, What, have not Civil Wars a sad event? No joyfull Triumphs in such Warrs have place, No brave exploits do here the Conquerours grace. No spoiles are taken from the captiv'd foes, But such, as even, whereby the Conquerours lose. Brother, doth Brother, unto death betray, Fathers, their Sons, and Sons their Fathers slay. Maids are deflowr'd, and Matrons chaste misus'd, Young-men for Souldiers prest; Old-men abus'd.
Those treasures that industrious Peace acquir'd, Exhausted are, the Villages are fir'd; Cities dis-peopled, Castles ruin'd bee, Friends even from friends (as from the Plague) shall flee: Justice, Laws, and properties, all stand As Ciphers, at the furious sword's command. Servants will of their Masters, Masters bee; From Tinkers, even the Constables shall flee: The basest men will proudly dominere, Rant, drinke, whore, plunder, strike, curse, damn, and swear. Oxen, Sheep, Horses, all that you possess, Souldiers will take, and if you seek redress, Perhaps you may bee cudgel'd by a slave, Or else imprison'd, and thats all you'll have. O what affronts! what wrongs! what violence! Must all sorts suffer, under the pretence Of Enemies; when, whom Souldiers dispose, They make at pleasure, either friends or foes; Nay the wrong'd people cannot bee assur'd, By whether party they were thus injur'd: Your foe, you shall not know, nor yet your friend, Such sad distractions Civil warrs attend. The Sword scorns councel (list) Drums beat I hear, The Trumpet sound, arm'd Horse-men do appear: The King from York marcheth with all his Force, To Nottingham they streight direct their course; Where first upon this Civil Warrs account, The King his Standard Royal doth amount;
And standing under't in the Armies view, His glistering Sword, hee from his scabbard drew, Which brandished about his head, hee said, ☞ Fellows in Arms, here in your Soveraigns aid Conveen'd, you to inform I shall not need, What to this Parliament wee did conceed, More than our Royal ancestors had done, (Thinking the most averse for to have wone, By acts of Grace) we granted: But behold! Our Condiscentions make these men more bold, Things to demand against a Kings renown, And what would they have now, except my Crown? When all such acts of Grace did vain appear, Wee left them, and resolv'd for Ireland were; Reveng'd upon those Rebels to have been, Whilst these into their Errours more had seen; Intending then at Hull to arme our Guard, Hulls entrance wee, by Hotham were debar'd, From Ireland; Ireland now Intomb'd in grief, This did obstruct our then-resolv'd relief. And when to Hull our next address wee made, With fire and sword, our Camp hee did invade; Wishing our Person in the number, where Some scores of our League subjects murthered were. By Proclamation they prohibit all, From their Allegiance to our Soveraign call; And whence do these affronts so numerous spring, But even from those, that mee a Glorious King
Pretend to make; The men presage my Fate, Onely the time they seek to antidate. But this (at which he shook his glistering Sword) Even this, our best redress must now afford, Traiterous, here, their proceedings wee declare, Denouncing Warr, 'gainst them, and all that are Their Fautors and Abettors; know, wee must Souldiers, to courage, and our swords now trust, Through wounds, blood, death our passage now doth lye To our detained Rights: resolve to dye VVith me, my Lords, and Souldiers ere we yeild, Essex that traiterous Cockoo's in the field: A numerous Army 'gainst us he doth bring, Are these League Subjects that will fight their King? My Lords (as you your lives or fortunes love) Your utmost interest, Force to raise, improve, For fight we must, and if the day we loose, Of us and ours, the Conquerours will dispose: Your Regiments with speed, my Lords compleat, I even presage, wee Essex shall defeat. And you, my Nephews, whose Heroick might, Hath been approv'd in many a bloody fight Beyond the Seas (with that hee cast his eye On Rupert and Prince Morice standing by; In England late arriv'd) Princes wee must, To your Heroick skill and prowess trust The conduct of our Horse. Rupert repli'd, Uncle, what's in our power, you may confide,
VVee shall effect; fear not but wee shall bring, The proudest Rebells, you to own as King. ☞ At this the flourish'd Trumpets that surround The King this while; commanded are to sound, VVhose sweetest Levits from the Rocks so near, VVith airy Eccho's ravish every ear. Then off the Troops to march commanded are, To Shrewsbury the intended seat of VVarr: Rupert and Morice late arrived here, Now in the Fronts of armed Troops appear. Rupert the elder, of complexion fair, Yet somewhat swarthy, of brown-coloured-hair, Of body slender, yet indifferent tall, Of minde couragious, wondrous fair withall: Scorning, both fears and dangers, on he went, Yet inconsiderate, in the management Of his bold charge: which prov'd indeed to us In many fields disadvantagious; His forwardness excus'd, Europe ne're bred, One who more nobly Chavalry on led. ☞ Morice more corpulent, yea, and more tall, Yet not so bloody, and so tragicall: Full as couragious, not so unadvis'd, More fortunate in what hee enterpris'd: VVhose prowess, and whose skill in feats of VVarr, VVere such as might renown a Souldier. ☞ Out breaks the War, with uncontrouled Rage, Great Lords, and Gentry, on both parts ingage;
Yet more of these the Royal cause maintain, As not deluded with pretences vain. But of Plebeians less intelligent, More do adhear unto the Parliament; Their Intellectuals hood-wink'd and captiv'd, By those pretences, specious then contriv'd. ☞ What City, Town, House, Castle now was free, But fortifi'd, and Garrison'd must bee? What Fields with Grain, Mountains with Flocks, that were Flourish'd of late; now terrible appear With armed Camps: what deadly Engins wrought? Sure not more Fields, than bloody battails fought Hath England now: try all the Sword would make, If that of blood, it could a surfeit take. ☞ London! what Martial fury thee possest, That thus with madness not to bee express'd, Against thy King, so boldly dost ingage, VVhat Hellish fury did their hearts inrage? To strive who should most forward bee in arms, How did they flock? adjoyn themselves by swarms To Essex Colours; what did they intend? VVhat, was Rebellion? or was Zeal their end? VVhat, were they weary of that Regiment? The loss of which (if lost) they'll much repent; VVhat do they think the name of a free State? More advantagious, or more fortunate, Or will Commerce, or Trading flourish more, Monarchy routed out, then't did before?
London, O let not such conceits thee blinde! All to thy expectation thou shalt finde Quite contrary: But what is it indeed, From Superstitious Rites for to bee free'd That thou dost thus ingage: Rebellion had Alwaies religion's Cloak; wherewith shee clad Her monsterous body: All the world shall see, Religion but a meer pretence to bee In these sad VVars: London will bee as proud, Her Sins will in the Ears of Heaven as loud Sound▪ If shee had desired Presbytery, As now under much-hated Prelacy; That much pretended, wish'd for reformation, Shall have a most apparent confutation, From those curs'd crimes, London will exercise, And grant her even what Form shee can devise For Government, either in Church or State, But whether doth my Muse thus deviate? Rupert the leading having now acquir'd, Of such a Party as his heart disir'd; Couragious Gallants, who did scorn to fly, The face of even the proudest enemy, Thought that his smaller parties fortitude, Might ballance Essex's numerous multitude: O! that their temperance had but equalis'd Their valour: would Rupert had exercis'd A stricter Discipline, and not by force Suffered his stout (though too licentious) Horse;
Coine, Arms, and Horses to extort from those, That doubtless (but for this) nere the Kings foes Had prov'd: Indeed plundring, intemperance, Bacchus his bowles; Venus her daliance Were of the Royal party the sole bane, How many men surpris'd! how many slain! Oft in their cupps; want! want! of discipline, Our Cause (though just) made many to decline. Yet our Commanders, this to tolerate; The want of pay, did thus necessitate. Nor long to us, did any such adhear, Who in their service mercenary were. ☞ By this time Essex numerous Forces were Drawn out of London, to North-Hampton, where They wait their General's coming: and indeed, In number three to one, they did exceed The Kings: So zealously was London bent Against the King, to aid the Parliament. Essex arrived, with his Army now, Coventry, Warwick, and North-Hampton too Did fortifie: Glocester then did stand For th' Parliament, under Massies command. To Worcester Rupert his Troops doth bring, Thinking that City, strongly for the King To fortifie; But Essex Horse so near, Prevents his stay and resolutions there, Nevertheless, both parties now so near, Scorn to retreat, as men surpris'd with fear,
Before their Gallantry they have express'd, By skirmishing most fiercely they contest, They ride up close, and boldly do give fire, In one anothers bosoms, then retire. Others advancing, do their rooms supply, Their discharg'd Pistols, at the heads do fly Then of each other, and incontinent Then hand to hand, unto the Sword they went, Some giving, some receiving many a wound, Till many a man lay gasping on the ground. But Rupert causeth a retreat to sound, Lest that the numerous foes should him surround, And from this skirmish, up his Troops doth bring To Shrewsbury, for to attend the King, Sands now his Prisoner, whose whole Regiment, To Rout and Ruine, in this Skirmish went. That famous River that Sabriua's name, From her drown'd in it, doth as yet retain, Almost surrounds the Town of Shrewsbury, His Magazin, Mint, Coin, Artillary, His Person too, here did the King confide, A Town by Art, and Nature fortifi'd: ☞ During the King's (though short) residing here His smaller Forces much augmented were, So that hee takes the field, fully intent For London, but this Essex doth prevent, Who with his Force, at Worcester did lye, And hearing that the King was marching by,
Draws out his Army, and to Coventry After the King, directly marcheth hee Resolv'd to fight: Such preparations are, Made England to ingage in Civil War; Whose desperate prologue, Muse thou must prepare, Indoleful accents, now for to declare. Now Phoebus did from th' Equinoctial Line, His course to the Antartick Pole decline, Nor could the cooler air yet qualifie, Mens hotter Zeal, and desperate fervency To Civil Wars; this Fire alone must bee Quenched with blood, dolorous Phlebotomie. In Warwick-Shire there lies a spacious Plain, (Pitty that Civil blood should it distain) Nere Keinton, call'd the vale of the Red Horse, Where General Essex, with his numerous force Was now arriv'd: The Royallists hard by Upon Edge-Hill, their near approach discry, And there their Troops most gallantly display, Putting their Battaile, quickly in Array. Linsey was Captain General for the King, But Ruthen ordered their embattailing, The Valliant Linsey with his Pike in hand, Led the main Body: Rupert did command Those Gallant Troops, placed in the right wing, Bravely the left Carnarvan on did bring. Essex this while embattailed did stand, His right Battallions Balfore did command.
Ramsey his left: Hurry this Day did serve In the right wing, and was Balfore's reserve: Essex a while his Infantry did head, Till Meldrum came, who on the same did lead: Essex now mounted, in his Armies sight, Thus to the Battail did his men excite; ☞ Take Courage, Souldiers, from your juster cause, It's for Religion, Liberty, and Laws You fight: who would not spend their dearest blood Now for Religion's sake; and England's good? What, do not Pressures, Poles, curs'd subsidies? Ship-monies, Taxes, damn'd Monopolies? Now Fleece us Subjects, for no Soveraign use, Impudent by permission, grows abuse. VVhat is not superstitious innovation Of Romish Rites, Cross-Altar-Adoration Obtruded on us? have wee not permission Of the Mass-Idol: See! the exhibition Of Sports, even to the Sabbath's Prophanation, Are authoris'd by Order, Proclamation. Cards, Dice, Bowls, Tennis, Stage-plaies, Sabbath∣sport Are made, both in the Country and the Court. Dare mortal men, Gods morral Laws withstand? VVhat God forbids, dare earthly men command? O Sinfull daies! O impious, hellish times! VVhen even by Order, warranted are Crimes, Bad Presidents, without indulging Laws, Finde too too frequent, practise and applause:
Ambitious Prelates, now do arrogate, In honours temporal, to Officiate, Their Romish Doctrines, ceremonious guise, All pious hearts resent and much despise. Nuncio's from Rome to England now resort, And much were honoured in our English Court? Whither when Jezabel's proud Sons were come, They much admir'd in England to finde Rome. It's not against the King that wee declare, But those that Authors, and Abettors are, Of these strange things: who will not rather dye? Then be insnar'd againe in Popery? Even in your looks I easily perceive Your forwardnesse, I know you'l not deceive My expectations: for (meethinks) I see You in pursute, and yonder Troops to flee; Meethinks I see what numbers we have slain, How many prisoners, Horse, Armes, Colours tane; How every Souldier is inrich'd with prize, What rare inventions London doth devize To grace our Tryumphs: how their Bone-fires burn, And Bels ring loud to honour our return. His wicked councel all dispers'd and fled, In Tryumph shall the King himself be led By us unto his London Parliament, Who will reward with condigne punishment Most of his wicked party: valorous bee, Take resolution, magnanimity,
Brave Souldiers, and indeed you may confide, All these presages shall be verfi'd. ☞ At this, a prologue, to the near dispute, Essex the King, daringly did salute, With a loud Volley of his Ordinance, Whose fiery bals near to the King did glance, As he from his prospective did survey Their Army, in that Valley where they lay, And then three acclamations, even so high Their Army gave; as seem'd to rend the sky. ☞ At which brave Linsey soon the King desir'd Leave to go on: Saying Essex hath fir'd His Cannons on us; and shall we stand still And suffer his great shot our men to kill? Shall we be dared thus by such proud foes, And thus our bodies to their Guns expose? ☞ To whom, the best of Kings, sadly reply'd, Loath, loath I am my Sword should e're be dy'd In civil blood; my soul doth much decline These worst of wars; are not these people mine? (If undeceiv'd) we suddenly should see Their Arms cast downe, they all would come to me. ☞ But now (more pity) fight indeed we must, Therefore (brave Souldiers) that your cause is just, I know you are perswaded, Loyalty Under your Soveraign's Ensignes here to dye, Or conquer, doth, and did you first ingage, How factious Zeal some Sectaries doth inrage
Against their King, you are not ignorant; I hope they'l see their errours and recant. Others that are not such, we soon shall see Prove loyal, Essex leave, and turne to mee. Wound not, who e're of them before you flies Such are not yours, nor yet my enemies. And now your magnanimity approve, If you your Country, or your Soveraigne love. See, how your King (if conquered, see no more) Your courage, utmost valour doth implore. They are more numerous; let our fortitude Their numbers ballance; when they are subdu'd, 'Twill be our glory that with numbers lesse, Wee did their greater conquer; on, possesse Their Riches, Campe, Artillery, as prize, Yonder rich Army I to you demize, Win Gold and wear't: my cause's just intent, God now assist as I am innocent. The murthering Cannons now began to play, VVhose so well levell'd bullets made their way Through many a rank; heads, armes, and legs, off fly VVhich hit, and oft strike dead the standers by. The Chain-shot, by the middle cuts asunder VVhole Files of men; who, now in death do won∣der How this so wide a passage open stood, At once to let out all their vital blood. How head and feet, leggs, and arms, in one place, By this strange death conjoyn'd should now imbrace
From Morterpeeces great Granado's fly, VVhich in their fall kill some; but to the skye Do in their breath blow up who stand them near, From others their dismembred Limbs they tear: Others their furious blasts do blow stone-blinde, O haplesse men to such sad fates design'd. ☞ As a tempestuous, Heaven-obscuring shower, VVith violence doth Raine, or Hail down power, VVith Lightnings, frequent flashes intermix'd, And loud sky-renting Thunder claps betwixt. Even so from fire-lock-Pistolls and Carbines, The fire like lightning from the sky now shines; And fiery Bullets with their thicker flight Obscure the day and antidate the night. Sulphurious clouds of smoak toff'd with the winde With fiery flashes glancing through them, blinde Both Horse and man, so that they cannot see, Therefore lesse fear their quick Catastrophy. ☞ The King's Forlorne, Dives his Regiment, First down the hill couragiously on went. Where Major Backstake with his party clears The Hedges lin'd with Essex Musketeers. The Royalists then cheerefully discend The hill: as bravely Essex doth defend The ground whereon his Army Marshal'd stood, Till that red Valley, redder became with blood. ☞ But like a Lyon greedy of his prey, At length their left wing, Rupert doth assay,
VVhose charge most furious and Heroick might Them break, and put to a disordered flight, Rupert through Keinton in pursute doth ride, Then fell to plunder; Hurry soon espy'd This fair advantage; and with eagernesse, Did now on Wilmot and Carnarvan presse, Forcing them to give ground: Then wheel'd about And fiercely charged on the Royal foot, VVhere soon the furious Horse asunder rents, Linsey's, Bowles, Paget's, Fieldings Regiments. Brave Linsey seeing his in such distresse, Rallies a party soon for their redresse; And like a Tygar of her whelps depriv'd, In thickest Troopes of Armed foes arriv'd? Most valliantly thousands doth kill or wound, Yet him the numerous foes at length surround, ☞ But when his Son, renowned Willowby, His Father thus encompassed did see He rides up with his Troopes: gave such a charge, As soon, his noble Father did enlarge But wounded, soon (too soon, alas) he dy'd, A fatal losse unto the Royal side. ☞ The Royal Standard Balfores Troopes had tane Varney the Standard-bearer being slain, A valiant Gentleman who this espy'd, Gallantly through their thickest Ranks did ride, And there (the new Possessor having slain) The Standard Royal bravely did re-gaine.
For which brave exploit, Knight and Barronet The King bedub'd him: Balfore hard beset With our fresh Troops, most bravely was assail'd, And made give ground: The Royalists prevail'd Sometimes, and sometimes Essex: Dubious Was Fortune whom to make victorious. ☞ By this, that spacious Valley was bespread, With heaps of Men, and Horses that lay dead; From several wounds, the several streams of blood, Increased to an overspreading Flood, Whose stronger currents to the lower ground, Drove down some bodys, now both kild, & drownd, Thus many deaths, poor mortals do attend, VVhen one's sufficient to inforce their end. Here might you hear the sad laments and moans, In doleful accents, of their dying groans, Some execrating their Nativity, Others that Fatal day: Reveng'd to bee Some vow'd; and with their Swords about them laid, Now even in Death: Some boldly did upbraid The Parliaments Pretences feign'd, some swore, And off their heads, their hair they fiercely tore; Some Pray'd, and were exceeding Penitent, Such several humours, dying men present. VVho late against each other boldly fought, Their Reconciliation Death had wrought, VVhose blood dispended, falling in one place, Kindly now, arm in arm, by Death imbrace.
Here might you see a bullet-galled steed, Now of his wounded, or dead rider free'd, Fiercely run through the field, and oft out-tread The bowels of the living, and the dead. Here might you see two armed Gallants met, Their courage sharper than their swords was whet By vow'd revenge, much hotter was their ire; Than from their clashing swords that sparkling fire, Whose courage, strength, dexterity, and art, Byinter-courses each did play their part Till blood and strength expended; these two foes Upon that bed of honour both repose; Whose streaming blood could not be intermix'd Such strong antipathy was them betwixt. ☞ A Cockney, whom blinde zeal-did much inflame, Essex to serve, a Volunteer late came; Who to his fellows vaunted, they should see; The wicked (none pursuing) for to flee. Tomkins said true, the Cannons 'gan to play, Down went his Arms, and streight he ran away. A flying peece of a Granado-shell, Stroke Simpson into th'back, who dead down fell, Speaking these words, then with his latest winde 'Tis base and cowardly for to strike behinde. ☞ A welsh-man, who came as a Volunteer, Hur King to serve, proudly did dominere Before the fight, vowing that hur would slay, All Rebell-Round-heads that came in hur way?
Essex himself should not escape hur hand If that he durst, till hur came to him stand? Essex might long have stood; Taffy was gone Before the fight, and so kill'd ne're a one, For when he heard the Cannons 'gin to play, Down went his Bill; and streight he ran away Swearing by got, in English he could swear, He ne're before such roaring Devils did hear. ☞ Another Welsh-man, arm'd a cap a pee, Upon a Charger fierce, mounted was hee; His two-edg'd-sword, drawn in his hand did shine, His Pistols charg'd, and also his Carbine. To have him heard, and seen, you would have swore Stout master Morgan would have chas'd a score. But when't came to his turne for to have fought, T'have fac'd about, and fled, Morgan had thought. But his fierce Horse, that did in War delight, Went on indeed in Morgan's hearts despight; Morgan with all his might pull'd at the Raign To stop his Horse, alas! 'twas all in vain. With pulling, and for fear, dead men to see, Backwards, even to his horse taile, bowed hee. On went the horse: The Royalists surpast, Amongst the adverse party runs at last. ☞ A Cockney that him in this posture spy'd, Come fiercely on; hold good sir, quarter cry'd; The Cockney seeing that he made no stay, Turn'd's horse about, and fairly ran away.
Morgan more valorous than hee wis'd or wil'd, Was throwne at last, and under's horse feet kil'd; The Cockney that fled, when hee Morgan spi'd, Into a Saw-pit, broke his neck, and died. ☞ But now the obscure mantle of the night, Each Army vail'd, from one anothers sight, Only the Musketiers, so thick gave fire, As yet gave light, to both for to retire; Neither could either Iö, Paean, sing Though victory more inclined to the King: ☞ Yet both parties claimed the triumphal Baies, And noble Palme; both parties returned praise For Victory, to their Heavenly Deities, Both parties had taken Ensigns, Prisoners, Prize, Both parties of Victory, Trophies did display, And on the field that night, both parties lay: By those great fires, which were the only light, Left them in this obscurity of night. That night in a black cloud, the Sun had set, As looking on Edge-Hill, with much regret; Ravenous beasts, Rapacious birds of prey, All hovered neer this fatal field that Day, Each man the night before, in his last sleep Seem'd to lament, howle out, and sadly weep, And by Anticipation to prevent In fancy, this curs'd daies doleful event. ☞ Titan (though late) now Thetis lap forsook, And either Army, might with horrour look
Upon each other; all the Vale bespread Betwixt them, with their intermixed Dead. Nor would the Sun, bee-clouded that Day, yeeld His Rayes should shine upon this bloody field. In Warlike posture here both Armies stand Until high noon, then Essex gave command For to march off: His Briggade's to compleat, From hence for London, straight hee doth retreat. ☞ But when the best of Kings survey'd the slain, Hee sigh'd and wep't, and wep't and sigh'd again, Saying, alas! alas! deceived were Some thousands of these Dead, that now lye here Slain in Rebellion; wee lament their fate, And their Sepulture, here wee imperate, As well as these, that Love and Loyalty, Have for our Cause ingaged here to Dye; Our gracious Pardon too, wee here Proclaim To all, that shall or will imbrace the same. Before that Cynthia with her borrowed light, Shall three times fill her Globe; at this he sigh'd And wept again, but off the Army went For Loyal, Royal Oxford now intent. Finis Libri Secundi.
THE English CIVIL WARRS. BOOK III. The Contents. Blake hang'd: diverse vicessitudes of Warr. Brainford fight: Rupert storms Cirincester: Lord Brooks his acts, his fatal wound, and death. The fights in Riple-fields: On Haopton-heath, Litchfield storm'd twice: & Reading tane had been Chalgrave, Landsdown; and Roundway fights: The Queen At Burlington doth land: The King and shee Meet on Edge-Hill: Glocester seige: Newberry First fight: Eccleshal seige: Arundel tane; Bramdean-heath fight; where noble Smith was slain. Prince Griffiths gallantry, and quick defeat, Rupert from Newark seige, doth Meldrum beat. IN order good the Royalists retire, And now at leisure, farther do inquire Into their taken papers, which discry One Blake a Traitour, whom the King to dy Adjudged in a halter, would each tree, To end the Wars, bore but such fruit as hee:
This Blake the Royal Court belong'd unto, Worse is a secret, than an open foe. To Banbury the Royal Army came, Resolv'd by storm for to inforce the same. Rochfords, and Peterboroughs Regiments, All Blew-Coats did lye there; Marrow prevents The Kings assault, by yielding of the Town Upon Conditions. Rupert now sate down Broughton before, a House of the Lord Say, At the first Peal, his Ordinance did play; The House is yeilded, the King's next address, By dint of Sword, was Brainford to possess. Nor could the Foes, the Kings approach discry, By reason of the mist-condenced sky, Till them the Cannons thundering language gave A fierce allar'm; a while resistance brave, Was made by Traiterous Hollis Regiment. Couragiously the Royalists on went; Inforce the Town, whose Streets are pav'd again, With numerous bodies of the men there slain, The Channels run, as after a great flood In stronger currents, with their warmer blood. ☞ But while the King plaies at this prosperous game Lord Brook's, & Hamden's regiments on came Maintaining 'gainst the King, a bloody fight, From Noon, till the Obscurity of night Parted the fray; Also the Parliament Had numerous Forces out of London sent,
So That the King almost surrounded was; Kingston alone gave way for his repass: Then having given the Rebels this defeat, Safely for Oxford did the King retreat. ☞ Though greater Hoasts in Winter Quarters rest, Yet smaller parties, sharpely thus contest, Nor, had the Royalists alone success, Massie did Sudeley-Castle much distress; Wooll-packs on rowling frames, his men had set, Under whose covert, to the Walls they get Free from the Castle-shot, the Barns they fire With Hand-Granado's, in the smoak aspire And mount the walls, but Bridges thus distres'd A Parley sounds, and yeilds what hee possess'd. ☞ Prince Rupert taking this in great despight, Resolved was, the Rebels to require; Therefore next day, his Force hee did combine Sudeley before, yet was his chief design On Cirincester; whether when hee came With fire and sword, hee did assault the same. Of Hand-Granado's, a thick flight was sent Into the Town, for the first complement, Which their Out-houses, and their Barns all fir'd, With resolution, yet to bee admir'd, Over the Bul-works, then the Foot soon flew In full Divisions, then the Horse insue; Stamfords whole Regiment, were well nigh slain, And twice five hundred Prisoners also tane.
A timerous Footman, when the Prince drew near, In a Straw-mough had hid himself for fear, Burn'd was the Straw, in it the Foot-man too, Him his presumed safety did undo, Apparent danger's often more secure, Then in strong walls, our selves for to immure. Next day from hence, the Prince victorious went To Glocester, and in his Summons sent: But Massie boldly his Demands deni'd, Now did the Prince before the Town reside, But marched off; and in great triumph came To Oxford, with his Prize so lately tane. ☞ Some Irish also, for the King do land, Over which Earnly did in cheife command. Massie to Berkley, with his Troops now came, And for a while stood facing of the same, Till Herbert with his Horse came up, they fire, Kill some on both parts, and then both retire. Near Tedbury, Massie also dissipates All Cary's Horse: Beverston on thy gates, Massie's bold Foot, do fasten their Pittard, But their audatiousness, thou didst reward, Beating them off with loss: To Wotton then Massie (still active) next led up his men, Skirmishing there a while, with those within. Now landed Leger, and bold Collonel Min At Bristol with more Irish: These design With Herbert, Digby, Winter to combine
And Block up Glocester, Massie suppress; Skirmishes oft indifferent, for success Hapned amongst them; scarce a Town was free Of any strength, but garrison'd must bee, In that impoverish'd County: Wretched are The Seats of most uncivil Civil War. ☞ Worcesters Earl with his most noble Son, To Glocester with their Welch Forces come, Encamp at Higham, and demand the Town. Near Monmoth, as this Army late came down, Burrows they beat, with his new Regiments, ☞ Massie from their Demands in scorn Dissents, Telling them plain, hee Rupert had deni'd, And soon would curbe, their Insolence and Pride. Could a Welch Army think that to regain? Which Rupert did Demand, but all in vain; Glory not that you Winter did defeat, Slew Lunley, and did Burrows Forces beat Late in the Forrest; shortly you shall feel, And know, our sword's of better-tempered steel. ☞ Now while these Forces here incamped lye Against the Town, from Bristol a supply Came unto Massie: Malmsbury now wone, Even Waller too, did with his Army come To joyn with Massie; The Welch they assail Even in their Camp, and do so far prevail, That in the place, some hundreds there they kill, The rest take Glocester against their will.
☞ To Hereford from hence then Waller goes, Scudamore, and his Roy allifts oppose And keep the Town; Waller against the gates His Guns doth play, the first shot perforates The boards (though strong) and did the Gate behind Strike off a Captains head; some were design'd Upon another side, assault to make, Which boldly Captain Grey did undertake. The Town distress'd, un-mand, not fortifi'd, Yeilded, most of the Souldiers undiscri'd, Over Wy-bridge, away for Wales do pass, Whilst Waller busied in the Parley was; Nor yet did Waller keep the Town thus gain'd, Though after for the King it was retain'd. ☞ Monmoth before, when Waller first appears, It is deserted by the Cavalliers, Waller it leaves, and toward England came, Yet for the King Lane after kept the same, Till Stovens by Trechery did the same surprize, That Lane betraid it, some indeed surmize. Waller from Wales, for Glocester intent, To intercept and fight him Morice went, Who, ere the Princes Horse could him Descry, Beat up their Quarters, and so marched by. Morice alarm'd, thus falls in his rear, And for a while ingag'd both parties were, And then do both retire: Massie had heard, How Wallers passage, Morice had debar'd:
And marching out to meet him, did him finde Near Teuxbury, and their Forces now combin'd, They do resolve upon that Town to fall, And on they go, the Guard surprized all Sleeping, (indeed over secure they were, Dreading no danger, Morice now so near) The Town they enter, break up doors, inquire For Cavalliers; Muskets and Pistols fire In at the windows; Carew's men some dye, Some Prisoners tane, some hide them, others flye. Next day some of the Prince's Horse appear In Ripple-fields, the rest embattel'd were Near Upton-bridge: Waller came, doth them view, But fighting did decline, and off-ward drew With his Dragoons, thinking to guard his Rear; The Prince advancing chargeth: all in fear Through their own foot upon the Bridge, they fly, Whose heels could not them save, there Pistol'd lye Hasleridge comes up with a fresh recrute, And for a while retards this hot pursute; But Morice presseth on with his bold Horse, And soon to flight, them all doth re-inforce, Many of Wallers, in this flight do dye; But at Mitch-hill again a fresh supply Of Foot them meet; The Prince there makes a stand, And then an orderly retreat command. ☞ From London with his forces came Lord Brook And Stafford-Avon first his Lordship took,
Defeating Crooker; Wagstaff, and stout Twist. Nor could brave Leichfield then his powers resist, The Town first wonne, his zealous Ordinance Play 'gainst the Close. But mark what fatal chance Befel this Zealot; whilst he did espy Out at a loop-hole, even into the eye A bullet peirc'd him, and down dead fell hee? Thus from a Church, the Church's enemy, By the Son of a Church-man here lay slain, His men went on, and did the fight maintain Winning the Close, a noble sacrifice Of Cavalliers unto his Ghost here dyes. ☞ But stout North-Hampton, Leichfield to regain Against the Close, doth a close fiedge maintain, Until his Scouts came in and do him tell, Of the approach of Brearton and old Gell. At this, with his Horse and Dragoons he goes, Boldly to meet his near approaching foes. Where soon his unexpected charge and sight, Puts all Gell's Horse to a disordered flight. And then the foot threw down their Arms and yeeld Num'rous the Prisoners were, tane on the field. Yet dear (too dear, alas) this victory cost, For brave North-Hampton's life, for it was lost, Who charging in the front, his Horse first shot, Dismounted there his mortal wound he got. But gallant 'tis on honours bed to lye, And thus victorious Loyally to dye.
☞ Prince Rupert too, at Leichfield now arriv'd, His mines the Close for to re-gain contriv'd, Which sprung, the valorous Souldiers on do go, But were repulsed stoutly by the foe. After an hours respite, (though in vain) With greater courage on they went again. For with great slaughter they repulsed were, Ruddy with blood the Moats do all appear. And of dead Corpse in every place do lye Great heaps, the Breaches and the Ladders by. Yet to the Souldiers no discouragement Was this, for on the third time now they went, And bravely enter, Russells then retreats Unto the Church, and there a parley beats. Rupert that they in warlike equipage Should all march off, his honour doth ingage. ☞ This while had General Essex Force sate down Reading before, playing upon the Towne With his great Ordinance; then did assay To scale the works; and by main-force, his way To make into the Town; but off was beat, And in despight was forced to retreat. After some daies, again they do assail The Town; and did some of the out-works gain Though with much losse: The King sent a supply, Of Ammunition, Men, Artillery, Which safe arrived there in Essex sight, But this his Lordship did so much dispight,
That he commands the Souldiers to prepare Now for a third assault, his Ladders are Provided; walls, and works, his Cannons beate All down before them, his Granadoes great Blow up whole houses; and in furious guise His souldiers do attempt the Enterprize. Aston made brave resistance for that while He could do service; for a ponderous Tyle, Which from a house a Cannon bullet rent So brus'd his head, that now incompetent Of all command he was; Fielding's resolve Now upon whom the power did all devolve, Was for to yeild, a parley sounded is. On gallant tearms, indeed both he and his March out: The Royalists the Act decry, And by a Martial Councel judg'd to dye Was Felding for't at Oxford: but the King, Pardon'd the person, and forgave the thing. ☞ Rupert and Gunter did at Chalgrave meet, And with their discharg'd Pistols boldly greet Each other, but Rupert shot Gunter dead, And whilst the Traiterous Hamden there did head His party, he receiv'd a mortal wound Even on that field, upon that very ground; Where first against the King hee did declare, Even so remarkable God's Judgements are. Numerous the Prisoners were, that Rupert took; ☞ But let's a while now into Cornwall look.
On Lands-Down hills, most advant agious ground Waller encamps; Hills, Woods, and Walls, surround His Camp almost; what part did open lye With Rampiers, and strong works they fortifie, Lining the hedges thick with muskereers, Slaining advanceth with his Cavalliers. Whose horse at the first charge disordered were. The Cornish foot charge up; the hedges clear; The Horse now ralli'd, bravely wheel about Charge home in deed; put Waller's Horse to rout With a great slaughter; the first hill regain'd, Brave Greenvile with a stand of Pikes maintain'd Against their Horse, and shot both great and small But there, alas, that valorous Knight did fall, With hundreds more; four brave assaults they make On Wallers Campe: the fifth, they do it take. To the next hill, Waller his men retires, At mid-night many Marches there he fires, Hanging the hedges with them; and so flies, The Royalists still fireing: A brave prize. The morning light, to Slaining's men discry'd, Sharpe was the fight, numerous the men that dy'd On both sides; for from noon even till mid-night, Continued was this bloody desperate fight. ☞ Through unfrequented by-waies Waller flies, Yet him Prince Morice met near the Device At Roundway-Down; but with two thousand men, And though indeed Waller was nine or ten,
Morice him greeted with so brave a charge, That from close Order, soon his men inlarge To shameful flight, the Royalists pursue, Numbers of Prisoners took; numbers they slew Six thousand Arms, ten Cannons, and great store Of Ammunition, hence the Victors bore. The Captives did the Victors duplicate, Which Round-way-Downe did Run-way nominate. ☞ Whilst these trans-actions in the South do pass At Burlington the Queen arrived was; Of Arms and Ammunition store she brought, With the Crown Jewels late in Holland bought. The Parliaments great Ships that hovered near, When once these Royal parties landed were, And the Convoy return'd; near shore advance, On Burlington with their great Ordinance They play off Ship-board; for an hour and more, And then weigh Anchor and put off from shore. ☞ Ougleby and Montrosse to the Queens traine Conjoyne their Troopes, and first to York they came. Jermin was the Queens General, th' Infantry Infamous Lesley led; her Chavalry The noble Gerrard; Leg the sole Chieftain Of her Artillery; and thus they came From York up to Edge-Hill; where the King meets His Loyal Consort, and most kindly greets Her with imbraces most affectionate, And with great joy doth there congratulate
Het safe return; Sweet Martial Melody, Doth make the Ecchoing Hills and Vales reply, And tell the World, what love and joyes there are Conceiv'd at meeting, of this Royal pair. The Thundering Cannons play at such a rate, Judgements loud Trump, seeming to antidate, So sweet the Levits were, so high the strain, Joying those Loyal Ghosts, there lately slain. ☞ From hence these Royal Armies, all repair To Glocester: All things provided are Now for the Siege: And thus the Camp sate down, After the King, in vain, summon'd the Town. Upon the South, laid Ruthen Earl of Forth, Ashley on th' East, Vavaser on the North, The River, and most of the Chavalry, Upon the West side of the Town did lye; Still in the Leagure doth the King reside, Ladders, and Engines, numerous they provide, And with their batteries, make the City-wall As leaves from Trees, in Autumn, for to fall: Yet could not enter, for the Deeper Moat, In which so many Faggots thrown, still float Upon the waters, so that they repair Their breaches: The Kings Mines countermin'd are. The King (whilst here) much precious time did lose, Either the art, or prowess of the Foes, Or the Towns strength (this Town's) unfortunate, Did all the Kings assaults annihilate.
Many bold Sallies the Besieged make Some wound, some kill, & some they prisoners take, ☞ Whilst Glocester the King besieg'd in vain, Exiter did Prince Morice powers regain. Before this Town a while the Prince had laid, And on it only with his Cannons plaid, Then makes a fierce assault, prevails so far, As that their mounts, works, sconces, all won are, And their own Cannons turn'd against the Town, In this distress they beat a Parley soon And yeild on Quarter: Thus even the whole West Became the Kings, for Rupert had possest Bristol before: The third or fourth Day, Fines had surrendred, and was march'd away. ☞ That constant Herald, even swift flying fame, Now told the King, how General Essex came To raise his Siege, who Rupert off soon sent, To bee to Essex an impediment, And to retard his Marches, whilst that hee From Glocester drew of's Artillery. Some skirmishes betwixt these parties pass, Yet Glocester releiv'd by Essex was, And having done this feat so much desir'd, For London hee resolv'd to have retir'd. ☞ But Rupert follows with a numerous force Of Chavalry, and Bodies brave of Horse, Marches for Wilt-shire, and to Aubern near, Most boldly falls in General Essex rear.
Urry first charg'd, who the Forlorn did lead, Did execution much, many fell Dead His Troops before; But Essex fac'd about, And well-nigh put brave Jermins Horse to rout; Jermin and Digby shot, some also tane, Constable and La-vienville slain. ☞ On Mavern Hills, they have a second bout, And for a while ingage both Horse and Foot, With success equal: But this while the King To Newberry, his Infantry doth bring. Essex goes on to Cirincester, where Of Royallists, too many Quartered were Which hee surprizes. Next Day hee did see The King embattail'd, near to Newberry. At the first sight, both parts began to fire, But night comes on, and so they both retire. A plot of very advantagious ground, This night about two miles off Essex found, On which hee did encamp; But the next Day So soon as Phaebus, did his Rayes display Fully upon our Hemisphere, the King Up even to Essex Front, his powers did bring. With the Forlorn, brave Lisle boldly went on, And first did fight, for ground to fight upon: Then the two Byrons with much Gallantry, Led on the Royal Horse, and Infantry, Acting their parts like Souldiers excellent, Even to their Enemies astonishment:
☞ Louder than Thunder, now the Cannons roa Heads, Leggs, Arms, Thighs, with violence they to From whom they hit; Of Bullets the thick flight Even at high noon, induce a sudden night: As leaves in Autumn from an Oaken Wood, Men fall down Dead; the field o'reflows with blood Most hideous, pitteous cries, and groans, resound From Dying men, laid on that bloody ground. Some wounds so wide, at once mens bloods do spill, Rapiers and Tucks, do full as surely kill With smaller pricks, the Fauchians broad hew down And cleave men, to the middle from the crown. Here might you see two ride up close, present, Give fire, then both fall Dead incontinent; Of Musketiers, whole Bodies you might see, Now come to push of Pike, fiercely let flee, With But end of their peeces at the Head Of one another, striking many Dead Even at a blow, their brains dispersed were, And oft did the survivours face besmear. Here might you see a Bullet-galled Horse, Through Ranks and Files, his bloody way inforce, Till on the point of a well-level'd Spear Hee runs himself, and there ends his carrear. ☞ Whole Files of men, the Chain-shot cuts in twain, With the Plebeians, are great Nobles slain; Stroud, Falkland, Morgan, Fielding, Sunderland, Are now by Death, sequestred from command.
☞ Noble Carnarvans Death was eminent, Who now had multitudes before him sent To Charons-boat; At length there did him meet An Armed Gallant with fierce blo Each other, from each stroak the Doth slye about them, both at length retire, And then ride up again, and bravely tilt At one another, up even to the hilt: The Enemy did in Carnarvan sheath His bloody Blade, nor did the other breath One minute after; for in Death more fierce, Carna vans sword, his very heart did peirce, Thus with their swords in one anothers brest, They fell and laid on Honour's bed to rest. ☞ A timerous Foot-man laid close on the Earth Amongst the Dead, onely for fear of Death, Yet peeping up often about him spi'd, A fierce Dragoon that him lye quick descri'd. In twain, his head with a broad Pole-axe slit, Freed him from what hee feard, by giving it. ☞ Andover, Peterborough, and Carlisle, Brave Lucas, Darcy, Gerrard, Ivers, Lisle, All wounded are led off; But Essex lost Here not a Lord, though dear his victory cost. ☞ The King and Queen as sad spectatour stood, And see the effusion of those Seas of Blood That flow'd upon that field, and to retire Their well-nigh routed Army did require.
Shrill sound the Trumpets, and the Drums loud beat; To some a glad, t' others a forc'd retreat. ☞ Nor now had Essex any appetite To rally, and renew this bloody fight, For with Dead Corps having now pav'd his way, For London straight hee march'd without all stay: And to Westminster did in Triumph bring, His (dear bought) Colours taken from the King. ☞ Had but the King this Fatal Seige declin'd, And his brave Troops for London then design'd; When first hee came Glocester walls before, Hee need not sure, have foughten any more. Essex condition desperate at that time, The Londoners assistance did decline To th' Parliament, the Lords did all accord To end the Wars, the King should bee restor'd, The Principallity of all the West, (Save Glocester) the King as then possest, But the Errata's wee commit in War By fates Decree irrevocable are. Gell, Brearton, Ridgby, Jacson, all prepare, Bird in his Nest, Eccleshal, to insnare And take; who came, first won the Church & Town, And then those Barns and Stables all burn down That stood the Castle near; Their Guns they plant Play at the Walls, yet all this cannot daunt Those here besieg'd; their hold they do Defend. To raise the Siege his Majesty did send,
Capel, and Hasteings, who now drawing nigh, I' th' Church do the Besiegers fortifie Themselves; Bird councels to inforce them thence, The Lords cannot with so much time dispence To beat them out, so Bird resigns his place (Hopeless indeed as in the present case) To Captain Abel, and away hee went With the Releif, the Siege incontinent Renewed was, and Abel thus confin'd, After a while to Gell the place resign'd. ☞ Arundel-Castle Waller came to take, Assaults most furious, many did he make, Yet, with great loss was bravely still repel'd. After a month or more they out had held They yeild; In it was a full years provision, Wondrous well man'd, of Arms and Ammunition Abundance, who can value this rich prize? Which made the most that knew it to surmise, Waller with Golden Cannons here had plai'd, And so this last and greatest Battery made. ☞ For Winchester Waller doth march, the Town Hopton possest, and doth to Bramdean Down Draw out his men, resolv'd Waller to fight, Waller comes on, the Armies now in sight Each of the other; with loud shouts they rent The very Clouds, a Dareing complement Of thundring Cannons, is the first salute, Waller the Hill had gain'd, the first Dispute
Was him to dispossess; but dear it cost, And many a life on both parts for it lost. This dear-gain'd Hill, Stout Lisle guarded that night, During which both parts did desist to fight. Another Hill more advantagious farr, Waller had found, hither his Foot drawn are, The hedges lin'd, his Horse themselves display All in the Van. No sooner had the Day Lightned the World, but Hopton on doth press, Waller of his new-ground to dispossess. Balfore wheels off, as though hee seem'd to fly, The Ambuscado's of their Infrantry Are now discri'd: Yet no time to retire. In Vollies thick from th' hedges they give fire, Bullets like hail-stones fly, that bloody ground Is covered with Dead Corps, Ruthen a wound Received here; Lord Stuart here was slain, And that brave Smith, that erewhile did regain The Royal Standard at Edge-Hill; Stout Scot, Apleford, Mannings, Sandies, all Collonels, shot. Most violent, and bloody was the fight, Sulphureous Powder-clouds, obscure the light, And fiery flashes through them blinde mens eyes, Clashing of Armour, tumult, dolorous cryes Of dying men resound in every place. Wallers Commanders also fall apace, The Stout Dalbier had many a wound here got, A Cannon Bullet Thompsons thigh off shot,
And numbers more lay bleeding on the ground. ☞ Hopton at length a forc'd retreat doth sound, His men disordered well-nigh to a rout, To Basing-house from hence he wheels about Winchester left; Waller doth follow near, Winchester yeilds, when once his men appear Before the Town? Waller's successeful fate, Prince Griffith doth indeed so animate, To undertake North-Wales, obedient To bring by force, unto the Parliament. From Lonoon in a most heroick guise, They set him forward to his enterprize; His silver Trumpets, Sumpters, brave attyre Even of his Troopers, make the most admire. His first design is Rupert to seek out They meet; This Pseudo-Prince is put to rout, His men dispers'd, all driven into holes; His golden Mountains, thus do prove but Moles; Like Phaeton now fallen from the sky Of all command; his vaunts and gallantry Lye buryed now in scorn, his means spent all, Debauch'd he lives, Pride needs must have a fall. ☞ Newark against Meldrum close siedge had laid And many waies the Town to gain assay'd; His Batteries, Mines, assaults were all in vain, Numbers each day of his assailants slaine. Rupert at length with a brave Army comes, To raise the siedge, Meldrum draws off his Guns
At his approach; and to the Spittle near He plants them; all his foot embodied were In the same place; strong trenches them surround, His Horse stands pransing on that champion ground Under the Beacon-hill; Rupert draws nigh, And from the Beacon doth the foes discry Resolv'd to charge them; though his Foot and Rear Some three miles distant yet behinde him were. In Order good, his men the hill discend, Stoutly their ground do Meldrums Horse defend. Bloody grew the dispute, the Vale bespread With heaps of Men and Horses, fallen, and dead. Rupert's right-wing was well-nigh put to rout, And cowardly some did run till Martin stout Came in to their relief, and turn'd the chase Making the late pursuers flye; give place. ☞ Hasting's and Porter's acts were eminent, And Gerrard did service most excellent Till first dismounted, in his arme then shot He yeilds himself a Prisoner; who did not Rupert's heroick valour here amaze. As on some prodigy men stand and gaze So do his actions even attract each eye, To see, and wonder: him his deeds discry Three sturdy fellows him at length beset, And one fast hold, did of his Choller get; But that hold hand Neale at a blow in twain, Cut from its arme; a second there was slain
By Rupert's self, the third was Pistol'd dead By Master Mortaign. On the Prince doth lead His troops victorious; charging through the foes, Hewing down lains before him where he goes. ☞ At length they run even quite behind their foot, Up to their works Rupert pursues the rout; And then retires out of their Cannon shot. ☞ Tilliar by this, up with the foot was got; And from the hill most boldly doth them lead, Towards their Bridge of Boats, for which they plead With Vollies thick of Muskets, intermix't With thundering peals of Ordinance, betwixt Them, there they mannage a most bloody fray. From Muscam-bridge their horse run quite away For Nottingham: the Princes force surround Them at the Spittle. But at length they sound A parley; Rupert let them march away With Colours, Drums, Swords, Horses; but doth stay Their Cannons, Muskets, Powder, Match and Ball; The noble Gerrard was releas'd withall. Then Rupert having given them this defeat, Doth to his best advantages retreat. Finis Libri Tertii.
THE ENGLISH CIVIL VVARRS. BOOK IV. The Contents. Essex and Wallers Forces are combin'd, Essex for Cornwall goes: Waller's design'd The King to fight: Copedray-bridge dispute: The King doth after Essex make pursuite; Essex defeat in Cornwall: Malsmberry tane, Pennington Siege and Banburies: Min is slain; Ast-ferry fight: Monmoth lost and regaind: Newberry second fight: Norton constraind Baseing to leave: Wye-fight. Shrewsbury won Some Northern actions that this while are done. THe wing'd Musitians pleasantly did sing Their airy notes, to welcome in the spring, Tellus in her Green Livery was beclad, Flora the Meads with Flowers enameld had,
And now what County, or what Hamler clear Of Armed Camps, and Martial tumults were? Great expectation of some actions great Possess the World, for Oxford-shire the seat Of three great Armies was; combined here Essex and Wallers numerous Forces were Against the King: who fighting did Decline, With their united Forces; and design Them to divide, and then the one assail. Nor did the King his expectations fail, For hee with winding Marches flies about, And they pursue their Guns, their numerous Foot, Their Carriages: their Marches so impede, That Essex doth from Waller now recede, And into Cornwall his great Guns doth bring, Waller alone left to pursue the King, ☞ But ere they part the Heavens did evidence, Their Frowns on their Rebellious Insolence, And made them feel the thundering Jove well knew That his Anointed, none should dare pursue, A most prodigeous storm of hail there fell Near Woodstock on them, out of Heaven, even Hell Seem'd to bee poured; every stone so great, As to the ground, down Horse and man did beat; Thus for two hours, the angry Clouds did pour Upon their heads this more than furious snower; Yet in the Royal Camp no hail at all, But two miles distant (wondrous strange) did fall.
But let's return to Waller, and the King, His Majesty to Worcester doth bring. His Army Waller follows, Beudley then The King march'd towards. Waller with his men Here got before; thinking the King would flye Straight up the River, unto Shrewsberry. The King wheels back for Worcester, and so Some two-daies march had got before his foe. When first the King to Worcester drew nigh, From Dudley-Castle the Besiegers flye. In winding marches hence the King doth pass To Buckingham: his next March ordered was For Banbury; But Waller in his way, Upon Croach-hill, his Army doth display To the Kings view: From that time, even till night, For Burley, and for Nethrope they do fight, Two Villages betwixt their Camps that laid, The loss was equal; but when night displaid Her sable Mantle o're our Hemisphere, Waller advanc'd to Burton-hill; more near To Banbury, and here his Excellence Embattail'd stood: nor could be drawn from thence. For Daintry, off then march the Cavalliers, Leaving the Bridge well man'd with Musketiers To guard their Rear: Waller his Cannons sends First down the Hill, and then himself discends With his main Body, falls in the Kings Rear, Compton and Cleaveland, first commanded were,
With noble Bernerd's brave reserve of foot To make a stand, and then to face about And charge: most nobly on the Lords do go Charge through, and through the proud advancing foe. Nor Waller's thundering Cannons did they fear, Of which, the most here from him taken were. Wilmot, the Lords did second gallantly, Many of Wallers on the Turfe do dye. Bloody the fight with courage brave maintain'd, Yet victory Nobly was at length regain'd On the Kings part; Wilmot twice Prisoner tane, The valiant Cleark and Bootlier, both here slain. Haward and stout Cornwallis Knighted were Who seeing Wilmot Prisoner void of fear Rush through their thickest foes, and hundreds send To Charon's Boat; reschew their honoured friend. Waller by this gave ground, sounds a retreat, Fearing indeed a total rout, defeat; Nor could the King his victory home pursue, Cause Waller his advantages too, drew. ☞ Some Leathern Guns; twelve Brass here taken were With Weems that Scot; their Master-Cannoneer, Who both against his Oath, and Loyalty Unto his Prince; Waller's Arillery Commanded; oh! ingratful mone-sworne-Scot, Against the King to act; who sure did not Deserve at thy hand; two hundred foot, Were also taken prisoners at this bout.
And the like number on the ground lay slain Of Waller's men; for London now again For fresh recruits Waller his march doth take. Haste after Essex, hence the King doth make. In Cornwall now arriv'd Lestithiel near Where General Essex forces quartered were. The King's victorious forces upon sight Would needs go on, ingage them there to fight. But them to starve the King resolves, and so Encamps his Army very near the foe. Himself at Mohum's house Boconnock lyes. Greenvile came up at length with more supplies, And now by force of Lesterman possest Essex was straightned much, much now distrest. A Fort and House near to Foy-Haven stood, The King got these; Essex depriv'd of food Was from the Sea by this; for these now man'd, The King that harbour solely did command. Yet 'cause the foes ground had so much still West And two small Harbours there as yet possest. Morice upon their quarters doth design To fall; yet after some advice, decline The enterprize; for them to hunger out Was held the best: Goring's Horse, Basset's Foot Therefore went West, betwixt them and Saint Blaze Obstructing all relief, in this sad case, Balfore doth with their Horse break quite away Leaving their Foot: Walgraves near Saltash lay
Whom with his men, Balfore had nigh suppris'd. But when the old man better was advis'd That they were foes; his Brigade out he drew, A hundred of them on the place there slew, Took Abercony Prisoner, and some more Goring pursued too, but they got o're To Plimouth: in the mean time all the foot Lestithiel left; to Foy-ward marching out, Many brave Cannons left behind them were The King possest them; followes in their Rear From hedge, to hedge, most bravely doth them beat. At length they face, and force the King retreat, Having got an advantage of the ground, On goes brave Bret, (and though he got a wound) With the Queens Troop, and forc'd them run again, Onely some four or five of his were slain, For which brave service he was dubbed Knight. Nobly Lord Stuard did in this same fight Behave himself; With the Kings Troop: Wray's Foot Twice forcing from their hedges, to a rout; But night comes on and parts this running fray, And in this night their General stole away With Meirick, and Lord Roberts in a beat, To Plimouth o're the Waves they nimbly float. Leaving their Army in this great distresse. Pity such men should General's names possesse; Who will not with their men participate, In most adverse, as well as prosperous state;
O timerous men! notorious cowar dize. Ten thousand men to leave in such a guise. But the swift hours by this induce the day, And known it was Essex was run away, Butler his Drums a parley caus'd to beat, And with the Royalists on tearms they treat. And in conclusion, thus they do agree, To leave their Powder, Arms, Artillery. Onely to officers it granted was, With Pistols, Swords, and Horses off to passe. Ten thousand Arms, brasse Peeces forty nine, Seven hundred Carriages they here resign Of Powder too; three hundred barrels: then Their Armelesse Army march: yet of their men Some thousands take up Arms on the King's part. From Cornwall doth his Majesty depart For Oxford; and sole Master of the field Barstable, Ilfercombe, and Saltash yeild, To his victorious Troopes, (Saltash was ta'ne By storme, and therefore many of them slain.) Thus in the West, the King was prevailent Glocester near, the game against him went, As though that county were design'd to be, The King and Kingdomes, sole Catastrophie. Massy at Beverstone once wors'd; again Draws out his men that Castle to regain, Makes an assault; but least unto the foes The places weaknesse should their lives expose,
Upon conditions the Defendants yield. Nor yet could Malmsbury Collonel Howard shield From Massies powers, the suburbs first they gain'd. But Howard sallying out boldly; constrain'd Them to give ground; what cowards will you flee? Said Massy to them, rally, follow mee, On then again they go, the Town they win Many put to the Sword, of those within. On Teuxbury Massy had his next design Which he surprises; but they soon combine, Their dispersed for ces beat him out again Massy comes on afresh; many are slain: Min routed in disorder fled away, The Town to Massy left is as a prey. ☞ The Fox so politick had left his den Of Tamworth and to Beudley leads his men, Pretends to Rupert that he did retain Demands accesse, it's granted; the Guard's tane, The Town he enters falls upon his prey, Littleton and his men all led away His Captives are; Mythologists applaud In Foxes, not their sortitude, but fraud. Dennington-Castle Middleton comes to take, And an assault unparralleld did make; With more than desperate fury they maintain, This fierce assault six hours, but all in vain, A hundred Souldiers on the place there fell, Nine of their Captains, and a Collonel;
Hundreds more wounded, but Blois of his men Both kil'd and wounded, had not full twice ten. Middleton marches off towards the West, Bridge-water, near Courtney, and hee contest Sharpely a while (the hedges all were lin'd With Musketiers, in Ambushes design'd, Middleton to catch) but off he wheels and flies, Many first kil'd: at Sherburn doth surprize A Troop of Royalists, and some doth slay, Victor and Vanquish'd in the self-same Day. ☞ Dennington too, now Horton comes before, Twelve nights & days, his thundering Cannons roar, And play most furiously against those Walls, Some part whereof unto the ground there falls, Three lofty Towers they raze too, to the ground, Yet all attempts in vain, experience found For the Defendants gallantry, and art (Maugre their malice) forc'd them to depart. ☞ With numerous Colliers now comes Collonel Fines From Bedworth, Banbury-castle undermines, Thought in a cloud of Sulphure, to have sent These Walls up to the Skies: Waters prevent His wish'd attempt, frustrate his Colliers skill. Then with his thundering Cannons next he will The work effect, a breach full wide hee made, With Sword and Pistol they the same invade, In four Divisions more, on came his Foot With Scaling-Ladders on their shoulders; stout
To admiration, the Defendants were, Nor could the assailants any Ladder rear, But with a vengeance all beat back again, Except some hundreds on the place left slain. The next means for to win it, Fines doth try, Is with Granado's them to terrifie Out of their hold; with streaming fires these blaze Amongst the Clouds, while the Defendants gaze VVith wonder, Down precipitate they fall, VVhose thundering language did indeed, them all At first affright, some kill, and some blow blinde, As Dust in streets, is by a whirling VVind Blown every way; So bullets, many a nail, VVith shattered shells the standers by assail VVhen these do break; the onely waie's to fall And lye prostrait, so to avoid them all. VVhilst multitudes of these, Fines on them plaies, North-hampton comes with Gage the Siege to raise. Fines facd the Earl a while, then off-ward Drew To Hanwell, but North-hampton doth pursue, Falls in his rear; Fines faces, many slain, Two hours and more, both sides the fight maintain With resolution, and much gallantry, At length Fines Forces do disperse and fly, Three carriages of Powder, Match and Shot, With one brave Cannon, here the Victors got. ☞ Mins grand design was Massie to insnare, And to this purpose many projects are
All set on foot, but fail; Hartpury near Some few of Mins Rear-guard surprized were, But near to Elderfield their whole Brigade Advance; and there their Ambuscado's laid, Lining the hedges with their Musketiers, Their Horse stand in their Front; Massie appears Next morning, chargeth: Mins Horse soon retire, Thinking their Ambuscado's should give fire, Upon the now advancing Enemy, And so they did; but forc'd at length to fly. Min with two-hundred on the turfe were slain, And near three hundred Prisoners of them tane. Wounded and taken Passer was also, Slain Min's Brigade as hee came posting to, To let them know more Forces were at hand. And though those follow under his command; Yet their pursuit was vain, the feat was done, And Massie with his prize and prisoners gone. ☞ Rupert Ast-ferry to secure intent, Six hundred Horse and Foot thither had sent, These for their Guard intrench that neck of land, That Wye and Severn's confluence 'twixt did stand. Massie this hears, and therefore doth Designe, Thence to inforce them, ere their works and Line Perfected are; thither therefore hee went, A Squadron of his Musketiers are sent Privately on; Ruperts men them discry, And at them all, their Guards at once let fly,
In a loud Volly all their shot; again Ere they could charge, Massie's Forlorn amain Now mount their works; then his reserves on came, A bloody fight both parts a while maintain; But in conclusion Massie got the Day, Except whose heels and Boats bore them away, All slain and Prisoners are; So various are These sad successes of this Civil Warr. Kirle to Massie, Monmoth had betrai'd, Which to effect, thus they their plot had laid. Massie to Monmoth first advanceth near, Then feigns a Post him to recall; they hear In Monmoth Massie's gone; Draw out, pursue Kirle commands this party, who well knew Where Massies Ambuscado's now were laid, Thither hee leads his party; all betraid, And now surrounded, yeild to Massie; then To Monmoth with a part of Massie's men Kirle returns, saying these Prisoners were They on the Gates; But, behold, in the Reat Massie comes up; then Kirle and those got in, Declare themselves, to wound and kill begin The Guard; let down the bridge, Massie comes ore The Garrison they instantly ore power, The Governour, advantaged by night With many more, escape their hands by flight. Broughton intends Godridge to fortifie, Hereford Forces his design discry,
Draw out, the first assault they on it make, Broughton and all his men they Prisoners take. Now Massies Horse to Monmoth quartering near, Bravely assaild by valiant Blaxton were, Many hee took, many of them were slain, Yet fresh supplies came up, and back again Blaxton inforce with loss. Massie also With Gerrard and with Winter had to do, Skirmishing oft. Massie from Monmoth gone, Throgmorton had the Regiment alone, And Drawing out on Chepstow to attempt, From Ragland and from Godridge some are sent, Who in Throgmorton's absence now devise A Stratagem, Monmoth again surprize. What Treachery lost, Policy bravely won These nobly did, but Kirle had basely done. ☞ Stephens, Raudon to releeve, flies with his Horse To give him ground doth the besiegers force, Whilst hee alights, makes merry with his friends, Renowned Ashley a strong party sends, They block him up, who others thought to free From a straight siege, besieg'd himself is hee, And all together yeild, so excellent Such Stratagems was Ashley to invent. ☞ Manchester, Essex, Waller, all combine Forces, the King for to surround, near Spine They randezvow; then off their Horse they Draw, First to inforce the Royalists from Shaw,
A hot dispute Prince Morice Horse and they, Maintain with loss on both parts all that Day. Nor did their thundering Cannons cease the while, Some men they kill, some houses they untile, And with those tiles, oft strike some Souldiers Dead. Then for a Mill on Kennet next they plead, Where (many Royallists surpriz'd and slain) That Mill and passage the Essexians gain, Till noble Ashley with his Valiant Foot, Came up (the Foes put all to flight and rout, And many in the River Drown'd) regain'd The Mill and Passage: Bennet too maintain'd, Waller against a bloody fight: Whose Horse For to retire, Leggs Chavalry inforce. Yet rallying Legg did bravely charge again, Routs Essex's Life-guard, whose Commander slain By Bennet was; The Duke of Yorke's Brigade, Led on by Leagure, gallant service made, Thus on the West of Newberry went the game. ☞ But on the East the bold Essexians came With confidence, and resolution on, And noble Goring pressed sore upon; Who did with courage no whit less oppose The numerous, and as yet prevailing Foes. Till on goes Cleaveland with his own Brigade, And those insulting Foes to fly soon made: In this same charge was Major Urry slain, And Cleaveland's self, that Noble Earl was tane.
☞ Manchester's men this while on the North-East, To Shaw-ward in this bloody fight, the least Part had not mannag'd: where Renowned Lisle, Had bravely kept them Martial play this while; Astley and Brown here service brave had done, And had some Cannons from the Rebels wone. Thus was this fight maintained in a round, Till with dead corps that blood-ore-flowing ground Newberry on each side, lay thick bespread, And Kennets ruddy streams discoloured With several rivulets of crimson blood, United, and augmented to a flood, Nor on the Day alone here did they fight, But in loud Vollies fired all the night, The Ecchoes of their thundering Guns, loud cries, In Doleful accents from those woods replies, And neighboring vales, tumult, licentious rage, Fills every place; here armed Troops ingage, There great Battailions of brave Infantry, With Death-Defying magnanimity: The Earth seem'd for to tremble and rebound, Whereon the prauncing Horse did charge; a wound Brainford receiv'd i'th' mouth, Alford i'th' thigh, Leagure and Leak stout Royalists here Dye, Their honour lost in Cornwall to regain The Roundheads fight; the Kings part to maintain Their Honour got; the motives equal were Courage to breed, and to exempt all fear.
☞ A Cornish Foot man slipt and got a fall, As hee was running nigh a Garden wall, Even at that time, that a thick flight of shot, Came whistleing ore his head, hee swore by Got That hee was slain; and panting there hee said, For Saints and Souls, Desiring his Comrade Him there to Bury: But to search his wound, A Surgeon came; behold! none could be found. They bid him rise, and fight, for nought him ail'd, But all their words with him nothing prevail'd: Rather, said hee, Inter mee here alive, Then I should in such Dangerous times survive. Cold grew his limbs, his pulse beat weak, his breath Fetch'd thick, at length hee Dies, for fear of Death. ☞ Dubious as yet, was victory whom to grace With her triumphant Palms, for in one place The King prevails, takes Cannon, when hard by, The like success attends the Enemy. Here might you see some fly, others pursue, Fresh Horse advance, those victors late subdue. Both sides had Ensigns, Cannons, Prisoners tane, Numbers of both parts on the field lay slain, Dubious it was, to whom to attribute Victory, in this so late, and fierce Dispute. Yet Trophies more on the Kings part appear, Now marching off for Wallingford: whose Rear Till midnight on that bloody place did stay, And then without Disturbance march away.
☞ Basing had been besieg'd nigh half a year, Many th' assaults, many the batteries were Against it made; yet those attempts all vain, Defendants few, numerous assailants slain. Many assaults Waller upon it made, Who six whole weeks battering before it laid. Then Norton's, Morley's, Onslow's Forces come, Out the Defendants Sally oft, kill some At each adventure; but at length the King Sends them releif, which on stout Gage did bring. On Chidnam-down, Norton and hee doth meet, And with a gallant Charge most nobly greet Each other; In conclusion Norton flies, Basing-house furnish'd is with all supplies Now necessary, Gage doth back retreat. Johnson and Cufford Sallying out did beat Up Onflows Quarters, many Prisoners tane, One Demi-culvering, with some hundreds slain. But the besiegers rally, and again Renew their Siege: To whom Manchester came With a great Army, yet here did not stay, But to meet Essex marched straight away. When the besiegers heard of Essex fate In Cornwall, and that battail passed late At Newberry: with the Kings approach, they fire Their Hutts, and rise; to Reading straight retire. ☞ Winter intends a passage upon Wye, For his advantages to fortifie.
But Massi'es forces all upon him came, Put him to rout; Gamne and Vangerris slain, And Pore of Barkley drown'd; the Prisoners were Many (though Winter's self escaped) here. ☞ Shrewsbury to surprize, Mitton had laid His project, which now took: some say betray'd Into his hands, that Town and Castle were, Great was the losse the King sustained here. Commanders many of great dignity, Arms, Ammunition, Men, Artillery, Abundance here were tane: Plimouth also Surrendred had to her beseiging foe. Weymouth was yielded too; even every where Sharpe seidges, bloody skirmishes there were. So active Mars was on the Southern Stage. ☞ No whit lesse furious was his Northern rage. New-Castle's numerous Forces now advance, Haward to Pras-bridge comes, whose fatal chance Was there for to be slain, Hotham that day, Had fac'd; at night draws off, marching away. New-Castle comes to York; where Cumberland Conjoyns these forces under his command, To Tadcaster they march, where the bold foes, Fairfax and Hotham's forces, them oppose. The Town well nigh New Castle's men had got Till Lister's men (though Lister's self was shot) Did in disorder beat them back again, About a hundred Royalist; here slain.
Fairfax at night (the fight maintain'd all day) Clear quitts the Town, for Selby march'd away. ☞ Young Fairfax with his Troops from Bradford came To Leeds, and fiercely did assault the same. After some hours dispute the Town they winne, Many are slain and tane of those within. Savile doth flie to Pomfret; Beamount drown'd In swiming Ayre: Briggs here receiv'd a wound And so did Leigh: some twenty of these slain. Fairfax his Horse, Foot, and his Club-arm'd train To Sea-croft leads, after a sharp dispute Routed is Fairfax, nigh to Leeds, pursute After his dispersed men the conquerers make, Many they kill, great numbers Prisoners take. Wentworth with his Brigade at Wakefield laid, Fairfax comes thither, doth the Town invade, All Wentworth's men (just as the Trojeans) here, Drunk, or asleep, in bed, surprized were Though Wentworth scap'd, the Prisoners taken thus Then the assailants were more numerous. Chamley the Quarters of the Cavaliers Oft with successe attempted when he hears, Slingsby at Gisborough to be resident, Bointon and he conjoyned, thither went, After a sharp encounter, Slingsby's tane, With nigh two hundred more, many are slain; Many the Arms the Royalists lost here. ☞ Active the Royalists at Latham were.
Before Manchester did Lord Strange Display His new-rais'd forces, but was beat away Thence with some losse: alas! who can declare, All the occurrences of this sad Warre. The valiant Tinsley did with sword and fire Lancaster fall upon; the Rogues retire, Out of those flaming streets, discoloured With blood, and with dead corps also bespread; Then on the Castle Tinsley makes assay, But leaves it, and for York-shire march'd away. Girlington stout, Thirlan his house maintain'd 'Gainst a sharpe siedge; yet was at length constrain'd On tearms for to surrender, Horneby too Had yeilded to the now prevailing foe. Leviston with his valiant Skiptoneers To Setle came; the Town assaults, Briggs fears His men would not hold out; up th'hills he flies, Onely some three in this dispute there dyes. After a while, Briggs did to Skipton near, Conjoyn'd with some of Hothams Troops, appear. At Carleton or Kildwick these remaine, Often they skirmish, often some are slain. In Richmond-shire the noble Darcy had, Agallant Regiment in blew-Coats clad; Under blew Colours raised for the King, Which Regiment he doth to Skipton bring. With these conjoyn'd, 'gainst Thornton-Hall we go, Make an attempt out thence to beat the foe
But neither House nor Barns, scarce once hit were, At twenty shots, by our blinde Cannonier; Whilst some Dragoons alight on foot to play, Some of our horse the foes had stoln away; Onely some Barns we at this bout did fire, And thence for Skipton with some losse retire. ☞ To Thornton-Hall, that Country that lay near Much dis-affected to the Kings part were, Clowns for the most part sturdy, savage, rude, Whom fair pretences did trapan, delude And court into Rebellion; these did fear Cause some; that all of us even Papists were; Their whineing Preachers made them think the King Strange innovations on the Church would bring And that his studies all he did imploy The Laws to change, Propriety destroy. And on the contrary they did pretend, The Parliament the country would befriend Popery rout out; make them a people free From any Tax, from any Subsidy, And all their charges in these Warres defray; (These things they did the clear contrary way.) And still their exhortations thus did end. Your Coine and Plate on publick Faith now lend. The Parliament is on your good intent, O freely then, aid you the Parliament. Such fair pretences, promises untrue, To sad rebellion multitudes soon drew.
And did much Coin into their Coffers, bring To mannage these late warres against the King. Finis Libri Quarti.
THE English CIVIL WARRS. BOOK V. The Contents. Atherton fight; Hulls Siedge yet these between, At Gainsborough and Nantwitch do interveene Some actions. Winsby fight: Hulls siedge doth rise: New Castle meets old Levens enterprize Invading England, his Oration His Covenanters to; Bowden-Hills on And Pinshaw; Skirmishes: Corbridge dispute, Fairfax's forces mightily recruite In York-shire: Selby stormed is by them, Renowned Redman's Cauwoods Stratagem. NEw-Castle had receiv'd a brave supply Of Arms, Commanders, great Artillery, Late from the Queen: against Bradford then we go, That town devoted so much to the foe, That scarce a Royalist in it was found. The place is situate on declining ground;
A craggy River on the South doth glide. With Bulworks strong the Town was fortifi'd. Trading had flourish'd, rich the Boars late grew Of which no cause, but self-desert they knew. A deep dissembled, verbal, sanctity Was their Religion; for true piety, Truth, and good manners had small practise here, Bishops and Papists hated of them were. Also the Gentry; facile to perswade Upon the Account of liberty: to aid The Parliament, which made them in such swarms; Under rebellious Ensignes now bear arms. Such is the Town, such is the Country too, With which our Forces now must have to do. Leeds is forsaken; before Howley-Hall We then encampe; a breach soon in the wall Our thundering Cannons make; they yeild, then we Bradford towards, draw our Artillery. Near Atherton a whinny More doth lye, Full of old Cole-pits, now fill'd up, and dry: ☞ Fairfax in these his Ambuscado's laid, From out of these, our Forlorne they invade Put them to rout, our seconds also fly, Till General King came with a fresh supply. Whose words, and actions much encouragement, Unto our flying Cohorts did present So that they Rally; and charge up again, Many of both parts on the field lye slain?
Sharp was the contest, desperate, fierce and hot, Thick flew the vollies of dead wounding shot, Loud roar'd our Cannons; a tumultuous rage, Fill'd every place, Bodies of Foot ingage, (Having their Powder spent) at push of Pike, And with the But-end of their Muskets strike Out one anothers brains, so fierce each stroak As Barrels bow'd, and Stocks to shivers broke, Leaving their Pans oft fixed in the head Of whom they wounded, or had last struck dead. Fairfax's Horse advantage had of ground, In number ours, Haward a mortal wound Receiv'd; our Swords, Rapiers, and Tucks we Dye In one anothers blood: Pistols now flie With more than furious, angry violence At one anothers heads: most brave defence The foe still made, though we press on amain, So difficult was victory to obtain. Hieron and Talbot meet, most dexterously At one another let their pistols flie One in the breast, the other in the head Shot; from their horses on the Turfe fall dead. Now victory, that of late was dubious, Had her tryumphant Palme bestow'd on us; The foes before our Troopes victorious flye, In this pursute numbers of theirs do dye. A zealous Puritan amongst the rest, Before the fight did Fairfax thus request?
'Beseech your worship let's no quarter give, Pity these wicked Cavalliers should live. Their party beat; a Cavallier did ride Up to this Zealot who soon quarter cry'd? Villain, said he, no quarter thou shalt have, Who will not give, pity they should receive. ☞ From Hallifax a club-arm'd short-shorne crew Zeal for the cause, unto this battel drew, Who, while the day seem'd on their side to go, Pursu'd and cry'd, see! God doth rout our foe! At length the battel sore against them went, Their Clubs and Sythes thrown down incontinent They run, and cry'd, oh! God where art thou now These Cavalliers, alas! will us undo. Smalwood had told them, Preaching in a tree, Ten before one, ninety 'fore ten should flee; Smalwood was a true Prophet in this case, One now might ten, and ten might ninety chase. A Northren Trooper after Briggs did ride, About to strike, his club-foot he espy'd, Turning his horse he said thus in great fear, Alas! Comrades is not the foul Fiend here? But with the fight the day began to close To several guards our Prisoners we dispose. Lousie to grow indeed they need not fear, For now of cloaths as thin as hair they were: From close crop't heads, and long ears preminence The name of Round-heads late they did commence.
☞ Next day betimes Bradford we came before, Against the Town our thundering Cannons roar, Resolv'd the place by storme to force we are. But for the on-set while we do prepare Advantag'd by obscurity of night Fairfax with some Commanders take their flight To Selby-ward, which when our General knew A party strong are sent, them to pursue. Fairfax having got (start enough) arriv'd At Selby safe, th'old Lord and he contriv'd, That Town to quit and streight for Hull to make. To Selby come our Horse, some kill, some take, Ere o're the River they all Boated had. ☞ Bradford this while was tane, a plunder sad (But yet deserv'd) it suffer'd. Rotheram tane We had before, with Sheifield: To regain Hull, fatal Hull, our Army makes addresse Hotham of this by force to dispossesse. Fairfax on Gainsborough an assault doth make, Enters the Town, in it doth Kingston take, Who in a Pinnace down the river's sent To Hull; King meets them as they thither went, And plays upon them with his Musketeers, The noble Earl upon the Deck appears, To cry for quarter, for his enemies, But by a Bullet shot from Shore, he dyes. Thus by his friends the noble earpoint's slain. Cavendish marcheth Gainsbrough to regain
From Newark, and close siege thereto had laid, But Cromwel comes to the Defendants aid, They fight: a many Royalists there dye, The rest for safety are inforc'd to flye. Not many hours after this fight was done, New-Castl's Army to the field up come. For Lincolne, Cromwel his Retreat doth make, And Gainsborough soone New-Castle's Army take. Want of Intelligence, thus cast away, Many brave gallants on this fatal day. ☞ Nantwitch before, the Siege some while had laid When Monk at Chester-lands, and Byron made Both with his own and these receiv'd supplies, Them to releeve, this following enterprize. At his approach off the besiegers drew, They meet, and fight, thick now the Bullets flew, Many of both parts on the ground lye slain, Fairfax at length is victor, Monk's here tane, And Byron put to a disordered flight, And nigh to Chester walls pursu'd that night. ☞ Kingston before, our Army late sate down, Mounts high were rais'd, Cannons against the town Are planted, furious batteries many made; Many Granadoes on the Town are plaid, Great Engins, many Ladders frame were Onely perhaps to put the Town in fear, For no assault was made, the siege throughout. With the Defendants many a bloody bout
Our Army had, the strength of that curst hold, Made them in frequent sallies far more bold. Their numerous Cannons from the walls they play Beat down our works, many Commanders slay One fatal shot Leviston of his head Depriv'd, and struck another Captain dead. Alutus with many more of Eminence Here lost their lives; Witherington led from hence A party brave, Boston (as some surmise) To take; but Cromwel meets the enterprize. They fight, at length the Cavalliers do fly, The valiant Hopton, and brave Bowles do dye, With hundreds more, numerous the Prisoners were And great the prize, Cromwel obtained here. ☞ As with her Traine the Queen late Southward went Bravely she had regain'd Burton on Trent. Of Darcy's Blew-Coats some the River wade, Whilst that their Collonel had his entrance made Upon the Bridge, their Cannon leapt upon This is the Kings, said he, thence nobly on His men he leads into the very Town, Their Rampiers and their Bulworks all thrown down Many of the Defendants there do dye, And Burton's taken by their gallantry. Not many hours after the Town was tane, Within the Church by accident the Trane Took fire; the Leads into the Ayre it blew, And of Legg's men, some lam'd, and some it slew
'Gainst Hull the siege was stoutly still maintain'd Though but small hopes that Town should be re∣gain'd But the same day of Winsby's late defeat, Boldly they sally out in numbers great, Beating up many of our Guards; they take And kill a number. And the Scots now make Their entrance into England, and we were Drawn off to meet and stop the Scots Carear. From Hull the Camp thus rose, oh! fatal place, Out of our Annals let's even quite dirace Of Hull and Glocester those odious names, Rebellions hellish sin them much defames, And infamous for ever let them be, Till they repent of their disloyalty. ☞ In that same month from Janus that bears name The Covenanters into England came; Deep was the Snow, conjeal'd the Rivers were With christal Ice, drowning they need not fear? No though the Ice had not been half so strong, Seldome the water doth the Halter wrong. Thus cold the winter, but the zeal was hot, Of the rebellious, and falacious Scot. Some twenty thousand strong, they march in men And with great Guns about some two times ten. Each Loune had numbers of those creatures bold, That sit till taken napping at their hold. If winter their increase did not prevent, Each Loun had bred his triple Regiment;
For a reserve they bore amongst their raggs, At least a couple of well cram'd meale-baggs, His Can, his Pan, his muckle large-horn-spoone, The luggage was of every lousy Loune. A Piper did before each Cohort play, Each Jocky had his Ginny by the way To mow with now and then; All was their own They could lay hands on, the long Robe and Gown Especially they hate; nor did they irk, (Though sacriledge) to plunder every Kirk. What there they found, as bratts of Popery Most superstitious do the Louns decry? This deform'd army for the Reformation, Is hir'd to fight, of this our English Nation. If out of Hell an army they had sought, Sure no such Villains, could from thence be brought. ☞ This Army now advanc'd New-Castle near, The General bade each Lad, draw nigh and hear What to their expedition he could say. 'Tis not bra Lads those Louns that run away, Some five years since, not far from this same place With which we are to fight: Indeed the case Is alter'd now; all England then were foes, But now th'are friends, let's only beat but those, (Casting his eye upon New-Castle's men) Our work's then done, home we may turn agen? What, said I home again, nay by my fay, Not till we have receiv'd even all our pay.
If then all England fled at our first sight, These Cavalliers ne're dare our forces fight, Meethinks as yet, that running Charge I see, When quite through Tine disordered they did flee. And if my Genius, Lads, do truth presage, These Cavalliers ne're will with us ingage, Our cause is now the same that it was then, We have as many, and as gallant men. The Parliament will let us nothing want, Being ingag'd in our good Covenant; These Louns before us we shall hunger-starve, The names of souldiers they do scarce deserve; Wee need not fight, this snow, this frost, this haile Hunger and cold, 'gainst them will soon prevail, And make them either run away; or dye By multitudes, meethinks I do descry, Discouragement already in them all. Many good prizes to our share will fall; Plunder of the Malignants we shall take, But who are such? even whom we please to make, Bra' Quarters we shall have, bra' commodation, Wee'l put our selves into the English fashion. Each Ginny here shall have her silken Gown, Those Cloaks, bra' sutes, good Beavours, all our own Shall be we find: wee'l then fare of the best. With good your worship, th' English shall request The worst Lad here, even for their own: for we Of them and theirs, will the sole Masters be.
Take courage then, and hardship let's indure, Toile is a mean will wealth and ease procure, Even in the height of future gallantry, Past toyles to think on, will most pleasant be. Thus said th'illiterate General while the rest, By a loud shout their high flown hopes exprest. ☞ New-Castles Army was arrived near. On Bowden-hills, therefore these Blew Caps were Streight ordered to their post, whence all that day, From their advantages both Armies play Upon each other, Vollies thick of shot, Yet at the push of Pike ingaged not. On Pinshaw-hills they have a second bout, And for some hours in vollies thick the foot Upon each other play: The English stand Embattel'd, much desiring acommand For to fall on: But all that Winter's spent, And yet no service that was eminent Perform'd, except at Corbridge; Langdale here Had charg'd the Scottish horse, who by him were Routed to'th purpose: numbers here he slew Took many; did their flying Troops pursue With execution great: The Jockies had Ne're such a breakfast; but my Lord forbad The further prosecution of the game. Whereas if he had seconded the same By fresh supplies, many good Souldiers thought, Ruine on all the Scots that day had brought.
But seeing fighting was indeed declin'd, Thousands now Winter starv'd, or hunger pin'd, And English-men impatient of delay, New-Castles Army mouldred quite away. Whom for a while we leave, Fairfax by this In York-shire with his Troops arrived is; And grows each day more and more numerous, Many that were arrayed late by us, And run away, with him do arms up take, From Hallifax, and Bradford many make To him addresse. Sole master of the field, Many of our lesse holds to him do yeild. ☞ Selby before, his forces now he drew; The Town deny'd him, on his Souldiers flew With fury; several entrances they make, More then themselves, of ours they Prisoners take. Whether our men surprized were with fear, Or for those narrower streets too numerous were We shall not now dispute: The Conquerers know, Scarce where their numerous Prisoners to bestow. Manchesters Army towards York repaire, Wortley and Nostill taken by them are, As down they came; Nostil they burn to ground, Putting the most to sword they therein found. Now hovering about York these Armies laid, The Scots advance expecting by whose aid York closely to beleagure, they might be Put into a compleat capacity.
Before which siege, one stratagem of War, For Pomfrets honour shall my Muse declare. ☞ The valiant Bedman Canwood to surprize, From Pomfret marching, doth this plot devise; Of Orrange-Ribbons bought that morning store, Flourished in our Hats each souldier wore; Six men from the waste upwards, stripped were Into their shirts, with blood we all besmear, Their heads and shoulders; These before us drive As Prisoners. At the Town when we arrive, Their Centinel bids stand; come draw thy chain We answered; we to Cromwel do retain And Prisoners brought: That Centry did obey, Then up the Town we streight direct our way Unto the Castle gate, where there did stand A Serjeant, with his Halbert in his hand. Of him accesse demanded, streight the Gate He opens, bids us welcome prosperous fate. Thus brought us to our wish, some there were slain And twenty only of them Prisoners tane. Their Cannons we dismount, some gall ants free (Their Prison's broken) from Captivity; Yet Girlington (though Prisoner there he were) And call'd upon oft by us; did not hear, Not yet could we him find though him we sought In many a Room. To Pomfret safe we brought Our Prize, and Prisoners, though the foes in view, Did even nigh to the Castle us pursue. Finis Libri Quinti.
THE ENGLISH CIVIL VVARRS. BOOK VI. The Contents. New-Castle from the North, the Scots before Doth fly: York Siege: The fight at Marston-more, New-Castle England leaves; a short reveiw, Of all those Northern Seiges that insue. BEhold of men a Concourse from all parts Of England: with arm'd hands divided hearts, Conjur'd of King and Parliament, the right To try by dint of sword, and Martial might; And York-shire by the Fates design'd to bee, The Stage whereon, to act this Tragedy. New-Castle now deserts the Banks of Tine, And to the Scots those Quarters doth resign, His numerous Army almost ruin'd now, By means insensible; And who knows how?
But that I may the noble General here, From all suspition of dis-loyal clear I'dare ingage; that Boreaes might take wing, Sooner at Nilus-head: Tygras-spring, Sooner in Itie Island: than that he Perfideous prove, unto his Majesty. Whether then, fate conspir'd to aid the Scot Or General King with Lesley did complot, This gallant Army basely to betray, And Fabious like to conquer by delay Is still unknown, yet this is too too plain, That Lesley did this victory onely gain, By times procrastination, hunger, cold, O how resolv'd! how numerous! and how bold Upon our first advance our Armies were, How few! how hunger-starv'd! surpriz'd with fear; Now in Retreat, what thousands run away! Or kill'd by hunger, cold, or base delay. Neither the number nor the fortitude Of Lesley and his Scots, our men subdu'd. If that our army at our first advance Against the Scot, had bravely try'd the chance Of War: these Victors might have been captiv'd, Our Northern Army had York-siege surviv'd, The Scots like mercinary slaves most slain, The rest sent with a vengeance home again. But see! the Scots do march, this barbarous crew Even to the walls of York, our men pursue.
Oxen, Sheep, Horses, all thats's in their way, Spoons To these rapatious Harpies proves a prey. Their Cans, their Pans, their Meale, their long-horn Their raggs, their baggs, so load the lousy Louns, Their Drums, their Guns, their Plundering in the way Their slower marches do so much delay, That York hath for a siege, time to prepare, And our now dispers'd Troops united are. Ramsdale from Leeds, doth lead his Regiment; From Knaisbrough, and from Pomfret some are sent And those too under Belhouses command, That late at Selby did escape the hand Of Fairfax: come these broken parties all Conveen'd at York: Our honoured General Beckning his hand, our silence to request; Thus to the Army his designs exprest? ☞ Souldiers we cannot in the field withstand, These Rebels that flock in on every hand? 'Tis not the Scots alone but Fairfax too, With whom at present we must have to do; Selby is wonne, most of our Souldiers tane, And what but York to Leagure doth remain. Manchesters Army also now draws near, All these combin'd are, to besiege us here. Therefore in York these Foot I will secure, Till from the King assistance wee procure, Hulls bloody siege in kind we will requite, And with these walls, and guns we'l make them fight
With fallies bold their courage wee'll fore-stall, With thundring shot, their bodies wound and gall. May Yorks siege prove as sad, disasterous To Fairfax, as his Hulls hath done to us. May all these Blew-Caps once before us flee, As Caesars men Torguatus did from thee. Langdale shall with these Troops fly to the King And such relief will shortly hither bring, As shall these Rebels all then put to flight, Or bravely vanquish if they dare to fight. Within these walls, provision here's in store, For half a years subsistance or for more, These Citizens all Loyal, here secure, Within these walls we may our selves immure. Necessity admits no Law, we must Now to these walls, souldiers, our selves intrust, And though to be besieged be some grief, Yet here's our joy, certainty of relief. At this, the Horse now for the South design'd March off: The Foot are unto York confin'd. By this the pale Queen of the silent night. With her dark Mantle vailed had the light, The Gates commanded are for to be shut, And round upon the walls strong Guards are put. ☞ The first besiegers that discovered were, Were the Scotch Armies, who next day appear Rang'd in battailions great; Then Lesley takes Bishop-Thorpe for his Quarters, Fairfax makes
At Forforth, residence; Manchesters force Encampe at Clifton: Thus with foot and horse Of armed foes, under three Generals, Surrounded are Yorks now well manag'd walls. But no assault this City for to take By violence did these besiegers make, Save Manchester alone; whose great design Was, these our City walls to undermine. Blow up, and enter; but his Minors skill Fail'd, with the execution of his will. As stronger winds striving their force to vent, From Caverns under ground; furiously rent The Rocks, and make even mountains to give way And to their uncontrouled rage obey, Causing the Earth to gape and to devour Whole Cities, yea whole Islands; even such power This Mine now sprung had; for up to the sky, Earth, Walls, and Towers, and men on these do flye In a sulphurious globe; till down at length, They fall, the Powder having lost its strength. Then in the place you quickly might espy Those lofty walls, and Towers intomb'd to lye In their own ruines: he are a souldier's head, And there his leggs, or armes discovered. But not the City, but the Manour-wall, By this sulphurious Powder-blast doth fall. At this, the Arm'd foes with great fury run, Up at the breaches, and doubtlesse had won
The City, but that here the inner wall, Still standing firm, their expectations all Deceiv'd: And here bagan a fierce Dispute, Their errour by repulse ours would refute; And they by further violence maintain Against our Sally-Ports; till from the slain; The mannour-Guard like to a great Land-flood Did overflow with intermixed blood; Yet at the length the enemy was wors'd, And from the breaches headlong re-inforc'd, Where now on heaps, wounded, and dead they laid And buryed in those graves their own Mines made. But the besieged and the besiegers here We leave a while; Prince Ruperts Troops draw near Worcester and Bridge-North, now left in haste And all those Western Counties now surpast. His swifter Troops new Quarters do acquire, In the adjoyning towns of Lanca-shire. Stopwash, the Prince to stop did first design, And therefore did their thick-set-hedges line With numerous companies of Musketiers; But Washington of these the coast soon clears, Charging them in their flanks, making them flee Into the Town, in whose pursute even hee Entred; putting some hundreds to the Sword, Leverpoole to surrender doth accord. And off from Latham the Besiegers run, Hearing what Rupert had at Stopwash done.
☞ Though thus the Princ's numerous Troops af∣fright The most: yet Bolton dare oppose his might. In their more bold affront they dare assay His Quarters up to beat; and men to slay. But to correct their prouder insolence, The Prince can with so much of time dispence To storm the Town, and cause them to lament, Thus to provoak a Princes discontent; For full three hundred Widdows here are left, Which were of husbands in this storm bereft. And not the Towns men only, here are slain, But hundreds more of souldiers, that maintain The town against us: All which town as prize The Prince unto his souldiers doth demize. From hence to Skipton, Rupert's Army come, But by the way they Thornton-Hall had wonne, Which down unto the ground they burne with fire That Rebells thither may no more retire. From hence to York the Prince's marches were Directed: But when the Besiegers hear His near approach, they raise their siege in haste, Leaving their Cabins, Hutts, and Trenches waste; And their three Generals those their forces all, To Randezvow immediately do call, Where they consult, both where, and how to fight The Princes Army; marching off that night Towards Long-Marston, where a spacious Plain; From Hessom, or Long-Marston bearing name
Doth lye; in some places full thick beset, With whin-bushes, and Marshes deep and wet. Least these Disorder should their Horse, they take A field well grown with Corn their camp to make. The onely, and most advantagious ground, That round about that spacious Moore was found. Here they their murthering Cannons plant, and then In order good Imbattaile do their men. Of intermixed English-Scottish bands Their main battallia stood; Crawford commands, And leads on these: On the left wing and side Cromwel with his Manchestrian Troopes doth ride. The right wing was Sir Thomas Fairfax care, To whom the Scottish troops conjoyned are, Which David Lesley leads, the Generals find A place, the main Battallions close behind To lodge their Tents: Thus these three Armies large, Stand Marshal'd to expect the Prince's charge. ☞ By this, New-Castle a brave party had, Of Foot, in white-Coats uniformely clad, Led out from York, some Gentry, Voluntiers, Attend the General, and his Souldiers Well mounted: we near Popleton do meet The Prince's Army, and imbrace and greet Our old acquaintance, (for the fates decree, That these the last imbraces now shall be Of thousands of us) Ouse having o're past. The Prince the Army marshal'd all in hast.
But some Commanders thought by wise delay He might have famish'd and made run away Even without blood, the numerous enemy. Pomfret, York, Knaisborough, Garrisons had we Environing the foe, which might have staid Provisions from their Camp; and doubtlesse made Them to remove, fresh Quarters to have sought, And so for us a fair advantage wrought. But Ruperts purpose nothing can disswade, But even that night, their Campe, he will invade, And to our disadvantage make them fight. ☞ Goring our left wing leads, Byron the right, In the main battail do our white Coats stand With others; the word's given, and straight com∣mand To fall on; Thus on our own Ruine bent, Our souldiers all couragiously on went. ☞ With equal fury now both Armies meet, And with their Cannon-Rhetorick loudly greet, Bullets begin at distance the dispute, Till their thick flights Sword Logick could refute. The Horse Rang'd in battalia's proudly prance, While fire oblickely through their eyes doth glance From thundering Guns, like lightning from the sky Whose fiery balls, thicker than hail-stones flyes Shrill Trumpets sounding, with loud beating Dr Clashing of Armour, with great roaring guns Rattleing of Pikes, Powl-Axes, naked Swords, From different minds different effects affords.
These sights the Valorous more do animate, But Cow-heart, timerous-courage, quite abate, And if dismay should not diminish fear, Such would fall dead before they wounded were. The empty air is fill'd with dolorous crys, The ground with bodies of the men that dyes. Whole Ranks and Files by Cannon fiery balls Asunder cut, upon the ground there falls. Here without head, there without leggs or thighs In blood, dismembred bodies wallowing lyes. And that pale Death may potently fulfil Her pleasure; she most barbarously doth kill The Living, with those Limbs dasht off the Dead; Here flyes an Arm, there flies a souldiers head Which strike their fellows down even to the ground Thus friends by friends a way to kill Death found. The smaller shot clouded bright Phocbus light, Darkning the Ayre with their far thicker flight; Whose whistling fury quickly did assaile The strong'st brest-peeces, and best Coats of male, And through the strongest armour passage found, To death, even brave Commanders for to wound. But where no armour did their fury stay, Theough many bodies they inforce their way; them gasping on that bloody ground. om the nigh Vallies and the Woods re-sound, T doleful occhoes of their dying cryes, But most of all the Sword doth Tyrannize
And glut it self with the expence of blood, Which now like to an over-spreading flood Ran under our Horse feet; for every sword By this time, had some breast or other goar'd, And issues made, by which their souls had left Their bodys, now of blood, and life bereft. These several streams of blood from several wounds Winding along those Vallies, lower grounds Thy lesser waters Nid, do multiply, Thy streams discolour with their crimson Dye, Thou into Ouse dis-burthenest the same, Who swiftly down to York with tydings came. And to the Citizens did soon discry, In bloody colours, this dire tragedy. But still most furiously both sides maintain The fight, though thousands on the ground lye slain. Here might you see a strong couragious Horse, Whose wounds add fury to his former force, (His livelesse Rider thrown) through friends through foes, Through ranks, through files, make way; and where he goes Doth men by scores of their last breath deprive Whose falls himself doth not so long survive, Till on the point of a well level'd Spear, To'th'he art himself he runs in his carear; And falling with his heels about him lies, Till strength and blood expended, there he dies. Here might you see a wounded Rider thrown, There others from their horse come tumbling down
Hang by the stirrops, dasht against pikes and swords, Thus fate to one, more deaths than one affords, For with the fall the frollick horse afright, Through thickest Ranks takes his enforced flight, Tossing about his hanging Riders head, Killing the living, often with the dead. A timerous foot-man did himself immure, Amongst dead corps, thinking to bee secure From flying shot, where closely as he lay, Some Troops of Horse design'd to charge that way, Came prauncing down the Moore, in full carrears, Squeesing the blood, out of his nose, mouth, ears, As he lay sprawling under their horse feet Who flies from one, another death doth meet. A Cannon bullet stroke off Sandies head, And with it hit poor Wolley who fell dead, Crying alack! alack! I ever ken'd, Sandio's fauce head, would bring mee to my end. A thick grown wood, unto the Moore stands near Where many a blew-Cap hid himself for fear. Patrick behind the bulk of a grown Tree. Peep'd often out, the battaile for to see, Thinking that if his party lost the day To span his gates, for Scotland run away. But as poor Patrick at bo-peep thus plaid, A bullet shot at randome did invade His fore-head naked; who falling, mercy cry'd Alas! alas! for Ginny, and so dy'd.
When Wolly heard the smaller shot to play, In such thick whistling Vollies, he away, Spanning his gates through Ranks, and Files, at last Presuming he all dangers had fur-past He stops to see, and hear, the fights event, A bullet from a Peece at randome sent, Hit Wolly where he stood devoid of fear, Under the long of his right side leav-ear, Who falling dead did never there intend Under a whin-bush thus to make his end. But thickest ranks of arm'd foes to assay, Is still more safe then thus to run away. ☞ The victory still was very dubious, Yet rather seem'd to smile, and fawn on us, For our left wing, had routed now their right, The Scots and the Fairfaxians put to flight. All their three Generals now the field forsook, To Bradford ward Lesley his fleet betook, Whom wee pursue, his Scots now curse the time, That e're they crost the Northern Tweed, or Tine. Their raggs, meal-baggs, gull-pans, long-cans down cast They span their gates, and run away full fast. In doleful accents, now the Louns do cry, Mercy and Quarter, O! how thick they lye Wounded and slain, how many Prisoners were, How many Colours taken? in their Rear We follow still, thinking the day our own But Goring our Commander should have known,
That to pursue one party was not good, Whilst any of the adverse Body stood; If after we had put that wing to rout, Against the other we had wheel'd about And on the flank have charg'd them, sure we might Victors have been; Crommwel's men put to flight And Routed, unto Cauwood sent them all, After old Fairfax and their General. ☞ But now when Cromwel (apt enough to take Advantage) see our Horse the field forsake Now rifling, now pursuing such as fled In their right wing he presently up led His Troops; to whom in brief he thus did say, Assure your selves, brave souldiers of the day. How stand these foot, and horse to us expos'd? How easy are they all to be inclos'd? How will they flye our Armed Troops before, And for the rest that now have left the Moore In pursute of our other wing they'l yeild Or flye; when we are masters of the field. If but one Troop of ours fall in their Rear, They'l run, surpriz'd with unexpected fear; Onely the time at present doth require, Your valour to demonstrate; you desire The spoile of this rich field; Victors to be; And from our wish, but one brave charge are we. Our Generals all now off the field are gone, The Victories glory will be ours alone.
And what the Prince and his brave Chavalry Possesse; after one Charge all ours shall be, Their Sumptors, and Port-Mantles, by and by We shall have time to search. Then furiously On Byron's wing they charge, routed, and broke Our bravest Regiments: Each bloody stroak That their Pole-Axes gave was present death, And thousands did deprive of their last breath; Scarce one of ours escap'd without a wound, But our vain stroaks and thrusts again re-bound Off their Arm'd breasts and heads; The Prince doth flye, And yeild the field to the proud enemy. Now when the Prince's Horse thus routed were, A party wheel'd about, and in the Rear Charged on us; broke our disorder'd Horse, And from the pursute of the Scots inforce Us unto a base flight; Yet our brave Foot, Especially our white-Coats stood it out. For though the foe on each side them surround They scorn to yeild, but drawing to a round On every side most stoutly do give fire, Forcing the conquering foe oft to retire, Till all their Ammunition's spent and gone, Our Horse all fled the field, they left alone Night drawing on, and many of them slain; No hopes at all the victory to obtain. Rather opprest by th'adverse multitude, Then by true valour conquer'd, th'are subdu'd;
Taken, kill'd, wounded, even most barbarously By the insulting desperate enemy. ☞ After their Arms down thrown, they Quarter cry'd Their armed Troopes amongst them fiercely ride, And put them to the Sword, in vain to live Most of them supplicate; Cromwel would give No quarter: Much delighting in that blood, That ran under his horse-feet like a flood. Like as a ravenous Wolf greedy of prey, Is not content alone, to kill and slay So many of the flock as shall suffice His greedy Jaws; but even doth Tyrannize Over the sheep, and hundreds of them kill, To satiate his so natural-savage will. So Cromwel's bloody mind not satisfy'd, With all that bloods expence of such as dy'd During the fight, and while we kept the field Murthers even Captives, after they did yeild, And to the mercy mercylesse expose Themselves of such in-humane savage foes. ☞ The bloodyest field of all our Civil Wars Now foughten is; the furious Conquerers Our Cannons and our Carriages possesse. Here Cary, Slingsby, Prideaux acquiesse Upon the bed of fame; affociates Are Wentworth, and stout Gleddal in their Fates, Here Lampton, Dacres, Metham, Kirton, dye Hure, with Fenwick these accompany.
But now the kind obscurity of night, Gave an advantage of far safer flight To Rupert, who (though with a fresh supply Claveren came up next day) yet will not try The chance of War again: but rather yeild What's lost, then hazard more, by a new field. Nor were our hopes then altogether vain, If we next day had Rallied to re-gain The victory: even those of them that staid Upon the field, it would have much dismaid, To see us on the Moore again appear, Before their broken Troopes united were. ☞ But Rupert flyes, (though North-ward first he went Up to the South, in minde much discontent; That this great fight had such a sad effect. What sure said he, it was not my neglect In Marshalling my men, no want of skill Or valour on my part, that to this ill, And fatal Rout, expos'd my souldiers, Only I was too forward as appears. Why did I Charge this night? or why not stay; Till Claveren's coming up? (though his delay His Armies service did this day prevent) Must I be rash, 'cause he was negligent. Why did I not refresh my men before? I did attempt to march up to the Moore; Both Horse and Man our longer marches tyr'd, And of repose some longer time requir'd;
If we before we fought a while had stay'd, Perhaps some fair advantage to our aid Conspired had: Seldome the Powers Divine, Do give successe unto a rash design. ☞ This night strange thoughts New-Castle's head possest At length in passion he these words exprest. O! resolution strange of adverse Fate! How am I thrown from a most prosperous state, Into mis-fortunes nethermost abyss Yet this the honour, of my sufferings is, And that which seasons all my sorrows well, That with, and for, my Soveraigns cause I fell. Where shall I fly? where shall I be secure? Within what walls shall I my self immure? Did forty thousand Souldiers once appear, Under my Colours, did the Rebels fear My numerous forces? and their Dreadful Powers? Were all the Towns 'twixt Trent and Tweed then ours Excepting Hull: And now behold! even I Where to secure my self, whether to flye Am dubious: had I Hulls siege declin'd, And to th' associate Countys then design'd My marches, sure our cause had gain'd thereby. Or if the first time we the Scots did eye, We had them fought, no doubt but then we might Have put those ragged Ruffians all to flight. But time, with fair advantages now past, Are not to be recall'd: With this, in haste
He Posts to Scarborough, where both King and he The Seas do take; intent for Germany. ☞ Gleman, of York the government doth take, And for a Siege the best provision make That time would then admit; Scorning to yeild The City yet; though we had lost the field. ☞ By this, all their Three Generals that had fled The field: return'd, and up to York they led Their men: The City to besiege again. Each General his old station did retain Having their Cannons planted, night and day, Most furiously against the walls they play; They vow, the work by storm for to effect, Nor age, nor sex, their Swords shall then respect. But Gleman doth their prouder vaunts defie, Yet at the length Provision's scarcity Prevails; On tearms they do capitulate, York's yielded: Gleman marcheth out in state And Martial gallantry: To Carlile where We leave him for a while; The Scots appeare By this before New-Castle, on the wall Make furious batteries, while their Miners fall To work, which work they to perfection bring, And trains now laid, their several Mines they spring As great sulphurious globes of stone and fire, From Aetna's hideous Jaws the clouds aspire; Whence falling, all the neighbouring Vales they spread With Coals adust, the fire extinct, and dead
Even so the trembling earth was heard to roar, Which, with those walls, and Towers the Powder tore Up with great violence, and lightly threw Into the ayre; here like a Comet flew A souldiers head all on a flame, and there Whole guards in those sad Ruines buryed were. Up at the breaches flye the Scottish Foot, Though the Defendants made resistance stout, And bravely did from street, to street maintain The fight; till numbers of both parts were slain, And Tines augmented Tide discoloured, With the great influx of the blood here shed. Entred now were also the Scottish Horse, Which Marley to the Castle doth inforce, Upon the which, they forthwith Batteries make, But good Conditions while they might pertake; Surrender's made. Then did the Scots sit down Carlile before, boldly demand the Town, Thinking perhaps the New-Castilian Fate, The valiant Gleman could Disannimate. At his Defiance furiously they play Their battering shot, by Mineing to assay To make their entrance, Ladders they provide; But the Defendants bravely curbe their pride By frequent sallies, killing multitudes, Which the Scots high presumptions all excludes, Of taking Carlile by arm'd violence. Therefore most strongly they themseves intrench
Knowing what force could not, that famine will Effect. Provisions fail, Horses they kill Within those walls; their Horses all up eat, Dogs, Cats, old shooes, Mice, Rats, nay Froggs are meat. Yet Gleman e're to yeild he will consent, To know the pleasure of the King had sent. Phillipson bravely mounted through their guards Had charg'd; and now rides post to Oxford wards, At Borrow-Bridge some English Horse him tooke, But a close friend by chance in that same Troope Secur'd his Horse and Armes, till he could make From York, which soon he did, his wish'd escape. Near Ferry-Bridge, the place his friend assign'd, (Thither now got on foot) he safe did find His Horse and Armes; hence to the King he went, To whom he Gleman's Letters did Present In Oxford, whence he with the Kings reply Return'd, and now to Carlile drawing nigh, Quite through the Scottish Troopes he bravely rode. But famine will not suffer their aboad Longer within those walls, which to the Foes Surrendred are: Gleman to Oxford goes, With a small traine, lean, naked, hunger-pin'd And the Scots are, for Hereford design'd. E're Fairfax was made Generalissimo, A party strong he Hemsley led unto, VVhere while in Leagure with his men he laid, One from the wall so dexterously had play'd
A shot; that three inch lower had debar'd Him, from what victories he got afterward. But he recovers, and the place doth take, Though Skiptoniers it to relieve did make A brave attempt. Scarborough was battered sore, The greatest Tower whereof asunder tore; Half standing, half into the Sea down fell. Upon the top there stood a Sentinel, Who in the renting, to the standing side Had leap'd, and sav'd his life. But to abide Longer within those walls, famine forbad And Chamley yeilds, what he possessed had. Devoid of any grounded hopes of aid, Scroop of his Bolton had surrender made. Not long on Knaisborough had their Cannons plaid E're breaches wide in those old walls were made, Which Croft (though valiant) did necessitate Now to submit to a surrenderers Fate. VVith Horse and Foot, Pomfret they do surround Some Towers whereof were battered to the ground And the Defendants much distress'd, when wee VVith a brave party, from the South do flee. (Langdale commands in cheef) swifter then flame On the besiegers with our Troopes wee came After a short Dispute, few slain, we take Of Prisoners store, Pomfret releiv'd, we make A quick return: To Melton-Mowberry near, VVith Rossiter we skirmish'd had, and there
Were valiant Girlington, and Gascoin slain As we came down. Pomfret's besieg'd again, And though with frequent Sallies they assaile The enemy, yet Famine doth prevaile, Which Lowder doth on tearms to yeild compel. The Sandalliers had plaid their parts full well; And made the enemies full often feel, Their swords were made of the best temper'd Steel. Yet famine's leane Pittard enforc'd the Gates A passage for the Foe, this perforates To enter; and for the besieg'd away To march: 'Gainst Latham the besiegers lay A year, what Art, or Force, could do, to win This House was done, but bravely those within Not onely their own Interest did maintain, But hundreds of the enemie had slain. Resolv'd the gallant Countesse was to try All straits, e're Rebels she will gratifie By a surrender; but, alas! compel'd To yeild what she so stoutly had with-held By famine, this Virago noble is. Though Greenay valiantly held out, e're this Yeilded it was. Now Skipton they assay Enter the Town, plunder, and bear away What lighter then stone-walls in it they finde; Batteries against the Castle were design'd, Numerous Granadoes in the interim plaid; When here the Leagure had some few daies laid
From Apleby upon Paroll I came, Having exactly first perform'd the same. I to the Castle with a Trumpet went Whom we return'd. Their Scouts stood eminent On Rumles-Moore, from whence they might us When any party we together drew. Therefore some twenty in their sight do mount, view They take th'Alarm, and to their Guards account Our motion; In the interim we drew out, Three hundred undiscovered Horse and Foot, Their Horse all mounted, our small party drew Streight on our ambuscado: out we flew; Their three divisions soon we put to rout. Briggs had some parties to draw out of Foot Whereof some slain, the rest we dissipate, Take Briggs with many more. So fortunate In such attempts, were the bold Skiptoneirs; Their gallantry, in these their acts appears, In their own meadows, numerous Horse and Foot, A party small of them did break and rout, Tripleing their number with the Prisoners tane. At Ast-wick-Fair how many had they slain, Taken, and broke; their party very small; Wren's Regiment we beat at Eshton-Hall. But with a hundred Horse, Kighley's designe Was gallant, though alas! the love of Wine In some Commanders, a miscarriage wrought Fatal. But we to yeilding tearms are brought,
And hence, convey'd to Leichfield, march away In Arms compleat, and souldier-like array. Finis Libri Sexti.
THE English CIVIL WARRS. BOOK VII. The Contents. The Model new, with some of Cromwels deeds: Lidney Siege raisd: Ludberry fight succeeds. Taunton besieg'd: The King storms Leicester; Naisby fight: Gorings forces routed are At Lang-port: whats at several Sieges done, Routon and Shearburn-fights: Westchester won Kilsithe fight: Digby's rout on Carlisle Sands: Torrington fight: Goring his men disbands. Stow fight: Oxford besieg'd: The King doth make Thence in disguise unto the Scots escape: Hereford is surprized by a Plot: Newark Siege: North the King goes with the Scot. THe Parliament now their Grandees recall All from command: Young Fairfax Generall Is made of England: By this Modell new, Many advantages to them accrew
Emulous Lords now being laid away, Men of less note, will need the lesser pay, Spirits most active for the Cause they chuse, Of milder Zeal. Commanders they refuse As useless now: Cromwell for Eminence, Was now the MAN next to his excellence. Northampton's Horse, with the Queens Regiment, At Islip-bridge, in Quarters resident Cromwell upon them comes, they fight, at length The Royalists ore-powered are in strength; Cromwell some hundreds of these Horse doth take With the Queens Colours: then pursuit doth make To Blackington after the rest that fled. Cromwell demands the House; delivered By Windebank on tearms it is next day, Both Horse and Arms they leave, and march away To Oxford: where a Martial Court decree, Windebank shall for this delivery Bee shot to Death: when too late to prevent This Collonels Death, the King doth it resent, Blaming Prince Ruperts too much urgency, In this young Gallants late Catastrophe; His Royal bounty doth the King express, (All hee could do) to his Relicts distress. Near Bampton-Bush, Vavisors party lay, Cromwell his marches doth direct that way So privately, that hee surpriz'd them all, Numerous his Prisoners, and his prize not small.
Lidney against Massie close Siege had laid, Langdale at length to the Defendants aid, Came with a party brave, Massie off beat, Many hee slew, and took, in this defeat. To Ludberry Rupert with his Forces came, Massie before possest was of the same, But seeing Ruperts Horse so near drew out; Whilst off for Glocester hee sent his Foot, Hee charged with his Horse: fierce the dispute, Massie at length doth fly, in the pursuit Rupert shot Massie's Horse, doubtless his aim Was at himself, though short his bullets came; Harlow was tane, Bacchus laid on the ground, Bleeding of his (now last) and mortal wound. Numbers were kill'd, numbers of them were tane, On Ruperts part, was noble Haistings slain. ☞ Hopton on Tauntons Seige had now design'd, Greenvill and Goring were with him combin'd: Willington-House by storm they late regain'd, Many within put to the sword: maintain'd This Siege was with much courage, and more art. Nor wanted these on the Defendant's part, Which Blake advanced unto such renown. Many assaults were made against the Town, Mounts high were rais'd, off which their Cannon plaid Fairfax sends Graves at length unto their aid, At his approach th' Assailants march away, Tauntons releiv'd, nor longer Graves would stay.
Th' Assailants soon renew the Siege again, Where to their work wee leave them to remain. ☞ Massie recruited, Evesham comes before, Demands the Town, Legg no such spirit bore To yeild at the first Summons, Massie then Commands the storm; with loss three times his men Were bravely beaten off; Sevorn grew red Soon with the influx of the blood here shed; But at the fourth assault, the Town they win, Many put to the Sword of those within. ☞ Fairfax and Brown, Oxford before sate down, But the Defendants all the Meadows drown, Sleight their out Forts, and all the Suburbs fire, Cromwell doth from the Kings pursuit retire. (For Cromwell had a while follow'd the King, But now recall'd) doth to the Leagure bring His well-arm'd troops; while Fairfax veiws the town And ore the Bowling-green rides up and down, A Cannon-bullet from the works doth fly, (Pity it mis'd) which wafts his head hard by, Which made his excellence in great fear, Once vaile his Beavour to a Cavallier. But now let's leave this Leagure, and review The Kings transactions, who together drew A gallant Army, and North-westward went, The Siege at Chester for to raise intent. Brearton his Siege draws at the Kings access, The King wheels East; to Leicester address
Wee make, demand the Town in vain, for they Within do entrance to their King deny. At this, command is given to storm the Town, After our Guns wide breaches had beat down, (Though those within did make resistance stout) Resolutely wee enter, Horse and Foot. Those enemies that yet survive do fly To th' Market-place, where their Artillery, With some fresh Companies of Horse and Foot Did stand, with these wee have a bloody bout; For full two hours and more they here maintain The fight, in fine the most of them were slain; Here laid whole heaps of Scotish Voluntiers, There Dalbin's men by scores; ruddy appears The Soure with blood, the Channels did convey Out of those streets; here Gray's men slaughtered lay The Town was plundered, Gray and Hacker were Prisoners: Great was the prize was taken here. ☞ Fairfax hears of these actions of the King, Rises from Oxford, and doth Northward bring His Army: Orders unto Cromwell sent, (Who lately to the Isle of Ely went, From Oxford Siege) to march; Naisby fields are For the most fatal fight of this sad War Design'd the place: The King had got the wind, Which now stood West; to Rupert was assign'd, With Morice the right wing, Langdale did head The left; the King did the main Battail lead,
The right hand Tertia Linsey did command Bards, and stout Lisle the left; Ashley did stand With Linsey. Skippon now had Marshalled Fairfax's Army, Skippon's selfe up led The main Battalia, Cromwell the right wing, Ireton the left, Pride, Rainsborough, Hammond bring On the reserves; The Hill was their intent To get, which the King hastens to prevent. The Signals given, the thundering Cannons play, Of smaller shot, thick flights obscure the day, That vale seem'd all in one united fire, Which in a Pile sulphurous did aspire The very clouds; the Aire shrill Trumpets wound, Clashing of Armour, the tumultuous sound Of different voices, reach th' Olympick Skye, Numbers of both parts, on the ground now lye Bleeding, the last of their, yet vital blood, Which now the field o'reflow'd like to a flood. That Brook from Welford that doth downward glide Ran now more blood than water; proudly ride The prauncing and curvetting Horse about. Rupert by this, put their left wing to rout, Who like a swelling stream down fiercely bore, All opposition him that stood before. While Rupert follows the pursuit amain, As far as Naisby, numbers having slain Of their dispersed Troops: with slaughter Great, Cromwell with his, did our left wing defeat.
Our Northern Troops too much inriched were At Leicester, to stand well to it here, If these of Leicesters prize less had thought, Perhaps much better here they would have fought. Yet did stout Langdale here himself behave, Like to himself, making resistance brave, While either skill or courage might prevail. Our Foot their main Battailians do assail Most boldly, puting most of them to rout, Skippon and Ireton wounded at this bout, The last our Prisoner too: Cromwell doth see Their Foot, back on their own Reserves to flee, Rides thither and doth re-inforce them on Joyning his Horse, mainly they press upon Our standing bodies; who assailed were At once, both in their Fronts, Flanks, and their Rear, For some indeed to admiration fought, Whilest others by their heels for safety sought. ☞ A Cobler from North-hampton lately came Fairfax to serve, but here hee got a lame, Having in his right Leg receiv'd a shot, Tush saith the Cobler, Sirs I value't not, For runing from my work, my Wife mee beat, Now shall I sit much closer to my Seat. As Mars himself against the Giants fought On Phlegra's Plains, when Heaven to scale they thought; So active was the King in this same fight, Giving his Souldiers of Heroick might,
A still to bee admired president Sometime ingag'd, numbers his own hand sent To Erebus; sometimes hee did recall, And rally such as fled; a Generall Hee shew'd himself, both valorous and expert, Acting Ulisses and Achilles part. His words the Timerous much did animate, His acts the Valorous strove to imitate. Such as did run, hee did implore to stand, To every wing hee Rode and gave command, For what to our advantage might conduce. For Cowardise who now could plead excuse? Seeing their Soveraign King thus to ingage, In the most sharpe Encounters, Fury, Rage, Tumult, Disorder every place doth fill, Sirrah, the Sword! and then no more but kill, Pistol, strike down, here heaps of men do lye, With Horses intermixt; here some do flye, Others pursue; here lay a Leg, or Head, And there an Arm, under our Horse feet Dead Many were trod, nor could wee understand Whom to obey, to whom to give Command, Such the confusion; thick our Pistols flye At one another; all the Ground doth lye Bespread with these; Pole-axes cleave Men down, VVhich oft left fix'd are in the patients Crown. From covered Armour our charg'd Tucks rebound, And in the Glance oft times do kill or wound
That party whom against wee did not aim. ☞ By this the sword might sole dominion claim Over the field, with this alone wee plead, Till many a Gallant on the field lay Dead: Brown, Dallison, Cave, Band and Markam slain, Linsey, and Ashley wounded, now 'tis vain Ours to intreat to stand. They round beset Most of our Foot, the Coach, the Cabinet, The Royal Standard of his Majesty Are taken; all our great Artillery, The thousand Arms, well nigh five thousand men; ☞ To Leicester-ward now wee flye, but when His Majesty came there, hee would not ftay, But even that night for Litchfield rode away. Cromwell pursues, takes many, then beset Leicester, till his Excellence could get Up with the Foot; which on in haste they bring, Thinking perhaps, here to have tane the King. The town they Summon; their demands deni'd, They vow to storm it, and forthwith provide The Onset for: Mounts rais'd, Batteries they make. But Haistings, while as yet hee might partake The Benefit of good conditions yeilds. ☞ Many successful Skirmishes, and fields. About this time, fall to the Parliament: Gell towards Newark late a party sent, VVhich met a Troop from thence, they fought, and beat The Royalists; Mitton a great defeat
Near Shrewsberry, had given to some of ours: Brearton near Chester also now o're powers A party, near two hundred Prisoners took, Hingham's now yeilded, but a while let's look, To Fairfax who march'd Taunton's siege to raise. Goring draws off to Lang-port, there Displaies His Army; Massy first charg'd in his Rear, Ere the Fairfaxians Troops advanced were Up to the field: neither could vaunt success In this contest, Fairfax comes, doth possess Himself of Sutton fields, where upon sight Of Goring hee draws up, intent to fight. Goring presaging that hee might bee beat, In the best order, for his safe retreat Unto Bridge-Water, did his men dispose. Many strong Hedges did those Lanes inclose, VVhich with his Musketiers hee lin'd, then stood His Cannon, and his Horse in order good Rang'd in the Lane: Fairfax by this drew nigh, Though at some distance thick the Bullets flye, And many a Man lay Dead upon the plain. But Gorings Foot at length they do constrain, Quite from their post, Bethell then charg'd the Horse VVho with a vengeance did him re-inforce VVith loss; till Desborough his reserve came on, And pressing sore the Royal Horse upon Put them to rout; Goring did what hee could, To bring the most of his safe to his hold,
Odd of a thousand on both parts were slain, Some Cannon Goring lost, many were tane Of his: The rest, Fairfax amain pursues Up to Bridge-water: first the Town he views, Then sends his summons in, to yeeld on sight (As Burroughs now had done) or else that night He vows to storm the Town, put all to sword, Goring is gone; Digby returns him word To do his worst: But Fairfax makes a pause, Till Peters Preach'd the justnesse of the cause, And till his men received had their pay. And then with fire and sword he did assay The Town; The storme was furious, many slain But in the end the low Town they re-gain. And Fairfax Colours on the works display, To grace those bloody Tryumphs of that day. ☞ Out of the high Town, the Defendants power Upon their heads, a most stupendious shower Of great Granado's, which the low Town fire About their ears; Fairfax doth much admire Their Courage, for a second storm prepares. Yet more for's own security than theirs, Offers conditions; which refus'd, they rear Their Ladders, and go on, but bravely were Repulsed, with th' effusion of much blood; On heaps they lye now dead, their Ladders stood Forsaken, and the Trenches round were fill'd Now with the Arms and bodies of their kill'd.
Fairfax thus beat, his thoughts doth soon Reflect Upon a new design, which took effect, Numbers of Iron Bullets straight they make, Which shot red hot, straw, Hay, and Houses take A sudden fire, the Town's all on a flame. Eliot to treat for the Defendants came, But Fairfax all his offers now refus'd, Telling him they his patience had abus'd, And that indeed he'l put them all to sword, Or burn them there: Yet doth recall his word, And grant them with their lives to march away. Thus of that Town to ground burn'd both parts lay No house or harbour the poor Townsmen had, Of Civil wars a spectacle most sad. Hence unto Bath, Fairfax directs his way, Rich with his Forelorne did the Town assay, Gaining some out-works, e're the General came. But on these tearms Bridges doth yeild the same; That he and his, in war-like posture should, To Bristol march; To Shearburn that strong hold. Next Fairfax came, of which being deny'd His Mines, and Batteries, for a while he ply'd; Vaine were his Mines, his Batteries do prevaile, Making wide breaches, on they go, and scale In furious wise; The Cannons while they plaid Had the Defendants not so much dismaid. But Dives bids them fight, and lets them know, In valour, their security all now
Consisted: But the enemies on presse, On every side the Castle they distresse; Those walls not able longer them to shield; They beat a Parley, and on tearms do yeild. ☞ Bristol before, the General next sate down, Boldly of Rupert doth demand the Town; Yet e're the summons, Rupert sallyed out, And from the fired Suburbs beat their Foot? But on again they come, the works down tear With thundering shot, the Moats all filled were With Faggots, then they force their bloody way Up Ladders; and in spight of fate Display Their Colours on those works, from whence they beat The Royalists: Rupert makes his retreat Into the Castle; but thus yeilds next day, That Souldier-like he march with his away. ☞ Next the Fairfaxians before Dartsmouth came To whom when Pollard had deny'd the same, Incourag'd with successes, on they go, What walls or works can keep out such a foe? Hammonds Brigade first enter on the West The Gate-House, with mount Flagon soon possest, Forward they go: Pride had like prosperous Fate, Having now entred at the Northern Gate. Through every street they force their bloody way, Kingsworth alone, as yet did hold them play. But as of blood they had been Prodigal, Or scorn'd their lives, most furiously they all
With mounted Ladders this strong Fort assay. Twelve murthering Guns at once upon them play And numerous Vollies of dead wounding shot, But mounts they'l raise of corps; rather then not Now conquer: But all the Defendants tyr'd With killing, these Conditions yet acquir'd, Unto the Castle safe to march away. Which Castle fiercely they assail next day, The storme so bloody the Defendants crave, Their lives and liberties alone to have; Which Fairfax Nobly grants. And marcheth hence To Exeter: where wee his excellence Shall leave a while, Cromwel and he now were Parted; two Suns could not shine in one Sphere. ☞ On the Devises Cromwel first Designes, The Governour his offers all declines, Which made him on a desperate battery fall After a while down tumbling comes the wall; And the Defendants a surrender make. To Winchester Cromwel doth then betake Himself, the Gates against him there are bar'd To which his men affixing a Pittard With other combustibles, burn them down, And in despight make entrance on the Town. The Castle, which to, the Defendants fled, Is to some purpose by him battered, That the within besieg'd, for tearms do suo, Which granted: Unto Basing Cromwel drew
His great Artillery, Batteries soon they make, And then the House to storm they undertake. Had all been Cromwells, had all thought upon out A Crown, as he, sure not more fiercely on They could have gone: That house that had stood Both many a siege and many a bloody bout, By force they enter; The Defendants crave Quarter alone, which Cromwel nobly gave. But who the prize can value taken here, Let's leav't to Cromwell; for we must: And hear A while the exploits of the Scots. By this Near Hereford arriv'd, Cannon-Froom is The place, which first to storme they do accord Which they perform, putting the most to Sword Within that house; to Hereford next came Leaven with all his Mercenary traine. Their lines they draw, Mounts raise, batter the wall With thundering shot, imploy their Miners all Under the ground, of Ladders store provide; Yet by all this, not one whit terrify'd Are the Defendants. Mines they counter-mine, Their battered walls, with earth they counter-line: On the Besiegers often sallying out, Many they kill; oft put whole Guards to rout. But when the Louns heard how the King drew near They quit their fiege and North-ward march forfear. Hereford-shire of these Scotch guests may rue, Their curses even to this day them pursue.
☞ The King this while imbodied had of Horse, With some Dragoons, no Despicable force; And late to Worcester advancing near, Even at his name, the Scots had fled for fear From Hereford: From hence the King went East, And here and there some enemies supprest. At Huntington arriv'd, the Town he won, Some put to sword at entrance, then we come By Cambridge; and so unto Oxford went. After a while the King is fully bent West-Chester's siege to raise; thither we go, Skirted still in our marches by the foe. At length on Routon-Heath, West-Chester near Arriv'd we make a holt; Pointz doth appear, After a while, and boldly doth assail, Our now imbattail'd Horse: who shall prevail Is dubious for a while. Hot the dispute, At length they flye, we follow, in pursute Many are tane and kill'd; but in our Rear, Louthian and Jones do suddenly appear, With a fresh party, both of Horse and Foot Drawn from the siege; Pointz Rallies, wheels about As soon as e're their signal Cannons play. Our Front and Rear at once they do assay With a fierce charge; Ours did what men could do But in conclusion with the numerous foe O're press'd, we fly: many of ours they kill And numbers take, Churches with these they fill.
Where Hunger-starv'd they keep them to repent, And grow Religious (as the Parliament.) The King with hundreds more from this sad fight Arriv'd at Chester, where we lodge that night. Then into Wales again take our recourse. After a while some two Brigades of Horse Conveen'd we had, near Welbeck we divide Our forces. Part do with the King reside, And part march North with Digby; our design Was Forces with Montrosse for to combine, Who at Kilsithe in Scotland lately beat The Covenanters, with a grand Defeat. ☞ Forward we go passe Ferry-Bridge, and then At Shearburn are oppos'd by Collonel Wren, Whose Regiment of Horse, we put to rout Surprizing there too, nigh a thousand Foot With all their arms, many we put to sword. 'Twas but small rest our Quarters did afford; For while our men parting their prizes were, Many fresh bodies of their Horse appear, Whom Copley did command: straight out we drew With courage great on one another flew; Sharpe was the charge, Copley's own Regiment Had cause indeed this meeting to repent. Routed to purpose, many of them dyes; But in conclusion, with their fresh supplies O're-powr'd we are; turning our backs, we fled Our Prisoners and our prize relinquished.
Three hundred Horse, Digby's Coach, Letters, Cook A Countesse, with five Collonells here they took. Carnaby, and Sir Richard Hutton slain. To Skipton ward we fly, when we attain That Garrison, we find them there in fight, Near to the Town, our presence did affright The enemy; making them run; before Who were well nigh victorious; full a score Of them we took and slew: Digby goes on, (After some rest) but Browne fell him upon On Carlisle Sands, and put his men to rout, Many were tane, some slain too, at this bour. To Workington Digby and Langdale post, Whence to the Isle of Man the Seas they crost. And thence for Ireland do their voyage take. ☞ Newark about, the King this while did make His residence, where to his discontent, Amongst his Officers most eminent A sad Discention fell, resolves they make, Their King in's greatest need for to forsake. But hence the King (sadden'd at this in heart) With some few Horse for Oxford did depart, Whom Pointz met by the way, they joyne in fight, The Royalists o'repower'd are put to flight, And forc't to ride for't now to save their lives. But while the King at Oxford safe arrives In person, Pointz before Belvoir displaies His Troops, with Sword and Pistoll, then assaies
The place to storm, first the out works they win The Barns and Stables; putting all within Unto the Sword; but dear his victory cost, For many of his Troopers here he lost. When some months more the Castle out had held Provision's failing, Lucas was compel'd To yeild: His tearms in souldier-like array, That he with his for Leichfield march away. ☞ We left West-Chester by her foes opprest, Who now the suburbs had by storm possest, Their Mines and Batteries strenuously they ply'd. Nor yet impunely did their men recide, Before the Town, oft Byron wonderous stout, With execution on them sallied out. Many attempts of fatal consequence Unto the King, the siege to raise from hence Were made: the first design unfortunate, Was by the King to Routon-Heath of late. Then Vanghan with at least two thousand went This siege to raise: Mitton and Jones are sent Against him, near to Denby both parts met; In a like Order both their battels set, With equal fury charge: Many there dye, But in the end the Royalists do fly, Losing, at least, a thousand of their men. Dayes had not passed above nine or ten, Ere noble Aston in the enterprize, Was met near Sturbridge, in this fight there dyes
Many of both parts; for both stoutly fought, But at the length safety, alas! was sought, By flight on Aston's side, wounded was hee, And Prisoner to th' insulting Enemy. From Litchfield, Worcester, Ludley, Bridge-north, Then the Lord Ashley draws some Forces forth; To Chester-ward wee march, but our design. Was with some Irish Forces to combine; Which Combination Mitton did prevent, So, nought effected, back again wee went. Now of releif all expectations void, Many within for want of Food Destroy'd. The City suffering under miseries great, On tearms of yeilding, Byron's forc'd to treat. Though Brearton had the Town now at his will, What tearms hee grants, hee nobly did fulfill, A shame to those who often falsifi'd Those Articles, they had pre-ratifi'd. The Herefordians Warrants did direct Into the Country, unto this effect, To bring in men, their Frost-congealed Moats To break; Morgan this hears, in rustick Coats Suborns a party: Thither doth them send, Rusticks to bee themselves they do pretend, And fall to work, long ere the break of Day, At length the Guard, these for admittance pray, Pretending they store of Tobacco had, The Guard admits them (of the news full glad)
But being in they fall upon the Guard, Their Ambuscado's near, their Signal heard, (For Birch did with some Fire-locks lurke hard by, And Morgan with a thousand Horse) these fly O're the Draw-bridge, which now they found let down, And in an instant do surprize the Town. ☞ Fairfax wee left for Exeter intent, (For to this Siege both hee and Cromwel went) Pouth-rain to them surrendred is: and then On Boats of Bridges, over Ex their men They march; inclose the City on each side, To Waller then this siege they do confide, And march themselves for Cornwall; by the way At Torrington, Hopton and Digby lay: At sight of the Fairfaxians they Draw out, Charge, put the Rebells Forlorn unto Rout, But on their Army comes, Hopton is beat, Who through the Town, doth with some loss retreat. The Enemy pursue, the Town they take, Then to the Church (not for Devotion sake) They haste, for there was Hoptons Magazin, But by a train (many of them within) Of Powder, eighty Barrels fired were. This blast the Timber, and the lead did tear Off from the Church; and for their Men made way, Elijah-like (as Peters then did say) In this same fiery Chariot, Heaven to mount, But surely Peters ly'd on this account,
For in a sin-like Witch-craft, they were slain, Their mangled bodies tumbling down again. But while this Dreadful Stratagem doth take, Afurious charge Hopton and Digby make, Upon the fear-surprized Enemies, Many of whom in this confusion Dies; And then for Cornwall do their party lead, Hopton i'th Thigh, Digby shot in the Head. Fairfax pursues, to Lamiston come near, Basset did quit the Town; the Prince doth hear These tidings, and Pendennis doth forsake, Then to the Isle of Scylly him betake. Capel, Culpepper, Hide attend his Grace, With many more Commanders: In this space Goring that did that Army left command, On Fairfax Summons, yeilds for to Disband Upon some tearms: Himself the Seas then crost, Thus the whole West to the Fairfaxians lost. In Tryumph they return to Exeter, With thundering Vollies welcom'd here they are, And straight this Summons unto Berkley sent, To yeild what hee commands incontinent, Or to expect nothing but fire and sword. Hopes of releif all void, hee doth accord To treat, and then upon some tearms doth yeild. ☞ From several holds Ashley had Drawn to field, About three thousand gallant Horse and Foot, With these from Litchfield, by Bridge-north about
To Worcester wee came; a Seige hard by Wee rais'd; into a Church some Rebels fly, Leaving some Cannons which wee soon possest. The Church wee enter, earnestly request Those in the Steeple, Quarter for to take, But they refusing, under them wee make A mighty fire, and leave them there to burn, Or break their necks; to Bramiard wee return, And so do march about, but our Design, Was with some Horse, our selves for to combine At Farrington, and so an Army make, At length our marches thither-ward wee take. ☞ Morgan and Brearton follow in our Rear, Whom for to fight, at Stow inforc'd wee were; For having Skirmish'd with them there that night, When the swift houres induce the morning light, Of Horse and Foot their Bodies wee Discry. Our General said, Souldiers, let's nobly Dye Or Conquer now, 'tis base to turn, and fly, This will bring shame, or else Captivity, The other fame: the Kings condition's low, To raise it, let's our hands and lives bestow. Suppose his Majesty stood you before, And did your utmost courage now implore; Suppose, as Forlorn Prisoners now of Warr Led all wee were, by the proud Conquerer To nasty Gaols; there scorn'd and Hunger starv'd, And might from all these miseries bee preserv'd
By Valour: nay, suppose they should Decree, That wee should hang'd bee for our Loyalty; (For they of Loyalty can Treason make, If wee bee vanquish'd) rather courage take, And these by a more noble Death prevent. This said, with resolution on wee went, As scorning wounds and death, up to the face Of th' Enemy: Pistols are fir'd a pace, Some of their Bodies soon wee put to rout. Nor with less Gallantry on went our Foot, Levelling their thick-vollied shot so well, That numbers of the Enemy there fell. Indeed both Horse and Foot had here exprest Such bravery, as the Enemy confest, Their number, not their Valour won the Day. Lucas did here, there Vaughan did assay Fresh parties: while that these wee Dissipate, Hydra-like shee new Heads repullulate. At length our Foot the Enemy surround, Our Horse ore-power'd inforc'd are to give ground, And after to inlarge to open flight, Some fifteen hundred tane were in this fight, 'Mongst whom our General, who aloud did say, Your work's now done, put up your swords & play, For now no Army had the King on field. Dennington to the Foe, stout Bloys doth yeild This while: Barnstable also they possest, Ruthen, and Woodstock too: Now from the West
Comes Fairfax, before Oxford doth sit down, Which hitherto block'd up had been by Brown. To take the King Fairfax did think to have The Glory: but the King doth him deceive, Who in disguise, Oxford, alas! forsook, And to the Scots at Newark Siege betook Himself: the Scots having receiv'd the King, From Newark rise, him to New-Castle bring. Five months 'gainst Newark had the siege now laid, Fiercely the Town oft times had been assai'd; Sand-fort the Scots had now some time possest, Th' English and they in their attempts, contest Who should most active bee; Granado's store Shot on the Town; their thundering Cannons roar Against the Castle, Houses down are burn'd, Sinite and Trent are from their Channels turn'd, And nothing unattempted for to win The Town: No whit less active, those within Make many sallies bold upon the Foe. The Quarters of the Scots sometimes into They fall, with fire and sword: sometimes they try Rossiter, Pointz, or Copley's Gallantry, At every sally slain are more or less, Each enterprize was Growned with success, On the Defendants part: but Fatal still Th' Assaillants to, his Majesty doth will Bellas to yeild: And Tearms concluded are, Then to the North the King and Scots repair,
Where (ah! good King) with this perfideous crew, Wee leave him, Southern actions to review. Finis Libri Septimi.
THE ENGLISH CIVIL VVARRS. BOOK VIII. The Contents. The Royal Garisons distress'd much are, The Scots the King do sell: The second Warr. Horton doth Poyer, and Lang-horn both defeat, The London and the Kentish Forces beat. Barwick and Carlisle, Langdale doth surprize: Duke Hamilton's succesless enterprize. The Kirk, late Cromwels Foes, with him now side. Colchester tane: Cromwels curs'd Regicide. WEe that from Stow (routed of late) had fled, In diverse Holds are now beleagured, With Sieges close the Enemies distrest, Even all those Garrisons that wee possest. Dudley against Brearton a while had laid, Many Granado's on the Castle plaid:
Of mines and batteries too, use hee did make, When none of these, nor yet them all would take, Levison doubting of releif doth yeild. ☞ Not yet our hopes on no grounds did we build, Wee did presume that the Kings presence might, The Scots into an understanding right, Of these late bloody differences induce. Wee did presume the Irish might take Truce With one another, and their Forces bring England into, for to assist the King. Some hopes wee had too of Domestick Jarrs, 'Twixt Independents, and the Presbyters. But all our hopes and expectations fail'd, With fire and sword the Enemy assail'd Bridg-north this while, not one house i'th high town, (Except in rocks) but burned were all down. The town (or rather now no town) thus won, The least part of their work they had not done, For from the Castle oft wee sallied out, One Colour took, and put whole Guards to rout. Scarce Pistol shot a barn stood from the wall, In which a Guard they kept, on this wee fall, Kill some, beat out the rest, and then return, But first the Barn down to the ground wee burn. The Church th' Assailants made their Magazin For Powder, while Alarm'd they pressed in: A spark that from a lighted match did fly, Their Powder fir'd, which sacralegiously
Rent off the Church the timber and the Lead. Some scores blown blind, some scores stricken quite dead Here of their men: those that had burn'd the Town Burn'd were i'th Church, and to the clouds up blown Like fiery meteors down their bodies came, Their cloaths and hair all in a smoaking flame. Five hundred of their battering shot each day Fiercely against our walls th' Assaillants play; Of great Granado's too, full many a flight They sent into these walls, us to afright; And in those Rocks, their miners did imploy Us in a blast, Sulphureous, to destroy, As many of themselves i'th Church late were. But our Provisions to an end grow near, On tearms wee yeild, which tearms they falsifi'd, Those march on foot, who promise had to ride; No Martial Law th' insulting Foes regard, Of recompence they think us quite debar'd. Hence to the Scots many of us repair, Who gave us words, made promises full fair, But their performances, their mindes discry'd, 'Tis bad to trust such as wee have not try'd; This wee may say, their dealing was with us; Their words full fair, their acts perfideous. ☞ Though many a futious Battery, Bloody bout, Couragiously Banberry had stood out Her Foes, and famine now grow prevalent, Needs must shee yeild, though much shee it resent.
The Valiant Byron was again immur'd Within Carnarvan, where hee had indur'd A Siege most sharpe: by batteries, storm, and mine To win the place, the Enemies design: But the Defendants answered each attempt, With so much gall antry, as did exempt All hopes the place to gain by violence. But now provisions fail, who can dispence With famine? thus stone-walls will penetrate, This lean Pittard will break the strongest Gate, And make the stoutest Champion condiscend To tearms; His Trumpet out doth Byron send, With some proposals of delivery, Then to surrender next day doth agree. Close siege to Worcester this while was laid, But Washington dispairing now of aid; And for to yeild having the Kings command, Not able long the Foe for to withstand, Begins on tearms for to Capitulate, Then yeilds: even Oxford falls under the fate, Of all the rest of the Kings Garrisons. Here Fairfax self with all his Mirmedons, Had laid some months, and done what in them laid The place to force; Batries most furious made, And many desperate bold attempts to scale, Nor could their Mines, & great Granad's prevail. Never was place with greater Gallantry Defended, nor assail'd; The Enemy
Thought it more Honour, Oxford to regain By storm, than all those Holds they yet had tane; Those undertakings great, they did reveiw, Accomplish'd late; how o're the Works they flew At Bristol, Basing, Dart-mouth, and else where, And shall their fury bee resisted here? What, shall this Town not yeild when they com∣mand? Shall this 'twixt them, & their grand triumph stand? Nay, Cromwel knew it was the onely Town, That interpos'd betwixt him and a Crown. Rather than Oxford shall their hopes defer, Rather than Gleman shall protract the War, As many Pioneers they swear they'l bring, As Oxford all shall into Isis fling With Spades: the City all to fire they vow, Man, Woman, Childe, to put the sword unto, And e're of sudden Conquest they will fail, On one anothers shouldiers, mount and scale. Not their attempts (though bold) much less their vants, The valiant and resolved Gleman dants, Not only Oxford bravely hee Defends, But often sallying out, some hundreds sends Of these insulting Foes to Erebus. The Muses proud to Mars propitious, For Schollars now turn'd Souldiers stoutly fought, And more by swords, then words, for honour sought, The Gown indeed did love the Royal cause, Consisting with Religion and the Laws,
Which life and limb they venter'd to maintain Most bravely; what, Oxford by storm bee tane? They vow they'l rather on the works all dye, Gleman doth therefore all their powers defie. If Oxford yeild, hee must; conditions good Hee'l have, or with the town resign his blood. Shall the Kings Fort, Metropolis, submit To tearms unworthy, not becoming it? First to worse straights, than e're hee yet indur'd In Carlisle, in these walls hee'l bee immur'd, Not onely Mice, Cats, Horses, shall bee meat, But Boots, and shooes, nay, Humane flesh they'l eat. These brave resolves inforce the Enemy, On noble tearms, with Gleman to agree, And Oxfords yeilded: the two Princes are, Rupert and Morice shortly to repair To forraign parts: The Duke of York must goe, His noble Brother, and his Sisters to, Now at St. Jameses: For the Parliament Had all the Royal Children up there pent, Except the Prince who had escap'd their hand. From Exeter of late they did command, The youngest Daughter thither to bee brought, What thei'l do with them divers things are thought Let Royalists pray, and presage the best, This absent is a safety to the rest. ☞ But whither doth my wandering Muse digress, Than Articles, the Roundheads nothing less
Perform: this the Oxfordians fully finde. Wallingford is to Fairfax too resign'd, Though Blague the place most nobly did defend, But who 'gainst swords and famine can contend? This place like others must submit to fate. ☞ Litchfield the next comes to capitulate On tearms: here valiant Tinsley plaid his part, Not all their Force, not all their Miners art, Not all their Batteries and Granado's great Prevail; at every storm, they off were beat With loss, and shame enough; the Moats were fil'd, With bodies of th' Assailants in them kil'd. This place by storm had been twice tane before, Which did th' Assailants animate the more To bold attempts; but so they answered were, That no more Ladders did they dare to Rear, But close laid in their trenches and the town, But now provisions wonderous scarce are grown Within; that Horse-flesh they begin to eat, Necessity Tinsley inforc'd to treat With th' Enemy, and now to yeild the place. ☞ Of all our Garrisons Ragland the Grace, And honour had, even out the last to hold, Nor the Old Marquess this surrender would, For all that Morgan with his Force could do, (Though much hee did) Fairfax arriv'd here now The Marquess tels; as good tearms hee would give If they shall yeild: So none of them shall live
Refusing: Life and Death stood in his power, Expecting answer once within an hour. The Marquess to this Summons doth reply In time; nor did hee Fairfax quite deny; After some intercourse of Letters sent, The house is yeilded: Out the Souldiers went With Colours flying, and their Drums did beat, All arm'd in Martial furniture compleat. Having some miles march'd in this Gallantry, Of Horse and Arms, they make delivery To Fairfax, the Triumphant Conquerer. ☞ The mercenary Scots mony prefer Before their King; hee's sold to th' Parliament, And from New-castle first to Holmby sent. ☞ The King had not long been here resident, Before five hundred Horse the Army sent, Which him surprize, and then to Hampton-Court Do with their Prize (or Prisoner) next resort. Thus though a King indeed bee in distress, 'Tis valu'd much, his person to possess. Here of access though friends admitted were, Perhaps, their projects that the King might fear The less; yet some gave him an intimation, 'Gainst him of a resolv'd assassination, Therefore in a most dark tempestuous night, Hence he's inforc'd to his life-saving flight. Though thus these Harpey's Talents hee evade, By th' imprudence alas! hee is betraid
Of Berkley and Ashburnham, to the hands Of Hammond, who the Isle of Wight commands, Where most of that sad time hee yet surviv'd, Hee's kept of worldly comforts quite depriv'd. ☞ But out again most fiercely breaks the War, Poyer and Laughorn for the King declare, Confessing they Deluded had been long. The Cavalliers conjoyn, potent and strong They grow at Pembrook; Chepstow do surprize, Rout and kill Fleming: but with fresh supplies, Of well arm'd, and well ordered Horse and Foot Comes Horton, fights them, to a total rout Puts these unarm'd, scarce Marshall'd Cavalliers. Cromwell before Tenby then soon appears, And falls to storm, indeed so furiously, That the Defendants soon for Quarter cry, On mercy yeild: Pembrook and Chepstow are Surrendred too, to this proud Conquerer. ☞ The London Mutiners this while are quel'd The General by, the Kentish men compel'd, After the fight at Maidstone to disband Upon Black-heath: nor did the Essexians stand To a field Fight, but into Colchester Do fly, beseig'd by Fairfax. Parties are Combin'd at Kingston upon Thames, and led By Holland: whose designs discovered, Roured they are to purpose, many tane, And that young Lord stout Francis Villiers slain,
Brother to Buckingham, who did escape, Then to beyond Seas straight himself betake. ☞ Langdale this while did in the North surprize Carlisle, and Berwick; and with him do rise Many the Northern Gentry; whom unto Advanceth the Scots Generalissimo Hamilton, with his numerous Regiments. Lilburn of Tinmoth also now resents Rebellion, and doth for the King declare, But a short time, for a Siege to prepare, To him and his doth Hasleridge afford, The place hee storms, and puts them all to sword. The other Lilburn did this while surprize, Some hundreds of brave Gallants who did rise Near Anwick for the King. To Apleby Hamilton comes, Lambert and his do fly, With some small loss o're Stain-more: but their way To make through Lancashire the Scots assay With Langdale: As they march they do declare, The King from thrall resolv'd to free they are. But when the King heard who did thus ingage, Successess their design hee did presage. But Cromwel having Pembrook lately won, And all his Western work 'gainst Poyer now don; North-ward by expeditious Marches flies. Lambert near Skipton with his Forces lies Conjoyn'd, ten thousand strong upon the Scot, Directly they advance, that fight was not
Defer'd, whereof the King presaged true, And the Scots their sad expedition rue. Cromwel goes forward Lancashire into, Near Preston his Forlorn ingage the Foe, But e're the Scots will draw their Forces out, Langdale's expos'd unto a total Rout, Then charge the Scots thinking to bear away The Victory, and sole Glory of the Day, But no such facill thing it was to beat Cromwel; the Scots are forced to retreat Into the Town: Cromwels Horse them pursue, Soon clear the Streets, and numbers of them slew. The Duke doth with a stand of Pikes maintan The Bridge, till many of his men were slain, And till the wish'd obscurity of night, Gave him advantage of a further flight. With execution great pursu'd those were, Who fled to Lancaster-ward: every where Great heaps of slaughter'd Scots by th' way do lye. To Wiggon-ward this night the Duke doth slye, Yet a strong Barn hee manned by the way, This for a while Cromwels pursuit doth stay, And did some execution on his Horse, But for to yeild on mercy they inforce The Scots, who from them little mercy finde. From Wiggon the third day, the Duke design'd For Warrington: but by the way, of ground, Having a plot most advantagious found,
They make a stand: so fierce a fight maintain, That Roundheads there are full a thousand slain In half a hour, the rest reacy to flye. At which Cromwel ride, up, aloud doth cry, Come follow mee, and on himself then goes, Leaping the Hedge t' amongst the thickest Foes, Of whom some hundreds on the place are slain, And full two thousand of them Prisoners tane. The routed Scots straight to the Bridgeward make, The Duke with all his Horse doth here forsake His Foot; which at the Bridge delivered are, With all their Arms, as Prisoners sad of War, By Bayley unto Cromwel, who did go North-ward tryumphantly to meet Monroe. ☞ Hamilton to Nantwatch directly flies, Against him every where the Country rise, At Uxiter Lord Gray doth him inforce Himself to yeild, with nigh three thousand Horse. Thus are his men all routed, tane, or dead, And hee himself adjudg'd to lose his head. Heaven in their kinde the Scots repay now would, Who sold the King, by multitudes are sold. ☞ Cromwel by this had Barwick bounds acquir'd, Monroe for Scotland had again retir'd. And the Kirk party do most Zealously, The Dukes late expedition, curse, decry. At Edenburge they feast, applause, and stile, Cromwel the man, who now could reconcile
Their Differences; whose presence, prowess, wit, Made the Malignant party now submit. For Lannerick and Monroe are forc'd t' agree Now with Arguile, the Kirk, Presbytery. With Cromwels part, but late Sectarians stil'd, The Kirk's cemented, and fresh reconcil'd. Thus Proteus-like the Kirk's even what you list, An Hamiltonian or a Cromwellist. ☞ Barwick and Carlisle too delivered are To Cromwel, who for England doth repair Tryumphantly; Scarborough and Pomfret's won, ☞ Though the Colchestrians act what might be don By art or valour, in their own Defence Though with his Fleet, the Prince not far from thence Hover'd at Sea, yet Famine doth prevail, All expectations of releif them fail, And yeild they must to Fairfax; whose Decree, Was Lisle and Lucas shot to Death should bee. And thus in short wee end the second War. ☞ Cromwel his hopes no longer will defer, Cobbet is sent to Carisborough for the King, To Hurst, and then to Winsor they him bring. ☞ Of Justice an High Court they then erect, A thing most unjust, horrid, these effect, Their King arraign, condemn, and execute, What Hell-hounds thus did Cromwels purpose suit? What Judge durst Sentence pass so Impious? Was there no Gods that had respect to us?
Or to our King? what, will the powers Divine, Their Vengeance from such Miscreants heads de∣cline? If such acts irreligious shall go free, Who will beleeve there's any Deity? Or that these things sublunary, at all Under cognizance of the Gods do fall. The Gods on Mortals can inflict no wrath, Jove's but a fiction, and no thunder hath Tisiphone! there no such Fury is, Hell's but a fable and her Nemesis, No matter whether Heaven wee love or hate, There's no such place; all things are rul'd by Fate. Ah! whether doth my passion mee transport, Justice dispenc'd will be from Heavens high Court, On the High Court of Justice: blood for blood Cryes out aloud, and will bee understood, Revenge whereof although the Gods delay, It's with more Fury, that they may repay, Their Miscreant Enemies, and make them know, They have respect to things done here below. Finis Libri Octavi.
A TABLE Of the most remarkable passages contained in this Book. MEldrum's first sally upon the Kings Leagure at Hull. pag. 22. A second sally. ibid. The King sets up his Standard Royal at Nottingham pag. 29. The King's speech to his Army pag. 30 Prince Rupert's Character. p. 32. Prince Morice his Character. ib. Worcesters fight p. 35 Sir Lewis Dives and Prince Rupert set upon Essex his Army p. 42 Mr. John Smith regains the Royal Standard p. 43 The Kings Proclamation of pardon to all that shall re∣turn to their Allegiance p. 48 Blake hanged p. 49 Banbury yeilded to the King p. 50 Broughton-house yeilded to Rupert ib. Brainford Battle ib. Sudeley Castle yeilded to Massy by Bridges the Go∣vernour
p. 51 Cirincester stormed by Rupert ib. Prince Rupert summons Glocester p. 52 Some Irish land ib. Herbert and Massy fight ib. Massy routs Carey ib. Massy beat off from Beverston ib. More Irish Land ib. Herbert, Digby, and Winter, block up Glocester p. 53 The Earl of VVorcester summons Glocefter ib. Massy scorns the summons ib. The VVelsh Forces routed by VValler ib. Hereford yeilded to VValler p. 54 He leaves it un-Garison'd ib. Monmouth left to VValler, and left by him ib. It is Garisoned for the King ib. VValler beats up Prince Morice's Quarters ib. Prince Morice and he Skirmish ib. Massy came to bring off VValler, and both fall upon Teuxbury, and surprize it p. 55 Prince Morice and VValler fight ib. VValler Routed ib. Hasleridge comes to VVallers relief ib. Morice puts them to chase again ib. A fresh supply comes to VValler. ib. Morice Retreats ib. Strafford-Avon taken by Lord Brook ib. Leichfield taken by him p. 56.
His fatal wound and death ib. His men storm the Close ib. North-hampton befiegeth the Close ib. Brearton and Gell, come to relieve it ib. They fight on Hopton-Heath ib. Brearton and Gell Routed ib. The Earl of North-Hampton slain ib. Prince Rupert comes to Leichfield, Undermines the Close p. 57. The Mines sprung, they scale it. ib. They enter at the third assault ib. Reading besieged by Essex ib. He stormes it. Is repulsed ib. A second assault ib. A third assault p. 58 Reading yeilded ib. Fielding adjudged to dye for yeilding ib. The King pardons him ib. Chalgrave fight ib Lands-down fight p. 59 VVallers Horse Routed ib. VVallers Camp assaulted, at the fifth assault it is won ib. VVallers stratagem to march off ib. Round-way-Down fight ib. VValler Routed p. 60 The Queen arrives at Burlington ib. The Parliaments ships play on her at her arrival. ib.
Montrosse and Ougleby conjoyn with the Queen ib. The King and Queen meet at Edge-Hill. ib. Glocester besieged p. 61 Exeter taken by Prince Morice p. 62 Bristol surrendered to Prince Rupert in three daies siege ib. Essex comes to relieve Glocester ib. The Camp riseth from Glocester ib. Glocester releived ib. Newberry first battel p. 63 Carnarvans gallantry p. 64 His noble death p. 65 Several Lords wounded on the Kings part ib. Eccleshal siege. Bird Governour p. 66 He is relieved ib. Eccleshal yeilded p. 67 Arundel-Castle besieged by VValler ib. It is yeilded to him ib. Bramdeon-Heath fight betwixt VValler and Hopton ib. Balfore draws Hoptons Horse upon their Ambusca∣does p. 68. Collonel Dalbier and Collonel Thomson wounded ib. VVinchester yeilded to VValler p. 69. Collonel Griffith, commonly called Prince Griffith, sets out from London gallantly ib. Newark besieged by Sir John Meldrum ib. Prince Rupert raiseth the siege p. 70
Essex marcheth into Cornwal p. 73 A prodigeous Tempest ib. VValler follows the King p. 74 Dudley siege raised ib. VValler and the King skirmish at Burley ib. The fight at Copedray-bridge ib. VValler Routed p. 75 The King marcheth into Cornwal p. 76 His Army ingage Essex ib. The King encamps near Lestithiel ib. Greenvile stormed a Castle and Fort near Lestithiel. ib. Balfore breaks away with the Horse. ib. VValgraves skirmisheth with Balfore p. 77 Essex and the King skirmisheth ib. Brets gallantry ib. The Lord Stuard's gallantry ib. Essex, Meirick, and Roberts steal, away by water in the night ib. Essex his men treat with the King. The result. p. 78 The Kings prize which he took at Lestithiel ib. Barstable and Ilfercomb yeilded to the King ib. Salt-ash stormed by the King ib. Beverston yeilded to Massy ib. Malmsbury stormed by Massy p. 79 Collonel Fox his stratagem against Beudley, whereby he took it. ib. Middleton storms Dennington-Castle ib.
Bloyes repulsed Middleton ib. Middleton and Courtney fight p. 80 Middleton put to flight, and in his flight surprizeth a Troop of Royalists neer Sherburn ib. Horton batters Dennington, and retreats ib. Fines undermines Banbury, batters and storms it, is repulsed ib. The Earle of North-hampton relieves Banbury p. 81 Hee fights with Fines, and routs him ib. Min and Massy ingage neer Elder-field p. 82 Min slain, and his Brigade routed there ib. Rupert and Massy fight at Ast-ferry p. 83 Monmouth betrayed to Massy by Kirle ib. Collonel Broughton surprized at Godridge, by the Herefordians p. 84 Sir William Blaxton assails Massy ib. Monmouth surprized again by the Cavalliers ib. Stephens releiving Rauden, is himself besieged there∣in ib. Rauden yeilded to Ashley ib. Newberry second fight ib. Waller besiegeth Basing-house p. 88 Gage releives it, Norton and hee fights, hee routs Norton ib. Basing-house besieged again, releived by the King ib. Many eminent Commanders slain p. 89 Shrewsbury surprized by Mitton, in it were eight
Knights, fourty Collonels, Majors, and Captains, two hundred Souldiers, &c. ib. Plymouth and Weymouth surrendred to the Parlia∣ment ib. Haward slain at Pease-bridge ib. Captain Lister slain in the fight at Tadcaster ib. Sir Thomas Fairfax takes Leeds p. 90 Sir William Savile flies to Promfret. Major Beau∣mont drowned in swiming Ayre ib. Captain Briggs, and Captain Leigh are both wound∣ed ib. Fairfax routed at Sea-croft, by the Kings party ib. Sir George Wentworth surprized at VVakefield by Fairfax, where hee took one thousand four hun∣dred, or, one thousand five hundred Prisoners ib. Cholmley and Bointon, defeat and take Slingsby at Malton, with many Prisoners and Arms ib. Lancaster stormed, and some streets burned by Tins∣ley p. 91 Thirlan-castle, and Hornley, both taken by siege ib. Settle taken by Leviston, left by Briggs ib. Bradford, and the Inhabitants thereabout described p. 95 Leeds regained, and Hooley-Hall taken ib. Fairfax and King fight on Atherton-Moor ib. Bradford taken, and plundered p. 98 Rotheram and Sheffield both taken by the King ib. Gainsborough taken by the Parliament ib.
The Earl of Kingston slain, and Cavendish routed ib. Earl of Newcastle regains Gainsborough p. 99 Nantwitch besieged. Byron and Monke attempting to raise the Siege, are routed ib. Hull besieged by the King ib. Witherington and Cromwel fight at Winsby p. 100 The Queen takes Burton on Trent ib. The siege raised from before Hull p. 101 The Scots Armies enter into England ib. Lesleyes speech to his Covenanters p. 102 The Scots & English skirmish on Bowden-Hils p. 104 Another skirmish on Pinshaw-Hills ib. Langdale and the Scots fight at Corbridge ib. Fairfax taketh Selby p. 105 Sir John Redman's stratagem to take Pomfret p. 106 In Pomfret was taken, Sir, Peter Middleton, and about twenty Officers more ib. The Scots march toward York p. 108 The Lord Generals speech at the head of his Army p. 109 Fairfax, Manchester, and Lesley, besiege York p. 111 Manchester springs a Mine ib. Manchesters Errour in undermining the Mannor wall instead of the Cities, his men enter the breaches ib. The fight in the Mannor Yard, wherein he is re-infor∣ced p. 112 Prince Ruperts march to Worcester and Bridge-North ib. Hee takes Stopwash, and Leverpool ib.
Latham siege raised, and Bolton stormed p. 113 Rupert burns and takes Thornton-Hall ib. Hee marching to York, they withdraw their siege ib. They Incamp in a Cornfield, neer Hessom-Moore p. 114 The Parliaments Army consists of English and Scots ib. Prince Rupert, Goring, and Byron Imbattail on Hessom-Moore p. 115 The Parliaments right Wing routed p. 119 Cromwels speech to his Horse, for a second Onset p. 120 Cromwels furious charge on Byrons Wing p. 121 Hee putteth Prince Rupert to flight ib. The Gallantry of New-castle's white-coats ib. Cromwels cruelty in giving no Quarter p. 122 York besieged by the Parliaments three Generals p. 125 York yeilded. Gleman marcheth to Carlisle ib. Newcastle besieged by the Scots ib. The Scots storm Newcastle, and take it p. 126 The Scots besiege Carlisle, and take it p. 127 Hemsley, and Scarborough yeilded to Fairfax p. 128 Bolton-Castle, and Knaisborough yeilded ib. Pomfret besieged, Langdale raiseth the siege ib. Langdale and Rossiter skirmish at Melton-Mowber∣ry ib. Pomfret since besieged again, yeildeth p. 129 Sandal yeilded. Latham besieged, and yeilded ib. Greenay-Castle yeilded. Skipton besieged, and yeild∣ed p. 130 Essex, Denby, Manchester, &c. recalled from
command p. 132 The Parliaments New-Model of their Army p. 133 Cromwell routs North-hamptons Horse ib. Blackington delivered unto Cromwel by VVinde∣banke ib. Vavisor and his party surprized by Cromwel ib. Massy beat from Lidney siege, by Langdale p. 134 Rupert and Massy fight at Ludberry ib. Massy routed by Rupert ib. Taunton besieged by Hopton ib. Willington-house stormed by him ib. Fairfax sends Graves to releive Taunton ib. Taunton besieged again p. 135 Massy storms Evesham, kept by Legg ib. Fairfax and Brown block up Oxford ib. Brearton rises from before Westchester ib. The King storms Leicester p. 136 A bloody fight in the Market-place ib. The bloody fight in Naiseby-field ib. Rupert Routs the Parliaments left wing ib. Cromwel Routs the Kings left wing ib. Fairfaxes main Battalia much broken p. 138 The Kings Gallant behaviour in the fight ib. The Kings Army totally Routed p. 140 Cromwel regains Leicester ib. The Parliaments many successes ib. Fairfax Routed Goring at Lang-port p. 141 Burrows taken, Bridge-water stormed p. 142
The low town burnt, the high town stormed ib. The high town burnt by Fairfax, yeilded p. 143 Bathe yeilded. Sherburn besieged, and stormed ib. Sherburn yeilded. Bristol stormed p. 144 The Castle yeilded. Dart-mouth stormed ib. Dart-mouth Castle, and Fort, yeild on Quarter p. 145 The Devizes battered and stormed by Cromwel ib. Winchester stormed by Cromwel, the Castle yeilded ib. Basing-house stormed, yeilded on Quarter p. 146 Cannon-Froom stormed by the Scots ib. Hereford besieged by the Scots, and the King raiseth the siege ib. A fight on Routon-Heath, near Westchester p. 147 The King and Pointz Routed ib. Kilsith's famous battail in Scotland p. 148 A fight at Sherburn, neer Ferry-bridge ib. Digby Routed on Carlisle Sands p. 149 Belvoir stormed by Pointz, is yeilded p. 150 The Lord Aston Routed. Westchester yeilded p. 151 Hereford surprized by a stratagem to break Ice ib. Hopton and Digby fight Fairfax at Torrington p. 152 Goring disbands all his Horse p. 153 Fairfax goes to Exeter, it is yeilded to him ib. Lord Ashleys speech at Stow on the VVould p. 154 The fight at Stow on the VVould p. 155 The Lord Ashley Routed and taken ib. Dennington, Barnstable, Ruthen, VVodstock, yeild∣ed, ib.
Oxford besieged, the King leaves it and in disguise goes to the Scots before Newark p. 156 Newark besieged, and yeilded ib. The King carried to Newcastle by the Scots ib. The Kings Garisons all distressed p. 158 Dudley besieged, and yeilded p. 159 The high Town of Bridge-north taken and burned ib. The Church blown up, with many men in it p. 160 Bridge-north Castle yeilded ib. The Scots perfideousness. Banbury yeilded ib. Carnarvon besieged, and yeilded p. 161 VVorcester besieged, and yeilded ib. Oxford Schollers, their gallant Commendation p. 162 Oxford yeilded. Rupert and Morice depart England p. 163 The Kings Children disposed of at St. Jameses ib. VVallingford yeilded p. 164 Litchfield besieged and yeilded ib. Ragland holds out the last of the Kings Garisons ib. The King sold to the Parliament by the Scots p. 165 Hee is brought to Holmby. Surprized by the Army, by them brought to Hampton-Court ib. The King put himself into Hammonds hands ib. The beginning of the Second VVar. POyer and Laughorn turn Royallists, surprize Pem∣broke, Chepstow, Tenby, &c. rout and kill Fleming. Horton routs them p. 166 Cromwel storms Tenby ib.
Pembroke and Chepstow, surrendred to Cromwel ib. Fairfax quels the London Mutiniers ib. Routs the Kentish Insurrection. Pursues them to Colchester, and besiegeth it. Breaks Hollands party ib. The Duke of Buckingham escapeth, his Brother being slain. Langdale surprizeth Carlisle and Barwick. Duke Hamilton enters England. Lilburn revolteth at Tinmoth. Hafleridge storms it, puts Lilburn and all his to sword. Collonel Lil∣burn surprizeth a brave party of Royallists neer Anwick. Hamilton and Lambert Skirmish at Apleby. The King's presages of Hamiltons Army p. 167 Preston-fight. Langdale exposed by the Scots to a rout. Pre∣ston gained by Cromwel. The Bridge maintained by Hamil∣ton. The Bridge won, the Scots routed. Hamilton man's a strong Barn in his flight to Wiggon. Cromwel puts them all to Sword. The fight at Red-Hill neer Warrington. Crom∣wel ready to flye. p. 168 Cromwels Resolution. The Scots routed. Hamilton leaves his Foot. Bayley surrenders himself, with all the Foot, to Crom∣wel. Hamilton yeilds himself with three thousand Horse. Hamilton beheaded. Monroe retreats into Scotland. Crom∣wel feasted at Edinburgh. p. 169 Lannerick and Monroe submit. Carlisle and Barwick sur∣rendred. Scarborough and Pomfret surrendred. Colche∣ster surrendred. Lucas and Lisle shot to death. Cobbet sent by Cromwel, brings the King from the Isle of Wight. The High Court of Injustice erected. The King Martyr'd. Bradshaws infamy for his sentence. p. 170 A Presage. p. 171 FINIS.
