C6785 12827906 94304
Great Britains Prayers IN This dangerous time OF CONTAGION. Together VVith a Congratulatory for the Enter∣tainment of his Majesty out of SCOTLAND. By Iohn Cragge, Gent. Printed in the yeare, 1641.
Great Brittaine praies in time of pestilence, To have Gods mercy for its great offence. LOrd we have sinn'd, our sinnes we doe confesse, Forgive our sinnes and all our wickednesse, Our sinnes for vengeance crie, if thou pursue, We for our sinnes our woefull state shall rue; We pardon crave for all our sinnes committed, Good Lord forgve them, let them be remitted, Draw back thy plaguing hand, Lord sheath thy sword Of vengeance drawn, and comfort us afford; Lord spare our Kindomes, draw thy plaguing hand From us, we pray be friendly to our land: Lord in thy mercy us behold we pray, Forgive our sinnes, Lord turne thy wrath away, Avert thy plagus, let mercy us imbrace, In mercy Lord behold our wretched case, Passe by our sinnes, Lord let thy vengeance slack, Forbeare thy plagues, let us our sinnes forsake; In mercy Lord behold great Brittains Land, To stay thy plagues Lord give thy sweet command, From fearfull plagues and all diseases ill, For evermore defend and keepe us still, And as thou mercies ever dost bestow, Lord in thy mercy save and helpe us now,
Preserve grat Brittain from thy plaguing hand, Each City, Town, and Country in this land; This City London Lord preserve in chiefe, Draw back thy plagues, Lord send us some reliefe, Our sinnes are great, thy mercies greater farre, Let not our sinnes thy mercies sweet debarre; Repentance give us of each sinfull deed, That we repenting may of mercy speed, Mercy we crave, Lord let thy mercy fall, In mercy spare us else we perish all; From plague and pestilence, from famine, sword, Good Lord defend us by thy holy word; Thou hast been gratious, be thou gratious still, To be propitious let it be thy will, We have no merit to present to thee, We merit death except thou set us free, We have no merits of our owne that's good, Our fearfull sinnes infected have our blood; We are poluted, in our sinnes we dye, Unlesse thou spare us we for mercy crie: Spare us good Lord, in mercy us forbeare, Though in thy sight we foully doe appeare, Yet spare us Lord for Iesus Christ his sake, That of thy mercies we may still partake, So shall we render thanks and praise to thee, Who art one God alone, in persons three; One blessed Father, Sonne, and holy Ghost, To whom all Glory be ascribed most.
To welcome home our gracious King, With joyfull hearts, which peace doth bring, Let us give thankes to God, and sing, True Protestants rejoycing. OUr Famous King concluded hath a peace 'Twixt Scotch and English, to our joies increase, By Gods assistance he hath done the deed, Which will for ever make us well to speed. Thankes be to God for that which he hath done, We give God praise the Father, and the Sonne, And praises give to God the holy Spirit, Who ever doth eternity inherit. One ever blessed God in persons three, To whom all glory, thankes, and praises be. Let us with joyfull hearts receive our King, Which in Gods name doth such contentments bring. Let us with joy expresse our loving hearts To God for him, such comforts that imparts. England rejoyce, and Scotland be thou glad, Let Ireland pleasant be, that was full sad. Let all to God sound glory, thankes, and praise, In heavenly songs, in spirituall hymnes and layes. Let Dutch be glad, French Protestants rejoyce, King Charles in Christ hath made the chiefest choice.
He rules in Christ, in Christ he governes well Obeying Christ he then shall sfly dwell. Come let us all with hearts and mindes addrest, To give God thankes and praise be ready prest, Let Bells ring us out, let Bonefires now be made Unto Gods glory, and our Kingdomes ayd. Let Instruments of musicke now sound forth The praise of God, that is of greatest worth. But let our mirth be modest, not exceed Sweet moderation, lest Great Britaine bleed. Let it be honest, modst, civill, sweet, Unto Gods glory, honour, praises meet, So shall we then when we such mirth have done, Be blest in Christ under great Britaines Sunne. If we our mirth in measure temper well, We by well doing free our selves from hell, In Christ our head, in truth, faith, hope, and love, Such sacrifices God doth well approve. But in our mirth let us still mindfull be Of friends inthralled, that they may be free. Let us not thinke that we can peace enjoy, If they in thraldome suffer great annoy. How can we mirth expresse, and be full glad, When Gods deare Saints be sorrowfull and sad? Come let our peace sweet comforts now afford To friends inthralled for Gods holy word. Let us make haste and speed for their rliefe, Let our sweet peace suppresse and end their griefe. So shall we then for ever peacefull be, When we this thing performe with courage free.
Let not our hearts be fill'd with grudge, repine, Let us be mindfull of sweet river Rhyne, Thinke that our soules and bodies are not sound, If faith and truth therein cannot be found. How can our peace continue, if our skin Be torne and rent, our pith and rine bee thin? If we be well, and not our friends at ease, We must helpe them if we our God will please. What better deed by us can now be done, Then helpe a Royall Mother, and her Sonne? What better fruits may this our peace produce, Then Babel punish for her foule abuse? She hath beene traytor to the Lord of life, To pull downe her will make an end of strife. Christ and his members she hath torne and rent, She sinnes in pride, her heart cannot repent. Her downfall will the Iewes conversion be, Christ and the Pope in truth cannot agree. Christ is the Truth, the Pope maintaines a lye, Christ and the Pope cannot agree, say I. Pull downe the Pope, and we shall ever reigne In Christ, under command of Charlemaine. Whilst Pope and Turke on earth doe beare the sway, These strive to cast whole kingdomes quite away. But when the Pope and Turke have had their doome, Then will our everlasting freedome come: Christ will appeare to judge both quick and dead, Hee'll those advance that him advanc't their head. Hee'll make an end of all our feare and griefe, And be our comfort, joy, and sweet reliefe.
Then will that Sabbath comme that lasts for aye, We shall have rest that never shall decay, We shall have joy and peace that shall not end, We then on Christ for ever shall attend, In heavens blisse wherein there is delight, Where day shall be, where never shall be night; Unto which place of rest good Lord us bring, That we thy everlasting praise may sing; Grant this good God, for Iesus Christ his sake, That we thy heavenly joyes may still partake, To whom with thee and blessed holy Ghost, Be glory, honour, power, praises most, Who hast been, art, and shall for ever be, Advanc'd one blessed God in persons three. FINIS.
