C7547 12145103 54931
Semeiotica Vranica. OR AN ASTROLOGICAL JUDGMENT OF DISEASES From the Decumbiture of the Sick; 1. From Aven Ezra by way of Introduction. 2. From Noel Duret by way of Direction. Wherein is layd down, The way and manner of finding out the Cause, Change and End of a Disease. Also whether the Sick be likely to live or dye, and the Time when Recovery or Death is to be expected. To which is added The Signs of Life or Death by the body of the Sick Party according to the judgment of Hippocrates. By NICHOLAS CULPEPER Gent. Student in Physick and Astrology. PERSIUS. Disce, sed ira cadat naso, rugosa{que} sanna. London, Printed for Nathaniell Brookes at the golden Angel on Cornhill, near the Exchange. 1651.
TO THE ASTROLOGERS OF ENGLAND, Nicholas Culpeper wisheth peace and Prosperity in this world, and eternall beatitude in that which is to come. Dear Souls, TO you all, and to you especially that heard these Lectures do I de∣dicate them, and present them to you, not to look upon onely (for then I had as good have sent you a picture, and as much it would have pleased your eye). Man was made not only for Speculation, but also for Practice; Speculation brings onely pleasure to a mans selfe; its Practice which benefits others; And I hope I need not tell you that Man was not born for himself alone. These Rules
will serve (if heedfully observed by the eye of Reason) to ballance your judgment in sayling through the Pro∣gnosticall part of Physick, that so you may steer your course by the Card of Truth, and not float unsetledly upon the waves of Errour, Ignorance or O∣pinion. To you (rather then to any that I know) belongs the practice of Physick; and that Practice may be per∣fect, Judgement ought to be sound; and to make judgement sound is requi∣red an exquisite knowledge. Judge∣ment is perfected by knowledge, know∣ledge by experience: whence it ap∣peares, that the more communicative knowledge is, so much the more ex∣cellent it is. Of all the men in the world I hate a drone most, that sucks the sweetnesse of other mens labours, but doth no good himselfe; and will as soon teach Physick or Astrology to an Oake, as to a creature the center of whose actions is terminated in him∣selfe, Surely, surely, If God had not
made the nature of man communica∣tive, he would not have made one man to stand in continuall need of another: but we see the contrary, and the sons of wisedome know how to pick out the meaning of God from it. I have given you here all my Prog∣nostications from the Decumbiture of the sick party: And although I inge∣nuously confesse the greatest part of them will hold true, in a Horarie Que∣stion erected upon the sight of the U∣rine; yet this is my judgement at pre∣sent, That next the Nativity, the De∣cumbiture is the safest & surest ground for you to build your judgement up∣on; and you shall always find it by ex∣perience. Together with this I have given you the presages of Hippocrates, all which never decline from the Zodiack of the sick person: And thus much I can say of them by experience, I never found one of them false. Make use of them both together; God hath given you
two eyes; why may you not look up∣on the Macrocosme with the one, and upon the Microcosme with the other? In both I desired to be as plaine as I could, because all Artists are not Schol∣lers. Thus have you what I have done, and you know for whose sakes I did it. What now remains, but that you la∣bour with might and main for your owne goods, and the increase of your owne knowledge to make experience of them? For as the diligent hand ma∣keth rich, so the diligent mind increa∣seth knowledg; and for my owne par∣ticular, never feare, but during the time I am amongst the living, I shall never cease to do you good in what I may or can. Spittle-fields, next door to the Red-Lion. Nich. Culpeper.
TO THE READER. EXcellent and true was that Mot∣to of Hermes Tresmegistus. Quod est superius, est sicut inferius, and this will appeare to the eye of every one that deserves the name of a reasona∣ble man, if he do but consider That his body is made of the same materials that the whole Universe is made of, though not in the same forme; name∣ly of a composition of contrary Ele∣ments. There is scarce a man breathing that knows his right hand from his left, but knows that if you sett bot∣tles of hott water to a mans feet, it will
make his head to sweat; and the rea∣son is the mutual harmony of one part of the body with another; why then as well should not the actions of one part of the Creation produce as well effects in another, that being also one entire body, composed of the same Elements, and in as great Har∣monie? Whats the reason that a man will do more for his brother then hee will for a stranger? Is is not because he is formed by the blood of the same Mother, and begotten by the seed of the same Father? Why then should not the Celestiall bodies act up∣on the Terrestriall, they being made of the same matter, and by the finger of the same God? He that will not beleeve Reason, let him beleeve Ex∣perience; he that will believe neither, is little better then an Infidel. I confesse this was of Judicature hath been desi∣red by many; promised by some; but hitherto performed by none; which was the motive cause I now took the
taske in hand my selfe: In perform∣ing which, in many places I corrected the faylings of my Author. What was srivolous I left out, as being unwilling to blot paper, and trouble your braines with impertinencies: where he was too large, I abbreviated him: and where he was deficient, I supplied him both with Precept and Example. If there be any failings, consider, 1 Nemo sine crimine vivit. That man nev'r breathed yet, nor never shall, That did all well, and had no fault at all. 2 My failings (if any be) were not intentionall, but accidentall, together with this Astrological Judgement, I have also given you the Judgment of Hippo∣crates. The rules whereof are drawne from the person of the sick, which al∣though they have been often printed before, yet I have compared them with the originall Copy, and brought them into a plainer method, so that you may have your desire at one single ingresse. If you make use of both these wayes
together in judging of the disease, with∣out a miracle you can hardly faile. If a∣ny find fault with the shortnesse of my rules, let them learne to walk worthie of those they have first; their own Ex∣perience will bring them more; he's but an apish Physician that builds all his practice upon other mens foundations: Man was borne to look after know∣ledge, and in this particular you are set in the way how to find it, by one that desires to remaine a friend to all ho∣nest and ingenuous Arts. Nich. Culpeper.
Courteous Reader, These Books following are Printed for Nathaniel Brooks, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Angel on Corne∣hill. PLanometria, or the whole Art of Survey of Land, shewing the use of all Instruments, but especially the plain Table; whereunto is added an Appendix to measure regular Solides, as Timber, Stone, and the like, and to  the contents of Timber tree as it groweth, usefull for all that intend either to sell or purchase, by Ol. Wallingby. 8. 2. An Arithmetick, discovering the secrets of that Art in Number and Species, in two Books: 1. Teaching by precept and example the operation in Numbers, whole and broken  Decimals, a new practise and use of the Logarithms,  bones, with new Propositions, touching the Quantities, Qualities and Rules of Medicines. 2. The great Rule of Al∣gebra in Species, resolving all Arithmetical Questions by opposition, with a Canon of the powers of Numbers, fitted to the meanest capacity, by Jonas Moor, late of Durham. 8. 3. Tactometria, or the Geometry of Regulars, after a new,  exact, and expedious manner, in Solids, not onely in re∣spect of magnitude or dimension, but also of gravity or , according to any metal assigned, with usefull Experiments,  in by the way of measure and weight. And withall, the like artificial Practical Geometry of Regular-like So∣lids, and of a Cylindrir body, for liquid or Vessel Measure, with sundry new Experiments never before extant for gauging, a work very usefull for all that are imployed in the Art Me∣tricall, by John Wiberd, Doctor in Physick. 4. Records Arithmetick, or the grounds of Art, teaching the Practises of Numbers and Fractions after an easie manner. 5. Stella Nova, Or a new Starre leading wise men unto
Christ, Preached before the learned Society of Astrologers, August 8. 1649. in the Church of Saint Alderniary Lon∣don, by Robert Gell, Doctor in Divinity. 6. An Astrological discourse with Mathematical Demonstra∣tions, proving the powerful and Harmonical influence of the Planets and fixed Stars upon Elementary Bodies, in justifica∣tion of the Validity of Astrologie. By Sir Christopher Heydon, Knight. 7. Magick and Astrologie Vindicated, from those false aspersions and calumnies, which the ignorance of some have cast upon them; in which is contained the true definitions of the said Arts, and the justification of their practise, proved by the authority of Scripture, and the experience of ancient and modern Authors, By Hardick Warren. Histories with curious Discourse of Humane Learning. 1. The English Gentleman and Gentlewoman, both couehed in one Volum, with the Ladies love Lecture, and a Supple∣ment, called the Turtles Triumph; fitted for the Education and training up of both Sex, by Richard Braithwait, Esq, Folio. 2. The History of the Golden Ass. 3. The Painting of the Ancients, the beginning, progress, and Consummating of that Noble Art; and how those ancient Artificers attained to their still so much admired Excellency. 5. Israels Redemption, or the Prophetical History of our Saviours Kingdom on Earth, that is, the Church Catholike and Triumphant, with a Discourse of Gog and Migog, or the Battle of the great Day of God Almighty, by Robert Maton of Exon-Colledg in Oxon. 8. 6. An Introduction to the Teutonick Philosophy, being a de∣termination of the original of the Soul, at a Dispute held in the publike School at Cambridg at the Commencement, March 3. 1646. by Charls Hotham, Fellow of Peter House. 12. 7. Oedipus,  a Resolver, being a Clew that leads to the
chief Secrets, and true Resolution of Amorus Naturall, Moral and Political Problems, by G. M. 12. 8. The Celestial Lamp, enlightening every distressed soule from the depth of everlosting Darkenesse to the height of eter∣nal Light, by Tho. Fettisplace. 12. Choyce Poems, with severall excellent Tragedies and Comedies. 1. Fons Lachrymarum, or a Fountain of Tears, from whence doth flow Englands complaint, Jeremiahs Lomenta∣tions, with an Elegie upon that Son of Valour Sir Charls Lu∣cas, by John Quarls, 8. 2. Nocturnal Lucubrations, or Meditations Divine and Mo∣ral, with Epigrams and Epitaphs, by Robert Chamberlin. 3. The Vnfortunate Mother, a Tragedy, by Tho. Nabbs. 4, The Rebellion of Comedy, by Tho: Raulins. 5. The Tragedy of Messalina, by Nathaniel Richards 8. Excellent Peeces of Divinity of certain Ortho∣dox Divines, with other Sermons, viz. 1. The remedy of Discontentment, or a Treatise of contenta∣tion in whatsoever condition, fit for these sad and troubled times, by the Right Reverend Father in God Joseph Hall late Bishop of Exon and Norwich. 12. 2. The Grand Sacriledge of the Church of Rome, in taking away the sacred Cup from the Laiety at the Lords Table, by the late Reverend Daniel Featly, Doctor in Divinity. 4. 3 The cause and cure of Ignorance, Error, Enmity, A∣thiesm and Profaneness, or a most hopefull way to Grace and Salvation, by R. Young. 8. 4. A  for the Times, tending to still the Murmuring, to settle the Wavering, to stay the Wandring, to Strengthen
the Fainting, by John Brinsley Minister of Gods Word at Yarmouth. 5. Comforts against the feare of Death, being short Medi∣tations of that precious Gentlexoman Mrs Anne Skelton of Norwich, wherein are several Evidences of the worke of Grace, in her own soul, which were the stay of her Heart a∣gainst the feare of Death, by John Collings of Norwich. 6. Jacobs seed, or the Excellency of seeking God by Prayer, by Jeremiah Burroughs, Minìster of the Gospel to the two greatest Congregations about London, Stepney and Criple∣gate, 12. 10. The Zealous Magistrate, a Sermon by Tho. Trescot. 11. Britania Rediviva, or a Soveraigne Remedy to cure a sick Common-wealth, in a Sermon preached in the Minster at York before the Judges at the Assize, August 9. 1649. by John Shaw Minister of Hull. 9. The Princes Royal, or a Sermon preached in the Min∣ster in York before the Judges, March 24. 1650. by John Shaw Minister of Hull. 10. Anatomy of Mortality, divided inio eight Heads, 1 The Certainty of Death. 2. Meditations of Death. 3. Pre∣parations for Death. 4. The right Behaviour in Death. 5. The Comfort in our own Death. 6. The Comfort against the death of Friends. 7. The Cases wherein its lawfull or un∣lawfull to desire death. 8. The glorious estate of Gods chil∣dren after death, By George Stronde. 11. THRATOLOGIA: Or, Adiscovery of Gods won∣ders, manifested in the former and moderne times by bloody Raine and waters: By I. S. LUX VERITATIS: Or, Christian Judiciall Astrology Vindicated, and Demonology Confuted; in answer to Nath. Holmes, Dr. D. By W. Ramesey, Gent.
A Synopsis of the Worke. ABraham, Aven Ezra of Criticall dayes, being an introduction to the worke Page 1. Necessary questions answered. page 7. CHAP. I. The definition of the word Crisis, it's use, cause, kinds, division and difference. p. 17 CHAP. II. How to find out the Decumbiture and Cri∣ticall dayes both by ancient and modern writers. p. 27. CHAP. III. Of the Sympathy and Antipathy of the Signes and Planets. p. 29. The Authors opinion. p. 30. Writers confuted. p. 34. CHAP. IV. The way to set a figure of Crisis, consisting of eight houses. p. 36. CHAP. V. An example of a figure of eight houses, and Judgement upon it. p. 40. CHAP. VI. The way to set a figure of 16 houses, illustra∣ted by a Decumbiture judged upon. p. 51
CHAP. VII. How to set a Criticall figure of twelve houses, illustrated by an example and judg∣ed. p. 57 CHAP. VIII. Twelve precepts premised before the Prog. nosticks. p. 70 CHAP. IX. Eighteen generall prognostications of the disease. p. 76. Particulars. PAAT. I. The diseases each Planet signifies. p 77 PART. II. What diseases are under every sign of the Zodiack. p. 89 PART. III What parts and numbers of the body every planet rules. p 93. PART. IV. What parts of the body are under every sign of the Zodiack, and house of the heaven. In all these the Errors of writers are cor∣rected by the Author. p. 100. CHAP. X. How the nature and kind of the disease may be found out by the Decumbiture, laid
down in 22 Aporismes. p. 106. CHAP. XI. How to know whether the disease lye in the minde or body. p. 110 CHAP. XII. How to know what part of the body is af∣ilicted. p. 113 How to know which side of the body is afilicted p. 116 CHAP. XIII. Whether the disease shall be long or short, mortal or not mortal. p. 118 Six Cautions premised. PART. I. Signs of long and short sicknesse, laid down in fifty Aphorismes. p. 119 PART. II. Signs of life at the Decombiture laid down in sixteen Aporismes. p. 129 PART. III. Signs of death at the Decumbiture laid down in forty four Aphorisms. p 133. Presages of Life and death by the body of the sicke Patient. p. 144 Lib. 1. Chap. 1. Presages by the face. p. 146 Chap. 2. Presages by the eyes and lips. P. 147
Chap. 3. Presages by the manner of lying in bed. p. 148 Chap. 4. Presages by the teeth. p. 150 Chap. 5. Presages by Ulcers and Issues. ibid Chap. 6. Presages by the hands. p. 151 Chap. 7. Presages by the breath. ibid Chap. 8. Presages by sweat. p. 153 Chap. 9. Presages by Tumours. ibid Chap. 10. Presages by Aposthumes. p. 154 Lib. 2. Chap. 1. Presages by dropsies in fevers. p. 157. Chap. 2. Presages of life and death in Fevers, p. 158 Chap. 3. Presages by the Testicles. p. 160 Chap. 4. Presages by sleeping. ibid Chap. 5. Presages by the Excrements of the belly in Fevers p. 161. Chap. 6. Presages by winde in the bowels and womb.
p. 164 Chap. 7 Presages by the Urine in Fevers. p. 166 Chap. 8. Presages by vomiting in Fevers. p. 169 Chap. 9. Presages by the Spittle in Fevers. p. 171 Chap. 10. Presages by sneezing in Fevers. p. 172 Chap. 11. Presages of suppuration of Apostums. p. 172 Chap. 12. Presages by the time of the breaking of A∣postumes. p. 175 Chap. 13. Presages of Apostumes about the ears. p. 177 Chap. 14. Presages of Apostumes in the feet. ibid. Chap. 15. Presages by the bladder in Fevers. p. 179 Lib. 3. Chap. 1. Presages in Fevers. p. 181 Chap. 2. Presages in the Quinsey. p. 185 Chap. 3. Presages by the Uvula. p. 187 Chap. 4. Presages of vomiting in Fevers. p 188
I promised a Table of explanation of some hard words in one place of the Book, but having looked over the Book, I can find none but those at that place which can ex∣ceed almost the meanest capacity. The words there are these three, Uvula, Grgarcon, Columella, the signification of them is all one: I shall tell you, 1. What i'ts substance and place is. 2. What i'ts uses are. 1. The Uvula, Gargarcon or Columell, chuse you whether, is a red spungy piece of flesh sticking to the roof of the mouth near the throat. 2. It's uses are, 1. To give pleasantness to the voice, there∣fore in hoarceness this is afflicted. 2. To stay the aire that it passe not to fast upon the Lungues; therefore such as have gotten colds cannot sing well. 3. It hinders drink, and such liquid things as we eat, from comming out at our Noses. Courteous Reader, you may expect an Ephemerides or Prediction for the year, 1652. in which there is treated on the ef∣fects of the great Eclipse of the Sun, which will appear on the 29th of March, 1652. Yours, Nich. Culpeper.
Errors thus to be corrected. Abscence of the Author, and folly or rather madness of the Transcriber, hath introduced such a numerous rout of errors, as would make a man sick to look upon, there∣fore kind Reader, let me entreat thee, 1. To set the Sad∣dle upon the right Horse: 2. Before thou readest the Book, have but so much patience as to mend these capi∣tal ones with thy Pen. PAge 3 line 4. read earth. p. 4. l. 24. r. another, p. 6. l. S. for in r. is, p. 10. l. 3. r. gill, l. 10. for compasse, r. compare, l. 28 r. significator, p. 11. l. 4. sor so r. for, l. 27. for in the quartile, r. of the humour, l. ult. r. choler, p. 12. l. 5. r. have latitude, l. 26. r. for, l. ult. for accidental, r. occidental, p. 13. l. 28. r. at the, p. 15. for Duryet, r. Duret, and so throughout the treatise p. 17. l. r. for as, r. its, p. 18. l. 21. r. and so breaks out, p. 19 l. 2. dele not, l. 14. r. sixt, l. 16. r. down right, p. 21 l. 13. r. for hangs, r. hanged, p. 23. l. 3. dele as & them, l. 15 for Fever, 1. disease, l. 16. r.  l. 22. for nine, r. ninty, p. 2 l. . r. particular, p. 25 l. 2. r. former times p. 27. l. 20. r.  counts, r. quotes, p. 31. l. 2 for Jupiter, r. Saturn, l. 21. r. hot, some cold, p. 32 l. 4. for , r. Element, l. ult. sor Leo, or, p. 37. l. 8.  hours, r. house, p. 44. l. 10. r.  p.  l. 2. place a comma arrer about, p. 44. l. 13 r. so, p. 51. l. ult,  the Sun, p. 54. l. 15. r. , p. 55. l. 1. for iust, r. not, p. 56. l. ult. r. to be his, p. 5. l. 13. for, and 30. r. add 30. l. an∣tepen. r. as walking, p. 58. l. 17 1 r. what, r. that, p. 60. l. penult, r. as like, p. 65. l. 6. r. intercidental time, 66. l. 15. for her, r. his p. 67. l. 16. r. hurtial, l, 25. place a period after past, l. 26.  the period, p. 63. l. 19. r. of such sick, p. 69. l. for chance, r. change, p. . l. 12. for ascendent, r. attendants, l. 18. dele that, p. . l. 23. for et, r. cit, p. 85 l. 8. r. will do, l. 9. dele another, l. 24. r. Antipathy, for nothing r. notice, p. 90. l. antepenult,  all the Ague in the breast, p. 93 l. 6. for for r. in, p. 95. l. 16.  breech r. teeth, p. 97. l. 12. for every, r. very, p. 98. l. 15. for sickly, r. sickle, p. 99. l. 4. dele is in, l. 16 for one r. me, l. Ante∣penult, for Genesis, r. Gemini, p. 105. l. 16. for therein, r. they are in p. 108. l. 17 for a dusk, r. a dust, p. 111. l. 1 for the Lord, r. their Lords, and put an s. to the end of Lord throughout the page, p. 112. l. 6 r. Jupiter never troubles the mind, unless it be in that, p. 113. l. 21 for under, r. onely, p. 114. l. 3 r. run into fit, l. 9 r. in the l. 10. for Mars, r. Scorpio, p. 116. l. r. for in, r. 0, l. 7 r. it is that, p. 118. l. penult, for in, r. of, p. 119. l.
r aspected to, l. 7 dele in, for to, r. of, l. 21 for by, r. of, p. 120 l. 6 for under, r. on the, p. 121. l. 24 for and, r. in the, l. ante∣penult, for an, r. in, p. 122. l. 16 for even, r. if, l. 24 dele it, and the comma, l. ult. for and, r. in, p. 123, l. 13 for though, r. for, p. 28, l. 8 for ever, r. for, l. 21 read diseases, p. 131, for bene. volence and malevolence, r. benevolents and malevolents, p. 134 l. 13 dele lord of the, l. 25 for to assist him, r. systeme, l. penult, 1. heuretes, p. 137. l. 21 r. hold Jupiter, p. 138. l. 12 for a, r. her p. 139. l. 2 r. wiser, l. 21 for their, r. the, p. 140. l. 26 for posi∣tive r. or posited, p. 141. l. 10 for house r. houre, p. 142. l. 5. for Jupiter: r. Saturn, l. 9 for the Aries, r. Aldebaran, l. 17. for apogeum, r. perigaeum, p. 144. l. 12. for Physitians, r. Piss p. 150. l. 14. dele wil, p. 154. l. 20. for mature action. r. ma∣turation, p. 160. l. 15. r. and she if she be not, p. 163. l. ante. penult, for of r. with. p. 164. l. 5. for then, r. for, p. 165. l. 15 for inflamation, r. inflation, p. 167. l. 14, for hair, r. eare, p. 171. l. 13. r. if such Spittle, p. 176. l. 25. for ask, r. ake, p. 179 l. 9. for when, r. then, p. 183. l. 13. for against Astrologers, r. an Astrologer, p. 187. l. 6. r. did it because, 188. l. 3. r. for it for ought, p. 189. l. 17 r. wringings. Other litterate faults which may easily be discerned and as easily amended, I omitted, least I should make the Er∣rata as big as the Book.
Abraham Avenezra, Of Critical Dayes. LIB. I. IT is a palpable and apparent truth that God carries men to the prin∣ciples of grace by the Book of the Creatures; For this beginning of Abraham Avenezra an Arabian Physician, and a singular Astrologer (whom the Ptiests of our times call a Heathen) savoureth of the things beyond Heathenisme; for in this Treatise of Criticall dayes, he begins thus; I intreat the Lord God, that he would en∣lighten my heart with his light and truth, so long as my Spirit remaines in me, for his light is very delightfull and good for the eye of my soule to see by; for so shall the night be en∣lightned to me as the day, neither shall the clouds shadow it; it shall not be like the light of the Sun by day, because it shall not be clou∣ded.
nor like the light of the Moon, because it shall never be diminished as her light is. God hath made these lights as he hath made man and he appointed the greater light to rule the day, and the lesser to rule the night; hence it appeares, the Sun was made to rule the day, and not to give light to it onely, as the Priests affirme: and the Moon was made to rule the night, not to give light to it onely, as appears Gen. 1. because she hath no light to give; also he hath made the whole host of heaven, the fixed Stars and Planets, and gave them ver∣tues, together with the Luminaries; but their vertues are not so great as the vertues of Lu∣minaries; are neither is the vertue of the Moon so great as the vertue of the Sun, because she borrowes her light from the Sun; also the whole host of heaven, that is, the fixed Stars move all in the same Sphere, and therefore their distance is always the same the one from the other, and their latitude is alwayes the same; but it is not so with the Planets; for their course is various, and so is their distance the one from the other, and so is their lati∣tude; for sometimes they are upon the Eclip∣tick, sometimes North from it, sometimes South, sometimes Retrograde, sometimes di∣rect, sometimes in conjunction one with ano∣ther, sometimes in opposition, sometimes in other aspects; the reason of this is, because
the Sphere of one is lower then the Sphere of the other, and the lower the Sphere is, the sooner they make their revolution. The neerest to the eart of all the Planets is the Moon, and therefore her course is swift∣est: and besides her difference in longitude and latitude, there happen other accidents to her which are not visible to other Planets; for sometimes she increaseth, sometimes de∣creaseth, and sometimes she is invisible or faileth in light: the reason why the Planets are not seen horned as the Moon, is, because their distance is greater from us; all the Planets seem biggest when they are at their greatest distance from the Sun, or when they are neer∣est to the earth, according to Copernicus; also sometimes the Moon is Eclipsed, but not in the same manner as the Sun, for the Sun ne∣ver looseth its light, but is onely shadowed from a particular people or place, by the body of the Moone; but the Moon Eclipsed totally looseth her light; and the reason is, the Suns light is his owne, but the Moon is a borrow∣ed light. This being premised, consider that all things under the Moon universally, whether men, beasts, or plants, are changed, and never remaine in the same state, neither are their thoughts and deeds the same: take counsell of your head, and it will certifie you what I
speake is true; and they are varied according to the various course and disposition of the Planets; look upon your owne genesis, and you shall find your thoughts moved to choler, so often as the Moon transites the place where the body or aspect of Mars was in your gene∣sis; and to melancholy when she doth the like to Saturne; the reason is, because the Moon is assimilated to the body of man: whose vertue as well as her light increaseth and diminish∣eth; for she brings downe the vertue of the other Planets to the creatures, and to man if he lives upon the earth. The Sun causeth heat and cold, day and night, Winter and Summer; when he arives to the house of his honor or exaltation, to wit, Aries, then the trees spring, living creatures are comforted, the birds sing, the whole crea∣tion rejoyceth, and sicknesses in the body show themselues in their colours; also when he arrives at his fall, to wit, Libra, the leaves of the trees fall, all creatures are lumpsh, and mourne like the trees in October. Also anothes notable experiment is, usualy sick people are something eased from mid∣night to noon, because then the Sunne is in the ascending part of the heaven; but they are most troubled when he is descending, that is, from noon to mid-night. The course of the Moon is to be observed in
many operations both in the Sea and Rivers, Vegetables, Shel-fishes, as also in the bones and marrow of men, and all creatures; also seed sowne at the waine of the Moon, grows either not att all, or to no purpose. Also wise men have experiences of many vertues of the Starres, and have left them to posterity: and Physicians in old time when they were minded to be honest, have found out the changes and terminations of diseases, by the course of the Moon; Wherefore the 7, 14. 20, or 21. 27, 28, or 29. dayes of sicknesses are called Criticall dayes, which cannot be known but by the course of the Moone; for let not your braine rest in the number of the days, because the Moon is sometimes swifter, sometimes slower. As for such diseases as do not terminate in a month (I meane a Lunar Month) viz. the time the Moon traceth round the Zodiack, which is 27 dayes, some odd hours, some few minutes; you must judge of these by the course of the Sun; the day is not called Cri∣tical, because it is the seventh day from the decumbiture, as if the vertue lay in the num∣ber 7. but because the Moone comes to the quartile of the place she was in at the decum∣biture, its no matter whether it be a day soo∣ner or later. Whe she comes to the opposition of the
place she was in at the day of the decumbiture, she makes a second Crisis, the third when she comes to the second quartile, and the fourth when she comes to the place she was in at the decumbiture, and its well she can make so many; being The reason of the difference of the Moons motion in the difference of her distance from the Earth; for when the center of her circle is nearest to the center of the Earth, she is swift in motion; and hence it comes to passe that sometimes she moves more then 15 degrees in 24 houres, sometimes lesse then 12. therefore if she be swift in motion, she comes to her owne quartile in six days; if slow, not in seven; therefore must you judge according to the motion of the Moon, and not according to the number of the dayes. Know then that the Crisis', viz. upon a Criticall day, the Moon being well aspected by good Planets, it goes well with the sick; if to ill Planets, it goes ill; but I know you would be resolved in one particular, which is, if the Crisis depend upon the motion of the Moone, and her aspect to the Planets; What is the reason, if two men taken sick at one and the same time, that yet the Crisis of the one fals out well, and not so in the other. I answer, The vertue working is changed according to the diversity of the vertue recei∣ving;
for you all know the Sun makes the clay hard, and the wax soft; it makes the cloth white, and the face black; so then if one be a child whose nature is hot and moist, the other a young man, and the third an old man, the Crisis works diversty in them all, because their ages are different. Secondly, the time of the yeare carries a great stroke in this businesse; if it be in the Spring time, diseases are most obnoxious to a child, because his nature is hot and moist; a diseale works most violently with a cholorick man in Summer; with a melancholy man in Autumne; with a flegmatick by reason of age or complexion in Winter. Thirdly, To this I adde, suppose at the be∣ginning of a disease, the Moon was in the place of Mars, in the genesis whose nature is hot and dry, if the disease be of heat it migh∣tily aggravates it; not so if it be of cold; and you shall seldome find two men that had Mars at one and the same place in the genesis at one and the same time, fall sick and the di∣sease differ either at the middle or at the end. Quest. Put the case, the age of the people, and the season of the yeare be the same, and the disease be the same, would the Crisis be the the same, yea or no? I answer thus, Their complexions may be
different, the one hot and dry, the other cold and moist: If the diseases be hot and dry, the effect will not be so violent upon a cold and moist body, as it will be upon a hot and dry; the fire will sooner seize upon that which is hot and dry, then that which is cold and moist. 2 Imagine the complexions to be the same upon both parties? I Answer, That is impossible, there must be some dif∣ference upon complexions; for though they may be the same in the universall, yet in par∣ticulars there must needs be some difference, by reason of their different dyet, exercise and climate, unlesse they be borne and brought up altogether under one latitude. 3 Let us imagine they be all alike, yet di∣vers things may intervene and alter the Crisis; their nativities may not agree; for example, If the Moon be in the place of Saturne or Mars in the nativity, the disease is dangerous; not so if she be in the place where Jupiter or Venus was in then; or its possible Jupiter or Venus may hurt in the Nativities of such to whose ascendents they are inimical or posited in the six t or eight houses. 4. Again, Saturn may be Lord of the one nativity, and not of the other; and then he may hurt the one and not the other, whose nativity he is Lord off, for the Devill will not
hurt his owne; the like of Mars. Innumerable such things may be added, as that the one may provide for the sick∣nesse before hand, not the other, but it is needlesse. Object. But then you will say, there can be no certainty at all found in the Crisis. I answer, Astrologers passe judgement two manner of wayes in diseases. The First we call Universall, and so Saturn rules Consumptions, Mars Feavers, Venus o∣ver women, Mercury over Schollers. The Second is particular, and so the Se∣venth house hath dominion over women, the ninth over Schollers. Now no particular can destroy a universal; for example, if Venus be ill seated in a nativi∣ty, and the Lord of the Seventh well seated, we say the native shall generally incur evill by women, though some particular good may incur from them in like manner; judge in this case by the generall significators of sick∣nesse, viz. Saturne and Mars. But Secondly, if you can possibly get the Nativities you shall not erre: And now give me leave to quote one experiment of my own. If the Nativities be one and the same, the Cri∣sis will be one and the same: For example, I know three Children borne at one and the same time (as the event proved) at five yeares
of age they all three had Convulsions, where∣by they were each of all three lame of one leg, the boyes on the right legg, and the girls on the left; at fourteen yeares of age they dyed altogether in one and the same day of the small pox. Thirdly, if the Nativity cannot be gotten, view the urine, and erect a caelestiall Scheme upon the sight of it, and if you have a decum∣biture compasse, the decumbitures with the caelestiall Scheme at the view of the urine, and you may judge clearly of the Crisis. To proceed to the matter, if the Moon be strong when she comes to the Quartile or op∣position of the place she was in at the decum∣biture, viz. in her house or exaltation, the sick recovers if she be aspected to no Planet. Judge the like of the Sun in Chronical di∣seases: but judge the contrary, if either of them be in detriments or fals; for there is as much difference between them as there is be∣tween the Zenith & the Narder; if the Moone be void of course at the beginning of a disease the signe is neither good nor bad. Look then to the Signe ascending at the beginning of a disease, and let the Moon alone for a time. If the Moon be anguler at the decumbiture and in the Ascendent judge of her alone, and make use of no other signification; if she be  the Lord of the Ascendent with
'Tis very dangerous when the Moon is E∣clipsed, when she comes to the quartile or op∣position of the place she was in at the decum∣biture; so usually at such a time death turnes Physician. If in the beginning of a sicknesse the Moon be in a moveable signe, the sicknesse soone moves to an end one way or other; fixed signes prolong sicknesse, and common signes set a stop to the wisest braine in the world. Also this is a certaine rule, as sure as the Sun is up at noon day, that diseases of pleni∣tude are very dangerous, when a man is taken sick upon a full Moon. Diseases of fasting or emptinesse are most dangerous when a man is taken sick upon a new Moon. Let me intreat you to give Physick for a disease of emptines when she is neer the full. And for diseases of fulnesse when the Moon hath lost her light. Diminish a Humor when the Moon dimi∣nisheth in light: Increase when she increaseth in light; Flegme opposeth Choler, Meian∣choly opposeth Blood: 'tis none of the worst ways to diminish choler by increasing flegme; a word is enough to the wise. 'Tis very bad when in the beginning of a sicknesse the Moone is in a signe of the nature, if the quartile offending, Naturally wen she is in a fiery signe, a∣mend a disease of flegme; but if choles a∣bound,
'tis very good if she be in a watery signe; you may know by a penny how a shil∣ling is coined. If the moone be in conjunction or aspect with any Planet, and neither of them Lati∣tude, the Crisis will be firme: if they differ much in Latitude the Crisis will be weake. The Moon in conjunction with Saturne at the decumbiture shewes long sicknesse; and if Saturne be slow in motion, so much the worse (and bad is the best) at all times in such a case. If Saturne be retrograde when he comes to the opposition of the Sun beware of a Relaps. If Saturn have North Latitude, be sure the sick is bound much in body. If the Moon be joyned to a retrograde Planet, the sick vo∣mits up his Physick. Venus helps more in the sicknesses of young men and women, then she doth in old. If the desease come of heat, Venus helps more then Jupiter; if the disease comes more of cold, Jupiter helps more then Venus. If the disease comes of Love, there is not a more pestilent Planet in the heavens then Venus; then call help of Jupiter: in persecutions of Religion Jupiter is little better then the De∣vil; call helpe of Venus in such a case. Mercury accidentall and strong, signifies good in diseases.
If Mars cause the disease Venus helps more then Jupiter; if Saturne, then Jupiter more then Venus. If in the beginning of a sicknesse the Moon be in conjunction with any fixed stars of the first magnitude, whose Latitude from the E∣cliptick is but small, you may safely judge of diseases by the nature of that Star she is joyn∣ed to; suppose he be of the nature of a Planet good or bad, take him according to his na∣ture. When the Moon is joyned to any planet by body or aspect in the beginning of any sick∣nesse, if she aspect that Planet when she comes to the quartile or opposition of the place, the Crisis will be firme and stable, and twill move no faster then a house, and twil not be altered be it good or bad. But if when she comes to quartile or oppo∣sition she meets with another Planet, be sure the disease changes either to better or worse, according to the nature of that star she meets withall. And this will appeare in the sick party, or else in the Physician, or in the course of Phy∣sicke. See what house the Planets she meets withall at the Crisis is I ord of the de∣cumbiture, and judge accordingly; and so a sick person may happen to have more witt then an old doting Physician.
If it be a fixed starre of an other nature to that fixed star she was withall at the decumbi∣ture, it will not alter so much, or at least there will not be a universall alteration of the disease; and my reason is, because the fix∣ed stars are so far from the earth. And the last the thing is, Whatsoever is said of the Moon in acute diseases, will hold as true of the Sun in Chro∣nick Diseases.
LIB. II. Astrologicall Judgement upon DISEASES; OR, A Methodical way to find out the Cause, Nature, Symptoms, and change of a Dis∣ease, together with the parts of the afflicted, the exact time of reco∣very, or dissolutions by the Decumbiture; Amplified by Examples. THe Basis of the Story was borrow∣ed from Noel Duryet Cosmogra∣pher to the King of France, and the most excellent Cardinall the Duke of Richelieu. 'Tis confest, in some place I have abrevia∣ted him, in others corrected him; let another doe the like by me: What I have done, I have done, and am not ashamed the world should see it. Through the never failing mercies of
God, I had an oppertunity put into my hands to finish this so much desired, so long wished∣for work; if there be any weaknesse in it, it is my owne; if their be any excellency in it, give God the glory. He that writes ignominie upon the backside of an other mans book, never setting forth a∣ny of his own, let the name of ignominy be branded, and not ingraven upon his Sepul∣cher. I would fain see the piss Prophets of this age deliver such a judgement of diseases by the U∣rine; he that can doe so, Erit mibi magnus A∣pollo. Why doe I trouble my head with the Physicians whose Covetousnesse or Lazinesse, or both, or something worse, will not suffer them to study those Arts which are Essentiall to their Monopolized calling; but I will be silent; for their fall is approaching by reason of their pride, if he wrote true that writes, that pride goes before a fall, and a haughty mind before destruction: my Genius is too dull to commend my Author, or to give him the thousanth part of his due praise. I desire to be censured by Dr. Experience, who will give judgement without partiality and I hope 'tis no disparagement to Monsieur Duryat that I deliver him in my own Language.
CHAP. I. The Definition of the word Crisis, as Vse, Cause, Kinds, Division and Difference. CRisis according to Galen, is a swift and suddain change of any disease, whereby the sick is either brought to recovery, or death; and a sick man can be brought to nothing else, unless you will make him a beast of a man. For every swift and suddain change where∣ever it happens, whether in the Moon or the Aire, or sick body, Galen playes the man and calls a Crisis; and from this Crisis is Judge∣ment given, whether the sicke be like to live or dye. The word Crisis is a Greek word derived , which signifieth to judge or dis∣cern, or pass sentence upon a thing: therefore Criticall dayes are nothing else but dayes wherein a man may discern a disease, or give Judgement upon it, be it good or bad, it mat∣ters not much; 'tis taken by a Metaphor from the Judiciall Court to the Art of Physick, because 'tis something like to plead; mans cause for his lise, and to labour acutely un∣der a disease to be drawn by Inimicall ac∣cusers
before the Judgement Seat, and to run the hazzard of life, with a cruell and hoftil Disease. Moreover there are three things re∣quisite to a judicial Court; the Accuser, the Person indicted, and the Judge. So likewise are there three things by which the Art of Physick consisteth, and by which every cure is perfected: 1. The Disease, 2. Nature, and the Physitian, which is natures servant, or at least should be so; and 3. the accidents which manifest what the disease is, and stand as wit∣nesses. The cause of the Crisis is twofold; inward, outward; the internal cause is taken from i'ts one proper principle, if you will believe Hip∣pocrates; and that is double or two-fold; for either nature labours to expell the humour that causeth the disease, or else the humour it selfbeing drawn to a place, and not fit for Excretion, by i'ts own weight or quality, burdens nature, and soares break out. Hippocra∣tes was but a man, and I am no more; a man saith he, is troubled when he is in a Fever, and the sign is horror, trembling, running hither, and thither throughout the Microcosm; this is one internal cause. The second internall cause. Others there be, 'tis no matter who, that ascribe the efficient cause of the Crisis to na∣ture
it self: Nature if she be strong, as 'tis pit∣ty but she should not, is a good Physitian for all diseases; and concocts the humour which causes the disease, and separates that which is good from that which is bad; and having done so, prepares that which breeds annoy∣ances for Excretion, and at last makes a shift to cast it out. The externall cause of the Crisis, is cau∣sed by an alteration of the Aire, whence ari∣seth an alteration of the breath a man draws in, from cold to heat, from dry to moist, or the contraries to them both. For Hippocrates himself in his six Aphorisme, three Comment, and in his Treatise De , speaks in down dunstable language, that heat and moisture in the body, moves for∣ward the Crisis: for diseases, some saith he, come by ill Dyet, other by the Aire we draw in. So then the Dyet as it breeds such and such humours in the body, is internal; but the Aire we draw in, is the externall cause of the Crisis. And now give me leave to leave my Author, and yet I will not forget him quite neither. The Lord eternall in the beginning when he made the Creation, made it of a composition of contraries; discord makes a harmony as
in Musicke; if the World be composed of a composition of contraries, various must needs be the disposition of mans life: Hence comes sometimes health, sometimes sicknesse, some∣times melancholy, sometimes choler to the body of man, and happy is that man that knows himself. These qualities in man being altered by the various influences of the Stars, the Sphere of the one carrying a swifter motion then the Sphere of the other, then various must needs be the disposition of mans body. The Luminaries carry the greatest strength in the heavens, and so do the time-servers in the State; and this needs not be doubtful to any body, if you consider that the sound of a Drum or Trumpet incites a man to valour; and the sound of a Fiddle to dancing. Besides other manifest effects of the Luminaries ap∣peare to our eyes. Who makes hours and dayes, and seasons in the year? is it not the Sun? who makes alterations in the Aire, in Plants, and in living Creatures? What is the reason that Oysters are suller at the ful moon, then at the new? To the number of Oysters, joyne Crabs and Lobsters; nay the marrow in the body of Man; is it not the Moon? A man if he pleaseth, may say his right hand is his left, and a prating Priest may preach his plea∣sure,
let Doctor experience be judge. Now then we have brought the matter to this pur∣pose, that the Universall cause of the Crisis is the influence of the heavens: for the Celesti∣all bodyes either by heat, light, motion, or aspect, configuration, or all of them, or some of them, act not onely in the four Ele∣ments, but Elementary bodyes; for if they act in the one, they must needs in the other; and then by consequence in man, which is but compounded of Elements. The earth is a great lump of dirt rolled up together, and by an onely wise God hangs in the Aire; the Stars are no more, neither is the Moon; onely what mettle the Sun is made of I know not. If the bodies of men are Elementary, compo∣sed of Fire, Aire, Earth and Water; he must needs participate in one measure or other of all these Elements. The Elements being con∣traries, cannot alwayes agree; hence comes the cause of health, sometimes of sicknesse, sometimes death it self; and Aristotle was halfe of my opinion when he wrote these words; From the Rain and Dew of Heaven both good and bad things are caused to bud. Kinds of Cri∣sis. The kinds of Crisis are two; one in acute diseases, and they
are to be judged by the Moon; the other in long and lasting, or chronick diseases, which are to be judged of by the Sun: For those Crises which come from their own proper principle, are from the internall cause depen∣ding onely upon the motions of the Moon and her Configurations and aspects to the place she was in at the Decumbiture. But you must note in acute diseases, the a∣spects or radiations of the Moon, to wit her Quartile or Opposition, are not taken from the Coniunction of the Moon to the Sun, as they are in Almanacks or Ephemerides, which is but the Father of an Almanacke, but from the place in which the Moon was found at the Decumbiture, as shall appear by a few exam∣ples hereafter. There are acute and Chronick diseases. Of Acute diseases, some are simply acute, others are peracute, others are very acute, per-per-acute, or exceeding acute. Those which are simply acute, are finished in 8. 10. 11. 14. 20. 21. dayes, and they are called Monthly diseases by some, and Lunary by others, and they none of the greatest fools neither; they are terminated in the time the Moon traceth the 12. Celestiall signes of the Zodiack, which is in 27 dayes, some odd houres, and some odd minutes.
Thoseacute diseases which suffer changes or degenerate, are to be judged of by an imper∣fect way; as for them sometimes they increase, sometimes they are remitted; they are as fickle as a weather Cock, according as the Moon meets with the beames either of good or evill Planets: and that is not all the trick they have neither. For sometimes they change out of acute diseases into Chronick di∣seases; and so a continued Fever may change into a Hecktick Fever; or an intermitting Fever into a continued Fever; and these di∣seases terminate in forty dayes, very acute diseases, such as are concluded in 5. 6. 7. 8. dayes, among which are the Fevers the Greeks call , an inflamation of the Lungs. In exceeding acute diseases, they are such which end in three or four dayes at furthest, as Pestilencies, Apoplexies &c. Chronick diseases follow the motion of the Sun, and 'tis about nine dayes before the first Crisis appears; for in that time the Sun comes to the proper Quartile of the place he was in at the Decumbiture, as appeares in Hecktick Fevers, Dropsies: but when he comes to his Sextile, or Trine aspect of the place he was in at the Decumbiture, some motion appeares whereby a man if he have any guts
in his braines, may judge of the Crisis to come. It falls out well, if the Sun be well aspected by good Planets, and worle if to evill Pla∣nets; and this holds true, if you consider it from the Nativity, throughout all the whole course of a mans life: for diseases are parti∣cularly attendants on a mans life, if Dr. Ex∣perience tell truth. Moreover of the Crises, some are perfect, some are imperfect. A perfect Crisis, is, when the disease ap∣peares intirely, and perfectly to be judged of; and this is sometimes hopefull, some∣times desperate; hopefull when there is great probability of health and recovery; desperate when there is palpable signes of death. An imperfect Crisis, is, when the disease is changed upon every light occasion; and if Mars be Author of the disease, and in a sign of a double body, upon my life you shall not faile; for the Critis happens as true as the Weather-cock. Your safest way then to judge of the di∣sease, is by the Aspects of the Moon to the Planets; when the Moon meets with the Ini∣micall, or hostil beames of Saturne, or Mars, have a care of your Patient: And if you know what hinders, by the same reason,
you may know what helps. Physitians in former, when they were wise, and minded the common good, and not their own gain, they distinguished the Crisis of diseases thus; Some were safe, some doubtfull; some fit to be judged, and some not fit to be judged. That Crisis is safe, which comes without great and pernitious aspects. It is doubtful, suspitious, I had almost said dangerous, which comes with great perni∣tious aspects. The disease is fit to be judged, when signes of Concoction come the fourth day; and then certainly the Crisis will appear the 9th. The Moon moves not upon a equal motion; there∣fore you had best trust to her motion, rather then the dayes. The Sun hath domination in Chronick diseases, the Moon in acute; if you be a wise man, your judgement shall be as sure as the Sun, and that never failes without a mi∣racle. In times of yore, when knowledge was scant, men went a begging for it; and they that had gotten knowledge, monopolized it. A few glimpses of Adams happinesse in Para∣dise, which happinesse all the World have been reaching after ever since. They knew well enough the Moon moved
so many degrees, in so many dayes: an evill Angell, I had almost said the Devill, percei∣ving there was want of knowledge in the World, goes and transformes himself into an Angel of light, and taught men to count the time by dayes: 'Tis no great marvail the Egyptians should worship Garlick and Ony∣ons for Gods, when we defie Christmas-day, though perhaps it may be cloudy. What I have spoken, I have onely spoken to shew that it is the motion of Sun and Moon that produceth the Crisis in diseases, and not the number of dayes. I must return to the place I intended; Of dayes, some are called by their own name, Criticall dayes; other are called Judiciall dayes, and they are so called, because upon them, dame Nature and her Son Doctor Rea∣son would make manifest what the disease is: and Doctor Experience tels me 'tis true. Another time is called Intercidental, which is a time falls out between the judicial dayes and Criticall. Upon these Intercidental dayes, the disease is usually remitted; if so, then a good Crisis may be expected; if not, an evill. I shall explain these terms before I go further; a man fals sick, there is the first Cri∣sis, let the cause of the disease be what you will; when the Moon comes to the same de∣gree
of the next figue she was in at the De∣cumbiture, there is the judiciall dayes; for in that time the disease shews it self in its colours, with bag and baggage. When the Moon comes to her Sextile, it brings the In∣tercidental Day, and should mitigate the di∣sease; if she do not, she is aspected to evill Planets: and if she be aspected to ill Planets, an ill Crisis is to be expected, and so the con∣trary; and you shall never find this faile. CHAP. II. The way to finde out the Critical dayes, as also the Decumbiture, both by Ancient and Mo∣dern Writers. ANcient Physitians, because they were ig∣norant of the motion of the Moon, though not of her operation, as many of our modern are, made their account by number of dayes; and in so doing, erred egregiously: And although Durate my Author counts their opinions, I hold it not worth time to recite mens failings: But of the certain term or time when the Criticall dayes begin, I shall quote these few words.
When any notable disease comes, if you would discern whether it tends to Health, Death, Mutation, or Continuance, it is ne∣cessary that you begin at the first punct of time of the invasion of the disease. This Galen saith is very hard, if not impossible to find; 'tis taken proconfesso, that it may be easily known, when a man takes his bed in his sicknesse; but when the beginning of the sicknesse is, that's the question: For a lusty stout man beares the disease longer, and is longer before he takes his bed, then a puny weakly sickly man is: a meer suspition of a sicknesse, will send a faint-hearted man to bed; you may per∣swade him he is sicke, whether he be or no. Notwithstanding this is most certain that in most acute diseases, as also in many other diseases, as the Falling sicknesse, Palsies, Apo∣plexies, Pluresies, &c. 'tis an easie thing to find out the beginning, or the preci e time of the invasion of the disease. The common opinion of such as are learn∣ed in Astrology is, and according to their o∣pinion I affirm, that that moment of time is to be taken for the beginning of the disease, in which a man finds a manifest pain or hurt in his body: for instance, when a man hath got a Fever, usually the head akes certain dayes before; this is not the Fever, but a Mes∣senger
or forerunner of the Fever; the true beginning of the Fever, is when the disease appears sensibly, or when a horror or trem∣bling invades the sicke, as does usually in the beginning of a Fever; that is the beginning of the disease, when the disease appeares ma∣nifest to sence; And this was the judgement of Hippocrates, one of the honestest of Physiti∣ans: And you shall find this alwaies, that the more acute the disease is, the more manifest the beginning of it is to sense: yea so mani∣fest, that it is almost impossible that the be∣ginning should lie hid from any one that wants reason, if he have but sense. CHAP. III. Of the Sympathy, and Antipathy of the Signes and Planets. BEfore we come to prognostick, we must know that there is a Sympathy between Celestiall and Terrestiall bodyes, which will easily appear, if we consider that the whole creation is one entire and united body, com∣posed by the power of an All-wise God, of a composition of discords. Also there is friendship and hatred between
one sign of the Zodiack and another; for fiery signes are contrary to watry, and nocturnal to diurnall, &c. The Planets are also friendly and inimical one to another; but in their friendship and enmity, what ever the matter is, I cannot a∣gree neither with ancient nor modern wri∣ters: And when I cannot do so, I le fly to Dr. Reason for advice; they hold Mars and Ve∣nus to be friends. And what your opinion is of all the rest, you may find by Mr. Lillies Introduction. My own opinion grounded upon reason, is this; that there are two causes of friendship and en∣mity, between Planets Essential and Acciden∣tal; Planets are essentially inimically three wayes. First, When their Houses or Exaltations are opposite one to the other; and so Saturn is an enemy to both Luminaries; Jupiter to Mercury, and e contra Mars to Ve∣nus. 2. Planets are Inimicall one to the other, when their temperatures or qualities are op∣posite; and so jupiter is an enemy to Saturn, he being hot and moist, Saturn cold and dry: So Mars is enemy to Venus, he be∣ing hot and dry, she cold and moist. 3. Planets are Inimical when their con∣ditions
differ; so there is enmity to Sol and Jupiter, for he loves the Court, and he the Country. Jupiter is enemy to Mars, for he loves Peace and Justice, Mars violence and oppressions; Mars is enemy to Venus, for he rejoyceth in the field, she in the bed; he loves to be publique, she playes least in sight. And thus you see in every respect, what a dif∣ficult thing it is to make Mars and Venus ra∣tionally friends. Accidentall inimicalnesse to Planets, is when they are in square or opposition &c. the one to the other. Also Inimicalnesse must needs be in the Signes; for if cold and heat, moisture and drynesse, be inconsistent toge∣ther in one and the same place, as your eyes will tell you, if you will but please to take a pale of water and throw it into the fire; then can they not be in one and the same place in the heavens. And if so, as is most true, then must some signes be cold, some dry, and some moist; one sign must needs cherish one quality more then another; and seeing the first qualities are adverse the one to the other, there is a necessity, that sometimes one must yeild, and sometimes overcome: and this is the reason of the corruption, generation, and vicissitude of things. Moreover the Moon constituted in a signe,
commonly strikes upon the nature of the signe she is in: as if she be in a fiery sign, she stirs up Choler, &c. Also as every Climate hath two qualities, so hath every celestiall sign; the Aereal signes are hot and moist, the Farthly signes cold and dry, the Fiery signes hot and dry, the Watry signes cold and moist: And thus you see how the concords are made of discords; for Aery signes are joyned to fiery by heat, and to watry by moisture: Watry are joyned to aery by moisture, and to earthly by cold∣nesse: the Earthly are joyned to the watry by coldnesse, and to fiery by drynesse; this is an old true maxime of Philosophers; which I shal not at this time be captious against. Besides, the congresse and configurature of the Planets and fixed Stars is diligently to be heeded; of these, some are obnoxious and hatefull; a Quartile and Opposition, as also the Conjunction of bad Planets; others are healthful, as Sextile and Trine, and Con∣junction of good Planets; and indeed the chiefest part of Astrology consisteth in the due observation of configurations; for by these come alterations in things below, either to better or worse, according to the nature of the Planets or Stars that signifie them: for when two Stars are joyned with  aspect∣ed
to one another, they seminate something in Sub-Lunary bodies according to their owne nature; It dissention be between the starres, the sperme proves malicious and destructive, and tumultuous, even as the opposition of winds, especially the North and South winds, produceth thunder, lightning and pestilenti∣all vapours, and this we find never failes, if the South-wind prevails, and the Moon and Mercu ry behold one another. Thus you see a reason, if you know but what a reason is, or ever heard of such a thing, why diseases in the body of man are either exasperated, or remitted, according to the good or evill meeting of the Planets. Of the Aspects opposition is the worst of all, not by any contrariety, or diver∣sity of nature of the Signs in which the op∣positions fall out, but in respect of the Pla∣nets themselves opposing, which being at greatest distance are most inimicall; they be∣ing in a posture to outface one another, and this is the most principall cause of enmi∣ty. A Quartile is inimicall, because the Stars so aspected be in signes of contrary nature; as Sol in Aries; Luna in Cancer, the aspect is hatefull, because Aries is hot and dry, Cancer cold and moist; Aries masculine,
Cancer feminine; Aries diurnall, Cancer nocturnall. Andnow by the leave of my Author, and also of of great Ptolomy himselfe, and of all the sons of Art this day living, who build their judgement upon Doctor Tradition, and not upon the sound principles of Doctor Rea∣son; if this be the originall of the enmity of of a square aspect, as is agreed upon on all sides: Then, Why do they hold that a Quartile in Signs of long ascentions is aequivalent to a Trine; and a Trine in Signs of short Ascenti∣ons as pernicious as a Square? put the rest of the non-sence into the bundle: and when you have done, look upon it a little while, and when you have viewed it a little, tell me I pray, Doth the longnesse or shortnesse of the ascentions adde or take away any thing from the quality of the Signes? Is not this the way, the onely way to bring the Art into a Labyrinth, if not into a confusion? in truth in my opinion it is; This I will confesse, and give you my reason for it when I have done; one square is not so bad as another; as from Aries to Cancer is worse then from Cancer to Libra, because the Signs Cancer and Libra are in better harmo∣ny, as agreeing in passive qualities; namely,
moisture, whereas Aries and Cancer disa∣gree totally. By this rule you may find out the rest. Also this I affirme, and will prove it when I have done; that some Semisextiles are worse then some Quartiles; for Pisces is more inimical to Aries then Capricorne; first because it is the twelfth Signe from him, 2. besides disagrees more in qualities. A Sextile Aspect is good, because the Signs which are in Sextile the one to the other are both of the same active quality, both of a sexe both of a time, for example, Aries and Gemini are both masculine, both Diurnall; Taurus and Cancer are both cold, both Fe∣minine, both Nocturnall; but because they differ all in passive qualities, it is not altoge∣ther so friendly as trine aspect is; for that con∣sists altogether of Signes of the same nature, sexe, quality and time, and are correspondent the one to the other every way. A Conjunction or Synod is the strongest of all, and cannot properly be called an aspect. A Conjunction of good Planets with good, is exceeding good: It is good in the highest de∣gree. A conjunction of bad Planets with bad Planets is as bad, as the former was good. A conjunction of good Planets with bad is no ways commendable. I have now done, if you
will be pleased but to take notice, that the conjunction of all Planets with their Sun is bad, because the Sun who gives them their ef∣ficacy, takes it awy at such times. I could be Criticall at this, but I shall sorbear it at this time. CHAP. IV. The way of finding, out the Critical and Judiciall dayes by a Figure of eight houses. THis is the method of Hyppeerates, and from him Galen used, and it is to be done in this manner. 1 Make your scheme of eight equal parts. 2 Search out the Signe, Degree and Mi∣nute the Moon was in at the beginning of the sicknesse. 3 Place the sign degree & minute the Moon was in at the beginning of the sicknesse upon the cuspe of the first house, as though that were ascending at the time. 4 Add forty five degrees to this, you need not regard the latitude of the Region, for it is of no use in Criticall Figures, but take the de∣grees barely from the Ecliptick, when you have added forty five degrees to the place of the Moon at the decumbiture, the point of the Zodiack answerable to that shall
make the cuspe of the second house. 5 Forty five degrees more added to that will bring you to the Cuspe of the third House, to which when the Moon comes, she comes to the quartile of the place she was in at the decumbiture, and this makes the first Crisis. 6 Forty five degrees more added to this, makes the 4th. house; 45 degrees more added to that points out the place of the true opposi∣tion of the Moon to the place she was in at the decumbiture, and this makes the second Cri∣sis. The second quartile of the Moon to her owne place at the decumbiture, makes the third Crisis: And the fourth is when she comes to the same sign, degree and minute that she was in at the decumbiture. The time or houres noted betwixt the Crisis, are called the Judiciall times; or such times wherein a man may judge what the di∣sease is, or what it will be; remember this all along in such kinds of judgement; And do not forget not to number the time by dayes as the ancients did; for they were either igno∣rant, or regardlesse of the course of the Moon; for the Moon comes to the Judiciall or Criti∣call days, sometimes sooner, sometimes lat∣ter, as she is either swifter or slower in mo∣tion.
Now the time called Criticall is alwayes evill, because of the contrariety of the signe the Moon is in then to the sign she was in be∣fore, or the contrariety of her nature to the opposite place: At such a time there ariseth a controversie or battaile as it were, between the disease and nature; the Moon maintains nature in acute diseases: And now you have the reason why, that if she be afflicted upon a Critiall day by the bodies or ill beames of Saturne or Mars, or the Lord of death, which is alwayes Lord of the eighth House, and sometimes the Lord of the Fourth House, will serve the turne if he be a malevolent, because the fignisies the grave, the disease in∣creaseth, and sometimes the sick dies: But if the Moon at the time of the Crisis beholds the Lord of Ascendent or the fortunes for∣tunately, health ensues; for the malady is van∣quished and routed in the conflict If the disease terminate not upon the first Crisis see how the Moon is configurated on the second Crisis, and judge then by the same Rules. If it terminate not then neither, as some∣times such a thing happens, view the third Crisis, and judge by that the same way; if your judgement ballanced by reason, and the former rules, certifie you the disease will
not end one way nor other, neither in health nor death; see what you can say to the Moon when she returnes to the place she was in at the decumbiture, which is about twen∣ty seven days eight hours, and some few mi∣nutes; and see how the Moon is then seated, and to what Planets she is configurated then: And this of necessity must be the end of all acute diseases. Thus you see an acute disease can last but a moneth at longest; not one in a hundred last∣eth so long, not one in twenty lasteth above halfe so long. If the disease end not then, the acute disease is turned into a Chronick disease: And all Chronick diseases must be judged of by the Sun. The rules of judging of Chronicall di∣seases by the Sun are the same by which we judge of acute diseases by the Moon, As for Judiciall days which fall out just in the midest betwixt the Critiall days, I shall passe them by at this time, because I fancy not this way of judgement by a Figure of eight houses; yet I shall not so passe them by, but that I shall remember them in the Treatise.
CHAP. V. The former rules illustrated by an example. A certaine man fell sick of an acute disease at Paris in France, Anno 1641. Jan. 12. about eight of the clock in the afternoon, at which time the Moon was posited in Aquari∣us, 10. 19. This I place in the Ascendent. To this Aquarius 10. 19. I adde forty five degrees; the product is Pisces 25. 19. which makes the first judiciall time; To which adding forty five degrees more, it will bring you to Taurus 10. 19. to which place when the Moon arrives she comes to the exact quartile of the place she was in at the decumbiture, and makes the first Crisis. Adde forty five degrees to that, and it pro∣duceth Gemini 25. 19. which is the second judiciall time. Is you would know when the second Cri∣sis comes about, it is but onely Adding 45 de∣grees to that, and you will find the result to be Leo 10. 19. just the place opposite to the Moon at the decumbiture. The remainder are found out in the same manner.
When you have done so, it is no more but this, First, Seek the time when the Moon comes to Taurus 10. 19, and you shall find it comes upon the 19 of Jan. about eight of the Clock at night. Secondly, View first the face of heaven, se∣condly the position and configuration of the Planets one with another at the same time.
A Synopsis, or joynt view of the Calculation. Criticall Dayes. Moons Motion. Time of In∣cidence. Lunar state according to the Decum biure, her aspects, as also the mutu∣all aspects of the Planets. Decumbiture January 1 D. H. M. ☽ ad ✶ ♂ ad ♀ ct ♄ ☌ ☉ ♃ ☿ □ ☉ ♂ ♒ 10. 19. 12. 8. 0. P. m. ☽ vacuâ, no good Crisis to be expected. Judicat. I. ♓ 25. 19. 16. 5. 43. A. M. 1. Crisis. ♉ 10. 19. 19. 8. 0. P. m. □ ♂ ♀ ☽ vacuâ 2. Judiciall ♊ 25. 19. 23 2. 36. P. m. ☽ ad △ ♄ Threatens an ill Crisis. 2 Crisis. ♌ 10. 19. 27. 5. 50. A. m. ☽ vacuâ, an ill Crisis. 3 Judiciall 25. 19. ♍ 30. 3. 44. p. m. ☽ ad △ ♃ A good Crisis to be hoped. February, 3 Crisis. ♏ 10. 19. 2. 9. 1. p. m. ☽ ad △ ♀, he recovers. Judiciall 25. 19. ♐ 4 Crisis 10. 19 ♒
The History of this observation is of a certaine person who by reason of great wearinesse in a journy, was surprised with a Feaver, at the time before mentioned; toge∣ther with his Feaver he had a Cough and a Plurisie; The Feaver came to a  I never read of this name in Galen that I re∣member; I take it both by Mounsieur Durats discription, and also by his Figure of Heaven, to be the very same which Galen cals . The originall of this disease is Choler putrified with the bloud in the veines, and is the most violent of all Feavers. The night af∣ter the decumbiture this Feaver appeard; although on the third day all snaking left him, yet felt not the Patient the least inter∣mission, the Moon being in Aquarius 10. 19. Aquarius being also a signe of infirmity, the Moons being in Sextile to Mars apply∣ing to Venus and Saturne, Mars afflicting the Sun with a Quartile, as also Jupiter and Mercury who were in combustion. The 16. day of the same moneth of Janu∣ary the disease increased, at which time the Moone came to a Semi-Quadrat making the first judiciall time. And meeting then with never an aspect, the Crisis could be expected no other then doubtfull and unfortunate. The 19. day of the same Month at eight of
the clock in the afternoon, the first Crisis came about some little sweat the diseased had. And if I may be bold to leave my Author for a little time, if you view the presages of Hip∣pocrates, which you shall find at the latter end of this Book; The words run thus, or to this purpose; It is very hopefull when a man sick of a Feaver sweats upon a Criticall day; however my Author confesses, that both his Cough, and his paine in his side left him, though his Fea∣ver still remain, nay increased; by reason of the Quartile of Mars & Venus at the same time Mercury being Lord of the Ascendent at the Decumbiture. Also it is worth noting, that the Moon being in Aquarius at the de∣cumbiture, and comes to Taurus at the first Crisis both Taurus and Aquarius are signs of infirmity; yet you see the Plurisie left him, the Moon being strong in her exaltation, though void of course. I passe by my Authors infirmities in this and other things. January 23. When the Moon by transit made the second judiciall time, she was afflict∣ed by the Trine of Saturn, which prognosti∣cates cause enough of fear in the second Crisis. January 27. at 5. 50. in the morning, the Moon came to the true opposition, to the place
she was in at the decumbiture, she being then without any Aspect, either good or evill; this brought no hopes to the sick man of cure at that time; and indeed the sick was at that time very bad; yea, so bad that his Physicians were in doubt whether he would live or die. January the 30. at 3 houres 44 minutes af∣ter noon, comes about the third judiciall time, at which time the Moon was in Trine to Jupiter, which gives strong hopes that a healthfull and propitious Crisis would en∣sue; and o it did; for upon February the second at nine a clock after noon, the Moon coming to 10 degrees 9 mi∣nutes of the Scorpion, where she made the se∣cond Quartile to the place she was in at the decumbiture, and the third Crisis she applyed to the Trine of beautifull Venus: his Feaver began to leave him, and he began to attain his pristine health By this one example you may see the won∣derfull harmony and consent of diseases with the motions of the heavens, which that it may appear more cleer, and be visible to all, unlesse it be to such as are so blind they will not see, my Author adjoyns a rationall Figure of the decumbiture, and gives his judgement up∣on it.
A Rationall Figure upon the Decumbiture. An astrologicall Judgement upon the face of Hea∣ven at the Decumbiture. THe chief Significators of this Figure are the Ascendent and Mercury Lord of it, Retrograde in Capricorne, a moveable Signe
in the 5th House of the Heaven, and in the House of Saturne. The 6th, house and his Lord Saturne in Aquarius, in the 6th. house strong and po∣tent. The Moon in the 6th house upon the cuspe of it; Sol in the 5th House with the Lord of the eighth, afflicted by the Quartile of Mars in a fiery Signe; this plainly shewes a disease of Choler. Jupiter in a moveable Signe in the 5 th. House, who rules the Stomack, Liver and Sides, combust and in Quartile to Mars stirred up a Plurisie, and Mercury afflicted shewed a dry Cough. Hence it appeares that Monnsieur Duryet was no Physician; for if he had, he would easily have known that a Plu∣risie never comes without a dry Cough; the most excellent of men may have failings. The Moon in Aquarius applying to Sa∣turn at the beginning of the disease, shows the disease comes of wearinesse, according to the Doctrine both of Hippocrates and Hermes; but here arises another question; Shall the disease be long or short? This is answered thus, A fixed Signe upon the cuspe of the 6th. House shews length of the disease. Saturne in the 6th. House shews no lesse, but tels the same tale.
Againe Saturne Lord of the 6th. stronger then the Lord of the Ascendent, shews a vio∣lent increase of the disease. Seeing Mars in a fiery signe afflicts both Luminaries, the Sun by a Quartile and the Moon by a Sextile; hence we may safe∣ly gather, that Saturne and Mars are Au∣thors of the disease, and to part stakes be∣tween them, the one made it violent, the other continuing. Give me leave now a little to passe my judgement upon this Figure: When first I viewed the Figure, upon the first blush I ad∣mired the man should live; the Lord of the Ascendent being combust, & applyed to the Sun, Mars casting Antiscion to the Sun, the Moon upon the Cuspe of the 6th. Cum multis aliis; The onely reason that I could finde of the life were these; 1. Saturne and Mars are both strong, and neither of them Lord of Death, though both of them of the sicknesse; then will they both of them shew themselves like potent enemies, that are able to hurt their foe, but scorne it; though they are enemies to life, yet they are honorable enemies, because strong. The Moon implies not immediately to Saturne, but to the body of Mercury, who is Lord of the 10. which shews the disease might
be cured by Physick if a wise Physician had it in hand. 3. There is a Reception between the Sun and Mars which tyes the Sword of Mars from killing. 4 Venus beautifies the signification of the 6th. house, almost as much as Saturne deforms it. 5 Neither Saturne nor Mars behold the Ascendent, and thats good. 6 The disease came by the mans own mis∣guiding himselfe, because the Lord of the 12. and Ascendent are together. 7. The Moon applies to a fortune which hath triplicitie in the Ascendent, though in an ill House. 8. I am confident the man journyed again so soon as he was well. First, because Mars Lord of the end, is neer the House of Journyes at the decumbiture; Secondly, be∣cause the Moon applies to the Lady of the third House at the decumbiture which is Ve∣nus.
CHAP. VI. The way to set a Figure of 16. Houses. THe way of setting this Figure, differs no∣thing from the former, save onely that the Heavens are divided into twice as many parts. The manner of erecting it, is this; the true place of the Moon being taken at the decumbiture, place that upon the Cusp of the Ascendent, as though it were ascending at the time, to which adde 22 degrees 30 minutes, and you have the first intercidentall time 22. 30 being added to that shew the first judicials time; as many more being added to that shew the second intercidentall time; and as many added to them brings about the first Crisis; this shall be clearly shewed in this Example. The Sun a Figure of Crisis in 16.
A Synopsis of the Calculation. Criticall dayes. Moons motion. Time of incidence. State and Aspects of the Moon, and other Planets. 0 Decumbi. 27. 18. ♎ 9. 8. 0. A. M. ☽ a △ ♄ ad ☿ ♀ ♃ 1 1 Interc. 19. 48. ♏ 10. 8. 40. P. M. ad □ ♄ & △ ♂ 2 1 Judic. 12. 18 ♐ 12. 21. 12. P. M. 0 0 0 0 3 2 Interc. 4. 48. ♑ 13. 10. 23 P M. ☌ ♃ ♀ 4 1 Crisis 27. 18. ♑ 15 a little P. M. ✶ ☽ ♂ an ill Crisis. 5 3 Interc. 19. 48. ♒ 7. 3. 0. A. M. ✶ ☉ ♄ 6 2 Judic. 12. 18. ♓ 18. 8. 2. P. M. ☽ applies to ☿ ♀ and ♃ arguing a hopeful Crisis at wch he recovered 7 1 Interc. 4. 48. ♈ 8 2 Crisis. 27. 18 ♈ 9 5 Interc. 19. 48. ♉ 10 3 Judic. i. 18. ♊ 11 6 Interc. 4 48. ♋ 12 3 Crisis. 27. 18. ♋ 13 7 Interc. 19 48. ♌ 14 4 Judic. 12. 18. ♍ 15 8 Interc. 4. 48. ♎
The History of this second observation is of a certaine religious person, some Monke or Fryer a hundred to one else; who in 1640. December the ninth, stilo novo, was taken with a Feaver and shivering at eight of the Clock in the morning; the next day the shivering left him, the Feaver remaining; The Feaver seeming like a Hemitriters, or dou∣ble tertian, or a Causus, which is a continuall burning Feaver; which of them soever it was, this is certaine, it arose from some cholerick matter. The second day it had another accesse, and the third a worse then that. The place of the Moon at the decumbiture was in a preterited trine of Saturne. The Moon applyed to the Sextile of Mercury, Ve∣nus and Jupiter. The Fifthteenth day of the same month of December appeares the first Crisis; and though to sweat well many medicines were applyed, and those powerfull, yet the Feaver gave not way an inch, because the Moon applyed to Mars, and the Sun to Saturne; though by good aspects; neither was it mitigated till the eighteenth day; at which time the Moon ap∣plyed to Mercury, Venus and Jupiter. Here was that Aphorisme of Hippocrates ra∣tified, Chap. 5. Aphor. 15. that if the Moon be
just afflicted at the decumbiture, yet if she be with the beames of the Malevolents at the Crisis a good Crisis is not to be expected, but health will be staved of. A Rationall Figure upon the De∣cumbiture.
An Astrologicall Judgement upon the Figure. I Confesse in this judgement my Author is very faulty; he is dead, and I shall not make knowne his faults to my brethren the communalty of England: however this is true; In this figure Capricorne is upon the cuspe of the ascendent; and it is a moveable signe, therefore the disease is likely to be short. 2 Saturne Lord of it, is very potent and strong in his owne house, and swift in course, ther's a Second Argument. 3 Both fortunes in the ascendent may well make up a third. 4 The Moone applying to the fortunes, makes up a fourth; this is enough; onely the Quartile of the Sun and Mars shewes the sick∣nesse of Choler. I could give you mine owne observations upon this disease, if I would; but I let it alone and leave every man to his own heuretes.
How to set a Figure of twelve Hou∣ses for the Crisis. CHAP. II. THis seems to me to be the most rationall of all the rest, and it is the most easily and readily done; and it may be thats the reason my Author left it out, though he promised it. And indeed the ways of God are all easie, ve∣ry easie. Tis the ways of men that are crabbed and difficult. I shall first of all shew you the way how to doe it, secondly give you an example of mine owne upon it. First of all if you would know how to make such a critical a figure upon a decumbiture, make you a Figure after the vulgar form; then note what signe, degre and minute the Moon is in at the decumbiture, set that signe, degree and minute on the ascendent, and thirty de∣grees to that, and the same degree and minute of the next signe will be upon the Cuspe of the second house; the worke is as easie walking upon and downe without a staffe, as I shall by and by make appeare by an example.
Then be pleased to take notice, that the first house is the decumbiture; the second the judiciall time; the third the intercidentall; which word Dr. Phage of Midburst in Sussex, in his Book called Speculum aegrotorum, So sillily translates Mortals, mistaking the word Caedo to kill, for Cado to fall; wherein the man most egregiously shewed his deficiency, both in Scholler-ship and Phisick; yet this commendation Ile give him, his heart was more free to do good then his braine was a∣ble. The fourth house brings the first Crisis a∣bout; and when you are come to that be∣gin againe as you did before; you may see the way without a paire of spectacles by the decumbiture, what I have quoted: you may take it pro confesso, if you please, that I have many decumbitures by me; But I want time to insert them, or if I did not, I would not blot paper with them. Be pleased to accept of this one in lieu of all the rest.
A Rationall Figure on the Decum∣biture. THis unhappy creature being untowardly matched with an unnaturall husband; came up to London and lived in a service; and in her service was surprised with a furious di∣sease
at the time, and under the face of heaven before noted. I shall first give a rationall judgement of the Figure, and afterwards treat of the Crisis. The Person of this young woman is signi∣fied by Venus in Sagittarius; and truly I be∣leeve she was an upright dealing creature; that the cause of her disease lay hid, or at least very obscure; is plainly signified by so many Planets being under the earth. That she procured her owne disease, be∣cause the Lord of 6th. is in the twelfth. As al∣so because the Lord of the ascendent is dispo∣sed by a Planet in the 12th. Pisces is the Cuspe of the 6th. her disease came by wet taken at the feet. Jupiter in Vir∣go gave corruption in bloud, and infirmities in the bowels; with what they were, more a∣non. Venus with the Scorpions heart shews a vi∣olent Feaver; neither proved it to be any lesse. The Sun and Mars in the Fourth house with the Dragons-tayl in Quartile to the as∣cendent, shew violence in the disease, danger of poyson and an ill end of it; her Physician is signified by Mars, which was a French quake which lay in the house, and he was like Mars in Capricorne, as a Pomewater is an Apple.
He was also troubled with sore eyes, a man of forlorne fortunes: view the position of Mars, and you shall easily see the reason with∣out a paire of spectacles. The position of Mars in the Fourth cum∣bust with the Dragons-tayle, and in the Quar∣tile of the ascendents; First, clouded his judg∣ement; Secondly, corrupted his practice; Thirdly set hard for her life. Tis a sad thing when the Lord of death must be the Phisician in the disease. Her disease was the smal pox in which being exceedingly bound in body, not going to stool in a week together aud above; he ap∣plyed her all that time with strong purges, (oh acute Physician,) never one of them working nor so much as coming from her, though there was Scammonie in every one of them, that had not I so soon as I knew of it perswaded her Nurse to give her a Glister every day, she had absolutely perished: her purges increasing her Feaver, and poysoning her body; and this I am confident was the reason, both of her be∣ing so much disfigured by her disease. And of her Aches and swelling in the knees (for Mars was in Capricorne) which continued upon her untill her dying day, which followed about a year and a halfe after. Neither was her Drs. judgement one jott
inferiour to his practice; for in the beginning of the disease (viz. the next day after) she fell sick, I came accidentally to the house, and found all the household weeping; every one that could eat an egge shed a teare. A Joyn∣er was busie pulling down the bed-steds, the whole houshold preparing for a flight, with bag and baggage. And what was the reason thinke you? the Dr, had passed a wilde peice of Non-sence, that she had got the peftilence, and was full of the tokens; up run I to se the Creature; I found her in a strong Feaver, thats true; but I could see no tokens, unlesse twere tokens of the Doctors ignorance. I demanded the time of her falling sick, which she very exact∣ly, gave me: And having taken the paines to erect the figure, I did what I could to cherish up her spirits. I told her my judgement was that she would live; I certified the houshold that she had no such disease as the Pestilence; much lesse any tokens; And thus whoever lost, the Joyner he got money by the bar∣gaine on both hands, First, pulling the bed∣steds and tables to peeces, and for setting them together againe: And thus you see tis an ill winde that blowes no body no profit. I have but two questions to answer, and then I come to the Crisis.
1 Will she live or dye? 2 Will her sicknesse be long or short? To the first of these I answer, That Mars is Lord of death, and also an afflicting Planet; in trine to the Lord of the Sixth. And in Sex∣tile to the Moon, he with the Sun are in Quar∣tile to the Ascendent; this is all the Signs of death, that is besides the great signe (viz.) her Doctor swore she would die, and could not possibly live, having, as the Cox-combe said, not so much of her lungs left, as amounted to the quantity of three of her fingers, a likely tale for sooth was it not? I was a diligent observer of every pas∣sage in this sicknesse; and I found it always true, that during her sicknesse, the Moone by transit to the body, or beames of Mars afflicted her sorely. But not so to the beames of Saturne, for that onely possessed her body with coldnesse and chilnesse. That she should live, is very cleer; the Moon being with the Sextile of Jupiter, and the Lord of the Ascendent no way afflicted save only by the Scorpions heart. To the Second Question, namely, whe∣ther her disease should be long or short? The Angles being all Cardinall, and the Moon swift in motion, and in Sextile to Ju∣piter,
shew a short sicknesse; The Lord of the Ascendent, and the Lord of the Sixth being both stationary prolong the disease. And indeed though the disease taken under the notion of acute, were long, yet ta∣ken according to reason, it is shorter then could be imagined. A Figure of Crisis.
The first judicial time is when the moon comes to Sagitarius, 10. 40. i'ts called a ju∣dicial time because at that time the disease appears in his colours that a man may know what it tends to. The second time which you may find up∣on the third House in the Critical Figure, is called intercidental, because it falls be∣tween judicial and Critical times: and up∣on this intercidental time, there is usually some remission of the disease, that so na∣ture may have time to rally up her forces against her incounter, with the disease on her Crisis. And according as it falls out upon the intercidental day, either to good or bad, so a good or bad Crisis may be ex∣pected: But to return, the Moon comes to Sagitaris, 10. 40. upon the 14. of December, about halfe an houre after six in the Mor∣ning. If you please but to set the figure, you shall find she is just upon the Cuspe in the ascendent, newly separated from the bo∣dy of Venus, and the Quartile of Jupiter; now the small Pox came out, aud not till now. The first intercident al tme happens when the Moon comes to 10. d egrees 40. minuts of Capricorn, the place where Mars was at the Decumbiture, and now the applies to
his body, having newly left the Trine of Jupiter. If you please to set the Figure, the time was December 16. 1 hour, 24 minuts, P. M. Saturn is upon the Cuspe of the as∣cendent: about this time she got cold. And I am of opinion, that the ascendant and sixt House being earthly signes at this time: and the Moon in Conjunction with Mars in an other earthly sign, doth clearly shew her being bound in body. This day which should have mitigated her disease, in∣creases it; and now her Dr. (if I may call him so without a Solaecism) begins to play the antique, I had almost said the mad man. Now he exerciseth her purging faculty, and left his wits abed and asleep with his last nights Mistresse. Sure I am, a Physitian would admire to heare Scammony given to a Creature that had the small Pox coming out upon her: To conclude, a very ill Cri∣sis is threatned. The first Crisis comes about upon the 18. of December, three quarters of an hour past 11 at night: the face of heaven is not much altered srom what it was at the Decumbi∣ture. The Moon separates from the Sextile of Venus Ladie of the ascendent, and applies to the Quartile of Saturn; and had Dr. Dunce onely judged she would have
dyed now, as indeed he did, he might have been pardoned although he had fail'd; but alas, he poor man had little skil in times and seasons; his skil was imployed to know awo∣man from a man, when he had got herin bed. He did not onely say, but also swore, that she would dye about the intercidental time, though such a thing be seldome seene in a mans age: but let us to our Art, and let the Doctors ignorance alone. You shall finde if you please to set the position of Heaven, the Scheme almost the same with that of the Decumbiture. The Moon carries the beams of the Ladie of the ascendent to the Quartile of Saturn. The Sun and Mars cast hot full beams to the ascendent; and indeed my own opinion is, that had the Moon applied to Mars, as she did to Saturn, it had kil'd her. Howsoever, the premises considered, it is cleare, that this is likely to be the time of greatest danger in all her sicknesse; and so indeed it was: Now must the disease needs be strongest, nature weakest: and if this time be passed, the bitternesse of death is past in∣deed at this time. The Combate was sore, she distracted, senselesse, the small Pox be∣gan to fall down; and withall, strength al∣most spent: but above all, the Doctor
swore she could not live while morning. Rationall hopes of her life are the digni∣ties of Saturn in the ascendent, but especi∣ally the Trine of the Sun and Jupiter upon that day. It is the opinion of the learned in this Art; that let the Significa∣tors of life or death be seated or disposed as badly as they can be; yet if the Sun be in Conjunction or good aspect with Jupi∣ter, the sick will live; and truly so did she, almost to admiration. But some will aske, and 'tis a question worth the answering; that if the Sun and Jupiter preserve life, as you say, when they are so seated: whats the reason men dye at that time? for we see men dye daily; To this I answer bricfly, that truly in the nativity of some people, Jupiter is the kil∣ling Planet; and in the sicknesse of sick persons, Jupiter will as soon kill, as Sa∣turn and Mars; every Planet must do his Office: I proceed, The second judicial time comes about the 21. of December, at noon, or a very little after; at which time Mars is Lord of the ascendent strong, and in his exaltation. The Moon having left the Sextile of the Sun, applies to his Sextile. The face of heaven is quite and clean altered from what
it was at the Decumbiture, a manifest signe of some chance. Besides, though Saturn be in the ascendent, and Mars in the 10th House; yet Jupiter is in the 6th; therefore some good may be hoped: I do not know that it is besides the rule of Art, if I should affirme that as Mars in the 4th House of the Decumbiture kept her Doctors (you may call it) folly, or madnesse (which you please) close; so now in the 10th house reveales it. Now, and not till now did I know of her Doctors frantick course of Physick, and of her not going to stool; from this time she took a Glister every day till she amended. The second Crisis comes about upon the Sun, the 26 of Decem. about one hour after noon; at which time the Moon is strong in her own exaltation, and applyes to the Trine of the Sun, and Mercury. At this time her Feaver left her, and she began to recover: And upon the third Crisis, which hapned upon the first of January, she went abroad.
CHAP. VIII. Certain precepts premised before the Prognosticks. FIrst of all, take notice that the Signifi∣cators of Diseases are to be taken under these two notions. 1. Generall, or more principal. 2. Particular or lesse principal; The generall or more principall are these, the Sun, the Moon, and the Ascendent; of these the Sun is most principally to be lookt upon in Chronick diseases, the Moon in acute. Significators particular or lesse principal, are these: 1. The Lord of the Ascendent. 2. The sixth House. 3. The Lord of the sixth House. 4. The Planets in the ascendent or sixth House. 5. Saturn and Mars; for they naturally hurt the body, whatsoever the matter is. 2. The sixth House and i'ts Lord, and the Planets in it, if there be any there, best de∣scribe the nature of the disease usually, nay alwaies if they afflict either of the Lumina∣ries,
or the Lord of the ascendent. 3. The aspects of the Moon to the Planets are alwaies to be noted; for they still pro∣duce something to the sick, but especially upon Critical and Judicial dayes; for you shall find this a certain truth, even as cer∣tain as the Sun (and he never failes without a miracle;) That when the Moon passes by the bodies of Jupiter or Venus, or their aspects, especially their good ones, if they be not Lords of death, remits the most desperate Symptoms in a sickness, and gives the sick some ease; as also the bodies, or any aspect of Saturn or Mars exasperates a disease, and spoiles the most hopefull Symp∣toms. 4. Here then you have one way to doe your selves good. A Physitian is natures helper, or at least he should be so; whosoever would help na∣ture, must of necessity be well acquainted with her: a little communication between them, will instruct him the way and man∣ner which Almighty God hath allotted her to govern the world by; wisdome instructs her Children in the knowledge of time; for there is an appointed time for every thing under the Sun: if then when a disease seems extream dangerous, you wovld make an es∣say
to relieve languishing nature, do it at the time when the Moon passeth by the body, or good aspect of Jupiter or Venus; then is nature in a capability of receiving helpe; you may better lift up a living man with onefinger, then a dead man with both hands; a Bird whilst she hath wings can fly; but cut off her wings, and hang a couple of Milstones on her legs, she cannot: Even so the bodies, and good aspects of Jupiter and Venus are like wings to carry a man from sicknesse to health. The bodies and aspects of Saturn and Mars, are like Milstones to weigh him to his Grave. One thing more let me tell you, and ile tell you but the truth; they say if Saturn afflict, Jupiter helps more then Venus; but if Mars afflict, Venus helps more then Jupiter; let them say so still; but if you will be ruled by me, make use of that fortune which is strongest; a rich friend may relieve your wants; a poor friend cannot, he may wish you well and so forth: but suppose you dare not stay while the Moon come to the good aspect of Jupiter and Venus, ad∣minister you medicine when she is in the place, where one of them was at the Decum∣biture, if you dare not stay that time neither,
for delay is dangerous in acute diseases, be sure you place one of them two in the as∣cendent, when you administer the medi∣cine; Put all these together, and it will tell you in words at length and not in figures; that a Physitian without Astrolo∣gy, is like a pudding without fat. 5. That place and state of the Planet, from which the Moon is separated at the Decumbiture, and the condition of the Pla∣net also (for Planets are of different con∣ditions as wel as men, some good, and some bad) is to be heeded. If you please to observe the state of that same Planet, by it you may know the state of the sick, and what the cause of his sick∣nesse is. 6. When you have done so, it is your wisest way to consider to what Planet the Moon applies; and then do but so much as view what signe that Planet is in, what his conditions be, whether he be benevolent or malevolent; whether he be Masculine or Feminine, Diurnal or Nocturnal, hot, drie, cold or moist; what parts of the body he go∣verns, and what disease he governs. 7. Consider whether the Planet the Moon applies to, be in an Angle, in a succeeding, or in a Cadent house; and when you have
done so, do but so much as consider what the House he is in signifies; and what mem∣bers of the body it governs; and then take but a little notice whether the Planet joy in the House or not, that you may not be mista∣ken herein. I will certifie you in what houses every Planet takes his delight, as be∣ing confident even amongst Astrologers, more are ignorant of it then know it. 1 The Sun rejoyceth in the fourth, ninth and eleventh houses. 2 The Moon rejoyceth in the third and seventh houses. 3 Saturn rejoyceth in the ascendent eight and twelfth houses. 4. Jupiter rejoyceth in the second, ninth, and eleventh. 5. Mars rejoyceth in the third, sixth, and tenth. 6. Venus rejoyceth in the fifth and twelfth, 7. Mercury rejoyceth in the ascendent and sixth. Here's but a few words, yet so significant, that the nature and condition, the Sympa∣thy, and Antipathy of the Planets, and by consequence of the Creation, may be known from it: 'Tis not my present scope to tell you which way; whet your wits upon it,
and they will be the sharper. 8. Consider whether the Planet the moon applics to, be direct or retrograte; swift or slow, in motion, Oriental, Occidental, or Combust, whether fortunated or infortu∣nated by other Planets; and — 9. And when you have done so, it is your wisest way to consider whether the threat∣ning Planet be in his own House or Exalta∣tion, or other essential dignities, whether he be in Terms of good Planets or cvill; for if a good Planet have gotten an ill Planet in his Terme, he will order him. To wind up this in one word, consider whether the threat∣ning Planet have power to execute his will or not; for sometimes a curst Cow hath but short hornes. 10. Do but so much as note what con∣sigurations the Lord of the ascendent, six and eight Houses have one with another: And amongst the rest, do not forget the lord of the seventh & twelfth Houses, and Ile give you my reason why: The seventh, because it opposeth the ascendent; he assaults life openly, and is not ashamed of what he doth; he plaies the part of Ajax, goes too't with down right blows without policy. The sixth, eighth, and twelfth Houses, have no affinity at all with the ascendent: And they
have more of Vlysses in them then Ajax; they take away a mans life when hee's a∣sleep, or else when he knows not how. 11. Partile aspects are far more strong and prevalent then Platick. 12. Be pleased but to consider, that the sixth House and his Lord signifies the sicknesse: The seventh the Phyfitian; the eighth Death; the tenth the Medicine; the fourth the end of the Disease: and when you have done so, I have done with this point. These things thus premised, when you have read them, you shall finde I first come to — CHAP. IX. Generall Prognostications of the Disease. 1. FIrst of all (quoth my Author) The House of Heaven is of more force then the Sign; and its very like; and the Signe then the Planet; and the Planet then the fixed star he is with: But Doctor Reason told me, the Planet was of more force then the signe, be∣cause he was nearer to the earth.
2. If the ascendent, and the luminaries, and their Lords be afflicted by the Malevo∣lent, or by an ill House, or by the Lord of Death, (its no great matter what star it is) and the benevolents lend no aid, 'tis shrewd∣ly to be uspected the sicknesse drags death ats taile; he's a wise Physitian that can cut the cord. 3. If the forenamed significators be well disposed and not afflicted, the fear of death is more then the harme. 4. A Benevolent Planet in the sixth, cures the disease without the helpe of a Physiti∣an. 5. A Malevolent Planet there causeth a change in the disease, and usually from bet∣ter to worse. 6 An infortune in the seventh shews but, a paltry Physitian, though he be a Collegi∣ate. A fortune there, the contrary. 7 A fortune in the tenth shewes proper Physick who ever gives it. 8 A fortune in the fourth brings the disease to a good and speedy end (unlesse he be Lord of the eight.) Every man must do his office; and as the case may be ordered, Ju∣piter may kill a man as soon as Saturne. 9. Jupiter helps most in cold diseases, Venus in hot.
10. The bodies of Jupiter and Venus soon cure the sick; their Trines and Sextiles will not be much behind hand in the busi∣nesse: And to tell you my owne opinion without any complements; The Quartile and Opposition of Jupiter and Venus is better then the Sextile and Trine of Saturn or Mars in this case, unlesse they be Lord of the ascendent. And by the time you have been acquainted with Dr. Experience but halfe so long as I have been, hee'l make you beleeve that what I say, is true. 11 A Malevolent in the ascendent threa∣tens death; and makes the sick as crosse∣grained as Bajazet the Turkish Emperour when he was in the iron Cage. 12. Good stars in bad places, afflict the humour they governe; They doe the like if they be afflicted with malevolent. Was ne∣ver any of you that reads these lines abused by honest people? 13 Th conjunction of the Moon and Mercury is as constant as a weather-cock: the disposition of Mercury is very various according to his position and aspect: With the Fortunes he is better then either. He's just like the people of this Nation; he fol∣lowes the swinge of the times. 14 The Moon in conjunction with the
Sun upon a criticall day, alwayes portends mischiefe; and take this for a Maxime from me, and say I told you of it; no aspect is so propitious to the Moon as the Trine and Sextile of the Sun. Nothing so hatefull to the squeamish Virgin as hls Conjunction Quartile and Opposition. 15 If the Moon upon a Criticall day apply to a malevolent, you'l say that is but a scurvy signe: I am halfe of your opinion: yet it is good to be wise, & that you may be so, see which of them is strongest; the Moon, or the Malevolent; if the Moon be strongest, she'l make a handsome shift with him: if she be weakest, you know the old Proverbe, The weokest goes to the wals, and the sick is like to be forced to make use of a winding-sheet in∣stead of a featherbed. 16. If the Moon upon a Critical day be with the bodies of Sol, Mars, or Saturn; and which of them shee's withall, be Lord of the eighth House: away trots life to seeke a new habitation; for shee's weary of her old House. 17. If the Moon on a Critical day be strong in her House or exaltion, though aspected to no Planet at all; shee'l play her part stoutly (for all she is a woman) that she'l restore the sick to his pristine health, if she were not
too too much afflicted at the Decumbiture. 18. If the Moon be not at all afflicted at the Decumbiture (as such a thing may be) yet if she be afflicted on the Critical day, a good Crisis cannot be expected: Sicknesse keeps his old house, unlesse death dispossesse him. This in general; But he that would go the wisest way to worke in judging of di∣seases, must come to particulars. The thing I promised you in this Chapter, was gene∣ral Prognostications of diseases; which that I may make lucidly appear to you, (for you shall not find one of Pharaohs Taske-masters of me, to set you to make Bricks, and give you no straw;) Be but pleased seriously to weigh in the Ballance of Reason, these particulars. 1. First of all, What diseases every Pla∣net of himselfe distinctly causeth. 2. What diseases distinctly are under e∣very severall signe of the Zodiack. 3. What particular part and member of the body, every Planet generally ruleth. 4. What particular part and member of the body, is under the the influence of every signe of the Zodiack, and house of the hea∣vens in a Caelestial Scheme. 5. What part of the body every Pla∣net particularly rules, according to his transit through each signe.
Of all these in Order, and in the same Order they are set down; and if I should happen to be a little critical against my Au∣thor, who can helpe it? PART I. The diseases the Planets signifie. 1. THe Sun causeth Pimples and Burles in the face, afflictions of the heart; Heart∣burning, Tremblings, Faintings, Timpa∣nies, sore Eyes, and diseases of the mouth; Cramps, Convulsions, all diseases of the Heart and Brain, and their ascendents, viz. the Nerves and Arteries, Stinking-breath, Catharr's, rotten Feavers; thus Authors. And if any aske why I mention no more, tell them heres more then is true. Now to the purpose. First, Of all Timpanies that are under the Moon, I have known the Sun give a fiery disease, but never a watry. 2. Cramps and Convulsions are under the Moon; and so are all diseases that often return, as Agues do: you shall find the same
in another Aphorism afterwards; and al∣though my Auther contradict himselfe, I do not delight to imitate him in that sport. 3. The Head, Brain, and Nerves, are not under the Sun, as you shall heare hereafter. 4. Catharr's are under either Mercury or Jupiter, or both; take this for a Maxime of truth, and say I told you so. A Planet ruling a part of the body, if he be weak in the Genesis, that part of the body is natu∣rally weak: I confesse I know not where∣fore Art was made, unlesse to helpe nature. The eyes are under the Luminaries, and whosoever hath them weak in their Genesis, hath but weak fight. The Lungs are under Jupiter; Mercury is the opposite Planet to Jupiter: Now then, if Jupiter be weak, he is not able to strengthen the Lungs as he should do; if Mercury be the afflicting Planet, he weakens the Lungs by oppositi∣on: If you have but wit enough to know by a penny how a shilling's coyn'd, Sensibus hecimis imis (res non & parva) repone. Afford these lines a place amid'st your sences, And be not gull'd by specious pretences. I have now leaped from the Sun to the
Moon, and she (they say) causeth Apo∣plexies, Palsies, Cholick, Belly-ach, diseases in the Stones, Bladder, and instruments of Generation; stopping and overflowing of the Terms in Women, Dropsies, Fluxes, all cold and Rhumatick diseases, Gout, Sci∣atica, Wormes in the Belly, Rhumes, and hurts in the Eyes; Surfets, rotten Coughs, Convulsions, Falling-sicknesse, Kings-Evil, Aposthumes, small Pox, and Measles; all coagulated and crude humours in any part of the body, Lethargies, and all diseases of Flegme; thus my Author. Amongst these I except against, 1. Apoplexies, and you shall find my rea∣son within a quarter of an hour, unlesse you fall asleep with reading. 2. Diseases in the Instruments of Genera∣tion, for they are caused by Venus and Mars; by the one by Sympathy, by the other by Antipathy. 3. The Gout is caused by Saturn. Who knows but that's the reason why he moves so slowly? Now must I leave the Moon, and mount up to Saturn, for I am like the World, ne∣ver in a Station. Under Saturn say Authors, are Apo∣plexies, Tooth-ach, Quartain Agues; all
diseases which come of Melancholy, cold and drinesse. Leprosie, Rhumes, Consumpti∣ons, Black-Jaundise, Palsies, Trembling, vain-feares, formidable fancies of a Hob∣gobling, Dropsies, Gouts of all sorts; a Dog-like-hunger, Hemorrhoides, broken Bones, and Dislocations, Deafness, pain in the bones, Ruptures if he be in Leo or Scorpion, or in an ill aspect to Venus: Ili∣ack passion, Chin-cough, Catharr's, pains in the Bladder; all long diseases, all mad∣nesse that comes of Melancholy, fear or griefe. If you will give me leave (after I have been first a little Critical) I will be (second∣ly,) a little instructive. 1. I except against Apoplexies; and if you would learn why; you shall so soon as you have learned a little Patience. 2. I except against Dropsies, for they are under the Moon. 3. I except against Catharr's, for they are under Jupiter or Mercury, or both. 4. I except against Dog-like hunger, for it's under Mars. A few instructions would I very wil∣lingly give you, if I thought you would be so wise to heed them. I had as good give them you under Saturn, as under another
Planet. I will not give them you under each Planet, because hee's a foolish Musici∣an that harps alwayes on on one string. A planet causeth diseases. 1 By Sympathy. 2 By Antipathy. And as the cause is so must the cure be, unlesse you wic do as Scogging did, strike him that stands next you, because another another abuses you. These diseases Saturne causeth by Sym∣pathy; Tooth-ach, broken bones; the rea∣son is because he rules the bones. Deafnesse he cavseth because he rules the eares. Me∣lancholy and all diseases of the spleen by the same argument. 2 Also he afflicts all the parts of the bo∣dy that are under the Moon by antipathy; and likewise he playes the same tricks with those that are under the Sun; you shall know what they are by and by. The great wisedome of a Physician is to know whe∣ther Saturne cause the disease by Symapthy or Hntepathy, and then take nothing, that as the cause is so is the cure, Sympatheti∣call, or antipatheticall; and withall do not forget, that sympatheticall cures stren∣thennature; antipatheticall cures, in one degree or another weaken it: And now
your owne mother-wit (if you have any) wil teach you, that antipathetical Medicins are not to be used, unlesse to such patients whom Doctor Ignorance, or Doctor Care∣lesnesse hath had so long in hand, that sym∣patheticall will not serve the turne. To bring all this to the point in hand that so it may be usefull: If Saturne cause the disease by sympathy, cure it by the sympatheticall hearbs of Saturne. If he cause the disease by antipathy, note whether it be antipathy to Sun or Moone; or if it happen in the in∣struments of generation, be sure it is by an∣tipathy to Venus. Make use of the sympa∣theticall hearbs of those Planets respective∣ly for cure: you shall not live the age of a little fish, before I give you rationall in∣structions for them all, I now leave Saturne and come a little lower to — Jupiter. Jupiter they say causeth Apo∣plexies, all infirmities of the Liver and Veins, inflammations of the Lungs, Plurifies and other Aposthumes about the Breast and Ribs, all diseases proceeding of putrefacti∣on of blood and wind, quinsies, feavers, and other diseases; which Authors either for want of witt, or super-abundance of igno∣rance are pleased to attribute to him. Against these I except.
1 Against Apoplexies; for it cannot come about that all the Planets should cause Apo∣plexies; if so, they would be more frequent then they are. 2 Against corruption of blood: For Saturne corrupts the blood by melancholy, and Mars by choler. Mars. Diseases under Mars are pesti∣lences, burning feavers, tertian and quoti∣dian agues, megrim, carbuncles and plague sores; burning, scalding, ring-wormes, blisters, phrensie, furie, hare-braines, sud∣den distempers in the head coming of heat: yellow-jaundise, bloody-flux, fistula's. All wounds whatsoever: Diseases in the instru∣ments of generation: the stone in the reins and bladder: scars and pock-holes in the face: all hurts by iron and fire: the shingles, falling siknesse, calentures, St. Anthonies fire; all diseases coming of choler, anger or passion. Amongst all these I can justly except but against one; and that is the falling sicknesse, which is under the Moon. And your selfe will be of my opinion, if you please but to take notice that those hideous fits usually come at conjunction, opposition and quar∣tile of the Moon to the Sun. Venus. Diseases under Venus are all di∣seases
of the wombe whatsoever, as suffo∣cation, precipitation, dislocation, &c. All diseases incident to the members of gene∣ration, the reins and navel, as the running of the reins, the French pox, &c. All di∣seases coming by inordinate love or lust, priapismus, impoteney in the act of genera∣tion, ruptures of all sorts: All diseases be∣longing to the urine, as disuria, iscuria and stranguria, iliack passion, diabetes, &c. Against these I except; 1 Impotencie in the act of generation, for thats under Saturne. 2 Ruptures, for he hath a share in them also. 3 Diseases of the urine, for they are un∣der Mars. 4 The Iliack passion, which is under Mercury. Mercury. Under Mercury are almost all the diseases of the braine, as vertigo's, mad∣nesse, &c. all diseases of the lungs, as Asth∣ma, Phthisicks, &c. All imperfections of the Tongue, as stammering, lisping, &c. Hoarsnesse, coughs, snuffling in the nose: all defects of the memory, gout, stopping of the head, dumbnesse, folly and simplicity (the Epidemicall diseases of the time) and whatsoever hurts the intellectuall facul∣ty.
Against these I except. 1 Against the defects of the memory, for Saturne hath a great share in that. 2 Against the Gout for Saturne wholly wholly rules that. I have now done with this part, and if any youngsters aske, Why I have not given a Reason for all I have spoken: Tell them the Reason is cleare in the matter; and he that is not able to see it, is as unfit to give Physick. A blind man cannot see the Sun in a clear day when he is upon the Meridian. PART. II. What diseases distinctly are under every signe of the Zodiack. 1. UNder Aries are all pushes, whelkes and pimples, freckles and Sun-burn∣ing in the face; the small pox and measles, polipus or noli me tangere; all diseases in the head, as head-ach of all sorts; vertigo, fren∣zie, litthargie, forgetfulnesse, catalepsie, apo∣plexie, dead palsie, coma, falling sicknesse, convulsions, cramps, madnesse, melancho∣ly, trembling.
Amongst all these I can justly except but against one, which is small pox and measles. 2 Under Taurus all diseases incident to the throat, as Kings evill, quinsy, soare throat, wenns in the neck, flux of rheume in the throat. 3 Diseases under Gemini are all such as are incident to the hands, arms and shoul∣ders, whether they come really or by acci∣dent, as fractures, dislocations, and such as come by blood-letting, corruption of the blood, windinesse in the blood; and indeed I have often found by experience, that Ge∣mini signifieth wind in the blood more then any other signe. I have now done with Ge∣mini, after I have told you my owne opini∣on, which is, that the upper part of the shoulder, namcly that with which we carry burthens, is under Taurus, which is the Embleme of labour, and not under Gemi∣ni, as the common received opinion is. 4 Under Cancer are all imperfections of the breast, stomack, or liver whatsoever, as also whatsoever are incident to the breasts of women, as Cancers there, and that in∣flamation, which women commonly call the imposthumes, plurifies, want of appetite to victuals, want of dige∣gestion of Victuals, coldnesse and over-heat
of the stomack, dropsies, coughes; you may find out the rest your selves; the rule is as plaine as the nose in a mans face. 5 Under Leo are all passions of the heart, as convulsions saith my Author. But if I may make so bold as to digresse a little, I shall tell you, and prove it too when I have done, That convulsions are not a disease of the heart, but of the braine. The truth is, it is one of old Aristotles o∣pinions, which crept into his noddle, as he was marring Plato's Philosophy; The nerves have their originall from the braine; Con∣vulsion is a plucking, or twitching of the nerves; ergo it is a disease of the braine and not of the heart. But to returne to my purpose; under Leo, are all diseases the heart or back is subject to, as qualmes and passions, palpitation, and trembling of the heart, violent burning feavers, sore eyes, the yellow jaundies, and all diseases of choler, and such diseases as come of adustion of blood as the pestilence; and I am afraid London will find this too true so soon as Saturne comes into Leo. I pray God mitigate this evill influence to∣ward them at that time. 6 Under Virgo are all diseases incident to the bowels, the meseraick veins, the o∣mentum
the diaphragma, spleene. Take a few instances in this particular; wormes wind in the guts, obstructions, the cholick and iliack, passions, hardnesse of the spleen, hypondriack melancholy. 7 Under Libra are diseases of the reines or kidnies which you please; for the signi∣fications of the word are the same; heat of the reines in women, which sometimes causeth death in travaile, many times abor∣tion, alwayes hard labour; the stone or gravel in the reins. And now let me teach you a little, if Mars be significator of the di∣sease, and in Virgo, it is the wind-cholick, without appearance either of gravell or ftone. Have a care of your patient, least it turne to gravell in the kidneys when he comes in∣to Libra, and to the stone of the bladder when he comes into the Scorpion. Your owne ingenuity, if you have any; you may by this example find out twenty more like to it. Lastly under Libra are all diseases co∣ming of wind and corruptions of blood. 8 Under the Scorpion are gravell and stone in the bladder, inflammations and ul∣cers there, all difficulties of urine whatsoe∣ver; all imperfections of the urine, rup∣tures,
fistulaes, hemorrhoids, the french pox, running of the reines, priapismus; all diseases that infect the privities of men or women. All diseases of the wombe, of which more for my Guide for women already in print. 9 Under Sagittarius are all diseases in thighes and hip; as the Sciatica &c. fistulaes in those places, heat of blood, pestilentiall feavers; and take this for a generall rule, that Leo and Sagittarius signifies fall from horses, and hurts by four-footed beasts; they being both of them signes of horse∣man-ship; besides Sagittarius prejudiceth the body by choler, heat, fire, and intem∣perance in sports. 10. Under Capricorne are all diseases in the knees and hams; as pains, sprains, fra∣ctures, and dislocations, leprosies, itch, scabs, all diseases of melancholie, and all tumours called Schirrus. 11 Under Aquarius are all diseases inci∣dent to the Leggs and Ankles; all melan∣choly coagulated in the blood, cramps; and the truth is, thicknesse of blood most usual∣ly proceeds from this signe. Aske old Sa∣turne and he will tell you the reason. By this the ingenuous have a plaine way to
find out more; and by this Doctor Experi∣ence got materials to worke with. 12. Under Pisces is all lamenesse, a∣ches and diseases incident to the feet, as gouts, kibes, childblains, &c. All diseases coming of salt flegme, mixt humours, scabs, itch, botches, and breakings out about the body, the small poxe and measles; all cold and moist diseases, and such as come by catching wett and cold at the feet. And if you will be pleased but to consi∣der the affinity Pisces holds with Aries, you will soon see a reason, why wet taken at the feet strikes so speedily up to the head. As for the houses of the heavens, they have the same significations with the signs; the first house with Aries, the second with Taurus, and so analogically till you come to the twelfth house, which hath the same significations that Pisces hath. I have now done with this part, onely be pleased to take notice that the fiery signs stir up diseases of choler; airie signes, di∣seases of blood and wind; earthly signes diseases of melancholy; watry signes di∣seases of flegme; signes of double bodies, diseases of mixt humours. And thus much for this part, the pains of which has been mine, the benefit shall
be yours; if you will turne but idlenesse out of Doors, and place ingenuity in his room. PART III. The particular parts and Mem∣bers of the body, which the Planets generally rule. HErein I must either a little be critical, or else part from my loving friend Doctor Reason: I am loth to do the lat∣ter, and therefore must make bold with the former. 1. Saturn say Authors, rules in the body of man the Spleen, and there he keeps his Court; the right Eare, the Bladder, the Bones, the Breech, the retentive faculties throughout the body; which what it is, be pleased to see my short Treatise of humane vertues, in the latter of my Ephemerides, for Anno 1651. where you shall finde not onely what it is, but also what it is good for. Against all this I except but against one∣ly
one, which is the Bladder, for that is un∣der the dominion of the Moon. 2. They say Jupiter rules the Lungs, Ribbs, Sides, Liver, Veines, Blood, the di∣gestive faculty, the natural vertue of man which he rules, as Lawyers call it, toto & in solid. Besides Authors say, he rules the Arteries and Seed; but how they can bring it a∣bout I know not, nor I think themselves neither: why should Jupiter rule the Arte∣ries, when the Sun rules the Heart? He that can give a reason erit mihi magnus Apollo, and as little reason can be given, and that's little enough, why Jupiter should rule the Seede, which is dame Venus her fee-simple; surely the Planets will not rob one another, though men do; howsoever Jupiter seems to keep his Court in the Li∣ver; and if you are minded to strengthen his operations in your bodyes, begin there. 3. Mars rules in the body of man, the Gall, the Reines, the Veines, the Secrets, the left Eare; thus Authors; And there is but two true words in it, which is the Gall, and the left Eare. The truth is, he rules the apprehension, and that's the reason that cholerick men are so quick-witted. Yea, a man of a mean apprehension when
he is angry, wil make a quicker apprehension in things satisfying his fury then a man of a quicker apprehension hath when he is pleased. Anger summons up all the powers of the body and mind to revenge wrong, though it be but imaginary. And then a∣gain, Mars rules that faculty which incites men to valour; he makes a man a Souldier every inch of him; he fortifies the smell; and that's the reason Martical creatures have so good smels as Dogs &c. But every little reason, or none at all; unlesse you wil make a reason of traditions, who derives his pedigree rather from Dr. Corruption, then Doctor Reason: Why, Mars should rule the Veines, seeing Jupiter rules the Liver. If Jupiter rule the foun∣tain, shall he be deni'd the streams? and then the Reynes and Secrets are under Venus, and that's apparant without auy more dispute of the story. 4. Venus rules the Wombe, the Testicles, Yard, and all the instruments of Generati∣on, the Reynes or Kidneyes, the Throat, Womens breasts, and the Milke contained within them, the Seed and Liver. But by my Authors favour, I can give no other reason why Venus should rule the Liver, unlesse I should give this for a reason;
because Jupiter stole the seed from her before, she to quit scores with him, steales away the Liver from him. 5. Under the dominion of Mercury is the Braine, especially the rational part of it; the imagination, the tongue, hands and feet, the motionall part of man. And that's the reason Mercuriarists (if Mercury be strong) are so swift in motions, so fluent of speech. He gives a quick apprehension, a strong imagination and conceited; he makes a good Pen-man, and stirs up that faculty in man which causeth a thirst after know∣ledge; he is very fickly in his disposition, and that's that that makes men so fickle∣headed. If Saturn vouchsafe him a friendly look, he is very constant; otherwise, if you look upon a Weather-cock, you may safely draw his Picture, and no disparagement to his person neither. 6. The Sun governs, if you wil believe Au∣thors, the Brain and Nerves, the Heart and Arteries, the sight, the eyes; and in the eyes, the right eye of 2 man, the left eye of a wo∣man. Against these I except, against the Brain and Nerves, the bulk of which is un∣der the Moon.
Their operation is under Mercury; now then if Mercury afflict the Brain, the failing is in the operation. If the Moon is in the Bulke or body of the Brain, or Nerves he that is a Physitian, knows what the operations of nature are: and then he knows what I say is truth, and the foundation of it built upon a Rock. He will esteem it as a Jewel. It is the property of a Fool to carpe at what he cannot imitate. 7. Under the Moon is the Bulk of the brain, the stomack, the bowels, the bladder, the taste, the left eye of a man, the right eye of a woman: a teem of Horses cannot draw one to believe that the moon rules the tast. If you please to peruse my Treatise of humane vertues, at the latter end of my Ephemerides for Anne 1651. I think you shall find there that Jupiter rules it: and my reason for it may there be found. Besides I have something from Doctor Experience for it, my own tast being exceeding good, and yet the moon exceeding weak in my Genesis. Being in a Cadent House, and in Genesis, a signe which in my opinion more afflicts the moon then Capricorn.
I confesse Mr. Lilly affirms Gemini to be a most noble signe, but I dare scarce believe him. Aries is the most principal of all the signes; Gemini is cadent from Aries Ergo, &c. But not now to enter into a Contest with that famous man, to whom this Na∣tion is so much beholding; Be pleased to take notice, that the twelfth House is more inimical to the ascendent, then the seventh; which if so, then is the moon more afflicted in Gemini, then in Capricorn. PART. IV. The particular parts of the body, under the severall signes of the zodiack, and the houses in the Hea∣vens in a Celestial Scheme. 1 UNder Aries is the head, and what ever belongs to it, as its Bones, the Face, Brain, Haire, Beard, Eyes, Eares, Nose, Tongue, Teeth &c. whatsoever in man is a∣bove the first Vertebra of the Neck. 2. Under Taurus is the Neck, Throat,
the Vertebrae of the Neck, which are in num∣ber seven. The chanel bone, the shoulder blade, according to my opinion. Also Taurus hath again signification in the voice; for he will roar like a Bull. 3. Under Gemini are the shoulders, shoul∣der bones, Armes, Hands, Fingers; toge∣ther with their bag and baggage. 4. Under Cancer is the Breast, Ribbs, Lungs, PIeura, the Ventricle of the stomack, womens Breasts, the Liver, Spleen &c. and yet Doctor Reason told me the other night, that the Spleen was under Nirgo. 5. Under Leo is the heart, the back, and the Vertebrae of the breast, which are in number twelve; The Pericardium; some Au∣thors say the Stomack is under Leo, but I can scaree believe it: I am perswaded the Appetite is under Leo, and that's the reason such as have that signe ascending in their Genesis, are such greedy eaters. You that are Astrologers, and have the Nativity of such persons in your hands, you know my words are truth. And if in a Nativity, the prevalency of other significators should happen to con∣tradict it: You know the old proverb, one Swal∣low makes out a summer.
6. Under Virgo is the Belly and Bowels, the Navil and Spleen, the Omen∣tum, and all their Appurtenances &c. This is that she rules, and she bids you by my pen to be chast. 7. Under the Ballance say Authors are the Reynes, Loynes, and Kidneyes, between which in my judgement, is as much differ∣ence, as is between eight pence and two groats. Under Libra besides they say, are the Hams, Buttocks, Bladder, and Navel; thus Authors. And I quoted it onely to this end, that young Students may see what a monster tradition is; and may avoid being led by the Nose by it, as Beares are led to the Stake. You know well enough if the blind lead the blind, what will become of them both: Let every one that desires to be called by the name of Artist, have his wits in his head, (for that's the place ordained for them) and not in his books. The Hams are under Capricorn, the Blad∣der under Scorpio, the Navel under Virgo; aske Doctor Reason, and see if he tell you not the same tale. 8. Under Scorpio are the Secrets of both Sexes; it is not very fitting for me to name them; as also the feminall Vessels; all the vessels dedicated to the Generation of
man, the bladder and fundament; and therefore though artists cry out so much a∣gainst the Scorpion for a false, deceitfull, treacherous, mischievous, violent, poyson∣some sign; Let them look back to the rock from whence they are hewen: It may be they shall see the reasons of some of their violent speeches against my self. A word is enough to wise men. Let them not speake evill of what they know not. This is is most certaine, from those parts of the body under the dominion of Scorpio have all men and women in generall the in∣fluence of their propagation; And in them take they their greatestplea∣sure; And thus have I spoken something for a Signe which every one speaks against. 9. Time will not stay, therefore I must be briefe: under Sagittarius are the thighs, the bone called Os sacrum, which whether justly so called, or unjustly, I know not. It is either Jewish superstition or worse. The rump-bone, the thigh-bone, together with all the appurtenance belonging to the thigh. Some Authors say the hams are un∣der Sagittarius, but then they are beside the Cushion.
10 Under Capricorne are the kne es, hams, and what belongs unto them. 11 Under Aquarius are the leggs and whatsoever belongs unto them, even from the outward skin called Cuticula, to the midst of the marrow in both bones; for these are two of them, which Chirurgions because they would keep you in ignorance, called, Focile majus, & Focile minus, or if you will, tibia & fibula. They all know what the bones are but a quarter of them are not able to give you a reason, why the bones are so called. Pray take notice of this in going about to make slaves of you, they have made fools of themselves. 12 Lastly, Pisces claimes the feet and an∣cles, toes and all the bones. To write like a scholler 'tis tarsus metatarsus, and the bones of the toes. It rules also the skinne of the foot, the flesh and vessels betwixt the skin and the bones. For though the sign be the weakest in the Zodiack, it is unwilling altogether to leave you nought but skin and bones. Also some Authors hold an opinion that the signes carry the same signification in order that the houses of heaven do; and that Aries should signifie life; Taurus estate; Gemini Brethren and short journeys; you
know the rest. Truly, My owne opinion is, many Authors invented whimsies, and when they had done, set them downe to posterity for truth; who taking them up without tryall, cloathed Tradition in Plush, and left poor reason to goe in Rags. An Author said so; ergo tis true, right or wrong. I take this to be one of that generation, and I prove it thus; By this account Can∣cer should rule the Fathers; but experience tels us, that an ill Planet in Cancer in the genesis threatens evill to the Mother, but in Leo to the Father. A word is enough to a wise man. Also there is another signification of the Planets according to the respective signes therein; Every Planet making his Aries in his owne house. I forbeare it here; First of all because it conduceth not much to my present scope, for example, a Urine came to me about a yeare agoe; Mercury was the afflicting Planet, and in Aries, ac∣cording to this rate Mercury rules the leggs and privities; but the man was diseased in his head, for he was madd. I gave you a table of it in my Guide for women; and I am as loath to write one thing twice, as you are to pay for one thing twice. If this will not content you, you are
so hard to be pleased that I shall not un∣dertake to please you, but to please my selfe; and in so doing I am confident to please some body else. CHAP. X. How the nature and kind of the Disease may be found out by the Figure of the decumbiture. 1. THe nature of the disease is found out three wayes; First, by the houses of heaven, of which the 6th. 7th. and 12th. signifie diseases. 2 By the nature of the signes, of which fiery signe signifie choler and diseases thence proceeding; earthly signes signifies the di∣seases of melancholy, aery Signes di∣seases of blood and wind; watery signes, diseases of water and salt flegme. 3 By the Planets themselves and their as∣pects; All this I shall make cleer, by this subsequent discourse, before which I shall premise these following Aphorismes; 1 If Saturne signifie the disease, tis like to con∣tinue long enough, if not too long; yet if
he be with benevolents it mitigates: if with malevolents it increaseth the evil. 2 Sa∣turne in Leo, or Capricorn with the Dra∣gons head or taile, or with Venus cumbust, or with violent fixed stars, he stirs up pestilen∣ces, or other pernicious feavers that are lit∣tle better. 3 Saturne alone in fiery signes shewes Hectick Feavers. 4 In watry signs sicknesses or watry hu∣mours. The disease comes of grosse and vi∣cious humours, which will continue long with continuall fluxes and cold tremblings. 5 Saturne in moveable signes shewes flux of humors in all parts of the body; Ima∣gine the Dropsie or other diseases like to it; and yet it is some question to me, whether Saturne cause Dropsies yea or no, unlesse assisted by the Moon in signification. 6 Saturne in common signes gives com∣pound diseases, and such as run out of one disease into another, and yet they passe lea∣surely out of one disease into another to, you may almost whip a snaile as fast; you may easily see it before it come if your eyes be in your head. 7 Saturne in fixed signes, if in Leo, gives hectique feavers, in other fixed signes quar∣tane agues, gouts, leprosies, and other di∣seases that stay longer then they are wel∣come.
8. If Jupiter cause the disease, look to the Liver for that's afflicted, the digestion is bad; bloud abounds either in quantity or quality; a thousand to one if it be not too hot. 9 Jupiter in fiery signes bestowes upon men such feavers as come of bloud without putrefaction, such as the Greeks cal Synochus non putrida; they last but a very little while. 10 Mars gives violent feavers with putre∣factions, and the Sun gives no other. 11 If you find Mars in a fiery sign, judge the disease either a burning Feaver called , or else the pestilence; if Saturne beare a share in signification with him, me∣lancholy beares a share, or else a duske cho∣ler which is more usuall. 12 Mars in common signes varies the di∣sease; take heed of relapse; the Crisis is as certaine as a weather-cock, so exceeding swift and sudden will they come, even as swift as the wind not waiting the Moons leasure; In such a case you may more safe∣ly iudge by the aspects of the Moon to the Planets then by the Crisis. 13 Mars in Leo afflicts the heart, the di∣sease is a Feaver, and the cause of it Cho∣ler.
14. Alwayes when Mars signifies the di∣sease, it is very short but extream acute. 15 If the Sun at the decumbiture be af∣flicted by the body or Quartile Opposition, Antiscion of Saturne, the disease is Saturn∣ing Melancholy, and will in all probabili∣ty last longer then you would willingly have it. 16 If the Sun be afflicted in the same manner by Mars, the cause is choler; the motion of the disease is as swift as the wind, and as violent as the whirlwind. 17 If Venus be ill affected to the sicke, the disease comes of Intemperance, either one way or another; perhaps with drink∣ing, perhaps by venereall sports; what ere the cause be, those parts of the body signifi∣ed by Venus suffer for it. 18 Venus in fiery signes causeth one day Feavers; but if Mars joyne with her in signi∣fication, the Feaver is rotten and proceeds from flegme. 19 If Mercury be infortunate and cause the disease, he proclaimes that the infirmi∣ty lies in the braine, perhaps madnesse, or falling sicknesse, or it may be the man dreams waking. 20 If Mercury joyne in signification with Mars, you may be confident the di∣sease is a frenzie.
21 The Lord of the ninth in the sixth, witchcraft is to be feared, or else the disease lies very occult; I doubt my Author is mi∣staken: surely it should be the Lord of the 12th in the 6th. for the Lord of the 9th. should rather occasion the disease about some whimsies in Religion. 22 The Moon in Aries in the 8th. afflicts the head with a disease to hot for it to bear, whether the disease lie in the mind, or in the body. CHAP. XI. How to know whether the disease be in the mind or in the body. ALL the Aphorismes of my Author up∣on this question are got so deeply to∣gether by the ears, and in such a hubbub, that I know not in the world which way to goe about to reconcile them; every fol∣lowing Aphorisme thwarts him that goes before; in one he affirmes that the Sunne, Moone and ascendent rule the body, and
the Lord the mind; The very next Apho∣risme affirmes the contrary; most of them contradict one another in such a hideous manner, that I was forced to leave their companies and search other Authors for a resolution of this point; and they conclude, that the Sun, Moon and Ascendent signifies the body, and their Lord the mind; and if this may be taken for truth, the directive Aphorismes are these; 1 The Sun, Moon and Lord of the As∣cendent impedited, and their Lord safe shewes the disease lyes in the body and not in the mind. 2 If their Lord be impedited and they safe, the disease lyes in the mind and not in the body. 3 If both Sun, Moon and the Ascendent and their Lord also be impedited, or the greatest part of them, both body and mind are diseased; and this I confesse is something rationall. 4 Saturne generally signifies melan∣choly, and by consequence alienation of mind, madnesse, &c. and therefore al∣wayes you find him to be significator of the disease, or in the ascendent, or in the 6th. house afflicting the Lord of the Ascendent, or either of the Luminaries; the sick is af∣flicted
with care or griefe or something else thats as bad; be sure the mind suffers for it. 5 If Jupiter be significator of the disease, it lies in the body, if it lye any where; for Jupiter never troubles, unlesse it be that Monster which men call Religion. 6 It were a good thing when a man is troubled in minde, if an Artist could tell the cause of this his trouble; that you may do so, make use of these two or three rules; there is enough of them though there be but few, if you have but witt enough to know by a penny how a shilling is coyned; they are these; 1 If the Sun be Author of the distemper, as he may be if he be Lord of the House As∣cendent 6th. or 12th. houses; the distem∣per comes through pride, ambition or vain-glory. 2 If it be Jupiter it comes through reli∣gion, some idle Preist hath scar'd the poor creature out of his wits. 3 If it be Venus, Love, luxurious expence, or something else of like nature is the cause. 4 If Mercury be the afflicting Planet, the sick is pestered with a parcell of strange i∣maginations, and as many vaine feares at∣tend him; great vexation or study, or both is the cause.
By these you may find out all the rest; for this is the sum of the businesse. CHAP. XII. How it may be knowne what part of the body is afflicted. THat this may be knowne, for tis not onely possible, but also probable, be pleased to consider, 1 If the signe the Lord of the 6th posses∣seth, especially if he be an infortune, or a fortune infortunated. And then 2 Consider what part of the body the signe he is in governs, as Aries governes the head, Taurus the neck and throat, &c. and be sure that part's afflicted. 3 Consider what parts of the body the afflicting Planet rules, which are under that signe, and you need not question but thats afflicted.; for example, Venus though she rule many parts of the body, yet in Scorpio she rules under the privities. 4 Saturne Lord of the 6th. and in the 10th. in Taurus afflicts the body uni∣versally, but especially the left side. 5 Saturne Lord of the sixth in the last
degrees of Gemini, or in the first degree of Cancer, causeth paine in the left side, as though an Awle were running to it. 6 Saturne Lord of the 6th. in Leo in the second house causeth pains in the back and heart; the originall of which saith my Au∣thor, is bloud, but I should rather thinke it Melancholy. 7 If he bein Virgo the 12th. house, signifies paine in ths head; If he be in Mars orien∣tall and slow in motion, signifies diseases in the Reines, as the gravell, stone and pis∣sing bloud. I confesse I can give no reason for all this. 8 If Saturne be Lord of the disease and in Aquarius, the disease comes by travaile. 9 Mars Lord of the 6th. and in the 5th. and in Scorpio gives an internall pain in all parts of the body; if it be a woman she is not well in her wombe, the illnesse of which afflicts all her body, especially her head, by reason of that admirable congruity betwixt that part and her wombe; kind women, take notice of it; for it is as true as that the Sun is up when he is upon the me∣ridian. All Cephalick medicines helpe the wombe and remedy its griefe; I am confi∣dent you desire a reason of it, you shall not fail of your desires. It is because Aries and
Scorpio are both the Houses of Mars. 10 If Mars be retrograde in Scorp io and in the Ascendent, the whole body is universally afflicted, but externally, viz. the man breaks out in boils and ulcers, or iteh, perhaps it is the small pox or measles; if Venus set forward the mischiefe, the French pox is shrewdly to be suspected. 11 If Mars be Lord of the 6th. in Leo, the sick is extreamely pained in his back, in this you need never fear failing. 12 If Mars be Lord of the 6th. in Virgo, my Author saith it will lye in the left side, or left legge; But after I had had halfe an houres talke with Dr. Experience, he pro∣ved to me it was alwayes the Colick, and heat in the bowels; take heed it comes not to the gravell in the kidneys, when Mars comes into Libra: and to the stone in the bladder, when Mars comes to Scorpio. He that is a Physician knowes as well how to prevent a disease before it comes, as how to remedy it when it is come. 13 The Moon in the Ascendent afflicted by Saturne or Mars, bestowes difficulty of breathing, and infirmities in the lungs up∣on a man; I confesse I can give no reason for it. 14 Venus Lady of the 6th. and infortu∣nated
by Mars gives suspitions enough in the French pox. Here is enough to teach you more; lot not all your wits lye in your books; be di∣ligent and studious, or else you may hap∣pen to dye fools; let not all you wits lye in your books, but some in your heads; it is within you, and not that without you must do you good. As sor the side of the body afflicted, my Author hath left a few rules to know it, which I will declare to you, and leave them to the approbation or exprobration of Dr. Experience; they are these, 1 If the Lord of the sixth house be afflict∣ed above the earth, and in a diurnall signe, the sicknesse is in the right side of the body, and in the upper part of it. 2 If the Lord of the 6th. be under the earth, and in a nocturnall signe, the sick∣nesse lyes in the inferiour parts of the body, and on the left side. 3 Whether he be under or above the earth in a diurnall, the sicknesse is in the forepart of the body, imagine the forehead, face, breast, belly, or some other visible part. 4 If it be in a nocturnal sign, the disease lies in the backe parts of the body, or else
in some part but lies invisible, as the bowels, &c or perhaps the disease lies occult; for take this for a generall rule, the diseases are more hid from the eyes of your understanding, when the significators of them are in no∣cturnall signes then they are when they are in Diurnall. 5 If the significators be corrupted by o∣ther Planets, and a difference in these rules between the significator and the planet that corrupts them, the patient is afflicted both wayes; namely according as he signifies, and according as the Planet corrupting signifies. 6 In such a case view diligently which of them is most afflicted: and your reason, if you have any, will tell you, that the most part of the malady lies in that part of the body signified by the Planet which is most afflicted. 7 To wind up all in a word; Masculine Planets denote the right side of the body, Feminine the left, all of them afflict that part of the body which they governe.
CHAP. XIII. Whether the disease shall be long or short, or whether it shall end in Life or Death. FOr judging of this, take a few cautions by the way. 1 Consider if the Sun, Moon, Ascendent and their Lords be much or little afflict∣ed. 2 Consider the age of the sick party; for old age brings longer sicknesses then youth. 3 Consider the time of the year; for Au∣tumne and Winter bring longer sicknesses then Spring or Summer. 4 Consider the complexion of the Pati∣ent; for a melancholy man is more subject to retaine a sicknesse then a cholerick. 5 Consider the Planet afflicting; for Sa∣turne produceth longer sicknesses then Mars. 6 The Planets generally and briefly or∣der the sicknesses they give in this manner; Saturne gives long sicknesses, the Sun in Jupiter short, Mars shorter then either of
them, but acute; Venus meane; Mercury various and unconstant, according to the Planet he is joyned with or aspected. The Moon gives such sicknesses as often returne, as Agues, falling sicknesse, &c. And therefore tht direction of the Moon to the body, or in aspect to Saturne will soon∣er cause a falling sicknesse then the directi∣on of any other significator. These are the cautions, and according to these cautions so understand these follow∣ing Aphorismes which you shall find mar∣shalled into these three divisions; First, Signs of long or short sicknesse; Secondly, Signes of recovery; Thirdly, Signes of death. PART. I. Signes of long or short sicknesse. 1 FIrst, the 6th. house being possessed by a fixed sign, argues length in the disease; if the signe that possesseth the Cuspe by the 6th. be moveable, the disease will be short; if the signe be common, the disease will ei∣ther be meane in respect of length, or else a
change of the disease, or a relapse is to be feared. 2 If the latter degrees of a signe be upon the Cuspe of the 6th. the disease will quick∣ly end either one way or another. 3 A fixed signe under Cuspe of the 6th. shews tough and hard humours to be the causes of the disease, and such as are hard to be expelled, they stick to the body like birdlime. 4 Saturne Lord of the 6th. shewes long diseases; Jupiter, Mars and the Sun short; Mercury such as are as constant as the wea∣thercock. 5 If the Lord of the 6th be stronger then the Lord of the Ascendent, the sicknesse gets strength against nature: if you find it so up∣on a figure in urine, judge the disease in∣creaseth. 6 If the Lord of the 6th. be weaker then the Lord of the ascendent, nature, gets strength over the disease, and will at last put him to a totall rout. 7. Common signes shew the disease will stay in one state, as long as a Cat is tyed to a Pudding. 8. The Lord of the 6th. if he be a Ma∣levolent, it is an ill omen; if he be a benevo∣lent, you need not so much as feare a long
sicknesse; for the disease will be cured both speedily and easily, unlesse the said benevo∣lent be Lord also of the 8th. 9. If the Moon apply to the Lord of the 6th. the disease will be increased till it has put life to it's trumps. If the moon be Lady of the ascendent, ill dyet was the cause of it; perhaps a sur∣feit by drinking. If Venus be Lady of the 6th. 'tis women, or it may be sports and pastimes, or such gewgaies as Venus delights in: you know how to judge of the rest of the Planets ac∣cording to their severall natures. 10. If the Lord of the sixth apply to the Quartile or Opposition of the Lord of the ascendent, the disease increaseth, and is not yet come to his height. I confesse this, and many other Apho∣rismes hereabouts, belong not at all to the Decumbitures; but to questions upon Urine, and most of them, if not all of them, will hold true in them also. 11. The Lord of the 6th. and 8th. is but a scurvy unlucky signe, and shews the sick∣nesse will end in death: if it be in the 4th. it shews the sicknesse will end in the Grave. 12. The Lord of the 6th. and the 12th. cryes aloud that the Patient opposeth his own health.
13. The Lord of the 8th. in the 6th. and the Lord of the 6th. in the 8th. if they be in friendly aspect, the sick soon recovers. 14. I confesse the former Aphorisme seems a paradox to me; I should rather think sicknesse and death had made a match together, to take away the life of the Pati∣ent, and shall do so still, till I have spoken with Doctor Experience about it. 15. If there be an Opposition, Sextile, or Trine between the Lord of the sixth and Jupiter, the sick soon recovers; for Jupiter will handle him without mittons, and 'tis very probable Venus will not come much behind them in the businesse. 16. Even in such a case Jupiter be in the ninth House, the sicknesse comes by reason of some Physick formerly taken, which will at last much conduce to the Patients health. I doubt my Author mistooke the ninth House for the tenth; did I say I doubted it? nay, I know it. It is the tenth house, that it is, the house of Physick, and not the ninth. 17. A malevolent in the 6th, is an ill signe; but a benevolent there is as good a one for all that. 18. The Lord of the 12th, and the 6th
shews Witch-craft, or possession by the Devil, thats as bad: and if he be a malevolent, you may take it for granted, 'tis as sure as a club. 19. The Lord of the ascendent in the 6th. and the Lord of the 6th. in the ascen∣dent, shews long diseases; and such as will continue till one of them, if not till both of them make his exit out of the signe he is in. 20. If in such a case the malevolent cast ill aspect to her, bid her Physitian use his wits as far as he can, though the fear of death is not small. 21. The Lord of the Ascendent and 6th house, in Quartile, Opposition, or Con∣junction, in such degrees as Artists call Azemini, and in Angles, threatens such per∣petuall pain, which none but Doctor Death is likely to cure. 22. The Lord of the 6th. in the ascen∣dent, shewes the disease will continue long enough, nay longer then 'tis welcome; but it doth not signifie the sick must needs dye; for that belongs to the 8th house and his Lord. 23. 'Tis no good signe of quick recove∣ry, when the Lord of the 6th. house is a malevolent.
24. If the Sun, Moon, and Lord of the ascendent, be free from ill beams of ill Pla∣nents, and apply to fortunes that are any thing strong and like to do good, the cure will come as soon as you can in reason hope for it. 25. Tis alwaies bad when the Sun, moon, or Lord of the ascendent apply to the Lord of 6th, 8th. or 12th. houses; and tis not a whit better, if they be Lord of those houses. 26. It is an exceeding good signe at the beginning of a sicknesse, if neither the Lord of the ascendent, Sun nor Moon be∣hold the Lord of the 6th. or 8th. houses. 27. Its very ill when the Lord of the a∣scendent is afflicted, namely if he be retro∣grade or in an ill house, in his detriment or fall, or besieged the malevolents. All houses which behold not the ascendents, are ill houses; namely the 6th. 8th. and 12th. I will take no notice at all of the second in this case, because it is succeeding to the first; but the 7th. shall not scape so, because it op∣poseth the ascendents: it is very bad when the Lord of the ascendent is there. 28. In such cases, tis true the disease may happily be cured, if good courses be taken; but either a relapse into that disease is to be
feared, or else the disease is subject to a change out of that disease into another as bad, whereby the sick is in danger of death, unlesse in the mean season the Lord of the ascendent grows stronger; for the stronger he is, the better able he is to preserve life. 29. The Lord of the ascendent infortu∣nated by the Lord of the 6th. though he be but in his terme, prolongs the sicknesse. 30. If the Lord of the ascendent be in∣fortunated by the lord of the 8th. gives feare enough, that none but death can end the quarrel between the sick and the sick∣nesse. 31. If the lord of the ascendent be slow in motion, the sicknesse will be as slow in the parting, and slower if Saturn be lord of the ascendent: but if the lord of the ascen∣dent be swift in motion, according to the haste he maks, such speed you may expect of the disease. 32. The lord of the ascendent angular and strong, and no way impedited, let the disease be never so violent, the feare of death is more then the harme. 33. The lord of the ascendent entring into another signe, though it be out of his own house into another; provided it be not into the house of the lord of the 6th.
8th or 12th. the disease soon ends in health; if it be into the house of the lord of the 8th. the sick dyes at the time; if it be into the house of the lord of the 6th. the sicknesse is increased; if into the house of the lord of the twelfth, the sicke either keeps ill dyet, or is unruly, or is mad to takes supper in another word; in such a case, he that will not be ruled by reason, must be ruled by force. 34. If the lord of the ascendent be weak of himself, yet if he joyned to a fortune, the recovery will be very speedily; for if the fortune be any thing strong, he will helpe it forward with tooth and naile. 35. The lord of the ascendent, the Sun or the moon joyned to an infortune, pro∣longs the disease; and the weaker they are, the longer is the disease like to last. 36. If the significator of the disease be in a signe of the nature of the disease: for example, suppose the disease proceeds of melancholy, if the significator be in an earthly signe, it exceedingly prolongs the disease; judge the like by the rest of the humours; in such cases the cure is exceeding difficult; vis unita fortior. 37. If the significator of the sicknesse be an infortune, and applyed to the lord of the
ascendent, it mightily retards the cure; you see what need there is the Physitian be an Astrologer; I know not how a man should help nature, unlesse he knows it. 38. If the moon be with the lord of the ascendent, or applyed to him, the cure comes gallantly on, if she be swift in mo∣tion; but if she be slow in motion, she hales the cure back-wards. 39. If the moon decrease both in light and motion, and be with the Quartile, Op∣position, or body of Saturn, the disease is extream; for the next time she comes to his body or opposition, unlesse you can cure the disease before, and he is a Physitian in∣deed that can do it, death takes possession of the breathlesse Corps of the Patient. 40. The moon, or any other significator of the sick joyned to a Planet direct and swift in motion, shews but a short sicknesse; But if the Planet be retrograde or slow, the cure will be as slow to a haire. 41. If Scorpion ascend, the sick is the causer of his own sicknesse; because then Aries is upon the cuspe of the 6th. house and one Planet is lord of both places; and if he be in either of both those houses, it is so much the worse, for he will add fire to the fuel, and blow the Bellows too.
42. Both the Luminaries in Cadent houses and their dispositors together with the lord of the ascendent afflicted, shews a disease so dangerous, that the Physitian hath need e∣nough to look about him. 43. If in such a case the benevolents set the helping hands, the disease will be pro∣longed, and ever acute become chronick; yet if the benevolent be strongest, the disease will at last be cured beyond all hope; if the malevolents be strongest, tis shrewdly to be feared, that death must turn Physitian when all comes to all. 44. Suppose Mars be lord of the ascen∣dent, and in the 6th yet if he be in any aspect to Venus, 'tis not desperately bad, because she mitigates his evill. 45 The lord of the 6th. in the 8th. af∣flicted by Saturn or Mars, if he be weak, viz. retrograde or combust, or in his detri∣ment, the discase will continue till death cures it. 46. The Sun, Moon, or lord of the ascen∣dent with a fortune, and that fortune they are with retrograde, promiseth cure; but to∣gether with the promise, comes a threatning of length of the disease. 47. The Moon in a blad place of the heavens, prolongs thr disease if she be in a
fixed signe, without any further dispute of the story. 48 Never forget this generall rule, the stronger the Moon is at the decumbiture, the better it is for the sick; the weaker she is at that time, the worse. 49 It were a good thing and very com∣mendable if the nativity of the sick could be procured; for if Saturne be Lord of the Nativity, the sick may live, though the Moon be in with his body, or opposition at the decumbiture. 50 Judge of the length or shortnesse of the disease according as the disease is; for it is not to be expected that a Feaver should last seven yeare; and it is as little to be ho∣ped that a Consumption should be cured in a day. PART II. Signes of life at the Decumbiture. FIrst, Jupiter, Venus, the Sun and Moon in the Ascendent, not afflicting nor be∣holding the Lord of the 8th, nor being Lord of the eight themselves, take away not one∣ly
the feare of death, but also promise a speedy cure. 2 The conjunction of the Moon with Ju∣piter is alwayes prosperous; most propiti∣ous if it be in Cancer; if doubtfull at all, it is when they are in Capricorne, because in the one they are both dignified; in the other both Cadent from their dignities; And yet let me tell you but thus much, Ju∣piter is Jupiter still, be he where he will. 3 The Moon in an angle well disposed in good termes, and free from the body i beames of Saturn or Mars, it restores the sick to health, and scornes to be beholding to any of them all. 4 The Moon applying to the Lord of the Ascendent, unlesse she carries the beams of the Lord of death to him, doth the like. 5 The Moon increasing in light and swift in motion, and not posited in the 6th, 8th nor 12th. houses; applying to the Sex∣tile, Trine or antiscion of Lord of the A∣cendent, though the Lord of the ascendent be a malevelent, it matters not, so he be direct, and not infortuned by house, nor impedited by another malevolent, neither in his detri∣ment nor fall; it promiseth recovery. 6 If the Moon be. void of course at the decumbiture, if on the Criticall day she be∣hold
a good star, there is no question of re∣covery to be made. 7 If on a Criticall day the Moon be in her own house or exaltation, though she be void of course, the fear of death is more then the harme; for the sick will recover. 8 The Sun, Moon and Lord of the A∣scendent free from the beames of Saturne, Mars or the Lord of death at the Decumbi∣ture, there cannot be so much as a bare suspition of death. 9 If the benevolence be stronger then the malevolence at the decumbiture, and with∣all if they behold the Moon the Ascendent or his Lord, they promise recovery. The Malevolence may threaten hard &c. but the benevolence wil stay the deadly blow. 10 If the Moon be separated from a weak malevolent, and applyed to a strong benevo∣lent, the sick is easily recovered; for the weakest alwayes goes to the wall. 11 If Saturne be significator of the sick∣nesse, orientall of the Sun, the disease com∣ing of cold, &c. occidentall of the Sun, the disease coming of heat, seldome kils: My Author may be something questioned for this; yet this Ile easily grant him, that Sa∣turne is not so subject to take away life in such a life as in the contrary.
I dare not be positive in the thing, be∣cause I have not spoken with Dr. Experience about it. 12 Mars is not so formidable when he is occidentall as when he is orientall. 13 Mars afflicteth the Moon more when she is orientall then he doth when she is oc∣cidentall. 14 A reception between the Lord of the Ascendent and the Lord of the eighth, if they be benevolent, or if the benevolence lend them aid, shews recovery. 15 Also my Author saith, that if the Lord of the eighth receiveth the Lord of the Ascendent without the malicious beames of ill fortunes, the sick will escape, even when there is no hope of life. I know not the truth of it, because as yet I know not the judgement of Dr. Expe∣rience in the thing; but Dr. Reason is of o∣pinion, that it is far better that the Lord of the Ascendent dispose the Lord of the eighth, then that the Lord of the eighth dispose the Lord of the Ascendent. Is it not better that life dispose of death then that death dispose of life? Indeed this he told me, That if the Lord of the Ascen∣dent doe dispose the Lord of the eighth, the sick will take such a course as will be for
his owne prejudice, and the hastning on of his end. But if sick people will not be ruled by fair means, they must by ruled by foule; and that is all that I can say unto it. 16 If good Planets be in the Ascendent or Mid-heaven at the decumbiture, & pretty strong withall, they will stand to their tackling stoutly to maintaine life, though the significators of it be never so much af∣flicted. PART. III. Signes of Death. FIrst of all the Lord of the Ascendent af∣flicted in the eighth, the Patient is more madde to be apud inferos, then death is to have him; The man will dye, and his life will be cast away absolutely with evill gui∣dance. 2 If at the Decumbiture you find the Lord of the ascendent, combust in the ascendent, passe the same judgement with the former. 3 If the Lord of the eighth house be in the mid-heavens, and afflict the Lord of the
Ascendent, the Physick will be in a shrewd mistake, and instead of curing goe neer to kill. Listen to this, O Colledge of Physicians; let me intreat you to learn the principles of your trade; and I beseech you no longer mistake avarice for witt and honesty. 4 The Lord of the eighth very strong in the Ascendent, gives you faire warning that death's a coming. 5 A conjunction between the Lord of the eighth, and the Lord of the Ascendent, is as mortall a signe as the Lord of the heavens can shew. 6 It is a very unlucky signe when the Lord of the eighth house is Lord of the house at the decumbiture. And not much better if the Lord of the house at the decumbiture be afflicted by the Lord of the eighth; especi∣ally if the Lord of the eight be a malevo∣lent. Such ill beginning of a disease usually proves fatal at the latter end, unlesse the Physician be a very able man 7 If the Lord of the Ascendent fall retro∣grade from the body of the Lord of the eighth, it gives you a timely warning of death at their next conjunction, unlesse the Lord of the ascendent meet with the
Sun before he meet with the Lord of death againe. 8 The Lord of the eighth in conjunction square, or opposition to the Moon at the decumbiture, threatens death, unlesse there be a reception between them. If the Lord of the eight be retrograde or infortunated, you may the more confide in his judgement. 9 The Lord of the eighth in an angle, es∣pecially the westerne angle, the Moon and Lord of the ascendent being in cadent hou∣ses or afflicted by malevolents; death may be feared, and that justly to; especially if a malevolent be in the eighth, or Lord of that house. 10 The Moon with both Saturne and Jupiter, profits not he sick at all, unlesse Ju∣piter be much stronger then Saturne, or with the Lord of the Ascendent then either of them. In such a case medicines under the influ∣ence of Jupiter will do good, because his body is afflicted by so potent an adversary. This had I from Dr. Reason; neither is it barely to assist him of truth, but a foun∣dation to build other truths upon; a rule for practice; a key to open the closet of practice; an heurete to find other truths by.
11 The Lord of the ascendent in the a∣spect, or with the antiscion of an infortune in the eighth, threatens death, unlesse the wholsome beames of Jupiter and Venus helpe; which if, there will be a strong con∣test between nature and the disease. The fortunes strive to maintain nature the infortunes to destroy them: In such acase, look which is strongest, and passe judgment upon the end of the dispute accordingly. 12 If you find the Moon in like case in an acute disease, or the Sun in a Chroni∣cal, passe the same judgement. If there be a reception between the Lord of the ascendent, and the Lord of the eighth by any aspect, the sick will probably live; and that as I remember I told you before. But the sicknesse will be long and tedious, and the effects of it lye long in the body, and that I never told you till now. 14 The Moon with Saturne and Mars, or the Moon with the one, and the Sun with the other, or either of them with one, and the Lord of the ascendent with the other, or the Lord of the ascendent with both, gives shrewde suspitions, that the sicknesse is but the Prodomus or usherer in of death. 15 The slower in motion the afflicting infortune is, the worse it is; for then the
Moon meets him againe upon the Criticall day. 16 The Lord of the ascendent in the se∣venth or fourth houses, and there afflicted, gives warning to the sick man that his dis∣solution is at hand. 17 An infortune upon the Cuspe of the Horiscope, bids the sick provide for a change. 18 Fixed stars of a violent nature, speaks the same language, if they be upon the Ho∣riscope. 19 Those fixed stars are said to be of a violent nature, which are of the nature of Saturne or Mars; as Lanx Austra∣lis, the Buls eyes, the Scorpions heart, &c. and some which are of the nature of the fortunes, if Authors mistake not their na∣tures, as Algol, or the head of Midusa which is placed in the Buckler of Perseus. The Gre∣cian Astrologers call him the Devils-head; and yet all the Astrologers Jupiter and Ve∣nus to have a share in his nature. Let it suf∣fice that all hold, and Doctor Experience himselfe certifies, that his conditions are as bad as who is worst. Neither shall he come behind any one of the fixed starres in doing mischiefe. 20 If the Moon be void of course at the
beginning of the sicknesse, and yet afflicted upon a criticall day, a good Crisis cannot be hoped; an ill Crisis may justly be feared and that not without grounds from sober rules of Art. 21 The Lord of the ascendent in Leo or A∣quarius impedited by the body of the Lord of the 6th or 12th houses, signifies danger of death. 22 Both the Luminaries afflicted under the earth, carry the same signification. 23. It is evill if the Moon be in a detriment or fall at the Crisis, though she be not afflict∣ed at all; The time of the Crisis is the time of a combate between nature and the disease. And if the Moon be weake, she is not able to maintaine nature in the combate. 24 The Sun afllicted by the body Square or Opposition or Antiscion of a malevo∣lent, it tels the patient the disease will be long and tedious, if not mortall; and bids him provide himselfe of such a Physician as knowes how to do something else besides onely to tell mony. 25 The Moon opposed to the Lord of the ascendent at the beginning of a sicknesse, if the Lord of the ascendent be also retrograde or cumbust, shews bitter accidents will fall out to the sick during the time of his sick∣nesse;
He is a wise Physician that can re∣medy them; but he is wise that can antici∣pate them. 26 The Moon in the fourth house with the body square, opposition or antiscion of Mars, soon brings a man to his last inheri∣tance, the Grave; she threatens it, if she be there no way afflicted, unlesse she be very strong. 27 As I have judged by the Moon, so judge by Mars if you find him; for if he being there have any dignities in the ascen∣dent, he will urge a man as fast to his grave as ever sleep urged him to bed. 28 Saturne opposite to the Lord of the eighth house, threatens danger enough to the ficke. 29 The Moon in Conjunction with Mars in the fourth house will send the sick to take a supper in another world, though both their fortunes stand and look upon him. 30 The Moon in the ascendent, if you will believe Authors, alwayes hurts; and they give some shew of reason of it, because there she hath most power over the body of the sick. Yet mine owne opinion for the present is, that if she be there, and in Cancer or Tau∣rus,
she will rather helpe then hinder the sick. If the Moon doe hate the ascendent as Authors say, I suppose the reason to be be∣cause Saturn loves it. And then she hates the eighth and twelfth houses by the same rule. And if you wil call yourwits into examina∣tion, they will tell you it is true enough. 31 If the Moon be in the a cendent, and the signe ascending of a contrary nature to her, it is a hundred to one that the sicke die not of that disease. And here my Author spoke something to the purpose; If the former Aphorisme made a discord in your braine, this if right∣ly understood, will reduce them to a har∣mony. 32 The Moon applying to the body of the Sun, within twelve degrees at the De∣cumbiture, the sicknesse comes not so much to terrifie your body, as to give you warn∣ing of your end. And the neerer the Moon is to the body of the Sun, the speedier dispatch will death make of the body of his captive. 33 The Moon besieged by the bodies of the malevolents positive between the Sun and one of them, the hopes of life are very small, or none at all. 34 Authors say, That if a man or wo∣man
fall sick when the Moon is going out of combustion, their sicknesse will increase till she comes to the opposition of the Sun. And if then she meet with an ill Planet, the sick recovers; if not, they die. For mine own particular, I speake no more then I have found by continuall experience; I have of∣ten found this false and never true. 35 If the Sun or Moon be Lord of the house at the decumbiture, and behold the Lord of the eighth; the sicknesse is sent to proclaime the approach of death. 36 It is very bad when the Moon carries the light of the lord of the ascendent to the lord of the eighth, it threatens death; but it does not so in all diseases neither; for example, in such as come and goe by fits, as Agues, falling sickness, &c. you may make this use of it; that none are fit to make Physicians, but such as are intimate∣ly acquainted with Madam Nature, and her eldest son Dr. Reason. 37 It is extreame bad when the Moon applies to any star in the eighth, as bad as when she applies to the lord of the eighth himselfe. 38 The Moon cumbust in the eighth in Leo, threatens death, sayes my Author; and so the truth is she doth, if she be cumbust
in any other house or signe, unlesse she sepa∣rate from the body of the Sun. 39 The disease will appeare little other∣wise then the fore-runner of death, if the Moon be in Libra, and Jupiter and Venus in conjunction; he that knowes any thing in Physick that he should know, knows the reason well enough. 40 The Moon with the Pleiades, and the Aries, or with any other violent fixed star, shewes danger of death. 41 The Moon applying to her own Nodes, namely the head and taile of the Dra∣gon is very bad, but not so bad if she sepa∣rate from them. 42 It is very bad when Saturne is in his Apogeon, or neer it, if the disease come of retention. 43 Judge the like by Mars, if the disease be a Feaver, or proceed of choler; and here you have another instructer to teach you knowledge; the neerer a planet is to the earth, the more stoutly will he maintaine and increase the humours he governes. 44 It is a very bad signe, if not disperate, if there be an Ecclipse of either Luminary upon a criticall day; and if it misse a day of it, it will breake no squares in such a case: the time of the Ecclipse hath to my
knowledge anticipated the time of the Cri∣sis a whole day naturall, and proved mor∣tall too, as I have had experience in Essex, in the latter end of October, 1649. Thus have I given you the signs of death, by Astrology; I do not say absolutely a man must needs dye when any of these signs appeare; but this I say, the danger of death is much; I advise the Physician to have a care what he doth; let him advise with na∣ture, and her two sons, Doctor Reason, and Doctor Experience; let him have some brains in his head and not all in his books; let the Patient provide for a change, and make his peace with God, and set his house in order, and then hath he the lesse need to care whether he live or dye. One Chapter of Noel Duryet which is the last, and contains certain observations ta∣ken out of Cardanus and other expert Phy∣sicians, which at first I intended to translate, but finding them very imperfect, I thought good to forbeare, for wanting an Ephe∣merides of that age to perfect them my selfe, I thought better to leave them quite out, then trouble this prying age with imperfe∣ctions.
Presages of life and death, by the body of the patient being sick. Two wayes did the famous Hippocrates leave to posterity, for they judging of the life and death of sick people: one by the Celestiall aspects of the Planets, and the other by the Symptoms of the body of the man lying sick. The latter of these must first be performed; the profit of which, for 'tis good for something, according to Hip∣pocrates, is first the credit of the Physitian: so first of all, he hence avoid defamation, evill speeches and reproaches; the world shall never say he is a Dunce. 2. It will better his own knowledge, he need not apply living medicines to a dying man. Secondly, for the profit of the sick; hereby you may give them warning of death before it comes, and they will the more confidently commit themselves to the hands of a Physitian when they know he knows something. If the credit of Hippocrates may passe for starling, he protest's that what I here write, was confirmed in all his practises in Ethiopia, Lybia, Mauiritania, the Isle of Delos, Schythia and Italy.
And he that diligently observes these, and compares them with the aspects of heavenly bodyes, can never without a mi∣racle faile in his judgement upon diseases: For my own part, I dare command the greatest part of them for authentick, though I have not made tryal of them all; yet 'tis very probable, set the antiquity of the Au∣thor aside, that the meanest of them (if wel heeded) may give a more infallable judge∣ment upon a disease, then a whole Tub-full of Physicians. I have somewhat inverted Hippocrates or∣der; and my reasons was, because I would bring the businesse into one single ingresse, and make them as plain to the meanest ca∣pacity as a pike staffe: and if they cannot understand them, as I have committed them to posterity, the fault is in the dulnesse of their own wits, and there let it rest. Hippocrates divides them into three books, and in that I will follow him to a haire. The first book I shall divide into these parts; presages of diseases. 1. The face. 2. The eyes and lips. 3. The manner of lying. 4. The teeth 5. Ulcers or Issues.
6. The Hands. 7. The breath. 8. The sweat. 9. Tumours and Aposthumes. CHAP. I. Presages by the Face. 1. IF in a sick body the face look as it did in the time of health, or but little dif∣ferent; the hope of recovery is not small: signes of death in the face of a sick body, are these; 1. The Nostrils are extenuated and very sharpe. 2. The Eyes are hallow. 3. The skin of the fore-head or eye∣brows, hard dry, and loose; and looks as though it were tan'd. 4. The Eares are cold, shrunk, and al∣most doubled. 5. The face is black, pale, or swarty, or deformed; he looks but ill favouredly. If these, or most of these appear (be not to rash neither for rashnesse is the daughter
of ignorance; but be sober minded; and first inquire whether the Patient have not fasted much, or wanted sleep, or had a flux a long time: if these, or any of these had not a being before the sicknesse, the danger of death is to be feared. If the sicknesse have been four or five dayes, before you see these Symptoms, they are but the harbengers of death, and he fol∣lows them at the taile. CHAP. II. Presages by the Eyes and Lips. 1. Signes of death by the eyes are; if they be deprived of sight, or weep against the patients will. 2. If thy seem as though they would fall out of his head. 3. When one of the eyes becomes lesse then the other. 4. When the white of the eyes become readish. 5. When they are blear-ey'd, or dimme∣ey'd, and not used to be so before.
6. When they are very moveable, gashful, staring up and down, or funck deep into the head. 7. When the sick grows squint ey'd, and not so before, and stares up and down as though he was frighted. 8. When the Patient sleeps with his eyes open, and was not so accustomed to do. Then inquire if these come not by flux, nor laxative medicines; if not, they are signes of death. 9. When the Eye-lids, Nose and Lips are crooked, or drawn in to one side. 10. If the lips are thin, cold, pale, and hanging down, and the nose very sharpe, it denotes death. CHAP. III. Presages by the manner of lying in Bed. IT is best when men lye in bed in that form in sicknesse as they did when they were in health, mortal signs are first. 1. When the neck, hands and feet are ex∣tended
stiffe and inflexible, not to be mo∣ved. 2. Suddain starting up out of the bed. 3. Casting their head down to the feet of the bed. 4. Sleeping with their mouth open con∣trary to former custom. 5. Tousing and tumbling, or throwing himself from one end of the bed to the o∣ther, shews the man in a terrible condition, if not in a dying condition. 6. To sleep with the belly down-ward, contrary to custom; shews aches of the bel∣ly, or little lesse then madnesse. 7. If the desire in sicknesse be to go out of one roome into another, mistake the room for a world. 8. He that is impatient and forceth him∣self to rise upon a Critical day, puts him∣self in great danger: if the disease be vio∣lent and touch his Lungs, the Critical day may prove mortall.
CHAP. IV. Presages by the teeth. 1. GNashing of the teeth in a Fever, if not naturally, is a dangerous signe. 2. If with all he be deprived of his sences, and his sicknesse, onely a Fever not a frensie, and gnasheth his teeth; he calls for death, and he will quickly come. CHAP. V. Presages by Vlcers and Issues. IF a sick person have any Ulcer or issue, whether it came before the sicknesse or with it; (their is not a half penny to choose) and it will dry up and become green, black, or swarthy if the Patient become worse and worse, Doctor Death is comming to cure him.
CHAP. VI. Presages by the Hands. 1. IF in Fevers or any other acute diseases, frensie exeepted: the sick by pedling or plucking the bed-cloaths, or pulling straws if he could find them; a thousand to one if he lives the age of a little fish. Judge the like, if he take violent hold of the bed-cloaths, seeling or wall. CHAP. VII. Presages by the Breath. 1. BY the breath is best judgement given upon the spirits, heart and lungs. If a disease have invaded the spirits (and that is the quickest way to kill a man) car∣ry a urinal full of Piss to the Doctor, and he will say he ailes nothing; the reason is, there is no digestion found in the urine; because the disease seizeth not the body, but
the spirits. A man is troubled in mind, his Wife and Children do not please him; be∣ing troubled, is sick for madnesse; his wife as bad as she is loves him, and as ill as she hates him, she will carry his Pisse to the Doctor; he looks upon it, and thinks the man is at well as himself (and that is bad enough) onely his trouble is not so great: he knows as much by his urine, as if he had looked into a Crows nest; he hath no more skill in Astrologie then I have in making of Candles; the man speaks out all his wit at once, and saith her husband ails nothing; it may be tis true enough, he ailes nothing, but onely to be out of this world; the drift of this discourse is onely to show you some diseases seizeth onely upon the spirits, o∣thers onely upon the body. But to the pur∣pose. 1. The distance between breathing, if it be too long, and coldnesse of the breath, shows death is not above two or three foot off; gentle breath in hot diseases, is an ar∣gument of death.
CHAP. VIII. Presages by Sweat. THose kind sweats which happen upon judicial or critical days, are wholsom, commendable and good, for they are sent by Doctor Health. 2. If sweat be universall, 'tis excellent; and if the Patient mend by his sweating, 'tis a fore-runner of a Cure. 3. Mortal sweats are first of all cold. 4. Onely in one part of the body, usually in the fore-head and face; if the Patient afllicted by such sweats dyes not, his diseases will continue longer then he would have it. CHAP. IX. Presages by Tumours. 1. IF the Patient that lyeth sick of a Fever, feeleth neither pain, inflammation, tu∣mour nor hardnesse upon or near about his Ribbs, 'tis a very good signe.
2. If any of these be there, and upon both sides, 'tis but a bad signe at the best. 3. If he feel great motions and pulsations in one of his sides, it prognosticates great pain and deprivation of his senses. 4. If with his pulsation his eyes move faster then they should do, the Patient is in danger to fall into a frenzie, if not to mis∣chief himself. The last Chapter of Apostumes. 1. The Collection of an Apostume in both sides in a burning Fever, is more dan∣gerous then if it had been but upon one side; for two men will sooner kill a man then one. 2. 'Tis more dangerous one the left side then one the right. 3. If it continue 20 dayes, and the Fe∣ver ceaseth not, neither the Apostumes de∣minisheth, it will come to mature action. 4. If there come a Flux of blood through the nose upon the first critical day, it easeth the Patient; onely he will be pained in his head, and troubled with dimnesse of sight at noon day, chiefly if he be about thirty, or thirty five years of age. 5. When the Apostume is soft, and with
pain when 'tis handled, it requires a longer time to cure then the former did, but not halfe so dangerous. 6. Such a one may continue two months before it comes to be ripe. 7. That Apostume that is hard, great and painful, if it be not mortal, I am sure it is dangerous. 8. Apostumes of the belly are never so great as those that grow under the midrife; and yet those that grow under the Navel are lesse then they, and usually come to suppuration. 9. 'Tis a good signe when they purge by a Flux of blood in the nostrils. 10. Some Apostumes purge onely outwards, and they are little round and sharp pointed; and they are most healthful, lesse mortall. 11. Such as are large, grosse, not round but flat, are most dangerous. 12. Those that purge and break within the belly, and make tumours outwardly, are as bad as the Devil himself, or Robin Good-fellow, and are very perniciou s, those that make no tumour outwardly, excell them as far as the shot of a Canon doth that of a Pistol. 13. The matter which comes out of the
impostumes, being white and not unsavory, is very good and healthfull. 14. The more the colour differs from white, the worse it is; and thus much for the first book. The second Booke of the Presages of Hippocrates, you shall find marshalled in this Order. 1. FIrst of all, Presages by Dropsies in Fe∣vers. 2. Life and Death in Fevers. 3. By the Yard and Testicles. 4. By sleeping and dreaming. 5. By the Excrements in the bowels. 6. By wind in the bowels. 7. By Urine. 8. By vomiting. 9. By Spittle. 10. By Sneezing. 11. By suppuration of impostumes. 12. From the time of breaking. 13. By pasions of the Lungs. 14. By Apostumes in the feet. 15. By the bladder and Fevers.
CHAP. I. Presages by dropsies in Fevers FIrst, All manner of Dropsies in Fevers are dangerous, if not mortal: I know you would fain know a reason; Ile tell you; a Fever proceeds of heat, Dropsies of cold; and as fire and water agree, so doth a Fever and a Dropsie; and what you give to miti∣gate a Fever, increaseth a Dropsie; a Drop∣sie and a Fever agree like fire and water; the Sun having drawn up a fiery quality from the earth, and invellopeded it round with a cloud of Snow, thence comes lightning and thunder, and terrifies the people; and as well doth a Fever and a Dropsie agree in Microcosms, as fire and water doth in the Region of the aire; many men know their is a middle Region in the aire, but few know what it is, and as little where, onely a few Sons whom mother Wisdom hath in∣structed in it. 2. If a Dropsie and a Fever meet in one body, they will play reaks (as sometimes they do, though not often) the Liver pays all the score.
3. It afflicts the Vena lectua, and most commonly the guts themselves; the legs are presently tormented, and they cannot march handsomely; a flux follows, and the swelling in the belly is not a whit lessened by it. 4. If the Liver be most afflicted, the Pa∣tient hath got a dry cough, and he knows not how to help it; he spits but very little, and wishes he could spit more; the belly is very hard, and if he goes to stool, 'tis with more pain then he would willing; his feet swell, there is tumours, inflammation in his sides; sometimes they dissipate, and some∣times they swell again. CHAP. II. Presages of Life and Death in Fevers. 1. WHen the Patient is cold on his head or face, or hath cold sweats there: also if his hands and feet be cold, but his belly and sides hot and burning, the case is extream dangerous, and is a signe that death
hath taken possession of the house and clay where life formerly dwelt. 2. It is a healthfull signe in a Fever, when all the parts of the body is equally hot, though they be something hotter then they should be. 3. The body heavy, the nailes of a lea∣den swarthy colour; the disease will be cu∣red by death, and not by Physick. 4. Induring of a sicknesse without an∣guish, shews strength of nature; and so long as she hold up her head, there is some hopes. 5. Let every one that views a Patient, if he would act the part of a wise man, in∣quire after the custom of the mans body when he was in health; and if his spittle, sleep, or excrement &c. be as they were when the body was in health, recovery is com∣ming, and it comes a pace, and will speedi∣ly be with the sick for his comfort. The more these signs differ in sicknesse from what they were in health, the more is the danger. 6. By these signes you may also know in some measure, what part of the body is afflicted, and by what humor if you can but understand their language; if you cannot, go to the school of dame Nature, she is an excellent School-Mistris.
CHAP. III. Presages by the Testicles. WHen the yard and testicles are shrunk in, and apparently diminished a∣gainst nature, it signifies great paine and anguish, and death follows them at heels as swist as the wind. CHAP. IV. Presages of Sleeping. FIrst of all, when the sick sleeps in the night, and keeps waking in the day, this is usually a lovely hopefull signe of re∣covery to the sick; the reynes of govern∣ment are not yet forced out of the hands of dame Nature; and if she be not hindred by intemperance or other impediments, governs prudently. 2. Although it be not altogether whol∣some to sleep from break of day till eight or nine of the clock in the morning; yet it
is more commendable to sleep then, then a∣ny other time of the day. 3 Coutinuall watching is extreame dan∣gerous, and cryes aloud that deprivation of sences is at hand, if it be not already come. CHAP. V. Presages by the Excrements of the Belly in Feavers. FIrst of all, the most commendable figne is, when he that is surprised with a Feaver, retains the same custome in avoid∣ing his excrements which he ordinarily u∣sed when his body was best in health. 2 Alwayes in excrements you must re∣gard the quality and quantity of the dyet; for take this for a certain rule, and you shall find it never vary without a miracle, how much the excrements are different from that, so much worse is the signe. 3 Laudable excrements are neither too thick nor too thin, yet it is worse that they be too thick then too thin; for astringency
in a Feaver is naught and not to be allow∣ed. He is fitter to make a Hangman then a Physician that takes no care that his Pati∣ent goe orderly to stoole. A loosenesse in a Feaver proclaimes to the world that the Patient kept ill dyet before. 4 It is exceeding good that the colour of the excrements be according to the food taken. 5 It is very good that the patient goe to stool without paine; for if nature be troubled to expell naturall excrements, she will find a harder pull of it to expell the disease. 6 If the excrements be liquid, viz. if the man that is sicke of a Feaver have a loose∣nesse, and what comes from him, come with∣out violence, pain or wind, it is a hopefull signe, for nature hath found out a way to turne out the disease at the back-door. 7 Yet I beseech you take notice of this; frequent going to stool weakens the sick, spoils the digestion, marrs the retentive fa∣culty, makes the sick froward and faint. 8 Wormes coming forth of the body with excrements, at the end of the Malady, is a good signe and hopefull; But at the beginning of the sicknesse tis desperate; the
poore wormes know when nature is a de∣caying, and therefore leave the body before it is breathlesse. Here's a strange thing, that the wormes have as much knowledge as the Physician. 9 It's very good in every sicknesse, when the belly is soft, and not puft up with wind; wind is an active creature, and playes reaks in the body of man when it gets where it should not be. 10 The excrements when they are ve∣ry watery, white, or very red or frothy they are very dangerous. But by the leave of Hippoerates, not al∣ways mortall. 11 Excrements black, green or slimie give you faire warning, if any warning will serve the turne, that the disease may end in death, and thats most probable. 12 Mixture of the forenamed colours is no lesse dangerous, but shews longer conti∣nuance of the disease, in the former the sicke runs to his grave as hard as he can drive; in this he walks to the same place as though he told his steps. 13 When little skins like the peeling of guts come forth of the excrements, the di∣sease is dangerous. This symptome was ordinarily seen, in that Epidemicall di∣sease
in London 1649. which so puzled the Colledge of Physicians, that their learned ignorance was so far from curing of it, that they could not tell what it was. Then Master Galen (for they know not where dame nature the Mother of Physici∣ans dwels) instructed them in no suth prin∣ciples. Mine owne Son about three years of age was taken of the same disease, my selfe be∣ing in the Country, when the hopes of life were but small, I was sent for up; what came from him, and that was once in an houre, was wrapt round in skins. I cured him by onely boyling Mallows in his drink; and to manifest my thanke∣fulnesse to God, for so great a mercy, I here declare it to the world. CHAP. VI. Presages by wind in the Bowels and Wombe. 1 FIrst of all, wind issuing forth gently and voluntarily, is the best and most wholsome signe.
2 Worse then that when it comes forth with pain and griping. 3 Worst of all when it is retained, and cannot come out at all, but causes swellings there. 4 Swellings of the wind in the belly ac∣cording to Hippocrates, are best cured by ex∣pulsion downward, or by Urine; thus my Author. I care not greatly if I relate the cure done in such a case, by one of the wisest Physici∣ans that ever the Sun shone upon in Eng∣land, Dr. Butler of Cambridge. A Gentleman was possessed with wind in his belly, a great inflammation there was there. The Doctor comes to him, and perceiving the originall of it was wind; for he was a man of pene∣trating judgement; calling for a rolling∣pin; The man was never subject to cove∣tousnesse, and as little to pride: Downe turnes he the cloathes from the bed: up he gets boots and all, not regarding the hol∣land sheets; and fals to rowling the mans belly with a Rowling-pin; the Patients fundament sounds an alarum, and certifies all the company that ease was a coming.
CHAP. VII. Presages by the Vrine in Feavers. 1 FIrst of all, if the Urine in a Feaver or any other sicknesse, hath residence neer the bottome, in colour white, in forme like a Piramid. 2 So much the more the Urine differs from this, so much the worse it is. 3 Grosse resolutions, like dust or bran in the bottome of the Urine, is a very evill signe. But tis worse then that, when they are like scales of fish. 4 The Urine white and cleer, signifies melancholy, and is very bad; for if the re∣tentive faculty be caused by melancholy, the disease is like enough to hold long; for melancholy will retaine as well what it should not as what it should. 5 A cloud hanging in the Urine signifies health if it be white; if it be black tis dan∣gerous; and then your Mother witt will tell you, that the blacker it is, it is the more dangerous. 6 The Urine yellow very cleer and sub∣tile, shews the sicknesse will continue longer
then the sick party would willingly have it; crudity and indigestion has taken occasion to shoulder out health. 7 In such a case there is feare, and that not a little, least the sick die before the hu∣mour come to concoction; what a trick's that to cut off nature before she can do her businesse? and let me tell you this, I knew a man in London that shall be namelesse, that was surprised with a furious and mercilesse pestilentiall Feaver; his Urine was according to this Aphorisme, he had a swelling in his Emunctuary of the braine, (viz.) under his haire. It rose as fairly as faire could be, even till the houre of his death, yet he died; nature did the best she could to expell the disease, but she was anticipated; did you never know a man dye in the prime of his health? if not, goe to St. Tyburne and you may be informed. 8 Slimie, muddy black, tawny, dirty, nasty, filthy, stinking urine is usually mor∣tall. 9 If a childs urine be brought to you, and it look pale and cleer, like conduit water, it is very bad; I know you long for a rea∣son, you shall not loose your longing; I told you before such a humour was the
badge of a melancholy disposition; youth is naturally hot and moist; melancholy cold and dry, ergo, extream inimical to youth 10 If you spy in the Urine a thing like a cob-web swimming on the top, it us but a scurvy signe. 11 Thick Urine signifies but a thin bo∣dy, for he that made it hath a consumpti∣on. 12 White clouds in the urine and neer the bottome, are commendable; blacke clouds and neer the top are bad and vitupe∣rous. Jn all these have regard to the blad∣der; for if that be diseased, all these presa∣ges are in vaine. Thus Hippocrates; the truth is, many of them seem to me pretty rationall, neither am I able to contradict the rest; As I have never been a pisse-Prophet all my life, yet this I know to be true, and Dr. Experience is my witnesse, that if the man be sick of a Feaver, and the urine appears like the urine of a healthy man, as I have knowne it in more then one, and by this argument will I prove a very uncertainty in urine, death's a coming, provide for him. I spake with Dr. Reason at the same time
for they two brethren seldome goe asunder; And he told me the reason was because the disease work't upon the spirits, and not up∣on the body: and thats as ready a way to kill a man as to chopt off his head. CHAP. VIII. Presages of Vomiting in Feavers. 1 FIrst to vomit up flegme and choler in a Feaver, is a very good signe, because they are better out of your body then in it; they are but scurvy inmates when they keep not their proper place. 2 If what be vomited up be green, livid or black, tis dangerous. 3 If it be mixed or compounded of these, tis mortall. 4 If it stink, so that you cannot indure to hold your nose over it, and have but one of these colours, death comes gallowping; thus Hippocrates. Hippocrates was a brave Physician I con∣fesse; Galen mended his works in Physick, just as Aristotle mended Platoes in Philosophy, and that is as soure Ale mends in Sum∣mer.
CHAP. IX. Presages by the Spittle in Feavers. 1 SPittle in all diseases of the lungs, and maladies under the ribbs, if it come in the beginning of the disease, without pain, of such a colour as spittle should be, well digested, not viscous, Its very commen∣dable, ther's some hopes of it. 2 If the spittle come not up without ve∣hement coughing; it's an ill signe when nature is forced by violence to cast out her enemy. 3 White spittle, tough and knotty, is very dangerous in a Feaver; But when men spitt blood, it's worse, and yet such things happen sometimes. 4 If the Spittle be green or fleshy, it gives notice of a bad and ill conditioned sick∣nesse. 5 Black spittle is the worst of all, for then grim death's a coming. 6 When the matter which should be spit out, remaines still within the lungs and
troubles the windpipe, there's but little se∣curity of life: and I am confident never a one of the colledge keeps an insurance office for such a businesse, nor will insure thereupon at 50 per cent. 7 What we told you was wholsome at the beginning of the malady, if it continue longer then the first Crisis, it's suspitious, if it be not dangerous. 8 If the paine be eased by spitting, it's very good; let the wind blow which way it will; and then 9 If the Spittle be black, and if spittle doe foreshew death, it is that yet if the pain be eased by it, though I cannot say it is hopefull, yet this I say, it is lesse dange∣rous. CHAP. X. Presages by Sneezing in Feavers. 1 SNeezing in hot maladies, (let the ma∣lady be as dangerous as a halter) it is hopefull and commendable, and may pro∣cure a Reprieve. 2 Yet in maladies of the lungs, if it come
with much rheume, and pain be felt after, it is dangerous, come it when it will, whe∣ther in the fit or presently after. CHAP. XI. Presages of Suppuration of Aposthumes. 1 IF the paine of an Imposthume cease not by spitting, to which adde laxative me∣dicines, and letting blood, tis forty to one if it come not to suppuration. 2 When the Aposthume breaketh, the spittle giving notice of choler, whether matter come out with the spittle, or af∣ter, it is dangerous. 3 If the matter come upon the first Cri∣sis, it comes to tell you death will come upon the second Crisis, unlesse the Physician be all the wiser to stave him off: doth there such a one live in Amen-Corner? 4 If the former Aphorisme appeare, and other healthfull signes appear together with it, Dame nature may happen to helpe her selfe, and never be beholding to the Col∣ledge: and if you be ruled by me, take ac∣quaintance
with her; and that you may doe so, I'le describe her to you, that you may know her when you meet her in the street: shee's a plain homely woman in a beggarly contemptible condition, regard∣ed by none (unlesse it be the children of wisedome) she hath truth written upon her breast; those that think themselves wise tread her under foot; she carries Dr. Reason in her right hand, and Dr. Experience in her left; her head is bound about with the eternall providence, and in her braine is written the knowledge of all things, in words at length and not in figures: she al∣wayes goes toward heaven; and if you ask her, shee'l bid you come after: God is her Father, and her Mothers name is the good of the Creation: If you follow her you shal not want: she treads upon the world, and looks upwards: she is a virgin, a wife, and a widdow: she will give you a paper in your hand, in which is written, Know thy selfe: she hath no mony, yet is Mistris of the mines of India: In all her words you shall find more truth then eloquence: If you please to aske her for her Commission, she will shew it you, Signed by Jebovah, not by Ari∣stotle or Galen. Her wayes are very plaine, you may finde them in the darkest
night without a Candle and lanthorne: she is alwayes every where and yet still with me: she is my Mother; shee's a woman and yet an Academick: shee's present to all that call upon her, yet not Ubiquitary: she alwayes weeps, and yet I never saw her laugh. I hope none will blame me for wri∣ting this discription of my Mother, so much despised, so little thought of by the Rabbies of our age. Noverint universi per praesentes, that she is my Mother; and her two Sons Dr. Reason, and Dr. Experience my bre∣thren. CHAP. XII. Presages by the time of the Rup∣tures of Aposthumes. 1 THat all Aposthumes have not one and the same time of maturation, is so certaine that it needs no further dispute of the story. 2 It is most usuall and most wholsome for Aposthumes to break upon judiciall dayes; what they be and when they happen
you know already, unlesse you began at the latter end of the Book first. Hippocrates rec∣kons them by number of dayes, tis true; but so have not I, but by the course of the Moon. Do not blame Hippocrates for a small fault; rather thinke your selves ingaged to him for doing any thing; it may be twas Galens fault, not his. 3 Take notice that Hippocrates was gui∣ded by good principles; for he tels you, That the beginning of the disease is when the Pa∣tient feels heat, a feaver, stiffnesse, paine, pricking, or any thing else that denotes a disease. 4 When you feel that, do but so much for me as to make that time the basis to prognosticate the event. 5 Coughing, spitting and spawling, paine, difficulty of breathing, are true prog∣nosticks that the Aposthume is neer break∣ing. 6 As by the Forlorn-hope you may judge what the Army is; so by these signes you may judge of the greatnesse. of the Apo∣sthume. 7 As by a Citizens spending you may judge how long he will hold; so by the swiftnesse of these signs you may judge how soon the Aposthume will breake.
8 Sometimes the Aposthume breakes, and life is undone by it; sometimes it breaks, and death runs away for fear of the noise. Twere worth the while to know how this might be knowne. Ile tell you how, and never goe so far as a Amen-Corner for it neither. If when the Aposthumes broken the man begins to fall to his victuals, and feed like a Farmer; if the matter be white, equall, salt, and come out without paine; take these to be signes of speedy health, and say I told you so. 9 If the Feaver cease not, or ceasing come with a fresh supply, twere worth the while to know whether it will return again or no, 'Ile tell you how to know (if you will but read it.) If the Feaver will returne a∣gaine, the thirst remains still to keep posses∣sion: and when the Feaver doth returne a∣gaine, the Faeces being very watry, green, lived or slimie, fortifie against death; for he is not far off. 10 If the Patient feel pain on both sides, both sides are Aposthumated; wherefore do they aske else think you? 11 If he feel more pain on one side then on the other, cause him to lye on the sound∣est side; If he he feel heavinesse there be sure there is an Aposthume also.
12 If some good signes appeare, and some bad, compare them all together, and judge by most testimony; make use of all the rules you can, that so you may find the truth, and avoid infamie. CHAP. XIII. Presages of Apostumes about the Eares. FIrst, when Apostumes which come ei∣ther about or under the ears, come to maturation and break, the bitternesse of death is past. 2 You may know when ther's an Apo∣sthume there by swelling and paine, by heat and burning, by rednesse of colour and in∣flammination about the place. CHAP. XIV. Apostumes in the feet. 1. INvehement and dangerous diseases of the lungs, it conduceth much to the
helpe of the Patient when small pustules or Apostumes appear in the feet. 2. If withall the spittle change from red to white, it gives certain testimony that re∣covery approacheth. 3. If the spittle turne not from red to white, then the pain ceaseth not, and the sinews of the part apostumated, are in dan∣ger of shrinking. 4. If together with the former, the A∣postumes also vanish away, the man looseth his sences first, and his life afterwards. 5. Aged people are more usually troubled with the diseases in the lungs, then young people. 6. It's very dangerous in all Apostumes, when the pain ascends upwards. 7. Easie spitting white spittle, and not stincking, is a commendable signe in all di∣seases of the lungs; but if your spittle be red, black or stincking, tis deadly.
CHAP. XV. Presages by the Bladder in Fevers. FIrst, Hardnesse and pain in the Bladder in quotidian Fevers, usually fore-shews death is approaching. 2. If withall the urine bee stopped, judge the like. 3. In Apostumes of the Bladder (when they come in scurvy places) If the urine be like matter of the Apostume, and the pain cease, and the Fever mitigate, and the Blad∣der be mollified; when you see these signs, you may be confident the worst is past. 4. This disease usually happens to few, but Children, and to them most usually, a∣bout the 7th. or 14th. year of their age.
The third Booke of the Presages of Hippocrates. THis book I confesse is but short, yet the better order it is in, the handsomer wil ii look; and the reason is, because God is the God of Order. Let no man blame that Gallant soul Hip∣pocrates for writing a little disorderly; ra∣ther let him blesse God that he wrote at all: Let our Colledge of Physitians write so to purpose, and in their Mother tongue as he did in his; and the rest of my dayes shal be spent in admiring and applauding of them. But to return to my purpose, you shall find this third book presented to your view in this Order. 1. Presages in Fevers. 2. Quincies. 3. The Vvula. 4. Vomiting in Fevers. Of all these in Order.
CHAP. I. Presages in Fevers. 1. THis is most certain, and verified by continuall experience, that a Fever terminates in death to one, and in life to a∣nother, in both upon one and the same days and the reason why, you may find in the beginning of this book in that part, the ba∣sest of which was borrowed from the fa∣mous Avenezra. 2. Then you see a reason, why it is as re∣quisite to view the body of the sick, as the position of the stars. It is a custom in Italy, or at least it was but a few years since, that a Physitian might not deny to view a sick body, if he had but his fee given him, which amounteth but to 18. d. ster; if he carry two Scholers with him, he had 12. d. more, if the Patient were willing to give it him; which being ad∣ded to the former, amounts just to 3. s. 6. d. if he be carryed twenty Scholers, he had no more. To the Patient comes he, for he dare not deny it what ere the disease be; if he be in
health, and at liberty, there doth he instruct the Scholers by the Urine, by the Symptoms of the disease, it's continuation and acci∣dents &c. whether the sick be like to live or dye, how the disease opposeth nature, and which way. This makes the Italian Physitians able men, when the greatest part of ours are like to dye dunces; who dares deny, that has but wit to know his right hand from his left, but that seeing the body, hearing the relati∣on, and feeling the pulse of the sick, is a bet∣ter way to judge, then gazing upon as much pisse as the Thames will hold? I wish from my heart our present State would take this matter into consideration, and take a little care for the lives of the poor Commonalty, that a poor man that wants money to buy his wife and Children bread, may not perish for want of an angel to fee a proud insulting domineering Physitian, to give him a Visit. I think it is a duty belong∣ing to the Keepers of the Liberty of England I would help my poor brethren in this par∣ticular if I could, but I cannot. Whosoever reads what I have here writ∣ten, and approves of it; let him joyn with me in a Petition to the State, for the recti∣fying of this disorder.
Those which approve not of it, let them answer me to this question; who made a difference between the Rich and the poore? was it God or the world. If the world, as is most certain, then wil it not stand; for the fashion of the world passeth away. 3 If many good signs appear at the begin∣ning of a Fever, note the sign and degree the moon is in at the Decumbiture. And the par∣ty will recover when the moon comes to the Sextile of the place she was in then. Hip∣pocrates was against Astrologers, as appears by this Aphorism: And our Colledge, the Physitians, hug his writing under their arms, But follow him as much as the Pope fol∣lows Saint Peter. 4. Note the place the moon is in at the Decumbiture; then view the sick body, when the moon comes to the Sextile of that place: If you find ill Symptoms of the sick body, then you may fear death, when she comes to the Quartile of that place, and you have cause enough. 5. Short Maladies are better judged of then long; a great deale of time may pro∣duce more alteration then a little. 6. If Fevers happen to women in child∣bed, begin the Calculation at the time of
her delivery, and not at the Initiation of the sicknesse, and take their Crisis that way. 7. If the Fever continue to the third Cri∣sis, which is not often; you may presage bleeding at the Nose; and it is twenty to one, it comes not upon the day of the third Crisis, or near it. 8. If the Patient bleed not at the Nose, be sure he hath an Inpostume in some of the in∣fetiour parts of his body. 9. Flux of blood in such a case most u∣sually haps to people that are under thirty years of age; Impostumes to them that are older. 10. If the sick find a vehement pain about his fore-head, or places near it; he is very subject to bleed at the Nose, and that may save his life. 11. Young persons oftener dye at the first Crisis in Fevers, then ancient; and the rea∣son is, becanse their nature is hotter, and the more subject to take fire; for he that knows but his A. B. C. in Physick, knows a Fever comes of heat. 12. Old persons sooner dye upon relapses then young; and the reason is, because their bodies are weaker. 13. Ulcerations in the throat are usual∣ly mortal in hot diseases.
14 Fevers continue longer in ancient peo∣ple then they do in young; and the reason is, because the bodyes of ancient people are colder; dry wood will burn most violently it is confest: but wet wood will be longer a burning. 15 Ancient people are more subject to quarten Agues then young; and the reason is, because Saturn causeth them: a child wil leave playing with his Father, to play with it's equals. CHAP. II. Presages of the Quinsey. 1. ALL Quinses are extream dangerous, and sometimes mortal. 2. The most dangerous signes in a Quin∣sey are great pain, great difficulty in brea∣thing, yet no swelling outwardly appear∣ing; for if the swelling appear, the exter∣nal part of the throat is most afflicted. And if you do not believe better to have the External part of the throat afflicted then the Internal; I wish you did. 3. Here you find, that in the Quinsey, it is better when they appear outwardly, then when they do not.
4. If the swelling appear not outwardly, they usually kill within four days at the fur∣thest, although no Crisis come at that time. My own opinion is, though I hold an abso∣lute truth in the Crisis, as I have laid them down in this book: yet withall, I know as well, that there is a difference to be made between the time that the disease overcomes the vitals, and the time of the dissolution; as also That in a proper acute disease. The moon to the semie Sextile of the place she was in at the Decumbiture, often kills; because she is then in a signe opposite in respect of nature, sex, and time. 5. If a red tumour appear outwardly, and fall in again, the danger of death is great; Life may borrow a little time, and so forth, but 'tis to be feared, must be forced to yeild to her enemy Death at last 6. If the tumour in a Quinsey increase upon a Critical day, and break neither in∣wardly nor outwardly, death or a relapse, or some thing as bad is to be feared, though the Patient feel case for the time.
CHAP. III. Presages by the Vvula. THe presages are but few; happily ho∣nest Hippocrates whom Authors call divine for his ingenuity rather then his reli∣gion, because the diseases in this part of the body are but few, and those few appear but seldome. 1 Incision in the Uvula, Gargarion or Columella, when it is swoln red or grosse, is dangerous; Physicians love to trouble your pates with hard words; for if they would write plaine English, they could not make silly people believe wonders, and then their Diana would downe; you shall find an explanation of all such words, which he that can but read his Primmer shall find at the latter end of the book. 2 If the Uvula look pale or livid, and the upper part not swelled, you may make an incision without danger. 3 Be sure you purge the belly before you be too busie in making incision in those parts; Thus Hippocrates. The truth is, I cannot find any reason
why any incision at all should be made there; a man may as well plead Excise as Custome for ought I know. If there be an inflammation there, blood∣letting in the arme will serve the turne; if putrefaction or ulcer, as sometimes, happen to such, as our company of Chyrurgeons Flux for the French pox, either for want of care or skill, or something else; clensing medicines will do the deed. I do not in this Treatise professe to write an Anatomy; if I did I could tell you what the use of the Uvula was, and how difficult an incision there is, and how dangerous the effects of it may prove; but I passe it and come to CHAP. IV. Presages of Vomiting in Feavers. FIrst of all when there appears blacke things, or things like flies before the eyes of him that hath a Feaver, viz. when he thinks he sees flies, when ther's no such thing neer him; be sure the sick will vomit yel∣low choler, and the surer if withall he find an ilnesse at his stomack.
2 If there be a stiffnesse and chillinesse in those parts neer the Hypocondria, the vomi∣ting will the sooner be hastened. 3 My Author doth not tell whether this vomiting be good or bad in a Feaver; there∣fore Ile tell it you for him; it shews strength of nature; therefore take it as a hopefull signe; the choler which is vomited up lies in the stomack; and thats not the place dame nature hath provided to hold choler. Dame nature iis like a Prince in the body, and holds in tenure by Soccage, under Al∣mighty God; and if the can expell her ene∣my out of her dominions, doth she not doe well? 4 If together with what was mentioned before, there happen swelling or ringings, by reason of wind under one of the sides, be not too hasty to predict vomiting; it is more probable to be onely bleeding at the nose. 5 Bleeding at the nose in such a case usu∣ally happens to people under 30 yeares of age, vomiting to such as are older. 6 These presages hath Hippocrates left to posterity verified by his owne experience; I have ordered them for your owne good, as well as I can; I haue given you the reasons of some of them; because I would instruct
you; of others I have not, because I would incourage you to study; for take this for an absolute truth, my writings may teach you, but it is your selves must make your selves Physicians; Doctor Reason told me these presages were true. And Experience tells you by my penne, that you shall find them so. I now take my leave of you for this time, and withall tell you, that if you be not so free to do good to others, as I am to you, look to answer for it another day at the generall acount. I remaine Yours to do you good whilst I remain amongst the Living. Nich. Culpepper.
15. Aprilis 1651. Imprimatur, JOHN BOOKER.
