C905A 13280543 98738
The Case of Edmond Prideaux Esq THAT the Borough of Taunton is an Antient Borough by Prescription, and time out of mind hath sent two Burgesses to Sit in Parliament, which have been chosen by the House-keepers thereof not receiving Relief. That in pursuance of a Writ under the Great Seal of England, a Precept Issued from the Sheriff of the County of Somerset, directed to the Mayor of the said Borough for the Election of two Burgesses to Serve for the said Borough in this present Parliament. That after the date of the said Writ, and before the time of Election, several Briberies, Threats and Promises, and other Illegal Practices were used to procure Votes for Sir John Cutler, and to deter others from Voting for Edmond Prideaux Esq and John Trenchard Esq particularly several Notorìous Riots being commit∣ted in the said Borough, those that promised to Vote for Sir John Cutler were dis∣charged without any punishment; and some that would have Voted for the said Mr. Prideaux and Mr. Trenchard were committed to Goal without Bail or Main∣prise, upon a pretended Burglary: whereas it appeared plainly on their Tryal, that no Burglary was committed, but only to keep them from Voting for the said Mr. Prideaux and Mr. Trenchard; and they were offered a Discharge if they would give their Votes for Sir John Cutler. That William Turner, then Mayor of the said Borough, did declare before the said Election, That he was resolved to Return Sir John Cutler, although he had not the Majority of Voices of the Electors. That the said Mayor combining with the Friends and Agents of Sir John Cutler, did Erect a Booth in an unusual part of the said Borough, where they endeavour∣ed to shut out such of the Inhabitants as came to Vote for the said Mr. Prideaux and Mr. Trenchard, and admitted many of the Voters for Sir John Cutler who behaved themselves very rudely and insolently at the time of Election. That the Mayor admitted no Clerk to take the Poll on the behalf of the said Mr. Prideaux and Mr. Trenchard, and hath ever since denied them a Copy thereof. That the better to colour their intended design, several Strangers were brought in by the Friends and Agents of the said Sir John Cutler in a tumultuous man∣ner; whereupon the said Mayor did shut up the Poll, and refused to take the Names of such as were ready to Vote for the said Mr. Prideaux and Mr. Trenchard; 231 of which were afterwards Polled for the said Mr. Prideaux and Mr. Trenchard in the presence of Five Members of this Honourable House. That notwithstanding all the said Practices, the said Mr. Prideaux and Mr. Tren∣chard had about Fifty more Voices on the Poll than the said Sir John Cutler; but the said Mayor nevertheless did unjustly Return Sir John Cutler, together with the said Mr. Trenchard, although the said Mr. Prideaux and Mr. Trenchard were duly Elected Burgesses of the said Borough.
