D1173 99827245 31661
A Description of Wanton Womn. Wherein I briefly shall declare, What Habit and what dress they wear; This dainted new Compossed Ditty, Is to be Sung in Town or City: Where Young-men and maids are merry bent, I hope 'twill give you all content. To the Tune of, Braggundary: Or, Southampton. With Allowance. YOu that in Verses do delight, I here have some to read, He that has wit, let him shew it, For never was there more need: And I that never made Verse before, I'le make one now if I never make more; O Women, wanton women, what do they mean to do? The Subject of my whole discourse, concerneth Women kind, It came in my Read as I went by my self, and I cannot put it out of my mind: To see how these Women make such a shew, In City, Town, and Country too; O these Women, &c. You have Doublets much like unto Men, although you seem to flout us, And Deck'd with Ribbons every where, 'is time for to look about us: But seeing the doublets so well doth fit 'um they would have the breeches too if they could get them; O Women, &c. You paint your face, you curl your Locks, you let your Breasts go bare, So that a man may almost see, what underneath you wear: And in the Church you make such a shew, We cannot serve God for looking at you; O these women, wanton women, what do they mean to do? If women were alive that dyed in old times, and of you could take a view, They surely would say what I dare swear, old England is grown New: Such tricking and triming was never before Since Noah he landed on the shore; O these Women, &c. You cannot be content to go as did the Women of old, But all for Pride and outward shew, and for the thing you should, For let men go as neat as they can, Yet women will pass them ten to one: O these Women, &c. But if that I was to marry a wife, i'de choose one of the old fashion; That is one that would prove as good as she seems and not one of the new translation: For some wear fore-sleeves, I dare to swear, that scarce on their backs have a smock to wear O these women, &c. But one thing more I had like to forgot, which now comes in my mind; When men about their business go, some women are so kind; Or when they to a Market are gone, Some are made cuckolds before they come home O these women, &c. And when we have met with what we desire, my meaning you well understand, It is no more then what is requir'd, by most men that is in the Land: But as for my part I don't care, For medling with such kind of ware; O these Women, &c. So honest young-men that wives do want, I wish you to beware: That in your choice you do not repent, a good Wifes a jewel most rare: Nay, she far exceeds both silver and gold, But his fortune is bad that lights of a scold, O these Women, &c. So wanton women I bid you now Farewel, of my Verses I here make an end, For now a conclusion I mean for to make, of what in this Ditty is pen'd: So wishing you health and happiness all, Both young and old, both great and small; O these Women, wanton Women, what do you mean to do? Printed for F. Coles, T. Vere, J. Wright, and I. Clarke.
