D2190 19619589 109217
Upon the most Hopefull and ever-flourishing sprouts of Valour, the indefatigable Centrys of the Physick-Garden. ALLthough no brandish't Cherubins are here, Yet Sons of Adam venture not too neare, Nor pluck forbidden fruit: if with intent To visit Paradise be Innocent. Here's your [Nil ultra] else; in each of these Is both a Pillar and an Hercules. If you not dread their looks, yet may you fear The many strange Fatalities they bear. The Embleme of Mortality the Yew Does likewise now the Armed Agent shew; And if unwary Mortals slight their Guard, They doubly make the Garden a Church-yard. In this Conjunction mischiefe's never scant, The Saturnine's become a Martiall Plant: Far off, in Heaven it selfe are these bad Stars; What here at hand, when Saturn clubs with Mars. Th' Hesperian Dragon, were it not a Fable, Then these our Porters is lesse admirable. Their bloud is Poyson; Pestilent their Breath; And very shade the shadow is of Death. But since in England they can doe no harme Internall, they for outward mischiefe Arme; Desperate Poyson in most Forein ground, Instead of Sicknesse, here they mean to Wound. (As lately Rebells serv'd that Blessed Head, When Poyson might not doe, they struck Him dead) Who dares be safe? no Turk is Armed soe, When every member of them is a Bowe. Ev'n Arms are Arm'd; Bows chargd with Mace or Bill; So that at once with Sroke and Shot they Kill. And lop each limbe you cannot strike them dead; Each limb will multiply like Hydra's head. Some Vegitables doe themselves Protect With Prickles, Stings, or Stinks of same effect. Our Garden Genii, more generall, Do not defend themselves alone, but all. Old Heroes hung their Weapons, so as these, For signall Victories on signall Trees: But, sure of Conquest, these presumptuous Sophys Doe antidate: are Victors both and Trophys. If Quibling Cambridge, when they next Commense, "Shall say, here's Terrae filii without sense, "And very Block-heads: know that they were meant For Military not a learn'd intent. Valour and Wit at equall Honour fly, Yet Valour often, seldome Wit dwells high. As Wisemen most are Cowards; so 'tis fit That Combatants have neither Feare nor Wit. Their Education though they may not brand, Bred in the Gardens Garden of the Land. Manners make Men, of Men, means Wickham's Box, Our Yews declare they may be made of Stocks, By culture too: And Trunks assume of late The grand Proprieties of Humane state: Coucht in an Oake the Soverainty ye knew; See here appropriate valour in the Yew. Say, they are Speechlesse too: the Men of Swords And truly valiant are not men of Words. They Murmur though, & shake their Crests disturb'd By saucy Winds: nor would their rage be curb'd, Were't not in vaine their Honour to repair, When 'tis to fight the Winds, and beat the Ayr. Jove whispers Peace; or else we well might wonder He, so secure, lets rust his dastard Thunder. These Earth-borne Gyants take a diff'rent course, By plots more perilous then was their Force. Each Man's an Ambuscado; and may well Be said at once Perdue and Centinell. How they advance tow'rds Heaven Night and Day And strength increases still upon the way. Yet march unseen: But Joves all-kenning eye Did soon these wily stratagems espy. Else might th' All-conqueror have been surpris'd, As was our own, by men in Boughs disguis'd. So that Apollo's sent a league to treat, And to Caresse them with his gentle heat; With numerous Presents of his golden Rayes; And farther promise of serener dayes. Else would their force crack Heavens chariot wh But prorstrate Earth too hangs about their heels; And as an Ancient loyall Sabine Wife, Ventures to intercede, and part the strife. So men, whose humbler scope is heavens Crowne, With darling Earth are clog'd and fetter'd downe. Could we believe but what old people do; They were not only Men, but Christian too, Who fright the Div'll himselfe; had God but set In his first Colony this Amulet; No work for Cherub had there been: no doubt The Fiend had been, and not poor Man cast out. And Proserpine might here have fill'd her lap With only flowers, and not an after-clap. From Sons of Adam now we must retrieve One warning to the Daughters next of Eve. You Ladyes whom Priapus can't affright, Whose toyish weapon rather does invite, (Proscrib'd for his indulgence) since you are Beneath displeasure, therefore do not dare To use the Garden so as Men use you; At once to love ye, and deflowre ye too. Gardens of Beautys, many in pursuit Are of your own choice flow'rs, and rarest fruit▪ Weake is your Sex; you know the Dev'l in Swine Was nere repuls'd by hedge of Eglantine. If yet the Courtier Fox, or Ruffian Bore That mound have never undermin'd and tore, Thus fortify your selves; in your defence Set Gyant Honour, Gyant Conscience. So shall you never keep, by this advice, Knaves Kitchen-Garden, but Fools Par So farewell Heroes; Who shall Sing of you When as Heroick is Georgick too. Printed 1664 Joh. Drope M. of A. Fellow of Magd Coll the author.
