e3417a r30444 11322272 47448
EUROPAE Modernae SPECULUM: OR, A VIEW of the Empires, Kingdoms, Principalities, Seigni∣euries, and Common-wealths OF EUROPE: IN Their present State, their Government, Policy, different Interest, and mutual Aspect one towards another, from the Treaty at Mun∣ster, Anno 1648. to this present year. LONDON, Printed for Peter Parker, and are to be sold at his Shop in Popes-head-Alley, next Lombard-street. 1666.
By Order and appointment of the Right Honourable Mr Secretary Morrice, let this be Printed. JOHN COOKE.
To the READER. WHen the whole World stands amazed, suspecting its own Fate; and most of the Kingdoms of Europe are a Rid∣dle to themselves: When the wiser sort of Man∣kind discourse Events, and the rest dread them: When Men apprehend Things by piece-meals, and discourse Business by parcells; A clear, compleat, and impartial State of Af∣fairs (such as this, representing all Europe in one entire View) must needs be as Ʋseful in the Perusal, as it was Plausible in the Ʋn∣dertaking: Especially since, 1. It contains such Discourses, as were not the Author's Reading, but his Observation of Things that happened, not only since he re∣membred, but since he observed too.
2. It's not only Lumen Siccum, I mean such an Account of Things, as is not steeped, in either Humour, or Interest. 3. It's not only a Superficial Relation of Affairs, but a deep and solid Inquisition into their Grounds and Bottomes: Not a short Gazet of 1665. but prudent Reflections on the State of most Kingdomes, since the Peace at Munster, 1648. With what Content the Politician here may observe the Interests and Pretensions of Eu∣rope; With what Satisfaction the Curious may here discern the Fate of Empires; With what Pleasure the Gentleman notes here the Suc∣cessions, Alliances, and Relations of Christ∣endom; With what Gust the Novelist gains here the Ground and Reason of most Ʋnderta∣kings, Transactions, Successes, and Miscar∣riages; With what Delight the Retired Man looks, in one View, on the several Aspects of each Kingdom one towards the other, and expects in silence the issues of Grand Counsels
and Revolutions; looking wisely into the dark, but pleasing Prospect of Futurity, upon the Concerns of late Posterity, Is not so easily ex∣pressed, as experienced; it being the issue of calm Reason in large Breasts, that are not content to Inhabit the World only, but to Understand it too. To see the Grandeur and Glory of France, the Decaying and Infirmities of Spain, the fa∣tal Resolutions of Holland, the uncertain For∣tune of the Empire; the Troubles and Disorders of Poland; the Settlement and Strength of England, Sweden, and Denmark; the general Design of Europe for Free-Trade; the old Claims, Pretensions, and Titles of States and Kingdomes; the Riches, Power, Sea, & Land-Forces, and Policies of each Government; the Failures, Over-sights, Errours, and Defects of most Potentates; the Plots, Designs, and In∣clinations of each Common-wealth; the Situa∣tions, Dependencies, Respects, and Confedera∣cies of most Nations, in one entire Prospect, is
such a Satisfaction to inquisitive and reason∣ing Spirits, as may excuse this publication of a Posthumous work, whereof the Author saw two third Parts printed; especially since, that next to Authors and Composers of Books, their Con∣servators and Guardians deserve most Thanks and Commendations. We think we owe a great deal to such as Photius and Stobeus (and the publick-spirited Sirmondus, of the late Times) through the industry of whom, we do enjoy many things, which but for them we might have lost. How comes it to pass, that we have nothing, (unless meer Fragments, and arrant Scraps) of such as Berosus, Citesius, Megastenes, Theo∣pompus, Eughorus, Callisthenes, and Timuus? Or that we want so many Books of Diodorus Siculus, Polybius, Livius, and Dion Cassius? But because there were not, in all Times, Men of faithful, industrious, and publick Souls, that looked on themselves as Citizens of the World, and could not enjoy a thought of their own, but what they made (as we do these Discourses) common to Mankind. Vale.
Europae Modernae Speculum: OR, A VIEW OF THE Empires, Kingdoms, Prin∣cipalities, Seigneuries, and Common-Wealths OF Europe, In their Present State; WITH Their Distinct Interests, Policies and Concerns. THere was once but one uniform, simple and genuine Reason, the sure Guide, and uner∣ring Rule of all humane Counsels, until the depra∣vity of Mans Nature, by its Luciferian Arrogance, would needs exalt Sense above her, and sought out many devices to accomplish it. One of the chief
Projections hereto was the deriving and slucing out that comprehensive and capacious receptacle, the conservation of the publick good, lodged in the depths of wisdom, into manifold branches, and oblique narrow windings and Maeanders of pri∣vate advantages, which so drained and exhausted that first Bed and copious source of all those bles∣sings which the first Age of the World enjoyed, that it is now become a meer shallow conception, and like the Springs of the River Nilus, more in Notion and Speculation, than of any certain Exist∣ence. And this hath been the labour and industry of all Persons in all ages, the Populacy, and the Vul∣gar as guilty of the Innovation as those Potentates whom they implead of a most injurious Usurpation of their right: all times concurring in their suffrage against this first Law, seeking nothing else in the changes and vicissitudes of so many Governments, but their temporary ease, and some particular Emoluments to themselves, although they have vainly pretended, that those their restless Agitati∣ons, and irregular confused wayes to the pertur∣bation of the publique, were nothing else but na∣tural tendencies, how violent soever to that common Center, the Good of the Whole. That Prin∣ciple of Common Good how iluded.By which means it hath come to pass, that the World hath put on another dress, and hath been disguised in various shapes of Policies, such as would best sute the Humour and Genius of Peo∣ple, without consulting that first and perpetual Principle, which in this crazy declension of all things, must needs be supposed to abate and lose
of its vigour; And to help out this Position, Men have invented an Artifice, by placing such and such Nations under such & such Climes & Temperatures, which either do so rarefact and attenuate it in some sharper and serener Aires of Europe, that it is as good as lost, or else condensate it in some thicker and grosser Regions, that it is as difficult to be found. And under these, or the like Capricies, are the Europeans rendred obnoxious to one another, by natural Antipathies framed to keep them in mutual abhorrence, (as if wise Nature, when she framed but one Man in the beginning, out of whose Loyns all Nations should proceed, had composed him to their very purpose of inconsistent and unso∣ciable Qualities and Materials) which hath been fomented also by two of the most powerful Passi∣ons, Jealousie and Ambition, the Effects where∣of, in sundry National Quarrells, have almost ex∣tinguished both the Combatants. But Jealousie is the uncurable Disease, which hath made Christ∣endom to languish under a tedious and wasting Consumption, in spite of all cure and remedy, even of the peaceful and saving Gospel, by the ineffectual operation whereof, we are not only like to become a Prey, but are already the scorn and reproach of Turks and Infidels. Me thinks I hear that of Lucan, in his elegant flattery to Nero, given as true counsel and advice in the Courts of some Princes and States, — Librati pondera Coeli Orbe tene medio. —
To get so high, that they may govern and ballance the World, and overlook the Affairs of the Uni∣verse; which Elevation to so ticklish a point of Grandeur and Felicity, as it hath been fancied by some, is so incapable of persistency, that the Fate of Phaeton hath attended their ambitious De∣signs, and cast their Dominions into Flame and Combustion. Not to deny, but that a just Temperature of a formidable power and greatness, ought to be nice∣ly regarded, when the vicinity of so many united Dominions and Soveraignties unequally distribu∣ted, may give suspicion of Encroachment; but when such Discourses are like the story of 88. an∣tiquated, and very unpracticable; and the very Umbrages of those things disappear, and are vani∣shed, for that the Spanish Monarchy, and the House of Austria, (whose great accessions of Territory gave rise to those Observations on which the Policy of the last Age was founded) are con∣cluded to be consumptive, and to stand meerly on the defensive part; the present divisions of Europe in this unhappy Juncture cannot be palliated or co∣vered with this fig-leaf. As, if the Toss of Ambition be in the other Bucket, which in counterpoize of the formers as∣piring glories, hath strugled through a War of al∣most a 100. years duration, but hath now inter∣changed Aimes and Designes by Conversion, in∣tending the self-same advantages of a Purse and Puissance; the said Differences are more enviously calamitous, and are so far from Colour of Excuse, that they give the World to see, that they do not
act by the Rule of what they ought, but what they may or can do; and that the longest Sword hath no measure but its Scabbard, to which once drawn, it seldom returns. Such as these may be the occult cause of our Differences, (not imputing it to the present War between the Muscovite and the Pole, which is an Haereditary and National Quarrell a∣bout the Lands of their Dominions, conterminate and confining upon one another; or to some small mis-understandings in Germany, not considerable but for this Juncture, of both which we shall treat in its place more amply) but there is a kind of Evil, which hath attended every grand and happy Revolution in Christendom, that is assignable as the principal and general Motion to these present Troubles. Fortune was never yet so respectful and offici∣ously kind, but that her Train was very chargeable; nor doth she in her greatest Indulgence but fae∣nerate and commute her Favours. The late ge∣neral Peace was not given Gratis, nor those Pal∣ladian Semblances of Accommodation, without armed force in the womb of those concealed De∣signes which yet amuse Christendom; and it is most true, that the Pope his Holiness, who, in the beginning of his Papacy, laid about him so much for the Reconciliation of the two Crowns, was not over-pleased when he saw it was finished, and yet not out of any pique with the Cardinal Mazarine, (who attributed to himself the glory of the Affair, by timing it to his own Notes) as hath been suppo∣sed, but because he prudently foresaw that the over-grown power of that King would be dan∣gerous
to the Ecclesiastical State. So that Peace and War are like Generation and Corruption, they follow one another, naturally and commonly the greater the pacification is, and the more things seem to be stilled and composed, the more vehement and violent the rupture; for War is like an Earthquake, presaged by a serene Sky, and a quiet, gentle Air, sooner than by any other prognostick or sign whatsoever. And so much less sufficient is the state of Christendom to provide against the suddenness of such a calamity, for that the scale of Politiques, as was hinted be∣fore, is quite altered, and of a different and vari∣ous administration, the power being circulated to another Corner, and with the Wind may blow where it list, while the Eastern Torrent or Inunda∣tion carries all before it. Having thus glanced at these Causes which have embroyled Europe, we come now to the Effects in the description and account thereof for the plain and perfect Elucidation of the premises; and first we consider Europe in General, where we content our selves with the survey of its Extent and Defini∣tion. Of Europe in General. IT is reputed one and the chief Quarters of the World, though far less than any of the other three; whom it as far exceedeth in Magnificence, Nobleness, Number of People, Armes, Arts, Prudence and Prowess, and the result of all these,
Fame and Renown. It is bounded on the North with the North Ocean, or Deucalidon Sea, on the South with the Mediterranean, on the East with the River Tanais, and a Line drawn from thence to the Scythian or Frozen Sea (which hath been un∣known to our modern Geographers, who suppo∣sed the Tanais to be of a longer and further derived Current than in truth it is) and on the West with the Western or American Seas. It containeth 28. Kingdoms, reckoning those petty Royalties of Spain, and the Hereditary Dominions of the Empire. The Principal Provinces are, Germany, France, Spain, Belgium, Italy, Slavonia, Greece, Hungary, Poland, Lituania, Moscovia, and that large Ter∣ritory towards the North, called Scandia, being its general name, but divided into the Kingdoms of Norway, Denmark and Sweden, with their Pro∣vinces of Jutland, Finland, Lapland, &c. The Islands are Great Brittain (containing the King∣doms of England and Scotland) Ireland; and Ze∣land, Holland, Engroveland in the Northern Oce∣an. In the Mediterranean are Sicily Candy, Corsi∣ca, Sardinia, Majorca, Minorica, Nicropont, Malta, Corfu, and many other in the Archipela∣go. The Air is excellently good, wholesom and Temperate, and the Soyl Fertile; which qualities appear in the Constitution and good Temper of the Natives, by which they have excelled all other Nations, in Courage, Arts, sharpness of Wit, and all other Gifts of Nature; to the perfection whereof it is stored with many famous and learned Universities, the peculiar Dignity and Advantage
of this quarter of the World. In former and more antient times it commanded Asia and Africk, un∣der the Greek and Roman Empires; the last ob∣scured in the House of Austria, and the other as much if not more renowned in the Ottoman Fami∣ly, whose present Armes are the Terrour of the Whole. It is also solely famous for Navigation, and the great acquisitions made thereby upon vaster Regions of the unknown World. So that it may be reckoned the Mother of one of the biggest and lar∣gest quarters of the Universe, to wit, America. Having thus briefly described the whole, we come to a particular view of the distinct Regions, their Site, Advantages, Government and present Interest; and that we may take the Round the more commodiously for the purpose of this Dis∣course, we will begin with the retrograde course, from North to the Westward, and so Eastward, the Point and main Entendment of this Perambula∣tion, and in order thereunto begin with Poland, though lying Eastward also, but now faced to the Northward, and hath wholly unconcerned it self in the War in Hungary, and so of less moment to this Treatise, which directs chiefly to that sole Affair. POLAND. POLAND is bounded on the East with Mus∣covia, and Tartaria, and part of Moldavia, on the South with Hungary, on the West with Germany, and on the North with the Baltique Sea.
The Air is most extraordinarily pure, and the Soyl so excellent, that it is almost impossible to suppose the quantity of Corn which is hence transported into foreign Countries. It is a champian plain Country, interlaced with Lakes and Rivers, and beautified with many little Woods, but this Cha∣racter chiefly respects the Greater Poland, which lies between Dantzick and Cracovia, and all Litua∣nia, wherein notwithstanding are very massy Woods. The Lesser Poland, which contains the rest, even to the Frontiers of Hungary, is not less fruitful, although it be not so uniform, where it is divided from Prussia with little Hills, rather than Mountains. In it are many Mines of Salt and Sil∣ver, with Wines, infinite quantities of Honey and Wax found in their VVoods, and other excellent Fruits. The Air hereof is so temperate, that it is commonly called, the Entrance of Italy, that is to say, the Gate and Portal of all Delights and Plea∣sures imaginable. It containeth, as its now in Circuit, 120. German Miles, from the utter∣most bounds of Livonia, or Liefland, to the bor∣ders of Hungary, and from the borders of Silesia, East and VVest to Muscovia as many. It compre∣hends many goodly and large Provinces, as the two Polands, Massovia, Podolia, Prussia, Russia-Nigra, Volinia, Livonia, and Lituania. Poland was the Proper Seat of the Polonians, but Prussia, part of Pomerania, Podolia, Volinia, Massovia, and Livonia, were gained by Armes; Lithuania, and Symogythia, once Provinces of Russia, were the Inheritance of the House of Jagello, who in the year 1380. taking to VVife the Princess Hed∣wiga,
the youngest Daughter of Lewis King of Po∣land and Hungary, was in her right, upon his Conversion to Christianity, accepted for King of Poland; since which time, that Dutchy hath been united to the Crown; the last Heir of this Family was Sigismond Augustus, after whose de∣cease, the Lithuanians dreading the power of the Muscovite, agreed to the way of Election of a King, with the other Provinces of the Kingdom. As to Prussia, the other great Limb of this King∣dom, it did belong to the Dutch Knights, their great Master residing herein, who being weakned by many combats, at last yielded himself Feudato∣ry to King Casimir; Since which time, Albert of Brandenburg, their great Master, becoming a Protestant, changed his Title, and was created Duke of Prussia by King Sigismond, and the Coun∣try divided into two parts, the one Regal, im∣mediately holden of the Crown, and the other Ducal. In the former stand Marienburg, Thorn, Elbing, Culma, Varnia, and Dantzick, enjoy∣ing the Priviledge and Title of the second Hanse Town. In the latter, the chiefest place is Co∣nincksburg, a Port of traffique, where the Duke sometime keepeth his Court. As to Livonia, it came to be reckoned into the Poles Dominions on this manner; in the year 1558. these People be∣ing spoyled of the greatest part of their Territory by the great Duke of Muscovia, and the great Ma∣ster of the Order no longer able to maintain them; nor his own Dominions therein (the Country be∣ing wholly his) submitted to Sigismond King of Poland, who took them into his protection, and
maintained them under it, maugre all the force of the Russians. At present there is a third Proprie∣tor, namely the Swede, who hath a good, and the chiefest part in it, being possessed of Riga, the principal City of trade (with many other con∣siderable places, as Revel, Narve, Pernow, &c.) which was besieged in 1658. by the Russian Em∣perour in person, when the King of Sweden was engaged in Denmark; but as the Town was brought to extremity, some dismay or despair seized the unwitting Assailants, and made them abandon a very hopeful Enterprize. The Town is now bet∣ter fortified and provided, and dreads not the pow∣er of the Pole or Muscovite. This Province, as also Prussia, for the nearness of the Sea, Con∣course to the Havens (many of them of good worth) and commodiousness of the Rivers, hath fairer Cities, goodlier Buildings, and by traffique greater plenty of Riches than any of the rest; but Poland is better and more generally peopled. Sa∣mogythia being a more Northern Country, is more rude and barbarous than any of them; and Podolia more barren; the fault whereof is not in the soyl, reported by Dr. Heylins Author to be miraculously fertile, but in the barbarous and unmerciful depo∣pulations of the Tartars every year commonly, but of late it hath pretty well recovered it self. Having thus discoursed of the Provinces, it will be requisite to describe in brief manner some of the principal Cities thereof, which do concern this discourse. Dantzick is the first,Dantzick Described. seated upon the Weysel, and accosting the Baltique Sea. It is par∣ticular State of it self, in the manner of a Repub∣lique,
or Free State, once reckoned an Imperial City, under the protection of the King of Poland; who appoints annually the chief Burgo-Master, but He is to be taken out of the body of the Citizens. It is as well and as proudly built as most of the Ci∣ties of Germany, but beyond all in Poland, and as regularly fortified. It is the Magazine of Poland, for hither is brought all the Corn that grows there, and there exchanged for all foreign Commodities, as Cloth, Spices, (which the Polanders mainly use) VVine &c. And indeed Grain is the chief∣est Riches of the Country, and supplies most parts of Europe. The Haven is very advantagiously si∣ted, and defended by four Fortresses, each of which is able to sustain the impression and effort of a powerful Navy. Next is a most magnificent: Ar∣senal, excellently furnished and provided. The Church of our Lady is a Fabrick of great and beau∣tiful Dimensions. The Lutherans have here the precedence and preheminence, the Catholiques next, the Calvinists are third, and the Anabaptists last of all, under a general Toleration and Liberty of Conscience. Their Language is partly Polonish, and High-Dutch. 2. Thorn is one of the Principal Cities of Prussia, its buildings, and Guild-Hall are very splendid; nor is Elbing much inferiour; these two places fell in the power of the Swede in 1656. and somewhat after, but are now in statu quo sub∣ject to the Crown of Poland.Warsovia. 3. Warsovia is the Regal Seat and Residence, and lies in the Province of Poland the Greater, built upon the Weysel, of little extent, but full of people; there is consider∣able in it, the great Place, the Pyramid, the Ar∣senal,
the Palace, the Castle, and the Royal Garden; the two chief Churches are the Jesuites, named St. John, and St. Mark. 4. Cracovia in Lesser Poland, once the Court of the Kings of Po∣land, a wealthy and well-peopled City, sited like∣wise upon the Weysel. In it is remarkable an Aca∣demy of great Renown, founded by King Casimir the First, and supplyed at first with Professors from the Sorbonne of Paris. 2. The Castle, built up∣on the banks of the River, of a great compass, and of great state and magnificence, although outward∣ly it appear rough and disproportioned; the Cathe∣dral is enclosed within it. This City, by way of Excellence, is called, the Rome of Poland, and its University, the Daughter of that at Paris, The City of Casimir is built on the other side the water, and will hardly forget the Swedish Arms. The Jews City, which is Neighbour to it, may for honours sake, be called, the principal and first Street of Hell, it is so filthy, &c. Not to mention Vilna in Lithuania, and Koningburgh in Prussia, both Universities; Dantzick and Cracow, making up four in this Kingdom. As for the other Towns, as Grandentz, Newamburg, Culmen, and the like, they are meer Names of Cities, and nothing else. Pauperum Tabernae, quatuor aut septem si sit latissi∣ma villa. Seven or Eight Houses make a large Town. As to the People, and their Manners, the Gen∣tlemen are extraordinary large and strong of body, and will skilfully manage a Shabel or Scymiter, are well skill'd in foreign Languages, are liberal Gi∣vers, good Cavaliers, and good Catholiques. On
the contrary, and the reverse of the Medal, they are much brutal, superstitious, fierce and proud, and sacrifice to their own approbation of things, and acknowledge no Soverain but their Liberty. From whence have proceeded those Mischiefs which they have often suffered, more mediately from the Tartars and Muscovites; and by which means the late King of Sweden brought them to the utmost degree of Extremity, followed with no more than 40. thousand men, when as the Pole is able to bring a 100000. Horse into the Field. This happened by that small power and authority which is allowed the King, and that little good in∣telligence that was maintained between their Ge∣neralls, and the divisions and revolts of their Troops. An Apprentice, a Novice, will be thought a Master; and a simple Gentleman, who never saw a Battel,The King of Polands Chiefest Praeroga∣tive. but in picture, will not want of confidence and presumption to believe of him self, because he is born a Gentleman, that he is able, at the first Essay, to manage and conduct the Forces of an Empire. And in effect, private Gen∣tlemen are so frequently raised to Places of the greatest Office and Command, (which is the fairest flower of this Kings Prerogative, and is legally vest∣ed in him as the Fountain of Honour) that every man thinks himself of merit and capacity enough for the greatest Employments. Besides, they hold themselves all equal in blood, and have the same Voices in their Diets and Assemblies, the same Priviledges, Rights, and Franchises; their Riches only distinguish them one from the other. These Gentlemen, for the defence of the King∣dom,
are bound to serve at their own charge, which they do generally on Horseback, gallantly furnished and attired in Cassocks, and garnished with gold and silver, and variety of other Colours; they also adorn themselves with Eagles Plumes, the Skins of Leopards and Bears, with many Banners, and parti-coloured Ensignes, which distinguish them from the ordinary sort, and strike terrour (but sometimes covetous desires) into their Ene∣mies; and most an end they carry, like the Philo∣sopher, all they have about them. It is reckoned that Poland after this manner can raise a 100. Li∣thuania 70. thousand Horse, but not so good as the Poles; whose best are very small, yet nimble, and far more couragious than the Dutch. In this Cavalry, consisting of Gentlemen, and their Ser∣vants, with their Auxiliaries, as the Circassion, the Cossacks, they are so confident, that they slight all Fortifications, unless Frontiers: And for the Country being all Champian, is most and only fit for that service; the Foot they have are borrowed of the Hungarians and Germans; and for Camp Drud∣gery, as Pioneers, &c. they use Tartars their Slaves. Of Priests there is great store in this Coun∣try, and they held in good esteem and veneration. Of Merchants there are very few, scarce worth mentioning: But of all men, the Boors and Pe∣sants are the most miserable, for they possess nor enjoy a Farthing; and are meer Vassalls to their Lords, which treat and use them with all the rigour and tyranny in the world. A Gentleman in a slight matter, among his Domestiques and Clowns, hath and doth exercise the power of life and death.
The Government representeth rather an Aristo∣cracy than a Monarchy, and is a kind of medium be∣twixt both, or both together. It is Monarchical, in that it acknowledges one Supremacy and King: it is Aristocratical, because the King is not an ab∣solute Prince, to do what he pleaseth; and because the Nobility, who have also the greatest Authori∣ty in the Diets, do Elect Him. They have nei∣ther Law, nor Statute, nor Form of Government written, but it is all by Tradition; as by meer Cu∣stom, from the Death of one Prince to the Electi∣on of another, the supreme Authority resides in the Arch-Bishop of Gesne, who is alwayes Presi∣dent of the Council, appointeth the Diet, ruleth the Senate, and proclaimeth the new Elected King. Before King Stephen's time, who erected new Bishops, Palatines, and Castellanes in Livonia, there were but 14. Bishops, 28. Palatines, and 70. of the chiefest Castellanes, that had Voices in the Election of a King, who is Rector Senatus sed Regnantis. Ruler of a raigning Senate. Whereby he is obliged to comport with them in these things following; In any Affair of Impor∣tance, the King by his Chancellour sends Letters to the Arch-Bishops, Bishops, and Palatines, which are called Instruction is Literae, Letters of Instruction, because they contain the account of that Business which His Majesty will propose to them at the Diet, and therein appoints them the time of their meeting. These Letters being re∣ceived,
every Senator examines the particular qua∣lity, nature and consequences of the Proposition, to which he hath free liberty to answer negatively or affirmatively, and as he judgeth best, either for the publick good, or his particular advantage. The King also sends his Letters to the respective Palati∣nates, the Nobility whereof presently assemble together, to chuse a Nuncio, as they call it; that is, a Person of merit and sufficiency, to be their Speaker; and the manner of that Palatinate, is to bring things to an universal consent and accommo∣dation: For if it should happen, that any single Gentleman should dissent from what this As∣sembly hath concluded, there is no further pro∣ceeding to be had, the Nuncio must not depart to the Diet, nor that Province have any Voice or In∣terest amongst the States General. When the Provincial Assemblies are finished, by the time appointed by the Kings Majesty; the Se∣nators, and the Nuncio's come to Court; where the King, attended by the Chancellor, having a∣gain declared to them the Subject, and the Cause, for which he summoned them, receives and hears their advice, and so the Affairs are ended; Ne∣mine contradicente, nemine dissentiente: Other∣wise, the Diet is dissolved, every one departs, and the Proposalls, so far advanced, return again to their Idaeas. The ordinary Matters are decided by those Judges that are established in every Pro∣vince. It is reported, that all sorts of Persons are ad∣mitted to enter, and to hear that which is proposed in the Provincial Assemblies, but not in the Gene∣ral
ones; so that the meanest Pesant may divulge that which ought not to pass the Cabinet of the Prince. If they treat of War, the Enemy having news of it, stands upon his Guard, and oftentimes prevents that, whfch, after long debate, is con∣cluded for the Conduct of their Troops. Every man knows how many men shall make the Vant∣guard, or the Reserves: what Provisions, Advan∣tages or Dis-advantages; and in fine, every thing relating to the menage of the War. When this is considered, and these Maximes of State examined, with the slowness and the difficulty of concluding any thing, together with the bounded power of the King, and the licence, and caprices, and ig∣norance of the Subject, as to a particular Person, whose No spoils all: And lastly, those Engines which move this Empire; it may be assuredly affirm∣ed; that the Policy thereof cannot be much advan∣tagious to the Publique; and that the Being thereof depends more upon the Valour, than the Prudence of the Poles; unless in Matters meerly Military, and in Action, and in the General's Disposal; And that the Allies of this Crown shall never receive a∣ny advantage or succour from it, for that this way of Government was solely invented for the subsist∣ance of poor Gentlemen, who render themselves necessary and considerable by this liberty of their Vote and Suffrage. Notwithstanding this Liberty of Election and Voice, it was never known, that the States passed by any of the Children or Descendants of these Princes in their Elections, and when the direct Line of them hath failed, commonly chuse no Strangers (though
the Tartar hath put in for this Scepter) as could be instanced in the present King Casimir, and his Pre∣decessors, and the former Election of Stephen Ba∣thory, Prince of Transylvania, who married the Sister of Sigismond the 2d. excepting Henry of France: as now the Duke of Enguien, Son of the Prince of Conde, is like to succeed the present King, who hath no Issue of his own. This King is the second Son of Sigismond, who valiantly re∣pelled Sultan Osman 1622. Crowned at Cra∣covia in 1587. in consideration of Katherine Jagello his Mothers right, who was the Daughter of Sigismond the 1st. right Heir to the Crown of Sweden, as Son of John, eldest Brother to Charles, the Sons of Gustav Ericus, who chased the Danes out of Sweden in 1560. by vertue of which Primo∣geniture, the Poles laid claim to the said Kingdom of Sweden. As to the present Aspect of the Crown of Poland, something hath been hinted, as it is now engaged in a War with the Muscovite, the ordinary and usu∣al Employment of its Armes; which have the Great Duke (and sometimes the Tartar) for their con∣tinual Enemy, in the same nature as the Scots and We before the Union The old Quarrel is the de∣tainer of the Dutchy and City of Smolensko, and the Province of Moloch, taken first from the Pole, (to whose Dutchy of Lithuania they were annex∣ed) by Ivan Vasilowich the great Russian Tyrant, in the Reign of Sigismond Augustus; and after ma∣ny Changes and Vicissitudes, subdued again by this present Emperour in 1654. when the Swedes threatned Poland on the other side. Both Armies
are now in the Field (for neither of them value the weather) but the Russian will hardly put it to a deci∣sion by Battel, keeping himself encamped, unless up∣on great Advantages; but they are now upon Treaty. The Pole is otherwise at perfect Peace with all his Neighbours, having the Tartars and Cossacks, very various of adhaerence, to his assistance in this War; and he is pretty well assured at home, the Nobility having so sorely smarted for their Pride, and Dissentions, by the Swede; and the late Army of the Confaederates, notwithstanding the Grudges thereof, are wholly disbanded; but this course is ta∣ken to vent the Humour abroad. But he doth ill re∣quite the House of Austria (who undertook his as∣sistance in 1657. when the Emperour sent an Army of 16000. Men into Poland) in denying any aid or supply, or to concern himself in the Quarrel a∣gainst the Turk, from the constant Precedent and Policy of the former Kings; who lying so obnoxi∣ous to the Tartars, alwayes ready at the Beck of the Grand Seigniour, might endanger their own Estates. There is something to this purpose, a me∣morable Saying of King Stephen, to the Emperours Ambassadors; Let me see the Princes of Christendom at Peace and Unity, and I will not be backward in ap∣pearing against the Common Enemy. This Kingdom hath indeed suffered much by the Turk, as confi∣ning upon his Dominions; but how he will save his Stake, when he comes to be his nearer, and more potent Neighbour, by his designed Conquest of Hungary, Time must determine: At present he is resolved not to meddle or make with the bar∣barous Enemy, but await the issue, and keep
his League with them duly and inviolably. This Casimir the 5th. succeeded his eldest Bro∣ther Uladislaus the 7th. after whose Death the Kingdom was dangerously afflicted with the Facti∣ons of the Nobility, and by the mutinous and re∣bellious Cossacks, who bordering Eastward upon Lithuania and Podolia, being part of the Cireassi∣ans, but Christianized according to the Greek Pro∣fession, of which there are several Bishops in Poland, have for some Ages since submitted to the Crown of Poland; but upon all occasions are ready to re∣volt, and to side with the Tartar, Russian, or any other People, for their advantage; as living chiefly upon spoyl, being a murderous and wild People: Nor will the Mischiefs caused by Chime∣linsky their General in the years 50, 1, 2, 3. be easily forgotten. The Wife of this Casimir (for∣merly an Ecclesiastique, and of the Order of Je∣suites, in his Brothers Reign) is a Daughter of the House of Mantua and Nevers; unto which Family the Duke of Enguien is Married, which will have a great influence upon the Crown of Poland. The Revenues of this King are Computed at 600000. Crowns per annum. arising chiefly out of Salt, and some Mines of Silver; which the King disposeth, either by making Portions for his Sons, or Kindred; for as to his Daughters, they are married at the Charge of the Kingdom. The War neither stands him in a Farthing of his own Treasure, for the Expence thereof is levyed upon the People by Excise or Taxes; as his Court Expences are born by the respective Places of his Residence: all the
Provinces partaking alike of the same Priviledges and Honours with Poland especially so called (which hath been one chief Policy to win them the better;) it seemeth reasonable, that they should equally partake with them in defraying the Charge. The Interest of this Kingdom requires, that a good Understanding and Correspondence be main∣tained betwixt the King and the Nobility; not to quarrel with the Turk; to preserve Friendship with the Swede; to make Alliance with the Persi∣ans; and to keep the Tartars at home; to ruine the Muscovite; to have an eye upon the House of Austria; and to respect France, as that which can put a stop to the Imperial Armes, if they should enterprize upon that Kingdom. CURLAND. BEfore we dismiss this Kingdom, we must men∣tion the Dutchy of Curland, being one third part of Livonia, the other two being called East∣land, and Lettenland, and a Soveraignty of it self, but held in Fee of the Crown of Poland, upon this account. Gothardus Ketler, a Noble Dane, the last of the Dutch great Masters in Livonia, having surrendred the Province to Sigismond Augustus in 1562, conditioned for his Investiture in this Dut∣chy, to him and his Heirs, but to be holden of
that Crown: Since which time, the Nobility ha∣ving accepted him as their Haereditary Prince, the succeeding Princes have continued Feudatories un∣to Poland, but are not reckoned as Parts or Mem∣bers of the Body thereof, for they come not to the Diets, nor have any Voice in the Election of the King, nor are lyable to any Taxes; but are ac∣counted, as indeed they are, Strangers, and not natural Lords or Peers of that Kingdom. The present Prince of the same Family of the Ketlers, is neer allyed to the Marquess of Branden∣burg, whose Sister is his Mother; so that for want of Issue, all those great Estates of the Elector, in the Ducall Prussia, Germany, and Cleve, &c. will come to this Duke, as his next Heir. During the late Danish War in 1658. the Swede expecting some Invasions of this Duke, as being so interested in both his Enemies Cause and Quarrel, ordered General Dowglas to secure him; who surprized him in his Residence at Mittaw, by some Boats full of Souldiers, pretending for the Pole; and car∣ried him and his Dutchess away Prisoners; in which condition they contiued till the Peace was made and concluded between all Parties; so that he hath no great affection to that Nation. He is a Prince of little Power, as his Subjects of Trade, although his Country border upon the Sea, but it affords no convenient Harbour for Traffique any where in his Coast: Yet so much must be said for his Honour, that he supplyed our late Soveraign Charles the 1st. with two Ships loading of Armes, upon his own ac∣count, during those unnatural Wars in England; and was ready to do him any further Offices of Re∣spect and Friendship.
I should next speak of the Europaean Tartars, and the Circassians, as confining to the Eastern parts of Poland; but I will reserve the discourse of them to the succeeding Chapter of the Russians, with whom they will best sute and agree. RUSSIA. THis spacious Empire is bounded on the East by Tartary; on the West with Livonia and Fin∣land, from which divided by great Mountains, and the River Poln; on the North by the frozen Ocean, and some part of Lapland; and on the South by Li∣tuania; and the Tartars and Circassions inhabiting the Lake Maeotis, and the Euxine Sea. It is partly seated in Asia and Europe, distinguished by the River Tanais, the common Boundary of those Parts of the World. It stretcheth in length 3660 English Miles, from Cola in the North, to Astrachan in the Caspian Sea; and in breadth 3300. which is 4400. Versts (to adjust which to English Miles, we deduct one fourth part) From the Narve in Livonia West, to the Province of Severia East, a vast Extent: but nothing so populous as spacious; especally since it was drained of so many Men by the continual Wars
of Vasilowich the Great Tyrant, and his Prede∣cessor the Great Duke John, who took the great Dutchyes of Severia and Smolensko, Nielchess, Plescovia, Novogorod, Jaroslaw; most part, or indeed all Livonia, with the Kingdoms of Casan and Astrachan, from the Tartars: as the other from the Polanders; but for want of supplyes to reinforce their Armies, lost them all again, ex∣cept some few Places, and the two Asian King∣doms, which yet they maintain. The Tartars have formerly as much, nay more plagued this Country, than the Christian Enemies thereof; for by their frequent Conquest, and Invasi∣ons, they made the Great Duke their Tributary, with this kind of service to be performed by him, to the Emperour of the Praecopenses, or the Great Chrim Tartar; that is to say, every year, the Russian, on foot, fed the Chrim's Horse, he sitting there∣on, with Oats, out of his Fur Cap,1140. in his Castle of Musco; for commonly every year the Tartar (bordering nearer to him than seven dayes jour∣ney, at which distance he now stands) progressed thither as in State: whereas of late times he comes every other year likely, like a sudden Tempest; and having wasted and ruined the Country, and made up the number of his Captives, departs as hastily: unless the Sultan in person make it an Ex∣pedition Royal, or when the business comes to bat∣tel; where, if the Russian prevails, the War and Ravage is carried as far into the Tartars Country: But to prevent this danger, the Russian doth all he can to be at Peace with him, both by Bribes and Presents.
And it will not be unworthy the relation (as I my self in 1654. have been particularly informed in that Country, from the Deputy Governour of the Castle of Archangel) how the Tartar came to lose that Claim, his Hold and Soveraignty in this Kingdom; which the Russians ascribe to a certain Boyar (in the Reign of Basilius, some a 100. years since) or Nobleman, intrusted with a strong Castle of the Great Dukes, which the Tartar, upon the last reduction and subjugation of Russia (having compelled the Great Duke to sign an In∣strument of Vassalage and Fealty to him his supreme Lord) in his return besieged, no other Place then standing out against him. This Fortress he there∣fore strenuously attempted, withall intimating to the Governour, when he saw Force would not presently do, that his Master had himself yielded and submitted, and that it was to no purpose for him to resist, unless he had a mind to draw upon himself the Punishment of Treason: and to this purpose he had such a Writing, &c. to produce. To this the prudent noble Governour made pre∣sent answer, that if such a thing were real, and he might see it, for his Justification to his Prince, up∣on the surrender, it should bind and conclude him; which the unpractised Tartar had no sooner sent into the Castle, but the Governour caused it presently to be torn into pieces, before the Mes∣sengers face, whom he returned with a more reso∣lute defiance than at first: And in fine, so long de∣layed him, and so wasted his Army, that the Great Duke resuming his Spirit, was making to his re∣lief; when the Tartar, in no condition to oppose
a fresh Force, quitted his Camp, and made hast homeward. Since which time, that Yoak could never more be put on the Muscovite. The Country is divided into these Provinces, of Muscovy, especially so called. 2. Novogorod. 3. the Great Smolensko. 4. Nosaisk. 5. Pleskow. 6. Corelia. 7. Biarmia. 8. Petzora. 9. Con∣dora. 10. Obdora. 11. Ingria. 12. Severia. 13. Permia. 14. Rhezan. 15. Wiathka. 16. Casan. 17. Astrachan. 18. Novogorod Inferi∣our. 19. the Mordwitz. 20. Worotine. 21. Tu∣vir. 22. Wolodomir. 23. Dwina. And 24. the Russian Islands, in these are contained 15. Dukedoms, and 2. Kingdoms. As to the Temperature of the Air, it is govern∣ed solely by the Seasons of the Year, and vast is the difference betwixt Summer and Winter, when the Ground lies covered with Snow for seven Months; and the Cold is so rigid Northward, that Water cast into the Air, or dropped down will congeal in the way: And going out of a warm Room into a Cold, Men have sensibly perceived their Breath to wax stiff, and have been near stifled in drawing it in. Oftentimes Travellers are brought dead and stiffe in their Sledges to Towns, without any per∣ceivance of it while touched; so sudden and pier∣cing is the outrage of that Climate. In the Summer time, which lasts four Months, it is absolutely the most pleasantest Country in the World; the Mead∣dows so rarely green, such variety of Flowers, and melody of Birds, especially of Nightingales; which Verdure proceeds from the warmth the Snow keeps in the ground, & when dissolved richly drencheth it.
The Summer is extraordinary hot, as the Winter is cold, but not so extremely. The Soyl is covered Northward with Woods, Branches of the Hercini∣an Forrest, and Lakes, which are dispersed all o∣ver the Country. Here grow the goodliest big∣gest Trees in the World, and spontaneous Honey, left by the Bees in the Trunks of them, of which there is a vast quantity, and of Wax there cannot be less. The greater part is Meadow and Pasture, in which graze an innumerable quantity of Cattel; the Beef the best incomparably in the World, would it long endure Salt: other Flesh nothing near so good, except their Fruit of all sorts, and incredibly plentiful. There are also wild Beasts in abundance, famous for their Furrs, as the Sabel, Martin, Ermin, the rarest in the World. Their great Commodities they vent are Hides, and Tal∣low, Cavear, Hemp, and Tarr; Firre or Deal Planks they have the longest in the World. They have also some quantities of Yarn, and course Lin∣nen, with other smaller Merchandise. They have in many places plenty also of Corn. The Inhabitants are perfect Slaves, both to the Cazar, or Great Duke; whom they never men∣tion, as the Jewes reverence the Name of Jehovah, but under the Circumlocution of His Clear Eyes, which they believe sees all things: as to their parti∣cular Lords; these likewise have no Haereditary Ti∣tles to their Honours, but are continued at the Emperours pleasure: but degraded, are in the rank of Gentlemen, if such distinction can be al∣lowed, as Souldiers, and in the Emperours Pay. The Boyars are very proud and surly, yet valiant
in War; but strangely given to Sodomy, as are most of the Russians: The generality of whom, are a most malicious and perfidious People to one ano∣ther, so that they would steal Goods, and get them conveyed into their Enemies Houses; which Villany grew so frequent, that of late it hath been made highly Capital to commit it. They are like∣wise very theevish, and most cunning Knaves in their bargains, and impudent withall, to out-face any thing. They are spunged and fleeced by their Superiours, and therefore right or wrong they will make themselves whole. They are generally gi∣ven to drink, from which the Priests do not ab∣stain; and covet Tobacco, severely forbidden them, with which they will make themselves most abhominably drunk. In all the Oppression they suffer, they think rather better than worse of their Prince, and begin to reckon their Sins, and seri∣ously lament for having offended him. None of them ever stirrs out of the Country, unless with Ambassadours: nor Stranger neither, if once in, if he articled not for his liberty of return, except∣ing Merchants; who having formerly traded by the Baltique Sea to the Narve, now sayl about the Northern Cape, in the great Ocean, to the Gran∣wick Bay, and so to the Port of St. Archangel, near the mouth of the River Duina. The other chief Cities of Trade are Volegda, Musco. The Imperial Residence Novogorod, Smolensko, &c. The Language is a mixt Slavonian. The Religion is the same with the Greek Church, except in some Ceremonies of their own devising; being instru∣cted in the Christian Faith by some Priests sent
from the Patriarch of Constantinople, to whom this Patrarch of Russia acknowledged subjection; but since a 100. years last past he hath withdrawn it, and the Patriarch is now nominated by the Empe∣rour, and Consecrated by his own Suffragans. The Government is meerly Tyrannical and Ar∣bitrary, and comes nearest to that of the Turks, as one of the Viziers resembled them: For he is sole Executor to the Estates of deceased Persons, and sometimes too to those that are living; for if he sends for a Summ of Money to such a Person, of whose Wealth he hath information, it is presently sent him, without the least grumbling: and if he sends for his Head, it is sent him, with the same dispatch: And this may be, and is the Case some∣times also of the greatest Nobleman in the Empire; more frequently used to very great Barbarities in the Reign of that monstrous Tyrant Vasilowich. Since whose death, by reason of two preten∣ding Impostors, who usurped the Throne: and the Faction of the Grandees, who advanced o∣thers; the Nobility have had the Liberty of Elect∣ing their Prince: And yet such is their natural Fondness of Slavery, that they advanced their Fel∣low Subjects to the same unbounded Soveraignty. No Prince can be served in greater State: He sel∣dom sheweth himself unto the People, but in Ap∣parel of inestimable value, all glistering with Jewells; and in his Court, at any solemn Enter∣tainments of Ambassadors, the great Audience Chamber is furnished with all sorts of Plate of infi∣nite value, and filled with men in Vests of Cloth of Gold, which are ordinarily some grave well-Countenanced
Citizens, who for this purpose are apparelled out of his Wardrobe; a most glorious Cheat to such as know not the mystery of this Pomp and Magnificence. His Revenues, by what hath been said, may be what he pleaseth himself; but these two last Princes have used a very moderate hand toward their Slaves, as they style themselves. His ordina∣ry means and way of amassing Treasure is, by en∣grossing or forestalling most of the homebred Com∣modities, (besides, all the Drink that is drawn in the Empire, is Farmed to his use; and a monthly account taken of the Cabacks or Victualing Houses, how much is spent, which must be presently satis∣fied to his Officers) and hindring all Trade till his own be sold, is a most vast and therefore uncertain Revenue. 2. By his Provision and Purveyance of Rent, Corn and Victual, raised some years to 200000. Rubbles, which Coyn makes little more than an Angel. 3. The Poll Money to 200. thou∣sand Pound Sterling. 4. His Customs, which a∣rise chiefly and solely from his Ports of Archangel and Astracan, to 400000 l. 5. By his own Do∣main, Escheats, and Forfeitures, and Presents: (very considerable on this account) All which may make up two Millions of Pounds Sterling, or two and a half at most; which were no great Sum, were he to pay for the service of all his Horsemen, who, like the Turks Timariots, have Farmes al∣lowed them. As to his Forces, and the Militia of this Em∣pire, they are of a very formidable and considera∣ble Power: For first, He hath of his Dworancy,
or the Guard of his Person, 25000. Horsemen, who are alwayes in readiness where ever he resides. Then there are Lands let out to several of his great Men, which are never aliened from that use, on∣ly the present Proprietors changed at his pleasure; for the Profits whereof, they are bound to main∣tain 65000. Horse more; and these likewise are alwayes to be ready at sound of Trumpet; which makes a standing Body of 90000. which with Of∣ficers, and other Voluntiers, are effectually in the Field a hundred thousand. Besides these, He may raise what additional Numbers the Country will afford; whish is so plen∣tiful of Horse, that it is said, he is able to bring 300000. into the Campania: but it is of the o∣ther side supposed, he cannot find so many Riders by one half; especially considering, that at the same time as these Horse are in service, his Foot hardly exceed the number of 40000. not only, for that he confides not in his Infantry, as unapt to the War: but because of the thinness of his Countries. Of late years he hath found out a way to supply that defect, by entertaining foreign Foot, chiefly Germans, and once some English, about the year 1633. in a Regiment transported by Collonel Sanderson, amounting to near 3000. Men; at which time he besieged Smolensko, (once a Province, under the protection of the Pole; di∣stant Southwest 80. Polonian Miles from Mosco; taken by Vasilowich, and retaken by the Poles in 1610. with the loss of 200000. Muscovites) two years together; at last came the Pole, when the Russian was wearied out, and besieged the Be∣siegers,
and reduced them by Famine to a surren∣der: For which the General lost his Head at Mus∣co, although Cosen of the Emperour; and his Son was whipp'd to death, as was the Major General; the Lieutenant General escaped at the intercession of the English, who had done excellent service, (and had taught the Russians how to stand a Shock of the Poles Lances, and to break their Troops) and could give a handsome Character of perform∣ance, as to his part; ever since which time the English Officers have been highly respected and preferred. This Emperour therefore is better provided of Foot than any of his Predecessors, who could ne∣ver make 20000. and therefore lost that they had gained, because they wanted those standing De∣fences to make good their ground; having trained up a number of his own Subjects to the Discipline, and by the example of Strangers; so that he is able to bring near 50000. into the Field, if necessity require. He is excellently and infinitely stored, as much as any Prince in Christendom, with all manner of Artillery great and small, with Ammunition and Provision sutable. His Souldiers most patient of Cold and Hunger, and sustained with little: but better to maintain a Fortress, than to assault it, or engage in Battel: Notwithstanding, they will do what they are commanded, in the most present dangers, but it is not out of boldness or bravery of Spirit. They have been twice invaded with the Turks alone (not joyned with the Tartars) the first
time was in the Reign of Vasilowich, in 1569. when Selymus the Second attempted to cut a Navi∣gable Trench betwixt the Tanais, and the River Volga; and brought his Fleet out of the Euxine Sea: but the Russian overthrew his Forces, and spoyled his Navy and Design together. The o∣ther was in 1598. by 70000. of them, in the Winter time; 40000. of whom were presently nummed and killed with the Cold, not knowing the Russians preventing Chirugery; which is to rub their Nose and Ears every foot with Ice or Snow, to recall the motive Spirits to those parts, which otherwise they might lose: the remainder ran home to catch themselves a heat; since which time the Turk hath never troubled this Country: Nor doth the Russian think it worth his pains to in∣vade his Southward upon the Euxine Sea, being parted from all other his Territories by Poland, Moldavia, and Transylvania; so that without their leave, he can attempt nothing against him: and their leave he is never like to have, unless invinci∣ble necessity and calamity perswade it. His continual Goads and Thorns are on the West of his Dominions, the Pole, and the Swede; to whom he hath lost more than he hath gained of the Tartar: Notwithstanding, since the Empire hath been setled in this new Family, whereof there have been but two Princes in the tract of near 50. years; especially in the Reign of this present Great Duke, they have not got much Ground: nay, the Pole hath lost the Dutchy of Smolensko in 1654. with some other Places, which is the present Quar∣rel and Cause of this Polish Expedition.
The Peace with the Swede, which the Russian prefers, hath been long in agitation, by reason it is clogged with so many Demands, and nice Claims of both Parties; but it is believed, the Russian must quit many of his Pretensions and Punctilioes, lest that Negotiation take no Effect, and the Swede take advantage. Little else can be said of this Mo∣narch, as to his Interest in Europe, where he was never further concerned, than these two Provin∣ces of Lithuania and Livonia; and scarce known to our Parts, till almost 90. years since: They main∣taining Correspondence with Us in point of Commerce only, and with our Nation especial Friendship and Affection, particularly towards the Soveraignes of England: Besides, they are of very little or no Address, there being not a Schollar a∣mong them, for even their Priests can but read. Furthermore, They never made any Alliance by Marriage with any Christian or Neighbour Prin∣ces, but chuse their Wives from among their own Subjects: nor do they marry their Princes Children to them; in this, like the Grand Seigniour, whose Policy they resemble; and certainly this is some secret Principle of State; for it is not many years agoe, since Wolmar, the Brother to the present King of Denmark, came thither a Suitor to one of the Sisters of the Emperour, and was there nuzled with a fruitless Expectation of a Match, but in conclusion had much adoe to escape out of their Dominion. In sum, They care not for, indeed ab∣hor, the Introduction of new Customes, and to that purpose prohibit Communication with Strangers, as the only bane of their Government: nor must a
Foreigner stir abroad without leave, &c. And lastly, They are so Proudly conceited of their own Prudence, that they think their Politiques the most perfect and absolute in the World. No question he would lend his Hand against the Turk (if for no other Cause than the Vindication of the Greek Church, of which he is the sole So∣veraign Protector) but it is not Long enough, and will not reach that distant Enemy, but by the wayes aforesaid. The present Emperours Name is Alexei Micha∣lowich, that is, the Son of Michael, which is all the Sir-name they use, both Prince and People: His Fathers Christian Name being Michael Fedorowitz, the Son of Theodore, who was Patriarch of Musco. This Michael, the Nobles (having been twice imposed on by the Polanders, who brought in two counterfeit Princes, named Demetrius, pretend∣ed Sons of Vasilowich, the last Prince but one of the Royal Blood; and in their quarrel subdued Mosco, and almost ruined the Empire) weary of their own Confusions, and the intollerable oppression of the Poles, unanimously chose for their Emperour; who setled the State, and managed it in a more constant way of Peace with the Turk, Tartar, Pole, and Swede, than any of his Predecessors had done be∣fore him. He began his Reign in 1615. and died in 1646. much lamented and adored of his Slaves, as well for his foreign Acts, as those at home; and for his Justice and Moderation: And so we pass Westward to the Kingdom of Sweden.
SWEDEN: OR Swethland. THis Kingdom is bounded on the East with Muscovy; on the West with great Hills, which divide it from Norway; on the North with the great Frozen Ocean; and on the South with Donmark, Livonia, and the Baltique Sea. For the quantity, reckoning in Lapland, it exceedeth France and Italy by 900. Miles: and for fertility, if you count Wells, Stones, Mountains, and Lakes; it excelleth them both likewise: but Goth∣land and Finland are excellently well stored with all Necessaries, and supply their Neighbours with Malt and Barley. The Religion is Lutheran, introducted by Gu∣stavus Ericus, or de Vasa, descended from the last King Magnus, who coveted the Revenues of the Church, but kept up the Episcopal Dignity, who have Voices in Parliament. The Swedish Gentleman is a well-accomplish'd and gallant Per∣son, a good Souldier, and a good Captain, un∣derstands the Politiques, and speaks most Langua∣ges. They are something fierce and insolent on
advantage, but it is in War, which excuseth it. The People are naturally strong and active, pro∣vident, patient and industrious; are very humble, and hospitable to Strangers; and in the Northern Parts so healthy, that they live commonly to the Age of 130. or 140. years; and this is imputed to the purity of the Air, but sometimes over-cast with Foggs, by reason the Inhabitants neglect the Water-courses of their miry standing Lakes. Of no great note for Arts or Armes, till that Gustavus Ericus, who chased out the Danes, under their King Christiern the 3d. and Gustavus Adolphus, whose Conquests were admirable, and his Conduct not to be matched by any Parallel: They are ex∣ceeding apt to learn the Mechanick Arts, so that every Souldier is his own Smith, Cutler, Car∣penter, &c. They are very Valiant, both their Horse and Foot, as they have given good proof, both in Germany, Poland, Russia, and Denmark. Their Religion is wholly Lutheran; Bishops they have, whom they call Surintendents, and who retain their Voice in Parliaments, but have no set∣led Church Revenue, being paid and maintained by the King, with an inconsiderable yearly Pen∣sion. The whole Kingdom is divided into two Parts, the one lying on the East, the other on the West side of the Gulph or Bay of Bodner, or Sinus Bod∣dicus, a spacious Branch of the Baltique Sea; ac∣cording to which division there are, 1. the Pro∣vince of Gottoland. 2. Of Sweden, lying on the West side. And 3. Lapland, on the North. 4. Bodden. 5. Finland. And 6. the Swedish Islands;
so that He is a Prince of no small Territory: but, like the Russian, he is not very Populous, by rea∣son of those cold Regions, which none but Sava∣ges inhabit, under a certain tribute of Furrs; of which this King hath his share from the Lap∣landers. As for the Government, it is Monarchical and Absolute to the King in Actu, but the Senators pretend it to be Elective, although the Son hath continually succeeded his Father in the Govern∣ment, which was made a Sanction by the States, at the instance of the same Ericus, who would not ac∣cept of the Crown, urged upon him, without such a Law: and this hath prevailed ever since, but in the Case of Sigismond, beaten out of Swe∣den by the Faction of Charles Duke of Suderman his Uncle: for we have seen the Infant Son of the late Charles Gustavus advanced immediately upon his Fathers death to the Throne. And when the King is once seated there, he governs pro imperio, for he layes what Taxes he pleaseth, as 5, 6, 7, 8, Dollars yearly upon every Housholder, accor∣ding to his quality: And that which is chief, all Appeals for final Determination are made to him, not to his Parliament or Council. This Kings Revenue consisteth in four things, the Tenths of Ecclesiastical Livings, Mines, Tri∣butes, and Customes. 1. The Revenues of the Church arise to a great Summ, consisting before the Reformation of seven Bishopricks, and sixty Monasteries, which enjoyed very great Possessi∣ons, now incorporated into the Crown, except only some small maintenance to the Bishops, as a∣bovesaid.
2. His Mines, a great deal more con∣siderable, for that his tenth part of three Copper Works, almost a hundred years agoe, yielded him 3000. Dollars, whereby estimation may be made of his Silver and Gold. And those Mines may be found in every place, if the Country Peo∣ple (bound to carry wood, and do other servile work there) did not hide and hinder the disco∣very. Most fine Silver is found in the Province of Vestras, were it not for the envy and jealousie of the Inhabitants, either murmuring that Strangers should be employed, or suspecting that they should be over-reached; so that his Revenue is mightily hindred by this means. 3. But his Taxes do far surpass all his other Incomes, for he levyeth the Tenth of Rye, Wheat, Barley, Fish, Skins, Oxen, &c. Of the Tenth of Oxen he hath ga∣thered at some times 18000. Dollars, with all which he maintaineth his Court, Officers, Navy, and Armies. In the time of War with Dane or Muscovite, his Neighbours, he alloweth his Soul∣diers Victuals, which by his Taxes he provideth at easie Rates: He giveth them likewise a Coat or Cassock every year, which maketh them ever fully ready to obey his Commands. The Marriage of the Kings Daughters is at the disposal of the Senate, who give them for their Portion, besides Silver, Plate, and other Gifts, a 100000. Dollars. Of the Uplandish People, which pay not the Impost of Victuals, the King is accustomed to exact of e∣very Poll acording to his ability, five Dollars or more yearly. 4. His Customes, that are paid in the Haven Towns, the Chief whereof in Sweden
are Caymare, Lodhuys, and Stockholme, where at some times four hundred Ships of Burden lye at Anchor: Also Auge, Revel, Riga, Parnovia, and the Narve. But these Customes are much improved since the Confirmation of his Acquists in Germany, by the Munster Treaty 1648. by which he had the Upper Pomerania, the Inheritance of the Marquess of Brandenburg, with the City of Wismar, in the Dutchy of Mecklenbury, and Isle of Rugia, with the Bishopricks of Bremen and Verden, &c. bor∣dering along the other side of the Baltique Sea; by which he hath a wide inlet into Germany, given him in recompence of those Places he had Conquered in the more inward Parts: so that this great addition of Territory, hath made him a far more considera∣ble Prince than ever he was; and the Dane by sad Experience found as much in that War he managed against him in 1658. when, by the Conjunction and Contiguity of those German Provinces, he speeded without Obstruction out of Poland, to stop the Progress of the Danish Armes, and with speedy success reduced that King by the Agreement at Rosckeild, to a very petty and pittant Sove∣raignty; for thereby as good as one half of his King∣dom was passed over to the Swede, the Principal Member whereof was Schoneland, one of the fruit∣fullest Provinces, but formerly belonging to Swe∣den, with some other Places, particularly the great Bayliwick of Drontheim in Norway, which would have dis-membred that Kingdom, and rend∣red the Dane but a precarious Prince of the rest: But this, and divers other former Concessions by
that Treaty, were annihilated or retrenched by the succeeding Agreement, in the Swedes Leageur before Copenhagen, after their Defeat in the As∣sault of that Town, by the Mediation and Guaran∣ty of the English, Dutch, and French Ambassa∣dors, in May 1660. nevertheless Schoneland re∣mained to the Swede, with some of the Baltique Islands; and other Places, not to be particularized in this Discourse. All which Estates being laid and joyned together in some manner, it were supposable at first view, that he might easily render himself Master of the Baltique Sea: but when it is again considered, of what strength the Dane, the Hanse Towns are, as Lubeck, Hamborough, Dantzick; together with the Interest of the Dutch in the Trade therein, it will seem a tougher matter, and too big for his Na∣val strength, which yet of it self is very considera∣ble: No doubt the Swede hath chawed deliciously upon the Design, but could never digest it; it sufficeth him at present, that his Ships are Toll free as they pass the Sound: and that he enjoyeth other Priviledges, which the Violence of his Armes have purchased him, of the Princes his Neigh∣bours. As to the Force of this Kingdom, it hath been perceived of what Effect and Puissance it is, by that War it carried on, under the late King Charles Gustavus, against the Pole, the Dane, and the Muscovite, at one and the same time: But truly, I cannot tell, whether I may ascribe those Numbers of Men, with which they have enterprised so much lately, either to the Production of their own
Country, or their Fortune, which hath drawn so many Foreigners into their service, in which there is a certainty of Pay, and general good respect had to them, if they prove men of desert. It is cer∣tain, that in the late Danish War, he had above sixty thousand men in Pay, which is a number that few Princes can long maintain together; and yet such is the good luck of these Martial Princes, that they have been served faithfully, without any Pay, for many Months together, as certain of Satisfacti∣on somewhere, either by the Swede, or from the Enemy, who is looked upon as very good Se∣curity, in all the Undertakings of this Prince. As to the Policy of this Kingdom, having touch∣ed before, that the Government is Monarchical, we will briefly describe the menage of it: Matters of Peace, and War, of Embassyes, and Allian∣ces, are proposed by the King to the Senate, for their Resolution, which the Senators deliver with an entire Liberty, and most Voices carry it: but if it happen, that the Vote be contrary to the Kings purposes, he will assemble the States Gene∣ral, to obtain of them what he cannot of the Se∣nate. These Estates are composed of the Nobility, of the Clergy, of Merchants, and of the Peasants of the King; that is to say, Peasants that serve not Gentlemen (in English Yeomen) but subsist of themselves. The Nobles that sit in such Parliaments, or Estates General, are of the eldest of their Families: the Church sends two Priests of every Community or Diocess, the Cities two Merchants, and every Shire two of its Inhabitants: These four Bodies
consider of the Kings Will and Demand, and by the major Voice determine of it; if their Voices be equal, the King makes the Election himself, and gives the casting Voice for his own Designes and Interest: All other Matters are referred to one of these seven Councills, viz. The Council of Justice, where presides the Lord Chief Justice, assisted by four Senators, six Gentlemen, and six Doctors. 2. The Council of War, where pre∣sides the Constable, assisted by four Senators Mar∣shalls. 3. The Council of the Admiralty, where presides the High Admiral, with four Senators Vice-Admiralls. 4. The Chancery, where pre∣sides the High Chancellour, assisted with four Se∣nators, and the Secretaries of State. 5. The Council of the Revenue, where presides the High Treasurer, assisted by four Senators, [These five Officers are called the five great Lords, and are Tutors of the King, and govern the Kingdom ab∣solutely, during his Minority, being now in the 8th. year of his age.] 6. The Council of Trade, where a Senator is President, assisted by four more of the same rank and order. 7. The Council of the Mountains (as we have of the Marshes) where sit the same number and quality of Persons as in the Council of Trade. The whole Kingdom, into which are reckoned the late Acquists, is divided into five Governments General, viz. Of Finland, of Ingermanland, of Liefland, of Pomerania, and Schonen; and obeys four great Presidents of Ju∣stice: He of Finland holds Judicatory at Obo, He of Ingermanland and Schonen at Norkopin, the third of Liefland at Dort, and of Pomerania at
Wismar; and acknowledges twenty nine Lieute∣nant Generalls, Governours of Provinces for the King. The Interest of Sweden, is to keep and maintain Peace with the Muscovite; to alarum equally, and to divide Poland and Denmark; not to quarrel by any means with the Hollander; and to esteem and highly respect their strict Confaederacy with France; and to seek all occasions of a War in Ger∣many, to be therein assisted with the French Mo∣ney and Supplies; not to neglect the friendship of the King of England, who can, when he pleaseth, interest himself in any Difference in the Baltique Sea, by a potent Umpirage. Touching the Turk, they are not over-forward in that service, as expecting nothing but blows for other mens sakes; nevertheless, as the King is a Prince of the Empire,He is also a Prince and Mem∣ber of the Circle of the Rhine. made so by the aforesaid Treaty at Munster, he is obliged, and hath ac∣cordingly sent away his Aides into Hungary: but so unwelcome is the Nation to the Germans, that they had like to have been engaged, and set upon, in their passage near Erford, by those whom they came to assist; so that they have little encourage∣ment to that service: Besides, He is in League, or some rude manner of Friendship with the Tar∣tar, who merited of him well in the Polish War; and he himself is so great an Invader, and Souldier of Fortune, that Religion, or its Interest, weighs little with him, however our Puritans cried up the Great Gustavus for a Zealot: All therefore that will be done by him in this Affair, will be more out of necessity, and the Laws and Decree of the
Empire, and the Example of other Princes, than his own Choice and Generosity: And so we pass to his Neighbour the Dane. DENMARK. DENMARK is bounded on the East and South with the Baltique Sea: On the North with Norwey (bounded on the West and North with the German and Frozen Sea) and Sweden, and on the West the said German Ocean. The entire Body of this Kingdom was made up principally in form of three Parts; The First is the Realm of Denmark, containing both the Jutlands, part of Scandia adjoyning upon the Swedes Country, as Halland (and Schonen, which is now in the Swedes possession) and the Islands of the Baltique Sea. 2. Norwey, To which must be added the Islands of Iceland and Freezeland (in the Northern Ocean, where such abundance of Cod is taken by the Dutch the Danes and Us) of large extent, but of little benefit to this Crown. 3. The Dukedome of Holstein containing 4. Provinces, but now exempt from the Kingdom, and other Jurisdicti∣ons added to the said Dukedom, which are like∣wise
aliened from Denmark, of which more here∣after. The Kingdom of Denmark lyeth partly in the Cimbrick Chersoness adjoyned to the Dukedom of Holstein, as both the Jutlands (out of which some part is newly borrowed, to adde to the said Dut∣chy) divided into several Districts; and partly in Scandia, but principally in the Islands. As for the Dutchy of Holstein, it hath of late years been unfortunate to the Danes, being over-run by the Imperialists in 1628. in the Reign of Christiern the 4th. but honestly restored by the Emperour upon easie Conditions: Then it was harrassed by the Swede in 1643. and 4. and now finally freed by them from the Crown of Denmark, only the best part of Jutland remaines in its pristine obedi∣ence. In Scandia, Schonen being gone, Hal∣land and Blecking is all he holds there; and indeed they are fine Provinces, but the unkind separation of their Sister of Schonen (which signifies Beauti∣ful) renders them a little unpleasant to the Kings view and prospect. So that his chiefest strength of his Dominions lies in the Islands, in number 35. two of which, Zeland, and Fuenen or Fionia, are most consider∣able, and made more eminently famous by the late Swedish War; the Latter, for the Passage of the King of Sweden over to it upon the Sea on the Ice, with Horse, Foot, and his great Artillery, with the loss only of two Troops: and the Defeat of his Forces there afterwards, by the Confaederate Ar∣mies: The Other, for the Castle of Cronenburg, that guards the Sound; and Copenhagen, the Royal
Residence of the Kings of Denmark; and which, for almost two years space, withstood a most per∣rillous Siege, and finally beat off the Swedes with great loss, and thereby overthrew all their De∣signes, which proved in effect the death of that King. It is a low Town, ordinarily built, and hath nothing of Magnificence in it, but the Spirit of the Inhabitants; the Kings Palace being no ex∣traordinary Building, save that its covered with Copper. The Kingdom of Norway, toward the North, is separated from Lapland by high and craggy Rocks, and the Eastern and Western Parts are hard to travel for the same reason. The Land is not ve∣ry fruitful of Corn, and therefore the Inhabitants (the meaner sort) eat Stockfish, which trans∣ported into other Parts, is exchanged for Corn. The Inhabitants are naturally honest, and not a Thief among them; and very Civil to Strangers; and formerly very Martial, for these People were first called Normans, and were Ancestors to our Conquerours; but such is the hard Condition un∣der which they are kept by the Danes, though in appearance Fellow Subjects, ever since the Union of the two Kingdomes, by the Marriage of Aquinus in 1359. with Margaret the Daughter and Heir of Waldemar the 3d. of Denmark, (the Issue of which Marriage died, and left this Kingdom to the Usurpation of his Mother Margaret, whose Suc∣cessors have continued it to this day) that the Nor∣wegians have wholly lost their Courage, and for∣mer Valour, not being suffered to go out of the Kingdom to traffique their own Commodities;
which, besides Fish; are rich Furrs, Tallow, Butter, Tann'd Leather, Train Oyl, Pitch, Clap-board, Masts, Deal-boards, and Fire-wood; from the Custom whereof ariseth the Kings greatest Profits, being received for him at Bergen and Wardhouse; but this Revenue is very inconsidera∣ble. The whole Realm is divided into five Lieu∣tenancies or Governments, which in this unculti∣vated remote Country, will not concern us in any particulars, no more than the appendixed Islands above mentioned. Having thus summarily discoursed of the Parts of this Kingdom, we will briefly mention the Go∣vernment, which having been placed in an Haere∣ditary Monarchy from the Foundation of this Estate, was challenged as Elective by the Usurped Power of the Nobles and People, by their Depo∣sing of Ericus about 1420. and Electing his Cosen Christopher, Count Palatine of the Rhine, who dying without Issue, they again chose Adolph, Duke of Holstein, who excusing himself by reason of his age, by his advice, they chose his Nephew Christiern, Earl of Oldenburg, who brought both those Estates to this Crown: Since when they con∣tinued the fashion of an Election (but never pas∣sed by the next Heir) until the year 1660. when, in consideration of this Kings extraordinary Care, Valour and Vigilance in defence of his People a∣gainst the Swedes, they resolved to restore what they had so long detained, by returning the Go∣vernment into the old Channel, and making it a∣gain Haereditary in the Family of this Prince al∣though with much reluctancy and discontent of ma∣ny of the Grandees.
By which change, so lately made, there can no perfect account be given of the present administra∣tion, being solely at the Kings disposal, as it is with other absolute Monarchs. As to the Nobles, they are reputed the most antient of all Europe, and the Gentry the like; and to preserve and main∣tain that honourable Esteem, they never match into Plebeian Families, but keep their Blood un∣mix'd and pure in its first Current. The Gentry are neither so fierce, nor so subtle as their Neigh∣bours; and are very generous and hospitable to Strangers. The People generally thrifty and dili∣gent in their Callings, and of very good converse and civility. The Religion is altogether Lutheran, but the Bishops have more Authority, and better Maintenance here than in Sweden: but I know not what they do for a Metropolitan, since the Archi-Episcopal See of Londen in Schonen, which was the Primacy of Denmark, was assigned to the Swede. In elder times this Church depended upon the Arch-Bishoprick of Bremen, and then the el∣dest Son of the King of Denmark (which was in use till the Treaty of Munster) was stiled the Arch-Bishop of Bremen; but that dependance was re∣moved to London above 500. years since, and whether it will be removed now, is uncer∣tain. The Strength of this Kingdom is mostly Naval, the Danes proving better Water than Land Souldi∣ers, and more affecting the Employment; yet of modern times, they have dared also by Land; their Conquest of Sweden was not above 300. years agoe; (not to mention their old Conquests with
Us) in 1628. they enterprised upon the Empe∣rour, in behalf of the Liberty of Germany (of which, as Duke of Holstein, he was a free Prince) although unfortunately: Nevertheless, the Enemy could not but acknowledge the Gallan∣try of King Christiern, and dealt with him accor∣dingly: Since which time they were willing to be at quiet, till the opportunity of the Polish War in∣vited this King Frederick the 3d. to revenge the injurious Violence done to his Country of Holstein, by the Swedes in 1643. and 4. which was acted partly by the instigation of the Dutch, who per∣ceiving the Dane screwed up the Rate of the Toll Money in the Sound, for which by an old Treaty those Netherlands were to pay but a Rose-Noble for every Ship, without searching or visiting: (and this was paid, because of the Lights, Tuns, and Marks at Sea, kept and maintained by the King of Denmark; which Payment, from the time of their separation from Spain, he had raised at his own pleasure, searching the Ships, and seizing the Goods, under pretence of Contrebanda, or prohibited Merchandise) By a League made in 1640. with the Swede, they insinuated this Grie∣vance, which also offended that Queens Subjects; so that in conclusion, the Dane, betwixt the Swedes Land Forces, and the appearance of the Dutch Fleet, was forced to a new Agreement with the Hollander, at a set easie rate, for the Toll; which afterwards in 1650. (having made the like defensive League with the Dane) they Farmed at 140000. Peices of 8. per annum. for some term, with a Proviso and Caution of not be∣ing
searched for any Goods, the Master only de∣claring what they were, To return to an account of his Forces, they may be thus computed. First, Such as the Nobi∣lity and Gentry are bound to raise for the publique service, which are a considerable number. And, Secondly, What the People furnish upon such oc∣casions; and these have formerly amounted to great Armies: But the strength of the Kingdom is now exhausted, and it is yet able to do little. The preceding discourse leads me to consider of this Kings Revenue, which chiefly consists in his Toll upon Ships aforesaid, (for he makes little of his own Customes, Fish being his greatest Com∣modity, and no great Port of Trade in all his Realm) which hath fallen much since his late Agreement with the Dutch, who have the sole Trade here almost; and more by the Northern Pas∣sage to Russia, found out many years since. He had also a Toll of 50000. Oxen, which went year∣ly out of North Jutland into Germany by Holstein, but the Duke now receives that at his Toll-house, erected at his Residence of Gottorp. There are al∣so some Crown Lands, but they do not amount to any considerable Revenue. The Interest of Denmark is, by no means to dis-oblige the Emperour, as his surest Friend a∣gainst the Swede; nor the Hollander, unless upon insolent Encroachments, against which he hath the King of England, his nearest Ally, to a sure Friend and Defence; to watch and keep fair with the Swede, his constant and natural Enemy; and to that purpose, to keep the Russian alwayes en∣jealousied
of their Greatness; to be at League with all the German Princes, and make his Interest as strong with them as is possible; to be perpetual∣ly Confaederated with the Pole, Offensively and Defensively; and so to cherish the French Kings Friendship, as to keep him a Neuter betwixt the Swede and himself; Lastly, to love and respect the Crown of England, above all other Friendships whatsoever. With other Princes than these he hath no Concern, only a civil Correspondence with Spain and Portugal, in point of Trade and Commerce. What he can do against the Turk, or what Sup∣ply he can give the Emperour, may appear by the preceding Discourse, the late Wars having utterly disabled him, so that, besides his good will, and his Prayers, he can no way advantage the Christian Cause, without much despoyling and injuring him∣self, which that Occasion cannot expect, and perchance will not need. And it is most certain, that the Turk took his Resolution of the late Inva∣sion, from the Embarassement and Difference be∣tween these two Northern Kings, in which the Emperour, the Pole, and the Marquess of Bran∣denburg, were so far engaged; so that having suf∣fered sufficiently, and he being the only loser upon that account, he may well be excused: And so we pass to the Dutchy of Holstein.
HOLSTEIN. THis Dutchy of Holstein ought to have been referred to the Survey of Germany, of which this Duke is a Prince, although he never comes to the Imperial Diets, nor is subject to any imposi∣tions or Taxes laid upon the Empire; only in case of Appeal some Causes have been carried to the Rix-Chamber at Spiers, which are now disconti∣nued, because of its former dependance to the Crown of Denmark, to which it was annexed some Ages since by the Election of Christopher Count of Oldenburgh Heir to Adolph last Duke hereof, and hath remained as the Title and posses∣on of the eldest Son, or the younger brothers of the said Crown, we will not dis-joyn it from this entire view of both together. It is seated in the Southern part of the Cimbrick Chersoness, or the Peninsula made by the Baltique Sea on the German shore, and is divided from the Danish Provinces of Jutland by the River Eydore: It contains four Provinces, viz. Heagerland, in west near the Sea, and the fall of two Rivers, Lu∣beck is seated, a famous Hanse Town, neatly built, and well traded, but of more estimation in
former times. 2ly. Stormarsh, whereupon the Elbe stands. Hamburgh another Hanse Town, and of late more famed than Lubeck (by reason of the English Staple of Cloath) for its greatness of commerce. 3ly. Ditmarsh, and 4ly. Holstein, properly so called. The whole Peninsula is but 75 miles in length, and 60 in breadth, with the 2 Jutlands belonging to the King of Denmark; so that this Dutchy can be reputed of little force, al∣though it consist of a great number of walled Ci∣ties and Towns, and is very populous, but the li∣berties of the said two Hanse Towns, and the Da∣nish part, retrench the estimate of its force. It was over-run by the Swedes in 1643. during the residence of this King Frederick the third, as Duke thereof, to the great surprisal of old King Christiern, yet he so notably bestirred himself, with the help of the Emperour, both against them and the Dutch, at Sea and Land, that he brought the business to some advantage on his side, had not the French King interposed his Authority in the very nick of a decision of it by Battel, and did the Swede a notable kindness; since when, by the marriage of the late King of Sweden with the Daughter of this present Duke, who is a lineal Descendant of John the younger, Son of Christiern the 3d. King of Denmark, it hath suffered in that War from the Dane and his Confaederates what it had formerly underwent by the Swede, who to shew his Affection to his Father-in-Law, had procured him some Concessions and Assignments by the Roschild Treaty, which being afterwards violated by the Swede, this Country paid for the
Swedes undue courtesie by the forces of the Mar∣quess of Brandenburgh and the Emperour; not∣withstanding in the last Treaty in the Leagure be∣fore Copenhagen it retained thus much, that the Jurisdiction of Swabstadt, together with half the Chapter of the Dutchy of Sleswick (lying in North-Jutland) together with the soveraignty thereof, was assigned and passed over to this Duke for e∣ver. So that this Dukes Interest is at present bound up in that of Sweden, having countermarched its Ground, being formerly more strictly tyed to the Dane; but we see what Fate and Revolutions can do As to the Turk, being he is exempt from the Decrees and Injunctions of the Empire, it is not to be expected he will put himself forward, for that he is none of the wealthiest Princes, having not one Farthing of Customes by Sea, but only his Toll for the 50000. Oxen above mentioned, and some Patrimonial Lands belonging to the Dutchy. We are now obliged to pass to Oldenburg, because it had formerly the same Dependencies and Aspects to Denmark; but because I will not trespass too far upon Germany, we will leave it to its place there: And so we pass by Sea to Holland, and the seven United Provinces of the Netherlands.
THE NETHERLANDS: OR, The 7. Vnited Provinces OF HOLLAND, &c. THese Countries are bounded on the North and West with the German Ocean, on the East with part of Germany, and on the South with Flanders, &c. They were once under several Lords and State-holders, who by the Power, and their Interest with the Emperours of Germany, made themselves absolute; from whom, by the Marriage of their Heirs General, they devolved at last into the Soveraignty of the Dukes of Bur∣gundy, whose Daughter conveyed them to Maxi∣milian Arch-Duke of Austria. By his Grand-Son Charles the 5th. they were designed to be made with the other ten Provinces, one entire Kingdom: but the Discrepancy of their Laws and
Customes, and the irreconcilable Contrariety thereof, made him give over that Resolution. About the Year of our Lord 1567. at what time the Duke of Alva raged against all these Provinces, they shook off the Spanish Yoak, and the Govern∣ment of Philip the 2d. Son of Charles the 5 th. who setling himself in his Realm of Spain, intend∣ed to govern them by a Stat-holder: That Dis∣content, together with the memory of their for∣mer Oppressions, the Insolence of their present Governours, the Contempt of their Laws and Pri∣viledges; together with the Decrees of the Coun∣cil of Trent, the revived Edict of the said Charles against Haeretiques, and the Introduction of the Inquisition; to which may be added; the hated Administration of Perennot the Cardinal of Gran∣velle, the Death of the Counts of Egmond and Horn, and the tenth and hundredth Penny, taxed by the Duke of Alva, and his Cruelties there∣after; so animated these People, that they entred into a Confaederacy, under the Conduct of Willi∣am, Prince of Orange, Count of Nassau, and in the year 1581. by a publique Instrument, decla∣red the said King to have rightfully fallen from the Dominion and Jurisdiction of these Provinces, then united under the Profession of the Reformed Religion, (Nevertheless, they are not yet, nor are ever like to be, an entire Common-Wealth, while each retains its Soveraignty distinct; and therefore it is a new Module of a Republique, with∣out any Pattern) viz. Guelderland, Holland, Freizland, Zeland, Zutphen, the Bishoprick of Utrecht, and Groeningen.
Now the Cement and Principles of these Con∣faederate States, and the Contracts by which they are Combined together, and by which they have so gloriously subsisted, come next, under a brief Consideration. The First of them is; That they shall continue inseparably united, nor shall act di∣stinctly in the common Affairs. 2. The Rights, Priviledges, and Franchises, &c. of each parti∣cular Province, shall be continued inviolate. 3. They shall strennuously assist one another; and if any Difference arise between two Places, they shall submit to the ordinary Course of Justice; and shall attempt nothing to the prejudice of one ano∣ther. 4. They shall mutually aid and defend one another against the Armes of Spain, and shall sym∣pathize with one anothers Losses, 5. The new Fortresses shall be made at the common Charge, but the Frontiers at the particular Charge of each Province. 6. Peace, War, or Truce, not to be made without the common Consent of all the Estates and People. 7. Liberty of Conscience shall be allowed. 8. All Care shall be used by each particular Province, and all of them in gene∣ral, that they give no Cause of Quarrel or Offence, whereby they should become engaged in any other War, than that of Spain. These were the Originalls of this Republique, and the Fundamental Laws thereof; we will now see the Practice and Execution of them, in the Ad∣ministration, and the Policy of the Government. 1. Every City of these United Provinces, ac∣knowledges its particular Magistrate; the Provin∣cial Magistrate, and the Colledge of the Lords,
the States-General. By the Magistrate of the City, are understood the Councellours, whose total number is forty; (which are paid for their service, and hold their Places for life, because they may act freely, without those resentments of a future pri∣vate Condition; these deliberate of the Affairs of the Province, and inspect and choose all other Magistrates, and are in effect the Peoples Servants, as they will sometimes taunt them) the Burgo-Ma∣sters, and Sheriffs, together with a Baily, who judgeth absolutely in Criminal Causes; but he holds his Place not longer than Durante Placito, of the Council of the City. The Provincial Magistracy is composed of a Councellour of every City of the Province, whose Office is to Conserve its Priviledges and Immuni∣ties; to this Court there lies an Appeal from the Sentence of the Sheriffs Court. The Colledge or Assembly of the Lords States General, is constituted of the Deputies of the Pro∣vincial Councils; these make the Alliances, and Treaties, or War with foreign Princes and States; and these raise Money, and impose Taxes, and take the Care of the Peace and well-Being of the Publique. In this Assembly, one of the Assessors, or Pensionary Counsellours, opens the Matter or Affair in a proportion, which the Deputies re∣ceive, but give no answer till they have received one from the Provincial Councils, who likewise must be resolved by the respective Cities, which makes State Business very tedious, but that's re∣compensed by a good digestion, and mature deli∣beration. So that the Soveraignty resides not in
the Assembly of the States General, although they seem to have all the Power, but in the Estates of every Province, and the Council of the Cities. In effect, the Cities frame their particular Laws, and do their own business, without communicating it to the States General: But the States General cannot undertake any thing, without first writing to the Provinces, and obliging their Negotiation with the Cities, to obtain the permission of their Determinations. The States General meet at the Hague, where every Province presides weekly; Every Province sends one or more Deputies, who all of them make but one Voice; Each Province takes Place of other in their own Territory, to preserve Aequa∣lity, and their Votes are of the same Validity: Every Province likewise Payes its own Deputies, and changeth them once in three years, to make room for others to finger the Government; but they must be such as have Desert and Estates, that they may solely intend the Publique, without De∣triment to their private Fortune. The People are generally good natured to Stran∣gers, and free in their Converse one to another; their Looks very vivacious and pleasant: yet are they wondrous subtle and prudent, and love in things most excessively Money and Liberty: But such the Capricies concerning the latter, that they sute that Character of Tacitus; Nec possunt Liberta∣tem, nec Servitutem pati: Or that of Strada, which comes nearest the matter; Nulli magis Servitutem execrantur, nulli melius patiuntur; They can neither endure Servitude nor Freedom: for every man will
take upon himself to rectifie the present Govern∣ment; and in this their Presses are very scandalous. As to the latter, the many miseries & violences they have done to Trade in all Nations of the World, both by private Men, and publique Commission, have made it too notorious; and this Kingdom chiefly feeleth the Mischief thereof. And here were oc∣casion to speak of those Encroachments, both up∣on our Fishing at Home, and our Traffique Abroad, especially in the East-Indies, where they have in a manner engrossed all the Trade: Not to mention their Attempts upon Guinea, and their Insolen∣cies committed there. By which means, in a few years, if un-interrupted, they will gain all the Wealth in the World into their Hands; which that they drive at, is apparent by those vast Fleets they have for a good while maintained in those In∣dian Seas, and those Acquists they have made by Land there also; so that they are Formidable to all the Princes of those Parts: And it is very Credi∣ble, that the repute and dread they have gotten there, is partly obliged to a quantity of English Seamen, whom they have for some late time em∣ployed and shipped upon Voyages to those Coasts, and left them dispersed in Garrisons, contrary to Articles and Agreement made at their Embarquing; by which means they deprive us also of Seamen. But to proceed. They have been declared a Free State, and the High and Mighty Lords the States General, ever since 1648. when the King of Spain, wearied with a 80. years War, was more than willing to re∣linquish his Claim, and Regal Title, (being per∣plexed
and engaged on the other side with the French) for that the Dutch were obstinately bent against a Peace with him: Nevertheless Prince Henry, their General, and State-holder, being induced thereunto by great Advantages to himself and Family, as well as the States, it took effect. Since which, they concerned themselves, that nei∣ther the French, nor the Spaniard grew too Po∣tent in the Low Countries; and to that purpose, maintained a good Correspondence with their new reconciled Enemy, supplying him with Mo∣ney in his Distresses, upon security of his Plate Fleet, in which they have deeply interessed them∣selves: who likewise omitted no Courtship nor Civility, to oblige them to his side. Being thus absolute, and look'd upon as one of the most considerable Members of Christendom, their Ambition and Arrogance transported them to quarrel with the new usurping States of England, as their Juniors, and to try Title for the Dominion of the Sea, and all things seemed to favour the Enterprise, for the State had been in sore Trou∣bles newly before, by the Interest of the Prince of Aurange, the Husband of the Princess Royal; who perceived the Republicans began to grow weary of his Authority, by which, and the Merit of his Ancestors, they had attained to their present Greatness; but he dying soon after, all mention of those matters was laid aside, and the Common-Wealth Faction predominated every where. It is true, some of those Grandees, after the ill success of the War, cunningly shifted the engaging in, and inducement to it, upon that Princes
and his Counsellours Designes and Interest, in re∣spect of his Alliance with the King of Great Brit∣tain: But there appeared no such thing in the me∣nage of the whole War; Nor would the Hogen Mogens own either of them throughout the Con∣test, but most unhandsomely disclaimed and deny∣ed both in the Conclusion, although they never were in the Premisses. By this War, when they might have boasted of a precarious Peace, granted by them to our new Coddled States, who courted, and earnestly sought their Republican Friendship, out of fear of the joynt revenge of all the Kings of Christendom, for their late perpetrated Regicide, they were redu∣ced to a very low Ebbe; and they may thank the Protectoral Revolution, that they were not left dry, and exhausted, and the Sea wholly debarred from them, but what they sayled by our permission. Nor was the Death of their Renowned Admiral Van Trump, one of the least of their Losses, as they publiquely exprest; and I think I shall grati∣fie the Reader, if I present him him with a Copy of his Epitaph, inscribed on his stately Monument at Delfe, being a Person so much celebrated in e∣very mans discourse. Aeternae Memoriae Martini Harperti Trompi Qui batavos qui Virtutem ac verum laborem amas. Lege ac Luge. Batavae Gentis Decus, Virtutis Bellicae Fulmen hic jacet qui nunquam jacuit & Imperatorem stantem mori Exemplo suo docuit. Amor Civium, Hosti∣um
Terror, Oceani stupor, quo nomine plures Con∣tinentur Laudes; Cui Schola Oriens & Occidens; mare materia Triumphorum, Universus Orbis The∣atrum Gloriae fuit. Praedonum certa pernicses, Com∣mercij faelix assertor, Familiaritate utilis non vilis: Post quam nautas & milites (durum genus) paterno & cum Efficacia benigno rexit Imperio, post tot prae∣lia quorum Dux fuit aut pars magna, post insignes supra Fidem Victorias, post summos infra meritum Honores, tandem Bello Anglico tantum non Victor, invictus certe 20. Aug. Anno 1654. Aetatis suae 56. Vivere ac Vincere desiit: Faederati Belgij Patres Heroi optime merito Monu∣mentum hoc ponunt. With this gallant Persons Death, the Dutch reso∣lution of Fighting changed into milder & humbler thoughts: but sad was the face of this Country, upon the return of their Fleet, so maimed and un∣manned; nor did they forbear to deplore this la∣mentable loss, and to demand openly a sudden Peace with the English, with whom if they were Friends, they would defie the World: And now their Governours were blamed, for commencing such a destructive Enterprise, (and the English Merchants, and others, highly carressed, who some while before had changed & transferred their Staple from Rotterdam to Dort) and they terribly threatned, if it were not quickly set an end to, and composed, by any manner of Agreement: And yet as soon as it was concluded, they fell pre∣sently
to their old Depraedations in the East-Indies, and have continued them there, and elsewhere, ever since. So natural it is for these People to take all advantages for gain; and such the dilatory proceed∣ings of their Courts of Justice, and removal from one Chamber of the East-India Company (which are six in all, viz. Of Amsterdam, Delf, Rotterdam, Middleburgh, &c.) to another, that it is a worse vexation to prosecute the recovery, than is the loss of our Goods; as might be instanced in the Case of those interessed in Squire Courtens Ships; (who lost not only the Ships and Goods, but his Factories also, the best and richest in all the In∣dies, and ever since 1643. possessed by that means by the Dutch, for that Squire Courten was thereby wholly deprived of any means to supply them) and this one thing hath proved as great a Damage to the English Nation, as any Action of theirs since Amboyna. We have been thus liberal in discoursing of their Trade, because it is the Soul, nay, the best part of the Body of this little vast Republique; and is the only considerable thing: For alass, what are those puny Provinces they till and manure, and make Pasture of, (and much of that torn from their better Parent the Sea) to be compared with those vast Regions they possess abroad? So that Holland seems to be the Hive; but the sweet Flowers from whence the Honey is gathered, and with which they sustain themselves, are planted in more blessed Countries. It hath been said, and it is true, that the Bank of Venice gives Law and Rule to the Exchange of Money in Europe: and
hereafter it may be said, if the Dutch Trade go on thus, it will give Law to all Trade through∣out the World, if it presume not also to the Sword. And as they are thus careful and industrious for their profit and glory in the East-Indies, where they aspire to an universal Soveraignty, and have already intitled themselves to the Southern Seas: so do they as diligently mind their near Concern in the Baltique Sea, and the Trade about the North∣ern Cape to Russia, of which we had experience in their stickling so between the two Northern Kings, And although they were adventrously engaged in that Business by the Brandenburger, their old Con∣faederate and Ally by the House of Orange, who afterwards left them to their own Councils: yet did they at last come off handsomely with the King of Sweden, by the Treaty of Elbing 1657. though with great loss of Money; and afterwards more gloriously with him, when, by their assistance gi∣ven the King of Denmark 1659. they made the Swede to understand, that He could not be Master of the Sound without their leave. As for the Em∣perour of Russia, they carry fair with him, and cheat him sufficiently, but yet they find good re∣spect from him, and a kind Correspondence; so that he will be no Enemy to them, unless upon an English account, which he highly prefers. And incredible is the Profit which ariseth by their Trade out of those Countries by Corn, (which they disperse into Europe) Hemp, Tarr, Cordage, Masts, Deal-boards, Clap-boards, &c. which they have in Exchange for their Spices from
India; so that 600. Sayl have gone together out of the Texel for the Baltique Sea: Nor is their Herring Fishing less considerable, of which they make three Millions Sterling yearly, and of Cod∣fish little less, beside their Whale Fishing; so that they do not trade and barter for less than forty Mil∣lions yearly. Now to encourage People to settle themselves with them, and to carry on their Na∣vigation: they give great and equal Priviledges to all Commers; nor are the Duties upon Goods Ex∣ported or Imported, any way so considerable as in other Kingdomes: Besides, they will not suffer any Corporations, or the Enclosure of any Trade, but it shall be free for all men, either to Voyage whither they please, or to adventure their Money on the joynt Stock, that menageth that Employ∣ment, without any distinction or difference what∣soever; which courses, with their Toleration of all Religions, have made them so thrive in this manner, and to be so Populous as they are at this day. We come now to speak of their Forces, and their present Posture, which is chiefly Naval, as may be concluded from the fore-going discourse; and that Naval Power supposed to be greater and better now than e're it was, so that they can arm and man 200. Ships of War built for service in a very short time, and upon a sudden alarum, but we will leave that to time. Certainly they are well provided, but it is as much certain, they care not for a War, especially with the Englsh, it being so contrary to their Interest, that every Cabbin Boy will not endure to hear of it. He that reads their
Books Printed upon this subject, will perceive as much, together, with what fine Artifices they have contrived to flur their Misdemeanours, and compound them under-hand by Friends; and this is avowedly laid down, as a method to Satisfaction beyond all Comparison: And then their Tempori∣zing, and peremptory Promises, is another Shift, which may chance to help them to better Oppor∣tunities. At this present they assure the King of giving him Content, and have promised him to call a General Assembly of the Estates to that pur∣pose: And by an express Envoy, have intreated his Majesty, to take off the Quarantayn or Demoorage upon their Ships, by reason of the Plague; but there's more stiffness in the wind. As to their Land Forces, they alwayes keep up a standing Militia, both for fear of the Spaniard, their near Neighbour, and for all Emergencies at home; but of late they have reduced it to a less number than formerly; notwithstanding, it is suf∣ficient for Defence, and for any sudden Employ∣ment; and if they want upon any Rupture, their Money will raise them Souldiers: but the great Armies they maintained under the Princes of Au∣range, for the gaining of one Town in a Summer, makes 'um now very parsimonious. They are now in firm League both with France and Spain, and all the other Princes of Christen∣dom, (excepting some Piques in East-Friezland, about the Eyler Sconce, with the Earl thereof, which Prince William, by their order, besieged, and had it yielded, during a Treaty above) so that they have leisure (if they mean to be honest with Us)
to revenge themselves of the Algier Pirates, who have done them most despiteful outrages: and to supply the Emperour with some assistance by Land, which is the Consideration of this Discourse. And indeed, there are no People so engaged to assist against this Enemy, as these, especially by Sea, where they themselves have made them thus powerful to do mischief, by yielding their Ships to them without striking one blow, (which, by the Turkish Custom, gives Liberty to the Mar∣riners, upon such innocent and speedy rendition) which Ships have formerly served for the Piratical Trade, till with those they took better of theirs, and so framed their Modules. They have now a Fleet, under De Ruyter, preparing to set sail for Algier, but upon no other account, than to re∣press their Insolencies; not intending to give any offence to the Grand Seigniour, whose Coasts and Maritime Places, a Conjunction of the Christian Fleets now hovering in the Streights, would quick∣ly reduce, and do him thereby a great deal of mis∣chief, if the War were prosecuted; otherwise it we e labour and time lost. As for Land service, they have the same convenient passage for them to Hungary, as the Princes and Provinces of the Rhine, if they were free, and open-hearted, in this time of danger; but it is to be feared, the Emperours Ambassadour will not have his answer from them in any reasonable time, or that it will no prove satisfactory and effectual, for they have little inclinations to the House of Austria, unless the Case prove very dangerous, and threaten them nearer: And there is a Saying of a former Grand
Siegniour; That if they should have provoked him, as they did their Soveraign the King of Spain, he would have sent Fellows with Shovels, and have thrown that little Marish into the Sea. Of late they have driven a great Trade in his Countries, till very now, and the War in Hungary, (by which our Cloaths are risen there to good price and esti∣mation) and do all they can to maintain a good in∣telligence at the Port; where, and in other Pla∣ces, they enjoy the Priviledge of Ambassadours or Consuls. I would not omit, that they have been long and much pressed by the French, and Catho∣lique King, and sometimes by our Soveraign, at the instance of the Grand Master, and Knights of Malta, to make Restitution to that Order, of some Lands they enjoy and possess of theirs, in the Low Countries; but they take it unkindly, to be urged to such stale Demands and Pretensions. The Interest of Holland is considerable in a dou∣ble respect, either to Land or Sea. As to the Land, they are obliged to look to their Frontires, and maintain their Places of Strength, as those that will secure them best, it having been proved by experience, that one Leagure hath destroyed whole Armies. They are likewise concerned to keep their Common-Wealth free from the Di∣sturbances that may arise by the Estates of some petty Soveraignties, that are within their Pre∣cincts, and out of their Jurisdiction, for fear of Potent Interests in the Quarrel, from their Neigh∣bours, and therefore to suppress them with all speed: Of this nature there are some Places be∣longing to the Earl of East-Friezland, some to the
Bishop of Munster, as the Eyler Sconce, about which the present Troubles are arisen, by the In∣juries of that Garrison, as is pretended; and the Earldom of Culenburg in Guelderland, (the Coun∣ty of Buren, the fair Patrimony of the Prince of Aurange, in the same Province) separated from the Dutchy of Guelderland, and so dignified by King Philp the 2d. of Spain, who had respect to the entire and rich Situation thereof, with its Do∣minions and Appurtenances. This Earl is likewise in a readiness to be embroyled with the Hollander about the same score, and its Credible he hath Par∣ties to back him. They are also more nearly inte∣ressed, that the French, nor no other Potent Prince, get any further footing in Flanders, upon the King of Spain, who is the best, and most ad∣vantagious Neighbour they can have. They must keep fair with the Prince of Aurange, and abridge him of no Rights his Predecessors enjoyed; but of his Concerns we shall speak more particularly in the Original of his Family in Germany. An even and equal hand must be carried between the Swede and the Dane; and they must have good Friends in Germany, of which Brandenburg will alwayes be one, and most of the Calvinian Princes, whom they keep at their Devotion with some small Offi∣ces or Kindnesses done them. As to the Sea, there is a necessity of a firm Cor∣respondence with the Hanse Towns, not in point of Commerce, for they grudge them any society in it, but out of security to their own, in Case of a Rupture; for by their entitling themselves to Lubeck and Hamburg, and the like Places, in
the late War between them and Us, they cheated Us of many considerable Prizes, which were own∣ed by those Cities. As to the French, they must be likewise firmly Leagued, for the benefit of their Ports, and the protection of their Shore, if they gain not something else of that King in Case of War. As to the Portugal, they must, as Cases go, suffer him to go away with his Conquests in Brasile, whatever amends they make themselves in the East-Indies, by their late taking of some Places there, and the further progress of their Armes in those Parts; but it is supposed, they have some as∣pect upon the same Brasile. As to the Turk, suffi∣cient hath been spoken concerning them in the Premisses. I should have described the Situation, but it be∣ing so near a Neighbour to Us, I suppose it un∣necessary; all therefore that I shall adde, is, that it is conveniently and commodiously seated for Trade with all the Provinces of Europe, either by Land or Sea. For the Air, it is indifferent, according to the Season of the Year: And so we pass to the other ten Provinces, under the Jurisdiction to the King of Spain.
BRABANT & FLANDERS: OR THE Ten Provinces of the Ne∣therlands, under the Do∣minion of the King of Spain. THe Names of these Provinces, are, First, Brabant, Flanders, Limburgh, Lutzem∣burgh, Namur, Zutphen, the Marquisat of the Sacred Empire, Mechlin, Henault, and Artois; of the two latter whereof, the King of France is near possessed; as of some Towns in the Country of Flanders, of which more at large. For the Situa∣tion of them, it is so different, in respect of eve∣ry particular Province, and so well known to our Nation, that I will not stand to describe it. The Country is generally very pleasant, and far exceeds the 7. United Provinces for Corn, Grain, and production of Cattel; and affords all manner of good Diet, in a plenteous manner; and a very
wholesome Air to digest it. Brabant is the first in our way, although the States General do share in the two first Stages thereof (and some other Towns, as Hertogenbush, &c.) namely Breda, the Dominion and Jurisdiction of the Prince of Aurange, and Bergenapzom; and that they had not Antwerp was their own fault, when underta∣ken by Prince Henry of Aurange in 1648. (assi∣sted thereto by 6000. French Horse and Foot, sent them by the Duke of Orleans, the French Ge∣neralissimo, then besieging Dunkirk, to his great dis-advantage, for want of the said men, to carry on the Siege of Dunkirk) but given over by him at the order of the States, and the instance of those of Amsterdam, who fore-saw that that Town would carry away the Trade from them, and de∣prive Holland of that Wealth and Glory she had so long enjoyed in the Traffique of that her grand Emporium. And indeed it is one of the finest Places in the World, famous for its Exchange, from whence ours was patterned, and that general re∣sort made it so some a 100. years agoe from all Parts of the World, when Amsterdam was in its Infan∣cy, and might never have risen to any grown Estate, but for the War with Spain, which eclip∣sed the lustre of this Mistriss of all Negotiation, and pent her up in the Shallows of the River Scheld, (hard by the Sea Port Towns of Middle-borough and Flushing, and the Block-house of Lillo) which had had all the Deeps flowing in upon her with the Treasures of the World. And in this Condition she yet remaines, an Impost being still paid to the Dutch for all Goods passing from
Flushing, by Lillo, and so thither: It continueth nevertheless the residence of many wealthy English Merchants, (and of all Nations besides) who live there in great splendour, and are highly re∣spected by the civil Inhabitants. The Government being Monarchical, with the Intervention of the Estates of the Country, to ad∣vise upon occasions, and the raising of Moneys, it will be unnecessary to give a further account thereof, because common, and the same with all Regal Administration, save that this is not so abso∣lute as other Soveraignties; for although the House of Burgundy, by a standing Militia, raised at first (and paid by the consent of the Estates) for the Honour and Majesty of their Persons, which they increased afterwards at their pleasure to a for∣midable number of Gens d' Armes, did keep them very low; and the House of Austria (into whose Patrimony this Princely Estate fell, with the Mar∣riage of the sole Daughter of Burgundy to the Arch-Duke Maximilian) endeavoured to subju∣gate them totally by the same and other Means and Policies; upon which followed many terrible Revolts, particularly that of Ghendt: yet could they not be brought to abandon their Pretensions to Liberty, the Terms and Name whereof they held as precious Reliques, and would boldly talk of them, though to no effect. But when the Hol∣landers, by their valiant strugling, had shook the Power of Spain, and as good as shook off that Yoak; that King found it high time to carry a gen∣tle sweet hand over those Provinces that remained in his Subjection, and their Allegiance, and gave
them that Gratis, which the other had extorted, although not to that full Liberty, yet as much as satisfied this People; who being addicted to the Romish Religion, (which was the main Grievance of the Revolters) and eased in point of Taxes, were content with their old Master; being natu∣rally of a more tractable and ducible temper, than the stiffe and storm-driven Hollander, who could never compose or quiet his thoughts after the first rupture. And indeed, had not these People been fast and sure in Allegiance, which was sweetned to them by many Acts of Grace, this King had never been able to have withstood such Potent Enemies, as for 12. years together, from 1636. to 1648. set upon him on both sides; notwithstanding, in which year, or somewhat sooner, without doubt he had been driven out of this Country, betwixt the French, and the Dutch, and the Prey shared betwixt them; but that the Dutch were more jea∣lous of the French, as a potenter and nearer Neighbour, whose entire strength might at one time be powred in upon them: So, that although they made a show of pursuing their Confaederacy in 1646. and so to 48. yet in the mean while, not∣withstanding all the French Instances to the con∣trary by Mounsieur Servient at the Hague, they secretly proceeded to an Agreement with the Spaniard, and finally concluded it at Munster a∣foresaid. By which means, the more Northernly and Westernly Provinces, as Brabant, Namur, &c. had a discharged respite from the harass of War, but the Easternly and Southerly suffered as much as e∣ver from the French.
Nevertheless the King of Spain made shift to make his Party good against the French alone, gain∣ing one Summer what he lost in another; until Oliver Cromwel, upon account of Partnership, joyned with the French, and turned the Ballance; wherefore the King of Spain, who had begun a Treaty, and debated most of the Particulars, in the year 1656. at Madrid, earnestly resumed it in the Summer 1659. at St. John de Luz, in the Confines of both Kingdomes of France and Spain, by the Plempotentiaries of the two Crowns, Car∣dinal Mazarine, and Don Lewis de Haro, who in November concluded it, and made this Agreement, as to these Provinces, which were assigned to the Crown of France for ever; Namely, the County of Artois, with the Town and City of Arras; Hesden, and the Liberties thereof; Bethune, with its Jurisdiction; Bapaume, Lents, Lillers, Ter∣roane, de Pas, with the Liberties, &c. together with the Count of St. Pol. Excepting the Towns and Jurisdictions of Ayre, and St. Omer. With the Town of Renty, as belonging to either of those two Places. Within the Province and County of Flanders, the Towns of Graveling, the Forts, Philip, Sluce, Hanouin, and Bourbourg, toge∣ther with St. Venant. (Since which time the French are likewise possessed of Dunkirk and Mar∣dike Fort) Within the County of Hanault, of the Towns of Landrecy and Quesnoy, the Ducal Title of Marshal Turenne, with all their Jurisdicti∣ons and Appurtenances. Within the Province of Luxemburg, with the Towns of Theonville, Mont∣medy, and Damvilliers, with their Dependen∣cies;
the Government of Ivoy, Chavanty, and Marville, as belonging partly to the Dutchy of Bar. In lieu whereof, the French King exchanged the Towns of La-Bassee, and Bergen, St. Wynox, with the Fort Royal, built upon the Channel, in the way to Dunkirk, for the Places of Marienburg, and Philippe ville, seated betwixt the Rivers Sam∣bre, and the Maes; together with Avennes, seat∣ed upon the same Rivers: And as to other Places, taken by the Armes of France, in these Countries, the French re-delivered the Towns of Ypres, Oude∣naerd, Dixmude, Furnes, with the Forts of La Fintelle, La Quenoque, Merville, upon the River Lys, Menene, and Comines, with the Forts of St. Amour, Bleverans, and Joux; the Towns of Rocroy, Catelet, and Linchamp; which is a small Restitution for the Acquists the French have made by this Treaty. As to the Forces of these Provinces, it is, and hath appeared to be very redoubted; the Walloons being excellent Souldiers, both for Horse and Foot, as they have approved themselves, both at Home and Abroad: nor are they less numerous; besides, the Gentry are very ready to the service of their Prince and Country. (and are most accom∣plish'd Persons, speaking promptly six or seven Languages, of which, Latine very readily; but this reputed to the continuance of the War, which brought a Conflux of all Nations into those Parts) As to maritime Affairs, their Dunkirk Navigati∣ons sufficiently tell the World what they were able to do at Sea; but now they have but two Port
Towns, Newport and Ostend, and neither of a convenient Station or Harbour for Shipping, be∣ing very narrow and difficult to come out of with some Winds; notwithstanding, they will serve well enough for Pyratical Conveniencies, but to Fleets let Flanders bid adieu. The Revenue of these Provinces was considera∣ble, were it not for the constant Charge which the King is at in maintaining them; so that they have been said to be the Correlative of the West In∣dies, during the late Wars, when they spent and consumed all that Treasure, and bankrupted the King of Spain besides; And sure it will be a long time, and there must be as long a Tract of Peace, before their Incomes will ballance the Account, and make the King of Spain a Saver: However, at present he is in hopes of being no further Loser, and of reducing his Revenue to some settlement, which the late times so perplexed and squandered; and the Care and Frugality of the present Gover∣nour, the Marquess Caracence, hath made a fair progress therein already. In former times these People would not be content without a Prince of the Blood to be their Governour, which made King Philip the 2d. send his Daughter Isabella Clara, and afterwards invested her, and her Hus∣band Albert the Arch-Duke, with the Soveraign∣ty; and since the Cardinal Infanta, the Arch-Duke Leopold, and Don John of Austria: but such is the present acquiescence under this fair and ami∣cable Government of the Marquess; besides, such is the paucity of the Princes of the Blood, both of Spain and Austria. that they willingly accept of
soever the King sends; but such is his aequality and evenness with the People, that the States are in∣terested in the Administration more than ever any Prince would in former times allow; but now they are grown up into a mutual Confidence, and right Understanding one of another. The Marquess of Caracena is supposed to be upon his departure, and the Marquess Castel Rodengo is appointed to succeed him. As to their Interest, it being conjoyned, and depending upon that of Spain, further than what the Ecclesiasticks will do voluntarily of themselves, in this Grand Cause of Religion, against the Turks: Besides that, this People, and Clergy especially, are mainly devoted to the Imperial Fa∣mily; we will consider it when we come to treat of the Kingdom of Spain.
FRANCE. THe Kingdom of France hath on the East the River Aa; the Alps, which divide it from Italy; the Rhosne, which parts it from Savoy; Sa∣gona, which separates it from Lorrain, and the Dutchy of Luxemburg: On the South, the Me∣diterranean Sea, and Pyrenean Mountains: On the West, the Atlantick Ocean: And on the North, the English Ocean. The nearer to the North, the narrower it is, and narrowest of all near Ca∣lice. The Figure thereof between round and square, and therefore bigger than a man would take it. It containeth many large Provinces, as Picardy, Normandy, Britain, Aquitayn, Gascoyn, (by which Names the two last are better known to Us, than by the modern Divisions of them by the French) the Isle of France, Champayn, Au∣vergn, the Dutchy of Burgundy, Daulphia Province, Languedoc, &c. The two last lying toward the Mediteranean Sea, bringeth forth all sorts of Fruits, like that of Italy; whereas Picardy, Brit∣tain, and Normandy, bringeth forth little or no Wine; and the rest aboundeth with it, and other Fruits; so that it is under great diversity, and va∣rious
temperature of Air. It containeth in length 520. Miles, from the Alps to the Atlantique or West Ocean; and in breadth 584. from Mar∣seilles to Calice. The whole Land of France is fruitful and fertile, and though the Apennine Hills, spreading over al∣most all the South of Italy, are barren, yet in the Mountains of Auvergue (which are the only of note, and few else in France) stand many good Towns, richly seated, where Cloathing is exer∣cuted, and a good part of the Kingdom served with Butter and Flesh of excellent relish; the rest of the Kingdom is almost plain, here and there garnished with fruitful Hills, and green Valleys, whose plenty doth contend with variety, fertility, with delicacy, commodiousness of situation, with the beautiful Fabricks and Structures of Cities. And herein, without controversie, Italy giveth place to France; for although some one Corner thereof affordeth exquisite Pleasure, and delight∣ful Prospects, with happy Conveniences of Situa∣tion, as Rovera d' Sala, Campania, the Terri∣tory of Croton, Tarent, and some other Cities of Calabria: yet those are singular, and few in Ita∣ly, common and frequent in Fra ce; especially in Burgundy, Brie, the Isle of France, Turen, Anjou, Xaintong, and Languedoc: In each of which Provinces, it seemeth that Nature hath set apart, and as it were dedicated by allotment, some Places to Ceres, some to Bacchus, some to Pomona, and some to Pallas; Yea, it happeneth very often, that the Western or North-west Wind arising from the Sea, bringeth the Spring-tide
before the Winter be fully expired, so decking the Fields with Flowers, and the Gardens with Herbs, that the Inhabitants of Poitou, Bourde∣aux, the Isle of France, &c. enjoy as forward a Spring, as those of Jago d' Garda in Italy, which is reckoned one of the most praecoce Fruta∣ges in Europe. But there is nothing in France more worthy the noting, than the number and pleasure of the Na∣vigable Rivers, whereof some as it were gird in the whole Realm, as Sagona, Rhosne, and Mo∣sel; some other cut through the middle, as the Sequan or Seyn, Layre, and Garon; Into these Streams fall so many other Rivers, some from the utmost bounds, some from the inmost Parts of the Realm, that it maketh the whole Country commodious for Traffique and Exchange of each o∣thers Wants: Insomuch, that by this facility of carriage, and intercourse of Merchants, all things may be said to be in common to the whole King∣dom. In Anjou alone are forty Rivers, great and small, whereupon Q. Katherin de Medicis was wont to say; That this Kingdom contained more Ri∣vers, than all Europe besides: This indeed was an Hyperbolical Speech, yet something of affinity to truth. And we see, that this easie and ready con∣veyance, with the goodness and luxuriance of the Soyl, hath been the original of so many great Ci∣ties, and good Towns, in this Kingdom, and those most commonly seated upon the Banks of Ri∣vers. And although it have many goodly Havens, yet the Up-land Towns are fairer and richer than those that stand near the Sea, Marseilles excepted;
which argueth their wealth to be their own, and not brought from foreign Countries; for there the Sea Towns excell those of the Land, as Genoa, Ve∣nice, Ragula: but where the prosperity of Cities dependeth wholly upon the Land, there it is o∣therwise, as in Millain, Nurenberg, and most of the Towns of Germany, Flanders, and Hungary. All this notwithstanding, although almost like goodness of Soyl be proper to the whole Realm of France, as likewise the situation of the Rivers commodious; yet, Paris excepted, (whose largeness proceedeth from the Kings Court, the Parliament, and the University) the Towns there are for the most part but small and mean, yet beautiful, commodious, and very populous; so that, in a Description of the Number of this Peo∣ple, written in the Reign of Charles the 9th. it is asserted, that the Number of the Inhabitants ex∣ceeded 15. Millions. And as the Cities and Towns in France may boast of their Rivers, so the Castles and Villages of Noblemen are no less pleasured and favoured with the pleasure and strength of Lakes and Ma∣rishes; which, although they may not be compa∣red to those of Italy and Switzerland: yet are they so many, and so fall of excellent Fish, that the numbers of the one may aequal the largeness of the other. The same may be spoken of Woods, not so well as thick grown, out of those Woods in times past the Kings Revenue did arise, and the Noblemen do make great profit, by selling great quantities thereof for fire-wood; but greater by sales of Timber Trees, which they use, for want
of Stone, in the greatest part of their Buil∣dings. In regard of the commodious situation and cur∣rent of these Rivers, serving so fitly for the trans∣portation of Victuals from one place to another, this Kingdom is so abundantly furnished with all plenty of Provision, that it is able to nourish an Army in the Field, how multitudinous soever. When Charles the 5th. entred France, first by Provence, and afterwards by Champaign, it main∣tained One hundred and fifty thousand Souldiers, besides the ord nary Garrisons. In the Reign of Charles the 9th. (and since that, in the time of the League, a greater number) there were main∣tained in this Kingdom 20000. Horse, 30000. Footmen Strangers, and of French 25000. Horse, and 100000. Foot. Besides this plenty, there is enough to spare, being four wayes or Loadstones to draw Riches from foreign Nations 1. Corn, carried into Spain and Portugall. 2. Wines, transported into England, Scotland, the Low Countries, and the Inhabitants of the Baltique Sea. Together with Salt, wherewith the whole Kingdom, and the bordering Nations are plentifully stored. This Salt s made in Provence, of the salt water of the Mediterranean Sea; and at Brouage in Xaintong, where the heat of the Sun ceaseth his vertue of making, getting, and boyling Salt of Sea water, not daring to yield so great a favour any farther Northward; I mean of Sea water, because fur∣ther North there is Salt found also, but made ei∣ther of some special Spring water, as in Lorrain;
or compound of some Mineralls, mix'd with fresh waters, as in Poland, England, Germany; or else taken forth of some Salt Mines, as were once in Sweveland; but of this Merchandise of Salt, something more shall be said hereafter. The 4. and last Commodity, is Canvass, and Linnen Cloth, whereof what profit ariseth is hardly cre∣dible to those who have not made an inspection in∣to it; what abundance thereof is carried into Spain, and Portugal, and England, and Holland also, to make Sayls for the furnishing of Shipping? There groweth also Woad, Saffron, and other Mer∣chandise of smaller value; which, though they arise not to aequalize the above-said Commodities, yet they arise to a competent summ; so that the Emperour Maximillian used to say; That France was a continual flourishing Medow, which the King did mow as oft as he listed. And Foreigners, from the mouth of Maximillian the Emperour, who Charactered the several Princes and Subjects of Europe, call him, Rex asinorum, for the conti∣nual Burdens and Pressures he layes upon his Peo∣ple; so that in Normandy the Peasants wear wood∣en Shooes, and neither eat nor drink, Flesh, Wine, or Beer, throughout the year. Having intimated before that we should not tra∣vel this Country, for that it is so generally known; we will survey only those places that are of mo∣dern concernment: Omitting therefore the names of some eminent places, which have given title to the Kings of France, as Valois, Bourbon, which aspect the History, but are far deducible, and supposed to be generally known; (here also, to
pass by the Sabique Law, which admits no female to a Scepter; under pretence whereof our Ed∣ward the 3d. was put from his title to France, by Philip the first King of the House of Valois) we will mention only three places, which of all the Members and Provinces of France keep themselves yet distinct and absolute Soveraignties, notwith∣standing that the French Kings in all times endea∣voured the Union of the like parcels to the Crown; witness the Dutchy of Britany, of some late Ages; and now the Principality of Aurange, the County of Venascine, or the Papal Jurisdiction of Avignon; and lastly, the Dutchy of Nivernois, all which are totally exempt from any dependance on the Crown. The Principality of Orange did belong to the County of Provence, as did Avignion, being Tributaries thereto, and made 2 parts of 3; the other being for many years in the Kings possession, by the resignation of the last Earl of Provence, who died issue-less, and is governed by a Parliament held at Aix. This Principality was once in the Possession of the noble family of Chaalons, who had it in marriage with an Heir General, and ob∣tained the absolute Soveraignty thereof from the Earl of Province; with the Priviledge of Coyning, and all other Royalties added to the Title of Prince of Orange by the Grace of God. To this Family succeeded the House of Nassaw, by their marri∣age of the Heir General likewise, about the year 1500. in which House it hath ever since conti∣nued without any disturbance, until the year 1660. In the beginning whereof, the Cardinal
Mazarine seeing the Restitution of our Govern∣ment, resolved to seize it into the French Kings hands, before any stop might be put to his pro∣ceedings by our Kings Intervention, and accor∣dingly by menaces to the Count of Dhona the Go∣vernour, and other artifices (upon pretence of misdemeanours and outrages committed by those Protestant People upon their Catholique Neigh∣bours, to the endangering the Peace) by a Trea∣ty managed by Monsieur Jure Millet, the Kings Commissioner, possessed himself of the Town, Castle, and Principality, upon Condition to ren∣der it, with all the stores, &c. to the Prince at his Majority, or in case of his decease to the Family of Brandenburgh, but what the performance will be, is not determinable, though he hath not scru∣pled to detain the like intrusive Guardianships in lesser places, as we have mentioned in Wittenberg and Alsatia. As to the Revenue of this Principa∣lity, it is computed worth some 35000 Crowns a year, amounting to 10000 sterling; but the force of this Province no way available, for that it is every way encompassed with French Provin∣ces, and Avignion; so that in effect it is a distinct Soveraignty but as long as that King pleaseth. Concerning the County of Avignion, It is seated to the Southward of Orange, and border∣eth upon the Mediterranean, as Neighbouring Marseilles, and was given in fee to the Popes of Rome (who had a right of Possession before, and had also had an actual Possession for some time) by Queen Joan of Naples, the rightfull Proprietor of this whole County of Province, for the defence
and assistance she had from Clement the 5th. in re∣stating her in the Kingdom of Naples, whence she had been expelled by Lewis King of Hungary for her murtherous hanging of his Brother Andrew her Husband. Not long after, the same Pope re∣moved the Papal Chair thither, where it continu∣ed for 20 years, while Italy was grown into so many factions, and the Romans and they so dis∣gusted against the Pope, that Pope Gregory found it high time to return in the year 1377. since when it hath been governed by Vice-Legates, till the year 1663. when the King of France took possession of it, the manner whereof having been already published, 'twill be superfluous here to repeat. But the Difference between the Pope and the French King concerning the affront given the Duke of Creque his Ambassadour at Rome being compos∣ed and reconciled by the agreement at Pisa,But the French King hath a Gover∣nour there yet. the said Town and County, by vertue thereof, was forthwith returned into the Popes hands, as the French found it, and there it remains. The Dutchy of NEVERS or NEVER∣NOIS hath beyond memory continued abso∣lute, though in several Families, although it be the smallest Province in France, not to deduce the Princes or Dukes thereof from long antiquity, we will look no longer than the last Century, when in 1563. Henrietta the Daughter of Fran∣cis the 4th. and Sister to Francis the 5th. the last Duke hereof, being the Heir General to this Estate, married with Lewis, second Son of Frede∣rick Genzaga, Duke of Mantua, who; in her
right was invested in this Estate, their Son Charles chose to succeed in Nevers, and gave Mantua to his Cosen German Vincent, whose Line failing, it reverted to this House of Nevers, placed there by the potent Armes of Lewis the 13th. although then busied in several other Wars, so that both Dutchyes were now united, untill of very late, Cardinal Mazarine, to instate his Family in the Splendour of France, purchased Nevers for his Nephew Mancini, at a very considerable rate, the Particulars whereof are extant in that Cardi∣nals Will, lately Englished by my self, to which the curious Reader is referred. In the same Soveraign condition stood Bearn, till the time of Lewis the 13th. (an Estate governed distinctly by H. 4. their Soveraign, as united to the Crown of Navarre some Descents before) who, with his Armes, and his Presence, reduced them under his Obedience: and imposed a Parliament up∣on them of his own Nomination, whose Residence is at Pau, leaving them notwithstanding the exer∣cise of their Religion, as he did all the Protestant Towns, and Cautionary Places, viz. Rochel, Mon∣talban, Saincterre, &c. who, since their Cal∣vinists Armes have been taken from them, and their Forts dismantled, enjoy their Conscience a great deal more securely, and as priviledgely from the King, as when they took upon them the quali∣ty of Free States, and would all have been Sister Genevas. We have next to consider the Revenue of this mighty Monarchy, mighty for its Populousness and Chivalry, mighty for its large and compact
Territory, as for its Fertility, and conve∣nience of Conveyance from Province to Pro∣vince, and for the In-land Fortresses, and of late suspectful also for their Maritime Advancements, while other Princes slept, or regarded not that growing Mischief; more potent also by many ad∣ditions of Conquest of late years, since Fortune hath turned her ballance, and rejected the Spani∣ard; so that the French King is absolutely the greatest Prince in the Continent of Europe: And he aspires also now to the Sea, by his late Pro∣jects of making Guilds and Companies for the East-India Trade, where scarce a Ship of his hath been ever seen Trading. But to return to his Revenue; In the year 1643. the Taxes and Tallages alone amounted to five Millions Sterling. The Impost of Salt amounts yearly to two Millions of Pounds Sterling, which is an insuportable Burden upon the poor People, who are forced to take such quantities yearly, more than they can use, at the Kings excessive Rates. It is true, that Henry the 4th. had once designed to buy all the Salt Pits in Poitou and Brittany, that were in particu∣lar mens hands, and to have fold the Salt at those Places to the Merchants, at a Price he should set, and they to sell it over the Kingdom, as Corn is in the Market, without any Compulsion or Impost; by which means, twenty thousand Officers would be spared, all which are paid at the Charge of the King: and the poor Subject should have it four times cheaper than it is now sold, and the King also put more Money in his Pocket, with-not any trouble.
His next Revenue consists in his Customes of all Merchandises, exported and imported, which arose in the year 1648. as by Computation was found, to the summ of ten Millions Sterling; and his Customes do not grow less, but greater every day: but of all this Revenue, scarce the tenth part comes and remains in the Kings Treasury. Thus large is the Intrado or Income, and the Issue is but little narrower. The Kings Table stands him in 500000 l. yearly, besides the Daulphins, and the Queens Expences of Court. The King hath every day nine Suits of Cloaths appointed to be made him, but the Money designed thereto, comes into the Lord Chamberlains Pocket, this King not affecting too frequent shift. Then in Pensions, and yearly Interest, there is paid seven Millions more; And for many years together, nu∣merous Armies have been maintained, although in such Cases the King extends his Prerogative, and takes what he pleaseth: Not to mention his Sale of Offices, which amounts to very vast summs; (the Office of the Great Master of Artillery being worth 500000 l. Sterling) nor his disposal of Ecclesiastical Benefices, the right whereof is sole∣ly his, without the Popes intermedling in the least; and the Clergy possess there no less than 30. Millions Sterling of yearly Rent. And because we have here instanced his Armies, and touched before something of the Force of this Kingdom, we will give a summary account of those Forces he had on foot in 1662. to bring down the Discourse to these modern times. Of Horse, besides 12. Comets of Foreigners, he
had in Pay 240. Troops, Cavaliers of his own Nation, which in all amounted to above 30. thou∣sand: Of Foot, he had 210. Regiments, some few of them of 30. Companies, and consisting of 90. Men in a Company; not reckoning in the Switzers, who make 6. or 7000. besides some Scots, Irish, Italians, and Luyckers. At Sea, he had 30. Ships of War, and 25. Gallyes, and the number is now increased; and their Lord Great Admiral, the Duke of Vendosme, which was before a meer Titulado, with great Profit and Revenue, become an Officer de facto, and of great service in that Kingdom: The Duke of Beaufort his Son, commanding the Fleet before Algier. The King hath four Guards; the first of French Gentlemen, in Place and Attendance like our Gentlemen Pensioners, they are 200. in number, their Pay 20. Crowns a Month. The second consists of Scots, and they Gentlemen, some at∣tending on the Kings Person, others appointed to other Offices in the Court, and go alwayes armed either with the Halberd or Harquebuze; those which attend on the Kings Person are 24. and receive yearly 400. Franks apiece, the resi∣due 300. and a Livery. The third sort is of in∣feriour French, and their Employment is such as the service of the Yeomen, and the Guard in England. The fourth consisteth of Switzers, and they wait at the Court Gate in warlike manner. This King retaineth the Switzers, more to dis-en∣gage them from their Respects to the House of Austria, and that Families service, than for any
other reason, though the long Correspondence maintained with those Cantons, hath abated of that jealousie. Now notwithstanding, for the number of the Gentry, which is infinite almost, the greatness of the Offices, goodliness of Towns, and multitudes of Forces, and store of Ammuniti∣on, this Kingdom may seem to challenge Prece∣dence before any Court in Europe; yet for Ma∣jesty of the Prince, Order of the Court, Provi∣sion of the Courtiers, and Entertainment of Stran∣gers, it may no way compare with that of Eng∣land; and this is not mine, but a Foreigners judge∣ment of them Both. As to the Government, it is Monarchical to Excess; as it was said of Caesar, Voluntas Caesaris pro Lege habebatur, so it is as true of the French Kings, Their Will is the Law; For though they have now nine Parliaments in the Kingdom, and that of Pau in Bern added by Lewis the 13th. yet are they no more such a Constitution as Ours, than Our Late High Courts of Justice, which were Persons pick'd for the Usurpers purpose. The main work of these Parliaments is to ratifie the Kings Edicts, which are sent to them with a Com∣mand, that such is Our Pleasure: Nor doth this Ratification, when done, signifie any thing to the Validity of the Kings Acts, but is meerly for shew, and to personate that Authority, which was in the former Parliaments, even till the time of Lewis the 13th. By which means, the King imposeth upon his Subjects what he lists, and sup∣plyes that want of Patrimony, which is mostly aliened, and is the great Blemish of this Crown,
which commands so fair and spacious a Territory, and yet hath very few Mannours or Houses of its own, except about Paris. And for the better support of this way of Go∣vernment, the Nobility are most of them employ∣ed in Offices and Commands; the whole Kingdom being divided into 12. Lieutenancies, as Imperi∣ous altogether as our late Major Generalls, and who; enjoying the sweets of their Arbitrary Pow∣er, help to awe the People to a stupid Acquies∣cence under their Oppression: And these Gover∣nours continue during life, and are sometime Haereditary; so that not seldom they have dis∣puted it with the King, and stood upon their Terms. The Interest of this Crown is of late very per∣plexed, and very closely carried; the late League with Spain seems to be zealously regarded; and many good words are given the Emperour of As∣sistance and Friendship; Greater Respect was ne∣ver given, nor higher Professions of Amity ever expressed towards the Crown of England. The Pope and He seem to be reconciled, and the Con∣firmation of the Friendship between them is now in Actu, by the Popes Performance of the Conclusion made at Pisa; for that Cardinal Chigi, the Popes Legate, for the greater solemnity of this Affair, is on his way with the Satisfaction a∣greed on: The Duke Crequy is ready to return to Rome, where the Pyramis is erected, in memory of the Fact of the Corsi; and Don Mario, the Popes Nephew, upon his departure: But when all this is done, no man conceives the Christian
World more assured, or freed from those jealou∣sies, which it hath long conceived of the Potency of this King. He hath lately made a motion in Germany about Colmar and Slecksladt, and it is suspected, they are the light Trepidations of some greater Rupture thereabouts; for that the French have long aimed upon the Imperial Dignity, is obvious to every eye, and this Prince is supposed to be more ambiti∣ously bent upon that design, than any of his Prede∣cessors. He hath to the purpose baffled and terrified the Pope, the Emperours left hand, and scared him before hand; and for his right hand, the King of Spain, besides the Peace between them, he will not be remiss in fomenting the War with Portugal. The Princes of the Empire therefore give him fair words, and will oblige him, by performing his De∣mands about those Towns. He is sure of the Duke of Savoy, so long as he enterpriseth not upon Italy, for then he would become a Morsel between his Grinders. As to the Princes of Italy, they do not care to see him there, but love him well enough in France. We neither suspect nor dread this Riddle of Fate, nor shall want a Sword to solve it, if with the Dutch, and any body else, he could make a three∣fold Cord of it; and so we leave him to the Revolu∣tion of Time. His Kingdom of Navarre lying in Spain, we shall mention it there.
SPAIN. SPAIN is defended towards France, on the North, with Confines strengthened both by Nature and Art, viz. by the Natural Height of the Pyrenean Mountains, which separate the one Country from the other; and by the Artificial Forts of Scialon, Parpignian, and Pampalone, the Metropolis of Navarre: on all other sides it is encompass'd with the Atlantick Ocean, and the Mediterranean Sea. Its Empire is divided into four Parts or Members, but we shall mention one only here, viz. 1. The Kingdomes of Spain. 2. The States of Italy, Sicily, &c. And 3. Flan∣ders. And 4. The Dominions of India. Spain is by the Spaniards, for the greater grace, divided into 15. Kingdomes, namely, Castile, Aragon, Murcia, Granada, Gallicia, Guypuscoa, Biscay, Oviedo, Leon, Corduba, Toledo, Navarre, Ca∣talonia, Majorca, Valentia, and lastly Portugal: but it being wrested from the Spanish Dominions, as it was formerly, and now is a distinct Soverain∣ty, we will treat of the other 14. together, and of that by it self. The Country it self is very barren, if we con∣sider each part thereof by it self alone, but all be∣ing
reduced together, it aboundeth, and is suffi∣ently stored with all Necessaries, and is particular∣ly furnished with Minerals. It is not very Popu∣lous, both by reason the Spanish Man is not apt for Generation, being more hot than virile in his Lust; and the Women are Mothers so young and early, that Nature is decayed in them before the half of their Teeming. And 2. Because such vast numbers have been drawn thence continually, to serve in the Wars, and to re-inforce Garrisons; as also, for that many of his Subjects do excercise Navigation, especially in great numbers to the Indies; which is peopled, what it is, with Spa∣niards only, and the Natives, for they will not trust other people on shore, they are so jealous of their wealth; nevertheless, the Country is by this means rid of all slothful home-livers. Most of those Kingdoms above mentioned were conquered and won from the Moors, and the At∣chievement made by Ferdinand and Isabel, Kings of Castile and Aragon; which two Kingdomes, with Leon, became united by their Marriage at this same time: And for Navarre, it was seized by the Policy and Valour of this Fer∣dinand, as we shall speak more at large of it, be∣cause it is the Title of the French King, and the House of Bourbon. NAVARRE is bounded on the East with the Principality of Bearn, (in the Kingdom of France) and acknowledging the same Soveraign∣ty; on the West with the River Iberus, which di∣vides it from Castile; on the North by the Canta∣brian Mountains, which part it from Guypuscoa;
and on the South with Aragon. It taketh up some parts of both sides the Pyrences, but the sixth part of it lyeth on the French side, and is very steril, it is called the Base or Low Navarre, which Lewis the 13th. united with Bearn, to the French Crown; the other being called the High Navarre, lyeth on the Spanish side, and is fertile, and adorn∣ed with Trees. In the Reign of John of Albret, who had mar∣ried Catherine, Sister and Heir of Francis, the last of the House of Foix, Kings of Navarre, Ferdinand, the most Catholique King, who had Conquered the Kingdom of Granada from the Moors, and united the two Potent Kingdomes of Castile and Aragon, to which all the other, but this, and Portugal, were one way or other in∣corporated; resolved to add this also, and to compleat the Monarchy of Spain. Hereupon, in the year 1512. pretending a final and utter Ex∣tirpation of the Moors, he raised an Army, and of a sudden marched towards Navarre, demanding of them passage for his Army into France; Lewis the 12th. the King whereof, with all his Subjects, were then under Excommunication, the Execu∣tioner of which Ferdinand undertook to be, as his Successors have done ever since; which being waved by K ng John, and his Queen, he imme∣diately en red the Country, and without the stri∣king of a blow, reduced it; the French King be∣ing backward to the relief of it then, but after∣wards endeavouring with all his Power to recover it, when it was too late, being fortified and secu∣red by the Conquerour. Not long after, in 1556. by
Joan the Daughter and Heir of Henry of Albret, this Title, with the sixth part mentioned before, came to Anthony of Bourbon, Duke of Vendosme, Father of Henry the 4th. of France; but the design of regaining this his paternal Inheritance, (by reason of his tedious War for the French Crown) was to him also unfeasible; but had he survived that fatal stroke, given him by Ravilliac, no doubt he would have bid fair for this his just Right; to which his Successors have such an appetite, (as Patrimony is a great Magnetick) that in all Trea∣ties with Spain since, they insert a salvo jure, a saving of their Claim, Right and Title to Na∣varre, to be lawful for them to prosecute in an ordinary Course of Justice; but that Justice hath no Courts, nor have Princes Patience or Hope in the Brawles of Lawyers, or those Decrees which cannot give Seizin and Delivery. A lucky oppor∣tunity for a re-surprize, is only worthy of their ex∣pectation. The other Kingdomes taking up too much room and time in their Limitation and Description, we will mention and comprize together, giving the Reader to understand, that Castile and Aragon are the most noble, as who have made all those Ac∣quisitions of the Spanish Greatness; and their di∣stinct Titles were these; to Arragon belonged Sicily, Sardinia, Majorca, Valentia, Catalo∣nia, Navarre, and Naples: To Castile belonged Leon; Gallicia, Toledo, Murcia, Biscay, Gra∣nada, and America, because Queen Isabel furnish∣ed Columbus. Nor was Navarre, when under its former Princes, far behind them in such Atchieve∣ments
on the French side. Note we also, that the County of Rossilluon, formerly a Member of the Kingdom of Majorca, is by the late general Trea∣ty, together with the Viguery of Conflans, and part of the County of Cerdana, as is situate in the Pyrenean Mountains towards France, and not be∣longing to Catalonia, assigned by the Spaniard to the French for ever, to whom it was long since pawned for 300000. Crowns, but remitted by Charles the 8th. of France, to Ferdinand the Catholique, upon condition he should not hinder him in the Conquest of Naples. By the same Treaty the French surrendred all his Garrisons and Places he had taken in Catalonia, excepting such as should be found to belong to the County of Cerdana a∣foresaid. These 14. Kingdomes are governed by the same Court, or Imperial Laws, intermix'd with some Customes of the Goths, and some additional Con∣stitutions of their Kings, and the Government conserved by Justice, impartially here executed, and the Inquisition in Ecclesiastical Affairs; so that there is never like to be a War upon pretence of Reformation in this Kingdom. To give the Peo∣ple their due, (whether it is, that that Inquisiti∣on hath awed them to it) they are very devout and zealous, and most Loyal to their Prince, whom they will spare no blood nor treasure to aggran∣dize, and of whom they never speak without great reverence and honour, and in his service, no men can possibly be more patient, or endure more mi∣sery and hardness, than will they, even to the ut∣most and worst of Extremity; and as faithful and
true they are to him, there having been few Tray∣tors of all his Subjects, nor any Command or Trust betrayed by any of them. Generally of them∣selves, they are very grave and serious in all their Actions, and yet notwithstanding so addicted to Pride, that they think all the World pittiful Fel∣lows and Fools, in comparison of themselves. In summ, they have effected great and noble things, viz. their Conquest over the Moors, and the New World, together with Philip the Second's Conquest or Possession of Portugal: and they have failed of as great, viz. their Design upon England in 88. and in their Grand Project of an Universal Empire, which hath almost broke the Heart of this Monarchy. The Government is Absolute and Royal, Mat∣ters of several qualities are handled in several Councils, and they are seven in number; which, that the King may be the better informed of all Af∣fairs, they keep alwayes near about his Person, in several Chambers under one Roof; their Names are these, The Council of Spain. 2. Of the In∣dies. 3. Of Italy. 4. Of the Low Countries. 5. of War. 6. Of the Order of St. John. And 7. Of the Inquisition. In these the slow and con∣siderate Advisoes of Fabim, rather than the prae∣cipitant Resolutions of Marcellus, are received. In as much as may be, Innovations and change of ancient Customes are avoided, by which constan∣cy, and their wariness in their Actions, they do seldom commit any oversight, or fall into any dis∣order or rupture at home. By this way of Coun∣cil, the King rangeth under his Obedience Castili∣ans,
Arragons, Biscayners, Flemings, Italians, Indians, Christians, and Gentiles; People utterly different in Laws, Customes, and Natures, as if they were all of one Nation, and all his natural Sub∣jects. The ill Correspondency that is alwayes amongst those Counsellours, who aemulate one anothers greatness, is the Cause of long Deliberations and Slackness in Matters of greatest Importance; but all Matters once resolved on in Council, pass in∣differently, with incredible and surpassing secrecy, as well those of mean, as those of the weightiest Consideration. Secrecy of all securing every par∣ticular, and being indeed the true scope of all Mat∣ters of State; for Designes as soon as they have ta∣ken air are blasted therewith. In this point, Philip the 2d. of Spain, the a∣blest Prince of his time, was very tenacious, do∣ing many things with his own hand, which never came near his Secretaries, but were transmitted by himself uncopied (but what he took likewise himself) to his Expresses and Dispatches. In his last Advice to his Son there are these words; Do not offend or anger the Secretaries, deliver them al∣wayes work of small or great importance, and make proof of them rather by your Enemies than your Friends, lock your chief secrets in your own breast. In this Prince failed that high-flown Ambition, which had tormented his Father Charles and Him∣self, during the whole course of their Reign, namely, the Conceit of an Universal Monarchy; nor did it dye with him, for having all his life stu∣died nothing more than the ruine of France by the
League, and his own Armes, he commended the pursute of the Design to his Son; having also a lit∣tle before his death resolved on another Expediti∣on for England, having procured a more exact ac∣count of its Havens, the Roman Catholicks, &c. but his Successor Philip the 3d. (for his Son Charles was murthered in the Inquisition (as suspected to favour the Protestants) by his own consent) see∣ing how the Treasure was wasted, and his Fathers Credit engaged for divers vaste Summs of Money, not fully paid to this day, but running on Interest, and discharged by degrees, resolved to steer ano∣ther Course, and first made Peace with England, and then a Truce with the Dutch for 12. Years; and, as the greatest Act of his Reign, utterly ex∣pelled the Moors, 1100000. being driven out af∣ter their former Expulsion by Ferdinand, who, lest the Country should be dispeopled, suffered such as would turn Christians to stay, but now the Inquisition discovered them all for Hypocrites, and entitled the King to a brave Patrimony. This same Philip the 3d. was a great Stickler for the House of Austria, in the German War, newly begun with the Elector Palatine, at which time in 1621. he died, and his Son Philip the 4th. suc∣ceeded, with whom was that fruitless Treaty of the Marriage of the Infanta, and the Restitution of the Palatinate. This Prince hath been embroyled in the Dutch and French War all along against his Inclination, which is otherwise disposed, for he loves quiet and pleasure, and vacancy from those troubles of Empire which afflict ambitious People; and it is
hoped therefore he will hearken, now in his old age, to a Composure with Portugal, from which he hath reaped more loss and dishonour, than the Kingdom can be worth to him. Besides, there are some Reasons of State, why the Army of Spain should be disbanded, and no Forces more than u∣sual kept on Foot, lest the General make some di∣sturbance in the Succession, who hath the Clergy and the Souldiery on his side. However, at pre∣sent nothing is more eagerly carried on, than the Preparations for this Campagnia; but what the issue will be, either Peace or Victory, time will de∣cide. As to the Forces of this Kingdom, the same may be said of them as of the Bees; Quae Regio in terris nostri non plena laboris: There is no Nation in Europe, but the remote Northern Kingdomes, that have not felt the Puissance thereof; and it is well known, that in all ages, the Spanish have been accounted one of the most Valorous Nations in the World. The French in nine Years were sub∣dued to the Roman Yoak, the Spaniards held out 200. and then too, the Fortune and Person of Augustus Caesar, the Universal Conquerour, was requisite to their Subjugation. They serve better on Foot than on Horseback, although they have Horses of excellent Courage, and better with the Harquebuze, than with any other Weapon. As concerning their Cavalry, it cannot be gain-said, but that the Spanish Gennet is the noblest Horse in Christendom, far excelling the Courser of Na∣ples, or the Horse of Burgundy, so much esteem∣ed of the French; or the Friesland Horse, in so
great request with the Germans. And it should seem, that Nature her self hath armed this Peo∣ple, in giving them the Iron Mines of Biskay, Guypuscoa, and Medina, with the Temperatures of Bilbo, Toledo, &c. To conclude, as to the number of the Forces aforesaid, this Prince is of that Mightiness and Reputation to this day, that, besides his own Subjects, he is able to wage what numbers of Horsemen and Footmen of the Ger∣mans, Italian, and Dutch Nations it pleaseth him; besides, his Noblemen are bound to bring so ma∣ny Horse into the Field, &c. And he that re∣members how the War was carried on in Catalonia, Portugal, Italy, and the Low Countries together, cannot but resolve, that his Puissance is most con∣siderable. At all times his Majesty is likewise constrained to maintain a strong Armada in these Seas, to safeguard the Navigation to the Indies; besides 24. Gallies to guard the Coast from the Turks, the Charge whereof is a Million of Crowns. There are besides 8000. praesidiary Souldiers, and no more, in the Frontier, and Coast Towns of Spain, the Charge whereof I saw not com∣puted. As to the Revenue of this Potentate, the ordi∣nary Income thereof amounts to six Millions of Gold, or 11. Millions of Crowns yearly, where∣of much is engaged for the Debts of the Crown, the rest is spent in Charges of the Wars, the main∣tenance of the Kings Houshold, and in the Gallies furnished against the Barbary Pirates. To this may be added, as another ordinary Revenue, the two Millions of Crowns which he receives yearly of the
Clergy, together with the Commendams of vacant Praesentations, and the praeferring to Benefices. The whole Revenues of the Clergy are valued at six Millions of Gold yearly Rent, there being 34. Cathedral Churches, all richly endowed, some whereof having 50. some a 100. and some 200. Millions of yearly Revenue, and in particular, the Metropolitan Arch-Bishop of Toledo hath more than 300. Millions: Neither do the Kings of Spain care to parcel these Churches to a greater number, although over-grown with their plenty, for then they should with more difficulty make use of the Revenues and Notes thereof, when occasi∣on required, which is very often, upon any disa∣strous Event. As he likewise layes extraordinary Taxes upon the Laity in the like Occurrence, for in the Kingdom of Castile alone, Philip the 2d. had nigh 8. Millions of Gold in one year; reckon∣ning hereto also the Profits which his Orders of Knighthood yield him, viz. 200. Millions of Crowns; so that here is Revenue more than e∣nough, were it not for the Canker of Interest at the Bank of Genoa, nor are the Merchants of Ant∣werp without their share in the partition thereof; and now the Amsterdammers also. This Princes Coyn notwithstanding is the best in Europe, since all their Neighbours make a gain of them, as a Piece of Reals, or 8. Six-Pences in our Money, goeth in France for 4 s. 6 6. a Doub∣lin in Gold, that which is a Pistolet with them, being 13. Shillings, is in France, and other Pla∣ces, 29. Reals, which is 14 s. 6 d. of our Money. Most of the Coyn that passeth for Wine, Bread,
Fruit, &c. is of Brass, which they call Quartas, and Quartillas; of their Maravedies, 20. make three-pence; but sometime the King enhanceth the Price of this Brass Money of a sudden, and with a great deal of profit to himself, brings a great loss upon Trade. All their Meat, Fruit and Bread, are sold by the Pound, and not except before an Officer, which they call Alcalda, so that no Stranger can be deceived in price or weight. As to the Interest of these Princes, it hath been evidently seen what it hath been; but since the French mated them under Francis the First, and held them to it, till Lewis the 14th. was too powerful for them; since the Dutch baffled them, and We triumphed over them, they have been put to defend their own, instead of over-running others. Their Designes are now to secure their Estates, and to draw from them that Revenue into their Coffers, which was squandred away in the War, without any account; and yet to be as gen∣tle a Soveraign as possible. For all the late League, the Spaniard nor French will ever joyn Interests, or agree together, more than they do in their Hu∣mours or Fashions. In fine, they really hate one another, but more revengefully the Spaniard frets at the French, as he that first put a stop to his Career of Ambition; and therefore there's no∣thing but Jealousie and Suspition between them, however smoothed and oyled over with Court Ar∣tifices, alike understood for such on both sides; nor have their late frequent Consanguinities and Marriages any influences to draw them nearer to a∣ny amicable understanding.
With the Dutch he firmly keeps a good Corres¦pondence, as his very good Friends, since Fate would needs have it so, and useth them very re∣spectfully, as his good Neighbours, and as securi∣ty to his Estates in Flanders; for the Dutch, as was said, do not love the Frenchmens vicinity. For the King of England, he cherisheth a more than usual respect, testified by those publique Honours done his Ambassador Sr. Richard Fanshaw in that Kingdom, and inviolably observeth the Peace betwixt us. With the Duke of Savoy he is newly reconciled, and certainly that Duke (who hath the Citadel of Verceil restored him by this King, by vertue of the late Treaty) hath no great Antipathy against Him, for he hath suffered twice more from the French, than from the Spaniard, who is as well able to Defend Him, as he is con∣veniently scited to Offend him upon every displea∣sure. The Duke of Parma is allyed to him, and so sure to his Interest. The Florentine is stiff, but is aequal between the French and Him. The Mantuan will be Neutral; and the Pope his secret Friend. The Prince of Modena will hardly en∣gage any more against Him, for in a manner he is the Umpire of all Quarrells between those Prin∣ces. He is Patron also to the Common-Wealth of Luca. And for the States of Venice, ever since the Dutchy of Millain came to the possession of this Crown, they have set them down with great quietness, rather looking to the strengthening of their own, than attempting his; and good reason too, for our Ancestors have seen the Spanish, favouring the Venetians, (when their Estate was
dangerously hazarded by the Turk) chearfully to have entred into the Actions of Cephalonia and Le∣panto, when nevertheless at the same instant they had at their own Doors Algier, Tunis, and other African Ports, their dangerous Enemies. The State of Genoa must favour the King of Spain, and stand by him, for he is their Protector, and owes them vast summs, which by any partiality of their side will be wholly lost. With all the Catholique Princes of Germany he is in perfect Correspon∣dence, and how great a relation and necessity of mutual adhaerence there is between the Emperour and Him, no man is ignorant, confirmed now, and more intimately contracted by the late Marriage of the Infanta. With the King of Fez and Morocco his Catholique Majesty is in League, but it is of no use or availment to him. Of the Religion of Malta the King taketh a particular protection, as that in like sort depends wholly upon his pleasure, and doth readily execute his Royal Commandements, serving him often in keeping the Coasts of Spain, and the Kingdomes of Naples and Sicily from Incursions of Pyrates, and that without one penny cost or charges to the King. As to the Turk, he maintains no intercourse, nor useth any Trade with him, and yet he hath neither Peace nor War with him; Peace he pre∣tends he ought not to have, and the other he ca∣reth not for; and the Turk is as unwilling to quar∣rel as he, remembring what he suffered from him at Lepanto: So that pivate Damages are privately made good, and the Algier men do take upon themselves the Rupture, if any louder Mischief
happen, of which the Spaniard will not complain. It is thought that this King is Superiour to the Turk in Naval Furniture and Provision, and the Cou∣rage and Ability of Seamen, for his Biskayners and Catalonians are hardly to be paralleled for enduring of Winter weather and Tempests: and the Turk is alwayes moared at home from October to March; besides the convenience of his Coast for building of Ships and Gallies, of which he hath a 100. in readiness: and the Turk hath but two Places all a∣long his African Coast, viz. Algier and Tunis, where he can build a Vessel. Upon this account it was, that Philip the 2d. was advised to seize upon the Morea and Greece, those People being willing to embrace a Christian Defender against that unsupportable slavery which they suffer from the Turk; but he considering his Fathers ill success in Africa, (though ascribable more to Tempest, than to any other Cause) would never cast his eye upon that Enterprize, being bent upon far worse, to the disturbance of Chri∣stendom; so that it appears, he is the only Prince, that is able to give him a Potent Diversion, were not his Fleets otherwise employed. But withall, this King at present is so exhaust∣ed, that he is not in a Capacity to undertake such an Expedition, without the assistance of other Christian Princes, which the Venetians have a long while in vain implored, and he cannot hope to ex∣pect it till the danger is more eminent, and then hee'l find wayes to defend himself: This may be certainly concluded on, he will do what in him ly∣eth, to keep the Turk from swallowing the Haere∣ditary
Countries of the Emperour, in which he hath an Expectation and Reversion, and will spare him such Supplies, however he pincheth for it, as shall testifie his Zeal, Affection and Care for the Imperial Family: And so having finished this sur∣vey of Spain, we will next take a short view of Por∣tugall. PORTUGALL. INto this Kingdom of Portugall are reckoned, as in Spain, two other Kingdomes, so teeming are these little Soveraignties of other Principali∣ties, namely, the Kingdom of Algarve, and that of the Isles of the Azores, or the Terceras. Por∣tugall is bounded on the North with two Rivers, which part it from Gallicia; on the South with Algarve, on the West with the Atlantique Oce∣an; and on the East with the new and old Castile. Extended on the Sea Coast from North to South, reckoning in the Kingdom of Algarve, 400. Miles; in breadth not exceeding a 100. and in some places not 80. and 60. The Country is very destitute and unprovided of Corn, but that supplyed by Wine, Oyl, Figgs, and other Fruits; as for Cattel, they have no store, nor have they much
use of them, as in Spain, the People being natu∣rally hot and dry, and delighting in Fruits and Sal∣lads, as cooling and satisfying also. This Kingdom is now governed by Alphonso the 6th: (who hath a Brother, a very hopeful Gen∣tleman, named Don Pedro) of the House of Bra∣ganza, whose Claim against Philip the 2d. (de∣scended of Mary, fifth Daughter of Emanuel King of Portugal, but immediate surviving Heir to Hen∣ry her Brother, (third Son of Emanuel) Cardinal and King of Portugall) was judged lost when the Crown came into his Fathers Possession, for that his Ancestor had married Katherine, the Daughter of Prince Edward, fourth Son of Emanuel, who dyed indeed before his Brother the Cardinal King Henry. It is true, the Prince of Parma had mar∣ried Mary her elder Sister, but against that the Civilians alleged, that the Crown, by a peculiar Law of that Kingdom, passed in such Cases to such Heirs as were Natives of the Realm: However the Title was, the People were resolved the House of Braganza should have the Crown, which was wonderfully accomplish'd in 1640. and of which we will discourse no further. This Crown hath had wonderful Successes, both in the East and West-Indies, where they have wrest∣ed Brasile from the Hollanders; and at Home also; for though they be but a handful of People, yet by immuring themselves in such strong Places, as they took by Shipping and Naval Sieges from the Indi∣ans; and venturing in all weathers to relieve one another, to the disappointment of their Enemies, who thought by Sieges at Land to recover the Pla∣ces
they had lost by the opportunity of such tem∣pestuous seasons, they have fixed themselves so in those Indies, that they command a great part thereof, and the best also, till by our Assistance, some forty Years agoe, the Persian recovered Or∣mus, the notedst Place of Trade then in the East; and in defence whereof, they defeated two Na∣vies of the Turks, who hath his City and Port of Aden in the same Sea; but now the Turk and they have done, and the Persian is in their room. At Home he is engaged against the Spaniard, but the War hath proved so fortunate to him, that he hath rather got than lost by it; however, it is hoped it will be composed by a Peace, although there are several Interests which do with-hold it all they can. The French deserted them by the late general Treaty, but it is conceived they would stick as close to them now. The Dutch do no way care that the Portugalls should have Peace at home, for their fingers itch at Brasile, and they have been long quarrelling about it for Damages, but they are in fear of Seconds; besides that, they are now in prosecution of a War in the East-Indies, where also they have had some Successes. It concerns Us, that the King of Portugall, our chief Ally, should be advanced to a Condition of Prosperity and Grandeur, and no wayes will be omitted con∣ducing thereunto. With other Princes and States this Kingdom hath not to do, save with the Pope, who hath at last promised the Confirmation of all Ecclesiastical Preferments, and the Bishops other Clergy in that Kingdom: Unless with some of the
African Potentates, which Affair is devolved up∣on our Shoulders, by our Possession of Tangier, as we are likewise of some Places in the Kingdom of Goa, in the East-Indies. By all which it may be guessed, what a great loss happened to the King of Spain, when this Kingdom, and all its Dominions, at the same day revolted from him. The Force of this Kingdom is not very great, the Commanders finding much adoe to bring 20000. Effectif Men into the Field against the Spaniard, nor are those well provided or harnes∣sed; but such hath been their resolution and ani∣mosity against their old Enemy the Castilians, that they have generally carried away the Victory; and what Wings We have added to Her, Fame hath al∣ready told the World. As the Force but the For∣tune of this Kingdom is little considerable, so is the Revenue, saving that the Patrimony of this Prince is of great value, and yearly Intrado, for, as Duke of Braganza, he possesseth more than one third of the Kingdom, and there is a little belong∣ing to the Crown. The rest of his Revenues come by his Customes, with this he maintains se∣veral Store-houses all along the Country, a dayes march commonly from one another, for the sub∣sistence of the marching Army, and the relief of the sick or travelling Souldiers with Passes; as he doth Ships of War for security of his Trade, that of Sugar bringing him in exceeding great Profit. As to the Turk, he hath no leisure to look to∣wards him, nor is he accommodated with Ships or Naval Apparel to engage him, His Navy consist∣ing
chiefly of great and slow Gallions, built for Burden, and Defence, and against swelling Seas, and for other Coasts, and the great deep Ocean, so that they would soon perish in the windings of the Mediterranean; and therefore we cannot con∣sider him as any Help against the Common Enemy, but must look upon his Quarrel as fatal to the Chri∣stian Cause; and therefore we should pray, that it would please God, maugre all Opposition, speedily to reconcile it: And so we pass through the Alps to the States of Italy. GENEVA. GENEVA is an Imperial City in Savoy, situated at the South end of the Lake Le∣mannus, upon the brink of the said Lake. It is in circuit about 2. English Miles, very strong both by Nature and Art, as well for that it is seated on a Hill, which on the West is not easily accessible, as also for that it is exceedingly well fortified with Ravelings, Bulwarks, and Platforms, besides a deep Ditch, the East and West parts thereof standing continually full of water, the South part remains dry continually, and is well defended with Casemates, the better to scour the Curtayn.
The Town is so much the stronger, for that it tandeth almost in an Island, having the Lake a∣foresaid on the North, the River Rhosne upon the West, and the River of Arba upon the South, be∣ing from the Town half a mile, and by reason of the swiftness of the Current, and great moveable Stones in the bottom, which are violently carried down, the River is not passable, but with great dan∣ger. The River Rhosne divideth the Town into 2. parts, the one is called the High Town, and the other St. Gervais. It is well peopled, some 20000. of all sorts. Their Territories are small, being no way above 2. Leagues and a half, yet by reason the soyl is fruitful, being well manured, it bringeth Grain of all sorts, and good store of Wine. There are likewise many pasture and feed∣ing Grounds, by means whereof the Inhabitants are well provided of all sorts of good Flesh, at a reasonable rate; no want of good Butter and Cheese; and of wild-Foul, as Partridge, Quayl, Mallard, &c. There are also excellent Fruits, the rarest Pear-mains in the World; and the Ri∣ver, and the Lake, afford all manner of fresh Fish, as Carp, Tench, Roach, &c. But above all, the biggest Carps in Europe. Besides, they are served out of the Duke of Savoy's Country, and the Can∣ton of Bearn, by the Peasants of each, for that ready Money cannot be had else-where. It standeth al∣so convenient for, and doth exercise Merchan∣dise, being the ordinary transport of Commodi∣ties out of Germany to Lions, and so into France, and back again; by which means the Inhabitants
are grown very rich: As also, for that the Sa∣voyards, and the said People of Bearn, do resort hither to buy their Armour, Apparel, and other Necessaries, the Citizens being for the most part Mechanicks, and making excellent Muskets, Car∣bines, &c. As also Satin, Velvet, and Taffa∣ty, though not so good as that of Italy. The Merchants that are here, are generally rich, and of great Estates. The Revenue of this Town is some 100000. Crowns, which ariseth out of the Gabels of Mer∣chandise, Flesh, their Demayn, and Tithes, which is conserved in the common Treasury, and issued out thence to publick uses. The Duke of Savoy pretends a Title to this Town, as governed before the Reformation by a Catholique Bishop, who being Lord thereof, as his temporal Estate, did homage for it to the said Duke; that the Mo∣ney the Bishop coyned bore his Inscription; that the Dukes of Savoy had alwayes an Office there, without acquaintance of which no sentence of Law could be executed; that the power of pardoning Offenders remained in the said Dukes. But the Genevois turn a deaf Ear to those Pretensions, but do therefore bear him a perpetual grudge, and hate him worse than all their Neighbours; nor do they much fear him, for neither the French, nor Spaniard, nor any of the Princes of Italy, will suffer him, or he, or they suffer one another, to possess themselves of this strong, commodious, and most convenient Fortress. Insomuch, that when any Design hath been formed against them, they have had timely notice thereof, besides Mo∣ney
to provide themselves with necessaries; but such is the careful Government of the place, that there is alwayes 6. Months Provision in the Store∣houses, and of Men and Munition they have enow within the Town; no less than 20. Guns being mounted on their Bulwarks, besides what they have in their Arsenal, wherein are 10. or 12. Canons and Culverins, with some lesser Ord∣nance, with Powder, Match, and Ball propor∣tionable to 4000. Muskets, lodged in the same Arsenal; they can also raise and maintain 2000. Men. The Town is governed by a Council of 200. called the Great Council, out of which is chosen another Council, composed of five and twenty, and out of these 4. especial Men, whom, by a Greek term, they call Syndiques, that is, Co-Judges, who have the managing of the whole Common-wealth, unless it be in some great mat∣ters, wherein the whole State is concerned, as in making of Peace or War, Leagues offensive and defensive, &c. and then the whole Council is assembled. They are governed by the Civil Law, as generally the Germans are, the Judge whereof is called a Lieutenant Criminal, before whom all Causes are tried, and from whom lyes no appeal, but to the Council of two hundred. They allow no refuge to any Offenders of other Countries, but punish them as they should have been in the place where the Crime was committed. I have been the more prolix in describing the Military and Secular Government, with the site and strength of the Place, because this is the Pal∣ladium
and Original of Presbytery, of whose Di∣scipline, and its share or influence in the Admi∣nistration of this Common-wealth, I purpose to speak more largely in the Conclusion, and will now take in some other Observations. It is for certain, the Receptacle of divers Eng∣lish Transports, who will, or now can comply with the Geneva, though not with the London Presbytery, forsooth it is here in purity, and hath not contracted the Pride and Covetousness of our Rabbies. But among the rest, here is that Illustrious Nothing, or at least here he was not long since, who was knaved into, and was fooled out of, his ridiculous Usurpation in England, I mean Richard Cromwell, the eldest Son of the late Oli∣ver; the Town he guessed could not but be civil to him, for the great Expence his Fathers 3. Com∣missioners, Mr. Pel. &c. made here about the Composition of the Piedmont Troubles, and out of respect to the Moneys which was deposited in their hands. How he lived here is not discovera∣ble, for privacy hath enveloped the fond Glories of this short reign'd Usurper, and obscurity is the best foyl to this once glittering Pibble; but enough of this example to ambitious wretches. And here out of hand is to be formed, as it was most ingenuously and aptly represented, a huge Army, in aid and assistance of the Turk, who will publiquely profess the Religion hereof, as agree∣ing best with that Tyrannical Goverment. But to proceed. This Religion was introduced by Calvin, 1541. the summ whereof was this, viz. All Ministers to
be equally great amongst themselves. 2. Lay∣men out of the People to be joyned unto every Minister, and these were called Elders; the Mi∣nisters to continue for term of Life in this power, but the Elders to be chosen every year, which was very grateful to the Burgers, who hoped each of them to come to the Administration of the Ecclesi∣astical Authority; these, together with other Pa∣rish Elders, being met together, to be called the Presbytery, and to have power of Ordination, Excommunication, and Absolution, and what∣ever else was done by their Bishop in times before, whom he made the Genevois utterly to abjure, and to receve this Platform as sent from Heaven. But — Nevertheless the People did not long like it; but Calvin, by his Authority, and the awe of the Canton of Zurich, kept it rigidly up, du∣ring his life time; after which, the succeeding Ministers allowed the People the use of all man∣like Exercises in the Morning, and intervalls of Divine Service, which something mitigated the Humour, and, like the Roman Sports, took them off from quarrelling with their Ministers. What they are like to do against the Turk, the Passage above-mentioned declares; 'twas Luther that gave admittance, I mean his Reformation, to the Turk to invade Christendom; that is to say, he took advantage of those Divisions that reigned then; and it may be now said, that the troubles in the Roman temporal Estate, have engaged him, which the Romanists lay all upon the Heretique, so that it comes to this Door at last, or they will leave it there. In fine, They are able to do no∣thing,
and are the only Snayls in Europe. They are confederate with the Canton of Bearn, but 'tis for their security. Switzerland. IN our passage from Geneva to the Switzers, lyeth a Country called Wallisland, governed by a Catholick Bishop, and leagued with the 7. Ca∣tholick Cantons: They are divided into 7. Re∣sorts, and 2. Districts or Provinces; the lower, and the upper; they lye included betwixt Moun∣tains, out of which they seldom issue, and there∣fore we bid adieu to them, and make way to their Neighbours. SWITZERLAND is bounded on the West with Mount Jour, and Lake Leman; on the North with Swevia in Germany; on the South with Wallisland, and the Alps; and on the East with the Grisons, and part of Tirol in Germany. It is reported to stand upon the highest ground in Christendom, yet hath it plenty of Rivers, which it dispenseth in the greatest Chanels through the mightiest Provinces of Europe. It hath many Lakes, and abundance of fresh, and excellent good Fish, by which Lakes and Rivers there is
good passage and conveyance; there are also Medows, as pleasant, and as eminent for their fer∣tility, as their Mountains are prominent, rough and sterile. The whole Country contains in length 240. Miles, and in bredth 180. The Peo∣ple rude and Military, as all Mountainers use to be. They were once under the Government of the House of Austria, as Earls of Halspurg, the Castle whereof is standing in this Country, which gave Original and Title to that Family, but rising for their Liberty, provoked by the Rape of one of their Daughters, they, by 2. terrible Defeats given the Austrians, shook off their Yoak; and immediately 3. Cantons combined in a League, with which, after some Ages or Years, all the 13. entred, and in which they now continue. The first thing they did in the beginning of this Confe∣deracy, was to root out all the Gentry, and not leave a remain of them, as those that were the In∣struments of their slavery under the Austrians: So that no man there pretends to be gentilely de∣scended, for thereby he is made uncapable of any Office in the Common-wealth; yet there are some noble Spirits, that prefer their blood to such slo∣venly Magistracies, where the Butcher, and the Shooe maker takes his turn in the Government, and is in his Town the supreme Ruler, and to this module they yet keep. Their Exemption of themselves in this manner from the House of Austria, made them notable in the World, which they were not since Julius Cae∣sar; but their defeat and slaughter of Charles
Duke of Burgundy, and their renue for the Duke of Millain against the French, made them terrible and famous; until finding their own strength, they began to play fast and loose with their Confe∣derates, and to become open Mercenaries, losing Millain, which they had preserved, and serving the French and Spanish King, the Venetian, and others, at the same time, under certain secret Pensions, which the chief Counsellours do receive at this day; so that all the Honour that is left them (which they might have blazoned by many Conquests upon their Neighbours) is borrowed from their attendance as Guards to the Person of the French King; and Sedan-men, or some such Office about the Pope. Nevertheless, it is to be confessed, that they are very good Infantry, and will stand a shock firm, and in good order, which is a main security to the French Foot, that can hardly endure an easie impression. Their Government at home is divided into 3. Members: 1. The 13. Cantons, being 7. Ro∣man, and 6. Protestant. 2. The States and Cities confederate, as the Abbot of St. Gall, Multiuse, a free City, &c. And lastly, The Praefectures, or several Lordships and Towns, which they pos∣sess in the Alps, in the Dutchy of Millain, &c. which are a distinct part of the Common-wealth, but are subject to the Cantons, and obey their Decrees (without any Vote in their Councils) as Subjects; and of these Towns and Lordships they have some number, which yields the best of their Revenue. The Regiment or Magistracy is altogether Popular, and consists in a Great Coun∣cil,
summoned upon any great and emergent Oc∣casion; and yet the particular Cities, and Re∣sorts, or Hundreds, in number 148. are govern∣ed by one Officer. So hath every Canton a su∣preme Mastistrate, called the Ungman, or single Person, who is assisted with a Council in Cases of Importance. The Diets are held commonly at Baden, for the beauty and commodiousness of the Place, where all things concerning Peace and War, Embassies, Leagues, and the like, are alwayes determined. Their Revenue is very inconsiderable, for having no Commerce with Strangers, they have no Customes, nor have they any Manufactures. Cutlery is a great Trade. What they raise is by Impost upon Wine, and those Taxes laid upon their Prefectures, whom yet they use very ten∣derly; besides, the yearly Pensions they receive from the Crowns of France and Spain, are brought into the publick Treasury, save what comes pri∣vately into the hands of the Grandees, and those that manage the State, one of the greatest ble∣mishes and prejudices to their State; but as 'tis no shame to be mercenary in the Field, so 'tis no blame to be a Mercenary in Council. As to their Force, it far excceds their Revenue, for upon occasion, they can bring 30. thousand Foot into the Field, besides what the confederate Cities will add thereunto: As for Horse, they are of no use in those hilly Countries, nor a quar∣ter of the number of the Foot, to defend a Region so impregnable; and they have no ambition, as we have mentioned before, of invading others.
And if there should happen a Division, and Quar∣rel should arise betwixt the Cantons, as lately there did, and that to Armes, such Forces are on∣ly requisite as may oppose the numbers of the ad∣verse Party, for they cannot march in great Bo∣dies; and, as I remember, there were not 3000. Men engaged on either side in the late Difference; Fights are there by hundreds, and twenties, for few more have room to combat. But what they want at home, they have in the wide World; they are now in the service of the French, Venetian, Spaniard, and Genoise, whose Dukes Guards likewise they are; and they are raising 6000. more Foot for the Spaniard against the Portuguez, among the Catholique Cantons, if the late Broyl do not hinder the Levy. But not a word all this while of any Forces for the Em∣perour, so true is their usual Proverb; — Non point L'argent, non point Swisse, No Money, no Swisse; besides they no way affect the House of Austria: and their late solemn Embassy of 30. of their Sages, and their no less magnificent recepti∣on in France, with more Ceremony and Punctilios than was ever used towards them before, doth ar∣gue some Intrigue that way, but what Time must be tell troth; nor care for his service, or regard his distresses; what ever betides him, they are secure by their Mountains; and there we must leave them, for the Turk, if Victorious, to look up to.
THE GRISONS. OR THE Valtoline. THis is another Member of the 5. which make up the Estates of the Alps, and the Duke thereof formerly the first Duke of the Empire. They are a Common-wealth, seated in more ab∣rupt Ground, yet enjoying as fruitful Valleys as any of the rest, and as good Wine growing there∣in. By Religion generally Protestants, and con∣federate with the Cantons of Switzerland, and, like them, divided into 3. Leagues or Shires, con∣siderable for nothing more, than that they are a Passage for the Spaniard from Millain to Germany, and so contrarily, which the Spaniard secured, and thereupon, in 1623. happened a War in this place, the French, and Confederates, forcing the Spaniard to a Treaty, whereby nevertheless, in the lieu of Sondrio, a pleasant and strong Province, the Town and Castle being of that name also, he enjoyes the Fort Fuentes, he built, and hath still
a passage open to Germany, but Millain being to supply another War another way, there is no oc∣casion to speak farther of these Grisons. SAVOY. THis Noble Dutchy of Savoy is another, and the principal Member of these States of the Alps, and though we have not given it praece∣dence in this Transition, yet it justly claimes it, but our design was to mention it in our way to Italy, and to place it before that most excellent Region, and those Soveraignties and Principali∣ties which better aspect it, than the uncouch rudenesses of those Mountainous Common-wealths. It is bounded on the West with Daulphine; on the South with Province, and the Mediterranean; on the East with Millain and Montferrat; on the North with Switzerland, and the Lake Leman; and is divided into 2. Members, Savoy, properly so called, and Piedmont; the later of these is the most noble, as wherein stands Turin, the Dukes Residence, and wherein are abundance of Marqui∣sates, and other noble Titles, and their Mansions, a number of Towns, and as well built and fortified,
but better peopled; famous also for the Valley of Ast, and for one of the strongest Fortifications in the World, viz. Nizze, a Sea-Port, which be∣fore it had any Walls finished, baffled and baulked the famous Turkish Barbarossa, called in by the French King, against Charles the 5th. with 200. Galleys, but now it is impregnable. The vulgar Savoyards are naturally stupid, and no way given to Military affairs, but the Gentlemen of excel∣lent Address, as are the Citizens, and many of the middle sort. This Duke is indeed Master of a fine Country, and a good People; the Country of a large extent, and the people of a large Heart and Liberal Hand to their Prince, when upon occasion he demands supplies, especially the Piedmontese; for besides his ordinary revenue, which some have reckoned at 400000 l. sterling, he usually doubles it by im∣positions upon his Subjects, if he increases it not beyond that proportion. And he had need of a good Revenue; for he hath a number of Garrisons, both Frontire, Mid∣land, and Maritime to maintain, out of which in Field service he is forced to draw his Army, al∣though he is served voluntarily by the Gentry, who with their retinnue and attendants do furnish out his Troops. This Prince assumes to himself the style and title of his Royal Highness, as King of Cyprus and Jerusalem, and will have his Ambassa∣dours treated as the Ministers of a Teste Couronne, and to be placed and received like them, which hath of late times been admitted in most Courts of Europe, although scrupled by the Venetian, Hol∣lander, &c.
As to his Interest in the World, he appears very considerable, both the French, and the Spa∣niard, willing to be his Friend, and his Concern is to be neutral to them both, as his mighty and potent Neighbours on both sides his Dominions; He sided in this last War with the French, but 'twas by reason of his marriage with Christiana, the French King's Sister; as when coupled with Spain, he engaged there: But formerly these Dukes were constant Sticklers for the House of Austria; but it is judged that the French Friendship is more ne∣cessary and safe for this Dutchy, not only by the Event of the late War, whereby he hath all re∣stored him in the general Treaty: but also as to the present Juncture, and the likely aspect of fu∣ture Affairs: But to proceed. This Duke is challenged as a Feudatory and Feif of the Empire, but he cannot of late be drawn to acknowledge it, although Charles the 5th. rein∣stated one of these Dukes, after he was despoyled in his quarrel by the French King; and though it is alleged, they were first invested by the Empe∣rours in these Dominions, and upon this account he exempts himself from any Subsidy or Aid to be given the Emperour, but he pleads a Release of all Feifs, &c. and so sub judice lis est. At pre∣sent there is no noise of any Preparations for that Expedition, the Court being in mourning for the death of the Dutchess Royal, the Mother of the present Duke. There have been some late broyls about the Protestants of Piedmont, for the old Grudge, heightned by that mischief-maker Oliver, in those stout-hearted people, but by his Majesties
prudent intercession, the Duke hath acquiesced, and they have composed themselves without any Stir or Articles: And so we pass hence to MILLAIN. MILLAIN. IT is bounded on the West with Piedmont, on the East with Mantua and Parma, South with a great ridge of Hills, called the Apennine, and North with the Marca. This Dukedom yet the first in Europe for Dignity, was piece-mealed by the Venetians, the Florentine, Mantuan, and o∣thers, while it was in Contest, and embroyled by Pretenders. It is the Garden of Italy, and for the delights and pleasures thereof so striven for by France, and Spain, in whose possession it now is. It's Revenue is computed worth 300. thousand Pound a Year, but that never served to defray the Expence of the Government during the War, by reason of the number of Garrisons that were con∣stantly maintained, but since the Peace it yields some advantage to the Crown of Spain. As to the War in Hungary, this Province is the ready way for the Forces of Spain to march for the relief of the Empire, but instead thereof, such Forces as
can be made ready, are bending the other way, to the Sea coast, to be embarqued for the War in Portugall; so that the House of Austria is mainly disappointed of their great support, in a very fatal Juncture: And so much for Millain. MANTUA. IT is bounded and surrounded with Millain on the West, Romandiola, the Marca, and Parma, seized from a tyrannical Lord thereof, by Lewis de Gonzaga, in a tumult at Mantua, and conferred upon him afterwards by the Empe∣rour, and in his Family this Dignity continues: The Spantard, and the Emperour Ferdinand the 2d. made opposition, and would not admit of the Duke of Nevers of France, the next Heir to the deceased Duke, but Lewis the 13th. although en∣gaged in the Rochel business, by an Army sent in∣to Italy, relieved Casal distressed by the Spaniard, who had spoyled Mantua, and stated the Duke in quiet possession; which brave and admired Enter∣prise, was worthily reckoned as one of the great Actions of that King. The Territory of this Duke is very large, but
his Revenue not so great as amounting to 230. thousand Pound sterling. He is the next Prince in Dominion to the Florentine, but more easie to his Subjects, for he might improve his Exchequer by Imposts, but either the danger, or the un∣customariness of the thing, makes him forbear it: Besides, he hath no Trade, nor Sea-Ports, as the Tuscan Duke, being altogether inland; but with this Intrado he lives like a Prince indeed, though, like the rest of the Princes of Italy, they have scarce a Foot of Land of their own. As to the Turkish War, the Princes of this Territory were farr readier, as were all the rest of the Feudatories of the Empire, to assist the Germans, than now they are; for William, one of those Dukes, in Person, with 2000. Foot, and 500. Horse, as∣sisted the Emperour Maximilian the Second; at the same time the Duke of Florence sent 3000. Foot, the Duke of Savoy 600. Curasiers, the Duke of Ferrara in Person led 1500. Horsemen, and Henry of Lorrain, Duke of Guise; com∣manded 300. Gentlemen; the Common-wealths of Genoa and Lucca assisted him with Money; and at the same time, being the Year 1566. and when Solyman took Zigeth, several English Gentlemen served as Voluntiers, for whose Families Honour I will particularize some of their Names, as Mr. Greenvile, Mr. Champernoon, Mr. Cotton, Mr. Pudshall, Mr. Smith, Captain George an eminent and skillful Commander. But all these Italian Aides are now quite disappeared, and they think themselves scarce secure with what Force they can make for their own Defence, such are the Jea∣lousies
now in Italy. This Duke is very well af∣fected to the Imperial House, as being near ally∣ed to it, but, except some Money, it is supposed, he will not supply him with any thing else, unless, if such be the ill Fate of the Empire, things come to Extremity. He hath no Piques or Feuds any where, but is a Prince of very great Esteem and Reputation, and allianced with the best Families in Europe, and yet he is less in Demesn, and per∣haps Interest, having lately sold to the deceased Cardinal Mazarine his Dutchy of Nevers, of which before in France. MONTFERRAT. THis pleasant Region is seated betwixt Pied∣mont and Millain, and belongeth to the Duke of Mantua; it is the best Flower in his Gar∣den, and yields him more profit. It is moreover the best security of his Estates, for herein stands the famous Casal, the jealousie of the French and Spaniard. In former times this Marquisate suf∣fered much by several Intruders, but being finally setled by the Emperour with Mantua, upon the Family of Gonzaga, with which it remains com∣bined under the same Laws and Privileges.
MODENA and REGGIO. THese 2. little Dutchies are situate in that great and fertile Territory once called Lom∣bardy, as are all these we have mentioned hi∣therto, and were assigned by Clement the 8th. to Caesar de Este, the Grand-son, by a Bastard, to Alphonso the last Duke of Ferrara, in lieu of his claim or pretence to that Dutchy; the Pope with an Army of 20000. Foot, and 2000. Horse, perswades the Duke to accept of these Conditions of the Exchange, with this clause also, that he should acknowledge the Pope as his supreme Lord, and therewithall he seized the said Dutchy and City of Ferrara, as an Escheat to the Church. Now although this be a small Dutchy, yet are the Dukes of good Renown, especially the last, who approved himself an excellent Captain in the late War betwixt France and Spain in Italy, on the behalf of France, which procured that match between the now Duke Alphonso, and one of the Cardinals beloved Neeces, and whom he dowried well, and hath legacied her in the same manner. By the late Treaty between France and Spain,
the Spaniard is reconciled unto him, at the in∣stance of the French King, and both Kings joyntly are to use their endeavours and supplications with his Holiness the Pope, for the restitution of the Valleys of Comachio to him, of which such often mention hath been made in the publick week Books. This Comachio is a District of Marish Ground for the most part, lying in the Dutchy of Ferrara, and was formerly the Title of the House of Este, before they had that of Ferrara given them by the Emperour, and was their proper demesne Estate and Inheritance; now when Clement the 8. pos∣sessed himself of this Dutchy, and agreed by Treaty that all Lands, or what properly belonged to the said Family of Este, he notwithstanding seized upon this Estate, with the rest, without any di∣stinction; and hereupon Complaints have since been made to the Apostolical Chamber, rein∣forced by the instances of the French King, in which he hath engaged the Spaniard, and lately made it a Pique against his Holiness. This Duke, like the rest of the Princes of Italy, desires to be at peace, and live in quiet, nor to see no Armes in Italy, now enjoying a serene tranquillity, after a most tedious harassing War; He is fast in the embraces of his beautiful Lady, and will hardly arm himself like his Predecessor in the Emperours Cause, some supplyes he may chance to send him of Money, and do as his Neighbours that are Feifs of the Empire like him∣self; and some Moneys the Emperour hath had al∣ready from some of the Princes; but he cannot be
very liberal out of his Revenue, for it amounts to but 40. thousand Pound a year sterling. PARMA. THis Dukedom is bounded on the South with the Apennine, North with Millain, East with Modena, West with Montferrat. Pope Paul the 3d. of the Family of the Farnese, gave this Dut∣chy to his bastard Son Petro Luigi, and in lieu thereof, and recompence to the Church, assign∣ed to it the Dutchy of Camerone, situate in the Dutchy of Urbin; but he proving a most vicious debauch'd Person, was assassinated, and his Son Octavian forced to guard himself in Parma; whi∣ther soon after came Charles the 5th. in Person, and besieged him, although he had married his base Daughter Margaret, afterwards Governess of the Low Countries; to the relief hereof came the French King, and a 4. years VVar ensued, for Charles was resolved to ruine his Son in Law: but he resigning, Philip the 2d. to disoblige him from the French, not only proffered him his Friendship, but gave him the Dukedom of Placentia in Millain, although for the present he kept the Citadel with a Garrison of his own; but afterwards, in recom∣pence
of the great services of Alexander, Prince of Parma, in the Low Countries, he not only withdrew that Garrison, but added to his Estate the Territory of Novara in Italy. This Prince layes also claim to the Dutchy of Camerone, and much sollicited the Court of Rome, aided therein also by the mediation of the French King, who continues to afflagitate the same things to this day, as a main Concern of his own, as in which he hath so far engaged himself, and his ho∣nour, and vogued it as a part of his Quarrel, that it is supposed, he will not recede without some∣thing done in it, in the Conclusion of this magni∣ficent Business at Paris. The Dutchy of Parma it self is considerable for its Revenue, but the best part of it, and more, is expended upon Garrisons, being surrounded on all hands with the Estates of other Princes; not to mention other Charges of the Government. He is a good VViller to the House of Austria, as their Ally and Kinsman, and will advance what he can, but the narrowness of his Fortune is a Clog to his Affection; besides, the petty Princes of Italy live to the heighth of their Revenue, to make themselves seem more considerable than they are: And so we pass to the Papal Dominions, or Ecclesiastical STATE.
THE DOMINIONS OF THE Church of Rome. IT is dis-joyned West from Naples, South-west from Florence, North-west from Venice, and lyes North and South cross from the Adriatick to the Tuscan Sea, broad 100. long 300. Miles; a fair advantage and opportunity to the Lords there∣of, either for enlargement of Empire, or increase and improvement of Trade; but the Popes are not much for Force, since they can effect more by Fraud; and the Romans retaining the humour of their old Ancestors, will not bargain and traf∣fique, nor follow any Trade, as a sordid and vile life; but this Pride is accompanied with a generous Courage, and they are generally daring Spirits, and reputed the best Souldiers in Italy; for which reason they are invited frequently to forein Com∣mands, which they discharge with great Reputa∣tion. The Estate of the Pope is of 2. sorts, the one consisteth in Temporal Dominion, the other in
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction: His Temporal Domi∣nion is divided likewise into 2. sorts, the one im∣mediate, which yields a Revenue, the other me∣diate, which is holden in Fee of the Church; of the first kind, are St. Peters Patrimony, Avignion in France, &c. of the latter, Naples, &c. The immediate Temporal Estate consists of 7. Mem∣bers, Romandialo, Ferrara, with Urbin, Mar∣ca Anconitana, the Dutchy of Spoleto, St. Peters Patrimony, and Campagna de Roma. 1. Roman∣diola, famous for the City and University of Bo∣nonia, or Bologna, and the Exarchate of Ravenna, once the Seat of Emperours, and extorted by the Popes from the Venetians in former times, with some other adjacent Territories, and made Holy Ground. 2. Ferrara, in which the Valley of Commachio aforesaid, a brave Dominion, and worthy the state and splendour of the Papacy, both for Revenue, Delight and Fertility. 3. Urbin, in it the Dutchy of Camerone, belonging, as a∣bove-said, to the Duke of Parma; Urbin is 60. Miles in length, 35. in bredth, and yields 100000. Crowns Revenue. 4. Marca Anconitana, in which stands the famous Chapel of our Lady of Lo∣retto, one of the notable Sights of Italy. 5. Spo∣leto, the old Demesne of the Church. 6. St. Peters Patrimony, lying in Tuscany, and given to the Church many Centuries since by Pope Pas∣chal. 7. Campagna de Roma, wherein Rome, the Mistress of the World, is seated; and the Pope presides with as much Empire and Authority as any of the Roman Caesars, by what means it is too tedi∣ous and unnecessary to relate, the Story of it being
so publick in many Prints; for which reason also we shall pass the manner of the Election of Popes, of the College of Cardinals, of the Consistory, and whatever concerns the Civil Polity of that prudent and subtile Government, because we will not nauseate the Reader. The ordinary Temporal Revenue of the Eccle∣siastical Dominions is 2. Millions of Crowns, and for the Spiritual Intrado, its a Mystery, or a Mi∣racle, for all Luthers Execrations against Indul∣gencies, and the wiser Worlds Discovery; yet is their Exchequer mostly empty, the reasons whereof are reputed to be the great Pomp and Magnificence of the Popes, in their Vesture, and the Ornament of their Persons, their vast Allow∣ances to their Nuncioes, and Legates, (when ex∣traordinary Occasions happen) and other Intelli∣gencers and Spies in the Courts of Princes, but of late the Jesuites have saved that Expence. As to the Force and Power of this Potentate, it hath been greater than now it is, yet still he had the misfortune in any Quarrel to be worsted, if left to himself, I mean in the defensive part; for how oft hath Rome been sackt, and the Popes changed and imprisoned? But as a Specimen of what Armies they can raise, set us consider, that Clement the 8th. had 20000. Foot, and 2000. Horse, to the reduction of the Dutchy of Ferra∣ra; and Paul the 3d. in the League betwixt him, the Emperour, and the Venetians, against the Pro∣testants, bore the sixth part of the Charges of that War; Against the Protestants, and in aid of Charles the 5th. he sent 12000. Footmen, and
500. Horsemen, bearing their Charges during the War. This man was he that advanced his House to that Honour wherein it continueth to this day in Florence. Pius the 5th. aided Charles the 9th. of France, with 5000. Footmen, and a 1000. Horsemen: And Xistus the 5th. raked together in the 5. years and a half of his Pontificy, 5. Milli∣ons of Crowns, and expended magnificently not∣withstanding, in bringing Water-Pipes, and e∣recting Conduits in the City, with Pyramids, Pa∣laces, and other sumptuous Buildings, Churches, and Porticoes. This Money so left in the Trea∣sury, was immediately squandered away by the succeeding Pope; such is the successive variation of Humour and Temper of these Potentates, that men imagine they do purposely run Counter to one anothers designs This considered, the Papacy seems in this pre∣sent condition to goe below it self; the Pope one of the Prudentest that ever sate in the Chair, all things composed, Money enough, but (hinc il∣lae Lachrymae) No Friends, or Backers. The Church of Rome are very tenacious of their Forms, and its supposed they will be now held to one, the untunable Recantation of their Injury to the French. The Pomp and Triumph of the Legates Entry is intended to dazle the eyes of his good Ca∣tholiques, and the Affair is excellently well cloathed, but the World sees the nakedness of it; and that the Church of Rome hath not this first time yielded to the will of her Sons, like a kind and in∣dulgent Mother, when her Chastisements cannot reach them. In the mean time her bosome hath
been opened to her eldest Child the Emperour of Germany, and she raised her Levies to his assist∣ance to the same proportion as the forwardest; and without question hath not been wanting either in her Advice or Purse. THE Republique OF VENICE. VENICE, (of whom it is written by a well known Author, That were it within the reach of humane society, to prescribe Rules for fixing a so∣ciety and succession of People, under the same species of Government, as long as the World lasts, that Re∣publique were the fittest Pattern on Earth, both for Direction and Imitation) a Place of that strong constitution in point of Government, that in spight of all the Powers of Europe and Asia, of the Eastern and Western Empire, bears up her Liberty and Authority for well nigh 1100. Years, being still in case to make good Thuanus his Pro∣phesie, Venetiae non nisi cum rerum naturâ & mun∣di machinâ periturae.
It is bounded Southward with Ferrara, and the remainders of Romaniola: Northward with a great part of the Alps: Eastward with the Adriatique, and the River Arsia, on the Ceast of the Schavo∣nian Province Liburnia: Westward with Millain. Containing these Estates and Places, viz. 1. Hi∣stria, a woody, barren, and sickly Peninsula in the Adriatique; a Nest of Thieves, formerly trou∣blesome to Rome, till Manlius, Cl. Pulcher, Sempronius, and Augustus Caesar reduced it: And as troublesome to the Venetians. Duke Petro Can∣diano, An. 938. and Duke Henry Dondolo, An. 1190. made it tributary and serviceable for Tim∣ber, Marble, and a Passage to Hungary. 2. Friuli, a pleasant and fruitful Country, 50. Miles square, lying between the Mar{que} of Trevi∣so, the German Alps, and the Adriatique. 3. The Mar{que} of Treviso, parted Southward by the Po, and Athesis, from Ferrara, and the rest of Romania: Westward by the Rivers Mineiris and Sarla, from Millain: Eastward adjoyning to Friuli, and the Gulf of Venice: And Northward divided by the Alps, from Tirole in Germany. A most temperate and fruitful Country. 4. The Adriatique, a Gulf extending 700. Miles in length, and 140. in bredth, under the command of Venice. The Duke whereof marrieth every Ascension Day, with a Ring thrown in very so∣lemnly, in token that it must be subject to them, as the Wife is to the Husband: As on every Epi∣phany Day it is Baptized by the Bishop of Zant, in token that it shall continue Christs faithful Souldier and Servant against the Infidels for ever. The
Principal Islands whereof, under their Jurisdicti∣on, on this side, being 1. Mala mollo, 2. Tor∣cellan, 3. Muriano, 4. Chioggia, 5. Bovegia, 6. Judaeha, and 7. a shot of 72. little Islets, near the main Land of Friuli, whereon stands Venice her self, with 4000. Bridges, and 10000. Boats, to pass from one part of it to another; 8. Milies in compass, containing 1300000. Inhabitants, built within the Adriatique, in the midst of salt Lakes, for 90. Miles round, and deep Marshes for 5. Miles, several Monasteries and Churches (as Forts and Castles) lying between it and the Ports of Italy, not under its obedience; whence its im∣pregnable, and not to be taken, but by an Army that extends 150. Miles in compass. On the other side the Adriatique, she hath Bris∣cia, Bergamo, Verona, Crema, and towards Dalmatia, 1. Corfu, within a Mile of Albania, 120. Miles in compass, a craggy and mountainous place, whose Castles are the Keyes to the Adria∣tique Gulf. 2. Zant, 60. Miles round; where they have no use for Currants, but to dye cloaths, or fatten Hoggs with them. 3. Candia, that noble Isle in the Mediterranean, 270. Miles in length, and 50. in bredth; so opportunely situ∣ated, that Aristotle would say, She was made to be Mistress of the Sea. An 100. Miles distant from Syria and Aegypt, and 300. from Caramania, Cyprus, and Albania. Neither doth the situation of the Seignory more befriend it, than the Nature of the Inhabitants, both close and reserved, the People being so much advantaged by a native gravity, that in a
Book called Le Treature Politi{que}, its recom∣mended, for the great School of it, to all pub∣lick Ministers, Bodin himself saying thus of them, Quae de consilii capiendi ratione diximus nusquam sa∣nè meliùs quam Venetiis fieri consueverunt. The great Maximes they proceed upon are these. 1. To be Umpires and Spectators in the trou∣bles of the World, rather than Actors; to em∣broyl all other States, and say, as their Motto, Pax tibi Marte; none being more reputed for their open Intercessions for Peace, none more suspected for their clandestine Incitations to a War; for as they stole at first, so they must stand at last, a Republique only, because of the com∣mon troubles; But being addicted to Peace, Tra∣fique, Wealth, and Repose, the first and fun∣damental Maxim they propose to themselves, is, to maintain common freedom, and live secure. 2. To ballance the Powers of Europe, keeping them all out of Italy: In pursuit of which Princi∣ple, many have been its Contests with the French and Spaniards; being as famous for varying Coun∣sell, Alliancies, Dependencies abroad, as for keeping close to her Constitution and Government at home; where the Rule is, the Venetians deli∣berate long before they decree any thing, but when it is once seriously decreed, it is as ir∣revocable as the Laws of the Medes and Per∣sians. 3. To understand all the Intrigues of Europe; whence it is that they observe this method in the
Employment of their Ambassadors: First, They send a man to Switzerland, thence they employ him in Holland, from thence they transmit him to England, and from England to France, from France to Spain, from Spain to Germany, and from Germany to Constantinople, and are said to expend 140000 l. per Annum in Intelligen∣cies. 4. To keep their People in a perfect state of Obedience, alwayes ignorant how to dispute, al∣ways knowing how to obey their Superiours Or∣ders, which they will endure no Jesuite, or any other. Ecclesiasticks, to discourse, or cavil at; and therefore are out with the Court, rather than Church of Rome most commonly, because it pro∣pagates a Religion that is so prejudicial to the In∣terest of Government, and the Peace of Common-wealth; insomuch that I find applyed to Venice what the Historian saith of Lacedaemonia, Diù ste∣tit, non quod Rex benè imperabat, sed quia Populus benè parebat: It lasted so long, not so much be∣cause the Prince did command well, as because the People did obey so. 5. To make use of the French Power to check the Spaniard, and the Spanish to check the French in their Encroachments upon Italy, and both to watch the Popes, since they have been transport∣ed: by their own interest, to neglect or betray the common good. 6. To admit neither Churchmen nor Women into her secular Council, the one being subject to their own humours, and the second to others, I mean those of the Pontifical Interest; advancing
none that have a forein relation in her domestick service; keeping likewise a watchful eye over Priests and Pulpits, that none, from the meanest Frier, to the highest Patriarch, meddle with the Transactions and Designs of the Senate, upon pain of the severest punishments: Only that State hath 2. very eminent men, the one a sound Di∣vine, the other a learned Casuist, alwayes in Pension, and ready; in case of any Contest about excentrick and irregular proceedings of Rome, to defend and vindicate her by publick writing, as Padre Paulo did Anno 1612. 7. To entertain for Generals and Souldiers, whom, when she loseth she misseth not, when she hath finished her War, she dischargeth, to a∣void Expence on the one hand, and Faction on the other, which are usual in Common-wealths, where the Members are advanced to too high an Employment; to which purpose, she puts such restraints to the Power of her Duke, and the Ri∣ches of her Nobility, that neither can attempt or maintain any Design prejudicial to the publick In∣terest. 8. Yet to encourage any Person that shall find out or invent any thing that may tend either to her advantage or honour, as suitably with rewards, as they punish those that attempt or conspire any thing against them agreeably with punishments; every Design against the Government there being Death without mercy, as is the revealing of the least secrets from the Council of State; whence it is a part of every forein Ambassadors instruction, not to entertain conference with any Senator in
private, it being a matter of an implacable jea∣lousie in that Republique, where no Senator re∣ceives a Pension from any forein Ambassador, nor Ambassador any gratuity from any forein Prince, save what they openly acknowledge, and bestow upon the Treasury of St. Mark, of late grown a Proverb for Riches, as the Arsenal is for Strength. 9. To which you may add, that the Venetians are so good and publick-spirited Patriots, that every Galley that goeth out in course, thinks she hath Venice her self aboard her, every mans care being Ne quid Respublica detrimenti capiat: And every man is as grave and as silent as the Duke, owning a slowness of apprehension abundantly recompenced by the exactness of their judge∣ment. 10. The Character of the Italians running thus, the Veronians are studious and faithful, the Paduans fierce, the Vincentians revengeful, they of Friuli ingrateful but inconstant, they of Histria Cowards and short-liv'd, and they of Venice publick-spirit∣ed, crafty, and greedy: And in reference to War, the People of Padua manage Horses, those of Bergomo lay Stratagems, those of Brescia digg Trenches, those of Treviso bring Swords, and those of Venice contribute Money, Counsel, and Resolution, especially Counsel, being the Peo∣ple of whom Machiavel observeth, that what∣soever they lose by War, they recover by Treaty. 11. To enlarge their Territories by the several Opportunities which they watch, of the Inrodes of
the Turks, or the Divisions of Christians; by their Encounters with the first whereof, they have gained all the Islands they have at present in the Aegean and Ionian Sea, or Peloponnesus: by ob∣serving the second, they became Masters of many Places belonging to the Empire, and the Church of Rome, and of the best Havens in the Adriatique, belonging to Naples, and some Towns of Millain; they seldom assisting any distressed Neighbour, without the Mortgage, or direct sale of one Place or other: whence the Princes of Christendom con∣spired in the League at Cambray, to deplume the proud Jay, as they did, leaving her only her own bare Isles and Marshes, till partly by working up∣on the Pope, to whom they quitted all their In∣terest in the Towns aforesaid; and by severing the Confaederates the one from the other, they reco∣vered all but the Town of Naples, for which they are not willing to contest with the Crown of Spain, their Bullwark against France, and the Pope too, with whom she had to do about some Church Donations, prejudicial to the Republique, and the peremptoriness of the Ecclesiastiques in de∣fence of the same, untill encouraging the Prince of Parma (in whose behalf all the Italians were confaederated) to face the very Walls of Rome, she got off with ease, and had her antient Elo∣gium set up in the sala Regia, in the Va∣tican. 12. Neither was she any sooner reconciled to the Pope, than the Malteses having taken at Sea some Galleys, and Curamusulls, with Passengers to Mecha (among whom was one the Sultans
Mistresses, and another of the Ottoman Race) and being entertained at Candia, belonging to Venice, the Grand Seigniour vowed to revenge the Sultana upon Christendom; and, as Sir Sack∣vile Crow advertized the Venetians (though they believed it not, having no notice thereof from their own Bailio) with a formidable Fleet, and Land Army, in a manner surprized Canea, the second Port of Candia; which yet the Republique recompenced by her next Summers success in Dal∣matia, where she took Clistu, which after a great debate whether it should be demolished or no, was fortified, and is a Curb to the Turkish Inrodes at this day; and afterwards pursued the Turkish Fleet to the Bay of Foggia, where if not Com∣mission bound (a Defect in that State) their Navy had utterly overthrown them. Towards which Ge∣noa, upon Condition she treated with her as Sere∣nissima (which she doth, it being a cheap Assistance that is got by Complement) allows 500000. Li∣vers, and 10. Auxiliary Galleys: the Jesuites coming up to no less, upon the terms of their re-admission, negotiated by the King of Polands Brother, who is of the Society himself. 13. To set up Tumults in Turkey among the Janizaries, as they did in the Year 1648. with the assistance of a Renigado, with 600000. Livers, when their great Enemy Ibraim was deposed, and his eldest Son Mahomet, the present Sultan, then a Youth, was set up in his stead; whose glorious and aspiring Designes awakening the drowsie Va∣lour of the World, the Venetians checked in the Defeat at Foggia, Anno 1653. where he lost 48.
Galleys, 6. Galliasses, 12. Mahones, and 9. Ships, with his Admiral Bassa: And another in the Dardanells, the Streight of the Hellespontique Sea, between Asia and Europe, Anno 1654. where 20. Ships of War and Galleys were taken, 6000. Turks slain, and the Captain, Admiral of the Port (Amurath Bassa) mortally wounded: These two successful Victories, the industrious Veneti∣ans pursued with the old Design of Dissentions and Tumults in Constantinople, that cost the Prime Vizier his Life, and had almost cost the Grand Seigniour his Empire; the Bassa of Aleppo upon their suggestions revolting, and all Asia falling off, had not the generous Bassa of Damascus, the present Prime Vizier, nobly met the approach∣ing Fate with singular Prudence and Conduct, and (notwithstanding the Venetians Treaty with the Persian) made a League with Persia, setled Asia, overthrew the French Auxiliaries of Venice, un∣der Prince Almeric de Este (of the House of Modena) in Candia, upon intelligence given him from France, which the Venetians have thought fit to cut off by a more strict Alliance with that most Christian Kingdom: Recovered Tendos, lost An. 1655. after the great Fight in the Dardanells, under Mollenique, who got a stern of the whole Turkish Navy, and so hemm'd them in, that 40. Galleys were taken, 28. Ships burnt, 9000. Men lost, 9. Mahones scattered, the Captain Bassa only saving himself, and 14. Galleys, and he well deserved his Chain of Gold, worth 2000 l. and the Generals Place. But this Government aims at the Commendation of Wariness, rather than
Valour; practising with Money, rather than Armes, and contenting themselves more with their first Title of Fishermen, or their second of Mer∣chants, than that of Warriours: Besides that, it is their general Interest to keep the Peace of Italy, to which, as things stand yet, they are able to give Law. Its no wonder that their Agents are so busie in Mediations for Peace over the Christian World, as in Spain, France, Holland, and where-ever else any Controversies are like to arise, since that Enemy that astonished all Christendom, is like to fall now entirely on this Republique, excluded the late Peace, and (notwithstanding the late Op∣portunity of ingratiating her self upon the French Rupture) likely to be deserted by the Pope, who, by her Entrenchments upon his Jurisdictions, her Affronts to his Nuncioes and Clergy, particularly his Jesuites (to whom she gave a bitter farewell, Andate, minte Pigliate, & may returnate, Goe your wayes, take nothing, and never return) and her readiness to comply with the French for a Passage into Italy, is so far disobliged, that he seemeth intent, upon the Peace of the World, to bring down that City; having no other Design doubtless, 1. in his Connivance at the Turkish Arsenal, built in Candia; 2. in his strange sub∣mission to the French King; 3. in his obstinate re∣fusal of those advantages that might serve in this Conjuncture, than the settlement of the Church in Italy; whereby a man may guess, how much a Courtier Don Mario was, when he told the Vene∣tian Ambassador, It was not reasonable, that the discontent for particular Affairs, should cause a
prejudice to that which concerneth the general; which is to maintain the Grandeur of that State (meaning Venice) inseparable with the Splendour of Italy. Though yet the Venetians have done wisely in this, that they have involved their Neighbour States in the same Premunire against the Church with them∣selves, having wrought on the covetous humour of the Tuscan, and that more ambitious of the Genoan, to retrench the Papal Encroachments so far, that they are concluded within the same jealousie, and obnoxious to the same displeasure, as only secured by the Favour of Spain, as Venice may be by the Power of France. Her great defect (as the wisest have a soft place whereon they may be hit) lyeth in this com∣pass, viz. that being so near the Turk, that up∣on any affront from the Christians, they must make War with him: And yet so near him too, that for want of Provisions of their own, they cannot live without him (for all her Territories afford her not Bread to eat) (to which I may add, the distance of her Territories from her, and from one another) she doth not either engage the Christian Princes more vigorously against him, or engage him more closely to her, a Particular more worthy of her consideration, 1. In regard that all the Isles, Coasts, and Maritime Places, which the Seignory possesseth, do confine with some part of the Ottoman Empire, where she may be easily invaded and surprized. 2. In regard that being the best peopled City in Italy, she cannot support her self without the Friendship of the Mahumetan, and his plentiful Country. 3. In
regard a War in the Levant, stops Trade, the chief Stay of that Mercantile Town. THE Republique OF GENOA. NExt to Venice in Reputation, and Tuscany in Situation, lyeth the Common-wealth of Genoa, between two Rivers, commanding for∣merly the Islands of Corsica, Sardinia, and the Ba∣leares in the Mediterranean: Lestos, and Chio, with some others in the Ionian: Capha, or Theodosia in the Taurican Chersonese: Pera, and a consider∣able Portion of Tuscany, and thereby able to arm (as they did once) 58. Galleys, and 8. Pham∣phyli (Vessels of 140. Oars a piece) for present service, in 3. dayes time; but now confined to Liguria, and the Isle of Corsica, by their Intest∣ine Divisions, and Forein Defeats, particularly by Venice, which hath brought them to live by Usury, Retail, and Mechanical Trades, under the Protection of the King of Spain, or the Vice-Roy
of Millain; who value it the more, because its Metropolis, or chief City Genoa, is so seated, that it is esteemed one of the Keyes of Italy; be∣ing much courted by the Pope, out of envy to the Venetians; and as much by the Italian Princes, for fear both of France, and Spain. Its Interest seemeth to be as much limited as its Situation, for it hath but 6. things to do: First, To exclude the Nobility, and keep the Common∣wealth even, by a restraint upon all Excesses of Power, Riches, Honour, or Popularity. Se∣condly, To assist with Men, and Money, in all the Wars round about them, at that rate maintain∣ing their own Peace. Thirdly, To be the Bank of Spain, and other Kingdomes, where they take Money at that excessive rate, that the Revenues of Millain and Naples goe to pay Use Money; the Common-wealth of Genoa so obliging the Spani∣ards more to its self, than all the Powers of En∣rope could do: Though Charles the 5th. and his Son Philip, thought, by borrowing their Money, to weaken, and engage them rather to himself; which they might do the better, since France at∣tempted the reducement of the Seignory to its old Yoak, shaken off 1528. by Augustine Flisci, and his Family, who seized their Navy, slew their Captain John Dorya; but leaping from one Gal∣ley to another, to secure all, stumbled and fell in∣to the Sea, where he, and his ambitious Treasons, were both drowned together. Fourthly, To keep 12000. Men in Armes, to guard their Territo∣ries; and 30. Galleys at Sea, to keep their Trade, together with some Auxiliaries, to serve their
Protector of Spain; which they may well main∣tain, considering their Revenue amounteth to no less than 44000. Crowns per Annum, besides their Bank of St. George, the most famous in the World, whose original, growth, use, and in∣fluence is thus. When the untoward War between the Genoese, and the Venetians, was at an end, and the Genoese could not pay their Debts, they assigned over first their Taxes, and after that their Revenue and De∣main, to such private Citizens hands as were their Creditors; who electing among themselves a Common-Council of an hundred, with 8. Officers over them, managed this Intrado and Stock so orderly, that they became at last possessed of most of the Common∣wealth; the Towns and Territories whereof they go∣vern by Officers chosen by their own common suffrage; insomuch, that the common People, in all times of Dissentions, stick to St. George, regarding no Faction any otherwise, than in relation to that Bank; to which they require all Parties to swear faithfulness. This prevailing over the rest of the Republique, be∣cause it hath no changing of Officers, and the other being subject to that Inconvenience, their Duke, his 8. Assistants, and 400. Gentlemen, that is their Mayor, Alderman, and Common-Council, being changed every two year, so that they are out of their Places before they know to what end they are in. Its Territories are either Liguria, or the Isle of Corsica. 1. Liguria is parted Eastward by the River Wa∣rus from Provence, Westward by Magia from Tus∣cany, and Northward bordering on the Apennine
Hills, as Southward on the Tyrrhenian Seas; in length, from Luna, a Port in the East part of it, to Monaco, in the West, 40. Miles long, and all centring upon Goa, the stately and pleasant Me∣tropolis on the Ligustick or Ligurian Shore; for∣tified towards the Sea by Art, toward the Land by Art and Nature, there being but one way to goe to it by Land, and that steepy and craggy: Indeed the whole Country is its own Fortification, all Historians concluding, as he in the second Punique War, That it is a harder thing to come at them, than to conquer them. Aliquanto major erat La∣bor invenire, quam vincere, are the very syllables of my Author: And no more than needs, consider∣ing the temptations the aforesaid Neighbours have to invade it, for its plentiful Valleys, covered with Citrons, Lemons, Olives, Oranges, &c. And its rich Cities, made up of Merchants and Usurers; insomuch that the Geographer inserts a Story, generally agreeable to all Christendom, as peculiar to this Place; the Story is this, that one should say, That here there are neither Scholars, Gentlemen, nor Jewes enough: And another an∣swering, That there were more than enough of all: He should reply, That there were not Scholars enough, because there were so many double-beneficed men; nor Gentlemen enough, because so many Mecha∣niques; nor Christians enough, because so many turn∣ed Jewes and Usurers. But Populus me sibilat at ipse mihi plaudo Domi. Let the World laugh, Ge∣noa applauds it self for that Treasure that supplyed the Kings of Spain in their Wars with England, and the Netherlands, with Catalonia, Portugall,
and France, and thereby endeared them likewise to the See of Rome (whose most devoted Spain is) from whose Territories they fear no danger, as well for the Spaniards sake, who protects them, as the Venetians, who opposed them; the Pope being not more their Friend for their Patron of Spain, his Catholique Son, than their Champion against their Adversary of Venice, his troublesome Neighbours. And as for Usury, one part of the Interest of this State, its descryed in all States, and in all States allowed; then to be abrogated, when Trade may goe on without young or mean Mer∣chants, young or mean Merchants may traffique without borrowing, or borrowing may be with∣out Usury, or other Considerations more pressing in cases of necessity, and not till then. 2. Corsica, an Island 120. Miles long, and 7. broad, 60. Mile from Genoa, and 6. from Sardinia; first won by the Genoese from the Pisans, next by the French from the Genoese, and since restored upon the Peace between France and Spain 1557. For securing whereof for the future to this Com∣mon-wealth, my Author tells me, they fell upon this handsome Project, emplying none but natural Genoese to serve in the Garrisons of the Island, the better to keep under this rude and untractable Peo∣ple. And filling all their Garrisons upon the Conti∣nent with natural Corsicans, whereby the Island is unfurnished of its ablest men, who also serve for Ho∣stages of the publick Faith. It is the destiny of Princes and States, who are little in themselves, or who have but a moderate strength. Its a pittiful thing to see to what Necessity the petty Princes are re∣duced
to maintain themselves, how many real Evills they are exposed to, to conserve that vain Image of Liberty, and that sweet Illusion of that Soveraign Authority that doth bewitch them. In Expences they consume themselves for their defence, and al∣most give all that might be taken from them, that nothing might be taken from them. They are obliged to observe all the Fancies and Motions of their Ene∣mies and Friends; and if they subsist, 'tis not by their strength, because they have none, but by their weakness, and because their Countries are of so little Concernment, that they beget not a desire in ambitious Persons, nor that Justice should be violated in the Conquest of them: Or they are under shelter from the Enterprizes of the one, by the Jealousie of the other; and preserve their Liberty, for that the Ambitious hinder one another to seize upon them, and to become the Masters. 1. But since men will rather aspire to the shad∣dow of a troublesome Freedome, than live in the easiest depenidence, and in the most commodious subjection in the World, the Interest of such men is, to provide for the first Onset of an Enemy, on their own Charge; it being better to spend themselves, than be over-run by strangers; and a wasted Country being more Eligible than an en∣dangered one by Auxiliaries, most commonly ad∣judged, in little Common-wealths, worse than Enemies; and though the Charge be excessive, yet either the Assailant is tyred to an Accom∣modation, or, which is the great happiness of weak States, they have time to settle their Correspondence abroad, so as it may check their
Enemies, and not endanger themselves. 2. Their Provisions must be timely out of the hazard of surprizes, inconveniencies that have befallen the Enemies of these men, the Vene∣tian, both in the business of Cyprus and Cre∣mona. 3. Their Friends must be employed, rather to divert their Enemies, by an Inroad upon their In∣terest, or Country, than to help them: by laying waste their own. Its fitter the Pope should quar∣rel with the Venetians in Venice, than fight with them in Genoa. Assistants are Physicians which cannot cure an ill Humour, without that alterati∣on and disorder, which leaves a worse Impression sometimes after it, than the Disease that went be∣fore it: Neither is it to be doubted, but the de∣sign of diversion will be effectual, since there is no Enemy, that values not the security of his own Country, above the honour of conquering ano∣ther. 4. Yet if it be necessary that forein Force be ad∣mitted, they must be inferiour to their own, and such as they may alwayes give Law to, and receive no Jealousie from, that may abate their Authority at home, by that mark of Dependence abroad: Whence it follows, first, that the Forces called in, depend rather upon the Prince that employeth, than the Captain that leadeth them; and secondly, to keep them from uniting in a Body. 5. But however, a cold and impartial compari∣son of the Inconveniencies on all sides, both of ad∣mitting Friends, or yielding to Enemies, being premised; a few Fortresses, such as are up and
down in Liguria, which controul both Friends and Foes; though I think Genoa (as long as the Pope is angry with the Venetians, and will want its assistance; the King of Spain is needy, and must be supplyed by its Bank; the Trade of Europe is damm'd up, and must be quickned with its Coyn; the King of France is great, suspected and watch∣ed by all its Neighbours) need do no more than improve its Trade, and leave these Rules, which are rather Shifts, and Deliveries, than Po∣licies, to their necessitous Neighbours, the Vene∣tians, from whom this is the best Opportunity they will ever have to recover their antient State and Freedom. The STATE of LUCA. BEtween this Common-wealth, and the great Dukedom of Tuscany, lyeth the little State of Luca; whose extent is little more than one City of that name, 3. Miles in compass, whereon there are 7. Forts, and containing 24000. Inha∣bitants (well skilled in Manufactures, especially in weaving Silks, and Cloth of Gold) the fittest Place to set up a Free State in the World, being
seated in a plain, walled round with Moutains, except towards Pistoria, in which Post stands a strong Castle, Art and Nature befriending it so far, that its in the List of the 4. strongest Cities in the Christian World, Zara in Dalmatia, Canea in the Isle of Candy, and Legorn in Florence being reckoned the other three; especially considering it can maintain 15000. Foot, and 300. Horse; no more than needs, respecting the several At∣tempts that have been made upon it, 1. By the Emperour Rodolphus, who at last sold it for 10000. Crowns to the Inhabitants. 2. By Lewis of Bavaria. 3. By the Genoese, who bought it from that Emperours Garrison there. 4. By the Emperour Charles the 4th. of whom the Lucans bought their own Freedom for 25000. Florens, demolishing all his, and the Usurper Castruccioes Fort; but being not able to secure themselves from Genoa on the one hand, and the Duke of Tuscany on the other, they betook themselves to the King of Spain, for whose sake the Civil Power of Mil∣lain backs, and the Ecclesiastical Power of Rome countenances this little Kingdom of Ivedo, other∣wise a certain Prey to the Florentine, who hath al∣ready as much in yearly Presents for letting it alone in the Inhabitants hands, as he would in yearly Revenue were it in his own. Two Defects they seem to labour under, the first is, That their chief Ma∣gistrate, the Gonfalonere, is changed every two Months, as the Duke of Genoa is once every two Year: And the second is, That the Genoan No∣bility is not so much too mean and depressed, as those of Luca are magnified and regarded; and that the
one doth not more discourage an Ambition that may be honest, as these promote a Popularity that is dangerous; especialy in the Families of the Buonvisi, Sardini, Galganelli, Senumi, Arnol∣tini, &c. whereof every one is able to buy, and every two able to seize this little Seignory, only they are kept in awe by the Great Duke, in the middle of whose Dominion they are shut up, ha∣ving no Corn, or other Necessaries, but what they have from him; who first directed them to set up a Granary, that brings in 36000. Crowns to the Publick, besides supplyes to the Tuscan, upon all little occasions, and Provision for 7. years siege at all adventure: Especially in this latter Age, when the great State and Empire of Austria, the support of this place, breaks and fails. For great Empires, saith my Lord Bacon, while they stand, do enervate and destroy the Forces of the Na∣tives which they have subdued, and awe their Neigh∣bours; who, when they decay, recover their Liber∣ty, and revenge their former Slavery; So was it in the decay of the Roman Empire, and likewise in the Empire of Almaign, after Charles the Great, eve∣ry Bird taking a Feather; and were not unlike to be∣fall Spain, if it should break. Yet as things stand at this time, there be but two things that this Re∣publique should take care of, 1. Trade abroad, 2. Unity at home, towards the last of which, it was well contrived, that they have Armes for 500. Men, ready charged and fitted, upon half an hours warning (the Muskets, Powder, Match, Corslet) hard by the Council House, to be seen by none, without the three Senators leave, who
have each respectively a Key to them. To which I need not add, how much it concetneth them, to model their Affairs with respect to those of Venice, at this time likely to part with some of her Privileges to her Neighbour Common-wealths. THE Dukedom OF TUSCANY or FLORENCE THis Dukedom, divided on the East, from the Churches Patrimony, by the River Piso; On the West, from Genoa, by the River Macra, and the impregnable Strong-hold Sarizna; On the South, from the Graecian Coast, by the Tuscan Seas; And on the North, from Romandiola, and Marca Anconitana, by the Appennines, was the greatest Eye-sore in all Italy, to the Common-wealth of Rome, before Christs time (the People of this Place, being the first that carried an Offen∣sive War to the Gates of Rome) and the most
considerable Thorn in the sides of the See of Rome since: whence the Popes, as they grew in strength and power, intermedled with this Province, and finding it sometimes in the Lombards, sometimes in the French, and sometimes in the Germans hands, made bold to bestow it themselves, sometimes on the King of Naples, sometimes on the Dukes of Anjou, untill the subtile Florentines bought their own Liberty of the Emperour Rodolphus Habspur∣gensis; and after purchased the Town and Territo∣ry of Cortona, of Ladislaus, King of Naples; that of Arezzo, of Duke Lewis of Anjou; and setling their Duke, have got within their Territories, 1. Florence, which hath the Appennine on the North, and the Estates of Pisa, and Sienna, on the South. 2. The small, but rich Seigniory of Masta, situ∣ate on the Borders of Genoa. 3. Pisa, lying to∣wards the Sea, betwixt the Genoese, on the West, and the Territory of Sienna, on the East, able of it self once to wage War, both with the Venetians, and the Genoese, from it's notable publick Arsenal for Shipping. 4. Sienna, situate between the Pa∣trimony of the Church, and the Estate of Pisa; the People whereof have been as very Guelfes, that is, Men devoted to the Emperours Interest; as they of Florence have been Gibellines, that is, People devoted to the Popes: Upon which ac∣count, rhe Duke of Tuscany is looked upon, as equally capable of assisting Austria, or France, a∣gainst the Pope, as the Pope against either of these. To say truth, saith my Author, it stood with good reason of State, that the Florentine should use all his wit, to get this City, and keep
it; which, besides the accession of 150000. Du∣cats of yearly Revenue, was a Rival with Florence in the Command of Tuscany; only I may say of the Florentine, as Count Imball once did, Non supive dove contestesse O ingegni tanto celebrate de Floren∣tini: That I could never learn where the celebra∣ted wit of the Florentines lay, when they yielded to the King of Spain, upon the Treaty 1558. the Ports, 1. Piombino, 2. Telamon, 3. Droitello, 4. Argenterats, 5. Hercule, 6. Longone, of so much consequence upon the Mediterranean and Tuscan Seas, that they do not only keep the Dukes of Tuscany at the Spaniards Devotion, but like∣wise enable them to carry the Keyes of Italy at their girdle, and become Lords Paramount of those Seas. 5. The Islands in the Tuscan Seas, as 1. Iola or Elba, 10. miles from Piombino (which if the Turks had, they would be Masters of Province and Italy) defended by two Castles, on two little Mountains, made impregnable by Art and Na∣ture. 2. Giglio, bordering on the Genoese. 3. Capraria, not farr from Legorn. Time was, when the Popes of Rome had so great a kindness for this Dukedom, that on the great Politician Cosmo de Medici's Coronet, one of them caused this to be engraved, His Quintus Pont. Max. ob eximiam dilectionem & Religionis Catholicae Zelum praecipu∣um{que}, justitiae Donavit. But since, when one of this Dukes Successors would have been created King of Tuscary, the Pope answered, That he was content he should be a King in Tuscany, but not King of Tuscany. Ever since which time, the great Port,
on the main Land Legorn, hath been well defend∣ed with 12. Galleys, 2. Gallions, 5. Galliasses, the Maritime Strength of that Dukedom. The Land hath been secured with 16000. Men, al∣wayes in Armes, under the most experienced Cap∣tains, besides so many Fors and Towns in conti∣nual Garrison, that his Estate is said to be made of Iron. In which respect this Duke is a dreadful Neighbour, both to Millain, with whom he hath waged 5. Years War at a time, and the Genoese and Lucans, which he spareth only out of his re∣spect to the Kingdom of Spain. This Duke is at this day the richest Prince, and this State the wisest Common-wealth in Europe, able as well to buy the Popes friendship, and look into the Intrigues of France, which is their most profitable Friend, and most dangerous Enemy. The first in respect of Spain, whose ambitious Counsels, touching the seizure of Italy, it di∣sturbs. The second in respect of Venice and Genoa, whose troublesome Pretensions it may effectually assist. Neither is the See of Romes favour less consi∣derable to this State, than the Realm of France's, since, besides it's mediation between this Dukedom, & the Empire (in whose Court this Duke bestow∣eth 35000. Crowns yearly for favour) if the Pope should be angry, he hath an open Passage into Tuscany, advantaged with supplyes of all kinds from Lombardy and Bononia; whereas, on the o∣ther side; the Tuscan hath no way to invade St. Peter's Patrimony, but over such craggy Moun∣tains, as no Army or Artillery can pass, or be maintained. Towards other Princes he carrieth a
fair respect, as willing to maintain the Trade of Legorn and Florence; towards which, and the Sea-Forces that must preserve it, this Prince hath amassed an infinite treasure; and may do very well, but that the Genoans and Venetians have this advan∣tage of him, that they are as wise in publick Coun∣sels, as his People are in private; and that they can alter their Resolutions with the Occasions, whilst they of Florence stick to their Decrees, not∣withstanding all Events. Besides that, this Prince, with the assistance of his Brother, and Uncle, of the Sacred College, have this defect, that they pre∣tend to arrive at that in a short time, to which o∣ther Potentates could not attain, but by a successi∣on of many Ages. Yet the Dukedom being cen∣tred in the very Navel of Italy, is thereby furthest from Invasion on all sides, and the most partici∣pant of the Common Interest, which may secure that State in the busiest times, though a little o∣ver-awed by the Spaniard, who holdeth in actual possession Pont Hercule, Telemene, and Piombino, the Setlers (as the Historians call them) of He∣truria. SARDINIA. AN Unhealthy Place, where there is no more fresh Water, than what is rained down, and kept from the VVinter to Summer, which lyeth VVest of Sicily, some 200. Miles from Cape Bo, or
Cape Cow, being a convenient Passage into Africa; the People of which Place are so given to Hunt∣ing, Running, and other riotous Matches, and thereby so prone to Rebellion, that the Spaniard permits not a Cutler amongst them; but by reason of the ignorance of their Clergy and People (so rude, that after the Mass said by rote, they will dance and sing in their Churches, in a way unbe∣coming either an Alehouse or Tavern) much de∣voted to the Church of Rome, and, for it's sake, to the King of Spain, who governeth it by a Vice-Roy, who resides at Calaris; and must of neces∣sity be a Spaniard; under whom are 2. Deputy-Governours, Spaniards also, the one for Cape Cag∣liari, towards Africa, and the other towards Cape Lugierdois, towards Corsica; both secured by the 3. Islands about them, 1. Isola Rossa, 2. Afine∣ria, 3. St. Peters, which belong likewise to the King of Spain. It's security against the Turks, this Place oweth to the Pisans and Genoans; and it's safety upon the French, and other Nations Incur∣sions into Africa, it's beholding for to Rome and Venice; so that the King of Spain need not fear it, as long as he is in the Genoans Books so much for Use-money, in the Venetians for Trade, and the Popes for Kingdoms.
SICILY. THis Kingdom, environed round with the Tuscan Sea, contains 700. Miles in compass, joyned to Italy by the narrow Streight Mestaena (not a mile and a half broad) shooting into the Sea, with 3. Promontories, 1. Capo de Bow, Northward; 2. Capo Passaw, VVestward; 3. Capo Boio, Southward; and secured by the 2. dangerous Gulphs, Scilla and Charybdis. The Granary formerly of Rome, and now of Italy, Spain, and Barbary; besides Malta, and the ad∣jacent Isles, made up of 4. Provinces, 1. Vallis de Noto, Eastward; 2. Mazam, Southward; 3. Mona, Northward; and 4. the Aeolian Islands, VVestward, by Don Pedro, King of Arragon, after the Sicilian Vespers, added to Arragon, and in right of Arragon to Spain, with whose Fortunes it stands and falls. It's 7. chief Port Towns being guarded by 18. Men of VVar, and it's 3. Divisions kept under by 3000. Men. It were worth the while, to understand the reason, why so devout a Son of the Church of Rome, as the King of Spain, should renounce it's Supremacy in this Island, for∣bidding
any man, upon pain of death, to appeal to the Court of Rome; insomuch that Baronius, in his 11th. Tome, writes against him; and he hath forbidden the Importation of that Book, into ei∣ther Naples, or Sicily, upon pain of Banishment to Noblemen, and the Galleys to the common Peo∣ple. Indeed, since that Author hath taught the Court of Rome the supposititiousness of the Bull, whereby Spain holds this Place, it's high time to exclude the Power of that Court, and deny their Authority to dispose of it to any, since they find not the Grant whereby it was bestowed on it. But now the Affairs of Spain are so weak, it were well the Jesuites were banished Sicily, lest, upon King Philip's death, they solemnly divide what he (as they alleged) unlawfully united, viz. the Tem∣poral, and the Spiritual Dominion, and give to Caesar, the things which are Caesars, and the Pope, the things that are the Popes, making the Vice-Roy a King, under the Emperour, and the Bishops Dependents on the Pope: To which Design, the severity of the Governours (a Spanish Errour here) will contribute as much in Sicily, as the In∣dulgence of the Emperour in Germany.
THE Kingdom OF NAPLES. WHen we reflect on the State of this King∣dom, the frequent Seditions in it were a Wonder, considering the Settlement of the Spanish Reiglement (but for Spains 2. Over-sights in Go∣vernment, alterations of Vice-Royes, and op∣pression of Subjects) and the present Peace, were a Miracle, considering the subtilty and restless∣ness of the Inhabitants; but for Spains two poli∣tique Diversions, the one more serious, an hour∣ly Devotion; the other more jocund, a daily Co∣medy; they would revenge their being so poor, but that they are kept so, as well by their own va∣nity, which is wisely humored, as their Governours Impositions, which are necessarily exacted; besides the two Securities for their Peaceableness, viz. 1. That the Commonalty thinketh all Employment above them, but the Plough: 2. That the Gentry
judge all Business below them, but their Pleasure; the first of which humours will keep them too low, and the second too bare, to be troublesome; to which I may add two more, 1. Their Perfidy and Treachery, that makes it impossible for them to trust one another in a Design: 2. Their Rudeness & Ig∣norance, whereby they are capable of managing nothing but the great Horse. Were not half the Neapolitan Clergy Dependents on the King, Spain might be jealous of Rome; and did not half hold of the Pope, Rome might distrust Spain; and because they were wholly neithers, both might fear, did not that, in this last Age, set up for the Spiritual Monarchy of this, and this for the Temporal one of that. The Fate of Italy is it's only security against the French, and that of Eu∣rope against the Turk; while this last had often in∣vaded it, as they did 1433. had it not been the Key of Christendom; and the first had often sur∣prized it, as they intended under Lewis the 12th. but that is an Inlet into the Papacy: though the People would out at the Back-door, under the Saracen, as formerly, but that they choose slave∣ry (as they call their duty) rather than barbarism: And at the Fore-door, under the French, but that that is not an Escape, but a change of pressures. The Emissaries of Richlieu and Mazarine had often embroyled this Place, had not those more nume∣rous, from the Pope, secured it. The Horse be∣stowed on his Holiness, keeping the King of Spain in the Saddle, and the Caution that the Church puts in at that Ceremony, that she be not prejudi∣ced in her Right, is the best ground: Of the other,
the King of Spain puts, that he be not disturbed in his Power, especially since the Duke of Modena could do the French against Arragon, as much right as Gon Salvo did Arragon against France, did not Millain bestir it's self, on the one hand; and had not the Pope diverted the French, on the o∣ther: Although the modern ambition of the Ne∣politan Noblemen, is more dangerous at this time, than the antient pretension of the French King (al∣beit bottomed on the Duke of Anjou's Adoption, Pope Clement the 7th's Confirmation, the last Will of the Duke of Main, and the Agreement between Lewis the 12th. and Ferdinand of Castile, nothing obstructing, but the Popes gift of it upon Spain) did not the Spanish Preferment divide, and the Castilian Army of 6000. Foot, and 2000. Horse, awe them, and their King prove too hard for them. I know not whether more by drayning 22000. Neapolitans into the Spanish Garrisons, or by drawing 4000. Germans into the Neapolitan. Besides that, every second House maintains a foot Souldier (a Janizary extraordina∣ry) sent out of Spain or Germany. 1. Which to∣gether with the Spaniards firm League with the Pope, 2. their Confederacy in Italy, 3. their Im∣poverishing of the Nobility, 4. their Indulgence to the Commonalty, 5. their strong Navy at Sea, 6. the Jealousies of France and Germany, 7. the Largesses bestowed on the Clergy, and 8. the Fears of Venice (the 8. Branches of their Interest of State) may secure the Peace of that unquiet Place, for this Age, if it escapes an alteration upon the death of the King of Spain, whose Treasure is more
beholding to the Gabals of Naples, that come to 4. Millions of Crowns (the People paying there for every thing they enjoy, to their very Sallets) than to the Mines of India, that cost them more. THE Republique OF RAGUSA. THE Command of this puny State is of little Extent, the Soyl very unfruitful and steril, without any River, and the City situated among abrupt Hills, and many mighty Neighbours, and nevertheless this Republique, for some hundreds of Years, when as other greater Soveraignties of Senia, Bosnia, Hungary, &c. were destroyed by the Turk, hath not only preserved her self, but advanced her Subjects in Wealth and Reputation. She commands in the Dalmatian Coast, from Cape Cumeno, to Castelnuovo, about 4. Miles into the Land; as also over these 4. Islands, Agosta, Melada, Inpana, Calamita.
The City lying long-wayes, is yet no more than 2000. Paces in it's Circumference, and cannot be made greater, or enlarged, because of one side it lyeth against a Rock, which commands it; and on the other against the Sea; And because Merchan∣dise and Peace have flourished here so long, it is built very narrow, with high Houses, and is full of Inhabitants; who being necessitated to spread themselves among the adjacent Lands, when they have gotten Estates, fix at home. It is fortified with Walls, and quadrangular Towers, ramm'd and filled with Earth; but the impregnable Castle standing upon the aforesaid Rock, and encompas∣sed in a manner with the Sea, commands both it, and the Haven. No man, but a Gentleman of Ragusa, hath any thing to do in the Government; and he that mar∣ries with an under Degree, loseth his Gentility; by which means there are now but 24. Families. All Gentlemen aged 20. are Members of the Great Council; and of these Gentry there were lately in number 317. In all their Councils, they vote by Ballot, and to any Offices and Dignities, 3. are first named, and out of them one chosen, as in Ve∣nice. The Rector of the Republique, with his 11. Counsellours, out of different Families, ap∣pear in all the Colleges, there to vote with those of the College. These 12. were called the Little Council, for they assemble every day, to receive Petitions, Remonstrances, Agents, Envoyes, or Letters, either from Strangers, or the Inhabi∣tants, and do deliberate thereupon, but conclude nothing; In this manner they serve 12. Months,
and are then discharged, and are not eligible again for 2. Years, as is usual in all the Colleges, except the Senate, and the Pregadi, who are alwayes continued. This Senate consists of 48. and with the Little Council of 12. is made up to 60. who resolve upon all which the Little Council propo∣seth. Thitty five of these is a Quorum, and may conclude by Major Voices; for among these 60. are alwayes 5. old men, of divers Families, who are to be present at such Resolutions; and to pro∣vide Ne quod detrimenti capiat Respublica. There are 4. Collectors, who receive the Intra∣do or Revenue of the Publique, and pay, upon assignation of the Little Council, to the 2. under Receivers, that which they have occasion for the ordinary Charge of the Publique, and that which remains overplus, is brought into the Treasury, of which 5. antient honourable persons (as they do the Money of the Orphans) keep the Keyes, and these men continue 5. Years in this service. Their whole Revenue can hardly amount to 30000 l. Sterling, which ariseth chiefly out of the Impost on Wine, and out of this they pay the Turk for Protection 5000 l. and lay-out as much upon his Bashaws, to have Friends at Court; for their great Negotiation in the Levant, makes them al∣wayes to have business there; for this Money they are Toll and Custom free, which is a matter of great advantage to them, and preferrs their Com∣modities before any others. The whole Force of this Common-wealth, be∣sides the Burgers, is a 100. Hungarians, who are a kind of Garrison to the City, and serve the Ma∣gistrate
to put Sentences in Execution. These are commanded by City night Captains, 6. where∣of are chosen every 2. Months, 3. of them shut the Gates by day, and guard them with Burgers, and some of these Hungarians, till midnight, then come the other 3. Captains, and relieve their Bro∣thers, and in the Morning open the Gates; be∣fore the shutting whereof, according to the Roll, 2. Gentlemen, under 40. Years old, do daily guard, the one the Castle of St. Lawrence, and the other the new Fort, and tarry there till they are relieved, by Persons of the same quality, the next day; all other Officers and Captains, who serve the State abroad, either in War, or Negoti∣ation, are chosen by the great Senate, some for 7. others for 12. Months. The Inhabitants of Ragusa are of the Romish Re∣ligion, and have a Bishop, but he must be a Stranger; Moreover they have 2. Churches, one for the Men, where the Preachers are hired by the year, by the State; and the other for the Women, where Preachers are hired for their lives; the Common∣wealth not fearing the levity and sedition of the Women, who are naturally modest, and keep al∣wayes at home; but suspecting the Men, who, by the constant insinuations and inculcations of some pestilent Doctrines, might be perverted. The charge of the Church Goods and Revenue is committed to three Ecclesiastiques. Thus have I given a more particular account of this little Spot, because nothing was ever yet published, to give satisfaction, what it's Module was. As to it's In∣terest, the Turk governs it wholly, and it is in∣considerable
to Christendom. He could swallow it when he would, for all the Venetian (contrary to the vulgar Errour, that it is a Poize betwixt them) were it not, that he cannot make more of it, nor so much, as now he doth. It sufficeth, that they do abundance of good Offices, in relieving of Christans, in their Traffiquing in the Levant, and that's the best supply to be expected from them. GERMANY, AND The several Dominions, Principalities, and States thereof. WE are now to discourse of a great, but he∣terogeneous Body, made up of divers Religions, divers Laws and Customes, and different Constitutions, under many Princes; for in the Declension of the Roman Empire, after
the frequent Devastations of it by the Barbarians, when Charlemaign had setled his Conquest therein, he divided it among his Sons; and their Successors likewise multiplyed it into more Divisions: After∣wards, when the Empire came to be Elective, by the Aurca Bulla (and had lessened the Popes pe∣remptory and absolute Authority therein, who yet continues formalities of Confirmation, & without which none can be called Augustus, the only barr to Protestant Princes, on whom he will never conferr it) and the Power thereof confirmed by Gregory the 5th, a German, to the three Electors Ecclesiastick, and 4. Temporal, all being within the Pale of the Empire; the Candidates, for that Dignity, to assure their Advancement, would bribe Voices with the Patrimony thereof, by which means, and their liberality to their Fa∣vourites, while it was in their power to do them good (as knowing their Authority was very tran∣sient) together with the Covetousness, and sor∣did Huckstery of some Emperours, who sold the Imperial Lands for Money, little or nothing was left to maintain the Majesty of the Place. Besides these squanderings made in Germany, a great deal more hath been limbed from it, which belonged to it, as it was the Representative of the Roman Empire, under which name it ports it to this day; but it is but a meer shadow of that migh∣ty State; for the Pope stript it of all it's Feathers in Italy through the frequent Broyles raised by Excommunication and Anathemaes against the Em∣perours, who were willing to part with that di∣stant Dominion, which they could not keep,
without unsufferable Expence and Hazard of all; then the Dukes of Savoy and Lorrain refused to own them, more than formally, and in Title, which were main Members of the Empire; as did also the King of Denmark. It will be needless to insist longer upon this Consideration, having premised, that for 10. Descents together, the Dignity hath continued in the Austrian Family, and three before that, the Founder of this Family being Rodulph, Earl of Habsburg, a Prince of a mean Estate, but great Spirit, who succeeded our Earl, Richard of Corn∣wall, after a vacancy of 12. Years, the Electors continuing it so long in vain, in hope of a Pur∣chaser like Richard, the greatest Moneyed Man in Europe. The perpetuating of it in this Family so long, was effected by the policy of Charles the 5th. who caused his Brother Ferdinand to be Elect∣ed Rex Romanorum in his life time, and soon af∣ter resigned the Empire to him; which course hath been observed ever since, till the Reign of Leo∣pold Ignatius, the present Emperour, who was chosen after his Father's death, but his Brother Ferdinand was chosen before him in this manner. The College of these Electors was once a Septem∣virate, but by the proscription of Frederick Count Palatine, the Father of this present Prince, the Duke of Bavaria was substituted in his Place; and upon the Restoration of this Charles Lodowick, an Expedient was found to make him the Octovir, but so, that he is the last of them all, by this means. Their Names are the Arch-bishop of Mentz, Arch-bishop of Triers, and Arch-bishop
of Colen, Spiritual Electors; the King of Bohemia, the Elector of Saxony, Duke of Bavaria, Mar∣quess of Brandenburg, and Count Palatine of the Rhine: And as to their Precedency, the Ecclesia∣stical, who are chosen by and out of their own Fun∣ction, have the first place; among the Secular, the King of Bohemia, between the later three of the four, it is not yet agreed. There are other great and free Princes, who have Voices in the Imperial Diets, and are Tributaries at will to the Emperour, such are the Dukes of Brunswick. Lu∣nenburg, Wittenburg, Lantgrave of Hassia, &c. several Bishops, with secular Jurisdiction, as of Saltzburg, &c. And lastly, Free Cities, which are of two sorts, not reckoning the Residences or Metropolis of free Princes, viz. Cities Imperial, in number 60. formerly 96. such as have bought their Liberties of the Emperours, and pay a small tribute yearly, and ⅔ ds. of all Assessements at the Diets to them, such as Spiers, Wormes, No∣remburg, Stralburg, and many others; of all which more particularly in the Description of the several Provinces. As to the Religion of this People, except under Ecclesiastical States, the Duke of Bavaria, and the Hereditary Countries of the Emperour, it is altogether Reformed, but for the most part Lu∣theran; betwixt whom, and the Calvinist, there is as great a Fend and Difference, as between the Romanists, and either of them. The Force of this whole Region of Germany, hath been computed to amount to 200000. Men,
and somewhat above half that number hath been often seen effect if in one body, in Expeditions a∣gainst the Turks; and if we consider the multitude of Garrisons, and the many Armies on foot, in the late War, between Sweden, and this Empire, there can be thought to be few less of both sides. The best Footmen are those of Tiroll, Swevia, and Westphalia: the best Horsemen, those of Bruns∣wick, Cleveland, and Franconia. Of Weapons, they handle the Sword and Harquebuze best. In the Field they are very strong, as well to give the Charge, as to bear the Shock; where Order, which they duly observe, is of great effect, and it is as it were natural unto them, to keep a stately pace, and firm standing. They are not accounted on for defence of Fortresses, or to hold Garrisons: and by reason of their corpulent bodies, they are not fit to storm a Town, unless to fill the breaches: And therefore they are accounted rather resolute and constant, than fierce and couragious; for they do not much affect that service, wherein they see too much of hazard. After the Victory, they do kill all whom they meet, without difference of Age, Sex, or Calling. If the War be drawn out at length, or if they be close besieged, they pre∣sently either mutiny, or give up the Town (but there alwayes excepting to general Rules.) In Camp they can endure no delayes, nor will they practice the Art of Temporizing: If their first En∣terprize and Attempt falls not out to their mind, they will hardly be engaged again, or perswaded to it by any means; and if they once begin to run, they will hardly turn their backs again, as was
wofully manifest in the Battel of Kevesture, in 1596. betwixt Matthias the Arch-duke, and Sul∣tan Mahomet. He that retains them, must be at extraordinary charge, and great trouble, by rea∣son of their Baggages, and Wives, who follow the Camp, and consume abundance of Provision, and without that they stand in no stead. Their Horses are rather strong than couragious, of ten of which, eight are usually prest from the Plough, which ren∣ders them of small service; and besides, they quail when they see their blood. The Revenue of the Empire, which comes to the Emperour, is so little worth, that it is scarce worth mentioning; for, besides the Tribute paid by the free Cities, which is but 15000. Guilders yearly, 1500 l. Sterling, there is little else that can be reckoned as a Revenue; It had need there∣fore of some Prince, whose own Estate can support the Grandeur of the Dignity; which hath been an∣other reason, why the House of Austria hath held it so long: as also, for that it is the only Rampire against the formidable Power of the Turks. And his Authority is as little as his Revenue, for he hath no Negative Voice, but is as it were the su∣preme Officer, to execute the Decrees of the Diets: whereas the Princes, and free Cities, are absolutely Soveraign; and can, in their Assembly General, Depose him, if they see cause. We come now to Particulars, and pass into East-Freisland,1. East-Freisland. a County of the Empire, sub-di∣vided into the County of Embden, or East-Freis∣land properly so called, and the County of Ol∣denburg, both of them extending Northwards, to
the German Ocean; bounded on the West with the River Emms, which parts them from West-Freis∣land; on the East with the River Weser, which di∣vides them from Westphalia; and on the South with the Earldom of Mark. It is a very fruitful Coun∣try, and most populous, thick built, full of Arable and Pasture Land, affording plenty of excel∣lent Cattel, Butter, Corn, &c. to their Neigh∣bours. The Earldom of East-Freisland, or Emb∣den, was formerly governed by Provincial Earls, under the Emperours of Germany, to whom they were accountable, untill the Year 1453. when Ubrick the Governour was invested with the Here∣ditary Title of it, in whose Family it continues at this day. That which advanced him, being his Conquest of the City of Embden, from the Ham∣burgers; which City, considerable for its Traffique and Situation, becoming Calvinist, turned Rebel, and revolted from their Prince, as a Lutheran, and confederated themselves, as a Republique, with the States of Holland, in 1592. and so con∣tinues. The Count of Oldenburg is of a farr antienter standing, and of a Princely Descendency, and is Master of as fine, and larger a Country, by some Provinces bequeathed to him by the Countess of Jevere; infinitely stored with Oxen, Sheep, But∣ter, &c. and with Venison also, which run in large and fair Woods, the pleasant Game of the Gentry of this County. He is allyed to the King of Denmark, as descended from a common Ancestor, Christiern the 2d. King of Denmark, and the 4th. of the Name of Earl of Oldenburg.
Both these Princes are reckoned as Members of the Empire, but they are lame ones, and are of no use to it, for they contribute nothing to the publick Charge, nor come to the Diets; but which means they exempt themselves, and are uncon∣cerned in this Turkish War. The Earl of East-Freisland is like to be engaged in this Holland Bu∣siness, about the Eyler Sconce: nor will the Count of Oldenburg be suffered to be at quiet, if it comes once to Armes and Parties. However, their In∣terest is to live at Peace, and good Correspon∣dence with their Neighbours, the best security to small Estates; but there are some old Grudges, which this Juncture will give vent to: And so we leave them, and pass to Westphalia. This Country is bounded on the North with the Dutchy of Holstein,2. West∣phalia. and the River Elb; on the East and South with Hassia, &c. and on the West with Colen, Cleveland, Overryssel, and the two Freislands. The Country is in most places full of VVoods, which bear plenty of Acorns, and nou∣rish many herds of Swine, which make Bacon of excellent relish and tenderness: and in other places as plentiful of Corn. In this Province stands the City and Bishoprick of Munster, infamous for the Story of John of Leyden, and as famous for the late Treaty, and general Pacification, in 1648. Since which time this City hath had some Disputes with their Bishop, but now composed to a good understanding, by the powerful Interest of the Hol∣lander, who espoused the Cities quarrel. 2. Min∣den, once a Bishoprick, now setled upon the Mar∣quess of Brandenburg, with the Title of Prince,
in lieu of what the Swede had of his, by the same Treaty: He hath likewise here a secular Town and County of Ravensberg, in right of his part-inhe∣ritance in the Dutchy of Cleve. Here is also the Bishoprick of Osnaling, the alternate succession to the Profits whereof, is given, by the Munster Treaty, to the Duke of Brunswick, for his cession of his Bishoprick of Halberstadt. Not to omit the Town and Castle of Aremberg, with the ample and goodly Patrimony thereof, which gives Title to the noble Family of the Counts of Aremberg, eminent for their service done the King of Spain, in the Low Countries, where, as his Subjects, they have o∣ther Estates. Lastly, The Bishoprick of Bremen, which is the second Division of Westphalia; formerly go∣verned by its own Diocesans, but of modern times the King of Denmark's Sons enjoyed the Title, with the Protection of it; till, by the late Treaty at Munster, it was assigned, together with the Bishoprick of Verde, to the Swede (with condi∣tion, that the City and Territory should enjoy their antient Privileges and Liberties) who, with much adoe, had Possession delivered to his General Count Coningsmarck. It is a rich and fair City, and much traffiqued, by reason of its situation upon the Weser, which dischargeth it self into the Elb, and so joyntly into the German Ocean. In this Bi∣shoprick stands the City of Stoad, famous once, and made for ever, by the English Staple, upon some discontent removed some time agon hither from Hamburgh. There are other petty States and Earldomes
herein, which, together with the rest, acknow∣ledge the Emperour, but it is more in shew than effect; although they were scared to some real performances, by the Emperours successes in these parts, in 1627, when he overcame the Dane. The Title hereof as Ducal, is used by the Arch-bi∣shop of Colen, and the House of Saxon Lunen∣burg; but with the same Profits thence, as the Emperour receives; notwithstanding, in this pres∣sing Condition of the Empire, and in all general Taxes, they pay their proportion, as a Circuit of the Empire. So we pass Westward, to another Border of the Empire,3. Cleve. viz. the Dutchy of Cleveland, consist∣ing, while it was the entire Patrimony of those Dukes, of four Members, 1. Cleve, 2. Gulick, 3. Berg or Mont, 4. Marck; the two last divided from the other by the Rhine, and severally joyned, some two Centuries agoe, to one another, in the Family of Cleve; the last Duke whereof, John William, dying in 1610. without Issue, this am∣ple and princely Estate, the main whereof had con∣tinued 900. Years in this Family, came to be di∣vided (after mature consideration of the evil of a War) equally between the Marquess of Branden∣burg, and Wolfgang, Duke of Newburg, a young∣er Descendant of the House Palatine; whose Fa∣thers had married the Sisters of the deceased Duke, but Brandenburg the eldest. It was first agreed be∣tween these two Princes, to govern the Estates joyntly, but afterwards they fell out, by being too familiar; insomuch that the Brandenburger, at a Treatment made by him, gave the other a box
of the ear; which unseemly injury, caused the Palatine of Newburg, to call in the Spaniard, and the other the States General: Of which Story read more in the Duke of Rohans Observations upon this subject. Both the Partitions are subject to the Laws of the Empire, and are obliged to the pro∣portionable supplyes. Adjoyning to this Country are the three Elect∣oral Arch-bishopricks,4. Colen. the first whereof is that of Colen, a fair and goodly Country, bounded every way upon some part of the Dutchy of Cleve, but on the South limited by the Land of Triers; the present Elector is the Uncle to the Duke of Bava∣ria, and considerable in his Interest, as to the Catho∣lick Cause, being also Prince and Pastour of the City and Jurisdiction of Leige, the Government whereof resides in him, and the Canons of that Cathedral, who by right elect their Prince or Pro∣tector as aforesaid: This Arch-bishop is Chancel∣lour of Italy, and second in Dignity. To this succeeds the Arch-bishoprick of Triers,Triers. whose Bishop is the Chancellour of France for the Emperour: This Country lyes all along South the Moselle, on the East lyes Luxemburg, on the West Franconia; It is a pleasant, but not a fruitful Country. The Arch-bishop of Mentz,Mentz. although last men∣tioned, is first in Dignity, as being Chancellour of the sacred Empire: His Jurisdiction, like some of our Diocesses, lyes dispersed in several Countries; so that his temporal Estate is a great deal less than the other two: Nor had any of them enjoyed such secular advantages of Dominion, had it not been
for that the Empire was made Elective, and they set their price often upon the Market; Besides, there hath happened a dissolution of many great Estates, out of which they have carved to them∣selves what they liked, with the Connivence of the Empire, and under the specious pretence of Dee∣dands, and Bequests to the Church. The Interest of these Electors, is to defend the Papal, Imperial, and their own Authority, of which they are equally jealous, from the Reform∣ed: Notwithstanding the Arch-bishop of Triers took part, or was a secret friend to France, in the late Swedish War, which made the French so hot upon the rescue of his Country, and so resolute in the freeing of it: But in case of danger to the Em∣pire, no question is to be made, but they will unanimously concurr against it; and with them∣selves, they draw all the Ecclesiastical States of Germany: And are prone enough to assist the Em∣perour against the Turk. The next Principality or Dutchy we shall treat of is Lorrain,5. Lorrain. the Duke whereof is a Prince of the Empire, and the Country reckoned as a part of the fifth Circle of the Rhine; and as a Feudatory there∣of, stickled hard in the late War, for the Empe∣rour, to the loss of his Country, and his almost undoing; but by the Treaty of the general Peace, he was restored to a great part of it. It is bounded and circumscribed between the lower Palatinate, Alsats, Triers, the Dutchy of Bar, Burgundy, and Luxemburg, all of them fine Provinces; nor is Lorrain inferiour to the most of them, were it not for some dark and thick Forrests, which inter∣sperse
the Country. There were in it formerly some Imperial Towns, as Metz, Verdun, and Thoul; but Henry the 2d. of France, reduced them under his obedience, and erected a Parliament there, to make it a perpetual Province of France, as it hath since proved: Of late it hath lost some Ducal Towns (and Provinces, as the whole Dutchy of Bar, taken from him by Lewis the 13th. and County of Clermont) viz. Moyenvic, Stenay, Dun, and Jametz; these three last be∣longing formerly to the Prince of Conde, and re∣stored to him by this Treaty; and the Provost-ship of Merville; Besides, the Duke is at all times to give passage to the French Forces into Germany, and to renounce all Leagues, Alliances, and In∣telligences with any forein States or Princes, to the prejudice of that Kingdom; withall, he was bound up to an acquiescence in whatsoever had pas∣sed by judicial proceeding, gift, or disposal of the Kings of France or Spain, untill the date of the Treaty, by which these Conditions were also a∣greed to be ratified by the Emperour: This was a bad bargain, but more could not be obtained; so that the said Duke, feeing himself thus exposed to the Armes of the French King, and any sudden surprize, upon pretence of passage, besides many other Retrenchments of his Soveraignty, did offer, by a Treaty, to surrender the same wholly into the hands of the King, upon Condition, his Family to be admitted, as Princes of the Blood, and to the succession of the Crown, after those of Bourbon, with some Provision of Money and Pension, for the support of his Dignity and Family; and this
was highly talked of, and near a Conclusion, but it is not yet confirmed and accomplished. As to his Interest, we may guess how narrow it is; and how he is pent up, as to any Concern of his in Europe, by that comprehensive Clause, That he shall not hold Intelligence with any Prince, to the prejudice of France; which will be construed so, if he send but a Complement to any of them. The French King hath had a longing envious eye up∣on his Country, as dis-joyning his Conquests from his other Countries, and therefore he lives here but precariously, and as a Tenant at will. As to the Turks, he concludes, there are no such Infi∣dels, as the French Ministers of State, who laid all wayes to entrap him, and finally forced him to take Armes against France, as a desperate remedy. Besides, he is extremely poor (although his Re∣venue is said to amount to 700000. Crowns, a good part whereof ariseth from his Salt made here, which the French King hath bargained to be afford∣ed to Metz, and Alsatia, &c. a price current) and cannot lend a Stiver, nor raise a Hand against them, in his present Condition, the result of his barbarous plunderings, in which his Forces ex∣ceeded those very Tartars and Turks, and like to like was seldom opposed. We proceed next to Alsatia,6 Alsatia. or Elsas, whose boundaties are these, briefly; On the East the Rhine, with Baden, on the North the Palatinate, on the South part of Switzerland, and on the West Lorrain; divided by the Mountain Voyesus; a fine and pleasant Country, d vided into three parts, the Lower, and the Higher, and the third called
Zuricgaw, bordering upon Switzerland, the two last Divisions, by the Treaty of Munster, being assigned over to the French King, in the name of the whole (on Condition only of paying 30000 l. Sterling to the Arch-duke of Inspruck, the Pro∣vince before belonging to the Imperial Family) for his Expences in the preceding War of the Lower Alsatia. The Bishop of Strasburg, or Argentina, the chief City seated therein, is yet Lord and Go∣vernour: There are in it besides many Imperial Cities, free from the Jurisdiction of the French; so that he hath little more than the modern Strengths, and Command of the Country: and yet so much in that, by his free passage into Germany, that he is well recompenced for troubling it; ha∣ving Philipsburg, a most strong Town in the Pala∣tinate, and the County and Town of Brisac added to the bargain. There is some Difference arisen, by some pretences of the French, to admit the Go∣vernours of the two Imperial Cities of Colmar and Slechstadt, both antient and strong Towns; and this Duke Mazarini demands, by his right, as the Governour of the Province, and the King in∣tends to effect by force; which makes many men think, there are some Designes that way, upon this quarrelling Punctilio; but the free Cities will assuredly not suffer any such intrusion or violence upon their Privileges, and the Princes will brook it as little: Considering this, and other the like Piques, in other places, in this Juncture, it seems as if there were a Conspiration of those little Mis∣chiefs, like the appearance of the small Cloud, that will condensate and overspread Christendom at
last, and shower it with abundance of blood and misery. What this Country signifies against the Turk, is easily resolvable, for hinc Dolor hinc Lachrymae, here was the fatal Jealousie lodged, that rendred the Emperour so impotent and feeble against the Barbarians. This, if any thing, is one of the great Remoras, that retarded the quick work, which would have been made with that Enemy, by the German Princes, and therefore we will put down this Province for a Cypher, if it be not al∣ready reckoned, with some large numeral Figure, by the other side. The Palatinate lyes next to this, with which it is bounded on the South;7. Palat. on the East with the Duke∣dom of Wittenberg, and some part of Franconia; and on the West with Triers: And because this Country somewhat concerns us, by the alliance of this Prince Elector to the Crown of England, we will be a little larger, for full satisfaction and in∣formation of the Reader, in the whole series of the late Affairs of that Family, than we have hi∣therto been; but according to proportion, the Lower Palatinate, which is all the Dominion of this Prince, being in bredth but 90. Miles, and in length 72. It is one of the most pleasant Coun∣tries of Germany, and affords the best Rhenish Wires; the Princes alwayes, till this late mis∣fortune, reputed the wisest, as who had enlarged their Estates, and from the beginning raised it from nothing, being meer Courtiers, or great Officers at first, although else acknowledged to be the Descen∣dents of Charlemaign.
In this Grandeur these Princes continued till the Year 1620. when the Family seemed to have re∣ceived the greatest accession and accrument of Feli∣city, by the Marriage of Frederick the 5th. (Ne∣phew to Prince Maurice, by his Sister Louisa, married to Frederick the 4th.) with our Princess Elizabeth Daughter of King James, some time before; and his Investiture in the Crown of Bohe∣mia, by the Election of those States; who indeed, by the Concession of many Princes, of the House of Austria themselves (Letters reversate they call them) and by their own Customes and Privileges, had right thereunto; but the choice and acceptation thereof, being not so free and voluntary on his part, for that some affronts were like to be put upon him by the Chamber of Spires, who were ready to proceed to Sentence against him, for his demolishing Udenheim, which the Bishop of Spires, whose Town it was, was then a fortifying; which Spinola afterwards took in hand, and finished, and called it Philipsburg, now in the possession of the French. The Reader is here to understand, that in this Lower Palatinate, there are several famous Imperial Towns and Bishopricks, as Worms, Spires, although Feudatories, for the most part of their Estates, to the Princes Electors. No sooner was the Palatine King of Bohemia, but the War began to flame in Germany, portend∣ed by a fearful Comet in 1618. in the first Battel whereof at Prague, the King of Bohemia, assisted by Bethlem Gabor's Transylvanians, and Hunga∣rians, was totally routed by Count Bucquoy, the young Prince of Anhalt slain, a great slaughter
made, and Prague soon after taken: This Battel was fought on the 5th. of November 1620. and thereupon the King, as he was then called, fled to Breslaw in Silesia, where he secured himself, com∣mitting the care of his Estate to the Marquess of Anspach, who was General of the Confederate Pro∣testant Princes; but being corrupted by Spinola's Gold, who was sent for out of the Low Countries to attaque the Palatinate, basely sold it, and the Prince's Interest; by which means Spinola shortly after reduced Manheim and Frankendale, Garri∣soned by the English, but hopeless of relief. Soon after King Frederick withdrew into Holland, ex∣pecting some new undertake of his Quarrel, and the Protestant Interest, of which Ferdinand the 2d. Emperour, was a most violent and bitter Ene∣my. And here he heard the issue of the Danish War, more to his disadvantage, till the Swede en∣tred Germany, when he followed that King, and was by him, upon some hard terms, restored to his Estates, which he enjoyed not long, deceasing at Mentz, November 29. 1632. But soon after his death, and the King of Swe∣den's, at the Battel of Lutzen, the Imperialists over-ran the Country again, having routed and broke the Swedish Power at the Battel of Nordlin∣gen; and although some Efforts were made by Prince Rupert, with some Forces out of Holland, in which service, my Lord Craven, and other English Gentlemen were engaged; yet were they finally vanquished, and driven out of the Country, and hardly put to it by swimming to make their escapes. So that the Country continued sequestred
from the young Prince Elector, till the Treaty at Munster, by which he was restored to the Lower Palatinate, and made an 8th. Elector, with the Office of Arch-treasurer; for that his former. Ele∣ctoral Office, together with all the Appurtenances of it, and the County of Cham besides, was con∣ferred upon his Counn of Bavaria, of the Guliel∣min Line, this being the Elder, and called the Ro∣dulphin; but the Younger is farr more rich and powerful, and the greatest Enemy to the other: This Dignity and Estate being given the Bavarian for his assistance of the Emperour with Men and Money in this War. By the same Treaty, the Emperour was likewise to give the Elector's young∣er Brothers and Sisters their Portions in ready Mo∣ney; which, Pro benevolo Caesareo affectu in domum Palatinam, as the words run, he did assent to, and punctually pay and perform. This Prince now quietly enjoyes what he had by that Treaty, and hath been highly carressed by the present Emperour. He hath married a Daughter of the House of Hassia, between which Family and his there have been frequent Marches. As to his Interest, it lyes in a general Peace and Amity with all Princes, but especially with the Empe∣rour, and next the Protestant Party, and princi∣pally those of the Calvinian way, which is the Re∣ligion professed in his Country, and of which he was the Chief and Head in Europe. His Alliance leads him to respect the Kings of England and Den∣mark; and this King of Sweden's Father was born of his Aunt: The Family of Nassaw and he are likewise near in Blood, his Grandmother being the
Sister of Prince Maurice, and Daughter of Prince William; so that he stands secure, and may in time repair his fortunes. Against the Turk he is at his proportionable Charge, assessed upon him by the Decree of the Dier. We come next to a brief view of the Upper Pa∣latinate, transferted, with the County of Cham, to the House of Bavaria; whose Duke Ludovicus, Emperour also of Germany, upon the partition of Estate, resigned it for ever, some Ages since, to Rodulphus his elder Brother; who, in right of his Mother Gertrude, the Daughter, and sole Heir of Henry, Count Palatine of the Rhine, was in∣vested in all those Dominions and Dignities. In this Province is seated Newburg, the Title of the second Branch of the House Palatine, and Duke of Cleve, in share with the Marquess of Brandenburg. Here is also the City of Noremberg, famous for its rate workmanships, a fine and beautiful Town, yet no River near it, but the curious Industry of the People supplyes that defect. The Country ve∣ry near as bigg as the Lower, but nothing so plea∣sant and fruitful, being chiefly mountainous and barren, except in Mines of Iron, and some of Si∣ver, one of which is very considerable: So that it is a great retrenchment and dismembring of the Palatine Patrimony; but what cannot be cur'd, must be endur'd: And so we pass to Bavaria. It is bounded on the North with the Upper Pa∣latinate,8. Bavaria. on the West with Schwaben, and on the East and South with Austria, Tirol, and Carinthia; divided into three parts, the Higher, the Lower, and the Bishoprick of Saltzburg, a District, and
distinct Jurisdiction of it's self. The Country ge∣nerally overspread with Woods, and cold, and barren; but the Lower somewhat more fruitful, and abundantly more pleasant. In the Higher is seated Munchen, famous for it's seizure by the King of Sweden, who found infinite Treasure there∣in; and for that it is the Residence of the Dukes of Bavaria: In the Lower Ingolstadt, farr more fa∣mous, for that it put the first affront upon the King of Sweden in Germany, and made him give o∣ver the siege thereof. 2. Regensburg, or Ratis∣bone, famous for the Diets held there, being a most beautiful and pleasant Fabrick; and Passaw, as eminent in former times, for divers Consultati∣ons held there by the Princes, and for the notable Diet made there, by Charles the 5th. in favour of the Protestants. As to the District of Saltzburg, it is a barrener Country than the Higher Bavaria, and considerable for nothing more, than that their Bishop challengeth the precedency of all other Ec∣clesiasticks, except the three Electors. It borders upon Austria, which shall limit this Discourse of Germany, because we will consider the Hereditary Provinces together, when we come to Hungary, and the Actions and Designes there, as more pro∣per for that place, though with some disorderly revulsion of this great Body. The Interest of the Duke of Bavaria is very con∣siderable, he being look'd upon as one of the po∣tentest and richest Princes in Germany, or indeed in Europe; for he was paid in both hands for his service in Germany; and Duke Maximilian was else very much afore-hand with the World, as his
Loans to the Emperour Ferdinand the 2d. suffici∣ently manifested. The present Duke is a most zealous violent Catholick, as was his Father, and therefore sure to the Emperour, as well as by his Alliance, being born or this Emperour's great Aunt, married young to old gouty Maximilian, who, by some prolifick Cordials, got for him by the Jesuites, had Issue by her, but the present Duke, and his Brother, are of weak Constituti∣ons. The Jesuites have also alwayes had a mighty influence upon this Court, so that no doubt is to be made of the Duke's forwardness in the War a∣gainst the Turks, to which the Duke offered him∣self upon condition he should be made General; notwithstanding he will, and hath advanced alrea∣dy some very considerable Supplyes, by way of Loan; and as to his Proportions rated upon him, they will be ready with the formost, and are likest to do the best service, for that they are accustom∣ed to the Fruits and Wines of that Country, ha∣ving none of their own, any being Neighbours to that. By this Electors Voice, the Papacy hath five Votes against three, in any Matter; and in the Vacancy of the Empire, a pretension, and forci∣ble exercise of the Vicuriat, which belonged to the Palatine of the Rhine, not as Elector, but as Count of that Circle, as he alleges, and so did not forfeit that right. And it is concluded also, that if the present Emperour dyes without aged Issue, the Imperial Dignity will be given to the Bavarian, who is the only Catholick Prince (not reckoning the Arch-dukes of Tirol and Inspruck, as nothing considerable without the Patrimony of Austria,
and whom we shall mention there) of power and ability to support the Empire. And it was this Dukedom that in effect bore up the Austrian a∣gainst the Swedes, and the French, and came off with Victory at last: And so we return by Fran∣conia. FRANCONIA is bounded on the East with the Upper Palatinate,9. Fran∣conia. on the South with the Palatinate of the Rhine, on the West with Wet∣teraw; and on the North with Hassia, &c. It is governed by many distinct Princes, some of great∣er, others of lesser Power and Dominion; but the Title of the whole, since the failer of the French Dukes (for the present Inhabitants are de∣scended of the old French) is given to the Bishop of Wurtzburg. The Country a fine, pleasant, fruitful Seat (but skirted with great thick Woods) and the People good-conditioned, and indu∣strious. The Bishop of Wurtzburg, as he hath the Title of the whole Dutchy, which is also called the Cir∣cle of Franconia; so hath he a large and spacious Territory, and the largest Revenue of any one Bi∣shop in Germany: Next to him, in this Province, is the Bishop of Bamberg, once bigger than now it is, but yet of a competent Jurisdiction, exempt from any subordination to the Metropolitan. Both these Bishops are Princes of the Empire, and, as their Religion obliges them, firm Adherers to the House of Austria, and the Papacy; and there∣fore very jealous of their Neighbours, the Prote∣stant Estates, that conjoyn to them, having suffered exceedingly in the Swedish War.
The Marquess of Anspach, a Descendent of the House or Brandenburg, that Marquess, who was chosen General by the Princes of the Union, for the Defence of the Palatinate, 1620. being the youngest. Brother of the Grand-father of the present Elector, who treacherously suffered Spino∣la, unfought with, to reduce the whole Country, his Son Christian is now the present Marquess, and is obliged to follow the Interest of the elder House. There are in this Circle also the Earldoms of Henneberg, Hohenlo, Rhesneck, Swartzen∣burg, &c. the last of which hath yielded abundance of gallant Persons, and the Family at this day in great estimation. As for Imperial Cities, it is not without its proportion; but especially Frank∣furt is most considerable, not only for its famous Mart, especially of Books, but for the Election of the German Emperour. These several Estates do live in good Peace and Correspondence, having smarted for their former Divisions sufficiently: And so we proceed to the Dukedom of Swevia, or the Circle of Schwaben. SCHWABEN is bounded on the East with Bavaria,10. Schwaben on the South with Switzerland, on the West with Alsatia, and on the North with Fran∣conia; It is divided into four parts, Hegow, Al∣gow, Brisgow, and North-swaben: In the first stands the Imperial Town of Constance, famous for the Council here held about the three Anti-Popes, and the Condemnation of Huss, and Hierom of Pragne; It is now under the Protection, or ra∣ther in particular servitude to the House of Au∣stria. In Algow is the noted Town of Auspurg,
called in Latine Augusta Vindelicorum, more cele∣brated for the Lutheran Confession, called Con∣fessio Augustana, made by the Protestant Princes, to Charles the 5th. Here the Family of the Fug∣gers, a wealthy and splendid Barony, and who have enlarged their Patrimony by Merchandise, contrary to the custom of Nobles in Germany, have great and ample Possessions. I mention this Family the rather, because he is at present one of the Major Generals of the Rix Army, designed against the Turk. In the third Division stands that memorable Town of Brisach, seated upon the top of a Mountain, and strongly fortified, and as pleasantly built, but incommodated for want of Water, having but one Well, and the Water which, with much trouble, they bring from the Rhine, that runs at the foot of the said Mountain. In the fourth part stands Norlingen, famous for the great and fatal Overthrow given the Swedes there, by Ferdinand the 3d. where General Banier was slain, and General Horn taken Prisoner, and the Duke of Weymor put to his shifts, by whose un-ad∣visedness the Swedes were engaged. Furstenburg, which gives Title to the Earls thereof, Princes of the Empire, and Men eminent in their Generati∣ons. And lastly, Ulme, the chief among many other Imperial Cities in this Tract. Nothing more remains to be said of this Region, but that there is no Person that pretends Title to it, the Dukes thereof being long since extinguished, and their Patrimony dismembred among the petty Princes, and Imperial Towns (save that the Arch-dukes of Austria enjoy Brisgow, by vertue of a Purchase
made with the Proprietor (some Ages since) di∣sturbed in his Possession by rebellious Subjects) who have well feathered their Nests therewith. There hath nothing of Feud passed in this Cir∣cle since the Treaty: And so we proceed to Wetteraw. WETTERAW is bounded on the East with Franconia,11. Wet∣teraw. on the South with the Lower Palati∣nate, on the West with Colen, and on the North with Hassia; It consists of several petty Estates confederated together, viz. Of the Counts of Nassaw, the Earls of Hanaw and Solins, the Ba∣ron of Lichteberg, and two Imperial Cities. The County of Nassaw is a most pleasant fruitful Place; and the Original of that Noble Family, who, by Marriage of Engelbert the 7th. Count of this Title, with Mary, the Daughter and Heir of Philip, Lord of Breda, became possessed of the City and Castle, and a large Territory into the bargain, improved by many additions; by which means his Successors became first Subjects to the Dukes of Burgundy, and after to the King of Spain, who endangered the Head of Prince William the 2d. and afterwards caused him to be assassinated. Con∣cerning their Title of Orange, which is of above a 100. Years more modern Title, we shall speak of it in our view of France; but it is also here to be remembred, that the Counts of Nassaw are of late years also Earls of Buren, by the Marriage of Phi∣lip (eldest Son of the abovesaid Prince William, kept Prisoner by the Spaniard to his death) with the Heir of the Earl of Egmond, to whom this Bu∣ren, seated as before in Gelderland, did belong:
The Reader is to understand, that there are three several Branches of this Family, as that of Count William, Governour of Freisland, and the other of Weilborough; yet notwithstanding, in case this present Prince, Son of the late Lady Mary, Sister of our Soveraign, and Prince William the 3d. should dye without Issue, the greatest part of all these noble Estates, but this of Nassaw, together with the Title of Count Catzenbogen (a Town seated herein, but sold, after much difference and contest, to the Lantgrave of Hassia, who pre∣tended a right to it) goes to the Marquess of Bran∣denburg, who married a Daughter of the Family of Orange; as by Contract with the French King, he is certain of that Principality: This Family is ally∣ed to the greatest in Europe. The Earldom of Hanaw, and Lordship of Lichteberg, belong to the first and second Bran∣ches of the same House, and are a very Illustrious Family for Descent and Territory, but must give place to the Count of Solins for Antiquity; and in all times highly esteemed for their personal worth, much advanced in reputation of late, by the Mar∣riage of one of the late Earls thereof, with one of the Sisters of Prince Maurice, and afterwards with the Widow of the Earl of Egmond; and very re∣cently, by the Marriage of a Daughter of that House, to Prince Henry, who proved the Mo∣ther of William, the Father of this present Prince of Aurange. As to the two Imperial Cities, Friberg, and Wetzelaer, they comply with their Neighbours in the same Combination; the Religion profess'd
here being Calvinian altogether, but the Disci∣pline and Pride thereof mollified and accommoda∣ted to the Government, and the Peoples temper, as it is served in most places of Germany, where it hath been received. We pass now to the Dutchy of Wittenburg,12. Wit∣tenburg: and the Marquisate of Baden, and will suffer them to go joyned together, as we find them in Geography; and they are thus bounded; on two parts, South and East, with Swevia; on the West with the Rhine, and Brisgow, another part of Swevia; on the North with the Lower Palatinate; they are divided from one another by a high ridge of Hills. Wittenburg is, for the most part, a plentiful Country, but to∣wards the edges, and hath been the Dominion of many Martial Dukes, to which the present is no way inferiour: For want of Military Employment at home, he would have served the French, in the late War against the Spaniard, and should have been General of the Horse, being highly cares∣sed by that King; but that War being compo∣sed, he is now engaged in the service against the Turks. His Revenue is very considerable, for the Earl∣dom of Montletgard in Alsatia, omitted there pur∣posely, as to be reduced to this Estate, to which it hath belonged for many Ages, but lately some part thereof hath been seized by the French; who, after they had got Lorrain and Alsatia, stick'd at the Strong Holds of this Country; the Principal whereof, viz. Montletgard, being strongly seat∣ed on the top of a Mountain, under pretence of securing it for some younger Descendent of this
Family, whose right it was, they yet keep in their hands; as they do the Principality of Aurange, upon the same score: But his Towns are very de∣ficient in all furniture of Ammunition, and war∣like Provision, otherwise he would not be inferi∣our to most of the Princes; And yet a Magazine should concern this Prince, for he is alwayes in Fend with the free Cities, of which there are six in his Dutchy of Wittenburg, as Wimpten, Hail∣bran, on the Neccar, &c. But it is hazardous to begin new Troubles in Germany. The Marquisate of Baden is a great deal less con∣siderable, although it have the Earldom of Hoch∣berg joyned to it, but that advantage is reciproca∣ted by a disadvantage, that the Patrimony is par∣ted between two Families, this of Baden, and the younger, that of Baden Durlach; who, by the Imperial Constitution, is a Field Officer against the Turks this Campagnia. Concerning the Inte∣rests of these Princes, little is to be said, for all things were so lulled and secured by the Treaty at Munster, that scarce any Seeds remain of any Dis∣content; but if any such there be, Prudence will conceal them. Having thus traversed a great part of the Mid∣land, we will make a transition to the Eastermost parts of Germany, and in our return thence take in all the rest of the Country, being hindred from a methodical Conjunction of it, by the omission of the Hereditary Dominions; and therefore we shall next survey Brandenburg. This Province is bounded on the East with the Kingdom of Poland; on the South with Lusatia,13. Bran∣denburg.
Silesia, and Misnia; on the West with Saxony; and on the North with Pomerania. It contains 180. English Miles in length, and as much in bredth, which makes up 410. Miles in compass; plentiful of Corn, but not thick inhabited, nor well furnished with other accommodation. It is called, the Marck of Brandenburg, because they were the antient Marcks of the Empire, divided into the old Marcks, and the middle or upper Marcks, in which is Berlin, the Marquess's Resi∣dence; extending from the River Odera (which distinguisheth another Frankfort, abounding in Corn and Wine) to the Borders of Poland; Be∣sides this, he is possessed of the Ducal Prussia, and the share of the Dukedomes of Cleve, the reversi∣on of the Bishopricks of Magdeburg, the possessi∣on of Halberstadt, Minden, and Camire, with Title of Prince and Duke thereof, which he had in lieu of his resignation of the higher Dutchy of Po∣meren, &c. By the Treaty at Munster, the low∣er Pomeren, with the Lordships of Prignits and Cotten in Silesia, and two Towns in Vorteland, with the County of Rapir, and Jurisdiction of the Town of Cothins, in the Lower Alsatia. The Revenue of this Prince, notwithstanding these large Territories, is computed to be nothing considerable, not to amount to above 200000. at the utmost, but certainly they reckon without their Host; for although his Intrado be not any where exactly made out, yet the effects thereof do declare some greater matter; for what Armies did he maintain in the late Polish and Danish War, for six Years together, without any impairing of
his Dominions, and his Souldiers constantly paid? And if it be said; that he had a Purse before-stand, it will appear, that his constant Charge in Peace would consume such a summ, by the multitude of Garrisons he keeps, with such incident Expences. Most certain it is, that his Puissance is answerable to most of his Neighbour Princes, not hath he wanted Conduct and Fortune answerable there∣unto. His Interest is to keep a firm and good under∣standing with the Hollander, whom he knows how to use to his advantage; and because of his Expect∣ations there, if the Prince of Aurange should de∣cease a Minor without Issue. He hath respects for the Family of the Count Palatine, whose Sister he married; and at whose instance he would have in∣troduced the Calvinian for the Lutheran Professi∣on, but found it too hot for his fingers; never∣theless he exerciseth the Calvinian way in his pri∣vate Chapel, according to his Stipulation with his then mutinous Subjects. He is in good and per∣fect amity with the Emperour, and all the Prote∣stant Princes; with the Kings of Denmark and France; and Sweden and he reconciled, but he stands upon his Guard in that Point. In the first beginning of the Reformation, there was some Difference betwixt Albert of Brandenburg, and John Frederick of Saxony, but ever since they have continued Friends, for it was a Difference in Religion, the Saxon being then a Lutheran. He was first proposed as General against the Turks, but he declined it; but his rated numbers, with some super-numerary supply, will be advanced by
him; besides, he will be necessitated to keep some considerable: Forces in readiness, if the Turks, by some sudden Incursion, should ever pass through Silesia, as they have often attempted to get into it: And so we proceed to Pome∣rania. POMERANIA is bounded on the South with Brandenburg, on the West with Mecklen∣burg, on the North with the Baltique Sea, 200. Miles in length; and on the East with Prussia. It is divided into the Upper and Lower Pomerania, the former whereof, with the Isles of Rugen (a well-traded and inhabited County) the Isle of Wollin (the Trade whereof was long since con∣veyed to Lubeck) and the Town of Stettin, all three belonging to the Lower Pomeren, were as∣signed to the Swede; and the Brandenburger, whose it was, otherwise recompenced, but whe∣ther so well contented is the question: By this way the Swede hath an entrance into Germany and Po∣land, and is therefore a great Eye-sore to all the Neighbouring Princes, who look upon this back∣door, as a trap-door to surprize them unawares; but nothing less would content the Swede, who then had his Garrisons in every place of it; and be∣cause he first set footing in this Country, the Low∣er Pomeren is likewise to be his, in case the Male Issue of the Brandenburger should fail. This Dut∣chy is rated its Proportions for the Turkish War, which the Swede is not to exceed: And so we pass to Mecklenburg. MECKLENBURG is bounded on the East with Pomerania; on the South with Branden∣burg,
and Saxon Lawenburg; on the West with Holstein; and on the North with the Baltique Sea. The chief Town hereof is Wismar, built upon the ruines of old Mecklenburg, but assigned to the Swede at Murster; and the Temporalities of the Bishopricks of Swera and Ratzenburg given this Duke in lieu thereof. This is a fine Port Town, and another Inlet into Germany, and renders the Swede formidable also upon the Baltique Sea. In this Dutchy stands Fridland, the Title of Albert of Wallenstein, the Emperours General, who was afterwards made Duke of Mecklenburg also, in place of Adolph Frederick, and John Albert pro∣scribed by the Emperour; but was, by his raiser, soon after caused to be assassinated in his quarters at Egra, upon suspicion of his aspiring to the Impe∣rial Dignity; but by the Treaty these Dukes were restored, and Gustavus Adolphus, the Son of John Albert, now enjoyes the Estate. These Dukes are of little Power of themselves, and afford no discourse of Interest, which is bound up in the Union and Combination of the Protestant Princes. SAXONY, bounded on the East with Bohe∣mia and Brandenburg;16. Saxony. on the North with part of the same, and Mecklenburg; on the West with Hassia, Brunswick, &c. and on the South with Franconia. Divided into two main Members, viz. Upper Saxony, Misnia, Vorteland, and Turin∣gia, the Estate of the Duke of himself: And 2. the Principality of Anhalt, Earldom of Mansfield, Arch-bishoprick of Magdeburg (yet administred by the Brother of this Duke, but after his death
to be given the Elector of Brandenburg) and Saxon Lawenburg, the Estate of another Family of this Duke, besides that of Weymar, descended of John Frederick, deposed by Charles the 5th. and the Town or Weymar given him for his mainte∣nance: His Nephew, with Count Mansfield, and the Marquess of Jagerendorf, followed the fortune of Frederick, Prince Elector, and greatly molest∣ed the Emperour, till forsaken by Bethlehem Ga∣bor, and destitute of all means, being then in Hun∣gary, to maintain their Army; whereupon Mans∣field hasted, with his most Expedite Troops, through Bosnia, where he dyed of a Flux, having given himself Poyson, as was reported; and the gallant Duke of Weymar, wasted with the same dis∣content and vexation, retired into Silesia, and there also expired; as not long after did Jageren∣dorf, and Gabor sooner. The Son of this Weymar proved as gallant a Person as his Father against the Emperour, and was made Generalissimo of the French Forces in Germany, but he dyed soon after, and in him by report that Family is extinct: But to return, for we must not stand to enumerate all Particulars in this mighty Province. The other Part is meerly Feudatory, and that scarcely per∣formed, 1. The Princes of Anhalt indeed owe some kind of dependence to this Duke, but they are free Princes of the Empire, and have proved excellent Warriours, and Favourers of the Refor∣mation; Christian the young Prince thereof, fal∣ling unhappily in the quarrel of the Count Pala∣tine, at the Battel of Prague; and the Interest of this Family is still the same, although in former
times highly honoured by the Emperours, and in∣deed not yet dis-respected by them. They are by Religion Calvinists. The Counts of Mansfield have almost traced the same steps of Military Glory after those of Arhalt, and their Revenue almost as considerable, part of their Estate being in Mortgage to the Dukes of Saxony, but neither o any ment to enterprize any thing of themselves; for the late Count Mans∣field's sudden  the motions and actions, and keep∣ing his men together, oo ing me to day, and getting as many more speedlly after, were rather Miracles, than the Effects of Reason. This Family is still in being, and thinks it best yet to be quiet. As to the Bishop of Magdeburg, that Title was abolished by the Reformation, the Magdeburgers putting themselves sometimes under the Protection of the Brandenburger, and sometime of the Saxon, with the Title of Administrator, which Augustus, the Brother of this Duke enjoyes, &c. as afore∣said. And as much as sufficeth hath been said of the fourth Member of this second Part, the Dutchy of Lawenburg, which depends dutifully upon this Elder House. The Revenue of this Prince is computed at 400000 l. double to that of Brandenburg, ari∣sing partly out of his Silver Mines, which yield 140000 l. of the Money; and next, out of his Salt, made at Hall, and the Excise of Beer, which amounts to great summs; Besides, he levies a con∣stant Tax for Provision, and maintenance of a War against the Turks, although in the most serenest
times: With this Revenue he keepeth a splendid Court, at his Residence of Dresden, and main∣taineth a noble Magazine, out of which, in a dayes time, he can furnish out Armes for above 30000. Horse and Foot; Here also he hath a Stable, which will hold 128. Horses, fit for service; both the Horse, and the Armes, so neatly kept, of which there is at least 12000. for Horse, with 80. Can∣non, and Demi-Culverins, and 170. other Cul∣verins, and Sakers; Besides which Magazine, all the Cities and Towns have Armories of their own, well kept and provided, nor are the Gentry unprovided. By which it appears, that this Prince is the most Considerable in Germany, as well as by that advan∣tage and disadvantage he did the Swedes, first by ad∣hering, and then relinquishing them, by a Neu∣trality with the Emperour. His Alliances also with all the Protestant Princes, and the Common Inte∣rest of them all, which hath its dernier resort hi∣ther, as it rendred him in former tsmes suspect to the Emperours, who never liked so much Great∣ness in any House but their own; so is it not plea∣sing now to the Catholique Princes and States, and especially the House of Bavaria, and the Ecclesi∣astiques. There lately happened a quarrel in this Dukes Territory of Turingia, at Erford, an Uni∣versity, to which the Bishop of Mentz layes claim, as founded and built by his Predecessors; but they having shaken off that Soveraignty, in the time of that Founder, by name William, the Son of the Emperour Otho the 2d. have since dis∣claimed any other Power, but what they exercise
themselves, as a Hanse and Free City of the Em∣pire; having the Duke of Saxony for their Patron, and good Neighbour; and who, by interessing himself for them, ceased those troubles which were like to arise between the Bishop and them, in this unhappy Juncture. He is obliged to do something extraordinary a∣gainst the Turk, for that Taxes sake, which he hath received for so many Years together, with∣out any occasion of disbursement; yet his Subjects do not much care for that War in person, and would wish the Money bestowed in hiring of Mer∣cenaries, for they march heavy, and laden with Weapons, and Bottles, and a Baggage behind, without which a Saxon is no-body in the Field: So we pass to Brunswick and Lunenburg. 17. Bruns∣wick.BRUNSWICK is bounded on the East with the County of Mansfield, on the North with Lunenburg, on the West with Westphalen, and on the South with Hassia; The Principal Town is Brunswick, but Imperial; about many quarrells here happened betwixt the Dukes, and that Town, the Dukes Residence being at Wolfenbittel. Here is also the Bishoprick of Halberstadt, of which these Dukes were Administrators upon the Re∣formation, but now conveyed to the Marquess of Brandenburg. 18. Lu∣nenburg.LUNENBURG hath on the West the Diocess of Bremen, on the North the River Elb, on the East Magdeburg, and on the South Bruns∣wick. The chief City of Lunenburg is Imperial and Free, and eminent for its strength and beauty, but acknowledges not the Duke; And herein is
seated the Bishoprick of Verda, granted the Swede likewise at Munster, together with the Bishop∣rick of Bremen. Both these Families are so inter∣woven with one another, by Alliances and De∣scents, that the one succeeds the other in either Dukedom, if there be a failer of Issue in either; but now the Brunswick Line is wholly extinct, and a second Brother of Lunenburg is Duke thereof. These Dukes have alwayes had a kindness for our Nation, as being originally descended of the Dukes of Normandy; and the late Duke of Bruns∣wick somewhat allyed to this Crown, by marry∣ing with the Lady Elizabeth of Denmark, Sister to Queen Anne. These are Considerable Princes, but can be no Undertakers of themselves: And so we proceed to Hassia. 19. Hassia.HASSIA is bounded on the East with Tu∣ringia, on the South with Wetteraw, on the West with Westphalia, and on the North with Bruns∣wick. It is a very pleasant Country, stored with good Sheep, who yield the finest Fleeces; and with Venison; and is also plentiful of Corn; and hath good store of Mines of Brass and Lead, very profitable to the Inhabitants. The Lant∣graves of this Country have been in former times a great deal more powerful than now they are, for Philip the Lantgrave, in the Reign of Charles the 5th. did in a manner dispose of the Affairs of the Empire, till Fortune turned, and made him a Pri∣soner, although with treachery; he was after∣wards restored, although much disabled by his Composition: Since when, the Estate hath been more weakened, by the numerous Issue of his Son
William, betwixt whom this Estate was parted, one Moyety to the elder Brother, the other to the two younger; who are known by the names of the Lantgraves of Morpurg and Darmstadt, two Cities in this District: The elder House being di∣stinguished by their Residence of Cassils; who readily concurred with the Swede in the German War, managed by a Widow, the Administratrix of her young Son the Lantgrave; and by which, and the Swedes instances on her behalf at Munster, she came off no loser: no more than did her Cousin George of Darmstadt, against whom, upon some Pique, she was engaged, by the Swede, who as∣sisted her therein, towards the Expiration of the German War; for the Swedes themselves, being bound to a Neutrality with him, and lacking quarters, and otherwise offended at him, as one which secretly favoured the Emperour (he fol∣lowing there the advice of his Father, upon his death-bed, who counselled him, that when a War should be raised, upon pretence of Religion, he should be sure not to take Armes upon that score, against the House of Austria) found this Expedi∣ent to attaque him, but by the means of the Neighbour Princes, this unnatural Flame was soon extinguished. This Family is reckoned as Honour∣able as any in Germany, and of a considerable Inte∣rest among all the Princes of the Empire, especially of those of the Protestant Union, and is in good terms with all forein Princes. Thus have we sur∣rounded Germany by a Circumambulation, and finished the Survey, by bringing it to the Point where we set out.
THE Arch-Dukedom OF AƲSTRIA. THE Arch-Dukedom of Austria, being al∣lyed to the Empire, alwayes (its Arch-Dukes descending, as some think, from Charles the Great, in a direct Masculine Line) was very strong; and united to it now, is much stronger; as Commanding Hungary, which bounds it on the East; Obliging Bavaria, that encloseth it on the West; Possessing Bohemia and Moravia, that lye on the North of it; Awing Istria and Friuli, that stand on the South; and seeing nothing round about it, but its own Territories: Whether we reflect on its Interest a∣broad, 1. In strong Obligations upon the Pope, since the kindness of the Emperours, Phocas, and Rodolphus the First; 2. On the (now useful) Title to the 17. Provinces, by the Marriage of Maximilian of Austria, with Mary, Daughter of Burgundy; 3. In the many Inter-Marriages
with the Kings of Spain, since the time of Charles the Great: Or on its Condition at home, plenti∣full for all manner of Provision, and so strong, with all manner of Strong-Holds, that (as Count Hohenlo delivered himself at Regensburg) if Tyrol were well-fortified, on the Alps, towards France; Walkinstein, Lints, Ens, Ipnewstad, and other Towns, upon the Danube, and Dravus, well-strengthened, towards Sclavonia; Stiria, or Stier∣mark, well-guarded, towards Hungary; If Liber∣ty of Conscience were allowed, and the Privilege of Princes were abated, this Dukedom might be well called (as Solyman the Magnificent termed it) The Rampire of Christendom. For, 1. Wien, or Vienna, its Metropolis, on the Banks of the Da∣nube, as strong as it's stately, hath a mighty Wall, that gave the aforesaid Sclyman such a repulse, as that of 200000. Men he brought before it, he car∣ried away but an 118000. from it. 2. The Alps, with a few Forts, secure it on the one hand: and the Danube, with the Dravus, wall it on the o∣ther; this from Turkey, that from France. Here is 320. Miles in Land, and yet none of this hold∣ing of the Arch-Duke; 4. Earls. 23. free Barons, and none of these enfeoffed of the Empire; inso∣much that Austria is of late shrunk in its Power, for the Vastness of its Estate; and eclipsed in its Glory, for the Honour of its Subjects. Yet 223000 l. it will afford in Revenue; 14000. Foot, and 4000. Horse, it can raise in Forces; Four Years Provision it yields in Necessaries; Furniture and Armes for 60000. Foot, and 24000. Horse, it keeps up in Magazines; Four
Councils it holds (one at Vienna, for Austria properly so called; another at Insbruck, for Ty∣rol; another at Grets, under a Chancellour, for Stiermark; and another at Gertun, for Carinthia and Carniola) for War and Peace. The Interest of Austria, Carniola, and Carin∣thia, is to secure their Bulwarks, Tyrol, and Stiermark; and the Interest of Tyrol, and Stier∣mark, is to second Count Serini, in fortifying upon the Mur, and Dravus, near Gratzpruch, Steckaw, Petaw, and Canisia, against another In∣cursion of the Mahumetans; and to follow the Duke of Insbruch, in strengthening Trent, to∣wards Italy; Hall, Swaz, and Malh, towards the Alps, to check the Transalpines from passing to Germany, till the next time they have need of them. It were not amiss likewise, that Anstria left its State-pretences of Liberty, under a Christian Em∣perour, urged by it so long, till it was almost en∣slaved to an Infidel; That it ceased limiting its Arch-Dukes Authority to Command it, before he lose his Power to Protect it; That it quit its Fears and Jealousies touching Religion and Privileges, before it have none to be afraid or jealous of : It being never likely to be well in Germany, till the Princes, and the free Cities agree, who shall Obey; the Emperour, and the Princes consent, who shall Command; the Catholiques and Prote∣stants set down what is Christianity: Obedience o∣therwise being likely to become a Snare, Autho∣rity a Name, and Christianity a State of Infidelity. Besides that, the Arch-Dukes hereof (branched
since into three most considerable Interests, viz. that of the Emperour, the King of Spain, and the House of Burgundy) rising, as it is observed, at the same time with the Ottoman Family, to re∣strain the growing Greatness of that Empire, should, as the first Emperour of that House, since the last Interruption, keep a strict Correspon∣dence with the Potentates of Asia and Africa, that border on that dreadful Monarch; to invade the Turk from Europe, when he lyeth too hard on either Asia or Africa; and to annoy him from those Coasts, when ever he looked towards Eu∣rope; as the King of Carmania did in Asia, when Amurath invaded Hungary; and the Hungarians did, when that Surly Musulman turned short up∣on the King of Caramania. HƲNGARY. HUNGARY lying 300. English Miles in length, 290. in bredth, from Presburg, along the Danube, to the Borders of Transylvania, is all along in danger of the Oppressions of the Em∣pire, from Stiria, and Austria, that lye on the West of it; from the Turmoyles of Poland, and
Swedeland, that border the North of it; from the Turkish Power of Sclavonia, Dacia, Wallachia, and Transylvania, that limit the East and South of it. A Country that can endure neither its Mise∣ries, nor the Remedies of them; neither the wast∣ing War of the Mahumetan, nor the suspected Peace of the Empire; especially since the People here are so long used to War, that they know not how to live in Peace; being so lazy that they can∣not work, they will be so troublesome as to fight for their Livelyhood; and when the Turk doth not make it necessary for the Emperour to defend him∣self, the Hungarians make it more than necessary for him to offend others. A rich, but trouble∣some Clergy they had, which Maximilian the Em∣perour brought to Stipends and Pensions. Great Privileges they boasted of, since King Andrew's time; but they are undone if they lose them not, (for while they are disputing whether Elective or Hereditary, whether they have not Power to op∣pose their King, in case he wrongs them, they are hardly a Nation worth the enjoying, or a People worth the governing) the Turk having swallowed up almost two Parts of three. While they are an∣gry with their Master, the Emperour, that they had not the pleasure to laugh at his ruine, and their own (for some People had rather be undone than governed) he having clapped up so sudden a Peace, it's well they have so much Wit in their Anger, as yet to fortifie their Borders; Particularly, 1. Ra∣ab (on the meeting of the Danube with the River Raab) 2. Castlenovo; 3. Gomorrha, an Island en∣circled by the Danube; 4. Fyleck, the Place that
cost Solyman the Magnificent, and Amurath the 3d. 300000. Men; 5. Lippe, a Fort that com∣mands the Passes to Transylvania; and 6. Tockay, a Strong Hold of vast service. Lentulus would say of the Hungarians, then called Pannonians antiently, That they were so un∣constant, that there was no governing them, but by Cittadels; so unruly, that they knew no other Kings, but their Landlords; that they understood no Duty, but towards a General; and that they owned no Reli∣gion, but Liberty. And I may add of Hungary, what they say of Scotland, That as long as the Peo∣ple hang so much on the Nobility, and the Priest∣hood, neither Nobility nor Priesthood will stick to the King: Since they are so subtile and proud, it's well they are so voluptuous, and that their wit and malice is softned by their pleasures. It's some secu∣rity, that a Faction is deboished, especially here, where none comes to undoe the Common-wealth, but a Sober Man; it being an Hermit that first taught Hungary that dangerous way of Marrying Noblemens Children as soon as born, and entring them in a Combination, as soon as they are matri∣culated Christians. It's a wonder the Emperour cannot as well be rid of the Palatine of Hungary, as the King of Spain is of the Justice of Arragon, both whom pretending a Power between King and People, usurped an Authority over both; not easily checked, unless, as Albertus, Arch-Duke of Austria, got the Title to the Kingdom, by mar∣rying the King's Daughter 1431. so his Successors may keep Possession, by marrying the Palatine's: The Hungarians, and the Welshmen, agreeing in
this, that they would willingly be governed by none but their own Natives. But rather than insist on these Niceties, it be∣comes these desolate People, 1. To fix upon some Principles that may unite these divided States; 2. That they promote the general Peace of Christen∣dom; 3. That they provide good Shipping upon the Danube; 4. That they Victual and Garrison the Frontier Towns already erected, and erect more; 5. That they set up the Profession of Reli∣gion, in so decent a way, as may work upon their Neighbour Turks, a Reverence at least of, if not a Respect for it; 6. That they observe those Dissen∣tions that grow among the Infidels, and make use of their Discontents to weaken their Power: A Lesson they might well learn from the very Turks themselves, who have invaded Hungary now 8. times, upon no other Encouragement, than the Contests that they have had among themselves a∣bout Religion, and the Quarrels with their Liege Lords about Liberty; 7. That they prosecute the Mines that yield the Emperour 162000 l. and em∣ploy 10000. idle men, that might be worse busi∣ed: And encourage Tillage, where Wheat is high∣er than a man's head, Vines over-top the Trees, Grass groweth up to the Knees, and the Woods threaten the Clouds; And 8. That they train their Foot to as much Expertness, as they do their Horse; that the Bandi may be as eminent amongst them, as their Heyduchs: to which purpose, a ve∣terane Army of 3000. Horse and Foot, such as t ey raised Anno 1561. were not amiss, since the Emperour holds but one Part of this Country, and the Great Turnk two.
BOHEMIA. BOHEMIA lyeth open to the same Dan∣gers with Hungary, from Greece alwayes ob∣noxious to Invasions, and from Germany alwayes lyable to Pressures; only it receives not less advan∣tage from Calvinism, than the Neighbour Coun∣tries have done from Lutheranism: For the Empe∣rour had been absolute e're this, and all the Privi∣leges, contended for here, and elsewhere, swal∣lowed up, had not the Reformers put in a new stickling Principle into the People, and made those, who were ready to forgoe their Liberties, stand fast for their Religion: The Italians (saith a Statesman) who are very clear-sighted in Matters of State, have perceived this long since: And Bocalini, when he brings in Apollo, making answer to Sir Thomas More, That all People will be Catholiques, when the King of Spain will be content with Castile, and the Emperour with the County of Hasburgh; Makes it evident, That Religion is the Bulwark of their Liberty, and that which upholdeth all other States, secures this. It was a great weakness in the Bohemians, to cast off the Emperour, whose Power raised them to a Kingdom, and whose He∣reditary
Estates surrounds them: And it were a greater now, to dispute with him, since it lyeth so open to the Mahumetan, by the way of Mora∣via, lying on the West of it; and to the Swede, by the way of Silesia, lying on the North. In which Places, were Olmualz, on the River Mark; Brin, on the River Schwatz, Swaein, on the Teia, on the one stand; Glatz; with Noiste, on a River of that name; Breslaw, and Glogaw, on the River Odera, well guarded with Forts, Re∣doubts, and Lines of Communication, the 200000. Foot, and the 32000. Horse (that Dubravi saith the Emperour could raise here, taking only a tenth man) might make such an impression upon the de∣bauched and divided State of the Turk, as might alter the present settlement, and fear of the World. Only the Cavalry here are not so excel∣lent, by reason of the generous freedom allowed their Gentlemen, as the Foot are unserviceable, by reason of the despicable dejectedness impressed on their common People: Otherwise, this King of Bohemia, might bid for the Eastern Empire, as fairly as Sigismond of Luxemburgh, another King thereof, did for the Western; of whom it's said, that being in the Diet, for the Choice of an Emperour, after the Death of Robert of Bavaria, spoke the first, according to the Custom; and say∣ing, That he knew no man more worthy of the Empire than he was, named himself; whereupon, the rest of the Electors, his Colleagues, admiring his free∣dom and generosity, unanimously gave him their Voices. An Interest as easily made, had this Em∣perour three Lay-Counsellours, and three Clergy∣men
of his Council (Bohemians by Birth) as that had, who might give such safe Counsells in the grand Points of Religion and Liberty, as might ac∣commodate all the Pretences of both kinds, those Bohemians made against the Emperour Mathias; Provided alwayes, That that Emperours mistake be avoided, and than no Person there be advanced so farr, that he hath nothing more to be ambitious of, save his Power that advanced him: For I shall never forget, how Theodosius, Duke of Bragan∣za, and the richest Lord in Portugal, being dis∣pleased with Philip the 3d. his Liege Lord, be∣cause he was not permitted to walk side by side with him, withdrew from Court; and how the Courtiers, fore-seeing the danger of so great a Person's discontent, in so unsetled a Kingdom, intreating his Majesty to satisfie him, before he went home; the King sent for him, and upon his approach, with an extraordinary sweetness, said to him, Pedid Du{que}. Ask what you would have, my Lord: The Duke, swelled with his Grandeur, answered, Senor, los Mayores de vuestru Majestad, que tanbien han sido los mios, hizieron tautas merce∣des a msa, que no me queda, nada que pedir: Sir, Your Majesties Ancestours, who were mine al∣so, have bestowed so many favours and bounties upon my House, that there remains nothing for me to ask. Whereat the whole Court was surprized, and, af∣ter much Discourse, concluded, That though it be honourable for the Soveraign to aggrandize his best-deserving Subject, yet ought he to be very circumspect in the distribution of Favours, if he would not lose that honour and respect which his
Inferiours owe him; especially, if there be an Op∣portunity left too, by a pretence of Election, to be the Soveraigns Competitor: A Pretence, how∣ever plausible, hath cost Germany, Poland, Hun∣gary, and Bohemia, more blood and treasure, than would have made their respective Princes Univer∣sal Monarchs; Wherefore it's expected Hungary and Bohemia would make it part of their Interest utterly to exclude it, and set up Succession, a way least obnoxious to Disorder and Anarchy, to En∣croachments and Usurpations, to Feuds and Ani∣mosities, to Charges and Impositions, with many other Inconveniencies, this last Age is so sensible of, that another will not venture the Experiment. But allow the 1200000. Imperial, raised from the Mines, and other Revenues, to the Emperour, for its peace and safety, whose Power is the more firm by the last shaking, and more rich by the last Confiscation: For there was something in Gondo∣mar's humour (though failing in the instance it was occasioned by) who, upon the famous Revolt of the Portuguez upon Christmass Day 1640. went to his Master, and challenged Allobricias, that is, a Reward for good News; who asking what it was, he told him very seriously, that Portugal was fallen off: And his Majesty standing amazed, both at the News, and the Relator; the strange∣ness of the one, and the impudence of the other: Nay, said he, Sir, be not amazed, for now the whole Realm is your own, every man hath forfeited his Estate, and stands at your mercy. What Peo∣ple soever goe to disturb a Monarchy, settle it, as giving advantage to that Power, which in the or∣dinary
times of Peace was limited, in those extra∣ordinary of War to become boundless: And provo∣king that Authority, which, by the Constitution of it, is regular, in its own, and the Publicks de∣fence, to become arbitrary: As it must needs be here, where there is no hope of flourishing again, untill Bohemia is divided now, as it was formerly, by Charles 12. into 12. Parts, under 12. Gover∣nours, like the Bashaws of Turkey, and the Major Generals of England. TRANSYLVANIA. TRANSYLVANIA, into which, 1. The Turk hath so easie an entrance, by Mol∣davia, on the East of it; 2. The Emperour, by Upper Hungary, on the West of it; 3. The Po∣lander, Muscovite, and Swede, by Russia Nigra, and Wallachia, on the North of it: And all by the Differences between its seven free Cantons, hath its Concerns reduced into a narrow Compass, ha∣ving no more to do, than to submit to a great Ma∣ster, that may awe its Neighbours to Civility, and its self to a Peace, by an Army of its own Natives; who (so populous a Place it is) seldom appear under 70000. Men, and these so fierce and war∣like,
that if, leaving a competent number to ma∣nage their rich and fertile Country, they were employed (especially the Heyduchs or Horse∣men) abroad, would rescue the Liberties of Christendom, while with Intestine Animosities they lose their own: Especially, since the Princes of that Country are guilty of the same over-sight with the Bishop of Rome, permitting, as he doth, some pretendingly Noble Families, who have no other visible subsistence, than those Pensions al∣lowed them by their respectively Royal Patrons, to observe the Defects, and disturb the Peace of the Places they live in: Which yet they attempted in vain, as long as Clausenburgh was well fortified, Alba Julia is secured, Waraden is furnished, and the wild Province Zaculiria is reduced to any or∣der or civility; Which being but once happily done, Moldaviaes. plentiful Wilderness, that lyeth on the West of it, 300. Miles round, might be recovered; Wallachiaes barbarous Country, that runs 500. Miles in length, and 120. in bredth, might, notwithstanding its woody Mountains that environ it, be subdued; Poor Rascia, that lyeth 80. Miles Northward of it, might be peopled; Rich Servia (that lyeth on the East of this Place, and Upper Hungary) and its Mines, might be seized; Bulgaria, and its Hills, might be at∣taqued; the Danube might be commanded: But I leave these things to those mighty Emperours of the East and West, who having spent most of their own, and their Neighbours ill humours, in the late War, have now both security and leisure to settle their Dominions, and improve them. Only
we may observe one great Defect in the Policy of both these Potentates, that they transplant not the Natives into other Countries, and settle Strangers here, to keep these unquiet People in some order; who can endure neither Liberty or Servitude, and know as little how to Command themselves, as to Obey others. What the Emperour may do, who hath Waruden, Enguiden, and such Places, on the one hand: and the Polander, who hath Zilhali, and Gela, on the other; we shall see, when the Succession of Spain and Poland is setled, and the Discontents between the Turk and Constantinople are heightened: In the mean time, if Abell shews not his Superiours a Trick, he is no Calvinist. CROATIA. IT were a Wonder, why the Grand Seigniour, 1663. as soon as he had set up his Standard at Constantinople, should command the Prime Vizier, and the main Body of his Army, to so inconsider∣able a Place as Croatia, did not the World since understand, that it is the Habitation of the Seri∣nies, and the Croates, the best Commanders and Souldiers this day in the Christian World; who not only kept this Place against the Impressions of
Windischland, on the North of it; Bosnia, on the East; Cantado de Zura, on the South; being assist∣ed only by Carniola, on the West: but also threat∣ned as much mischief to the Mahumetans, on the Christians side, as the Cossacks or Tartars did the Christians, on the Mahumetans. Especially, since they have the Hungarians to assist them, under a pretence of right in one part of Sclavonia, on the one hand; and the Venetians pretending to another part of it, on the other: The House of Austria having a ready passage into it, from their part of Winchesland, one way; and the Serene Republique the like, by the way of Dalmatia, another: Only the Republique of Ragusi, having its Peace of the Turk, on Condition to distract the Christian, doth unfortunately interpose ever and anon; upon which account, it's thought the Interest of Christ∣endom, that there were no such thing as a Com∣mon-wealth in it: but that the whole were guided by the same Principles, in order to the same grand Interest; Only the mischief of it is, the Venetians command Zara, the chief City of Contado de Zara, for which they, and the Hungarians, had such long Wars, as the Key into Ragusi, Croatia, and Hun∣gary it self: Which Inconvenience yet the Seri∣nies, and other brave Gentlemen would remedy, did it stand with the Interest of Germany, their Religion with Armes, or their Popularity with Power.
Of those Parts OF EƲROPE, That are under THE TURK. HItherto of the Christendom of Europe, now of the Turkey thereof; Having surveighed our own State, and what we may hope, take we a view of the Mahumetans, and what we may fear; whose Dominion is placed most conveniently for the Universal Monarchy he aimed at, being evenly situated between Europe and Asia, as some think, on the Center of the habitable World; whereby he is ready, on all Occasions, to stretch his Con∣quest every way, being able to conveigh Recruits, Supplyes, and Armies into either Coast: His own Seat, Constantinople, the boundary of both
Parts of the World, lying on the shore of the Seas of either the Euxine, and the Mediterranean, which command the Plenty of each Region, to the very Walls of the Seraglio; and then conveigh the Power of that mighty Place to both those Countries: As, 1. To Europe; and there, 1. to Sclavonia, ly∣ing so obnoxious Eastward to Macedon, and Epi∣rus; whence their great Lord pours forth, over the River Drinus, his numberless Slaves, upon all Occasions; when either Germany threatneth them Westward, by the way of Carniola, Venice, by the way of Histria; or Hungary, by the way of BOSNIA; Formerly united to that King∣dom, till Mahomet the Great, having taken Con∣stantinople, and with it most part of Greece, in the Year One thousand four hundred sixty and four, seized it, and its new King, whom he stead alive, annexing his Kingdom to his own Empire, and set∣ling a Bashaw over it, with order to alter the Con∣stitution of that Place, as the North of Dalmatia, along the Adriatique (where the Venetians pay Custom to the Grand Seigniour, for all their Mer∣chandize, wherewith to conjure him to Peace) setling the People of Bosnia in the Garrisons of Dalmatia, and those of Dalmatia in the Strong Holds of Bosnia; which is bound to send 1500. young Ladds a year into the Seraglio, as a token of their subjection, and a security for their good be∣haviour: Besides that, no Inhabitant must be a Field Officer, without a special Licence of the Grand Vizier, within an hundred Mile of his Na∣tive
Country; save at Ragusa, a Place the Turk keeps from the Usurpation of the Venetians, and the Venetians keep from the Oppressions of the Turk; as the little Republique of Geneva is kept by the Duke of Savoy from Spain, and by Spain from France, and by France from both the former. And in the Isles Curzola, Zara, and Coreym; Places too remote for this great Potentate to pass, and yet too near to trust; especially, since the Republique of Venice possesseth the greatest part of the Islands, and all the Sea-coasts, from the River Arisia, to the Bay of Calthaw. And the Empe∣rour, as King of Hungary, the Inland parts of Windischland and Croatia; He himself having only Bosnia, some Cities in Windischland, and among the Croates, with a little share of Dalmatia, on∣ly from the Bay of Calthaw, to Albania; which would be quickly lost, had not Solyman, in the un∣seasonable Dissentions, between Ferdinand, Arch-Duke of Austria, and John Sepusio, Vayvod of Transylvania, seized, with other Towns; which seizure is now so farr improved, by the possession of Newhausell, and divers other Places, which the Turk keeps upon the last Peace, so farr, that no eminent Places, save Presburgh, Gomorrah, Raab, and Tockay, are reserved to the House of Austriae; the whole Country besides lying open to the Pow∣er of that mighty Monarch, not to be checked, but by new Fortresses upon the Borders and Frontiers of that Kingdom; especially towards Belgrade, a strong Place upon the Confluence of the Dravus, and Danow, by the former whereof it is walled in Northward, and Eastward by the later; formerly
the Bulwark of Christendom, lost, for want of suc∣cours, to Solyman the Magnificent, and now the Strong Hold of Turkey; especially, since it is re-inforced by Gran, Newhausell, and Novi∣grad. DACIA: And the stronger for the absolute Power and Command the great Sultan hath in Da∣cia, on the East of Hungary, which contains not only Transylvania, of which at large before, but Moldavia, Wallachia, Rascia, on the North side of the Danow, together with Servia and Bulgaria on the South. MOLDAVIA; Guarded by the danger∣ous, and miscalled Euxine Sea, Eastward; with unsetled Transylvania, Westward; with the tur∣bulent Niiestru, and the more turbulent Podolia, Northward; and with Wallachia, Southward. More plentiful in Provision, than in People; and more abundant in People, than in Habitations for them; and in more Habitations for Men, than the thousand heads of Cattel, that run, for want of Owners, from the fat Pastures of this untilled Country, to the better peopled Parts, towards Crakow, on the one hand, and Constantinople, on the other. So rich a Country, but for the sad Neighbourhood of the depopulating Tartars and Cossacks, that the Turk dares not trust it to its own People, for fear of a Revolt: nor to the Neigh∣bourhood, for fear of a War; but keeps it, for 300. Miles round, as broken in its Constitution, as it is in its Religion; the one being but the Image
of Government, allowed at Constantinople: and the other but the Shape of Religion, professed in the Greek Church. He that gives most Money at the Seraglio, hath the tributary Vayvodship of this Place; and he that drives most Cattel, hath the most Money. One whereof was so Potent, I mean John, who was Vayvod 1570. that assisted by Peter, his Neighbour of Wallachia, he shaked off the Turshish Yoak: As did likewise Aaron, another Vayvod, confederate with the Prince of Transylvania, and sheltered by the King of Poland, and the Emperour; till all these, weary of the daily Incursions of the Turks, rendred it up a Prey to their fury, 1622. Since which Year it sub∣mits peaceably to its great Masters, and attends their service most dutifully in all their Wars; so that they never marched into, or traversed over this miserable Coast; which wants nothing but a resolved number of Inhabitants, such as over∣stocked Europe would easily afford, backed by the Pole and Muscovite, who might be this way better employed, than they are at present, to garrison, fortifie, and husband it; in order to that Freedom, to which the Turkish Dissetledments give no little Opportunities; especially to a Place utterly unac∣cessible to the Ottoman Army, which never durst attempt any farther than its Borders, where it ra∣ther Frighted, than Conquered it, to that Vassa∣lage, that is unworthy of Humane Nature, either to Impose, or Submit to: A Vassalage no part of the World groans under, but this, and its next Neighbour
WALLACHIA; Distinguished from it only by a ridge of Mountains, otherwise so near a kin in barbarism and misery, that they went under one sad Name of Moldavia, till their last Devasta∣tion, more merciful on this side that Place, than on the other. That there should be a Country, in so civil a Place as Europe, five hundred Miles in length, an hundred and twenty in bredth, so plen∣tifull, as to be the Granary of the wasted Confines of Asia; and to give as much Reputation to the Ri∣ver Ister, as it borroweth Fertility from it; That admits neither a Scholar, a Book, nor a Letter into its Borders, upon pain of death, were a Wonder: but that a mans second thoughts inform him, this ignorance contributes so much to the Mahumetan Government, that the banishment of Learning, is no less a part of its Constitution, than the forbidding of Wine. Since their suing for Protection in Hungary, had almost ruined it; since their resignation of themselves into the hands of their several Neighbour Princes, as the necessi∣ty and occasion of War required, proved success∣less to themselves, and fatal to those Neighbours; and since the Great Turk, finding the entire Con∣quest of the Country so difficult, by reason of the defence Nature had provided, with its Rocks, Mountains, and Precipices, cunningly, some 30. Years agoe, declined any further Enterprize of War, undertaking those more subtil of Peace, whereby he managed the Intestine Divisions of the Brethren, Wladus, and Dracula, with suggesti∣ons, and supplyes on either side, to such a degree
of Devastation and Ruine, that his own Auxilia∣ries there, were able to make him acknowledged Lord of the Country, under Conditions and Li∣mitations to his absolute Authority, as the nearness of a continual Aid from the Christian World ad∣joyning, induced him to: Thereunto allow, I say, the nearness of the Christian Succours, which Ra∣gotzi had effectually raised, to assist the late Vay∣vod, but that the Fate of Germany had rather un∣dergoe a general Calamity, than assist those parti∣cular Undertakings; as if it were more Eligible, to have these Limbs of Europe unnaturally turned a∣gainst its self, than prudently strengthened against its most dreadful and irreconcilable Adversary; who, I am confident, must quit his hold here, as soon as ever it pleaseth God to recover the anti∣ent and lively Impressions of Christianity, which, if not defaced, would ennoble its Professors with thoughts above their present condition; especial∣ly, if some more civil People were invited thither, by their Gold and Silver Mines (which they will not yet discover) to secure Golatz, on the Pruth and Danube; surprize the strong Castle of Pralai∣ba, the Inlet into this Coast; and furnish Zorza, re-incompassed by an Arm of the Danube, in which, when Sigismund of Transylvania took, he found 39. great Ordinances, with Armes and Am∣munitions, enough to furnish a Kingdom: Only the mischief of it is, RASCIA, Which is their Neighbour Coun∣try on the East (as it is the Hungarians on the West, the Transylvanians on the North, and the
Danubes on the South, which indeed, with Te∣mes, coasts it on three sides) is made so despe∣rate, by the Oppressions of Servia first, and since by the Desolations of Turkey, that they care not what they attempt upon this Place, by the Autho∣rity of their Master, the Grand Seigniour; under whom they are in better case in times of War, than in those of Peace: The People hereof being so miserable, that they have quitted and forgot their very Names, not a man of quality surviving the general depression, and escaping the common barbarism. Often did they link themselves to their respective Neighbours of Servia and Wallachia, with whom they tasted the same fortune: but now they own no body but their tyrannical Master, to whom they perform excellent service, when their natural Courage, which, like Brutes, they re∣tain, is emulously provoked by other as barbarous People. Yea, likewise so farr do they retain their primitive hatred against the Musulmans, their cruel Masters, that upon all Occasions, they have been ready to shew their inclination, but to very little purpose, more than to shew their more Noble Extract and Ancestry, though they have not Colonies to plant there, the Mahumetans be∣ing not so numerous, notwithstanding their Poly∣gamy, as they are accounted; and their often mis∣carriages (the Country being so desolate, that a man cannot find an Inn, or an Harbour, in a dayes riding) having discouraged all Expeditions thither on purpose; so that the wretched Inhabitants, with a little backing, might withdraw their necks from the Mahumetan Yoak, and save the 200000
Chequins, or 45000 l. Sterling; besides the Fees and Presents of the respective Tributaries, paid constantly to the Port, which is most concerned in the two Kingdoms, or Despotical Provinces, on the Southern shore of the Danube, Servia, and Bulgaria. 1. SERVIA; Which being so happily situ∣ated between Bulgaria, which lyeth on the East of it; Bosnia, which boundeth it on the West; the Danow, that limiteth it on the North; and Greece on the South; is so rich in Corn and Mines, as could not escape the Conquest of the Turks; who mastered all those adjacent Regions, at first; nor their Colonies since: The People themselves being so rude, that they seem born for servitude, and good for nothing, but to be commanded a∣broad; and so drunken, that it was absolutely im∣possible they should hold out against the Impressi∣ons of so sober a People as the Turks; whose ab∣stinence from Wine, is as much their Policy, as their Religion. Though as rude as they were, they might have held longer against the Infidels, Had not Fate included them within that desperate Folly of Princes, to undertake an unjust, though advantagi∣ous Design upon others, while there is a superiour Enemy thereby invited to Umpirage the Quarrel; As there was, when the ambitious Designes of the Despot of Servia, upon Rascias Freedom, was punished with their own Slavery; which was yet hastened by an Accident as fatal, viz. Peter, John, and Martin, the Despot Lazarus his Children, flying to the Hungarian Protection, and his Bro∣thers
taking sanctuary at the Port, untill the migh∣ty Power of the Turk swallowed up both their Rights, with dread and terrour breaking the stub∣born Natives; whereof Mahomet the Great Im∣paled some, Gaunched others, and Flead a third sort; so that they were quickly tamed, and made the second Province of the Eastern, or Greek Eu∣rope: Past all recovery, since Nyssa, the Key of the Country, is so strongly garrisoned and fortifi∣ed; and the Frontier Town, Novigrad, is so im∣pregnable: And indeed, all the Passages into that Country are inaccessible, 1500. being able to keep out Uladislaus, with 39000. 1564. And Hunniades had much adoe to pass through (the weak Despot complying with the Turk, who only reserved him to his last Conquest) into 2. BULGARIA; Which lyeth Eastward on the Euxine Sea (Axinos ille foret) Westward towards Servia, Northward on the Danow, or Ister. Under the Turks Dominions ever since the last cowardly Prince, Saimenos, prostrated himself, in a winding, before the insolent Tyrant Amurath the First; who set, in three of the most eminent Provinces, viz. Nicopolis, Sophia, and Silistria, three Sanjacks, or Major Generals, un∣der the command of the Begleberg, or Vice-Roy of Greece. The Wood of these Provinces affords Constantinople Fuel, the Sea Shipping: Besides that, it is esteemed a very good Defence against any sud∣den Irruption into the more inward part of Roma∣nia, as where the Christians, under Hunniades, had, the greatest Loss ever known in the World:
An Argument urged against the Invasion of the Turk, though holding only for Caution, which way best to invade him: That it be not in a Coun∣try where the People are so incapable of the no∣ble resentments of Freedom, and patient under a∣ny servitude; but that the fear in the alteration of their one great Principle, being Seldom comes a better: Though otherwise the situation of it, and its most famous Towns (1. Axium, 2. Dinogetin, 3. Marcianopolis, 4. Nicopolis, 5. Sophia, 6. Var∣na, 7. Sillistria, 8. Venuzina) upon the Sea, the Danow, and the Ister, invite any Underta∣kers to attempt it, that could have any security from the Inhabitants, to open their way to it; which cannot be expected, untill we take some of them, and instruct them in the grave Principles of Religion and Liberty, as the Turks do most of them, in those of Infidelity and Slavery: For the Case would be quickly altered, if there were but as much Learning here, as there was on the other side Mount HAEMUS; A long Line of Hills, from the Euxine Coast, to the Adriatique; so high and boysterous, that the old Graecian Souldier sware, That eight Months in the Year it was Cold here, and for four Winter; Commanding Macedon and Epirus, so that from hence a man may guess, where the best Fortresses, and Strong-Holds may be built, in each Place, and which is the best Pas∣sage into either. This Mountain secures Bulga∣ria so well, by the little River Saltiza, with the broken Rocks, and dangerous Precipices, that
one Attempt this way upon Adrianople, cost Christendom 49000. Men, and ever since taught them to stand upon the Defensive, though often∣times invited over this Place to GREECE; A Place that looked formerly on all the World as barbarous, is its self so now, but that, when its Learning could not, its Religi∣on doth, bear up against Mahumetanism; so that there are 21. Churches in Constantinople, and 33. in Thessalonica, to four Moskies, notwithstand∣ing the Tyranny of the Infidels, on the one hand, and the hopes of Encouragement, on the other; together with the 1000. Infants, yearly bred up in the Turkish Worship; and would be more en∣larged, did not the uncharitableness of the Church of Rome, use them more severely, than the cruel∣ty of their own Masters, whom they would in time shake off, had they that Communion and Corres∣pondence with the rest of Christendom, that is due to so considerable a Part of the Catholique Church. In the mean time, that third Monarchy is fallen in∣to petit and contemptible Cantons, of that barba∣rous Seigniory, that aimes at a fifth Monarchy, partitioned and divided under the several inferiour, and therefore cruel Governours, all subjected to the Begleberg of Rum Ili, throughout its present extent along the Hellespont, and Aegean Sea East∣ward, the Adriati{que} Westward, Mount Haemus North∣ward, and the Ionian Sea Southward. Though its pity that Country could not be recovered, that hath Christendom on one side of it, and three Seas between it and Turkey; since towards a recove∣ry
the Government of the Patriarch of Constan∣tinople is very helpful, who, having many depend∣ing Clergy-men, who, insinuating themselves to all those Coasts, might prepare the Inhabitants, at least those that are Christianly Principled, for a better Condition, than what they now enjoy: If there be any remainder left, of that either Learn∣ed or Martial Spirit, that possessed it in former Ages, which was so farr from being Captived within its own Borders, that the World was too narrow for it. Greece, now called Turkey-Roma∣nia, was indeed sometimes oppressed by Cyrus and Xerxes of Persia, but relieved by Philip of Mace∣don, and his great Son, who made it the Head of the third Universal Empire, which the Romans swallowing up, left to the Graecian Emperours, till the Goths invaded, the Bulgares spoyled, the Saracens depopulated, and the Turks enslaved it; the last whereof possess all of it, the Continent, and Island (save that the Republique of Venice layeth claim to. And well they may, seeing that through all their Cities, you shall not find a School to instruct their Youth, or themselves, in any thing Civil or Religious. In this Condition lyeth Macedon, Epirus, Achaia, Peloponnesus, Thrace, and its Chersonese. 1. MACEDON; Which hath Albania on the West, Epirus and Achaia on the South, the Aegean Sea on the East, and the Upper Mysia on the North. And whether you respect Thessaly, Macedon, specially so called, or Migdonia, or Jamboli, is most happily situated, being made up
of fertile Valleys, amidst most pleasant Hills. All commanded by that one City (of all that remains of the strong Fortresses of the Eastern Empire) on the Borders of Albania, whence the Turk may over-run it when he will. Only, I should think, the 6000. Priests upon Mount Athos, the Mount of St. Basil (for there are none but Priests suffered to live there) having such a Privilege, as they have; and such a concourse of People, daily flock∣ing to them, for their Reliques sake; might either deal with, or over-rule the Sanjach, who hath not above 5000. Horse, and 4000. Foot, to guard him; whereof 2000. are to be ready for the Grand Seig∣niour's service, upon six dayes warning, from 2. THRACE; That populous and fruitful Country, secure in its own Wood and Cold; Ly∣ing Northward on Mount Haemus, Westward on Higher Mysia, Southward on the Archi-Pelago, and Eastward on the Euxine, the Bosphorus, Pro∣pontis, and Hell-spontis. Kept under by the Turk, not so much as his Dominion, as his Pleasure; Con∣stantinople, that most convenient Place, not only to govern that Place, but the Empire, being the Metropolis of it; 18. Mile in Compass, a third part bigger than London, and its Suburbs; Con∣taining 700000. Souls, notwithstanding the Tri∣ennial Visitations of the Plague; Fortified Land∣ward with three strong and high VValls, the one higher than the other; and Sea-ward with one VVall, built with many Turrets, which strongly flanker it: And now that Place is become sawcy and dangerous, by the long Residence of the Em∣perour
there. Adrianople, the Place of his re∣treat for his Affairs in Europe, now of his constant Residence, is the next City of Thrace, although very ill accommodated for so great a Court, being so farr from the Port, and therefore likely to be quitted by that Emperour, who hath several in∣stances before him, of their Miscarriages, who forsake their Imperial Cities in troublesome times, especially a City seated on so known a Sea as that is (which puts me in mind of the Lord Mayor of London, that said to a King of this Nation, that threatened a departure from that Place, I hope you will leave the Thames behind you) and secured by the two Block-houses of the Dardanelles, which command all Ships passing out of the Hellespont, into the Euxine Sea; on which the two black Towers, on the Asian shore of Constantinople, are not a greater Defence of it, for that Sea, than these two Custom-houses before mentioned, are for the Mediterranean; wherein the Aegean Islands, Samothrace, Lemos, Imbrus, Enbaea, Salamis, Aegina, and the 53. Ciclades, or the Isles of the Arches, encompassing Delos, and the Sporades, yea Candia its self, 270. Mile in length, and 50. in bredth, in the midst of this Sea, are now either possessed or awed by the Grand Sultan; who is now at leisure to make himself absolute here; the Venetians having dis-obliged most part of Chri∣stendom, otherwise like to assist them, upon this unexpected closure with the Emperour in Hunga∣ry, being Master of Cyprus, a famous Place, ex∣tending from East to VVest 200. Miles, and round 600. on the Syrian and Cilician Sea, which open∣eth
the way on both sides, for the Conquest, either of Asia, or Europe: Especially since 1. EPIRUS, or ALBANIA; Lying Eastward upon Etolia, VVestward on the Adria∣tique, Northward of Thessaly, and Southward with the Ionian; A large, and utterly subdued Country, that furnish so many Ships and Men. 2. ACHAIA, or LIVODIA; A goodly Region, doing the like. And 3. PELOPONNESUS, or MOREA; The Bulwark of Greece, as it was antiently called; and still so well peopled a Place of Greece, as pours forth more Souldiers, than the Venetians have power to look upon, much less to Conquer. This is the best Province of Turkey, as maintaining a 1000. Horse, besides the infinite number of Foot it sends abroad for the Mahumetan service, with whom it offereth constantly 230000. Ducats. The Turkish Garrisons are so thick in these Countries, that there is no good to be done, untill such time as a great Famine or Mortality render the People as desperate against their Infidel Masters, as Ne∣cessity made them cruel to the People: In the mean time, the great sway the Turk carrieth in these Seas, gives him opportunity, more than enough, to secure his Interest here, but that he is so intent upon the Borders of Hungary, which being strengthened, and either a vigorous VVar, or an honourable Peace, had with the Venetians, render his Inland Dominions cock-sure: The Christians
being never like to meet with that Opportunity they lost, when Don John of Austria, after the Battel of Lepanto, instead of retiring, might have entred the Archi-Pelagus, and (all Persons being amazed under the Consternation of that great and happy Event) have taken the adjoyning Islands without resistance, shaken the Ottoman Empire, and planted the Crucifix, where the Crescent is a∣dored: The Grand Seiguiour having lost his Sea Forces at Lepanto, and his Land Souldiers at the furious Sieges of Nicosia and Pamagoust, lying naked and open, and his Empire remaining a great Body shrunk with weakness, and wanting force to sustain its self, and bear its proper weight, fsils of necessity, so soon as it is justled: An Opportu∣nity never to be regained, now the Naval Force of Turkey is so Compleat, consisting of three Fleets, 1. The one (parallel to our New-Castle Vessels) sayling the Euxine, and Mediterranean, either to∣wards the Muscovite, Circasse, or Cossack; whence returning with Slaves, Honey, VVood, and VVax, it sayls to Alexandria, to barter those Commodities for Flax, Sugar, Tapestry, Sher∣bats (made of several dry preserved Fruits, as Apricocks, Peaches, Citrons) Corn, Rice; and come back with Tribute (guarded with a Fleet, for fear of the Malta and Florentine Galleys, that lye in wait for the Stragglers) to Constantinople. 2. The other is the Fleet of VVar, built and equipped in the Streights. 3. And the third, the Barbary Men of VVar, which exercise Pyracy over all Christendom, and depend upon the Grand Seigniour: All now taught, by the Renegadoes,
a skill at Sea, as considerable as that of the Europaeans. ENGLAND. NOW we have gone round the Circle, we finish where we began, in that fortunate Island, if there be any in the VVorld: If all men, as I, that travelled, understood either their own, or their Nations Happiness. England, in its Re∣stauration a Miracle, and in its Settlement a VVonder. 1. At Peace with Spain, 2. Allied to Portugal, 3. Inward with Denmark, 4. Court∣ed by Sweden, 5. Addressed unto by the Empe∣rour, 6. Caressed by the Princes, 7. Despaired of by the Pope, 8. Admired by the Turk, 9. Ap∣plauded by the Muscovite, 10. Feared by the In∣fidels, 11. Suspected by the French, 12. And Affronted only by the Dutch: A People it hath set up, when in their lowest Estate; and pulled down, when in their highest: To whom it hath been the best Friend, and the worst Enemy; whose Sea maintains them, whose Fish relieves them, whose Commodities employ them, and whose Trade hath hitherto upheld them.
England now, as of old, the Ballance of Eu∣rope; giving Law, with its Armes, to Africa, and its Princes; opening the way, by its Com∣merce, to the Wines and Sugars of Spain, to the Treasure of the Indies, to the Manufactures of Turkey, and China; to the Cordage, and Naval Materials of Muscovy, Sweden, and Denmark; to the Delicacies of Italy, to the Kersies of Flan∣ders, to the Wines of Burdeaux; and whatever owneth the Name of Necessary or Convenient. Improving its Native Commodities with the great∣est Art at home, and Exporting them with the highest Freedom abroad. Its First Interest is Intelligence and Negotiation; and the World understands, how Active a Person it employes in Holland, how Wise a Man it hath set∣led in France, how Grave an Ambassadour it main∣tains in Spain; and what Reserved, Prudent, and Noble Agents, it hath dispatched to Denmark and Sweden; not to mention the Honourable Person re∣sident at the Grand Seigniour's Court. Its Second is Trade, and the Dominion of the Sea; and it's not unknown, what Expert Captains are trusted, what Multitudes of Seamen are bred up, what Provisions are made for Fishing, what Laws are in force for the Vending of Fish, what Correspondence is kept with the Northern Coasts for Cordage, how many and strong Vessels are built; what Stores and Magazines, even beyond what ever was known, are set up; how blessed a Prince, who makes it his business to understand and manage the Sea Affairs; how Royal an Admiral, the King's only Brother; what Noble Officers, all
the Nobility, choosing rather a Ship at Sea, than a Court by Land; how willing the Kingdom is to float upon the Sea, how watchful the Commis∣sioners of the Navy are to guide it, and how vigi∣lant His Majesty, and his Honourable Council is upon all; what formidable Preparations, what a∣bundance of gallant Men, what skillful Buil∣ders, what expert Seamen, what valiant Com∣manders; and, in a word, what a brave Admiral, whose conduct, diligence, and success, is known to the World. Its Third Interest is the Protestant Religion, which it encourageth abroad, and hath setled at home; where the Laws against Recusants of both sides, the Papists, and the Separatist, are very strict; the Uniformity distinct from them both, is very orderly; Our Doctrine, how confessedly Or∣thodox; Our Devotion, how avowedly whole∣some; Our Ceremonies, how famously decent; Our Discipline, how admirably primitive; and our Order, how honourably antient! Our Peo∣ple submitting humbly to their Guides, they to their Overseers, they to their Soveraign, and all to the Word of God, the confessed general Coun∣cils, and the primitive practice. Ministers are restored to their Right, and Bishops to their Pow∣er, Jurisdictions are established, Courts are o∣pened, a Terrour hangs over evill doers, and En∣couragements are set before those that do well: Favours are derived to merit, and Preferments to worth; and a man may be as good as he will, and as great as he deserveth. The Honour of Religi∣on, and its Clergy, is asserted; the Levity and Pe∣tulancy
of the Populacy is restrained; and every one knoweth his own place, where they serve one God, in one Faith, by one Baptism, in one Spirit, in one hope of one common Salvation. Its Fourth Interest is Unity, the Head whereof is an excellent Prince, made up of power and sweetness, who is feared and loved, whose Veins swell with all the Royal Blood of this Kingdom, and whose Soul is thronged with all the Virtues of its Kings; so that his Right is as undoubted as his Possession, and his Merit as his Right: And the awe upon all men arising from the three Wonders of his Escape 1651. His Restauration 1660. and his Success ever since. Great is our happiness in him, multiplyed it is in Relations, Uno avulso non deficit alter Aureus: On his Throne he sits, with a Gracious Queen on his right hand, his Ex∣cellent Mother before him, his Royal Brother on his left hand, his Grave and Honourable Council at his Feet, his Reverend Bishops about his Throne, his Loyal Nobility near his Person, his Unanimous Gentry attending his Pleasure, and that August Council, called a Parliament, made up of all these, as one man, reconciling his Preroga∣tive, and his Peoples Liberties, to the Envy of most Neighbours, and the Amazement of all. Look we into their Debates, they are dutiful: in∣to their Counsells, they are rational, loyal, and resolute; into their Expedients, they are season∣able; into their Supplyes, they are honourable; and into their Unanimity, and, as one man, they are resolved to live and dye with their dear and dread Soveraign.
If we return to the Court, it's full, thrifty, wary, and strict. If to the Exchequer, it's full, with a Revenue, double that of former Kings, 1200000 l. per Annum; besides the Resolution of the People, to spend their Lives and Fortunes, for the defence and honour of the King, and in him, of the Kingdom, and themselves. If to the Courts of Justice, they are filled with most rever∣end and famous Men. If to the Church, it's full of venerable, learned, and prudent Churchmen. If to the Officers of State, they are honourable and experienced. If to the Cabals, there was never Prince, or Council, since the Constitution of Empires, a safer Preserver of secrets; and yet none, whose secrecy and silence we less may fear; where the chief Prelates cast Reverence, and the chief Nobility, of both Kingdoms, Dignity; and all knowing in Forein Affairs abroad, and Dome∣stique Constitutions at home. If into the Church, Disputations are silenced, Pulpits are modest, Presses are regulated, Learning is encouraged, Debauchery is discountenanced, Faction is sup∣pressed, and Schism is made ridiculous. If into the City, the Lord Mayor, and Major General, are active and vigilant; the Aldermen, and Com∣mon Council, are liberal and free (200000 l. at at time) the Companies, Officers, and Vestries, are setled. If into the Country, the Forts, Strong Holds, and Havens, are secure; the Militia is setled, and reduced to excellent Rules, for the ease and service of the Country; the Lords Lieu∣tenants, and their Deputies, are powerful and ho∣nest, made up of the choicest Gentry; the Sheriffs,
that command the Power of the Country, faithful, and well affected; the Justices of Peace, Men of Estates, Wisdom, Interest, Repute, and known Integrity: who execute Justice, regulate Disorders, discover Plots, di∣sperse Conventicles, promote the honour and security of the Kingdom: and these hold, some their Estates, o∣thers their Places, and all their Honour, of his Majesty; under whom Tillage and Husbandry prospereth, Ma∣nufactures are encouraged, Native Commodities are promoted, all People are employed in the Necessities or Conveniencies of the Kingdom, every man under his own Vine, every one under his own Figtree. If we look back upon the Pretences, Methods, or Principles, of the former Rebellion, they are cut off by Acts of Par∣liament. If forward, on the Opportunities for a future Disturbance, they are all vacated by Acts of State. If men pretend Religion for Disturbance, England know∣eth it's Hypocrisie; If Liberty, our People is too sensi∣ble it is Licentiousness; If Propriety, we have been taught, that the meaning of that is Taxes, Plunder, and Free-quarter; If Conscience, English Men have learned to Obey, and not Disobey, for Conscience sake; If Op∣pression, none to that of Disorder, Universal Liberty, and a standing Army; If Looseness in Manners, every man among us, saith, It cannot be so bad, as when there is no King in Israel, and every man may do what is good in his own Eyes; If the Errours of a Statesman, we see men aim at the Kings head, through the Statesmens sides: No colour for Disturbance among us; and all reason for Peace, in a Nation, to the Government whereof, the grave, learned, and prudent Persons, of all sides, sub∣mit; wherein no man doth or suffereth, but what he consenteth to himself. We hear indeed of War upon the Borders of the Empire, but we have Peace in our Bor∣ders; being walled in first with the Ocean, and that Ocean secured by as strong a Navy, as is this day in Chri∣stendom. We read of mutual Challenges of Right be∣tween Spain and Portugal, but we are the People, to
whose Land, none so much as pretendeth Right, save our dread Soveraign. We observe others failing in their Designs upon forein Parts, we great in our own Posses∣sions, maintain our own Right to the full, and forbear others; equally famous for our Justice, and our Power. They talk of Kingdoms like to expire in their dying Princes, when we are secured in a Royal Family, not more a Blessing to us, that it is good, than that it is numerous. If Neighbour States have provoked the World, we pity them, for we are at Peace with it. If other Princes throw away their People with vain and ambitious Attempts, we are onely employed to secure our own Borders, to promote our own Interests and Honour. Some Republiques have the miserable choice of either an intollerable War, or an unworthy Peace: we give the Law to Africa and Europe, in utrumque para∣ti, a prosperous War, or an honourable Peace. We stand to no Nations Courtesie, having made our Friendship, and our Enmity, the most Considerable this day in the World. Our Kingdom is Populous, our Ground Fertile, our Gentry Expert, our Yeomen Trai∣ned, our Scholars Learned, our Noblemen Active, our Magazines Full, our Money Ready, our Court Ʋnani∣maus, our Genius Warlike; and, in a word, every Particular amongst us, sensible of the Concerns of the Whole, Prayeth for His most Excellent Majesty (the Breath of our Nostrils) that his Counsels may prosper, his just Cause may succeed, his Enemies may be asha∣med, and upon his Head his Crown may Flourish: All that love their King and Country, saying, AMEN. FINIS.
