F1044 12409647 61486
The most excellent Oliver Cromwell Lord Genll: of Greate Brittayne. Chancellor of ye Vniversity of Oxford, & Ld: Cheife Gover: of Ireland &
VENI; VIDI; VICI. THE TRIUMPHS OF THE Most Excellent & Illustrious, OLIVER CROMWELL, &c. Set forth in a Panegyricke. Written Originally in Latine, and faithfully done into English Heroicall Verse, By T: M: Jun. Esq Whereto is added An Elegy upon the death of the late Lord Depu∣ty of Ireland, the much lamented, HENRY IRETON, &c. LONDON, Printed for Iohn Tey, at the White Lion in the Strand, near the New Exchange, 1652.
TO THE Most Excellent, and Right Honourable, as well for his valou∣rous Atchievements, as His Incomparable Vertues, His Excellency OLIVER CROMWELL, Lord Generall of Great Brittaine, Chancellor of the famous University of Oxford, Lord Chiefe Governour of Ireland: A Member of the Parliament of England, and of the Right Honourable the Councell of State. IT is reported of Caesar, Right Ho∣nourable Lord, that he never re∣joyced more then when he heard his valiant exploits were spoken of in simple Cottages, alledging this, that a bright Sun shines in every corner; which makes not the beames worse, but the
place better. My Lord, having seen the follow∣ing Panegyricke in Latine, a Language too high for the greatest part of our Nation to un∣derstand: and considering that it was a jewell exposed only to the view, not to the understan∣dings of all, made me presume to render it into English, that even the meanest of our Natives might be able in their hearts with joy and thankfulness to confess the greatness of their Obligations to your Excellency; by whose successefull and divinely victorious hand the yoke is broken off their necks, and their hap∣py Liberty restored, that thereby, with that great Macedonian Conquerour, there may not be so much as a Miller but both loves and prai∣ses thee. Neither durst I offer to any other hand what is only fit to be laid on thine own Altars, least I might become presumptuously foolish, but that as the Acts sung in the ensuing Panegy∣rick were thine own, the honour of them thine own, so thou only thy selfe wert fit to be their Patron. Accept therefore, Most Noble Sir, these weake endeavours, whose only aime hath been to publish and make known thy Vertues in our uttermost Borders, and that it may ap∣peare
how evidently the hand of God hath gone along with thee in all thy Actions, and carried thee with triumphall honours through the midst of so many dangers. May the Great God of Heaven and Earth still carry you on that you may add triumph to triumph, and be victorious on every side, till arrived at that height of earthly happiness than which no man can enjoy more, you may at last be crowned with eternall felicity; which is the humble desire, and hearty Prayer of Jan. 30. 1652.My Lord, Your Excellencies most devoted, in all duty and observance, Tho. Manley Junior.
To my Honoured Friend Mr. THOMAS MANLY on his accurate Translation, &c. SEE how the Thespian Gyrles can dare those Fates That threaten Kingdomes, and disorder States: Ages to come, had never known the use Of wilie War, had Fishers Buskin'd Muse Been silent; he doth trayterously conspire, Even to dis member the Maeonian Lyre; His fancie like a flame her way does take, Leaving no track for after-times to make Progression; Is't not strange, see, heres no oddes Betwixt his worthies, and the Grecian Gods, The frowns of Mars, and dire Bellonas rage Drawn to the life, in each elaborate page
So that the Effigie of our Famous Nol Rather then here, deserv's Romes Capitol, But if such thanks to him be due, what praise, What Heccatombs of Beev's, what Groves of Bayes Shall we designe thy worth, who mak'st his Song To vail it's Bonnet, to our English tongue. Th' Indulgent censure of succeeding times Shall crown thee (Manly) for thy flowing Rime, With the same Chaplet that wreathes Sands his brow, This he predicts, who honours thee, I vow, SAMUEL SHEPPARD.
Errata. PAge 3. line. 4. for sate read state. p. 10. l. 14. bear, r. owe, p. 11. l. 13. deere, r. done, p. 12. l. 1. expect her, r. expects she, ibid. l. 12. brow, r. browes, p. 23. l. 15. strayning, r. streaming, ibid. l. 17. bracked, r. wracked, p. 31. l. 14. on, r. or, p. 33. l. 7. the, r. them, p. 34. l. 6. for, r. soe, p. 38. l. 9. Muse, r. Muses, p. 52. l. 16. louring, r. lowing, p. 76. l. 17. layd, r. lay, p. 92. l. 1. the, r. Thou.
A GRATULATORY Song of PEACE: OR, Triumphall Canto for the Victories of the Most Illustrious and Right Honble OLIVER CROMWELL, &c. Dedicated to the Lord President BRADSHAVV, And the rest of the Right Honble the Councell of STATE, &c. In the yeare of our Redemption, 1652; And of Englands Restored Liberty, 4 Translated into English out of Latine, BY T: M: Jun. Esq
To the All-Worthy (The good hand of the great God so ordaining; And by the choice of the Supreme Authority of ENGLAND) The Overseer of the Common-wealth, and Re-gained Liberty, JOHN Lord BRADSHAVV, Sergeant at LAVV, Chiefe Iustice of CHESTER, Chancellor of the Dutchy and County Palatine of LANCASTER, LORD HIGH-PRESIDENT OF THE Right Honble the Councell of STATE: AS ALSO, To the rest of those ever Renow∣ned Patriots, Sitting Members of the same Right Honble Councell,
Lords Commissners of the great Seale of England. Bulstrode Whitlock, John Lisle, Lords Chief Iustices of England. Oliver Saint-John, Henry Rolls, Charles Fleetwood, Lievtenant-General of the ARMY. Knights and Baronets. Sir Arthur Haslerigge, Sir Henry Vane, junior, Sir William Masham, Sir James Harrington, Sir Gilbert Pickering, Colonels. William Purefoy, Valentine Walton, Richard Salloway. Esq Thomas Challoner, Thomas Scot, John Gourdon, John Carew, Nicholas Love, Dionys Bond.
Philip Earl of Pembrooke. Philip Sidney Viscount Lisle. Knights of the Bath. Sir William Constable, Sir Peter Wentworth, Generall Rob. Blake, Admiral of the Sea. Colonels. Alexander Popham, Anthony Stapylton, Herbert Morley, Iohn Downes, Henry Marten, Esq Robert Wallop, Cornelius Holland, Isaac Penington, Abraham Burwell, Henry Nevell, William Masham, Henry Herbert, Iohn Dixwell, William Heyes. Iohn Corbet, &c. F. F. Happinesse, Victory, Triumphs, &
The Epistle Dedicatory. Honoured Lord, and you most eminent & worthy Patriots, THat I should go unarmed into the field to meet the Muses, the wishes of a few might easily perswade me, since my own affections drew me; by which Incitement egged on as by Spurs, I recalled my now old-grown Genius from the Camp to the Court, from the War to congra∣tulate the return of the Lord-Chief-Generall. And who in such ovations would not even be wrapt beyond himself? Who can contain his joy within bounds at so solemn, so publike a
Triumph? That we may the better perceive the effects of this rejoycing, we must first weigh the causes. Cast your eyes then upon our conducting General, whose heroick acts (ex∣ceeding even the utmost limits of belief) to the present age proclaime their own triumph, and amazes succeeding generations with their greatness. Consider how with more then Her∣culean strength he strook off the Head of those Hydraes of superstition with his Conquering Sword! How many Centaures breathing forth nought but slavery hath he tamed! How many Troopes of enraged enemies hath he over∣thrown, and offered them so humbled as so ma∣ny satisfactory victims to the publike liberty! Hence it proceedes that war is banisht from
our borders: hence is it that the serener beams of Concord have so cleerly darted down upon us: O the happiness of Brittain grown even beyond expectation great! For who can but ad∣mire so many the elaborate endeavors of the Parliament? Who will gaynsay you the suc∣ceeding upholders of our State? Who but will confess the immediate providence and Divine Finger of God to be seen even apparently in the victorious, atcheivements of our Generall; In the acts of our Parliament, the Supreme Authority; And in your own consultations and designes? That therefore the happiness of our established Common-wealth may the more largely be notified to all the world, weigh we but equally in the ballance of our
serious consideration the tottering basis even of the most firmly seated thrones; but if your enemies are yet so stubborn that they will not be convinced thereby, let them peruse that ex∣cellent peece with a little seriousness that cleerly declares the Prerogative of Kings, and evidently defends the Priviledges and liberty of the people: but whereto tends this? I will not obtrude upon your wisdoms trifling ex∣amples, or vain relations: for I have onely mentioned these few, that all your malicious e∣nemies may know, and knowing confess, that God alone is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, that he puts down Princes from their Thrones, and disposes of the powers of the world after his own pleasure.
Away then you malicious enemies of order; and since ye acknowledge all powers to come from God, obey the present as Gods stewards placed here by himself for the governing of the Common-Wealth. Me-think, even our publike profession of Religion should draw us to this, if our own security also did not whi∣sper the same; for it is somwhat an inhumane thing to resist our common, our publike Pa∣rents, and altogether repugnant to reason, to kick against the Pricks. But I deviate from my first proposition; and humbly beg your par∣don, most worthy Fathers of the Common∣wealth, hoping you will cherish these first∣fruits of my duty under the wings of your in∣dulgent protection: Which have betaken
themselves with a blushing humility to the sanctuary of your Honors goodness. An Olive is sometime brought in amongst the costlyest dainties and well rellisht too; somtimes the Ivy doth happily grow and increase among trees of a greater tallness: And you, most No∣ble Heroes, suffer this low-growing Ivy to creep forth among the Laureat Cypresses of your E∣minencies. If you approve of these my desires, and favor my present endeavors, you will in∣fuse new life and confidence into me, who may enterprise a greater work worthy acknow∣ledgement, perhaps both from your selves and future ages. In the mean while, the All-great, the All-good God make you all unanimous even for e∣ver,
that therby his Church may be glorified, & the Common good and liberty be inviolable to all the people, that the secure peace and quiet of a flourishing Common-Wealth may be reciprocall from you and yours to the Com∣mon-Wealth; that ye may be blessed here in earth with continuing happiness, and in hea∣ven with future eternity, which is, and shall be prayed for by The most obliged to your Honours by all bonds of duty and obedience, F. F.
A Gratulatory Ode of Peace. ALL hail great Patron of our English Isle! Dreadfull as lightning to the Irish vile, Double triumpher o're the Scottish crown, Chief refuge of the godly when cast down, Restorer of our liberty once lost! All Hail! whose warlike actions every coast Doth Eccho, and the world fill with the fame Of the deserving vertues of his Name.
Rise now ye Muses, help ye Virgin Quire Aeonian Nymphes, once all your skill inspire; Favor my task, our Generalls praise I'de sing, From whose each act Honor and greatness spring. And thou, who of the supream Parliament, Art (justice prop) the worthy President, With the same calmness both of brest and eye That you into much greater writings spye, Deign but to look at ours, Thalia thén May happen somwhat stoop to grace my pen. And you brave Heroes, whose grave counsels waite Upon the high designments of the State; And who skill'd in the Laws do first amend, And then the burden of their rule defend: So that stout Atlas is not said more even With a strong shoulder to prop up the heaven, You steere the English, you the Pilots are, You sit at prow and poope in peace and war,
While you do seek Charybdis sad to fly, And would put off the Rocks of Monarchy, With safe and gentle gales you change the Scene, And make a Sate where Monarchy hath beene; Thus free from danger at the last in health Arrives ith' port a happy Common-wealth. Tell me ye Muses in your milder Vein To sing these changes what must be my strain. These joy'd retreates no verse can truly sing, Cromwells return doth nought but raptures bring. Til now the earth groan'd through the weight of war, Scarce was the care of cattell, use of share; The fields were barren and did uselessly, Through the neglect of ceasing Husbandry. Wisdom was out of date, had no regard, Minerva and the Muses small reward, The pious Prophets little leasure had, With warlike tumults being made afraid.
Such and the like displeasures alwayes are Attendants on the rage of kindled war. Cromwell but thou (thy Countryes hope and care, Pious in Peace and politick in war; The present age their glory reads in him, And the amazement of succeeding time) Hast shut up Janus place with treble gates, And strongly call'd back Peace from lower shades, Whence to the Rulers both and people brought Shewes better times to those that better sought. Hence to us English springeth up new bliss, And just reward to learning promis'd is. Parnassian Laurell will put forth new shoots, The mourning Muses will retune their Lutes, To sing new verses: no less doth the State, Arms being laid aside, grown moderate, Revive and rise again even from her urne At thy so wished, thy so joy'd returne,
Feeling her changed reines she doth implore, That Tyrants never her may ravish more. Religion saw thee come and hasted hither, Mercy and Piety met thee together, And here began to settle: Justice too Came back from heaven, and here her self did shew; And banisht from our English Coasts those jarres Which breeding factions had commenced warres. As the Sun entring th' Agenorian signe, The happy Planet doth the earth refine, And the celestiall vertue quickning th'earth Begins new pledges for a tender birth: So doth blest England flourish joy'd while shee Her Generall returning safe did see; The dancers leap'd, the Musick sweetly playde, The warlike Trumpet too rejoycing made, No hostile clangor to blood-swelling veines, But sweetly Warbles forth some gentler straynes.
The zealous vulgar this just joy resent, Meeting therein City and Parliament; The Souldier more safe rejoyces now With Olive wreathes on his triumphall brow; He even his well-come Generall adores, And out of's heart to heaven thanksgiving powres. Thrice happy Brittans, whom the world so call, Under the care of such a Generall! As Children, Parents, England values thee, Or as a Bride her Husband, so doth shee: Whil'st broke with Scottish tumults, growing harms, And shook with cruell Mars his bloody arms, Begins at last at least to hope to see Her Treasure-blood-bought quiet under Thee. But stay my Muse, rash Clio, whither away? Thou know'st not how thy sails plow up the Sea; Hold in, and lesser use the winde and Sail, At the first setting out Oars best prevail.
It is enough for triall once to soare Up to the highest top of glories store; But if high flying now I shipwrack shall, I shall arise much prouder by my fall; For why? 'twould comfort both, and credit be In such a gulph of vertues even to dye. The league of peace so long since made was broke, By the unfaithfull Scot, who did provoke The harmless English injurious harmes, To punish treachery with Victorious armes. The Scottish truce thus broken, straight contempt, A while was throwne on th' English Parliament; Deceits by little to increase begin, At which report Bellona entring in, Taking the Vizer off did soon produce The horrid actions that were then in use. As fire rak'd up in ashes doth revive, And by a gentle blast new heat receive;
First burning softly, with the hafle playes, And like uneven shrubs, anon doth blaze More siercely, while still it burning moves, And levels without number woods and groves; Sparing nor knotty Beach, high Ash nor Pine, So much renowned for that head of thine; Thus rageth Scotland in her war, her ire, While every house brings fewell to the fire: While every hand and age more arms do bring, Scotland of nought but warlike troopes did ring. Such was the madness of the Priests, and such The Presbyterian power, and so much Besides the peoples dotings were so great, Of that which heaven withstands, 'tis vain to treat. A swift, a sure revenge, plagues, death, what not Will persecute the Covenant-breaking Scot. God will destroy them: Cromwell doth appeare With his unconquer'd troopes victorious there,
Removing hence, the war he there doth start, More cunning then the foe in his own art. Thus the unhappy Scot is compast round Within the limits of his proper ground, And turn'd their sword on their own plotting pate, By them for us intended with such hate: Thus did Perillus in those torments dye Wherein the others had design'd to lye. The Generall proceedes; the Common peace, And common danger do his cares increase, To waft his troopes to Scottish ground in time; Who meetes a sickness cures it in its prime. He undertook this journey, that he might His countreys honor and the people right: Worthy revenger of unfaithfull acts, Whose virtue famous by so many facts, Oppressed with so many treacheries, Ennobled with so many victories,
Tryed with so many suff'rings; yet no art Could make him waver, fear, give ground or start; Learning at last that ridicle to know, A Scottish battail is but wars mock-show. So the fair Cypress having fixt his rootes, Boasting her high-top-growing, heaven-sent shootes Doth nothing fear winters tempestuous stormes, Nor Tyrant Aeolus his threatned harmes. Then go to Fame, paint out old Times best story, We can no less then Romane Trophies glory; Admire our Cromwell, fading Englands fort, A sconse whereto the Britaines may resort. Not Italy to Fabius, nor Greece So much doth beare to her Themistocles, Nor Carthage proud to her known Haraill, As we to our renowned Generall: Nor Trojan Hector, nor Aeneas just, Penelopes Vlysses neither must,
Or Priam Equall him: though Fame their glory boast Upon the confines of each several coast. Blest Hero, whose uprightness all commands, Whose joy in vertue more then triumph stands, Thou scorn'st the peoples suffrage, or their praise, Those airy cracks cannot thy Trophies raise; Thus doest thou valiant Leader overthrow Thine enemies, thy selfe thus conquer too. While you curb passions sea, and wandring sense, You shew your self guarded with reasons fence, As Castor is reported to restrain, Those tam'd yoke-bearers with Amyclean rain, Well dear! thou care of heaven! the sole renown Of future ages, Brittains fort and crown, Thy Countrey ownes thee as her Dearest Son, Yet doth to thee as to a Father run; While shewing hearty Love, she quits now free, All former Tyes at thy return for Thee.
Expect her peace I her reformation must Have thee her refuge, her assured trust; The fatall judgment seat doth ask the same, The Courts of Justice even adore thy name, And in the fatall danger that they stand, Implore the help of thy victorious hand. But too much hast is nought, stay, what do I In this mean paper scrible things so high? These are not things for our so humble quill, Void or of worth, or confidence, or skill; Nor Ivy dare I put among the boughes Of conquering Cypress circling round your brow. Why should I speak the rest? why should I blaze The civill battailes of our troubled dayes? To count the conquered foes, the nobles slain, This is a labor, this a work of pain; Whose many funeralls and herses stand, So many Trophies of thy conquering hand.
Marston, and famous York will Pillars raise, With large inscriptions for thy greater praise: Naisby Triumphall Arches will compile, Excelling far the Pyramides of Nile; Though to the wandring stars th' advance their head, And in Fames book are the worlds wonders read. This was no period, here no end as yet To his atcheivement, or his praise was set; England alone can't circumscribe his fame, The world it selfe's too narrow for his name: While o're the sea you waft your troopes, and goe Implacably upon another foe, Ogygian nets were laid; the Irish shore Trembled at thy approach, though proud before. Thus conqueror in England, you proceede The Rebell-Irish to chastise with speede; O're whom victorious too, at last you come To scourge the Scot in his own hated home.
And broughtst their necks under a double chain, Who were before impatient of the rain. The glory is as great, the happiness, Of conquering that people, is no less Then from that feared watching Dragon fell, By cunning stratagems the fleece to steal; Or the half Bull, half man Chimaera tame, Kept in the Cretane Labyrinth of fame. Thus you proceede still happily, and do As often fight, so often triumph too. While for your Countreys liberty and right, While for Religions sake you truly fight; Even God will help you, and the stars will stand, Assistant to your troops in rear and van. The heaven stayes for thee, moving not a jot, An ample Weight of glory hast thou got. To have the Thund'rer lead thee as it were, And to have servants full of pious care,
Vulcan himself put on thy arms, and those Sicilian Cyclops magazines compose, Brones thy feared Crest and helmet made, And Steropes temper'd the active blade Of thy all-threatning sword, Pyracmon yields His best endeavors to thy massy shields; Thy Huntingdon doth still this favour crave, Thee with her native brooks and springs to lave. Tethys her self brought up thy horse, neer whom Arion, Theron can't for courage come, Nor Cyllarus, nor Aethon can compare, Made tame by Pollux hand the yoke to beare. On Souldiers backs how well do corslets sit! How well do martiall hearts and brest-plates sit! When once the Scottish Armies saw the fire Diffuse it self, each minute growing higher, When once they saw our so-increasing light, And crests whose tops like diamonds shined bright,
There might'st thou in amazement see menstand, Of fearfull coward hearts, and trembling hand, And trees were from their stations like to fall, Such was the presence of our Generall. As on the Lybian coasts, when weaker beasts See a fierce Lion range those long-left wasts, If they distrust their heels and fear to fy, Straight at his feet they lay them down to dy. So barbarous Scotland did thy entrance dread: Magnanimous Cromwell, fear neer made her dead; The shadow of so great a name as Thine, Made Caledonia tremble when but seene, So did our standards fright those Scottish slaves, They shun'd our troopes and sought them safer caves. Lik Crowes that hover o're those fields, where Mars Hath glutted's fury in the heat of wars, Sitting securely safe, while all is still; Preying now here, now there with greedy bill;
But if a hasty hunts-man, or by chance On that sad place a traveller do glance, Affrighted straight their pitch-like-wings they take, And with out-stretched necks the same forsake. Tell me ye Scots: how oft were you defeate By war-like Cromwell? Towns how strong and great, With Forts and Castles hath he overthrowne? In one years compass, how much hath he done? Go to, and call to minde that former fight, When famous Cromwell with his very sight Uanquish't your coward Armies, and did venter The quitted garrison of Dunbur to enter. Speak (if old griefs 'tis lawfull to renew) You that the cofines of (once) Glads-more knew, Relate those slaughters; when stout Lambert fought, The great Montgomery, and to nothing brought Both his and Naeirnyes troopes; I say relate When his small force on Hamilton did waite,
And in a hasty, yet well order'd fight, Great-bragging Kerr and's fellows put to flight. Lambert, what more should I of thee set down? That art thy Countreys both and Yorkes renown Who draw'st the English with the cords of Love, But mak'st the Scots thy swords sharp edges prove, While careless of thy blood, thou dost encrease And to the English would'st establish Peace. Who can recount the foes slain by thy hand? What arms have been reduc'd by thy command? For Maro's quill these things are onely fit, They onely suite with Homers sharper wit. Great Fleetwood! of our present age the glory, Of future times the trust and faithfull story, It is not fit, nor can our humble string The worthy prayses of thy actions sing. For why? such plenty cloyes, and I grow dry Like Tantalus in midst of waters high.
Nor can I speak enough of what was done By thy fam'd vertues gallant Harrison; That by thy growing merits doest augment, Thy Countreys honor: neither art thou spent With stollen titles studying how to rise, But lying vainer honors dost despise, Knowing that granted truth, that thou shalt get More noble glory, to be good then great. Whaley, who truly can thy praise set forth? Most noble Deane, what can describe thy worth, Potent at sea and land, whose ready skill Is fortunately met with active will? Or who, brave Okey, can thy deeds rehearse As they deserve in a sublimer verse? Nor can I famous Lytcot pass thee by, Or let Mnkes actions in oblivionly, Vnder the first of whom my self begun In Martiall pathes a ready course to run.
First when the Scots on English riches prey'd, Next when our troopes the Irish did invade. No more, it is enough, I must not pass Th' appointed limits of my hour-glass. To you, brave Souldiers, I this little sing, Summing great acts in compass of a ring; The time perchance may come, (if once my Muse Can take the boldness confidence to use) That I may write such fields, such deedes, such wars, More largely, by the help of favouring stars, And to discover in a graver strain, The many Triumphs of your Irish gain. With such like Omens war-like Lambert still Proceedes, and Scotland doth with terror sill, Which straight began with an inveterate hate Some new seditions to meditate. The villages lost peace; when Country Clownes, And brawny neat-herds sled to fenced townes.
What rage and terror then was in the brest Of Musleborow, spoyled of her rest, To hear her neighbouring Croziers crack, and see O're all her bordering fields slain bodies lie? Say, when our Leader did possess those hills Of Penc-land, and their tops with foot-men fills. How was th'adjoyning Countrey moved, and how Did murmurs through the villages creep now? The sword and bullet knocking at the gate, Red-house was open'd to the souldiers straight, And Collington seeing our lucky hap, Yieldest thy self into the conquerors lap. Relate that happy Omen of our war, The famed wondrous battel of Dumbar, Fit to be kept for ever holy, when Cromwell, more strong in's vertue then in's men, O'rethrew the head-strong impious rout of those, Call'd the Kirk-party but the Churches foes.
What liberty was then, how cruel rage Was acted by the sword on every age! The bullets flew, o're all the field were spread Disheartned men that dying were, or dead; Nor from the darkened skie doth ever fall So much, so great, so terrible a hail, Even when the Sun his shining lustre shrouds Under the threatning veiles of sable clouds; Or when thick mists the darkned air bedew, Foreshewing rainy weather to ensue. The ground infectious grew, with such a blast Was layd as open all the woody wast; The beeches fall, the husbandman doth finde His broken corn lodg'd by this furious winde, And nipt his blooming hopes even in their bud, Which in his thoughts before as ripned stood; Thus did Bellona proud of slaughter rage, Boasting her self in funeralls and strage
Fell Mars his work, while with the blood that's shed The very hands of every man grew red. Alas! what store of Scottish Commons fell, What Priests, what clerks, what leaders? how did swel, That great account by the vast multitude, Of the unknown and name-less vulgar rude? Tell me ye Muses, what loss did redound, What damage to those Scottish vagabonds. Flying dispersed o're the scattering plain, Unto the neighbor garrison, though vain. Alas! the pastures did abound with woe, Proceeding from that tragick overthrow; The bodyes of slain men lay scatt'red here, Wounded and maimed in their members there, Strayning their purple blood upon the grass, Even moving pity in such foes as pass. As in a ship bracked by stor my blasts, Whose broken ribs, here, there, the Ocean casts
Now under water, now above again. What discord grows there in the swelling main! The decks can't keep the saylers, now the mast, Anon the Sail-yard 's in the waters cast. Here the sailes float far off, and there behold, Both Pilots seat, and rowers loose their hold. Such madness in that Scottish rout did raign, So fell their Souldiers, so their youth was slain. The horse forsake the foot; th'unhappy foot Turning the scale straight leave the hors-men to't. But see! their coward leaders arms thrown by Leave both forsaken, and most basely fly; By providence thus Cromwell, still you bear A Lawrell in your hand as conquerer; Thus with the sword the falling Scot you reach, And the rewards of peace from war you fetch; Extracting honey from that fatall juice, Which all men else as poysonous refuse:
Let all posterity think how memorable That fight to th' English was and profitable! Which we who find the profit must confess, Then the great'st acts of former times no less. For if we weigh the English few weak hands, And note the foes so great, so many bands; Marius himself gave not so great a blow, Vnto the Cimbriams in their overthrow: Nor was that famed Persian defeat, At Marathon so cruell or so great, When stout Miltiades the fight made good, Even till the field was buried in blood. Thus happy Cromwell, daring greatest things, Ads wounds to wounds, slaughters to slaughters brings; Leaving the road, his sword new wayes did hew Through that base people, till a conquest grew. Let fame forget each ancient Roman wighte, And not Fabritius or Serranus cite:
Flaminius cease or Fabius to read, That by delays his slaved Countrey freed; Speak not of Pompey, nor the deeds enhance Of Caesar, that to heaven their fame advance. Neither let Greece in all her height of pride, Brag of her Heroes that were Deify'd, Nor her Vlysses of so sharp a wit, Nor Jason that the golden fleece did get. For why? the Vertues of our Generall Equall the Trophies of these worthies all. What said I equall? heaven will witness bear, Our Mars his fame exceeds their want as far As the tall Cypress, that so high doth grow, O're-tops the Ivy that but creepes below. For if we may speak truth, but one great deed, The ancient Heroes famous oft decreed; One Hector made Achilles fam'd, and one Darius rais'd the name of Macedon.
But one Heraclian vict'ry did create Pyrrhus not onely great but fortunate. To Hanniball one Cannae gave a name, Scipio from him did raise a latter fame. One Mithridates heighten'd Pompeys praise, Whose fall did Julius Caesars Trophies raise; So the Lernaean Lake one Hydra bred, In the Arcadian woods one wild boar fed, On the Nemean rock one Lyon was, One Geryon for Three bodies did surpass, But one Antaeus of Gigantick frame, Whom thou Alcides with thy club didst tame. But Cromwell's greater yet, whose frequent blowes Thousand Gigantike monsters overthrowes, Taming proud Nobles with a fatall stroke, Bringing their necks under a servile yoke; Revenger of Scotch Tyranny, who will, On the poor people better laws distill.
At last, report had carried neer and far, The news of this, the slaughter of Dumbar, And the Kirk-party overthrown relates. Thus forced by their neighbors evill fates, And the quick fall of many castles strong, To Istrome, Crawford, Godward that belong, To reckon which would to a volum mount, And 'tis unfit at present to recount: They yield themselves, and to our mercy leave Their empty walls, our Souldiers to receive. As a free Lyon ranging in the plain, Doth mock the barking of the dogs as vain, And conscious of his strength, fears nought, but fiyes Enraged on the Hunts-mens treacheries, Chasing the dogs, and Hunts-men here and there, Making a Vacuum where he doth appear. Whole herdes of beasts through terror stand as dumb, And at his pleasure Vassals do become,
Being too few to tyre the preying paw Of wolves and beares or glut their greedy maw; Choosing their death, they'de be one Lyons food, Rather then thousand dogs should suck their blood. Tell me ye Muses (that do oft relate The greater actions of a rising state.) Tell me I say, what horrors did arise, In Edinburghs sad dwellers hearts and eyes, When first our Generall did invest about That City with his spreading armies stout? Say, in thy streets how did the tumults roare, When, Edinburgh, thy Natives greater store Fled, and of comfort did themselves bereave, And of their own accord their dwellings leave; When both the Souldiers and Commanders runs Shelt'ring themselves in High-land Garrisons? Like birds by coming winter forc'd away To warmer climats for a surer stay.
Such was that Cities terror, and so great. But the more generous sons of Mars retreate Into the Castle, that for building rare And strength, with our best English may compare; Then which in all the Caledonian land (Sterling except) a rarer doth not stand. For this those other Castles doth out-vye, As a grand monastery built on High, Those other creeping houses doth out-go, Which round about it placed are below. Or as the Moon those lesser light excells That in the sky are hidden as in cells. Now Cromwells fame and labors did designe The Castle and defenders t'undermine. Upon the towers they their standards place, Part guard the walls, part are in other case Loading with stones the upper battlement. Nor did their rage stay here, but further went
Within, without their fury they display; Here some the corn, there others cut down hay, Cramming their bags to bursting, corne and all That they can reach hoarding within their wall, And what through fear they can't import they burne, Themselves chief foes unto their fruits and corne. Alas poor wretched Citizens, whose fate Is to become sadly unfortunate? Whither, O whither do you think to fly From a Provoked angry Deity? Though you inclose your selves in rocks, and heap Up strengths together liberty to keep; Yet neither walls nor forts can force delay On swift revenge, when in her hastened way The strongest gates cannot resist her force; No brazen walls with-holds her in her course: Nor can your Castle, (which such Columnes beare Though to the clouds it's lofty head it reare,)
Can from the scourge of Cromwells wrath secure Your guilt, or to you liberty insure. But now under the walls our Generall came And of his coming overwent the fame, (That they might never into question call, The carefull mercy of our Generall) When drawing neer, he first a summons sent, That if they would be speedily content To yield the Castle so besieged, he Would give them quarter and fair liberty. Such pious godly care we only finde Kept in the casket of a noble minde; But they elated with vain-glorious pride, With boasting brags our clemency deride. (Free from our Souldiers, in their Castle safe) With jeering tannts they at our proffers laugh; Straight they'r alarum'd, and the trumpers sound To arms, each Scot takes his appointed ground.
And now with wrath the blood begins to boil, The cruell sword, and fire begin the spoil, The heaven even thunders with the noise of war, The flying bullets dark the troubled air. Nor do the Northerne windes more loudly rage, When Aeolus op'ning their close kept cage, Lets there rush out, and calleth back again Orion with the windes that showre down rain. On th' other side did Cromwells army stand Triumphing in their victory, not gain'd; A squadron of old footmen pitched here, Who for a famous death had quit all fear; And with undaunted courage dare to run, And meet the bullet from the thundring gun, Dreadless receiving the swords direfull stroke, Even destiny it self they dare provoke. The famous Generall bold on these straight calls For warlike Engines to approach the walls.
Wherwith the strongest He can soon make weak, And through the inmost rooms of Castles break. Nor in the Cannon was his only hope, Worse Instruments of death are now laid ope; A Mortar-peece was brought, whose very sight Sufficient was th' immured for to fright (About the mouth it did appeare more wide In a great Circle raising up the side) When it goes off, you sulphurous flames may note Fram'd by the Cyclops, belching from his throat; You would beleeve the heaven were darknes grown, And that the Basis of the Earth made moan: It did but make a noise, and straight there was A Breach, wherby whole Troops of men might passe. Hence by this thunder, with these frequent blows Weary'd at length, the Castle fearfull grows, And that wals best upholders, those same Bars VVhich never danger knew in former wars,
Did now begin to shake, and doubt their strength, Fearing their utter ruine at the length. The besieg'd Citizens now in despaire Their courage lose, and 'tis their only care That they together hand in hand may dye In this so publike a calamity. All things their ruine feare, and to be brought Or to their ancient Chaos, or to nought: Now they beleeve the Stars inflam'd may fall, And that their eyes see the worlds Funerall. Not much unlike a well-grown Hart (that doth In his faire hornes equall the Beeches growth, And in his flight the wind) insnar'd at last Stands at a bay, th' Hunters about him cast Into a Ring, seeing himselfe beset By barking Hounds, intangled in a net, Perceives their closing shoutings set a date Unto his Life, and hasten on his Fate.
Sad Fate of Scotland! doubly full of woes; Within by terrors, and without by foes. And in these fractions doubtfull what they will, Whether to yeeld their strength or keep it still, Th' issue proceeds from wavering desire. On this side whisp'ring hope doth good inspire; Standing on that side hurtfull feare they find With various fancies to disturbe their mind: But taught by greater evils of the wars, And by the insluence of malignant Stars, While they do weigh the strength of adverse Arms, And see their Neighbors daily growing harms; Feare overcame at last, and so decreed, That to surrender there was fat all need. Say; then what glory did our Troops receive, When such a Foe did such a Castle leave; And Cromwell, having gotten both the Place And Magazines, did presently possesse
The same with chosen souldiers of his own, Making that Princely Fort his Garrison. Thus Edenborough taken, all the rest That were of smaller strength, themselves addrest To Him in hope of mercy, learning wit, To Cromwels sword with patience to submit. At Paulus deaththe case with Rome thus stood, When Cannae was o'reflown with Roman blood, Th' Apulians, Brutians, Samnites, fell away, With the unfaithfull, though rich Capna, Opening her Gates to conquering Hannibal, Fearing his Force might be too Tragicall. What should I speak of Kelbright, Kinmore, Hume? Or why of Black-nesse should I talk assume? Kilkowbrey's gone, nor could Tantallon scape Free from our swords most just though furious Rape: Though spurred on by malice, madnesse, hast, With horrid flames he laid whole Townships wast.
'Tis not my work to write each action, Or name each Fort or Town, great Cromwell won, That tedious Labor would be much more fit, For an Historians accurater wit, Who in large folio Chronicles indite, Whose length great acts doth rather hide then write; Leith, Lithgoe, Rosband, I pass by and more, To sing atcheivements, never done before. Tell me ye Muse; how it came to pass, That in our Troopes such confidence there was; And how beyond all common humane sense, In all designes we had such confidence: When our brave Leader did each day renew, His horse the flying enemy to pursue, In little boats he sent a thousand foot, Over the Frith, to put the foe to rout. Who did so well, that the astonisht flood Was purple colour'd with the enemies blood.
Great was that work; whose like was never found Within the limits of all Scotlands ground. Horatius Cocles, thy report be dumbe, And wonder at the dotage of old Rome. Thus is the sea cover'd with ships and boats, Caesar himselfe did not more safely float Upon the Rhene, or tame the prouder course Of Rhodanus proud waves by witty force; Nor did Augustus teach Araxis so, By joyning banks, th' yoke to undergo. Nor did great Xerxes merit such a name, When he the rouling waves did seek to tame By casting fetters on them, and did threat Irons to Neptunes selfe at his retreat. Happy that voyage was, happy in both Its end and entrance; the Pellaean youth Did not more fame by his atchievement win, Nor with more happy Omens did begin,
(Fear'd by the Moores, and Indians) when he was Convey'd o're Ganges as a Common pass, And all the dangerous hardships did o're-come Of the Gigantike Pous far from home. Tell me, what rage or fury thence did flow, What wrath in Iohns-town dwellers hearts did grow, When our brave troops possest the adverse shore, And made Fife tremble with their coming o're, While yet we are hardly entred, and our scouts The neighbor coasts were ranging round about. What a new tempest bringing death did rage, Dewing the moystned fields with blood and strage? War made men mad, the fields were cover'd too With growing tumults and with ensignes new. Their army rag'd, as if all Scotland had To ruine Cromwell a conjunction made: But he resolv'd for all, doth undergo Meekly, the worst Fortune can put him to,
For the high glory of the English name, And to protect Religion from shame. Protected thus and guarded from above, To adverse coasts he doth more boldly move. He doth the sword and bullet fearless pass, Standing against them as a wall of brass. Like to a rock that lifts his towring head Above the Sea by tempests furrowed; When th' angry windes lift up her waves so high, That you would think they'd reach the very sky: Yet stands it firmly 'gainst the furious puffes Of winds, and th' Oceans furious Counter-buffes, Rising triumpher from his watry bed, Breaking the billowes with his conquering head. Speak (for ye know) how many captaines great, Were taken with their troopes in that defeat? How did death triumph in the fields of Fife, That cover'd were with bodyes voide of life?
It was a fell-black-day, alas! how there In various manners did grim death appear! When Lesley fled well-hors'd, through cross by-waies▪ And among others whom our troops did seize As Captives, was unhappy Brown, who gave Himselfe to Lamberts armes, his life to save. Speak ye, whose soules are slow and dull as lead; Is ancient virtue or retir'd or dead? If that Book speak the truth; if we believe What's written there, or it as true receive, Ye have been valiant, when your Armies stood, And Rhenes and Isters streams dy'd red with blood, And when Count Tilly did affrighted stand, To see the wonders acted by your hand. All Germany look'd on you as the Fort Whereto the Dutch-men chiefly did resort. Such was your honour then; alas! but now Where is that former vertue? do you know
Only to shew the Valour of your state Abroad, and be at home degenerate? Your spirits, like your soyle, are poore and dry, At home your hearts are in a Lethargy,; Your Army else would not let us surprize Calenders fenced house before their eyes: In so great danger they like Cowards stand, Fearefull to lend their Mates a helping hand. Thus Cromwell art thou Conquerour, thus do Armies surrender up themselves to You. Thy conquering sword thousands of foes doth rule, Whose habitation is the furthest Thule: The valiant Scots and Picts, that did let fly Their Ensignes through the lower Germany, And those of other Lands that Conquerors be, Magnanimous Cromwell, are subdu'd by Thee. Thou dost destroy the Caledonian Boare, (Sooner than Meleager could before;)
Thou brok'st the bonds of tyrants now grown strong, And kill'dst the Hydra while it yet was young; Half-buri'd England, while you were her Head, Rais'd up her self again as from the Dead; By thee regayning strength she rises free, Wasted before by Scottish treachery. What should I speak of more, what words or wit Can such high darings with expressions fit? Or how can my so mean endeavors raise, Trophies to equall your deserved praise? Be it enough (since all my pains fall short) To be amazed at the fam'd report Of your great actions, and since all I write In these mean papers doth appeare too light; Seeming to do no more, when all is done Then hold a candle to the shining Sun Or adde a drop unto the Ocean.
After our Leader had triumphing got, Into the Fisian region of the Scot, When both Saint Johnstons, and Burnt-I stand came, And Torwood subjects to thy honoured name: And other towns did of their own accord, Yield up themselves, and to our troops afford Shelter; the half-dead Scots seeing affairs Thus to go backward, falling in despair, Suffering such woes in their polluted home, Resolve from that accursed place to come, In so great danger only hoping health, (Though much deceiv'd from th' English Common-wealth: Such was the confidence, and such the hopes Springing among the Caledonian troopes. But that their hope was vain, the cure was worse Then the disease and prov'd a greater curse: Wretches ye headlong run, (changing the star) Into the hazards of a sharper war.
So a poore Sayler tost from shore to shore, When in a storm the winds and waters roare, To whom no glimmering star yields any light, No Cynosura to direct him right In that his unknown way, being struck with feare, Not knowing to what place his course to steere, Stands void of sense, and while he seeks to fly The roks, and barking Scylla to pass by, And takes a care Synphlegades to shun, Sad Fate doth make him on Charybdis run. "What reason, pray, had we to trust you so, "That you to England a new guest would go; "To take those dainties from us, which you knew "Not being cal'd were ne'r prepar'd for you? "Think'st thou the English look'd for thee once more "That Presbyterian fancies did adore, "And on their slaved necks bore Calvins yoke? "Tell me ye mad men, what did thus provoke
"Your minds to this beliefe that you should have "From the discording English, what you crave? "Vaine hope! Caerdigan cannot helpe you now, "Nor are the Norfolke Rebels helpfull, who "Proud in their hopes of greater numbers grown, "By Rich's smaller force were overthrown. "Most honour'd Rich, that dost advance thy fame, "And by thy vertues raise thy budding name; "Who after he had Norfolke quiet made, "And those seditions by his Sword allay'de, "He fals upon the Scots, who once againe "Invade us, but he made their journey vaine: "That they might learne by such mischances sad, "Nought to the good is hard, safe to the bad. "Keep back therefore, the Fates have all decreed, "Ye must not, Brethren, pass the River Tweed. "The way that leads to England is beset "With thorns, and dismall shades of mountains great.
"Unlucky Birds did your first March attend, "And will wait on you to the very end.) "Poore greedy rout! you the sole wretches are "That closely nursed our first Civill warre; "Then wicked thou thy just reward wilt have, "And of a double tongue the losse receive, "When those Troops slain by us thou shalt bemoane, "And in thy losse and nearer ruine groane. "Oh! Nation base and treacherous! what lyes "Have you maintain'd as greatest verities "Under a specious Vizor? Oh what Sects "And swarmes of Errors did your zeale protect? "Who can relate, how wisely you did sow "Such seeds of discord as you knew would grow? "When thus your policy had gain'd the day, "How on th' intangled English did you prey? "With thousands witcherafts you did them inchant "Forcing at last a guilefull Covenant.
"Could love of gold, and like insatiate tricks ""Saint you, and with us in our Border fix? "Was this your zeale, your Covenant, to rise "More rich and full by Englands miseries? "Was this your care to Canaan, that so "Your Thistle might in our sweet Gardens grow? "And that your Tares might at the least oppose, "If not quite choke the growing of our Rose? "This was the Scots fully resolved scope, "They thought them sure of this their wretched hope. "But Heaven forbad the banes, and with the eyes "Of pity, looking on our miseryes, "Turning the scale quite blasted all their hopes, "And in their Borders set our valiant Troops. "Could the blind zeale of Priests such ills perswade "To quiet peace, through Seas of blood to wade: "Or that the sword was a fit instrument, "Religion to establish with content?
"O damned impious crew! doth your Kirke teach "Her Clerkes the very Gospell thus to preach? "What godliness is that, with bloud and spoile, "And rage of War the Churches to defile? "Away, and to your Countrey when you come, "This Doctrine may be fit to teach at home: "Let your mad Priests belch out these Tenets there, "Your Scottish Kirks such things as these may beare; "If in these lines you happily may meet "Some barbarous names, (your pardons I entreat) "For I was forc'd to use them, since but few "Would well agree with such a cock-braine crew. "But whither doth this straying errorlead? "If I go further, convoyes I shall need. "Well! all this while I speake but to the winde, "And cast a Pearle before a durty swine. And now all things go back, for cruell Fate Sent o're the Scots our coasts to depraedate;
And since at home they suffered so much ill, At last abroad their Fortunes try they will; Not much unlike a cruell Wolfe, whom bloud Of a young tender Lambe makes far more wood; Leaving his empty Den, he doth infest Sheep-cotes with grinning mouth, and hatefull brest, Where he a bloudy rendezvous doth keep, On the securer Neighbours harmless sheep. So Scotland thou, forgetting ancient fame, And having soyled thy once-better name, Unmindfull of thy Covenant, dost come To spoile the guiltless English in their home; Daring to hope, and in that hope you dare Some Trophies from our English wreath to teare. Oh foolish men, and too too credulous, By hopes delusive to be guided thus! Your sense is drown'd in such a Lethargie, Wherein the Hamiltonian troopes did lie,
When happy Cromwell in Lancastrian Plains, Did with a handfull see his army slain! That against heaven with harden'd hearts did bowl, Nor would b' admonish'd by proud Pharaohs fall! For nor the cruell slaughter of that fight. Nor loss of such a battell could you fright. For Hydra-like one head cut off, you have Not one but two ith' place, more seeming brave, With tongues extended mingling hisses great, Wherewith you ruine to opposers threat. Like to a bull ta'ne from his wonted bait, At last regathering strength doth fiercely waite, And whisking's fatted buttocks doth invite, Now with his foot, then with his horns, to fight, And then again unto the skirmish cogs, By his loud Louring the stout Mastive-Dogs. So you poor Scots, like hunted beasts secure Account your selves, till you your selves immure
In Worcester, there a gin and net To catch your selves at unawares you set, You build the Funerall Pile, whereon you'l lye, And doe as 'twere appoint your day to dye. Whom providence enraged doth designe To ruine for their sin, it gives the line, Untill at last blind by security They are the authors of their misery. And now the Scottish Armies weary'd are With the crosse chance of unsuccessefull war, And with the toile of tedious Marches prest, Till Worcester did become their place of rest: Nor was there any place whereto they might Betake themselves more safely in that plight; The tumult grew so great on every side, That very clowns arm'd to the war did ride. And gallant Cromwell daring greatest things (Whose very name an equall terror brings
To Scottish hearts, and feare as dreadfull works, As Castriots did among the scourged Turks) Him all the Scottish Nation feare, and sly When with his Army he approacheth nigh. Like Chickens, who no sooner see a Kite Stoop with his wing, but in a deadly fright To the first place of safety they make hast, And soon get in, each fearing to be last. Or as the Lybian Ostrich; if she spy Over the sands by chance men passing by, With her rich plumes straight hides both head & ey, And by that means conceits her self unknown, And now she sees not, thinks she's seen by none: So too kind Worcesler did the Scots receive, And like a mother all their wants relieve: But oh sad off-spring, thou most viperous brood, Whom nought contents but such a Mothers blood!
For whose defence that City underwent So many slaughters, hath such detriment; That if it would, it cannot but retaine Fresh in its mind the sadnes of their gain. Alas! unhappy, whither dost thou flee? That City will not Refuge stand for Thee, Though with the Country you at first prevaile, And make your first met enemies to quaile; Yet Cromwels deadly scourge thou canst not shun, Such provocations are not Scot-free done. Not much unlike a Ship that Pirates bears, Preying on all, replete with stollen wares Of daily spoiled Barks, but if at last 'Tis on a ship of war adversely cast, Alas, how soon it suffers! and must beare That losse, for others which it did prepare! Her Sayles are torne, her Oares are broke, and now Tost by the winds, she doth the Ocean plow,
Till now no longer able up to keep, As she deserv'd, shee's drenched in the Deep. And now 'twas fully by the heavens decreed, To give the Scots an overthrow indeed; The Fates did presse it, and the Furies were With all their mischiefs summon'd to be there. The Sun foreseeing that so great defeat, Under a cloud did make a sad retreat, And to Olympus tremblingly he trips, Making an unaccustomed Eclipse; The standing Stars distilling waters powre, The Scottish woes ensuing to deplore. Nor were they long delay'd, All-conquering Fate Within short time those things did perpetrate. For the three fat all Sisters never know Their furious wrath intended to foreslow. Then ye triumph'd, when Cromwells valiant Train, With brave atchievements Vpton-bridge did gain,
What trumpets sounded the alarum then? How did the hoarser drums call out the men, Hastning those troopes that first were in a fright, With promis'd hope of glory to the fight! The slaughter with the horse-men doth begin, Unto whose help th' enraged foot run in. Arm, arm, they cry. And thus both parties meet, And with their swords in hand each other greet, And that no terrors wanting might appear, The Gun re-ecchoing thunder doubles there And by their sending shew what they prepare. The heaven was clouded with a dismall mist, Which of thick smoke and bullets did consist; The ratling noise of arms did make the ground Tremble for fear, and yield a dolefull sound. Opening her very inmost bowels wide, Seen through the open gapings on each side.
Sure no such noise in heaven and earth doth rise, When Jove commands out of his Treasuries Whole showers of raine and haile, and brings againe Those Stars to sight, he did before restraine. Nor doe inclosed Aetna's flames, though blow'd By a strong blast of wind, roare halfe so loud; The ayre grows dark with smoaking fires, each stone Scorcht by the fiery heat sends forth a groane. How grew your rage so fierce! O how increast Such cruell anger in your heated breast! The Armyes edg'ling fight, they mingled stand, Swords meeting swords, and hand encountring hand. Like to the Centaures, when with dreadfull cryes Against each other they with fury rise: Hylaeus puls up rocks, and Hippason With torne up Trees doth lusty stroaks lay on; Abas with monstrous strength doth Castles throw: And Polyphemus comming from below
Out of his den, with some excessive weight Exceeding all the rest the ayre doth beat; Raging Antaeus, Lapithus more fierce Does through the sides of his mad brethren pierce; Nylaeus rises, and whole woods doe shake Bistonian Rocks with terror strook doe quake; Othrys and Ossa tremble, and the rest Feare by their doings to be quite supprest. The victory was doubtfull, for the fight Was full of various changes: now to flight This side betook them, and anon they fly On t' other side: they must or run or dye. Now with full hopes on Cromwels Troops she smiles, And straight unto the Enemy recoyles; Thus Fortune kept the triumph doubtfull long, None could decide who was more stout, more strong. As when the Northwind with the Ocean strives, And the then calmer waves to tempests drives,
The tottring ships do first on one side lean, Then with the wind to t'other turn again: So many turns did in this fight appear, Such many changes; and the chance of War, Though it stood doubtfull yet it did proclaim, Bayes for the Victor, to the conquer'd shame. One wing of Cromwells seem'd at first to yield, And falling in it self, to leave the field: But when the Royall Fort our Generall gayn'd, And kill'd the valiant Scots that it maintain'd, Immediatly they on the enemies are Quicker then lightning or a falling-star, Being the first within the Cities wall. And now th'example of the Generall, And his so war-like presence did increase New strength in those where it began to cease. The English Souldiers minds are now on fire, And blown with angers bellowes still grow higher:
So force encreaseth from received wrong, And Vengeance by delay grows twice as strong. Nor was't enough for ours, in every street The proudest of their enemies to meet, And kill, but they search every Lane, And every house hath in it some one slaine. Where search they not? the sword no Church doth pass, But rages in the very market place. Now a new storme arises, (such as Aeolus He Who keeps the blustring winds did never see,) Which did the troubled Citizens assaile, And in the Cities very heart prevaile. What fury there? when strife, the sword and rage Even in the Market acted hourely strage, When heapes of dead, and those that stoutly stood Fil'd every house with danger and with blood; When both the childrens and the mothers cries Did with their terrour pierce the very skies?
Vertue and Honour in that fight appeare Clos'd in the brest of every High-lander. Whom no attempts could breake, no valour tame, But with their swords, (til kil'd) they rais'd their fame. The more they were opprest, the more they raise Their greater minds (to their eternall praise) In death, not slight, they did their vertue shew; And from the slaughter rising up anew, Like Wolves, they run upon the sword and speare, Nor Bullets they, nor armed Legions feare. You'd thinke them either desperate or mad, When cover'd with their shields, themselves they add Unto that place where Mars doth reigne as chiefe, Scorning the title of a given life; Slaughter to slaughter adding, still they go First wounding, next they kill the wounded foe. Like to a cruell Dragon, full of scales, And therin dreadfull, 'gainst whom nought prevailes,
Whose brawny back feares no ensuing harmes, Nor can be pierced by the strongest Armes. But if his Belly or more secret parts Be once but touched by the meanest Darts, How soone he fals, how soon his breath is fled! See I how he cules his body (not yet dead) In various circling formes! and at his death With stretcht out tongue, yield up his poysonous breath! So the unhappy High-lander doth try All meanes for life, not knowing how to dye; At last the Sword and Bullet makes a lane Among their ranks, and so those Foot are slaine. Not much unlike a Husbandman, who goes Through all his sields, and with his Sickle mows The riper Corne, and the fit Grass for hay, Where e're he comes making an open way, And laies those Plants which did so glorious stand, Like to dead stubble, on the mowed land:
So do those towring lightnings sadly cleere The place from Troopes, and make a Vacuum there: But they undaunted bear the greatest ill Standing, their members fallen, and distill Their utmost strength untill they fall, and shew Their armes cut from the sinews where they grew. Like to a happy Oake, whose Trunke so great Is both to birds and beasts a safe retreat, Which hath endur'd the shocks of wind and weather Untouch'd and free for a long time together; Laid at, at last, with Axes doth begin His lofty head towards the earth to leane, Falling with monstrous weight, doth plow the ground, Digging as 't were his grave with falling down. So those brave Foot, who had the burden bore Of that sad fight, all day and night before, Seeing their loss, at last began to doubt, And faile; their valour was quite weary'd out.
For when the horse ingloriously were fled, And left their Royall Squadron vanquished, Then all went backwards with the Scots, then they For their first treachery receiv'd the pay, And the revenge due to them till that day. Relate; how many carkases there were Scatter'd about the City every where, Which nor Eumenides nor Tisiphone could Without a dismall horror but behold, Which did encrease the shambles, while of course Whole heards of beasts dy'd there without remorse. So great a worke it was to overthrow And give the Scots so terrible a blow. All things at last thus running back and gone, And the whole Army being overthrown; And when poore Charles neither by prayers nor force Could to a new engagement bring the Horse,
He grows starke mad, (and trusting armes no more) His wretched fortune sadly doth deplore, (Weighing His Royall Race, and Kingly Stem) And blames the Stars, foes to that Diadem. So without more delay, to horse He hies, And much afflicted at his loss, he slies Among his scatter'd Troopes, t' avoid the fate Of Worcester bloudy battell, though too late. Thus with much labour and expence of bloud, (Mosley and others dying where they stood) Stout Cromwell did th' amazed City win, And lead his toyled weary Legions in, To take the plunder, due to their desert. For a new conquer'd City must impart Of force her Riches, and her captiv'd Youth Unto the Conquerors spoile and pleasure both: Rich housholdstuffe one Souldier plunders there, Another Princely Aras hanging here;
Entring this house he richer comes away, Soone growing rich with such a royall prey. But there were others, (whom not any love Of spoile, but hate against the Scots did move) Well hors'd, who laying Clemency aside, Did of the flying Scots pursuers ride. Whom once o'retaken, strongly they assaile, Nor do their prayers or teares at all prevaile; They spread their hands in vaine, for they must dye, And in the dust their hated bodies lye. Nor cease they here, still more and more they kill, A cruell slaughter doth continue still In stragling ruines. that far scatter'd be, As leaves in Winter fallen from the Tree. Tempests so great as these are seldome seen, Even when the Pleiades heve raging been, And shew their feared head, which showres beget Th' Olenian Capricornus to make wet.
Nor, Congleton, was that revenge the least, Which by the angred High-shooes was exprest. Nor dost thou, Samback, let the Scots proud horse Pass free, but fallest on them with thy force; Those Country Clowns, (which neither can nor wil Pardon, forget, or beare the smallest ill) As Bees, fly in his face, whose anger drives Them from the quiet of Hyblaean hives, Sharpning their stings: so these run with delight, And those known forces do provoke to fight: Some arm'd with pitch-forkes, some with clubs, and some Only with stones, unto the conflict come. Nor without slaughter could they drive them thence, Though they stood scarcely in their own defence. So when a Troope of many shepheards have With valiant Mastives slaine a Lyon brave, Which long before the Moorish coasts did wast, Th' Inhabitants, over-joyed, meet in hast
On his despised feared trunk to stare, Some pull him by the main, some by the hair Of other parts, all fain would be before His bared members fearing now no more. The ancient mischiefes that he us'd to do At the beginning, they remember now. Nor otherwise rage they; what Muse can tell Thy gratefull anger, Samback, and how well The madness of thy many-headed Rout Became thee, as to skirmish they went out. Nor was that slaughter less, which did succeed In the Lancastrian fields by fate decreed, When valiant Lilburne Darbyes forces met Like Lightning, and the victory did get, Breaking his strongest troops at their first charge. But whither stray I? why do I enlarge Or dwell on these? If I should strive to write Each single battle, mention every fight,
The day would fail; And th'Ocean hide the sun, And stars would glimmer e're my task were done. A glimpse of peace, brave Cromwell now we see, Since Scotlands conquer'd, and o'recome by thee. Thus do you fight, and fighting overcome, And overcoming triumph: fame be dumbe; What more can be? here sets he up his rest. No, no, his triumphs make the English blest, Which way so ere you go, you still prevail, Vertue attends you, Fortune fills your sail. With what old Heroes may I thee compare, Guardian of England, the renown of war? For few of these by upright fame were crown'd, Unwearied zeal with few of these was found; Some crimes their Vertue oftentimes did blot, Their milky colour oft receiv'd a spot. As when a cloud obscures that eye of Night, The sun withdrawing his, she gives no light.
As Caesars conquests did his honor raise, And crown his temples with Imperiall bayes; So did his treacherous dealing merit shame, And mixe dishonor with so great a fame. Nay more then this, most horrid but to speak, For gold the very temples he did break, And stayn'd his sword with country mens dear blood, If His unlawfull pleasures they withstood. Great Hannibal, Cannae thy fame doth praise, That battell honor to thy Name did raise; That womens slights this Conqueror should spoil, This, this alone doth all thy honors soil. The farthest Indie and Taprobane did sing, Th' eternall fame of the Aemathian King: But when he was enrag'd, to his disgrace, Cruell he'd fly into his Nobles face. Ev'n at his feasts of mirth, his cruell sword With guiltless blood defiles his very Boord.
But YOu Great Sir, Greater then Casr are, The Empire of your Vertues reacheth far, And keeping Passion under, dost restrain Its insolencies with the strongest rain. No Avarice with it's destroying hooks Inrolles thy Name in Fames infamous books; At hopes of Lucre you unmoved stand, No wretched gold thy spirit can command. Nor doth the Carthaginians pattern please, By lying long in a continu'd eafe, And too much pleasure to lose war-like State, And grow unfit for Mars, effeminate: For you a charging horse, and sword embrace Before the witch-crafts of a womans face, And hating idle sloth, and sinfull peace, By constant warfare th' English dost encrease. Nor like the Macedoni an, drunk with wine, Doth passion sway you to a dire designe:
For moderation rules you, not abuse Of Life you love, but a more sober use. If you be angry, Prudence doth allay Your milder temper; Clemency doth sway, And seat it self upon your calmer brow, Not breaking any that it can make bow. One Scipio there is, whose name no blot Ever receiv'd, whose vertue ne're had spot, With whom, thy Goodness admirably rare, And pious zeal may make thee to compare. You are both equall in the book of Fame, Your equall love of justice saith the same; You both alike to maintain chastness move, Both alike goodness, and Religion Love. What do I sing thy deeds? alas! my verse Neither thy prayse nor battells can rehearse. They do exceed the Muses faith, nor can The quickest wit their true dimensions scan,
Unless he saw them and were present by At the atcheived deeds, so done, so high; Thou Patron of our peace, and of our war The just revenger; you our helper are You come a new Alcydes, and do bear Those things upright, that er'st declining were. The greatness of thy minde did still supply Our wants, when losses made us gasping ly; You did with succors always ready stand, And save from common shipwrack with your hand: You did that English-ruine-threatning war, Unto the Scots, that plotted it, trans-fer, Like Jove himself, who doth his lightnings throw On rocks and Pirates, carefull lest a blow Should shed our blood, his Thunderbolts doth cast Within the limits of some forraine wast. Your merits ask, Great Sir, a larger store, But you must Pardon, if I can no more;
'Twould be too great a Task; my skill surmount, All the atcheivements of your hands to count. Can I so many great Commanders name? No, my weak Muse can never know the same. Mongst whom come Gray of Grooby like the Sun, His shining Vertue has the rest out-gone. That is his Countreys Father and delight, And a true Guardian of oppressed right, Whose faith in all the heat of war was try'de Yet without moving constant did abide; Whose constancy was lessen'd by no harms, Was neither shaken nor remov'd by storms: But like an anchor in this sea of blood, To stay the wavering people firmly stood. Most noble Grey, the rest I'le not repeat, Nor speak thy care in Peace, and War how great: How many great endeavors didst thou blow With fortunes bellows, till at last they grow,
To famous actions; and how great a light, Of Vertue didst thou shew at Worcester fight. My muse would longer dwell in such a field, That she to Disbroughs better times might yield Victorious Trophies, raysing to the stars His fame and acts of Valor in the wars. But now to war I here must set an end, And what remaines to well-come Cromwell send. Hail happy star! Sweet comfort bringing light; Our Nations and this ages glory bright! At whose return, black clouds no more appear, Our calmer sky begins to shine more cleer. The Citizen, and Souldier both rejoyce, Shewing their joy in their triumphall noise; Pallas and Mars, arms laid aside, do meet, And weekly guarded, at this triumph greet Each other, while to laid aside they yield The Gorgons head, the sword, and goat-skin shield.
Thrice happy day that dost deserve a note Of happinesse never to be forgot, Which brought thee safe from Scottish enemies, And from the dangers of a dire disease, Returning thee to our more safer shore More strong and healthfull than thou wert before. What gratefull thankes do we acknowledge due Goddard renowned for thy skill to you? Which brought back Cromwel from the gates of death, And when he gasp'd, as dying, gave new breath; Renewing th' intrals that before decay'd, And cur'd his sicknesse, which had all dismay'd. Thus Cromwell comes, whom false report had said Of his disease so long and doubtfull, dead. As a kind mother doth in mind embrace Her dearest son in some remoter place, Is so o'rejoyed, when once she sees the coast Of her bewailed pledge so long since lost,
That words grown insufficient to express The weight and greatness of her happiness, (Filling her swelling heart and pleased eyes) She melts to teares, and when embracing cries: So England joyes at Thy returne, so she Ambitious dayly growes to honour thee; And in the reall wishes of her heart Shewes her sincerest Love to thy desert. Cambridge confirm'd by thy returne, doth boast Thee for her Burgesse, that her borders coast Thy neighboring birth-place, now remembring those Her ancient Honours, doth againe propose Unto her Muses promised reward From thy Paternall fatherly regard. And Oxford doth her happinesse prefer. Triumphing: under Thee her Chancellor. And now at last, if it may lawfull be, Mixtures of small with so great things to see,
Even I my selfe mov'd by your vertues rage, To sing your greatnesse in this narrow page. As in a pleasant garden when we come Plucking the flowers, here and there we rome, Still plucking more, although in nothing rare, But that by our own hand they pulled were; And as we never count an evening cleare, Unless we number every chiefest star: So with mv humble quill I thought to write Only great acts, and famous to recite. The time may come, wherein I may declare At large the triumphs of your greater war, And all your Souldiers famous actions shew, Laying them open to the publike view. If those most honour'd Nobles of the State With their great President but animate Kindly these first-fruits of my zeale and toyle, A new designe may grow from every smile.
What hitherto is done, Great Cromwell lies Upon Thy Altars as a Sacrifice. Now it becomes the Coll'nels names to shew, (And but to shew them) and to tell those few That fell in service, since you first did stand As chiefe Commander in the Brittish Land. Of noble Sydney, Bingham, Heynes Id' speake, But straight-lac'd time doth my intentions breake. Who knows not Barksteads Regiments report, The Citizens and Cities happy Fort, For who declining were, or wholly broke, Fearing their state, themselves to thee betooke, And turning souldiers under thee, they reach To that whereto their Trade would never stretch. Thus to thy men thou'rt good, and they in thee, And thou in them hast a felicity; (And at the supreme Parliaments desire, While you brave Captaine do at home retire
Your selfe from war, with a more watchfull eye Th' Army abroad you with Recruits supply. And as the Sea, into whose bosome go A thousand Rivers, doth more fiercely slow, Grown great with many waters, and expands Her raging waves o're all the neighbour sands: Such is thy Regiment, which though you draine, With fuller numbers still it swels againe; Now sending forces to the Irish coasts, Anon transfunding into Scotland hosts. Cobbet; what narrow verse can thee inclose? Or who can Talbots worthy praise compose? Who did his knowing skill in warfare shew, When the Kings Troopes of horse he overthrew; Innobled by thy birth, and in the field, By thy true valour, thou to none dost yeild. Nor can my Quill, O Hasilrige, set forth Thy so excelling, so deserving worth.
Nor may I famous Constable report Thy acts in briefe, ast striving to be short I grow obscure) and in the middle breake His gotten same, while I so little speake, I pass by Mackworth, and it grieves me sore That at the present I may speake no more: As of his perseverance in the right And wonted faith, which neither threats could fright, Nor Kingly proffers win to baser slight. Berry and Gosse, and famous Coxe I pass, And many other names which aske a place, Which I perchance may in a scrole set down, With famous Moyle our judge of high renown, That smiling fortune may my next part crowne. Brave Hacker, that hast from the first drawn blood, Immovable by art most sirmely stood, Both Horse and Foot, and Drums thy praise proclame, And fierce Bellona doth extoll thy name.
Nor will I mention old and ancient acts, But I will trace thee in those newer tracts, Thy latter deeds, which Scotland will attest, And Worcester felt thy scourging hand and brest; (And which was first) i'h' battell of Dumbarre The enemy found thy armes were fit for war. Nor can I ought of Gravener repeat, In whom all gifts of mind and body meet; Whose bloody hand, where ere it went, did shew With how much strength it could lay on a blow. Of Bradshaw nought, whose Ancestors have been In the Lancastrian fields some ages seene, Of old deducted from the Saxon Race. Neither for Brookes, nor Crexton have I place, Nor have I time to set out Chesters worth, Or tell how many Troopes they have set forth. Or say what Essex did: nor can I looke On Matthewes, Honney-wood, or famous Cooke.
Nothing of Kenricke, Gibbons, may be said, Both which in Kentish fertile fields were bred. My Index would to a vast volume swell, If I on every severall head should dwell; If Twisletons, or honour'd Birches fame I with Fames shriller trumpet should proclame; I will not speake the gallantry of Pride, Nor many others, which I pass beside: As Tomlinson and Alred known of all, Nor Downing the Scout-master Generall. Beaumont, nor Benner, whom I only name, Commanded briefeness doth exact the same, By whose victorious armes the English gain'd A glimpse of concord, Tyranny restrain'd; By these encreased Liberty they have Restor'd unto them from the very grave. Whither doth my rash errour lead? do I Only to Souldiers yield these praises high?
I do revoke those speeches, I recall My slipping tongue from that unwilling fall; For pious Zeale, the pulpits sacred Lawes, And our own pray'rs stood bull-warkes of our cause. Some Ministers examples I'le unfold, Whose godly precepts, and monitions bold, Strengthened our war-prepared troopes with might, And made them oft victorious in fight. For Armes and Armies of no value be, Where not conjoyned with true piety, And helped with an awfull reverence Of the divine all-ruling Providence: Hence noble Deale and Lockyer you became The Pulpits honour, and the Preachers fame. And Stapleton in's predecessors great, While with diviner vertues he's repleat; Doth grace the Pulpit on occasion fit, With the rich dowries of thy ripest wit.
That honour in our Armies you have got, What help your wisdome and your learning brought Unto our forts, the good event doth shew, And the got triumphs, which from thence did grow, And Peters (though thou scarce wert known before, Though thy report had hardly reacht our shore.) Thy vertuous courage, and thy zeale compile Their own record, worthy the highest stile; Whether the minist eriall function You, Or publike civill charges looke into. Is there a man that in his place doth know A quicker wit, a readier hond to show? Who in the Pulpit is so oft and free, Declaring Heavenly Oracles as He? Nor doth he teach like them, who credit win By soothing up their Auditors in sin: But mindfull of the Gospell which you teach, And of that saving health whereof you preach.
You soare more neere to heaven, and with the word Pierce neerer to the heart than with a sword; Only to preach at home, contents not Thee, The Utmost limits of the world you see: And to the savage Indians where you came The Gospell of salvation you proclame; Shining a happy star to guide aright Those barbarous peoples feet into the light. Nor can my little leysure spare to sing From what most noble Ancestors you spring, Nor what great deeds their honour made to swell, Thy noble Lignage let thy Cornewall tell, And shew your late increased coat of armes, How beautifi'd from Hamiltonian harmes. Thy wondrous zeale the godly doth befriend A hand, to all that want or aske, you lend, In thy admired vertue quick and wise, Who on the common Altars sacrifice.
You to th' afflicted, like Achates, prove, To them, like Atlas, whom sad terrors move; The falling English in the heate of war Were kept upright by thy upholding care. Nazeby, Wales, Ireland, Cornwall, Worcester too Sooner or late have felt what you can do; Thy frequent toile, thy dangers, thy great heart Broke by no threatnings, let those men impart, Who verst in war and Martiall bloudy strife, Know what belong to a right-ruled life. Thy travels both in body and in mind Let their relation be to them assign'd. These common things, Peters, I soly own Thy selfe and deeds, being both to me unknown. Pardon, I pray, I only mention this, That the Priests worth the English may confess; And that the peoples safety doth not stand Fortifi'd only by the souldiers hand.
And You who of the Councell of our State Members at present are, or were of late, Who by the supreme Senate are decreed The first in changed courses to succeed. GOD make you all unanimous, and bless You with eternall growing happiness: And, as Attendants, make the stars to waite Upon your high atchievements for the State; That pure Religion undefil'd may be Increasing with revived piety, Whose sweet perfnme will to the heav'ns arise A gratefull and accepted sacrifice. Then peace and truth will kiss; and all that sinke Of horrid blasphemies to Hell will shrinke. Concord will grow, and all divisions ceafe, And all things whisper to the Brittaines peace, Then shall the Woolfe, that with a fatall eye Did meditate before new treachery,
Against the lambe; his fierceness laid aside, Henceforth together safely they reside, And the safe flocks of kids need not to fear, When they the roarings of the Leopard hear; The Lions whelp and Calf, now void of dread, Dare company together in one bed. A little childe these tamed beasts shall lead Unto their pastures where content they feed. The Cow doth feed together with the Bear, Their young ones are Companions void of fear, The Lyon leaves to prey; and the same. ficld Both to the Ox and him doth fodder yield. All deadly poyson's taken from the Aspe, The sucking child him in his hand may graspe, Nor shall the Viper hurt the weaned childe, That sporteth with him, it is grown so milde. These raging beasts shall act no future ill, For God will seat his Chosen on a hill.
Even on Mount Sion: when he shall record O're all the earth the knowledge of the Lord, As do the raging waters of the deepe O'reflow the earth in a tumultuous heape. Go on grave Fathers therefore, and imprint These secrets in the heart from sacred hint: That the first honour of your counsels may To God redound, the next that peace may sway In all our Regions, while there is a day. And thou most honour'd Bradshaw by consent The parent of our State and President. (Although thy innate modesty won't beare All thy deserved praises but to heare; And though with patience thou dost hardly know The burden of thy honour t'undergoe) Yet give me leave, thy vertue and thy fame Moves me a little to extoll thy name.
The Vindicator of our Liberty, And sharpe revenger of our slavery; When first thy stretched hand did strongly break The cruell chains from off the Britaines neck, Like faithfull Palinurus, without feare You undertooke a weighty taske, to steere A raging boystrous people, and procure Through unknown swelling waves a haven sure. You mindfull of your Countries good, uphold The Common-wealth, resembling Atlas bold: Free from the cares of a dissembling brest, The publike you prefer to private rest. Hence your unwearied pious zeale and paines A glad remembrance to all Ages gaines: But if your actions here have no reward Worthy their merits, 'tis not worth regard; All earthly things thy vertue doth surpasse, And will in heaven have their deserved place;
Mean while to heaven these are our dayly prayers, Methusalems or aged Nestors years, That you may reach to make us English blest, And that at last freed from this worlds unrest, With more content you may, as old in this Praeside new Councells in a State of Bliss. FINIS.
An Animadversion. IT was not my purpose to write an elaborate History, but onely in brief in a Panegyrick, to point at the triumphall vi∣ctories of our most excellent Generall. Neither be troubled, Reader, that tying my self to such brevity, I have either slen∣derly or not at all, touched every single Action, or Actor by name, especially those truly worthy, and Honourable Men Monke and Overton, whose famous acts rather challenge a vo∣lume then the narrow scantling of a Page. Neverthelesse I shall neither forget these nor those, when (God assisting and by the favour of the Councell of State) I shall set forth in their lively Colours the whole series of all things done, (as far as Poesy can) to adorn a second book, taking it's beginning from the rendition of S. Johnstown. In the mean, while Gentle Reader. If ought you know that may more worthy be, Impart them, but if not, use these with me.
TO THE Most Excellent, The Lord Ge∣nerall of Great Brittayne, OLIVER CROMWEL. VVHat force can drive, or what perswade My wandring minde farther to wade? Whence is it, sickle fancy mine You bring me to my old designe, Thy vertue bright, our losses do invite, (Like harping Flaccus) me to be An humble suppliant to thee, Who in another cause deserv'd of late, Though sadly crossed by decree of Fate.
Even providence your arms befriends, 'Tis not blind Fortune that attends Vicissitudes of men, and things: But heaven it self such changes brings; Who gives and takes Esteem from things, and makes The smallest things grow great, and can Change the renown of any man; Though on a Throne to day he sit on high, Making his height upon the ground to lye. The great disposer whose bare word, Or grow'th or ruine will afford; Turning mans heart, and firm intent, Against their own accomplishment. Thus am I come At last unto your home, A willing guest; drawn by the fame Of your great deeds and honor'd name,
And spotless life; I humbly do appear Thy glories trumpet, and Thy Honorer. Unto the mighty as a rain, Their tyrannizing to restrain; To the unarmed as a shield; Unto the Souldiers strength you yield, The Cities light Cleer, shining, bright; Chief Leader of the Epick Quire: The drum, the trumpet, and the Lyre, Together-with the sweeter Lute agree, To sing thy praises in a Symphony. The heaven assists you in your war; Your high and wary counsells are Thy Countreys stay, the hoped health Of the decaying Common-wealth. A deadly strage To this malignant age.
When the unhappy Kings ill luck The State into a storm did pluck, Thy Country found thee her desender then, Thou wert a Victor without blood of men. Thou dost with meekness happy Guide, The greatness of thy chance abide. When formerly the war did grow, By doubtfull causes hindred, slow, Then there was need of you, great Sir, to lead. In dangers by your humble prayer, You move the Deity to hear, Beloved Guardian sent us from on high, Thus dost thou conquer even necessity. The cunning Scot, the Irish wilde, And Wales with hills and mountaines fill'd, And all our Northern world confess, Thy strength of hand, of head no less,
Forrayners next Shall by thy sword be vext, If 'gainst the English they devise Mischiefes by stop of merchandise; Whether they quarrells pick not known before, Or else pretend a greater, older score. Rise up revenger of our harme; Quickly prescribe a heavenly charme To free our Church from sad debate, And fixe the Pillar of our State. Let banisht truth From thee receive new growth; Silence contentious Schismes, and stand A safe protector of our Land; Shine like a star in our Horizon, cleare, And both of heaven and men the joy appeare. Go, famous for thy acts, replete With honours, happy, good, and great
Exult therein; may no annoy Once interrupt thy calmer joy, O do not stain, With grief too much or vain, His gallant funeralls: though void of breath This Heroe lyes, yet in his death He triumphs in a never dying fame, His vertue left him an eternall name. Leave of to grieve, and cease to moan, Let no sad sigh or fatall groan Accompany his funerall: Because he liv'd enough to all, Himself, his friends And Country; while he lends To after ages a clear light Arising from his vertues bright, And having done what wit could not enlarge, Quite weary'd out he got a free discharge.
On God all humane changes tend, He all things towards their end, Close to true Piety you keep, And thence deserved honor reap. (Since now come back) My Muse shall not be slack, Thy prays'd Encomiums to sing, Or gratefull Panegyrtckes bring, Others may praise thee in a verse more high; But none so well, since not so soon as I. Make me but happy by thy smile, If thou with favour dain my toile, By that thy favourable breath We are (as 'twere) redeem'd from death. Thus rais'd by thee, It shall our Triumph be, In the eternall house of Fame To register thy present name,
That future ages each succeeding hour To thy blest name may new Encomiums powr. Thy Coat of Arms, brave Cromwell fill, And by thy acts adde something still To make it greater, looke and see The Common-wealths calamity, And be a stay To Religions decay; So will thy Country thee reward With more, with new, and fresh regard, And Mars, and Pallas will, thy fame to spread, With Bays, and Olive crown thy Pregnant head. Thus do you sit exalted high, Applauded by the joyfull Cry Of the pleas'd City; those who are Truly religious send a prai To heaven for thee; (Poor Poets) so do we.
Now on a Dytherambicke Lyre Anon in a Pindarick Quire, Or else like Virgil we thy deeds rehearse, And joy'd return in an heroike verse. REader (if ought) Come and be taught, Why do you so Look on a picture, or dumbe show? Would you unconquer'd Cromwell know? alas! View not then a carved face, But mark his vertues manifold, Then Brass more lasting, more desir'd then gold. Attentive be; This, This is He, Who, for the Publike born, doth Live To that, for which Nature did Give Him life; whose sharper wit For all great counsells fit
His valor shew'd So oft abroad, (Equally happy to his own, And to the foe most fatall grown) Unto his Countrey renders him to be The fort and Patron of her Liberty. Honor his Name, This is the same; Our freedomes strongest Hold, Brittaines Alcides bold, Th'unwearied Atlas of our State, Keeping upright, what would precipitate, Diverting all the spleen of fate. Acknowledge this, He, He, it is, Englands new leading Ioshuah, (no less Or in his cause or his success)
Guarded by heaven, to whom the helping stars, Serve as inferior Officers. Applauded by the righteous, while he fights For the Republikes private rights And common too— A Deadly scourge of Tyranny And superstitious Vanity. Delighted be; For this is He, Who when the flood Of late shed blood, Began to ebbe, and cease, Brought back the Olive both, and Bayes; Who shutting all the passages of war, And taking away cause of jar, With the same sword that he before did cut Ope Ianus gates, again the same doth shut.
Hence Readers go And these things show, Them to your Children yet to come proclaime, And to their off-spring let them do the same, Both even amazed at our Generalls fame; Whose Monument (which doth in triumph stand, Ore enemies conquer'd by thy hand) The world will soon confess without abuse 'Tis the eighth wonder which she can produce. And you (Great Sir) of honours full and dayes To thy eternall praise Added at length To the nine former Heroes, make the TENTH.
TO THE Most accomplished Gentleman. EDMƲND LƲDLOW The Most Noble Deputy-Governour of Ireland, when he set forward on his journey thither. An Ode wishing health. NEptune make smooth the waves, lest in a throng Justling together they grow high, and wrong This new Commander. And thou Milford too, When he thy neer-adjoyning waves shall plow, See that there only be a gentle gale, And that no tempest on the main prevail, May the contentious winde abate it's pride, And those their ancient strivings lay aside: And when he goes, whisper a gentle blast Into his sails, to countervail his hast;
And you the Tritons who dominion have, Although unhappy, on each Irish wave, Compose their tumults when on high they rise, As if their rage would reach the very skyes, Till your Vice-leader pass the dangerous sands, And on th' Ogygian coasts with safety stands. And thou most famous Ireton, whose head And hand, are alwayes powerfull indeed, To whom the former nor the present time Did ever yield an equall in our Clime, Assist thy Ludlow with a free consent, Since Hee this dangerous journey underwent, That by conjoyned arms he might relieve That tedious war and fitting succors give. Othou whose worthy memory's more sweet Then all the best Companions I meet! My fort and comfort! what heroick verse Can thy great prayses worthily rehearse!
How, where shall I begin? shall I record The valour that thy younger yeares afford? Or that thy Candor! what, a child, you shew'd Of valour, while you ne'r had been abroad, Only at Blanford; how you did excell Among three restlers! how you shewd your skill In turning bals: what man did better know To throw the Bar, or give a stronger blow. With such like trophies you did think no scorne The first yeares of your active youth t'adorne; But when a downy cheeke makes you put on An age more virile, straight these toes are gone; You wish to heare the Trumpet which doth raise The Horses courage to the Riders praise; You lov'd to bound and curvet; hence it came, That in your youth you did begin your fame By your great vertue, when as yet your force Was ty'd within a Century of Horse,
But not your courage, for with them you go Through many Troopes of a more potent Foe. England will speake this of thee, and confess The greatnesse of thy acts with joyfulness. Sad Warder Caster, which long siege did tame, Will speake thy labours, and confess the same; Who, when her wals all broken did appeare, And all her buildings nought but ruines were, Yet did remaine valiantly faithfull still, A Conquerour by suffering so much ill. A worthy act, which fame will ever sing, Amazement to the present age to bring, And future too: then Mayden-Bradley holds Out to the world thy fame, renown'd of old From thy fore-fathers, known both wise and bold. Next happy Wiltshire doth triumphing stand, So often sav'd by thy victorious hand,
When the destroying Enemy with boasts Entred, and rage, into that Countries coasts. Wiltshire relate the changes of that war, When Ludlow followed the Enemy so far. Speak Sarisbury Church-yard, which stood and gaz'd Upon thy passage through the swords amaz'd; Like to a Lion when he is beset, Which fearelss runs and breakes the scorned net. 'Tis a vaine worke thy praises all to bring Within the compasse of a narrow ring; A little now shall serve; for that we know We do unto thy praises much more ow. Which we shall pay; if once our Muse can get A little respite to refresh her wit. In the meane while, brave Captaine, go thou on With happy Omens, as you have begun, That by your Guard, fam'd Ireton may rise Much more conspicuous in the publike eyes.
While to each other force and armes you lend The horrid bloudy Irish war to end, That once againe her ruin'd houses may Of their rebuilding see the happy day. And that poore Ireland, wearied out with age May yet grow young againe, when freed from strage By your most worthy hands; and that sweet peace In her may settle first, and then increase.
TO THE Most Famous, as well for his Valour, as Vertues, HENRY IRETON, Late Lord Deputy of Ireland, A Member of the Parliament of England; As also, Of the Right Honourable, the Councell of State. At whose Tombe, and to whose Memory this Funerall Elegy is offered and Wept By T. M. Junior.
An Elegy. IS Ireton dead, and yet the heavens not beare In such a publike loss an equall share? Can such a Patron of our Liberty VVithout a grand Eclipse, or Comet dye? Although not at his death, yet he will have The Sun a mourner at his honour'd grave. The Muses Fountaine is too small, too dry, My Quill with fit Encomiums to supply. If all your raptures, all your sacred fits Could be inspir'd into my working wits, Could Aganippe by some secret veine Be brought into the Cisternes of my braine,
Your fits would faile and that exhale in teares, By this new Sun late placed in the spheares. Let England speake his worth, Ireland proclame His Trophies, and proud Limrick keepe his name Ingrav'd in brass, that future times may see, And speake his honour to Posterity. Great Cromwel's Son! Oh speak not Titles, Fame, "But tell his Vertues, give his Soule a name. His Valour mixed with such meekeness rare, That no old Hero might with him compare, But only Moses: And straight cal'd aside, And Canaan seen in hopes, he gently dy'd. His VVisdome speake, his Temperance, his Zeale, And strong endeavors for the Common-weale; But that you can't, the Dotes thereof was such, That nor my tongue, nor Pen can say how much Their Value was; but when that all is done, If you would speake their worth, say Ireton,
Whom all rich graces round about beset, And piety the Center where they met. Hence then all smiles, come weeping, change we mirth To mourning Dirges, lave the pretious earth Of this so honour'd Patron with our teares (Fertile as them the cheeke of Aprill weares) Let Angels sing his graces, who did call His soule to heaven to its originall; And murmur not that losse, which here but lay A pawne that might be cal'd for every day. But if upon our sorrow and thy fate Poore Mortals could but set an equall rate; The world would praise thee, while it did appeare With a full sorrow, in each eye a teare: For where Art failes to yeild us her reliefe, Our will to praise thee wee'l express in griefe. FINIS.
