F1440 12303740 59194
A TRVE COPIE OF TWO LETTERS BROUGHT By Mr. Peters, this October 11. from my L. FORBES from Ireland. The one to the House of Peeres, the other to the House of Commons. I. Declaring the wofull misery of that Kingdome in all corners and quarters. II. His very happie and successefull endevours against the Rebels what they have been. III. How (through Gods blessing) with five or six thou∣sand men presently sent, he may regaine that Kingdome yet, before December be past. LONDON, Printed by L. N. for HENRY OVERTON, in Popes-head Alley. MDCXLII.
A TRVE COPY OF TWO LETTERS, brought by Mr. Peters, this Octob 11. from my LORD FORBES from Ireland. My Lords, THe miseries of the distracted Ireland, are so many in all the corners of it, that it would require a just volume, rather then a Letter to rerpesent them, the combination is so strong, and the Rebellion universall, the Brittish in∣habitants for the most part ruined, and the small Ar∣mies in Munster and Connaght, (for lacke of necessaries and timely supplies) more like to be a prey to the Re∣bels, or thorough mutinies to turne Rebels themselves, than any wayes likely to reduce the Rebels to their due obedience: there is two things by the policy of their Priests, which adds strength to the Rebellion: the first of which is worse then the Rebellion it selfe:
which in al places they are so impudently bold, as to fa∣ther their Rebellion upon his sacred Majesty, as if all they did, were in obedience to his Majesties commands, which by way of implicite faith: although they never saw any such warrants, they are bound to believ, because their Priests and prime Commanders doe informe them; the second, their Priests indeavour to perswade them there is no distruction nor hope of pardon; there∣by to drive all to such desperate courses, as they will bee rather kill'd then taken, and encourage one another to enter into a bond, for killing all his majesties Brittish subjects, and protestunt professours. An happy agree∣ment betweene his Majesty and the Parliament would quickely take of the masque, and so weaken the power, that the greater part of the seduced Gentry and Com∣mons would leave them, and a discreete liberty given to Governours of Counties, and Provinces, to pardon some speciall Persons, and Corporations upon honou∣rable termes, would untye their bond, and make every one of them, cut anothers throats to secure their owne pardon: the Towne of Galway hath by the Earle of Clanricard and Saint Albons meanes made a pacificati∣on with the Fort, but upon such dishonourable termes, that it hath rather beene a subtile strengthning of their rebellion, then a truly intended pacification. Although in every Province where I come, I desire the assistance of, and to be assistant to the chiefe Governours thereof: and have accordingly in that Province of Conaght, find∣ing his Majesties Fort, and the Town of Galway at odds againe, being called thither for the reliefe and assistance of his Majesties Fort, advertise the Earle of Clanricard Governour of the Towne and County of Galway, and my Lord Rannelagh President of Connaght, who did
concur in their opinions, that the loyalty of the Towne of Galway could never be secured without a garrison, if they knew how to obtain it, my Lord Clanricard com∣plaining that his friendes had left him, and the rest would leave him, if the pacification were broke: and my Lord Rannelagh complaining that his Souldiers lacked all necessarie provisions, mony, food and cloa∣thing, and but small proportions of Amunition, my small force not being in any probable way sufficient to compell them to receive a garrison: I silently suffred the Earle of Clanricard, and the Captaine of the Fort, to patch up their broken Pacification, by which the Fort is sufficiently relieved; leaving the Fort of Gal∣way in these termes of peace and plenty, I sent to the Isles of Arran, and did great spoile in burning the Re∣bells cabines, and corne, and brought from thence two hundred cowes, and some sheepe. But the Rebells (ex∣cept twenty that were kil'd, fled in boates from the o∣ther side of the Island, some eight miles distant, the stormes being so great, that in eight daies time I could scarce gaine the mouth of the River of Limerick: where I am still doing all the harme I can to the Re∣bells: but seeing the warres are not like to be soon en∣ded as was first supposed: if your Lordships will take a course for the strengthning of these forces at present under my command to the full proportion contained in the ordinances of Parliament. I am confident they will be as usefull here if not more, as in any part of the Kingdome: it will likewise be expedient that ships of good strength be appointed to waite this winter in the speciall harbours betweene this and Kinsale: this I thought it my duty humbly to represent to your Lord∣ships wise consideration, remitting the more full rela∣tion
of all things to Master Peters, and the rest rest of the Committee of Adventurers of the additio∣nall forces by sea and land, for the reducing of Ireland, not doubting of your Lordships wonted care and provi∣dence to do every thing that may advance his Majesties service, and honour, and encourage those that are ready and willing to lay downe their lives for the good of the State, as shall be signified unto them by your Lord, ships, or any having power from you, amongst which∣as I esteeme my self one of the meanest, so it is my hum∣ble desire, I may doe your Lordships some acceptable service, which may honour me with the title of Your Lordships most affectionate humble service, FORBES. Castle of Glin. 27r Sept. 1642.
Mr. Speaker, I Had a purpose to have sent you a full rela∣tion of all our proceedings heere in Ire∣land: but this bearer Mr. Peters, who hath beene an eye-witnesse, can out of his Diurnall give you more full satisfaction and acquaint you with these things, that are most requisite for the subduing of Ireland, which will be an easie worke, if it be yet taken in time, and rightly pro∣secuted; for I dare say five or sixe thousand men well com∣manded and well provided for, could take both Limrick and Galloway, and so end the Warre before Christmas, for the strength of the Rebellion lies here, and there would be no difficultie in subduing the rest, Mr. Peters will ac∣quaint you what was my purpose; but I dare not goe beyond my limits, the Countrey diseases as Fluxes and Feavours have mightily weakened these few men I have; yet blessed be God we have done good service as could be done with so many men, as you will perceive by Mr. Peters Diurnall; to the which, and his owne Relation, and the Copies of the Letters I have sent, I remit all further. Your Nephew is in good health, and will prove a very good Souldier; and if speedy supplies be sent or provisiios and Warrants to make them, I shall have care of his fur∣ther advancement!, Mr. Maurice Thomson will ac∣quaint
you with what is necessary to be proposed to the House in the behalfe of poore distressed Ireland: and as I neither doubt of his sufficiencie in proposing, your willingnes to doe that good that is respected from you: so at this time I will trouble you with no longer Letter; but shall be much re∣joyced to heare from you, of the happy and long wished for agreement betwixt his Majestie and the Parliament: for which I shall never cease to pray, and shall ever remaine, Your affectionate Friend to serve you. FORBES. Castle of Glin. 28. Sept. 1642.
