F2057 16397025 105358
POEMS BY BEN. FRANCIS. Vivat in aeternum REX CAROLUS SECUNDUS; Quem Deus nunc & in saecula saeculorum conservet, oro. Enter'd according to Order. LONDON, Printed by T. R. for the Author, 1660.
A Pastorall Elegie, upon the Barbarous decollation of King Charles the first, of ever Glorious me∣mory; written shortly after his death. Palaemon. Chorus of Shepherds. PALAE. I From the Bloodyest Barbarous Act am fled That ever was by Monsters nourished; And though my feet pursue an eager flight, Yet still my soul retaines that horrid sight, Ah Cursed fate which me unwilling drew To that sad place this Tragedy to view. CHOR. What Luckless fate, what wofull accident Hath happ't that makes Palaemon to Lament?
What sad misfortune is't that can possess Thy sprightly soul with so much heaviness? Needs must the cause be great that moves thee now, Since sorrow's seldom seen to Cloud thy brow. PALAE. Ah dearest mates, mirth sounds a sad retreat; The day is come our Ruins are compleat: Our miseries cast up in this most dread and black prodigious Totall, Charles is dead. CHOR. What! Charles the Great, the Good, the Quintessence Of all our earthly happiness; from whence Our breath we draw; and by whose beames we live? Ah! dear Palaemon, 'tis a cause to grieve: Horror Confounds us; yet we pray thee tell By what sad Chance this best of Princes fell. PALAE. Should death and all Hells powers stand between, And make Relation what mine eyes have seen, To hear this execrable Act express't, Would Conjure Terror in each furies breast. This Cursed Rout; this most prodigious band Of Ravenous Tigers that infest this Land, Great Charls surpriz'd and dragg'd him to the Barr, Where all his deadlyest foes his Judges were, Peace is accus'd of Warr; Meekness of Pride;
Mercy of blood, and truth by Treason's try'd: Whose Royall soul their Arrogance Contemn'd, Till Monstrous guilt pure innocence Condemn'd, And sentence past of death: hut O! prepare Your hearts of Steel, or bid my tongue forbeare. CHOR. O no, speak on, and let thy words redound Such Terror to our souls that may Confound Our vitall Spirits, in such sort, whereby We may obtaine the benefit to dye. PALAE. O 'twas a Crime past Satans when he fell A fact no age can yeild it's parallel. In deep Oblivion Mithridates sleep, Nero and Tarquin with Tereus keep A harmless squeaking; Cromwell and his Traine Outstrip your Rage and Tyrannyes retaine. From hence he's brought to that most wofull place Glorious of late by his Illustrious face: White-hall: whence he his Godlike Mandates gave, And all the World his bountys did receive. There whence his vertue through the earth was fam'd There, there; those impious hands his Scaffold fram'd, There like a Lamb he's to the Slaughter led, There Hells stern brood smote off his Royall head.
CHOR. Was there no signe no miracle discry'd? The Sun was darkened when our Saviour dy'd, And could he view this Act so full of Dread And not amaz'd shrink in his frighted Head? PALAE. 'Twas not without a signe which did contract A wonder to attend this monstrous Act, Five Angels in the shapes of Fouls appear'd, And from the Aire all Cloudy vapours Clear'd, These hover'd o're the Fatall place and spread Their blessed wings just o're his Sacred head, Eager to catch his Soul before his breath By that Dire stroke had yeilded unto death. For one which late above the rest appear'd With greater evidence the same declar'd, As if struck dead by these most horrid sights, Stoops down and almost on the Scaffold lights, Then up retreats, and wings againe assumes, And to her former height directs her Plumes, There stayes a while and hovers in the skyes, Then with his Soul they vanisht from our eyes. CHOR. No more; no more; his fall's a greefe so high, None can Lament unless a Jeremy:
Yet dear Palaemon we may justly turn Our greefs from him and for our selves may mourn. His Blessed Soul now sits above the spheares, And there most happy Tryumphs ore the Stars, Whilst we in's blood to our destruction swim, 'Twas us they murder'd when they struck at him. PALAE. Hold, Hold, forbear your Mourning and no more His wrongs, nor your own injuryes deplore: See; see; his Ashes move; his Blood revives And there behold where Charles the Second lives: Where Phaenix like he rises from his dust, And Charles the great proceeds from Charles the just, By whose great hand the potent Heaven decrees A just revenge for these dire Butcheryes. Mean time (my dear Associates) come, O come, Let's pay our Tribute to his Sacred Toome And Begg from Heaven a charme unto our verse That may for ever Guard his Royall Herse. Rebellious Traytors Tremble; come not neer; Hence with your Sacrilegious feet, forbear: Touch not our dust we Charge ye; but be gone, And Rue the Act your Cursed hands have done: Nay rather mourn your miserable fate, Since no Repentance this can expiate. But you whose breasts this horrid act doth move With sad Resentments of a Loyall Love, Draw nearer, and devoutly spend a teare, 'Tis Charles the Great, the Good, the Just, lyes here.
AN ENTERLUDE Upon the sudden Extirpation of our late great Controlers. Speakers. Philotheus. Philolethes, Fleetwood. Lambert. Vane. Lenthall. Richard, late Protector. Mutes. Berry. Hewson.
Enter Philotheus, Philolethes. PHILOTH. VVHat! are our Glorious Plannets set so soon? Has Tardy Saturn quite outstript the Moone? And made a quicker Revolution farr, Then Sol or Luna in our Hemisphere? Is this great Fleetwood? that great Lambert? he! These grand Corrivalls in the Soveraignty? Is all their power defunct? their great Commands dissolv'd and lost?— PHILOLE. Yes see where Fleetwood stands, A piteous object— PHILOTH. Sure it cannot be That Fleetwood! sure that sniv'ling Elef's not he. PHILOLE. But 'tis the same— PHILOTH. Truly if it be so His Excellency's now exceeding low:
He's Courting Lenthall, and for pardon sues, His late absurd Transgressions to excuse. PHILOLE. But hear him speak. FLEETWOOD. Great Sir accept I pray; The Soveraign power, and unbounded sway; With all those great Exactions, and Commands, We lately wrested from your sacred hands. Acknowledging our errour and offence, Witness these humble teares of Penitence; Alas 'tis true, cheer'd, with the late success, We found perform'd with so much easiness, Crying up Justice, and the good old Cause, How right we either meant, the auncient Laws In time may judg between us— PHILOTH. Faith 'tis true, Your fate's the same; when Tyburn claimes his due, FLEETWOOD. In overturning puny Richards powers, We by his fatall fall, advanced yours; And to your Pristin state, did you restore; Whence your Protector kick't ye out before.
Thus we first rais'd, then Routed you, and I, In Imitation of his subtilty, Manag'd these great affaires: but he alass, In greater favour with the Devil was; Who him preserved in the Government Untill his soul to his Protection went. When as upon the Contrary, when I No sooner mounted on the Soveraignty, As if my service had not equall'd his In Barbarous Treasons, and Impietys; When first I seiz'd the Government of State, You my Commission voted out of date, My Mushroome Majesty extinguish't, all My hopes Conclude in this most shamefull fall. Exit Weeping. PHILOLE. What is he gone? doubtless he more had spoke, But that his teares his stammering words did Choak: And now behold where Lambert doth appear, But not as Late onth' Northwick Theater: When like a Tempest he came Thundring on Poor timerous Booth and aged Middleton: VVhom by his looks he vanquished; and now He looks so poorely, that he knows not how For shame t' appear; or shew his graceless Face. PHILOTH. " These Beagles hunted honor as their Chace: " They made a faire pursuit and kept the Troyle, " But now hunt Counter back upon the foyle:
" The prize deserted with a shallow Cry, " untill they seise their former Beggery, Now comes to make Confession of his sins: Hark and observe the Brasen head begins. PHILOLE. How well the Epithite befits the place: " And properly; he's Aries head and Face, " Nothing deficient, to compleat it so, " For Hornes his VVife procur'd him long agoe. LAMBERT. Most mighty Sir! into whose powerfull hands Dominion's Crept, by those united bands, VVe lately from your guard expuls'd and thought By Clipping your long wings our own t' have brought To that aspiring pitch; this Land to steer, And why not I, as well as Oliver? I had the Sword alike, t' assist my Claime: And no man doubts, but that our right's the same, Nor wanted fit associates, to my aide; Untill your envious Gen'rall Monk betrayd My rising fortunes; and my hope prevents By his more gallant, honester intents. No more let Fleetwood boast himself, 'twas I That imitated Nolls old Policy, And things at first to this distraction brought, being tutor'd by the self same Spirit, wrought
The selfsame way; he purg'd them that withstood The shedding of Great Charles his sacred blood, And Fairfax from the Generalship expell'd; Whereby the rule he uncontrouled hel'd As need requir'd, reserving you withall These few dependants, which the Rump we call, Till time occasion gave, by scattering you, The Government did to himself accure: Whereby he Trampled on your yielding necks: And unreprov'd securely played REX: All England made observant to his eye: Whilst none durst murmur at his Tyranny: This my ambition aim'd at; and went on Traceing the very footsteps he had gone. First as a Parliament I called you (Being still Obsequious to the Sword I knew) Which prov'd a faire beginning; for in hast Poor sneaking Richard to the ground we cast, With all his Titles and his Honors down, Even so by him Great Charles was overthrown. Nor herein know I what I more could do Then what I did unless I'd hang'd him too: But he poor Fool no further strove to try it, But took his whipping kindly, and is quiet. PHILOLE. Whereby 't appeares he never was the Son Of Oliver but only Maddam Jone.
LAMBERT. Then I the Cheshire Forces did oppose With equall Terror, as his dreadfull Nose Brave Ormond and the Irish overcame, So this I trusted would augment my fame, VVhich rais'd my soul to such a height of pride, When with a Thousand pounds you gratify'd That rare Exploit, it seemed to express A glad presage of a more great success. Next, that I might his Scholar more appear, And wisely hoping that the time drew near, The Army (then my slaves) I hither drew, And like my President supplanted you, First having by my Patrons Policy, Advanced Fleetwood to the Generalty, Thereby the more t' engage him to my aid, But quickly would of him a Fairfax made. And thus you see 'twas not my want of brains That made the Dev'll so soon reward my pains. Discourteous fate! can Richard now forbeare Having so fit a subject for to jeare His Brother Fleetwood, and my self when we With such disgrace quit our Authority? O mortall shame! and what is worse 't appeares We'r subject to Politicus his jeares. Much more a Devill, would 't not vex a Saint, He who so lately with our names did paint His weekly Pamphlets; raisd us to the Skyes, And all our Actions us'd to Canonize:
Can now imploy his wanton scurrilous Pen In making matches with Sir Henry Vane, For Wimbletons Infanta and his Son. O Hell! 'tis time or never to have done! Such high disgrace the Boyes will hoot that hear it! VANE. O Brother 'tis our fate and we must bear it, No Remedy remains our shame's so great, Unless the Alderman of York's Receipt; Though my ambition soar'd not all so high As yours, who playd on surer grounds then I? I alwayes temporiz'd, and where I saw The Sword prevail, and Justice still withdraw; I made the Sword my Load-starre; by it steer'd And ever where it Rul'd, there I appear'd; Untill this fatall; this prodigious Rout; Wherein the Sword did with the Hilt fall out, And strange! when first against it self it bent It's horrid point; my Craft did still prevent Approaching dangers; seeing both sides loath To leave their rule; I took a part with both Comply'd with you that first brought on the Warre, And yet sat close with these at Westminster, That whether side so ere prevaild, I thought Mine own secure; but now alas I'm brought To this untimely Ruin. PHILOTH. 'Tis not so, 'Tis more then time ye all had hang'd ere now.
VANE. By this discovery and the Dyre event That made my double dealings evident; But O what mortall man conceiv'd that ye Would such revengers be of Treachery. LENTHALL. Friends, 'tis your fortune, grudge not at our powers Theeves have their Reign ye know, & you had yours: If fates have payd ye what your work deserves So soon (as Gusman learnedly observes) You ought not blame them; for the fates are free And 'twas not them but your simplicity That wrought your bane; how many of the Trade Prosper an age, ere their accompts be made? VVhen others contrary to these we see (Being not so expert in the Mystery) Perish upon their first Transgressions: so Your indiscretions wrought your overthrowe: What foolish madness was 't possest your brain To think of acting that old Scoene again, Wherein as both affirm, you strove t' appear The perfect Scholars of old Oliver? You did observe his Policies, 'tis true; And trac't his steps as neere as men could do: But fail'd when your design you should have bent Not the same way, but one equivalent: O then yee'd gaind your wished ends; when now The more ye did▪ the more ye made us know
How to prevent your Actions in the State; Which drawe on all a lamentable fate: For know 'tis order'd that poor Richard he (O're whom ye acted your first Tyranny) Be made your Judge, and what his sole Command Decrees; it must unalterably stand. Enter RICHARD in a fools Coat. Lenthall removing, he takes his place and gives judgement. RICHARD. What happy fates this Revolution wrought That my desires to this perfection brought Even past my hopes expectancy shall I An Ideot Censure fools before I dye! Where's the Delinquents? Cause them to appear Fleetwood come forth; and Lambert stand you there. Enter FLEETWOOD. Brother your will.—I yield unto your rule, Not as the elder but the greater fool.
RICHARD. You speak too late friend, 'tis no thanks to yield To our subjection when ye'r thus compel'd: Are these the men me from that power constrain'd Which my late Fathers usurpation gain'd, And me condemn'd uncapable of Rule My Father being a Knave and I a fool! O horrid impudence! dos't not appear That you as well as subtill Oliver, Expulst these members from the Parliament, Whose loud Remonstrance publisht your assent! Speak damned Hypocrites, must Oliver The sum of all your curst Transgressions bear, Condemn'd for all, when you alike as he Were equall Actors in each Tragedy? Wading through blood and Tyranny 'tis true For which I doubt he's damn'd, and so will you: Your guilt's so evident we shall not need For further proof but sentence may proceed: 'Tis vain to think that Justice so insenc't, Can with your worthless lives be recompens't, Besides our mercy some relief shall give To your despairing souls; ye all shall live: Fleetwood and Lambert 'tis to you decreed That you stark naked shall to Rushia speed And there remain in the Muscovian fields, Which sometimes cold yet store of Hony yields. You lov'd and had so sweet a time before You still shall be with Hony noynted o're.
And being you here are famous for your Arms, Your office there shall be to guard the swarms From Wasps invasion which the Hives assail With the long feather of a Capons Tail. And you because your impious name is Vane, Shall to the Pigmies, and affront the Crane Banisht from hence to Earths remot nd Your Valour try; your hands behind und, Whereby you'l give us cause t'accomp wise, If in those Conflicts you preserve your eyes. Now Berry you so silent all this while Whose dark extract came from a Charcole-pile, Shall post to Aetna, there constrain'd to lie Where th' hottest showers of flaming Cinders fly Expecting no relief, or ere come down From that sad place till Hell shall claim its own. But you, you Cobling Poliphemus; you With that your squint Monoculus shall view These Judgements put in execution, And see each tittle be exactly done; But least they grumble that we favour you You must perform this Charge stark naked too, Which being done, we doubt not t'will appear, Of all their sufferings you'l not want a share. Our Judgement's past! let this our grand report Be ratify d, and so dissolve the Court. Flourish. exeunt.
Manent Philotheus. Philolethes. PHILOTH. O dearest Philolethes have not we A Cause to magnifie the Deity? These black prodigious Clouds dispers't and gone, Confirms our hope to see the rising Sun. Advance great Charles, thy storms are overblown, And smiling Heaven presents thee with a Crown. PHILOLE. But O my Philotheus when shall we Be blest with that compleat felicity Our souls so long desire (next Heaven alone) To see him plac't on his bles't Fathers Throne. PHILOTH. O doubt not Philolethes, we shall see A glad reward for all our misery. Hells pow'rs depos'd, and Heaven's propitious eyes Benignely looke on our Calamities. That happy time draws near that will produce A glorious subject for our drooping Muse: Then in a lofty strain wee'le chant and sing, And eccho forth our joy, a King a King! Deo semper & ubique Gloria.
AN ELEGIE Upon the death of that most valorous and gallant Gentleman, Capt. Edward Morgan, slain near Northwich in Cheshire, August 19. 1659. MOst wofull fate! had we but onely one Right valiant noble soul? and is he gone! O'twas t' appease the offended Deities That they chose out this richest sacrifice, Whereby they might our errors expiate And make our Adversaries sins compleat. Brave happy soul! whose spirit did defy Subordination to the Tyranny Of Earth-born Brats and Spawns of Hell; who thus Most insolently Lord it over us. How did thy rare unerring Judgement see, The guilt of their abhorred Treachery, Who like to self-condemning Traytors, fled Before encounter'd; or scarce threatned: Then forth most brave Heroick Morgan stood And seal'd our Causes justice with his blood. That Hell-belch't flame, that wing'd the fatal Lead, Which rais'd thy soul, and struck thy body dead.
Hells Instrument encounters and commands A trembling terror in the Traytors hands, And so each drop which from thy body fell Condens't and press't a Rebels soul to hell. Forbear ye Sonnes of darkness; you that boast A happy fate by what our party lost, Falsly accusing Heaven to patronize Your horrid Treasons and curst villanies; Nor say that God your foul Rebellion owns, Because success your damned Actions Crowns. No, no, just Heaven a while its Arm recalls, That it may prove the heavier when it falls. And thus the Cursed Antichristian Crew Of Mahomet are justly yoak't with you. Mean while most blessed Soul, our Loyall eyes Shall pay their Tribute to thy Obsequies: Lament thy losse; and from the glorious Train Of happy Martyrs, wish thee back again; Forgive the Injury (great Saint) which we Herein commit gainst thy felicity; Where thou remain'st and from her starry Throne Thy milk-white soul, on erring men looks down: Yet still we wish thee here! O sad distress! Our losse is great, which makes our Crime the less; This palliates our presumption; and herein Makes even Sacriledge a veniall sin.
For though that thou 'mongst those bright Troops dost shine, Yet wanting thee our wofull Troops decline; And in this sad distraction must abide; Thus onely labouring to be satisfy'd. That thou endeavouring Charles a Crown to gain, Did'st to thy self a glorious Crown attain.
A Relation of a mad merry Ramble, merri∣ly begun, and as madly concluded. VVHen Pleasant Summer to the colder signes, It's flowry Meads and verdant Boughs resignes, And Phaebus cast's on us a Feebler Ray Cold Winter entring Cloaths the fields in Gray, Such was the Morne when by my Friend call'd on I left the House of NobleKinaston of Otley. Kinaston, And straight to Marbury steer'd our course from thence There to compose 'twixt friends a difference, Which hardly ended ere we fudd'led were, And for repose return'd to Combermere. (But think not pray ye Gentlemen that here Il'e in my Journall turn Geographer, Nay I beseech ye Sirs forbear t' expect That here I Speed, or Camden should Correct, Although 'tis true I travail'd late the bounds Of a faire Country, which it self surrounds In fruitfull foyle, and bless't with Auncient fame, Till late Rebellion forfeited the same: But I must needs averr 'tis gain'd agen By diverse Loyall souls that dwell therein, Yet be it known 'tis not my task to prate How Rivers run or Townes be scytuate.)
Being here refreshed with a moderate Rest, Betimes next morning we our selves addrest't Unto a place where we appointed were To meet the Auncient Spurstowes gallant heire Who us Conducted to that goodly seat That's honord with his name; a house repleat With noble entertainment; sumptuous cheere, Free Cordiall welcome; high and mighty Beere: O thou most terrible and Monstrous (b) Beare That gav'st me first my entertainment there,(a) Birch Can with the rough bark on it, that held about a quart. I can't forget how thou did'st me surprise, Forcing sad teares to trickle from mine eyes, Which as a preparation to our course Of harder drinking must'red up our force, Wilbraham, Spurstow, Griffiths, Allen, J: Being at present all the Company, For earnest bus'ness Fletcher had withdrawn, And in his absence I remaind his Pawn. Each man Charg'd Cup observ'd this Watchword—now! 'Tis bravely done Boyes; what's here more to do: Is all perform'd? the field we needs must win, Faith we must Rally, Charge 'em up agen: Whilst thus we ranted and fell on pell mell, If not the first, I was the next that fell Where now I do entreat ye let me lye. Disturb me not I'le waken by and by, So! now I am reviv'd; prepar'd to try A fesh encounter with the Enemy
That did so lately foyle me: but what's here, Methinks a Thund'ring at the Gates I hear; The word is brought us, Fletcher is return'd, Whose absence we so much in Beer bouls mourn'd, A dreadfull sight behind him did appear As strange, as ugly, so that some did swear If ere the Devil as fam'd that house assail'd He then had brought him like a Cloak-bagg mail'd: But yet to be resolv'd we all drew near, And that she's split up from the hipps did swear. Faith Sir I had been so ere I came hither, But that my C—'s compos'd of stretching Leather, We bad brave Fletcher Welcome with his guide, His naked Hanger glitt'ring by his side, The Scabbert lost whenOut of his Belt. out the same he drew And furiously a drinking-Can he slew. This Scene performed we settled foot to foot, The Cups go round, and we a fresh fell to't, Each Cup contein'd a friends remembrance in't, Till full four houres we of the night had spent: Now Fletchers Luggage drunk denyes to take Cupps as before; nor yet would she forsake Our Company, but evermore she Cry'd, Do what ye will, I will not tak't, 'twas try'd: Quoth I, thy face shall hav't, my breech cryes she Will better brook it, and more willingly Shall take it for me; I who first begun't At her entreaty dash't it in her C—.
Now time it was to part, the far spent night Our wearied bodyes did to rest invite. A small repose suffis'd our labouring braines, As if forgot our last nights taking paines, Again we freely quaff the flowing juyce Which Tellus tortured bosom did produce; And in the afternoon we went to see A Town of Auncient note call'd Bunbury, Where being sate we tipp'led there a space, At night removing to another place, The Habitation of one Badcock, where We all encounter'd by our hostess were: How Bad the Cock may be we nothing know, But Allan's well assur'd the Hen was so: For 'twas at first his sad and luckless chaunce, Calling her VVhore, to cause her to advaunce Her deadly Tallons, grappling armes at length, The Devil could hardly match her Mastiff strength, VVe in our friends defence did all arise: Away ye Drunken Puppyes she replyes, Have you been drinking elsewhere all the day, And now at night come here your wreaks to play? Her Husband stood and could not speak indeed, But all the Children were the Mothers breed, VVhose trebble Throats so sharpe a note did raise As Challeng'd Hell to match them with a base. Their tongues; his silence; was enough from whence To prove her VVhore▪ and quite dissolve suspence. At length concluding peace from hence we went Unto another house of more content,
Where being enter'd, I desir'd to know If Allens strength had fail'd him yea or no, So too't we fell; and whilst we struggling were, By chaunce I stumbled o're the Schoolmaster, What Gentlemen crye's he forbeare your speed, I have a charge about me; pray take heed, I trust you will not rob me: out he flyes; I to intreat him follow'd: whilst he cryes Hang out your lights, Good people, else these Rogues VVill rifle here the best of Pedagogues: Good Sir refraine these extasies quoth I, Nor thus abandon civell Company. My charge, my charge cryes he, my charge is lost, A Mark or neer't: was ever man so cross't? Thus I pursu'd him to the furies door, The fatall House from whence we came before, VVhere by the Candlelight we might perceive His Eyeballs from their stations taking leave. Thus did we leave him half dissolv'd with fear, And back to Spurstow we that night repaire. Early next morning ere I could arise, Thrice that prodigious Bear did me surprise, Thrice was I forc't to turn that substance o're, Till rest became as needfull as before, Yet not permitted me: enforc't to leave My sweet repose, full goblets to receive Of flowing Liquor; Liquor that might raise Strains more sublime to speak the founders praise, VVhose noble Breast so rare a soul inherits, Mirrors of sweetness equall to his Merits,
And may a world of happiness pursue His noble House which now we bid adue. Still his oblieging presence we retaine, And back to Bunbury we march againe, Where long our wandering fancies could not bide, But for a frollick in the evening tyde, Remov'd to Northwich nine miles distant, where With lusty Sack we did our spirits chear, Our suppers ended, and our brains well try'd, A brace of Beds convenient did provide Both in a Roome; we hugg'd our needfull rest Whilst either Wine or weariness opprest Our Drowzy sences: but not long our eyes We soon disclose, and make Obedience rise To give attendance; stooles instead of Drums Strook up th' Alarum; till at last she comes Whereat we all our loathed Beds forsake, And through the house a match of rambling make: Room after Room we search resov'd to see Our Landlord with his Wife in Geminy As we suppos'd they were; thus in we go, But she deny'd and Vow'd it was not so: Well he replyes sweet heart be not afraid, Thy due benev'lence shall be justly paid, And shall it so? (then Fletcher cryes) make room Between ye both, there I to bed must come, A weak resistance proveing vaine he in To bed did step, and 'twixt them did begin A health to their performance on each side His place resign'd was by the next supply'd,
Till all had pledg'd this jolly health, and then We all agree to take our restsagen, Betimes next morning with the Sun we rise All deadly sick with last nights exercise, With looks dejected every thirsty soul, Doth his afflicted Brothers Case Condole, Till at the length we did our selves assure What wrought the Malady would work the Cure, Applauding what theBishop Andrews in praise of Ale. learned Father taught The vertue of a plentuous mornings draught: Now little Mallary did our Tribe Augment With whom we sound the Cellers deep descent, Health upon Health, Cup upon Cup we ply, The Tavern rung with our confused joy, Not overlong it being Market day, We of the Town did take a short survay: And thence to Daneham two miles off repaire, There drink, and what we left unfinisht there, Performe at Middlewich, where we that night Arrive, but how I could not here recite, Were't not for two occasions which befell In this dayes journey most remarkable: viz. As hence we posted at a speedy rate, I sadly troubled with the Poets fate, Ill Horst, Lagg'd after, doubtfull which to chuse For loosing them I needs my self must loose, And piss I must: there hast my stay forbid, So I pursu'd them pissing as I rid:
A hansome Girle before me makes a stand, As I rid on, my whynyard in my hand. Now out, upon ye Sir: what's that I see? O been't asham'd sweet heart? troth you may be. Of what? it's posture. Mistriss I presume To serve you 'twould a better forme assume: Hast now denyes me time farewell; but yet Your new acquaintance pray ye not forget: He's at your Service, and who knowes but fate Your familiarity may renovate? Next (sad remembrance) was a fatall fall Where Horse and man, and man and Horse and all Fell to the ground, my Horse above the eares, Above the Elbowes I in dirt appeares, Sadly bedabled, not at all asham'd, Rather in me a haughty spirit it fram'd: For entring th' Town I forc't a man to stand, And with obeisance kiss my dirty hand. Hence to our Inn: noyse flies about the Town, Gallants are come, mongst whom Ben Johnson's one, (so Spurstow call'd me) how! a third replyes, If Ben be there 'tis time for us to rise, He'l scare them from their witts where e're they go, Then sure 'tis he; for they'r already so. Whilst Rumor thus reports our boon arive, We overhead in monstrous Flaggons dive, Till overcharg'd of sence and friends bereft, Poor harmeless I upon a Bed was left. What then worth notice past my braines so wet, Must needs be pardon'd if I do forget:
For some report that we a supper had, Wherein I must confess, my memory's bad; Yes, and that I thereon did freely feed: Pardon, sweet Host, I knew not what I did; Wakening, I assay'd to stand; me thought with ease My feet perambulate th' Antipodes, Seeking to go, I imitate the Sun, When he in his diurnall course doth run; Whereat enraged, and amaz'd, I sware That Fates had turn'd me perpendicular; My head descends, and like a Meteor flies Through fleeting Aire, I foot the arched skies. But stay, I am encompast with a roof, I feel the walls, and come from bed for sooth, And fain would find't again, but that alas, I sought about and knew not where it was. And still the more I search, the more I'm led Through darksome entryes, black Enigma's thred, Whereat I stamp't, and swore I was crept in The Labyrinth where Minotaur had been, Hopeless of restauration, crying, where Is faithfull Phaedra, Ariadne neer? When lo at last, most welcome one appears, Take heed, your worship's tumbling down the stairs. In fine, the rest, which I two hours had sought, Obtain'd, again I to the bed was brought, Whereon ere I could hardly close mine eyes, We are inform'd again, 'tis time to rise; For that most Noble Manwaring had then Vouchsaf't a visit to the Gentlemen;Manwaring of Bostok,
Whose courteous favours, if my pen forget, May I in shames black Catalogue be set. For base Ingratitude, in which 'tis said All Crimes and Vices are at once display'd. No time delay'd; but up they all arose, I shortly after, mockt with a repose, With all celerity forsook my rest, And shook my ears, no sooner up but drest. And hence we went to please a various mind, Where every Woodcock on a Woodcock din'd. What next we acted, few men understood, Being half distracted, mad with foolish food; Fletcher and Spurstowe, with young Mallery, Maintain a combat 'gainst poor Jack and I, And whil'st brave Mallery on the table fought Op'e stood the Casement, whil'st I striving sought To pull him down, he less himself amends; For out the window he from them, descends. I fearing's hurt, lookt after him, and thought To call for help, when by the heels I'm caught, And after him sent; partaker of his fate, To wish me back 'twas quickly grown too late, Whil'st both supposd we by our falls should dye, But 'twas not so, we fell so dextrously, Excelling Airey Hope, or Pudding's sleight: For like to Cats, on hands and feet we light, Nor fear'd, nor hurt, insensible of pain, We rise and breath, and to't we fall again. Two hours this lasted, till in fine made friends With Ale which Caesars Coments so commends.
He whose great Pompy's Eagles did subdue,A word for Als. He who but came and look't and overthrew Yet still assirm, proceeding ages will, His conquering sword was conquer'd by his Quill. Ale, thy rare vertuses, and thy sacred use, Is th'glorious subject of his crowned Muse. I'le not relate what afterwards besell; But here we bid brave Manwaring farewell, And little Mallery: hence we undertake A three miles journey, for our Hoses sake, For them no further we that night compell, They did but little, but they did it well; For on the Road an Inne we found, and there A boon and bounteous Host, indifferent Beer, Who us before our money did regard, So he with us in every pottle shar'd: For what for four pence they to others sold, Afforded us for three, and swore 't should hold Whil'st we remain'd there; to't we sate that night, Till bright Aurora put the starrs to flight. And then, as we prepar'd to go away, Comes Erswick's Minshul, and procures our stay, With him re-entring, there we drink again, Till onely one half barrell did remain, Which we resolve at one health to drink up, And for that purpose found a Posset cup, environ'd with black handles round about, Which held four Flagons justly measur'd ouu. This monstrous dish we drink, of sable hue, Horrendum dictu; but by—'tis true.
Now bound for Namptwich, without lets or stays, O're hedge and ditch, to'voyd the fouler wayes; At length arriving neer the place where late The Kings Army being routed there A thousand Gallant souls receiv'd their fate. Here we alighted in the Towns survay, And till their Preachment's past resolv'd to stay; During which time, by chance there hapn'd to be Two brethren of Saint Hugh's fraternity, With me dispos'd to quarrell; till the one Recants, and crys, to you I am unknown: Brave 'squier Starky (thus for him mistook He Spurstow) but were Spurstow here, he'd look More favourably, and him defend from harms; He oft had hugg'd the Booby in his arms: And sure he was, he'd free him from abuses. Spurstow begins, and thus himself accuses: Spurstow's an Ass, a base ignoble slave, I long since lent him money; which to have I now dispair: how much was't, he requires; But fourty shillings; onely my desires Are these, to have thee beat him for't sometime, And here behold the moiety is thine. Sir, let me see him; I will do the deed, Though he in strength, or stature should exceed The great Golias; here's the man will do't, I'le bring his neck beneath your worships foot. Then here's thy money; now prepare thy hands, And here, behold where little Spurstow stands:
Hereat the valiant young man's valour's quail'd, Throws down the money, lest he be assayl'd By us, and beaten; to a Chamber by He quits the room, and there takes sanctu'ry, There rests secure, when he that hold had gain'd, Bolted within, without the key remain'd: And that he might more safely there abide, We lock't him in, and thence with th' key did ride. Neerer the Town an Inne we sought; in fine, We found a Reverend Host, more reverend Sign, Which to the view in ample distance spreads, Such as imaginarily the heads Of many new-bred Nobles, oft adorns, And frequently in English, call'd The Horns. Here we alighted, and resolv'd to sup, There, though the lodgings were before ta'ne up. Much taken with our Host's boon merriment: Bedless that night we rather are content To stay, then enter th' clamorous town, much more We'd rest that night, as we the night before Had done: the night we shorten, being long, With wine and mirth; sometimes John Dory's song. Thus till the travellers for their march prepar'd, We drank and sung, and then their places shar'd. Spurstow and I a little stay'd behind, The rest afore unto a place design'd To take our parting tap-lash; for our way Lay through the town where Spurstow bids me stay, There at the Holy Lamb we 'lighted down, Which might be styl'd the Embleme of the Town:
For what more proper simile may be, Compar'd to painted out-side sanctity: Or who more fitly can such zeal define, A house of riot, and a sacred Sign. Here, to avoyd prolixity of time, Five pintes apiece of brisk Canary wine We drank to friends, but chiefly he to one, To me most dear, although to him unknown, Which made the favour double; then came in The Mistress pint, that drunk, we did begin, To think of Fletcher, who by this, though t's long, When lo a voyce amidst the ruder throng Call'd Spurstow, Spurstow; turn again, come hither, He wanting second thoughts, turn'd, and went thi∣ther, Where being come a Matron grave appears, One who for beauty aged Sibils years, Might well example; but for impudence, and vicious acts, with Circe might commence, Then with a complement, old as her self, she brought A Jack with silver tipt, and at a draught O're turn'd it, though the Jack contain'd a quart. Then gives it him; here boy, observe my art. Now heavens protect me, this upon our Wine! She'l Circe-like transform us both to Swine. And Beldam for thy favour take this curse; The pox confound thee, or some plague that's worse. Thus parted noble Spurstow with his train, Fletcher and I to Marbury march again. Some business of the first day's left undone, Where we remember our companions gone,
Past Acts recount, as loth to part we fit, And all that redious night we frolick it: This my fourth night, and Fletchers third, since we our cloaths put off, or any sheets did see. So in the morn appearing, you might then Behold a brace of parboyl'd Gentlemen, Like cattle standing at Avernus brink, Even dead with thirst, yet daring not to drink. Now farwell dearest Fletcher, let's give over, 'Tis time to try, can we our sense recover, And what my soul to Spurstow renders due, Thrice noble Fletcher, must return to you; And pray that heaven may ever let me see, A bliss on you, and your Posterity; So to his wishes fortune condescend, Whose life's your servant, and whose faith's your friend. BEN. FRANCIS.
Postscript. CRiticks, excuse the rudeness of my stile, Perchance my Muse could better Verse compile. But here my Penn presumes to be as free, As was our noble Gallant Company; Nor say I have your tyred sense abus'd Being over tedious, since 'tis thus excus'd. The Ramble's long, and those that did it see, Confess I have affected brevity. Then howsoe'r my Verse by you's approv'd, Doubt not, but 'tis by better Wits belov'd.
A Recantation. 1. YE false deluding Joyes Terrestriall, Your fond Temptations I despise; My thoughs are soaring to a Caelestiall, And never fading Paradise. Wherefore farewell Ye steps to Hell, Your flattering paths I'le tread no more, Nor your false vanities adore. 2. Base world, amongst the worst I rank thee, of ills that e're created were, As yet I ne're had cause to thank thee. Thy smiles but base delusions are, Which since I scorn'd, To frowns they turn'd; But thus thy injuries I'le retort, Detesting to be made thy sport.
3. 'Tis true, I doated on thy pleasures, And thy alluring treachery; My soul betray'd in horrid measures To honour thy impiety, But now I see Thy slavery, I bid farewell to all thy joyes, And these my most lov'd vanities. 4. Farewell my Dear, my Boon Companions, Farewell, Eternally adue; And for the favours which were many ones, And loves I alwayes gain'd from you, I thanks return To you, and mourn The precious time we spent in vain, Which now I'le labour to regain. 5. By you my company was prized, And far beyond its worth esteem'd, So I your joyes have Idolized, And equall to the blessed deem'd; But since our love Did often prove A lewd debauchery in the end, Ile to diviner thoughts attend.
6. And you, fair Virgins, who resemble The brightness of the radiant skies, With whom I oft did thus dissemble, And heavens created in your eyes; A fairer now, My thoughts pursue, And pure devotions duly pay To one whose splendors ne'r decay. 7. Yet pray mistake not lovely fair ones, Your beauties I do still admire, And bear due Reverence to the Rare ones Of your most sweet selected quire; For, when I view Those forms in you, My breast with admiration fills Of your Creators heavenly skills. 8. And now to you that are devoted, Alone to serve the Deity; And to that happiness promoted, To wait upon the Trinity, I come, I come, Vouchsafe me room, Where I with you my offerings may Before the sacred Altar lay
9. Where though this earth our feet retaineth, Our souls surmount the starry skies, And in that blest estate remaineth, Adoring of the Mysteries; And though 't appear We wander here, And breath from this dull Aire receive, Yet Aliens to the world we live. FINIS.
