G1619A 12696751 65886
March 2. 1671. IT is Ordered by the Lords of His Majesties most Honourable Privy Council, that none shall Re-print or Import this Book of Mr. Andrew Gray, on Mortification and Contentment; nor any other of his Sermons, without the Licence of the Printers hereof.
The Spiritual WARFARE: OR, Some SERMONS concerning the nature of Mortification, right exercise, and spiritual advantages thereof. Whereunto are added other two Sermons, concerning the mystery of Contentment. Being the substance of ten Sermons, never heretofore printed. By Mr. Andrew Gray, late Minister of the Gospel at Glasgow. Col. 3. 5. Mortifie therefore your mem∣bers, &c. Heb. 13. 5. Let your conversation be with∣out covetousness, &c. EDINBVRGH, Printed by George Swinton, Iames Glen and Thomas Brown, ANNO DOM. 1672.
Unto the sincere Sin∣mortifying, and Soul-contentment-seeking-Christian. Dear and loving Friend, AS the name of the precious Author (who now enjoy∣eth what he then aspired to, when he preached these following Sermons) will, no doubt, ingratiat them to thee, so we are perswaded, that the divine Subjects here treated upon, when perused by thee, whose serious design is to stu∣dy
and aspire to what is here pressed, may not only prove effectual to in∣crease thy esteem of the worthy Au∣thor, and thy respects to his Works; but also may highly advance thy soul, in thy begun work of mortification of sin, of dying to the world, and of having the world crucified to thee, that so thou may possess thy soul in patience, and sit down as a content∣ed one, in every state whatsoever, good or bad, letting patience have its perfect work. O! how timely hath the Lord begun with the blessed Au∣thor, to make him not only acquainted in his own experience as a Scholar, with the hardest lessons of Christia∣nity, but also to make him a practi∣cal Preacher of the spiritual and suc∣cessful method of learning these so in∣tricat lessons, and of the advantages of studying, or disadvantages by the neglect of the study of them.
This we dare say, that in perusing of them, thou shalt find him a work∣man, who (if he were alive) needed not to be ashamed, nor affraid of thy censure, if thou be a real student in these spiritual duties thy self. For these two or three things (as emi∣nent perfections in a youth) are most remarkable in him. First, that from the speculations and metaphysical con∣templations of Schools, he was im∣mediatly, as it were, rapt, not only into the contemplation, but also soul experiencing and powerful preach∣ing of the most mysterious points of Christian profession and practice. Secondly, that in the handling of these mysteries, he was free of all youthly vanity and affectation of hu∣mane literature, (though he had more then common abilities therein) and having renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, not walking
in crafinesse, nor handling the word of God deceitfully▪ he preached the Word of God, not as the word of man, but as the Word of God, commending himself to every mans conscience in the sight of God. Thirdly, that he was gifted of God with such plainnesse of speech, and with such an open door of utterance, in delivering these mysteries, that he did out stripe and over-reach ma∣ny of those who entered into the Lords Vineyard long before him, the Lord verifying that in him which is, 2 Cor. 3. 17. Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. All which singularities and eminencies of a spiritual Preacher, to have been his special mercy from the Lord, to fit him to be eminently a burning and shining light, for the space of about two years in our Western cli∣mate, is manifest from what of his
Works have already come forth to the view of the world, and doth now fur∣ther appear by these excellent and di∣vine Sermons, upon these two most necessary, but little studied and lesse practised points of Christian Do∣ctrine, viz. Mortification of lusts, and Spiritual Contentment, ne∣ver heretofore Printed. Wherein the zealous servant of God endea∣voureth to awaken this secure gene∣ration unto the study of these so ex∣cellent and necessary duties, by lay∣ing before us the necessity of these duties, and the advantages attending the study of them, and the prejudices and disadvantages accompanying the neglecters of the saids duties: As also, to encourage and strengthen in the way, all such as have begun the spiritual conflict against sin, and are aiming at perfection in the study of spiritual contentment. He not only
presseth the duties, but also pointeth out the right means whereby a Chri∣stian may be helped to attain at last, victory over his lusts, and to sit down contentedly with Jonah under the shadow of his Gourd, Jon. 3. 6. And be satisfied with Elijah to hide himself by the brook Cherith, and to drink of the brook, and to have the ra∣vens to feed him there, I King. 17. 3, 4. And to say with David in an universal resignation of himself to the will of God, 2 Sam. 15. 26. Behold, here am I, let him do to me as seemeth good unto him: And withall thou shalt find intermixed, soul-reviving and comforting reso∣lutions, of the most pressing soul-exer∣cises accompanying such as seriously set about these so much soul-concern∣ing duties, of sins mortification and spiritual contentment under every lot. That thou may read with that
same affection that the holy Author preached, and reap the same blessing which was with much prayer wrestled for by him to his hearers, wherein he was not unheard, is the earnest prayer of his soul to God, who is Thy servant in the Go∣spel of our dearest Lord and Savior. A. S.
THE SPIRITUAL WARFARE. SERMON I. Rom. 7. 24. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death? WHen the sword of the ju∣stice of God was com∣ing down upon us, then our blessed Lord Iesus, in the infinite depth of his unsearchable love and compassion to self-destroying sinners, cryed forth with a loud voice, that justice might hold the hand▪ And as that ram sacrificed for Isaac, so was he willingly content to be caught in a thicket, and to become a spotlesse and everlasting sacrifice for sinners. He was content to be bruised, that so we might passe free, and his Fathers hand might be turned upon the
little ones. But, notwithstanding he hath died for our sins, and risen for our righteousness, yet hath he given to all his followers a spi∣ritual warfare to accomplish, so that they should be continually taken up in contend∣ing against principalities and powers, and spi∣ritual wickednesses in high places; or, as the words are rendered by some, we conceive more appositely, in heavenly things. And certainly, there is no discharge in this war, neither any interruption while we are on this side of Eternity: We confesse, God might easily have served an Inhi∣bition on all our spiritual enemies, that they should no more oppose themselves against a believer after Justification, but He in the depth of his unsearchable wis∣dome, and, we may say likewise, infinit love towards his own, hath so contrived their way to heaven, that thorow many af∣flictions and tribulations in our spiritual warfare, we must enter there; It is much indeed for a Christian to die a victor after warre, though not a triumpher; that must come after death, and the trophies and re∣wards of our victory, shall then be fully given to us, when our feet shall stand with∣in the gates of the new Ierusalem, and when we shall receive these two glorious and everlasting badges of our victory, a crown set upon our head, having this written upon
it, It endureth for ever; A motto which could never be engraven upon any Crown here below; and a Palm put in our hands; and then indeed shall we sing, as those that divide the spoil, when we have led captivity captive, and fitten down upon a Throne which is established for ever. And we conceive, much divine reflection and holy contemplation upon that precious re∣compence of reward, and that high and un∣conceivable pitch of dignity unto which belivers and overcomers are to be advanc∣ed, would make us with much cheerfulness and alacrity undergo this spiritual war∣fare. And yet all our triumphing is not suspended, till our war be ended; believe me, there is more real joy in the victory and vanquishing of one lust, yea more divine satisfaction, in a serious pursute and contending with them, though with very small successe to our apprehension, than in the actuall enjoyment and fruition of all thy lusts. Thou may hide sin under thy tongue, and have it pleasant to thy taste, yet at last it shall be as the gall of asps, and the poison of dragons. O! put on so much holy generosity and spiritual ambi∣tion, that though Satan should offer unto thee all the Kingdoms of the world, that thou may fall down and worship him, thou mayest cry forth in holy zeal and in∣dignation,
Get the hehind me Sathan; O! that deceitfull oratory and malitious guile wherewith he ensnareth immortal souls, and brings them into subjection. O! but the depths of Satan are subtile and great; And he is a man of understanding that can draw them out, and not be ignorant of his devices; and except we be helped by the candle of the Lord that discovereth the in∣ward parts of the belly, to know these mysterious subtilties of him, whose name is A deceiver, they will remain still riddles and mysteries to us. But since we are compassed about with this body of death, and there is a law in our members rebelling against the law of our minde, we should be much in groaning for the day of our redemption, when the lawfull cap∣tive may be delivered, and the prey taken from the mighty, and that blessed decree may come forth, O prisoners of hope, go forth and shew your selves. We are afraid that the Christians of this generation, have pro∣claimed a cessation of armes, and have con∣cluded a treaty of peace with their lusts, and a league not only offensive, but (shall I adde this) even defensive; not only, that we shall offend our lusts, but shall defend them: and if once we have sealed this treaty and agreement with our Idols, what can they require more at our hands?
We conceive, we may sadly allude unto that word, that there is not one amongst fourty thousand in Israel, with whom there is a spear and sheild seen in contend∣ing in this holy warfare. O! can such a delusion as this overtake you, that ye can be an overcomer without fighting; is your strength greater then those that have gone before you, that you think you can accom∣plish this war in one day, and pursue your enemies till ye overtake and consume them? O! when shall that day be, when we shall be groaning forth dayly this mournfull dittay, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death. In the words we conceive first, there is a sweet and pleasant emphasis in that word (me) speaking so much, that if infinite power and grace were capable of any limi∣tation, and there could be any bounds fixed to it, Paul did conceive he was the bounds and limits of infinite power and grace; if there were an impossibility for grace to save any sinner, it should be impos∣sible for grace to have saved him who was the chiefest of sinners, and lesse then the least of all Saints. And if each Christian did look upon himself as the greatest debter to the Justice of God, his debt to the infi∣nite grace of God should appear more singular.
Secondly, we may perceive, that a Christians happinesse, doth consist in a sweet exchange of dominion and govern∣ments: Once sin doth reign in his mortal body, and he is under the dominion of his lusts, but then grace doth step in, and ex∣auctorats and dethrones the former King, and doth reign in the temple of our heart. This is clear, Rom. 5. last, and that is a re∣markable word which is there, that grace may reign, the word in the original doth signifie so much, that grace may play the King, , and this fulnesse of graces dominion, is that, the Apostle would be at here. And certainly, there is no repentance of this exchange of Ma∣sters: There is much noise and rumour of complaints amongst people in these dayes of the exchange of governments, from one species of government to another, we shall leave these debates unto men who desire to exercise their spirits about them: but sure we are of this, that those who are given up to this change, shall have it passe as most legitimat and lawfull, by the divine ap∣probation, both of angels, and of the souls of just men now made perfect. Thirdly, the way that Paul taketh here to propose his complaint under the strong prevalency of the body of death, by way of question who shall deliver me? doth not
import any hesitation about his perswasion of certainty, that he at last should sing a song of triumph over his lusts; but only that it would be among the richest and the most singular monuments and trophies of the victorie of Christ, to save him. Paul did (no doubt) conceive that amongst all the royall monuments of Christs con∣quest, that should be, as it were, hanged about the walls of that higher and glorious palace, Paul should be put in the highest place, as having least merit to bring him there, (if there could be any merit at all) and most love and grace. Now to come more particulary to the words, after Paul hath most divinely, set forth that woful opposition and contradi∣ction, that was betwixt the unrenewed part and the renewed, and what strong domini∣on sin had over him he doth in these words breath out a sweet desire to be delivered, not only from his actual corruption, but from his original guilt, which here he cal∣leth the body of this death, not only because corruption is a thing which may be easily discerned and known to us, it being (so to speak) a thing which may fall under the object of our sight, being no spirit but a body; but also because of these great mul∣titudes of corruptions that flow from that root of original sin, it having so many
different members and parts which are so diversified and so compleat, that they may make up a body, which body if it be intertained, shall certainly bring and oc∣casion death. So when he is under the strong convictions of his guilt, and hath had a compleat discovery of himself, you may see his exercise holden forth in these words, O wretched man, the word in the original , signifieth one that is wearied with troublesome and continual combats, with little apparent successe, and this doth certainly import that he was a man, much and continually taken up in wrestling against his corruptions, and endeavouring to bring them unto subjecti∣on unto the obedience of Christ Iesus. And ye may see likewayes in these words, the way that Paul took to overcome his lusts, he was much in the exercise of prayer; for the words that we have read are indeed a short and pathetick prayer. I conceive that word which is recorded in Isa. 38. 14. O Lord, I am oppressed, under∣take for me, is a sweet paraphrase upon these words. Fourthly, You may see his great and principal suit to have been, deliverance from this body of death: this captive exile was hastning to be delivered, and looking out at the windowes of his Prison-house, waiting
till the Jaylor should come and open the doors, and take his chains and fetters from off his feet: We confesse these shall not be fully taken off, till we shal be passing tho∣row the door of our everlasting rest, and then that woful and sad complaint shall take his everlasting adiew and farewell; for if we may speak so, the burial place of sin is before the door of our eternal rest, it then ceaseth to be, when we begin more eminently to have a beeing▪ But may we not be ashamed and blush, that we are not more in uttering those inexpressible sighs and groans of the spirit, under the convicti∣on of our sinfulnesse, since this holy man, who had, no doubt, attained unto a great length in mortification, who had plucked out many right eyes, and cut off many right hands, and oft times returned victor after war, was so much in groaning under his corruption. O! but we have inverted strangely the way to heaven! I conceive practical Antinomianisme is an Epidemick error in these dayes: Many think that it is below a regenerat man to mourn, and to sit down and lament over the body of death; we know not what it is to make our bed to swim with tears, and to be bedewing the way to Zion, when our faces are thither ward; ye conceive that it is a lesson to be practis∣ed, and learned by those in a lower classe,
and those who are learning (so to speak) the Rudiments of Christianity, and not to be exercised by those, who are now ad∣vanced unto the high classe of Christianity, that being, (as it were in our apprehensi∣on) a degrading of your selves from that pitch of perfection unto which in your imagination you have attained: but, be∣lieve me, it is a work not below the eldest Christian, nor above the youngest believ∣er; and the more one be old in reality in Religion, this work will alwayes be new in their practice. I shall only give you that divine counsel of a holy man, who desired Christians to set about the mortifi∣cation of their lusts, as though they had never been taken up in that duty before; each day to set about to mortifie, not as a proficient, but as a beginner, who hath never made any progresse in that blessed work. Now in speaking upon Pauls exercise, which is here holden forth, that he was continually exercised in wrestling against those corruptions, and that body of death that was in him; we need not stand long to prove that it is the duty of a Christian to be so exercised and taken up; there is somewhat of that implyed in that word, Act. 24. 16. And it is more clearly pressed, Col. 3: 5. Eph. 6. 13. and, 1 Cor. 5. 7.
And, no doubt, if a Christian did reflect more upon the nature of sin, and consider that by it, difformity with God is increas∣ed, and precious conformity with him lost; and, did we take up sin in its wofull effects, that it worketh death, and involveth us un∣der the curse of a living God, we would be more constant in this spiritual warfare. O! but Christians thorow want of the ap∣prehension of these, are much disinabled to stand fast to that liherty wherewith Christ hath made them free, and oft-times entangled them∣selves again with the yoke of bondage: So that I conceive if God were coming to give a name to the Christians of this generation, he might call us, Isfachar, because we do now croutch down under two burdens, and are become servants unto tribute; and even those that are more refined and tender in their walk in those dayes, he might call them Reuben, because they are unstable as water, which marreth their excellency. But that which first we shall speak to is, how the wrestlings of a natural man against the body of death, and those cor∣ruptions that are within him, may be di∣stinguished from the wrestlings of one that is really godly. And first we conceive, that it is without debate and controversie, that a man altoge∣ther unregenerate, by natures light may be
put on to mortifie (if so we may speak) and contradict those sins, which are most sensual and grosse; natures light including an antipathy and detestation of those things within it self; though we confesse, thorow the depravement of our nature, those sins, which fall under the sphere of natures mortification, are now abridged unto a small sum, it being not now refined and clear, as it was when man was in the estate of innocence. Secondly, another sort may, from some common qualification, oppose some sins, as those that are of more heroick and re∣fined spirits, will have detestation against covetousnesse and other sins of that nature, and so in some sense may endeavour the mortification of these things. Thirdly, the same may a natural man do, by such a conviction of the holy Ghost, as is but a common work of the spi∣rit, he may be put on to mortifie these sins that are more visible, and some what grosse in their nature, as is clear from the practice of those who cleanse the outside of the plat∣ter, and studies to have an outward confor∣mity unto the law of God, notwithstanding of that inward and secret antipathy, against the strictnesse of his law; yea more, a na∣tural man who hath some predominant evil, may endeavour and will atempt
to wrestle against that sin, which is in a direct line of opposition against it; as one that is given to that vice of covetousnesse, he will study to mortifie that vice of pro∣digality, those being two opposit vices. Now from all these we may conclude, that upon every opposition which we use against our corruptions: it is not safe to infer, that we are really ingaged in this spiritual warfare; it being, we think another thing then the most part of us do imagine it to be: And we confesse, it is a difficulty even to attain that length of endeavour in mortification, which the natural man by these things which we have spoken may attain to. But for the difference betwixt their debates, the first is this; that a natu∣ral and unregenerat man, doth mainly wrestle against these sins, that are outward and more grosse, and not so much against those sins that are inward, and falls not under the eye of man: we do not deny but a natural man may wrestle against vain thoughts, and have some small oppo∣sition, against the stirring of corruption within his own bosome, but we conceive, that there are these two secret sins which a natural man is not at all taken up in wrest∣ling against, at least very little, viz. his original corruption, and his unbelief; where∣as one that is really godly, is much taken
up in bearing down these. Paul is here taken up in wrestling against his original sin; and David, Ps. 51. 5. compared with ver. 2. and 7. is likewise taken up in wrest∣ling against it; and that good man that is recorded in the Gospel, who cryed forth, Lord I believe, help my unbelief, was much taken up in wrestling against his unbelief; and, David, Ps. 77. from the beginning to the I0. verse and forward: and certainly, one that never was taken up in wrestling against these two (at least in some small measure and degree) he may hesitate much whether or not he was ever seriously engag∣ed in this holy warfare. O! but if many that passe under the notion of Professors were posed, when they did enter into the lists with original corruption, there are many who without breach of truth might say, they never knew what it was to con∣tend against it: And this certainly speaks forth much of our ignorance of original guilt; And believe me, there is more dif∣formity unto the Image of God in original sin, then in a thousand actual outbreak∣ings: And it is but in vain for a Christian to attempt the mortification and cutting off of branches, till once he study to pluck up the root, which doth bear wormwood and gall.
A second difference is this, a natural man wrestleth against his corruptions, rather because they bring him under the stroak of the justice of God, than because they are contrary to the holinesse of God: Hence is it that the most part of a natural mans wrestling is, when he is under affliction; somewhat of which is pointed out, Ps. 78. 34, 35. Now this difference is clear in Io∣seph and Paul, who made the holinesse of God, the great topicks and common place whence they did produce all their argu∣ments for contradicting sin, as Paul in this Chapter, and Ioseph in that precious sen∣tence, Shall I do this, and sin against God? but Cain, who was a man cut off from the right hand of the Lord, had another prin∣ciple of contradicting and wrestling against his lusts, My punishment is greater then I can bear, Gen. 4. 13. And hence is it that a natural man doth never oppose sin, as it is a cause to interrupt fellowship and com∣munion with God, or from that divine principle of Christs love constraining him: O! but the principle of a natural man wrest∣ling against corruption, be selfish and low! and if there were not a hell, and a place of torment, natural men would take a latitude to themselves not to mortifie sin. But sure it argues a divine and heroick spirit, and most suteable to them, who have Christ in
them their hope of glory, that though there were neither any regard or remuneration of their obedience, neither any punishment of their disobedience, yet simple desire to please God, and not to profane his holinsse which he loveth, doth tye them to obedi∣ence. I may confidently say, that these who never knew what it was to have that threefold cord, and that precious triple chain, binding them to obedience, and in∣ducing them to mortifie their lusts, to wit, the holinesse of God, the fear to interrupt com∣munion and fellowship with him, and the love of Christ, they may question whether or not ever they were seriously engaged in this holy warfare: But withall we do not de∣ny, but the fear of punishment is likewise a most divine principle of mortification, in its own place; but except there be some∣what higher, it is not to build upon. The third difference is this, that a natu∣ral man studieth more to restrain sin, then to mortifie it; for he is a man that resteth satisfied with the restraint of the actings of sin, though there be no mortification of that vicious inclination which is in the man: this is clear in Haman. Esth. 3. 5. in Saul. 1 Sam, 24. 16, 17. and following verses compared with 1 Sam. 26. 2. and in the Scribes and Pharisees, Matth. 23. 25. But, the mortification that the Gospel re∣quireth,
quireth is of a higher nature, Gal. 5. 24. where we are commanded to crucifie the flesh with the affections and lusts; not only to re∣strain the acts, but to mortifie the habits: we confesse it is a difficulty to determine the difference betwixt the restraint of sin, and mortifying of sin, and this maketh it the more difficult, that sins which are really mortified, sometimes a Christian may be overtaken to commit, which I conceive seldome or never holds of sins that are more gross, but holds oft-times of sins that are of a lower nature and degree. Yet, these things may a little point forth the diffe∣rence, first, a Christian who hath sin mor∣tified, is filled with much divine joy and satisfaction in the mortifying of it, which we conceive partly doth proceed from this, that a Christian, when he is honoured to mortifie a lust, he ordinarily then receives the intimation of his peace and interest in God, in a more lively and spiritual way. And, secondly, because at that time also he doth receive much precious and sweet communion with God, his soul then is in life; somewhat of this is pointed out to us, Rom. 8. 13. and, Rom. 7. 24. compa∣red with vers. 25. Thirdly, the difference may be known by this, that when a man hath been much in the exercise of fasting and prayer for the mortifying of such a lust
and idol, and hath not attained to this with great facility, there is great appearance that upon the desisting of tentation, and the act∣ings of his spirit to commit such a thing, such a lust is mortified, and not restrained only; there is somewhat of this pointed forth, Matth. 17. 20, 21. where it is said, that power of casting out of devils goeth not forth but by fasting and prayer. We conceive the place is principally to be un∣derstood concerning the faith of miracles, though by proportion and analogy it may hold of sanctifying faith: O! our lusts in these dayes do rather go out, then are cast out; they rather die to us then we to them. Fourthly, the frame of spirit which we have after mortifying of a lust, may let us see whether it be a real work, or only some re∣straint for a time; a man that doth attain such a length, as really to mortifie and cru∣cifie any lust, is much taken up in the ex∣ercise of praise, Rom. 7. 25. 1 Cor. 15. 55, 56, 57. he is under conviction of his duty to blesse the Lord though he is also convin∣ced of an impossibility of blessing him as he ought to be: but we think, when lusts are restrained only, and not mortified, the man is not so much taken up in the exer∣cise of praise. O! what heavenly Elo∣gies and Songs of praise have the Saints penned unto the unsearchable and omni∣potent
grace of Christ, when they have been enabled to overcome, and crucifie a lust, Their souls have been enditing a good mat∣ter concerning the praises of the King, their tongue hath been as the pen of a ready writer. And this may, lastly, point out the diffe∣rence; Sins that are mortified do not for the most part presently recur so, as to obtain victory over the Christian; we confesse, Sathan, to weaken our confidence, may assault us with tentations to commit that iniquity, that so we may be brought to call in question our real and spiritual victory over it: but if lusts be only restrained, it cannot be long away form obtaining vi∣ctory: this is clear from Esth. 4, 10. com∣pared with the following verses, as like∣wise from 1 Sam. 24. 16, 17. &c. compared with 1 Sam. 26, 2. The fourth difference; a natural man is not constant in his wrestling against his corruptions, but takes it by fits and starts, either when he is under affliction, or some other sad occurrence that doth befall him, or through some sharp and sudden con∣viction of a commonly enlightened con∣science; but he that is really taken up in this spiritual warfare, hath a constancy in maintaining of it, at least in his endea∣vours: this is clear from Act. 24. 16. and Col. 3. 5. and indeed that wofull inconstan∣cy
that we have in this spiritual warfare doth evidence our little real engagment in the work. Are there not many here, who can interrupt the warfare many weeks, and yet not be much under either the discovery of their losse, or under any impression of sorrow because of it? Sure if this were believed, that there may be more lost in one day, than can be gained in many, we would endeavour to be more constant. O! but grace is a tender thing, and we ought to keep it as the apple of our eye. Alace, there are but too many, who slacken their endeavour against sin, and will ly idle many dayes, and yet are ready to think, that when they please, they can shake themselves of their lusts as at other times; but to these we shall only say this, beware lest that dispensation once meet you, that when ye shall begin to shake your selves of your lusts and of your bands, your strength shall be gone from you, and then your enemies shall lead you captive, and put out your two eyes. O! but some times our corruptions get such advantage over us, that we may say, Vidio meliora proboque, deteriora sequor. The fifth difference, they go not about this warfare from a right principle, which the Christian doth, the one wrestles in their own strength, but the other resting
upon the strength of Iehovah, that ever∣lasting strength, this is pointed at, Rom. 8. 13. there is a command, that a wrestling Chri∣stian studies alwayes to obey: a Christian uses much that precious divinity of David, 1 Sam. 17. 45, 46. when they go to war. And alace there are many that are living under the apprehension of this warfare, who in the day of their accompts, we fear shall be found never really to have entered in the lists with principalities and powers and spiritual wickednesse. And it is no wonder that many of us be foiled by the hand of our ini∣quities, we not having sitten down first when we engaged, to consult, whether we with our ten thousand, were able to meet him that came against us with his twenty thousand, we engaged without the appre∣hension of difficulty, and so no wonder we be overcome without much difficulty. Now examine your selves, by these, whether in∣deed you be engaged in this spiritual war∣fare. Now that which, secondly, we shall speak to, shall be, to those advantages that a Christian may have by being con∣tinually taken up in this spiritual warfare. The first advantage is this, it is an ex∣cellent way to obtain victory over these lusts and Idols, wherewith we are beset: we conceive it is no wonder that this be
the great and general complaint of Chri∣stians in these dayes, that they are led cap∣tive by the hand of their iniquities, and that the voice and noise of the spoiler is so much heard with them, because they are not taken up in a constant debating and contending with sin; there is somewhat of this pointed out to us, Rev. 3. 5. where though that promise be principally under∣stood of the reward of an overcomer, when he shall be above, that he shall be clothed in white, yet we think it may include this, that a man that is in the way, and constant exercise of overcoming, shall at∣tain to much divine conformity with God, and much divine difformity with the world: and to those who are much discouraged with their little successe and apparent victory in this warre, notwith∣standing of their constancy in debate with their lusts, we shall only speak that for their comfort by way of allusion, which is Dan. 7. 12. Their dominion shall be taken from them, but their lives be prolonged for a season and time: the dominion of your lusts shall be taken away, though their lives may be prolonged for your exercise and dependence on him for a short time and season: ye may have tribulation in this spiritual warfare ten dayes, but be con∣vinced of this that the day is coming;
when ye shall sit down upon a Throne, after ye have overcome, as Christ also did sit down, after he had overcome; once ve shall stand and defend the field when all your lusts shall flee as chaff before the wind: albeit oftimes our discouragement speaks that word which Saul spake to David, 1 Sam. 17. 33. (when we are to wrestle with the devil) thou art not able to go against this Philistine to fight with him, for thou art but a youth, and he a man of warre from his youth: yet a Christian ought to answer, through God I shall do valiantly. Secondly, it is the way to attain much divine consolation, as is clear, Rev. 2, 17. To him that overcometh will I give to eat the hidden Manna, which is (as we con∣ceive) in part, he shall have of the con∣solations of the holy Ghost, though it be principally understood of Iesus Christ. O! what a divine contentment and unspeak∣able solace of mind doth a Christian at∣tain by intertaining a constant enimity against his lusts. I am perswaded that that which doth interrupt a Christains peace much, is the interruption of that holy and divine enimity, which we ought to have against sin; believe me, there is more real satisfaction to be found in one dayes serious debate against sin, then in having an eternity of enjoyment of the most flou∣rishing
pleasures in the world: ye may sow in tears in this warfare, but ye shall only reap in joy: the first part may be true of the men of the world, in their pursuits after their pleasures, they do sow in tears; but it was never yet heard nor left upon record, that they did reap in joy; there was al∣wayes a correspondence betwixt their seed-time, and their harvest; but there is a divine transmutation and disproportion betwixt the seed-time of a Christian and his harvest, unspeakable joy can spring off the root of their most bitter sorrows. Thirdly, it is an excellent way to main∣tain the faith of our interest in God, this is clear from Rev. 2. 17. where Christ giveth this promise to the overcomers, that he will give them a new name, which hold∣eth forth their adoption and interest in him, which no man can know, but he that receiveth it; and certainly there is nothing that over-clouds a Christians hope so much, nor darkneth his interest, as an intermission in this holy warfare. Yea more particularly he attaineth to the most certain perswasion of his victory over his corruptions: there is somewhat of this pointed out, 2 Tim. 7. 8. I have fought the good fight of faith, and hence he doth infer, that there is laid up for him a crown of righteousnesse, which doth certainly
import and include in its bosome, that Paul upon his constant endeavour to wrestle against corruption, did attain to much certainty of overcoming. I think it is altogether impossible for a Christian, intermitting this holy warfare, to intertain any divine or assured perswasion, that there is a blessed issue and period unto his warfare. And we think it is from this, that of times his own cry out, who can stand before the children of Anak, and do conclude to make to themselves a Captain, and go back unto Egypt: though we think, that if we were constant in this, we would be taught, not only to intertain a holy under∣valuing of them, but likewayes a divine cer∣tainty of overcoming. I think a Christian hath not only that advantage by being constant in this warfare, that he is brought to an assured perswasion that he shall overcome, but likewise doth most sweetly conclude, that the strength of their corruption is gone, therefore they may go up and war with them. Fourthly, by maintaining this warfare, a Christian gets much experience; by it he attains to much distinct apprehension of the deceitfulnesse of him, who is the de∣ceiver of the brethren. We are perswaded, that these who are constant in this warfare, can speak most to those singular subtilties
of Sathan, and can most distinctly fathom these deep devices of his; as likewayes, they can most take up the unsearchable deceitfulnesse of their own heart: and there is, no doubt, no small advantage in the taking up of these two, both that we may be provoked unto self-diffidence, as likewayes to have our confidence and hope much reposed upon Iesus Christ, who is the Captain of our salvation, that we may be constrained in that day when the blast of the terrible one, is as a blast against the wall, and when the archer doth shoot at us, and grievously wound us, to go unto him, whose name is an everlasting strength, that so by his strength we may be inabled to overcome. That which thirdly we shall speak to, shall be, what is the reason Christians do obtain so small victory in this spiri∣tual warfare: and in this, we shall not only speak to these morall and culpable causes, why Christians do not obtain much victory, but we shall likewayes speak a little, to these divine and precious ends that God hath in denying victory to his own, who in some small measure are en∣tertaining a constant enimity against their corruption. And as for the first, it doth proceed from too much self-conceit and pre∣sumptuous opinion of their own strength;
I am perswaded, that that which made Pe∣ter so uncapable to resist the tentations of denying Christ, did much proceed from that word which is Matth. 26. 33. Though all men should be offended because of him, yet he would never be offended. Therefore we think, that the first and most excellent way to obtain victory is, to be dwelling under the apprehensions of our own weaknesse to overcome, that holy and divine paradox being alwayes made true, that when we are weak, then are we strong: and we may enter into the lists with our corruptions, having no confidence in the flesh, but desir∣ing in the name of the God of Israel to wrestle with the strongest Goliah that we meet with. O! but humility is a most sweet and strong armour, wherewith a Christian ought to be clothed, when he goeth to war: he must walk in that holy fear, which may be consistent with faith, and entertain so much faith, and spiritual confidence, as may not altogether cut off holy fear. There is a second cause, which is, too much intanglement with the pleasures, and affairs of the world: It is impossible for one who is taken up in the continual noise and buz of things here below, to be an overcomer; hence Paul presseth, 2 Tim. 2. 4. that no man that warreth ought to in∣tangle
himself with the affairs of this life, that he may please him who hath chosen him to be a souldier; and that word, 1 Cor. 9. 25. He that striveth for the mastery must be temperate in all things. O! oft-times through the deceitfulnesse of the world and pleasures thereof, we are led captive by the hand of our iniquities, and do fall before our enemies. I know nothing so suitable and helpfull for a Christian to overcome, then to be denyed to these three cardinal and fundamental temptations, by which Sathan standeth to allure us, which are the lust of the eye, the lust of the flesh, and the pride of life; that our eye may not take in, any sweet or pleasant representations of the transient vanities of the world, neither may our sensual appetite be taken with the taste of these bitter and most soure delights, nei∣ther may be ambitious in the enjoyment, and actual possession of them. There is a third cause, which is, that we are not taken up in the exercise of watchfulnesse: this is certain that the ex∣ercise of this grace, hath most divine in∣fluence for the overcoming of our corrup∣tions, as is clear from Matth. 26. 41. and Mark. 14. 38. That ought to be the great Motto of a Christian souldier, which ought to be engraven upon his armes▪ Watch: Watchfulnesse is not only effectual
for overcoming in this respect, that it doth discover unto us our temptations, when they begin to assail us, but likewise it takes up both the subtilty and strength of our temptations, as likewise it taketh up the weaknesse and inability in the Christian to resist that temptation; and if those three be attained, seldom or never is a Christian much foiled by the hand of his iniquities, therefore that which I would say to a Christian souldier, I would say unto all, Watch. There is a fourth cause, which is, that we are not much taken up in the exercise of secret prayer, prayer being indeed that noble and spiritual weapon by which Christians do overcome, as is clear from Matth. 26. 41. and 2 Cor. 12. 7. where Paul, when a mes∣senger of satan was buffeting him, was con∣strained to beseech the Lord thrice▪ a practice much unknown by the most part of Chri∣stians, who know not what it is to pray without ceasing, when they are tempted much without interruption. I think of all the weapons that almost a Christian tak∣eth to resist temptation, this is the most effectual; for when Sathan seeth that a Christian improves the temptation so much for his own advantage, as to make it an errand to go to God, then he desists and gives over to contend: I confesse a Chri∣stian
may in so far glory in his infirmities, as they give him an occasion to converse more frequently with God, O! but had we spent more of our time in conversing with God, when we were alone, we might have attained many sweet trophies, and fruits of our victory, which now we have only in hope and expectation. There is fifth cause, which is, that we are not much taken up in the exercise of Faith, which is that general peece of ar∣mour that Paul doth prescribe unto the Christian, Eph. 6. 16▪ Above all things, taking the shield of faith, whereby ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked: there is that sweet note of commendation put upon this armour, that there is no temptation a Christian can meet with, but through the exercise of Faith, he may be able to overcome it: hence Paul saith, ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the Devil: This peece of armour is not only defensive, but we may say, in some mea∣sure, it is offensive likewayes: now Faith helps a Christian to overcome his tempta∣tions and corruptions, wherewith he is assaulted, not only by laying hold on the infinit strength of him who is the Captain of Salvation; but likewayes, Faith is that grace which hath the most subtile and di∣vine eye in taking up the strength of cor∣ruption:
O! but a man much in the exer∣cise of Faith, is a man that can passe a most accurat sentence upon his lusts and Idols wherewith he doth rencounter: there is nothing impossible to the believing man: and I think, if there be any grace by which a Christian doth ascend most to a divine similitude unto the omnipotency of God, it is by the grace of Faith: hereby is the Christians power most intended. O! but Faith will make those that are weak, strong: Therefore we would desire you to be exercising your confidence upon him, who is that munition of rocks, that so through him ye may overcome, as like∣wayes through the word of your testi∣mony. This lastly may be a cause, that after some small victory over our lusts, we are ordinarily entangled with security, not knowing what it is to make the victo∣ry over one lust, a sweet provocation to the overcoming of another. I think (if we may allude unto that word which is, Psal. 18. 37) it ought much to be the practice of a Christian, to pursue his enemies till he overtake them, and never to return again till they be consumed, that by the strength of him who is Iehovah, we may run thorow a troup, and by our God we may leap over a wall. O! but constant exercise in this
war, never proclaiming a cessation of armes, would make a speedy riddance of all our adversaries; he then should teach our hands to warre, and by our armes a bow of steel might be broken. I think that which made David so little successfull over his lusts after some small victory, was his security: as likewayes in Peter. There is no dis∣charge in this war till death, and then we shall receive our everlasting arriers for all our toil. Now to the second, those divine ends that the Lord hath in this, why Christians do not attain victory over their lusts, though in some small measure endeavour∣ing constancy in war; it doth either pro∣ceed from this, that God knowes that we can better improve a wrestling estate than an overcoming estate, while we are here below; we can better dispense with war, than we can with victory. Therefore, while we are traveling thorow this wil∣dernesse, he doth still keep us in exercise with serpents and scorpions: or it doth much proceed from this, that we may be kept in a constant dependence upon God, and may intertain a holy and constant cor∣respondence with him: It is certain, that if we were not constrained to walk with God, through a principle of necessity, sel∣dom would we walk with him through a
principle of a Duty, or from a principle of love: for it is obvious to a Christian upon his secret search, that we walk most with God, when we stand most in need of him: It doth likewise proceed from this, that we may be kept humble while we are here below, and that we may not be exalted above measure; as also, that the grace and power of our blessed Lord Iesus, in helping us to overcome, may be rendered more conspicuous and evident, this being the great stage in which Christs power doth most eminently act and ap∣pear over our weaknesse, and the appre∣hensions of these insuperable difficulties, wherewith we are beset and oft overcome. Now to shut up our discourse, we shall desire, that once ye may give up your names unto Iesus Christ, to fight under his royal banner, and believe me, though your corruptions were never so strong, yet at last he shall overcome them, the certainty whereof is made out unto you by this, that your blessed head, hath led captivity captive, and is now exalted at the right hand of Majesty on high: and the hope and expectation of that blessed issue may make you rejoyce with joy unspeakable and full of glory.
SERMON II. Gal. 5. 24. And they that are Christs have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. O! when shall that great and ex∣cellent wonder be seen in heaven, which Iohn did see, Rev. 12. 1. 6. to behold the invisible Church, and those that are expectants of heaven, which is that woman clothed and ador∣ned with that spotlesse and beautifull righ∣teousnesse of a crucified Saviour, which is pointed out, by her being clothed with the Sun, and to be regulat by the Doctrine of the twelve Apostles, which are indeed those precious Stars that will bring us unto the place where Christ lyes, and will sweet∣ly conduct us unto him; and withall to have that great Idol under our feet, the world, the divine emblem of which is the Moon, because it is subject to many vicis∣situdes and changes, and hath most different and contrary aspects: though we con∣ceive, that if many Christians were to be painted, we might fix the Moon upon their head, for they use not the world as their
servant, but as their Master; Mortification is an exercise that doth not sute with flesh and blood, it is a hard saying to a man settled upon the dregs of nature, and yet incorporate in that old stock: O! but it is sad Divinity to many, that except one die with Christ, they cannot reign with him, we must win to the fellowship of his suf∣ferings, and be conformable unto his death, before we attain to the resurrection from the dead: we love to divide those things that God hath conjoyned, to take Christ for righteousnesse and salvation, but not for a King and for sanctification: And if it was an evidence unto wise Solomon, that she was not the mother of the childe, who pleaded for the division of it, so it may be supposed, that he who will not take whole Christ, but would have him divided, is not one that is predestinated to the adoption of children: we confesse there are many that love Christs coat, rather than his graces, and if they pursue after those, it is more after those graces that are adorning then saving: And we conceive that there are these three graces that a hypocrite doth most pursue after; there is the grace of prayer, the grace of knowledge, and the grace of humility, and of the last we may say, a hypocrite may endeavour to personat it, but there is
alwayes within his bosome some convicti∣ons of this little attainment: it is impossible for a hypocrite to think himself nothing; and, O! that we could once attain to that precious length of Christianity, as to be entertaining a holy oblivion of our attain∣ments, and a sanctified memory of our imperfections; that the former may be written, as it were in the sand, and the latter might be engraven in the fleshly tables of our heart, and kept constantly upon record: we confess there is not much of our leaf that withers in these dayes, but much of our fruit withers and decayes: O! is not man become so brutish and ig∣norant▪ that he may be sent unto the beasts of the field to be instructed of that which is his duty: Solomon makes mention of four beasts upon the earth which are little and exceeding wise, Prov. 30. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. all which may teach us some spiritual doctrine; first there are the Ants, who may teach us that grace of divine prudence, and Christian policy, in laying hold on our occasions and opportunities, who though they be not a strong people, yet provide their meat in summer; and no doubt, we should be fighting with our spiritual enemies, while it is the day, for the night cometh wherein no man can fight: actions done in season, addes a
great deal of luster and perfection to them, every thing being beautifull in its season: Secondly, there are the conies, who may teach us that grace of deny all, to distrust our own strength, and in the day of straits to run unto him who is that Munition of rocks, when the blast of the terrible one, is as a storm against a wall; for they being a feeble people, make their houses in the rocks; And no doubt, Athe∣isme and Idolatrie are the two great impe∣diments of mortification, too much con∣fidence in our selves, which is Idolatrie, and our too much diffidence in God, which is our Atheisme. Moreover, we may go to the locusts, which would teach us that primitive grace of unity, who though they want a King, yet go forth by bands: and lastly, we may go to the spider, which may teach us that grace of spiritual mind∣ednesse, and of aspiring after those sublime and excellent things of God, for they are in Kings places: and, O! to be more con∣versant with heaven, and those things that are above: this would make us to distaste these lower springs, and they would be to us as the waters of Marah. But to come more particularly to the words, you have many precious things concerning Mortification holden forth, which is that precious and cardinal grace
of which we intend at this time to speak; you have the infinit advantage of this grace held forth, to wit, that such do meet with divine intimation of their interest in Christ, and that they are Christs, which is indeed the high elevation of a Christian: And this is clear from the words, that such an one may from this gather, that his name was written in the ancient and precious records of heaven: And, no doubt, little divine wrestling with our corruptions, makes us to have the extract of our peace so often withdrawn to our sense: there is this held forth concerning it, the extensive nature of mortification, that a Christian ought not only to mortifie the flesh, which is original sin, which is so called, not only because of that wofull knot of amity and affection that is betwixt us and our lusts, hence that word, no man ever hated his own flesh; O! those invisible knots of union that are betwixt us and our lusts; but it is so called, because sin hath conta∣minat the whole man, so that from the crown of the head to the sole of the foot, there is nothing that is not defiled, as likewayes, because during our abode in those tents of mortality, we must have this wofull and sad companion▪ and there is an un∣changable and unalterable decree of heaven that during our time of Minority, we
should have that bad associat; but more, a Christian should mortifie his affections, which are his predominant lusts, to which our affections are so much joyned, and our soul doth so much go out after; as also his lusts, which are the first motions and risings of corruption within one, and withall may comprehend the eschewing the first shadows and appearances of evil, Prov. 4. 14, 15. Enter not into the path of the wicked, and go not in the way of evil men, avoid it, passe not by it, turn from it, and passe away: our mortification should be als much of our invisible Idols, as our visible lusts. There is this likewayes held forth, the difficulty and painfulnesse of this work under this notion of Crucifying, which was one of the most painfull deaths: we con∣ceive, that there are many who are of that mans humour, who wallowing upon the grasse, cryed forth, utinam hoc esset labo∣rare: there is, no doubt, more difficulty in this then we apprehend, we must not ly in the bed of ease, if we intend to be mortifying Christians, we must wrestle as princes with God, till we prevail; the longsomnesse of this work is also pointed at, under the notion of crucifying, it being a longsome death: we cannot ordinarily fight and triumph in one day; that ambiti∣ous
letter of Cesars will not hold here, Veni, Vidi, Vici; we must die mortifying and strugling with our corruptions, and when one of our feet is within the borders of eternity, to be sighing out that lamentation, O wretched man that I am, &c. You have also the intensive nature of mortification, that a Christian should be content with no∣thing but the death of his lusts, which is held forth in that word, crucifie. O! to bind our self with a holy oath and vow, not to dwell in much contentment, till we have gotten the life of our predominant lust: we must not give our idols quarter upon the most plausible and fairest termes of subjection, otherwayes, if ye do, I shall not say that word which the Prophet spake to Ahab, that your life shall go for his; but sure I am that confederacy shall be broken, and likely not without many sorrows to your spirits. There is lastly, the certainty of this victory held forth in that word, they have crucified; it is here in the preterite time, as it were already accomplished and brought to passe; and no doubt, this may make us to rejoyce with joy unspeakable and full of glory, that once we shall have a tri∣umphant song put in our mouth. Now before we shall speak unto any of these, we shall speak to some few things as previous to be known: We shall not
dwell long in pointing out the nature of Mortification; we conceive it thus. It is a divine quality of the immortal soul de∣rived from the efficacy and vertue of Christs death, whereby the strength of sin is im∣pared, and its dominion taken away, so that we should not totally nor with full consent yield our self unto that iron-yoke of our iniquity: Neither shall we stand long to prove that it is your duty to be much in the practice of this duty: It is clear not only from Col. 3. 5. Mortifie there∣fore your members which are upon the earth, but also from 1 Pet. 1. 15, 16. and, 2 Cor. 7. 1. it ought to be our great design and aim to bring all those things in subjection, which stand in opposition to Iesus Christ, and it is the noble prerogative of those young men, 1 Ioh. 2. 13, 14. that they have overcome that wicked one, and hath in some measure trodden Sathan under their feet. But we shall speak a little unto this, first, whether or not a Christian can fall again to the committing of that sin which once they have mortified and repented for, and withall hath received an act of pardon? We conceive indeed (so far as we know) there can be no explicit proof given of such a case in Scripture, that ever any of those that were heirs of the grace of life, did fall
into that sin which they had once morti∣fied and repented for: but however, we are confident to averre, that it is not incon∣sistent with a gracious estate, which we conceive is clear, not only from his names, but from his promises and from his com∣mands; doth not that name, that he is a healer of our back-slidings, and the repairer of our breaches, and that name, he will multiply to pardon, speak out that a Saints relapsing into a mortified sin, doth not put him without hope, Is. 55. 7. Hos. 14. 4, but that he may have confidence that he shall not die but live, and declare the won∣drous works of the Lord, though God may speak that word to him, which Absalom spake to Hushai, Is this thy kindnesse to thy friend: and withall, do not his promises speak this, Ier. 3. 22. I will heal your back-slidings; and do not his commands speak it, Ier. 3. 1. 12. 14. 22. how often is back-sliding Israel exhorted to return, and he who imposed that commandement upon us, to forgive our brother untill seventy and seven times, if he return and repent, will not his bowels be moved within him, towards a back-sliding heifer? But withall, to provoke you to beware of that sin, to sin after repentance and mortifica∣tion, we shall propose these things. First, such a sin doth creat and beget much hard∣nesse
and stupidity of heart, so that our own back-slidings do reprove us, and become not only our sin, but our punishment; and when God hath spoken peace to us, should we again turn to folly? Secondly, there is this to disswade you, that such Apostacy as this, makes a Christian to losse the sense and comfortable assurance of their Interest, so that sometimes they will be even razing, as it were, the foundations: O! but backsliders in heart are filled with the fruit of their own way, and are made to walk in darknesse and to have no light: it is much for a Christian to keep fast his hands, when after this manner, he hath lost his feet. Fourthly, such an one doth ordinarily give much reins, and much liberty to his corruptions; that is indeed, their year of Jubilee and release, as is clear from Ier. 5▪ 6. where these two are joyned: and may not the nature and aggravating circumstances of that sin, make you to eschew it? is it not a sinning against light? is it not a sinning against God, after he hath appeared unto you twise? So that this may be the manner of your bemoaning your self, If it had been an enemy that had thus done, O Lord, thou mightest have born it, but that it should be one, whom thou didst condescend to make thy familiar, and to
take sweet counsel together with, that hath lift up his heel against thee; this no doubt is an iniquity of deep dye; and we shall only say this, that it is imprinted upon the effigie of godly Iudah, Gen. 38. 26. that after his first fall with Tamar, he knew her again no more: And, no doubt, it were your advantage to obey that counsel, let him that standeth take heed lest he fall.. Now that which secondly we would speak to is, to propose something to you, by which you may know your growth in Mortification, since there are many that delude themselves in this, supposing that their lusts are really mortified, when they are but sleeping, and that they are really cast out, when they only go out for a season: those are they that are pure in their own eyes, and yet are not cleansed from their iniquity. And before we shall speak any thing to this, we would have you con∣sidering these things. First, that there may be a growth of leafes, where there is not much growth of fruit; a plentifull measure of profession, and yet much barrennesse in practice; there are some whose leaf doth not wither, though their fruit doth much decay, who have many specious appea∣rances, and yet cannot say that the root of the matter is with them; and with all we would say, that there may be some real
growth to the fruit, when there is not much growth to the root, so that though we spread forth our branches, yet we do not cast forth our root as Lebanon; we grow sometimes more in prayer, and knowledge, and joy of the Holy Ghost, then in mortification and humility, though there be a promise for both their growthes, Hos. 14. 5. 6. Now there is this secondly, that we would have you knowing, that there is a divine neces∣sity for Christians to grow somewhat in all the graces of the Spirit, and to bring forth fruits▪ even in old age, to be advancing in Mortification, to be ascending up in a divine conformity with God, till we shall be made like unto him: we confesse in∣deed, there are some sad interruptions, when we almost forget that we were purged from our old sins; And this necessity of growth, appears not only from this, that Christ is the head of believers, and they his members; this similitude the Apo∣stle useth twise to expresse Christians growth, Eph. 4. 15▪ 16. Col, 2. 10. and no doubt, since Christ is the head, and we the members, we must grow till there be a divine conformity and resemblance betwixt us and our head; and are not we predestinate unto this divine and noble end, Rom. 8. 29. and must not we purifie our selves, and endeavour to wash our selves
from our spots, through that precious bloud of sprinkling, that we may be holy, as he who hath called us, is holy. And more, this is one end of that fulnesse, which was communicat unto Iesus Christ our precious head, ever to make us compleat, Col. 2. 9, 10. And as his fulnesse is for our growth, so our growth is for the making up of his fulnesse, Eph. 1. 23. Mystical Christ will not be compleat, till once all his Members grow up to the stature of the fulnesse of Iesus Christ, and so from that, there is such an invisible knot of union and supernatural relation betwixt us and Christ, that a Christian must grow, and if once the first draughts and imperfect lineaments of Christs image be engraven on our soul, he will bring it unto per∣fection, since this is his noble prerogative, that his work is perfect. There is this also that speaks a necessity of a Christians growth in mortification, and all the graces of the spirit, that the faithfulnesse of all the persons of the blessed Trinity, is engaged for this, and is laid in pawn: it is clear that the faithfulnesse of the first person of the blessed Trinity is laid in pledge, from Psal. 92. 14, 15. they shall still bring forth fruit in old age, to shew that the Lord is up∣right, or faithfull: which we conceive doth relate to that promise made by the Father
to the Son, in that ancient and eternal transaction, Isa. 53. 10. And is not the faith∣fulnesse of the Son laid in pledge, is not this commandement of the Father laid upon him, that of all that are given to him, he should losse none, but raise them up at the last day, Joh. 6. 39, 40. so that as Christ must be answerable to his charge, he must pre∣sent all the gifted ones unto the Father, which presupposeth their growth in grace, and their being made meet for the inheritance of the Saints in light: and is not the faithful∣ness of the third person of the blessed Trinity likewayes ingaged in this? in that it is his great work, to apply Christs purchase, to reveal unto us the whole minde of God, and to communicate all things that are needful for us to know, and to guide us in all truth Ioh. 16. 13. And if this be his work, will he not accomplish it, and bring it unto per∣fection? all which great works that are com∣mitted unto the Holy Ghost to do, have that sweet and precious result, growth in grace. There is this thirdly, that we would have you knowing, that there are some graces of the Spirit, of whose growth, before we can judge, there must be a time allotted; grace is not like the grasse of the field, which groweth in a night, and perisheth in a night: it is a woful practice among many, they begin to search their growth,
before they have well begun to grow: we would rather counsel you to grow, then to search your growth; though it is indeed a Christians duty to take notice, to go up early to the vineyards, to see if the vine flourish, whether the tender grape appear, and the pom∣granats bud forth; this is clear from Cant. 7. 12. and from Psal. 63 8. where David taketh notice, not only of his following after God, but that his soul did follow hard after him: but if in this we may allude, we shall say this unto you, Iudge nothing be∣fore the time, let your graces grow before you judge of their growth. And there is this lastly that we would say, that growing in grace and the fruits of the Spirit, is a mystery that is more taken up by faith, then by sense; we must grow by Faith, and by Faith we will best discern, especially under desertion, and when we are walk∣ing under a cloud, and Christ carves out bitter things unto us: we confesse indeed, when we are dandled upon his knee, and our cup of divine consolations is running over, and he covereth to us a table in the wildernesse, then our growth may be known by sense. But as to the question we proposed, we shall give you these evidences of your growth in Mortification: There is this first, those are admitted to read their names
in those ancient and precious Records of heaven, and to know that they were engra∣ven upon his heart, before ever the corner∣stone of the world was laid; this is clear from Rev. 2. 17. and, 2 Tim. 4. 8. and the ground of it is this, that those who are wrestling as Princes with their lusts, and enduring the heat of the day, he lets them see a sight of the crown, and of that eternal felicity, that so they may endure that good fight of faith, and persevere to the end, that they may obtain that crown of life. And there is this ground of it also, because such are much in the exercise of those two car∣dinal and architectonick graces of the spi∣rit, faith and prayer, by which much divine familiarity and fellowship with God is attained, and so faith doth increase with the increase of God. There is this second evidence, when our lusts have not such power to disturb us in holy duties, as in prayer, hearing and me∣ditating; if you have dispossessed those un∣clean things, and can go about those du∣ties, with a great deal of more divine sere∣nity, and composednesse of spirit; but if this be wanting, it is an evidence of no great growth in Mortification, as is is clear from Ier. 23. 11. and Ezek. 33. 31. And we conceive, that this is an evidence of growth in Mortification upon those two
grounds; First, A Christian that is much a victor in this blessed warfare, is oft-times under the dreadful impressions of the Ma∣jesty and Holinesse of God, by which those sinful stirrings and motions of his heart are much abated; by reason of his terrour, he cannot endure himself to be with the fool in the ends of the earth, because such a one hath power over his spirit and rules over it, so that he is not like a city broken down and without walls. O! but it is much for one, to subject all his thoughts to the obedience of Iesus Christ, to have nothing within him that lifts up the heel against the knowledge and excellency of Iesus Christ: and by the way, it is a wofull and irrational evil, that we lodge Christ in our face, and in our mouth, we speak of him, and seem to love him, but we lodge idols in our heart, that glorious and excellent Mansion, which should be kept for that excellent guest, that immortal King of glo∣ry, who is the light of the higher House. There is this third evidence of growth, to be much in exalting and magnifying of Jesus Christ, and lifting up of that burden∣some stone of his praise; this was an evi∣dence of Pauls growth in Mortification, Rom. 7. 25. 1 Cor. 15. 56, 57, 58. O! but one that hath really tasted of that noble thing, mortifying and pardoning grace,
their soul will esteem Christ matchlesse, and a divine necessity of speaking out his praise and setting him on high, will lye upon them: There are two special times, when Christians are put to a divine non-plus in speaking out his praise, and are con∣strained to cry out that word, Psal. 65. 1. Praise waiteth for thee, (or is silent) that is, it cannot be expressed. There is that time, when a Christian is caught up, as it were, unto the third heavens, and hath some eminent discoveries of God, then they are constrained to cry out, exalt thy self, O Lord; their thoughts are so high of him, that there can be no expressions found sutable unto his worth; And we confesse indeed, it is hard, if not impossible, to commit any hy∣perbole in commending of him. And there is that second time, when Christians are able to turn the battle to the gate, and in some measure are enabled to conquer their spiritual enemies; then are they put to this, who can exalt him who is by infinit de∣grees exalted above our blessing and praise? Sometimes a Christian is put to that spiritual posture and heavenly frame, that he cannot make language of his thoughts of Christ, that though his heart could indite a good matter concerning the King, yet his tongue cannot be the pen of a ready writer.
There is a fourth evidence of a Chri∣stians growth, when a Christian hath more spiritual discoveries and insight unto his corruptions, and is more wrestling against them: and we would have you consider∣ing these two things; 1. That discovery of bosome and invisible lusts, is that which we mainly take to be meant in this evi∣dence, and wrestling against them; and there is this secondly, that all our victories over our lusts, should increase our anti∣pathy against sin, and make us to be zea∣lous, till once we shall obtain a compleat victory, and shall have accomplished our warfare. There is a fifth evidence of our growth, when the remembrance of our former lusts and Idols, do not provoke desires, after the enjoyment of those things again, but rather doth provoke the exercise of sorrowes, that ever that should have been our lot, to have been under the dominion of such lusts and Idols: O! but there are many, to whom remembrance of their lusts will provoke their affections, Ezek. 23. 19. 21. and this speaks much strength of love, that the pi∣cture of his Idols, should so much inflame him, and gain his affections; O! but looking upon our old sins with an af∣fectionat eye, speaks little growth in morti∣fication.
There is this last evidence of our growth, our high and majestick thoughts of Christ and his Word, for if once our humours be purged out, we shall then as new born babes, desire the sincere milk of the word; and I am perswaded, that as one doth obtain successe in this precious warfare, he doth ascend in his spiritual conception of Christ; such an one is endeavouring that evangelick and heavenly captivity of af∣fections, to have them all confined unto Iesus Christ, that precious and excellent object: O! but one sight of Iesus Christ, in his matchless and transcendent comli∣nesse, to behold that divine contempe∣rature, harmony and conjunction of all spiritual graces that are in him, would it not provoke us to cast away our Idols to the Moles and to the Batts, and should not they losse their beautifull hue and image? O! but eternally to contemplat that infinit Majesty that is in him, sweetly contemperat with his lowlinesse, so that we may say, there is both Majestick low∣linesse, and lowly majesty in him, to see likewayes his infinite highnesse, and his matchlesse condescendency, to see his abso∣lute Soveraignty, and his unparallel'd humility, those things if once they were attained, might make us to cry out, who would not love thee, O King of Nations.
Now that which we shall lastly speak to shall be this, to show unto you those things that speak and prove our soul-union and heart-conjunction with our Idols, that so we may be provoked to the mortifica∣tion of them; There is this first, that we im∣brace our Idols after frequent convictions of the disadvantages of them, that after they have been seen in their own native collours, yet we dandle them upon our knee, like that word, Isa. 57. 10. and that, Ier. 50. 38. they are mad upon their Idols, demented in their pursuits after them; and no doubt this speaks a most unmorti∣fied frame, and one filled with the love of his Idols. There is this secondly, that speak it, our imbracing of our Idols upon small tentations, like that, 2 Sam. 12. 2, 3. there are some tentations of our lusts to gain our affections, and some to gain our judgment; and to sin without the pro∣posal of some great advantage, or some solacing delight or pleasure, speaks us most strongly united to our lusts. There is this thirdly, that speaks it, that infinite toyl and labour that we expose our selves to, to satisfie our lusts; you will see it Eccles. 2. where Solomon making pleasure and car∣nal joy his Idol, is put to much toyl to satisfie it: and believe it, it is more easie to mortifie your lusts, then to satisfie them, for
that is impossible work: our Idols have two daughters that still cry, Give, Give: our Idols are like the grave, the barren womb, the earth that is not filled with water, and the fire, who never cry, It is enough: our Idols have two attendants, Impatience, and diligence; we will weary our selves in the fire, to obtain satisfaction to our lusts; and if we do not attain it, we will curse our King, and look upward. There is this fourthly, that speaks our soul-union to our Idols, and it is imbracing of them, after application of threatnings, against those who should imbrace that sin; and yet, to commit this sin with lifted up hand, is indeed, to sport with the justice of God, or rather to put a bill of defiance in his hand, supposing that we are above the reach of his justice and power. And there is this fifthly, that speaks it, our killing of convictions, which tend to the discovery of the sinfulnesse of sin, and pressing upon us those duties, by which we attain to the Mortification of them; and is it not certain, that we kill our convicti∣ons in the birth, and makes them to prove abortive? Love to our Idols is that which kills our convictions, and our killing of our convictions, is the mother of our love to our Idols: And there is this, lastly, that speaks our soul-union with our Idols; those
anxious sorrows when we misse the enjoy∣ment of our Idols, we are then ready to cry out, It is better for me to die then to live: and oft-times, when our Idols are taken from us, and are laid in the grave, our living lusts sit down, and lament over the grave of our buried Idols, crying forth, Ah, my Lord. And since there are such invisible, and wofull knots of union betwixt us and our Idols, we should en∣deavour to have all these knots loosed, and to have our soul united unto him, by those two precious and golden chains of Faith and Love, and to have our hearts a Bethel, a house for God, and a temple for the holy Ghost; and not a Bethaven, a house of Idols, and a cage for all unclean birds, that our spirits may be mansions for that eternal Spirit, and he may have an arbi∣trary power over us, and a negative voice in conducting us to heaven.
SERMON III. Gal. 5. 24. And they that are Christs have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. MOrtification is that precious duty imposed upon man, not only by the law of Nature, but by the royal and excellent law of Grace. Doth not the law and light of nature instruct man thus, it is better to kill then to be killed; and certainly, ex∣cept a Christian be the ruin of his iniquities, iniquity shall certainly be his ruine; we shall either sing a song of triumph over our lusts, or our lusts shall sing a song of triumph over us; and doth not that royal law of liberty and grace enforce this upon us, while it desireth, that we should crucifie our members which are upon the earth▪ and be aspiring after a divine conformity with the Image of the invisible God; Though we conceive, there be some, that if they would retire themselves a little to behold those subtile and invisible actings of the mystery of iniquity within them and those deep devices of Sathan, and how many strange Lords, beside Iesus Christ, exer∣cise
dominion over them; they might be constrained to put in their amen unto that truth, that it is more easie for a camel to passe thorow the eye of a needle, then for such unmortified Christians, as many of us are, to enter into the kingdom of God. It is better for us to dwell in the house of mourning, then in the house of mirth, and we may say of much of the carnal joy that is amongst us, Such laughter is mad, and such mirth what doth it? we may wish for some retired cottage in the wildernesse, where we may go aside, and spend our seventy years in the bitternesse of our soul, and account it marvelous loving kindnesse, if we shall obtain hope in our end: It is without all debate, that the general and universal evil of our dayes is, that Chri∣stians are so little in the exercise of this pre∣cious grace of Mortification; we think, we take a greater latitude in our way to heaven, than that cloud of witnesses which went before us, did adventure to take: and it is certain, that if one from the dead were admitted to write Commentars upon the disadvantages of satisfying the lusts of the flesh, they would point forth marvelous hurt and infinit losse in exer∣cising any of those; as likwayes, if any from above were admitted to write upon the advantages of crucifying the flesh with the
affections and lusts thereof, what precious commendation might they give to those that are exercised in those low, but exalt∣ing works of Mortification? Believe me this is most certain, that it is easier to mor∣tifie your lusts, than to satisfie them: for we conceive, that such an one who is spending his precious time in the satisfying of his lusts, doth spend his time betwixt these three, the impatiency of his lusts, which still cry forth, give, give; the im∣potency and weaknesse of the means he hath to satisfie such lusts, and the convicti∣on of the impossibility of satisfying the in∣satiable desires, and infinit lusts of sin: anxiety and sorrow are the constant at∣tendants of a man that is not studying to crucifie his lusts and affections: and cer∣tainly, if we may allude to that word, Jer. 48. 10. Cursed be he that keepeth back his sword from blood, he is cursed, that doth not endeavour to crucifie and bring low the seven abominations of his heart, that we may with Naphtali and Zebulun, jeopard our lives unto death in the high places of the field, and that there might be none of our lusts to cry forth within us, the bitternesse of death is past; but may en∣deavour to cut them in peeces before the Lord. We conceive, this work of Mor∣tification, is the most pleasant exercise of a
Christian, if not in its own nature, yet in its fruits and effects. Now before we shall speak any thing unto those things which we proposed to speak of at the last occasion, we shall speak a little to this, what is the reason that Chri∣stians resolutions and purposes to quite such a predominant lust, and to forsake such an idol, do oft-times evanish without any fruit? All these cords of divine resoluti∣on by which they bind themselves, are but as tow and flax before the fire of tempta∣tion, they decreeing many things which are not established: And we confesse, this is so incident an evil unto his own, that some∣times they are resolved in nothing so much as this, to resolve no more; they in a man∣ner give over the duty of resolution, because they are so short-coming in the duty of performance: And we conceive, that this is occasioned either through this, that Chri∣stians do not resolve upon the strength of a Mediator, or if they do resolve upon his strength, they are not much in the improve∣ment of it for the bringing low of such an iniquity. And we conceive, this was the ground that Peters resolutions were brought so much low, and were blasted; and this is somewhat pointed at▪ lsa. 40. 30. 31. where it is said evn the youths shall faint and be weary, and the young men shall utterly fall;
the greatest natural abilities which might help men to run and not be weary, and the most promising evidences from themselves, shall fail and be blasted; but (as it is in the 31. v.) they that wait upon the Lord, shall renew their strength, even those who are de∣nyed to their own strength. And we con∣ceive, that there are these two great myste∣ries of Christianity, first, to resolve so as being convinced of this, that we are not able, as of our selves, to think one good thought: And, secondly, which is a little more mysterious, to believe that Christs strength laid hold on by faith, is as ef∣fectual for the crucifying such a lust, as if it were our own proper strength and excellency: certainly, one that hath once swallowed this camel of Christianity, needs not strain at the lower gants of it: we would only say this by the way, study to flee comparative resolutions, for ordi∣narily these are much blasted, as was clear in Peter though all shall forsake thee, yet I will not: study to be positive in your resolu∣tions, but beware of comparisons. This is likewayes occasioned through this, that ordinarily they determine the mortifying of such a lust rather with their light than with their affections; as it is sometimes the exercise of a Christian, when he goeth to prayer for the mortifying of
such a lust, his light prayeth more than his affections; and sometimes it falls out, that when light and judgment is praying for the mortifying of such an Idol, af∣fection, as it were, entereth a protestation against the granting of such a desire, and in a manner saith, Lord mortifie not such a lust. This we conceive was the case and practice of those who are made mention of, Ezek. 14. 4, 5. who came to enquire of the Lord, having their Idols in their heart: we may put our idols from our minde, but have our idols in our heart, when we come to seek the mortification of them; and we would only say this unto you, when ye begin to resolve, study to have your souls under a divine impression of the sinfulnesse of such a lust, as likewayes under the infinite disadvantage of follow∣ing such a lust: we conceive, that the ordinary time of a Christians resolution is, when they are blessed with the dew of heaven, and are admitted to taste of his sweetnesse; And oft-times Christians reso∣lutions are rather according to their pre∣sent frame, than according to that which probably will be their frame ere long: And this is the occasion that Christians who are big in their resolutions, are often short and defective in their performances; or else we conceive it to be occasioned through Chri∣stians
being too much given to sloathful∣nesse, and that wofull idol of self-indulgen∣cy, they resolve fair, but do not take pains to accomplish their vows; This is clearly pointed at, not only, Prov. 13. 4. where it is said, The sluggard desireth, but he hath nothing but more clearly, Pro. 21. 25. The desire of the sluggard stayeth him, and the reason is subjoyned, because his hands refuse to labour: it is most certain, that except a Christian be diligent, he can never be a mortifying Christian; Mortification is not attained with ease, we must travel in pain, and have the pangs of the new-birth before Christ be formed in us. And there is this lastly, which doth occa∣sion it, Christians do not propose to them∣selves a sublime and divine end in mortify∣ing of their lusts; and certainly we conceive, this is the most ordinary and incident case unto his own, we either propose this end in mortifying of our lusts, that we may have somewhat whereof to glory, and to make mention of our righteousnesse, even of ours only; or else we propose this carnal end, of studying to have a name continually amongst the living in Ierusalem, lest that in∣ward mystery of iniquity that is within us be engraven on our fore-heads; and I think certainly, that name may be engraven upon many professors in this age, which
Iude giveth them, vers 12. of his Epistle, he calleth them twise dead, that is, not only dead in reality, but that through the deceit∣fulnesse of sin, they had even lost any name of living they likewayes had, so that it was also evanished and gone away. I am perswaded, that were we known each one to another, as we are known to him, who hath those seven eyes that run too and fro through the earth, no doubt, we should wonder at the boldnesse of our hope: and laugh at the strength of our delusions. Now that which first we proposed to speak of from the words was this, the advantage which a Christian hath by the mortifying of his lusts, and being conti∣unally exercised in this precious warfare; and (as we cleared at the last occasion) the advantage of a Mortifying Christian was this, ordinarily such a Christian doth live under the impression of his interest in God, he is admitted to read his name writ∣ten in the book of life: now this is clear from Rev. 2. 17. where he saith, to him that overcometh, who is in the way of over∣coming, will I give a white stone, and in the stone a new name written, which no man know∣eth saving he that receiveth it: as likewayes from Rev. 2. 11. he that overcometh shall not be hurt of the second death: as also from 2 Tim. 4. 8. where these two are sweetly
conjoyned and linked together: and it must certainly be so, that a mortifying Christian is one that liveth under the divine impression of his interest in God, not only because of this, that one who is not mor∣tifying his lusts, as it were, doth darken his hope and obscure his evidence; every dayes intermission of mortification, being (as it were) a score drawn through the extract of our peace with God, so that in processe of time that precious extract of peace becometh illegible unto us. And we shall say this, that a Christian who can keep the faith of his interest, without the exercise of Mortification, may suspect the reality of such assurance: mortification and assurance die and live together, are weak and strong together: But likewayes it must be so, because of this, that ordi∣narily God rewardeth a mortifying Chri∣stian with the intimation of his peace, he takes them in unto the eternal purposes of his heart, and the secrets of his counsel, and lets him see his name written in the records of heaven, lest he should faint in the day of adversity, and so prove his strength to be but small: did ye never know what such a thing as this meant, that when ye were most serious in the exercise of Mortification, ye were admitted to behold that precious and everlasting hope?
There is this second advantage that a Chri∣stian hath by being continually exercised in this blessed warfare, and it is this, Morti∣fication is that grace which keeps all the graces of the spirit in action and exercise; it is that superior wheel, at the motion of which, all the inferior wheels do move; and if we may so speak, Mortification is this, its all the graces of the spirit combin∣ed in one, and exercising themselves in one divine act; Faith is exercised by a Mor∣tifying Christian, not only in this, in drawing furniture from Jesus Christ who is our head, but likewayes, in that it is that defensive peece of armour, (it being called the shield of Faith) by which we quench the fiery darts of the Devil: this war will not proceed with much advantage, if faith be out of the field: So also the grace of hope is exercised by a Mortifying Christian, for this is its exercise in this blessed warfare, to hold up the crown of immortal glory in its right hand, with this motto engraven upon it, he that persevereth to the end shall be saved, and obtain this crown of life, which is the great encouragment of a Christian in this exercise: Likewayes, the grace of watchfulnesse is exercised in this blessed warfare: for watchfulnesse (if so we may speak) is the centinel of the Christian, that standeth upon the watch-tower, and
giveth warning unto a Christian of the motions of his adversary; watchfulnesse warneth us when first corruption begins to stirre: So the grace of love is much ex∣ercised in this blessed warfare; for a Chri∣stian where he beholds that divine and unsearchable compassion of Jesus Christ which he exerciseth towards it, in uphold∣ing it under its straits, that when the ar∣chers shoot at him, and do grievously wound him, that yet his bow should abide in its strength, this makes the grace of love to burn and live within a Christian. And lastly, the grace of Prayer is much exer∣cised in this blessed warfare, for when faith begins to die, and hope begins to losse its courage, when watchfulnesse be∣gins to sleep, and love begins to be remisse, and to wax cold, then prayer as a flying Cherub, doth go to the Captain of our salvation, and desireth that he might help them in the day of their need: prayer is the sweet correspondent of the Christian betwixt heaven and earth; prayer stayeth upon the Mount with Christ, when faith and watchfulnesse are in the field with our corruptions and lusts that are in us: and we shall only say this by the way, I know not whether a Christian be more obliged to Jesus Christ for justification than for sancti∣fication; but we conceive it is better to
conjoyn those together, than to compare them one with another. There is this third advantage that a Mortifying Christian hath, such a Chri∣stian doth most ordinarily meet with most divine solace and intimate communion and fellowship with God; such a Christian is admitted to taste of the honey out of the rock, and to be satisfied with the finest of the wheat. Would ye know the reason why you have not been in heaven these many dayes? it is this, ye have not been fight∣ing these many dayes. Now this this clear from Rev. 2. 17. where that promise is given to the mortifying Christian, that he shall taste of the hidden manna, which is the sweetnesse of Iesus Christ: as likewayes, Rom. 8. 13. If ye through the spirit mortifie the deeds of the flesh, ye shall live: as also, Rom. 7. 24. vers. compared with 25. where wrestling Paul doth receive songs of ever∣lasting praise put in his mouth: would ye know the person that is admitted to sing one of the songs of Zion, while he is in a strange land? it is the Mortifying Chri∣stian: for when he is in the pursute of his enemies, he is then admitted to put out his singer and taste of the honey, that his eyes may be enlightened. There is a mortifi∣cation that is pleaded for by many in these dayes, whose highest advancement in this
precious grace doth not consist in that which it is, in knowing and being con∣vinced of, and mourning over sin; but this is their Mortification, that one should be dead to the sense and conviction of sin: we shall passe no other verdict upon such Antinomian Mortification as this, but only this, it is indeed the Mortification of god∣linesse, it is a crucifying of repentance and holinesse, it is a killing of the new man within a Christian, as likewayes a quick∣ning of the old-man in its lusts and affecti∣ons; this Mortification is no other thing but Sathan transformed in an angel of light, and this is a peece of that new Go∣spel which is so much preached in these dayes, which if an angel should bring from heaven, we ought not to believe it: this is no new light, but old darknesse co∣vered over with the vail of a glistering light. O! study to be much under the impression of the bitternesse of sin, that so ye may taste of the consolations of the holy Ghost. There is this fourth advantage that a Christian hath by being continually exer∣cised in this warfare, which is, that such a Christian hath distinct and perfect disco∣veries, not only of the deceitfulnesse of his own heart, but also of the subtility of cor∣ruption and sin that doth assault him: a
mortifying Christian is a most experien∣ced Christian: this is clear all along, Rom. 7. where wrestling Paul hath so di∣stinct discoveries of himself, as he saith, there being a law in his members rebel∣ling against the law of his minde, and bringing him into subjection. And cer∣tainly, there is much precious advantage that redounds unto the Christian by being convinced of the deceitfulness of his own heart, and of that mystery of iniquity that is within him, for such a Christian doth attain to the exercise of the grace of humi∣lity: for when he beholdeth himself as in a glasse, he cryeth forth, Wo is me, I am un∣done: I think it is in some sense lawfull for Christians to practice much of Peters divinity, which he had, Luk. 5. 8. Depart from me, for I am a sinful man; not that it was well argued by him, but it spake forth the high apprehensions he had of the holiness of God, and the low apprehensions he had of himself: as likewise, such a Chri∣stian is much denyed to his own strength, and so is necessitat to go unto one, on whom his strength is laid, as likewise such a Christian is much in the exercise of the grace of watchfulnesse; he is not ignorant of the devices of Sathan, which make him to stand continually upon his guard, lest he be overtaken with the snare of the devil.
There is this fifth advantage that a Chri∣stian hath by being much in the exercise of mortification, he doth attain to much divine conformity with God, and is made a partaker of the divine nature, of that in∣visible Majesty: this is clear from, Rev. 3. 5. where that promise, I will cloath him in white, is in a part accomplished to a Chri∣stian, even while he is in this valley of tears. And certainly, this is the compend and sweet epitome of all Christian advan∣tages, to be made like unto the Majesty of God; and it is not a conformity unto him for a day but such a mortifying Chri∣stian, is most constant in keeping the di∣vine lineaments, and spiritual characters of that precious image undefaced in him; as it is promised, Rev. 3. 12. Him that overcometh, I will make a pillar in the temple of my God, and he shall go no more out: And certainly that promise of stability, is in a part accomplished to a Christian, even while he is here below: what could a Christian desire more then this, to be admitted to partake of the image of the invisible God, and to be made like unto him? There is this last advantage that a Chri∣stian hath, by being continually exercised in this precious work of mortification, such an one hath his antipathy and hatred
against sin much increased: would you know the Christian that liveth under the impression of the sinfulnesse of sin? it is the mortifying Christian. I think that vain distinction which Papists have, of mortal and venial sins, Christians in their practice do much allow and commend; there are some sins seems venial to them, which to commit and exercise, they take a latitude to themselves, as may be clear in this, a Christian will without much diffi∣culty, if he be not tender, commit such things as are not consistent with the exer∣cise of grace within him; he needs no other toleration but this, to have this made out to him that there is a consistency be∣twixt such a lust, and the living and spi∣ritual nature of grace within him: but, no doubt, if we argued right, we should be provoked to desist from sin, even from the disadvantages that attend the pursuing af∣ter any lust. Now that which we shall speak to next, shall be this, what disadvantages a Chri∣stian hath by an interruption of this spiri∣tual warfare, and not being much taken up in the exercise of Mortification. If this question were proposed to many, when they did last set some hours apart to mor∣tifie their sins? the most part should be put to a non-plus, not knowing the last time
when they were exercised in this precious warfare. And I would only say this, a Chri∣stian that can interrupt the work of Morti∣fication for some weeks together, may either suspect that grace is groaning within him, with the groanings of a deadly wounded man; or else that he is not at all begotten unto a lively hope, there is no forloffe nor discharge in this warfare, but we must fight till once the one foot be within that place of everlasting delight. There is this second disadvantage that attendeth a Christian who interrupteth this warfare, ordinarily such a one doth contract much hardnesse and impenitency of heart; this was clear in the practice of David, who when once he intermitted this war, could write a letter to the killing of godly Uriah, and no mention of smiting of heart: This is certainly a constant attendant of one who is not mortifying himself, he maketh his heart die as a stone within him: the mor∣tifying Christian keeps this holy Zeal within him, he hateth the garments spotted with the flesh: would ye read the original and rise of hardnesse of heart in these dayes amongst us? It is this, Christians are not much in the exercise of Mortifica∣tion; And I believe the Gospel hath been preached nigh six thousand years, and it is much to be debated, if ever misbelief, and
hardnesse of heart were so universal diseases among Christians as in these dayes: we think to win to heaven by gueste, which maketh us so little intend this blessed work. There is this third disadvantage, that a Christian meets with, by the intermission of this warfare, and it is this, that ordi∣narily such a Christian hath his lusts most reigning and living within him: Sin will gather more strength, by the interruption of one dayes exercise of Mortification, than ye can prevail over, by wrestling with it many dayes: This is that subtil dexterity of sin, it can recruit it self in few hours with much ease; and certainly, if ye be not constant in this warfare, it is like ye will not sing many songs of triumph over your lusts: he must be constant in this fight, who would be a triumpher in the fight: how long is it since ye set up an Eben-ezer to God, saying, hitherto to hath be helped me? and when did ye set up trophies and monu∣ments of your victory? We think the Chri∣stians of this age, leave sewest and least trophies of their victory in the way to heaven, as ever any that went before them. There is this fourth disadvantage which a Christian hath, by the intermission of this warfare, and it is this, that ordinarily such a Christian liveth without sight of return, and overcoming at the last: A
Christian who interrupteth this exercise of mortification, fighteth as we speak, with a doubtful war, not having determined whether the fight shall be in his favour or not; there is somewhat of this pointed out in the 1 Tim. 4. 8. where Paul fighting in an agony, as the word importeth, per∣swadeth himself that he shall have that crown of righteousnesse, which is the sutable reward of a conquering Christian: and believe me, I know not what shall afford a Christian, more Christian peace and consolation than this, to believe, that be shall put all enemies under his feet, and make them his footstool. There is this fifth disadvantage, that a Christian interrupting the exercise of mor∣tification hath, and it is this, that ordina∣rily such a one, when he is passing thorow the first and second gates of death, and when he is to render up an account of his stewardship, hath least perswasion of his interest in God. Would ye know the rea∣son, why Christians die with so little faith of evidence? it is this, they have not been much in the exercise of Mortification; certainly, the conviction of short-coming in this duty, and the apprehension of eter∣nity and of approaching judgement, are two sweet companions together: I think, next to Justification and Faith in Iesus
Christ, which is the hinge of all our conso∣lation, a Christian hath most peace in the work of Mortification, in the day when he shall be standing upon that utmost line betwixt time and eternity. O! what consolation had old Paul, when he spake these words, when he was ready to be dissolved, I have fought the good fight of faith; I doubt much, if ever Paul sang a song of praise upon a higher key, than when he sung that song, 2 Tim. 4. 8. I have fought the good fight of faith: Pauls heart was half transported, when he did reflect upon this, that all his lusts were dying and killed at his feet, And there is this last disadvantage that attends a Christian, who interrupts this warfare, that ordinarily such a one is much blasted of God, in the exercise of other graces; yea more, he is blasted in the exercise of gifts; these two losses will at∣tend a Christian who interrupts this war∣fare: and certainly, if a Christian be blasted in grace, and be not blasted in gifts, it is one of the sorest stroaks that can befall him; for ordinarily, it is a pillow sewed under out arm-holls, which maketh us pursue sin without fear: this is secretly hinted at, Eccles. 2. 9. where that which made Solomon rove after his Idols, was this, Also my wisdom remained with me: he was
as wise a man now, as he was before. And certainly, when gifts are vigorous, and graces not, they may sit down and lament over themselves seven nights and seven dayes. Now we shall shut up our discourse at this time: we shall only speak a little to this, what may be spoken for consolation to those who are somewhat serious in ac∣complishing this warfare, and yet have not sensible advantage, nor successe over their lusts, who have been toiling all night, and yet have catched nothing; And we conceive, that God doth ordinarily propose to a tender Christian these three divine ends, by carving out to them such a lot, first that he may be kept in a constant cor∣respondence with the Throne of grace; he, in a manner, wounds us in our leg, that we may not wander much abroad from his Throne: and certainly, Christians may be convinced of this, that if they had their will in Mortifying, they would not be much in corresponding; which may be demonstrat unto you thus, because that which provoketh one to converse with God, is rather a principle of necessity, than a principle of love: a Christian will go six times to prayer, yea many times, from a principle of necessity, before he go twise from a principle of love and delight.
Secondly, That the Christians faith may be put to trials and exercised, whether or not we will believe and rest upon him, not∣withstanding that we see not Mortification growing within us: we confesse, our little advancement in Mortification, is the foundation of misbelief: and certainly, to his own, God hath this design, even the trial of their grace, whether or not they will believe and hope against hope. Thirdly, The Lord doth it, because he knoweth that a Christian can better im∣prove his little advancement in Mortifica∣tion, than he can improve his great success; believe me it is certain, that in a Chri∣stians advancement in grace, it is more difficulty to bear it, than to bear his little advancement and progresse in grace; and the great reason and occasion of it is, be∣cause ordinarily pride and arrogancy do blossom and spring off this precious root of grace; for what doth decrease to a Christian of the lust of the eye, and of the flesh, seems to accrease to the pride of life; for as the one seemeth to go down, the other doth ascend and go up. And to you who never knew what this exercise of Prayer and Mortifica∣tion meant, (are there not many here who never knew what it was to have any change in their life?) We would only pro∣pose this unto you, did ye never know
what it was to be under the impression of the sinfulnesse of sin? or, did you ever know what it was to water your coutch with tears, under the impression of it? like that word, Psal. 32. 3. where David saith, When I kept silence, my bones waxed old, through my roaring all the day long. That word roaring speaks forth not only this, that sometimes a Christian doth rather mourn as a beast, than complain as a man, (roaring being the voice of a beast) but likewayes speaks forth this, that sometimes Christians are under such an exercise, that the open field is a more fit place for them, then the secret retirements of their most quiet chambers. David was forced to roar as a beast, when the bones which are the pillars of his house, were waxing old and mouldering within him: certainly the day is coming, when ye who never knew what it was to crucifie a lust, Christ shall crucifie you upon that crosse of everlasting pain, when he shall treade you in the win-presse of the indignation of the most High, when he shall make the arrowes of his indignation sharp upon you; ye who will not quite sin, sin shall once be your eternal compa∣nion: and when Christ hath been inviting you so often to quite such lusts, and ye re∣turn so often an negative answer to him, this will be the sentence, which shall
past upon you, Be it unto you, even as you will, they are joyned to Idols, let them alone; and certainly, when Christ ceaseth to be a reprover, that man is in a sad and desperat estate. O! that ye might once fight this good fight of faith: your scent doth remain with many of you; are there not many here who never knew what it was to spend an hour in secret wrestling and debating with their lusts? The strong man keeps the house, and so all is at peace with them, there is no going out, nor coming in at the gates of their city, but peace is as it were, exactors of that house, and those bear sway within it. O! cursed be that peace which shall end in everlasting warre with God. Would ye know the exercise and case of those who are in everlasting chains? We can represent it under nothing so fit as this, it is infinit justice and infinit omnipotency, wresting and crushing finit and sinfull man; sometimes the pestil of divine wrath coming down upon one part of his body, and at another time upon another; they are now living an endlesse life of death, and are spending their dayes in a dying life, they shall be eternally dying, and yet never able to die. Are there not some of you, who are so joyned to your Idols, that if Dives shonld come from hell and preach this text to you, Crucifie your
lusts, ye would stop your ears at that pre∣cious exhortation. Ye may hide sin under your tongue, but be preswaded, that at last it shall be in your belly as the poison of Asps, and as the venome of Dragons. And we would leave this advice and counsel upon Christians, who have begun this pre∣cious warfare, stand fast to the liberty where∣with Christ hath made you free, and be not entangled again into that yoke of bondage. Sin is a yoke that neither we nor our fathers were able to bear; and we desire you to meditate upon this advice, Study to be as much in mortification, and in the exercise of this duty, as if ye were to obtain salva∣tion by works; but withall, study to be as much denied unto those things, and to have as low an esteem of your selves, as if ye were bound to do nothing, or had done nothing at all: study to work as one that is a legalist indeed, and one who desires to maintain good works, but study self∣denial, as one that hath fied for refuge unto that blessed hope that is set before you. Christ is standing at the end of the walk of a Mortifying Christian, with a crown in his right hand, and he desireth us to per∣severe unto the end; that we may obtain that immortal crown: one day with precious Christ, shall be an infinite recompense of all our toil; and the more exercise of
mortification you are put to, heaven will be more sweet and delightsome unto you. SERMON IV. Gal. 5. 24. And they that are Christs have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. SUch is that universal stupidity and hardnesse of heart that hath over∣taken the professors of this generati∣on, that if Christ should come from heaven and read over unto us the compleat rol of our iniquities, and show unto us these records, in which all our wanderings are written, the most part of us would not be much affected, not much in the exercise of sorrow. No doubt, it is easier for a camel to passe thorow the eye of a needle, than for stupid Christians, such as we are, to enter into the Kingdom of God. It is one of the mysteries of his overcoming grace, that he hath not broken these two preci∣ous staffes of beauty and bands amongst us, that he hath not broken the covenant of his peace, and ceased to entertain so near a relation betwixt himself and us. As like∣wayes, it is a mystery of his love, that we
are not made eternal monuments of the justice of God, and this Motto engraven upon us, behold these that made not God their refuge: God is glorious in the exercise of all his holy attributes, but in none more, than in the exercise of his patience and long-suffering toward us; and in a manner he darkeneth the glory of his justice, and casteth a vail over his spotlesse holinesse, that the exercise of the attribute of patience and long-suffering, may be rendered more conspicuous. I only pose you with this question, is not mortification a mystery unto your practice? Can such a delusion as this overtake you, that ye shall reign with Christ, though your lusts reign with you as long as ye are here? It is certain ye know, that mortification is that precious exercise in which ye ought to be taken up: and I conceive, that there is only this difference betwixt sinning against Light, and that unpardonable sin against the Holy Ghost, that the sinning against Light, is a sinning against the common work of the spirit up∣on your understanding, but the sin against the Holy Ghost, is a sin against the common work of the spirit upon the affections: and no doubt, there is a near bordering betwixt these two, it is the first step to it, by which ye go up and ascend unto the acting of this sin. It is a faithful saying (saith the
Apostle Paul) that if we die with Christ, we shall also reign with him; and we may like∣wayes say, It is a faithful saying, that if we be not with Christ, and be not con∣formed unto him in his suffering, we can∣not be conformed unto him, in the power of his resurrection: ye are all willing to take Christ as a Iustifier and as a Saviour, but unwilling to take him as a Sanctifier and as a Prince: but know this, that the gifts of this spotlesse Lamb, are so sweetly linked together, that they were like his own coat that was upon his body, which was without seam that could not be divided: and so except the whole gifts of Iesus Christ fall unto us by divine lot, we can have no part nor portion therein: This Mortifica∣tion is the compend of Christianity; and certainly, a Christian reading these words, he may stand amazed and be ashamed at his own stupidity, that interest in Christ should be connected with such a degree of Mortification, though we conceive, there be many who take to themselves the name of Christians, that never knew what it was to exercise themselves in Mortification. I shall only (before I speak to that which mainly we intend to speak to) press this grace of Mortification upon you by these things. First, This may enforce this duty of Mortification of lusts, because it is
impossible for one to satisfie their lusts, let them accomplish never so diligent a search to find satisfaction to them; therefore ye would be undeceived and convinced of that delusion, ye conceive that if your lusts had their desire, they would be satisfied, but that is most clearly held forth to be false, Psal. 78. 29, 30. where it is said of their lusts, they got their hearts desire, and the word that is subjoyned, yet were they not estranged from their lusts. Let a covetous man suppose this with himself, that upon the having of so many thousands in the world, his lust of covetousnesse would be satisfied, but Iob doth refute this, chap. 20. 22. saying, in the fulnesse of his sufficiency, he shall be in straits: It is easier to mortifie your lusts, then to satisfie them. And this secondly we would say, that though ye hide sin under your tongue, and though it be sweet unto you yet know, that the day is approaching when it shall be in your bowels, as the gall of Alpes, and as the poyson of Dragons: know this for a cer∣tainty, that the momentany pleasures of sin which they afford unto you are not wor∣thy to be compared with that eternal weight of unsupportable misery that shall be inflicted upon you. O! but it is a ter∣rible sight to behold a living God entring eternally in the lists with a poor sinfull sin∣ner,
to have omnipotency and justice fight∣ing against the dust of his feet. There is this lastly which we would say, not exer∣cising your selves constantly in this precious work of Mortification, doth interrupt much precious fellowship, that you might have with Christ; ye that are tasting of the sweetnesse of sin, cannot taste of the sweetnesse of heaven: this is clear, Rom. 8. 13. where mortifiers have that promise, that they shall live. And I shall only say this by the way, we conceive it to be a question that is difficult to determine, whether it be more for the advantage of one that is under any predominant lust, to have the objects upon which it seeds withdrawn, or to have them furnished, to feed upon: as for instance, if one be under the woful predo∣minant of pride, it is a question whether the want of occasion to exercise and feed that lust, be better, or to have it; proud Achitophel, when he wanted the objects upon which pride doth feed, he will go and strangle himself; and when we have them furnished unto us, what secret Idolatry, what desperat Atheism do we commit in the secret temples of our heart, and in the chambers of our Imagry? Mortifie more, or ye shall pray lesse. Now that which we intend mainly to speak to, is that second thing which we
poposed concerning Mortification, from these words, and it was the extent of Mor∣tification, that they did not only crucifie their predominant lusts, which are here called affections, because they are Idols, and these are linked together by that passion of love; but likewayes they ought to mortifie the first motions and stirrings of corrupti∣on, and all occasions to it, which are here called lusts: but moreover, one that is a spi∣ritual mortifier, must mortifie original sin, which is here called the flesh, as oft-times it hath that name in Scripture, an exercise which is unknown to many, if not unto all: we think original sin but a Zoar, and it is hard indeed, to be convinced of the sinful∣ness of original sin, and to take it up in its native collours. Now in speaking upon the work of Mortification of original sin, we shall not insist long upon this, that it is the duty of a Christian to be exercised in the crucifying of this sin, it is clear from, Coll. 3. 5. where we are commanded to mortifie our members; and it is clear from the practice of Paul, Rom. 7. 24. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? there is a strong Emphasis in the word me, as if Paul would have said, if infinit grace can have bounds, then, no doubt, sinful Paul is the bounds fixed to it. We shall for more clear speaking to this,
first, speak a little unto this, what is ori∣ginal sin; and we conceive, that it stands in these, original sin is the imputation of that transgression of Adam unto us; for he being a common and representative person, we fell in his falling, and did stand in his standing, but likewayes original sin doth comprehend this, want of original righte∣ousnesse, man not being created after that noble pattern and divine Idea, the Image of God; man now carrieth but the image of God in his wisdom and in his omnipotency, but while he was in his primitive estate, he did carry an impression of the holinesse of God: as likewayes original sin doth com∣prehend this, a proneness to the committing of all evil, as also an ineptitude and unfit∣nesse for the doing of any good, and this is that which we are all by nature. The first part of original sin is clear from Rom. 5. 12. and 14. verses. And the rest may be gathe∣red from many places of Scripture, but is comprehended in that one word, Eph. 2. 1. We were dead in sins and trespasses: one can no more move in the acting of any spiritual good, than if he were one altogether with∣out life We shall secondly speak a little to those advantages that a Christian may have, by being convinced of original sin: I is most certain, that a Christian is lesse convinced
of original corruption, than he is of any actual transgression almost that doth befal him; and (as we were speaking) the reason of it doth proceed partly from this, that a Christian taketh not up the sinfulness of original sin, though it be a sin having more in it, than is in twenty, yea an hun∣dred actual transgressions: or else it pro∣ceedeth from this, that Christians are not convinced what influence original sin hath upon all the outward actings of iniquity; it is that fruitful womb that doth alwayes bear twins, and is never barren; it is that root that doth dayly bring forth worm∣wood and gall: or else it doth proceed from this, that we think that original sin is not our own, and that we are not so guilty, as if indeed we had eaten this cursed Apple. But as to the advantages of being con∣vinced of original corruption, we conceive that there is this first advantage, That it is impossible for any to have high thoughts of Iesus Christs love, and of the offer of mer∣cy, except he be convinced of original sin: Would ye know the reason why Christ hath so small an esteem among you? it is be∣cause of this, ye are not convinced of your original corruption: this is somewhat pointed at, Rom. 5, 6, 7, 8. verses, where the Apostle heighteneth the love of Christ in
dying for us, he pitches upon this to com∣mend it, our original corruption, that we were sinners and without strength. O! what a mystery is the condescending grace of Christ unto a sinner believing original corruption; it is as it were, the foundation upon which all our esteem doth arise and spring: there is somewhat of this likewayes pointed at, Rom. 7. 24 compared with vers. 25. where Paul beginning to commend free grace, his song doth arise to the highest key, because he hath been convinced of this body of death that dwelleth within him. I would only say this, if you would learn this divine lesson of putting a high accompt upon Christ, study original corruption much. There is this second advantage that a Christian hath from the conviction of it, and it is this, it doth exceedingly com∣mend the omnipotency of his grace in mor∣tifying corruption, when ye are convin∣ced of this sin: when was it that Paul had the highest accompt of the omnipotency of the grace of Christ? was it not when he was forced to cry forth, O! wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? And this is certainly pointed at, Eph. 2. 1. where the quickening vertue of grace, is commended from this, the object upon which it is exercised, ye that were dead in in sins and trespasses.
There is this third advantage, that floweth from conviction of original sin, and it is this. It is a compendious way to keep the Christian under the exercise of humility, under the highest attainments of Mortifica∣tion, or under the highest attainments of communion and fellowship with God. Would ye know the reason why we are so easily puffed up under some small successe, or some small familiarity with Christ? It is want of reflect thoughts upon original corruption that is within us: Therefore I would prescribe this to Christians under their highest advancement by grace, to sit down and seriously reflect upon that which they are by nature, that their father is an Amorite, and their Mother an Hittite, and the rock from whence they are hewn, may preach humility to them; this is clear, Rom. 7. 24. where Paul under the con∣viction of original sin, calleth himself a wretched man, and is clear also from the 9. vers. of that Chapter, where when once original sin is discovered, he died in his own apprehensions: if we were in the ap∣prehension of this more, the wind of the wildernesse would not bind us up in her wings, till our substance were dissolved. There is a fourth advantage a Christian hath from the conviction of original cor∣ruption, and it is this, it keepeth the
Christian under the deepest impression of the sinfulnesse of sin. I confesse, that is one of the greatest mysteries of Christia∣nity, to have our soul constantly under the impression of the sinfulness of sin, which we conceive, is impossible to be attained without solid conviction of original cor∣ruption: this is somewhat hinted at, Rom. 7. 13. when Paul once by the Command∣ment, having original sin discovered, sin became unto him exceeding sinful: and the reason why original sin discovered, hath such influence upon this, is because ordi∣narily we conceive, that the actings of sin do not proceed from our selves, but from that deceiver of the brethren, which Iames doth abundantly refute, for when a man is tempted, he is entised by his lusts. There is this fifth advantage that a Christian hath by being convinced of ori∣ginal sin; It is an excellent way to keep the Christian under a most watchful and fearing frame: such language would not been heard out of a Hazaels mouth, Am I a dog to commit this if he had been convinced of original sin; but because he was a stran∣ger to this, his presumption led him above that which was indeed within him: there∣fore, when one is convinced of their prone∣ness to act iniquity, of their want of that conformity with God, they remember to
stand upon their watch-tower lest they be ensnared: this is most clearly pointed at, I Cor. 9. last, where Paul is put to this ex∣ercise, I bear down my body, and bring it into subjection; and the reason is subjoyned, be∣cause he was possessed with a holy jealou∣sie of himself, and entertained a divine sus∣picion, which was consistent with the act∣ing of hope. I know nothing to make a Christian watch over his own heart so much as this: to see that spawn of iniquity which is within him, to behold that fruit∣ful mother of iniquity which never was declared barren, and never shall be, till sin shall be no more within his own. There is this fixth advantage a Christian hath, by being convinced of original cor∣ruption; It is that which will keep the soul under the highest estimation of Christ, and will make the grace of love to burn most vigorously within a Christian: O! but when one shall reflect upon these two, the spotlesse holinesse of Christ, that abso∣lute purity of that precious Lamb, and shall again descend to reflect upon these mysteries of iniquitiy which are within himself, it is no wonder that sometimes he be put to use Peters divinity, to cry forth, Depart from me, for I am a sinful man; but when he improveth the sight most fully, his case is, to have his soul transported, and
as it were, in a holy extasie of love, toward that precious and matchless One. And there is this last advantage that a a Christian hath by being convinced of original sin, It is that which putteth a Christian to a holy diffidence in his own strength, and maketh him to be much in the employment of the strength of him whose name is Iehovah. What is the rea∣son that Christians commit a breach of that first Command, so much trusting to their own strength, and not making mention of his righteousnesse, and laying hold upon his strength, even upon his only? It is this, be∣cause we do not dwell under the constant impression of original corruption. We conceive it is as great a mystery to mens judgement, as it is a mystery to their pra∣ctice, to mortifie it. What made Paul so much to cry forth, Rom. 7. 18. to disclaim his own ability, and ver. 23. was it not the conviction of original sin which was within him? Now that which we shall secondly speak unto, shall be this, to presse a little upon you the necessity of the mortification of original sin: and we conceive these things point out its necessity; first this, That all mortification is in vain, and as the beat∣ing of the air, untill once original corrup∣tion be mortified: What is all your mor∣tification
without this? it is, as it were, the lopping off of the branches, while the root doth remain intire, it is a damning up of the streams, while the fountain is still running; and no doubt, that mortificati∣on will easily grow vain: you must once mortifie this which is the mother of sin. And we would only say this by the way, that under correction, we conceive, that original sin is not, nor cannot well be mor∣tified in the body, but only is to be mor∣tified in the members, that is, we must study to mortifie such a part of original sin, to mortifie some living lusts, which are with∣in us, and to be groaning under the rest; for we conceive, it is hard to take up the whole body of original sin, and to make that the subject of mortification, or to la∣ment over it. There is this secondly, which speaks forth the necessity of Mortification of origi∣nal sin, it is that which is an undeniable evidence of a Christian, to be taken up in the mortifying of this sin; for we conceive it to be impossible for a hypocrite to attain to such a length, as to study the real mortifi∣cation of original corruption: It was the practice of these two holy men, the Apostle Paul, Rom. 7. 24. and of David, Psal. 51. 5. where they sit down to lament over the ini∣quity which was within them. And the
reason why the mortification of original sin, is an undenyable character and evi∣dence of a Christian is, not only from this, that one that setteth about the mortification of original sin, is a Christian that hath most distinct discoveries of himself, as like∣wayes some discoveries of the holinesse and spotlesnesse of God. It is hard to be con∣vinced of original sin by the light of nature, if at all, for to us it is a question, if he can be, which the Apostle seemeth to intimate, Rom. 7. 7. Saying, I had not known lust, except the Lord had said, Thou shalt not covet. There is this, thirdly, which speaks forth the necessity of the mortification of original corruption, that all the duties that proceed from a Christian, are exceeding defiled and polluted, except he endeavour the morti∣fication of this sin: for this was a paradox to the Apostle Iames, chap. 3. 11. That a fountain at one place shall send forth bitter wa∣ter and sweet: and till the fountain of cor∣ruption be removed, it is probably to be conceived, that all the actings of duty by us shall be exceedingly polluted. O! but when original sin lyes without the stroak of a Christians mortification, his duties will not ascend with acceptance upon his Altar. And there is this fourthly which pleads
the necessity of the Mortification of origi∣nal sin, that it is that sin which doth ex∣ceedingly war against the grace of God in a Christian: would you know why grace is in such a languishing estate? it is be∣cause of the power of original sin. We conceive this, that the opposition of origi∣nal sin to the advancement of grace, is more invisible, and the opposition of actual cor∣ruption unto the actings of grace, is more visible and obvious; but certainly that which doth intangle a Christian in his walk, and maketh him not to ascend as pillars of smoak from this present wilder∣nesse, is that original sin; this is clear from Rom. 7. 23. and, Gal. 5. 17. Where the spirit warreth against the flesh, and the flesh against the spirit, and these two are contrary one to another. Now that which thirdly, we shall speak upon the mortification of original sin, shall be this, what is the way how a Chri∣stian may be convinced and brought unto the spiritual impression of original sin? And certainly we conceive, that if a Chri∣stian shall exercise himself in these three, he may attain to some spiritual convicti∣ons of this sin. First, let him be much in the exercise of self-examination, and when he shall reflect upon himself, he will be∣hold the invisible motions of iniquity unto
every sin that hath been named among the Gentiles: who is so great a stranger unto his own heart, but if he will reflect upon it, may sometimes see the stirrings of unknown (almost) corruptions? which speaketh that aloud to the Chri∣stian, that there is a fountain and spring within him, that would send forth such bitter waters, except they were graciously restrained. There is this secondly, by which a Chri∣stian may be brought to the conviction of original sin, and it is, to be much in the exercise of the study of the spirituality of the law, which was the way that Paul attained to the conviction of original sin, Rom. 7. It is that compendious cut, by which one may behold that holinesse of God who imposeth a command not only to desist from the actings of sin, but to desist also from the first motions and lusts of sin. There is this lastly, a Christian would be much in the exercise of prayer, for that spirit who convinceth the world of sin, that what you do not know as of your selves, he who is the great convincer of the world, may imprint those con∣victions upon your souls, which may make you sit down and bewail your selves, in the bitternesse of your spirit. And we shall at this time shut up our dis∣course;
only we would say to these who are entertaining this holy warfare against their corruptions, that they would not be much discouraged, though they see not sensible victory: you must know that sin must be with you while you have a being: we may certainly allude unto that word, Dan. 7. 12. and may say, that the dominion of your sins shall be taken a way, though their lives shall be pro∣longed for a time and for a season. As likewayes we would say this for your encouragment, who have your corrupti∣ons stirring most within you, that ordi∣narily Sathan when he is in the way to remove, then stirreth and acteth most; as it is observed, that the last beating of the pulse in a dying man is most strong, so the beating of corruption, when it is going to be cast out, may be most violent. And we shall only give the reason, why Christians are not much affected with this, that the day is coming when once they shall prevail over their corruptions, and shall tread Sathan under their feet; why the feet of those who bring such glad tyding are not beautiful upon the moun∣tains? And we conceive that it doth either proceed from this, that Christians are not seriously engaged in this holy war∣fare, for that is most certain, that if you
were fighting day by day, then the hope of victory, and of a blessed issue would be as glad tyding; from a far country, and should be as cold water unto a thirsty soul, that though your hope were deferred un∣till your hearts were sick, yet the accom∣plishment of your desires should be sweet to your souls: or else it doth proceed from this, that Christians do not believe this truth, that there is an issue and period of their fight; if once you could be brought this length to seal this truth, that that victory shall be once heard in heaven, Speak comfortably to Ierusalem, for her war∣fare is accomplished, if we may allude unto these words; or if a Christian be seriously debating with his lusts, and hath also the faith of this truth in some measure, then it doth proceed lastly from this, want of the distinct perswasions of our interest, and want of the assurance of our peace with him; for as long as a Christian is under debate concerning his eternal rest, he can∣not be much affected with joy, under the declaration of these means, that there is a period of their fight, and that they who have been made partakers of the first resurrection, over them the second death shall have no power. O! what a blessed day suppose ye shall that be, when your feet shall stand within the gate of the new
Jerusalem, when you shall receive these two precious badges and eternal trophies of your victory, a crown put upon your head, of infinit more value than all material crowns, and a palm put in your hand. We conceive, it is impossible to determine, what joy will accrue to a Christian upon the reflect thoughts of this, that he hath trode Sathan under his feet, and hath bruis∣ed the head of him, who hath so oft bruis∣ed his heel: And as for those who are stran∣gers (as the most part of us are) unto this spiritual warfare, be convinced of this, that within threescore and fewer years, God shall enter into an eternal warfare with you, where there shall be no cessati∣on of armes, neither shall there be any in∣terruption. It is better to fight with your lusts, than to fight with a living and eternal God, when he shall declare himself to be your opposite and enemy. Man once was made perfect, but he did find out many inventions, and amongst all those inventi∣ons he found that accursed one, how there might be a separation betwixt him and the living God; and except He whose name is Prudence, and hath found out the know∣ledge of many witty inventions, had found out that precious invention of reconciling sinners unto God, we should have been Magor Missabib, terrors to our selves. O!
that you might be perswaded once to con∣tend with your lusts, that ye may endure the heat of the day, and the cold of the night, in wrestling against sin; know this, that sin goeth not out, but by fasting and pray∣er; it is so straitly united unto us, it is ea∣sier for a camel to passe thorow the eye of a needle, than for many of us to mortifie our corruptions. We shall shut up all that we would say in this one word, be perswaded of this, that the day is ap∣proaching and near at hand, when our blessed Lord Iesus shall come with ten thousands of his Saints: what if this were the day (O unmortified sinners!) that ye should behold that white Throne Fixed in the clouds, and ye should have a summons given into your hands without continuation of dayes, to appear before his Tribunal? What could ye answer when ye are reproved? Would not si∣lence and confession be your best desence? Certainly there is an eternal curse to be pronunced against those who do not ex∣ercise themselves unto this precious act of Godlinesse, of crucifying the flesh, with the lusts and affections thereof. There is a law of death over your head, and there is a law of sin, which is within your hearts, and ye shall be eternally subjects unto these two Laws, except the Law of the spi∣rit of life do make you free.
SERMON V. Gal. 5. 24. And they that are Christs have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. THe walk of a Christian, who hath Christ in him the hope of glory, is most sublime, and it being from spiritual principles, for spiritual ends, is also according to a spiritual rule. The walk of a Christian is from faith and love in Iesus Christ, as that predominant principle; nay more, from the spirit of Christ, living in the soul of a Christian by faith, and dwelling in it by love, which is that primum mobile, and first wheel of all its motions; as likewise, it is for a spiritual end, it being for the glory of God, and to subordinate un∣to this, their own salvation and advantage: they are not like Ephraim, empty vines bring∣ing forth fruit unto themselves, but it is their design to make Christ all, and themselves nothing, though it be natural unto a man to deifie himself, and to make himself the first Alpha of his actings, and the last Ome∣ga of all his performances: as likewise, it is according to a spiritual rule, it being
conformed unto that precious word of life, which is perfect in it self, and leadeth man unto perfection. But this is a lamentation, and shall be for a lamentation, that we love to take such a liberty to our selves, and such a latitude in our way and walk to heaven. There is much fear and complaint amongst many, for the losse of their civil liberties, and that they are detained captives in their own land by the hand of straingers, but there is a captivity and bondage that is lesse lamented, and yet more intolerable, and that is, the bondage of sin and ini∣quity, that though we should expire and spend seventy years (which is one of the utmost lines of our life) under this cap∣tivity, yet we should not cry forth, Return our captivity, as the rivers of the south. Are there not many amongst us, who ly with as much contentment under the bonds of their sin, and fetters of their iniquity, as if they were chains of Gold, and orna∣ments of fine gold? Mortification is a my∣stery unto our practice: That which was a paradox to Saul, that a man should find his enemy and yet keep him alive, that para∣dox is often commited in these dayes, when we do not study to crucifie the lusts and affections of our hearts. I think, Christians in these dayes, when they re∣flect upon those unmortified corruptions
that are within them, must be constrained to cry forth, that all their hope doth con∣sist in this, that a living dog is better than a dead lyon, and that their confidence is ter∣minate upon this, that yet they are within this side of eternity. We love singulari∣ty in opinion, but hate singularity in practice, though the one, no doubt, is much more commendable than the other. May we not wish for two moneths, wherein we may go unto the mountains and be∣wail our virginity, that we have not been espoused unto that precious and excellent one Iesus Christ, and that we have not been endeavouring to conform our selves unto his blessed and precious image? We confesse this may be a mystery to many every day, that they are not eternal monu∣ments of the justice and indignation of God, and that somewhat of Cains divinity doth not possesse our hearts, that whosoever shall find us, shall kill us. We would only say this, that ye would be as much in the exercise of the mortification of your in∣visible lusts, as ye are in the exercise of the mortification of your visible lusts and iniquities. At the last occasion that we spoke upon these words, we told you that the second thing that was held forth concerning Mor∣tification, was the extent of it, that a Chri∣stian
ought to mortifie not only original corruption, but also his predominant lusts, and the first motions and occasions unto sin. Concerning the mortification of ori∣ginal sin, we have spoken somewhat, and shall insist no further: only we would say this, that we laid down this as a conclu∣sion, that original sin could not be morti∣fied in its body, but only was to be morti∣fied in its members, and the ground of this assertion we conceived to be this, because it is impossible for a Christian to take up original sin in its body, as is clear from Ier. 17. 9. where it is said, that the heart is deceitful above all things, and desperatly wicked, who can know it? It is above the reach of any man to fathom and compre∣hend the deceitfulnesse of his own heart. It is a mystery that was never unfolded, and as long as we are within time, cannot be unfolded. We would only say this, that a Christian who is convinced of ori∣ginal sin, that there is the spawn and seed of every imaginable corruption within him will be much in the magnifying of restraining grace, and will sit down, and pen a song of praise unto the unsearch∣able grace of Christ; who hath redeemed them. I confesse, that which makes Chri∣stians have so much to do with pardoning grace, which was Davids practice, 1 Sam.
25. 32. We may call original sin Gad, for after, it cometh forth a Troup, chorus vitio∣rum, a troup of vices; it is that fruitful womb that doth alwayes bear Twins. And we conceive, that Christians who are so called, ought to be much in the study of original sin. It is a wonder, that we walk with such woful contentment to hea∣ven, and to that imagined happinesse which we suppose to have: can such a delusion as this overtake you, that you can reap in joy, who never did sew in tears, and that you can return, bringing sheaves in your bo∣some, who never went forth bearing pre∣cious seed? we think to climb to heaven by that short ladder of presumption: I would say it, and wishes that you may consider it, we are affraid that there shall be many woful and sad disappointments of many of our hopes, and we shall be constrained to reject our confidence: we separat those things which God hath conjoyned, we ei∣ther pursue for holinesse without justifica∣tion, or else we pursue for justification without holinesse. Now in speaking upon the mortifica∣tion of predominant lusts, which are here called affections, because the spirit of a Christian, and of any, are most strongly united unto these, we shall not insist to prove this unto you, that it is the duty of
a Christian, or of any, to mortifie their predominant lusts, it is clear from Matth: 18. 8▪ 9. Where we are commended to pluck out our right eye, if it offend us, the meaning of which is this, that if we had a lust as dear to us as our right eye, if it hurt and offend us, we should pluck it out; and from Mark. 9. 45. and 47. and from Coll. 3. 5. where we are commanded to mor∣tifie our inordinat affections. Neither shall we insist much upon that distinction of predominant lusts, that there are some predominant lusts, which are more pure and refined, which ordinarily passe under the notion and vail of vertue, as pride, when it is mixed with prudence in its act∣ings, passeth under the vail of generosity, and highness of spirit and prodigality when it is not sensual and brutish, passeth under the notion of mortification to the world; and Sathan in tempting people to the acting of these predominant lusts, doth not only study to gain the affections, but likewayes studieth to gain our light and our judgement unto the acting of these things: There are some predominant lusts which are more grosse; the sinfulness of which is more easily discerned, and Sa∣than in tempting people to the acting of these lusts, studieth mainly to gain the af∣fection, which in so far gaineth the judge∣ment,
as it sets about to devise and medi∣tate upon the way, how such predomi∣nant lusts may be effectuat and accom∣plished. O! but the mind of man will plot subtil iniquity, and the affection and heart will execute the plottings of the minde, with greatest carefulness and se∣dulity. Now that which first we shall speak upon the work of mortification of pre∣dominant lusts, shall be this, what are these disadvantages that a Christian hath by not studying to mortifie and crucifie his predominant lusts, but giving way and concession to them to live. The first disadvantage we conceive to be this, that a Christian who is not much in the mortification of his predominant lusts, doth hinder much of that precious fellowship and divine familiarity which should be betwixt God and him; the giv∣ing way to the King of our lusts to live, separats friends, and that word is true, that a brother offended is harder to be won, than the bars of a strong castle. Now this is clear from Ezek. 14. 5. where it is said, They are estranged from me by their idols: as likewise, ver. 7. of that chapter, Every one that separateth himself, whether of Israel or of a stranger, and setteth up idols in his heart. Separation from God, and that
woful idolatry, are two inseparable com∣panions: as likewise, it is clear from Ezek. 44. 10. where these are conjoyned again; and Isa. 59. 2. Your iniquities have separated betwixt you and me. And I would only say this, that a Christian who can to his apprehension, find some sweetness and enjoyment of God, without the exercise of mortification may question much the rea∣lity of his enjoyment: And it is certain, that the entertaining of predominant lusts, doth exceedingly interrupt communion and fellowship with God. not only because of this, that predominant lusts, when they are in exercise, do exceedingly weaken a Christian in diligence, and in his zeal and servency in going about these duties, by which communion with God is attained: Some folks predominant lusts have gotten such advantage over them, that they will almost cease to pray without conviction, or if they be convinced, their convictions will suddenly evanish: but also because of this, that when a predominant lust is in its vigorous exercise, then a Christian loseth much of the impression of the sweet∣ness of communion and fellowship with Christ. O! but Christ might live long in heaven, ere we give him a visit; we think we could be happy without him, and that is but an imaginary delusion of our lying lusts.
There is this second disadvantage that a Christian hath by not studying to crucify his predominant lusts, and it this, that such a Christian doth not receive any return of prayer, and God doth deny to him the answer of his desires. This is clear from Ezek. 20. 31. where he saith, Do ye pollute your selves with your Idols, and come and enquire at me? As I live, saith the Lord, I will not be enquired of by you. And this was the divinity of that blind man, Ioh. 9. 31. God heareth not sinners: And it was the divinity of David, Ps. 66. If I regard iniquity in my heart, God will not hear my prayer: and most clearly, Is. 59. 2. where their iniquities doth cause him de∣ny to hear their sutes. O! but there are many Inhibitions served in heaven against the Professors of this generation, that they should pray and not be heard, and should cry and yet not have accesse: And cer∣tainly it is no wonder, that such prayers as we present unto God, while our pre∣dominant lusts are in exercise, be not heard; we pray to God with such indif∣ferency and formality, as in a manner, we turn over our prayers unto a comple∣ment to salute God with in the morning, and to take our farewell of him at night; we know not much more use of many of our prayers, and hence it is that he denyeth
to us the answer of them. I would on∣ly speak this to you, let Christians hearts first speak the words which they are to speak in prayer, and then let their words speak their heart, that their heart may en∣dite that which is the matter of their desires. There is this third disadvantage that a Christian hath by entertaining his pre∣dominant lusts, and it is this, it doth excedingly interrupt a Christians motion unto heaven: how far have you gone these many dayes, or these many years? the motion of Christians is retrograde in these dayes, they go backward, but do not go on from strength to strength. O! that we might give obedience to that command, which is, Heb. 2. 4. Let us lay aside every weight and sin that doth beset us, and run with patience the race that is set before us; more Mortification would make more motion towards heaven then we do attain to. There is this fourth disadvantage that a Christian hath by entertaining his pre∣dominant lusts, and it is this, that when predominant lust is not mortified, then any corruption that is within you, will easily be discovered in the day of trial; the Lord oft-times taketh that revenge upon many, that because they would not mortifie at
home, he will write their iniquities in legible letters upon their foreheads, that those that run may read them: and if Christians believed this more, that God may be provoked to write your lusts that are not mortified, in capital letters upon your forehead, it might provoke you more to be in this exercise: This is clear, Ezek. 16. 36. compared with 37. ver. where their entertaining of their Idols, is threatned with this curse, that he will discover their nakednesse, and make the shame thereof to appear. There is this fifth disadvantage that a Christian hath by it, and it is this; that in the day, when he shall be passing thorow the valley of the shadow of death, and shall be looking long and endlesse eternity in the face, then a predominant lust unmortified will be ill company, and will raise a storm within the conscience, which will not easily be appeased: There are not many of us fit for eternity, neither do we live as though we were dayly to die. If you would walk with peace thorow the first and second gates of death, study the Mortification of your lusts: O! but at the singing of that trium∣phant song, O death where is thy sting? and O grave where is thy victory? shall not the soul be fraughted with divine consolation and unspeakable joy?
There is this last disadvantage that waits upon the Christian, and it is this, that such a one doth exceedingly marre all the performances which he goeth about, and (as it were) leaveth a print of his hands upon these most holy and excellent duties. A Christian who hath a predominant lust, and is not studying to mortifie it, his gifts prayes more than his grace: as likewayes, he is more in seeking the approbation of men, than the praise of God: A Chri∣stian that doth not study to mortifie his lusts, he is more in seeking the ornaments of Christianity, then the substance of it: I think, the vitals and essentialls of Christianity are much exhausted and spent; and there are some few bones left, rather the picture and anatomy of a Christian, than really such a one; As likewayes there is this, one who doth not study to mortifie his predominant lusts, he will not make conscience of obeying the command∣ment of faith; And this likewayes waits on him, much hardness and impenitency of heart. O! but oft-times through the deceitfulnesse of sin, our heart becom∣eth as a stone within us, and we are delivered unto the hands of our iniquities. Now that which secondly, we shall
speak to, upon the Mortification of pre∣dominant lusts, shall be this, what is that profound subtilty and desperate deceitful∣ness that Sathan useth in tempting people to the acting of their predominant lusts: we have six thousand years experience, that he is a lyer, and a murtherer from the be∣ginning, though we believe the flatteries of sin, as though our iniquities were of good report and of known integrity that never did deceive: and we con∣ceive, that Sathans subtilty doth appear in these, first, his subtilty doth appear in this, that ordinarily when a Christian, or any is in a most secure and presumptu∣ous frame, then Sathan acts and tempts a Christian to the acting of his predomi∣nant lust, when Christ is away, than he doth assail; this is most clearly pointed at, Luk. 22. 31. compared with 33. vers. where christ saith to Peter, Sathan bath de∣sired to sift thee as wheat; and if ye will read the 33. vers. ye will behold Peters frame, that he was in a high string of pre∣sumption, though all men should forsake thee, yet I will not do it: as likewise it is clear from 2 Sam. 11. 2. where when David was lying upon his bed, and walking upon the roof of his house, then is he tempted to the acting of the sin of unclean∣ness; Sathan studieth to catch his advan∣tage,
especially at that time, when we are most prone to embrace, and most unapt to resist; therefore it should be a Christians endeavour to exercise watch∣fulnesse, and to stand upon his watch tower. There is this secondly wherein his sub∣tilty doth appear, that ordinarily he doth propose the imaginary advantage of im∣bracing of such a lust, and doth affect our affections with the pleasure of it, but doth not make mention of the disadvan∣tage and infinit hurt▪ that doth appear and come from such a lust: this was clear in his first temptation with our first father, he makes mention of this. If thou eat of the forbidden fruit, thou shalt be as God, but no mention made of this, that he should be a sinner: and most clearly in Matth. 4. 8. where Sathan showeth unto that holy and spotlesse one, all the Kingdoms of the world, with the glory of them, and these things he promised to give Christ, and shewed him the glory of the king∣doms of the world, but did not shew to him, the vexation and toil of these king∣doms; and no doubt, the one is much more then the other: The hook wherewith he studieth to take us, is varnished over with the bait of imaginary dignity, with transient pleasures, and with passing va∣nities,
O! that we were wise as serpents, to know the depths of Sathan, that we might not be ensnared, nor taken by en∣tisments. There is this thirdly wherein it appear∣eth, that ordinarily he studieth either to extenuate the sinfulnesse of sin, that a Christian may be brought to call this but a Zoar; or else he studieth to prove the consistency betwixt such a sin, and the reality of the grace of God: and when once a Christian is brought to such a length, as to debate the reality of the grace of Gods consistency, with the acting of such a lust, they are near a fall, for then they cry forth, Master, pardon me when I shall bow my knee in the house of Rimmon, and when my Master lean∣eth upon my hand: they then take an indulgence and a latitude to themselves, to commit that iniquity. There is this fourthly wherein his subtilty doth appear, that oft-times he will restrain the temptations to the acting of your predominant lusts, and with∣draw the objects of them, that either you may be put off your watch, or, which is more ordinary, that lusts may take life, when the object of lust is with∣drawn: And that is most certain, that lust oft-times groweth most when there
are fewest temptations to assail it; for up∣on the absence of our Idols, our love to these things doth increase; a lusting Amnon will wax lean every day, when he wants the object whereupon to feed. There is this fifthly wherein his sub∣tilty doth eminently appear, that ordinari∣ly he will tempt people to the acting of these sins, that are introductive, and bring on the acting of their predomi∣nant lusts: he will tempt one that is given to uncleannesse, to pride, idleness, fulnesse of bread: And certainly one who is given to the evil of pride, he will tempt him to the smaller actings of these sins, that so he may ascend by degrees: he will study to seise upon the out-forts of the soul, that so he may gain the affections: he will break the Covenant that we have made with our eyes, that so we may break the Covenant that we have made with our heart. There is this lastly, wherein his sub∣tilty doth appear, that ordinarily he will tempt people to the acting of their pre∣dominant lust under the vail of vertue, and things commendable, as, he will tempt one to Covetousness, upon this ac∣count, that they may be capacitate to be charitable to the poor, and may be use∣full to these who want in their generation:
he will tempt one to sin, as is clear, Rom. 3. 6. that the grace of Christ may be more conspicuous in pardoning them: he tempted Christ to presumption under the vail of faith, as is clear Matth. 4. 6. If thou be the Son of God, cast thy self down, and the ground he giveth is, For it is writ∣ten, He shall give his Angels charge con∣cerning thee, &c. And likewayes he tempts many to the acting of Misbelief, under the vail of humility, knowledge, and distinct apprehensions of God. That which thirdly we shall speak to, shall be, to give you some evidences whether or not ye have attained unto the mortification of your predominant lusts, and whether indeed you have sung a song of triumph over them, and having spoken somewhat of this before, we shall not insist much upon it: only we would say these three things, 1. That a Chri∣stian that can reflect upon lusts which he supposeth to be mortified with delight, and want of the exercise of grief, may suspect the reality of his mortification. O! but one that can meditate upon his predominant lust which he supposed was mortified, and yet not be constrained to cover himself with ashes, and to put fackcloth upon his lions, may cry forth, Miserere mei, have pity upon me.
And there is this second evidence that your predominant lust is not mortified, when you are not sedulous and carefull to. eshew all things that lead unto the acting of that predominant sin: If ye be not giving obedience unto that command, 1. Thess. 5. 22. Abstain from all appearance of evil, you may question the reality of your Mortification. It is an excellent practice of a Christian, to be as much under the impression of the sinfulness of predominant lust and sin, after it is mor∣tified, and to be as much in pursuing it, as when it is in its vigorous exercise and life with you. And there is this lastly, which may evidence it, and it is, when one can upon suitable and convenient occasions of act∣ing such a predominant sin, have their lust set on fire, and endeavour to act it, they may question the reality of their Mortification. I know the great bond which restraineth many from the acting of their predominant lust, is not the ap∣prehension of the holiness of God, but the want of secrecy: O! but if we had se∣crecy, we would not mourn much for these sins which we commit in secret, neither would we be much in desisting from the acting of these things, unto which our lust doth lead us▪ It was
certainly a commendable practice of one, who being tempted unto the sin of un∣cleanness, did condescend to satisfie the desire of one that did pursue her, upon this condition, that he would bring her unto a place where nothing should behold her; which he attempting to do, and bringing her to the most retired imaginable place, she then most piously uttered forth these words, doth not God behold us? which words had influence upon him to whom they were spoken, that he desisted from further prosecuting such woful and carnal designs. O! but the apprehension of the omnisci∣ence of God, would keep us much to the crucifying of our most predominant lust. We shall shut up our discourse at this time, only we shall say a little unto those who are guilty of that predominant lust of Covetousness, which we conceive, is not only a predominant lust, but an universal lust: Sin is an universal King over the most absolute Monarch, and over every one that sits upon the dung-hill. And we conceive that covetousness is one of Sins greatest Princes, acting under this absolute Monarch, and having manyest subjects. And we would only propose these things, by which you may be helped to mortifie such a lust and idol. O! meditate much
upon the disadvantages attending this idol of covetousness; we conceive the dis∣advantages thereof are clearly pointed forth, 1 Tim, 6. 9. 10, where the Apostle Paul enumerateth four disadvantages of that sin of covetousnesse. 1. That it is that which maketh people erre from the faith, 2. It drowneth them in destruction and perdi∣tion. 3. It is the root of all evil. And lastly It pierceth them through with many sorrowes. And for those whose god is the world, we would only propose this consideration to them, which we conceive hath most in∣fluence upon such, be perswaded of this, that covetousnesse will abbreviat and shorten your life, as is clear, Iam. 5. 3. where this is one property of this idol of covetous∣ness, that it shall eat up your flesh as it were fire. It is not an unsensible cutting short of your life, but most sensibly it will abbre∣viat, and bring you in the midst of your dayes to your long and everlasting home. And there is this disadvantage of it also, that covetousness is that sin, which doth most directly commit a breach of the first com∣mand, Thou shalt have no other gods before me, as is clear Col. 3. 5. where this sin of covetousnesse is called Idolatry, and cove∣tousness which is Idolatry. And certainly, what are those things that you pursue after, but white and yellow dust and gli∣stering
clay? the excellency of which we conceive, doth consist as much (in the esti∣mation of men) in the rarity of these things, as in any intrinsical and internal worth and excellency: And how con∣temptible a thing riches and the world is, doth not this speak it, that when there is abundance of these things, they become contemptible? as is clear from that word, that Solomon made silver as stones in the streets of Ierusalem; which doth not only speak out this, the abundance of these things in his dayes, but likewayes it speaketh forth this, that abundance of these things mak∣eth them contemptible, and moveth us to undervalue them; And that which Solo∣mon hath, Prov. 23. 5. Why settest thou thy heart on that which is not, for riches take to themselves wings and flee away: e're long the world shall either leave you, or you shall leave the world. Now we shall desire to shut up our dis∣course with this, that ye would seriously intend the mortification of your lusts, and that ye would be much in the imployment of the spirit of Christ: Christ hath killed the damning power of sin, and hath promised to us the Spirit of Mortification, by which we may kill the dominion of sin: And certainly, a Christian ought to act so in dependance upon the Spirit of Christ, as if
they were meer patients and instruments under his hand: but with all we conceive, that in respect of activity and endeavours, a Christian ought to act so, as if he acted independently from him, and did act all himself; but withall in respect of self-deni∣al, he ought so to act, as if he acted nothing at all, but the Spirit acted alone in him, and therefore should cry forth, after he hath done all, that he is but an unprofitable servant: O! that ye would be perswaded seriously to ponder and ballance these things, that except ye be the ruine of your iniquities, iniquity shall certainly be your ruine, and ye know not how long it is unto that day when that decree shall be past in heaven against you, they are joyned to their Idols, let them alone. I shall only say that word which Iohn hath in his 1 Epistle. 5. last, Little children, keep your selves from Idols.
SERMON VI. Gal. 5. 24. And they that are Christs have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. IT is an unchangeable and unalter∣able decrce of heaven which cannot be repealed, that the wages of sin is death, and, that which a man soweth, that shall be also reap; Though we conceive, there are many that are possessed with this imaginary delusion, that though they adde drunkennesse to thirst, and do daily taste of that forbidden fruit, yet at last they shall obtain a place to walk in, amongst those that stand by: They con∣ceive, that there is a possible union of pure Religion and undefiled, and the want of Mortification; though we think that religion without mortification, is nothing else but the mortification of re∣ligion, and the crucifying of Christ afresh. Are there not many here, who in stead of traveling in birth, untill Christ be formed in them, are traveling in birth, till they bring forth iniquity, and till the Image of that old man be fully framed in them. Now there is this that we would have
you know, and wish, that it were en∣graven upon the fleshly tables of your heart, as with a pen of iron, and the point of a diamond, that there are two Tribunals, upon which God doth sit to judge; there is a Tribunal of Justice where all the sentences past, are pure, unmixed wrath, without all tempera∣ment or mixture of mercy; And before this Tribunal, all flesh must once appear, and receive that dreadful sentence of eternal separation from the Majesty of the Lord, and, if you do well, you must say Amen unto the equity of that sentence: But know this for your consolation, that this is not his last word; know that that Justice Court is but subordinat, and there is another higher, unto which we may appeal, to have that sentence of Justice sweetly repealed. And is not this one mysterious depth of infinite love, that Grace should declare them righteous, whom Justice hath condemned, and yet leave no imputation upon the Justice of God? that love should sweetly reduce decreets of Justice, and declare them in law to be void and null? this is the law of love. And is not this a mystery of infinit love, that that which is an abomi∣nation for man, to justifie the wicked, should be love and Justice in God, to
Iustifie the ungodly? And is not this a wonder, that though there be no condem∣nation to them that are in Christ Iesus, yet there should be many things condemnable in them, and that divine love should make such an abstraction, as to make a separation betwixt many things that are condemnable, and condemnation? Iustice and judgment are the habitation of his throne, yet mercy and truth go before it, and com∣eth nearest sinners, to make ready their way, that they may speak with Justice. There is this that we would have you know, that in the accomplishment of this work of mortification, (of which we have been speaking at many occasions) a Christian hath that same power com∣municable unto him for the overcoming of his temptations, which Christ had in the overcoming of principalities and powers this is clear, Eph. 19, 20. And certain∣ly, sometimes when a Christian doth re∣flect upon those living and strong corrup∣tions that are within him, he will have much of that fear which Elisha's servant had, who cryed out, Master what shall we do? but if our eyes were opened, we should see that there are more for us, nor against us: put on much of that divine generosity of Nehemiah (if we may allude unto it in this combate of saith) Shoulds
such a one as I flee? however, keep a midst betwixt discouragment, and anxious Misbelief: And I would only give Chri∣stians who are indeed ingaged in this holy warfare, that counsel which Ahab gave to Benhadad, 1 King. 20. 11. Let not him that putteth on his armour, boast as he that putteth it off, let confident faith be mixed with holy fear, that there may be a sweet mixture of these two. And there is this which we would speak to you, that there is a difference betwixt the grant and gift of pardon, and the intimation of pardon unto a Christian: yea more, there is a difference betwixt the intimati∣on of pardon, even for a sin mortified and repented for, and the divine appli∣cation of it: this is clear by comparing 2 Sam. 12, 13. with Psal. 51. where Nathan saith to David, thine iniquities are blotted out, and they sin is taken away. There is both the grant of pardon, and the inti∣mation of it, and yet he himself, Psa. 51. prayeth for the application of pardon; pardon was not applied, though it was intimated: and this would speak this to us, that we would not alwayes conclude from the want of the sensible convictions of pardon, the want of the grant of pardon. But now to come to that at which we
left at the last occasion, which was the extent of Mortification, that a Christian ought not only to mortifie original sin, but his predominant lusts also, with all the motions and occasions unto the act∣ing of these sins. Concerning the mor∣tification of original sin, which is here called the flesh, we have spoken already, and have spoken somewhat concerning the mortification of predominant lusts and presumptuous sins; It is turned now to be an improper expression, to make mention of a predominant grace that should stand in opposition to predomi∣nant lusts: I would only say this, that under the law, there is no expresse men∣tion made for any sacrifice for presumptu∣ous sins, unto which the Apostile doth allude, Heb. 10. 26. If a man sin wilfully after he hath received the knowledge of the truth, their remaineth no more sacrifice for sin, And certainly this may make us astonished to entertain our predominant sins, and our presumptuous iniquities, to entertain them so, as not to debate and wrestle with them, for they turn not unto presumptuous sins, except we go such a length: therefore we should be much, in presenting that supplication, Psal. 19. 13. Keep back thy servant from presumptuous sins, let them not have dominion over me.
Now that which we shall speak to first, shall be this, what are the most effectual and spiritual means, by which a Christian may be helped to the mor∣tifying of his predominant lusts? And before we speak of them, we shall only say this, that this generation desireth rather to know what to do, then to do and practice what they know: we think to win to heaven by knowledge; though we confesse we will not win to heaven without it, yet there is more requisit in a Christian. The first way how a Christian will be helped to mortifie his predominant lusts, is this, for a Christian to be much in the exercise of secret prayer. And I would say this, he is a blessed Christian who ever won to the mortification of the least strength of a lust by publick prayer, whether more publick, or in families, or with society: pride and self-seeking, is that Caterpillar and worm that eats up the fruit of these addresses unto God; but if you were much in secret prayer alone, it would be a compendious way to at∣tain to the mortification of your lusts, that when a Messenger of Sathan buffets you, ye may go to the Throne thrife and beseech the Lord, that this evil may depart from you, this is clear, not only, Eph. 6. 18.
where amongst all the rest of the spiritual armour of a Christian, prayer is made men∣tion of; Pray with all prayer and manner of supplication: it is clear, Iam. 5. 17. If any man be afflicted, let him pray. and, 2 Cor. 12. 7. 8. the words that we were speaking just now. O! whether is that washing of our bed with tears, and that presenting of supplications with sighs and groans that can∣not be expressed, now gone? There are few Christians, but can make language of their grief, whose grief of heart goes never to such a length, as they may cry forth, I am so troubled that I cannot speak. He were indeed a Phoenix of his time, who could without lying to the Holy Ghost, say, that his bones were waxing old through his roaring all the day; and we would only say to such, that are not endeavouring after this, you shall go down to your graves, having your bones full of the sins of your youth. There is this second mean that we would speak to, That a Christian would be much in the exercise of the grace of watchfulnesse: This is clear from Luke. 21. near the close, and from Matth. 26. 41. Watch and pray, lest ye enter into tempta∣tion. And certainly, watchfulnesse is a most requisit peece of armour, that after we have done all, we may stand; not only
because watchfulnesse is that which dis∣covereth unto a Christian his weaknesse and inability, for a Christian to be con∣vinced of this, it is his strength, as is clear from 2 Cor. 12. 10. When I am weak, then am I strong: this is a paradox to na∣ture, but no mystery to grace; but also because watchfulnesse is a most effectual mean to discover to a Christian, the sub∣tilty and profound deceitfulnesse of his ad∣versaries, which maketh him to be much in watching over his own heart: watch∣fulnesse likewayes is that grace, which discovereth unto a Christian, the formal and remisse actings of grace in this preci∣ous combat: when faith beginneth to die, and hope beginneth to languish, and love and zeal beginneth to wax cold, then watchfulnesse giveth warning to prayer, that it may go to seek strength for those that were languishing: As like∣wayes watchfulnesse is requisit, because it discovereth unto a Christian, the first motions of his adversaries, and when first he beginneth to stir, which, no doubt, is a great advantage, And more, watchfulnesse discovereth unto a Christian, that advantage which he hath over his lusts, which doth exceedingly encourage▪ him to go on in this spiritual warfare. There is this thirdly which is requi∣sit,
that a Christian would be much in the meditation upon the sufferings, death, and love of Iesus Christ. I know not (to a tender Christian) a more ef∣fectual mean to Mortifie his affections and lusts, then this, this is clear that it is so, not only from 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. where Paul saith, The love of Christ did constrain him, because we thus judge, that if one died for all, then were all dead, that we should henceforth no more live to our self. And Peter presseth this, 1 Pet. 1. 18. com∣pared with ver. 20. Be ye holy as he is holy: and he subjoineth the reason of it, for ye are bought with a price, even with the incor∣ruptible blood of Iesus Christ: and 1 Pet. 4. 1, 2. he presseth the doctrine of Mortification from this, that Christ was crucified in the flesh: and it is clear from Psal. 26. 3. where the great argument which per∣swaded David to pursue after sincerity, was this, for the love of God is alwayes before my eyes. And is not this a sweet portraicture, alwayes to contemplat and behold, to look upon love, untill ye be changed into that same Image from glory to glory. And certainly Christs death and love must have a most effectual influence upon this: Can one read these words, he swat drops of blood; and that word, If it be possible, let this cup depart from me.
Can you read these words and not be provoked to hate sin with a perfect ha∣tred? Can ye love that which crucified Christ, and brought him so low? If such a supposition had been possible, that all that were sinners had been standing round about the crosse, in the day that Christ was hanged up betwixt heaven and earth, in the day that his precious body was dropping down drops of blood, might not ye have said, O! what a thing must that be which we call sin, that hath brought him so low? And may not the reflect thoughts upon the love of Christ, provoke you to this, that if Christ hath so far condescended unto you, ought not ye to please him, and give obedience to his Commandments? Who would dispute the commands of such a One? And it is certain, that if we would me∣ditate on these things till we wondered, and wonder till we loved, no doubt, it should perswade you to be endeavour∣ing Mortification of your lusts. Christs death hath not only a moral influence (of which we have spoken) but it hath a physical influence also upon the mor∣tification of sin: for we are bought (saith the Apostle Peter, 1. Pet. 1. 20,) with a price from our vain conversation: Christ hath cru∣cified the damning power of sin, and hath
purchased this gift, the Spirit of Sanctifi∣cation, to crucifie the dominion of sin. There is this fourthly which is requi∣site, that a Christian under debates with lusts, be much in the exercise of the grace of faith: It is a most insensible and un∣known help to our apprehension: we think faith is a help, when all things are desperat. And therefore we judge pray∣er a more suitable help to sense and appre∣hension; therefore a Christian under the prevailing of his corruptions, will be more in the imployment of the grace of prayer, than in the imployment of the grace of faith; though we may say this to the advantage of the grace of faith, that it hath a most effectual and most divine influence for the crucifying of lusts: if so we may speak, faith is that that cometh nearest himself; for faith, (as it is spoken of it) hath a kind of Om∣nipotency, as it is said, all things are possible for those that believe. Now this is clear not only from 1 Ioh. 5. 5. This is our victory, whereby we overcome the world, even our faith: and it is clear from Eph. 6. 16. Above all things take ye the shield of faith, by which you may quench the fiery darts of the Devil. And certainly had we so much faith, as a grain of mustard seed, we might say to every mountain that is in
our way, be removed, and hurled unto the midst of the sea, and it should obey us. We shall clear the influence of faith in the mortifying of corruption, not only in this, that the grace of faith, discover∣eth unto a Christian that super-eminent and precious excellency of Jesus Christ, at the appearance of which, the glory and luster of our Idols do disappear. We think our Idols are like stars, that in the night do appear, and seem beauti∣ful creatures, but when once that Sun, even the Sun of righteousnesse doth arise, then their glory is not seen, neither can they be beheld. Saw you never such a sight of him, that constrained you to cry forth, what have I to do any more with Idols? If such a supposition were possible, that any idol should get entrance above it should get no entertainment there: for they are upheld by an infinit strength that cannot fail: As likewayes, the in∣fluence of faith may be cleared in this, that it is that grace, that doth lay hold upon the promises, by which and thorow which, strength from the head is con∣veyed unto the combatant: As for example, when a believer is wrestling with his lusts, faith layeth hold upon the promise of help, and by it, layeth hold on Iesus Christ, who is the
Promiser. As likewayes the influence of Faith may be cleared in this, Faith is that grace, which discovereth to a Chri∣stian, that crown and recompense of re∣ward, one sight and view of which ma∣keth love and zal take fire, and maketh them to tread upon the high places of the earth, that when the Archers shoot at them, and do grievously wound them; yet their bow doth abide in its strength. There is this mean likewayes, by which a Christian would mortifie his predomi∣nant lusts, and it is this, that he would be much in entertaining the grace of ten∣dernesse, Ioseph-like to cry forth, when temptation doth assail him, Shall I do this and sin▪ against God. I am perswaded that sin not resisted in its motions, doth pro∣cure hardness; And likewayes we may say, that sin resisted in its beginnings, doth bring forth the grace of tendernesse, in a most effectual and eminent way. And there is this mean likewayes which is requisit, that a Christian be much in the apprehension of death, judge∣ment, and eternity: these three much me∣ditated upon, would make us affraid to sin. I think a Christian never walketh as he ought, till he walk so, as if each moment next to that wherein he liveth, he had the expectation of appearing be∣fore
the judgement seat of Christ. O! but it would be a sad despensation to many, to have this day a summonds without continuation of dayes, to appear before that dreadful and terrible tribunal of Iesus Christ, when the books shall be opened, wherein your wanderings are written, and the books of your consci∣ences shall be opened, that shall say Amen to every thing that is recorded within the volume of these books: this is clear from Act. 17. 30. 31. He hath commanded all men every where to repent, and the argument en∣forcing it is, because he hath appointed a day, in which he will judge the world by this man Iesus Christ: as likewayes it is clear in Eccles. 11. 9. where Solomon pres∣seth by way of holy Ironie (for so the scope is) young men not to take their pleasures in the morning of their time, be∣cause for all these things God should bring them to judgement. And we wish that that memento, which did alwayes walk with a holy man, might walk with you, and sound in your ears, Awake, and come to judgement, that it may be that which may regulate your walk. I shall not say much, but beware to entertain your lusts, lest judgement overtake you, the stones of the wall of this house shall bear wit∣ness against you in the day of the Lord,
that ye have been invited to flee from the wrath to come, and have refused the pre∣cious offers of a crucified Saviour. We would obrest and beseech you, that, if there be a heaven, if there be a God, if there be an eternity, which are most cer∣tain and infallible, if there be a hell, and everlasting separation from the presence of the Lord, and if you have precious and immortal souls, that you would tender your own salvation, and speak much of Peters divinity, pity your selves, for you are destroying your selves through the want of knowledge, and if we may say it, hell is enlarging it self wide for the recei∣ving of many of the inhabitants of this place, and of many that live in this gene∣ration, who are destitute and void of the grace of the living God. Now that which secondly we shall speak to shall be this, what are the evi∣dences and tokens of this, when lust hath dominion over one? And we shall short∣ly point out the evidences of lust, when it hath dominion? And we conceive, this first may evidence it, when one wins to such a length, as they can commit sin with delight, and with greediness, when it is pleasure to them to go after the heart of their detestable things, then sin hath do∣minion over one: as it is clear, sin hath
dominion over those made mention of, 2 Pet. 2. 13. They account it pleasure to riot in the day time, and are sporting them∣selves with their own deceivings; such fools, as Solomon speaketh of, making a mock at sin: and likewayes it is clear of those that are made mention of, Eph. 4. 19. They commit iniquity with greedinesse, and as the Prophet speaketh in another place, their hearts are mad upon their Idols. There is this secondly which may evi∣dence it, and it is this, when one sinneth with his predominant lust without con∣viction, or if they be convinced, their convictions do suddenly evanish, like those made mention of, Ier. 6. 15. Were they ashamed, when they had committed abomina∣tion? nay, they were not at all ashamed, nei∣ther could they blush: They had won to such a length in impiety, that not only they would not do it, but they could not do it: and that same is made mention of, Ier. 8. 12. It is clear likewayes, Jer. 3. 3. Thou hadst a whores forehead, thou refusedst to be ashamed; and from Prov. 30. 20. Where the adulterous woman saith, that she hath done no wickednesse. When you are brought unto such a length of impiety, then know that you have yielded your selves servants unto unrighteousness for a time.
There is this which may evidence it like∣wayes, and it is this, when one can com∣mit iniquity upon small temptations, yea, upon none at all: this did prove that that sin of adultery had some dominion over David, when he did commit it upon so small or no temptation; for this is brought in to aggravat it, 2 Sam. 12. 8. I gave thee thy Masters wives into thy bosome: and it is most emphatically aggravat, ver. 2. 7. one poor man should have had one ewe lamb, and yet he had so many, and that yet he should pursue after that: And most clear∣ly, Isa. 5. 18 Wo unto them that draw iniqui∣ty with cords of vanity, and sin as it were with a cart-rope: the meaning of these words we conceive it to be this, that they did most violently, without any allurement or en∣tisement, pursue after the heart of their de∣testable things: certainly, those may sus∣pect themselves, that upon the first presen∣tation of an idol, they presently bow down their heads and worship it. There is this likewayes which may evi∣dence it, and it is this, when one notwith∣standing of the convictions of the omni∣science of God that doth behold them, will commit such an iniquity: no doubt, then sin is brought unto a most damnable and most attrocious height: then sin had dominion over Er, Gen. 38, 7. He did
evil in the sight of the Lord: the meaning of which word we conceive to be this, that he did the evil, notwithstanding he was convinced of the omniscience and all seeing eye of God: And it is recorded of Ahab, 1 King. 21, 20. He sold himself to commit iniquity in the sight of the Lord, when notwithstanding he knew that he had seven eyes that ran to and fro through the earth, yet he did act these abominati∣ons. And there is this lastly, that doth evi∣dence it, when one doth sin with much deliberation and advice, they are not over∣hailed by their temptations and lusts, and they sit down in counsel to consult how such a thing may be effectuate: then had iniquity dominion over those that are made mention of, Mic. 2. 1. Wo to them that devise iniquity upon their beds, that sit down deliberatly in the silent seasons of the night to contrive the mischievous plots of their hearts: and we would only say to such, read the 3. or 4. vers. of that chap∣ter, where God saith in a sweet and just opposition, in regard of their devising of iniquity; Behold (saith he) I will de∣vise against this people: God will deli∣beratly and with much indignation, pu∣nish those that sin deliberatly, and it is clear from, Ier. 18. 12.
Now we shall shut up our discourse at this time, only we would speak a little unto this, why God doth sometimes think fit to expose his own unto some dominion of their lusts? It was a notable and most true saying of a heathen, As many vices, as many masters, for every lust is a master; and we may say, every lust hath a servant, and some have ten thousand waiting on: And we conceive when a Christian be∣ginneth to establish his own righteous∣ness, then he is in hazard to be given up for a time unto the dominion of his sin: this is clear, Ezek. 33. 13. If he trust to his own righteousness, and commit ini∣quity; and there may be this reason of it, that they may know to distinguish, betwixt the yoke of Christ, and the yoke and bondage of sin, as it is pointed at, Deut. 28. 47, 48. And we conceive this may be a reason of it, because God in∣tendeth to magnifie the glory of his un∣searchable grace, by delivering them from the door of the pit, when this song shall be sung, This my Son was dead, and is alive, and was lost, and is found: this is the song of restoring grace, after grace hath once prevented the Christian. Now we will desire you seriously to intend this precious work of mortificati∣on: the most part of us are idol-Chri∣stians,
we have hands, and we do no∣thing, we have eyes and we see not, and we have feet and we walk not: And certainly, that practice and maxime of Matchiavel is much practised amongst us, he thought it was advantagious to have the possession of religion, and of vertue but he thought it dangerous to have the reality of religion: there are many that desire to be clothed with the coat of Christ, that never desired conformity with Christ in the inward man: And we think if Christ were to come down from heaven, he might preach this to many of us, Betrayest thou the son of man with a kisse? There are many that I am sure have a lower spirit then Iudas, that would sell Christ at a lower rate then thirty peeces of silver: O! eternity, eternity, what shall you do in the day of desolati∣on, when your visitation shall come from a far? where shall you flee for help? and where shall you leave your glory? I shall shut up all that I have to say with this the wrath of that living, but contemptible stone, that was cut out of the Mountains, shall be more intollerable then the weight of mountains and hills. Therefore the reprobats rather choise to be under the weight of hills and mountains, then to be under the weight of this living Corner∣stone
but so much despised. Will you not imbrace him? may not angels laugh at your folly, and have you in holy derisi∣on? the triumph is above, and it is not long before his own shall cry forth, It is finished. And no doubt, if we were much in the exercise of faith, we should easily accomplish this warfare: we may call Faith Eliezer, of whom it is reported, that he did so pursue his enemies, that the people returned to gather up the spoils. Love, prayer, and joy, will eternally sit down and reap the sweet fruits of the victory of Faith. Now to him that can make you overcome thorow the blood of the Lamb, and the word of your testi∣mony, we desire to give praise. SERMON VII. Gal. 5. 24: And they that are Christs have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. IT was a divine sentence of that Master of experiences, that love covereth a multitude of sins; we may say, that precious and infinit love, that Christ hath had to sinns, hath covered a multitude of sins: though this is a lamentation, and
shall be for a lamentation, that the most part of us have not come that length of religion, which the publicans and sinners did attain to, which is, to love those that love them. Doth not Christ his engrav∣ing of his love to sinners, in letters of blood, call for this at our hand, that we should devote our selves wholly to him? But we confesse, such is that desperat enimity and deceitfulness of the hearts of all flesh, that if all who have been partakers of the divine Nature, or shall be partakers of it, had but one heart to conduct them to heaven, they would misguide it in the way, it being the matchlesse and incom∣municable prerogative of the Captain of our salvation, to guide many sons and daughters to glory, I think, if there were a description to be given of the most part of us, we must give that which is, Prov. 6. 13. He speaketh with his feet, and teacheth with his fingers: and the great lesson that we would teach with our feet, and preach with our hands would be Iniquity, formality, and distance from God. And I would have you▪ who are expectants of heaven, and have some small hope of being eternally with him, to be much in this precious work of mor∣tification. There are some s habituat to sin, (if God do not prevent them) the
last act they shall commit in this stage of the world, shall be an act of iniquity, and they shall breath out their last, in departing from that invisible Majesty. There are some that though they live seventy years, they shall not have this to say, of one day of all their life, that they have devoted and given it to God. Mortification is a mystery to our know∣ledge, but much more a mystery to our practice: It is a wonder that many of us are not distracted, and that much of Cains divinity doth not possesse us, that whosoever shall find us by the way, shall kill us. However, unto those who make any conscience of this duty, we would say these two things; 1. Ye may yeeld unto the premisses and assertions of mis∣belief, which they draw from the domini∣on of your sin over you, but deny the con∣clusions of misbelief: This was the practice of David, Psal. 65. 3. there is the assertion of misbelief in the first words, Iniquities prevail over me, but he denyes that conclusion which we draw from it, that we are reprobats; but faith doth sweet∣ly subjoyn, As for our transgressions, thou wilt purge them away. This is bad Logick to deny the conclusion, but pre∣cious divinity: And secondly, we would say this to you, that ye may with a great
deal of liberty, make use of the dominion of your iniquity, as an argument to plead with God for pardon, according to that famous prayer of Davids, Psal. 25. 11. For thy names sake, O Lord, pardon mine ini∣quity, for it is great. And we would say likewayes, that God maketh use of the iniquities of the children of men, as an argument to provoke himself unto mercy, and even those iniquities, which before he hath made use of, as an argument of Justice. It is strange to parallel and com∣pare these two places, Gen. 6. 5. with Gen. 8. 21. where the reason that God giveth of the destruction of the world is this, because that every imagination of the thoughts of the heart of man, is only evi continually: and yet, chap. 8. 21. he giveth this as a ground, why he would curse the world no more for mans sake, because saith he, the imagination of mans heart i evil from his youth. Now we told you at the last occasion we spoke on these words, when we wa speaking upon the second thing of Mor∣tification, which was the extent of it, tha a Christian should not only mortifie ori∣ginal sin, which is here called flesh, bu likewayes, he should mortifie his predo∣minant idols, which are here called af∣fections; and of these two we have spoken▪
There is this likewise in the extent of Mor∣tification, that a Christian should mortifie the first motions and tentations unto sin, which are here called lusts. And for clearing what we shall speak upon this; we conceive, that the first motions of sin do comprehend these two: first, that a Christian should study to mortifie the first tentations he meets with unto acting, or embracing of any particular lust. And secondly, that a Christian should study to avoid all appearances of evil, by which he may be brought to the acting of that sin. We shall not stand long to prove that it is the duty of a Christian to do the first; it is clear not only from Iam. 4. 7. where we are commanded to resist the devil, which comprehendeth even the resisting of the first motions of sin, as likewayes from 1 Pet. 5. 9. Whom resist, stedfast in the faith; but likewayes it is clear from the practice of David, Psal, 56. 3. where when misbelief began to stir, he put faith in exercise, What time (saith he) I am afraid, I will trust in thee. And it is clear from the practice of Paul, 2 Cor. 12. 7. where there was a messenger of Sathan given to buffer him, he went and beseeched the Lord thrise. Neither shall we stand to prove, that it is the duty of a Christian to flee the appearances of evil,
It is clear, not only from Deut. 12. 30. where it is said, thou shalt not enquire how the Nations serve their gods: ye may suppose there was no iniquity in this ini∣quity; yet because it was the appearance of evil, God did sorbid it: as likewayes from Deut. 25. 13. 14. Thou shalt not have in thy bagg, diverse weights, a great and a small; thou shalt not have in thine house di∣verse measures, a great and a small: it might be supposed, that the having of these things when not used, was not unlaw∣ful, but the very having of them, be∣cause it was an appearance of evil, it was desired to be eshewed: and that remark∣able place, Prov. 5. 8. Come not nigh the door of her house, who is a whore: and that in Deut. 12. 3. where the people are commanded, even to forget the names of Idols. And from Iude 21. to hate the gar∣ments spotted with the flesh: and Deut. 16. 19 where it is forbidden for a judge to take a gift, not that there is iniquity in this, but because it is an appearance of evil, lest he should pervert judgment, it is for∣bidden. Now that which first we shall speak to upon this, that a Christian should flee the first motions and appearances of sin, shall be this: to propose some con∣siderations unto you, that may inforce this duty more.
The first consideration that we propose is this, that iniquity when it is resisted in its first motions, is most easily con∣quered and overcome; when sin is kil∣led in its birth, it is killed with the greatest facility and easiness: and certainly, when we delay the mortifying of our lusts, and resists not the devil, it is no wonder that we are led captive by the hand of our ini∣quities: It was an ancient saying worthy to be practised, resist the beginning of evil, for the remedy is ever more difficult in the close, then in the beginning. How∣ever, we would give Christians these two directions for this consideration. 1. After by the power of grace, ye have overcome the first motions of sin, do not give over your watch, nor sit down in carnal confidence, for he will again assail you, even after you have overcome: It is a remarkable word that is annexed to the close of Christs temptations, Luk. 4. 13. where, after Sathan was foiled most re∣markably, it is said, he departed from him for a season; he had a mind to re∣turn, though he was overcome. 2. We say this, that most ordinarily the resisting of the motions of sin, and overcoming of them, if they be not improven with humility, it is the fore-runner of some sad stroak from the hand of the Lord.
There is this second consideration that we would propose for inviting of you to resist the first motions of sin, and it is this, a Christian that maketh conscience of this duty, ordinarily he is blessed with most divine and precious enjoyments of Iesus Christ: let a Christian try this by experi∣ence, and when first sin doth assail them, if they will make conscience to resist it, the dew of heaven shall come down and ly upon their branch, that their glory may be fresh in them, and they shall be constrained to put up an Eben-ezer unto God, and to cry forth, hitherto hath the Lord helped us; this is clear from Rom. 8. 13. If ye through the Spirit shall mortifie the deeds of the flesh, ye shall live; and clear likewise from Rev. 2. 17. Where, to the man that is in the way of overcoming, Christ will give him the hidden Manna: And certainly, we think, if we may make allusion to these words, that curse is accomplished in these dayes, I will make the heavens brasse, and the earth iron. There are some upon whom it hath not rained these three years and six moneths, but are become as the bottle in the smoak, the marrow of whose bones is consumed. There is this third consideration that we would propose, and it is this, that the re∣sisting of the motions and first stirrings of
corruption, is the way to get the soul un∣der a most divine impression of the sinful∣nesse of sin: when was it that the Apostle Paul cried forth, O wretched man that I am? was it not, when there was a law in his minde, wrestling against the law of his members? When he was the greatest wrestler, then did sin appear out of mea∣sure sinful unto him. I confess, that di∣stinction which Papists do so much adore, of venial and mortal sins, I think Christians in their practice do make much use of. Are ther not many sins, which ye account venial, and writeth this name upon their forehead, this is a zoar, a little thing, and ye desire to be pardoned, when ye bow your knee in the house of Rimmon, if ye go no further: but certainly, the way to bring the soul to a divine loathing of all sin, is to be resisting the first motions of it. There is this first consideration, that resisting of the first motions of sin, is that which keeps the grace of faith much in exercise, especially in an hour of trial and of temptation. I think, there is nothing that will darken a Christians evidence so much as this, the conviction of this, that there was never a sin did assail them, that was resisted in its first motions and stir∣rings, I confess, I think a bad conscience,
is the mother of misbelief, which the Apo∣stle doth clearly point at, 1. Tim. 3. 9. Hold∣ing (saith he) the mystery of faith in a pure conscience, as if he would have said, that divine and precious guest Faith, can lodge in no dwelling but a pure and undefiled conscience: And to make this clear, that the resisting of the motions and first stir∣rings of sin, have influence to preserve faith in exercise, see Rev. 2. 17. To him that overcometh, that is in the way of overcom∣ing, I will give him a new name; he shall know that his name is written in these pre∣cious records of heaven, and that before the morning stars did sing for joy, e're ever the corner stone of the world was laid, he was engraven upon the heart of precious ones, in indelible letters which cannot be blotted out: As also it is clear from, Rom. 7. compared with 8. and 1. verse: when was it that Paul cried forth, There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Iesus? was it not then, when he was wrestling against corruptions? And there is this last consideration, which we shall propose to enforce this du∣ty, and it is this, that not resisting sin in its first motions, doth ordinarily creat and bring to passe much hardnesse and stupi∣dity of heart, when we silence our con∣victions with laziness, and answer our re∣prover
with this, I have put off my coat, how shall I put it on? I shall say to such, it is a bad omen and sign that God is upon his way to cease to be such a reprover unto you: I confesse, there is a difference be∣twixt sinning against light, and sinning with light; and we conceive that there are many guilty of the one, that are not guilty of the other: However, if once ye shall come this length, as when temptation doth assail you, to make a covenant of peace and agreement with it, ye may expect, if you go to heaven, you shall be safe, but so as by fire: and we confesse there are some whose consciences may bear them record, that they never knew what it was to resist the first motions and stirrings of corruption. It is a lesson of so high na∣ture, that it would need explication unto them: And think ye that ye can attain unto that living and precious hope, who never knew to wrestle with sin, and with your corruptions? is such a delusion as this amongst you, that ye can reign, though ye fight not, and triumph though ye con∣tend not? ye may reign to your own ap∣prehension as kings without Christ this way, but shall never reign as kings with him, if ye do not study to mortify your lusts. That which secondly we shall speak up∣on this, shall be this, what is the reason that
Christians do not resist sin in its first mo∣tions and stirrings within them? And we conceive, that it doth either proceed from this, that Christians are not much in the exercise of the grace of watchfulness. I think temptations seises oft-times upon a Christians affections before they be a war, hence it is, that when the Apostle Peter is prescribing this direction of resisting the motions of sin, he requireth this as an an∣tecedent duty, that they should be watch∣ful, 1 Pet. 5. 8, 9. Be vigilant, and then, re∣sist him, stedfast in the faith: when once a Christian hath given over his watch, he is a prey unto his lusts: we may certainly say of him, that he is a city broken down & without walls, that doth not exercise the grace of watchfulness. Or else it doth pro∣ceed from this, that Christians are not in a divine and spiritual frame to resist temp∣tations, when they are first assailed with them. We confesse, our spirits oft-times are so loadened with the pleasure of a world, and are so much taken up with the passing delights of a transient world, that when temptations do come; we do easily condescend to imbrace them: hence it is that the Apostle Iames when he is passing this exhortation upon these to whom he writeth, resist the Devil, he subjoyneth this in the 9. vers. as a concomitant duty, draw
near to God, as if he would have said, If temptations find you at a distance with God, then ye may cry forth, have pity on me; for ye are a prey, if ye be not found within sight of him, and if your hearts do not study to walk in the sight of his preci∣ous face. As likewayes, Peter doth pre∣scribe this, 1 Pet. 5. 8. 9. Be sober and then, resist him stedfast in the faith: and more clearly it is pointed at, Matth. 26. 41. Watch, and pray, left ye enter into temptation. And I would only say this unto you, it is a most high and divine walk alwayes to be living within sight of God, that when ye go down to the grave, ye may have this to say, I am now to change my place, but not to change my company; heaven may be to you but a precious passing and transition unto a more constant and im∣mediat enjoyment of God: Or else it doth proceed from this, that Christians when they are first assailed with the motions and stirrings of corruptions, they dow not do violence to their own flesh. I consesse these two Idols, which are dependant one upon another, that idol of Self, and that idol of Ease, they are the cut-throats of a Christians diligence, and are the great occasion, why we do not overcome, through the word of our testimony, and by the blood of the Lamb; Think ye that it is an
easie thing to overcome temptations? I confesse, those that are not acquainted with it, may probably say it, but this is certain, that such kind goeth not forth, but by fasting and prayer. It cost Christ much toil to liberat you from the guilt of sin, and it will cost you much toil to liberat your selves from the filth of sin. And there is this lastly from which it proceeds, that Christians do not mortifie sin, in its first stirrings and motions, be∣cause they are not living under an impres∣sion of the sinfulness of sin. We conceive, that oft-times when temptations do assail us, we think, departing from God a dispensi∣ble evil, and that which easily we may ob∣tain pardon for: I would prescribe that un∣to you, as one of the greatest mysteries of Christianity, and blessed, blessed is he eternally that hath win to it, and it is this, to be living constantly under a divine im∣pression of the sinfulness of sin, that ye may take it up, in its nature, and in its effects, I think, if one should come from the dead, having the chains of everlasting wrath, wreathed about his feet, and the sheckles of the fury of the Lord, wreathed about his hands, and should preach to you, con∣cerning the nature of sin, and how dam∣nable a thing it is, there are many who would not take heed much to such doctrine.
Now that which thirdly we proposed to speak to from these words was, the difficulty to attain to Mortification, which we conceive, was held forth under that word Crucify; which doth import, that Mortification is a longsome work, as crucifying was a longsome death: as likewayes it doth import, that Mortifi∣cation was a painful work, as crucify∣ing was one of the most painful deaths: And like wayes it holds forth the intensive nature of Mortification, that a Chri∣stian should study not to be content until he did kill corruption: And concerning these three we shall speak together: And we shall point out the difficulty of attaining to Mortification in these things. Is there not this which points out the dif∣ficulty of it, that there is a woful unity of affection betwixt us and our lusts, they are dear to us as the right eye, and our right hand, and right foot: And I con∣fesse, to convince you of that unity that is betwixt you and your lusts, I think that expression which ordinarily ye use, when one is reproving you for your passion, or for your swearing, may suffice; ye will answer, what aileth you at me? which doth speak this, that you say, your lusts and you are one. And I confesse Paul hath an expression like this,
Rom. 7, 8. I know (saith he) that in me dwelleth no good thing. There are two me's in a Christian; there is a spiritual and a refined Me, there is a carnal and a wicked Me, as Paul doth distinguish them in that verse, I know (saith he) that in me dwelleth no good thing: and yet he subjoyneth, In me to will that is present, which is one good thing. And we con∣fesse, that word is accomplished in Me, They are joyned to their idols, let them alone. There is that secondly which pointeth out the difficulty of Mortification, and it is the strength of those lusts that are within us, we think the Scripture is so abundant in pointing out the strength of sin, that we need not speak much to it: there is that expression, Rom. 8. 2. which is a most strange word, it is there called the law of sin and of death: as it were, sin pleads for as much subjection from us, as if we were tyed by law to obey it: And in that verse, there is a sweet con∣trariety of laws, the law of the spirit of life, hath made me free from the law of sin and of death. If so we may speak, there is, in a manner, one decree and statute of heaven declaring another to be null; for it was a law in heaven, that we should be under death, because we were under sin; but behold, here is a posterior law
that doth sweetly reduce this prior law, and it is, the law of the Spirit of life. As likewayes, that expression pointeth forth the strength of corruption, which is 2 Cor. 10. 4. where he saith, we are to fight for the pulling down of strong holds, as it were, sin fortifieth it self within our bo∣some: and we confesse, if this were be∣lieved, we should study to mortify our corruptions with a great deal of more pains and constancy. There is this like∣wayes, which pointeth it out, and it is, the deceitfulnesse of our lusts, and the subtilty which they vent in their deceiv∣ing of us; which is clear from that ex∣pression, Iam. 1. 14. When a man, (saith he) is drawn away, and entised of his lusts: the word there that is rendered entised, is taken from the fishers, who deceive the silly fishes, with an apparent bait of pleasure. We confesse, these two are the great obstrucions of a Christians pro∣gresse to heaven, there are temptations of fear, and there are temptations from advantage: which two, if they were removed, we might with greater facility overcome our lusts, and sing a song of triumph over our Idols: oft-times that expression is recorded, the deceitfulness of sin: we confesse, if this were believed, we would use a more divine and holy
prudence, least we should be ensnared. And to shut up our discourse upon Morti∣fication, upon which we have been speaking so long; we shall only speak a little to obviat any mistake that may be about the difficulty of any Mortification, which shall include that which we in∣tended to speak upon; which was the certainty of overcoming. And that which first we would say unto you is this; Be perswaded of this, that there is more divine satisfaction in the resisting of your lusts, and wrestling against them, then there is in the actual fruition of them all: that word of Solomons, Stollen waters are sweet, saith the adulte∣rous woman, but at last they shall be convinced of the contrary: and that word which he speaketh, Bread of deceit is pleasant to the mouth, but he knoweth not, that the dead are there, &c. And we think the Apostle sweetly chydeth the Romans concerning this thing, What fruit have you of those things, whereof you are now ashamed? it is sad to think upon that woful disappointment that many shall meet with. There is this which we would like∣wayes say, that there is a divine cer∣tainty of a Christians overcoming, let the difficulties be never so many, and (O be∣loved
in the Lord) are not these glad tidings from a far country, and may be as cold water to a thirsty mans soul, that a Christian shall once overcome: And I confesse there are these four things, that speak the certainty of a Christians overcoming: 1. The faithfulnesse, and the love of Jesus Christ is laid in pawn for our overcoming, which is clear from that Joh. 6. 39. And this is the fathers will which hath sent me, that of all which he hath given me, I should losse nothing but should raise it up again at the last day: And we confesse, this is certain, it is more of Christs concernment that a believer should overcome, then it is of his own. O! what songs to the faithfulnesse of Christ, what songs to his love shall be sung that day, when the precious troup of his Saints, shall return from the day of judgment, and that general infare shall be of all those that have been begotten unto a lively hope, when they shall convey Christ home, through the ports of the new Ieru∣salem, every one having a harp of God in his hand, and shall cry forth, Halelu∣jab▪ Halelujab to him that sitteth upon the Throne, and to the lamb for ever and ever: that song shall have no period; though it have a beginning. There is this likewayes which point∣eth
forth their certainty of overcoming, Christ hath overcome, and therefore a Chri∣stian shall overcome. It was the sweet divinity of the Apostle Paul, Heh. 2. 9, 10. there is a promise (saith he) that all things shall be put under our feet, but we see not that promise accomplished, saith he: I see one thing accomplished, which is a pledge of it, I see Iesus Christ, for the suffering of death, crowned with glory and with Majesty: Christ is in heaven, and he must be there: and that word John 16. last, Be of good cheer, saith he, for I have overcome the world; which is a pledge and certain token, that ye shall once overcome. There is this likewayes which points forth their certainty of overcoming, that that same power which was exercised in bringing Christ from death, and in mak∣ing him to overcome principalities and powers, is communicate to believers to make them overcome; as it is clear from Eph. 1. 19, 20. where it is said, That power that wrought mightily in Christ to raise him from the dead, doth also work in those that believe. O! Christians, heirs of the grace of life, believe this, that Omni∣potency is ingaged on your behalf; and have you not learned that first point of the Creed, that there is nothing-impossible
to God; and so when you are constrained sometimes to cry out, Who shall stand before the children of Anak: Content your selves with this, that there is nothing too hard for him. And there is this lastly, which points it out, that divine and invisible knot of union that is betwixt Christ and his mem∣bers: Is Christ above? the members must follow; for ye know, though Christ be the fulness of the Saints, yet the Saints are the fulness of Christ: there is a sweet mutual fulfilling and accomplishing each one of another: know ye not that word, that where I am, there they may be also: I think of all the words that Christ ever spoke to the Father, that word was the most imperious and commanding-like word which he hath, Joh. 17. 24. I will (saith he) that those that thou hast given me, be where I am. It was not his prayer which came that length, he willed it, and would not be contradicted: And certainly there is nothing that may com∣fort you in the our of trial so much as this, Christ is upon his way to relieve you, and ye are upon your way of overcom∣ing: And I shall only say that word, which ought to be your practice, 1 Joh. 5. 18. Whosoever is born of God sinneth not, and that wicked one toucheth him not: That
ordinary expression which you have you should not rub cloths with him, not touch him. And to those that are walk∣ing in the broad paths of sin, I shall only speak that to you which is, Joh. 21. 22. His eyes shall see his destruction, and he shall drink of the wrath of the Almighty. Your eyes and your taste shall be satisfied; and that word which is vers. 30. he shall be preserved to the day of destruction, or as the word in the original, he shall be reserved to the day of wrath: as it were, there shall be a combination of wrath▪ and justice that shall seise upon you. Now to him who is upon his way, who shall come and will not carry, and whose reward is with him, we desire to give praise. SERMON VIII. Gal. 6. 14. By whom the world is cru∣cified unto me, and I unto the world. CHristianity doth consist in a bles∣sed exchange of affections, a soul dying in its affections and respects to all things, that are here below; and living and advancing in its desires toward him, who is that bles∣sed and universal good. It ought to be that arch-plot, and great design, that
Christians ought to promove, to attain to that original unity, which once was in mans affections towards God: O! what blessedness did Adam enjoy, while he did stand in that estate wherein he was creat∣ed, he having a blessed harmony of all his affections toward God, and likewayes there being a most divine correspondence and blessed familiarity betwixt heaven and earth, betwixt him who fitteth on the Throne, and the foot-stool: but that was most eminently verified, that man being in honour, did not abide. O! what anxious and perplexing thoughts had poor Adam, no doubt, some hours after his fall, when he did reflect upon that which was once his condition, and did compare it with that which was now his lot: might not he take up that lamentation over himself, Man in his best estate is altogether vanity; And likewayes he might have that pro∣verb taken up of himself, How art thou fal∣len from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the mor∣ning? Now, man by lossing that blessed unity that was in his affections, hath con∣tracted a woful and infinit diversity in his affections towards these things that are here below: so that those affections which did once sweetly run in one channel to∣ward God, are now divided and separated in many channels, toward those things
that are below him: And there is nothing beneath the Son, that leadeth captive so many of our desires as the World: there∣fore it were your advantage to be crucified to the world, and to have the world cru∣cified to you: that you may discover, that endlesse vanity, and unspeakable vexation of spirit, that is in all things that are here: The world is a perfect compend and com∣pleat epitom of all misery: God himself is that compend of all blessednesse, so that there is nothing that we can take up under this, but it is most eminently in him. It is a duty which is much undervalued in these dayes, Christians to be promoving in that blessed work of having themselves crucified to the world, and having the world crucified to them: O! how suit∣able is it for those who are heirs and ex∣pectants of that blessed hope and everlast∣ing enjoyment of being with God, who is the Judge of all flesh, and with Jesus Christ, who is the Mediator of the New Cove∣nant, and with the innumerable compa∣ny of holy Angels, and to be made heirs and co-heirs with Jesus Christ. Is it not below you to be much taken up in your vain and anxiouspursuits afterthose things that are here below: The objects of the desires of your immortal spirits ought to be more high than things below; and
ought to be more divine than things hu∣mane; your affections ought to be ascend∣ing as pillaes of smoak, and ye should be breathing after that blessed day when there shall be a confinement of all your affecti∣ons on him. We have at some occasions spoken unto you, of the grace of humility, and of the grace of love, the one teaching us to undervalue our self, the other teach∣ing us to value God: And had you been much taken up in the spiritual and living exercise of those, there should not have been much difficulty to perswade you at this time. We shall not insist long in tel∣ling what Mortification is; It is a con∣stant and blessed endeavour of the Chri∣stian, to remove out of his way all those impediments, that do interrupt the exercise of love; As likewayes, it is that which entertaineth a constant and perpetual an∣tipathy and holy indignation against eve∣ry thing, thorow which his conformity with God, and that perfect likeness and si∣mlitude with his Maker, might be in any way impaired. Mortification doth not consist in those unconstant and unequal exercises of mortifying our lusts, it consists not in those violent flashes of holy zeal and indignation against our iniquities; for though that indignation be violent for its time, yet it doth quickly evanish and pass
away: but that grace of Mortification must be a constant and dayly exercise; We will solace our selves in the chambers of our imagry, by beholding our idols pourtrayed up the wall, we will study to receive satisfaction in our apprehen∣sions, when we cannot receive satisfacti∣on in the actual fruition of them: Such is likewayes the woful desperatness of the hearts of the children of men, that when God hath put a worm to the root of that gourd, under the shadow of which, we used to solace our selves, we cry forth from a discontented humor, It is better for us to die then to live: O! there are many here, to whom it would be death to out∣live their idols; their idols and they are pleasant in their lives, and they desire not to be divided in their deaths. 3. Mor∣tification doth not consist in that partial and divided way of mortifying our cor∣ruptions, we taking vengeance upon some of our lusts, but with Saul, spare∣ing it who is the King. Naaman the Syrian must have an indulgence of bow∣ing his knee in the house of Rimmon: Lot must plead for the sparing of Zoar, that small thing: and so when we are intend∣ing that work of Mortification, we plead for the sparing of these things, which we call Zoars, these small, but our Master-corruptions.
Certainly that evangelick Mortification which is required of us, doth not consist in this, for we must in∣tend an universal separation betwixt us and all our idols, we must cast away all our idols to the moles and to the batts, and we must defile the covering of them, and he alone must be the cover of our eyes: He never knew what the grace of Mor∣tification meant, who never set about the accomplishment of the ruine of that great and master-idol which domineereth over him: And we conceive, that the best and most solid way of knowing our growth in Mortification, is by reflecting upon the decay of these idols, which are our predominants; other sins which affail us may decay, and their strength wax weak, and yet mortification not be on the growing hand, for there are many of our lusts, that rather die by concession, then by constraint; there are many of our idols that rather go out of us, then are cast out. Now the first thing that a Christian ought to endeavour to mortifie is, his love to the the world, which was the pra∣ctice of this holy man: In the words he pointeth out unto us that way, wherein he did attain this compleat and spiritual Mortification to the world, holden forth
to us in these words, by whom, which doth relate unto Iesus Christ, who is made mention of in the words going before: or, as the words may be rendered, by which I am crucified to the world, and so they re∣late unto the cross of Jesus Christ. Now under this notion of being crucified, he doth certainly hold forth unto us, that great difficulty that is in accomplishing the work of Mortification; And under this name of being crucified, he holdeth forth unto us, the longsomnesse of the time that we must spend, before we can attain compleat Mortification, Crucifying being one of the most lent and slow of all violent deaths; Mortification is not a work of one day, it will cost us many dayes and years, before we shall crush the head of him, who hath so oft-times crushed our heel, before that blessed promise shall be fulfilled, that all things shall be put in sub∣jection unto us: Sin doth most easily in∣vade us, and take possession of us, but it is not easily dispossessed; for except we had the infinit strength of him who is Jehovah, we might sit down, and close our hands, and never mint to op∣pose these Idols, under whose subjecti∣on we are: This word of being cruci∣fied, doth likewayes hold forth the pain∣fulness and uneasiness of this work of
Mortification, Crucifying being a death, amongst all violent deaths, one of the most bitter: we must certainly be mor∣tified to our ease, before we can be mor∣tified to our lusts, we must travel in birth, before the grace of Mortification can be formed in us. It is a wofull evil in these dayes, that the most part of people walk under this apprehension, that there is not much difficulty to Mortifie their cor∣ruptions, but it is a token, that they never knew what it was to mortifie them, who never knew the difficulty of Mortification. The third thing that is holden forth under this name of being crucified is, that woful reluctancy and indisposition of spirit, which we have to this blessed ex∣ercise of Mortifying our corruptions; we have as great unwillingnesse unto it, as though we were to go to subject our selves to some violent death. O! how is vanity and corruption joyned to the spirits of the sons of men: how loth are we to have that wofull and accursed union betwixt us and our lusts dissolved? O! how many Orators and Procurators within our selves have we to plead for this, the sparing of our lusts: we may be perswaded of this, that if we be not the ruine of our iniquity, iniquity shall cer∣tainly
be our ruine. O! how may we blush and be confounded seven dayes, that we should be so loth to have a separation betwixt us and these things, by which our distance with God and estrangement from him, is so much increased: this vanity is unspeakable, that we should be so averse from that wherein our eternal blessedness dothly, in having that wofull band, which we have wreathed about our own necks, taken off by the blessed and everlasting hands of him who hath died and risen again, to accomplish this blessed design. Lastly, under this word of being cruci∣fied, is held forth unto us that compleat and spiritual Mortification to the world, that this holy man attained to, he was as one dead to these things: he was not much exercised in joy in having the world, neither was he exercised in grief, by wanting the things of the world, he was a man dead, which could not be moved by any of these things: We do not say so, that Paul was altogether a Stoick, without all passions of grief and sorrow, or of joy, but we only say this, that he did not grieve for the want of the world, as those who have no hope; neither did he so joy in having the world, as those who have not a more
divine and high spring of consolation, he was cloathed with a holy indifferency, and a blessed neutrality in having or wanting these things; it was none of Pauls desires to have the world, he had learned that divine and excellent art of being content with every estate of life: he knew not what it was to murmur; And it were certainly much our advan∣tage, to be provoked to jealousie, when we reflect upon the practice of this holy man. I conceive, that if all that are here would examine themselves, by how many degrees their Mortification to the world, doth come short of this, they might sit down and conclude with them∣selves, that they are yet to begin to mor∣tifie; yea, there are many here, to whom we may say, that they are so far from being clothed with a holy indifferency in having the things of the world, that they are clothed with that woful and indispensible necessity in pursuing after these things: this is the language of the most part, Give, give, men hurrying themselves in multitudes of hopes, and of fears, and of expectations, and likewayes an infinit number of desires; And what is the end and result of all these things, but vanity and vexation of spirit. Now that you may be helped to attain
this concerning-duty, to be mortified to the world, we shall propose these things unto you: The first is this, be much ta∣ken up in a holy contemplation and spiri∣tual beholding of these unsearchable excel∣lencies that are in God. If once the foul of the creature were elevated to behold him, there should not be much difficulty, to be mortified to the world: were we once admitted to draw by a lap of the vail, and behold that uncreated glory and unexpressible Majesty that is treasured up in him, Mortification should be no great difficulty unto us: this is clearly held forth here, for Paul doth tell by whom he had this grace of Mortification, it was by beholding that pleasant plant of renown Jesus Christ. This is clear like∣wayes, 1 Ioh. 5. 5▪ Who is he that overcometh the world, but he that believeth that Iesus Christ is the Son of God? Did we once believe that fundamental Article of faith, that he who was crucified upon the tree, was the real Son of God, we should most easily win to this concern∣ing duty of Mortification. We may reduce all the causes of our little growth in this blessed work, to that woful igno∣rance of God, wherewith the most part of us are clothed: were there a door opened to us in heaven, and were we in the spirit
to behold him who sits upon the Throne, whose countenance is like a Sardine stone, and about whose Throne there is that rain∣bow; could we penetrat thorow these vails, wherewith both he and we are covered, we being cloathed with the vail of our ignorance, and likewayes with the vail of our impurity; and he being cloathed with these two most glorious vails, the vail of his unsearchableness, and the vail of that wonderful and unexpressible Majesty that is in him, the one con∣founding the judgement, and the other confounding the affections, so that af∣fection and judgment in a manner is put to a none-exercise, and both of these do sweetly resolve in that blessed one act of admiration. We need not speak much to the commendation of those unto you, who were never acqainted with him, that so ye might be perswaded to forsake your old lovers; We shall only say this, silence and admiration they speak least, and yet speak most: there is more divine Oratory in holy silence, and more ex∣cellent expressions in blessed admiration, than all our inventions could reach: what can man speak of him who is that un∣searchable and incomprehensible Ma∣jesty? This may appear a paradox to you, that silence should speak, and admiration
commend: but it is no paradox, when the object of our commendation, is by infinit degrees exalted above our blessing and our practice. O! men of the world, will you once be perswaded to make that blessed divorce betwixt you and your idols, that there may be an everlasting conjunction betwixt God and you: O! if ye had so much divine understanding, as to judge of things according to their real worth, He alone should be exalted in that day: Come and see and behold what ifinit sweetnesse is treasured up in him, those springs wherewith ye delight your selves, shall ere long dry up; but he is that high and infinit spring, which alwayes floweth out, and yet is not impaired. The second thing whereby we may attain to this blessd duty of Mortification to the world, is this, by reflecting how passing & transient those things are, where∣with the sons of men use to solace them∣selves. Paul doth presse Mortification to the world from this consideration, 1 Cor. 7. 31. The fashion of this world pas∣seth away: the word is most emphatick, this Schema and representation of the world or this stage play of the world, it passeth away; therefore, let those that rejoyce he as though they rejoyced not, and be careful for nothing: this is clear, 1 Joh. 2. 17.
and 1 Pet. 4. 7. did we solidly believe how changable those enjoyments of the world were, would we hurry our selves so much in our pursuits after them? Those who are listed up in their enjoy∣ments this day, may be thrust down low the next day: Ioh, who was a man enriched in many things, yet a few dayes, yea, we may say, a few hours made a sad and strange exchange: We may af∣firm that, with great assurance of truth, Surely man at his best estate is altogether va∣nity: that word that is there (at his best estate) may be rendered thus, man al∣though he stand: Etiamsi constitutus, in your most fixed and settled condition in the world: his is the Emblem and Motto of your state vanity, most subject to change: and why should you weary your selves in the fire for that which is very vanity? The third thing by which ye may at∣tain this duty of Mortification, is to be much taken up in the consideration of the brevity of your life: I suppose, that if we were walking more in the house of mourning, and were believing that truth, that it is appointed for man once to die, and that shortly, we must be brought home unto that unchangeable estate of life; O! how would this allay us in our pursuits? I think this were a little water,
which we might mix with our wine, when there is greatest confidence of Creature contentments: left the foam of this wine should distemper our head, we may mix it with this water, the brevity of our life. It is a sweet subject for me∣ditation when we are most high, to be much in the consideration of this, that within a few dayes we shall be most low. What is your life but a vapour, which doth quickly evanish, and doth but appear for a little? Suppose the whole Creation should stay with you during all your time, yet how short should your enjoyment be? what is mans life, but a hand-breadth, these four finger-breadths, which is one of the least of all geometri∣call measures; there is morning, forenoon, afternoon, and night, all which do amount to a day? there is infancy, youth, manhood, and old age, and those do quickly evanish and passe away. How many are hurried into eternity, in the first step of their dayes, in their infancy? And again, how many in their youth? and we have frequent experience, that many in their manhood, and in the flour of their age, that sentence cometh forth, Return ye children of men: and there is not one amongst an hundred, that do attain to that utmost period that
nature doth allow; and what though ye did live fourscore of years, which is the utmost period that nature hath allowed, yet doth your time quickly evanish and flee away? Why should you solace your selves with those things that can∣not eternally remain with you? when ye go down to the grave, you can take nothing of these things with you▪ for in all points as you came, so shall ye go, and what profite is there that ye have laboured for the wind? The fourth thing whereby we may be helped to attain this, is this, Be much in the mortifying of those corruptions which cannot be entertained, but by intertaining also this woful corruption of covetousnesse: there are some corruptions, which have so near affinity to, as like∣wayes dependance upon, this sin, that if these be not crushed, we cannot attain to this duty of Mortification, there is pro∣digality and pride, these two grand enemies, to the accomplishment of this blessed de∣sign: and we would begin to crush these, before we can begin to accomplish this. There is another way which is this, be much taken up in the reflecting upon that blessed hope, and that grace which shall be brought unto you at the revelati∣on of Iesus Christ. Peter presseth sobriety to
all things here below, by this arguments, 1 Pet. 1. 13. Be sober, and he giveth this reason of it, for the grace that shall be brought unto you at the revelation of Iesus Christ: O! were we much taken up in beholding that blessed estate of life, which the souls of just men made perfect shall have with God, where we shall enjoy, and yet not loath: there shall be an everlast∣ing conjunction betwixt desire and en∣joyment of him who is the person belov∣ed, so that it thinks never to receive sa∣tisfaction; all it doth receive, is more to provoke its appetite, then to satisfie its desire. There is a last, which is this, be much in the consideration of that day, when all the families of the earth shall appear before him in the valley of decision. This indeed would help us, to much mortifica∣tion to these things of the world, as is clear from Eccles. 11. 9. had we the faith of that day engraven upon our spirits, that we must render an account of our wayes, O! how wary should we be in ingaging with vanity? I think the great cause why sin hath so universal a dominion over the sons of men is, be∣cause we do not solidly believe that there is such a day approaching, when we shall appear before the judgement seat
of him, who shall judge not after the seeing of the eye, nor shall reprove after the hearing of the ear, but shall judge righteous judgment: The terror of the Lord would certainly perswade us, if we did believe this. O! what a holy un∣willingnesse should we have in walking after the paths of our idols. Now we shall shut up our discourse with this, be perswaded once to begin that work of mortification, and especially in mortifying your love to the world: he that returneth victor after war with his idols, we may call him Ioseph, for he shall be as a fruitful bough whose branches run over the wall. If once you spoil that grand and arch-rebel, who doth so much oppose you, in a manner, you should stand alone and sing a triumph, they should flee when none pursueth; and we ought be strong as a lyon, and who should rouse us up?
Of Spiritual CONTENTMENT. SERMON IX. Phil. 4. 11. I have learned in what∣soever state I am, therewith to be content. IT was Adams ignorance of this divine mystery of Christianity, to be con∣tent with every estate, wherein he was placed, that did bring him down from that high pinacle of his excellency, and did degrade him from that primitive glory, wherewith he was cloathed, for he not being content with that precious and excellent lot, wherein God had placed him, but coveting after a more noble and excellent Beeing, he came exceedingly short of this design. And such is the Athe∣nian and woful frame of spirit, wherewith men are possessed, that they can fancy no blessedness in what they are, but imagine a great blessednesse to be in what they are not; hence is it that men do covet the
lot of others, and are dissatisfied with their own estate and condition: and cer∣tainly the affections of men while they are living under these sphears which are in perpetual motion, can never be satisfied, nor be at rest: which was the observation of that master of experiences. Prov. 27. 20. Hell and destruction are never full, so the eyes of man are never satisfied; and as he saith, Eccles. 1. 8. The eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear filled with hearing: And we may likewayes adde, that the heart is not satisfied with the enjoying; And it is certainly thorow the deceitfuness of the spirit of man, and that invisible root of pride, that every lot and condition of life is subject to satiety and loathing: pri∣vat men do envy the greatnesse of Princes, and Princes do envy the quiet repose of privat men, though they will not descend nor reduce themselves unto that estate, but do alwayes fear that, which some∣times they are constrained to desire: And believe me, a Christians sitting down seriously, to contemplat and view what an infinit multitude of hopes, fears and desires the spirit of man is possessed with; as likewayes to behold how that vanity and vexation of spirit, is engraven upon the choisest lot that a Christian can meet with here, he may be provoked to look out
at the windows of his prison-house, and long for that precious day, when Christ should be as a roe, or as a young hinde coming over the mountains of Bether, waiting to be exalted to that precious and excellent estate of life, where there shall be neither loathing nor longing: Abel who hath been the first possessor of heaven of all the house and family of Adam, and hath dwelt in it near six thousand years, yet there is not in him the least inclination or motion to change or alter his estate; there is no loathing in heaven nor desire to flit there; And, believe me, this divine mystery of contentment with every lot and condition, in which a Christian is placed, is not easily attained. O! what repin∣ings hath the unmortified spirit of man to the dispensations of God, in regulating his lot and estate, which doth alone speak forth the Atheisme of our heart: for it is, as it were, man proposing a model, and form unto God, how he should rule and govern the world. I think Christians are as much subject to the fashion of this con∣tempt and pride as any. It was a noble saying of one; in the commendation of victory over a mans self, Tunc omnia regna tenebis, cum poteris rex esse tui, ye shall then be made a possessor of all kingdoms, when ye shall be made a ruler and king
of your self. And no doubt, one that is once mortified to this passion of dis∣content, he may dwell upon the Moun∣tains of Ararat in the midst of all the revolutions, and changes that are here below; such a Christian may sweetly contemplat the overturning of Estates and Common-wealths, and may patient∣ly endure every lot that doth befall him, and possesse his soul in patience: And certainly, if men knew but this one thing, that the whole circumference of the earth, is but one point of the Universe, and that all time that hath been, is, or shall be, is but one instant, in comparison of eternity: and what is man but a part of that point? and what is his life but a small part of that instant? And why then should man anxiously complain, to spend a part of a moment in enduring the most anxious and sad things that can befall him? And, (as Christ doth most divinely speak) Can a man by taking thought, adde one cubit to his stature? what poor advantage hath a man by his discontentment and sorrow, if it be not to render himself more miserable? we may say of heavenly∣mindednesse and of contentment, they are like Hippocrates Twins, that live and die together, they are two sweet compa∣nions, that alwayes go along together, and cannot be divided.
But to descend a little more to the words, you have Paul in them obviating any misconstruction, that the Philippians might have of his joy, which he expres∣seth in the former verse, as if he had been one that was coveting great things for himself, or desiring to be great in the world, no, saith he, I speak not these things because of want, which formerly I had, and is now made up, for, saith he, I have learned in every estate that I am, there∣with to be content. There is no lot, saith Paul, but I can patiently endure it, and can with a divine complacency carry my self under it; And this he proveth in the 1 2. verse, I know saith he, how to be debas∣ed, I am instructed in this divine art, how to walk soberly under debasement, and I know, saith he, how to abound: I am not one that is puft up with a prosperous lot in the world: And least this assertion of Pauls should seem to be a boasting beyond his line, and of being exalted above mea∣sure, he doth sweetly subjoyn that humble assertion, I can do all things through Christ that strengtheneth me; As if he would have said, do not mistake me, or conceive me under a more divine and high notion then ye ought, for I am but a poor and sinful man, who can do nothing of my self, but as I am over-acted by a divine and supreme
hand. I am enabled to triumph over the most adverse and sinistrous lot, that can befal me. The words which we have read, in the original they are most significant and em∣phatick; that word which is here render∣ed Content, is All sufficient, and so the words may sweetly run thus, I have learned in eve∣ry estate wherein I am, to be all-sufficient, of which that word, Pro. 14. 14. Is a sweet commentary, The back-slider in heart shall be filled with the fruit of his own way, but a godly man shall be satisfied from himself▪ In a man∣ner, there is a well-spring of everlasting consolation with in the Christian, which maketh him endure every anxious lot. And no doubt, that word I have learned, doth both speak the difficulty of attaining this mystery of divine contentment, as likewayes it speaketh out that ignorance of this divine and noble end, wherewith Paul was once possessed: I was once, saith he, as rude as any in the knowledge of this thing▪ but now through the under∣standing & wisdom of God, I am made per∣fect in the knowledge of these things. And that word in every estate, doth exceeding∣ly commend that great pitch of Christia∣nity, unto which Paul had attained, there was no lot that could befal him wrong; And we shall only say this by the way,
continuance of affliction is one of the greatest occasions of impatience that is imaginable. A Christian, when first he meets with a cross, may be provoked to salute it, and embrace it but if it be length∣ened out upon him, then he cryeth forth, hast thou found me, O thou mine enemy? and then beginneth to call in question the lo∣ving kindness of the Lord, and to complain, that he hath shut up his mercies in everlasting forgetfulnesse; though we may say, in the day that a Christian shall be passing tho∣row the valley of the shadow of death, he shall be sweetly convinced of his impatiency, when a Christian shall be constrain∣ed, to engrave that Motto upon the door of his everlasting rest he hath done all things well: What thoughts will ye have of these risings and debatings of spirit where∣with ye have been possessed? We may imagine and not without some ground, that a great part of eternity shall be spent in interrogations, Christ shall interrogate us, if we laked any thing while we were here below, and we shall be constrained to answer, nothing, even in that day when he sent us forth without scrip; or money, or without sandals or any thing, and those that did belong to us, we shall be constrained, to subscribe to the infinit wis∣dom of God, in regulating of our lot.
Now in speaking upon this divine qua∣lity and duty of divine contentment, (which we conceive, is a duty most requi∣sit in these dayes) we shall not insist long in pointing out what this divine grace of contentment is, but we conceive, it in∣cludeth not only this, a sweet and com∣posed frame of spirit, under every anxi∣ous lot and dispensation with which we meet, of which that word is a commenta∣ry, Lev. 10. 3. where it is said of Aaron, when his sons were cut off, He held his peace, and that word, Psal. 62. 1. Truly my soul waiteth upon the Lord: But the words in the original are this, Truly my soul be thou silent unto God, as they are ren∣dered in the margine of the book, as if he would have said, do not fret nor be dis∣quieted, because of any thing that he car∣veth out unto thee. But likewayes this grace and duty of contentment includeth, a holy complacen∣ey, and sweet serenity and calmness of spi∣rit under every lot, of which that word is a commentary. Jam. 1. 2. Count it all joy when you fall into diverse temptations, and that word, Rom. 5. 3. We glory in tribulati∣on. Neither shall we dwell long upon this, to prove that it is the duty of a Christian to be content with every estate wherein God shall put him: This is
clear, 1 Tim. 6. 8. Having food and raiment let us therewith be content: and Heb. 13. 5. Be content with these things that you have and Iam. 4. 7. and Luk. 3. 14. And we may say, if a Christian made the world but his servant, little would content him, but if once he make the world his master, and lord of his affections, then his desires will be infinit, and cannot at all be satis∣fied. We shall not long stand to inveigh against that too much addictedness of man to those passing and transient vanities of the world: we conceive there are these three things, which men do most earnestly covet, there is pleasure, riches, and ho∣nour; And certainly, these are below an immortal spirit, to fix their desires upon them: would ye have Solomons verdict of riches, O ye that trust in uncertain riches, ye have it sweetly in, Prov. 23. 5. Wilt thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? In a manner, riches they have not a being, for they take wings to themselves and they flee away, as Solomon doth most sweetly speak, Eccles. 5. 11. If riches increase, what profit (saith he) is there to the owner thereof, save to be beholder of them with their eyes: all that the owner of riches hath is, the seeing of them, which a man, who is a passer by may likewayes have, though he be not a possessor of them. And hence is
that word, L. k. 14. where the man desir∣ing to be excused for not coming to Christ; saith of himself, I have bought a piece of ground and must needs go see it; all his enjoyment of it was comprehended in that one poor thing, to behold it; And as for ho∣nour and glory, which, spirits that are more refined, and are not so wedded to the things of a world, pursue after, I would only have them knowing that one word, Psal. 62. 9. Men of high degree are a lie, and men of low degree are vanity: as if he would have said, any preheminency that one hath, that hath an excellent lot in the world above a poor one, doth consist in this, the one is a vanity, and the other is a lying vanity, speaking somewhat to be in him, which is not really in him; and that word, Act. 25. 23. where, speaking of Bernice, that came in with great pomp and glory unto the Senat-house, the word that is there rendered pomp and glory is this, he came in with a great fantasie , with a great show and image, without any thing in reality: And as for pleasures of the world, with which these epicurean spirits of the world are so much besotted, know that verdict of Solo∣mon, which he hath of these things. Vanity of vanities, and all things are vanity and vexa∣tion of spirit: And what can the man do
that cometh after the king? If Solomon found no more, no doubt, none that com∣eth after him, can find any more. But that which we shall speak to first upon this, shall be, what are the causes and principles from whence the discon∣tentment of one doth flow, under any an∣xious or sad lot that doth befal him? And we conceive that it either doth proceed from this, a Christian not being much in the exercise of selt-examination, as it is clear from that word, Psal. 4. 4. Examine your selves upon your bed and be still, speak∣ing so much, that the compendious way unto submission and contentment under any lot, is to be much in self-examination: And certainly self-examination hath much influence upon contentment under every lot, because such a one doth most accuratly take up these imperfections and blemishes that are in him, so in stead of complaining, he is constrained to wonder and cry forth, Why should a living man complain, a man for the punishment of his sin: likewayes one that is much in self-examination, is a man that can take up the intendment of the rod, as likewayes the advantage of it, and so he is constrained patiently to bear the rod, in his youth, and to sit down and adore the unsearchable wisdom of God in dis∣pensing such things to him. That word,
Prov. 19. 3. is oft-times verified of us, the heart of man perverteth his way, and then he fretteth against the Lord, when he is chastened for it. O! but if a Christian were dwelling much at home, he might wonder that yet he hath a being in the world, and is not cut off from the right hand of the Lord. O! bless him eternal∣ly that ye are not sent away to be reserved in everlasting chains. There is this likewayes that doth occa∣sion discontentment under our lot, and it is, want of that divine preparation to meet with every lot that can befal us before it come. We think a Christian ought to be general in his resolutions, to bear every cross that Christ will carve out. And cer∣tainly there are these two advantages that a Christian hath of general and universal resolutions. First he hath this advantage, that when he is chastened, as it were, in his goods or any other thing that belong∣eth to him, he beginneth to sing a song of praise, because it is not worse with him: there can no lot befal a man who is uni∣versal in his resolutions, but he will have a song of praise unto God, because of it. Secondly, he hath this advantage, that foresight and resolution to meet with any cross doth exceedingly dispose the Christi∣an for meeting with it: we conceive that
word which is, Iob 3. 25. hath had great in∣fluence on Iobs patience, for the thing which I greatly feared, is come upon me: afflicti∣ons do oft-times surprize us, and so we faint in the day of adversity, and so prove our strength to be but small. There is this likewayes which occasi∣oneth our discontentment, and it is this, that little heavenly mindedness, that is in a Christian, when he meeteth with his rod: O! but a Christian sitting down up∣on mount Pisgah, to behold that promised land, might with patience bear his rod: this is clear, 2 Cor. 4. 16. compared with vers. 17. where Paul giveth this reason of his courage and constancy under his rod, that he had an eye unto those things that were eternal: did ye never know what such a thing meant, as to drown the thoughts of your present misery, in these precious depths of eternity, to be behold∣ing so much in heaven, as might infinitly solace, yea, and make up all your losses here. I confess that opinion of the Stoicks, that did commend apathie and want of passions unto men, that they should not be much moved with grief for the want of any thing, nor be moved with joy for the having or possessing of any thing, is in some sense good: hence was it that in some sense they  divinely, nihil boni vel mali ac∣cidit
homini, nisi bonus vel malus animus; that there was no evil nor good that did befal man, but only a good and evil minde: If the heart was in a divine and spiritual frame, they knew not what any other sad or anxious lot could do to them. There is this likewayes which occasion∣eth discontentment, and it is this, the want of the taking up God as the cause and au∣thor of those sad evils which befal us; which if it were once believed, we should be ashamed to dispute and murmur so much as we do: this is clear, 1 Sam. 3. near the close, that word of Elies, It is the Lord, let him do what seemeth him good: and that word, Psal. 39. 9. I was dumb, I open∣ed not my mouth, and this reason is given of it, because thou didst it: and that word, Isa. 39. 8. Good is the word of the Lord, And certainly the murmurings and repin∣ings of our hearts, do speak that grosse Atheism that dwelleth within us: O! durst we debate with him who is Almighty, or put him to render an accompt of his ways, who is that supream and absolute One? Is it sit to be said to such a Prince as he is, thou art ungodly, and to condemn him who is most just? O! be much in the study of the soveraignty of God, when he, as it were, doth call as in asolemn assembly, all your terrors round about.
There is this lkewayes which doth oc∣casion it, which is, our little being in the meditation and serious thoughts of the bre∣vity of our life and of time: If a man knew that it were but for an hour, or for ten days that he were to endure tribulation, he might patiently submit, and bear with his rod: this is clear, 1 Cor. 7. 29. compared with the following verses, where, from that doctrine that time was short, he doth infer this exhorration, let those that weep, be as though they weeped not, as if he would have said, let them not be much moved with those things, time time will have a close: Believe me, it is not long before the small period of time that hath interveen∣ed betwixt eternity before, and eternity af∣ter, shall be sweetly swallowed up, and there shall be nothing but eternity. And there is this lastly which doth oc∣casion our great discontentment, under our rod, which is, that unmortifedness and subduedness of spirit: pride being the great predominant evil, and if we may allude to that word, Only by pride cometh contention; we may certainly say it holdeth well here, that only by pride are these contendings that we have with God, concerning his dispensations towards us. In sum, it is this, it is impossible for a Christian not humble, to be content:
pride is one of the greatcst opposites unto divine contentment under any rod that we meet with: O! but if a Christian were humble, he might sit in the dust, and sweetly adore the infinit love and patience of God. Now we shall in the second place pro∣pose some considerations, that may hinder a Christian, or any other, from being discontent with any lot that doth befal them; and the first is this, that there are many sad and wofull companions of a Christians discontentment and repyning against any dispensation of God, and we conceive there is not only this bad com∣panion, that a Christian hereby is in∣disposed and unfitted to go about spiritual duties, especially these two, of prayer and praise: It is impossible for a Chri∣stian that is under the exercise of discon∣tentment, to pray or praise; there is some what of this pointed at, 1 Tim. 2. 8. where this is a qualification of a right prayer, that he should be without wrath, not having any murmurings or repynings within his heart: as likewayes it is clear concerning praise, Psal. 57. 7. My heart is fixed, it is fixed, which speaketh so much as this, that praise doth require a divine and composed frame of spirit: and it is most certain, that discontentment doth
impede prayer, for there are three sweet ingredients of the exercise of prayer, which discontentment doth exceedingly cut off; there is love, fervency, and faith; which no doubt discontentment doth abridge; a discontented Christian cannot be a Christian burning with love; jea∣lousie is such a predominant with him, that love cannot be his exercise: And cer∣tainly, if prayer do not proceed from the precious principle of love, it wants that one arme which it ought to have: Neither can a Christian exercise faith, because he hath now, as it were, taken up so bad an opinion of God, that he can∣not repose his confidence not hope in him: And as for fervency, they are so much in porring upon their present lot, that they can as it were, be servent about nothing, but only in the removal of that. It is cer∣tain, that let a Christian examine himself, there is nothing that cuts the neck of prayer so much as discontent; in a man∣ner, the spirit as it were, is turned bru∣tish, being uncomposed for any spiri∣tual converse with God. There is this bad companion likewayes, which accompanieth discontentment, we are incapacitat, and rendered altogether unable to resist temptations, while dis∣contentment is in exercise. It is impos∣sible
for a Christian to be a Mortifier, or resister of lust, when discontentment is once in exercise; And there are these two evils, that get most marvelous ad∣vantage under discontentment, and these are, the predominant lust of such a one, be what it will, and pride, these two evils do spring apace: And certainly, all other lusts do get much victory over such a one: a Christian may losse more by one hours discontentment under a crosse, then he can regain in many Months, yea on this side of eternity: And it is no wonder that temptations do prevail upon such a one, he is off his watch, and his strength is gone: In a manner, temptation speaketh that, Their strength is gone from them, let us go up and put them to flight. There is this bad companion like∣wayes, that doth accompany discontent∣ment, want of tenderness of spirit, and the losse of it. It is most certain, that there is nothing that doth cut off tenderness, so much as discontentment: for a Chri∣stian that is such, is not living under the impression of the fear or of the love of the Almighty, which are the two great principles of tenderness of spirit. Cer∣tainly, let one examine. they will find, that by their anxiety and briterness of
spirit, they have made their hearts to die as a stone within them, and have made their bands strong upon their spirits. And there is this last bad companion of discontentment, A Christians under∣valuing of all the former mercies which he hath received, when once a Christian meeteth with that which contradicteth his humor, he loseth his esteem of every thing that formerly hath been bestowed upon him: There is something of this pointed at, Gen. 37. last in Jacobs im∣patiency of the losse of Ioseph; where he doth undervalue all his mercies beside; And it is most clear in that word, Esth. 5. 12, 13. where, though it be spoken of a wicked man, yet by proportion it holdeth of a Christian, that because Mordecai did not bow his knee, he cried sorth, concerning all his other mercies, they avail me nothing; he knew not what it was to put a price upon mercies that he had received; but because this which was the great lust of his heart was away, he did undervalue the rest: And it is most certain, that there is nothing doth so highten a Christians disrespect unto the most precious and excellent things of God, as this of discontent: And this is one subtilty and device of Sathan, that a Christian may with greater ease, and
with lesse conviction do it: They do or∣dinarily construct their choisest mercies, to be delusions, and so upon that account begin to undervalue and misprize them. There is this consideration which may move you to wrestle against discontent∣ment, It is a character and distinguish∣ing mark of a Christian from a Reprobat: I would have Murmurers seriously to me∣ditate upon that sad word, which is in Jude. 19. vers. compared with the 15. where speaking of Christs coming to judge and execure vengeance, the first put in the roll are these, These are Mur∣murers and complainers: and that word 1 Cor. 10, 10. Be not murmurers, as many of them were; and were destroyed by the destroy∣er: And certainly, it is no wonder that Murmuring passe under so bad a notion, not only because it is indeed that sin, which speaketh out our Atheisme most, but because it is that sin which doth de∣clare most a Christian or any others desire to be independent, and not in sub∣jection unto God. In a manner, such is the woful ambition of our spirit, that we desire not to depend upon him, but that we should have our own lot in our own hand, to carve out unto our selves. O! we know not what it is to give Christ a negative vote in the dispensations that
do befal us: we love to be co-ordinat with God, and not subordinat to him. O put a blank in his hand, desire him to fill it up with what he liketh: Christ doth oft-times put a blank in a Christians hand, as in that word, What will ye that I should do unto you, there is Christs blank, that he doth give us, and though thorow our ignorance we cannot fill it up, it is best to give it back to himself, that he may fill it up, with what he listeth. There is this consideration also, that may perswade you to desist from discon∣tentment; It is that sin which doth in∣terrupt the accomplishment of the pro∣mises. As likewayes it doth interrupt the exercise of faith upon the promises; this is clear, Num. 14, 27. compared with 28. where that promise that was given to them of entering into the land of Canaan, they were cut short of it, because of their murmuring: and it doth interrupt the exercise of faith upon the promises, as is clear, Psal. 106, 24. compared with vers. 25. where it is said, they believed not his word, and the ground of it is given, for they were murmurers: And it is no wonder that murmuring interrupt the exercise of faith upon the promises; for it is impossible for a murmurer either to have the faith of the omnipotency of God,
or to have the faith of his goodness or love, which are these two precious pillars of faith upon which it must build it self: O! but these that begin once to debate with him, do quickly put faith out of exercise. And I would have you know∣ing this, That there is a discontentment of judgment, and a discontentment of the will and affections; and oft-times a Christian will win over the discontent∣ment of judgment and reason, when he cannot mortifie the discontentment of his will and affections; for the soveraignty of God; and the sinfulness of our nature, will silence our reason; but, no doubt, it must be his own immediat hand, that must silence the murmurings of our will: this is clear, Psal. 42. 5. where David is convinced of the unreasonableness of his discontent, and yet he is forced to debate with his will concerning the quiting of it. There is this consideration likewayes, which may provoke you to desist from discontentment under your lot; It is a most unreasonable evil for a Christian to be discontent. for as Christ speaketh Math. 6. 27. What profit have you by taking thought? Can you add one cubit to your stature? It is a poor thing, when a man hath lost his good, to losse his pati∣ence
also: what a poor revenge is that which a man taketh of himself? And certainly, the unreasonableness of impa∣tience under the rod, doth not on∣ly appear in this, that it hindereth and interrupteth a Christians seeing of any mercy that is in the rod, it is im∣possible for a discontented one to take up mercy in his stroak: but also that im∣patience is the compendious way, for the prolonging of your strait; and the involv∣ing of you in greater miseries and thral∣doms: As likewayes, impatience doth heighten and increase the cause of your bondage, and multiplieth your iniquities: O! but it is a sweet and excellent study for a Christian, to endeavour patience under every lot? And, in a manner, when we cannot read love in his hand, nor in his face, because of his frowns and stroaks, yet by faith to draw aside the vail, and read love in his heart, and cry forth, I know the thoughts of his heart, that they are thoughts of peace, and not of evil: Certainly it is through discontentment, that we cry forth, Though his words be as soft as oil and butter, yet war is in his heart; we do change him with contradictions, betwixt his profession and his purpose. And there is this consideration like∣wayes, which may deter you from dis∣contentment,
which is this, It is im∣possible for a Christian to profite by his rod, while he is discontent: all the time that a Christian is under the fit of impa∣tience, he spendeth so much of his time most prodigally: not imploying it, not promoving that which is the great design of the rod, to take away Sin, but studying to involve himself in greater captivity and bondage, and to subject himself under the hand of his iniquities. O! that ye might be perswaded to exercise more divine contentment under your lot, and that ye may be more exercised in contem∣plating and beholding those precious and excellent things that are above. That is a most remarkable word which Iacob had to Esau, Gen. 33. 11. I have enough: the word in the original is this, I have all: And as Criticks do observe, that word which Esau had in the 8. verse: I have enough, is not that which Iacob hath in the 11. vers, I have enough; that though Iacob was a poorer man then Esau, yet he had all: Such a Christian as hath Christ for his portion, may sweetly sing, though I be poor, yet do I possesse all things, as having nothing, and yet possessing all things, as sorrowing, yet alwayes rejoycing as poor and yet behold we are rich. It is not long before that day shall come, when
Christ shall make up his Iewles, when there shall be a clear and most palpable differ∣ence made betwixt the precious and the vile: Behold he is upon his way, and therefore do not murmur nor repine: A Christian must not expect two heavens, it is enough, if he possesse one, we must not travel to heaven thorow a bed of roses, it is not much though we go to heaven in a fiery chariot, having afflictions and calamity our companions all alongs the way: when our feet shall be passing thorow the thereshold of the door of our everlasting rest, then our chains shall fall from our hands, and our fetters from our feet, then might we lift up our heads with joy and rejoyce. O! but when those heavens which you behold shall be rolled up as a scroll, when those two great vails, the visible vail of the heavens, and the invisible vail of iniquity shall be rent from the top to the bottom, and we shall have most clear and precious discoveries of that noble plant of renown, when we shall sit down at the well head and drink, and forget our misery, and remember our poverty no more: let hope evanish unto fruition, and saith unto possession, and let time sweetly eva∣nish unto eternity.
SERMON X. Phil. 4. 11. I have learned in what∣soever state I am, therewith to be content. IT is an ordinary and usual error and delusion among Christians, that they place the exercise of religion in these duties that are more sublime and high unto their apprehension, as faith, hope, and prayer, but undervalue the ex∣ercise of those lower duties as contentment, mortification to the world, and charity to the poor, as not being so essentially neces∣sary for the being of a Christian. I am per∣swaded, that if any of you had been a hearer of the Apostle Iames, when he was discoursing upon that divine subject, wherein pure Religion and undefiled did consist, no doubt, ye would have imagin∣ed, that he would have brought forth some divine and profound thing, in the exercise of which, pure Religion before God and the Father, did consist: but believe me, Religion doth more consist in practice, then in speculation, and more in obedi∣ence, then in refined notions: What con∣ceive ye of such a definition of pure Reli∣gion
and undefiled, as that which is Jam. 1. 27. Pure religion and undefiled doth con∣sist in mortification to the world, and in charity to the poor, those two low under∣valued duties. And this may further in∣gratiate and commend the exercise of these low and undervalued duties, that in the day when Christ shall appear to judge the quick and the dead, the ground of the ap∣probation of the Saints shall be founded upon this low and contemptible duty, charity to the poor, and shall be that ground which is given of that eternal blessedness, which approbation of Jesus Christ, no doubt is a confirmation of Iames his do∣ctrine: and that which shall be the ground of the reprobation of the wicked, shall be the neglect of this low duty, want of cha∣rity to the poor, and visiting of the fatherless: And believe me, in the exercise of this di∣vine quality of Christian-contentment, not a little of religion doth consist: Paul saith, Godliness with contentment is great gain. It is by faith, that a Christian enjoyeth God, it is by love that he enjoyeth his neighbour, and by contentment that he enjoyeth himself. We confess, it is a most mysterious and difficult lesson for a Chri∣stian in each lot he is placed in, to be cry∣in forth, It is good for me to be here, let me make a tabernacle here. Ordinarily we have
strong desires to have the carving out of our own lo. Solomon maketh mention of three things, that are not satisfied, and of four things that never say it is enough, the grave, the barren womb, the earth that is not filled with water; and the fire. And we may adde unto these four, this one fifth, the most part of men who are unsatisfied in their lot: It is no wonder that men unlimited in their desires, meet with great disap∣pointments, for those that have exorbitant and excentrick desires, must have great hopes, as likewayes great disappoint∣ments: Therefore it were certainly your advantage, to be studying to compendize and abridge your desires after these things that are here below: for as one spoke well, he conceived that the greatest riches of a man did consist in poverty of desires, and in being content with that lot, wherein God had placed him. There are only these three things that befala Christian, under which it is great difficulty for him to at∣tain to contentment; there is the losse of his predominant lust and idol, especially if it be any whit refined and vailed under the vail and vizard of any vertue, as if one be given unto the seeking of the applause of the world there is nothing under which there is so great a difficulty to exercise con∣tentment, as in the losing of that applause,
our hearts oft-times crying forth, they have taken away my gods, and what have I more? And certainly, oft-times our lusts die unto us, before we die unto them, which is the occasion that our living lusts, do sit down and lament over the graves of our buried idols, and wisheth that they may awake and stand up from the dead. And we shall only say to such, Wo to you, when all men shall speak well of you, which may hin∣der people from pursuing after that idol, but much more especially that word, Ioh. 5. 44. How can ye believe, that seek glo∣ry one of another; which words seem to import an inconsistency betwixt the exer∣cise of faith, and betwixt the exercise of pursuit after idols. There is this likewayes that befalleth a Christian, under which it is a great diffi∣culty for him to attain to contentment, and that is the continuance and lengthning forth of any affliction that doth befal him: Oft-times a Christian, when first he meet∣eth with his crosse, will salute and imbrace it, and will cry forth, this is a grief, and I must bear it: but when the threed of our affliction is spun out unto any length, then we begin to be discontent and to cry forth, hast thou found me, O thou mine enemy? This was clear in the exercise of Iob, who when first he met with his crosse, did express di∣vine
contentment under a most eminent way, crying forth, blessed be the Name of the Lord; when he was made to possesse months of vanity, and wearisome nights were appointed for him, then he cryeth forth, I choose strangling and death, ra∣ther than life. And we shall only say to such, be much in the meditation of that precious and immense hope, and go up to the top of Mount Pisgah, and there be with Moses in the viewing of that land which is afar'off. As likewayes, study to seal that divine conclusion, that he doth all things well. There is this thirdly which befalleth a Christian, under which he hath a great difficulty to exercise contentment, which is, poverty and want in the world. Solo∣mon who was well acquainted with his own heart, and knew well his unsuitable∣nesse to bear such a crosse, cryeth forth, Prov. 30. 8, 9. Give me not poverty, least I steal, and take the name of my God in vain. It is certain, that to exercise faith upon God, for the receipt of common mercies, is more difficult, then to exercise faith on God for our eternal salvation, and for our interest in Iesus Christ. And we conceive, that the reason why a Christian findeth greater difficulty, to exercise faith upon God, for the receipt of these common mercies, then
for the receiving of that eardinal and un∣speakable mercy, salvation through Iesus Christ, to be either this, that faith, when it is exercised upon the one, most simply and immediately relyeth upon the omni∣potency and faithfulness of God, abstracted from all other props and considerations, for there, sense and reason doth contradict the exercise of faith; but when Christians do exercise faith upon God for righteous∣nesse and salvation, they ordinarily have either somewhat of sense or somewhat of holy reason, that doth under-prop and help their faith: And this likewayes is the occasion of it, that not so ordinarily a Christian is put to the excercise of the one, as unto the exercise of the other: But be∣lieve me, It is no small difficulty, for a Christian to act confidence upon God, when he is redacted unto a low and pinch∣ing estate in the world: And we shall on∣ly say to such who murmure and repine under such an estate; cast your eyes upon him who was the the heir of all things, of whom it is recorded, that he had not so much as where to lay his head. As likewayes, cast your eyes upon a number of that preci∣ous cloud of witnesses, who are now en∣tred into the everlasting possession of that precious and excellent lot, who were con∣strained to wander in dens and caves of the
earth, having sheep and goat-skins for their cloathing. Ye are now in the estate of your minority, and therefore ye are rich but in hope and expectation, and so ye may dispense, though ye be not rich in possession; though we may say, a Christian that hath him who is all in all, must of necessity enjoy all and all. Now that which we shall further speak upon this divine quality of content∣ment, besides these things which we spoke at the lost occasion, we shall point out a little, the difficulty of attaining unto contentment under every lot and estate that a Christian falleth in: The difficulty of it is fully shown in that word, I have learned, as it were, it speaketh so much as this, once Paul was an ignorant of this mysterious lesson of divine contentment, but he was instructed by him, who is that Prince of Pastors, by whom he did attain to the knowledge of this: and this speaketh forth the difficulty of it, that a Christian must be much in self exami∣nation, and self searching before he can attain unto contentment: there is some∣what of this poninted at, Psal. 4. 4. Exa∣mine your selves upon your beds, and there is a promise annexed to this, and ye shall be still, or be still: And the influence that self-examination hath upon this divine qua∣lity
of contentment, may not only ap∣pear in this, that a Christian who i much in reflecting upon himself, taketh up ordinarily a suitableness betwixt th crosse and his humour, as it were, he seeth infinit wisdom shining, in carving ou such a lot and dispensation unto him, and so is constrained to adore the unsearch∣able riches of the wisdom of God: A like wayes, its influence may be showen in this, that a Christian who is much in self-examination, doth behold such spo and blemshes in himself, that he is forced to wonder, that it is not worse with him, and so is constrained to glorifie God in th fire. I confesse, it may be a wonder that this is not a wonder unto a Christian every day, that he is not consumed, and cut off from his right hand. O! tha ye would once be much in the study o your self: That ancient advice of a hea∣then, , know your self, were worthy to be practised by all Christians; we are too much roving abroad, and too little at home. It is reported of some Beasts, that they have eyes to see abroad but have no eyes to see at home; which no doubt is the case and exercise of th most part who live in these dayes. This likewayes pointeth forth the dif¦ficulty of attaining to this duty of con∣tentment,
that a Christian before he can attain it, must be much in the exercise of these two cardinal graces, Faith and love; certainly, till once we be studying the exercise of them, contentment will be at a low and weak standing with us: And no doubt, the exercise of faith, not only in concluding out interest in Iesus Christ, and in sealing that conclusion, that he is ours, is most necessary for attaining of contentment; but likewayes the exercise of faith for attaining of contentment may be showen in this, that faith is that grace, which is the best interpreter of the dis∣pensations of God: This may be re∣corded to the commendation of the grace of faith, that it knoweth not, what it is to bring up a bad report upon God. And certainly as long as we consult with these three bad counsellors, sense, reason, and misbelief about the dispensations of God, this will be the result of that counsel, to have sorrow in your heart dayly, but study to imploy that wise counsellor Faith, which sometimes, because it is so intelligent a grace, is called understanding, as is clear from Col. 2. 2. Now this is clear, that faith hath influence upon content∣ment, 2 Sam. 23. 5. where David from this, that God had made with him an ever∣lasting
covenant, he cryeth forth, I am not much anxious, though other things should fail, and though my house should not he so with God As likewayes it is clear, Psal. 142. 4, 5. where the exercise of saith upon this, that God was his portion, made him with patience to submit though all refuge should fail him., and though none upon his right hand, or his left hand should care for his soul; As likewayes, Psal. 37. 1. compared with vers. 3. where he presseth that duty of trusting in God, by which they may obviat the exercise of discontent and fretting. Love likewayes no doubt, must be exercised, before a Christian do attain unto this divine quali∣ty of contentment: There are these two precious properties of love which are given, 1 Cor. 13. 4, 5. Love endureth long, and love thinketh no evil, which, no doubt, have great influence upon contentment; we confesse, love sometimes is the most impatient grace of a Christian, and sometimes the most patient grace of a Christian; in a manner, love when it is in its most vigorous exercise, will endure more sad afflictions then faith; Faith sometime will be languishing and giving over, when love will support and strength∣en it, it being affraid to seal that woful
conclusion, that he is not ours; love know∣eth not what it is to intertain, jealous thoughts of him, who is the lover, it thinketh no evil: And certainly, when the grace of love is in its vigorous exercise, it is most tender to act any thing, by which the person that is loved may be wronged, or a bad report may be brought up upon him. A Christian that is united unto precious Christ, by that golden and invisible chain of his beauty, and tran∣scendent excellency, can with patience endure the losse of all things beside Christ; love is peremptory in nothing but this, the enjoyment of the loved: And love is sorrowful for nothing, but the losse of him who is loved: he moveth in so high a sphere, and is so far elevat above all things that are here below, that in a manner, he possesseth his soul in patience in the midst of those revolutions and changes that are here below; in a manner, the grace of love doth incorporat a Chri∣stian in Iesus Christ, and doth make him to dwell in Christ as his mansion and house, and so he is not much taken up with those things that are abroad. There is this likewayes, which speak∣eth forth the difficulty of attaining unto divine contentment, and it is this, a
Christian must be much in the exercise of the grace of Mortification to all these pas∣sing and transient vanities of the world; do not these risings and murmurings of spirit; speak the little exercise of Mor∣tification that is amongst us? for if we were once mortified to the world, we should then exercise contentment under every lot: this is clear from the com∣paring of these two places, Psal. 119. 29. where David saith, I have seen an end of all perfection, which speaketh forth that distinct discovery that he had of the va∣nity of the world: in a manner, he had it brought within his sight, which is one of the most unerring senses, compared with that most remarkable place; which breaths forth much of divine contentment in him, 2 Sam. 15. 25, 26. where he saith, But if he say, I have no delight in thee, behold, here am I, let him do unto me, as seemeth good unto him. Here, in a manner, is David making a resignation of his crown, and seeing an end of the perfection of that glistering and passing vanity. As like∣wayes it may be shown from the paral∣leling of these two places, Gal. 6. 14. where Paul saith of himself, I am crucified to the world, and the world is crucified to me; in a manner, Paul and the world made a
sorrowlesse parting, as two dead men parting one from another: and the words that we have read, where he breatheth forth this divine quality of contentment. I think certainly, a Christian reflecting upon the changeableness, inconstancy and vexation of things here below, will not be much moved with the losse of them. It was upon this ground that heathens did attain unto such a length in this divine quality of contentment, for they behold∣ing, that fear and desires were the two inseparable companions of those that had most of these fancied delights of the world; for even those that have the greatest a bun∣dance, are vexed betwixt these two pas∣sions, fear and desire: fear to losse what they have attained, and desire to attain more: We conceive, that it is a remark∣able thing that is recorded of Sesostris King of Egypt, who was so ambitious, that he would needs have his Chariot drawn with four Kings, one of which had his eye continually upon the motion of the wheel of the Chariot, which the King observing, did ask him the ground why he did so exercise himself? He did most fitly reply, it putteth me in mind of the mutability and changeableness of the things of the world; for, saith he, the highest part of the wheel
is instantly the lowest part, and the lowest part of the wheel, is in∣stantly the highest; which moved that ambitious Prince to desist from so ambi∣tious a practice: And believe me, if ye would read that inscription upon the fore∣head of all things, vanity and vexation of spirit, ye might easily attain unto con∣tentment. There is this fourthly which speaketh forth the difficulty of attaining unto con∣tentment, that a Christian before he win to it, must necessarily be mortified unto that innate and connatural idol of pride: Pride must be once brought low, before contentment can be attained: We con∣ceive, discontent and pride have sworn a covenant of agreement, that they shall be undivided in their life, and undivided in death, they are chained together by an unchangeable chain of amity; and believe me, it is impossible for a Chri∣stian to be discontent, but he must of necessity be proud; And upon the con∣trary, a Christian that is proud, he must of necessity be a discontented one; for there is nothing that is the mother of contentment so much, as humility, which moveth, a Christian silently to bear his yoke, and to sit down, and put his mouth
in the dust, because he hath done it. In a manner, a humble one, and one that hath distinct knowledge of his own basenesse, knoweth not what it is to cry forth, Why am I thus? such a one is much in admiration, and little under murmuring, much in praise, and little in complaint. There is this lastly, which pointeth forth the difficulty of it, a Christian can∣not win to contentment, without he be much in heavenly mindedness, and have his spirit in a spiritual and heavenly frame. There is somewhat of this point∣ed at. Ioh. 14. 1. compared with the 2. vers. where Christ proposing a remedy unto the discontentment of the Disciples, that their souls should not be troubled, he doth begin a discourse of heaven, that in his Fathers house were many mansions, and that they had an interest into it: As like∣wayes, there is somewhat of this pointed at, Matth. 6. 25, 26. where to obviat their taking thought what they should eat, or what they should drink, or where∣with they should be cloathed, he desireth them to seek first the Kingdom of God. And certainly one that is much taken up in the contemplation of eternal life, and who is viewing these precious and end∣lesse
delights that are at his right hand, moveth in a most composed and divine frame, in a manner, he drowneth the thoughts of his present miseries, in those precious depths of eternity; he knoweth that one moment of the enjoyment of precious Christ, shall fully recompense and make up all those sorrows that he hath met with. I know not what shall be the thoughts of Christians, when that volumn of the mercies of the Lord, shall be presented unto them, which they have met with here below: how may they be filled with admiration to see that book written within and without, of the re∣ceipts of most singular and precious de∣monstrations of his love. We shall secondly speak a little to provoke you to the pursuit of this divine quality, and so to these advantages that a Christian hath by exercising content∣ment under every lot: We conceive, it is so excellent a grace, this grace of contentment, that it is indeed a com∣pound of these five graces, faith, humi∣lity, patience, hope and mortification; in a manner contentment is the result of all these graces, exercising themselves in one; and except those be in a most vi∣gorous exercise, that absolute content∣ment
is not easily to be attained: but no doubt, it must be an excellent thing that deriveth its pedegree and descent from so high and excellent things, as those precious graces of the spirit. But the first advantage that a Christian hath by di∣vine contentment, under his sadest lot, is this, it doth advance a Christian unto most nigh fellowship and correspondence with God; as likewayes a contented one receiveth most sweet manifestations of the presence and fellowship of God with him under his cross: It is most certain, that contentment when it is attained, is or∣dinarily accompanied with most near∣nesse and correspondence with him: there is somewhat of this pointed at, Heb. 13. 5. Where pressing that doctrine of contentment, he saith, the Lord will not leave you nor forsake you, which, though we confess it be principally understood of his providence yet it may include the ma∣nifestations of his presence: as likewise that in Iam. 4. 7. Humble your selves under his band, which he is pressing from this duty of contentment, and he shall lift you up: And no doubt, that invitation doth oft∣times come to a contented Christian, Come unto me from Amana, and from the top of Shenir, and from the mount Leba∣non, Can. 4. 8. Christ loveth to dwell
with one that walketh in a composed and silent frame of spirit: And the rea∣son why a contented Christian enjoyeth much of God under his crosse, is because he is much in prayer: It is impossible for a discontented Christian to pray to any purpose under his crosse, for he wanteth that divine qualification that is required in prayer, to lift up his hands without wrath, the soul is in such a con∣fused and distempered frame, it is so trou∣bled that it cannot speak; this is clear from Psal. 77. 4. or 5. vers. where David had this advantage by his discon∣tent, I am so troubled, (saith he) that I cannot speak: though we conceive that there is that which is imitable in David in that case, that a Chri∣stian, when he cannot speak, he may make this prayer, I am so troubled that I cannot speak, which was Davids pra∣ctice in that Psalm. There is this se∣cond advantage that a Christian hath by the exercise of divine contentment, the want of it doth exceedingly ob∣struct and hinder a Christians improv∣ing for the crosse of his advantage: a Christian that is discontent cannot re∣ceive any advantage by his crosse; there is somewhat of this pointed, Heb. 12. 11. where the peaceable fruits of righteous∣ness
flow to a Christian that is exer∣cised under his crosse, which no doubt doth take in the divine quality of con∣tentment. There are these three preci∣ous advantages, that a Christian may have by his crosse, which discontent doth exceedingly obstruct, there is the exer∣cise of humility, the exercise of prayer, and the exercise of mortification: one that is discontent, doth obstruct that great advantage of the crosse, even hu∣mility; he is so much in repining against the dispensation of God, that he cannot at all sit down, and fold his feet, and quietly bear his yoke. O! but con∣tentment includeth in its bosome much divine humility: In a manner, a Chri∣stian, when he is content, is clothed with it: discontentment is the mother of pride, and doth add fuel unto that fire: discontent doth likewayes obstruct mortification and conformity with God, which is the precious end of the crosse, he doth chastise us, that we may be par∣takers of his holinesse: And this is the fruit of all these things, to take away your sin. And certainly, a discontent∣ed Christian cannot be a Christian ta∣ken up in mortification; yea it is most certain, that a Christian may losse more by one hours discontent, then he can
gain in many dayes, yea on this side of eternity; O! to what a length may discontent lead one? Likewayes it doth obstruct the exercise of prayer, which is a precious end of the crosse, in their affliction they will seek me early, and when my chastening hand is upon them, they will then pour forth their prayers into my bo∣som: but one that is in a distempered and discontented frame, is incapacitate to go about this duty of prayer, he is so much in conversing with his crosse, that he cannot be much in conversing with God: And that is certainly one great defect in a Christian, that they are more taken up in studying the dis∣advantages of the crosse, then in study∣ing the advantages of it; the most part of us, will be Orators like Cicero in de∣claiming our calamities, and in setting them forth to the full, as it is clear in Iob, who proved a most elegant Ora∣tor in setting forth his calamities, but in the exercise of praise, our tounges stick to the roof of our mouth, and we are silent unto God. There is this third advantage that a Christian hath by the exercise of contentment, it doth obviat and obstruct many temptations, that a Christian is lyable unto by his discon∣tentment.
I know not any sin in Scrip∣ture that hath produced such bad and woful effects, as that sin of discontent∣ment: what made Achitophel to seek a cord, and go hang himself, was it not his discontent? discontent is the mother of most sad and desperat resolutions; for we cannot submit unto our crosse, and therefore we study to extricat our self out of our crosse, by envolving and entring our selves into that endless and unsupportable crosse. Therefore we would desire you under your afflictions to study contentment: O! what athe∣istical thoughts will lodge in the bosom of one that is discontent: we may see them clearly in the practice of David, who cryeth forth, under his discontent∣ment, I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in innocency. Cer∣tainly there is nothing that will occa∣sion the want of the faith of the ex∣istency of a Deity, and that there is not a God, so much as this of discontent∣ment. There is this fourth advantage that a Christian hath by his content∣ment, it maketh the crosse most easie to a Christian: would you know what is the greatest ingredient of the heaviness of any crosse, it is discontent: It is cer∣tain,
by it we make our chain more heavy and more unsupportable upon our necks; whileas, if we were study∣ing this divine quality of contentment, it should abate much of the bitterness of the crosse: we may say to one that hath attained to contentment, they may cry forth, the bitternesse of death is past, and may thus triumph over their crosse, O crosse where is thy sting, and O afflicti∣on, where is your victory? Certainly, discontent is that which maketh us to sit down, and cry forth, my stroak is heavier then my groaning. Did you ne∣ver know what it was to bear your affliction with much inward joy and peace of mind, when you had this grace of contentment? There is this advantage likewayes that a Christian hath by exercising contentment under his crosse, that he meeteth with; It is a compendious way for a Christian to win to an outgate under his crosse. Would you know what is the most compendious way, to have the threed of your affliction spun out unto a long length? then study discontentment: But would you know what is the most spiri∣tual and compendious way to have
the rod taken off, and to have God, no more to turn about the face of his Throne? then study content∣ment: In a manner, the crosse hath gotten and obtained that end and errand why it was sent, when you do attain to contentment and humi∣lity under it: We may say of the sin of discontent, that it is a most irrational and reasonless sin, for you cannot by your discontent, extricate your self out of your calamities; all the advantage that you have by it is this, to make your bonds strong∣er upon your spirits, and to have your fetters and chains lying more heavily upon you. There is this advantage likewayes that a Christian hath by the exer∣cise of contentment under every rod that he meeteth with, it is that di∣vine quality of the soul by which a Christian doth attain to most morti∣fication unto the pleasures and vani∣ties of a world. O! how sweetly will a contented Christian, under the losse of things here below, speak to the dispraise of these fancied images? It is a poor sight, to behold a li∣ving substance tyed unto shaddows
by these two iron chains of love and delight. Ought we not to stu∣dy so much holy ambition and spi∣ritual generosity, as to undervalue all things that are below God, as be∣ing below us? In a manner, as Ionadab spoke to Amnon, 2 Sam. 13, 4. Why art thou, being a kings son, lean from day to day? We may like∣wayes bespeak the heirs of the pro∣mise, and those that are begotten by a lively hope, who being the chil∣dren of him who is the King of kings, do you wax lean for the losse or want of those things that are here below? Have you not a kingdom? And why then should you repine at the losse of these things, which are but passing and transient vanities? That which is the great idol of the world, silver and gold, what is it but more re∣fined dust? It is white and yel∣low clay: And we conceive, that much of the excellency of it doth consist in the estimation of men, that they have so valued it: but one that hath the assurance of eternal life, and that God is their's, may walk thorow the wildernesse with joy. We
confesse, it is an evil amongst the heirs of promise, that they love to go to heaven thorow a most easie and pleasant way, they love to walk to that palace of everlasting rest, thorow a valley of roses; but we must not meet with two heavens, it is abundance, if we have that one eternal and everlasting heaven. And as for the cause of discontent under our crosse, or any calamity that we meet with, we conceive pride and want of mortification are those two catholick and general grounds of all our discontent and impatiency. We shall shut up our discourse upon this divine quality of content∣ment, desiring that men that have abundance of the world may study contentment: though this may seem a paradox unto many, why those that have enough, should yet be de∣sired to pursue after contentment: We conceive, there are none more discontent, then those that have the greatest occasion of contentment; their desires are so much wedded un∣to things here below, that that voice is never heard among them, It is enough, and I am satisfied: I con∣ceive,
that may fully confute that vain opinion that Christians and others do intertain, that if they had such a competency of the world, they would be discontent no more, but would silently make on in their way; and that which is the ground of their discontent is (as they al∣ledge) the want of a competency of subsistency: I shall only say to you, that which is recorded of Alex∣ander, who after he had purchased the possession of the world, he was so far from attaining to contentment that (as it is recorded of him) he sat down and wept, because there was not another world to purchase. And believe me, this is most unde∣niable, that if you cannot attain to contentment under your present lot, it is impossible for you to attain to contentment when your lot is better; It is only the delusion of Sathan, un∣der which the evil of your discontent is vailed. But as for those that have abun∣dance of these worldly goods, we shall presse this exhortation upon them which is, Prov. 23. 4. Labour not to be rich, which is a thing that ye will
not easily close with, though certain∣ly riches (as he there most divine∣ly speaketh) are a thing that is not. Now this is most clear that there is a necessity of pressing these, who have abundance of the world to be con∣tent, where Paul doth subjoyn in the following words, I know (saith he) how to abound. People might have imagined, that is no great les∣son, but believe me, it is a great, if not greater, then the other, which is that by which we would presse con∣tentment to those that are poor in each lot and estate that they fall in here below: know this that the day is coming, when ye shall acknowledge infinit wisdom in guiding you to heaven by that way. O give Christ a negative vote in the dispensation of your lots, and be content to be regulated by him, who is that won∣derful counsellor, who, though he lead you by a way that ye know not, yet take Christs advice upon implicite faith, for he knoweth not what it is to disappoint any of their expecta∣tion. Study contentment, for that is heaven brought down to earth: for what is the happinesse and blessed∣nesse
of those that are above? It is confined in this one word, Con∣tentment; they have now all anxie∣ty, and all loathing, and all desires save one, taken away from them▪ O I what a life must it be to drink of the rivers of pleasures? Did you ever know or read of such a river, the waters whereof were pure delight and pleasure? when we shall sit down, and be overjoyed with these consola∣tions, that shall flow from his face, when we shall draw forth that end∣lesse line and period of eternity, in having joy and light flowing in, admi∣ration and praise flowing out: be∣lieve me, the gleanings of a Chri∣stian, are better then the vintage of a re∣probate; Little that a righteous man hath, is better, then the riches of ma∣ny wicked, for it is a messenger of hope, of that more enduring substance which Christ shall give; And since it is the exercise of those▪ that are above, let it be the exercise▪ of those that are below, that there may be a sweet conformity and harmony be∣twixt the practice of that higher house, and the practice of this lower house, that we may have our souls united
unto him who is perfumed with all the powders of the merchant, and whose garments do smell of myrrhe and aloes. Believe this, time shortly is to have a period, and eternity is to come. Let a Christian comfort himself in this, eternity is at hand, when they shall hear that voice, and truth sealed by the oath of an Angel, time shall be no more: Let that precious day come, and let all other dayes passe away. FINIS.
