H2857 99860609 112733
Horrible Newes from HVLL. VVherein is declared how the Kings Majesty, attended by the Prince and 400. Horsemen, and 700 footmen are gone to besiege HVLL. Likewise foure of the Kings Ships un∣der the Command of the Palsgrave, and the Earle of Danbie, which have endeavored to mount Ordnance against the said Towne on the other side of Humber. Also His Majesties Resolution to take up Armes against all those that shall oppose Him. With many Remarkeable Passages concerning the last meeting of the Gentry and Commonalty of Yorkshire on Thursday last the 7. of Iuly. Whereunto is annexed A Remarkeable Report concerning the Lord Digbie. Ordered that this be Printed and Published. Io: Browne, Cler. Parl. Iuly, 11. LONDON, Printed for I. H. and T. Ryder, 1642.
Exceeding true Newes from HULL IT is a horrible thing for us that are Subjects to the King of England, we that have lived so many yeares under a peaceable government, and enjoyed the fruits of our Vinyard, yea all the blessings that could be heaped upon a Nation, to make it happy, that now after these Halcion daies, a storme threating so much danger should eclipse the Sunne and usher on destructi∣on, what greater terrour can there be im∣magined to fall upon a Kingdome (so great) as Civill Warres, the King against his peo∣ple, the Sonne against his Father, when blood, revenge, and slaughter will tryumph
and revell in our Cities, our Wives and Children ravished and destroyed before our faces, we our selves spectators of such horri∣ble and unhumane Tragedies, being in no waves able to helpe or defend them; these are the effects of Civill discords, and have we not just cause to feare that such will be the event of these Distractions, for these dis∣contents betweene the King and Parliament, vomited by the malignant party hath alrea∣dy wrought a sad effect. For His Majesty hath declared his irefull Resolution, conceiving all those that have opposed him, and that shall oppose him, by whose hand or by whose directions soe∣ver it was done in both cases, by the helpe of God, for he will have justice, or else loose his owne life in the requiring of it. Likewise his Maiesty declares, that if it be possible for his Subjects to beleeve that such a defence of himselfe with the utmost power he can make, Be raising Warre against the Parliament, he doubts not (howsoever it shall please God to deale with him in this
contention) but that the justice of his cause will at last prevaile against all those that have for their owne ends corrupted the un∣derstanding of the people. Likewise it is apparent that his Majesty intends to put this his resolution in speedy execution, For the King is gone to Hull, at∣tended with the Prince, with about 400 horsemen and 700 footmen musketieres, but the Inhabitants of Hull having intelli∣gence of their intended purpose, forthwith raised 1000 men well armed to stand upon their guard, to prevent ensuing dangers; there is two Ships lately come from Hol∣land, the Palsgrave being in one, and the Earle of Danbie in another, and many other Lords besides, and they came both to the mouth of Humber, but there arose a great wind, insomuch that they were forthwith driven from the shore, and disperst at Sea from each other, but one of them comming up very boldly towards Hull, Sir Iohn Ho∣tham made shot at them, and beate them to
other side of Humber, whereas yet they lye and have drawne certaine of the chiefest of their Ordnance a shore, and have raised cer∣taine Batteries, and mounted their Ordnance thereon, against Sir Iohn Hotham, and all the Souldiers aforementioned, accompanied with the Prince, are gone to aid and assist him against the Towne, and they have brought with them great store of Ammuni∣tion, beside 300 thousand pounds of Mo∣ney, so that the King, and the Prince, is gone to meet them with a strong Guard of Souldiers for his owne defence. Upon Thursday last, beeing the 7. of Iuly, the King summoned all the Gentry and Commonalty of Yorkeshire, that are Protestants to attend his Commands, where there was assembled great multitudes of Protestants, and many others that are favou∣rers of the Malignant Party, and many pro∣fest Papists which were there (notwith∣standing his Maiesties command to the con∣trary) from which we may inferre, that they that doe presume to meet in a tumul∣tuous
manner, contrary to his Maie∣sties command, while Warre is but in agitation. will be much boulder, and contest with that command, were War put in execution. Likewise the Cavalieres commit outrages of all sorts, dreading nothing, neither Law, nor Authority, being countenanced by some great men that are too neare the King in power, and Authority, so that we are not certaine to enjoy any thing but by their allow∣ance, nay they are so confident, that they will not sticke to sweare, that they will teach us new obedience, and many other reproachfull and dange∣rous words. Likewise in the neare adjoyning Counties, as Leicestershire, Lancashire. and other parties, the Lord Strange, Mr. Hastings, Sir Thomas Aston, and di∣vers others Commissioners of Array, have made great disturbances in those parts to the terrour of the Inhabitants.
Also it is feared that the Lord Dig∣bie is secretly landed and both endea∣vour to raise men in Dorsetshire. These disturbances the Parliament having seriously considered of and found the great detriment that these evill affected persons may doe to the Subjects under their authority of the Commission of Array, they have thought good to declare, that the Commission of Array is against Law, and that all those that are Actors in putting the Commission of Array in execution, shall be esteemed disturbers of the Peace of the Kingdome, and destroyers of the the Liberties of the Subject. Ordered that this be Printed, and published. Iohn Browne, Cler. Parl. FINIS.
