h3703a 99828715 33146
A PLEA FOR THE NON-CONFORMISTS; TENDING To Justifie them against the Clamorous Charge of SCHISME. By a Dr. of Divinity. With two Sheets on the same Subject by another Hand and Judgment. Ʋexatio dat intellectum. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1674.
A PLEA for the Nonconformists; tending to justifie them against the Clamourous Charge of Schisme. §. 1. IT was doubtless one of the greatest infelicities which ever befel the whole body of people in these three Nations (considering them as univer∣sally professing the Doctrine of Christ), that in the year 1662. the Settlement of the affairs of Religion, with relation to Worship & Government, was made to no more universal satisfaction, but that some thousands of Ministers, many of whom (their greatest Adversaries being judges) were men of no inconsiderable worth and usefulness, took themselves obliged rather to lay down the publick
exercise of their Ministry, then to do what was by Law required of them, if they would preserve it; and that such a rigid interpretation was at that time in practice, put upon the Act of Uniformi∣ty, as they were not only incapacita∣ted to hold, or take Livings, but also to Preach occasionally in the publick Temples. Whether the Act will ne∣cessitate any such sense, may deserve the second thoughts of our Superi∣ours. §. 2. Whether this was Originated in the anger resting in the bosom of some Church-men at that time, who had been Sufferers: Or in their zeal to continue some Bishops the repute of Martyrs, who had suffered for the rigo∣rous enforcing of some of the things now enjoyned, or in the desire of some of that filthy lucre, which ariseth from pluralities of Livings, Dignities, sine curare; or in their desire to propagate some Doctrines, to which they knew the persons who would be ejected, would be no more friends, then are the Articles of the Church of England (as
interpreted by King James, former all Professors of Divinity in our Uni∣versities, very many eminent Bishops, and once and again by the whole Parli∣ament of England), or from one, or all of these causes is uncertain to be deter∣mined; a better Original is hard to fancy, while the things required, are by our most knowing Eccles. Superi∣ours granted not necessary, anteceda∣neously to the Superiors command. §. 3. Nor could they ever have been made necessary (as is now said) by the King and Parliament of England, had they not been suggested to them as things that in themselves might law∣fully be done: Nor (probably) would that suggestion have prevailed with our civil Superiours, (who in things meer∣ly lawful, know sufficiently that they are to govern themselves in their com∣mands by Prudence, had they not been also told that the Numbers both of Mi∣nisters and People that would refuse, were very inconsiderable. Their per∣sons and circumstances very invaluable; that if once the things were enjoyned,
the Generality would do them, not∣withstanding all their pretences of Conscience, &c. §. 4. How true these suggestions were, quickly appeared to our Pru∣dent States-men, which made the then Lord Chancellour (a sufficient friend to Conformity and a Prudent Person) be∣fore ever the Act took place, send for some very valuable persons, and pro∣pound a Medium to them that they might yet abide in their stations (fore∣seeing the gap would be made) the Pa∣rishes only providing some who might read the Liturgy; but this was too late, and the Act would not, when it came out, admit any such thing. §. 5. With that rigour the Act was pressed, is sufficiently known, and how soon after fortified with another Act against private Meetings; and with another (when that but a probationer for a few years was expired) more se∣vere than the former; nor did there want those in all parts of the Nation, that executed all the Acts with seve∣rity so far beyond what those Acts Au∣thorised,
that they saw need of Indem∣nity for their actions by further Acts of Grace and Favour. How many God∣ly Ministers and People, were, during these years, not only publickly reviled in Pamphlets and Pulpits, but Impri∣soned (and how many dyed in their imprisonments) spoiled of their Liveli∣hoods, driven from their Habitations and Trades, is but an unpleasant story to reflect upon, and with how little success as to the bringing them to con∣form is abundantly known. §. 6. In the mean time it pleased his most Excellent Majesty (as a tender Fa∣ther of his People, and he who consi∣dered his interest lay not in the Divisi∣on and Ruine of his People, but in their Peace and Freedom to attend their several Trades, Professions and Callings (the King himself, as Solo∣mon saith, being nourished from the Field) to inspect the state of Ecclesi∣astical affairs; and hearing so many Crys from his People, with the Ad∣vice of his Counsel to direct means for his or their better information, about
the numbers of Ministers and People dissenting; for which purpose Letters were directed in the ordinary course from the Arch-Bishop to the Bishops, who by their Registers were to inform themselves, and then his most Sacred Majesty of the Number of dissenting Ministers, &c. §. 7. How imperfect the informati∣on must be in this method is obvious enough to every one; the Return could only be made of those, who being pos∣sest of Livings, Aug. 24. 1662. left them for not Subscribing, into which number came not a 5th. part of Mini∣sters dissenting. 1. None came, which 1661 were turned out to give room to others, who had a praevious Title to their Livings, and were not possest so soon of any other, which were very many. 2. No Congregational Mini∣sters, who had no Legal Titles to Churches. 3. None that fore-seeing they could not conform (the Act be∣ing out) did chuse rather to resign their Livings than abide a turning out. 4. No young men, not possest of Livings,
though ready for them: To say nothing of Anabapt. &c. To advantage this imperfect account, the Author of the Ecclesiastical Polity tells the World of but an hundred Ministers, that hindred all Uniformity. §. 8. But our Wise and Prudent States-men quickly saw through these Fallacies, and from their more perfect information of his most Sacred Majesty, and the meltings of his own bowels to∣wards the distresses of his People; the sound of which, came almost from eve∣ry Court of Judicature, and corner of the Nation, his most Excellent Majesty and his Privy Counsel took a fuller esti∣mate of the Number both of Ministers and private Christians dissenting from the publick modes of worship. §. 9. Upon this, it was that his Ma∣jesty (conceiving himself empowred thereto by his Prerogative, and a li∣berty reserved to him by the last Act a∣gainst Conventicles,) was pleased to issue out his Gracious Declaration for Indulgence, date, Mar. 17.
§. 10. What Power his Majesty had, or what was reserved by that Act, to him, we are no Judges to determine. It is enough for us, That as his most Sacred Majesty hath asserted to himself such a power, so the denial of it to him, hath been by no publick Act made known to us, much less his Ma∣jesties recession from it, Disputes be∣twixt Kings and Parliaments, we think, are not to be determined by private Per∣sons without the doors of the Pallace and Parliament-House, nor medled with by the Subject, till the matters in difference (if any be) be agreed by themselves, and by some publick acti∣on notified to the People. We know for the King of England in civil things, to suspend the execution of an Act which he hath found inconveniently practicable till the Parliaments meet∣ing, and further agreeing in it, is no more than hath been done even during this Parliament, and possibly to all may not appear unreasonable. §. 11. Upon this foundation we stand, and practice, Preaching to our
People in places distinct from the Pa∣rochial Churches. What can we do less? May we, having this liberty, sit still, and live without the publick wor∣ship of God? Thus indeed a very great number of the People of England (possi∣bly not inferiour to the N. Con.) yet we have rarely heard of one of them Endited, Presented, or Prosecuted, when our Brethren were in their fullest career against the new Recusants, at least, not comparably to those of their Brethren, who they knew were every Sabbath day (if not with them, yet somewhere strictly worshipping God, and either Preaching Christ, or hear∣ing him Preach'd. Surely our eager Men should rather have bent their Bows, and made their Arrows ready a∣gainst these Atheistical livers, than a∣gainst the Servants of the Living God, though of a little different Livery; different too, not in the Cloath, but in the insignificant Fringes and Laces of formes and ceremonies. What though they could say (which we know in truth they cannot) that Christ (amongst
the Nonconformists) was Preached of envy and strife, yet had they been of St. Paul's Spirit (from whom they pre∣tend to derive, though indeed Christ, amongst the Noncon. had been Preach∣ed of Contention, and not of Sincerity. (Yet a little charity would have com∣manded them to judge as Paul, Some out of good will Preached him.) But however they being (as St. Paul saith, Phil. 1.16, 17, 18. Set for the defence of the Gospel, should have said after him, What then? Notwithstanding every way, whether in pretence, or in truth Christ is Preached, and I therein do rejoyce, and will rejoyce: We shall only say, had they been of St. Pauls Spirit, they would have said so. §. 12. We take it to be a confessed Principle; That every individual Mem∣ber of the Church-Catholick Visible, is bound in duty both to God and his own Soul, to joyn himself to some particular Society of Christians, with which he may enjoy all the Ordinances of God, so as may be for his Souls advantage. What shall therefore these indulged Ministers and People do? How shall they live
up to this peice of the Divine Will? Shall they joyn with the Parochial Socie∣ties in their Temples? They have pro∣fessed to the World, that the business is so stated by the Act of Uniformity, that they cannot do this without doing what they judge sinful. If they could, nei∣ther would the Ministers 1662. have parted, together with that publick exer∣cise of their Ministry, with the liveli∣hoods also of themselves, their Wives & Children; or exposed themselves to Excommunications, Imprisonments, Fines, Banishments, and all manner of Reproach and Obloquy, or their Fami∣lies to the Charitable Baskets of Chri∣stians. Neither would more private Christians have suffered so much in most of these kinds, as they have suffer∣ed in vain. §. 13. It must therefore be in Con∣gregations, locally separate from the pa∣rochial meetings. Accordingly, having first obtained his Majestie's Licenses they practice. Presently they hear a great Out-cry of Schisme, and sinful se∣paration from true Churches, Gathering Churches out of Churches, and we know
not what, nor do we believe they do, that clamour at this rate. §. 14. But the truth of this clamour must be a little examined; for the Non-conformists have got very little by his Majesties favour, by escaping the hands of men, to fall into the hands of the li∣ving God. We remember when David was in his great strait, 2 Sam. 24.14. he acquiessed in this. Let me fall into the hands of the living God, for his mer∣cies are great, and let me not fall into the hands of men. We think we may (in this case) say the same thing, and that with some advantage (which Da∣vid had not, for his heart smote him for a known sin, our hearts as yet do not condemn us for any such black thing as a sinful separation; and we do believe those that thus clamour do not well understand what they say. Let men rather call us Schismaticks, sinful Sepa∣ratists, so we may worship God as his Word, and our own Consciences tells us he should be Worshipped purely, and in Spirit and Truth, rather than we not Worship God at all, or so as our Consciences shall continually flie in our faces.
§. 15. But certainly God's Word hath laid us under no necessity of sin∣ing; let us therefore challenge our confident Accusers to the Law and to the Testimony. 'Tis worth the while to exa∣mine whether this great cry be not Vox et praeterea nihil; A clamorous scandal & nothing else, which we are the more advantaged to hope that it will prove by a noted passage in a great Church∣man, Mr. Hales his discourse of Schisme. It is this, Schisme is one of those Theologi∣cal Scare-Crowes, with which, they who use to uphold a party in Religion, use to fright away such as make any inquiry into it, and are ready to relinquish or oppose it, if it appeareth to them either erroni∣ous or suspicious. Not that Schisme, truly so called, is of no graver importance, but that which generally by School-men and Casuists, and very many (and some of those Learned) Divines (though like Elias, men subject to like passions with other men) is no more, is as evident as the shining of the Sun at Noon-day, to any
one who knoweth any thing of Books, or of the World. §. 16. The Greeks, say those of the Latine Church, are Schismaticks, and they (because they are the most anci∣ent Church) seem to have best right; but the whole Latine Church requites them with the same-name of Obloquy. The Papist so call the Protestants, but they requite them with the like term, saying, They that gave the cause of the separation, are the true Schismaticks. Amongst the Protestants, the Luthe∣rans so revile the Calvinists; nor are the Calvinists behind them, Amongst the Calvinists. The Episcopal men so call the Presbyterians; the Presbyteri∣ans so call the Independents and Anti∣paedebaptists. Thus we have called one another Schismaticks round. Let us therefore leave these pittiful, unchari∣table, Boyish Revenges, especially see∣ing in vulgar use lately, the term hath had no further significancy than to speak persons not of our mind, and for a name to brand such of our Brethren with, who are a little more inquisitive
than others into the things of God, and is of the same import amongst Pro∣testants; that the word Heretick is a∣mongst Papists, that is not one of their mind; and leaving terms of reviling to the Women at Billings-gate, we will fairly state the Case, and argue it as coolely. §. 17. The Question is this, Whether the Non-conforming Ministers, and peo∣ple meeting ordinarily together for the Worship of God, in Assemblies and places locally distinct and separate from the meetings of the Parochial Congregations, because the said Ministers may not Preach there, nor the said people enjoy there all the Ordinances of God without the doing of some things which their Consciences upon Arguments which they judge highly probable, do judge sinful, be what the Scripture calleth Schisme, or be in any right Reason A sinful Separation; these persons in the mean time not condemning all Parochial Societies as no true Churches, nor in other things behaving themselves uncharitably towards them, We must profess our selves to believe
the Negative of this Question, in which are two folded together. We affirm then 1. This practice is not what The Scripture calls Schisme. 2. Nor what right Reason, conclu∣ding from any Scriptural principles can call A sinful Separation. We do grant there may be a sinful Separation of Christians from a Church, which the Scripture doth not call Schisme, that maketh us distinguish these two things, nor shall we discourse the former. 1. Because it is a plain Dispute about a Term. 2. Because the eminently Learned Dr. Owen hath made it good, that a Separation from a Church (though it may be sinful) yet is not that which the Scripture calls Schisme; and we observe, that his very Learned Adversary, upon the point, grants him this, and pleadeth for no more than an Analogical application of the term Schisme, to express the sin of un∣necessary separation from a Church, which we will not contend about.
§. 18. We say therefore, let it be so, or so, it is of no great consequence; all grant there may be a sinful separati∣on from a Church, and if the separation be not sinful, we are sure they Nick∣name it that call it Schisme. If it be sinful, whether it should be called Schisme, or by some other name, we think signifieth very little to the Con∣sciences of any intelligent Christians. §. 19. Mr. Hales still keeping the di∣alect of the Schools, calls this sinful sepa∣ration, Schisme, and gives us this de∣scription of it. Schisme, is an unnecessary separation from that part of the Visible Church, of which we once were Members. Like a wise man he speaks, Multa paucis, remembring the Canon about Definitions. So then according to him to make a Schisme. 1. There must be a separation, and that not from the whole Visible Church, (that is Heresy or Apostacy) but from some part of it, of which we were once Members.
2. Secondly: It must be an Unneces∣sary separation that is where the Union might have been kept, without sinning against God, we desire no further ad∣vantage than this Description will give us, let our case stand or fall, as it will abide, or not abide this test. §. 20. Hence we argue, Where there ne∣ver was an Union, or there is no separa∣tion; or if there be a separation, it is ne∣cessary, because the Union could not be kept without sin. There is no Schisme but in the cases of the Ministers and People. Either there is no separation, or there was no Union (which indeed sup∣posed there could be no separation) or no more than a necessary separation; Ergo, No Schisme, no sinful separa∣tion. §. 21. To make good which, Sepa∣ration being a term of motion, before we can strictly speak to the parts of the Argument, we must enquire for the Term, from which this Motion, or Sepa∣ration is pretended to be. The Author of The Doctrine of Schisme, p. 40. tells us this roundly.
'Tis a great and dangerous Schisme, both against the Church of England and particular Churches. We will not quarrel with the Zea∣lous Author for the propriety of that English,—a Schisme against the Church—because in the close of the same page, though he doth not at all mend the matter (as to the poor Non-conformist, whom he was wont to own as Bre∣thren) yet he amendeth his English, telling us: If you consider the Church of Eng∣land as a particular Organized Church, 'tis a Schism from but as part of the U∣niversal Visible Church only as the N. Con. use to term it, is a Schisme in it; and not only so, but p. 57. It is a Schisme from particular Parochial Congregations: For Mr. Candry (he saith) hath observed There was and is another Church-state in our particu∣lar Congregations. §. 22. Here now is a double term, from which this motion is pretended to be. 1. The Church of England. 2. The Parochial Churches in England. To let
our Author know what we hold, we do believe a Catholick Visible Church, which we take to be well described in the 19th. of the 39 Articles of our Church. The Congregation [or whole Body] of faithful men, in the which the pure Word of God is Preached, and the Sacraments are duly administred according to Christs Ordinance in all those things that are of necessity requisite to the same. Of this the Church of England is a part doubtless, and from the Church of England in this sense we do not know that any have separated, but such as have renounced Christ and the Gospel, or the Word and Ordinances ne∣cessary to Salvation, which would be plain and desperate Apostacy, with which, we hope our Brethren will be more modest than to charge us. From this our Plea is, we make no Separa∣tion, and therefore cannot be charged with a sinful Separation. But saith our Author, You make a sinful separation in it. We are not troubled at words that signifie nothing, what is the meaning of
this? Do we not Own Christ, his Gos∣pel, the same points of Faith, the same acts of Worship; where is the Separa∣tion then? Can all meet in the same place? It may be we do not pray by the same forms, nor ware the same habits, nor use some of those rites some others of our Brethren use. Do our Brethren then always when they pray, use the same forms of words? Do not they take a liberty in the Pulpit? why may not we? Do other parts of the Catho∣lick Church use the same forms? why else are not they Schismaticks? (for as yet we are only considering the Natio∣nal Church of England as a part of the Church Catholick Visible:) Is there any form, any habit, any rite or cere∣mony commanded by Christ, and o∣mitted by us: if there be not, where is the Schisme? It seems the term Schis∣matick, is their priviledge to use that can first get it out of their mouths; if we divide in no command of Christ, why may not the Non-Con. call their Brethren Schismaticks, as well as they call their Brethren? Doth an humane
Law create a difference? Let it be que∣ried whether that can give a rule to Schisme or no. What is the business then, how do we then make a Schisme in the Church of England, considered as a part of the Church Catholick Visi∣ble? Do we break Charity with our Brethren? do we Revile them, or Re∣proach their Persons or Societies. Let them bear the blame who do it, we plead not for them; in the mean time, let not all other Non-Con. be called Schismaticks for their sake. We know very many of the Non Con. have been uncharitably enough dealt with by those three famous Authors of the Friendly debate, Ecclesiastical Polity, and of Knowledge of & Communion with Christ, have they rendred reviling for reviling, though the Masters of Morality have so treated their Brethren, as if Veracity, Comity, and Urbanity were not in the Catalogue of their Moral Virtues. When the Author opens himself a little plai∣ner, and tells us what he meaneth by a Schisme in the Church of England, con∣sidered as a part of the Church. Catho∣lick
Visible, we shall better understand him. §. 23. But he saith, we sinfully sepa∣rate from the Organical National Church of England; and indeed this he must mean or nothing, by what he said be∣fore; for it is not possible to separate sinfully from a National Church consi∣dered only, as a large part of the Church-Catholick Visibles, while they keep in the profession of Christ and his Gospel, and in the practice of the same Acts of worship with them, and in the same Doctrines of Faith, unless they fail in love, refusing all kind of occasional Communion with their Brethren, con∣demning them as no parts of the Church of Christ. The worshipping of God by different phrases and forms of Prayers, in different habits of Vest∣ment, by different rites and ceremo∣nies, &c. will not do it, for these are things which belong not to any Natio∣nal Church as a part of the Church Ca∣tholick Visible; Christ left no Liturgy to his Catholick Church, nor any such rites and ceremonies, and habits; nor
was ever the Catholick Visible Church uniform in them; our Brethren them∣selves confess these mutable things, wherein several parts of the Catholick Church differ each from other: These things proceed from the Church, con∣sidered as Organical, not as a part of the Catholick Visible Church; for then the major part of all particular Chri∣stians must consent to the imposition of them. §. 24. Now truly for this Particular Organical National Church, it is possi∣ble we may have separated from it, for we never knew there was any such Crea∣ture; and at last our Author doth con∣fess that Mr. Caudry hath told him that the Presbyterians do generally agree, That the Disciplinary part or form of Go∣vernment is not essential to a National Church; he should therefore first have proved that there is such a thing under the Gospel as A Stated, National, Orga∣nical Church; and we should then have tried whether the same Arguments would not have served the Papists to have proved a Catholick organical
Church, and that something better than they serve our Author, because they have found out a single head for it, which we find our Author, p. 43. at great loss to find for his particular Nati∣onal Organical Church. §. 95. He knows not whether he should fix it upon the King, for he is to be considered as a mixed person: Or The Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, be∣cause he is Primate of all England, or all the Bishops and Pastors. That the King is the Supreme Political Head and Governour of the National Church of England, is our of doubt to all Pro∣testants, but such a one as will not claim Authority to any one strictly called Ec∣clesiastical act, neither to Preach, nor administer a Sacrament, nor Ordain Ministers. Are we discoursing of such a head think we? The Arch-Bishop of Canterbury indeed may do all these; but may he execute any acts of Disci∣pline in the Province of York? must the Arch-Bishop of York be taken in. Then we have one National Church Organical with two heads; yet that is
better than 26. for so many must be, if all the Bishops make the head; and that yet is better than 9000 heads as must be, if the Pastors of all Parishes be the Head. In short, none of these can by an act of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction in∣fluence the whole body; and what kind of head is that? The King indeed (as Political Head of the Church) may influence the whole with his commands, relating to Ecclesiastical affairs; but surely we have no Arçh-Bishop, Bi∣shop, or Pastor, can Excommunicate from Dan to Beershaba. Our Author not being able to fix his thoughts in this point, at last tells us, It is not ma∣terial, for it is a certain Vanity to say,43. Because I cannot find the the Head, I will deny the Body. Is it so? can there then be a living Or∣ganical Body without an Head? It is not the body we are discoursing of, but an Organical Body: We may know our Mother (as our Author saith) though we do not know our Father; but we must know we had a Father, and that Father is, or was a visible Crea∣ture,
or else he could not be known. §. 26. Well, but what is this same National Organical Church of England. He p. 42. gives us this Description of it: It is a community consisting of pro∣fessed Christians united in the same Doctrine, Government and Worship, according to the 39. Articles, and Ho∣milies, her Liturgy, and Canons, and Laws, and divided into Parochial As∣semblies, for the more convenient Wor∣ship of God. And p. 45 Schisme from the Church of England is a sinful dividing from, or dissolving our Union or Communion with her in her Governours, Worship, Members, or Assemblies. We can neither allow his descriptis on of the National Church of England, nor yet of his description of Schisme, or sinful separation from it, and we would gladly hear by what Scripture or reason, either of them can be made good. §. 27. It will be no wonder if deny∣ing the thing of a National Governing Church, we deny the description of it,
for Non eus, non potest definiri; Now we do believe that under the Gospel there never was, nor can be a stated Na∣tional governing Church, unless what is indeed somtimes, though far from the sense we are now speaking to, and per∣haps not so properly called a Church, according to the dialect of Scripture made up of all the Messengers of all the particular Churches in a Nation, in an Assembly for deliberations, advice, and determinations in some weighty emergent cases, to obviate which, we put in the term stated, for this is only an Occasional National Church, or Synod, which hath but a temporary being pro renatâ, and meets and acts at the plea∣sure of the Prince, the Supreme Politi∣cal Head. §. 28. When we speak of a Church, we understand Church as a Scriptural term in the Religious usage of it, appli∣cable to no body of people, but such a one as the Scripture calleth so. So that if there be any such body as may be call∣ed a National Governing Organical Church, we must either find it in the
New Testament, or at least find some di∣rections there for the constitution & or∣dering of it, some Commissions given for a succession of National Officers, but we find none of this; we find indeed a ge∣neral commission to Ministers to go and Preach and Baptize; but this referred as well to the Heathens, as to pro∣fessed Christians. If any will say that the Apostles were General Officers, and from thence will argue for a succession of them, it will better serve the Papists to prove an Universal Organical Church, than it will serve any to prove a National Organical Church; and we think that is what our Brethren will not be very free of granting. If any urge the Example of the Jewish National Church, which was Organical, they will be also obliged to find our Saviours directions for the Hereditary discent of an High-Priest, or the Election of one into his place. We always thought the Jewish H. Priest was a type, and Christ the Antitype, whose coming abolished the type, be∣sides that that also will prove an Uni∣versal Organical Church, for the Jewish
High Priest govern'd the whole Visible Church, which God in his days had up∣on the Earth; besides we must have found some rules and laws left us by Christ for this High Priest. Finally, who so will erect a stated National go∣verning or Organical Church in Eng∣land, must find us an Officer cloathed with Authority to Excommunicate from Michaels Mount in Cornwall to Car∣lile and Berwick. Such a one we sup∣pose there neither is, nor ever was in England since the reformation. §. 29. But if we could allow such a Creature of God as a National govern∣ing Church in England, we should have put Governours (being certainly one of the Essential parts of such a Church) into the description of it, as well as into the Notion of Schisme from it. Nor should we have so straitned the Notion of it, as to necessitate all the members of it to be united in Doctrine, Worship, and Government, without saying how far they must in these things be united. Whether in every point of Doctrine delivered in the 39. Articles and Ho∣milies,
so far as to approve and embrace all. And in every point of Government, according to the Canons; or in every mode, rite, or ceremony according to the Liturgy; or if not, in what, and how far they must be thus united? And for the Laws (as distinguished from the Canons,) we should have left them quite out, being but civil constitutions, about the affairs of the Church, not pro∣perly Laws of the Church, or in the more intrinsick matters of it; but Im∣petus cuncta male ministrat, this is the unlucky effect of long Definitions, and too great eagerness to prove all Non∣conformists Schismaticks. The Au∣thor should have done well to have con∣sidered what he, as well as we long since learned at the University. 1. Defini∣tiones debent esse breves. It is the length of this description that spoils it, and makes it by no art defensible. 2. Debet constare ex attributis preoribus & notio∣ribus simpliciter, had this been thought of the 39 Articles, Homilies, Liturgy, Canons, Laws, had been quite left out; nor certainly did our Author consi∣der
what would follow upon this de∣scription. §. 30. Let us but a little shew what inferences follow his Description of the National Governing Church of England. 1. All Arminians without bail or main∣prise must be Hereticks. They are none of the Community of professed Chri∣stians in England, united in the Doctrine of the 39 Articles; will they tell us they are? Let us ask King James, once the very learned Head of this Church. He tell us. That Arminians was an Enemy to God,Reg. Jacobi Dec. contra Vorstium, p. 12. 14. that his Disci∣ples are Pests, Here∣ticks, Arrogant persons, Sectaries, A∣theists. That the very Title of Bertius his Book, concerning the Apostacy of the Saints, required the fire. Shall we be judged by the Parliament (they make the Laws put into the description of this Church) they confirmed the Articles: We find them Anno 1628. crying aloud, We Claim, Protest, and avow
for Truth, the sense of the Articles of Religion, which were e∣stablished by Parliament,Mr. Rush∣worths Col∣lections, p. 650. 130. Eliz. which (say they) by the Publick Act of the Church of England, and by the general and currant exposition of the Writers of our Church, have been delivered to us; and we reject the sense of the Jesuits and Arminians, and all others where∣in they differ from us. Shall we ask the Professors of Divi∣nity forty years since and upward in ei∣ther University: They joyntly agreed these points contrary to the 39 Articles (one Dr. Baro only excepted), and we know who was the first Doctor of that Divinity, knowingly created at Oxford, and the Professors course complement to him at his Creation, after he had de∣fended one of them. Hujus te Theologiae creo Doctorem, meaning the Arminian Divinity, whence ever after to his Death, possibly, he took the liberty to Profess it as the Doctrine of our Church; yea, and they must be Schismaticks too,
though not from, yet in the National Church, and that's the worst sort of Schisme, because that which the Scrip∣ture chiefly, if not only, taketh notice of. 2. Those who will sing no Psalms, must be Schismaticks too; for surely, that's an act of Worship in the Church of England, and owned by her; yea, and those that do not ordinarily con∣form to all Rites and Ceremonies, and Formes in the Liturgy, do they approve of them? The worse, they still (accor∣ding to this description) make a Shisme in the Church. Quaery: Whether none of the Conformists do this? I could tell him of some, nay One (and he no mean One neither) that openly told the People, singing of Psalms was one of the Idols of the Church of Eng∣land; there were three Preaching, and keeping the Sabbath were the two o∣ther. §. 40. Now if the Author could have been content to have described the Na∣tional Church of England, the number of professed Christians in it united in the
same Doctrines necessary to Salvation, and in the same Acts of Worship; the Definition had been shorter, many of these had been included, and we had all been agreed. But to be sure to make all the Nonconformists Shisma∣tick, he first Describes a thing not in being, and which never was since Christ came, and then describes it in such a manner as if he could create it, would do very many of his own friends far more hurt than us. §. 41. In the mean time, we must freely yeild him such a National Church as we before described, and the King the Supreme Head of it, not in a capacity to Preach or administer the Sacrament, or exercise any act in it strictly an Ecclesiastical by Divine in∣stitutions, but to Protect it, to enjoyn the fulfilling in it what God hath com∣manded; to do as much (in it) in short, as any King of Israel and Judah (as a King) might do, and to make rules and constitutions about it. But we deny that our Meetings are any more Schismes, in, or from this Church,
then the Meeting of Christians to wor∣ship God at Westminster in the same acts of worship, is a Schisme from that part of this Church, which meet for that end in London. §. 42. Nor is he helped at all by saying Our Churches are not of the same constitu∣tion,Doctrine of Schisme, 55. which he says was Mr. Cawdrys answer to Dr. Owen; let Mr. Cawdry, or who will say so, Dolus versatur in Generati∣bus. What is the difference, did Christ constitute theirs? We trust he hath con∣stituted ours, that is, by the Rules gi∣ven in his Word. Were theirs con∣stituted by Parliament? (that will be hard to prove as to the first constituti∣on; Parishes in England were first made by a Popish Arch-Bishop, the Parlia∣ment afterwards, or Custom rather might confirm them). Doth it then make a Schismatick to depart to a Church not established by humane Law or Custom? How else are we of another constituti∣on? Is not the same Doctrine Preach∣ed, the same Sacraments administred?
the same acts of Worship performed? Where's the difference? In the Modes, Rites, and Ceremonies only; And these all of humane institution. This is that which the Church of God never before called Schisme, & which the Apostles ne∣ver thought of. Do not we agree in the same Government? That concerns us not yet, while we are clearing our selves only from a Church, which the Author must shew us capable of any such Go∣vernment as Christ hath appointed in∣trinsecal to his Church. In the mean time, as to the National Church of Eng∣land, we deny that we are guilty of any Schisme, either in it, or from it; so that the whole charge must rest upon parti∣cular Churches, and our (pretended) separation from them. §. 43. This is that other Church-state mentioned by Mr. Caudry, and quoted by our Author, ch. 9. p. 57. these he calls Parochial Congregations: We are (he saith) guilty of Schisme from them; we all agree that these are capa∣ble of the name of Churches. 1. As they are lesser parts of the Ca∣tholick
Church, and so capable of the name of the whole; thus we were in∣deed united to them, as we were united to the Catholick Church, and united still to them as unto that; owning the Lord Jesus Christ, his Word and Or∣dinances, and professing a subjection to them: But this is not the other state he speaks of, by which he can mean nothing but a governing state. 2. Secondly therefore; These Pa∣rochial Societies may be considered as perfectly, or more imperfectly Orga∣nized, furnished with all Church-Offi∣cers requisite and walking in Gospel or∣der, or not so furnished, or so walking. The Author tells his Reader in a latter Book, called Advice to the Conformists and Nonconformists: That the sum of what the Author of the short Reflections offered, lay in two things; the latter of which he delivered thus. Our Pa∣rochial Churches are no true Churches,Advice to Con∣formists, &c. p. 72. or at lest they are so faulty as they may be lawfully se∣parated from.
We have read over the Book; and good Reader, at thy leisure, do but read over that Pamplet, the second chapt. particularly the 13, 14, 15. pages, and see whether this Author hath, or no, dealt ingeniously with him, p. 14. He speaks of these Societies, as parts of the Catholick Churches, and saith,Short Re∣flections, p. 14. In this Notion we cannot deny that every Parish, yea, Family of Christians, is a true Church: But he in∣deed concludes, that out of such parti∣cular Churches, it must be lawful to ga∣ther a Church, for all particular Churches in the world, are gathered out of the Catholick Visible Church; even Hea∣thens, when converted, must be of the Catholick Visible Church, before they can form a particular Church: In this state, and no other, must all Parochial Societies be that have no Minister, un∣less we will have Organical Governing Churches without any Governours, which we think is a contradiction. P. 15. He takes notice of another Noti∣on of them, as Ministerial, by which (he
saith) he underst ands a competent number of Christians, who have either first chosen, or after submitted to A. B. as their Pa∣stor, he might indeed have spared this Notion; I do not remember I have met with it in any Author, but Mr. Ru∣therford; and the truth is, if it be a sin∣gle Minister, I do not understand how he Preacheth otherwise to them, than as he is (so far) an Officer of the Catho∣lick Church, and they a part of that vast body. He considers these people Either as living in the use of all Gospel-Ordinances, or as at present li∣ving without some Ordinances, or having them so unduly administred, as may offer just cause of doubt to some Christians, whether they may lawfully communicate with them or no:—He adds, we do believe that from such a Church as is furnished with a duely sent, able, painful Mini∣ster, regularly administring the Or∣dinances of Christ, so as people may communicate with them without sin, and pressing forward to that perfecti∣on in order, which in all things they
have not attained Christians as be∣fore united to them, may not separate without sin. He did not indeed say, but I dare say for him, he believed there were many such Parochial Socie∣ties in England, and he hints it, when he saith, This was that indeed which some Presbyterians reflected upon our Brethren of the Congregational per∣suasion, and these were those Paro∣chial Churches which they contend∣ed for as true Churches. Was this to say Parochial Societies were no true Churches? Reader, judge in his 15. page, He tells us; There is yet a more perfect Notion of a particular Church as perfectly Organical, and furnished with all its affairs, and walking in all points of Gospel Order.—He adds, such particular Churches were in ma∣ny Parochial Societies in England; and there is no doubt but such Paro∣chial Churches were True Churches, from which causeless, and unnecessary separation is sinful. Indeed, he says, How far other Parochial Churches were true Churches, avowed so
by Presbyterians, he was yet to learn. And his Answer is, for any thing I see in his Remarques, yet to teach him, and I believe will so continue. For his guesses at what the Author meant by Perfection of Order. He I am sure will tell him he means no more, Than a capacity to administer all the Ordinan∣ces of Christ proper to a particular Church. The Word, Sacraments, and Censures of Jundical Admonition, Sus∣pension, and Excommunication, which they cannot do till they have Officers. I believe it must be a case of Extraordina∣ry necessity must justifie a single Mini∣ster in Suspending, or Excommunica∣ting, but that those that help him must needs be persons not ordained to the Ministry. I do not think he believes, but that there may be more Ministers (if the Parochial Society hath more than one) or others chosen by that Church. And if any will contend that the body of the people must joyn with him in those acts (though he re∣serves his private judgment in the case)
yet he will not contend especially as to Excommunication, because he under∣stands not to what purpose Officers should cast any out of the fellowship of their Church, who are yet resolved to have fellowship with him: He thinks he hath read some rule of the ancient Church, that none ought to be Excom∣municated sine plebis consensu, without the consent of the body of the Church. But was this to say, Our Parochial Churches are no true Churches? 1. The Author said they were all true parts of the Catholick Churches, and so true Churches. 2. The Author believes There are many Parochial Societies that are true Churches in the second sense. 3. He plainly says there were many so in the third and most perfect sense. What pittiful disingenuity was this in this Writer of the Doctrine of Schisme, thus to represent his Adversary? In∣deed from the Authors discourse it plainly appears, That he did not be∣lieve.
1. That Parishes that had no pro∣per Minister, or faithful Minister, were true Organical Churches; but only true parts of the Catho∣lick Church he grants them. 2. That no Parochial Societies as such, were true Organical Chur∣ches. 3. Though some Parishes had able and painful Ministers, yet if they never chose them as their Pastors, nor submitted to them as such, They were not true Organical Churches; or those who had not so submitted, were not true Mem∣bers ever united to them. §. 44. 4. That if persons living in those Societies, had chosen and submitted to a Minister as their Pastor, believing him a∣ble and faithful, and professing to press after a perfection in order, & they afterwards found the contrary, that he proved negligent in his work, leud in his Life, corrupt in his Doctrine, unfaithful in his Administrati∣ons;
and there were no visible hope of a Reformation, that in this case they might peaceably and charitably with-draw from that communion, and joyn with a bet∣ter. These seem to be that Authors principles, which amount to this, that all Parochial Societies, either are no true Governing Churches, or the parties con∣cerned were never united to them; or if they were once united to them, yet their secession from them was just and neces∣sary, and therefore could not be a sin∣ful separation. §. 45. Now what says the Author to this? Will he say that Parochial So∣cieties are all, True Governing Churches. Surely he will not say so, if he own Epis∣copacy; for men of that persuasion must maintain That the Bishop is the sole Pa∣stor of the Diocess; that Government belongs only to him, that Parish-Mi∣nisters are but his Curates, according to this Model; surely every Parochial Society is not a Governing Church; do they say so? we say so too. So we are agreed, and not chargeable with
gathering Churches out of true Chur∣ches. Will he say that Parochial So∣cieties having no peculiar Pastor, or none that resides with his Flock, are true Ministerial Churches. Surely this in the first part is a contradiction, to talk of a Ministerial Church without a Mini∣ster. And the second part, contrary to our Authors judgment (if consistent to it self,) for if the cohabi∣tation of Members be ne∣cessary,Doctrine of Schism, p. 85. and that as he tells us, by the Law of Na∣ture, and so Divine, the cohabitation of the head with those Mem∣bers, must be necessary too by the same Law. §. 46. No, but he will say, They were united to them, those of them that were true Ministerial Churches: And 2. Being united, they have no just and necessary cause of separation. These are the two things to be tried; for the tryal of this issue we must enquire. Quest. What is a sufficient Union of a person to a true Ministerial Church. The Author seems not to think
meer cohabitation doth it, though he thinks it of the Law of Nature and Di∣vine (which I do not understand) that the Members of a Church should coha∣bitate. I think it very expedient and necessary that they should live so near together, that ordinarily they may meet for worship together in one place, and be able mutually to perform the dutys of exhortation and admonition one to a∣nother; yet the Author will not say this makes their Union in a Church Or∣ganical; besides many questions would arise, as How near they must live? Whi∣ther none may live betwixt them? What if a Jew, Turk, or Pagan hires an House betwixt them, &c? What the Author doth say, I will candidly transscribe, as I find it in his Doctrine of Schisme, ch. 13. p. 89. They were Baptized unto these particular Churches,Doctrine of Schism. chap. 13.89. as well as into the Univer∣sal, and the known Laws both of Church and State, oblige their Consciences to communion with them, —Their ordinary attending up∣on
the publick Worship as they gene∣rally do, or have done, concludes them by their own consent, &c. Here now are three things brought to prove the Union, 1. Baptisme, 2. The Laws of men. 3. Their own consent implicitely, by their ordinary atten∣dance upon the Worship in Parochial Tem∣ples. Let us candidly examine whe∣ther any of these will do it. §. 47. That men are Baptized into a particular Church, and by it made com∣pleat Members of it, is what I cannot yeeld. Baptisme indeed admitts into the Universal Church. If any Presbyte∣rian Brethren have judged more, I must understand their Reasons before I subscribe their Opinions; besides that, hardly one of twenty Christians were Baptized in that Parochial Society wherein they live; when at years of discretion, Baptisme indeed gives a Christian a claim to a Membership in some particular Church, but makes no Union with it. 2. As to the second, it can have no truth in it, till he hath proved That it is
the will of Christ, that Christians should be Members of that particular Orga∣nized Church, where their Superiours in Church or State will command. As this is no civil thing, but Spiritual, and such wherein the Souls of Christians, as to their Eternal concerns, are highly con∣cerned. So neither is it a thing indiffe∣rent; but let the Author prove what I say he must prove in this case, and we will say more. We think, though God hath expresly no where told Christians in his Word (which had been almost impossible) what particular Church they should be of; yet he hath obliged them to attend what in their Consciences they judg, and upon experience they find the most propable and effectual means for their Instruction, Holiness, and Eternal Salvation; not expecting he should work miracles for them. God hath no where told every Man, what Woman he should Marry; yet surely he hath not left Magistrates a power to determine all their Subjects to Wives. Yet we think this concern of Souls
is much higher, and that there is as much difference in Ministers as in Wives. 3. The last therefore is all, for which there can be any pretence, consent indeed will do it. And we will grant, that this consent may be either Explicit or Im∣plicit. Explicit when Christians have either first chosen, or upon recommen∣dation accepted a truly sent, able, faith∣ful Minister to be their Pastor, to admi∣nister the Ordinances of God to them: Or more Implicit, when though they have not first called him, nor so expli∣citly declared their consent to him; yet they have ordinarily and statedly walked with him in the fellowship of all Ordinan∣ces. But here must be considered 1. That there is a great deal of dif∣ference betwixt desiring, consen∣ting to, and accepting of one as a Minister of the Gospel to Preach to the Parochial Society, where a Christan lives, as it is a part of the Catholick Church; and con∣senting to such a one to be his or
their Pastor, in order to a Church Organical, It must be a consent of the latter Nature. I may consent and desire one to Preach to the people in the precinct where I live, and yet have no thoughts of consenting to him as my Pa∣stor. 2. That there is a great deal of diffe∣rence betwixt an occasional hear∣ing, and it may be receiving the Sacrament with a Minister, and a slated ordinary fixed doing of it. If a Christian, that is of a particu∣lar Church at London, goeth down to York, and be to stay there 6 or 9 moneths, and ordinarily hears and receives the Sacrament there, while he is there; this will indeed prove his owning the Church of York as a true Church, & having communion with it, but not that he is a Member of it. Suppose many Christians, who were for∣merly stated Members of Chur∣ches, but for 10 or 12 years last
past, have not been able to walk with their Pastors and Brethren in all Ordi∣nances, meeting in the same place to worship God, have in the time ordina∣rily, or often heard a Parochial Mini∣ster; nay, sometimes received the Lords Supper. This indeed proves their Charity, that they lookt upon that Society as a true Church; but it doth not prove them Members of it, nor their consent to such a Member∣ship; no, not to such a Minister as their Pastor, though it may be, they con∣sented to him for the good of the place where they lived, as a Preacher of the Gospel to them. If indeed they were of no other stated particular Church be∣fore, and did ordinarily joyn in Sacra∣mental Communion with such a Minister, it goes far to prove an Union by implicit consent, and we think such cannot plead, They were not United. §. 48. It is true, these Notions a∣bout particular Churches, Worship and Government, especially the first and last, were very dark, and little under∣stood by many good men, Anno, 1641.
and no wonder if it be considered. 1. How very few Books were then wrote of them, on the Presbyterian side. 2. And how poenal it was made to have, or read them, and how little hope before that time appeared of reducing any thing had been said to practice. Some of our Congregational Brethren having had more rest and freedom, and opportu∣nity of exercise in N. England and Hol∣land were better studied in them. As also our Brethren of Scotland. This for a few years occasioned great animosities. Yet I could never read, nor hear quo∣ted that even then any judicious Pres∣byterians ever granted: 1. That all Parochial Societies were true Organized Churches. 2. Nor that living in a Parish did more than give the Christian a li∣berty to claim admission into that Society. But some few years passing, and mens heats abating, and peaceable converse each with other, better advantaging them to understand one another, than at first they did, they began to be far
more clear and unanimous in their No∣tions, and more charitable in their practices. §. 40. I cannot speak for all, but I can speak for a very competent num∣ber so many (as in one County) would be perswaded to meet in 1657. & 58. They agreed in the following Cha∣racter of a person fit for Church-fellowship in all Ordinances and Priviledges. I have by me, also the Scrip∣tures affixed to prove this. 1. One that is indu∣ed with some competent knowledge in the prin∣ciples of Religion. 2. Whose life & conver∣sation is free from all gross and scan∣dalous evils, both of Omission and Commission. 3. Who maketh such a profession of Faith and Holiness as may give unto the Church a probable hope in the judgment of true Christian Charity, that there are some seeds of some spiritual work of God in his soul. 4. Who professeth a willing subjection to the Gospel, and all the Ordinances of Jesus Christ, and so giveth up himself to the Lord, and his Church, to walk in
all duties of Obedience and Love, ac∣cording to the Will of God. To which they added, and then subscribed. We acknowledge such Churches to be true Churches, as consist of such persons coming together as are here described, and such to be true Ministers as are call∣ed by, and unto such a people. And we further acknowledge such to be Chur∣ches, and their Ministers to be true Mi∣nisters, though some bad with the good agreed to the call of those Ministers, or to own and embrace them; and al∣though there were some disorder, and failing in the Ordination, and coming in of such Ministers. By this, these Presbyterians judg∣ments easily appeared, what Parochial Societies they judged, True Churches; and also what they judged necessary to make up the Union of a Member with a particular Organical Church. §. 50. I think I can from a Friend also, assure the Author that the person whom this Author doth somewhere de∣clare not only a Presbyterian, but one of great judgment and Worth (as indeed
he was) I mean Mr. Brinsley of Yar∣mouth, was the man drew up this Wri∣ting, recommended it to his Brethen; himself agreed in it, and they also, and made it a great foundation for an Agree∣ment betwixt them and their Congrega∣tional Brethren. For my own part, I am much of his mind: We say many of the Ministers and people he reflects up∣on as Schismaticks, neither were actu∣ally thus united to Parochial Societies, nor we in capacity so to be, because formally Pasters and Members else-where. §. 51. But the Author thinks the Law forbidding Ministers to Preach in the Parochial Temples, hath dissolved this Relation. In this we differ from him, and desire a better proof of it, both de facto, then he hath given us, and de jure, Then Solomons putting A∣biathur from the Priests Office, who had deserved to dye (as Solomon tells him first;) but more of that by and by. I do not profess strictly to Answer the Authors Book about Schisme: It is di∣rected against an Author able enough
to speak for himself; but something I must say to this and some other passa∣ges, only as they come athwart me in maintaining the Negative part of my Question, and justifying my self and o∣thers from the clamour of Schisme. Therefore in Doctrine of Schisme, p. 75. I find these words, What if a man hath a mind to be Friends with him, (that we desire, for we are for peace, &c.) and should grant that those Ministers were not de∣graded [discommissioned he should have said, or unordained as to] their Ministry within the Church of Eng∣land; and that those Churches were not dissolved by having new Pastors, [he forgets the Bishop, Curates he should have said] no more then the Kingdom, when the King dyes; and yet certainly the King and People are as much constitutive parts of a King∣dom, as Pastor and People of a Church; who will say, that considers what he saith, that a particular Church is dis∣solved by the death or removal of the
Pastor. Afterward he tell us the O∣pinion of Dr. Gouge, then of Mr. Bax∣ter, as to the removing of Abiather; and lastly, p. 77. That he hath thought hitherto, that the distinction of the Office, and of the exercise of the Office had gone uncontrouled amongst Presbyterians; and though the Mini∣sters of Christ depend not (not upon the Christian Magistrate for their Office) and he cannot degrade them, yet quoad Exercitium, as to the Exercise of it in his Dominions he might, and that he had power to silence such as are judged unmeet to Preach; and in this Mr. Bax∣ter confirms him, &c. §. 52. He will at least (ex abundanti) grant that man hath no power to say to those, Do not preach, to whom Christ and his Church hath said, Go and Preach; it is some relief yet, that he will in any thing suffer us to acknowledge Impera∣torem coeli. The Ministers were not put out of Office, 1662. then; Onely forbidden to exercise that Office within the Kingdom of England; but where was this prohibition? The Law only
saith, in publick Churches and Chappels. But the Churches he saith were not dis∣solved any more by having new Pastors, than the Kingdom is dissolved when the King dyes [he should have said by ha∣ving a new King.] The Question is, whether the Churches were not dissol∣ved by the removal of their Pastor. We think not: so he saith, Are we not agreed? the Governours were in being; the Go∣verned in being; only the Governours were in Prison, and for a time could not exercise their Office in their Chur∣ches. But if the Governours were dis∣commissioned, unordained, surely the Governing Church was dissolved as the Governing Kingdom; (so far as the Go∣vernours act by commission) is by his leave dissolved at the death of a King, as we all know. §. 53. He asks who will say That a particular Church is dissolved upon the Death or Removal of the Fastor. I an∣swer any one that understands sense, if there were no other Governour, and he be not in being, surely the particular organical Governing Church is dissolved,
the body is not necessitated to part, but at liberty, whether they will agree to the next Pastor, yea or no; his Friend Mr. Candry hath said so. Mr. Hooker had said, If the Church be not a Church without Officers,Cawdrys Answer to Mr. Hookers Survey, chap. 8. page 133. then as oft as the Officers dye, the Church dyeth also. That is an Authoritative Governing Church; and indeed, for any to say a Church is a Mi∣nisterial Church, without a Minister, or a Governing Church without a Gover∣nour, is a piece of sence I cannot under∣stand. §. 54. But to return to the Case of Abiathar, which is brought to prove the power of Magistrates, to put Ministers as well out of their Office, as out of their Preferments, Possessions, and publick Temples (all which is granted and ex∣cluded the Question.) I have nothing to do with any mans Opinion in the case. Let us fairly debate and under∣stand the case, and see whether it will conclude for the Author, yea or no.
Aaron was Gods undoubted High-Priest, immediately constituted so by himself. His Sons were also ordained by God to succeed him. Aaron had four Sons, 1 Chron. 6.4. Nanab and Abihu, (these Lev. 10. dyed before their Fa∣ther) Eleazar and Ithamor. By Gods special order Eleazar was made the High-Priest instead of Aaron, Numb. 20.26, 28. Eleazer died, Josh. 24.33. Phinehas his Son succeeded him, Jud. 20.28. Here the Scripture leaveth us. The next High Priest we read of, was Eli, for his neglect to correct his scan∣dalous Sons, God threatneth that he would cut off his Posterity from his Al∣tar, 1 Sam. 2.33, 35. and raise up un∣to himself a saithful Priest: This was the known will of God, declared to Eli by two Prophets; his Sons Hophni and Phinehas died before him. Ahilub is by Divines concluded to have succeeded him; he is called Ichabods Bother, 1 Sam. 14.3. That is Elies Grand∣child. Ahiah succeeded Ahilub, as is plain from 1 Sam. 14.3. Ahimelech succeeded him, as is plain, 1 Sam. 22.11.
Here God's Vengeance on Elies Family began to appear. Saul slays him and all his Fathers House, 1 Sam. 22.16. only v. 20. Abiathar escapeth and fleeth unto David, and was with him in all his troubles by Saul; but in the mean time it would be enquired who was High Priest for Saul at Jerusalem? and this the Scripture saith not, (possi∣bly he little regarded the Ecclesiastical Order instituted by God.) But it is a greater difficulty how the H. Priesthood came out of the line of Eleazer, Aarons Eldest Son, into the line of Ithamar the Younger Son of Aaron? Nor doth the Scripture resolve us, nor Josephus, who assureth us, Eli was of the Family of I∣thamar, and the first of it, but says on∣ly, He took the Priesthood, of whose Fa∣mily Abiathar was the last.Josephus, v. 62.12. This Abiathar was one of those, who during Davids life, and contra∣ry to his Will, proclaimed Adonijah King, 1 Sam. 1.25. which was no less than High Treason. Solomon call∣ing him to account for it, spares his life
for the kindness he had shewed to his Father, telling him he was worthy of death, but confineth him to Anathoth, (where he could not execute the Priests Office) 1 King. 2.26, 27. So saith the Text, He thrust out Abiathar from being Priest unto the Lord; and it is added, That he might fulfil the Word of the Lord, which he spake concerning the House of Eli in Shiloh: yet 1 King. 4.3. In the rool of the Officers we find Za∣dock and Abiathar were the Priests; so that it seems he was a Priest still, What∣ever is to be understood by, He put him out of the Priests Office: 'tis certain, 1 King. 2.35. he made Zadoc in his room, who was of the Sons of Eleazar, 1 Chron. 24.3. We cannot understand from Scripture, but that the High-Priest∣hood ought to have been in the Family of Eleazer; and it is like the disorder∣ly times of the Judges altered it. Solo∣mon restoreth it, and in doing it, ful∣filled what he knew was the will of God about Elies Family. It is not im∣probable but David had done it before, but for Abiathars peculiar Service to
him in his troubles. Now we have the case, 1. Solomon knew that Abiathar was of the younger House from Aaron, whereas the High-Priesthood truly be∣long'd to the Elder. 2. He knew also God had declared his Will to root out the House of Eli. 3. This Abiathar had committed the highest crime; Solomon might have put him to death, but for his kindness to his Father as to life he spares him, but thinks fit to send him far enough from the Court, and the place where the High-Priests Office was to be Executed at Hierusalem, and to confine him to A∣nathoth, where he could not execute the Office of the High-Priest; and so he was in effect turned from the High-Priests Office. 4. And Zadoc, to whom that Office was due, is invested with it: But Abi∣athar remains a Priest still, & is so called after, and joyned next to Zadoc; but the High Priesthood could not truly be∣long to him, but to the Elder House
from Aaron; and besides, God had de∣clared his Will, that this should be done; he is said to have done it, that he might fulfil the Word of the Lord, and he that did it was a man inspired by God, and a Pen-man of Holy Writ. What will follow from hence think we? there∣fore Kings and Magistrates may re∣move 1. The chiefest Priests from their Preferments, Dignities, and their own Courts. 2. That in case they have deserved death, and the Magistrate thinks fit to shew mercy, but yet to punish them with Banishment to remote places where their flock cannot come; he may thus in ef∣fect turn them out from their Pastoral Relation. 3. That in case he finds them no true Ministers of Christ, he may forbid them to Minister. 4. That if God from Heaven by a revelation, or by any plain Scripture com∣mands them to turn true Ministers out of Office, they may do it. I can see nothing more, let the Author make his best of this.
§. 55. But he had thought the di∣stinction of the Office, and the exercise of it, had been uncontrouled by the Presbyte∣rians; and that they had granted, that though the Magistrate could not degrade them, yet as to the exercise of their Office he might, and that he had power to silence such as he judged unmeet to Preach. Presbyterians can (without the help of this Authors Logick) distinguish be∣twixt the Office and the exercise of the Office, and make one distinction more between the exercise of the Office in pub∣lick places, (undoubtedly in the Magi∣strates disposal,) and in their own pri∣vate Houses, or in the private Houses of others. They do believe it in the power of the Magistrate, though not to take away their Office, or Relation to their Flock. Yet to hinder the exercise of it, and that they ought to obey him, com∣manding them to forbear the exercise of it in publick places belonging to the Magistrates; and accordingly have ge∣nerally been so obedient, though the Law so far, be not so plain, that any are prohibited to Preach, except such as are
disabled, which is the case of very few. They know Paul Preached in his hired House at Rome, Act. 28. and in the School of Tirannus, when the Jewish Rulers forbad them the Synagogues; the Office not taken away, nor to be taken away, they conclude the Relation atten∣ding the Office abiding. But hitherto we have only justified our first Plea. It is no separation, because there never was an Union, nor could be of very many of us to a Parochial Ministerial Govern∣ing Church. And considering it only as a part of the Catholick Church, we are in all points one with it. §. 56. But we will suppose that this is not the case of all our Brethren; but some have been United to the Parochial Societies, wherein they lived, and im∣plicitly consented to be one body with them, by not only hearing the Ministers there, but receiving the Communion with them. What shall be said for them? We say they are not sinfully separated. 1. Are they separated? They now indeed meet for worship in other pla∣ces, and that statedly; but do they con∣demn
the Ministers or Churches, from which they are come? do they not own them as true Ministers, and such Chur∣ches as true Churches? Do they not pay to the Ministers, & love the Brethren? where's the Schisme then? For when men have said all they can, Schisme is a sin against the command of Love to our Neighbour. It is no command of God, you shall be of this Congregation or ano∣ther, other then it falls under general precepts, commanding us to use the best means for our Souls. Now can∣not I love my Neighbour, except I dwell in his Family, or chuse her for my Wife, or him for my Husband: Be∣sides, it is most certain, I am bound to love my own Soul in the first place; and as an Evidence to that, I am tied to use the best means I can (not contradicted by God's Word) according to my own Conscience (which certainly must judg for me in my highest concern) for the Salvation of it. §. 57. I am a-ware of what this Au∣thor hath said, That a man may not de∣part from a Congregation to which he was
United, either to enjoy the Ordinances of God more powerfully, or purely, or perfect∣ly administred in another, convenient e∣nough for me to joyn with. This is the substance of what he hath said and quo∣ted from others as their Opinion. But this will never enter into my thoughts. Let them speak plainly to this. Is it not the duty of every Christian to use what appears to his Conscience the best and most probable means for his Salvation? The light of Nature as well as Scripture will evince this. Now I would fain know of any person what it is under Heaven, (except the bare Word and Sacra∣ments) that God hath appointed as means for the Instruction, Edification, and Salvation of my Soul, but the gifts of his Ministers or People, (with which, in order to these ends) his holy Spirit works not miraculously, but in a natio∣nal orderly way secundum quae nactus est, Organa. There is nothing more e∣vident than that in Ministers, there is a great diversity of Gifts, and as much a diversity of Wills, Humours, and Fan∣cies; and also a great variety of peo∣ples
Capacities. There's nothing more evident than that our Ministers parts, method of Preaching, &c. is really more fitted to the Instruction and Edification of some people, than the Gifts and Methods of others are; as we say every good Man makes not a good Husband for every good Woman; so it is demonstra∣bly true, that every able and good Mi∣nister is not a fit and good Instructor for every good Christian; they possibly understand not his language, nor cannot learn his method (possibly 'tis Cryptick, and requires a Schollar to understand it. Shall these people be perpetually staked down in the case, that let their Souls be never so much concerned, they must not ordinarily joyn with another Mini∣ster, and hear him, though their habita∣tions be convenient enough for it? or must these persons (possibly to the loss of their Trade and Livelihood, which in Towns lyes much upon their habita∣tion) be forced to remove into that o∣ther Parish; where hath God required any such thing?
§. 58. Besides that, I understand not much those of my Brethren that are so Zealous in this point. In my little dealings in the World, I use al∣ways to be afraid of that Trades-man, whom I perceive using arts to tye me to his Shop; and upon that Work-man that I see endeavouring to oblige me to none but himself. I fear always, they have no good meaning toward me; and I should fear my self, that I meant not to deal well with Souls if I went a∣bout to stake them to my Ministry. I should suspect my self of Pride, or Self-interest, or some other scurvy Lust or Passion. If I think none so able as my self, 'tis Pride; if I would have them to fill my Congregation, it is Self-interest. If I would save their Souls, so may ano∣ther, and possibly be a better instru∣ment for it, at least he is more likely, if sound in the Faith, able, and painful, because they have a more fancy to him. In short, I have for some good time been an unworthy Minister of the Gos∣el; I thank God, I can say, that as I never denyed any Christian desirous to
leave me, my License to do it; so I ne∣ver had an ill thought of any that did it; but said with my self, The fewer Souls I have will be under my charge, the lesser my account will be: And that which much confirm'd me in this, was my reading Chrysostom's expressing a fear that but a few Ministers would be saved, because their work and charge was so great; which if well considered, would abate our trouble for the diminu∣tion of our Auditory, and rather make us rejoyce. I have a number not in∣considerable under my charge now, and I can say, I dearly love them; and should think I did not, if I should not declare my free leave for them to leave my Ministry, and joyn with any other of sound faith and holy life, under whom they should think they could profit more than by me; and I do think this the duty of every Minister. I do not think this is any sinful separation which Schisme doth import. §. 59. But lastly: Supposing such a departing from a Church, to which we are united, be to be called Separation;
yet it is not sinful (in the judgment of all Divines) if it be necessary, or if it be not causeless; now possibly this may be the case of many. I remember in the case of Marriage, Divines distinguish between Repudiation and Divorce; Divorce, they say, can only be for A∣dultery; but Repudiation may be lawful and necessary in several other cases; in short, in all cases where it appears; there ought to have been no Union, had it been known; as suppose, 1. One had Married another (through deceit) of his or her own Sex. 2. His very near Relation, as Mother, Sister, &c. 3. or 3dly. One appearing evidently unfit for the chief ends of Marri∣age, &c. I think the same is to be said in this case. Let us try a little: Suppose Christians by an error, had chosen a man to be their Pastor, and ordinarily heard him, and communicated in the Lords Supper with him, whom at last they found to be no Minister. And when they discover it should leave him: This I hope were no sinful separation. If any shall say it is, he should complain
and have him orderly removed. We will suppose the case so, that it could not be obtained: Of this the late times gave us some instances. 2. Secondly: Suppose Christians, by an errour, and through ignorance, had done the like to one, whom after they discover to be corrupt in matter of Doctrine, suppose some points of Popery, Arminianisme, Socinianisme, which they in their Con∣sciences judge false, and makes a trade of this. Is it a sin for them to go to a∣nother Minister, not being able to get this removed? 'Tis plain, they ought not to have chosen him as their Pastor. 3. Suppose Christians by an error, have so chosen and joyned with one whom they then judged of a very sober life, but they find him a notorious Drunkard, Swearer, &c. Such a one ought not to have been chosen, but doth factum va∣let here; must they not leave him? If any say they may have him removed, I desire to know by what Law of Eng∣land? if he be neither Jew nor Schis∣matick. I am mistaken if I have not read or heard the Law allows no other
cases (or very few) of Deprivation. 4. Suppose Christians by the like Er∣rour, to have chosen one, who they thought would have been faithful watching his Flock, and to that end co∣habiting with them, the thing of the Law of Nature (saith our Author) and that is Divine for Members of the same Church; but they find, he rarely comes near them, or rarely Preacheth to them if amongst them, possibly once a moneth, hardly more, seldom or ne∣ver administring other Ordinances. In this case may Christians depart to ano∣ther, yea, or no? will any say No still? then he is bound to live without God's Ordinances all his life time for ought I know. §. 60. But lastly: Must it appear demonstratively, or is it enough for it to appear to the Christian probably, (that is so far as his Conscience can discern or judge) sinful to Communicate with a Church, before he separates from it. If any say Demonstratively, let him prove it: will any say it is enough, as to his practice? if it propably appears so; then
why are we so boldly called Schisma∣ticks before our probable Arguments be made appear to us, to have no probabi∣lity to? But They are the people, and have said Wisdom shall dye with them. We must be Schismaticks and sinful Se∣paratists, and for no other reason, but because they say so. §. 61. Once more. If it be Schisma∣tical for the Members of a Chuch to se∣parate from the Minister and Congre∣gation to which they are united: Then it is Schismatical for Ministers also to separate from the Congregations to which they were once so united, unless at least commanded by the Governours of the Church, for the publick good: If any say No, he will, I hope, give us a Reason; is not the Minister U∣nited? Doth not he break the Union, yea destroy the Organical Church by re∣moving, which private Christians do not? I am afraid the Author will rather quit us from Schisme, from Paro∣chial Societies, than grant us the conse∣quence, to the prejudice of, if not him∣self, yet of so many of his Friends,
One of them he must do, if I under∣stand sense. Will our Author think to excuse this, by saying, It is no Schisme in them, because they but remove to Chur∣ches of the same Communion (which he said before, for peoples removing from one Parish to another)? It lyes upon him to prove that persons agreeing in the same Doctrine, and in the same acts of Worship, though they differ in the words and syllables, and forms (of mere humane constitution) be of a different communion from their Brethren, o∣therwise the Presbyterians do not sepa∣rate, and are but Sister-Churches of the same Communion with their Brethren, not separated from them. §. 62. The Author of the Reflections had told the Author, That themselves with us had separated from Rome, which yet they, or some of them acknowledg a True Church: Therefore we might se∣parate from a True Church. The sum of his Answer is 1. That the Presbyterians do not ac∣knowledg it so, to whom he spake.
2. This was a current Argument of the Presbyterians against the Inde∣pendents. 3. He meant such true Churches as our Parochial Congregations. 4. They prove the Communion of Rome is corrupt; we only say theirs is. 5. Many do hold the Church of Rome truely a Church, not a true Church; true as to the Essence, but not Morally true as to her Do∣ctrine and Worship. 6. We did not separate from Rome, for we really were never of them; we reformed our selves without separating from Rome. Notwithstanding all these Answers (except the last) which I shall shew weak enough. Thus much we have gained. That it is Lawful in some cases to sepa∣rate from a body that is Metaphysically a true Church, that is truly a Church, which is all was intended to be gained. That the general Notion of the Truth
of a Church, should be no more a Medi∣um to prove us Schismaticks, now let us examine his particular Answers. §. 62. The Presbyterians do not ac∣knowledg Rome a true Church, and therefore he argued ad homines. In∣deed I find Mr. Caudry, to his Adver∣sary granting something of the Truth of a Church to Rome, crying Viderit ipse, but he is not the mouth of all Presbyte∣rians; did ever any know a Presbyteri∣an, Ordaining a Minister the second time, because he was the first time Or∣dained by the Church of Rome? yet he was there ordained to offer Sacrifice, but also to Preach the Gospel, which makes them afraid of it; or Baptizing any that turn'd Protestants from Papists. Till he had known this, he should have forborne this Answer, it may be that many of them will grant she hath some∣thing of the Metaphysical Verity of a Church. A rotten House, and falling, but yet an House still, and we think Christians from such a Church may with-draw.
§. 63. But this was an Argument a∣gainst the Independents. Produce a place where they ever said, It was un∣lawful for Christians to depart from a Church that had the least of truth in it. But he says he meant such as our Paro∣chial Congregations, this is a general: what doth he mean by such? 4. They prove the Communion of the Church of Rome corrupt; we only say it of theirs. And he only says that we only say it. We think that many have proved that we cannot Communicate or Minister in it under some present circumstances, without what we judge sin. Who shall determine betwixt us as to our practice? Hath this Author made, or can he shew us a strict Answer to Calderwood, Gil∣lespy, and Dr. Ames? and yet much more is to be said in our case, then they could speak. §. 64. Many do say that the Church of Rome is Vere, but not Vera Ecclesia, (that will not do) we can shew him vera, that is true as well as, Vere Truly; but his meaning is, True in Essence, not Morally True; what is the meaning of
that? Not true in her Doctrine and Worship. This kind of truth admitts many degrees. We would fain know of our Author to what degree of moral truth that Church must be arrived, from which he judgeth it sinful to separate; for we shall find that divers of his Brethren and Fathers have acknowledged a great degree of moral truth in the Church of Rome, from which yet they separated, and we believe died in their separation from it. Died they as Fools dyed? Let me shew this a little: Was not the Church of Rome morally true, because an Antichristian-Church, and the Seat of the Antichrist? So indeed Bishop Downame, Bishop Abbot, and many Bishops were wont to say; but since that time Bishop Mountagne hath called their Arguments Apocaliptycal phren∣zies. Dow saith it is doubtful. Dr. Hey∣lin saith it cannot be, for Antichrist must be a single man, a Jew that must kill Enoch and Elias.Star Cham∣ber Speech; p. 32. Bishop Laud confesseth therefore he hath raced out of the Li∣turgy, the scandalous term Antichristian Sect.
§. 65. Is the fault in the Doctrine of the Church of Rome; it may be some of us think there is fault enough there; I trust our Author himself thinks so, but neither all former Conformists, nor present Conformists believe that she differs from us in any Fundamentals. I my self have been told so within few years; the Author could not but know that Bishop Laud, Dr. Heylin, Bishop Potter, and many others have thus far asserted her Moral truth again and a∣gain, as to Doctrine. Now may not that be put for a Problem amongst those who are so Zealous in this point. Whither it be not Schismatical to se∣parate from a Church upon the account of Doctrine which errs in no funda∣mentals. Yet those great men confessed the latter, and did the former. If we loose this stand, I know not where we shall find a boundary to stop us from separa∣tion, from a true Church, for any one false Proposition of Doctrine maintain∣ed in it. But what Doctrine is there, as to which we cannot shew them that
some or other our conforming Fathers or Brethren have not either acknow∣ledged true in their terms, or so far true, as would make separation for it dange∣rous; yet all these separated from it, and died many of them in that black Schisme (if it were so.) Let the Author instance, and he shall hear what we can say to it; he will I hope, spare the Ar∣minian points. The Doctrine of Faith as an assent only to the Proposition, Justi∣fication by Works, &c. but let him in∣stance. §. 66. But it may be the business is, they have acknowledged and proved her Communion unlawful as to Wor∣ship; we indeed do so think it suffici∣ently sinful. But have all those Con∣formists separated from her thought so? we think so, because we judge her ido∣latrous in her Adoration of the Eucha∣rist, The Saints departed, Reliques, I∣mages, Altars, &c. and we know that many of our conforming Brethren are of the same mind with us, Dr. Brewynt, Dr. Stillingfleet, and many others have sufficiently told us so; but the question
is, whether all our conforming Brethren, who have separated thus, judged her thus morally not a true Church. What meant Dr. Heylins four bowings at his taking up and setting down the Bread and Wine in the Eucharist.Heylins mode∣rate Answer, p. 137. What saith the Author of Weights and Measures, as to the point of Veneration of Images? What saith Bishop Mountague, Antig. p. 318. and in his Antid. p. 30. and in his Orig. p. 40. he says the Ancient Church did Venerate Reliques, Antid. p. 44. but I will enlarge no further till I have particular instances given. §. 67. We see it was the judgment of these men, (and they were learned men) that we may separate from a Church that hath a great degree of moral truth. But it may be they thought they did not separate because they and their Fore-fathers were really never of them, but reformed themselves. But were not our Fore-fathers Baptized into that Church? Did not the Laws of England once tye us to them? Were we not U∣nited
to the Governours Worship, Members, and Assemblies of that Church. Did not our Fore-fathers shew their consent by ordinary attendance upon their Devotions, &c. This is all our Author saith for our Ʋnion to the National and Parochial Church, or Churches of England. §. 68. Again, they have proved it, he saith, that Communion in that Church is cor∣rupt. How? Because we cannot commu∣nicate with it without sin. How have they proved it? Demonstratively; so as the Ad∣versaries cannot deny it? Nothing less, they do deny it, and yet dispute it, but so as we probably judg it sinful. We grant this is proved, and so we think we have proved it too, though it may be more sinful to com∣municate with the Romish Church. But we know Magis & minus non variant speciem. But we think we ought not to do the least sin. §. 69. But we do not say it is sinful to communicate with them in all Ordinances. Why do we not communicate with them so far as we can without sin? Presbyterians indeed do generally acknowledg so much. But Communion is either stated and fixed, or Occasional. They conceive themselves ob∣liged, statedly and fixedly, if they can, to communicate to their proper Congregations where they can enjoy all the Ordinances of
God. For occasional Communion, they nei∣ther have denied it, nor shall deny it to their Brethren in such actions wherein their Con∣sciences will allow them so to communicate without sin, as occasion offers it self; they acknowledg many of their Ministers, and of their Churches, true Churches, true Mi∣nisterial Churches; they many of them hear them Preach and Pray, and bring their Children to them to be Baptized (especially if any of them will abate what in that admi∣nistration none judgeth by Divine precept Originally necessary, and they judg sinful?) what would the Author have more, unless a perfect communion? §. 70. As to which (though I do not much value Arguments from Authority of men, because they never touch the Consci∣ence, nor ad homines; because they are sin∣gle Bullets, and hit but one person; yet once let me use one. Because our Author in his Doctrine of Schisme, p. 28. assures us he is much of Mr. Fulwoods mind. I know not that Reverend Person; but I take him to be the same Mr. Fulwood that was some∣times Minister at Staple Fitzpane in Somer∣set-shire, and anno, 1652. published a Book called, The Churches and Ministry of Eng∣land true Churches, and a true Ministry (if he be not the man intended, I beg his par∣don
if it be he, he saith thus of the Church of England. For matters of Government, indeed of late we were under Episcopacy, all whose appurtenances savoured of Antichrist—and in the same page a little after—our Episcopal Courts, Service, Tyranny, &c. were very gross. This was Mr. Fulwoods judgment. I think we may easily argue according to his principles. It is Mr. Fulwoods assertion, not ours. From a Church, all whose appurtenances, as to Government, savour of An∣tichrist,Fulwoods Churches & Ministry of England true, &c. p. 12. and whose service is very gross. Christians may, and ought to separate, so far as to that Government, all whose appurtenances so savour, and whose service is gross. But saith Mr. Fulwood, &.—Ergo. When the Reverend Author hath found out an answer for his Friend Mr. Ful∣wood, we will further examin it. But there is no end of these things. § 71. In the mean time I must mind the Au∣thor of too little candor, as to his Adversary who wrote the Reflexions, in saying the sum of what he offered, was reducible to these two propositions. 1. That the Conformists held the Church of Rome to be a true Church,
yet did separate. 2. That our Parochial Churches are no true Churches, when as he never said the latter at all, but the clean contrary, and had acknowledged, 1. All of them true Churches, that is, true parts of the Catholick Church. 2. Many of them true Ministerial Churches. 3. Some of them true Organical Churches. Besides this, He that reads the Authors chap. 1. will see these two things were not the sum of what he said, and that how little soever Reason was in those Reflections, there was yet more then this Author in his Remarques was pleased to take notice of, for that Author had then in∣sisted on their not being united to Parochial Churches. §. 72. To shut up this discourse, I from my Soul wish, all the Lords, Ministers, and People of England were of one heart and mind. I am not of Gravity or Learning sufficient to Advise either Conformists or Non-conformists, but shall only propose my own thoughts, and not mine alone. The Reverend and Learned Dr. Hornbeck,  in his Dissertations de Episcopatu, hath these passages which I shall translate. The learned may read them in the Printed Copies. If men were every where as sollicitous for forming and reforming men, and fitting them for the sacred Ministry, to which they
profess to give up themselves, the disputati∣on about the form of Sacred Order and Go∣vernment would be more easie, and less evil need be feared from that which we judge not so good.—Here, saith he, We must begin that men may be made worthy for the work, and Parag. 4.—Here we must lay on our help—We see the Apostles in their Writings, were more sollicitous about the Ver∣tues than the degrees of Ministers,—Parag. 9. Before (saith he) we divide into parties about other things, we should joyntly agree about these things. A con∣fession of common Doctrine according to truth and piety, should be either set forth or confirmed, then exact Canons should be made about the whole life and manners of Ministers, and then a disputation about the form of Church Government should fol∣low—Thus far he. §. 73. I shall conclude with delivering my Opinion, That if 1. All the ancient Canons of Councils were executed, which concern Ministers Lives and Office. And the Do∣ctrine of the 39 Articles as expounded by King James and the Parliament of England were avowed, and those men might have nothing to do in the debate. Who are dead in Law, according to those Canons; that is, such as ought to be Excommunicated, or de∣prived, and who had declared, or should
declare themselves contrary to the Doctrine so expoundd and declared. The remaining part would quickly so well agree with other things, as we should be no more troubled with clamours of Schisme and Separation; and tell somthing of that Nature be, I see no medium, but either Dissenters must be in∣dulged, and Schisme clamour'd and never proved, or suffering for Conscience-sake must be imposed and patiently endured. Fiat Voluntas Dei.
ERRATA. PAge 2. l. 23. f. curare, r. curaes, p. 32. l. 14. f. Armi∣nians, r. Arminius, p. 33. l. 4. f. 130. r. 13th. p. 36. l. 12. f. generatibus, r. Generalibus, p. 42. l. 12. f. Jundical, r. Juridical, p. 70. l. 2. r. one Ministers parts, p. 74. l. 9. r. he Preach some, p. 75. l. ult, r. probably. ERRATA, in the Two last Sheets. PAge. 10. l. 14. after the word Apology, I pray add this, That which is of Divine, is undeniably greater than that which is of Humane Institution, p. 4. l. 10. f. act, r. acts, p. 27. l. 19. f. page 4. l. 34. r. B. 4. c. 34. p. 29. l. 22. f. Affirmations, r. Affirmatives.
AN Account of the Non-Conformists Meet∣ings for Divine Worship, by, Mr. H. according to his Middle-Way, against Dean F's charge of Schisme; and of the freedome of Conscience, from unusefull Laws, and the power of con∣straint against his Exceptions. HAving written four Papers which being bound together I call Mediocria, and finding in the end of one of them an Advertisement about a Book Entituled Two Points of great Moment, (which was the Obligation of hu∣mane Laws, and the Authority of the Ma∣gistrate in the matters of Religion,) by me dis∣cussed: I think it but civill to take an op∣portunity (while it is in my mind) of re∣turning my acknowledgments to the Reve∣rend and worthy Dr. & Dean, the Author of Tolleration not to be abused for his respectful Animadversions, in referrence (I count) to both these Points, in his Advice to Confor∣mists
and Non-Conformists. I confess my self obliged to him for it, and to requite the obli∣gation, I will present him with two things: my answer to what he hath put in against me, and an Apology, according to my Middle Temper, for the Non-Conformist in the mat∣ter above named. I will begin with the Last first, both be∣cause it is of most present import and it is al∣so fit I should preferr that of the Publick, be∣fore my Private Vindication. There are diverse sorts of the Non-Conformists, and they have their Meetings we know, not all on the same Reasons. There are some who have been and are for our Parochial Chur∣ches, who are satisfied with their Constituti∣on, and, if they might have freedome, would still choose them: And there are others that are in their inclinations for the Congregati∣onall way only. For my part I profess my Self of the former Sort, and do here declare in the behalf of my Self and many others of my Brethren, that we do not go from our Parish Church or Minister, in opposition to them, as if such Congregations were not Churches; No, we are sensible when our Lord hath commanded that the Tares should not be pluckt up for fear of endangering even but Some of the Wheat, what a grievous dis∣pleasure it may like to be to him, if we should go to Root up all the Wheat for fear of the
Tares, which to Unchurch whole Parishes were to do: Nor is it out of Pride, Vanity, Ostentation, Faction, or Self-advantage that we do it: We could not answer a lesser Man▪s, then a Dean's charge against us, if we did so. Two things therefore I will ac∣knowledg, That our Parish-Churches are true Churches: And that it is our Duty consequently to desire and endeavour their Union and Prosperity. And what would a∣ny Conformist have of me more, unless it be also to joyn with them there in the Partici∣pation of the Ordinances, which I refuse not neither upon convenient occasion? Well! Upon what ground then shall I offer my A∣pology for the Cause I have here under∣taken? Why I will give it very impartially. As I grant these two things to be our duty, so must I assume that which will not, and can∣not be denied me, that it is the duty likewise of those who are set apart to the office of the Ministry (supposing them in every respect fit for the Work, to have a call to it, and pru∣dent Sincerity does not at present other∣wise direct) to preach the Gospel, by way of discharge of that office. We have the Apostles express authority and example for this, who when they where Threatned and Commanded by the Magistrates to Speak no more in Christ's name, they have left us their
answer on record, Whether it be meet to obe Go or You, judg e. Now I must lay down this rule, that when two duties come toge∣ther so that we cannot perform the one, but we must omit the other, the greater duty must take Place of the less. The rule appears in it's own light, and also from Scripture. I will have Mercy (sayes God) and not Sa∣crifice. What is the meaning but that when act of Righteousness and Mercy fall in, such duties as that of Sacrifice which are less must give way. Here then is our case plain∣ly, which of these is the greater duty? We are to seek Unity, and to Preach the Gos∣pel. If we keep our Parish Churches, we must not Preach the Gospel: If we Preach the Gospel, we must go to these Private Meetings. Which of these is indeed of greatest concernment to the glory of God, and the Peoples Salvation? In General which is the greatest Matter that the Gospel of Christ Jesus be Preached: Or the Union of our Parish-Churches be promoted? In Par∣ticular, whether shall I, or any other Non-Conformist who have a call upon occasion to Preach at such a time, place, or Company, do more Service unto God by going & doing it: or by refusing and going to my Parish-Church, for the sake of Unity, for which I have still other Seasons? And which is the
greater Evil to have a people of a Parish di∣vided into several places to hear the Mini∣sters of both Perswasions Preach to them (when this too shall not hinder them being parts still, or Members of the same Church): Or that all the Preachers or Mi∣nisters in the Nation but those only who Conform should have their Mouths stopped or their Talents buried? How! when there is so many of them! So many of them truly serious and painful Labourers! So many of them that actually do so much good, and the ever-lasting welfare of thousands of men's Souls depend upon it? What is Pa∣rochial Ʋnion in comparison! I will appeal to the Conscience of every upright equal man, whether Conformist or Non-Confor∣mist, that fears God, to give Judgment. For the charge then of this Dean which he seems to have managed so strenuously, I answer. Schisme is a Causless Breach of the Churches Ʋnion, or a causless separation from her Com∣munion, the Communion of a Church where∣of we are Members, or should be. Let this learned man, or any other that hath read any thing about Schisme tell me, if I do not define it right by a Separation that is Causless, for if there be a cause, the Separation will be justified, as it is between us and the
Church of Rome. Now when the case be∣tween the Conformist and us is so open and in the face of the Sun, that unless we Countenance or allow of those Meetings which are Locally Distinct from our Parish-Congregations, the whole generation of the Non-Conformist Ministers must be laid by, from the exercise of their office for ought I see as long as these men do hold, whatsoever becomes in the mean time of the Souls of so many multitudes: what apology, defence, or Account do we need more but this on∣ly? Is there not a cause? They are the words of David to his surly Elder Brethren, that are offended only for his being about the business he was sent. And David said, what have I done? Is there not a Cause? I am very sensible that there is much more may be said, or that there are other Pleas which may be made by the Non-Con∣formist for their Meetings then this I offer. I have (I know) proposed my self a little in another Paper, towards some Catholick Healing of us, even under our stated Separa∣tions, if they cannot be helpt. If they can, or if this be enough, it is this Plea I choose, as the most indifferent between the Confor∣mist and us, the most fair and conducive to our Uniting again, if God give that Grace to the Nation. And this (under pardon) I
will be so bold, as to name my Plea, Mr. H's, Plea, Of Greater Duty. The Church is a number of such as own, or believe in the Lord Jesus, and joyn in Socie∣ty for the glorifying his Name in submission to his Ordinances. These Societies are either Particular, or that which consists of them all, the Church Ʋniversal. Of the Church as Ʋni∣versal Christ is the Head, from whom we have these Ordinances: &, when the Congregati∣ons which are Parochial, & others that meet separately from them, do both consent or unite in his Ordinances, that is, in the same Doctrine (so far as is necessary to Salvati∣on,) and in the same Worship, required in the Word, who can deny them to be both Parts of the Universal Church Visible, and so true Churches? As for going to diverse places, if there be no breach of the great Commande∣ment which is Charity, in other respects, it is a matter of indifferency, & can be no ground to charge Schisme upon one more then the other. There must be some other con∣sideration than of the Church found out if they will accuse us of Schisme: And that is not as it is Ʋniversal or Particu∣lar, but as it is National and Parochial. As it is Ʋniversal and Particular it is ex praecep∣to, of Divine: as it is National and Parochi∣al it is ex providentia, of Humane and pru∣dential institution. There are some things
required to the Church ad esse, and some things ad bene esse. That which is required ad esse, is named (a due administration of the Word, Sacrament and Prayer), and we divide not in it. That which is required ad bene esse is either necessary to that bene (or melius) esse, being of Divine Authority, and that is some Discipline in general, though for the Sort, I will not say which is such, or that which is accidental and accumulative from man, as to have the Supreme Magistrat Christian, and a Nursing Father to it, with his People generally of that Religion. The one of these (I say) is of God's Praeceptive (we speak it not simpliciter, but in regard to the Constitution of the Church of Christ): the other of his Providential will only. In this accidental regard as the Church is National do we acknowledg that the King is head of it, and hath his Ordinances in respect thereunto to be obeyed, as Christ hath in regard to the Ʋniversal. That the Magistrate hath Autho∣rity to Protect the Church of Christ, by see∣ing that Christ's Ordinances be observed in every Congregation according to their way, and in looking to the whole that they do no∣thing but what shall make to the Peace of the Nation, is out of question. The King here governs by his Laws, and the Laws of this Land have appointed the constitution
of particular Churches to be of Parishes as most convenient to that purpose. If we consent not to these Laws we break the Ʋnion which is of Humane institution, though we preserve that which is Divine. Disobe∣dience to the wholesome commands of our Superiours is sin, and when that separation therefore, which is a thing indifferent o∣therwise does become sinful through that disodedience, unless we have somthing to justify the disobedience, such separation, by Analogy, is Schisme. And here do I verily think must the bottom of all that can be charged upon us about Schisme be placed. If the Parliament should Legitimate these separate Meetings by an Act, they would immediately become parts of the National Church no less then our Parishes, and that would put an end to the Schisme; the Evil chargeable upon us any otherwise, being like to be found the Fault of the Persons, not of our meetings, or of the Thing: But so long as they are against Law, it is the Obligation of humane Laws I perceive, and the Authority of the Magistrate about Religion are the points must come into Plea. These have been treated and put together in a Book en∣tituled, Two points of great Moment Discussed. The substance whereof as to my present pur∣pose will resolve into this Distinction. Laws which are Wholesome Laws, that
is, for the Common Good in Civil's, and for Edification in Spiritualls, do bind us under Pain of Sin. Such is the law I count for Pa∣rochial Union, but there are two Cases wherein we are exempted from such Laws, and which justify the Non-Obedience. One is, when that which is commanded is against a man's Conscience. The other is, when that which is commanded cannot be done, but some other Duty which is of greater Con∣cern must be thrust out, and in this Case (I say) the omitting that which is the lesser Duty, is no sin. In this Point, ye see before, I have placed our Apology. I must add, that forasmuch as it is no Sin to omit a lesser Duty for doing a greater, when both cannot be done, but to omit the greater Duty consequently must be sin: it follows, that supposing it to be Schisme to refuse Communion, when we may come to Church without sin, it must be no Schisme to wave it, or not to come, when if we come we should sin, as we must, when we shall o∣mit a greater Duty by coming. Schisme is a Voluntary Departure without cause given from that Christian Church, whereof he was a Member; or a Breach of that Communion wherein a man might have continued without Sin, sayes that late Author of a Serious and Compassionate Enquiry, into the causes of men's contempt of the Church and the re∣medies.
A Book two fine I count to bear a Dispute, or uphold so large a design he undertakes. I would fain know (sayes ano∣ther) by what Authority this separating practise can be justified from the guilt of the most Horrible Schisme that ever was heard of in the Christian World. A sober Answer to the new Separatists. Pa. 156. again (Pa. 157.) Distinguishing of a Voluntary desertion of ones Ministry, and choosing silence in case of Non-Conformity. The second (says he) is the Illustration of four Cardinal Vertues, Humility, Meekness, Selfe-denial, Obedience. I cannot but quote these Passages as plea∣sant to my Humor, nor can I forbear Laugh∣ter at the Reading of them. Not because that worthy honest Citizen hath not read Ethicks, in calling these Cardinal Vritues, whereof we know indeed there are Four, but neither of these is One of them: But for the Spirit, or present Assurance where-with he Writes, I could never be so Confident when I wrote against Separation. Nor can I look on this Separation only from the Churches of the Nation, not from Christ's Church or Churches, that is a Schisme of mans Denomination (our Parishes being of Humane Contrivance out of Question,) to be such a Horrible Creature as he makes it. The great Bear hath been led so long a∣bout
the streets that the very Children are no longer afraid of it. Neither can I think it any such Vertue for a man to give over Preaching. I am mightily Flattered methinks in this Passage, who, if this good man be in the right, should be one of the most Vertu∣ous Non-Conformists among all our Bre∣thren. I pray God to for-give me that Ver∣tue with my Manifold Aberations. I de∣clare my Self with the Old Non-Conformist a Conformist Parishioner, though a Non-Con∣forming Minister, and refuse not to joyn in the Ordinances of Doctrine, Breaking Bread; and Prayers, in our Parochial Con∣gregations. Laws which are not Wholesome Laws, that is, not for the Spiritual or Temporal good of the Community (such as our Ceremonies & the like things I count be) may, I Presume, entangle the Mind and Oblige the outward Man to suffering, or to doing rather then Suffer, if they be not Sinful to us, as well as Ʋnprofitable, but they do not (I have main∣tained, and must desend still what I have de∣termined as of necessary import to tender Christians) oblige the Conscience of the Subject. And so I descend to my Pro∣per Concernment. J. H. sith, that unless th matter of the Princes Command be antecedently necessary in
Judgment of the Subject, it obliges not the Con∣science. Sir! This is a mistake, I say not so. I say indeed, that unless a Law be for the com∣mon Good, it binds not in point of Consci∣ence, and I give these two reasons for it. The one, because the Magistrate hath no Authori∣ty from God but for our Weale, nor the Bi∣shop but for our Edification. The other be∣cause we are to suppose the Superiours will, or intention, is measured by his Authority: And when the thing commanded is not for our Good or Edification, as it is destitute of God's Authority, it must be supposed void also of his Ministers intention. See my Ob∣ligation of humane Laws, Pa. 139. with pa. 25. But that I should be made upon this to hold therefore (and that for a Principle) that the Conscience is only Obliged from the Matter of the thing Commanded, and not from the Command of the Magistrate, is such an abuse and weakness, as the modesty of those Words [You seem to Say] will not excuse. There are a Thousand things good for the Publick, which, being not command∣ed, are not necessary, nor Oblige any Body. The controversie between Conformist and Non-Conformist is supposed to be about things indifferent, in which the Conscience is Free, and not Bound, till our Superiours Command comes. It is by the Authority
then of our Superiour (I say) derived from God, that the Conscience is obliged: Inso∣much as that before the Command there is no Obligation: and when he commands, the matter of the command must be such as he hath Power to Command in, or it is void. It is Authoritas imperantis agnita (I have noted it some-where) is the Objectum for∣male obedientiae, and answereth the question, Qûare obedis? But I am not aware (saith the kind Dean) That obedience to man in things indifferent is commanded of God in Scripture. Yes! I am aware that Things indifferent (by which we mean whatsoever is neither commanded nor for-bidden in the Word,) are either for the Common good, and so the subject matter of the Superiours Authority, and Obedience to men in such things is commanded by God in Scripture: Or they are not for the common Good, but a∣gainst it, and in such matters, neither hath the Superiour Authority (I say) from God to command them, nor can such commands for that reason be obligatory to the Conscience. But Obedience to them is also required in the Law of Nature for the common Good. How? Is Obedience required by the law of Na∣ture for the common Good, to things which I suppose not for the common Good? Why, It is for the security of the Publick
peace, and God's own Vicegerency on Earth. I answer, The Honour of the Magistrate, and security of the Government is preser∣ved (and the common good thereby con∣cern'd) in our obedience, when the Laws are wholesome Laws; in our suffering, when they are sinful Laws; in our avoiding con∣tempt and scandal, when they are unprofita∣ble Laws; in our subjection to the Autho∣rity residing in the Person under all Laws so that when he will, he can enforce them. Upon this account, there is a difference or∣dinarily between the Command of a Ma∣ster or Parent, and the Laws of a Nation. A Command to a Child or Servant, does suppose, a do it, or I'le make you. If the Magistrate sets himself to have a Law obeyed by a particular person, the case is the same; and seeing the honour of the Governour and the Government it self is still (I count) concern'd in this, that he should be able to make his Subjects obey, if he put his power out, and the thing be no Sin, Obedience being for the common good, in such a case, a man is obliged to it in Conscience: but if he do not, a Law sup∣poses only the common good mainly to be entended, prudence to be used, no contempt offered, and the will of the Magistrate is done. When our Obedience then (I say)
does indeed serve those ends he mentions (and greater be not served, or the same otherwise better served) we are obliged: But what if it serves them not? What if my impertinent Obedience shall but disturb the Peace (or the peaceable) and reflect dishonour on the Law-giver? what if it should do more hurt than good, taking one thing with another? when it is not for the common good, I say, and then only, that we are not obliged in Conscience. There are a few more words here need∣ful, because we are at the bottom. How far the Laws of man do bind the Consci∣ence, was the question, That the Consci∣ence is not bound at all by humane Con∣stitutions, hath been the opinion of no few Doctors, nor mean persons: for in the Act for the VVednesday fast, it seems to have been the received judgment at that time of the whole Nation. I say these fasts (or the like appointments) are to be observed, yet shall not the breaking them, make a man to do deadly sin, except in his mind be some other malicious affection therewith an∣nexed, as rashness of mind, despite, or such like; for so much as no positive Law of man made without foundation of Scripture, may bind any person, so that in breaking such he shall therefore sin deadly. John Lambert the
Martyr. So Luther, and the Protestants I suppose ordinarily after Gerson. See Dow∣nam, see Field. They do impiously Ʋsurp and assume to themselves, that which is proper to God; who will have their Lawes bind the Conscience, and threaten Damnation to the Offendors, sayes that learned Dr for our Currant Doctrine; who does therefore quote also two Papists. Human Lawes binds the Conscience not, Ex voluntate Legi∣slatoris, sed ex ipsa legum utilitate & ratio∣ne. Stapleton Cont. 5. De pot. Ec circa leges Mor. Quaest. 7. Art. 2. Quamvis peccet quis transgrediendo leges humanas, non tamen ligant conscientiam: patet per simile de prae∣ceptis medicorum, quae despicere quis non potest sine peccato, & tamen non ligant conscien∣tiam. Gerson De vita spir. anim. Lect. 4. If you think this too large, that the Lawes of Man, however, should not be made to oblige the Conscience in equality with the Lawes of God, is but most rea∣sonable; That they do oblige therefore only so far, as to the avoiding contempt and scandal, hath been our most constant deter∣mination (I think) against the Papists. Now I would willingly know here, upon what bottom such a Determination is laid; and that which offers it self, is this. That whereas all Lawes do oblige only, but ac∣cording
to the will of the Law-giver, it is supposed that he entends we should be ob∣liged so far only. But I pray why do we set these limits to his will? why may we not suppose as well, that he entends his ob∣ligation with other limits, to wit, that his Lawes shall bind us so far, as stands with our convenience; or so far as the hurt or damage to us, does not exceed the good we shall do the Community by our Obedi∣ence? If our Superiour entends not to bind us so far, as God does by his Lawes, but so far as, the supream Law of Charity re∣quires (See Davinants Determinations, Quaest. 20. p. 100.) why may we not sup∣pose other limits (I say) as well as these mentioned? The truth is, there is no bot∣tom in the business, till we come to that I have laid, which is this, that forasmuch as God hath entrusted no Authority with any to give Lawes, but for the Peoples welfare, and this is the end therefore of all Lawes, there are no Men in capacity of Law-givers (especially a Parliament that represent the Community) but are to be supposed to en∣tend this altogether: and consequently if a Law prove otherwise, or is against the common good, it must be supposed also, that such a Law is devoid of their intenti∣on, or is not according to their will, and so
does not bind the Conscience, even upon this double ground; both because it is desti∣tute of the Authority it should have from God, and its Authority from the will of Man also, upon the account declared. That the will of the Law-giver should be measu∣red by his Authority, is but meet (I hope) to be supposed: and this last ground, there∣fore having been but once touched in my Book before quoted, I do imprint it now more sensibly in this Paper. I must confess I have heard it said to me, by One or Two, sometimes thus, When a thing is indeed destructive to the publick good, we will grant you what you say; but not so, when a thing is only against it, or not for it. I reply, Sirs! I pray let us come to a bottome, This is not to go to the bottome. Why shall not a command destructive to the common good bind the Conscience? If it be sin to disobey, we must not sin to avoid mischief, we must say therefore it is not sin. And why is it not sin, but because such a Command hath none of God's Authority? I must assume, so hath no Command that is not for the common good; for the Autho∣rity that any Man hath from God, is only for our Good, for our Edification. Here is the bottome, if it be firm, it must hold throughout; if not, it must not hold at all.
He is the Minister of God for our good. Ac∣cording to the power given to us of God for Edification. To the Dean's Texts, I have answered, Subjection is to be owned alwayes out of Conscience. Obedience is supposed to be required in Scripture, in matters wherein the Superiour hath Authority, that is, a right from God to Command. Such matters being only what is for the publick good, those Lawes or Commands which are be∣sides that end, are no Lawes or Commands God bids us obey, that is, are in sensu uni∣voco no Lawes: and when  obey in all others, but in those which are Lawes only secundum nomen, I do obey him (I count) in all things; because those I disobey, are none secundum nominis rationem. It may be perhaps thought upon this, that I should have made a quicker dispatch of my Work then I do, to say that all Lawes do indeed bind the Conscience (it is pro∣perer to say do bind in Conscience), but such Lawes as are not for the common good are no Lawes. To which purpose may Cicero and Suarez be consulted. Omnium commune axioma est de ratione & substantia legis esse, ut pro communi bono feratur. Suarez, De legibus l. 1. c. 7. You may find Authorities enough there quoted to read at
your leasure. I will transcribe thus much out of Cicero my self. Principem legem mentem esse dicebant omnia ratione aut co∣gentis aut vetantis dei: ex qua illa lex quam dij humano generi dederunt, recte est laudata. Est enim ratio mensque sapientis ad inbendum & ad deterrendum idonea.—Constat pro∣fecto ad salutem civium civitatumque incolu∣mitatem vitamque omnium quietam & beatam conditas esse leges: eosque qui primum ejusmo∣di scita sanxerunt, populis ostendisse ea se scrip∣turos atque laturos, quibus illi ad scriptis sus∣ceptisque honeste beateque viverent: quaeque ita composita sanctaque essent, eas leges videli∣cet nominarunt. Ex quo intelligi par est, eos qui perniciosa & injusta populis jussa descrip∣serint, cum contra fecerint quam polliciti pro∣fessique sint, quidvis potius tulisse quam leges. The sum of both comes to this. The chief Law is the Divine reason; The Lawes of Men must be agreeable to that; God's Com∣mands are to make Men happy, by living ver∣tuously; Mens Lawes accordingly, that are not for the Peoples welfare, are nothing less than what they are called. To these I will joyn Augustine, Istas leges, injustas vel potius nullas dicemus? Nam mihi lex esse non vide∣tur quae justa non fuerit. August. de lib. arb. l. 1. c. 5. If you ask me then, why I did not go this way, I will tell you, that besides
it looks not safe, fit, or civil to say, that any thing which is once passed into an Act of Parliament is no Law, there is a necessity you may perceive here, that we must come to some distinction at last: and I did choose to distinguish of the Obligation, and to shew in what sense we are not obliged, ra∣ther then of the Law, and to say in what sense, it is no Law. Let Law be defined out∣right according to these, and, Law is the De∣claration of the will of the Law-giver, what the Subject is to do for the publick good. If a Law now be not for the publick utility, it is no Law according to this definition; it hath not that in it which is de ratione legis, as the Schools speak. It is a Law therefore in sen∣su aequivoco which agrees in the name, but not in sensu univoco, which participates of the nature or the definition. To avoid the using these terms therefore, and in regard such an Act is Law still in some sense, in the common sense and Vote of the Nation, and in some respect more than aequivocally so, because proceeding from a rightful Authori∣ty, it does in part agree in the definition, as well as in the name, and consequently in part must be Obligatory, it does appear how the distinction does as it were naturally devolve upon the Obligation: and so spares this upon the Law; seeing if we will truly
explicate what we mean, when we deny such a Law to be law, this we must say in good earnest, and nothing else is our mean∣ing, that it is a Law so far as to be obeyed for fear of the penalty (for never to resist I count in my Book is still pre-required), but not so far, as that every omission of it is sin, or that we are obliged to it in Con∣science. And thus by going the farther way about, we are but brought the nearer home to the true decision we entend. Only one thing I find wanting yet in the explanation of the terms of this distinction I use be∣tween the Outward Man and the Conscience. I have been at a good deal of pains to make those received terms currant (Compare my Obligation of human Lawes p. 24. with my Authority of the Magistrat p. 50.) and all I see will not serve till I distinguish also of Conscience it self, which is taken Physically or Theologically. Conscience Naturally taken is any knowledge of my self or my concern∣ments: Conscience taken Theologically is the knowledge of what I have to do with Reference to the will and judgement of God, Judicium de semet ipso prout subjicitur judicio dei. When Divines in this point therefore do distinguish the Outward Man and the Conscience, by the Conscience we must understand Conscience in the Theolo∣gical
sense only. That is, we Separate not he Reason, Will, Understanding, or Na∣ural Conscience it Self from the Outward Man, but Conscience only Theologically taken. And the Meaning is plainly, that though a Man in Reason understands, and is Conscious in regard to his own con∣cernement, that such a Law is to be Ob∣served, if he will avoid this or that Penalty or Inconvenience: Yet so long as he Believes God does not Command him to do it, and that he shall incurr no Displeasure from him though he omits it, this is to be Obliged in the Outward Man only, and not in Consci∣ence; or n the Conscience taken Naturally, not Theologically in Conscience. After I had wrote this and all the rest, (only somthing I hereupon inserted be∣fore), I had Dr. Field on the Church acci∣dentaly brought me. It was many years since I read him, and I had forgot every thing in him on this Subject but only his Distincti∣on between Subjection and Obedience which I like, and ever retained. I am well pleas∣ed to find my genius agreeing so much as it does with one of so great Note and Learn∣ing; especially seeing that Tenet which Dean F. opposes as mine is that alone in effect wherein our Sentiments meet not. You say (sayes Dean F.) when a thing is
Commanded of God, or we think it tends to the Publick good, then only Conscience is Obli∣ged: But this Obligation is only from the ne∣cessity of the thing Commanded, & because you approve it to be a Duty before, and consequent∣ly in Obedience to your own Reason, and not at all out of Conscience of the Command, or in Obedience to the King. Well! Let us then hear Dr. Field, a greater Dean, deliver his judgment: Which I will set down in his words at large for the Readers Edifica∣tion. The question should not be proposed, whether Humane Laws bind the Conscience (This he takes up in the Negative as not to be question∣ed): but whether binding the outward Man to the performance of outward things by force and fear of outward Punishment to be inflicted by men, the not performance of such things, (or the not prformance of them with such affections as were fit) be not a Sin against God of which the Conscience will accuse us, he having Commanded us to Obey the Magistrates and Rulers he hath set over us! For answer hereunto, there are three sorts of things (sayes he) Commanded by Magistrates. First, Evil and against God. Secondly Injurious in respect of them to whom they are Prescribed, or at least Ʋnprofitable to the Common-Wealth in which they are Prescribed. Thirdly, such
as are Profitable and Beneficial to the Society of Men to whom they are Prescribed. Touch∣ing the First Sort of things, We must not Obey. Touching the second Sort of things, all that God requireth of us is that we shew no contempt of Sacred Authority though not rightly used, that we Scandalize not others, and that we he Subject to such Penaltyes, as they that Command such things do lay upon us. In the Third Sort of things, it is only that God re∣quires our Willing and ready Obedience. The Breach and Violation of this kind of Laws is Sin, not for that humane Laws have Power to Bind the Conscience, or that it is simply and absolutely sinful to break them, but because the things they Command are of that Nature that not to perform them, is contrary to Justice, Charity, and the desire we should have to procure the Common-Good of them with whom we Live. We are bound then somtimes to the Performance of things prescribed by Humane Laws in such Sort that the not Performance of them is Sin; not ex sola Legislatoris voluntate, sed ex ipsa legum utilitate, as Stapleton Rightly observed. But some Man will say, what do the Laws then effect seeing it is the Law of Justice, and Cha∣rity that doth bind us, and not the Particula∣rity of Laws newly Made! To this we answer that many things are God and Profitable, if they be generally Observed, which without such
general Observation will do no Good. The Law procureth a general Observation. Bel∣larmine objects, Be subject for Conscience Sake. To this we answer. First. That it is a matter of Conscience to be Subject in all things, for Subjection is required Generally and Absolutely where Obedience is Not. Se∣condly. We say that it is a matter of Consci∣ence to Seek and Procure the Good of the Com∣mon-Wealth, and that therefore it is a matter of Conscience to obey Good and Profitable Laws, so farr as we are perswaded our Obedi∣ence is profitable. Moreover, General and Long continued Disuse is, and Justly may be thought an Abolishing, and Abrogating of Humane Laws. For seeing Lex institutitur cum promulgatur, vigorem habet cum mori∣bus utentium approbatur. On the Church Pag. 4. l. 34. I must remember my Antogonist to take Notice that What he goes to oppose in me as some singular Opinion of mine, which yet is not mine, but he mistakes me in it, is Presented by this Great Dr. of the Church as the received Doctrine of Pro∣testants: As also, that the Doctrine which in deed is mine, & this Dr agrees so much with me, does require his better Consideration. J. H's. Second Principle is that Human Pow∣ers may not lawfully Command or Inforce any
thing against the Conscience, even in Civil Concernes. He should have said in things that are materially Civil, yet under some Consideration unto some Religious. What the Magistrate cannot Command (I say in∣deed) he cannot Inforce. The Magistrate cannot Command what God forbids. God forbids every Man to do any thing against his Conscience. And what hath any Mortal to oppose against this? Why, he has one Ar∣gument only, which he takes from my Con∣cession, in the stating my Matter. I Di∣stinguish between a Man's doing according to his Conscience, and his doing against It; and of Restraint and Constraint accordingly in the Magistrate. I grant that the Ma∣gistrate may Restraine a man from doing ac∣cording to his Conscience when he is doing hurt to Church or State through his errour, and may Punish him for the Evil he does: He argues from hence that he may Con∣straine him to doe that which is Good for the Church or State, though it be against his Conscience, upon the same account. But I say, not. There is a Difference. I give my Reason. Because in the one, the Man does what God would not have him: In the o∣ther, he does what God would have. God would not have him to do Evil, because of his erroneous Conscience, but that he should lay
down his Errour and do Good: But God will have every Man so to regard his Conscience though Eerroneous, that he must not do any thing against it, for any Fear, or Advantage in  Eaerth. Author. of the Mag. Pag. 12. And what answer makes he to this Reason! Why not a word. So overly a men ordinarily to speak at the first sight against that, which others have thought long upon. The substance of the Distincti∣on, and so of my Detemination, I cited out of Augustine, and confirmed it with Grotius his Approbation. I might add to them the Learned Rutherford, who are Judicious mighty Men all three, but this Gentle Dean hath not Pondred the Matter. For thus he proceeds. The Law of God is the Rule of Con∣cience. This Law is Negative as well as Af∣firmative, and binds the Conscience equally in both respects. So far we are Agreed. Hold Sir! A mistake again. He forgets the known Rule in the Schools, that Affirmations bind Semper, not ad Semper, not to all times, or in all Cases: but Negatives do bind Semper and ad Semper, alwayes, and against all Ex∣ceptions. He remembers not himself there∣fore, when he saies they Bind equally, and so thinks not how the Decision of the Point must resolve into this Issue. In the affir∣mative Case I say it is true, that God re∣quires
the Man to lay down his Errour, and not to do the thing, and therefore the Ma∣gistrate may Restrain, or Punish him: In the Negative case he urges likewise, God commands him the Same as to laying down his Errour, and to do the thing, and there∣fore he may Constraine or make him. But I reply no still, the difference remains. Though in the Negative case (that is, when the Con∣science which is Erroneous sayes they must not do such a thing) God requires this Joyntly, to lay down his Erroneous Con∣science (or be other-wise informed), and to do the thing, yet does not he require this Separately, that while he is so informed, he should do it: When in the affirmative Case (that is when the Conscience which is erro∣neous, saies thou must do such or such a thing) God requires he should lay down his Errour & not do the thing both Joyntly and Separately; so that even while he is Per∣swaded in his Conscience that it is his Duty, God's Negative Command is Obligatory a∣gainst that Perswasion. The reason is from what is Said, because Affirmatives do not bind ad Semper, or in all Cases, but Nega∣tives do. This is one of those Cases. Thou shalt not do against thy Conscience, is a Ne∣gative Indispensable: Thou shalt do accord∣ing to it, holds not in this Case, when the
Conscience is in an Errour. I will conclude with the History of this little I have written. There is a Book call'd the Friendly Debate, which when it came out was received every where with diver∣sity of acceptation, and censure. There are many things in it I am perswaded in my heart fit to be spoken: yet do I not know, nor the Authour himself perhaps know from what manner of Spirit they are spoken. It is in appearance a Spirit elated, contemp∣tuous, engaged (if not imbitterd) against a party, and so far un-Catholick, which does through the sides of that party oftentimes make Religion her self feel, entrenching upon it almost all the way, in regard to those weaknesses and follies which Human reason is ever ready to impute to it. But God hath chosen the foolish things of the World to confound the Wise: and the things that are despised hath he chosen. Among other matters against the Non-Conformists, that Authour brings this, that they observe not the Lawes, the Oxford Act, and others, and that therefore they cannot be good Sub∣jects, nor good Christians, nor Ministers of Christ. A heavy charge, and a necessary case of Conscience! Upon this occasion I presented to the publick a sheet called the Case under this Title. Whether a Non-Con∣formist
who hath not taken the Oxford Oath, might come to live at London,, or any Cor∣porate Town, or within Five miles of it, and yet be a good Christian? To this Sheet the Authour was pleased to give me an Answer. That Answer drew me forth to write my Book by way of reply, of the Obligation of human Lawes. To this reply the learned Debater answered no more. After the De∣bate, another peice comes forth of Ecclesi∣astical Polity, exceeding the former both in Pomp and Design, in Lustre and the At∣tempt; that was for asserting an Authority in the Magistrate over the Conscience to end all Disputes, which being a thing not to be endured, though but in the matter of Con∣formity, as the Authour I think only meant, I wrote also my other Book, of the Autho∣rity of the Magistrate about Religion. Unto this Book I had no answer from that Au∣thour neither: Only having caused those few Copies which were left of the Obliga∣tion in Quires to be Bound up with this, and Printing so many on purpose of the Sheet called The Case over again, to fit and joyn to both, and then Entituled it, Two points of great moment Discussed, I do ob∣serve that it hath pleased this Reverend Dean to step in with these Two exceptions of his, which I have answered: and one
thing more in the close must not pass un∣regarded, which he brings in under the head of the former of the Two. This Obligation (of I. H.) is only from necessity of the thing commanded. But in all other cases you need not obey only for wraths sake, that is, no farther then you are forced; and therefore when you are got above fears you will not, or need not, regard Autho∣rity. This principle will hardly prove the Non-Conformists the only Loyalists. Be∣sides the mistake before noted. It is no∣thing but want of the present knowledge, in this Dr as it was in the Debater, of the distinction I offered them out of Dr Field, between Subjection and Obedience, or the sense of it, that made them fall into so slen∣der sort of reasoning, as this is. Though there be many cases, wherein we are not bound in Conscience to Obey: yet are we alwayes bound in Conscience to be Subject, or never to Resist, and upon that ground is our Loyalty maintained. This I have said, I know most effectually in my first Book of the Two Points, unto which, therefore, when that which is brought to its Assistance in the Second, and this little in these Two Sheets now more is added (which I would by no means have those, who have the
other be without), there is nothing be∣sides, as I can find in my mind (unless to tell the Reader, least he be at a loss, that there are a few of these Two Poynts so bound up, yet to be had, at the Golden Lyon in Paul's-Church-yard) that is lacking to my full satisfaction on those Subjects, Vale Lector & fruere Deo gloria. I. H.
