I224 13343972 99150
AN INSCRIPTION Intended to be set up for the E—l of R—r, WHEN By the HAPPY EFFECTS of his MINISTRY, THE Chappel of St. STEPHEN's is become a Chappel to the JESUITES. Approv'd by the GENERAL, By Father L' Chaise, And the Colledge at the Fleche. TO The Eternal Memory OF L—e E—l of R—r. Printed in the Year, &c.
AN INSCRIPTION INTENDED To be set up for the E—l of R—r. A Person form'd by the Stars for daring Exploits. Inspired by the happy Genius of our Society, And by the Insolence of his own Temper fitted for Ar∣bitrary Power. A Constant Friend to France in all Reigns, A True lover of Tyranny in all Persons; An Enemy to Moderation in all Times. Not Obscuring, but exceeding the Merits of his Father, Whose Sale of Dunkirk ought not to be nam'd with that of Three Kingdoms, And All EUROPE. Clarendon procured a barren Queen, And raised his Daughter to be a Princess. But his Son projected greater things in his Family, Which made him cut the Gordian knot of Three leaves out of his Accounts. * First to make his Daughters Dutchesses, And then Queens. By Marrying one to the Earl of Dalkeith for England, Another to the Duke of Ormond for Ireland. And offering a Third to the Earl of Arran for Scotland. Thus to take in all Titles, In which he was sure of our support. He was early initiated in our Tremendous Mysteries, And always active to promote our holy Cause:
Or to attempt the same at Dantzick, and the Cities of Prussia. Sent to Countermine Sir William Temple's sin∣cere designs. Securing to France what he intended for Spain. And betraying the Dutch, the better to subdue the English. Nurs'd with the Milk of Slavery, A Pensioner to Lewis the Great, An Enemy to the English Constitution, And the Rapacious Oppressor of his fellow Subjects, Which made a stubborn Parliament Vote him a Foe to the King and Kingdom, One of the Fam'd Triumvirate, S—d, G—n, Lory, Whose late good Fortune shall obtain Credit for all future Prophesie. So great a Favourite of the D. of York, As to be suspected to K. Ch. 2d. Whose seasonable and unnatural Death Prevented our Hero's Banishment and Disgrace: He was Ld. High Treasurer, And first Minister of State To our Blessed Disciple and Confessor, The Martyrs Son James the Just. When he bravely laid aside the use of Parliaments, And Arbitrarily Levy'd Taxes by his own Authority: First Layman in the high Commission Court, The Noblest Machine of it self to dispatch the Refor∣mation. But a Thousand times more effectual under such a Manager. The warmth of whose temper might kindle all our Fires. He stoutly oppos'd the Abdication, The Bill of Abjuration and Recognition. These 12 Years he hath been a Clog on the Wheel, to spoil the business of the Pr. of Orange. Averse to all Endeavours for enlarging Liberty: Or better secu∣ring the Protestant Religion.
But above all, and for the sake of all, His Master stroke must Eternally Shine in our Annals, the Getting himself to be first Minister to King William Tho Brother in Law to K. James. And notwithstanding his late, or old behaviour, whic is an Attempt even to be envy'd by a Jesuit. The Secretary of the High Commission, He has made a Secretary of State. Being soon after to bring the whole Commission int the Ministry. To this we Owe, The Seasonable Dissolution of the last Parliamen which gave a happy opportunity to the King of Franc to make his Grand-Son Vice Roy of Spain. Kept the Dutch Hereticks unresolv'd, And the English Hereticks unprepar'd. Weakning their Conduct by the Administration in h own Hands, Lulling them asleep, Dispiriting, and M¦nacing all, By his Trusty Emissaries, and fellow Conspirators. This hindred the Friends of Liberty from lending M¦ney; being resolv'd to refuse it while he Govern'd, lea it should be a Cause to hang them if his Plot Succeede By these means, And our Assistance, He meant to accomplish as sudden a Change, And with as little Opposition, As the late Curs'd Revolution. For which Services, As well as other Innumerable, And his striking the great Blow for Universal Monarch Which is now on the point of being Established: The Society is bound to acknowledge, Eternal Gratitude. 1701.
Translation of the L—d H—s Speech, now E. of R—r, to the King of Poland, 1677. Most Illustrious Prince, THE King my Master has commanded me to let your Majesty know, the Resolution he hath taken to concur in all points with the most Christian King, giving your Majesty all possible assurance in the Establishing your Majesties Title; in such ways as your Majesty shall judge most Effectual to the securing your Crown and Dignity, and the further honour and safety of the Queen and the Royal Issue. The King my Master is truly sensible of the great mis∣fortune of those Princes whose power must be bounded, and Reason regulated by the Fantastick humours of their Sub∣jects. Till Princes come to be free'd from these Inconve∣niences, the King my Master sees no probable prospect of Es∣tablishing The most Holy Apostolick Rom. Cath. Religion. In order to your Majesties affairs, the King my Master has written to the Kings of Sweden and Denmark, to the Elector of Brandenburgh, and other his Majesties Allies, in those Parts; that notwithstanding the Wars and diffe∣rences betwxt those Princes, they afford your Majesty all pos∣sible Assistance in your Majesties pretensions to Dantzick. He has also oblidg'd the Prince of Orange to divert the States of the united Provinces, from Interposing in that Affair, either by disswading your Majesty, or giving Assistance to the Rebellious Inclinations of those Citizens of Dantzick. The King my Master has commanded me to assure your Majesty, that as soon as he can dispose of affairs; so as to Effect a General Peace (the speedy acomplishment of which he doubts not of, the most Christian King having left the
whole affair in his hands) he dos not question, but by the As∣sistance and Concurrence of the Kings and Princes concern'd, to put an end to all the frivolous and vain pretensions, not only of the Free and Hans Towns, but also of the Dutch Republique, who have upon all occasions, not only threatned the Prince of Orange, but also the Kings and Princes in these parts of the World; their pretended Liberty having been of pernitious Consequence by their Rebellious Example. And for the better Effecting those good ends that are wish'd for and desired (the particulars of which I shall set down more hereafter) I am Commanded by the King my Master, to joyn with the most Christian Kings Ambassador in this Court, the Count de Bethune, to desire your Majesty to give what Succours can be afforded from this Kingdom, in order to the giving Life to the Male Contents in Hungary, the better to dispose the Emperour and the Confederates to ac∣cept of such tearms of Peace, as shall be judged reasonable for your Majesties Service and Interest, and the other good ends before premised. That you may no longer doubt of the truth of the Murther of King Ch. 2d. I send you here the plain story as it came from one of the Gent. who was daily con∣cerned in that Villainous Action; which take as fol∣loweth, viz.* A few days before King Charles the 2d's Death, the then Lord Hallifax informed his Majesty of some mismanagement in the Treasury; upon which the King went with him to the Treasury (this was upon Thursday the 29 of January 1684/5.) and examin∣ing some of the Books, found Three Leaves cut out of one of them, and upon comparing that with some o∣ther Books, the Sum wanting, and which could not be Accounted for, was found to be 80000 l. This put the King in such a heat, that he declared the Parties con∣cern'd, should be punish'd with the utmost severity the Law would allow; and the day after being Friday, he had some high words with the D. of York in the privy Garden upon it, and was heard to say to the D. that the
next day he should go to Scotland; to which the D. re∣ply'd By G—d he would not. The next day (being Saturday) Mr. Kingdon (who, with M. Bridges and Mr. Patrick Trant, are said to have been concern'd in the Imbezlement of the 80000 l.) came to Dr. Hobbs, and told him there was going to be an Inquisition made in some Accounts, which might perhaps be his ruin, he therefore desired the Dr. to accept of a present of 4000 l. which he would freely give him without Re∣ceipt, or any consideration whatsoever, and left it to the Drs. Generosity, in case he should suffer by the said Inquisition, to be kind to his Family. The Dr. for some reasons excus'd himself, but told him he would procure him two of his Freinds on whom he might intirely re∣ly, who should accept of the offer, and for whose Ge∣nerosity he durst answer: To which Mr. Kingdon agree'd, the Friends were spoke to (who were Mr. Edmond Wal∣ler, and Mr. William Clark; and they were appointed to be on the Monday following, at Eleven of the Clock at Noon, in a Coach at a certain place, where 2000 l. a piece were to be deliver'd to them without Receipt, or without knowing the Person who was to give it them; it was only left to them to be kind to Kingdons Family if he were brought into trouble: They (Mr. Waller, and Mr. Clark) went accordingly, and stay'd in the Coach from Eleven of the Clock till Three, but no Mony came; whereupon they went home, and the first news they heard was, that the King was suddenly taken with a Fit of an Apoplexy; which we may suppose was the reason the Money was not brought, according to agreement. The King continued ill, till the Friday following, which was the Sixth of February 1684/5. and then Dyed, which put a stop to the intended Inquisition. And may Kings never be used better who Employ such Ministers. FINIS.
