J667 99862858 115036
LONDONS BLAME, If not its SHAME: Manifested by the great neglect of the Fishery, which af∣fordeth to our Neighbor Nation yearly, the Revenue of many Millions, which they take up at our Doors, whilst with the sluggard, we fold our hands in our bosoms and will not stretch them forth to our mouths. Or the inestimable riches of the British Seas, which do yeild a monthly Harvest of several Fish in their season, which being brought into the Land, would make Flesh at a low rate, encrease Shipping, Mariners, Trade, and publique Re∣venue, whereof this Book doth give a plentiful ac∣count, the which we may in some measure thus accomplish: Let every Ward in London build a Buss, and Money to do it may be thus raised. If every Ward would pay a three moneths Assessment which they pay to the L. Generals Army, at the rate of 90000. l. per mensem, ready down, or if the poorer sort think it too much for them, if the richer will raise it, they may have the benefit of their Stock returned every half yeer, and one Merchant may be found in a Ward which may be the husband of that Buss for that yeer, and those 25. Merchants may be a Committee for the 25. Ships, for all Intents and purposes. Which Ship would imploy all the Poor in their Ward, for to beat Hemp, to spin it, to make Twine, and Nets, and Cordage for the setting of Her forth, and may be called by the Name of the Ward. Dedicated by Thomas Ienner to the Corporation of the Poor, in the City of London, being a member thereof, and desires that this Treatise may put them upon a more vigorous acting for time to come, that the whole City and Nation seeing this good Work, may be provoked to propagate it in the whole Land. Eccles. 9. 10. Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with all thy might; for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wis∣dom in the grave where thou goest. Printed for T. I. at the South Entrance of the Royal Exchange, 1651.
The inestimable Riches and Com∣modities of the Brittish Seas. THe Coasts of Great Brittain do yeild such a continual Sea-harvest of grain to all those that with diligence do labour in the same, that no time or season in the year passeth away without some apparent means of profitable employments, especially to such as apply themselves to Fish∣ing, which from the beginning of the yeer unto the latter end, continueth upon some one Port or other upon our Coasts, and therein such infinite shoals and multitudes of Fishes are offered to the takers, as may justly move admiration (not only to strangers, but) to those that are daily employed amongst them. The Summer Fishing for Herrings begins about Mid∣summer, and lasteth some part of August; The Winter Fishing for Herrings lasteth from September to the midst of November, both which extend from Boughoness in Scot∣land, to the Thames mouth. The Fishing for Cod at Alamby Wirkington and White∣haven neer the Coast of Lancashire, from Easter until Whitsontide. The Fishing of Hake at Haberdeny Abarswith, and other places between Wales and Ireland, from Whitsontide to S. Iames tide. The Fishing for Cod and Ling about Padstow within
the Lands, and of Severne from Christ-tide to Mid-lent. The Fishing for Cod on the West part of Ireland, and frequented by those of Biscay Galicia and Portugal, from the beginning of April until the latter end of Iune. The Fishing for Cod and Ling on the North and North∣west of Ireland, from Christ-tide until September. The Fishing for Cod and Ling upon the North Coast of Ireland, from Easter until Midsummer. The Fishing for Pilchard on the West Coast of England, from S. Iames tide unto September. The Fishing for great Scapling, and many other sorts of Fish being about the Islands of Scotland, and in the several parts of the Brittish Seas all the yeer long. In September not many yeers since, upon the Coasts of Devonshire neer Minigal, five hundred Tun of Fish were taken in one day, and about the same time three thousand pounds worth of Fish in one day were taken at S. Ives in Cornwal by small Boats and other poor Provisions; five of our men with Boats and Cables adventuring in a calm to launch out among the Holland Busses not far from Robin Hoods Bay, returned to Whitby full fraught with Herrings, and reported that they saw some of those Busses take ten twenty, and four and twenty lasts of Herrings at a draught, and returned into their Country wih forty, fifty, and an hundred lasts of Herrings in one Buss. Our Fleet of Colliers not many yeers since returning from Newcastle laden with Coals, about the Well neer. Flambo∣rough head and Scarborough, met with such multitude of Cod, Ling, and Herrings, that one amongst the rest with certain Ship-hooks and other Instruments, drew up as many Cods and Ling in a little space of time, as were sold well neer for as much as her whole lading of Coals; and many hundred of Ships might have been there laden in two days and two nights. Out of which wonderful affluence and abundance of Fish swarming in our Seas, that we may the better perceive the infinite gain which Forreign Nations
make, I will especially insist upon the Fishing of the Hol∣landers in our Coasts, and thereby shew how they by this means principally have encreased. First, In Shipping. Secondly, In Mariners. Thirdly, In Trade, Fourthly, In Towns and Fortifications. Fiftly, In Power abroad. Sixtly, In Publique Revenue. Seventhly, In Private Wealth. Eightly and lastly, In all manner of Provisions and store of things necessary. First, Encrease in Shipping. BEsides seven hundred Strand boats four hundred Evars, and four hundred Gallits, Drivers, and Tod-boats, wherewith the Hollanders fish upon their own Coasts every one of these employing another Ship to fetch Salt and carry the Fish into their Countries, being in all 3000. sail, main∣taining and setting at work at least forty thousand persons, Fishers, Trades-men, Women, and Children, they have an hundred Dager-boats one hundred and fifty Tuns a piece, or thereabouts, seven hundred Pinks and Well-boats from sixty to an hundred Tuns a piece, which altogether fish upon the Sea of England and Scotland for Cod and Ling only; and some each of those employeth another Vessel for providing of Salt and transporting their Fish making in all sixteen hun∣dred Ships, which maintain and imploy at least four thousand persons of all sorts. For the Herring season they have at least sixteen hundred Busses, all of them fishing only upon our Coasts, from Boughonouss in Scotland, to the mouth of Thames; and every one of those maketh work for three other Ships that attend her; the one to bring in salt from Forreign parts, the other to carry the said salt and cask to the Busses, and to bring back the Herrings, and the third to
transport the said Fish into Forreign Countries; So that the total number of Ships and Busses plying the Herring-Fare, is six thousand four hundred; whereby every Buss one with another employeth forty Mariners and Fishers within her own Bulk, and the rest ten a piece, which amounteth to one hundred and twelve thousand Fishers and Mariners; all which maintain double, if not treble so many Trades∣men, Women, and Children on land. Moreover they have four hundred Vessels at least that take Herring at Yarmouth, and there sell them for ready money: So that the Holland∣ers (besides three hundred Ships before mentioned fishing upon their own Shores) have at least eight thousand and four hundred Ships, only maintained by the Seas of Great Britain; by the which means principally Holland being not so big as one of our Shires of England, containing not above twenty eight miles in length, and twenty three in bredth, have encreased the number of their Shipping to at least ten thousand Sail, being more then are in England, France, Spain, Portugal, Italy, Denmark, Poland, Sweden, and Russia, and to this number they add every day, although their Country it self affords them neither materials, nor victuals, nor merchandise, to be accounted of, towards their setting forth. Besides those of Holland, Lubeck hath seven hundred great Ships, Hamborough six hundred, Embden fourteen hundred, whereunto add the Ships of Bremer, Biscay, Por∣tugal, Spain, and France, which for the most part fish in our Seas, and it will appear that ten thousand sail of For∣reign Vessels, and above, are maintained and employed by fishing upon our Coast; so that in Holland there are built a thousand sail at the least to supply Ship-wracks, and aug∣ment their store, which as the prime and common Nursery is the chiefest means only to encrease their number.
Secondly, Encrease of Mariners. THe number of Ships fishing on our Coasts being (as afore-said) eight thousand four hundred, if we allow but twenty persons to every Ship one with another, the to∣tal of Mariners and Fishers, amounteth to an hundred sxy eight thousand, out of which number they daily furnish their longer voyages to all parts of the World; for by this they are not only enabled to brook the Seas, and to know the use of the Tackles and Compass, but are likewise in∣structed in Trade, in the principles of Navigation and Pilo∣tage; insomuch as from home their greatest Navigators have had their education and breeding. Thirdly, Encrease of Trade. BY reason of those multitude of Ships and Mariners, they have extended their Trade to all parts of the World, (exporting for the most part) in all their voyages of Herring and other Fish, for the maintenance of the same; in exchange whereof they return the several Commodities of other Countries. From the Southern parts, as France, Spain, and Portugal, for our Herrings, they return, Oyls, Wines, Prunes, Hony, Wools, Grain, with store of Coyns; From the Straights, Velvets, Satins, and all sorts of Silks, Alloms, Currants, Oyls, and all Grocery ware, with much money. From the East Country, for our Herrings and other French and Italian Commodities before returned, they bring home Corn, Wax, Flax, Hemp, Pitch, Tar, Soap ashes, Iron, Copper, Steel, Clapboard, Wainscot, Masts, Timber, Deal-boards, Polish Dollars, and Hungary Gilders; From Germany, for Herrings and other salt Fish: Iron, Steel, Glass, Milstones, Rhynish Wines, Battery plate for Armor, with other munitions, Silk, Velvets, Rashes, Fustians, Poratoes,
and such like Francfort Commodities, with store of Rix-dollars. From Brabant they return for the most part ready Coyn, with some Tapestries, Says, and Hull-shops; yea, some of our Herrings are carried as far as Brasile, and that which is more strange, and greatly to our shame, that four hun∣dred Ships, which fish with our men at Yarmouth, within ken almost of Land, do vent our Herrings amongst us here in England, and make us pay for the Fish taken upon our Coasts ready money, wherewith they store their owne Country. Fourthly, Encrease of Towns and Forts. By their large extent of Trade, they are become as it were Citizens of the whole World, whereby they have so enlarged their Towns, that most of them within these four hundred yeers, are full as great again as they were before; Amsterdam, Leyden, and Middleburgh having been lately twice enlarged, and their streets and buildings o fairly and orderly set forth, that for beauty and strength they may compare with any other in the World, upon which they bestow infinite sums of money, all originally flowing from the bounty of the Seas; from whence by their labour and industry, they derive the beginnings of all their Wealth and Greatness; and particularly for the Havens of the fore∣said Towns, whereof some of them cost forty, fifty, or an hundred thousand pounds. Their Fortifications also both for number and strength, upon which they have bestowed infi∣nite sums of money, may compare with any other what∣soever.
Fiftly, Encrease of Power abroad. SUch being then the number of their Ships and Mariners, and so great their Trade, occasioned principally by their Fishing, they have not only strengthned and fortified them∣selves at home, to repel all forreign Invasions, as lately in the War between them and Spain, but have likewise stretched their Power into the East and West Indies; in many places whereof they are Lords of the Sea-coasts, and have likewise fortified upon the Main, where the King and people are at their devotion; and more then this all neighbours, Princes, in their difference, by reason of their Power at Sea, are glad to have them of their part; so that next to the English they are becom the most redoubted Nation of any other whatso∣ever. Sixtly, Encrease of publique Revenue MOreover how mightily the publique Revenue and Customs of that State are encreased by their Fishing may appear, in that about thirty yeers since, over and above the Customs of the merchandise, Excises, Licenses, Waftage, and Lastage, there was paid to the State for Custom of Her∣rings, and other salt Fish, above thirty thousand pounds in one yeer, besides the tenth Fish, and cask paid for waftage, which cometh at least to as much more, among the Hol∣landers only, whereunto the tenth of other Commodities being added, it amounteth to a far greater sum; we are like∣wise to know that a great part of their Fish is sold in other Countries for ready money, for which they commonly ex∣port of the finest gold and Silver, and coming home recoyn it of a baser Allay under their own stamp, which is no small means to augment their publique Treasure.
Seventhly, Encrease of private Wealth. AS touching their private Wealth, if we consider the abundant store of Herrings and other Fish by them ta∣ken, and the usual prices that they are sold for, as also the multitude of Trades-men and Artificers that by reason of this their fishing are daily set on work, we must needs con∣clude, that the gain thereof made by private men, must of ne∣cessity be exceeding great, as by observing the particulars following, it will plainly appear. During the wars between the King of Spain and the Hollanders, before the last Truce, the Dunkirks by taking, spoiling, and burning the Busses of Holland, and setting great ransom upon the Fishermen, enforced them to compound for great sums of money, that they might fish quietly one yeer; whereunto the next yeer after, the Fishermen among themselves were to pay a Doller upon every last of Herrings towards the maintenance of certain Ships of War, to waft and secure them in their Fishing; by reason whereof, there was a Record kept of the several lasts of Herrings taken that yeer, and it appeareth thereby that in one half yeer there were taken three hundred thousand lasts of Herrings, which at twelve pound per last, amounteth to three millions and six hundred thousand pounds; and at sixteen twenty, and thir∣ty pounds a last they are ordinarily sold, being transported into other Countries, it cometh at least to five millions of pounds. Whereunto if we add the Herrings taken by other Nati∣ons, together with the Cod, Ling, Hake, and other fish taken by the Hollanders and other Neighbours upon the Brittish Coasts all the yeer long, the total will evidently arise to above ten millions of pounds. This great Trade of Fishing employing so many men and
Ships at sea, must necessarily maintain as great a number of Trades-men and Artizans on land; as Spinsters and Hemp-winders, for Cables, Cordage, Yarn, Twine for Nets and Lines, Weavers to make Sail-clothes, Receivers, Packers, Tacklers, Dressers, and Couchers, to sort and make the Herrings lawful Merchandise, Tanners to tan their sails and nets, Coopers to make casks, Blocks and Bowl makers, for Ships, Keelmen, and Labourers, for carrying and removing of fish, Sawyers for plancks, Carpenters, Ship-wrights, Smiths, Car-men, Boatmen, Brewers, Bakers, and a number of others, whereof a number are maim'd persons, and unfit to be other∣wise employed, besides the maintenance of all their several wives, children, and families; and further, every man or maid-servant, or orphan, having any poor stock may venture the same in their fishing voyages, which affords them ordi∣narily great increase, and is duly paid according to the pro∣portion of their gain. Eightly, Encrease of Provision. ANd to conclude, it is manifest, that Holland only afford∣ing in it self some few Hops, Madder, Butter, and Chees, aboundeth notwithstanding by reason of this Art of fishing, in plentiful manner with all kind of provisions (as well for life) as in Corn, Beef, Mutton, Hides, and Cloth (as for luxury) in Wines, Silks, and Spices (and for defence) as Pitch, Tar, Cordage, Timber; All which they have, not only in com∣petent proportion for their own use, but are likewise able, from their several Magazines, to supply to Neighbor Coun∣tries. The premisses considered, it maketh much to the ig∣nominy and shame of our English Nation that God and Na∣ture offering us so rich a Treasure even to our own dores, we do notwithstanding neglect the benefit thereof, and by paying money to strangers for the fish of our own Seas, im∣poverishing our selves to make them rich; insomuch that for want of Industry and care in this particular, two hundred
and twenty five Fisher Towns are decayed, and reduced to extreme poverty; whereas on the contrary, by diligent en∣deavouring to make use of so great a blessing, we might in short time repair those decayed Towns of the Common-wealth, and add both Honour, and Strength, and Riches to this Nation; which how easily it may be done, will in some measure appear by some observations following. By erecting two hundred and fifty Busses of reasonable strength and Bigness, there will be employment made for a thousand Ships, and for at least twenty thousand Fishermen and Mariners at Sea, and consequently for as many Trades∣men and Labourers at Land; The Herrings taken by those Busses, will afford the State twenty thousand pounds yeerly Custom outward, and for Commodities returned inward, three hundred thousand pounds, and above. We have Timber sufficient, and at reasonable Rates, grow∣ing in our Land for the building of Busses. Every shire af∣fordeth men of hardy and able bodies fit for such imploy∣ment, who now live poorly and idely at home. We have victual in great plenty, sold at easie rates, with∣out pyment of Excise or Impost; our shores and harbours: are neer the places where our fish doe haunt; for drying our Nets, Saling, and Packing our Fishing, and for succour in stress of weather; We may bring our fish to land, Salt, and Pack it, And from parts of this States Dominions, be at our Markets in France, Spain, or Italy, before the Hol∣landers can arive in Holland. We have means to transport our fish into some Southern Countries, where the Hollan∣ders seldom or never come; and though we had as many Busses as the Hollanders, yet is there want for all, and more; for in the East and Northern Countries, and in many other places, Herrings are every days meat, Winter and Summer, as wel to draw on drink, as to satisfie hunger; And in most places the greatest part of the year they are scarce to be had; for presently after Michaelmas, the Sound & Rivers are fro∣zen up, so that no Herrings can be Transported into several
Kingdoms, Dukedomes and free Estates, until July which is for 30 weekes space together, so that when Lent comes, there are few to be bought for money. Lastly, since by care and industry gain'd from the Fleming, doubtles by the means we may grow as expert in the Art of fishing, and in time make it a Staple Comodity of our own. But this we shall the better and sooner do, if we consider and endeavour to reform certaine wants and abuses, which heretofore hath hindred us from effecting this good and great work, whereof these that follow are none of the least. General liberty of eating of flesh contrary to the old cu∣stom, and the Statute Laws provided for observing fish days, from whence scarcity and dearth of flesh proceedeth; for where flesh is ordinarily spent, fish will not be bought, and want of sale decayeth all Trade; Gain being the Nurse of Industry: Want of Order and Direction in our Fishing, every man being left to himself, and permitted to fish as best liketh him: whereas among the Hollanders, two of the best experienc'd fishermen are appointed to guide the rest of the Fleet, and the others are bound to follow them, and to cast their lines according to their discretion. The Hollanders and other Nations set forth with their Busses in Iune, to find the shoal of fish, and having found it, dwell amongst it till November; whereas we stay till the Herrings come home to the Road-steds, and somtimes suffer them to pass by, ere we look out, our Herring fishing continuing only seven weeks at the most, and theirs twenty. The Hollanders Busses are great and strong, and able to brook foul weather, whereas our Cobbles, Crayers, and Boats being small and thin-sided, are easily swallowed by a rough sea, not daring to adventure far in fair weather, by reason of their weakness, for fear of storms. The Hollanders are industrious, and no sooner are dis∣charged of their lading, but presently put forth for more, and seek for markets abroad as well as at home; whereas our English after they have been once at Sea, do commonly ne∣ver
return again, until all the money taken for their fish be spent, and they in debt, seeking only to serve the next Mar∣ket. The Hollanders do retain the Merchants, who during the Herring season, do duly come to the places where the Bus∣ses arrive, and joyning together in several Companies, do presently agree for the lading of thirty or forty Busses at once, and so being discharged, they may speedily return to their former fishing: Whereas our Fishermen are uncertain of their Chap-men, and forced to spend much time in put∣ting off their Fish by parcels. These, and other defects would carefully be taken into consideration, and certain Orders made to make our Fishing prosperous and successful, especially considering the mischiefs the neglect hereof hath brought to the Nation in general, and to many good Towns and Corporations in particular, as by Authority even of Parliament it self in the Statute of 33. Hen. 8. is plainly testified; which I have briefly set down, to avoid the prolixity of the Original. Because the English Fishermen dwelling on the Sea-Coast, do leave off their Trade of Fishing in our Seas, and went but the half Seas over,, and thereupon the English did buy fish of Pickards, Flemmings, Normans, and Zelanders; by reason whereof, many incomodities did grow unto the Realm (Viz) The Decay of the Wealth and Prosperity as wel of the Cinque Ports and members of the same, as of other Coast Towns by the Sea side, which were built and inhabited by a great Multitude of people by reason of our using and ex∣ercising the Craft and feat of fishing. Secondly, The Decay of a great Number of Boats and ships. And Thirdly, of many good Mariners, both able men in body by their dili∣gent labours and Continual exercise of fishing, and expert by reason thereof in the knowledge of the Sea Coasts, aswel within this land as in other parts beyond the Seas; It was therefore enacted, that no maner of persons, English Denizon,
or Strangers, at that time, or at any time after, dwelling in England, should buy any Fresh Fish of any Strangers in the said Ports of Flaunders, Zeland, Picardie, France, as upon the Sea between shore and shore, &c. This Act by mean Continuances, was continued from Parliament: to Parliament. until the first of Queen Mary, and from thence to the end of the next Parliament, and then expired. For Conclusion, saving by that which hath formerly been declared; it evidently appeareth, that the States of the Commonwealth of England, by immemorable perscription, continual usage, and possession the acknowledgement of all Neighbours, States, and the Municipal Laws of this Nati∣on, have ever held the soveraigne Lordship of the Seas, of England; and that unto them (by reason their soveraignty) the supreme Command and Jurisdiction over the Passage and fishing in the same rightfully appertaineth; considering also the natural Scire of these our Seas, that interpose them∣selves betwen the great Northern Commerce of the North part of the world, & of that of the East, West, and Southern Climats; and withal, the infinite commodities that the fishing in the same is daily made, It cannot be doubted, but that the States by means of their Wisdom and Vertue, and by the Justice, and faithfulness and obedient disposition of the Natives and people of this our Common-wealth, may easily (without injustice to any State or person whatsoever) be made the greatest State for Command and Wealth, and the people thereof, be the most oppulent and flourishing Nation of any other in the world; And this the rather, for that this State is now almost absolute Commander of all the Brittish Isles, and hath also enlarged their Dominions over a great part of the Western Indies; by means of which extent of Empire, crossing in a manner the whole Ocean, the trade & persons of all Nations moving from one part of the world to the other, must of necessity come within the Compass of
their Power and Jurisdiction; And therefore the Soveraignty of our Seas being the most Precious Iewel of the State, and next under God the principall means of our Wealth and Safety, All true English hearts and hands are bound by all possible means and diligence to perserve and maintain the same, even with the utmost hazard of their lives, their goods, and fortunes. By all that which hath bin said, it doth appear how great a Nation England is, by reason of the inestimable Riches and Commodities which (besides our selves) other Nations our Neighbours do yeerly reap, especially by Fishing in our Seas; insomuch that no Christian Prince in the World is Lord of any Territory that (considering all circumstances) yeildeth the like constant and general benefit. FINIS.
