L1000 99833283 37759
THE Saints Encouragement IN EVIL TIMES: OR OBSERVATIONS Concerning The MARTYRS in generall, withsome memorable Collections OUT OF Foxes three Volumes. Martin Luther. The Covenant and Promises. Living and dying by faith. By EDWARD LEIGH Esquire. REVEL. 14. 13. Blessed are the dead which die in the LORD, Mori timeat qui ad secundam mortem de hâc morte transibit. Cyprian de mortal. LONDON, Printed by A. M. for William Lee and Thomas Vnderhill, 1648.
TO THE CHRISTIAN READER. READER, THe Church even in her Infancy, the Christian Church was un∣der the Crosse, Stephanus lapidatus, Jacobus truci∣datus, saith Austin, Ste∣phen was stoned, and James
beheaded. The Church hath had two kinde of persecuti∣ons, When any common ca∣lamity befell the people or State, as famine, dearth, pesti∣lence, they straight∣way impu∣ted it to the Christians, saying, that they and their wicked religion were the cause there∣of. Christi∣anos ad Leo∣nem. Tertul. Away with them to the Lion, to the stake. one from Rome eth∣nicall, the other from Rome Papall. After the Apostles what a continuall storme arose against Christians, which lasted three hundred years under the ten mon∣sters of men those bloudie Emperours, Nero, Do∣mitian, Trajane, Anto∣ninus, Severus, Maxi∣minus, Decius, Valeria∣nus, Aurelianus, Dioclesi∣anus, whose rage was such as a man could not set his foot in Rome, but tread on the graves of Martyrs▪
Nero was the AuthourConsule Commenta∣rios vestros, illic reperietis primum Ne∣ronem in hanc sectamtum maxime Romae orien∣tem Caesari∣ano gladio ferocisse: Sed tali de∣dicatore damnationis nostrae glo∣riamur. Qui enim scit illum, intelli∣gere potest non nisi grande aliquod bonum à Nero∣ne damnatum. Tertul. Apol. cap. 5. of the first grand persecution, wherein Saint Peter (as it is said) and Saint Paul were martyred at Rome, with others innumerable, and Jacobus Iustus at Je∣rusalem, whence Tertul∣lian inferred, That the Gospel must needs be a pre∣cious thing, because Nero hated it. Dioclesian raised the tenth and extreamest per∣secutionVide Euseb. lib. 8., wherein Church∣es were overthrown, Bi∣bles
burnt, whole Cities ra∣zed, women hanged upon trees naked with their heads downwards. The Chri∣stians yet in that time under the Heathen Emperours had many lucida intervalla, many breathing spaces un∣der Princes not altogether so bloudy. But the Popes have persecuted the Prote∣stants for six hundred years together, and that without any intermission. I might exemplifie in ma∣ny of their cruell practices▪ 1. In their wars against the Waldenses and Albi∣genses.
2. In the Massacre of France, in which the rivers were died with bloud. 3. In our tempora Ma∣riana Queen Maries daies; Who hath not heard of blou∣dy Bonner and Gardiner? 4. In the rebellious in∣surrection in Ireland, and the cruell butchery of above 200 thousand Protestants there. Platina writes of seventeen thousand martyr∣ed by Dioclesian; but Me∣terane writes of 50 thou∣sand slaughtered by the Pope only in the Low-coun∣tries, aud that in the time of Charles the 5th▪ Na∣talis
Comes of sixty thou∣sand in France only in one year. Iulius the second in seven years shed the bloud of above two hundred tho∣sand Christians. Antichrist is drunk with the bloud of the Saints, Revel. 17. 6. and 18. 24. In her, that is, Babylon, now Rome, was found the bloud of Pro∣phets, that is, of all those that preacht the Word of God, and of Saints, and of all that were slain upon the earth; They were put to death by the authority of the Pope. Some hold that
the bitterest persecutions of the Church of God are yet to come, but two considera∣tions may much support the spirits of Gods peo∣ple. 1. The shortnesse of the Persecutours lives, and their miserable ends for the most part. 2. The good that comes to the Church of God by affiction and persecution. I will not speak of the short lives of many Popes, and the short reign of Queen MaryOf all since the conquest her reign was the shortest, only excepting that of Ri∣chard the ty∣rant, but much more bloudy then was his. Speeds Chro. in Q. Marie., nor of the misera∣ble end of many persecuting Emperours, but shall out of
Foxes Martyrology, instance in the exemplary punish∣ments of some of the perse∣cutours of our Martyrs. George Eagles (alias,Foxes Acts and Monum. 3d vol. pag. 1023. Trudge over the world) hid himself in a Corn-field, and by the benefit of the height of the Corn, and breadth of the field he had escaped, had not Ralph Lurdane one of his perse∣cutours with more malici∣ous craft, climbed a high tree to view over the place, and so descried him. This persecutour a lewd fellow of life for theft and whoredome, within a few
years after he had appre∣hended the foresaid George Eagles for gain of money, he himself was attached of felony for stealing a horse, condemned and hanged in the same place and Town of Chelmesford, where George Eagles before suffered martyrdome. A Bishop coming to Stephen Gardiner (Bishop of Win∣chester) on his death-bed, put him in remembrance of Peters denying his Ma∣ster;Foxes 3d vol. p. 95. he answering again: said, That he had denied with Peter, but never re∣pented with Peter, and
so both stinkingly and unrepentantly died.See also in Fox a nota∣ble story of the death of Dr Whitting∣ton a perse∣cutour. Do∣ctour Storie was a great e∣nemy to the Protestants in Queen Maries daies, but in Queen Elizabeths reign he being beyond sea was by a handsome wile brought over into England,Fox ubi supra and suffer∣ed as a Traitour, on whom the boyes sung these verses, D. Story for You I am sor∣rie, The hangman must have Your gown: Your father the Pope, could not save You from the rope; For all his triple crown.
Secondly, The people of God like Commomile, the more they were trod on the more they did spread, and (like Rabbets in frosty wea∣ther) did thrive under per∣secution. OneMr Manton on Rev. 2. 3. saith, Martyrologie and cate∣chizing were the great engines by which the re∣formers battered down Poperie. Jerome com∣pares the state of the Chrch under Constantine and some Christian Emperours with that under Dioclesian and some persecuting Empe∣rours: under the former the Church increased much Po∣tentia
& divitiis, in power and wealth, but diminished virtutibus, in vertue▪ How strangely was that pro∣mise accomplished in Eng∣land and France,Mat. 25. Who∣soever will save his life shall lose it; and whoso∣ever will lose his life for my sake, shall finde it. William Wolsey Mar∣tyr being in prison sent by a∣nother a noble to Richard Denton with this com∣mendation, That he mar∣velled he tarried so long behinde him, seeing he was the first that deliver∣ed him the book of Scri∣pture
into his hand, and told him that it was the truth, desiring him to make haste after as fast as he could.Foxes Acts and Monum. 3d vol. p. 433 This money and message being delivered to Denton almost a year after Wolsey was burned, his answer was this. I con∣fesse it is true, but alas I cannot burn. But he that would not burn in the cause of Christ, was afterward burned against his will; for his house was set on fire, and while he went in to save his goods he lost his life. On the contrary, some that were in prison, and purposed to
suffer for the truth, were y the death of Queen Ma∣ry happily preserved, that being a true observation whichDr Hall. one hath, As good husbands do not put al their corn to the oven, but save some for seed, so doth God ever in the worst of persecu∣tions. When Henry the fourth of France had conquered his enemies, he turned Pa∣pist, and gave this reason of it, That he might settle himself in peace and safe∣ty. Ravilliak who slew him, confessed that the rea∣son why he stabbed him, was,
because he was of two religi∣ons. It is well noted by a Reverend DivineDr Gouge on Exod. 13. 13., That the book of martyrs was in high esteem all the days of Queen Elizabeth: All Churches by authority were injoyned to have it, so as all that would might read it. There was scarce a fa∣mily of note that had it not, it was usuall to spend the long winter evenings in rea∣ding it. By the constancy of Martyrs therein set out, people were much encoura∣ged to stand to that faith which was sealed by their bloud. Whether the killing
of the two Witnesses be near at hand or no, I determine not, but sure there is likeli∣hood enough of troubles and persecutions to Gods people, therefore I conceive these severall Tracts, Of the Martyrs in generall, and Concerning our Eng∣lish Martyrs, Of Martin Luther a couragious Re∣former, Of the Cove∣nant and Promises, Of living and dying by faith may be very suitable to our times. But some may urge, that for the first subject concerning the Martyrs,
there was a book long since published, stiled, The Mirrour of Mar∣tyrs, usefull that way. I deny not but that book might be profitable to di∣vers Christians, who ei∣ther wanted money to pur∣chase or leasure to reade the large book of Mar∣tyrs: But my drift in this worke is to excerp onely (among the many dicta fa∣cta of the Martyrs) those speeches and acts of theirs, which were specially obser∣vable. Master Coton (who composed the book be∣fore mentioned) hath con∣fusedly
jumbled divers things together: some of which are ordinary, though others may be remarkable, and I believe he mistakes in that which he hath of Voes, it being not consonant to the originall whence he took it. He hath al∣so the same thing twice of Iohn & Christopher Waid. I hope therefore (though I have many things the same with Cotton, that this work will be of speciall use to those, who would not be ignorant of the living speeches of dying Christians. The Saints are best toward their end; so it was with Jacob and Moses,
as appears in his excellent song made a little before his death,Deut. 32. so David, Solomon, what an ex∣cellent Sermon and praier did our Saviour make a little before his death.John 14. 15. 16. and 17. chap. I have likewise long since put forth a Treatise of the Covenant and Pro∣mises, yet having collected divers new Observations of that excellent subject, (for some of which I was be∣holding to two of our worthy LecturersMr Mar∣shall and Mr Strong. at Westminster) I thought good to adde this Tract to the rest, it being of speciall use al∣waies
for Christians, espe∣cially in evil times. Thus hoping God will blesse these my endeavours for the good of his people, I rest Thy true Christian Friend EDWARD LEIGH▪
THE SAINTS Encouragement IN Evil Times. CHAP. I. Observations concerning the Martyrs in generall. A Martyr in common use of speech,Vide Be∣zam in Act. 22. 20 Heb. 12. 4. Rev. 2. 13. & 6. 9. means one which seals his witnesse to the Go∣spel with his bloud, suffers death for Christ. That's a Martyr,
in the highestMartyrū nomen bo∣diè dun∣taxat illis attribui∣tur qui mortem pro Christo perpessi sunt. Olim verò & potiss∣mum aetate Cypriani, etiam illis qui à confessione nomi∣nis Christi nulla tormentorum atrocitate abduci poterant; quos eleganter Tertullianus lib▪ ad Martyres, designatos martyres nuncupat. Pamelius ad Cypriani▪ epist. 9. degree. But the word in Grammar sense, means but a wit∣nesse. Tertullian cals confessours to Christ, Martyrs. He must suffer in a good cause for the name of Christ, 1 Pet. 4 14. Cau∣sa non poena facit martyrem. Non de∣bet quid quis{que} patiatur, sed quare pa∣tiatur, attendi. Aug. contra Crescon. lib. 4. cap. 46. The cause not the pu∣nishment makes a martyr. When I consider the cause of my condemna∣tion (said Mr Bradford) I cannot but lament, that I do no more re∣joyce then I doe. For it is for God verity and truth, so that the condem∣nation is not a condemnation of Bradford simply,M Brad¦ford to all that professe the Gospel in Lanca∣shire. but rather a con∣demnation of Christ and of his truth Bradford is nothing but an instrumen in which Christ and his doctrine i condemned.
How early did martyrdome come into the world?D. Halls contempl. The first man that died, died for religion. One saith,M. Pinkes fourth Ser∣mon on that Text▪ Luke 14. 26. See more there. None are saved but Martyrs; martyrs either actually or habitually; having faith enough to encourage, and love to constrain them to be martyrs, if the honour of their profession should require it. The habit of martyrdome is included in the most fundamentall principle of Christianity, love of Christ better then our selves, self-resignation or de∣niall. To suffer death for Christ is the greatest honour which can befall a man,Phil. 1. 29. Carelesse in his let∣ter to Ag∣nes. and such a promotion that the highest Angel in heaven is not per∣mitted to have.Glascock. Foxes 3. vol p. 29. And Guide Bree 3 vo. p. 38. In the primitive times they were wont to call martyrdome by the name of Corona Martyrij, the crown of martyrdome, and Stephen the pro∣tomartyr had his name in Greek from a crown.Magnificus martyrij titulus . One woman martyr having her childe in her hand, gave it to ano∣ther, and offered her self to martyr∣dome; Grot. in 21. Joh. 19. Crowns (saith she) are to be
dealt this day, and I mean to have one. Luther writing to those which were condemned to death, saith, the Lord will not do me that honour, I who have made all this busle: It was very strangeHic (sc. amor spon∣) leonis faucibus  eripuit, & uod meri∣tò stupebat mudus, in medio tot ac etiam potentum hostium, infimo homuncioni & longam vitam prorogavit, & placidam mortem intra domesticos parictes concessit. Brightman in cant. 6. 2 that one who had so provoked the Pope and all his po∣tent party, should die quietly in his bed. Bernard saith there are three sorts of martyrs, 1. Martyrs voluntate so∣lùm, in will only, so all the godly are martyrs. 2. Voluntate & opere, in will and act; those who chearfully lay down their life for Christs cause. 3. O∣pere solum, in act only; so the children of Bethlehem,Spanhom. Dub. Evan pr . Dub 84. Mat. 2. 16. This was rather a passive then an active mar∣tyrdome, and improperly so called, since to true martyrdome not only slaughter and a good cause are requi∣site, but a will and intention of under∣going death for Christs sake.
It is a question among the School∣men why Christ should so complain in his sufferings, as in the garden and on the crosse, and yet the martyrs suf∣fer so chearfully. 1. They suffered for God, and Christ from God. 2. They suffered in their bodies, Christ in his soul, and the wrath of God, Isa. 43. 10. 3. Their sufferings were mixed with joy and comfort, exuberance of joy sometimes. Christs sufferings on the crosse were void of all com∣fort, Mat. 27. 46. and there was a suspension of divine influence. M. Ball in his catechisme saith, The testimony of conscience is a strong ar∣gument to prove that there is a God, and the constancy of the SaintsEx illa tanta mul∣titudine omnis ge∣neris sex∣us{que} hominū tot locis ac saeculis di∣stinctorum, qui pro hac religi∣one mori non dubi∣tarunt, col∣ligendum, magnam aliquam tantae constantiae fuisse cau∣sam, quae alia cogitart non potest, quam lux veritatis Grot. de veritate Rel. Christ. l. 2. is a good reason to prove the Scriptures to be the Word of God, both these main principles of religion may be then confirmed from the carriage and courage of the Martyrs.
First,See Foxes 1. volume in Bilney, and 2. vol. p. 300. How forcible was the work∣ing of conscience in some of them! Bilny and Bainham at first recanted, but what a hell did they feel in their consciences till they returned to God and bewailed their abjuration! On the contrary, what ravishing com∣fort did Robert Glover injoy a little before his martyrdome? Dear wife (saith SandersIn a let∣ter to his wife Fox. 3. vol. p. p. 138.) riches I have none to leave behinde me, wherewith to endow you after this worldly man∣ner, but the treasure of tasting how sweet Christ is unto hungry consci∣ences (whereof I thank my Christ I feel part, and would feel more) I bequeath unto you, and to the rest of my beloved in Christ to re∣tain the same in sense of heart al∣waies. Secondly,See Raw∣lins and William Sparrow. The Martyrs constant suffering may much establish us in the assurance of the Scriptures coming from God. 1. Observe the number of those which suffered for the truth, of all sorts and conditions, stout and ten∣der, noble and base.
Famesius departing out of Italy is reported to have said,Sleid con l 17. That he would make such a slaughter in Germany that his very horse might swim in the bloud of the Lutherans. So much bloud of the Protestants was spilt in France that the very rivers in the streets flowed with bloud. The Duke of Alba sitting at his TableMeter. hist. de reb. Belg. l. 15. said, that he had taken diligent pains in rooting out the tares of heresies, having deli∣vered 18000 men in the space of six years only to the hands of the hang∣man.From the beginning of the Je∣suites to 1580. (being the space of 30 years) almost 900 thou∣sand Pro∣testants were put to death in France, England, Spain, Italy, Germany, and other parts of Christendome. Reverend Cranmer, learned Ridley, Down right Latimer, zealous Bradford, pious Philpot, patient Hooper. Fuller. on Heb. 9. 10. Within the compase of lesse then four years continuance, there died in England in Q. Maries reign 277 per∣sons, without regardSpeeds chron. in Q. Mary. Neither in Q Elizabeths reign, nor in the reign of K. James, nor King Charles, vvas any Papist put to death meerly for his conscience. of degree, sex or age. In the heat of those flames were consumed five Bishops, one and twen∣ty Divines, eight Gentlemen, eighty
four Artificers, one hundred hus∣bandmen, servants and labourers, twenty six wives, twenty widdows, nine virgins, two boies, and two in∣fants. Secondly, The persecutours could neither by torments nor pleasures in∣duce them to deny the truth. When Valens the Emperour com∣ing to Caesarea commanded Basil to assent to the Arians, and threatned to banish and punish him if he obeyed not, Pueris (saith Basil) illa terricu∣lamenta proponenda sunt, sibi verò vi∣ta eripi potest, sed confessio veritatis e∣ripi non potest. Those bug-bears were to be propounded to children, but for his part (said he) though they might take away his life, yet they could not hinder him from profes∣sing the truth. When King Lysim∣achus threatned Cyrenaeus Theodorus with hanging,Cic quest. Tusc. l. 1. Istis quaeso (saith he) ista horribilia minitare purpuratis tuis: Theodori quidem nihil interest, humi∣ne an sublimè putrescat. Threaten those terrible things to thy brave Courtiers, Theodorus cares not whe∣ther
he rot in the air, or on the ground. Cyprian said AmenS. Cypri∣an sen∣tenim in se latam audiens, dixit gra∣tias ago Deo omni∣potenti, qui me à vin∣culis hujus corporis dignatur absolvere▪ Pont. in vita Cy∣priani. to his own sentence of martyrdome, and the Proconsul bidding him consult a∣bout it, he answered, In re tam justa Aug Ser. de Cypr. nulla est consultatio. Bonner said, A vengeance on them, I think they love to burn. When the Proconsul threatned An∣drew the Apostle with the crosse, if he left not off his preaching, I would ne∣ver (said he) have preacht the doctrin of the crosse, if I had feared the suffer∣ing of the crosse. Jerom in the life of Paulus the He∣remite reciteth a story of a certain souldier, whom when the Pretor could not otherwise with torments remove from his Christianity, he devi∣sed another way, which was this: he commanded the souldier to be laid upon a soft bed in a pleasant garden among the flourishing lillies and red roses;Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 1 p. 8. which done, all others being removed away, and himself there left alone, a beautiful harlot came to him, who imbraced him, and with all other incitements of an harlot, laboured to
provoke him to her naughtinesse. But the godly souldier fearing God more then obeying flesh, bit his own tongue with his teeth, and spit in the face of the harlot, as she was kissing him, and so got he the victory by the constant grace of the Lord assisting him. Thirdly,See in Io. Hus. Ierom of Prague. Hen. Voes. Pet. Serre. Ia. Bain∣ham. Anth. Person. An. Askew The Martyrs suffered with much comfort, courage and assurance of their salvation, going to the fire as to a feast, calling the coles roses, and the day of their martyrdome, their marriage day. I am to die (said Bishop RidleyIn a let∣ter to his kindred & friends at his fare∣vvel. Fox. vol. 3. pa. 506.) in defence of Gods everlasting truth and verity, which death I shall by Gods grace willingly take with hear∣ty thanks to God therefore, in certain hope without any doubting to re∣ceive at Gods hand again of his free mercy and grace everlasting life. Rowland Taylour departing hence in sure hope without all doubting of eternall salvation,D. Tailour in his last vvill and testament. Fox. vol. 3. p. 175. I thank God my heavenly Father through Jesus Christ my certain Saviour. Amen. They thanked their Judges for con∣demning them, Sententiis vestris gra∣tias
agimus,Crudelitas vestra glo∣ria est no∣stra ert. ad Scap. c. 5. cum damnamur à vobis à Deo absolvimur. Tertul. Apol. c. 5. The Martyrs were eminent in many graces. 1. In humility. They neither called themselves martyrs, nor did they give way to others so to entitle them,Euseb. ec∣cles. hist▪ l. 5. but if any in epistle or speech so named them, they did sharply reprove them, saying, That this appellation was due to Christ alone, which only is a faith∣fall witnes to the truth. Ignatius in his Epistles saith, I salute you, who am ultimus, the last and least of all: and so in another Epistle, Tan∣tillitas nostra. Lord (said Hooper) I am hell,In a praie a little be∣fore his death. but thou art heaven, I am a sink of sin, but thou art a gracious God, and a mer∣cifull Redeemer. 2. In love to God and Christ.Fxes vol 3. p. 154. See the subscripti∣ons of Bradord lettrs. Ignatius called Christ his love, A∣mor meus crucifixus est, said he, My love was crucified. None but Christ, none but Christ, said John Lambert. They offered to some of them gifts and honors to take them off, to which
one well answered, Do but offer me somewhat that is better then my Lord Jesus Christ, and you shal see what I will say unto you. 3. In love to the brethren, and one another.Tertul. Apolog. c, 39. Ejusmodi vel maximae dilecti∣ovis operatio notam nobis inurit penes quosdam, vide inquiunt, ut invicem s diligant. In the primitive times the cry of the Heathens was, See how they love one another, See how they are ready to die for one another. How did they express their affection to one another likewise by their gilt pence, nutmegs, and other tokens which they sent to one another, and by their hear∣ty praiers? 4. InSee M. Kerby, Io. Rogers, D. Farrar, patience, Victi sunt Gentiles, & eorum Idololatria, non à repugnantibus, sed à morientbus Christianis. Aust. 5. In liberality to the poor.See in B. Hooper 6. In fidelity, John Bradford had oft∣en leave of his keeper, while he was in prison, to go see a friend, and he re∣turned to his prison again rather be∣fore his time. 7. In zeal and fervency inSee B. atier▪ praier. 8. In mildenesSee Archbi∣shop Cran∣er. and forgiving their enemies.
CHAP. II. Some memorable Collections concern∣ing the Martyrs, especially out of Foxes three large volumes. Polycarpus. EVsebiusHist. Ec∣cles. l. 5. c. 19. saith he was wont to say when he fell into the compa∣ny of hereticks: Bone Deus in quae me tempora reservasti? Good God what times hast thou kept me for? When Marcion the heretick ca∣sually met him and said, Cognoscis nos? Dost thou know us? Polycarpus an∣swered, Cognosco primogenitum dia∣boli, I know the first born of the devil. Being urged by the Proconsull to deny Christ, he answered: I have served him 86.Hilarion morti proximus dixisse fer∣tur, egredere, quid times? egredere anima mea, quid dui∣tas? septuaginta propè annis serviisti Christo, & mor∣tm times? Hier. epist. am. lib. 3. & in ejus vit▪ years, and he hath not once hurt me, and shall I now deny him?
When he should have been tied to the stake, he required to stand un∣tied, saying:Euse. hist. Eccles▪ Permitite me sic, in∣quit, Qui enim mihi dedit velle largetur & posse; atque ipsum tollerabilem faciet voluntati ignem ardentem. Smyrnensis Ecclesiae e∣pistola, de S. Polycarpi Martyrio. Let me alone (I pray you) for he that gave me strength to come to the fire, will also give me pati∣ence to abide in the same without your tying. Ignatius. Being led from Syria to Rome,A Syria Romam usque ter∣ra mari∣que cum testiis de pugno, no∣ct ac in∣terdiu al∣ligatus de cem Leo∣pardis (quae est militaris custodia) qui & be∣neficio af∣fecti pejo∣res. fiunt, utinam fruar be∣stiis mihi paratis, quas opto veloce mihi inve∣niri, quas & blandi∣tiis demul∣cebo, ut citius me devorent, non ut quosdm meuentes non attigerunt, sed & si ipsae aversae nolint, ego illas vi adigam. Ignatii epistola ad Romanos. there to be devoured, he wished by the way as he went, that he were in the midst of those beasts which were ready to rent him in pieces, and that their appetites might be whetted to dispatch him quickly, fearing least it should happen to him as to some o∣ther Martyrs, that the beasts out of a kinde of reverence and humanity, would not dare to approach unto him; being ready, he said, rather to provoke them to fight, then that they should suffer him so to escape. It is reported of him, by some po∣pish
writers (quam verè ipsi vide∣rint) that he was so frequent in ro∣ling the name of Jesus in his mouth, that when he died, there was ingra∣ved and written in his heart the character of that name in golden letters: This may be fabulous, but Christ was very dear unto him, he called him his love, meus amor cru∣cifixus estIgnatii epistola ad Romanos., my love (said he) is crucified. When he heard the lions roaring, he said; I am the Lords wheatFrmen∣tum sum Dei, den∣tibus fera∣rum molo ut mundus panis Dei inveniar. Ignat ep▪ ad Rom. that must be ground with the teeth of wilde beasts, that I may be found pure bread. Ignis, crux, ferarum concursus, (sectiones, lanienae) ossium discerpti∣ones, membrorum concisiones, totius corporis contritiones & diaboli tormen∣ta in me veniant, tantummodo ut Je∣sum nanciscar. Id. ibid. Come (saith he) fire, gallows, wilde beasts, breaking of bones, tear∣ing
of members, contrition of the whole body, and torments from the devil, so that I may gain Christ. After all his sufferings he said, now I begin to be a Disciple. John Hus. Martin Luther in his preface to Daniel, cals him, sanctissimum Mar∣tyrem, a most holy Martyr, where he rehearseth also this prophesie of his: They shall now burn a Goose (for Hus in the Bohemian tongue signifies a Goose) but a SwanLuther in the Bohe∣mian lan∣guage sig∣nifieth a Svvan. Foxes Acts and Mon. 1. vol p. 820. shall come after me, which shall escape their burning. The Bishops caused to be made a certain crown of paper almost a cu∣bit deep, in the which were painted three devils of wonderfull uglyshape, and this title set over their heads, HaeresiarchaA Ring leader and Captain of an he∣resie.. The which when he saw, he said, My Lord Jesus Christ for my sake did wear a crown of thorns, why should not I then for his sake again, wear this light crown, be it never so ignominious? Truly
I will doe it, and that willingly. You knew how before my Priest∣hood (which grieveth me now) I have delighted to play oftentimes at chesse,Foxes 1. vol. p 830. Iohn Has repents his playing at chesse. and have neglected my time, and have unhappily provoked both my self and others to anger many times by that play. Hierome of Prage. He being condemned by the coun∣cell of Constance, thus prophesied, Et cito vos omnes, ut respondeatis mihi coram altissimo & justissimo judice post centum annos.Foxes 1 vol. p. 830 Here I cite you to an∣swer unto me before the most high & just Judge within a hundred years. He said thus to the Executioner, make the fire in my sight, for if I had feared it I had never come hither. Henry Voes and John Esch. Henry Voes and John Esch Friers,Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 2 p. 102. K. Hen. being burned at Bruxels, one of them seeing that fire was kindled at his feet, said, Me thinks ye doe straw rooses under my feet.
Peter Moice. One of the Martyrs which suffer∣ed in Germany, being called befor the Senate at Dornick, they bega to examine him of certain articles religion. To whom as he was abou to answer boldly and expressely t every point,Foxes Act, and Mon. in 2. vol. Henry 8. p. 122. they interrupting him▪ bad him say in two words, either yea or nay: Then said he, If ye will not suffer me to answer for my self it matters of such importance, send me to my prison again among my toad and frogs, which will not interrup me while I talk with my Lord my God. Peter Serre. One of the Martyrs which suffer∣ed in France,Foxes Acts and Mon. 2. vol p 143. Plures ef∣ficimur quotiesme timur a vobis. Ter. being put to the fire stood so quiet, looking up to heaven all the time of his burning, as though he had felt nothing, bringing such admiration to the people, that one of the Parliament said, that way was
not best to bring the Lutherans to the fire, for that would doe more hurt then good. Bartholmew Hector. A French Martyr at his death,Foxes ib▪ p. 155. praying and speaking heavenly to the people, and taking his death pa∣tiently, many of the people wept, saying, why doth this man die which speaketh of nothing but of God? Pomponius Algerius. An Italian Martyr,Foxes Acts and Mon. 2. vol p. 183. thus under∣writes a comfortable letter of his to some of his Christian friends, From the delectable Orchyard of Leonine prison. Patrick Hamelton. Certain faithfull men being pre∣sent the same time when this Scottish Martyr was in the fire,Foxes 2. vol. K. Henry the 8. p. 238. they heard him to cite and appeal the black Frier called Cambell that accused him
to appear before the high God,See the like pro∣pheticall speech of Philbert Hamlin in Foxes . vol. p 151. And of a poor man in Calice, p 565. And of Roger Hol∣land, 2. vol. p. 145. a generall Judge of all men, to an∣swer to the innocencie of his death and whether his accusation were ju or not, between that and a certai day of the next moneth, which h there named. By the same witness it is testified, that the said Frier died immediately before the day came without remorse of conscience, that he had persecuted the innocent. Thomas Bilney. His first conversion was by reading the new Testament set out by Eras∣mus, and particularly, 1 Tim. 1. 15. At the last (saith he) I heard speak of Jesus, even then when the new Testament was first set forth by Eras∣mus, which when I understood to be eloquently done by him, being assured rather for the Latine then for the word of God (for at that time I knew not what it meant) I bought it even by the providence of God, as I doe now well understand and perceive: And at the first rea∣ding
(as I well remember) I chan∣ced upon this sentence of St Paul (O most sweet and comfortable sen∣tence to my soul) in his first epistle to Timoth. chap. 1. vers. 15.Foxes Acts and Mon in 2. vol K He. 8. p. 268. It is a true saying and worthy of all men to be em∣braced, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am the chief. This one sentence through Gods instruction and in∣ward working, which I did not then perceive, did so exhilerate my heart, being before wounded with the guilt of my sins, and being almost in despair, that immediately I felt a marvellous comfort and quietnesse, in so much that my brused bones leapt for joy.Psal 50. After this, the Scripture began to be more pleasant unto me then the hony or the hony-comb. Latimer cals him in his Sermons,Foxes Acts and Mon. 2. vol. K He. 8. p. 271, 27. And 3. vol. p. 450. blessed Saint Bilney, and shews how he was converted by him, and in what anguish of soul Bilney was in after his abjuration, and that he re∣turned again and suffered for the Gospel.
Being in the prison he divers time proved the fire by putting his finge near to the candle: At the first touc of the candle, his flesh resisting, an he withdrawing his finger, did afte chide his flesh in these words, Qu (inquit) unius membri inustione ferre non potes,Soultet. Annal. Anno 153 & quo pacto cras ttius corporis conflagrationem tolerabi What (saith he) canst not tho bear the burning of one member and how wilt thou endure to mor row the burning of thy whole body▪ The night before his execution, di∣vers of his friends resorted unto hi in the Guild Hall where he was kep amongst which one of them findin him eating an Alebrew with a cheer∣full heart and quiet minde, said, that he was glad to see him at that time so shortly before his painfull an heavy departure, so heartily to re∣fresh himself:Foxes 2. vol p. 277. Whereunto he an∣swered, O said he, I follow the ex∣ample of the husbandmen of the countrey, who having a ruinou house to dwell in, yet bestow cos as long as they may to hold it up▪
And so doe I now with this ruinous house of my body, and with Gods creatures, in thanks to him, refresh the same as ye see. Then sitting with his said friends in godly talk to their edification, some put him in minde, that though the fire which he should suffer the next day, should be of great heat unto his body, yet the comfort of Gods Spirit should cool it to his everlasting refreshing. At this word the said Thomas Bilney putting his hand toward the flame of the candle burning before them (as also he did divers times besides) and feeling the heat thereof, O (said he) I feel by experience, and have known it long by Philosophy, that fire by Gods Ordinance is naturally hot, but yet I am perswaded by Gods holy Word, and by the experience of some spoken of in the same, that in the flame they felt no heat, and in the fire they felt no consumption: and I constantly beleeve, howsoever that the stubble of this my body shall be wasted by it,Fox ubi supra. yet my soul and spirit shall be purged thereby, a pain
for the time whereon followeth unspeakable. And then most co∣fortably entreated of Isa. 43. 1, 2. well in respect of himself, as app∣ing it to the particular use of friends there present, of whom for took such sweet fruit therein, th they caused the words to be written on tables, and some in the books. The comfort whereof ( divers of them) was never tak from them to their dying day. James Bainham. As he was at the stake in the mid of the flaming fire which had ha consumed his arms and legs,Foxes . vol. K. He. 8. p. 301. he spak these words: O ye Papists, behold look for miracles, and here now y may see a miracle, for in this fire I f no more pain, then if I were in a bed down: but it is to me as a bed of rose▪ William Tyndall. For his notable pains and travel he may well be called the Apostle o England in this our later age.Foxes Acts and Mon. 2. vol. p. 361.
He translated the new Testament, and five books of Moses; for his faithfulnesse therein, observe his own words, I call God to record against the day we shall appear before our Lord Jesus,Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 2. p. 367. to give our reckoning of our doings, that I never altered one syllable of Gods words against my conscience, nor would doe this day, if all that is in earth, whether it be honour, pleasure or riches, might be given me. There was at Antwerp on a time amongst a company of Merchants, as they were at Supper, a certain jugler which through his diabolicall in∣chantment of art magicall, would fetch all kinde of viands and wine from any place they would, and set it upon the table presently before them,Fox ib. Tindall said I will go and see this, but I wil set my faith to beleeve te con∣trary. with many other such like things. The same of this jugler be∣ing much talked of, it chanced that Master Tindall heard of it, he desi∣red certain of the merchants that he might also be present at Supper to see him play his parts. The Supper was appointed, and the Merchants
with Tindall were there prese▪ Then the jugler being required play his feats,The pow∣er of Gods Saints a∣gainst the devil. and to shew his cu∣ning, after his wonted boldnesse began to utter all that he could d but all was in vain.He said, I cannot do it, for there sits the man (pointing to Tindal) who holds my hands. At the last w his labour, sweating and toili when he saw that nothing would forward, but that all his enchaments were void, he was compell openly to confesse, that there w some man present at supper, whi disturbed and letted all his doings. He cried at the stake with a fe∣vent zeal and a loud voice,He was burned at Filford in Flanders. Le open the KingFox ib. of Englands eies. John Lambert. After that his legs were consum and burned to the stumps, he lifti up such hands as he had, and his figers ends flaming with fire,Foxes Acts and Mon. 2. vol. p. 427. cri unto the people in these words, No but Christ, none but Christ. Anthony Person. He being come to the place of ecution,
with a cheerfull counte∣nance embraced the post in his arms, and kissing it,Foxes Acts and Mon. 2d. vol p. 554. said, Now welcome mine own sweet wife; for this day shall thou and I be married together in the love and peace of God. Henry Filmer. He said to Person and Testwood, two other Martyrs which died with him,Foxes d. vol. p. 555. The like words spake the L. Crom∣well to the L. Hunger∣ford, they both go∣ing to their death. Be merry my brethren and lift up your hands unto God, for after this sharp breakefast, I trust we shall have a good dinner in the kingdome of Christ our Lord and Redeemer. At the which words Testwood lifting up his hands and eies to heaven, desired the Lord above to receive his spirit. And Anthony Person pulling the straw unto him, laid a good deal thereof upon the top of his head, saying, This is Gods hat; now I am dressed like a true souldier of Christ, by whose me∣rits only I trust this day to enter into his joy. Many which saw their pati∣tient suffering, confessed that they could have found in their hearts (at
the present) to have died with them. Adam Damplip. He understanding from the Keepe that he should soon suffer, was ye merry and did eat his meat as wel as ever he did in all his life, in so much that some at the bord said un∣to him, that they marvelled how he could eat his meat so well,Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 2d. p 564. knowing he was so near his death. Ah master▪ quoth he, doe you think that I hav been Gods prisoner so long in the Mar shalsey, and have not yet learned to dy Yes, yes, and I doubt not but God wi strengthen me therein. Kerby. Master Wingfield said to Kerby prison, Remember the fire is ho take no more upon thee then tho canst perform,Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 2d p. 586. the terrour is grea the pain will be extream, and life sweet: Better it were betime to sti to mercy, while there is hope of lif
then rashly to begin and then to shrink. To whom Kerby replied, Ah, Master Wingfield, be at my burn∣ing and you shall say, there standeth a Christian souldier in the fire: for I know that fire and water, sword and all other things are in the hands of God, and he will suffer no more to be laid upon us then he will give us strength to bear. Anne Askew. Pray, prayShe said so twice. Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. d. p. 576, 578. Sanders saith the sme tvvice. George Marsh saith, pray, pray, pray, never more need. Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3d. p. 235., pray. To her confession in Newgate she thus subscribes. Written by me Anne Askew, that neither wisheth death, nor feareth his might, and as merry asFoxes Acts and Mon. vol. d. p 576. Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 2d. p. 580. one that is bound towards heaven. Wrisley Lord Chancellour sent her letters (being at the stake) offer∣ing to her the Kings pardon if she would recant, who refusing once to look upon them, made this answer again, that she came not thither to de∣ny her Lord and Master.
Sir George Blague. He being one of the Kings privy Chamber, was condemned and ap∣pointed to be burned,Foxes Acts and Mon. 2d. vol p. 586, 587. but being par∣doned by the King, and coming after into his presence; Ah my Pig (saith the King to him, for so he was wont to call him) Yea, said he, if you Majestie had not been better to m then your Bishops were, your Pig had been rosted ere this time. Mr John Rogers. That morning he should be burn∣ed he was found asleep,Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3d p. 130. and could scarce with much jogging be awa∣ked: At length being raised and waked, and bid to make haste, the said he, if it be so I need not to ti my points. The sunday before he suffered, he drank to Mr Hooper, being then un∣derneath him,Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3d. p. 130. and bad them com∣mend him unto him, and tell him there was never little fellow would
better stick to a man, then he would stick to him, presupposing they should both be burned together, although it happened otherwise, for Mr Ro∣gers was burnt alone. He was the Protomartyr of all the blessed company that suffered in Queen Maries time,He was a bold Isra∣elite that first st his foot into the red sea saies D. Hall. Foxes Acts and Mon. 3d. vol p. 131. that gave the first adventure upon the fire. His wife and children being eleven in number, ten able to go, and one sucking on her breast, met him by the way as he went toward Smithfield; this sorrowfull sight of his own flesh and bloud could nothing move him, but that he constantly and chearfully took his death with wonderfull pa∣tience in the defence of Christs Gospel. Laurence Sanders. He seeming to be somewhat trou∣bled at his lodging, one which was there about him asked him how he did:Foxes Acts and Mon. In very deed (saith he) I am in prison till I be in prison: Meaning, that his minde was unquiet untill he
had preached, and that then he should have quietnesse of minde, though he were put in prison. He that did lie with him in prison in the same bed, reported that he heard him say, that even in the time of his examina∣tion he was wonderfully comforted, in so much as not only in spirit but also in body, he received a certain taste of that holy communion of Saints, whilst a most pleasant refresh∣ing did issue from every part and member of the body, unto the seat and place of the heart, and from thence did ebb to and fro unto all the parts again. At Coventry (where he was burn∣ed) a poor Shoemaker which was wont to serve him of shoes, came to him and said; O my good master, God strengthen and comfort you Gran mercy good Shoemaker,Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3d p. 140. quoth Master Sanders, and I pray thee to pray for me, for I am the unmeetest man for this high office, that ever was appointed to it; but my graci∣ous God and dear Father is able to make me strong enough.
When he came to the fire he fell to the ground and praied, then he rose up again and took the stake to which he should be chained, in his arms,Id. ib. and kissed it, saying: Welcome the crosse of Christ, welcome everlast∣ing life: and being fastened to the stake, and fire put to him, full sweet∣ly he slept in the Lord. In the beginning of Q. Maries time, there being a communication between Laurence Sanders and D. Pendleton, the Doctor took upon him to comfort Mr Sanders all that he might, admonishing him not to start aside,Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3. p. 140, 141. having put his hand to Gods plough; I will see said he (be∣ing a fat man) the utmost drop of this grease of mine molten away, and the last gobbet of this flesh consumed to ashes, before I will forsake God and his truth. Sanders on the other side seemed so fearfull and feeble∣spirited, that he seemed rather to fall quite from Gods word which he had taught, then to stick to his pro∣fession and abide by his tacle, but after Sanders suffered most willing∣ly,
and Pendleton played the Apo∣stata. Mr John Hooper. Being at Zarick with Bullinger, at his parting with him he promised to write unto him how it went with him.B. Hooper prophesi∣eth of himself. But the last news of all I shall not be able to write: for there, said he (taking M. Bullinger by the hand) where I shall take most pains,Foxes Act, and Mon. vol. 3d. p. 145. there shall you hear of me to be burned to ashes, and that shall be the last news, which I shall not be able to write un∣to you, but you shall hear of me. When Mr Hooper being made Bi∣shop of Worcester and Glocester should have his Arms given him by the Herald, as the manner is for eve∣ry Bishop to have his Arms assigned unto him (whether by the Bishops or Heralds appointment is uncer∣tain) the Arms to him allotted was a Lamb in a fiery bush,Fox ibid. p. 146. and the sun∣beams from heaven descended down upon the Lamb, rightly denoting as it seemed, the order of his suffering, which afterward followed.
His life was so pure and good, that no kinde of slander (although di∣vers went about to reprove it) could fasten any fault upon it. I know not one of all those vertues and qualities required of St Paul in a good Bishop,Epistle to Timothy. lacking in this good Bishop. Bishop Ridley and he differed a∣bout the ceremonies,Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3d p 147. yet both being in prison for the truths sake they were reconciled. Every day his manner was to have to dinner a certain number of poor folk of Worcester by course,While he vvas Bi∣shop of Glocester and Wor∣cester in K. Edw. time. who were served by four at a messe, with whole and wholesome meats: and when they were served (being afore examined by him or his Deputies of the Lords prayer, the Articles of their faith,Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3d. p. 148. and ten Commandments) then he himself sate down to dinner, and not before. Sir Anthony Kingston his friend coming to him a little before his death,Foxes Acts and Mon. 3d. vol p. 153. used these words, Life is sweet and death bitter, to whom he replied, that the death to come was more bitter, and the life to come more sweet.
A blinde boy being brought unto him, who had not long afore suffer∣ed imprisonment at Glocester for confessing of the truth, Master Hooper after he had examined him of his faith and the cause of his imprison∣ment, beheld him stedfastly, and (the water appearing in his eies) said unto him:Id. ib. Ah poor boy, God hath taken from thee thy outward sight, for what consideration he best knoweth; but he hath given thee another sight much more precious, for he hath indued thy soul with the eye of knowledge and faith: God give thee grace continually to pray unto him, that thou lose not that sight, for then shouldst thou be blinde both in body and soul. Being at the stake, and having en∣tred into his prayer, a box wa brought and laid before him upon▪ stool with his pardon (or at least fained so to be) from the Queen if he would turn: At the sight where of he cried,Foxes Acts and Mon vol 3d. p. 154. If you love my soul away with it, if you love my soul away wit it. The box being taken the Lor
Shandoys said, Seeing there is no re∣medy dispatch him quickly. Master Hooper said, good my Lord, I trust you will give me leave to make an end of my praiers. Doctor Taylor. He told the Sheriffe and others (who laboured to turn him to the Popish religion) that he had been deceived himself, and was like to deceive a great many of Hadley of their expectation. I am (said he) as you see, a man that hath a very great carkasse, which I thought should have been buried in Hadley Church-yard,Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3. p. 176. if I had died in my bed as I well hoped I should have done; but herein I see I was deceived: and there are a great number of worms in Hadley Church-yard which should have had jolly feeding upon this car∣rion, which they have looked for many a day: but now I know we be deceived, both I and they; for this carkasse must be burned to ashes, and so shall they loose their bait and
feeding that they look to have had of it. Having light off his horse in his journey to Hadley a little afore he suffered,Id. Ibid. 177. he leapt and fet a frisk or twain, as men commonly doe in dancing:Another Martyr said, hold out faith and pati∣ence your vvork is almost at an end. Mr Doctor quoth the She∣riffe, how doe you now, he answer∣ed; well, God be praised good Mr Sheriffe, never better, for now I know I am almost at home, I lack not past two stiles to go over, and I am even at my fathers house. The same morning in which he was called up by the Sheriffe to go to his burning (about three of the clock in the morning) being suddainly a∣waked out of his sound sleep,Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3d. p. 179. he sate up in his bed, and putting on his shirt, had these words, speaking somewhat thick after his accustomed manner: Ah horson theeves, ah horson theeves, rob God of his honour, rob God of his honour. Afterward being risen and tying his points, he cast his arms about a balke which was in the chamber be∣tween Mr Bradfords bed and his:Id. ib.
and there hanging by the hands, said to Master Bradford: O Master Brad∣ford, quoth he, what a notable swing should I give if I were hanged? William Hunter. His mother said to him a little be∣fore his suffering, that she was glad that ever she was so happy to bear such a childe which could finde in his heart to lose his life for Christs name sake. Then William said to his mo∣ther, Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3d. p. 193. for my little pain which I shall suffer, Christ hath promised me mo∣ther (said he) a crown of joy, may you not be glad of that mother? with that his mother kneeled down on her knees, saying; I pray God strengthen thee my son to the end, yea I think thee as well bestowed as any childe that ever I bare. Being at the stake, he said, Son of God shine upon me, and immedi∣ately the sun in the firmament shone out of a dark cloud so full in his face,Fox ibid. 193, 194. that he was constrained to look ano∣ther way, whereat the people mused
because it was so dark a little time before. John Lawrence. He being not able to go (because his legs were so worn with heavy irons in prison,Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3d. p. 200. and his body weak∣ned with evil keeping) was born to the fire in a chair, and he sitting in the fire, the young children came a∣bout the fire and cried as well as young children could speak, saying, Lord strengthen thy servant and keep thy promise, Lord strengthen thy ser∣vant and keep thy promise. Dr Farrar Bishop of St Davids. One Richard Jones a Knights son coming to M. Farrar a little before his death, seemed to lament the painfulnesse of the death he had to suffer, unto whom the Bishop an∣swered again to this effect, saying, that if he saw him once to stir in the pains of his burning,Foxes Act and Mon. vol. d2. he should then give no credit to his doctrine. And as he said, so he right well perform∣ed
the same; for so patiently he stood, that he never moved, but e∣ven as he stood, holding up his stumps, so still he continued, till one Richard Gravell with a staff dashed him upon the head, and so struck him down. Rawlins White. The Bishop of Landaffe asking him whether he would revoke his opini∣ons or no.Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3d. 219. Surely (said Rawlins) my Lord, Rawlins you left me, and Rawlins you finde me, and by Gods grace Rawlins I will continue. The night before he was to suffer, he sent to his wife, and willed her by the messenger that in any wise she should make ready and send unto him his wedding garment, meaning a shirt, which afterward he was burned in. As he went to the place of execu∣tion, in his way his poor wife and children stood weeping,Fox ib. p. 220. See before in Rogers. and making great lamentation: the sudden sight of whom so pierced his heart, that the very tears trickled down his face,
but he soon after, as though he had misliked this infirmity of his flesh, began to be as it were altogether angry with himself, in so much, that in his striking his breast with his hand, he used these words; Ah flesh, staiest thou me so? wouldst thou fain prevail? well, I tell thee doe what thou canst, thou shalt not by Gods grace have victory. Thomas Haukes. Darbishire Bishop Bonners kins∣man said unto him, that he was too curious, for he would have nothing but his little pretty Gods book. And is it not sufficient for my salvation? said Haukes:Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3d p. 257. Yes (said he) it is sufficient for our salvation, but not for our instruction: God send me the sal∣vation (said Haukes) and you the instruction. Some of Haukes his friends privily desired him, that in the midst of the flame he would shew them some token if he could, whether the pain of suffering were so great, that a
man might not therein keep his minde quiet and patient. Which thing he promised them to do,Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3d p. 265, 266. and so secretly between them it was a∣greed, that if the rage of the pain were tolerable and might be suffer∣ed, then he should lift up his hands above his head toward heaven, be∣fore he gave up the ghost. Having continued long in the flame, and his speech being taken away by the vio∣lence of the flame, and his fingers consumed with the fire, so that now all men thought certainly he had been gon, suddenly and contrary to expectation the blessed servant of God, being mindfull of his promise afore made, reached up his hands burning on a light fire (which was marvellous to behold) over his head to the living God, and with great rejoicing, as seemed, strook or clap∣ped them three times together: At the sight whereof there followed such applause and out-cry of the peo∣ple, and especially of them which un∣derstood the matter, that the like had not commonly been heard.
John Bradford. He did not eat above one meal a day; which was but very little when he took it: and his continuall study was upon his knees. In the midst of dinner he used often to muse with himself, having his hat over his eies, from whence came commonly plen∣ty of tears dropping on his trencher.Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3d. p. 181. He was very gentle to man and childe, and in so good credit with his keeper, that at his desire in an even∣ing (being prisoner in the Kings bench in Southwark) he had licenc upon his promise to return again that night, to go into London with∣out any keeper to visit one that was sick lying by the Still-yard: Neither did he fail his promise, but returned unto his prison again, rather pre∣venting his hour then breaking his fidelity. He slept not commonly a∣bove four hours in the night; and in his bed till sleep came, his book went not out of his hand. He count∣ed that hour not well spent wherein
he did not some good, either with his pen, study, or in exhorting of o∣thers. Whosoever (saith he) hath not learned the lesson of the crosse,Qui non est Crucianus non est Christia∣nus. Luth. hath not learned his A, B, C, in Christi∣anity. He was not content till he found God coming into his spirit with se∣verall dispensations, according to the severall parts of his prayer. The keepers wife came up sudden∣ly to him (he being in the keepers chamber) as one half amazed, and seeming much troubled,Foxes Acts and Mon. vol: 3. p. 282. being al∣most windelesse, said, O M. Brad∣ford, I come to bring you heavy news, what is that, said he? marry quoth she to morrow you must be burned, and your chain is now a buying, and soon you must go to Newgate; with that M. Bradford put off his cap, and lifting up his eies to heaven, said, I thank God for it; I have looked for the same time, and therefore it com∣eth not now to me suddenly, but as a thing waited for every day and hour, the Lord make me worthy thereof.
Creswell offering to make sute for M. Bradford: He thus answered, I the Queen will give me life I will thank her, if she will banish me I will thank her, if she will burn me I will thank her, if she will condem me to perpetuall imprisonment, I will thank her. Some of the subscriptions of his letters were observable,Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3d p. 356, 357. The most miserable, heardhearted, unthankfull sinner, John Bradford. A very painted hypocrite, John Bradford. Christopher Waid. As soon as he was fastened to the stake, he spake (his hands and eies being lifted up to heaven) with cheerfull and loud voice, the last verse of the 86. Psalm.Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3d. p. 382. Shew me token for good, that they which hate m may see it and be ashamed, because thou Lord hast holpen me and comfor∣ted me. Fire being put unto him, he cried unto God often, Lord Jesus receive
my soul, without any sign of impati∣ency in the fire, till at length after the fire was once throughly kindled,See a strange token also upon Ro∣bert Smith in the fire, Fox ib. 410. he was heard by no man to speak, still holding his hands up over his head together towards heaven, even when he was dead and altogether rosted, as though they had been staid up with a prop standing under them. Robert Samuell a Minister. He would often in prison have drank his own water, but his body was so dried up with his long empti∣nesse, that he was not able to make one drop of water: After he had been pined with hunger two or three daies together, he then fell into a sleep,Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3. p. 414. as it were one half in a slum∣ber, at which time one clad all in white seemed to stand before him which ministred comfort unto him by these words, Samuel, Samuel, be of good cheer, and take a good heart unto thee, for after this day shalt thou never be either hungry or thirsty. Which thing came even to passe
accordingly, for speedily after he wa burned, and from that time till b should suffer, he felt neither hung nor thrist. Robert Glover. After he was condemned by the B∣shop, and was near his death, tw or three daies before his heart bein lumpish and destitute of all spiritual consolation, he felt in himself aptnesse nor willingnesse, but rathe a dulnesse of spirit, full of much discomfort to bear the bitter crosse o martyrdome ready to be laid upo him. Whereupon fearing in him¦self least the Lord had utterly with drawn his wonted favour from hi he made his moan to Austen Benh a Minister, and his familiar frien signifying how earnestly he had pra¦ed day and night unto the Lord, an yet could receive no motion, no sense of any comfort from him: un¦to whom the said Austen answerin again, desired him patiently to wai the Lords pleasure, and howsoeve
his present feeling was, yet seeing his cause was just and true, he ex∣horted him constantly to stick to the same,Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3d. p. 427. and to play the man, nothing misdoubting but the Lord in his good time would visit him, and satisfie his desire with plenty of consolation, whereof (he said) he was right cer∣tain, and therefore desired him whensoever any such feeling of Gods heavenly mercies should begin to touch his heart, that then he should shew some signification thereof, whereby he might witnesse with him the same, and so departed from him. The next day when the time came of his martyrdome, as he was going to the place, and was now come to the sight of the stake, although all night before praying for strength and cou∣rage he could feel none, suddenly he was so mightily replenished with Gods holy comfort, and heavenly joyes, that he cried out clapping his hands to Austen, and saying in these words, Austen he is come, he is come, and that with such joy and alarity, as one seeming rather to be risen
from some deadly danger to liberty of life, then as one passing out of the world by any pains of death. Such was the change of the marvellous working of the Lords hand upon that good man. Bishop Ridley. He offering to preach before the Lady Mary (being made Queen) was refused. He was after brought by Sir Thomas Wharton to a room, and desired to drink. After he had drunk, he paused a little while look∣ing very sadly, and suddenly brake out into these words; Surely I have done amisse, Why so? quoth Sr Tho∣mas Wharton.Foxes Acts and Mon. 2d. vol. p. 788. For I have drunk (said he) in that place where Gods Word of∣fered hath been refused. Whereas if I had remembred my duty, I ought to have departed immediately, and to have shaken off the dust of my shoes for a te∣stimony against this house. These words were spoken by him with such a vehemency, that some of the hear∣ers afterward confessed, that it made
their hair stand upright on their heads. The night before he suffered, his bear'd was washed and his legs, and as he sate at supper the same night at M. Irishes (who was his keeper) he bad the hostesse and the rest of the bord to his marriage;Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3d. p. 502. for, saith he, tomorrow I must be married, and so shewed himself to be as merry as e∣ver he was at any time before. M. Ridley looking (as he was going to the stake) espied Master Latimer coming after,Id, Ibid. unto whom he said, O be ye there, Yea, said M. Latimer, have after as fast as I can follow: Af∣ter they came both to the stake, D. Ridley with a wondrous chearfull look ran to M. Latimer, imbraced and kissed him, and as they that stood near reported, comforted him, say∣ing: Fox ubi supra. Be of good heart, brother, for God will either asswage the fury of the flame, or else strengthen us to abide it. D. Smith preached at the burning of Bishop Ridley and M. Latimer on the first of the Corinth. 13. 3. wherein
he railed against the Martyrs (and these two especially) crying still to the people to beware of them, for they were heretikes, and died out of the Church. Dr Ridley (after the Sermon was ended) desired liberty to speak,Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3d. p 502, 503. but could not obtain it, un∣lesse he would revoke his erroneous opinions and recant. To which he answered, so long as the breath is in my body, I will never deny my Lord Christ, and his known truth: Gods will be done in me, and said with a loud voice, Well, then I commit our cause to Almighty God, which shall in∣differently judge all. M. Hugh Latimer. In King Edwards time he did so e¦vidently fore-shew and prophecy o all those kindes of plagues which af∣terwards ensued,Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3d. p. 461. that if England e∣ver had a Prophet, he might seem to be one. And as touching himself h ever affirmed, that the preaching of the Gospel would cost him his life.
When the Lieutenants man upon a time came to him in prison,Fox ib. the a∣ged He was called fa∣ther Lati∣mer▪ viz. Not burn, but starve for cold. Father kept without a fire in the frosty winter, and well nigh star∣ved for cold, merrily bad the man tell his master, that if he did not look the better to him perchance he would deceive him. He praied fervently, and often∣times so long continued kneeling,Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3d. p. 463. that he was not able to rise without help. The three principal matters he praied for, were First, That as God had appoint∣ed him to be a Preacher of his Word, so also he would give him grace to stand to his doctrine untill his death, that he might give his heart-bloud for the same. Secondly, That God of his mercy would restore his Gospel to England once again, and these words, Once again, once again, he did so inculcate, as though he had seen God before him,The Lord did most graciously grant all these re∣quests. and spoken to him face to face. His third request was for the pre∣servation of Queen Elizabeth, whom
in his praier he was wont to name, and even with his tears desired God to make her a comfort to this com∣fortlesse Realm of England. Upon new-years day every Bishop was used to present the King with some handsome new-years gift,Latimers new years gift sent to K. Hen. the 8. so they did some with gold, some with silver, some with a purse full of mo∣ney, and some one thing, and some another: but M. Latimer being Bi∣shop of Worcester then,Foxes Act, and Mon. vol. 3d. p. 486. among the rest presented a new Testament for his new-years gift with a napkin ha∣ving this posie about it, Fornicatores & adulterosHeb. 13▪ 4 judicabit Dominus, Fornicatours and adulterers God will judge. To some that asked him why one that preacht his Sermon did not preach as he did,They both suf∣fered to∣gether in Oxford a∣gainst Bai¦ly College Martialis Epig. he answered, he had his siddle and stick, but wanted his rozen. Quem recitas meus est O Fidentine, libellus: Sed malè dum recitas, incipit esse tuus. He spake to M. Ridley at the stake
with him in this manner;Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3d p. 503. Be of good comfort M. Ridley, and play the man, we shall this day light such a candle by Gods grace in England, as I trust shall neve be put out. M. John Philpot. Bishop Bonner said thus to him, What say you to the omnipotency of God?Foxes Act and Mon. 3d. vol p. 555. Is not he able to perform that which he spoke? This is my body, I tell thee that God by his omnipoten∣cy may make himself to be this car∣pet if he will. To whom Philpot an∣swered, God is able to do whatsoe∣ver he willeth, but he willeth nothing which is not agreeable to his Word: Non potest Deus facere quae sunt natu∣rae suae contraria. It is contrary to the nature of God to be a carpet, for a Creator to be the creature. A mes∣senger from the Sheriffs coming to M. Philpot,Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3d p. 593. and bidding him make ready, for the next day he should suf∣fer and be burned at a stake with fire. Master Philpot answered and said, I am ready; God grant me strength,
and a joyfull resurrection. And so he went into his chamber, and pour∣ed out his spirit unto the Lord God, giving him most hearty thanks, that he of his mercy had made him worthy to suffer for his truth. As he went with the Sheriffs to the place of execution, entring into Smithfield the way was foul, and two Officers took him up to bear him to the stake.Fox ibid. Then said he merrily, What? Will ye make me a Pope? I am content to goe my journies end on foot. But first coming into Smithfield he kneeled down there, saying these words; I will pay my vows in thee, O Smithfield. And when he was come to the place of suffering, he kissed the stake, and said, Shall I disdain to suffer at this stake, seeing my Redeem∣er did not refuse to suffer a most vile death upon the crosse for me? Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury. He was so milde to his enemies that if any of them (who had wron∣ged
him) would seem never so slen∣derly to relent or excuse himself,His life is written in latin (out of Fox) by Melchior Adam. he would both forget the offence com∣mitted, and also evermore afterward friendly entertain him, insomuch that it came into a common proverb,Foxes Acts and Mon. 3 vol. p. 63. Doe unto my Lord of Canterbury a displea∣sure, a shrewd turn, and then you may be sure to have him your friend while be li∣veth. He was a means to bring some lear∣ned men from beyond sea into Eng∣land, as Bucer, Paulus Fagius, Peter Martyr, TremelliusHom , nec minus  (Thomas Cranmerus Cantuariensis Archiepiscopus) me non solum excepit, sed etiam in aula sua aliquandiu detinuit. Sed quid aulam invidioso verbo nomino? Schola certè fuit, vel palaestra pietatis & literarum. Tremel. epist. in Hos▪ enarrat., being very hospitable to learned and pious men. And there are in Calvins Epistles let∣ters between Calvin and him. When the fire began to burn near him,Foxes Acts and Mon. 3d. book, p. 671. he stretching out his arm put his right hand to the flame, which he held so stedfast and immoveable (sa∣ving that once with the same hand he
wiped his face) that all men might see his hand burned before his body was touched. His eyes were lifted up into heaven, and oftentimes he repeated his unworthyBecause by his right hand he had formerly subscribed his recan∣tation. right hand, so long as his voice would suffer him; and using often the words of Stephen, Lord Jesus receive my spirit; in the greatnesse of the flame he gave up the ghost. William Tyms. He being brought and examined before Bishop Boner and the Bishop of Bath, The Bishops began to piy Tyms case, and to flatter him, saying; Ah good fellow thou art bold, and thou hast a good fresh spirit, we wish thou hadst learning to thy spirit. I thank you (my Lord) said Tyms,Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3d. p. 682. and both you be learned, and I would you had a good spirit to your learning.
Hugh Laverock an old lame man, John Apprice a blinde man, Martyrs, burn'd at Stratford the Bow. At their death Hugh Laverock af∣ter he was chained, casting away his crtch, and comforting John Apprice his fellow martyr,Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3d p. 701. said unto him; Be of good comfort my brother, for my Lord of London is our good Physitian. He will heal us both shortly; thee of thy blindenes, and me of me lame∣nesse. Bradbridges wife. When she was condemned of the Bishop to be burned, she had two children named Patience and Chari∣ty. Who then said to the Bishop, That if he would needs burn her, yet she trusted that he would take and keep Patience and Charity,Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3d. p. 2, 7. meaning her two children. Nay, quoth the Bi∣shop, by the faith of my body I will meddle with neither of them both.
Elizabeth Folks. She being a young maiden and ex∣amined, Foxes Acts and Mon, vol. 3d. 832. Id. ibid. 833. whether she believed the presence of Christs body to be in the Sacrament substantially and really o no, answered, that she believed it was a substantiall lie,There is no use of faith and hope in heaven, love & joy remain. See 1 Cor. 8. 13. and a reall lie. When she was at the stake, she said, Farewell all the world, Fare∣well faith, Farewell hope, and so ta∣king the stake in her hand, said, Wel∣come love. William Sparrow. He said thus to Bishop Boner, that which you call truth I do believe to be heresie,Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3d p. 557. and that which you call heresie is good and godly, and if e∣very hair of my head were a man (said he) I would burn them all ra∣ther then go from the truth, &c. John Rough. Master Rough being at the burning of Austen in Smithfield, and return∣ing
homeward again,Foxes Acts and Mon. 3d. vol. p. 862. met with one M. Farrar, a merchant of Hallifax who asked him where he had been. Unto whom he answered, I have been where I would not for one of mine eyes, but I had been. Where have you been, said M. Farrar? For∣sooth (saith he) to learn the way. And so he told him he had been at the burning of Austoo, where shortly af∣ter he was burned himself. Roger Holland. He said thus to Bishop Boner.Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3d p. 877. This I dare be bold in God to speak (which by his Spirit I am moved to say) that God will shorten your hand of cruelty, that for a time you shall not molest his Church. And this shall you in a short time well perceive, my dear brethren, to be most true. For after this day, in this place shall not there any by himB Boner, after which day no man suffered in Smithfield for the te∣stimony of the Go∣spel. be put to the triall of fire and fagot.
William Pikes. Somewhat before his apprehensi∣on, he sitting in his garden, and read∣ing in a Bible, suddenly there fell down upon his book between 11, and 12 a clock of the day four drops of fresh bloud, and he knew not from whence it came.Foxes Acts and Mon. 3d. vol. p. 879. Then he seeing the same was sore astonished, and could by no means learn from whence it should fall, and wiping out one of the drops with his finger, he called his wife, and said. In the vertue of God wife what meaneth this? will the Lord have four sacrifices? I see well enough the Lord will have bloud: his will be done, and give me grace to abide the triall. Afterward he daily looked to be apprehended of the Pa∣pists, and it came to passe accord∣ingly. Alice Driver. D. Gascoin and she conferring, she asked him whether it was Christs
body that the Disciples did eat over night.Foxes Acts and Mon. 3d. vol. p. 887. He answered, yea. What body was it then (said she) that was crucified the next day, he reply∣ing, Christs body, How could that be (said she) when his Disciples had eaten him over night? Except he had two bodies, as by your argu∣ment he had.Luke 22. 19. One they did eat over night, and another was crucified the next day. Such a Doctour, such do∣ctrine: She put all her examiners to shame, that one looked on another, and had not a word to speak, whence she brake out into these words, Have you not more to say? God be honour∣ed, you are not able to resist the Sperit of God in me a poor woman. I was an honest poor mans daughter, never brought up in the Vniversity, as you have been, but I have driven the plough before my Father many a time, I thank God, yet notwithstanding in the defence of Gods truth,Fox ubi supra. and in the defence of my Master Christ, by his grace I will set my foot against the foot of any of you all, in the maintenance and defence of the same; and if I had a thousand
lives they should goe for paiment thereof. Prests Wife. In her trouble she would take no money,Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3. p. 891. for she said, I am going to a city where money beareth no mastery whiles I am here God hath promised to feed me. Elizabeth Young. She being committed to close pri∣son, the Keeper was charged by Do∣ctor Martin in her hearing, to give her one day bread, and another day water, to which she made this answer: If ye take away my meat, I trust that God will take away my hunger.
CHAP. III. Martin Luther. HE was born on St Martins day, and therefore calledThree Martins have much opposed the Papists, Martin Lu∣ther, Mar∣tin Bucer, and Mar∣tin Chem∣nicius. Martin Luther. He was though strong in body, yet sparing in diet; I saw him (saithMelanct. Praefat. ad dum vo∣lumen Lu∣theri. Melancthon) when he was in good health, four whole daies eat∣ing and drinking nothing at all, I have often seen him at other times to be content many daies with a little bread and herring daily. When he recreated himself, and took his minde off his studies, he was delighted with the play of Chesse, and was skilfull at it. He was almost beyond measure li∣berall toward the poor: it happened once that a student asked some mo∣ney of him, he bad his wife to give him something, but she excusing the matter in regard of their penury at that time, he took a silver cup which stood near to his hand, and gave it to the scholler, wishing him to sell it
to the Goldsmith, and take the mon to himself. Erasmus saith,Homo af∣fectibus su∣is nimium indulgens, qui ipse a∣nimi sui¦aestum prae∣properum saepe ag∣noscit. Raiol. de lib. Ap∣poc. prae∣lect, quarta vide Ges∣ner▪ Bb∣liothecam. Lenitatem se in desider are, He wished him more mo∣deration and temper in his writing Erasmus also often said, That God gave to this last age a sharp Physitian because of the greatnesse of their dis∣eases. Intemperans aeger crudelem me∣dicum fecit. He was by nature fiery but placa∣ble; therefore when Melancthon came once to him being vehemently moved, he rehearsed this verse to him the rest being silent, Vince animos iram{que} tuam qui caeter vincis. Overcome thy minde and anger▪ which overcomest other things. CalvinSaepe di∣cere soli∣tus sum: etiamsi me Lutherus diabolum vocaret, me tamen hoc illi honoris habiturum, ut insignem Dei servum agnosca: qui tamen ut pollet eximiis virtutibus, ita magnis vitiis laborat, Vehementian autem quae illi est ingenita, utinam in hostes veritatis sem∣per contulisset, non etiam vibrasset in servos Dominituti∣nam recognescendis suis vitiis plus operae dedisset. Cal. Bul. saith, Though Luther should call him a devil, yet he would honour him as a famous ser∣vant
of God, who as he excels with great vertues, so he hath also great vices, but I would (saith he) he had alwaies exercised his vehemency which was imbred in him on the ene∣mies of the truth, and not also on the servants of God, and that he had spent more pains in acknowledging his own faults. He was of a just stature, a strong body, of such a Lion-like vivacity of eyes that many could not endure to look directly upon him. He had good health, except that towards his later end he was often troubled with a pain in his head; whence he: Valemus omnes praeter Lutherum ip∣sum, qui corpore sanus, foris à toto mundo, intus à Diabolo patitur & om∣nibus angelis ejus. We are all well save Luther himself, who being sound in body suffers outwardly from the whole world, inwardly from the devil and all his angels. A great deal of money was given him by Dukes and Princes, so that I began (saith he) to fear least God would herereward me, sed protestatus
sum me nolle sic satiari ab eo, but I pro∣tested that I would not so be satisfied by him.As for se∣dition, for ought I know me thinks I should not need Christ if I might so say. He saith somewhere of himself, that he was never in all his life tem∣pted to covetousnesse, one that was so great a reformer as he was, had need to have a spirit disingaged from the world. When upon a time one Papist de∣manded of another,Latimers 3d Serm. before Edw. the 6 why do you not stop the mans mouth with gold and silver? The other answered, Hem, Germana haec bestia pecuniam non cu∣rat. See, this Germain beast careth not for money. He was the first that opposed the Popish Indulgences.Rivet. Ie∣suit. vap▪ Occasione nun∣dinationis Indulgentiarum pretio nu∣merato,Lutherus initio fuit permotus ad hoc quod suscepit reformaetionis o∣pus. In the same yearAbout the year 1517. when Martin Luther began, Pope Leo the tenth did create one and thirty Cardinals: In which year and day of their crea∣tion, there fell a tempest of thunder and lightning in Rome, which so
shook the earth when the Cardinals were made,Foxes Acts and Mon. 2d. Tom. out of I. Bale. that it removed the lit∣tle childe Jesus out of the lap of his mother, and the keyes out of S. Pe∣ters hands, which thing many then did interpret to signifie and fore∣shew the subversion and alteration of the Sea of Rome. Erasmus told Frederick Duke of Saxony,The spirit of Luther was raised by opposi∣tion. Con∣currimus utrin{que}, illi extremo u∣rore, & ego summo cō∣temptu, & vincet mea audacia. That in Luther were two great faults: First, That he would touch the bellies of the Monks. Se∣condly, That he would touch the Popes Crown, which two matters in no case are to be medled with∣all. Luthers friends disswading him from going to Worms, some crying that by the burning of his books it appeared he was condemned in the judgement of the Papists: others in∣stancing in the examples of John Hus and Savanarola: Luther thus an∣sweredMelch. Adam. Si scirem tot Wor∣matiae esse diabolos quot tegu∣lae in te∣ctis▪ tamen essem in∣gressurus., As touching me, since I am sent for, I am resolved and certainly determined to enter Worms in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, yea although I knew there were so
many devils to resist me,He might more fitly be called Doctor re∣solutus then the schoolman as there are tiles to cover the houses Wormes. Whose undaunted minde, mos fervent zeal, great learning (sait Tom. 2d l. 16. c. 15. Chamier) stirred up many who ar∣med themselves against the errours and commonly received superstiti∣ons, among which were ZuingllusFamous writers of the refor∣mation, Luther & Melancthō in Saxony, Oecolam∣padius in Helvetia, Calvin and Beza in France, Peter Mar¦tyr and Zanchis from Italy Oecolampadius, Melancthon, B∣cer, Calvin, and many others, whos labours and endeavours that way God would not suffer to be frusta∣neous. Albertus Crantzius an Historia of the Vandales is reported to hav said to Luther, Frater vadeSculter. Annal Fox. Acts and Mon 2d Tom. p. 83. in cellam, & dic Miserere mei Deus. Bro∣ther go into thy cell, and say, Lord have mercy upon me, insinuating that an Austn Monke should in vai dispute against the Pope. His praiers were so ardent unto Christ, that (as Melancthon wri∣teth) they which stood under his window where he stood praying might see his tears falling and drop∣ping down.
He praied every day three hours,Tanta re∣verentia aliquid pe∣tit, ut cum Deo: tanta spe & fide ut cum pa∣tre & a∣mic se lo∣quisentiat. Melc. Ad. and then when his spirits were most lively, Pertres horas eas{que} ad studia aptissimas. When he preached they which heard him thought every one his own temptations severally to be no∣ted and touched, whereof when signification was given unto him by his friends, and he demanded how that could be: Mine own manifold temptations (said he) and experi∣ences are the cause thereof.He said  things make a Di∣vine, me∣ditation, praier, tē∣ptation. For from his tender years he was much exercised with spirituall conflicts, and vexed with all kinde of tem∣ptations. Hee regarded not the threats of his adversaries the Papists, he said to Melancthon, Si nos uemus ruet Christus una,His motto was, Sit miser, qui miser esse potest. scili∣cet ille regnator mundi: & esto uat, malo ego cum Christo ruere, quam cum Caesare stare. If we fall Christ the Lord and Ru∣er of the world falleth with us, I had rather fall with Christ then stand with Caesar.
When any evil news was brought to him, he called for the 46. Psal to comfort him. He saith in one place, odi istud v∣cabulum paenitentiPrius non fuerit fermè in Scriptura tota ama∣rius mihi verbum quam pae∣nitentia, nunc nihil dulcius aut gratius mihi sonat qua paenitentia. Lutherus Stupitio. there was one no word so terrible unto him (while he was a Papist) and which his sodid more hate then that, Repent, b after no word was more sweet, when he understood the Gospel. When a certain Jew was appoint∣ed to come to destroy him by poison yet it was the will of God that Lu∣ther had warning thereof before,Foxes Acts and Mon 2d. tome. p. 88. an by the face of the Jew sent to him by picture, whereby he knew him, an avoided the pill. In the garden of his houses the de∣vil appeared to him in the form of black bore, but he regarded it not. Cajetan asked him whether thought the Duke of Saxony would make warre in his behalf▪ he said,Quid (in∣quit) putas princiem Frideriū propter te¦arma sum∣turum dixi? hoc nollem prorsus, & ubi manebis? Respondi, sub caelo. Lu∣therus praetat. ad Tom. primum. would not have him: Where wil you be then said Cajetan? Luthe
answered, I shall be sub caelo under heaven. Erasmus wrote that there was more solid Divinity contained in one folio of Luthers Commentaries, then in many large writings of the School∣men and such like. He said and taught many things truly and gravely, as concerning the sacred Scripture and its authority, Solis canonicis libris debetur fides,Ego ipse odi meos libros, & saepe opto eos interi∣re, quod meto ne morentur lectores, & abducant à lectione ip∣sius Scri∣pturae, quae sela omnis sapientiae fons est▪ Luth. in Gen. 19. cae∣teris omnibus judicium. We must be∣leeve the Canonicall books only, and may judge all others. He was so zealous to have the Scriptures read, that he professed, if he thought the reading of his books would hinder the reading of the Scripture, he would burn them all before he died. His saying was, Ecclesia sanguine & oratione totum mundum convertit. When something concerning a busi∣nesse was concluded amisse at No∣rimberg, he said, Longe aliter in cae∣lo
quam Norimbergae hoc de negoti erat conclusum: It was farre other∣wise concluded in heaven then at Norimberg concerning that matter. He took a liberty to himself t speak stoutly when he was brought before the Emperour, till he hear the pen go behinde the hangings. He hath some high expressions in in his writings, fiat volunt as nostra, let our will be done. Cave non tan∣tum à peccatis sed etiam a bonis ope∣ribus. Take heed not only of sins but also of good works.Hic me prorsus re∣natum esse sensi, & apertis por∣tis in ipsū Paradisum intrasse ibi ontinuò a∣lia mihi facies to∣tius Scri∣pturae ap∣paruit. Lutherus praesat. ad prmum opus. He being in an agony, and glimpse of Christs righteousnesse be∣ing discovered to him out of Rom. 1. 17. and perceiving that it was not meant, de justitia puniente, but ju∣stificante, not of his punishing ju∣stice, but that which justifieth the ungodly, he saith, I perceived my sell regenerate, and to have entred into Paradise, the Scripture presently ap∣peared in a new hew. He would have been content at the first if they would have taken away indulgencies. He said, Brevi effici∣am
ut anathema sit esse Papistam: I will shortly cause it to be a curse to be a Papist. A young man about Wittenberg being kept bare and nee∣dy by his father, was tempted by way of sorcery to bargain with the devil or a familiar (as they call him) to yield himself body and soul unto the devils power, upon condition to have his wish satisfied with money, so that upon the same an obligation was made by the young man, writ∣ten with his own bloud, and given to the devil: upon the sudden wealth and alteration of the young man, the matter first being noted, began afterward more and more to be sus∣pected, and at length after long and great admiration he was brought unto Martin Luther to be exami∣ned. Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 2d. p. 88. The young man whether for shame or fear long denied to con∣fesse, and would be known of no∣thing, yet God so wrought being stronger then the devil, that he ut∣tered unto Luther the whole sub∣stance of the cause, as well touch∣ing the money, as the obligation.
Luther understanding the matter and pittying the lamentable state of the man, willed the whole Congregati∣on to pray, and he himself ceased not with his prayers and labour, so that the devil was compelled at last to throw in his obligation at the win∣dow, and bad him take it again unto him. He held Consubstantiation, but confessed to Melancthon that he had gone too far in the controversie of the Sacrament.Paulò ante mortem a gens cum Philippo Melanctho∣ne, fatetur in negotio caeae ni∣um esse factum. nold▪ de lib. Apoc prael quarta Melancthon perswaded him by the publishing of some milde writing to explain himself. Luther replied to that, that by this means he should cause his whole doctrine to be suspected, but Melancthon might do what seemed good to him after his death. When they said he had recanted, he writing to his friend Stupitius, saith, Omnia de me praesumas praeter fugam & palinodiam: Presume any thing of me sooner then flying and retracting. Luther so much esteemed of his book de servo arbitrio, that he glo∣ried
in it as unanswerable and wrote to Wolfangus Fabricius Capito:They of∣fered him a cardi∣nals hat if he would be quiet & not speak against the popish indulgen∣cies, he answered, he would not though he might be Pope. Nullum se agnoscere justum suum librum, nisi fortè De servo arbitrio, & Catechismo, that he acknow∣ledged none of his books for his, but those two, that de servo arbitrio, and his Catechisme. If any of his books be to be disliked, surely that de sermonibus Convivali∣bus is most faulty, of which GerhardLoco primo de sacra Scri∣ptura. (a Lutheran) saith thus, Liber ille Convivalium sermonum à Luthero nec visus, nec lectus, nec approbatus est, quin multoties privato quorun∣dam arbitrio mutatus, mutilatus, auctus. He said of the Pope, non habeo ar∣gumentum robustius, that he should fall, then quia sine cruce regnat. Luther speaks slightly himself of his first labours. Above all I beseeeh the godly Reader, and for our Lord Jesus Christs sake, that he would reade my writings judiciously, and with much compassion, and let him know that I was formerly a Monk and a most furious Papist, when I
first entred into the cause undertaken by me.Lutherus de primis conatibus petit, ut ea legatiector cū magna commise∣ratione & meminerit authorem fuisse ali∣quando monachum & Papi∣stam insa∣niffimum. Luth. tom. 10. operū in praefat. Vide Melc. Ad. He fitly called the Popes bull bul∣lam, a bubble in respect of its va∣nity. Being reproached, he said, Pror∣sus satan Lutherus sit, modo Christus vivat & regnet, Let Lurther be coun∣ted a devil so Christ may live and reign. His saying was, Turcicum impe∣rium quantum quantum est, mica tantum est quam pater-familias pr∣jicit canibus, The whole Turkish Empire is but a crumme that th master of the family throws to a dog. He said he learnt more by one fer∣vent prayer, then he could get by reading of many books or most in∣tent Ipse go in una ali∣qua arden∣ti oratione mea plura saepedidii▪ quam ex multorum librorum lectione aut accu∣ratissima meditatio∣ne cosequi potusem. Luth. tom. 1. meditation. Melancthon in his preface to his 3d Tome reports this of him. When he often seriously thought of the anger of God, or the wonder∣full examples of punishments, sud∣denly he had such terrours that he was almost dead with them, and in
disputing once about some points being much amazed, he lay upon a bed in the next room, where he of∣ten inserted this sentence in his pray∣er: He hath concluded all under sin that he might have mercy on all. His prayer a little before his death was this,Melc. Ad. Paeter mi caelestis, Deus & Pater Domini nostri Jesu Christi, Deus omnis consolationis, ago tibi gratias, quod filium tuum Jesum Christum mihi revelasti, cui credidi, quem sum professus, quem amavi, quem celebravi, &c. My heavenly Father, the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the God of all consolation, I give thee thanks, that thou hast revealed thy Son Jesus Christ to me, whom I have beleeved, whom I have profes∣sed, whom I have loved and cele∣brated. When he lay a dying, this was his will for his wife great with childe and his little son. Domine Deus, gratias ago tibi, quod volueris me esse pauperem super terram & mendicum. Non habeo
domum, agrum, possessiones, pecuni∣am quae relinquam.Melch. Ad Tu dedisti mihi uxorem & filios, tibi reddo, nutri, doce, serva, ut hactenus me, O Pater pupillarum, & judex vi∣duarum. O Lord God, I thank thee that thou wouldst have me to be poor upon the earth, I have no house land or money that I should leave them. Thou hast given me wife and chil∣dren, I restore them to thee, doe thou O father of Orphans and Judge of widdows, nourish, teach, keep them, as thou hast hitherto me.
CHAP. IIII. Of the Covenant and Promises.Dicitur Hebraeis foedus  Be∣rith vel à  Ba∣rah id est, eligendo, quod Foedus est ut A∣benezra scribit mu∣tuus cōsen∣sus super aliqua re¦vel à  Bara id est exscindē∣do, e quod in foederi∣bus semper ali uid oc∣cideatur▪ Gen. 15 10, 17. Foedus Latinis a feriedo▪ Paul. Fag. Armot. in Deu. 9. 11. I. Of the Covenant. THE Hebrew word  Be∣rith, is derived from  Ba∣rah, elegit, to choose, because God in the Covenant of works did choose out man especially with whom he made the Covenant, and because in the Covenant of grace he chuseth out of the multitude the elect, and be∣cause a Covenant is a thing which two chuse, and of which they mutu∣ally agree and promise betwixt them∣selves, although the word be used where ore alone doth promise with a simple promise, and so it may be referred to the Testamentary dispo∣sition. Or else it may come from Barah, comedit, to eat, as if they should say an eating, because they u∣sed in the Eastern countries to esta∣blish Covenants by eating and drink∣ing together. The condition was
about eating in the Covenant of works.  Bara, signifieth to slay (whence some derive a Covenant) because God made the first Covenant of grace and sealed it by sacrificesBerith quasi Ce∣rith, be∣cause sa∣crifices were slain in making of Cove¦nants, and therefore it is often construed with the verb  Carath fe∣cijt, he sruck, vide Su∣kii, Antiq. Conviv. l. 1. c. 30, See also M Mede on Mal. 1. 11. and M. Cudworths discourse concern∣ing the true noti∣on of the L. Supper chap. 6. of beasts slain and divided. The Covenant in generall may be described a mutuall compact or a∣greement betwixt God and man, whereby God promiseth all good things, specially eternall happinesse unto man, upon just, equall and fa∣vourable conditions, and man doth promise to walk before God in all acceptable, free and willing obedi∣ence, expecting all good from God, and happinesse in God according to his promise, for the praise and glory of his great name. A Covenant is a solemn compact or agreement between two chosen parties or more, whereby with mu∣tuall, free, and full consent they binde themselves upon select condi∣tions tending to the glory of God and their common good. It differs from a promise gradually and in the formalities of it, not naturally
or in the substance of it. A Covenant usually is the collecti∣on of many promises, as a constella∣tion is the collection of many starres, though it be but one promise, I will be thy God, yet it is such a one as comprehends many. There is a difference between a Law and a Covenant. A Superiour may give a law whether the inferiour consent to it or no, but a Covenant is ratified by the consent of both parties. A Covenant is something unto which two persons by mutuall consent doe freely binde themselves. There are divers distinctions of Covenants. 1. A Covenant of nature. 2. A Covenant of grace. 3. A mixt Covenant consisting of nature and grace. Others make these three Cove∣nants, 1. Foedus natura, the Covenant of nature made with Adam. 2. Foedus gratiae, the Covenant of grace made to us in Christ. 3. Foedus subserviens, a prepa∣ring
Covenant to make way for the advancement of the Covenant of grace in Christ. Others say, there were never any but two Covenants made with man, one Legall, the other Evangelicall, of works or grace, the first in inno∣cency, the other after the fall. Foedus operum, when it was first made with man, was foedus amici∣tiae, God and man were then friends, foedus gratiae is foedus reconciliationis inter iimicos. 1. The Covenant of works where∣in God Covenanteth with man to give him eternall life upon condition of perfect obedience in his own per∣son. 2. The Covenant of grace which God maketh with man, promising eternall life upon condition of be∣leeving. We reade not in Scripture the Co∣venant of works and of grace totide syllabis, the nearest we come to it is Rom. 3. 27. the law of works oppo∣sed to the law of faith, which holds out as much as the Covenant of
works and the Covenant of grace. The Covenant of works was 1. That Covenant wherein God was the authour and the ground of it, was Gods free grace, it was re∣ciprocall betwixt him and Adam. We call not the second Covenant a Covenant of grace, because there was no grace in the first Covenant, but in opposition to the condition of the first Covenant which was works, and because greater grace is manifested in it then the first, 2. It was the same Covenant un∣der which the best of the creatures the Angels now stand and injoy their happinesse, and Adam should have been happy by observing this Cove∣nant if he had stood. Christ was made under this Covenant. 3. The promises of this Covenant were very glorious. 1. For naturall life, in the body there was perfection without defect, beauty without deformity, labour without wearinesse. 2. For spirituall life, Adam should not have had terrours in his
conscience, sorrow, fear, shame. 3. For death, he should have been translated without dissolution. The Faederati were God and A∣dam together with all his posterity. God made a Covenant with Adam as a publick person,Omnes nos eramus ille unus. Aug. which represen∣ted all mankinde. The reasons of it may be these, 1. From the imputation of Adams sin to all mankinde, Rom. 5. 12. In whom, or for as much as all have sin∣ned, they sinned not all in them∣selves, therefore in Adam, see vers. 14. In him all died, 1 Cor. 15. 47. 2. Those on whom the curse of the Covenant comes, they are under the bond and precept of the Cove∣nant, all mankinde is directly under the curse of the Covenant,Deut 29. 21. Rom. 8. 20. 21. Gal. 3. 13. Adam did consent to it and un∣derstood the terms of the Covenant, for God dealt with him in a rationall way, and expected from him a reaso∣nable service. Either he knew the tenour of the Covenant, or else he broke it out of ignorance, but the
first sin could not be a sin of igno∣rance, he knew whatsoever was ne∣cessary to know in a way of duty. God dealt with Adam not only in a way of sovereignty but in a way of Covenant, God did this for di∣vers reasons. 1. For the speciall manifestation of his free grace. 2. That it might be the greater obligation to Adam to obey, God made a promise and he gave his con∣sent.God re∣quired mans ser∣vice, non ex indigē∣tia, sed ex abūdantia. 3. To sweeten his authority to man, Deut. 6. 24. 4. To encourage man to obedience, Heb. 12. 2. 5. That this might be a ground to Adam to exercise His faith in beleeving whatso∣ever God had revealed or should reveal. 2. His love, 1 John 4. 19. 3. His hope. 6. To leave man inexcusable if he sin, that a clear way might be made for Gods justification and mans con∣viction.
Objection, God is a free Agent, how can it stand with his honour and absolute liberty to be bound to the crea∣ture? Answer, In a strict sense, 1. God cannot be said to be bound, but promittendo s fecit debitorem, saith Austins, and he is rather bound to himself,Aquinas. and his own faithfulnesse, then the creature. Objection, How can it stand with Gods justice to involve Adams posterity in a Co∣venant, which themselves never con∣sented to. Answer, It is not an injustice among men for parents to conclude their chil∣dren, their acts binde them and their heirs. 2. God hath reserved to him∣self a liberty to visit the sins, not only of the first, but immediate parents on their children, Gen. 9. 22. 1 Thes. 2. 26. The Sodomites children were punisht with their parents. 3. Adam was our parent, there was the will of the nature, which was enough to
inwrap them in originall sin, the sin of the nature. 4. This Covenant was made with Adam and his po∣sterity out of free grace, therefore all his posterity was bound by way of thankfulnesse to consent. 5. They ought to rejoice in Adams exaltati∣on being so advanced, and to agree to the Covenant made with him. 6. God made the best choice for them in the first Adam (as he did in the second) in so doing, seeing he made him so perfect. The first Covenant consists of three parts. Gal. 3. 10, 11, 12. 1. The precept, that continueth not in all things. 2. The promise, live, the man that doth them shall live. 3. The curse in case of transgression, cursed in every one. The precept requires perfect and personall obedience. The condition of the Covenant on mans part was 1. Perfect obedience. 1. The commandment then did (and still doth as it refers to the first Covenant) call for perfect
obedience, Lev. 18. 5. Rom. 10. 5. Gal. 3. 12. Ezek 20. 25. 2. Because there is a curse de∣nounced against the least trans∣gression, Gal▪ 3. 10. One sinne and that but in thought, broke the Angels Covenant, Rom. 5. 17. 3. Gods holinesse is such, that he requires from the creature perfect obedience, Job 4. 18. Heb. 1. 13. 4. There are two things in the law, 1. The principall part of it, the precept. 2. The accidentall, the curse: man is bound to the precept, jure creatoris, to the curse, jure judicis. 5. He gave us a perfect ability to obey in our creation, Ephes. 4. 22, 23. Eccles. 7. ult. 6. He requires perfect obedi∣ence in Christ, Rom. 8. 4. 2. Personall obedience. 1. There is a perfect obedi¦ence to the law required of eve∣ry
particular man, Gal. 3. 10. 2. The curse is denounced a∣gainst the person, the soul that sins shall die. 3. This was required of Christ our surety, Gal. 4. 4. 4. It was required for the ac∣ceptation of our persons and salvation of our souls. 5. The righteousnesse of the first Covenant might easily be lost by transgression, Dan▪ 9. 23. CHAP. V. Of the Covenant of grace. AFter man by his fall had broken the first Covenant, God our of his free grace did enter into a bet∣ter and second Covenant. 1. All the persons in the Trinity did enter into Covenant with man, they have all the same nature, essence, will, and this is an act ad extra, 2. Sin was against all the persons in Trinity, therefore all they were to
be reconciled, but the person that chiefly made the Covenant with man was God the Father, the other persons have their peculiar office in the administration of this Cove∣nant,Heb. 12. 24. Eph. 13. the persons that God would take into Covenant were designed by the Father, John 17. 9. Rev. 13. 6, 8. He imploies Christ as Mediator of the Covenant, Isa. 49. 8. Matth. 12. 18. He appoints how much grace and glory he will give to every one in this Covenant. 2. The fountain from whence this Covenant flows is the free grace of God, Gen. 17. 2. I will make (He∣brew, I will give) my Covenant. Ephes. 1. 6. Isa. 41. 1, 2. 2 Sam. 7. 21. Free grace is here exalted in these particulars. 1. From the considera∣tion of the person that enters into Covenant,Gen. 17. 1. God Alsufficient. 2. Of the persons with whom he enter into Covenant, man fallen, Gal. 4. 21. 3. In that this Covenant was made with some of those that fell, and not others, Ephes. 2. 12. 4. In that the Lord hereby exalts our persons
and services, Hos. 2. 19. 5. In that sin can never spend the righteousnes of this Covenant, Hos. 3. 2, 3. The Covenant of grace is that free and gracious Covenant which God of his free mercy in Jesus Christ,It is cal∣led the Covenant of grace, because God of his meer love and favour made it with man when he lay wal∣lowing in his bloud, Ezek 16. 6. It doth not exclude all conditions, but only those whch will not stand with grace. It is called a new Covenant, Heb. 8. 8, 10. The Covenant of life, of salvation and grace, Rom. 4. 16. Gal. 3. 18. Isa. 42. made with man a miserable and wretched sinner, promising un∣to him pardon of sin, and eternall happinesse, if he will return from his iniquity and embrace mercy reached forth by faith unfained, and walk before God in sincere, faith∣full, and willing obedience, as be∣comes such a creature lifted up un∣to such injoyment, and partaker of such precious promises. God himself plotted this Cove∣nant, Ephes. 1. 9, 10. He spent infi∣nite thoughts about it, Psal. 40. 7. took infinite delight in it, Isa. 53. 10. The main end of Christs coming into the world was to bring in a new
Covenant, Mal. 3. 1. Heb. 7. 22. an 12. 24. The spirit belongs to the second Covenant, Isa. 59. ult. his glorious works, a witnesse, seal, earnest, belong to the spirit of the second Covenant. The Covenant of grace is more glorious then that of works. The first Covenant was made with the first Adam a mutable head,As the first Adam Ca∣put cum faedere, so the 2d, Adam, Isa. 42. 6. the second with the second Adam an unchangeable head, Gal. 3. 16. Secondly, The Covenant it self was a changeable Covenant, it gave place to the Covenant of grace,Gen. 17. 7. 2 Sam. 5. 23. but this second Covenant was an ever∣lasting Covenant. Thirdly,Isa. 54. 10. The righteousnesse of the second Covenant is far more glori∣ous then the righteousnesse of the first Covenant,Hos 2. 19. Vide Ames. Medul. l. 1. c. 24. that of the first Cove∣nant was the righteousnesse of a creature,2 Cor. 5. ult. this the righteousnesse of God. Fourthly, The condition of the se∣cond Covenant was more glorious then that of the first, the condition of the first Covenant on mans part,
was perfect and personall obedi∣ence of this Covenant-faith,The first Covenant offers no surety, it is a Cove∣nant without a Mediator. to sin against God in Christ, is the highest way of sinning, and to glorifie God in Christ, is the highest way of glo∣rifying him. Fiftly, The power of performing it is more glorious, now we have a constant supply of the spirit, Ephes. 1. 19. and 4. 13. then we had none to assist us. Sixtly, The promises of the second Covenant are more glorious then those of the first, Heb. 8. 6.All the promises of the law were con∣ditionall, This doe and thou shalt live, Those great ones of the Gospel, of pardon of sin, of giving a soft heart, are absolute: 2. Those of the Gospel are mighty promises, they can give the mercy promised, and grace required, the law is weak through the flesh. I will be thy God, I will give thee my Son, my Spirit, God did not tell Adam that he would be his God in that way that he promiseth himself to his in the second Covenant. God promiseth a more glorious manife∣station of himself,God in the second Covenant set forth as it were a new e∣dition of all his at∣tributes. Repen∣tance is a fruit of the second Covenant Act. 2. and union with himself in Christ, a higher manife∣station of his wisdome, holinesse,
power, and also of his mercy, which was not before discovered, a higher union, under the first head there was only a moral union of love, under the second a mysticall union, we are the same person with Christ; the second Covenant brings repentance and pardon upon repentance. The first Covenant said, If thou dost well thou shalt be excepted. We have a higher Sonship. Adam was a son by creati∣on, we by Christ, our ground of the acceptation of all our services is high∣er, God looks on us as being one with Christ, we have a greater ground of perseverance, we have a higher ti∣tle to our inheritance, Adam was made King of this low world, Christ was made heir of all things, and we coheirs with him. Question, How can the Covenant of grace be called a CovenantFaedus dicitur, quia firma est promis∣sio in Scri¦pturis ēim quodlibet firmū sta¦tutū, quā vis sit de rebus ina∣nimis, di∣citur, faedus Ier. 33. 20, 25. Quia ta∣men gratu∣ita donati∣one constat, & morte donantis confirmatur, non tam pro∣priè faedus quam testamentum vocatur, Heb. 9 16. quod cum in priori non invenitur, illud non tam propriè testa∣mentum vocatur quam foeus. Ames▪ Med The. l. 1. c. 24., as Ier. 31. 34. since it contains a meer absolute free
promise, whereas a covenant requi∣reth mutuall conditions. Now no condition can be required to this covenant, which the covenant it self doth not work; For I will write my laws doth denote all things done by grace. Answer. Though God do perform, and in his Covenant promise to performe what he requires, yet still there is something required which man con∣senting to, and promising to perform (though not of himself by his own power) it is a covenant. The Covenant of grace is menti∣oned an hundred times directly in the Scripture, and a thousand times by consequence. In generall it comprehends all the blessings which God can give from election to glorification. Particularly he gives; 1. His own self, God spared not his own Sonne, To us a Son is given, I will be thy God, thy reward, thy portion, thine inheritance. He is their reconciled God, theirs in a
league of love and friendship. Scripture useth to expresse this some peculiar relations, as of King Husband, Father, He will do the offices of a good King, of a ∣ving Husband and Father. 2. He doth actually with himse put the soul into the possession many other things. 1. He brings reconciliati with God.He is their shield, Ge. 15. a wall of fire round a∣bout them Zech. 12. 2. Justification, the pardon all their sins, and covering their deformities with the of Christs righteousnes. 3. Adoption, makes them heirs with himself. 4. Sanctification, He gi his Spirit to dwell in them. Thirdly, He gives them infin wealth in bils & bonds, in promi 1. For this life, 1. Of preservation and deverance from all evils, they either be prevented that come not, or sanctified if do come, or removed. 2. Of a constant supply of
good things they stand in need of, for soul, body, name, Ps. 34. He will prosper and give successe to all the works of their hands, Psalm 1. 2. Job 22. 28. 2. For life to come. In the new Covenant there be three great Promises. 1. I will be your God. 2. I will pour out my Spirit on ou.The goodnesse of du∣ties lies inadverbs, and the sweetnes of the co∣venant lies in posses∣sives. 3. I will give you my Sonne. His giving his Son is the ground of both he rest, He is a God to none but whom Christ is a Saviour, we ave the Spirit also by interest in Christ. First, I will be your God, Genesis 7. 7. Psal. 48. This God is our God,Deus quan∣tus, quantus  noster est▪ Tolle De & nullus ero. Psal. 144. ult. 2 Cor. 6. 16, 18. at is, you shall have as true an in∣erest in all my attributes for your ood, as they are mine for my glory, y grace to pardon you, my power o protect you, my wisdome to di∣ect you. This is a comprehensive romise for God to be ourSubstan∣tia foederis, Iun. God it
includes all,Anima foe∣deris. Pare. Caput foe∣deris, Mus. Deus meus & omnia, said Luther. The Covenant of grace is both Faedus amicitiae & conjugale, a Covenant of friendship, and a con∣jugall Covenant. Abraham was in covenant with God, and God stiles him his friend; also it is a conjugall league, Hos. 2. 19, 20. Secondly,Isa. 44 3 God promiseth his Spirit,Ier. 31. 33 Ioel 2. 28. John 14. 16, 26. and 15. 26.Ezek. 36. 26▪ and 16. 7. Luke 24. 49. Act. 1. 4. an accomplishment of which promise we have, Act. 2. 23. The Spirit is called,The Spirit reveals & applies the promises. Christus impletio legis spiri∣tus imple¦tio Evan∣gelij. Ephes. 1. 13. The holy Spirit of promise, because this was the great promise which Christ from the Father hath made unto us, the giving of the holy Ghost to work in us all the good which he requireth & apply all the good wch he hath promised. The giving of the Spirit is a great and excellent pro∣mise of the new Testament. The great promise of the old Testament was the promise of Christ, Gen. 3. 16. of the Messiah, all the ceremoniall Law was but a typical enlargment of that promise. Christ when he was to goe
out of the world promised his Spirit. 1. That in this last age of the world there might be a more full dis∣covery of the great things of the Gospel,Veritas à quacun{que} est à spiritu sancto est. the Spirit reveals truth and stablisheth us in the truth, that Gods people might know more of himself and his Son, and prie more into the mysteries of the Gospel. 2. There are more glorious con∣quests to be made in this last age of the world, all the great enemies of Jesus Christ are to be vanquished, Ze. 4. 7. 2 Thess. 2. 9. the sharpest suffer∣ings are reserved for these times, therefore Christ hath provided the most sovereign cordials. What undaunted courage, what invincible patience, what ravishing consolation had the martyrs in the flames? God made good this promise to them in sending his Spirit. We should put our bond in sute, turn promises into praiers, presse God with much importunity for more of the Spirit. 3. God hath promised to give us his Son.
The whole Covenant of grace i purchased,Abraham saw Christs day a farre off, and rejoyced. Anna, Za∣charias, & Elizabeth waited for the conso∣lation of Israel, L. 2▪ 25, 30. founded, sealed, ratifi∣ed in Christs bloud, Mat. 26. 28. Heb. 9. 14, 15. and 13. 20. It was Gods plot from all eternity to save man in such a way, as should advance all his glorious Attributes, his wis∣dome, power, justice, mercy, compassi∣on, wrath, vengeance. The Covenant of grace is the most free and gracious tender of Christ, and all his rich purchases to all the lost and undone sons of Adam that shall believe in him. All other particular promises found in the book of God receive their confirmation by the promise of Christ. God promiseth sometimes to deliver from a particular afflicti∣on; to assure them that that shall be kept, he makes a promise of Christ, Isa. 7. 14. Behold a virgin shall conceive. There are three things in the pro∣mise of Christ to confirm all other promises. 1. Because there may be made more objections against the Lords giving of Christ, then against any o∣ther
promise whatsoever, in that the great provoked God must come to be a suter to his vassall, Jehovah must lie in a virgins womb. 2. More love and compassion is shewed in that one promise of Christ then in all other promises whatsoe∣ver. 3. Because this is the mother pro∣mise, 2 Cor. 1. 20.Rom. 8. 20 Some say, The conditions of the Covenant of grace, are repentance, faith and new obedience. Sincerity alone (or Evangelicall perfection) is the only absolute condition of the Covenant of grace, Gen. 17. . It is called an upright heart, that is, straight: It is also called Integrity, a body that wants no members, a sound heart, a pure or sincere heart, a single heart, a simple and honest heart. Evangelicall perfection is a work of Gods Spirit whereby the whole inward man is applied to God and his waies without the mix∣ture of strange intentions or affecti∣ons. 2. Sincerity of singlenesse, puri∣ty,
perfection is the whole substance and mettall of all graces which God worketh in the soul; it is not any one grace, as patience, meeknesse, but the substance of every grace, faith and love unfeigned, Praier which comes not out of feigned lips; we must worship God in spirit and in truth, Ephes. 4. 34. 3. God and the Saints have e∣ver judged of men by this, Iudge me, O Lord, according to mine in∣tegrity. 4. The promises are made to this, Ps. 119. 1. Mat. 5. 8.See those Greek words (which have an emphasis in them) , Mat. 10. 16, and  Phil. 1. 10. explained fully in my Greek Critica. Characters of sincerity. As preparatory or a motive to the rest, to be willing and desirous to have his heart thorowly tried and searched, Joh. 3. 18, 19, 20. Psalm 139. There are three reall marks, 1. It makes the work of grace u∣niversall. 1. In regard of the subject: therefore it is called a new creature. 2. In respect of the object,
abstains from all sin, and per∣forms all duty. 2. It is constant. 3. It presseth on to have more till it be filled with God and his waies, Phil. 3. 8, 9, 10, 11. It is a matter of great concern∣ment for a man rightly to understand the nature of the Covenant under which he is, 2 Sam. 23. 3, 4. Reasons. 1. Because it is the covenant which God hath respect unto in all his dealings with you, Psal. 105. 8. & 111. 5. 2. Else we shall never be able to understand our own state, 1 Cor. 11. 28. and 2 Cor. 12. 5. Galat. 4. 23, 24, 25. 3. Else we shall never be able to judge a right of any of our actions, neither of Gods waies to us, nor ours to him, Gen. 4. 4. 4. Without knowledge of the na∣ture of the Covenant we can never understand our own sinnes, we are not only breakers of the Law, but transgressors of the Covenant,
Hosea 6. 7. Deut. 29. 21. Lev. 26. 24, 25. 5. According to our Covenant, such is the Spirit by which we are a∣cted, and such is our law and pra∣ctice, one under the first covenant is acted by the spirit of bondage, one under the second is acted by the Spi∣rit of adoption. 6. We cannot else understand our mercies or afflictions, whether they come from Gods love or dis∣pleasure. 7. Without this we cannot under∣stand the riches of Gods grace in the second covenant. 1. That he should enter into a covenant at mans creation. 2. When man had broke that to enter into a new covenant. 3. To finde out such a glorious way to abolish the first covenant. 4. To make it with such a glorious Head, Christ. 5. That the promises of this cove∣nant should be better then those of the first covenant. 8. All our terrour or comfort
comes from our covenant under which we are,Isa. 34. 5. Heb. 6. 17. 1 Pet. 3. 9. Eph. 2. 2. We are under the covenant of grace. 1. If we be in the second Adam, if we be willing to accept of Christ upon his own terms, Hos. 2. 18. 2. If sin have not dominion over us, Rom. 6. 12. 3. If the Lord put his laws into our minde, and write them in our hearts, Heb. 8. 8.God dis∣covers four things to his people by writing the law in the heart. 1 His ho∣linesse, that a conformi∣ty to this law is a conformity to his holinesse, Ephes. 4. 24. 2. A perfect patern of that glorious image our first parents had in innocency. 3. A perfect patern of the law of God in Christs humane nature. 4. A patern of that perfection they shall attain unto, Hebrews 12▪ 24. It is an allusion to the two Tables of the Law. They were first written by the finger of God, and then put into the Ark: so God first writes the Law in our hearts, and then puts it in our mindes. The writing of the Law in the heart signifies, 1. Similitudinem, a con∣formity, an inward principle and di∣sposition in the heart answerable to
the doctrine in the book.Heb. 8. 10. It is not barely said thus, You shall not teach eve∣ry man his neighbor, but that clause is added, say∣ing, Know the Lord, not as if you were ignorant, but my law shall be in your hearts & you shal be taught as a know∣ing people. 2. Per∣manentiam, continuance, it is not a flitting but a binding principle, Lite∣ra scripta manet. All the errours almost of these times may be confuted from the do∣ctrine of the covenant, Heb. 8. 9, 10, 11, 12. 1. Merit and supererogation of works, Satisfaction given to justice must be commensurate to that justice which it must satisfie, infinite. 2. The Popish and Arminian do∣ctrine of Free-will. Can man work in a way of grace so as to determine and make it effectuall before he have grace, a principle of working? Can a man receive grace offered without a speciall work of grace stirring and exciting him? I will write my laws in their hearts, the promise then writ∣ten in the heart is the foundation of all our faith, and the precept of all our obedience. 3. For in vocation of Saints. Christ is the Mediatour of the new Cove∣nant;Iob 9. 3. He is touched with our infir∣mities, and yet cloathed with ma∣jesty,
to his Father he gives his merit for us, from his Father he gives his Spirit to us. 4. That Arminian doctrine of universall grace and redemption, that Christ should die intentionally for all. Where ever the merit of Christs death goes, there goes his Spirit, the price and power of his death are equal; all have not the Spirit of Christ, therefore not his merit. The Socinians deny the satisfacti∣on of Christs death, justice must have satisfaction. Christ (they say) came into the world to be an exam∣ple, and give us a patern of vertue, as the Pelagians say we have Adams sin by imputation. They deny all in∣fused habits of grace, and would on∣ly have moral perswasions. The Antinomians also are hence confuted, there must needs be a work of grace in a man else the death of Christ will be ineffectuall, then some principle of grace must be put into us. The old rule may stand still, though there be a new principle put
into the heart, because the holines of God is not varied. The Anabaptists, the covenant is with the house of Israel, and Gods children born in the covenant are of the house of Israel. Some say men are miserable two waies by Adams fall. 1. As we stand under his cove∣nant, and so come short of confor∣mity to the Law which requires per∣fect, personal, and perpetuall obe∣dience. 2. As we bear his image, life and eternall salvation is offered on im∣possible terms, therefore (say they) in conversion there is required a dou∣ble change. 1. Morall, which is the change of a mans covenant. 2. Physical, the change of a mans image. So that as a mans covenant is, such is his state, if under the first covenant, he is in a state of sin, of bondage and death, if he be under the second covenant, he is in a state of grace, of liberty and life, because he is no longer a son of the bond-woman,
but of the free-woman.Gal 4. 24. Partu se∣quitur ven∣trem. A man in Christ is freed from the Law as a covenant, in these respects. 1. For justification, Gal. 2. 21. in respect of condemnation,Gal. 4. 4. Christ was not only under the ceremoni∣al law as he was a Iew, but under the moral as a man, for it is under the law under which we were, and frō which we were redeemed. See Gal. 3. 13. Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the Law being made a curse for us, Gal. 5. 23. against such (persons, not works) there is no law. 2. He is freed from the Law in respect of irritation, there is a pow∣er in it to stir up the lusts of men, Ro. 6. 14. For ye are not under the law, as a covenant (whether we under∣stand it of its condemning or irrita∣ting power) but under grace. 3. In respect of coaction the law causeth him not to do duties or for∣bear sins out of fear of the curse of it, Gal. 5. 18. Ye are not under the Law, viz. constraining, 1 Tim. 1. 9. A godly man is perfectly freed from the Law as a covenant in respect of justification and condemnation, he is freed by degrees from the irritation and coaction of the Law, al those that are out of Christ are under the law for justification, condemnation, irri∣tation and coaction.
The covenant of grace is the same for substance now to us since Christ was exhibited, and to them before he was exhibited, but the manner of administration of it is different, be∣cause it is, 1. Now clearer: things were de∣clared then in types and shadows: heaven was typed out by the land of Canaan, we have things plainly mani∣fested, 2 Cor. 3. 12. in this respect it is called a better testament or covenant,Vid. Ames. Medul. l. 1. c. 39. Heb. 7. 22. not in substance, but in the manner of revealing, and they are said to be better promises, Heb. 18. 6. 2. Of greater extent: Then in Iudah was God known, now to all Nations. 3. Abundance of the Spirit is pour∣ed out now: some few men then had a great deal of grace, butRom. 4. 18. Heb. 11. 17. generally now men partake of abundant more grace,Isa. 11. 9 & 54. 13. both for knowledge and holi∣nesse.
CHAP. VI. 2. Of the Promises. CHristians have many and great Promises, 2 Cor. 7. 1. 2 Pet. 1. 4. whereby are given to us,Rom. 9. 4. , great and precious pro∣mises. 1. God makes them, they are the Promises of a great God: Great persons make great promises. 2. They are made to Gods peo∣ple, his elect: a King will not be∣stow mean things upon his Favour∣ites. Reasons, Why God makes great Promises to his people. 1. Hereby God sets forth his love to them, Tit. 1. 2. 2. That we might have ground for our faith and hope: here in this world we are in a state of expectati∣on, Heb. 11. 39, 40. 3. That hereby he might support them in their many troubles,
Gen. 15. 1. Heb. 10. 35, 36. This is a mercifull administration of the Lord, Adam had all his good things in possession, he soon lost them, by the Promises they are as certain as if we had them already, Though 1. The matter was ex∣ceeding great, yet God made good his Promise, as in that of Christ, Gen. 3. 15. who was more worth than hea∣ven and earth, yet in the ful∣nesse of time Christ came. 2. Though it exceeded all humane reason as the Promise of a childe to Abraham and Sa∣rah when so old. 3. Though it was a cluster of good things, and that to a nation. 4. Though he hath taken a great time to make it good. 5. Though humane policies have stood in the way, as in the case of the people of Israel and David.1 Pet. 1. 3. The Promises are sure and cer∣tain, God hath confirmed them, 1. By the Sacraments. 2. By oath, the strongest confirm∣ation that may be, Heb. 6. 17, 18. The faith of Gods people is built upon two pillars, his power and faithfulnesse resembled by those two pillars, 1 King. 7. 21. Bo in it is strength, Jachin, he will esta∣blish. 1. Gods power, that is often gi∣ven as a prop to uphold our faith in his Promises, Mat. 22. 21, 29. Rom. 4. 20. & 11. 23.
2. His faithfulnesse, Heb. 10. 23. 1 Pet. 4. 19. When Gods Promises come to be fulfilled to his people, they finde twice as much in them as they expe∣cted, 1 Cor. 2. 9. The Promise is the shell wherein the kernell is contain∣ed, Ephes. 1. 20. 2 Pet. 1. 4. That Promise in the covenant of grace That God will be our portion, there is a great deal more in it then we can understand; God will put his fear in his peoples hearts, Job 28. 16, 17. Prov. 3. 13. They shall enjoy eter∣nall life with him in heaven,2 Cor. 12. 4 Psal. 16. when this Promise comes to be accompli∣shed, it will be farre greater then we can now imagine. They finde the mercies of this life double many times to what they expect. Reasons, 1. From our weak capacity, we are not able to understand how much is laid up in a Promise, the ex∣perience of Gods people is a great proof of this, the longer they chew the Promise the sweeter it is. 2. The infinite goodnes and boun∣ty
of God joyned with his om∣nipotency and all-sufficiency, because God hath set his heart on his people he will give them abundantly more then they think of. The Promises of God are of two sorts. 1. Absolute, those which the Lord hath undertaken to perform of his own free grace, not only citra meritum, but also citra conditionem, without all supposed or pre-required conditions in us: of this kinde are all those great promises of the new covenant, Genesis 3. 15. and 17. 7. Isaiah 43. 25. Ezekiel 11. 19. Jeremy 31. 33. Hosea 14. 4. Joel 2. 18.M. Strong on 1 Sam. 2. 30. I will be thy GOD, I will give my Sonne,Gods pro∣mises are of two sorts, such as are ab∣solutely, and such as doe run conditio∣nally ac∣cording unto the nature of that good thing which he promiseth; some good things promised are absolutely good for us, as pardon of sinne, grace. Thus Gods promise is made absolute to the elect in Christ: some good things are but conditionally good for us, as degrees of grace, comfort and outward bles∣sings: and concerning these Gods promise is made conditionally, which condition if he break, he is at liberty. M. Bridge on Lam▪ 5. 2. Numb 14 34 qd I have pomised to bring you into the land of Canaan upon such and such conditions, if you doe not perform the condition I am free. I will pour out my Spirit, I, even I am he who blot out your iniquities for my Names sake, I will take away the heart of stone, and I will give an heart of flesh, I will put my Law in your inward parts, and write it in your hearts; I will heal your backesliding, and love you free∣ly,
for mine anger is turned a∣way. 2. Conditional, which shews what God will do upon the perfor∣mance of such duties and conditions by the creature, which conditions without Gods grace he is never able to perform; Ier. 17. 8, 9, 10. These are made for the encouragement of the creature in the waies of obedi∣ence, and to shew a mans inability, that he may flie to Christ for strength, but they doe not alwaies shew the purpose of God to give the conditi∣on or reward. When once God makes a Pro∣mise, though it may be a long time
before it be fulfilled, yet it yeelds comfortable fruit from the day of his making of it. All agree that a Promise is a cer∣tain pledge of performance in due time. Four other fruits grow from a Promise before it come to be accom∣plisht. 1. It is a certain evidence of Gods love,Promises are a ma∣nifestation of the co∣venant of grace, the covenant of love. a declaration of his heart and good will; outward administrati∣ons come all from Gods hand, but his Promises come all from his heart, his affection is set on them who have an interest in the Promi∣ses. Reason, All the Promises are made in and thorow Christ, to Christ and then to those who are united to him. 2. A Promise from the day of the date of it is a sufficient pledge to the soul to whom it is made, that God will never doe them hurt, but his purposes and thoughts to them are alwaies good, notwithstanding the outward administrations.
3. It brings preservation to the soul, 1 Pet. 1. 5. It will preserve it from the assaults of the devil, and the world. 4. It brings present consolation to the soul: in Peter,The con∣solations of the Go∣spel differ from all other comforts, 1 They are unuttera∣ble, 1 Pet▪ 1. 8, Phil. 4 5. 2. Real, Ioh. 14 27. 3 Great & strong, Ephe. 6. 18 4 Reach to the inward man, 5 Com∣fort in the saddest di∣stresses. Mic. 5. 5. 6. Are e∣verlasting, 2 Thess. 2. 18. where the A∣postle speaks of great and precious promises, he saith, We rejoyce with joy unspeakable. An ingagement of God in a Pro∣mise is a speciall means to support Christians in times of distresse. God was ever wont to bear up the spirits of his people rather by Promises then providences. First, A great part of the Bible is spent in reporting Gods ingage∣ments to his people by promise, and the exemplification of his people in performing his Promises. Secondly, The Saints of God were wont to live by faith, Ps. 56. 4. They ever fetcht consolation from the Promises, as Jacob, Hast thou not said? and Jehosaphat, 2 Chron. 2. Reasons, 1. The end of God in making the Promises was to give security.
2. They are a ray of his power for the creating of help: he that hath a promise hath a blessing in the root of it. 3. Promises issue from the love, the grace and goodnesse of God, and are as unchangeable as his love, they are founded upon the truth and Allsufficiency of God. That in Heb. 13. 5. is as full a pro∣mise as any is in the Bible, it is ap∣plicable to particular cases, made in the hazards of warre and difficulties of reformation, it is double to shew it is a fixed truth, and for time to come in the future tense, in the He∣brews there is more said then is to Ioshua.Josh. 1. 5. God saith, He will not leave him nor forsake him, Heb. 13. 5. there are five negatives in that little sen∣tence. All the subjects of Christs King∣dome of grace inherit all the Pro∣mises of the Covenant, they are their portion. 1. It is a great priviledge to be the heirs of Gods Promises, and the Saints have gloried in it, David saith,
Thy Promises have I claimed as mine heritage, by faith they imbraced the Promises, Heb. 11. 2. Every childe of God hath a right to all the promises, 1 Tim. 4. 8. Gal. 3. 16. Rom. 9. 4. 2 Pet. 1. 4. 1. They are all made in and through Christ, as branches of the Covenant of grace. Objection, Particular Promises were made to this or that man in a speciall case. Answer, No particular Promise was ever made to any for his own sake, but for Christs; Therefore those Promises which at first uttering of them were made to some particular person on a particular occasion, were after pressed on all Gods people, as that, Josh. 1. Heb. 13. This is a peculiar priviledge to Gods people, none but those under Christs dominion have interest in the Promises. We should therefore, 1. Study the Promises, and know for what use and time they serve.
2. Beware of weighing them by our own carnall sense and reason. 3. Set faith awork, let the heart rest on Gods Alsufficiency, his truth, wisdome, faithfulnesse. A good man fetcheth contentment▪ and satisfaction to his soul in all con∣ditions. 1. From the Covenant of grace in generall, 2 Sam. 23. 5. This Covenant of grace, which God hath made with his people is Gods assurance office, and the Saints in all their fears may and ought to go to the Covenant to assure all things to them, to assure their estates and their lives. 2. For particular Promises in the Covenant of grace,Those that are driven frō their houses, spoiled of their goods, should re∣member the hun∣dred fold promise, and that Mic 4. 6, 7 a gracious heart looks upon every Promise as coming from the root of the Covenant of grace in Christ. See Psal. 34. 10. and 37. 6. and Isa. 58. 10. and elsewhere where there are divers Promise which may bring Christian content∣ment. It is the greatest honour that creature is capable of to be taken into Covenant with God, Levit. 26.
18, 19. Jer. 11. 11. Zach, 11. the staffe of beauty, that is the Cove∣nant, and you sin against offers of a second Covenant which the devils never did. Those who are in Christ and have their covenant changed are in a hap∣py condition. 1. By this means God and thou art reconciled, thy covenant is a cove∣nant ofpeace, Ezek. 37. 26. 2. Being once taken into the co∣venant thou hast interest into glori∣ous relations; God is become thy Father, thy Husband, thy Friend, 2 Cor. 6. 16. 3. Thou hast interest into a most glorious inheritance by becoming the son of a free woman.When David was dri∣ven from house and harbour, he incou∣raged him∣self in the Lord his God Tolle meum & tolle Deū. Aug. 4. Thou hast a foundation for thy faith and a ground of all thy praiers, the covenant contains all the privi∣ledges a beleeving soul can expect, it is the ground of all thy praiers, Jer. 31. 18. Isa. 64. 9. The people of God still plead it, it upholds the soul from sinking. When David came to dy, God hath made with me an ever∣lasting
covenant. So Christ, My God my God, Psal. 89. 26. 5. It is a covenant that can never be broken, 2 Chron. 13. 5. Isa. 50. 7. CHAP. VII. Of living and dying by Faith. I. Of living by Faith. FAith is a staying,What faith is. Justifying faith is a spirituall habit, by which a regenerate man ha∣ving in himself, upon a Divine te∣stimony, an evi∣dence of te truth and good∣nesse of the pro∣mise, and covenant of eternall salvation through Jesus Christ, re∣lies on him only for everla∣sting life. Mr White. resting, depend∣ing and relying upon the merits and satisfaction of our blessed Savi∣our, by the vertue and merit there∣of to obtain remission of sins and e∣ternall life, and all good things pro∣mised in the new covenant, at the hands of God. That there is such a life as the life of faith, is plain, Habak. 2. 4. But the just shall live by his faith. The just shall live the life of grace here, and of glory hereafter, in and by faith. Gal. 2. 20. Neverthelesse I live, yet not I, but Christ liveth in me, and the life which I now live in the flesh, I
live by the faith of the Son of God Psal. 74. 13, 14. Thou didst divide the sea by thy strength: thou brakest the heads of the dragons in the waters: That is, of the chief captains, and commanders under Pharaoh. Thou brakest the heads of Leviathan (that is, Pharaoh) in pieces, and gavest him to be meat to he people inhabiting the wildernesse, for their faith, not their bellies. While they were in the wil∣dernesse they remembred Gods mercy to them at the red sea, and lived by the faith of this providence of God. It is a life arising from the union of God with us by his sanctifying Spirit, whereby a man is able to per∣form actions spirituall, in the Pro∣mises is the life of the spirit of Gods people.Isa 38. 16. The life of faith (saith Mr Perkins) is a true life indeed, the only life. The Schools dispute of faith, Mi∣nisters preach of faith, Professours talk of faith,M. Ward. prophane men swear by faith, but few men live by faith None can live, nor rightly under∣stand
this life but the Saints of God, a Promise from God is sufficient for faith to rest upon against all impro∣babilities whatsoever. Many reasons might be given why we should rather live upon Gods Word then any thing else. The first reason may be taken from Gods Alsufficiency. Consider 3. Attributes in God. 1. His Almighty power, he can as easily perform as promise. God urged this to his people when they were weak at any time, Numb. 11. Is the Lords hand shortened? Gen. 18. Is any thing too hard for the Lord? 2. The goodnesse and love of God, his promises are given to his people as fruits of his love, Jer. 31. 3. 3. His truth, faithfulnesse and un∣changeablenesse, Mal. 3. 6. The second reason may be drawn from the interest which Christ hath in him that makes the promise, and in him to whom the promise is made. 1. All the Promises are yea and Amen in Christ, Consider,
1. Christs interest in his Fa∣ther who makes the Promise, his Father makes them all for the Sons sake, all the Promises are called the sure mercies of Da∣vid, Isa. 55. He being a type of Christ. 2. Christ hath bought all the Pro∣mises of the Father with his own hearts bloud. 2. The interest Christ hath in his people,Ephes. 5. So is Christ, that is, the Church. he is one with them, and they one with him. A third reason may be taken from the nature of faith, the proper ob∣ject of it is a Promise from God, Heb. 11. 1. Faith sees things clearly, infallibly, strongly. Motives to living by faith. First, The necessity of it. 1. Take away this and you take away the only principle which distinguisheth the life of a man as a Christian from the life of other men. 2. The only cause of all heart-breaking and uncomfortable sorrows which Gods people
meet with in any condition is the want of this, Psal. 42. 3. The want of this is one great cause, if not the only cause of the unevennesse found in the conversation of Gods people. Rebecca and Jacob had a direct Promise that Jacob should have the blessing, yet because Esau was great with his father they used unjust means. 4. Without this we can ex∣pect no benefit from the Pro∣mises (though they be precious) unlesse we rest our selves upon them, Isa. 26. 3. Secondly, It is a very becoming, amiable, fitting thing that we should rather live upon a word of God, then any other help whatsoever. No creature on earth ever attains to a self sufficiency, one must have some∣thing for his support, therefore it is better to take a Promise from God, then to depend upon the deceitful∣nesse of creature-comforts. Thirdly, The wonderfull gain which comes by it.
1. The soul which hath but once learnt to make the Word of God a sufficient stay to it self, such a one will live the easiest life that any man in the world lives. It is not easily learnt (for much grace is required to it) but when thou hast once got it, it is comfortable. Such a one lives as a childe when he is in his fathers house, he is ne∣ver troubled with care for meat, drink, or cloathes: the soul is at quiet when it hath learn'd to center it self upon the word. 2. It is the greatest ingage∣ment (as I may say) to God to help them, we cannot put a greater obligation upon him, then by trusting in him, God will never fail such as trust in him, Isa. 26. 3. Psal. 91. 9, 14. Means to attain this life of faith. How may a soul learn to pick a living out of the word, to live by faith. The life of faith is to fetch the counsell, the portion and comfort
of his life out of the word. Ten directions how the soul may attain to live this life of faith. First, Nothing but a sound, true, living faith is a principle of this life, all the Schoolmasters in the world cannot teach any creature to live by reason, till it hath a reasonable soul. Labour to understand the true na∣ture of faith, and get it wrought in thy soul, the just man will live by his faith. Secondly, Every degree of saving faith will not serve a man to live comfortably and free from distem∣pers, one must have a sound faith, and a plerophoy, and a great deal of faith for that end, the least de∣gree of saving faith will serve for justification, sanctification, adoption, salvation, but not for consolation: Every blast of temptation overthrew the Disciples while they were weak beleevers, they questioned the truth of all, Christ therefore rebukes them for it, and saith, Why are your hearts troubled? Paul when he could say, I know whom I have beleeved,
though after he was told he should be whipt, he said, none of these things troubled him. Thirdly, He gets acquaintance with some things in the covenant of grace which may take off those ob∣jections that usually trouble belee∣vers, which are four, and these doe hinder Gods people from living by faith. 1. They finde corruption in their hearts, this should no way hinder their comfort, if they hate it and strive against it. 2. Temptations trouble them, whereas Gods own people are liable to temptations of all sorts. 3. Afflictions, God breeds them up which are in covenant with him under divers and great afflictions. 4. Desertions, They finde not the working of Gods Spirit, nor the assurance of his favour, God many times leaves his best chil∣dren to great and sad deserti∣ons.
Fourthly, Thou must get sound acquaintance with the Promises of the Gospel, else thou wilt be to seek in time of trouble. Some generall Promises concern all estates we can be in, all things shall work for good to them that fear God, and no good thing shall be wanting to such. 2. There are excellent promises in the Scripture for any condition ima∣ginable. Fiftly, As the exigents or occasions require, whether to bear afflictions or go through temptations, act thy faith upon that Promise which sutes thy present need. A good man having all taken from him, and his wife desiring to know how he and his family would live, he said he would now put his bond in suit. Think on Gods power, truth, love, and Christs interest in the Pro∣mises to incourage thy soul. Sixtly, As a Promise from God must be measured by faith, so only by faith, not by carnall sense or rea∣son, doe as Abrahaem did, he never told his wife Sarah when he was to
go cut his childes throat and offer him a sacrifice to God. Seventhly, Faith must be helped with a use of all other means which God hath appointed to attain the blessing, 2 Sam. 7. later end. Psal. 5. 3. Psal. 119. Deal well with thy ser∣vant according to thy word. Faith made Noah to build him an Ark, work belongs to us, successe to God. Eightly, Resolve to wait the Lords leasure in all thy beleeving, limit him not to the time or manner of deli∣vering thee, resolve God shall do it in his own time, if thou hast an able good paymaster thou wilt be willing he should pay thee how and when he will. He that beleeves will not make haste. Ninthly, Get thy will so far sub∣dued to Gods will, that his will may be thine, as near as it is possible for poor sinners to attain it: learn to say Gods will is the best will, Rom. 12. 3. 4. Tenthly, Study the life of holines,
let David be an example to thee, he had great communion with God, and knew how to improve a Pro∣mise. Some think one ought to beleeve whatever corruptions he gives way to, they say men are duty-mongers, merit-mongers. Others of Gods people are too much deje∣cted with the remainders of their own corruption. CHAP. VIII. 2. Of dying in Faith. QValis vita, finis ita: He that will die in faith,Heb. 11. must first of all live by faith, and there is but one ex∣ample in all the whole Bible,M. Perkins his right way of dying wel of a man dying in faith that lived with∣out faith, viz. that thief upon the crosse. To die by faith, is when a man in the time of death, doth with all his heart rely himself wholly on Gods speciall love and favour and mercy in Christ,Psal. 73. . and as it is revealed in the
word. Religion is seen in its glory, when one not only lives but dies in Christ,These were the words of Tremellius a conver∣ted▪ Jew near his end, Vivat Christus pereat Barabbas. Domini causa, id est▪ propter Dominum. Beza. Phil. 1. 21. For me to live is Christ and to die is gain. And ver. 20. So now also Christ shall be magnified in my body, whether it be by life or death. If I live, by preaching, if I dy, by suffering. Dr Preston said a little before his death, I have long con∣versed with Christ in the world, and though I change my place, I shall not change my company. Revel. 14. 13. Blessed are the dead which dy in the Lord, from henceforth, yea saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their labours,In Domi∣no mori∣untur, qui∣cunque per¦fidem uniti & conjun∣cti Christo inunum quasi cor∣pus cum eo coalescunt. Rainold. de l. Apoc. praelect. 80 and their works doe follow them. In the Lord, that is, say some for the Lord, as Ephes. 4. 1. Which suffer death for Christ, rather in the faith of Christ being incorporated into him,  from henceforth, as Rom. 8. 1. and 16, 17. That constant∣ly hold out in these times of persecu∣tion, say some, presently, saith Dr Rainolds, from the very time of their death, they rest from their labours, of their particular calling, under afflictions from God, and persecu∣tions
from men, under sin, tempta∣tions, Beati a modò, sta¦tim, è ve∣stigio, ab ipso mortis tempore. Id. ib. desertions. And their works, That is metonymically, the rewards of their works, as 2 Cor. 5. 26. Do follow them, accompany or go with them, the words well weighed sound so. When a godly man dies he dies in the ord by vertue of his union with Christ,There must be a being in Christ be∣fore there can be a dying in him, those that sleep in Iesus. when there is a dissolution of the soul and body, the mysticall uni∣on is not dissolved, as the personall union of Christ was not dissolved when he died. Before I lay down directions how to die well, and shew the benefits that come to the godly by death, I will shew 1. The necessity, or certainty of death, and the misery of it to the wicked. 2. Resolve some questions about death. Of the first, Death is a common condition ap∣pointed for every man first or last to undergo. Heb. 9. 27. And as it is appointed unto men once to die, but after this
the judgement. The Greek word translated, It is appointed, signifieth, it lieth as a mans lot. Once imploies two things, 1. A certainty, it shall once be. 2. A singularity, it will be but once, 1 Samuel 26. 8. 1 King. 2. 2. I go the way of all the earth, saith David Job 30. 23. The grave is called the house appointed for all the living. Eccles. 12. 5. Solomon calls the grave Bajith Gnolam, domum saeculi, the house of age: We tran∣slate it long home, where he must abide for a long time. 1 Cor. 15. 26. The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death, that is, death destroies all and after is destroied it self. Psal. 89. 48. What man lives and shall not see death? When we would affirm any thing to be infallibly true, we say as sure as death. A young man may die, an old man must die. It is an Hebrew proverb, In Golgotha are to be seen sculs of all sizes, that is, death comes on the
young as well as the old. Omnes una manet nox, Et calcanda semel via lethi.Horace. When it was told Anaxagoras that both his sons (which were all he had) were dead, being nothing terrified therewith, he answered, Sciebam me genuisse mortales, I knew I begat mortall creatures. There are three speciall reasons why all must die. 1. Because God hath so decreed it, Heb. 9. 27. 2. All men are made of one mould and matter,Adam of Adamah, homo ab humo. Job. 4. 19. Dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return, Gen. 3. 19. 3. Because all have sinned, Rom. 5. 12. Wherefore as by one man sinne entred into the world, and death by sin:Some reade  propterea quod, for as much as. and so death passed upon all men, for that, or in whom all have sinned. Beza prefers that version, in whom, In Adam legally, as they stood under his Covenant, in him naturally, as they bear his Image. Sin brought death into the world, either meri∣toriè, as it deserves wrath, or priva∣tivè,
as it takes away the power of the law to conferre life. Rom. 6. 23. The wages of sinne is death. The word in the Stipendia capitur, Lu. 3. 14. & 1 Cor. 9. 7. pro stipendio militum. de Dieu. in loc. Vide Grotium. in loc. Originall signifies properly victuals, because victuals were that which the Roman Emperours gave their souldiers as wages in recompence of their ser∣vice: but thence the word extends to signifie any other wages or salary whatsoever. Death is then certain, because no man can eschew it, yet it is 3. waies uncertain. 1. In regard of time, no man knows whenMorte ni∣hil certius, boramortis nihil in∣certius. he shall die, Hezekiah only had a lease of his life. 2. In regard of placeIncertum est, quo te loco mors expectet, itaque tu illam omni loco expe∣cta. Sen. epist. 26., no man knows where he shall die. 3. In respect of the kinde of death, no man kuows what death he shall die, whether a naturall or violent death. Objection, 1 Cor. 15. 51. We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed, Christ is said to be the judge of the quick and dead,Act. 10. 42. therefore all men shall not die.
Answer, Cajetan on 2 Thes. 4. 17.Vide Calv. in 1 Cor. 15, 51, gives both a succinct and sufficient answer, Sta∣tutum regulare est, illos autem non mori singulare est. Others say that change shall be a kinde of death. Secondly, The misery that comes to the wicked by death. Every man in an unregenerate e∣state lies under the fear of death.Death is the Athe∣ists fear, and the christians desire. 1. The Scripture thus frequently sets forth naturall men. Heb. 2. 15. And deliver them who through fear of death were all their life time subject to bondage. Job 18. 14. Death is called The King of terrours, an ordinary hebra∣isme, as the Lord of glory, that is, most glorious, death hath a dominion over them. Luk. 1. 79.Tenebrae metum mortis in∣cutientes. The shadow of death, that is, such darknesse as strikes men with fear of death. 2. All unregenerate men hate the very thoughts of death, Isa. 28. 15. Lewis the 11th of France straitly charged his servants, that when they
saw him sick they should never dare to name that bitter word, Death, in his ears. 3. Thoughts of death often im∣bitter all the comforts of this life. The reasons of this truth may be these. 1. Because death is contrary to nature it self, and to that inseparable desire of its own preservation, it be∣ing a dissolution of the whole man,1 Cor. 15. 26. and a separation of two most loving companions, the soul and body, by vertue of that ancient curse, Gen. 2. 17. Yet it is not an enemy to the godly mans person, though it be to his naturall estate, 1 Cor. 3. 22. Christ did maledictionem benedicere, pau∣pertatem ditare, ignominiam glorifica∣re, saith Luther. 2. Because they die in their sins they must themselves conflict with the terrours of death,Lies down with the sins of his youth. 1 Cor. 15. 55. John. 8. 44. Sin in every man brings with it a secret guiltinesse, which makes him fear something worse will follow after death. 3. It puts an end to all the bene∣fits
and comforts of this life. Son remember that in thy life time thou re∣ceivedst good things. It deprives him of friends, goods, pleasures, credit. 4. It puts an end to all his hopes,A great man wrote thus a little be∣fore his death, Spes & fortuna valete. Job 11. ult. Their hope shall be as the giving up of the ghost. 5. His conscience shall then be a∣wakened, this is the worm. 6. It brings him to the barre of judgement, Heb. 9. 27. He must go to God to give an account, in whom he hath no interest. 7. All offers of grace shall be at an end. 8. It is the inlet to eternity and puts them into an unchangeable con∣dition. In the next place I shall resolve some questions about death. 1. Question, Whether it be lawfull to desire death? We have examples of both kindes,Phil. 1. 23 Paul desired to be dissolved, but Hezekiah mourned, and prayed ex∣ceedingly against it, so did David, Psal. 102. yet he rashly wished to
die for Absolom, 1 Sam. 18. 33. The Israelites offended this way, Would God we had died in Egypt, and would God we had died with our brethren. Elisha,1 Kings 19. 4. Job, and Jonah were to blame this way,Jonah 4. 3. O that I had never been born,Job 7. 15. and 6. 9. said Job, O that I had died so soon as I was born, O that I might die out of hand, for these are the three parts of his desperate words. It is often in the mouths of wicked people, would I were dead, and I would I were out of the world. If they were to die indeed they would be loath enough to it.M. Fenner of consci∣ence. Like the man in the fable,Summum nec metas diem nec optes. who being wearied with his burden of sticks, lay down and called for death, but when death came indeed to take him, and said, What shall I doe man? thou calledst me: I pray thee, said he, help me up with my burden of sticks. To answer this question, we must distinguish, 1. Of desire, there is Desiderium carnale, spirituale, heros∣cum, a carnall, spirituall, and heroi∣call desire. If this desire ariseth,
1. From diffidence of Gods help and succour. 2. From impatience under crosses.Mors non est simpli∣citer &, absolutè optanda, quia habet in seratio∣nem mali, sed primò tanquam medium ad finem prae∣stantiorē, secundò propter consecutio∣nē majoris boni. Or 3. From shunning of those la∣bours and pains which are to be en∣dured for Gods glory and the Churches good, it is very sinfull, but if it arise from a holy desire to injoy the presence of Christ, and to be freed from sin, it may be lawfull. Secondly, We must distinguish of the manner in desiring, which is ei∣ther absolute or conditionate, if it be a conditionate one with submissi∣on to Gods will, as long as the Church hath need of him, it may be lawfull, Domine si adhuc populo tuo sim necessarius, nllum recuso labo∣rem. 2. Question, Whether a godly man may fear to die? Answer, He may. 1. For some sin that he is not e∣nough humbled for. 2. For want of the clear evidence of pardon and assurance of interest in Christ.
3. Question, Whether may one pray against a sudden and violent death? Answer, A violent and sudden death chiefly by some immediate hand of God, is redious to mans nature: The Apo∣stles themselves in a tempest made bold to waken Christ with some what a reproving speech, Master, carest thou not that we perish? Christ told Peter (foretelling a violent death) that he should be led to it as to that which he would not, meaning by the naturall inclination of his will, this gives us just ground and warrant to pray against sudden and violent death. 4. Question, Whether may we mourn for the dead? Answer, Yes, Because 1. Death is a fruit of sin, In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt de the death, and a sign of Gods dis∣pleasure against it. 2. It is a separation of friends, and
they should not part without some grief, onely we must look that our mourning in such cases, be 1. Serious, not counterfeit. 2. Moderate, not excessive, either for quantity or continuance, which may shew want of hope and excesse of love, both naught. 3. Holy, turning our sorrow from the death of our friends to the be∣wailing of our sins, the only procu∣rers of that and all other crosses.Egredere, quid times? egredere anima mea quid dubi∣tas? septu∣aginta propè an∣nos servisti Christo & mortem times? In the last place I shall lay down directions how to die well, and shew the benefits that come to the godly by death. 1. What a Christian should do that would die comfortably. 1. Discharge the place and office which God hath called him to with much diligence and sincerity, 2 Tim. 4. 7, 8. Act. 20. 31.Hier epist. Fam. l. 3. Non est timendum quod nos liberat ab omni timē, do. Tertul. Why dost fear O my soul (said Hilarion) thou hast served God this seventy years, and art thou afraid to die? Live much in a little time, doe all for eternity, be a∣bundant in serving thy generation, Acts 13. 36. You live no longer in
Gods account then you serve him. 2. Doe nothing against conscience for the greatest advantage, this trou∣bled Iudas, he betraied innocent bloud, this made the wofull tragedy of Spira. 3. Take heed of unjust dealing and violent oppressing of others. Samuel before his death,Deu. 32. 19 Tell me (saith he) whose ox or asse have I stolen or taken away?Psal. 90. 12. 4. Improve thy riches and honours for Gods glory,This will make death less bitter and terrible unto us, forewarn∣ed fore∣armed. Luk. 16. 9. 5. Spend the time of thy health well, and lay up praiers for death before hand. Teach us to number our daies (that is, to consider how few they are) that we apply our hearts to wisdom. 6. Get acquaintance with death,Tu morē ut nunquā time as, semper co∣gita. Senec It is the act of acts & science of sciences to learn to die. take notice of all the approaches of it, behold the mortality of others and consider thine own, do not think to die all at once, the Apostle saith, I thank God I die daily, So seriously meditate on death, as to draw from thence some whole∣some and profitable conclusions and
resolutions for the well ordering of thy life, and that in respect of four things chiefly; sin, the things of the world, our own persons, and the per∣sons of others. For sin, this conclusion must follow, therefore sin is a most hatefull thing to God, and a most harmfull thing to man, for it alone hath provoked God to inflict this heavy punishment of death, yea of eternall death after this upon the sons of men, unlesse re∣pentance come betwixt. Sinne is the parent and sting of death, sin brought it into the world and makes it ter∣rible,Moriantur ante te vitia Sen. therefore I must hate sinne, la∣ment sin, resist and mortifie sin, and must make it my chiefest and in a manner my only care to get my sins forgiven,Our Savi∣our being at a great feast at Bethanie, sell into meditatiō and speech of his death and , Ioh. . 7, 8. my iniquity subdued, and then resolve especially to mortifie that sin which thy heart is most un∣willing to reform. 2. In respect of the world, we must conclude and resolve, that wealth ho∣nour, pleasure, friends, are but very vanities, trifles and toies, poor petty short and vanishing goods, therfore I
must,Ioseph of Arimathea made his tomb in his gardē, Ioh. 19 4 and by Gods grace will resolve to pull mine heart from off these things, not rejoice in them, trust in them, boast of them, seeing I brought nothing into the world and must car∣ry nothing out, use the present world as if we used it not. 2. Diligently prepare for the life to come, every man must be for ever in heaven or hell (there is no middle place as Nemose decipiat fratres, duo enim loca sunt, & tertius non est visus. Qui cum Christo regnare nō meruit, cū diabolo absque ul∣la dubita∣tione peri∣bit. Aug. serm. 1. de ebrietate. pargatory) so soon as his soul and body are separated. Labour there∣fore to get good assurance of bet∣tering your estate and injoying eter∣nall life by bewailing the sinfulnesse of your nature and lives, and seeking unto, and resting upon the Lord Je∣sus Christ alone, and his mediation and obedience and the sprinklng of his bloud for pardon of sin and help against damnation, and lastly labour and study to reform your hearts and lives more and more. 3. Concerning our own persons, we must thus conclude that we are but mean and contemptible crea∣tures that must die and turn to dust and be made food for worms, why
should I then be proud, or think my self better then others because of my strength, beauty, wit, learning, pa∣rentage, titles, offices, attendances? of all which death will strip me and teach me to know they were but borrowed things. 4. For other men we ought to to conclude thus, they also must die as well as my self, my husband, wife, my dear and faithfull friend, who knows how soon? therefore it is a great weaknesse to trust on such, to place my happinesse in them. Cease from man whose breath is in his nostrils, therefore use al persons as well as all things, as if thou didst not use them. Lastly, Let the Saints of God take great comfort in the contemplation of the good that death will bring them, it concludes all their sorrows and evils and is a beginning of all joies, pleasures, comfort, glory and happinesse. Death is to such a re∣sting from their labours, Rev. 14. 14. A happy change, Phil. 3. 21. Job 14. 14. cals death a change, it is not an anni∣hilation or extinction, but a muta∣tion,
and that by way of eminency, My change. It is the last change we shall meet with till the resurrection. 2. A lasting, nay an everlasting change, it puts us into an eternall condition of happinesse or misery. 3. An uni∣versall change, 1. in respect of persons all must meet with it. 2. In regard of the whole man, body and soul, makes the body a stinking carkasse, and puts the soul into heaven or hell. 4. A dif∣ferent change according to the qua∣lity of the person changed, terrible to a sinner, comfortable to the godly. Death is their bodies seed-time, 1 Cor. 15. the crowning day to the soul, 2 Tim. 4. 7, 8. the funerall of all their sins and sorrows, Rom. 6. 7. I shall in the last place mention some of the chief benefits that come to the godly by death. By it he is freed 1. From sin, not only the destroying power, but the being of it is then ta∣ken away. 2. From those miseries which fol∣low sin, Isa. 57. 1, 2, 3. 3. From the temptations of the de∣vil, Rev. 12. 8.
4. From the troubles of the world, and vexations of the flesh, Rev. 14. 13. Eccles. 4. 1, 2. 2. There is nothing in his death but what conduceth to make him happy. 1. A godly man dies in Gods love, and mercy, 2. He never dies til he be prepared,See Ioh. 11. 44. till his graces be perfected and work finished,2 Tim. 4. 7 Job. 5. 26. 3. He shall in some measure be assu∣red of a better life, 2 Cor. 5. 1. 4. When he dies he shall leave a sweet favour behinde him, Prov. 10. 7. The memory of the just is blessedThe Iews when they make mention of any of their de∣ceased Worthies, are wont to doe it with this encomium  id est, Memoria ejus sit in benedctionem. Which encomi∣asticall scheme is taken from that of Solomon, Pr. 10. 7. Buxtorf. de Abbreviat Hebr. Fuller. Concord. Hebr. transm. and Mede on Psal. 112. 6. The Septuagint thus translates it, . The memory of the just is with praises. Let the godly therefore comfort themselves against death with these promises, Joh. 3. 16. & 5. 24. and 10. 28. and 11. 25. 1 Cor. 15. 22, 57. 2 Cor. 5. 1. FINIS.
AN ALPHABETICALL TABLE. A. Anne Askew. p. 29. Aprice. p. 59. B. Bainham. p. 24. Beleever freed from the law, how. p. 111. Bilney. p. 20, 21, 22, 23. Blague. p. 30. Bradbridges wife. p. 59. Bradford. p. 44, 45, 46. C. Covenant, the reason of the hebrew name. 81, 82 What a covenant is, 82. The severall kindes of covenants. p. 83, 84. 1. The covenant of works. p. 85, to 91. The covenant of grace. p. 91, to 113. Cranmer. p. 56, 57, 58. D. Damplip. p. 28. Death is common to all. p. 136, 137, 138, 139. The misery which comes to the wicked by death. p. 140, 141, 142. Whether it be lawfull to desire death. p. 142, 143, 144. Whether may one pray against a sudden and violent death. p. 145. Whether may one mourn for the dead. p. ib. Whether a good man may fear to die. p. 144. What a christian should do to die comfortably. p. 146. Dying in faith. p. 134, to the end.
E. Error, all the errors al∣most of these: times may be confuted from the doctrine of the cove∣nant. p. 108. to 110. F. Faith, what it is. p. 124. Farrar. p. 40. Filmer. p. 27. Folk. p. 60. G. Glover. p. 48, 49. H. Hamelton. p. 19. Hauks. p. 42, 43. Hector. p. 19. Hierome of Prague. 17 Holland. p. 61. Hooper. p. 34, 35. Hunter. p. 39, 40. Hus. p. 16. I. Ignatius. p. 14, 15, 16. Indulgencies, Luther first opposed them. 68. K. Kerby. p. 28, 29. L. Lambert. p. 26. Latimer. p. 52 to 55. Laverock. p. 59. Lawrence. p. 40. Living by faith. p. 124, to 134. Luther, divers memo∣rable things of him. p. 65. to 81. M. Martin, why Luther was so called. p. 65. 3. Mar∣tins much opposed the papists. ib. Martyr, Observations concerning the martyrs in generall. p. 1, to 13. What a martyr is. p. 1, 2, 3. The great honor of martyrdome. p. 3, 4. The severall sorts of martyrs. p. 4. They suffered cheerfully. p. 5. Constantly. p. 6, 7, 8, 9. With much comfort and assurance. p. 10. The number of them.
p. 6, 7. They were emi∣nent in many graces. p. 11. to 13. Moice. p. 18. P. Person. p. 26, 27. Philpot. p. 55, 56. Pikes. p 62. Policarpus. p. 13, 14. Pomponius Algerius. p. 18. Prests wife. p. 64. Promises. p. 113, to 124 R. Ridley. p. 50, 51, 52. Rogers. p. 30, 31. Rough. p. 60, 61. S. Samuel. p. 47, 48. Sanders. p. 31, 32, 33. Serre. p. 18, 19. Sincerity. p. 103, 104, 105. Sparrow. p. 60. T. Taylor. p. 37, 38, 39. Tyms. p. 58. Tyndall. p. 24, 25, 26. V. Voes. p. 17. W. Waid. p. 46. White. p. 41, 42. Y. Young. p. 64. FINIS.
