l1488 11732072 48399
A Letter from Lucifer, TO HIS Roman Agents N. T. W. P. J. F. & R. L. Sir Edmond-bury Godfrey's Back-friends. NO less than a Legion of Devils have been mixt in Counsel with an Army of Papists, to make Sir Edmond bury Godfrey Felo de Se. Oh, how diligent has N. T. that over-loyal Protestant been in the service! He (no doubt) was made Messenger to the De∣vil's back-stairs, and sent by his Master Pluto the Prince of the Air, to procure two Fellows that would swear whatever that Hellish Coun∣cil would dictate to them, or else to bid Farewel to the hopes of Gold, and the sale of his Popish Pamphlets; and now he's in pain till Mother Celier, by the help of her Imps, brings him to Bed of two or three such Demi-Devils as will swear that he stab'd himself at home, choakt himself at Somerset-house, and then ran two or three miles to gather Primeroses for his last Nosegay. Such they say that never-failing Friend to the Popish Interest has got him; but whether a Rope or a Pillory must be their Reward, time must tell us. One would have thought Redding's miscarriage in a different Enterprize, and the fate that attended it, might have put a period to the rest of their Shams: If an eminent Counsellor was bawk'd in his premeditated Contri∣vance, what will become of the Pimping Sollicitor? No doubt he has Lang∣horn in his Heart, and Gold in his Eye; the remembrance of the one, and his zeal for the other, will make him swear home. But heark you, my hot-mouth'd Friends, have you not read Sir Edmond-bury Godfrey's Apparition to Nat. Thompson? methinks if you have, it would a little retard your motion: Why this haste to the Devil? Go on fair and softly; my life for yours you'll come time enough to Hell. What Jesuitical Doctrine makes you gallop so fast to your own destruction? are you weary of Earth? and do you long to see the Fashions of the Devil's low Countries? then ride upon that Horse you have lately mounted, and I'll warrant you he'll carry you safe to your Journeys end: Possibly you may meet with some rubs of Conscience by the way, that may make him stumble a little; but if you have taken a resolution never to mind them, whip on, and doubt not but you'll come to your Journeys end in good time. If you can but go through-stitch with this Work which you have taken in hand, the Popish Plot will be hid in Embers, and the Papists may hope to sing Te Deums in a little time in every Church in Town. This is your Master-piece: if you can dexterously compleat this designe, what can you not do? what Task can be too hard for you? You may even remove Mountains, if they lie in your way. If you swear effectually to this Murther, so as the stain of this Justice's Bloud is washt off from the Papists, oh, how should I curse my Stars, that I found you no sooner! two of you would have done more for the Popish Interest, than two thousand St. Omers Lads. Pox on your slow heels, why were ye not at Langhorn's Tryal? why is your Con∣trivance so late? It had been some hundreds of pounds in your way, if you
had come to deliver old Will. Stafford from the hands of merciless Ketch: Come ye now, when all the Roman Martyrs are lockt up in their Coffins, and as fast asleep as a Rope and an Ax could make them? Come ye now, when the Plot is laid waste to your hands? Had you come in time, the Meal tub-Plot would never have miscarried; and with much more difficulty the Earl of Shaftsbury and the Lord Howard of Escrick, and Mr. Whittaker, had e∣scaped the Snare laid for them: but better late than never; though you come late, you are not come too late, if you can but swear home to the matter in hand. Now the Scales are almost even, whether a Plot or no Plot, is the Question in dispute; if you can thurn the Scale, then i' faith we'll pick the Whigs, that have made this Popish Sham-plot to hide their own: Wo be to them that have shed the Roman Martyrs bloud: Then we'll call Father Plun∣ket's Impudence, his Innocence; and every thing shall look with other co∣lours, and with another countenance, than now they do. A Whig shall not dare to say his Soul's his own; and though it's against their Reason and Con∣science, we'll make them turn Abhorrers and Addressors. They'd  good take a Bear by the Tooth, or a Lion by the Throat, as come with their Ifs in point of Succession, let him be Pope or Devil that comes to reign over them. Let me advise you how to harden your selves, so that you may swear with∣out any manner of remorse or fear: First, Keep your Correspondence with the Priests and Jesuits more fre∣quently now than ever, and they'll tell you, you do God good service by the worst of your Oaths, that tend to the Ruine of the Protestant Religion. And then, Secondly, Learn to frame new Lyes every day, and swear they are as true as the Gospel; thus custom of Sinning will take away the conscience of Sin∣ning. Thirdly, Meditate on your promis'd Reward, when you have brought your Work to perfection; viz. the Gold you shall have here, and the Honour you shall have hereafter, when the Pope regains his Arrears in this Kingdom. Fourthly, Put God Omnipotent always out of your mind, and let me that am Magnipotent be in your thoughts; 'tis I that must back you in this Un∣dertaking: for what has God to do with this business? the Work is mine, and I'll help you to finish it. Lastly, Never give ear to the Whisperings of Conscience; I know your Consciences will be speaking to you thus: Oh, be careful what you swear, be tender of his Repute that di'd for you, whose Death gave you the Watch-word to look to your selves; Conscience will tell you, the Oath you are about to swear is a sin against God, against your King, and against all his Protestant Subjects; but what is that to you? what have you to do with their Religi∣on, further than to destroy it? Mind your Conscience no more than the Moon minds the barking of a Dog; whenever it offers you any service, bid it be gone: for it's an Enemy to your present Interest. Read over your Promises, to put it out of your thoughts: Imprimis, 1000 l. from the Pope, for swea∣ring that Sir Edmond-bury Godfrey Hang'd himself. Item, 500 l. from the Earl of Pow Item, 500 l. from the Lord Pet. Item, 500 l. from the Lord Bell. Item, 500 l. from a Lord with a single Eye and a double Heart. Item, a general Contribution from all the Papists in England. And this Summa To talis will be so pleasing to your covetous desires, that in a little time you will be as able to kick Conscience out of doors, as the Yea-and-nay-man was to kick the God-damn-me-man down stairs.
A PRESENT from an unknown Friend, TO Sir Edmond-bury Godfrey's BROTHERS. YOur Brother's murther'd or'e and or'e again; They put his precious Memory to pain: Now they make woful work with his sweet Name, To our great Grief, but to their matchless shame. Was't not enough to choak and stab him too? Must they his Reputation quite undo? What will their Fury never have an end? Will they still stab and hang our martyr'd Friend? Have they no Modesty, no Sense, nor Zeal? Do they the pangs of Conscience never feel? Where will their Killany and Malice rest? Why do they his most sacred Corpse molest? What had he done? or, oh! what had he said, That he so dearly for his Actions paid? Oh, he dealt justly! 'twas too great a Crime, If you will weigh both Circumstance and Time. Cou'd he have daub'd or plaister'd or'e the Guilt Of Papists, then his Bloud had ne'er been spilt: Cou'd he have sail'd with the Pope's Wind and Tyde, Neither his Life, nor his Repute had dy'd. But now for doing Justice, this curst Crew Their bloudy Hands within his Breast embrew. Oh, horrid Villains! are you not afraid To have your Actions by such Actions paid? Lord, why so slow? why doth this lingring Rod Forbear, since they forget there is a God? Why are thy Saints, thy martyr'd Saints abus'd? And why's so very much of Mercy us'd? Because thou'rt slow, they think thou dost forget; Therefore these Villains dance in their own Net. But, oh, make bare thy Arm, come forth, O Lord, And shew them that thou hast a three-edg'd Sword: One edge for Nat, another edge for Pain, And one for Farwell, such as swear for gain. Those that divide thy People without cause, On them (Lord) execute thy fiercest Laws. Thy Patience makes them study to do Evil; They're striving who should first go to the Devil: Nat rides the winged Horse, he's in such haste, And thinks the time he stays he does but waste. It's strange to see at what great pains and cost, These Villains to the Devil do ride Post: How eager they're to get a place in Hell, Where perjur'd Raskals must for ever dwell.
They think we bid them loss, if we cry, Stay, Oh, stop your course, and make some small delay; Consider what you do, and where you go, What pain and misery you're like to know. This is lost breath, they do not thank you for it; Nay, let me tell you, that they do abhor it: They'd rather go to Hell, than take advice From Whigs, though never at so small a price. A sober Whig cries out, Proceed no further About Sir, Edmond-bury Godfrey's Murther: Be wise and wary, ere it is too late, And do not gain the King and Kingdoms hate, For fear your Necks salute a Hempen Fate. But pish, cry they, let's on a full Carer, And shew that neither God nor Man we fear: Let's swear, forswear; what if we perjur'd be? The worst we know is but the Triple Tree: Alas, a sight of Hell they do not see. These Hawks have golden Hoods before their Eyes, They see not where their greatest mischief lies: The God of this World blinds them, we do find; With golden Wedges ev'ry Pocket's lin'd: Conscience is sear'd, a Mill-stone's not more hard; Their Eyes are onely fixt on their Reward: Hopes of Preferment, and some present Pay, Doth steal their Wit and Senses quite away. And if their Gold and Silver heaps may swell, They'll dread no danger, till they drop to Hell. But are these all the Devil nam'd before? I fancy I could guess there's yet one more. May not Rogero come in for a Snack, Who doth his Fancy strain, and his Brains crack, To shield the Papists and the Popish Cause, E'en to the utmost, with his Roman Paws? Strange Le the Knave doth write in their defence; Joanna with her Broom sweeps him some Pence; That is one reason: but the Rogue doth hope For far more comfort from his Lord the Pope. Were it not for the Popish Pence, I'm sure His scribling pains he never wou'd endure; He'd rather chuse to fiddle to the Dogs That sometimes dance, and sometimes run at Hogs. This is his Harvest time; when th' Commons sits, He must pike off, they'll fright him out on's Wits: If hanging does not stop him, he will flie To France as fast as ever he can hie; There like a Vagabond the Knave may range, And this will be the fate of R. L'Estrange. FINIS. LONDON: Printed for Charles Lee. 1682.
