L447 12330636 59666
With Allowance May 12. 1676. Roger L'Estrange.
ASTERIA AND TAMBERLAIN; OR, THE Distressed Lovers: A NOVEL. Written in French by a Person of Quality. And rendred into English, by E. C. Esq; LONDON, Printed for Robert Sollers, at the Flying Horse in St. Paul's Church-Yard. 1677.
TO THE HONOUR'D MADAM▪ Madam, M. P. I Have made bold to dedi∣cate this little piece to your Ladyship to give the World a publick Testi∣mony how great an ho∣nour I receive from the
friendship you are pleas'd to make me blest with. I never had any reason to accuse my self of guilt from any haughty vanity before I became known to you, I was till then so inconside∣rable, I thought there was nothing capable to give me the least Elevation: But, Madam, I have felt since the force of your Charms, wherever you bestow so high a favour there's no re∣sisting the fate of that pride which unavoidably,
attends it, and I can't but glory now in my exalted∣ness which springs from your bounty, which other∣wise would render me a no mean Criminal. One may have good thoughts of ones self for be∣ing a Religious Votary to Heaven; and Madam, I know not wherein the fault lies, if I ingenuously con∣fess, I have at present no indifferent ones as to my own regard, in being with so much Devotion yours,
especially when that awful respect I bear you, is re∣ceived with so great an ac∣knowledgment of kind∣ness from you. You'll find the ensuing History full of various and perplexed Accidents from which your distress'd Asteria is at last happily delivered through the con∣stancy of her Love to the as faithful and generous Adanaxus. And, Ma∣dam, let me humbly in∣treat you, what ever Risque
I may run of displeasing you by this hardy adven∣ture, to give me your par∣don for the rash address I have made to you; since it was beyond my power to overcome the Ambition I had to signalize my self by the quality of, Honoured Madam, Your most Humble, and Obedient Servant,E. C.
ASTERIA, OR TAMBERLAIN. A NOVEL. The First PART. WIth a great deal of Reason is Fortune made to stand upon a Globe, which is under an Impossibility of having a∣ny solid steadiness, being the first Principle of all Revolutions. We are furnished from Antiquity with se∣veral notable Examples of her Ca∣pricious humour: The Rise of Mo∣narchies, the Elevation of mean and obscure persons to places of the highest rank and dignity; the Down
fal of an Infinite Number of Kings, and the ruine of Empires, are as so many signal Instances of her Incon∣stancy. But because we will n absolutely relie upon those of the past distant Ages for the Justificati∣on of this Truth, we will make our reflections upon Accidents less re∣mote, and see in the misfortunes o Bajazet, with what Soveraignty she at pleasure does dispose of the De∣stiny of Mankind. Bajazet was of the Illustriou Blood of Ottoman; his Birth had exalted him to the Empire of the Turks, and his Valour was so bright that it dazled the glory of those four great Princes who preceded him in it: he had almost brough Europe under his submission, as he had made all Asia tremble. Hi Laws were revered in the most re¦markable Parts of the Earth; and never had any man acquired to himself a Renown more glorious. Tamberlain, Emperour of th
Tartars, put a stop to the course of this prosperity: he was of a low and obscure birth, but having with violence through the succour of Arms placed himself upon a Throne, which others with tremb∣ling ascended, his happy destiny surmounted that of Bajazet's; he triumphed over him, and at that time when he look'd upon Europe and Asia, as easie conquests, he de∣solated his Country, reduced his Fa∣mily to a peregrine condition, and carried him Captive to Samarcanda, which was Tamberlain's most belov∣ed City, as being built by him. The Wife and Daughter of Bajazet were partakers of his misfortune; the former of whom died a little while after, but the Daughter, be∣ing, either more couragious, or of a more robust and resolute Spirit, was better able to resist the attaques of Fortune, and became the admiration of the Tartars, as she had been of all those who had seen her in her Fa∣thers Palace.
Themir, Tamberlain's Eldest Son, who was one of the first, felt the ef∣fect of this admiration: he had an ab∣solute Empire over his Father's mind, and had abused it by his ill conduct, even to the banishing of A∣danaxus from the Court, otherwise called the Prince of Tanaïs, his yong∣er Brother; and he had improved this affection to a thousand cruelties a∣gainst the unfortunate Bajazet: it was He, who had sacrificed in his sight the eldest and dearest of his Sons, ruined the famous City Seba∣stia, took away the Princess Asteria his Daughter from the Palace of Bursa, and without any pity aban∣doned all the Empire of that mise∣rable Prince, to the violence of the Tartars. But Love punished him for all those Inhumanities, and his heart, as barbarous as it was, was sensible of the Charms of the fair Asteria, so that much against his will he did learn the use of sighs; and though
they were prevented with too great outrages from being favourably re∣garded, yet his Rage to see him∣self despised by the generous, but resolute Princess, threw him into the last extremity of desperation. He was violent and furious in his Temper; and though he had been capable of Sentimenrs more mode∣rate, yet the Princess was inspired with no mean and inconsiderable ones. He spoke as soon as he per∣ceived himself prest to it, but it was with so much boldness, that Asteria found she was coming under a new persecution, more afflictive and tor∣menting to her, than all the other: she answered the passionate Declara∣tions of Themir with a disdainful, fierceness, which many times set him in such a heat and fury that can∣not be expressed but with a great deal of difficulty. He imagined that Bajazet, whose courage was not re∣bated by his misfortunes, did forti∣fie this aversion, and by a new
piece of Injustice, removing him from his Daughter, he was shut up in a prison at a good distance from the Palace, and Asteria kept in her Apartment with a greater Guard than she had before. This procedure gave an accessi∣on to the Princesse's hatred, and in∣raged her more than ever, which made Themir become more furious. He went to visit Bajazet in his Pri∣son, and indeavoured sometimes by intreaties, and sometimes by threat∣nings, to bring him to a compli∣ance; but having made an unpro∣fitable attempt, he straight had re∣course to the blind Friendship of his Father, and discovering his pas∣sion to him, and the fatal conse∣quences that might attend it, he did so effectually prevail upon his ten∣derness, that he brought him to that pass of undertaking all things that might be for his satisfaction. He went then directly to Asteria's Apartment, with a resolution not to
spare any means likely ro make her flexible. He made her offers, intrea∣ties, and from thence fell to re∣proaches, and still finding her con∣stant in despising his gists and inju∣ries, he became so furious, that he thought he was obliged in point of honour to conquer her; and told her with an absolute imperi∣ous tone, that if she was resolved to persevere in her Obstinacy, he knew very well how to make her repent of it in the person of her Father. The Princess at those words was struck with a mortal terrour; Do not invelope Bajazet in a Resist∣ance where he is not at all concern∣ed, said she to him, pouring down a torrent of tears; the Just refusal I make to marry the murderer of Ortobulus my Brother was inspired into me by my own resentments, which were every way legitimate, and if it merits any punishment, on∣ly I ought to suffer it. Leave the
days of Bajazet to their Natural end, they cannot last very long, and no ways trouble the tranquillity of your Son; you ought to exercise your vengeance upon my life only, and it is against me that every thing proves an earnest solliciter to you. No, no, replied Tamberlain, I know better how to chuse my victims, and since for my Son's misfortunes, his days are fastened unto yours, you shall live, but you shall live to see that Father, who is so dear to you, expire in sufferings, and you shall never boast without a punishment, theh aving scorned the Alliance of the greatest Prince in the Earth. He went out as he ended those words; and the overwhelmed Princess fell into a dreadful swoon in the arms of her Woman, who had much ado to recover her from that weakness. The cruelty of Tamberlain did not only consist in words, Asteria had order the next day to go to
Bajazet's prison, and to dispose him for death, or for a marriage of her with Themir. Fatal Choice! for a Daughter who did so dearly love her Father, and detest that un∣worthy Lover! the sight of Bajazet had never been permitted her since their Separation; she had often de∣manded it, and would have given the best part of her blood to ob∣tain it; but the fatal condition that was put upon it rendered it then in∣supportable to her, she refused to go, and resolved to do her self some violence, but at last considering that that Obstinacy might possibly hasten her Father's death, she obey∣ed, and suffered her self to be con∣ducted, all over-whelm'd in tears, to the place where they were to bring her; she found there the Turkish Emperor so changed that she received his embraces without be∣ing able to speak a word. Bajazet asked her what return had obliged the Tyrant to grant her to come
and see him: the last of all his cruelties, Seignior, said Asteria to him; the severest effect of his In∣justices; in a word, what ever he has in the world that can be most tormenting to us. She then ex∣plained to him in a few words the sad mystery of her visit, and taking away from him all hope that Tam∣berlain could ever be made flexible, she gave him fully to know that there was nothing between a shame∣ful and cruel death, and the marri∣age that was so much desired. Ba∣jazet could not forbear sighing ve∣ry often during her Discourse; and sometimes casting upon the Princess such looks as were full of pity, and then again throwing most fierce and disdainful Ones on those Tartars, who by the Emperors order had waited on her. Tamberlain then must judge of my Sentiments by his own, said he to her, if he per∣swades himself that I am capable of betraying the blood and the memo∣ry
of my Son, in joyning you to his executioner: No, my dear Orto∣bulus, added he, lifting up his wa∣try eyes to Heaven, your shade shall never blush at an action so lit∣tle worthy him who had given you a Being: you judge well, Daugh∣ter, pursued he, to think that mine is hateful to me, and that in the de∣plorable estate to which I am redu∣ced, I shall not make a great sacri∣fice to the Manes of Ortobulus, and to your repose, though I should a∣bandon it to the cruelty of my E∣nemies: but, my Asteria, I will tell you more, and those Ministers of the horrid Acts of Tamberlain, that do attend you, may report it to him; that though this Marriage might restore me to my highest Fortune, and I might hope from it for felicities as tranquill and untrou∣bled, as my destiny has been uncon∣stant; yet faithful to the remem∣brance of my Son, and jealous of a glory, which all the prosperities of
the Tartars cannot obscure, I would resist what he exacts from us with the same courage you see me now refuse it. Thus then, Seignior, in∣terrupted the Princess, you are re∣solved for a death that will expose me to all that can be imagined most bloody and dismal. Think, that for my despair, I may be able to sur∣vive you: that the weakness of my Sex does neither permit me to make such escapes, or go about such un∣dertakings, as if I had the strength of the contrary: that I shall always remain Tamberlain's Captive, and the victim of Themir's violences: and that through pity you owe this conversation to the perils where∣with I am threatned: Think your self, replied the Emperour, that you will become the companion of all my miseries; if you force me to prolong those dayes which the cru∣elty of my fate hath rendered but too long already: think, that after the loss of an Empire, and liberty,
there is more weakness in support∣ing ones disgraces, than in seeing ones self sacrificed to them; and in∣stead of exciting an unworthy pity which my glory would utterly dis∣allow, do you remember you have your extraction from the most illustrious blood in the World, and so look upon my death as an action that will crown all the former ones of my life: I shall leave you Bro∣thers, whom possibly the bounty of Heaven will regard and pity. My death will suffice to appease its an∣ger, and from it you may receive assistances that will secure you from falling under those evils which so much disquiet you. Ah! Seignior, answered Asteria, let us then joynt∣ly expect these Succours, for I will have none of them, if you do not likewise partake with me: Will you then marry Themir? Interrupted the Emperour coldly, will you re∣solve that the Ottoman shade shall reproach you for the shameful
mingling the blood of Tamberlain with his? I would have you live, Seignior, cried the Princess out ve∣ry grievously, or else I would die with you: At these words her Spi∣rits failed her, which obliged them to carry her back to the Palace, without having made any conclusi∣on: and though Bajazet was sensi∣bly touched at her grief, yet did he see her go away without changing his Resolution in the least, and con∣tenting himself in putting up vows to Heaven for her, he waited his death with that undauntedness, which is only the partage of great and generous Souls. Those, who had been witnesses of Asteria's visit, made a very faithful relation of it to Tamberlain and The∣mir, without ever forgetting the ob∣stinacy or the fierceness of Bajazet's answers. But yet they made some further efforts upon him and the Princess, to obtain of them the con∣sent they desired; but at last per∣ceiving
the more they were prest to it, the more they shewed their stubborness and resolution, the Ot∣toman Prince was taken from his Prison, and conducted to the place where Criminals were commonly put to death. All those Tartars, that made any profession of vertue, de∣tested that action; Axalla, Tamber∣lain's favourite, and one who was greatly renowned for his extraordi∣nary valour, used his utmost indea∣vours to prevent it; but the Prince had a greater influence upon his Fa∣ther's spirit, and the unfortunate Bajazet was unworthily conducted to the Scaffold where he was con∣demned to lose his head. But how considerable soever the person was, yet was not this Impe∣rial Majesty suffered to have any re∣spect: he went to the fatal place, as if he was the meanest of all Man∣kind, without any thing to distin∣guish him, besides his resolution, and an Air of greatness which it was im∣possible
for all his miseries to despoil him of: he was sorrowful, but withal sedate; and if his eyes had not in them all that vigour and sprightli∣ness as before, they lost not their vi∣vacity from any prospect of fear or weakness. The houses were deso∣late, for all people flockt to the place of execution; And that con∣fusion having obliged a cavalier, who was just then arrived at Samarcanda, to demand the cause of it of some Inhabitants; he no sooner under∣stood it, but spurring on his Horse with all the violence imaginable to the Scaffold, he rode through the throng, and came up close to it just in that particle of time, as they were going to put a period to the days of one of the greatest men in the World. His cryes and name sus∣pended that fatal blow: Hold, cry∣ed he out, it is Adanaxus, it is the son of Tamberlain, who commands it of you. This Prince was dearly beloved by the Tartars, and they
with an extream affliction resented his absence; so that they solemnized his return with showts of joy, which for some little time he gave way to; and then pray'd th ouldiers, who assisted at that action, to stay till he had seen the Emperour before they proceded any further. He ran to the Palace, where he gave an agreeable surprise, to those whom his absence had afflicted, and parti∣cularly to Axalla, who alwayes had a most passionate love for him. Notwithstanding the difference Tamberlain had put between his two Sons, the merit of Adanaxus dispu∣ted in his breast against the natural inclination he had for Themir, and his unexpected sight caused in him so sensible a joy, that it forced him to express it in a shower of Tears; the Prince received his embraces up∣on his knees, and continuing in this submissive posture, Seignior, said he to him, you see again at your feet a rash man, who assured of your
goodness, is come to demand of you a favour of the last importance. 'Tis not the pardon of an absence which you have not approved, I am wil∣ling to be pushed for it; but, Seignior, it is the life of Bajazet, for which I am here upon my knees an humble sollicitour of your genero∣sity. 'Tis an Enemy of a famous name and of a blood that is illustri∣ous, who is no longer in a conditi∣on to prove fatal to you, and whose precipitated loss may be a blemish to your reputation. Think, Seignior, how happy it is to be in an estate to do favours of this kind to persons who have reigned gloriously, and who are depressed meerly through the capriciousness of fortune. Con∣sider, that of all vertues in Monarchs, Clemency is the most glorious, and deserving praise: And at the name of a Son who conjures you to it, sig∣nalize yours in the favours of a great, though now a wretched Em∣perour.
Those words of the Prince of Tanais did not less astonish Tamber∣lain, then his return had affected him; he could not refrain commen∣ding within his breast the generosi∣ty of his Son; but the importance of his demand ballanced this moti∣on, and made him remain unresol∣ved. If it was any thing perswa∣sive to him, to see prostrate at his feet a Son worthy of esteem, and the uncertainty where he had passed his life rendered him yet more dear, yet Bajazet contemning, and rebel∣lious to his designs, kept up his in∣dignation. You ought to let me resent the pleasure of seeing you again, said he to the Prince, with∣out intermixing it with the trouble to demand of me a kindness which it is impossible for me to grant you: Bajazet has but too much deserved that death to which he is condem∣ned; he is an insolent Captive, whose arrogance nothing is capable to mo∣derate, who never speaks my name
but with contempt, and who would not spare my life, if he had over it that power which I have over his. I have for a long time indur'd it, but now my patience is quite worn out, and there are so many reasons which authorize what I do, that I should be blamed of imprudence or weakness, should I act otherwise. Whatsoe∣ver reasons you are pleased to al∣ledge for his ruine, Seignior, Answe∣red Adanaxus, you yet have more to pardon him; The Example you will leave to posterity, the pleasure that comes from a good action, and your own glory, which would be deeply concerned in causing so great a Prince to fall, whom his severe destiny has delivered into your hands, ought to triumph over all those other considerations. Think, Seignior, that Bajazet has not long since seen what you are at present, yet the fate of Arms is capricious, it may do again for him what it has done for you; and if you are out of
a prospect of fearing; you have Sons, who may one day meet with Conquerours, and who may implore the same grace I now demand: Do not you then give an Example of in∣humanity, but make some reflection upon the uncertainty of what future times may prove. Tamberlain began to stagger at the pressing Reasons of the young Prince of Tanaïs, he revolved in his mind the circumstances of Bajazet's fate, what he had been, what he was, and considering that he him∣self was risen from a mean fortune to one of the most glorious conditi∣ons of life, and that he might by some return or other fall into the last of miseries, even that in which he saw his Enemy. You have conquered me, Prince, said he to his Son, the tenderness I have for you carries me above my resentment, and in a day that Heaven sends me a Son which I have lamented, it is just Igrant you something may testify
how acknowledging I am: Let Ba∣jazet live, I am willing to consent to it, but my Son, you must endeavour to overcome his pride, and make, if possible, an unjust Princess com∣pliant, whom the condition of a Captive, my entreaties, my offers, the love and submissions of Themir, have not been able to get her con∣sent to marry him, and if you are as sensible of my satisfaction as I am of yours, order it so, that the consent of Bajazet to this marriage, be the reward of that life you render to him. Adanaxus understood by that discourse, that Themir's love for A∣steria was the cause of that cruelty that Tamberlain was going to com∣mit, and overjoyed that it was re∣vealed to him, he made what hast he could to prevent its being ef∣fected. He got himself upon the scaffold, where Bajazet with an unshaken con∣stancy did wait his doom. He cut the Cord that tyed that Prince his
hands, and saluting him with as much espect as if Bajazet had been upon he Ottoman Throne. Receive, Seig∣nior, said he to him, this service from a man, who happy as he esteems him∣self in rendring it to you, would not at the price of all his blood but have done it, and who would give a thou∣sand lives such as his, if he had them, to make you forget the necessity that obliged him to give you so shameful a mark of that esteem and conside∣ration he has for you. Adanaxus had a charming Meen, and delivered his words with an a∣ction so tender and generous, that Bajazet was more enamoured with his sight, than with that life he had conserved to him. He regarded him with all the attention possible to be given to a discourse so extraordina∣ry, and as if his misfortune had not wrought any alteration upon his spi∣rit. Although my life be given me upon condition, said he to him, and by it I prolong those evils which I
should be glad to put a period to, yet I receive it from you without a difficulty, and the condition in which I am, does not keep me from being sensible of this obligation, the tran∣scendent virtue you discover does already interess me in what concerns you, and I receive no small consola∣tion in that I have furnished you with a means of giving such remar∣kable proofs, of it. Let us go, Prince, pursued he, holding out his hand to him, let us return from the Scaffold to the Prison, and there wait for the last decrees of heaven: You shall see me again, Asteria, added he, drying up some tears, which the remembrance of that Princess drew from his eyes, you shall see me again, if that tender love of yours for a miserable Father, has not made it fatal to you. Whilst the people by their cryes were applauding the generosity of Adanaxus and the safety of Bajazet, he was reconducted to his prison, and the Prince of Tanaïs having gi∣ven
orders for all things that might sweeten it to him, returned to the Palace. He there met with Themir, who complemented him, but with so much coldness and indifference, that one might visibly observe in it the remains of that old hatred that had obliged Adanaxus to leave Tar∣tary. He was extremely troubled to find him still so implacable, but as he did not intend to make a long stay at Samarcanda, being called elsewhere by powerful reasons, he resolved for some time to bear with the injustices of his Brother; and af∣ter he had spent part of the Evening with Tamberlain, he withdrew to his Apartment with Axalla, in a trans∣port of joy, that he had relieved Bajazet from so ignominious a death. As soon as they were without wit∣nesses, they began to speak to one another in their usual way of an open freedom: There had continually been between them a very strict
bond of friendship, and though Ax∣alla's age was already advanced, he was of such a sweet and obliging temper, that persons of all Ages were infinitely taken with his company, and he was not less charming in his conversation, than was his valour to be feared when ever he came into the Field. Adanaxus asked him a thousand questions, both about the war, and indeed every thing else he thought himself ignorant of; Axalla gave him a particular account of all things, and struck him with a hor∣ror for the inhumane actions of The∣mir, especially for the death of young Ortobulus, whom with his own hand he had cruelly murthered, af∣ter a battel where that young Prince had done immortal actions, and from whence he went out so wounded, that he might have expected the suc∣cour of a generous Enemy, with a great deal of more reason than the death he had received. Adanaxus was enraged at that cru∣el
piece of barbarity, but passing from discourses of war to those of love, Axalla who had a most infi∣nite respect for Asteria, by having sometimes the priviledge of seeing her, gave a most noble Character to Adanaxus of all those charms that rendred her adorable. She had so many, and they were so advantage∣ously represented by Axalla, that he was surprised not to find in the Prince the least motion of curiosity, and blamed him for his too great indifference for Ladies. You de∣ceive your self, Axalla, replied the Prince of Tanais, sighing as he spake, that Sex has too great an Empire o∣ver me, and my heart could speak to you more justly than any tongue, of the sensible proof I have made of it. 'Tis neither any contempt nor any fear of Asteria's charms, that keeps me from having a curiosity to see them: I honour beauty where∣ever I see it, and am too much pre∣vented by another object, to have
any fear of that of the Princess, but I am not willing to present before her the Son of a man who within this hour would have rob'd her of her Fathers life, as also the brother of him that murthered Ortobulus. I will, if possible, during that little stay I shall make at Samarcanda, act with some profit for his repose, and en∣deavour before I see her, by my ser∣vices to efface whatsoever the names of Tartar, of the Son of Tamberlain, and of the Brother of Themir might have, that is detestable to her. What Seignior, said Axalla, are you in pain whilst you continue here, that you talk of your removal? and have you given us a sence of the joy of your return, only that we should have the greater grief to think of your departure? When you shall have heard the reasons of it, replied Adanaxus, you will confess they are not unlawful, but that it is necessa∣ry for my repose to go from Samar∣canda. You know Seignior, replied
Axalla, the passionate interest I have taken all my life for your concerns, and I am in an earnest impatience to have your reasons told me, therefore I shall be infinitely obliged to you, if you will give me some small ac∣count of them. That I can do very easily, replied the Prince, we are here alone, and this Relation will not be long. Then beginning with some particularities a little more remote,
The History of Prince Ada∣naxus. YOu are not ignorant, said he to his friend, of the reason that obliged me to leave Tartary, the violences of Themir a∣gainst my most innocent actions, the indulgence the Emperour shewed to his proceedings, and the fear of not being in a continual power to sup∣port them without doing things of a dangerous consequence; All that, I say, you know as well as my self, and made me indeed resolve, among strangers to seek out a more happy life than that I enjoyed in my own Country. I parted from Samarcanda without any retinue, concealing my true name under that of Arsanes, and not designing to tarry in any place, but
where I might acquire some glory, I visited all Asia without finding the employment I sought for. After that I passed into Europe, which I knew to be more oppressed with war, and I arrived there at a time that Bajazet's forces were just sinking under the Grecian Empire. I knew Tamberlain had a most invincible ha∣tred for the Ottomans, and that all the Tartars had the like affections, and though I found them unjust, yet to do nothing that might one day reproach me, I cast my self into the Emperour Paleologus his party, who made head against the Turks on the side of Thrace, whilst those two Sons Andronicus and Emanuel defended other Provinces. My first essay was very favourable to my reputation, and without any ambition of being thought a Hero, I may affirm to you Axalla, that my actions began to make the name of Arsanes eminently considerable. The Emperour gave me many signal testimonies of his
esteem, and finding himself in a dan∣ger out of which I had the fortune to disengage him, he made a publick acknowledgment of the service I did him, and would not permit me to be absent from him. We had a pretty equal success in both Armies, the battels were so much favoured by the season, but Winter coming on we were oblig'd to give our Troops some rest: The Turk retired into his Country, and Paleologus went back again to Con∣stantinople, where his Sons were or∣dered to meet him. We arrived there nevertheless a Month before them: the Court was very glorious, the Empress, besides her two daughters, Eudoxia and Leonida, had about her person a great many others, as con∣siderable by their birth, as they were most killingly fair to all their behol∣ders. Mine were dazled with them without being wounded, and hea∣ven which had other persecutions in reserve for me, in this occasion ren∣dred
love unpowerful. The grate∣ful Emperour did very obligingly sound my Elogy to all the world, and unknown as I was at Constantinople, I bore there a quality but little dif∣ferent to that I ought to have been in. Because the war was in no like∣lihood to be concluded, I was wil∣ling to spend some time at the Court, receiving there a thousand civilities from the Emperour, the Princesses, and from the most considerable a∣mong the Grecians. A few days after our arrival, the Emperour received the news that the Princes had defeated a party of the Ottomans, and taken a good number of them prisoners, but that which qualified the joy of this good success, was that among those pri∣soners there was a Lady so beautiful, that it was reported Andronicus was become passionately in love with her. Paleologus who was sufficiently ac∣quainted with the uncontroulable humour of his Son, and who knew
very well that he had no moderati∣on in him, when ever he had a mind to any thing, did much fear the con∣sequences of this passion, and as soon as Andronicus and the prisoners were arrived, he perceived his fear was too legitimate. When first the re∣port came to us of that love, I con∣demned the frailty and easiness of that Prince's heart, and the inequa∣lity of his choice. But Axalla, I was punished likewise by the same fate, for I no sooner had cast my eyes up∣on her who had conquered him, but I felt the kindlings of an ardour in me, which fully assured me that I was fallen into the same condition. Axalla, what all the beauties of Greece had not the power to do, was in one moment effected by a Fair un∣known: the satigue of a great jour∣ney and the grief of her captivity, could not render her less beautiful to my eyes. Her paleness appeared to me to be infinitely charming, and the indifference▪ which in that con∣dition
she shewed to gain any victo∣ries, rendred her in my opinion more deserving to conquer all. Many hearts were forced to submit to her powers as well as mine, and Neris, (for so the Captive was called) in a short time became the charm of all Paleologus's Courtiers, as she was the object of jealousie among all the Gre∣cian Ladies. As soon as I perceived my love, and was out of all hopes to overcome it, I found my self the Rival of Andro∣nicus, I was one unknown, he was the Emperour's Son and could pre∣tend to all things, where I could hope for nothing; but as repute and fortune do not always contribute to the felicity of Lovers, but it is love and the disposition of hearts which does determine it, I resolved to conceal mine and thought I might succeed better by that discretion than by a publick declaration which possibly might be a means to remove me from the adorable Neris.
You may very well conceive, Ax∣alla, that that procedure so contrary to my wishes, did not give me a small affliction, my passion encreased eve∣ry day and my mind was divided between the necessity of being silent and that of speaking, so that I could not resolve with my self which to en∣cline to, my reason made me fly that which a violent inclination compel'd me to look after, maugre all its po∣liticks. My eyes sometimes were not so circumspect as they ought to have been, and when by accident they were cast upon those of Neris, they made her a thousand declarati∣ons, but whether she did not under∣stand them, or whether she was a∣fraid to do it, those dumb discour∣ses were very short and withal but seldom. In the mean time Andronicus con∣jured the Emperour by all the en∣treaties and submissions imaginable, that might perswade a Father to re∣sign Neris to his love. The inequali∣ty
of Fortune, he said, was suffici∣ently recompenced by the merit of Neris; and besides her beauty which was extreme surprising, she abound∣ed with so many charms both in her wit and humour, that the Prince thought he had a sufficient Autho∣rity openly to make this demand; the Emperour acknowledged all the advantage of Neris; and he had a very high esteem for her, and in his breast did not absolutely con∣demn the Sentiments of Andronicus; but having more profitable Allian∣ces in his eye, for the good of the Empire: and the calamities where∣with Greece was menaced, not be∣ing able to be avoided, but by the support of a puissance which might oppose the Ottoman Forces; he in∣deavoured to divert his Son by po∣licies of State; but seeing him un∣capable of them, he, like an abso∣lute Father, forbad him ever to speak to him any further about the marriage: this prohibition increas∣ed
the fierceness of Andronicus; and made him to answer the Emperour in terms that were little respectful, and from that time he laboured to put himself into a condition to be only dependent upon himself. Things were in these circumstan∣ces for two Months, and the Princes stayed well near three at Constanti∣nople, before I had ever spoke to Neris any otherwise then in general conversation. It was hard to meet with occasions of speaking to her in private, and I durst not openly seek them; but an accident presented one to me, which I did not in the least expect, and which you may well ima∣gine I did not fail to make use of. I was walking one Morning in the Palace Gardens, where commonly I was wont to reflect upon my ad∣ventures, and for that purpose I sought out the most solitary places to walk in. I found Neris in one of them that was least frequented; and besides the ravishing surprise her
sight gave me, I had a greater to see her in such a place, and at such a time. O Axalla, how beautiful did she appear to me, and in what a transport was I at my good fortune? One might observe in her complexi∣on a kind of blushing freshness, like to that which is borrowed from Sleep; the undress she was then in presented to ones eyes a thousand Beauties which most commonly she kept concealed. And the trouble she had upon her when she saw me, gave me a pretty kind of an I do not know what timidity, which ren∣dered me more passionate and har∣dy. I cannot tell whether she took notice of it, or whether it was only in civility that she judged it conve∣nient to withdraw, but she had done so, if I had not stayed her. Ah, fair Neris, said I to her, do not car∣ry away with you all the delicacies of these places; But suffer an un∣fortunate stranger to enjoy by your presence those he never thought to
meet with. Neris seemed astonish∣ed at my discourse, and looking with her face towards the ground; A miserable Captive, said she, is a very unfit person to contribute to the delights of any place, and in a conversation so languishing as yours you will but throw away that time, which you may imploy to a much better purpose. Would to Heaven, Madam, replied I, I could give all that of my life, and withal you would permit it, I would never else∣where seek a satisfaction which only you can procure me. Such an ear∣nestness you now express would be altogether new, answered she very negligently, and you would have much a do to perswade me into a faith that you had so passionate a one for that which till now appear∣ed to me very indifferent to you. I confess, replied I, without presu∣ming to dive into what might oblige Neris to speak so, I took upon me an Indifference absolutely repug∣nant
to those sentiments that were real in me: But, Madam, the move∣ments of the Heart, and those of the countenance do not alwayes run parallel, and if you please to have that goodness to distinguish them, I could very well justify that indiffe∣rence whereof you accuse me. I accuse you of nothing, interrupted Neris very briskly, and perceive your in∣difference is less criminal, than perhaps would be a closer applicati∣on, but whatsoever your move∣ments are, the calamities I indure do not give me the libertie to con∣cern my self about them, and the un∣happiness of my life is so great, that it does not permit me to think of things wherein I have no Interest. Ah! Madam, cryed I to my self, in a transport of passion, you never had a greater in any heart in the World then you have in mine: there is none so absolutely devoted to you, and though you seem to set so light by it, there shall never be
any capable to give you the services that this shall undertake for you. I have made it my great care and bu∣siness to conceal what I discover to you now, that so I might not ex∣pose my self to the fury of a Rival, who at Constantinople is more pow∣erful then I am, and who I fear has enough to countermand my staying in it; but since my fate gives me this opportunity to speak to you without any witnesses, suffer me to explain, Madam, and to tell you, though I appear here unknown yet your condition might be as happy with Arsanes as with the Son of the Emperour of Greece. All the while I was speaking, Neris's eyes were fixed on mine, and in spight of all her reservedness, I knew by her blushing, by her silence, and by a joy that seemed full of fear, which at last appeared in her face, she wished there might be no untruth in what I had said. One must love very passionately to penetrate into all
these things, but I did not lose any one circumstance of them and ma∣king an happy application of them to my self, I became thereby both more Eloquent, and hardy. I made use of that time that Neris was si∣lent to give her an account of the birth of my passion, and did it with so much sincerity that I began to make her believe it. She said no∣thing to me at that time, for the coming in of some persons obliged her to retire: But I could very well guess it by the looks she gave me; and I flattered my self with this thought, that when one has the art to perswade well, one is not very far from that of pleasing well too. From that time I had my eyes more languishing upon her, Neris accustomed her self to their lan∣guage, and sometimes likewise hers in her supprise made me such Dis∣courses as were very obliging; af∣terwards I found out several ways
to renew the conversation in the Garden, where I spoke in such a tender and pressing manner, that I brought Neris to a compliance of receiving the offer of my love: the first mark she gave me of her esteem, was her making me the confident of her thoughts, she confessed she had a natural aversion for Androni∣cus, that his greatness and his for∣tune were not capable of shaking her, and though he should be pos∣sessor of Paleologus's Throne, he should never be dearer to her heart, nor more agreeable to her eyes. I answered Neris, that I was afraid this aversion was general for all men: and she made me to under∣stand by a sigh, one half of which her Modesty deprived me of, that in her breast the Fate of Andronicus did not determine that of the rest of Mankind. I did whatever I could to improve the discourse, and to find out what her fortune was: But all I could learn from her was
that she was born in the heart of Africa, of a quality sufficiently il∣lustrious, and that she had been ta∣ken by the Pyrates, and afterwards sold to those whom Andronicus had taken prisoners. My passion every day grew more violent, and I wished from my soul that Heaven would be pleased to find out a way for me to show it to Neris by some extraordinary ser∣vice: but that was difficult to bring about in a Forreign Court, where I was without any power. My de∣stiny was so favourable to me as to overcome that difficulty, and you shall hear of an adventure which you could never have imagined. The preoccupation of Androni∣cus seemed to increase by the re∣sistance that was made against it, and the Emperour not knowing a∣ny further what means to use to re∣move it, thought that absence only could do the business, and that he was obliged by necessity to deprive
the Prince of an object that became fatal to the repose of a State. He had no very specious pretence pub∣lickly to put that design into exe∣cution, and indeed I know not when he would have had one, if be∣ing conscious as he was of the vio∣lent humour of his Son, he had ad∣ventured to serve himself with any, which made him resolve that Ne∣ris should be privately carried a∣way, and that free liberty should be given her to go where she pleased. It was an easie matter for him to effect it, & Princes do not want per∣sons, who, without examining the commands they give them, do blind∣ly run to perform all their Orders. The design was told them, and the hour stated; and Neris was taken from her Apartment, about the middle of the night, and making her to cross the Palace-Gardens, she was conducted to the sea-side which ran by them, where waited a Ves∣sel ready to set sail for the first port
dependant upon any other Prince. Neris is Naturally of an even and well balanced temper, and not easi∣ly carried out to make any out-cries or rude efforts. But as she thought her Ravishers were imployed by the Prince, she threatned them with the Emperours Authority, and present∣ed to them the injustice they com∣mitted upon the person of a Cap∣tive, who was then without any to defend her; those words reached a place where very frequently I u∣sed to spend the best part of the night in walking, I presently knew it to be Neris's voyce, and finding them going to use some violence to her: No, Madam, said I, putting my hand to my sword, you shall not be taken away before my Face, and though I be single in your defence, yet possibly I may behave my self with success enough to make these rash men repent they ever under∣took such an Enterprise; those fel∣lows laughed at the threats I made
them, and dividing themselves, one part of their company to ingage with me, whilst the rest were to carry Neris away, they did what they could to get to their Boat. But, Axalla, one is not sensible of any danger when one is imployed in the preserving of the object of our de∣voted Love. I laid down two of the Villains at my Feet with the first passes I made, and so clearing my way to Neris, with a reverse blow, I struck off the man's Arm who held her, and gave her the liberty of saving her self by running through the Garden. Those persons who were ordered to carry her away, without making any great attempt upon my life, left me to run after her, and by that means rescued me from a danger, in which I should o∣therwise most certainly have fell. I pursued them, and forcing them to turn and ingage with me; I had received two dangerous wounds, before some of the Emperour's
Guards, who were got thither by Neris's outcries came to my Suc∣cour, and knowing me to be highly in the favour of their Master, they obliged those that resisted me to be∣take themselves to their heels; they would not have fled, had they dared to discover themselves, for they were Messengers of an Order that was sufficiently warrantable, but they were sworn to secrecy till they had got her to Sea, and they judged it better for them to ac∣quaint the Emperour with what had happened, than to run the ha∣zard of publishing what they had such a strict charge to conceal. I lost so much blood, that my strength was quite gone, and I fell at Neris's Feet in a trance: but yet my weakness did not prevent me from hearing the obliging com∣plaints she made against Fate, and the affliction wherewith she did ac∣cuse her self for my misfortune; she her self indeavoured what she
could to stop my bleeding, but the pleasure I resented in perceiving Ne∣ris to take such pains, made my blood gush out with greater vio∣lence, so that all thought it would prove fatal to me; they recondu∣cted me to my Apartment, and Ne∣ris was led by Andronicus unto hers, who was come thither at the noise he heard of her being taken away; He bewailed me, protested solemn∣ly he would be revenged on the Author of that bold attempt, and Neris, ignorant all this while of the truth, demanded the next day ju∣stice of the Emperour for it in her name and mine. He was obliged either to grant it her, or publickly to justifie the procedure, and not daring to take the latter course, through the fear he was in of his Sons furious transports, he sent one of his principal Officers to declare to me the mystery of that Enter∣prise, and to testifie to me the grief he was in, that she should be the oc∣casion
of my loss of so much blood: the same Officer was ordered to discourse with me about the means of imposing silence upon Neris, and of stifling the business; she believes her self mightily obliged to you, said the Gentleman to me, and at the first word will put it up, if you will but advise her to it. Counsel her not any farther to search into the business, but let her un∣derstand that possibly a greater noise would bring along with it but more troublesome consequences. I knew what I had to say to Ne∣ris, and was not in a power to hide any thing from her; but that so I might have some pretence for see∣ing her without being under any suspicion; I promised to obey the Emperor's will, and that procured me many a happy hour with the fair Neris by way of visit to me. She acquainted me how that since that accident Andronicus, fearing lest any other should be strongly
pressing her to marry, assured her he had found out a way to marry her himself in spight of the Empe∣ror; you may very well imagine what Counsel I gave her, and what discourses Love put into my head. My prayers and protestations ren∣dring her more opposite to the de∣sires of Andronicus, did likewise render my Rivals passion more im∣petuous. She grew into a fury; and one day among the rest, after some propositions more pressing yet than ordinary, he made her know, she was to fear the worst that could be from his violence, and that he was now weary of using only his Intreaties and Submissions. I be∣gan then to leave my Chamber, and went to make my first devoirs to the Empress, where I met with Neris going out of the Princess's Apart∣ment, and knew by the sadness of her Countenance, that her breast laboured under a very great afflicti∣on: the Prince was just gone from
making those threatnings to her which I have told you of: her heart was almost dead with fear, and her eyes ready to burst into a shower of tears: what has happe∣ned to you, Madam, said I to her? your eyes reveal something that is fatal to my love, and if my jealou∣sies be just, though altogether weak, and a stranger as I am here in this place; yet you shall see I'll make my vengeance be dreaded by them. I can easily judge what you can do by that which you have done al∣ready, answered Neris to me; But, Arsanes, all your generosity cannot hinder me from Andronicus his per∣secutions. He continues his addres∣ses to me to marry him, and now threatens to use his power, if he finds not his Love sufficient. Ah! Ma∣dam, said I, interrupting her, in a great passion, and how do you re∣ceive his threats? As a person, pur∣sued Neris, who imagines nothing can be more cruel than for ever to
be ingaged to a man whom I can∣not love. Ah! Madam, continued I, you shall never then be ingaged to him, relie upon the word and conduct of a Prince, who in any o∣ther place than Constantinople, would not submit either to the Son of the Emperor of Greece, or to a∣ny other Prince in the world. Have Courage, Madam, take elsewhere upon you a quality more conforma∣ble to your merit, than that of a Cap∣tive; the Sea and my valour shall find us wayes for it, by conducting you eitherto the place of your Birth, or to such retreats as shall be far e∣nough from Andronicus his attempts upon you: be not afraid of my Love, it is extreme indeed, but my respect is extreme likewise: You shall find in me a passionate Guide to whom the person is sacred, and a Defender, who will sacrifice his fortune and his life to your safety. Neris hearkned to me with a great deal of indulgence, and testified to
me by her looks the acknowledge∣ment of her heart; but yet I could not perswade her to it; therefore I thought my true name might have a greater influence over her than my words, and acquainted her with it: but it would put me to a great deal of pains to express to you the trouble that this Declaration gave her. She looked upon me a good while, as if she had not known me, blushed, sighed, was speechless, and indeed all her Actions showed me the confusion so great a surprise put her into. However she assured me, that being fully perswaded of the reality of my discourse, she would have a grateful sense of my offers, which should be as lasting as her life: but the more considerable I became to her she had the less de∣sire to hazard so great a Prince. I neither forgot to make use of Oaths, or Prayers, to conquer those Scru∣ples, and to oblige her to remove
from Constantinople, but all my ef∣forts were insignificant: she alledg∣ed to me reasons of respect, to which for fear of displeasing her, I was for∣ced to submit; and leaving me, as if she was fearful, she might in her turn be vanquished: do not joyn your self to my misfortunes, Seignior, said she to me, perhaps fate will not distinguish you from Neris, and you may fall into such evil circumstances, as may make me to despair that I was the cause of them. I would have followed her to in∣treat her not to harbour such a fear, and to assure her that in what soe∣ver place her fortune should con∣duct her, I would inseparately wait upon her: but the Empress crossing the place where we were, to go to the Walks, perceived me, and hav∣ing called to me, obliged me to at∣tend her. In the mean time Andronicus was not Idle; he had in part discovered
the cause of Neris's being carried a∣way, and believing he might do what he had a mind to against a Fa∣ther who was resolved to deprive him of the sight of his Mistress: he got together a good number of lu∣sty resolute young Fellows, & made a dangerous Insurrection. The Em∣peror resisted it as well as he could, and I was so fortunate at that time, not to be a little profitable to him. Andronicus was taken, and added the shame of being overcome, to that of having made an attempt upon the Crown, and the life of his Father. The older and more experi∣enced of the Emperors Council, were for having him to spend the remainder of his dayes in prison; Prince Emanuel, being of a most ad∣mirable sweet disposition, opposed that advice, and with some advan∣tages he might hope to have over the unfortunate Andronicus, he did so ingeniously work upon the Em∣perours Spirit, that after the first
heats of resentment were over, he received the Rebel's pardon, and promis'd him to forget the Crime. But he had more need to repent of that too great clemency of his; An∣dronicus did not appear submissive but to get his libertie, which he no sooner obtained, but he made a new insurrection, and as you have heard, almost brought the Grecian Em∣pire to its last destruction. I could not ingage my self in these dissor∣ders, I had in the former been so much concern'd as I have told you; but scarce had they begun to break out, but Neris disappear'd at Con∣stantinople, without any bodies be∣ing able to discover either the rea∣son of her departure, or the place where she had chosen her retreat. At first I accused the Emperour for ha∣ving caused her to be carried away a second time; and besides my grief I made to him a confession of my Love, and I conjured him to tell me where I should find what he had
convei'd away from me: But he so∣lemnly protested he knew nothing of her flight. I could not turn▪ my suspicions upon Andronicus, for he was almost driven to desperation at it, and from that accident derived the chief pretence of his revolt. All hope then abandon'd me▪ but only that of searching my self for her, which made me prepare to do it in all the corners os the Earth; but I was surprised by a violent Feaver, which kept me languishing very neer two Months at Constantinople. The Emperour had given them or∣ders to pursue his ungrateful Son, and to make him fly where he might never hear of him again. Prince Emanuel had command of the Army, and as I extreamly ho∣nour'd him, I should have been ex∣ceeding glad to have kept him com∣pany; but the Remembrance of Neris was so much upon my Spirits, that I could not think of doing any thing, but to go and find her
out. I parted from Constantinople, after I had complemented the Em∣press, and embarked my self to pass into Africa, where according to what Neris had told me, I hoped I should hear some news of her. I will not tell you how oft I exposed my self to death, how many dangers I ran, sometimes beaten by tempests, some∣times assaulted by Pyrates; how many Countries I have seen, al∣most unknown to Mankind, with a thousand other circumstances of my voyage, they would make my relation too prolix: Let it suffice I tell you that I have learnt no news of Neris, and that her ab∣sence serves only to augment my passion. After I had spent four Years unprofitably I came again in∣to Asia, I understood the great revolutions that had happened there▪ the downfall of the Otto∣man Empire, and the captivity of the dreadful Bajazet; I must ac∣knowledge, Axalla, I could not
keep my self from pittying him, and knowing Tamberlain's humour, I did fear what has come to pass, and what I have been so happy to prevent: the thoughts of it made me tremble again, and how unjust so∣ever the Emperour had been to me, yet did Love infuse something in him of a paternal tenderness: I came back with all the hast I could to Samarcanda, where I arrived just in sufficient time to prevent the misfortune which would never have given me any comfort. You have now in a few words a very faithful account of the estate of my life, if you have at any time been sensible of the power of Love, you may judg, Axalla, if any thing be ca∣pable to give me a repose, so long as I shall hear nothing concerning Neris. The Prince of Tanaïs having left off speaking, Axalla told him for his consolation all that he could
think was able to make any im∣pression on his spirit. It was late e're they parted, and the Inquie∣tudes of Adanaxus being renew'd by the recital he had made, caused him to pass the night away in the greatest sorrow imaginable. In the mean time the Princess Asteria had very deeply resented the Joy of Bajazet's safety, the suc∣cour he had received came from a very dear hand, and the Prince, igno∣rant of his happiness, had no mind to foresee that the daughter of the Turkish Emperour was the same per∣son he had loved under the name of Neris in the Court of Paleologus, and whom he still loved with so violent a passion. The report of Adanax∣us's return had no sooner came to the ears of the Ottoman Princess, but all her grief for him was suspended. She loved this young Prince as much as her vertue could permit her, he had a very tender place in her remembrance, and she could
not without a transport hear he had been preserved in so tedious a Voy∣age; but when to this news was joyned the service he had lately rendered her in the person of Baja∣zet, her joy became so powerful, that she could no longer keep it concealed in her breast. She did imagine he knew her for Neris, and her return into Bursa was with too much noise not to have been pub∣lished in Greece, she flattered her self with the thoughts that he still lov'd her, since he came so far, and that too to give her so eminent an instance of it: and looking out Axalla, who, as she had observed, frequently did visit him, she in∣genuously confess'd she had an ex∣tream kindness for the Prince, and most passionately complayned to him that he had not given her the means to tell him her self how greatful a sense she had of the ser∣vice he had done her. I know so perfectly the character of your
Soul, Madam, replied Axalla, that I foresaw that gratitude, before it was possible for me to see the effects of it; and I would fain have obli∣ged the Prince to do what you de∣sire: But as he is indued with a sin∣cerity beyond example, he acknow∣ledged to me the unwillingness he had to present-before your eyes a Prince, who cannot be innocent in your account since he is the Son of Tamberlain, and the Brother of Themir: Asteria grew pale at these words, and giving them a cruel explication, she fancied the Inte∣rests of blood had absolutely stifled those of Love, and that Neris was no longer charming to Adanaxus, since he knew her to be the daugh∣ter of Bajazet. But yet she pre∣tended something else was the cause of her trouble, and the rest of the conversation was spent in general complements and civilities. But as soon as Axalla was retired, she called a Woman, who had accom∣panied
her in All her misfortunes, and from whom none of her thoughts were a reserve. Ah, Xaira, said she to her, what have I learnt? Alas, in vain I flattered my self with the thoughts of be∣ing beloved by Adanaxus at his return, and hoped to see him again with the same transports which he expressed when I was at Con∣stantinople. He was only concer∣ned for my Father out of generosi∣ty, Neris was not in the least the occasion of that adventure, and far from doing any meritorious service to me, and expecting any recompence from it, he came not to see me, but to prefer the duty of the Son of Tamberlain to those of the passionate Arsanes. Alas! Xaira, how criminal is my weakness rende∣red, and how good would it be for me to follow that example he set before me, if I was capable of intimating it. I had in my misfor∣tunes the comfort to believe he did
not any wayes contribute to them, they were less afflictive to me, and in a time when Heaven had taken all things from me, I flattered my felf with the thoughts that he re∣served for me a heart which I had no less an esteem for, then for the Empire of Bajazet. But I have lost it, Xaira, that heart which was so dear to me, that I gave it all my own; Adanaxus will not bely the cruelty of the blood of Tamberlain, and more barbarous then our Ty∣rants, he procures the sorrowful Asteria a misfortune which all the cruelties of the Emperour of the Tartars were not able alone to give her. I do declare the punishment of it by the criminal remembrance I have conserved of a Man, who has only testifyed to me an incon∣stant affection, and by the weakness which forces me still so deeply to resent his levity. Xaira interrupted the Princess by indeavouring to comfort her, and
told her all she thought was capable to make her doubt her misfortune, or to reinforce her courage; but she gave no great heed to her, but abandoning her self wholly to her error, she cast a thousand reproach∣es upon the young Prince, whilst he, blindly carried away with the desire of finding out his Neris, was preparing for a second Voyage all the Earth over, and found a great deal of difficulty to give his gene∣rosity a few dayes rest at Samarcan∣da. Themir had seen him arrive there with an inraged mind, and could not suffer him to continue in it without giving him some Testimonies of it. He had flattered himself with the hopes that he should never have seen him again, and perceiving he was not returned, but only to pre∣serve a victime from the effect of his vengeance, he was continually pressing Tamberlain to put  con∣ditions in execution, upoh
he had granted to the Prince the life of Bajazet, or else to have him reconducted to the Scaffold from whence he had been taken. Tamberlain persecuted on the one hand with the solicitations of his Son, and excited on the other hand by his own natural cruelties, com∣manded Prince Adanaxus to go visit the Turkish Emperour and to imploy the credit which so strict an obligation had given him with him, to obtain Asteria of him. But though Adanaxus was fully per∣swaded that he should never bring Bajazet's Spirit to a compliance to such a demand, yet he owed so much obedience to Tamberlain as this came to. He went then to the pri∣son where Asteria's Father was, with a resolution to use all the honoura∣ble means he could to gain him to it, and to make him consider after all, that the quality of being Em∣press of the Tartars was not a thing for a Captive Princess to contemn.
Though Bajazet's life was only conditional, the service he had re∣ceived from the Prince of Tanaïs, had wrought in him all the effect it could do upon a mind that is truly grateful: he had none of those barbarous blindnesses that lessen the value of civilities done to a person, and then confound them with inju∣ries. It was not from the hands of Adanaxus that the effects of his mis∣fortune did proceed; he knew him not but by a considerable service he had done him, and he received his visit with a great deal of satisfacti∣on, Seignior, said Adanaxus to him, after they had ended their first com∣plements, if it had pleased Heaven to have seconded my vows, I would have rendered you my submissions in a place more worthy of you than this is, but since my good inclinati∣ons prove weak, and mauger all my intreaties, you are still a prisoner. I am come to offer you all that may contribute to make this place less
grievous to you. Seignior, answe∣red Bajazet, according to the fashi∣on I now lead my life, it very little concerns me in what place I spend it, for all are equal to me in Tam∣berlain's Dominions. But do not think, Seignior, that this indiffe∣rence extends its self even to what I ow you, and that it extenuates a∣ny thing of my obligations to you. I am neither forgetful of the valour, manner, or circumstances of it: For I protest to you my greatest afflicti∣on is that I am not in a capacity of testifying to you my real resent∣ments: I have done so little, Seig∣nior, replied the Prince of Tanaïs, in comparison of the reparation I owe you, that it deserves not your remembrance; but as nothing is so afflictive to those who love and are acquainted with glory, as to see such a person as you in fetters, I would willingly do so much as may make my intentions pass for effects. If you have any concern for the re∣pose
of those who are likewise joyn∣ed with you in your misfortune, Seignior, you ought to be more pi∣tiful to your self, and consider on the means that are offered you to get out of this place. Pardon me, if knowing, as I do, your just aversi∣on for Themir, I presume once more to propose him to you for the Prin∣cess your Daughter. In a more hap∣py time I should not do this out∣rage to the hatred which exaspe∣rates you; but the pressing necessi∣ty of your Affairs, the continual fears in which you put Asteria▪, all that which threatens you, and what may happen, are such powerful rea∣sons, as I am forced to speak to you of it. I am sensible that Themir, is accused of many crimes, and I cannot own that he is not guilty as to your particular: but, Seignior, the love he bears the Princess may render him more reasonable, he would not be the first whom this passion should have changed, and
what speaks more in his favour than all things else is, that there is not any thing to which upon Themir's consideration Tamberlain cannot be obliged. I confess, Seignior, it is a hard thing to conquer ones self in matters of such importance as this; but what cannot the courage of Ba∣jazet do? If I could tell any other means how to deliver you out of this place, I would not have pro∣posed this to you. Ah! would to Heavens, that in contempt of The∣mir's repose, and of my own life, I could imagine any any other way; I would not balance the electing of it; but Seignior, nothing but this remains, of consenting to the Mar∣riage of Asteria, and therefore I would conjure you to make some reflections upon it. Prince, answered Bajazet, coldly, I do not doubt but that you would serve with zeal all those who could any wayes move your pity, since I have made such a convincing expe∣rience
of it; but I am both surpri∣sed and afflicted, that after you have treated me like a Prince, and have set some value upon the actions of my life, you look upon me as the slave of Tamberlain. Do not you judge of my Sentiments by my misfor∣tunes, it is not in the power of chains and fetters to make me forget my name, nor can any torments debase the mind of a Prince who has pre∣scribed Laws to the Ottoman Em∣pire, and has been the destiny of many others. You do not possibly know, that this Themir, which you offer to me for a Son in Law, is the Author of all my sufferings; that it was his criminal hand, that basely before mine eyes did spill the blood whom I intirely lov∣ed, whose vertues promised an end∣less happiness to my life, and whom I saw expire by his sword without being able to give him any Succour. Ah! Seignior, if you believe me to have any valour and resolution,
judge by the tears that this remem∣brance fetches from me, unto what excess my indignation swells. 'Tis one of Themir's most bloody out∣rages, but it is not the only One, Bursa pillaged; Sebastia destroyed; my Children become Fugitives; my Wife, oppressed with the rigours of her captivity, dead; Asteria's imprisonment; my own, and the treatments I have met with in it, are as so many effects of his furies: and ah! would you have me, Seig∣nior, renounce my hatred in favour of an Enemy who has so well de∣served it? No, no, let Tamberlain look to his own Rights, and give me leave to injoy the freedom of my breast; it is a comfort to me in my misfortunes to think that this liberty cannot be ravished from me, but that I can without any remorse or scruple wish to see Tartary o'r∣whelmed with Enemies that may be merciless; Samarcanda abandoned to flames and pillage; Themir to
serve as a victim to the cruelties of a mutinous people; and Tamberlain to follow the Chariot of a Conque∣ror, as little generous as himself. My liberty possibly may be too great, Seignior, but I cannot dis∣semble my thoughts, and indeed, it is that sincerity which obliges me to assure you, that if Heaven would be favourable to my desires, I would do no less for your fortune than I would for my vengeance; for I have a very valuable esteem for your merit, and do conserve in me a heart that is not unsensible of my obligation to you. I am too much indebted to your goodness my self, replied Adanaxus, for putting so high a value upon services that are so inconsiderable; and give me leave to answer you with the same liberty, there is not any thing I would refuse to do to deserve it. But, Seignior, must I renounce the hopes of obtaining any thing from you? consult a little the necessity
of the time, and do some violence upon your self to escape the fatal consequences that may attend your refusal: the present time is so wretched that it puts me into a ca∣pacity of dreading the future, in∣terrupted Bajazet, and there is no∣thing that we need to fear, when we have only a life to look after, which derives all its troubles and torments from the length of it. But, Seignior, that I may not be reproach∣ed for slighting your negotiation, and that I may let you know how dear I account your kindnesses to me; let Themir restore me my li∣berty; let him leave me to injoy the wrecks of my fortune with some equality; in a word, let him follow the example of your genero∣sity, and then I will hearken to his Propositions; but a heart like mine knows not how to yield to any thing, when I am in chains, and I have a soul too resolute, to give to the least of my Actions an appear∣ance
of a base and cowardly con∣straint. Adanaxus found so much of the Hero in Bajazet's discourse, that he could not answer him any further; only he assured him he would im∣ploy his utmost power to incline Tamberlain to grant him the liberty he demanded; and so immediately went to find out the Emperour his Father, to whom he forgot nothing that might any wayes be conducive to bring things to such a conclusion; but the Proposition was not receiv∣ed, nor indeed so much as hearkned to. What, said Tamberlain to him, when possibly by a Sentiment that discovers too much of humanity, I do consent that Themir should mar∣ry the Daughter of the Captive Bajazet, do I not bestow upon him a Grace that is sufficiently conside∣rable? He would fain prescribe me Laws in my Empire, and get to him∣self a liberty, who has cost me so
many thousand men: No, no, so easie a compliance would load me with an Eternal shame; and all Asia would call me to an Account for so important a prisoner: Let him pe∣rish, since he is resolved on't, and let Themir, to render himself happy, make use of the Rights and Privi∣ledges of his Victory. We have too much neglected them, and the reso∣lute Bajazet thinks to prevail upon the Remonstrances of our weakness. Adanaxus was very much troubled at this Determination; and though Tamberlain was resolved to have him execute it, and also forbad the Young Prince to bring him back so much as the least resistance to it, yet could he not forbear making some unprofitable intreaties: but at last he was commanded to pursue it so absolutely, that he was forced to do it, and he retired into his Apart∣ment, as much afflicted at Bajazet's unhappiness, as if he had known the secret Interest he ought to take in it.
In the mean time Asteria entered into the Chamber of this illustrious Prisoner. Adanaxus had obtained their liberty of seeing one another; he said that those Interviews might be conducive to the happy success of his Negotiation; and the Prin∣cess having heard that the Prince had been long in discourse with the Turkish Emperor, came to know the subject of it. Ah! Daughter, said Bajazet, as soon as he saw her, how opportune∣ly do you come to console me under that vast accession of grief which I have now received. Prince Ada∣naxus to whom I am redevable for my life; and who has prevented my having for him so high an e∣steem, is joyned to our Tyrants for my persecution, and has made such discourses to me, which coming from him are more insupportable, than all that Tamberlain, or Themir were ever able to invent. Adanax∣us persecute you, Seignior, inter∣rupted
Asteria, after a languishing manner! yes, he does, but in so handsom a fashion, pursued Bajazet, that in appearance I have no cause to reproach him for it; he speaks to me in the behalf of Themir, and seems to propose him to me as the means of facilitating my liberty; but all things well considered, it is still to make an attempt upon the just motions of my hatred, and this proceeding is more afflictive to me, coming from a Man to whom I am so much obliged, then if it had come from my most irreconcileable enemies. The Princess was so disturbed at Bajazet's discourse, that she was at a loss how to return any answer to it; she sighed, and in spight of all oppo∣sition she could not refrain shedding some tears, to which the Turkish Emperour gave such an explication, as they did not deserve; but, Daughter, pursued he, looking up∣on her very stedfastly, I perceive
this greatly afflicts you; would you have forgot what you owe to the resentments of your Father, and to the blood of Ortobulus, and should the Tartar Prince have come to speak to me at your intreaty? at mine? Just Heavens! cried the sor∣rowful Princess: Ah! Seignior, you penetrate into the sentiments of my breast greatly to my disadvantage, to think I am in the least capable to ingage Adanaxus to speak in The∣mir's favour, how you o'rwhelm me with joy, my Child, added Bajazet, in giving me this protestation, let it be to you an indispensable Law; and because possibly we may not al∣ways injoy this liberty of conver∣sing together, observe diligently this I am going to say, that what vi∣olence soever is used against me, do not you betray any weakness at it; prefer this charge of mine to all that a paternal affection can inspire you with: be you generous by my ex∣ample, and give up your life with
mine, if it be necessary, rather than betray my just resentments against Themir. The Princess presently promised the Emperor her Father what he had exacted from her obedience; the disinteressed Love of the Prince of Tanaïs had given her a real ten∣derness: she had not the power to defend her self from being in love with a person who was so worthy of her kindness; and being sensi∣ble by a cruel experience, that though he should deserve it less, she could not get him from her breast, she withdrew to her own Apartment so drowned in sorrow, and filled with despite, that she had almost resolved upon some actions that would have been unworthy both of her moderation and cou∣rage. She made Xaira to be called, to whom she recited all that Baja∣zet had told her, and accompanying her discourse with a thousand re∣proaches against her faithless adorer,
she stirred up so much pity in her woman, that she appeared as much afflicted as the Princess. He is un∣faithful, this Arsanes, said she to her, who seemed so little capable of infidelity; he betraies both his oaths, and my hopes, and not only forgets the Love he promised Neris, but he would with his own hands deliver her into those of an unworthy Rival. Ah! Xaira, how treacherous is the Sex of Men, how fatal is that of ours, and how wretch∣ed and little experienced do we discover our selves, when we be∣lieve any thing that Mankind tells us? Xaira made her no answer but with her tears, which were mingled with those of the Princess, but fate was preparing for them occasions of grief that were more legitimate, and they ought to have reserved those they then shed for a more pressing opportunity. Bajazet was Master of the moti∣ons of his Soul, and kept them from
breaking out by any action contrary to his constancy; but he could not prevent the impression they made upon his health. The Prince of Tanais his visit had extreamly trou∣bled him; that of Asteria had much increased it, and all this succeeding the preparatory of an unworthy punishment, and of a long retinue of miseries, made him fall into a sickness which he no sooner felt coming upon him, but he judged it would be his mortal one. If he was affected with it, it was only with joy; and the violence of his distemper did not in the least de∣prive him of his reason, for he per∣ceived with pleasure by the dimi∣nution of his health, that his suffe∣rings were now ready to take their leave of him, and to end with his life. Yet he lay languishing many dayes; but finding himself almost at his last period, he ordered that Asteria should be called; and the Princess observing in his counte∣nance
the infallible presages of his death, fell into such an agony of grief, that it wanted but little to cast her into the resembling conditi∣on. The dying Emperour indea∣voured as well as he could to com∣fort her; he commanded her to re∣ceive the assistances of the Prince of Tanaïs, as from the only person could give her such as were gene∣rous, and disinteressed; and being desirous to ingage that Prince not to betray his confidence in him; he sent to beg of him the favour to come unto his prison. The Prince would not have stay'd for this In∣treaty, if he had not apprehended his visit might be troublesome: he went to him in all haste, and Baja∣zet reaching out his hands to him; merciful death is now going to free me from the Tyranny of Tamber∣lain, Seignior, said he to him, and I on a suddain feel that fate is robbing him of the pleasure to bring me new persecutions, or to exercise his
generosity, if ever he should be made capable of it. I should look upon this so much longed for mo∣ment without any trouble, if I did not apprehend it would prove fatal to the unfortunate Asteria; and that having no longer the resolution of her Father to support her, she will fall into a misery that will be more dreadful to her than the most shame∣ful death in the world. Relieve me, Seignior, from this fear, and please to give me your promise to protect a deplorable Princess, whom at my death I commit into your hands. Captivity, death, and the other caprices of fortune have not yet been capable to render Bajazet a suppliant; but a paternal affecti∣on has greater influence than all these things, and you see me with tears beseeching you to defend A∣steria against the violence of Themir. She is prudent and couragious; but she is young, and my Child, pro∣mise me, Seignior, that she shall have
your pity, and that in her you will consider the remains of a precious blood, that will owe all her glory to you, if you afford it a generous succour against the violence of her Tyrants. Adanaxus was so moved by Ba∣jazet's discourse, that he could not refrain his tears; he would not have ballanced giving him all the promises he was able to exact, if he had not apprehended himself too weak to make them good; and this Impuissance rendering him some∣what reserved; Bajazet, though he knew himself sufficiently generous, suffered himself to be surprized with some little diffidence, and or∣dered the Princess to be called, that she might indeavour to bring Ada∣naxus to a determination by her presence, or to give her stricter or∣ders than yet she had received. She had heard the Prince of Tanaïs was with the Emperor, and wavering between a secret desire of seeing
him again, and an inraged passion she thought he justly deserved, she had past away the time of Bajazet's conversation with him in such dis∣quietudes as can never fully be ex∣prest: there were still some marks of her trouble upon her counte∣nance, and the tears she was so pro∣digal of at her Father's sickness, had made her eyes all red, as they had put an extream paleness into her face; but yet this change made her not unknown to the eyes of the Tartar Prince, he came up three or four steps to her, and his surprise not permitting him to come any farther, he stop'd and became immoveable: and found himself at that juncture of time capable of doing nothing but giving her his most languishing regards. He at last pronounced the Name of Neris many times over, with such remarkable demonstrati∣ons of Love, that Asteria was al∣most certain of her errour, and be∣came as weak as Adanaxus. The Turk∣ish
Emperor looking upon them with as great an astonishment as sen∣sibility, was going to demand of them the reason of their so strange surprise, but he was prevented by the coming in of Prince Themir. Possibly he hop'd, that as the ex∣tremity of his sickness did render him more weak, it likewise would make him more complying, and he came to make his last essay to con∣quer his valiant resolution: but it seemed to have an accession by the sight of Themir; and Bajazet ima∣gining that that Prince came but to tyrannize over the last moments of his life, was so seised with rage and horror, that he fell into mortal con∣vulsions. The Princess ran to him almost distracted with grief, and the Prince of Tanaïs making an effort upon himself to succour a man who was become so dear to him, sent for all Tamberlain's Physicians, though their art to him was unprofitable. Bajazet gave them no other signs of
life, but by his looks, which though dying, yet expressed the horror he had for Themir; and expiring in the Arms of the afflicted Asteria, she had reason enough to make her reproaches against Themir, for that his visit had some minutes sooner hastened the death of the unfortu∣nate Bajazet. She did not conceal from him this new cause of her resentment; but forcing away those Sobs which hin∣dered her Speech; Go on, Barbari∣an, said she to him, expose me still to thy sight for some time, and by that excess of thy cruelty joyn the miserable Asteria to the Emperor her Father, and to Prince Ortobulus. Those words having struck Prince Adanaxus to the Soul, he went to conjure Themir to render himself sensible, now it was in his power, and to grant to the tears of Asteria some hours of solitude. But The∣mir too much hated his Brother, and had observed him to be too fa∣vourably
distinguished by the Turk∣ish Emperor, and his Daughter, to receive his Counsels with any pati∣ence. I did not come hither, said he very fiercely to him, to receive any advice from you; and I can scarcely apprehend the motive of this confidence, though I would in∣stantly punish the Author of it, if I did not observe in it some circum∣stances which I would examine be∣fore ever I did inflict that punish∣ment. Adanaxus found himself no longer to be in a suffering humour, and since he knew his Neris was A∣steria, he quickly perceived in The∣mir such qualities that might make him dispence with his wonted mo∣deration. What would be a bold∣ness in Another, said he to him, must be called by another name in the Prince of Tanaïs; and if till now the respect I owed to the Emperor has constrained me to some obser∣vances; even that respect obliges me to defend in my person the ho∣nour
of his blood, and to prevent the doing any outrage to it. The∣mir stormed at those big words he said to him, and but that Axalla ve∣ry fortunately came in, the presence of the Princess would not have been powerful enough to have kept the two Brothers from a bloody in∣gagement: but that Illustrious Fa∣vourite making use of the power he had over the spirit of Adanaxus, to oblige him to withdraw, and the extream affliction that Asteria was in, having at last constrained The∣mir to leave her to her repose, this difference was suspended, and Axal∣la ran to advertise the Emperor of it, that so he might put his Autho∣rity in force to make an absolute ac∣commodation between them. But on the other hand the proud Themir was no sooner got to the Palace, but he caused Odmar to be sought for: This person had been Governour of the Prince of Tarta∣ry, of a wicked and pernitious spi∣rit,
and a barbarous humour, and who had inspired into him by a dangerous education, those vio∣lences and furious resolutions, which made him capable of so ma∣ny cruelties, and he would lay his contrivances with so much artifice and security, that though he had been of his blood, they could not have more resembled those of Od∣mar. As he was Themir's only con∣fident, it was in the Counsels of a man so capable as he was to give him such as were conformable to the violent transports he was at that time in, that that Prince was so earnest to have him found out, that he might be relieved from the trouble that possest him, whilst the afflicted Asteria poured out a flood of tears for her Father's death, in her Apartment of the Palace, whither she had been reconducted; and Ax∣alla, who found the Emperor inga∣ged with some of his Nobles about very important Affairs, could not
say any any thing to him of the Princess; but being by his Orders commanded to attend him, Ada∣naxus was deprived of the consola∣tions that that Prince might give him, and of learning from him the truth of her adventure, and his coming again to know that Asteria proved to be his Neris. The End of the First Part of Asteria.
ASTERIA, OR TAMBERLAIN. A NOVEL. The Second PART. THe First Counsels that Odmar gave Themir, after he had understood what had past in Bajazet's prison, were to search into the Sentiments which induced the Prince of Tanaïs to be so sensi∣ble of his loss, and Asteria's grief; and what made him so fierce in his Answers; and pressing Themir with an opinion that they might possi∣bly proceed from Love, he instilled
into him a hatred against the young Prince, which proved the occasion of a very violent jealousie. They fell presently upon their search, and as nothing was difficult to them, they made the next day all those come before them, who had attended Bajazet in in his sickness; and the least pro∣mise of a Prince, who was able to do all things, made them affirm that before Themir came into the room, the Turkish Emperor, and Adanax∣us frequently flung themselves into one anothers embraces; at the sight of Asteria the Prince of Tanaïs seemed extraordinarily surprized, and had often called her by ano∣ther Name then that they knew her by: there was nothing more need∣ful to perswade suspitious spirits, than that the acquaintance of the Princess and Adanaxus was not of a new foundation, but there was a particular understanding and in∣trigue between them. In Themir's
first rage, he thought upon nothing, but stabbing his Brother before Asteria's face; but Odmar, who was more prudent in his cruelty, con∣vinced him that it would be a great deal better to destroy such an Ene∣my with more safety, and less noise. Themir too much relied upon Odmar's advice, not to submit him∣self to it; and fearing lest the Prince of Tanais should find out some way to see the Pricness, he was resolved to take the surest mea∣sures he could to prevent him in it: and addressing himself to the Em∣peror, he told him, that Asteria be∣ing deprived of having any further fears for her Father, might be con∣triving now how to make her es∣cape, and therefore it would be re∣quisite to have her Guards doubled, and not to permit any body to make her any Visits. Tamberlain present∣ly consented to that new precauti∣on, and made Themir Master of that affair, who immediately commanded
an Officer to go and double Asteri∣a's Guard, and to forbid any en∣trance into her Apartment besides himself; the Officer obeyed him, but as he was coming up to the Princess's Chamber, he met Ada∣naxus, who was just joyned with Axalla, as he was coming from it; the sight of the Guards made the Prince question the truth of it; he presently asked them what was the occasion of their being in that place; and having learned it, his first choler had e'n almost proved fatal to them. He had laid his hand upon his Cimetar, but the pru∣dent Axalla representing to him the necessity he had to suffer Themir freely to act his pleasure, through his want of power to oppose him in it with success, and that by such a violent procedure he might possi∣bly loose the means of being ser∣viceable to the Princess with the Emperour, who was so strangely fond on Themir, that he looked
upon him as one, whom he had not the power to deny any thing. A∣danaxus was perswaded by him, contenting himself with a deep sigh; he was just going to give Axalla an account of his acquaintance with Asteria; not having as yet met with any convenient opportunity to do it, as also of the design he had to go and aggravate to Tamberlain the cruelties that were used against an illustrious, and a miserable Princess, when he perceived Themir coming towards him, whose impatience of knowing whether his Orders were put in execution had caused him to be upon the back of the Guards; they looked upon one another with eyes that no whit discovered the re∣lation that was between them, and Themir beginning the discourse in a very opprobrious and scornful man∣ner; have you been consoling A∣steria after the Death of Bajazet, said he to him? and may we hope that the acknowledgement she owes
you will be any obligation to make her satisfie the Emperor's pleasure and my desires? you express your desires by violences so outragious to a generous breast, replied Adanax∣us, that I can scarce believe they can be favourably heard: and the negotiations I have undertaken in your favour are too ill grounded to give you any hopes of their hap∣py success; the indeavours you use in explaining them, answered The∣mir, do contribute much to the rendring of them unprofitable, and I have great obligations to you which I am sufficiently informed of, we may one day discourse of them more o∣penly, added he, with a furious look; in the mean time, I shall go and know of the Princess what you have done for me. As he ended those words, he turn'd towards Asteria's Apartment, and Axalla got the Prince of Tanais away, for fear lest at the return some other discourses more fierce and bit∣ter should make them proceed to worse actions.
I will leave you near Asteria, said Adanaxus to him, when they were got to another place. You are just now come from her, have you not procured some abatement of her grief? or does she still abandon her self to it with the same vio∣lence? I did not entertain her long, replied Axalla; but, Seignior, since you are pleased to speak of Asteria, preferably to what we may say of Themir, give me leave to take no∣tice, that you seem to be very sen∣sible of her misfortunes, and the scruple you made of seeing her has not been able to stand against the first moments of her sight. Ah! dear Axalla, answered the Prince, it is not from to day that her sight has had its effect upon my heart, and to tell you in one word the most surprising thing that ever you have heard; that Asteria whom you see at Samarcanda, is the same Neris to whom I did devote my self in the Court of the Grecian Empe∣ror.
What? Seignior, interrupted Axalla, can it be true you tell me? and has the Daughter of Bajazet before this last Captivity felt the miseries of a former one? Alas, an∣swered Adanaxus, it is but too cer∣tain for my repose: yes, Axalla, it is the Father of Neris, to whom Tam∣berlain has procured all these mis∣fortunes; I am of that blood which is so justly hateful to her; but what heightens my affliction to the last extremity, is that I have made use of all my Rhetorick to get her to be delivered over to the barbarous Themir; and she may suspect me of having preferred a base and unwor∣thy complaisance for the desires of of my Father, to that fidelity which is redevable from me to her. Axalla could scarce recover him∣self out of this surprise, and any o∣ther besides the Prince would have had a difficult task to convince him of the reality of what he then heard; but his sincerity not leav∣ing
in him any room to doubt of so extraordinary a truth, and fore∣seeing the disorders that this acci∣dent was likely to bring into the Imperial House of Tartary. Ah! Seignior, said he to the Prince with grief, how fatal is this Neris to those States where her destiny has con∣ducted her, and how cruel a way does she take to revenge Bajazet of the rigours of his captivity: let us not think of the revenges she may exercise over the Children of Tamberlain, answered Adanaxus, and reflect upon nothing but how to make her know the real senti∣ments of Arsanes: If I did follow my transports, I should indeavour to find at her feet either my death or justification; but yet I am not less respectful than she is cruel; my sight would possibly trouble her and yet I study the tranquillity of her life: go then, and see her, I con∣jure you, you are now acquainted with our Interests; improve those
of the passionate Adanaxus; the tears that Neris sheds, have not con∣cealed her anger from me, and whe∣ther she considers me as the son of the Tyrant, or as a Lover that is unworthy of her, it is most cer∣tain that she indeavours to shun me. So far as Axalla durst venture himself in the favour of Adanaxus, being more generous then he was politick, he made him a promise to do whatsoever he desired; where∣upon the Prince reassumed some hopes, but they were cruelly abu∣sed; when Axalla told him, that having been to see Asteria, his en∣trance into her apartment had been refused him. This indignity was very outragious to such a person as he was; but he presently under∣stood that this was an effect of The∣mir's precautions, and of Odmar's counsels; and the only thing he then could do, was to advise the Prince to patience; but yet it was not in his power to keep him from
making his complaints to the Empe∣ror of the severities that were ued to Asteria. Seignior said he to him, Baja∣zet is dead; there only now re∣mains a fair young Princess in your fetters, whose Eminence and Sex should make you dispense with suf∣fering her to feel the weight of them; yet, Seignior, after the death of a Father whom she so dearly loved, in a time that she is capable of nothing but tears; her guards are doubled, she is reduced to seek her consolati∣on in her grief, and you use such rigorous and cruel securities, as if she was capable of troubling your Empire, or of tearing your Con∣quests from you: and what opini∣on of the Tartars will this treat∣ment cause all the rest of the World to have, Seignior? they will take us to be Barbarians, and that not without reason; a little more mild∣ness would make them frame more advantageous Ideas of us, and the
Princess Asteria would have the less to suffer, and the less to complain of. I do not mean Asteria shall play the Tyrant here, answered Tamberlain, nor do I think a Con∣querour who has destined her for his Son, ought not to give any ad∣vantageous Idea's of his clemency. You are convinced of her hatred for Themir, as likewise of what she is able to make him undertake to shun it; it is that consideration which makes me permit those pre∣cautions he has taken; if she was less violent, I would command you to go and see her, and indeavonr to perswade her, but you are the Son of Tamberlain, and that is suffi∣cient to keep her from hearkening to you. The Prince would fain have returned his Father an answer, and possibly would have accquain∣ted him▪ with the reason of his be∣ing so sensible of Asteria's captivity, but the Emperor did not give him time to do it, but went out about
some important affair. Adanaxus clearly perceived that he could not change the faoe of things, and therefore retired▪with his mind full of a thousand bloody imaginati∣ons. In those measures the Artificious Odmar had caused Themir to take, there was not a word mentioned of Adanaxus, for fear it might be thought it was a result of his hatred, and of their first fallings out: and Odmar, who was continually im∣proving himself in the favour of the Prince of Tanaïs, that so he might prevent appearances, would not at all be seen in the matter, but con∣tented himself with secretly▪ ma∣king the dangerous poison to work of which his breast was so full: He sought out whatsoever might dis∣cover to him the intrigue between Asteria, and Prince Adanaxus, and the effect did so abundantly recom∣pence his cares, that by seducing two of the domestiques, he came
to understand that they had their first acquaintance at Constantinople, and that Adanaxus had not run through so many remote places as they had follow'd him to, but only to find her out. Odmar overjoy'd at this new assurance, confirmed Themir that his brother was now his Rival, and redoubled a rage in him, the effects of which were preven∣ted by those very reasons before mentioned. In this manner two Months were spent, Themir daily proved Asteri∣a's persecutor which made her lead a life suitable to the grief she had up∣on her, Adanaxus was perpetually languishing for her, and the Empe∣ror suffered all things to run which way was most agreeable to the Son whom he little better then ado∣red. One night, when Adanaxus could take no repose, he went out of his own apartment into a great long Terrace, full the length of Tam∣berlain's
palace; the Princess's chamber joyned to it, and it was to be neer it at least that he chose that place to pass away his hours of inquietude: The Moon shone very bright, and the Prince of Tanaïs had no sooner leaned himself against one of the Ballisters that incom∣passed the Terrace, but turning his head at the noise of some sighs he heard emitted near him, he per∣ceived a Lady whom he immediate∣ly knew to be the Princess: her guards, less severe then their Ma∣ster, permitted her that liberty, which she only made use of in the night, and she had so little a de∣sire of discovering her self to him, that she did whatever she could to prevent his seeing of her: Not that she did not know Adanaxus, but to prevent her errour, she was going to deprive him of her com∣pany. But the Prince did not give her time to do it; he came, and threw himself at her feet, and
kept her by an amorous violence; notwithstanding all her▪ indea∣vours to get away from him. 'Tis true her heart did not absolutely give way to those resentments; but a motion more powerful then despite, pleading in Adanaxus's fa∣vour, did somewhat qualify an an∣ger that could not withstand the imperious force of Love, and made that innocent joy prevail of seeing a person dearly beloved af∣ter so long and tedious an absence; the Prince was offering several times to speak, without being able to find expressions: this silence was looked upon by Asteria as a Remorse, though she found her self disposed to pardon him if he was truly penitent, yet she had no mind to make a present discovery of her weakness to him; what transports do bring you again to Asteria's feet, said she to him, is it in favour of Themir that you come with this submission, and
do you address your self to me, as to the unfortunate Bajazet, to desire my hand for the murtherer of my Brother? This reproach gave the Prince of Tanais some new hopes, and as jealousie is not a work of in∣difference, he thought if that was the real cause of Asteria's anger, he ought not to believe it invincible. I do not lye at your feet as Themir's protector, Madam, replied he, it is my Love, which absence and time has not the power to diminish, that has brought me hither again: And if I have demanded the daughter of the Turkish Emperour for the Son of Tamberlain, it was through my igno∣rance that his Asteria was my adora∣ble Neris. Did not you know it, in∣terrupted the Princess, have you been the only person in Paleologus's Court, who has been ignorant of it? my return to Bursia madé a sufficient noise to be publickly known; and I am assured there is not one that dwels at Constantinople, who has not
heard that Neris was Bajazet's daugh∣ter. Ah! Madam, replied the Prince, do you think your loss permitted me to wait patiently at Constantinople, for the effects wherewith it must needs be attended, and do you be∣lieve, Adanaxus, who had endea∣voured to make you understand how absolutely he was at your devotion, could after your departure with a∣ny quietness live in a City where on∣ly your fair eyes had the power to keep him? Ah Neris, how injurious is this suspicion, and how ill a cha∣racter have you framed of my Love, if you have been capable of any? being overwhelmed with grief for your absence, I could not find any Asylum for my despair, but was for∣ced to bear it with that ardor, which is inseparable from the most passio∣nate adorers over unknown Seas, and through the desarts of Africa, and without ever being frightened at a thousand deaths which were daily present to my eyes, I still con∣tinued
my wandring, and guided only by my grief, even to that mo∣ment in which my destiny proved so happy as to bring me to you again; and yet you have accused me for having unworthily heard news of you in Paleologus his Palace, and possibly upon that reflection have hated me. What, interrupted Aste∣ria once more, is it possible that you should not have had any know∣ledge of the truth of my conditi∣on? No, Madam, pursued Ada∣naxus, I have heard nothing but what has preserved me in my errors; as soon as ever you disappeared, a violent, as well as hasty seizure re∣duced my life almost to its last peri∣od; and I was yet languishing un∣der that distemper, when I embar∣ked to find you out through all the places of the World. Remember, cruel Asteria, the confidence you made me, and judge whether I ought to look for you in Bursa, whom I thought in Egypt, in Mauritania,
in Ethiopia, or in any other part of Africk, could I inform my self of Bajazet's daughter, when I was running after an African Lady, and could I, to say no more, be in that remission you suspected me of, since I gave you what reserve all the movements of my life, and all the affections of a heart, which you have wrong'd by your mistrustful∣ness? The Princess hearkened to Ada∣naxus his Justification with all that content and satisfaction which the certainty of a happiness that one desires and hopes for could produce. I confess, said she to him, when he had done speaking, my suspicions have been unjust; but, Seignior, consider whither I could do less, ha∣ving such probabilities of the truth of your desertion, I was perswaded you must needs know me, and at a time wherein as much a Son of Tam∣berlain, and Brother of Themir as you were, I looked upon you still
no otherwise then as a Prince that was very dear to me, then as a Man in whom the blood of our Tyrants did strike no horrour in me; you came back to Samarcanda, you did to speak the truth, do a great ser∣vice for Bajazet, but you refused to see me; and went to demand me of my Father for one that was a Barbarian, whom I have a thousand reasons to detest; was not all this enough to allarm my tenderness, can you find any thing in my resent∣ment to complain of, if you consi∣der the cause of it, had not an in∣difference after such an occasion been more injurious for you, then the anger which I have not been a∣ble to conceal? Yes, Madam, an∣swered the Prince of Tanaïs, you have too many reasons to look up∣on me as guilty, and I have a thou∣sand more to be eternally sensible of your favour and goodness: But my Princess, ought I not to fear that those great Events which have a∣stonished
all the earth, those tean and sufferings which mine have pro∣cured to you, the outrages you have received from them, and the persecution you are still exposed to besides this birth which I owe to Tamberlain, should change my de∣stiny, and keep me from finding in Asteria the Adorable Neris? Seig∣nior, pursued she, Asteria will alwayes have the same esteem for you as the Slave of Paleologus▪ had, and she is already sufficiently in∣debted to you not any longer to conceal from you, that you have had as great a share in her tears, as the effects of that fortune which has authoriz'd the shedding of them, as the deaths, the Prisons, and the ruin of a glorious Empire have sometimes given to other remem∣brances; and I confess, that even in this moment I am now speaking to you, all my sorrow is removed by the joy of my finding you ac∣cording to my desires. I should be
ungrateful, cryed the Prince▪ if I would not sacrifice my whole life to estify my acknowledgements of your favours, and indeed what is there I ought not do to render my self worthy of the glorious esteem of my Princess! I am convinced you deserve more, pursued Asteria, and the kindness I have for you is no less redevable to your merit then your services; but, Seignior, how different is our destiny at Samarcan∣da from what it was at Constantino∣ple, every thing went opposite to the desires of Andronicus, and here all things contribute to those of Themir; the Emperour bears him out in hiscruelty; the People ap∣plaud his crimes; and I have no∣thing but my hatred to stand by me. You make nothing then of my Love, pursu'ed the Prince, do you think that shall be idle whilst The∣mir is so active? Pray, Madam, judg more kindly of it, it cannot be either weak or fearful, since it is
inspired by you and the zeal of it will not suffer any thing to be diffi∣cult, to give you a discovery of its ardour, yes, Madam, whilst I in∣joy my life, I will be an invincible obstacle to the vows and protestati∣ons of Themir; I know very well there's no way in the World which he will not attempt to take it from me; but if the Tartars fear him, without vanity I may say they love me; the Emperour may in little time be less blind, and more reaso∣nable, and with some help possibly I may e're long present to my Prin∣cess a more happy condition, then that I am as yet constrained to see her languish in. This hope has no prospect of likelyhood in it, repli∣ed Asteria, and how favourable soe∣ver Tamberlain may be to you when those changes shall come upon him, as you fancy; yet he will never be favourable enough to give the pre∣ference of Themir: and then what designs will not your Brother con∣trive
against your life? He is cruel, mbitious, violent, and what is more, Adanaxus, he is jealous, he knows that we have formerly been acquainted, though by what means, it has yet been impossible for me to learn. But I will assure you since my Father's death he hath given me such Intimations of it, as I've but too plainly understood. Fear no∣thing from it, Madam, answered the Prince of Tanaïs, I am no lon∣ger that weak and diffident Adanax∣us, whom thedominering carriage of an elder Brother did formerly send away from Samarcanda, I am now a passionate Lover, that will defend what he adores against all the at∣tacks of an insulting and audacious Rival, I will firmly maintain by my courage the glorious ambition of deserving you; and when it shall be imploy'd for that honour there is not any danger that can shock the resolution of Adanaxus. The Prince would have held the
conversation longer, but that Aste∣ria, who was fearful of being surpri∣sed intreated him to retire, but not without a mutual promise of loving one another, in spight of all the op∣positions that might combat with their passion. Adanaxus spent the rest of the night in a joy he had ne∣ver before resented: Nothing more could be desired from Asteria, and if Themir did prove his persecution, the trouble was not weighty e∣nough to ballance the pleasure he had in thinking how tender he was in the affections of his Princess: but whilst he was thus diverting himself with the pleasantnessof his thoughts, his destiny was cruelly preparing for him new traverses. Themir now no longer doubt∣ed Adanaxus being his Rival, both what Odmar had drawn from some of his own Servants, and the other Circumstances in Bajazet's Prison, made it clear to him; but still as Od∣mar was never without his spyes,
for he employed I know not how many creatures for that purpose, he presently heard of the interview in in the Terrace, and the two lovers who thought they had had no other witnesses of their conversation than the Night and their love, were both seen and heard. Themir was even ready to burst with rage at it, Od∣mar likewise was put into a strange fury, and after a long times consi∣deration about what was most con∣venient to be done, the advice was that Adanaxus should be permitted to make an attempt that might be more convincing, that so they may demand reason of the Emperour: But Odmar, pursued Themir, to what end should we give him far∣ther time, for him to do me more outrages, are not the affronts he has done me already great enough? No Seignior, added Odmar, all that you can do at present, will neither re∣establish your repose nor the safety of your love: But urge the Empe∣rour
to put Asteria into your posses∣sion, since you are so desirous to be united to her. Ah, but what shall we do with Adanaxus, interrupted the cruel Themir? What Seignior, answered Odmar, what other Prin∣ces do that are enraged with those things which prove their trouble, leave to me the concern of his de∣stiny, it shall be such as shall be wor∣thy of his boldness. Well then, pur∣sued Themir, il'e rest upon your ad∣vice, and demand of the Emperour the last sureties of his love. At these words Themir went to find out Tamberlain, but as he was coming into the Terrace where the Prince of Tanais had entertained A∣steria, he perceived him at the other end of it, the sight of Adanaxus, and the place where he thought he had so lately met with a very sensible outrage inflamed his fury; he strait forgot Odmar's advice, and fancying his Brother was only walking there to see the Princess, he made up to
him with a precipitation that argued his impatience: The young Prince very prudently shunned him, per∣ceiving his rage: But Themïr obser∣ving it; Stay, said he to him, and give me an account of the reasons that make you look after my Ca∣ptive, and of those secret plots you have laid to night against me. Speak with more respect of so great a Prin∣cess, as you think worthy to be made your Spouse, replyed Adanaxus, looking upon him very fiercely, and consider that you demand a satisfa∣ction from a man that owes you none, and who is not now in a hu∣mour to give you any. What, cry∣ed Themir, do you think to brave me after you have offended me, or do you imagine that my resentment will spare you? I have suffered so much from your pride, pursued A∣danaxus, as I am resolved to bear with it no longer: who has given you the priviledge of commanding
a person over whom you have no o∣ther advantage than what the name of Elder Brother affords you, that you think to make your self his Ma∣ster or Emperour? I ought not to give you an account any otherways than in sacrificing you to my ven∣geance, interrupted Themir, putting his hand upon his sword, and I owe my self that sacrifice upon too many reasons: A very weighty blow was the consequence of Themir's words, which hit upon Adanaxus's shoulder, who avoiding the second, put himself into a posture of defence and would have done it in such a manner as would have been fatal to Themir, if Axalla with some other Tartars of quality, brought thither by the noise they made, had not come and flung themselves between them. Themir was so base as to strike the Prince of Tanaïs in the arms of those that held him, but seeing it was impossible for him to satisfie his revenge; Your indiscreet zeal deprives my resent∣ments
of a victim I am going now to demand of the Emperour, said he to those that kept him off from the Prince. Away he went as soon as he had spoke these words, and Ada∣naxus continuing the discourse, You will not, pnrsued he, let him come before the Emperour, without gi∣ving me the liberty of going to de∣fend my self? We will follow you thither if you please, Seignior, re∣plied Axalla: Let us go then, con∣tinued the Prince, who came to Tam∣berlain almost as soon as Themir. Im∣mediately the Emperour cast his eyes upon the blood that ran from the wounds of the young Prince, and he was not so little in his affections, as to behold it without a trouble: what blood is that which runs down your cloaths, Adanaxus, said he to him, It is mine, answered the Prince of Tanaïs very modestly: From whom comes this, pursued the Em∣perour, with looks that sufficiently denoted the passion he was in? Is
there any in Samareanda that dares lift up his hand against you? Yes, Seignior, interrupted the violent Themir, there are those that would give him death if you did not hin∣der them, and in it give him that punishment he deserves, in affront∣ing me with so much boldness as he has done: I have a thousand things to accuse him, he has done me secret offences, and when I would have had him given me an account why he did so, with scorn he answered me. As for my discourse, said Ada∣naxus, it has been a great deal more moderate than it ought, and as for my action, I believe I could defend a life; for which the Emperour still reserves some kindness. Tamberlain then knew with an excess of grief, that his Sons found it difficult to vanquish that violent an∣tipathy which had disunited them, since that six years absence had not wrought any change upon them. Though he did in his heart condemn
Themir, and render justice to the discretion of Adanaxus, yet he had such a tender love for the former, as to sacrifice all his equity to him, and desiring to reconcile them, Heaven, said he to them, surely has not brought you together, to en∣gage you in new quarrels, which are so hateful to it: Shall I ne∣ver see you in that happy state of friendship, which would render your lives and my repose pleasant to me? shall it be in a continual uneasie∣ness by your divisions? Adanaxus, said he to the young Prince, do something to please me, testifie to Themir that you are sorry for the outrage you have done him: And, you pursued he, addressing himself to the other, receive the submission of your Brother as becomes you: No Seignior, interrupted Themir, just as Adanaxus, who had resolved to sacrifice his resentment to the com∣mands of the Emperour, was going to obey him; I will not pardon him,
but let him know by the vengeance you owe me, that he is not to go unpunished who will dare to offend him that has the advantage of being your eldest Son. Whatever dispo∣sitions the Emperour of the Tartars had to favour Themir, yet this vio∣lent procedure was very displeasing to him: You may be sure I would punish Adanaxus if he were crimi∣nal, replied he, but I do not see he is so, for having defended a life which you assaulted, without con∣sidering that he is my Son as well as you, and if the priviledge of birth has given you some advantages, that ought not to make any difference between you in my breast, do not you give me the disquiet of seeing you rebellious to my will: Submit your self to it Prince, since I com∣mand it you. I must acknowledge my trouble, Seignior, in that I can∣not be so obedient as I ought, pursu∣ed Themir, but the crime of Ada∣naxus then will have very strange
consequences: you ow to my re∣pose and possibly to my life what I now demand of you: and since you refuse it me I find that I am less hap∣py than I thought my self to be, and that my loss would not be very con∣siderable to you. He went out at those words, and Tamberlain who lo∣ved him more dearly than all the world, (though he learn'd the truth of what had passed from other faith∣ful persons and from Axalla, in whom he repos'd his greatest confidence▪) commanded Adanaxus to do what he could to get the friendship of his Brother. If Asteria be grateful, ad∣ded he, you have a sure way to ap∣pease the resentment of the cruel Themir, Bajazet is no longer in a condition to impose any laws upon her, intercede for your Brother, and do your endeavours to overcome an unjust a version: She ought to esteem you and credit you, after what you have done for her; and if you can in∣cline her to be favourable to Themir▪
you will engage him to your friend∣ship and to clemency, and you will procure me a repose, which it is im∣possible for me to injoy, so long as you are disunited. The Prince of Tanais found in himself no disposition to give him that obedience he desired: There were within him such obstacles a∣gainst it as were not to be vanquish∣ed, and perceiving the Emperour fix'd upon the happiness of Themir, he went away from him, resolving rather to perish, than to see Neris in the power of a Rival, and of such a one whom she mortally hated. But whilst by the diligence and care of Axalla, who waited on him, the Chirurgeons applied their reme∣dies to his wounds, Themir was on∣ly breathing out revenge: how he might destroy Adanaxus was the on∣ly thing he had been employed a∣bout since he had left the Emperour, and he was no less studious how he might sacrifice his brother to his im∣placable
hatred, than to possess him∣self of Asteria in spight of all right or reason. Tamberlain had put a kind of equality betwixt them, which made him almost mad, and in the fury he was then in, not Tam∣berlain himself was secure from the horror of his designs, he forgot that his Father had ever had any blame∣able weaknesses for any besides him∣self, and whatsoever he had done like an unjust man or like one enra∣ged, was a pure effect of his blind passion, the Prince of Tanaîs had of∣fended him and went unpunished, he could not digest the outrage, and it was in the Arms of his dear Od∣mar, that he went to seek out his cruel consolations. I am betrayed, Odmar, said he to him▪ Adanaxus triumphs over the weakness of the Emperour, and he is ceased to be what heretofore he was. I thought it was sufficient to make my com∣plaints, to have my revenge granted, and that Tamberlain would have a∣bandoned
that Rival to the safety of my repose. But I am the Victim on the account of love, and if I give him time to gain upon that Spirit which is already wavering betwixt us, I may also be the victim on that of nature. But Odmar, he must pe∣rish, it must be all his blood that must satisfie my despair, and assure my pretensions. Well, Seignior, he shall perish, interrupted Odmar, with that fury that ordinarily follows the resolution of great crimes, and we will sacrifice to your repose a victim that is so much your due: Let us have an ungrateful captive, and if it be necessary let us carry your re∣venge even to Tamberlain, do you dissemble and leave to me the care of managing the rest. Adanaxus must needs fall under the designs that I have laid, and that love which so much crosses yours, must be the occasion of his ruine. I will cause him to be suspected by the Emperour for making an attempt upon his
Throne and upon his Life, and in∣velop him in the horrors of a crime of which I shall not find it difficult to contrive sufficient probabilities. Tam∣berlain is jealous of his glory, and of the Soveraign Authority. Ada∣naxus shall dye hated by his father, his Ruine shall appear legitimate, you shall enjoy the tranquillity that that can procure you▪ and if the Em∣perour by an unheard of inconstan∣cy, protects him and abandons you, you shall then break out, the revolt will be permitted you, and it may be something more. But Prince, pur∣sued Odmar, perceiving Themir to grow pale, you change colour what makes you to despair, does nature still seem to work in you? Ah! think that Adanaxus is beloved by the un∣grateful Asteria, and that he may yet usurp the power and influence you have got over the Emperour's mind, to stir you up to a revenge that is legitimate. These fatal counsels which flatter∣ed
Themir's fury, began to work a calm upon his spirit, he resolved to feign obedience to the commands of Tamberlain, whilst Odmar was laying his designs, and the Emperour at last taking that dissimulation for a sincere return, forgat the disquiets that their enmity had raised in him. But whilst Themir, whose jealousie still kept up his cruel humour, hid his bloody intentions under indiffe∣rent appearances, the Princess Aste∣ria had some secret fore-notices of it. She was not ignorant of what the unmerciful Prince was capable, and when Odmar was labouring the performance of his horrible designs, she trembled for the Prince whom they threatned. At first the joy of finding Adanaxus faithful again was resented without having any thing to trouble it, but representing to her self to what perils his love exposed him; Alas! said she, if the Prince of Tanaïs came back to Samarcanda,
but to serve as a Victime to the cru∣elties of Themir, wherefore has he justifyed himself? I was not any whit concerned in his life, so long as I doubted his heart; but he is innocent, and now my tenderness makes me sensible of all that inte∣resses him, Ah! Themir, spare his blood, if you have any considera∣tion for my life, or at least com∣pleat all thy crimes by the death of Asteria. The Princess made not these com∣plaints upon light and trivial con∣jectures, Themir was not reserv'd enough punctually to observe the si∣lence that Odmar imposed upon him; and being transported by his choler, when he was with the Princess, he gave her by his threatning very great suspicions of some bloody en∣terprise. Time made his intentions break forth, Odmar gave out such orders aswere very faithfully executed, and they Iaboured night and day to
make the Prince suspected by the Emperour. The weakness he had for Themir, was not the only one of which he was▪capable; whatsoever concerned his authority, was very afflicting to him, and he was jealous of it after an extraordinary manner. Odmar had found some persons▪ whom the hopes of raising their for∣tunes had made his creatures▪ and caused several hints to be given to Tamberlain, which all agreed in the main, yet they came from dif∣ferent persons. His quality of be∣ing Governour of Themir and those places of eminence he was in, made him greatly honoured among the Tartars, and having spent his whole life in Cabals, and by a tedious con∣sultation thought upon all things that made to his advantage, and was pleasing to him, it was not dif∣ficult for him to hit upon such trea∣sons as he had contrived against him, and to gain persons of the same constitutionsand temper as he wasat
last by his wicked and malicious or∣ders, the first thing that shocked Tamberlain's spirit, and that submit∣ted reason and truth to the weak∣ness of fear, was a person's telling him that Adanaxus had held very blamable correspondencies with Bajazet: Which was presently back∣ed with anothers acquainting him, that being most passionately in love with his Daughter, he had returned to Samarcanda only to quit him from his fetters; that he had seve∣ral times made an attempt upon the fidelity of the Oltoman Prince's Guards to procure his escape; that he sided with his Sons, in the de∣sign of coming to seek their re∣venge of him; that to that pur∣pose he held secret Intelligences with the Tartars, and that an In∣testine War joyned to the former fu∣ry of the Turks rallied by Bajazet's Sons, might produce very great changes in his Empire. To these false conjectures were added the
reasons of Adanaxus's extraordina∣ry Rhetorick and earnestness to save Bajazet from his deserved pu∣nishment, and of his care and pains to render the irksomeness of his pri∣son as pleasant to him as he could: besides they refreshed the Empe∣rours memory with the excess of grief the Prince had discovered at Bajazet's death; his private confe∣rence in the night on the terrace with Asteria, the difference that had been between him and Themir, and in a word all things that might put an evil interpretation upon the acti∣ons of the innocent Prince of Ta∣naïs. Tamberlain, who upon the like occasion would have lost all af∣fections for Themir, presently empty∣ed his breast of all for Adanaxus, and not being capable of examining any thing, he ordered that Odmar should be found out, to whom he told all that this treacherous base man knew a great deal better then himself; and after a great many
threats, the cruel Tartar vehement∣ly uttered against the young Prince, he commanded him to go and secure Adanaxus's person, and to carry him to the Tower of Samarcanda. Pardon me, Seignior, answered the d'issembling Odmar, if I beg of you not to lay this command upon me, how criminal soever the Prince of Tanaïs is, he is the Emperours Son, and the Brother of an illustrious Prince, whom I have had the ho∣nour to bring up; and I don't find my self powerful enough to go and be the pronouncer of his mis∣fortune. I have a horror for his wicked designs, as I have pitty for his Youth. You are his Father, Seignior, use some indeavours upon that occasion and try your utmost efforts to moderate your resent∣ments, the perfidious wretch spoke after this manner, being very well perswaded that Tamberlain was too deeply prepossessed with his fear to hearken to him. What Odmar, said
he to him, do you advise me to a Indulgence which will it may be both cost me my Empire and my life? Your pitty is unjust, and I cannot too severely punish the am∣bitious Adanaxus: but yet I will not constrain you; but Calib, con∣tinued he, perceiving the Captain of his Guards coming in, shall be charged with the Commissions that you refuse. In short, he appointed Calib, who being much about the fame humour with Odmar, went presently to the apartment of the Prince of Tanais with a considera∣ble Number of the Emperour's Guards. He was alone when Calib came in, for Axalla had just before left him; his love, his justification, and his quarrel with Themir was for several hours the Subjects of their discourse; and he was still reflecting upon what they had said, when he per∣ceived Calib coming in, what would you have, said the Prince to him▪ not
ery well knowing him? Your word, Seignior, replied Calib, which the Emperour commands you o put into my hands, and to go long with me to the Tower of Sa∣arcanda: As I had never been wont to receive the honour of any visits from Calib, answer'd Adanax∣is, I thought at first he only came thither to make me some extraordi∣nary complements, shall I not see the Emperour continued he, and will you tell me nothing of my crime? I have no further orders, Seignior, replied Calib, then to conduct you to the Tower: and for the satis∣faction you desire of me, I must con∣fess, I was never made a Confident of the secrets of my Master. You act discreetly, replied the Prince; here Calib, take the Sword that you de∣mand of me, the name of the Em∣perour shall make me at any time render my arms; let us go to the Tower you are to conduct me to; if I ever do come out of it, I will
not forget that you were my guide thither, and besides will be mind∣ful of your discretion. Calib re∣turned him no answer, because that Adanaxus just then went out. They were to cross the great terrace to go into one of the Courts of the Palace where the Charriot waited that was to carry him. Asteria was leaning at her Chamber-Window, and thinking on the Prince of Tana∣ïs, just as he saw him in the midst of Tamberlain's Guards without his Sword, though she had been fan∣cying him a thousand times in that posture before then, yet was not her surprise less great; she gave a horrible shriek, which obliged the Prince to cast his eyes that way, and he had no sooner done so, but he perceived her sinking into the arms of Xaira. The news of his misfortune would have been a great deal less dreadful to her then this accident proved: He used all his Oratory to perswade Calib to per∣mit
him the favour of going to his Princess; but whether through fear r crueltie, the Tartar would not onsent to it: but he was obliged o go to the Tower without any more delay, where he was shut up. As soon as he was come thither, they ook care to redouble Asteria's Guards; and besides the affliction she was in, to know that her servant was become a Prisoner, she was de∣prived of the consolation of having daily intelligence from him, being afforded no other company but that of Themir's of all the Servants she ad at Samarcanda. The Prince of Tanaïs his being carried to prison occasioned a very considerable noise in Tamberlain's Court; he was generally beloved, and his destiny was in a high degree lamented, and amongst the most grave and sober sort of persons, there were but few of them who would not with all their Souls have done his vertue justice: But there was
nothing to be done in his favour: the zeal of his friends was now un∣profitable to him, and against both the commands and the pleasure of the Emperor, the generous Axalla, as being the most perswaded of Ad∣anaxus's innocence, became the most sensible of his misfortune: he saw no likelyhood of undeceiving a weak Father, so great a Lover of his fortune, and prevented by Im∣postors, who too well knew his humours and his fears, and had ma∣naged their business with a great deal of prudence and safety; but however he went to see the Empe∣ror and to speak to him concerning the Prince, but he was presently commanded silence; and judging that he might indanger himself to be suspected, and consequently to lose his liberty, if he spake any more to a Man, who by his trans∣port had made himself uncapable of understanding reason, he retired with an extream regret but as he did
not so much fear his disgrace any otherwise then as it might give him an absolute defeat from being any longer in a condition of serving Adanaxus, he made it his business to gain over to him the gallantest persons of the Court, that he like∣wise might have a party to speak in the favour of Adanaxus, and la∣bour his justification, and try if they could not in time melt down Tam∣berlain's heart into some tenderness for his captiv'd Son. In the mean time Themir was tri∣umphing; Odmar's projects met with such successful beginnings, that he could not but expect the consequen∣ses of them would be resembling: The Emperour would hearken to nothing but the counsels of his Rage and Error, and the ruine of the Prince of Tanaïs appearing now past all prevention unto the contri∣vers of it, his barbarous Brother was before hand pleasing himself with the agreeable thoughts of it;
and his hopes buoying him up, with such a delightful flattery, he went directly to Asteria, whom he found in a condition conformable to her grief. But in spight of all her tears and heaviness, (more charming then ever yet she had appeared to the sight of Themir) her eyes, which an extraordinary paleness rendered languishing, were not∣withstanding full of a Majestick cho∣er; she was then sitting upon a Couch, and without ever rising off it, she thus addrest her discourse: Are you come, said she to him, to make your boast that you have re∣duced Adanaxus to a Prison, as a new instance of you crueltie? Is he only guilty because he has with pitty resented the unhappinesses of Bajazet? And as this compassion obliges me to have a resembling in∣terest for him, should you have proved false to you furious trans∣ports upon my consideration, if you had spared him? I ought to have
done that which you reproach me for, answered the unjust Prince of Tartary, and this Rival sufficiently deserves my hatred, since I ow your aversion to him. You only ow it to your crimes, interrupted Asteria, to those barbarous sentiments which have made you find such sweetness in the death of Ortobulus, in the ruine of my Mother, in the loss of Bajazet, in my captivity, and in a word in all your unworthy threat∣nings of me. Thus Madam, repli∣ed Themir, you impute all the events of fate to me, and I am culpable still, because Adanaxus conspires against the Emperour. I shall not go about to justify my self any lon∣ger to you; but fear least you do not quite exhaust my patience; such a haughty pride does not alwayes meet with submissive Souls, and since I have suffered so much from your ingratitude, I may very law∣fully make use of my rights and pri∣viledges. I understand your mena∣ces,
pursued the Princess; but since I have nothing more to fear for Bajazet, they have not the pow∣er to frighten me: consider▪ Hea∣ven sometimes puts bounds to its an∣ger, it is not alwayes deaf to the prayers of the unfortunate and mise∣rable, but does reserve still its thun∣ders for the punishments of Tyrants. You ought then to make a Tryal, answered Themir, how far one may go without its succour and to begin to make a more profitable use of my Authority. I confess I am tyred out with those tedious and servie respects I have paid you, and in a short time, you shall either consent to my desires, or else not be in a condition to bring any obstacle to them. He went away as he ended those words; and though they had struck a terror into the Princesses soul, yet it was no small relief to her to see the Barbarian go out of her room, and leave her the liberty of finding consolations in her constancy
against all the afflictions she was o'rewhelm'd with. Axalla, and his friends did in∣cessantly labour to put a stop to the most pressing of them, they exami∣ned with all the care they could, when were those moments that the Emperour found in his breast any return of tenderness for his young Son, at last they began to find him in a humour to hearken to what might be said in his favour, then it was they conjured him to make a solid reflection upon Adanaxus's car∣riage, and what severity soever he resolv'd to use against him, he could not find any of his actions blame∣able, and deserving condemnation: his moderation in the unworthy treatments of Themir, his submissi∣on to the commands of the Empe∣rour, and particularly to the last he had received from him, coming again into his memory, he began to fear he had acted with too much precipi∣tation; and reproaching himself for
it as a default of paternal love, he perceived himself in one of those inquietudes which ordinarily do usher in a deep repentance. He was as soon come to himself as he had been provoked, being incapa∣ble of himself to be carried out to any great violences, but subject to a credulity which made him often take Chimera's for truths, and the wicked and poisonous counsels of flatterers for a sincere zeal. These kind of humours almost continually go from one extremity to the other, Tamberlain past from that so favou∣rably for the Prince of Tanaïs, that he could not take any comfort in his being so much inraged against him. I have been too cruel said he in those reflections, to condemn Adanaxus upon discourses which I've not given him time to op∣pose and answer: Those accusers, may not they be deceived in what they charge him with, and is his justification impossible? Weak
Prince, continued he, search into the procedures of your Son with more mildness and tranquillity; what, would you sacrifice him to your fears, and possibly to your er∣rors? Consider that a Prince ele∣vated upon the Throne of Asia ought to prevent accidents with a greater moderation; have you seen Adanaxus in the troops of Bajazet during that abscence which has de∣prived you of him? Has fame, that publishes all things, ever told you any thing of him that you have need to complain of? and in the extremity to which Bajazet was re∣duced when Adanaxus arrived at Samarcanda, can you find any pro∣bability that his return was design'd by the Ottoman Prince, or by his daughter? He saw him not but by thy orders, and did not obtain his life but by arguments very advanta∣geous to thy glory, and which it was impossible for thee not to yield to. Those very arguments which
have convinced me, become now thy crimes, thou wouldst make him suffer punishment for having perswa∣ded thee to be generous. No Tam∣berlain, do not thou become the talk or rather the horrour of the world by such an action, but seek the inno∣cency of thy Son and not his ruine, and if he be deeply smitten with the charms of that beauty, so fatal to the repose of thy blood, content thy self in bringing despair to his affection by giving that Asteria to Themir. This change of the Emperour was soon observed, by the friends and persecutors of the Prince of Tanaïs: Odmar was quite enraged at it, and did not doubt but that the love and care of Axalla did much contribute to it, he would with all his soul have destroyed him with Adanaxus, but how ruinously ingenious his en∣vy and revenge were, it could do nothing against Axalla's glory, and he was obliged to confine his rage
only in seeking out ways he thought might be most fit and proper to coun∣terplot him, in hindering the justi∣fication of Adanaxus. In the mean time Tamberlain came more and more to himself, and was considering among all those that were about him, who should be the man he had best pitch upon to be sent to examine the Prince of Tanais, and from his mouth to be informed when and how he got his acquaint∣ance with Bajazet and Asteria: af∣ter a great deal of balancing upon the election, he concluded that Tal∣mis should be the man, one who was of a considerable eminence a∣bout him, he was endowed with a great deal of wit and honesty, Tam∣berlain knew Adanaxus had a high esteem and service for him, and Tal∣mis appearing more fit than any o∣ther to take upon him such an office, and to discharge it with honour, re∣ceived the commands of the Empe∣rour, and performed them with as
much justice as zeal. He went to the young Prince, and addressing himself with all that respect which was due to the Son of the Emperour, he humbly beseeched him not to take it ill, if he propounded some questions to him that he had in com∣mission from his Father. Adanaxus satisfied with his submission, frankly told him all he had before acquaint∣ed Axalla with, and afterwards his surprise, when at the death of Baja∣zet he knew his Asteria again for Neris: Talmis being informed of the truth, made a very faithful recital of all the circumstances to the Em∣perour, and fortified them with ar∣guments that were so powerful for the innocence of the Prince, that Tamberlain was more than half per∣swaded of them, but yet he thought it prudence to see whether the Prin∣cess and Adanaxus would be found in the same story. He went to her Apartment early the next morning, and after he had excused himself for
the unseasonableness of the hour he had chosen; Madam, said he to her, I am not of right to flatter my self with the thoughts of obtaining any grace from you, yet I am come to demand one of you, upon which all my tranquillity does depend. The Princess thought that Tamberlain was come again to be sollicitous for Themir, and therefore looking on him very stedfastly, It is not likely in good earnest, replied she, you should effect a thing that the death of Bajazet has not been able to make me resolve upon. 'Tis not that now which brings me to you, pursued the Emperour, I only am come to demand of you how Adanaxus be∣gan his acquaintance with you▪ what correspondence Bajazet had with him, and what intelligences he may still have with your Brothers; and I swear to you, that were he convicted of a thousand designs ei∣ther upon my Empire or my life, A∣danaxus should find his pardon from
your confession, and that I will sa∣crifice my most just resentments to your sincerity. Thought the Prin∣cess could not much believe Tamber∣lain's discourse, yet because she had nothing to hazard in telling him the truth, she made him the very same relation as the Prince had done be∣fore to Talmis: but indeed if she did pass over her tender affections to him, it was easily discoverable, that she did it through modesty. It is sufficient Madam, said the Emperour to her when she had done speaking▪ I will keep my word with you, and set Adanaxus's Prison wide open to you. You will do him justice, an∣swered Asteria, and his innocence is manifest enough to oblige you to restore him his liberty. These stories agreeing together wrought a calm upon a great-part of Tamberlain's troubles, the sincerity of the Princess he himself discovered▪ Talmis was no way suspected by him, and nothing now remained but
only to confound the accusers of Adanaxus, the Emperour was just going to send for them when he saw Odmar coming up to him: The feign∣ed compassion he shewed for the un∣happiness of the Prince of Tanais, made Tamberlain believe he would receive abundance of joy at the ap∣pearances of his justification. Odmar, said he to him, the pity you have testified for my Son, and which I condemned in you was just: all things perswade me that he is not guilty, and you have appeared so sensible of his misfortune, that you cannot but receive as great a satisfa∣ction to learn the happy success of it. This was a thunderclap that made the perfidious Odmar think it would have struck him dead upon the spot, but as he was the best man in the world to manage a dissimulation, he concealed his trouble and confessed that he was overjoyed at this resolu∣tion. He asked the Emperour whence it proceeded, and by what means
he came to be informed of the Prince's innocence. Tamberlain with all the obliging civility imaginable, gave him an exact account of it, and continuing to entertain him with the same confidence; It is necessary, ad∣ded he, that those who have been the cause of Adanaxus's disgrace, should be examined before him, and that their punishment should re∣venge his glory, if he was not found guilty of any crime; make them to be sought out Odmar, they are known to you, and I my self will ex∣amine the source and progress of this calumny. Seignior, answered Odmar, so hasty a procedure will go near to exasperate them, therefore let us manage the business with more secrecy, and if you please to take my advice, do not discover your thoughts, one word is enough to allarm them, and their flight will defeat you of the revenge you may take, it will be hard for me to get them together, and bring them here
upon other pretences, give me on∣ly time to bring this to pass, and in the mean while conserve against the Prince Adanaxus, all the appearan∣ces of your first anger. This pre∣caution seemed reasonable to the Emperour, he embraced Odmar, and entrusting him with the conduct of this affair, he put a stop to the dis∣covery he so much desired. As soon as Odmar was gone from him, he gave his rage the full swinge, and after he had examined whatso∣ever might put things into disorder again, and make the accusations seem probable, he saw every way so many things to confound him, and so little security, that he thought he could not do better than to send away the informers. As they had done nothing without his orders, he immediately took this precauti∣on, and sent them from Samarcanda the same night, and having given them time enough to advance their flight, he went to find out the Em∣perour,
with a grief and perplexity in his face so admirably counterfeit∣ed that it appeared natural. I saw sufficiently, Seignior, said he to him, that there was but one word necessary to render your intentions publick, and to counterplot your absolute satisfaction: I have been in vain looking out for those whom I was charg'd to bring before you: they are fled, so that none of them are to be found in Samarcanda. Well then, answered the Emperour, this flight does fully convince me of the innocence of Adanaxus. If he had been guilty, his enemies would have stayed without ever fearing any thing of the event of this busi∣ness: Yet Odmar, we had best send so many in pursuance after them, that we may from some of them hear what is become of those fugitives. Yes, Seignior, answered the faith∣less Tartar, that is but requisice, and that I will labour with all the care I can. In short, he sent out several
persons, but he knew very well which way to send them so that they should never be the wiser: But yet all this could not be managed with∣out some noise: the friends of the Prince of Tanaïs had great resent∣ments of joy at it, and Axalla, who only was cautious of himself upon the consideration of Adanaxus, saw now that it was time to complete his happiness, and addressed himself to the Emperour to sollicite him for it: The Emperour presently yielded, and commanded him to go to the Tower, and bring the Prince from it: This was a very pleasing order to a person who had so tender a pas∣sion for him as Axalla had; he ac∣cepted of it with transport, and af∣ter he had continued with the Em∣perour a little while longer, to take away the reliques of his inquietude, he ran with the resembling fury of a Lover to his dear Adanaxus. Though the Prince could not expect any thing that might be fatal from
Axalla, yet he had a thousand dis∣mal Idea's in his fancy when he saw him: Must I then dye, my dear Ax∣alla, said he to him embracing him, and are you come to be a companion of my misfortune? No Seignior, an∣swered Axalla, I come to restore you liberty, which only your virtue and the justice of the Emperour has gi∣ven you. He then acquainted him∣with the change of his condition, the weak effort his enemies had made against him, and the Prince uncer∣tain of the consequences which that might occasion, appeared unshaken, he went towards the Palace, in∣forming himself by the way of Aste∣ria, and he had the joy to know by the acclamations of the people, that they had been as sensible of his im∣prisonment, as they were of his li∣berty. When he came up to the Empe∣rour he threw himself at his feer, which action made him blush through confusion, as it did also
cause him to sigh through repen∣tance. Adanaxus, said he to him, after he had done embracing him, I have not done any thing against you which I am not resolved to re∣pair, and as I no longer doubt but that the crimes you have been accu∣sed of are only forged, so I would already have revenged you of those who were the inventers of them, if they were not got out of the reach of my anger: To be plain with you, I am sufficiently sensible of your in∣nocence, for it I have believed my tender affections to you, and you are also redevable for one part of your justification to the Princess A∣steria. You have the freedom to go and pay her your acknowledgments for it, and judge of the return of my friendship, by this first effect of my indulgence. Adanaxus blushed to hear his Princess named; and it was not difficult for Tamberlain to interpret the emotion; but after he had learn'd from the Prince's mouth,
the same things that Talmis had re∣ported to him; You have a Rival in Themir, said he to him, whose pre∣tensions are strengthned upon my promises, and whom I cannot deny my protection against your flame, though I know that you have the ad∣vantage of a longer service, as well as of the gratitude of the Princess: But Adanaxus, is it not possible to conquer your self, and by a gene∣rous effort—Seignior, cryed the Prince, if I were unfaithful to Aste∣ria, I could become so to you: He that can prove a Traitor to his love will never have any great conside∣rations for nature, and I should ren∣der my self worthy of your Chains, if I were capable of doing the least effort to break those of the Prin∣cess. As the young Prince ended these words, Themir entred; his paleness expressed the despair he was in, and the looks he darted upon Adanaxus, sufficiently testified that his Soul was
full of a thousand bloody resoluti∣ons. Tamberlain seemed as if he did not mind them, and asked him if he came to share in his brother's joy to which he returned no answer, and the Emperour according to his usu∣al complaisance, not being willing to press him any farther, contented himself in giving to the Prince of Tanaïs the caresses that were due to him, and publickly protested that there were not any punishments which those who had unjustly accu∣sed him, ought not to expect. As soon as Adanaxus had the free∣dom to retire, he took the benefit of that the Emperour had given him, to see Asteria, and the jealous looks of Themir were not powerful e∣nough to prevent him from it. It would be very hard to tell, which of the two were the most sensible of the pleasure they resented in seeing one another again: Silence and sighs are the first marks of those kind of joys, and there is more said in an a∣morous
trouble and confusion, that in a set and orderly discourse. Oh▪ how eloquent were the eyes of A∣danaxus then, and how attentive were those of the Princess to hearken to them? As he entred he flung him∣self at her feet, and after he had been there a good while, without her having the least power to make him rise, at last, Madam, said he to her, the great mystery of my love is known to the Emperour, this know∣ledge has not hindered my liberty, and I am come to pay you my ac∣knowledgements for having procu∣red it me. What an honourable sa∣tisfaction is it to me to see my self prostrate at your feet, and not to ow it to any thing but your self. You ow me nothing for having done justice to a truth which was profitable to you▪ interrupted the Princess▪ and though I should not have this testimony to your services, my heart would have compelled me to render it you. Is it possible for
me to forget, without the last ingra∣titude, that you have been prodigal of your blood for Neris, treated a wretched Unknown like a Princess, run through Seas and Land to seek me out, and have done so many ge∣nerous services for the unfortunate Bajazet? You set too high a value upon those that are so little deserv∣ing, replied Adanaxus, but as for me my Princess, what do I not ow you, to suffer at your feet the Son of Tam∣berlain and the Brother of Themir? I do not confound the vices of The∣mir with your vertues, replied A∣steria, nor your services with the outrages that have been done me; and if I do hate your Brother as one that is worthy of my aversion, I love you, Seignior, because you deserve to be beloved, and because Bajazet has not imposed upon me such laws as are contrary to the sentiments of my breast. You see now my fears were but too well grounded, and you ought not to doubt but that
the misfortune you have escaped was a design of the Prince of Tartary, for the future take more precauti∣ons against him, let the Emperour know it was Themir that would have ruined you. Alas Madam, answer'd the Prince, the Empire that my Bro∣ther has over the mind of Tamberlain makes your commands be extreme∣ly difficult, none can accuse him without rendring himself at the same time suspected by the Emperour, and to testifie the least suspicion against him would be to prove my own de∣stroyer. And what will you do then pursued Asteria? Adore you, my Princess, interrupted Adanaxus with a melting fervency beyond expres∣sion, and this devotion shall be the glorious imployment of my life. Your fidelity is dear to me, replied she, but in this present occasion it is not sufficient for me, and if you love me you must think upon some way to conserve your self, and what would you do your self, Madam,
added the Prince, I would replied Asteria, despise Themir unto my last breath, render by my resistance all his pretensions useless, and though I would not do it for my self, believe me I would do it for you. Ah Ma∣dam, cryed the Prince of Tanaïs: ought I to be afraid of any thing af∣ter this glorious assurance? Alas, Seignior, answered Asteria, this as∣surance as sincere as it is, can it do any thing against Irons, Prisons, Im∣postors, and to conclude, against all the other ways that Themir is able to make use of to destroy you? Can my affection render you immortal, and am I more certain of your life, because I love you? Give me the sa∣tisfaction to see you mistrust all things, and then I shall value what∣ever you do to put your self in a condition that may secure you from your enemies. Yes Madam, pursued Adanaxus, I will obey, I will be care∣ful of my life, I will foresee, if it be possible, the designs that may be
hatched against me, and I will forget nothing that may make me capable of deserving the favours of my charming Princess. At the end of these discourses, and some others much resembling them, Adanaxus, who since he found that his Neris was Asteria, had never met with an opportunity to demand of her those adventures of hers that he was ignorant of; burning with an earnest impatience of knowing them, conjured her to give him a Relation of them which she presently consent∣ed to, and thus began her discourse▪
The History of the Princess Asteria. WHen Andronicus defeated the Turks who were to be my guide, I was going from Bursa to Sebastia to meet my Mother, who was to pass the Win∣ter with the Emperour; our Troops were on the side of Thrace, Bajazet had designs upon Constantinople, and it was not believed that in the Winter Paleologus his Sons, harde∣ned by the little opposition they found, would venture to go into the lesser Asia; but in their way they took us; I concealed my name, not knowing into what hands I was fallen; but having learnt it was in Andronicus's, and afterwards under∣stood his sentiments for me, I made
it my particular business to keep it from being known, and through the natural aversion I had for him, and the fear of seeing Paleologus ap∣prove of his Son's Love and of be∣ing the victime of a peace between the two Empires; it fell out very luckily for me that I did so, the Emperour of Greece would not au∣thorize an alliance unknown, and in all probability unequal; which gave me a very sensible joy, because my hatred for Andronicus augmen∣ted as soon as ever I had a sight of you. I quickly perceived how my heart pleaded in your favour by the trouble and melancholiness I resen∣ted, when I beheld you render your submissions with too much assiduity to the Princess of Greece: and time, and your procedure having as∣sured me of your heart, I blush'd sometimes to think I was the daugh∣ter of Bajazet, and that when I with scorn refused the vows of An∣dronicus, I hearkened with pleasure
to those of one unknown: but that confusion produced no effects which were not favourable to you. I told you nothing of my true birth, not so much out of any mi∣strustfulness, as out of a certain scruple I then had: I was very desi∣rous to know whether you had only a kindness for my person; but I did it out of policy, after you had told me yours. I was not ignorant of Tamberlain's hatred to the Otto∣mans: and fearing lest your senti∣ments should resemble his, I made that a secret to you, the reserve of which I thought I sufficiently re∣compenced by my weakness for you. I began in the mean time not to be in a power to be silent to you, but had insallibly told you all, if An∣dronicus had but for some days sus∣pended the design he had been me∣ditating since the unhappy success of his enterprise at Constantinople; but he made me be carried away then when I thought least of it, and those
fellows more hardly and resolute then those of the Emperour, imbar∣ked me in a Vessel, which in a short time brought us to a very strange and lovely House, which they were assured of. At first I accused the Emperour for this second carrying me away, but I was undeceived, when Andronicus reduced to his flight by the wicked success of those unfaithful enterprises of his against his Father, came to find me in the place where I had been conducted: I was fearful of all things from the violences of a desperate and furi∣ous Spirit; and therefore to inspire him with a greater respect then I thought he might have had to one unknown, I told him I was daugh∣ter to the Emperour of the Turks: This news appear'd to him to be much to his advantage, and he ima∣gined that in restoring me to Baja∣zet, he might not only obtain me from him, but he might with great∣er facility conquer his Father's Em∣pire,
in promising to share it with me. He then accquainted me with his design, and desired me to con∣sider of it as an effect of the passion he had to please me. You may ea∣sily believe that the hopes of re∣turning to Bajazet made me resolve upon some complaisance: at last we arrived at Bursa, and we were received there with all the joy that could be inspired into the Emperor, and my Mother, by the return of a daughter whose loss they had be∣wailed: The Grecian Prince had very extraordinary honours passed upon him, but when he explained his Intentions to Bajazet and that he perceived him much averse to fa∣vour them, he fell to reproaches, and from thence to threats, which had but too bloody effects. He went in great fury from Bursa, and mar∣ched towards his Father's Army, which he found driven back by the valour of Ortobulus, who had the command of ours in the Emperor's
absence, even within sight of Con∣stantinople. He made his peace by a thousand submissions, related his adventures, and seeing the Greeks every way weakned, he himself se∣creetly laboured the relieving of the Tartars. Tamberlain sollicited by Andronicus, and jealous of Bajazet's glory whom he hated, got toge∣ther all the forces of Asia, and brought where ever he went both horror and desolation. At last this Tamberlain famous by our disgraces, and eminent by our misfortunes, without any pitty burnt our Cities, sacrificed our people, and reduced, by that fatal success that did attend him, a Prince who was seen ready to share almost the World, with the rest of the Princes, to that de∣plorable condition into which he is fallen. Whilst these evils were happe∣ning, notwithstanding my grief I did not loose the remembrance of Adanaxus, nor forget the cares of
informing my self of him. I was confirmed of your absence, and was perswaded that you must needs learn who I was, I did imagine you had not gone from Tamberlain, but only to escape fighting with my Fa∣ther, and this very thought gave me a great consolation: at last Seignior, Bursa was ravaged, af∣terwards Sebastia, Themir haled us from the Palace, and made us take this voy age to Asia, where we were seen to follow the Chariot of that cruel Conquerour; and which cost my Mother her life. Our captivity preceded that of Bajazet's some few days, and I have often heard him say, that being over whelmed with a mortal grief, after Ortobulus's misfortune whom Themir had massa∣cred before his eyes, and the loss of the last battle, having suffered his Horses to carry him up and down without any design or hope through unknown desarts. He met with a Shepherd, who was all alone by
the side of a River pleasing himself with playing some rural airs upon his Oaten pipe, the Emperor look'd upon him a long time admiring at the sweetness of his condition, and then sighing: Oh! Too happy Shepherd, said he to him, how worthy is thy state of envy, to have nothing to spend but thy dayes, which bloody ambition never cros∣ses; Bajazet's calamities will furnish you with matter for your Songs, and you may hereafter in your pit∣tiful Numbers say, unfortunate Prince thou shalt never more see thy delightful Sebastia, nor thy dear Ortobulus. This Shepherd with the sight and words of the Emperour, offered him his little cottage, but that retreat was not very long servi∣ceable to him. Themir by his in∣quisition for him quickly resembled his fate to that of ours. She ended this discourse with a thousand tears, which made Adanaxus repent that he had been the unhappy cause of
them, and after he had imployed some time in drying them up, he left her, to teturn to the Empe∣ror. In the mean time Odmar was flat∣tering the transports of Themir with the hopes of a more successful crime, and promised him the ruine of Ada∣naxus with very powerful assuran∣ses, and counsel'd him to go once more, and make his last efforts to Asteria. Seignior, said he to the Emperor, I've now dispensed with all that has hitherto made me sup∣port the contempts of Asteria, will you give me your consent to impose upon her inclinations to make me happy, for I do not think you will authorize Adanaxus to thwart my pretensions, and especially upon the account of Asterïa, whom I may call my conquest, by the blood she cost me whilst he abandoned you▪ Indeed I have no intention to pre∣fer Adanaxus to you, answer'd the Emperor, but you have your liber∣ty
to satisfy your Love. But Son, are you stedfastly resolved to marry a Maid that cannot love you, who will look upon you as her Tyrant in your most pleasing moments, and become a torment to your Life. India, China, Egypt, Arabia, have Princesses, who will procure us such alliances as may be advantageous, and who are blest with charms, if Fame may be believed: You will bring▪ to your self a more quiet happiness, and the daughter of Ba∣jazet will see her folly punished by a contempt she will repent she had ever merited. No, Seignior replied Themir, I will have no other hap∣piness then that I demand of you. Well then added Tamberlain, give her some days respite to her mour∣ning. Seignior, interrupted The∣mir, Asteria will never soften by time, and it is unprofitable to throw it away. I will not prescribe you any long time, pursued the Empe∣ror, and then you shall have all my
Authority. Themir complyed with the Emperor and by an affected kind of submission got himself com∣mended for it. He presently went to fling himself at the feet of Asteria; and Adanaxus being a greater per∣secution to him then his love, he sought out Odmar, who advised him to give the Prince of Tanaïs the liberty of seeing the Princess for some few days, that so he may be deprived of it for ever. Adanaxus did not trouble himself about forming of bloody designs, but imploying all his desires to his Love, one obliging word from the Princess did move him more then the possession of an Empire could have done. He spent one evening with her with as much sweetness and tran∣quillity, as if he had neither had Rivals nor enemies, and was taking his leave of her with the ravishing joy of a successful Lover, when he heard a crying in the Palace, that
the Prince of Tanaïs was dead. It is impossible to express Asteria's re∣sentments at these pitiful cries, A∣danaxus was so newly gone from her that she had not had the time to undress her self since that separa∣tion▪ and to hear his death pro∣claimed, struck her with an asto∣nishment that gave her almost a mortal paleness, and she fell into a swoon that held her so long, as made her women believe she was quite expired. The cryes increased up and down the Palace, Tamberlain was fright∣ned at it, and Axalla enraged at the cruel destiny of so young a Prince, ran to the place where the massacred body lay (which was at the foot of a pair of Stairs that led to Asteria's Apartment.) He embraced it all bloody as it was, but it was not long e're by the light of several Flambeaus that the Servants brought, he dis∣covered that the person departed was Themir and not Adanaxus: Oh
how great was Axalla's joy? What was the surprise of Odmar in behold∣ing his dear hopes in the condition he thought the Prince of Tanaïs had been. The Emperour was also come to this place, and by his transports testified, how cruelly the loss of a Son so tenderly beloved, was like to be revenged. Adanaxus came thither too at the same time, and troubled at Themir's fate; how ex∣custable soever he would have been, if he had not bewailed it. Ah! Seignior, said he to Tamberlain, who∣soever is the murtherer of my Bro∣ther, he shall only dye by my hands. 'Tis I, interrupted Odmar, with an undaunted resolution, 'tis I who have given to the unfortunate The∣mir, that destiny which I only de∣signed for thee: and when I thought thy death certain, I my self was the publisher of it by my outcries. I saw you go to Asteria's Apartment, and having long since resolved thy destruction, I waited here to sacri∣fice
thee, to give a pleasing surprise to Themir by the noise of thy death, my first designs not having been suc∣cessful, I would not ow the execu∣tion of this last to any other hand, than mine own: but fortune has proved base to me, and betrayed my intentions, and Themir who in all likelihood would have prevent∣ed me with resembling ones, is now unfortunately fallen under the hor∣ror of my stabs▪ Odmar spake like a man despairing, who only owed his unhappiness to his crimes; and perceiving the astonishment that e∣very body was in by his discourse, gave him opportunity to pursue it. Themir was wicked through my care to make him so; continued he, for finding dispositions in him confor∣mable to my desires, I made it my business to improve the malignity of them: He was absolutely mine and I was ambitious to see him have the Empire, but Tamberlain, be not surprised with so blind▪ a passion, but
render justice to nature; for The∣mir was my Son, and in the first days of your own, your absence du∣ring the war of China, and the re∣sidence of your Queen at Cambalu, favouring my ambition, I very hap∣pily made an exchange of them: your young Prince died naturally in the exile to which I had sent him, and mine enjoying his place, would, had it not been for this fatal acci∣dent, have reigned over the Tar∣tars: He was ignorant of his birth, and I had used my utmost industry, and address to make him dear to you, and Adanaxus to meet with your hatred, or at least your indif∣ference, whom I looked upon as the only obstacle that could trouble me. But yet after the precaution of so many years, and the flattering Idea's I fed my self withal, I have inhu∣manely deprived my self of him, these are the effects of unconstant fortune, she yet demands one more, and he who has not trembled to
reach the heart of his Son, ought not to have any pity for his own. At those words he ran a poniard up into his body, and then throwing himself upon that of Themir, he there expired in a moment. The death and the last words of Odmar produced new causes of astonish∣ment, Tamberlain had not the power to recover himself out of his, to think that he had given the whole Empire of his Soul to an impostor, who had committed so many inju∣stices against him, and caused the ruine of his true Son. This dread∣ful accident which was so great a justification to the Prince of Tanaïs, obliged the Emperour to make him a publick reparation for what was past, and not being able to tarry a∣ny longer in a place that was float∣ing with such odious blood, he re∣tired to his Apartment, and the ge∣nerous Adanaxus after he had or∣dered that the wretched Bodies should be buried, returned to the
Princess, not doubting but that the eport of his death had sufficiently larm'd her. He found her in that dismal swoon he fell into at the first outcry. Just Heavens, cryed he, seeing her in hat condition, shall I never enjoy a appiness without such afflicting al∣ays, those tears and the name of he Princess which he several times epeated, began to make her come o her self. Asteria at last opened er eyes, and casting them upon A∣anaxus; Ah! Seignior, said she to him, is it you I behold? Yes, Ma∣am, replied the Prince, Themir as met with that destiny which was repared for me, Ortobulus is re∣enged, I am without a Rival, I ow need not fear any other to per∣cute me, and for my greater joy, hat Themir, who was so odious to y Princess by too powerful reasons, was not of the blood of Adanaxus. The Prince of Tanaïs who perceiv∣d Asteria, began to gather strength
by the joy he had inspired into her at the Relation, gave her a true and full account of all the circumstances▪ and passages of it, how he had esca∣ped death in passing through the Terrace. The rest of the Night passed in confusion, Asteria beheld her affe∣ction innocent, the murtherer of Ortobulus was not her Lover's Bro∣ther, and with a greater ease and tranqulllity than ever, enjoyed the pleasure of seeing her self beloved by him. This accident divested Tamberlain of that cruel Meen he had before, and which made him be looked up∣on with so much fear; now all his severity with Themir had its sepul∣ture; his eyes lost their fury; and put a very pleasing sweetness on his face, and all those whom the ad∣dress and subtlety of Odmar, and his complaisances for Themir, had re∣moved from his esteem, received then fresh assurances of it from him.
As Adanaxus only now took up all his thoughts, he minded nothing but how to complete his happiness. He went to visit Asteria, testified to her the sincere grief he had at the af∣flictions he had procured her, resto∣red her all the conquests he had made in her Father's Kingdom, to dispose of how she pleased, and of∣fered her the Crown of the Tartars with Adanaxus. It was not possi∣ble that such a proffer as this could be displeasing to the Princess, She loved the Prince of Tanaïs, Bajazet had given him his esteem, and she thought she could not do any wrong to his memory in marrying him; but as he had left her Brothers, she ac∣quainted the Emperour that she could not dispose of her self without their allowance. This reason ap∣peared to him but just and equita∣ble, he order'd Alizanes and Calix∣tus two illustrious Tartars, to go and find them out. The impatience of Adanaxus made some little mur∣mur
at it, but he was necessitated to submit to the Princess. Bajazet's Sons were found on the ruines of the Ottoman Empire, rallying by the help of their Neighbours such for∣ces, they thought might be sufficient to go out against Tamberlain. The Letters of Asteria and the conquests which were restored, put an end to that design; they now were think∣ing only how to raise up the Throne of Bajazet; which Mahomet the youngest of those Sons some few years after the death of the other▪ brought again to its first splendour▪ The Tartars returned, having mana∣ged their negotiation with success▪ Adanaxus's love was authorized, and the marriage of Asteria recom∣penced his fidelity in the great City of Samarcanda, where they passed away their days in a lasting happi∣ness, after so many long and tedious persecutions. FINIS.
