P4039A 99831965 36432
THE POPISH ROYALL FAVOVRITE: OR, A full Discovery of His Majesties Extraor∣dinary Favours to, and Protections of notorious Papists, Priests, Jesuits, against all prosecutions and penalties of the Laws enacted against them; notwithstanding his many Royall Proclamations, Declarations, and Protestations to the contrary: As likewise of a most desperate long prosecuted Designe to set up Popery, and extirpate the Protestant Religion by degrees, in this our ealm of England, and all His Majesties Dominions. Manifested by sundry Letters of Grace, War∣rants, Writings under the Kings own Signe-Manuall, Pri∣vy-Signet, His Privy-Councels, and Secretary Windebanks hands and Seals, by divers Orders and Proceedings in open Sessions at Newgate, in the Kings Bench, and elsewhere (all extant on Re∣cord in the Sessions-Books, Goal-Books, Crown-Office, where all who scru∣ple their indubitable verity or reality, may peruse them for their better satisfaction;) As likewise by the Kings Letter to the Pope, His marriage Articles, Oaths, and other preg∣nant Testimonies, worthy publike know∣ledge and Consideration. Collected and published by Authority of Parliament: By WILLIAM PRYNNE, of Lincolns Inne, Esquire. 2 CHRON. 19. 2. An Ioh the son of Hanani the Seer went out to meet him, and said to King , Shouldest thou help the ungodly, and love them that hate the Lord? therefore is wrath upon thee from the Lord. ESAY 29. 15. to 20. Wo unto them, that seek deep to hide their counsell from the Lord and their works are in the dark, and they say, who seeth us? and who knoweth us? Surely your turning of things upside down shall be esteemed as the potters clay. And in that day shall the deaf hear the words of the book, and the eyes of the blind shall see out of obscurity and out of darknesse, the meek also shall increase their joy in the Lord; and the poor among men shall rejoyce in the holy One of Israel. For the terrible one shall be brought to nought, and the scorne shall be consumed, and all that watch for iniquity shall be cut off. Imprinted at London for MICHAEL SPARK Senior, and are to be sold at the Blue-Bible in Green Arbour. 1643.
IT is this seventeenth day of Novemb. 1643. ordered by the Committee of the House of Commons concerning Printing, that this Book intituled, THE POPISH ROYALL FAVOURITE, &c. be Printed by MICHAEL SPARK Senior. JOHN WHITE. A matetiall Observation. THeSee their Re∣monstrance, and Dr. Iones, his book. Rebels in Ireland, declared the Parliaments proceedings and intendments against Papists, the only ground of their Rebellion. The Queen soon after, for to ayde them and the English Roma∣nists, departs the Realm with the Kings Jewels, to raise Monies, Men, pro∣vide Armes, Ammunition, the which she strenuously performed. The King immediatly upon her departure deserts the Parliament al∣together, notwithstanding all Petitions, Messages to reduce him: rai∣seth an Army first of English Malignants, then of Papists, to divert all supplies from hence against the Popish Rebels in Ireland, and secure the Catholike party in England and Scotland. Upon the Queens return, the Irish Rebels are first supplyed with Armes and Ammunition from the Queen, then after some negotiation, received into the Kings Royall favour as his good Catholike Subjects, by Articles of pacification, under the great Seal, contrary to two ex∣presse Acts passed by him this Parliament, to the undoing of the Eng∣lish Adventurers and Protestant party there: And finally, they are sent for hither to aide the King and English Catholiks against the Parlia∣ment. Judge then whether the Kings departure from, and taking up Armes against the Parliament, be not only and wholly to maintain his Roman Catholikes and their Religion, according to the tenour of his ensuing marriage Oathes and Articles, what ever be pretended, protest∣ed to the contrary. The King besides the generall and speciall Articles of the Spanish match hereafter mentioned, took this further Royall Oath Ex abundan∣ti; (as thePag. 48, 49. where this passage should have been in∣serted. French Mercury records;) To permit at all times that any one should freely propose unto him the Arguments of the Roman Catholike Religi∣on, without giving any impeachment thereunto: and that he would never permit, neither directly nor indirectly,Tom. 9. An. 1624. p. 9. that any one should speak to the Infan∣ta against it; taking since the like Oath, with reference to the Queen by which he hath irresistably exposed himself to all temptations, seduce∣ments to the Antichristian Religion, and bound himself, neither by word nor deed, to make the least opposition against it, but to give it all the protection and incouragements that may be, and to the professors of it, as appears by the Articles ensuing, p. 48, 49, &c.
TO HIS EXCELLENCIE ROBRT Earl of ESSEX, &c. Lord Generall of the Forces raised by the Parliament for the defence of the Kingdome, King, Religion, Laws, Liberties, against the Popish and Malignant Party, who by force of Armes invade them, and intend their utter ruine. Right Honourable, THeAlberius Gen∣tiles, & Hug. Grotius de Jure belli. lib. 1. Hen. Bocerus de Jure pugnae, l. 1. c. 5. Georgius Obrectus de Belli Principiis theses 50. to 82. Hen. Ran∣zo. Bellici. Com∣mentarii, l. 1. c. 4. goodnesse of the Cause for which Armes are taken up, is the Generals, Souldiers, greatest encouragement: where Religion and Iustice are the reall Causes, Victory and Suc∣cesse will certainly be the effects of War. That these are the true unfeigned grounds of the Parliaments and your Excellencies defensive Armes, is sufficiently manifested to the world by sundry late Printed Discourses; but by none more perspi∣cuously cleared then by these Collections, which upon this consideration especially I humbly recommend to your Honourable Patronage. The extraordinary presence and admirable Protection of God, with that victorious successe, which hath accompanied your Excellency in two Signall Battels, at Edge hill and Newbery, wherein the Enemy (by reason of their many advantages) assured themselves of a full and totall Conquest, are an undubitable evidence, that you are the Generall of the Lord of Hosts, and the Cause you fight for His. ThereforeIsa. 54. 17. No Weapon that is formed against your Excellency in this quarrell shall prosper; and every malicious tongue that shall rise against you in judgment (for fighting in this just cause) you shall condemn.Acts 5. 38, 39. This work is not of men, but of God; therefore the very gates of hell, the Antichristian adverse power of the Romish Malignant Party,Mat. 16. 18. shall never prevail against it, can never overthrow it. Your Lordship and our Reformed Church (now really Militant) resting upon this Rock of assurance, may, in expectation of future successes, confidently take up these triumphant speeches of the Heroick Psal∣mist: Thou artPsal. 44. 4, 5. our King, O God, Command deliverances for Jacob:Psal. 46 11. through thee we will push down our Enemies, through thy Name shall we tread them under that rise up against us. The Lord of Hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our refuge.Psal. 37. 20. But the wicked shall perish, and the enemies of the Lord (now in Armes against our Church, Parliament, Religion, Laws, Liber∣ties,
Properties, Lives, Estates) shall be as the fat of lambs, they shal consume, into smoak shall they consume away. Yea 83. 3.  though they have taken crafty coun∣sell together against Gods people, and consulted against his hidden ones: and have said, Come and let us cut them off from being a Nation, that the Name of Israel (of Puritans and Protestants) may be no more in remembrance: through the tabernacles of Edom and Ishmaelites, Moa and the Hagarens, Gebal, Ammon, Amaleck, the Philistines, Tyre and Assur, be now all confederated and joyned together to destroy them; yet God shall do unto them as to Sisera and Iabin at the brook of ison, which perished at Endor, and became as dung for the earth: he shall make them like a wheel, as the stubble before the wind: he shall persecute them with his tempest, and make them afraid with his storme. They shall be troubled and confounded for ever; yea they shall be put to shame and perish, that men may know, that he whose Name alone is JEHOVAH, is the most High over all the earth. And in regard of the former Victories at∣chieved by your Excellencies incomparable valour and prowesse, we may all sing this gratulatory Song of Moses and the Israelies, after the over∣throw of Pharaoh and his host at the red Sea.Exod. 5. 6, 7, 9, 10, 11. Thy right hand, O Lord, is become glorious in power, thy right hand, O Lord, hath dashed in pieces the enemy. And in the greatnesse of thy excellency thou hast overthrown them that rose up against thee; thou sentest forth thy wrath, which consumed them as stubble. The enemy said, I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil, my lust shall be satisfied upon them; I will draw my sword, my hand shall destroy them. Thou didst blow with thy wind, the sea covered them, they sank as lead in the mighty waters. Who is like unto thee, O Lord, amongst the gods? who is like the, glorious in holinesse, fearfull in praises, doing wonders! To this great Lord of hosts, andExod. 15. 3. man of war (of whose omnipotent Protection Our present Parliament and your Excellency have had many adorable experiments) I shall in my dayly Prayers recommend your Honours Per∣son, Forces, and Military proceedings, till through his blessing on them,Isa. 2. 2, 3, 4. the house of the Lord shall be established in the top of the mountaines, and exalted above the hills; the Kingdome and power of Romish Babylon (notwith∣standing all the confederated domestick, forraign, Popish Forces now uni∣ted to support it) utterly subverting throughout our Dominions; and thereupon our swords be beaten into plowshares, our spears into pruning ooks: And one part of our Nation, Kingdome, shall not have any cause to lift up a sword against the other, nor to learn nor exercise a civill destructive war any more, butRom. 16. 16. 1 Pet. 5. 14. mutually imbrace each other with an holy kisse of Charity and Peace. Which that your Excellency, by your successefull Armes, may speedily accomplish to your eternall Honour, shall be the prayer, Of Your Excellencies devoted servant, W. PRYNNE.
TO All who love their God, Religion, Coun∣trey, in SINCERITY. Dearest Brethren: YOu might justly repute me (especially since the late solemn Cove∣nant) a perfidious Traytor to God, Religion, and my now blee∣ding, dying native Countrey, should I wittingly conceal the under∣hand attempts of any mortall whatsoever, against them. I have therefore by authority of Parliament published these ensuing Letters, Warrants, Papers, extant under His Majesties own, His Councells, Secretaries, Hands and Signets, with sundry Orders made in open Court by Royall direction, for protection of Popish Recusants, Priests, Jesuits, against the many good Laws enacted to suppresse them; by means whereof, and of his Marriage Articles, that dangerous Traiterous Faction hath grown so power∣fully great by degrees, and insinuated so far into the Kings affections, that they now threaten a sudden extirpation of the Protestant Party and Religion, out of his Maje∣sties Dominions; a speedy subvertion of our Laws, Liberties, the present Parliament, by open force of Armes; having already fully possessed themselves of His Majesties Royall Person, Issue, Forces, Forts, Affections, bearing chiefest sway in all his late Councels, Proceedings, as we may now clearly discern, to our greatest grief, by ma∣ny wofull experiences and visible Demonstrations, written in red Capitall Characters of our own English Protestant blood; especially by the late sending for and landing of Irish Rebels to destroy us. It seems a strange mystery of Iniquity to me; First, that from the beginning of His Majesties reign till this present Parliament, the most zealous, conscientious, pious Pro∣testants have been continually persecuted under the Title of Puritans (the better to co∣lour the design) with extraordinarie rigour by the Prelatical and Popish faction, against the expresse Laws of the Realm, both in the High Commission, Prelates Consi∣stories, Councell-Chamber, and Star-Chamber, to the losse of their Estates, Bene∣fices, Liberties, Eares, Limbs, Many of them dying in prison. Lives. Yea, thousands of them have been expelled the Realm, or forced to flie into forraign desolate American Plantations for securitie:
And yet not one Royall Letter (for ought appears to me) could ever be produced all that time to any Courts of Justice in the lawfull favour of any of them; but many Royall Orders,See a new scovery of he Prelates tyranny. Expresses from his Majesty, have been procured, rigourously to proceed against them; Notwithstanding His Majesties many PrintedBefore the 7. Articles, and upon the dissolutions of the two last abortive Par∣liaments. Declarations to His Subjects, rally to maintain and defend the Protestant Religion, and professours of it, to the utmost of His power. Secondly, that since our late unhappy, civill, bloody wars, till this present, the best and most zealous Protestants (Ministers, people,) both in Ire∣land and England, have been every where most cruelly Massacred, plundred, tortured, imprisoned, ruined, aimed at, by blood-thirsty Popish Cavaliers; many of their houses, and almost some whol Towns of them (as Banbury, Malborough, Bromingham, Ok∣ingham, and others) fired, sacked, by his Majesties speciall Commission, (as the Incen∣diaries reported,) or at least by his RoyallSee Prince Ruperts his late Warrant. Permission, notwithstanding his many late solemn Declarations, Protestations, Remonstrances, Oathes to maintain the Pro∣testant Religion, the Subjects Liberties, Properties, Laws, and that he took up Armes to no other end but this. Thirdly, that on the other side sundry Popish Recusants and Seminary Priests have, during all his Majesties raign, obtained innumerable Let∣ters of Grace, Protection, from His Majesty, contrary to Law, and Orders of Session in their favour, to stay all manner of proceedings or executions of the Laws in force against them, contrary to the Iudges and Iustices Oathes, till this Parliament, in all Counties of the Realm; and that since this unhappy civill War, the Papists, both in England and Ireland, have been armed against the Parliament by His Maje∣sties speciall Commission, yea put into places of great command, trust, admitted free accesse to his Camp, Court, where they are now most in favour, and preserved from all violence, injury, plunder of His Forces; notwithstanding His many Royall printed De∣clarations, Proclamations, Protestations, Vows against Popery and Papists, to blinde or delude the over-credulous Vulgar: who now begin to be so well acquainted with these hypocriticall Court-stratagems (execrable both to God and men) that they will no longer be circumvented by them. And is this that brave, reall, royall, Defence of the Protestant Religion so oft protested, proclaimed to the world in Print of late, with deepest Oaths and Imprecations of Divine vengeance, if not cordially intended? Jer. 2. 12. Be astonished Oye Heavens, and horribly afraid at this most grosse hypocrisie, most apparent dissimulation, most palpable contradiction of regall Protestations and Actions, which the greatRev. 17. 14. King of Kings, andGen. 18. 25. righteous judge of all the earth will not suffer long to go unrevenged, if not speedily repeuted, reformed. Far is it from my heart to wish or imprecate the least evill to his Majesty, his Royall Consort, or Posterity, for whose reall happinesse and prosperity I shall ever be a dayly 1 Tim. 1. 2, 3. Orator to the Throne of Grace; yet this I cannot but in loyalty fear, if not informe them, that if they persevere to dissemble thus with God and men, to oppose Papists in words, yet cherish, protect them all they may in deeds, openly siding with Irish, English Popish Rebels against the Parliament and their Protestant Subjects; and pro∣fessedly arming them, with other Out-landish Papists, to waste, spoil, ruin, destroy their Protestant Kingdoms, Subjects, with Fire, Sword, as hitherto they have cruelly done, Psal. 83. 4. taking counsell against the Lord, and his Anointed Son, Servants,Psal. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 9. to cut them off from being a Nation, that the name of Israel may be no more in remem∣brance; though Earth be silent, or Men patient at this Scarlet impiety, yet Heaven, God will not be so: but he that sitteth in the Heavens will speak unto them in his
wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure: he will break them with a rod of yron, and dash them in pieces like a Potters vessell.Psa. 76.  Psal. 110. 5 Psal. 107. 4.  ob 12. 21. He who poureth out contempt upon Princes, who is terrible to the Kings of the Earth; who cuts off the Spirit of Princes, yea striks through Kings in the day of his wrath (as he smote,Psal 135.  9. to 13. Psal. 136. 10. to 23. Judges 3. Dan. 3. 5. Acts 12. 23. King Pha∣raoh, Sehon King of the Amorits, Og King of Bashan, all the Kings of Canaan, Eg∣lon, Nebuchadnezzar, Belshazzar, Herod, with infinite other Monarchs.) HeJob 34 19. Rom. 2. 6. who accepteth not the person of Princes, nor regardeth the rich more then the poor, for they are all the work of his hands; but without respect of persons rendreth to e∣very man according to his works; willLuke 18. 7, 8. Revel. 16. 6. c. 19. 2. most certainly avenge this detestable hypocrisie, with all the blood of his Saints which hath been spilt, and the injuries done to his Elect, who cry unto him day and night; Yea, he will avenge them speedily. For if he, by his Prophet Esay, thus threatned to cut off the King of Babylon and his posterity, onely for destroying his own Land, and slaying his Idolatrous Pagan Subjects that knew not God, Isa. 14. 19. to 23. But thou art cast out of thy grave as an abominable branch, as a carcase trodden under feet: thou shalt not be joyned with them in buriall, BECAUSE THOU HAST DESTROYED THY¦LAND, AND SLAIN THY PEOPLE. Prepare ye slaughter for his children for the iniquity of their fathers, that they do not rise and possesse the Land; for I will rise up against them saith the Lord of Hosts, and cut off from Babylon the name and remembrance, the Sons and Nephews, saith the Lord. Then what severe judgement may such Christian Kings expect from the God of Heaven, who con∣trary to their own frequently reiterated solemn publique Vows, Protestations, Impre∣cations, most inhumanely destroy their own flourishing Christian Realms, with fire and sword; plunder, pillage, captivate, slay, murder, their most pious Protestant Subjects every where without pitty or remorse? If1 King. 21. 2 King. 9. Ahab, Jezabel, with all their royall Po∣sterity, were utterly cut off, extirpated in a moment, for countenancing Idolaters, and putting Naboth unjustly to death, onely for a pretended blasphemy against God and the King, of purpose to gain his single Vine-yard; then what will become of those Kings, Jezabels, and their posterities, who not onely cherish and protect many Romish Idolaters, Priests, Jesuits; but likewise use their armed power to murder, plun∣der, ruin many thousands of innocent Protestant Naboths, yea, seize upon their whol e∣states as forfeited, under a pretence of Treason or Rebellion, andIohn 16. 2. think they do God good service in it? Certainly, if they impenitently persevere in this their tyrannicall violence, they cannot but expect the self-same judgement which these under went, from that Soveraign God,Dan. 2. 21. c. 4. 17. 27. c. 5. 20. 28. who removeth Kings, and setteth up Kings, and ruleth over the Kingdomes of men, giving them to whomsoever he will: at lest they may justly fear the undergoing of that exemplary sentence given against proud, tyrannicall Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4. 32. to 37. c. 5. 20. 21, 22. who when his heart was lifted up, and his mind hardned to deal proudly, he was deposed from his Kingly Thron, and they took his glory from him: and he was driven from the sons of men, and his heart was made like the beasts, and his dwelling was with the wild Asses; they fed him with grasse like Oxen, and his body was wet with the dew of Heaven, till he knew that the most high God ruled in the Kingdome of men; and appointeth over it whomsoever he will: Not like Butchers to slay, but asPsal. 78. 70, 71, 72. Shepheards to feed and protect his people; not to be aRom. 13. 2. to 5. 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14. terrour to good works, but evill, to render punish∣ment to evill doers, especially to Popish Idolaters; and praise or honour to those that
do well; and to be tenderIsa. 49. 23  nursing fathers to the Church of God: which God grant all those whom it now concerns, may seasonably and effectually consider. In the mean time it behoves all those who have any sparkes of love to God or Religion in their brests, to have theirEccl. 2. 14. eyes in their heads, not heels; to be asMat. 10. 16. wise as Serpents, though as innocent as Doves. To take heed, that they walkEph. 5. 15.  Col. 4. 5.  circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise; (weighing all mens actions, not their Protestations) redeeming the time because the dayes are very evill, deceitfull beyond all former ages; yea far more dangerous than most men apprehend them. Let the consideration therefore of the ensuing Papers, together with Romes Master-peece, the English Pope, the Parlia∣ments late Declaration of the rise and progresse of the Irish rebellion, the Articles of the Irish pacification, (to the ruine of the Protestat Party there,) with the Parlia∣ments Remonstrances concerning it, the many ships lately sent from Bristo, besides those from other parts, with Commissions to transport Irish Popish rebels into England to cut all our throats; with other daily See the My∣stery of ini∣quity. fresh experiments of the Papists great power, pro∣ceedings, treacheries, to re-erect their own, and root out our Religion throughout His Majesties Dominions, now at last awake, and rouse us all out of our over-long desperate sencelesse security; yea, fully open our eyes to behold the extream imminent dangers, our Church, Religion, Laws, Liberties, Estates, Lives, Parliament, Kingdome, Nation, are now actually threarned with from the prevailing blood-thirsty Popish party, in highest authority and favour with His Majesty, now wholly captivated, possessed, swayed by them, at their wils; and then speedily engage us all, ere it be over-late, with one unani∣mous consent (according to our late solemn Protestations, Covenants,) to put forth our utmost strength of body, mind, estate, prayers, to prevent that inundation of Po∣pery, that extermination of our Protestant Religion, Laws, Liberties, Parliaments, that utter destruction now menaced to our three united Christian Kingdomes, against which the great Roman Pontif, with all his Antichristian bloody generation of For∣raign and Domestick Popelings, have a long time conspired, and now united all their polices, purses, forces, to accomplish their finall devastation, as the ensuing papers will in part descry; which I shall recommend to your most serious perusall, and Gods blessing; the reality of them being so unquestionable, and these Transcrips so consonant to the Originalls, by which they have been diligently examined, that I should but waste time and Paper to trouble you with any other arguments or attestations of their verity, (so well known to the Papists, and all Officers of justice) then such as you shall finde annexed to them in the following pages, by the Collector of them. Your most affectionate friend, and reall Servant of our Church and Republique, to his power, WILLIAM PRYNNE.
The Popish Royall Favourite. CONTAINING Sundry Letters of Grace, Protection, and Warrants of discharge, granted by His Majesty to notorious Popish Recusants, Priests and Ie∣suits, to exempt them from all Prosecutions and penall Lawes against them; signed with the Kings owne hand, &c. The Originals where∣of are in the custody of Mr. Iohn Glynne Esquire, Recor∣der of London, Mr. Graves Clerke of the Peace for Middlesex, and others. CHARLES REX, WHereas we have received good testimony of the loyalty, and duty of our trusty and welbeloved, William Keeley, in the coun∣ty of VVorcester; and because he may be subiect to the penalties of the lawes for Recusancy, these are to signifie that we are gra∣ciously pleased to extend our speciall grace towards him, and doe hereby will and command, that no indictment, present∣ment, information, or suit in our name, or in the name of any o∣ther, be henceforth commenced, prosecuted, or attempted against him by any Of∣ficers or Subiects whatsoever, for, or concerning Recusancy. And if any such shall happen to be, then our will and pleasure is, that upon sight thereof the same shall be discharged and made voyd, or otherwise not prejudiciall to him. Given under our Signet at our Court at VVhitehall, the six and twentieth day of March, in the tenth yeare of our Raigne. To all and singular our Iudges of Assize, Iustices of peace, Mairs, Sheriffs, Clerkes of Assize and peace, Bayliffs, Constables, Infor∣mers, and to all other our Officers, and Ministers, whom it may or doth concerne, and to every of them. CHARLES REX. WHereas we are well satisfied of the loyalty, duty and affection of our trusty and wellbeloved VVilliam Cobbe of Sadringham in the County of Nor∣folke Gentleman; and because he may be subject to the penalties of the lawes made
against recusants, by way of Indictment or otherwise: these are to signifie, that we are graciously pleased to extend our speciall grace towards him, and doe hereby will and command, that no Indictment, presentment, Information, or Suite in Our name, or in the name of any other, be henceforth prosecuted, or accepted against him the said William Cobbe by any of our Officers or Subjects whatsoever, for or concerning recusancy, till We shall signifie Our pleasure to the contrary; and if any such shall happen to be, then Our will and pleasure is, that upon sight here∣of the same shall be discharged and made voyd, or otherwise not prejudiciall to him. Given under our Signet at Our Pallace at Westminster, the fourteenth of March, in the tenth yeare of our raigne. To all and Singular our Iudges of Assize and Barons of our Exchequer, Iustices of Peace, Maiors, Baliffes, Clerkes of Assize and of the peace, Constables, Headboroughs, Messengers, Pursivants, Informers, and to all every our Officers whom it may or doth concerne, and to every of them. CHARLES REX, VVHereas ou trusty and wellbeloved Sir Francis Eaglesfield Knight and Baronet being a recusant, is thereby subject to our lawes and statutes in that case provided. These are to signifie our royall will and pleasure, that no person or persons shall at any time hereafter, sue, prosecute, implead, either by way of In∣dictment, Information, or otherwise, against the said Sir Francis Eaglesfield, for be∣ing a recusant, or cause or procure him to be Indicted or convicted by vertue of any of our Lawes, or Statutes against Popish recusants, till we shall signifie Our pleasure to the contrary. Given under our signet at our Palace of Westminster the sixth day of December, in the tenth yeare of our raigne. To all our Iudges of Assize, Iustices of Peace, Maiors, Sheriffes, Bayliffes, Constables, Headboroughs, Pursivant, and to all o∣ther our Officers and Minsters, whom it may or doth concerne, and to every of them. CHARLES REX. VVHereas we are well satisfied of the loyalty, duty, and affection of our tru∣sty and wellbeloved Sir Iohn Shelly Knight and Baronet, and the Lady Iane his wife, and because they may be subject to the penalty of the lawes made a∣gainst recusants, by way of Indictment or otherwise: These are to signifie, that we are graciously pleased to extend Our speciall grace towards them, and doe hereby will and command that no Indictment, Presentment, Information, or suit in our name, or in the name of any other be henceforth commenced, prosecured or accep∣ted against them or either of them, by any of our Officers or Subiects whatsoever, for or concerning recusancy, till we shall signifie Our pleasure to the contrary. And if any such shall happen to be, then our will and pleasure is, that upon sight hereof
the same shall be discharged and made voyd, or otherwise not preiudiciall to them or either of them, Given under our Signet at our Court at Greenwich the ninth day of Iune, in the eleventh yeare of our Raigne. To all and singular the Barons of the Exchequer, Iudges of Assize, Iustices of peace, Maiors, Sheriffes, Bailiffes, Clerkes of As∣size, and Petty Constables, Headboroughs, Messengers, Pur∣sivants, Informers, and to all other our Officers and Ministers whom it may or doth concerne, and to every of them. CHARLES REX. VVHereas we have received very good testimony of the loyalty, duty, and affection of our trusty & wellbeloved Sir Iohn Wintour of Lydney in our County of Glocester Knight, and the Lady Mary his Wife, and because they may be subject to the penalty of the Lawes made against Recusancie; These are to sig∣nifie, that we are pleased to extend Our speciall grace towards them, and doe hereby command, that no Indictment, Presentment, Information, or Suit, either in Our name or in the name of any other, be hereafter commenced, prosecuted, or accepted against them, or either of them, by any of our Officers or Ministers what∣soever for matter of Recusancy, till we shall signifie our pleasure to the contrary. And if any such be already, or shall happen to be at any time hereafter, then our will and pleasure is, the same shall be forth with made void, or otherwise not preiu∣diciall to them, or either of them. Given under our Signet at our Court at Oatlands the seventh day of August in the thirteenth yeare of our Raigne. To the most Reverend Father in God, our right trusty and right entirely elved Councellour, the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury; to the Treasurer, Vnder treasurer, and Barons of the Exchequer for the time being, to our Commissioners for Recusancy for the time being, and to all the Iudges of Assize, Iustices of peace, Maiors, Sheriffes, Bailiffes, Clerkes of Assize, Petty Constables, Headboroughs, Mes∣sengers, Pursivants and Informers, and to all other our Officers and Ministers as well Ecclesiasticall as Temporall, whom it doth or may concerne, and to every of them. CHARLES REX. VVHereas we are well satisfied of the loyalty, duty, and affection of our trusty and wellbeloved Sir Francis Mannecke, of Stocke in our County of Suf∣folke Baronet, and Dame Mary his Wife; and because they are or may be sub∣ject to the penalty of our lawes made against Recusancy by way of Indictment or otherwise. These are to signifie, that we are pleased to extend our speciall grace and fovour towards them, and doe therefore here by command that no Indict∣ment, Presentment, Information, or Suite either in our name, or in the name of any other, be from henceforth framed preferred, commenced, prosecuted, or ac∣cepted
against them or either of them, by any our Officers or Ministers whatso∣ever, Ecclesiasticall or Temporall, for or concerning Recusancy, till we shall signifie our pleasure to the contrary. And if any such be, or shall happen to be hereafter, then our pleasure is, that presently upon sight hereof, the same be cancelled and made voyd, or otherwise not preiudiciall to them or either of them, and these our Letters shall be to all our said Officers and Ministers whatsoever, sufficient warrant and discharge in this behalfe. Given under our Signet at our Palace of Westminster the one and twentieth day of April in the fourteenth yeare of our Raigne. To all, &c. CHARLES REX. WHereas we are well satisfied of the loyalty, duty, affection, and good service of our trusty and welbeloved Thomas lennings of London, Merch∣ant; and because he is or may be subiect to the Penalty of our Lawes made against Recusancy, by way of Indictment or otherwise, by reason of his Wives Recusancy, although he himself be every way conformable: These are to signifie, that we are pleased to extend our speciall grace towards him and her, and doe therefore here∣by command that no Indictment, Presentment, Information, or Suit, either in our name, or in the name of any other, be from henceforth framed, preferred, prose∣cuted or accepted against them or either of them, by any of our Officers or Mini∣sters whatsoever for or concerning her Recusancy, till we shall signifie our pleasure to the contrary. And if any such be, or shall happen to be hereafter, then our will and pleasure is, that forthwith upon sight hereof the same shall be cancelled and made voyd, or otherwise not preiudiciall to them or either of them, and this our let∣ter shall be unto all and every our officers and Ministers, whom it doth or may con∣cerne sufficient warrant and discharge in this behalf. Given under our Signet at our Palace of Westminster, the seven and twentieth day of March, in the fifteenth Yeare of our Reigne. To the most reverend Father in God, our right trusty and right intirely beloved Councellour, the Lord Arch-bishop of Canterbury, Primate and Metrapolitane of all England, and to the Lord Arch-bishop of Canterbury for the time being, to the Tresurer and Vnder-treasu∣rers, and Barons of our Exchequer for the time being, to our Commis∣sioners for Recusants for the time being, to all and singular our Iudges Iustices of Assize, and Goal-delivery, Iustices of Peace, Maiors, Sheriffs, Clerkes of Assize and peace, Baliffs, Constables, Messen∣gers, Pursivants and Informers, and to all other our Officers and Mi∣nisters, as well Ecclesiasticall as Temporall now and for the time being, whom it doth or may concerne, and to every of them, CHARLES REX. WHereas Sir Chrles Smith of VValton VVavers in the County of VVarwick Knight, is or may be subiect to the danger of our Lawes for his Recu∣sancy
by way of Indictment or otherwise; These are to signifie, that we are graci∣ously pleased to extend our speciall grace and favour towards him, and doe hereby will and command that no Indictment, Presentment, Information, or Suit in our name, or in the name of any other, be henceforth preferred or accepted against him by reason of his said Recusancy, by any of our Officers or Subjects whomsoe∣ever, and if any such shall happen to be, then our will and pleasure is, upon sight hereof, that the same shall be discharged and made voyd. Given under our Signet at our Court at Greenwich the nine and twentieth day of June, in the tenth yeare of our Reigne. To all and singular our Iudges of Assize, Iustices of peace, Maiors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Clerkes of Assize and Peace, Constables, and to all other our Officers, and Ministers wh it doth or may con∣cerne, and to every of them. CHARLES REX. TRusty and well beloved, we greet you well, we have been often and earnest∣ly moved by our deare Mother the Queene Mother of France, to extend our favour to Sir Henry Bedingfield Knight, his Wife and Family, who are Popish Recusants, and we are very willing that for her sake they should receive our favour, when they shall stand in need thereof for that cause; yet we must so performe it, that it may not be ofWh then  so ma Letter this na grante others  ill example to others, who are or shall be in the like kinde obnoxious to our Lawes for Recusancy, nor be scandalous to our Go∣vernment, whereof we are and must be tender; therefore our will and command to you is, that you take knowledge of our pleasure herein, and take speciall care to preserve the said Sir Henry Bedingfield and his Wife from the danger of the lawes made against Popish Recusarits, that Sir Henry himself shall not be impeached any way for any of his Family for being Popish Recusants; for the doing whereof from time to time, by such wayes you shall thinke fittest, this shall be your warrant. Dated this twentieth of November 1634. To our tructy and wellbeloved, Iohn Bankes Knight, Atturney Generall and his successors. CHARLES REX. WHereas we are well satisfied of the loyalty, duty, and affection of our trusty and wellbeloved Clement Paston of Thrope, in our County of Norfolke Esquire, and because he may be subject to the penalty of our Lawes made against Recusants by way of Indictment or otherwise; These are to signifie that we are graciously pleased to extend our speciall grace towards him, and doe here∣by will and command that no Indictment, Presentment, Information or suit in our name, or in the name of any other, be from henceforth Commenced, prosecu∣ted, or accepted against him by any of our Officers or Subjects whatsoever, for or concerning Recusancy, till we shall signifie our pleasure to the contrary; and if any
such shall happen to be, then our will and pleasure is, that upon sight hereof the same shall be discharged and made voyd, or otherwise not preiudiciall to him. Gi∣ven under our Signet at our Palace of Westminster, the foure and twentieth day of March, in the tenth yeare of our Raigne. To all Iudges of Assize, Barons of Exchequer, Iustices of peace, Maiors, Sheriffes, Bayliffes, Constables, Headboroughs, Messengers, Pursivants, Informers; and to all other our Offi∣cers and Ministers whom it doth or may concerne, and to e∣very of them. CHARLES REX. WHereas our wellbeloved Subject William Peters of Landford-rivers in the County of Essex, hath particular imployments in Our service, which he cannot so well discharge and execute if he be troubled for his Religion; these are therefore to signifie our gracious pleasure, that we are so well informed and satisfied of his loyalty towards us, that from henceforward he be not any wayes questioned for the same, unlesse our pleasure be especially delivered to the contrary. And this to be sufficient warrant to any whom that may concerne. Given under our Signet at our Court at Whitehall, the six and twentieth day of March in the fourteenth yeare of our Raigne. To the Treasurer, Vnder-treasurer, Chancellours, Barons, and other the Officers of our Court of Exchequer for the time being. To all our Iudges of either Bench, Iudges of Assize, and Peace, Maiors, Sheriffes, Bailiffes, Clerkes of Assize and Peace, Constables, Headboroughs, and to all other our Officers and Ministers whom it may or doth concerne, and to every of them. CHARLES REX. WHereas the Lady Elizabeth Stoner of Blounts-court widdow, stands indi∣cted for Recusancy in the County of Oxon, she being a weake and sickly woman, as we are informed. Our Royall pleasure is, that you henceforth forbeare to proceed, and suffer not any farther proceeding against her, nor upon her lands and goods, upon the said indictment to Conviction, or upon any other the foresaid Indictment in the the said County of Oxon or Wilts, untill you know our further pleasure to be signified by us expresly touching the same. And this shall be your warrant in that behalfe. To all our Iudges of Assize and Iustices of peace for the County of Oxon and Wilts, To our Clerkes of Assize and peace for the said Coun∣ties, and to all other our Officers and Ministers else where, whom it doth or may concerne.
CHARLES REX. WHereas we have received very good testimony of the loyalty, duty, and affection of Sir William Pearsall Knight. And because he may be subject to the penalty of the lawes made against recusants, by way of indictment or other∣wise: These are to signifie that we are graciously pleased to extend our speciall grace towards him; And doe hereby will and command that no Indictments, Pre∣sentments, Informations, or suit in our Name, or in the name of any other, be henceforth commenced, prosecuted or accepted against him by any other officers or subjects whatsoever, for or concerning his recusancy, till we shall signifie our plea∣sure especially to the contrary. And if any such be already, or shall happen to be hereafter, then our will and pleasure is, that upon sight hereof the same shall be discharged and voyd, or otherwise not prejudiciall to him. Given under our Signet at our Court of Oatelands the five and twentieth day of November, in the tenth yeare of Our raigne. To our Treasurer and Chancellour of the Exchequer for the time being, and to all and singular our Commissioners for Recusants; to all Iudges of Assize, Iustices of the peace, Maiors, Sheriffes, Bayliffs, Clerkes of the Assize and of the peace, Constables, Mssengers, Pursivants, Informers; and to all other Officers and Ministers whom it doth or may concerne, and to every of them. CHARLES REX. WHeareas Iohn Carrill of Harting in the County of Sussex Esquier, sone and heire of Sir Iohn Carrill of Harting aforesaid Knight, is or may be subiect to the danger of our lawes for his recusancy, by way of indictment, infor∣mation or otherwise: and whereas we understand that the said Iohn Carrill hath componnded with us for his whole Estate by the Commission of grace which we have been pleased to grant for that purpose and the like, and hath duly hitherto paid the rent reserved to us thereupon, his whole Estate having been granted and released by us to him under our great Scale of England. And whereas we are in∣formed that the said Iohn Carrill Esquire hath no Lands at all to live upon but only some in the mannor of Warnham in the County of Sussex, which his Father allowed him for his maintenance, and which is part and parcell of the Lands afore∣said so compounded for with us by our Commissioners, and for which the Father hitherto hath duly paid the rent reserved. And whereas the said Iohn Carrill the Sonne hmbly offers, that if God call his Father before him, he will pay us the same rent to which his father is subiect now for the same favours and immunities which the said father now enioyes, so as we are not to be damnified at all in our Revenue by this our act of grace to the Sonne. These are therefore to signifie, that we are graciously pleased to extend our speciall favour towards the said Iohn Carrill the Sonne, and doe hereby will and command that no indictment, presentment, Infor∣mation, or any Suite of any kind, in our name, or in the name of any other, be henceforth preferred or accepted against him by reason of his said Recusancy by
any of our Officers or subjects whatsoever. And if any shall happen to be commen∣ced or brought, then our expresse will and pleasure is, that upon sight hereof the same shall be discharged and made voyd, and this ou Warrant shall continue in force untill we shall signifie our pleasure to the contrary Given under our Signet at our Court at Whitehall, the last day of February, in the twelfth yeare of Our Raigne. To all and singular our Iudges of Assize, our Atturney Generall and Solliciter, Iustices of peace, Maiors, Sheriffs, Bayliffs, Clerkes of Assize and of the peace, Constables, and all other our Officers and Ministers whom it doth, or may concerne and to every of them. CHRALES REX. WHereas we have received a good Testimoney of the loyalty, duty, and good affection of our trusty and wellbeloved servant, Edward Cotton of Shelwood in the County of Surry Esquire and of Mary his wife; and because they may be subject to the penalties of the lawes made against Recusants, by way of Indictment, or otherwise: These are to signifie, that we are graciously pleased to extend our speciall grace towards them; and doe hereby will and com∣mand, that no Indictmen, Presentment, Information, or suit in our name, or in the name of any other, be henceforth commenced, prosecuted, or accepted against them, or either of them, by any of our Officers or servants whatsoever, for or con∣cerning Recusancy, till we shall signifie our pleasure to the contrary. Or if any be, or shall happen to be, then our will and pleasure is, that upon sight here of the same shall be discharged and made voyd, or otherwise not prejudiciall to them, or either of them. Given under our signet, at our Palace of VVestminster, the fifteenth day of Iune, in the thirteenth yeare of our Raigne. To the most reverend father in God the Lord archbishop of Canterbury; to our Lord-treasurer and Chancellor, and Barons of the exchequer for the time being; to all and singular our Commissioners for Recusants for the time being; to all our Iudges of assize, Iustices of peace, maiors, Sheriffs, Clerkes of Assize and peace, Bayliffes, Constables, Headbo∣roughs, Messengers, Pursivants, and Informers, and to all other Of∣ficers and Ministers whatsoever, to whom it doth or may appertaine, and to every of them, as well Ecclesiasticall as Temporall. CHARLES REX. WHereas we have received very good testimony of the loyalty, duty, and affection of our right trusty and wellbeloved Thomas Lord Arundell of Wardor, and the Lady Anne his wife, and because they may be subiect to the penalty of our Lawes made against Recusants, by way of Indictment or other¦wise: these are to signifie that we are graciously pleased to extend our speciall grace towards them, and doe hereby will and command, that no Indictment, present∣ment,
information, or suite in our name or in the name of any other, be hence∣forth commenced, prosecuted, or accepted against them or either of them, by any of our Officers or Subjects whatsoever, for, or concerning Recusancy, till we shall signifie our pleasure to the Contrary; And if any such be already, or shall happen to be hereafter, then Our will and pleasure is, that upon sight hereof the same shall be discharged and made void, or otherwise not prejudiciall to them, or either of them. Given under our signet at our palace at Westminster; the one and twentieth day of Iune, in the thirteenth Yeare of Our Raigne. To our Lord Treasurer and Chancellour of our Exchequer for the time being: to all and singular our Commissioners for Recusants for the time being: to all our Iudges of Assize, Iustices of peace, Maiors, Sheriffs, Clerkes of Assize and Peace, Bailiffes, Constables, Headboroughs, Messengers, Pursivants, and Informers, and to all other our Officers and Ministers whatsoever, to whom it doth, or may appertaine, and to every of them. CHARLES REX. WHereas we are well satisfied of the loialty, duty and affection of our trusty and welbeloved William Therold of Arberfield in the County of Berks E∣squire, and Francis his wife, and because they are or may be subject to the penalty of our Lawes for their Recusancy, by way of Indictment, or otherwise: These are therefore to signifie, that We are pleased to extend our speciall grace towards them; and doe hereby will and command, that no Indictment, Presentment In∣formation, Citation or other Suit whatsoever in our name, or in the name of any other, be from henceforth framed, preferred, prosecuted, or accepted, against them, or either of them, by any our officers or subjects whatsoever, for or concerning their Recusancy, till we shall signifie our pleasure to the contrary. And if any such al∣ready be, or shall happen to be hereafter, then our will and pleasure is, that upon sight hereof the same shall be discharged and made voide, or otherwise not prejudi∣ciall to them. Given under our Signe-Manuall this fourth day of September 1639. To the most Reverend Father in God, our right trusty and right intirely beloved Councellour, William Lord Archbishop of Canterbury; Pri∣mate and Metropolitan of all England, and to the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, for the time being, the Treasurer and Vnder-treasu∣rer, Chamberlains, and Barons of our Exchequer for the time being, to all and singular our Commissioners for Recusants, for the time being; to all our Iudges of Assize, Iustices of peace, Maiors, Sheriffs, Clerkes of Assize and peace, Bailiffs and to all other our Officers and Ministers Ecclesiasticall and temporall for the time being, and to all others whom it shall or may concerne. The like letters of grace under the Kings owne signe manuall, I find granted to the Lady Elizateth Dormer, dated the 19 of June 1629 to Captaine Iohn Read,
13 of Iuly Anno 10 Car. to Anthony Metcalf Her Majestyes servant produced at the open Sessions of Goale-delivery made for Middlesex the 28 of March 15th Car. to Anne Lady Sands Dowager, Elisabeth Stukely her onely daughter, and Eli∣sabeth Hitchcock her servant, produced at the Sessions of Gaole delivery for the same County the 8 of Iuly Anno 15to Car. to Iohn Chamberlain of Lindhurst. Pro∣duced at the same place the 9 of May 14to Car. to Sir Henry Audley Knight, and Dame Anne his wife, dated 15 Ianuarii Anno 13 Car. to the Lady Katharine Windsor, wife of Thomas Lord VVindsor, dated 7 Febr. Anno 15 Car. all these Let∣ters of Grace under the Kings signe-manuall, and privy Signet, for protection of these Arch-popish Recusants against all Lawes and prosecutions, are registred, and the true copies of them entered by the Recusants themselves or their agents in the Clerk of the Peace his bookes for London and Middlesex, or in the Crowne-Office, besides sundry others left with the Clerks of the Peace in other Counties of England. What effects these Letters of Grace and protection produced in Courts of Iu∣stice contrary to Law and to the Kings and Iustices own Oathes, will appeare by these few ensuing Orders, made at the open Sessions of Gaole delivery for the County of Middlesex. UPon speciall directions given by his Majesty, and signified by a Letter from Master Secretary VVindebank to the Right Honourable Sir Thomas Richardson Knight Lord chief Justice of his Majesties Court of Kings Bench,17 April. 10 car. p. 157 Of the Sessi∣ons Book. bearing date the sixteenth day of April 1634 and shewed now to this Court. It is or∣dered by this Court' that the Recognisance taken in Court at the Sessions of Gaole-delivery holden for the County of Middlesex at Iustice Hall in the Old∣baily the fourth day of October last past, wherein Alexander Baker of the Parish of Saint Andrewes in Holborn in the County of Middlesex Gentleman, was bound to his Majesty with two sureties for his appearance at the Sessions of Goale deli∣very then next following, At which Sessions he made default, shall not be estreated but all further proceedings thereupon shall be forthwith stayed. Per Cur. UPon the reading of His Majesties Letters Parents under the Great Seale of England,Maii. 4. Car. p. 274. bearing date the third day of Ianuary, in the 3 yeare of his Maie∣sties reigne of England, &c. and inrolled in his Maiesties Court of Exchequer. It appeared unto this Court, that His Maiesty was graciously pleased to signifie His Royall pleasure that Iohn Chamberlain of Lindhurst in the County of Southampton Esq should not at any time hereafterNota. during the terme of LX years be indicted of or for Recusancy, or for not repairing to Church, Chappell or usuall place of Common prayer, contrary to the Lawes and Statutes of this Kingdome in that behalf had and provided. And that if any indictment be, that then upon such in∣dictment or indictments no processe or other proceedings by Proclamation or Proclamations, Utlary or Utlaries, or otherwise, shall be had against the said Iohn Chamberlain, and thereupon it is ordered by this Court that His Maiesties royall pleasure, signified as aforesaid would be obeyed, and that all proceedings against the said Iohn Chamberlain should be stayed accordingly. Per Cur.
WHereas this court hath this Sessions received command from his Majesty under his Signe Manuall,28 March. 15. Car. p. 304. on the behalf of Anthony Metcalfe servant to the Queenes Maiesty, for the staying of any indictment or any further proceeding up∣on any indictment against the said Anthony for matters of Recusancy. It is therfore by this Court ordered, that all proceedings in this Court against the said Anthony for the said cause, shall cease untill His Maiesties pleasure be signified to the con∣trary. Per Cur. ACcording to a letter under the hand of Master Secretary Windebank signifi∣ing his Maiesties pleasure therein.29 Maii. 15 Car. p. 312. It is ordered by this Court, that the estre∣ating of the Convictions upon the indictments of the recusancy against these persons here undernamed, shall be stayed untill his Maiesties pleasure be further known to the Contrary. Viz. Sir Iohn Symonds Knight. Elizabeth Good Widow. William Cape, and M•rs Forman Widow. ACcording to his Maiesties pleasure and grace extended towards Anne Lady Sands Dowager, and Elizabeth Stukely her onely daughter,8 Iunii. 15 Car. p. 316. and Elizabeth Hitchcock her servant, and signified to this Court under his Highnesse signe ma∣nuall; It is ordered and commanded by this Court, that no further processe or proceeding be made or had against them upon their indictments or Recusancy, untill his maiesties pleasure be signified to the contrary. Per Cur. WHereas the Kings Majesty under his Signe manuall, signified to this Court some three yeers since, that it was his Highnesse pleasure that no Indict∣ment of Recusancy should be received against Sir Charles Smith of Wotton-mavers in the County of Warwicke, Knight; or if any such shall happen to be, that then it should be discharged and made void. And whereas at the last Sessions an Indict∣ment of recusancy was preferred against the said Sir Charles, unknowne to this Court. It is now ordered by this Court, that no further proceedings shall be made against the saide Sir Charles upon the said indictment, but utterly to cease, untill his Maiesties pleasure be signified to the contrary. Per Cur At the Sessions of Goale-delivery for London, held 16 Ianu. 10 Car. Regis. Wil∣liam Stamford of Perry-barre in the County of Stafford Esquire, was indicted for recusancy, and after convicted 16 Feb. 10 Car. Regis, And afterwards at the Goale-delivery held 10 Apr. 11 Car. Regis, it was ordered. That according to his Maiesties expresse will and pleasure signified under his Privy Signet, dated 9 Ianuar 10 Car. Regis, to stay all proceedings, &c. That the conviction of the said William Stamford, should not be estreated at the Exchequer. The like stay was made of all processe and proceedings in the Exchequer, Kings bench, and Sessions of peace in other Counties upon all the forementioned letters of Grace and Protection, and in sundry others of that nature; as the Order made in Court upon them attest beyond all Contradiction.
A Note of the Names of those Recusants, against whom Processe hath been stayed by his Majesties Letters under His Privy Signet, in the Crowne Office. AGainst William Arundell Esquire second sonne to the Lord Ar∣undell of Wardour, and the Lady Mary Saint Iohn his wife, by letter bearing date the 25 of April Anno. 11 Caroli Regis. Against Captaine Iohn Read, by a letter dated the 13th of July 10 Caroli, Against Sir Francis Mannocks of Stoke, in the County of Suffolk, and Dame Mary his Wife, by a letter dated the 20 of April 14. Caroli. Against Sir Henry Brown of Kidington in the County of Oxford and Dame Elizabeth his Wife by a letter the fifth of January 12 Caroli. Against William Bradshaw of Saint Clements Danes in the County of Middlesex Esquire and Mar∣garet his wife; by a letter dated 4th of July 11 Caroli. Against Robert Hewet of Amptill Grange in the County of Bedford, and Mary his wife, by a letter bear∣ing date the second of July 13. Caroli. Against Sir Henry Audley Knight and Dame Ann his wife; by a letter of the 15 of January 13. Caroli. Against Thomas Lord Arundell of Wardour, and the lady Anne his wife; by a letter dated the 20 of Iune 13 Caroli. Against the Lady Katherine Windsor, wife of Thomas Lord Wind∣sor; by a letter 7 of February 15 Caroli, in the same Court of Kings Bench, pro∣cesse was staied against Gorge Cope, Francis Simmons, Beniamin Gill, and others in∣dicted of Recusancy by a warrant from William Noy, the Kings Atturney Gene∣rall, dated the 21 of May, 1633. And against Henry Constable Knight, Lord Constable, Viscount Dumbarre, by warrant from Sir Iohn Banks the Kings Attur∣ney Generall, dated the 23 of Iune 1635. with sundry others. So processe out of the Court of Exchequer, and Crowne Office against Robert Courtese and others, was staied upon this Petition. To the Kings Most Excellent Majestie. The humble petition of Robert Courtese, Matthew Reynolds and John Fitzwilliam, in the behalfe of themselves and diverse others. MOst humbly shewing, That whereas the Petitioners have lately exhibited a petition unto your Majesty, declaring, that for being Recusants there are writs out of your Highnesse Court of Exchequer, directed to the Sheriff of Lon∣don and Middlesex, to selfe their Goods to your Majesties use; albeit they have been alwayes and now are ready to compound according to Your Majesties most gracious favour, and their meane ability (being poore Tradesmen) which by reason of this contagious time, and other the weighty affaires of Your Maje∣sties most Honourable Commission, they have not yet done, and so stand in dan∣ger
to perish, unlesse your Majesty of your accustomed clemency doe extend your gracious favour towards them, in giving order that the said writs may be staied, which they most humbly pray. Since which time they humbly shew there are other writs come out of the Crowne Office to arrest their persons. Therefore they doe most humbly beseech Your Majesty to take compassion of them, and their poore Estates, and to give order that the said writs may be stayed, and that they may not be molested neither in their persons or goods, whilest they are upon composition with your Majestie, which they will indeavour to hasten with as much speed as may be, And, as by duty bound, your poore petitioners shall dayly pray for Your Majesty long to Raigne most happily over us. At the Court at Oatelands 7. August 1637. HIS Maiesties pleasure is, that the writs shall be stayed according to the de∣sire of the petitioners, till the first sitting of the Commission for Recusants, at which time the petitioners are to make their appearance, and submit them∣selves to a composition according to the usuall course, and hereof the Com∣mission of Recusancy are to take notice, and give order accordingly. Francis Windebanke. And as the Course of Iustice and proceedings against particular Popish Re∣cusants were thus obstructed by these warrants and letters, so when Commis∣sions issued out to the Sheriffs of the Southerne Counties of England, and Wales, for finding, and seising their Lands, Goods, and Chattels in the yeare of our Lord 1639. They were forthwith Countermaunded by Letters sent to the Sheriffs to Secretary Windebank in his Majesties name. Witnesse this following Letter of his to the Sheriffe of Somersetshire. AFter my very harty commendations, Whereas there did lately issue forth to your selfe and others, a Commission for the finding of the Lands, Goods and Chattells of certain Recusants, which said proceedings being onely intend∣ded for the enabling of them that are already convicted, and mentioned in a Schedule annexed unto the Commission, to make composition for the severall summes of mony due from them unto his Majesty, upon the Statutes for their Recusancy according to his Majesties most Gracious Instructions in that be∣half, which otherwise they would not doe. Now forasmuch as the said Com∣mission of enquiry hath been by divers misunderstood, as an unlawfull violent prosecution against Recusants, which is not his Majesties intention. These are therefore to signifie unto you His Maiesties said Gracious pleasure therein. And that no seisure be made of any the Lands, Goods, or Chattells, of those who shall at the execution of the afforesaid Commssion enter their names, that they will within three monthes after prosecute their Composition in LONDON with his Maiesties Commissioners for their Recusancy as aforesaid. And that you be carefull in the execution of your Commission, that all further or unusuall prosecution against Recusants be forborn, by those that shall be therein im∣ployed,
and that if any seisure of any of the Lands or goods of any Recusant as a∣foresaid be already made by you or your Deputies contrary to these His Majesties gracious intentions, that the same by you or them be forthwith restored, such being His Maiesties Gracious clemency towards them at this time, at the instance of HER MAIESTY. And so with my most hearty commendations I bid you farewell: Your very loving friend, Fran. Windebanke. From the Court at Whitehall, the fifth of Octob. 1639 To my very loving friend, the High-Sheriffe of the County of Somerset, now, and for the time being. The like Letters verbatim were sent to the Sheriffes of Oxford, Hampshire, Sussex, and other Counties, the Originalls whereof are yet extant in Mr. Glyns cu∣stody now recorder of London. The like Letters were sent into Wales, the copy of one of them sent into Flint∣shire, with the Commissioners certificate of their stay of proceedings against Recu∣sants thereupon, I shall here subjoyn. AFter my hearty commendations, whereas I understand that there is a Com∣mission lately issued out of the Court of Exchequer, and sent into your Coun∣ty to enquire of the estates of the Recusants there; you are therefore forthwith up∣pon sight hereof to cause stay to be made of all proceedings upon that commission till His Majesties pleasure shall be further known: for which this shall be your Warrant, and so I rest, To my very loving friend the High Sheriffe of the County of Flint. Your very loving friend, Fran. Windebanke. 11 Julii 1639. Copia vera exam. per. Io Evans. sub vic. WE the Commissioners whose names are under-written having received His Majesties Commission under the Exchequer Seale dated 3 die Iulii in the fitenth year of his Majesties reigne, to us and others directed to enquire what Lands, Goods, and hereditaments, certain Recusants convicted, whose names were in a Schedule thereunto annexed, written; for the execution whereof we having met at the Towne of Mould in the said County of Flint, the twentieth day of September, 1639 The Deputy Sheriff of the said County produced a Let∣ter to the High Sheriffe directed, whereof this is a true Copy; whereupon we did not proceed in that service. Richard Grosvenor. Iohn Eyton. Tho. Perton How many Recusants were convicted from the first till the sixteenth year of His Majesties reigne, onely in the Southern parts of England (besides Wales and the Northerne Counties, where they most abounded) many of them being persons of great estates, will appeare by this Certificate of Mr. Iohn Pulford, specially imployed in their prosecution by His Majesty.
Convictions of Recusants from mo Caroli, in the 29 English Counties within the Southerne Division.   Anno Car. about IN Bedford, untill 14 90 Berks 14 360 Buck. 14 310 Cambridge. 13 40 Cornwall. 13 160 Devon. 13 200 Dorset. 14 210 Essex. 12 190 Glouc. 12 80 Hartford, 4 20 Huntington. 14 50 Hampshire. 14 960 Hereford. 15 760 Kent. 13 290 Leicester. 16 420 Middlesex. 16 1060 Monmouth. 14 1400 Norfolke. 14 490 Northamp. 9 230 Oxford. 14 440 Salop. 12 560 Somerset. 14 330 Sussex. 12 950 Suffolke. 13 460 Surry. 12 160 Wilts. 14 160 Warwic. 12 1000 Worcester. 13 540 q. Rutland.         11970 For the 12 Welsh Counties, the Convictions remaine in the custody of the Pro∣thonotaries of Wales, who by Order from the Commissioners were to returne them 6 moneths agoe; but yet they are not come in. How little benefit his Majestie made of their Lands and Estates upon their con∣victions, by reason of the forecited Letters of Grace, for staying processe and procee∣ding against them, is manifest by this following Certificate of the payment of all the revenues of Recusants in the Southerne parts, by the Sheriffs of the severall Coun∣ties from the yeere 1627 to 1460. An abstract of all such sums of money as have been paid to His Ma∣jesties particular Receiver of the Recusants Revenue for the Southerne parts of this Kingdome of England, by any of the Sheriffs of the severall Counties on this side Trent, since the third yeare of his Majesties raigne that now is, viz. An. Dom. An. R. Car.   l. s. d. 1628 4 287 11 0½ 1629 5 482 5 6¾ 1630 6 563 18 6½ 1631 7 363 12 0 1632 8 462 7 8 1633 9 337 14 8¼ 1634 10 231 1 ½ 1635 11 251 15 4½ 1636 12 231 13 02/4 1637 13 198 1 1¼ 1638 14 261 5 8 1639 15 250 9 9¾ 1640 16 161 3 10¾     4083 0 4½ Rob. Long:
A very inconsiderable summe, if the multitude of the convicted Recusants fore∣mentioned be considered, and the great yeerely revenues of sundry of them. I shall close up this branch of his Maiestes extraordinary favour to popish Re∣cusants, with the Petition and Diclaration of Master Iohn Pulford, and his Maiesties answer thereunto in the margent, written with his owne royall Hand (by which the Papists contributions towards the Scottish warres are confessed, and made the ground of staying Processe against them) the originall whereof is remaining in the custody of Miles Corbet Esquire, Chaireman for the Committee of Examinatione. To the Kings most Excellent Majesty. The most humble Declaration of Iohn Pulford. Your Majesties servant, touching the proceedings as speciall Agent for advancing Your Majesties Revenue arising by the Forfeitures or Compositions with Popish Recusants in the Southerne parts of this Your Maiesties Kingdom, and the lets and oppositions which hindred him in ef∣fecting the service; the which be humbly conceives (both in discharge of his duty and trust reposed in him) be ought to present unto your Maiestie. THe 19. of Ianuary in the 14. yeere of Your Maiesties reigne, Your Maiestie confer'd the said imployment upon me. The 28. of February following, divers of Your Maiesties Commissio∣ners at my request, and for the better nabling me to proceed in the service, did signe letters (which I then presented unto them ready written) directed to the Iu∣stices of Peace within all the severall Counties for convicting of all Recusants, as by the said Letters may appeare.The reason of both these stais of proceedings was, because the Papists should not be diverted from their contribu∣tion which they were then ma∣king for me. But about two or three dayes after, one of the Commissioners did advertise me, That it was your Majesties pleasure those let∣ters should not be sent, which I obeyed. The eleventh of July after, I sent Comissions into ten severall Counties for enquiries to be made of the Estates of Recusants already convicted: But present∣ly after letters were sent to the severall Sheriffs of the said Counties, requiring them to stay all proceedings upon the said commissions untill your Majesties plea∣sure were further knowne, upon sight whereof the Commissioners desisted, whereby I lost 114 li. which I had disbursed to Substitutes and Messengers to de∣fray the charges of executing the said Commissions. And albeit in October fol∣lowing, Letters were sent to the said Sheriffs for proceedings to be had upon the said Commissions, yet in regard of the afforesaid stay, the Service was so dispara∣ged, and the commissioners were so discouraged, that they have since neglected to execute the like Commissions directed unto them; and some Sheriffs have likewise neglected to provide Juries for finding and returning Inquisitions of Re∣cusants Estates. In February following, I acquainted Your Majesties Commissioners here with the stay of the said Commissions,This was meer∣ly to make a distinction be∣twixt the No∣bility and per∣sons of meaner quality. and backwardnesse of the commissioners in the County to proceed in the like service, and intreated them that therefore they would be pleased to signe Letters once againe to the Iustices of peace, and therein Your Majesties pleasure might be signified, as well for the Indicting and Convict∣ing of all Recusants, as also that the Commissioners hereafter appointed should give better attendance in executing Commissions of equity: To which purpose
I did then present unto them a draught of a Letter, which being read over unto them, they desired the Lord Treasurer to shew it Your Majesty, in regard Your Majesties pleasure was to be declared therein, upon intimation whereof by his Lordship they would signe such Letters, the which his Lordship about two or three dayes after having signified, bid me prepare the Letters. But within a few dayes after one of the Commissioners advertised me in the presence of the Lord Treasurer, That it was Your Majesties pleasure the said Letters should not be sent, for that were divers of the Nobility, and other persons of quality, Recu∣sants whom Your Maiestie was pleased to favour, and would not have convicted. Neverthelesse Letters should be sent for the certifying of all Recusants names unto the Iustices, which Recusants names they should return up unto the Commissi∣oners here, the which being accordingly written and signed by some of the Com∣missioners, were notwithstanding afterward not sent, in regard ome of the Com∣missioners conceived, such Letters, being onely for the certifying of Recusants names, without direction of further proceedings against them, would rather hin∣der then further the service. In April and May following,I was informed that this was an illegall and undue proceed∣ing, by as good Lawyers as a∣ny are in the Kingdome. I caused some Messenges I had formerly imploy∣ed into divers Counties at my owne Charges for the discovery of Recusants un∣convicted, to Indict such as they had discovered at the Sessions then held for Mid∣dlesex, which they accodingly did: whereupon divers of those Recusants peti∣tioned Your Majesty against me, alleadging, That indicting of Recusants in a forreigne County, was contrary to the intent of the Law, and a Declaration made by Your Maiesties Royall Father of blessed memory; and thereupon Your Maiesty appointed the Lord Treasurer, Lord Dorset, Lord Cottington, Master Treasurer, and the Lord chief Iustice Littleton, to take due information thereof and deliver their opinions to your Maiesty, who in Iuly following, met and heard the Re∣cusants by their Councell, at which time I shewed Presidents for the like for∣reigne Indictments, and necessity for proceeding in that course, in regard many Recusants had for many yeares escaped Convictions in their proper Counties through feare or favour, and perhaps would so continue all their lives: howbeit I was advertised afterwards that it was your Majesties pleasure such manner of In∣dicting should be suspended. Besides all this I have met with another main hinderance in effecting the said service,Particular fa∣vours must not make a presi∣dent or rule for others. viz. Letters granted by your Majesty to divers of the more eminent and wealthiest of the Recusants, commanding no legall proceedings to be had against them by reason of their Recusancy. Whereby Your Maiestie not onely loseth the Penalties, and Forfeitures due unto Your Maiesty from them, but also under colour of those Letters they priviledge and protect the estates of other Recusants convicted, as their own, so as the same cannot be found by inquisition, by which Your Maiesty is defeated of your iust interest in their particular estates. For dis∣covery whereof Your Maiesties Atturney Generall hath (at my instance) preferred Bills in the Exchequer chamber against divers of them. In all which proceedings, my care, travell, and charges, have been extraordina∣ry,
for I have expended above 600. li. without one peny recompence from the Commissioners.It is good rea∣son that your pains and charges should be considered in this businesse. I therefore most humbly beseech your sacred Majesty to take into your royall consideration the aforesaid Letters and interruptions of the service, and to declare your Princely resolution concerning my proceedings for the time to come, as may be most for Your Majesties Honour and increase of Your said Revenue. And as in duty bound, I shall daily pray for Your Majesties long and prosperous reigne. Discharges of Priests and Iesuites under the King, Councels, and Secretary Windebanks hands. AS I have given you a brief Discovery of his Majesties extra∣ordinary Letters of Grace and Protection to Popish Recu∣sants for stay of all legall proceedings against them hitherto, so I shall in the next place present you a summary List of His own, His Councels & Secretary Windebanks (most likely by His Royall direction) favours to, and discharges of Seminary Priests and Iesuites from all legall prosecutions, and impri∣sonments, in or near London onely, all extant on record in the severall Prison Bookes to which they were committed, or in the Kings Bench, most of the Originalls of them being now in the Recorder of Londons hands, ap∣pointed long since to draw up Secretary Windebanks charge. I shall begin with His Majesties discharges under his own Signe-manuall. Charles R. WHereas on the 24 of March last, our pleasure was declared to the Lords of our Privy Councell, that AT THE INSTANCE OF OUR DEA∣REST CONSORT THE QUEENE, and in regard of the peace betweene the two Crownes, we were graciously pleased that THESE PRIESTS and Re∣cusants here undernamed, who were then in severall Prisons, should be released and delivered to the Marquesse De Chasteauneu, Ambassadour extraordinary to Us from the French King, NOTWITHSTANDING ANY FORMER ORDER AGAINST SUCH RELEASES AND DELIVERIES, with this further Declaration, That if any of them shall remain in, or return into the Kingdome, that our expresse will and pleasure is, ThatWhich was never executed in any poynt. the Law should passe on every such Person without further favour, all which was ordered accordingly, and all the said persons or divers of them were brought unto you by severall Warrants, these are therefore TO WILL AND COMMAND YOU FORTHWITH TO DELIVER to the said Ambassadour, or to such persons as he shall appoint in that behalf, all such of the said persons, as are already come into Your charge and custody, and ALL SUCH AS SHALL COME TO YOUR CHARGE HEREAFTER by vertue of the aforesaid Order, and this shall be your SUFFICIENT WARRANT: So as you doe not deliver any other but the persons hereafter named, and that you returne a List of such
as you shall deliver to the Lords of Our Privie Councell, Given under OUR SIGNE MANUALL at Denmark house the eleventh day of April, in the sixth yeare of our reigne. Iohn Dally Cornlius Crawley Iohn Southwrth Reynault Mac. Donnell Palmer Gilbert Brodin Roger Clay Thomas Gant alias Thornbrough Middleton Stevens Iames Willandson. Richard Salvin. Th. Ridale Brian Medcalf Iohn Seargin William Biddle. To our keeper of the Clinke, or to his Deputy. Here we have no lesse then sixteen Priests released out of one prison by one Warrant under his Majesties own hand at one time, at the Queenes own instance, when not altogether so powerfull, nor Popery grown to that head and power as now. I doubt, no such Warrant can be produced to discharge any Puritans (as the most zealous Protestants were nicknamed) our of prison all his reigne. Not long after there were six more priests taken, and committed to the Clink, all of them this same yeare released at once by this ensuing royall Warrant under his Majesties hand. Charles R. WHereas since our last Warrant unto you, bearing date the eleventh day of April last, there have been brought unto Your custody these here∣after mentioned PRIESTS or Recufants, the which according to our pleasure sig∣nified on the 24. of March last, AT THE INSTANCE OF OUR DEA∣REST CONSORT THE QUEENE, are to be transported beyond the Seas, by such persons as the Marquesse of Casteauneu late Ambassadour extraordinary from our deare brother the French King, hath appointed. These are therefore to will and require you forthwith to deliver to the said persons or person by the said French Ambassadour so appointed, THE SIX PERSONS hereafter named, to be presently transported into the parts beyond the Seas, whereof DOE YOU NOT FAILE, and this shall be your SUFFICIENT WARRANT for the same. Given under our Signe-Manuall at our Palace at Westminster, the 25 day of June, in the sixth yeare of our reigne. Thomas Holmes Robert Widdrington Thomas Readman Thomas Berry Thomas Sheephard Gilbert Shelton. To our keeper of the Clink or to his Deputy. After these liberall discharges of so many priests together, it seemes, the Of∣ficers of Justice were much dismayed in their bootlesse apprehensions of them, whereupon there were seldome many of them together in prison at once in succeed∣ing yeares; and if any single priest were casually apprehended by any deligent Offi∣cers, they soon procured their several discharges, many of them under the Kings own hand, of which there are sundry presidents, almost in all the prisons and Goales
of England and Wales, overtedious to ennumerate or transcribe; I shall instance onely in three or foure to the Clinke, whch together with Newgate, the Gate∣house, and Newprison, could furnish us almost with a whole volume of the like examples. Charles Rex. VVHereas Richard Salvin was heretofore committed to your charge to be kept prisoner there untill further order; these shall be now to will & require you to enlarge the said Richard Salvin, & to deliver him unto Du. Moulin a French Gentlemam, to be by him transported into the parts beyond the seas, for which this shall be your warrant. Given under our Signe Manuall at our Palace of Westminster the eighteenth of November, in the seventh yeare of our raigne. To our trusty and welbeloved, the Keeper of the prison of the Clinke. This Salvin was one of the 16 Priests formerly discharged, and staying here ap∣prehended, & now again discharged, contrary to the purport of the former warrant. Charles Rex. WHereas request hath been made unto Us by Mounsieur Biscaret, in the name of our deare Mother in Law, the Queene Dowager of France, in the behalfe of Matthew Wilson, a ROMISH PRIEST, now a prisoner in your custody, that he may be released out of prison, to depart immediately out of the Kingdome in the company of the said Mounsieur Biscaret: We being willing to give our deare Mother contentment in this particular, doe hereby will and com∣mand you forthwith to deliver the person of the said Mathew Wilson unto the bearer hereof Edmund Barker, one of the Messengers of our Chamber, to be by him conveyed unto the Sea side, and there shipped in such sort as We have directed by our warrant unto him in that behalfe: and for so doing, these our Letters shall be your sufficient Warrant and discharge. Given under our signe Manuall at Our Palace of Westminster this foure and twentieth day of January, in the seventh yeare of Our Reigne. To the keeper of the prison of the Clink within our Borough of Southwark. This Priest released by this warrant, under pretence of being sent beyond the Seas, continued either still in the Kingdome, or returned hither soon after, being here very lately, as divers credible witnesses have attested; and no doubt most of the other Priests released on this pretext, either remained here still after their enlarge∣ment, (as Salvin and Iohn Southworth did, as you will see anon) or returned back in short time after,See Summa Angelica & Rosella: Til. Obedientia Maffaeus Vegius, & Riba deniera, in vita Ignatii Loyalae, Xavior: & auters bien Heureux Peres de la Compagnie de Iesus. unlesse by the Generalls of their severall orders, others were sent to supply their places; it being contrary to their Oath of Obedience to their Superiors, who give them their missions, to return from any place whither they are sent, without their speciall License, and an unpardonable sinne; the true reason, why so many Priests and Iesuites chuse rather to suffer death then depart the Realme without the License of their Superiours first obtained, which mandates their Discipline and Doctrine, constrein them absolutely to obey, under pain of eternall damnation, & the severest Ecclesiasticall and Temporall Censures they can inflict. There is another Warrant under the Kings signe-Manuall directed to the Keeper of the prison, called The New prison, within the City of London, for the
release of Ion Plansford A ROMISH PRIEST, at the request of the same Moun∣sier Biscaret, in the name of Queene Mother Dowager of France, dated the same 24 day of January the same yeere as the last recited Warrant and agreeing verbatim therewith, therefore needlesse to recite: onely I shall adde this one War∣rant more of the Kings, running in a more legall forme. CHarles by the grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, &c. To the Keeper of the prison of Clinke in the Borough of Southwarke in the County of Surry, and to all Maiors, Sheriffs, and Justices of Peace, and to all others to whom it shall or may appertaine, Greeting. Whereas intercesion hath been made unto us by the Marshall of Bassampire, Am∣bassadour extraordinary from the Christian King our deare Brother, that out of our grace and goodnesse we would be pleased to release from imprisonment the body of Ioseph Pater a Romish Catholike, remaining in the said prison of the Clinke: know you, that we being willing to gratifie the said Marshall De Bassam, pire, in granting unto him this his request on the behalfe of the said prisoner have given and granted, and by these presents doe give and grant unto the said Keeper of the prison of the Clinke, and to you the said Maior, Sheriffs, and Iu∣stices of peace foresaid, whom it may concerne, full power, warrant, and autho∣rity to enlarge and discharge the body of the said Ioseph Pater of his impri∣sonment out of the said prison before mentioned, if for Recusancy onely, and for no other cause he stand committed: And this presents, or the inrolment thereof shall be as well unto you the Keeper of the said prison of the Clinke for discharging and enlarging of the said prisoner, as unto you the said Maiors, Sheriffs, and Iu∣stices of Peace, for suffering him to walke abroad at large, a sufficient warrant and discharge in that behalfe. Given under our Signet at our palace of Westmin∣ster the eight day of Ianuary in the second yeare of our Raigne. Exa. per Ro. Heath. May it please your most Excellent Maiesty: This conteineth a Warrant for the enlarging of Ioseph Pater, a Romish Ca∣tholike, now prisoner in the Clinke, at the intercession of Marshall De Bassampire Ambassadour extraordinary from the French King. Signified to be your Maiesties Pleasure by the Lord Conway. Rob. Heath. For releasments of Priests by the Privy Councels Warrants, take these three pre∣sidents in stead of many; The very originall Warrants under the Seale of the Privy Councell, being now in the Recorders of Londons hands. WHereas Iasper Loberi was formerly committed to your custody, to re∣main prisoner under your charge till further order: these are to will & re∣quire you forthwith to discharge & set at liberty the aforesaid Iasper Loberie, from his imprisonment; for which this, together with a certificate under the clerk of the Councels hand, that the said Loberie hath given security, according to an Order of this Board, shall be your sufficient Warrant. Dated at Whitehall the 15. of Iune, 132. Thomas Coventry C. S. Arundell and Surry Rich. Ebor. Manchester. Wentworth. I. Coke. Wimbleton. Francis Windebank, To the Keeper of the Clink, or his Deputy.
At Whitehall, the 18 of December, 1633. present Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Archbishop of Yorke. Lord Privy Seale. Lord High-chamberlain. Earle of Salisbury. Earle of Kelly. Lord Viscount Wimbleton. Lord Cottington. Lord Newburgh. Mr, Treasurer. Mr. Secretary Coke. Mr. Secretary Windebanke. VVHereas a petition was this day presented to the Board, by Robert Hais, prisoner in the New-prison, shewing, that the petitioner is much impoverished in his Estate, by his long imprisonment, and is now grwne so weake through infirmities that unlesse by their Lordships favour he may enjoy the benefit of fresh ayre for the recovery of his health, his life is in great danger. And therefore made humble suite to be discharged from prison (for preservation of his lie as aforesaid) upon good security to attend the Board within ten dayes after notice in that behalfe. Forasmuch as his petition was recommended to the Board BY THE QUEENES MAJESTY; their Lordships doe thinke fit, and order that the said Hais (first giving good security to attend the Board within ten daies after notice given as aforesaid) shall be discharged from his imprisonment, and enjoy his liberty without molestation or trouble of any Messengers, or o∣ther his Maiesties Officers whatsoever. Where of the Keeper of the said prison and all other whom it may concerne are to take notice. Ex. Wil. Becher. THese are to will and command you to set at fulliberty the person of William Waglrave formerly committed to your custody; and for your so doing this shall be your warrant. Dated at Star-chamber the last of lanuary, 1643. Wil. Cant. Thomas Coventry, C.S. Arundel and Surry Salisbury. R. Ebor: H. Manchester, Pembrooke and Montgomery. To the Keeper of the Clinke and New∣prison, or his Deputy. These three persons were committed for Priests, and discharged as such, though not expressed in these Warrants, the better to colour the businesse. Note that the Arch∣bishops hands of Canterbury and Yorke, are first subscribed to the two latter of them; but Yorkes to the first in Canterburies absence; whose hands I dare say, are to no Warrant for such a discharge of any Puritan or Orthodox Protestant Many more Warrants of this nature from the Privy-Counsell might be produ∣ced, which for brevity I omit. Secretary Windebankes Warrants for releasing of Priests are almost infinite. I shall touch onely upon some few now remaining in the Recorder of Londons hands, who was to draw up his impeachment before he fled into France.
VVHereas William Waller was comitted unto your charge for Recusancy, and for suspiion of being a Priest: these are strictly to charge and command you in His Majesties name upon the sight hereof, forthwith to set him at liberty: and I do likewise hereby require you to deliver unto him his apparell and other ne∣cessaries left in his Chamber when you gaveNota him leave to go abroad, at THE QUEENES MAIESTIES DESIRE, he paying unto you onely the ordinary Fees due by Law for the release of any prisoner from your charge and custody. And this shall be your sufficient discharge in this behalf. Dated the ninth day of Octob. 1632. Fran. Windebank. To Robert Davison keeper of the Clink in Southwark, or to his Deputy there. THese are to Will and require you forthwith upon sight hereof to enlarge and set at liberty the body of Henry Moore now prisoner in your custody, for which this shall be your warrant. Dated at Westminster 1 Decemb. 1633. Fran. Windebank. To Robert Davison keeper of the new prison in Maiden-lane, London. This Moore was committed for a Priest. The King himself by this Warrant under his own hand committed one Edward Moore a Priest, to the Clink, for a notable misdemeanour done in his Court. Charles R. WE will and command you to receive into your custody the body of Edward Moore, and him to keep and detaine in safe and sure custody, untill you re∣ceive our further pleasure concerning him; for which this shall be your Warrant; Given at our Honour at Hampton-Court, this 19th day of Decemb. 1629. in the 15 yeare of Our reigne. To the keeper of Our prison of the Clink. Secretary Windebank by his own ensuing Warrant, without any expressed dire∣ctions from the King, undertakes to release this Priest, committed by the K. himself. THese are to will and require you, forthwith to enlarge and set at liberty the body of Edward moore, now prisoner in your charge upon suspition of being a Priest, and hereof you are not to fail. Dated at Whitehall, 14. Mar. 1634. Fran. Windebank. To the keeper of the Clink, and to his Deputy. The like Warrants of release and discharge are under the said Secretary Winde∣banks hand to the keeper of the Clink, for William Drury, a popish Priest 24 mar. 16: 4. for Thomas Holmes a Priest 9 May 1634. for Humfrey Turbervill, a Priest, 1 Decemb. 1634. for Iohn Fisher alis Percy a popish priest, committed by warrant from the Lords of the Councell to the Gate-house 12 Decemb. 1634. and released by the said Secretaries warrant to the keeper of the Gate-house 12 August 1635. for Thomas Rainolds a Priest, (to the keeper of the Gate-house) 17 April 1635. for Iohn Goodman, a noted priest (to the keeper of the Gate-house) 17 Sept. 1639. with infinite others, whom I now omi.
It was the usuall practice of thisSee Romes Master-piece. p. 23. 24, 29. Iesuited Secretary) who had a pension from the Papists, and was a Lay-Iesuite brought up by the Archbishop of Canterbury, whose scholar he was, and made Secretary of State at his suite, as the memorialls of his life attest) First, if any Priests were brought before him by the Officers, if he could not discharge them without commitment, to commit them to prison for 4 or 5 dayes, for a shew, and then to discharge them. I shall give you one late instance in stead of many, out of his own Warrants in the case of Arnold Gerard. THese are to will and require you forthwith to receive into your custody the body of Arnold Gerard A ROMISH PRIEST herewith sent you, and him to keep till you shall have further order. And hereof you may not fail. Dated at my house in Drury-lane, 25 may, 1640. Fran. Windebank. To the keeper of the Gate-house in Westminster or, his Deputy. within five dayes after he discharged him again by this warrant, under the Se∣cretaries Seale. THese are to will and require you forthwith to set at Liberty the body of Arnold Gerard, whom I LATELY COMMITTED to your custody. And hereof you may not fail. Dated at my house the 30th of May 1640. Fran. Windebank. To the keeper of the Gate-house in Westminster, or his Deputy. So Thomas Reinolds a Priest committed by this Secretary to the Gate-house the tenth of April 1635. was absolutely discharged by him thence, on the seventeenth day of the sme moneth, as appeares by the Warrants. Iohn Southworth, one of the 16 Priests released by the Kings forecited Warrant of April 11 sexto Car. to be sent beyond the Seas as was pretended; continuing a dangerous seducer after his release, was afterwards committed again to the Clink prison by the Lords of the Privy-Councels warrant; but yet for all that had free liberty to walk abroad at his pleasure (as most Priests during their imprisonment, had, the more safely to seduce His Majesties good subiects, and open masses in their prisons to boote; whereupon being apprehended and brought before some of the High-Commissioners, and refusing to give bond to appear before them (though the good men never did such Romish-vermin any harm in their terrible Court, a Spa∣nish inquisition onely to torture Puritanes, and no other persons, (he was sent to the Clink by their warrant under the Seale of the Court, dated the 24 of June, An. Dom. 1640 (to which they found him to be formerly committed by the Lords, and to be then a vagrant prisoner) to be there detained under the Keepers custody untill other order should be given for his inlargement all, which is expressed in the war∣rant for his commitment. But within few dayes after this Priest was absolutely re∣leased by this warrant. THese are to will and require you forthwith upon the sight here of, to enlarge & set at liberty the body of Iohn Southworth lately committed to your custody. For which this shall be your Warrant. Dated at my house in Drury-lane, 16 Iuly 1640. Fran. Windebank. To the keeper of the Clink, or to his Deputy, or Deputies.
How dangerous a seducer this Southworth, alias Southwell was, appeares by this Petition of Robert VVhite, Sub-Curate of St. Margarets Parish in VVestminster to the Archbishop of Canterbury, the last great sicknesse, 1636. MOst humbly sheweth, That the Petitioner ever since the beginning of this grievous visitation in Westminster, hath used all the pains & diligence that possibly he could, to serve the Cure in the absence of Dr. VVimberley; and bein gimployd by divers charitably disposed people to distribute their alms among the most indigent and distressed sort of people, he hath observed TWO PO∣PISH PRIESTS to frequent VVestminster, one of which is called Southwell, who is, and long hath been a prisoner in the Gatehouse, butThese Priests had liberty to goe & live abroad even whiles they were pri∣soners, the more safely to seduce the people. lies about Clerkenwel, This Southwell, under a pretence of distributing Almes, sent FROM SOME OF THE PRIESTS IN SOMERSET-HOUSE, or OTHER PAPISTS, doth take occasion to go into divers visited Houses in VVestmin∣ster, and namely to the house of one VVilliam Baldwin, and VVilliam Stiles in the Kemp-yard in VVestminster, and there finding Baldwin neer the point of death, did set upon him by all meanes to make him change his religion, whereunto by his subtile perswasions Baldwin easily consented, and received the Sacrament from him according to the Church of Rome, and so died a Romish-catholique. And in the same maner he perverted William Stiles, who also died a Romish-catholique. And South-well to colour and hide these wicked practices, doth see the Watchmen and other poor people thereabouts, that they should affirm he comes onely to give Almes. And thus under a pretence of relieving the bodies of poor people, he comes onely to poysons their souls. Now may it please your Grace, the Petitioner having no means to ap∣prehend these Priests, or to stop this danger and dishonour to our Religion, doth humbly implore your Graces favour and zeal, that some speedy course may be taken to hinder the progresse thereof; and that not onely for the con∣firming and setling of poor people in our Religion, but also to prevent a great danger which may ensue to the Queenes Maiestie at her coming to Denmarke-house, for that divers poor people newly turned Romish-Catho∣liques, do commonly frequent the Masse at Denmarke-house; And three of those poor people watched all night with VVilliam Stiles immediately before he died, and the next day went thither to Masse. A most wicked course if it should not be remedied. Upon this, Southwell soon after was apprehended, indicted, arraigned, and the premises fully proved against him by sundry witnesses; and yet by the Queens and VVindebanks powerfull meanes, his finall triall was put off, to the great discontent of the people, & he not long after released, even neer the verie time that D. Bastwicke, Mr. Burton, and Mr. Prynne, were most grievously censured in the Star-chamber, and most barbarously pillored, deprived of their eares, stigmatized, yea sent away Close-prisoners and exiles into forraign Islands, and there shut up so strait, that not so much as their Wives of Friends might have accesse by person or letter to them, nor set footing in the Islands where they were cloistered up, under pain of impri∣sonment and the severest censures; and all for opposing the Popish Doctrines and Innovations brought into our Church by the Prelaticall and Popish Confederates, who conspired to undermine our Religion, and boldly discovering this their con∣spiracy
spiracie in printed bookes, to the incredulous secure world, who never dreamed of such an imminent danger to our religion, which is since more palpably and experi∣mentally discovered. To such an exorbitant power and prevalency had the Priests and Popish faction then attained. Secondly, if any Priests or Jesuits were committed in the Countrey, then it was this Secretaries ordinary practice to send for them up to London, by his own War∣rant and Messengers, under pretence of proceeding against them here, and so to re∣lease them: to give you one late instance (most Counties having made experiences of this practice.) Patricke Clerye, a dangerous Priest, was committed by the Earle of Salisbury to Hortford-Gaole by this Warrant. YOu shall receive herewith the body of Patricke Clerye, who BY HIS OWN CONFESSION made before me IS A SEMINARY PRIEST. Wherefore these are to will and require you to take into your cu∣stodie the body of the said Patricke Clerye, and him to keepe in durance, till he shall be delivered by sufficient Warrant for that behalf. And herein you may not faile, at your perill. Dated at Hertford this 26. of June, 1643. Salisbury. To the Keeper of his Majesties Gaole of Hertford, or his Deputies there. Within few dayes after this Priest was removed and released by Windebanke, by colour of this juggling Warrant. BY vertue of HIS MAJESTIES COMMAND to me given, These are to wil and require you forth with upon sight hereof, to deliver the body of Patricke Clerye, now prisoner in your custody, into the hands of this bearer, one of the Messengers of His Majesties Chamber, sent purposely for him, who is to bring him hither, to beThat is to be released. proceeded with, as his Majesty shal please further to direct; and hereof you may not faile at your perill. Dated at Whitehall, 21. July, 1640. Fran: Windebanke. To the Keeper of His Majesties Gaole of Hertford, and to all others whom it doth or may concerne. By such a Warrant as this, Captaine Read, that active Lay-Iesuite, mentioned in Pag. 20, 21, 22. Romes-Master-piece, the common Host and Agent of the Jesuits Society in Eng∣land, and chiefe Agent in the late Irish rebellion, was freed from the Gaole in Devon∣shire where he was imprisoned, and then inlarged, and especially protected by the King, in manner following; by the King himself, and this Letter of Grace. By the King. VVHereas we have received good testimonie of the loyaltie and dutie of OurO that the King should trust and stile such a Tray∣tor wel-belo∣ved, and grant him such spe∣ciall grace, and protecti∣on. trusty and wel-beloved Captaine Iohn Read, and because the may be subject to the penalties of the Lawes against RECVSANCY, These are to signifie, That We are GRACIOVSLY PLEASED to ex∣tend OVER SPECIALL GRACE towards him; and doe hereby will and command, that no Indictment, Presentment, Information, or Suit in our Name, or in the name OF ANY OTHER BEE HENCEFORTH com∣menced, prosecuted, or accepted against him by ANY OF OVER OFFI∣CERS AND SVBJECTS WHATSOEVER for or concer∣ning RECVSANCIE. And if any such shall happen, then Our will and pleasure is, that upon sight hereof the same shall be dischar∣ged
and made void, or otherwise not prejudiciall unto him. Given under Our Signet, the 13. day of July, in the tenth yeere of Our Reigne. To all and singular Our Iudges of Assize, Iustices of Peace, Majors, Sheriffs, Clerks of Assize, Basiliffs, Constables, Informers, and all other Our Officers and Ministers, whom it doth or may concern, and to every of them. This Letter of extraordinary grace and protection to this Arch-Traitor, Conspi∣rator and Rebell, is entred of Record in the Sessions-booke of the Clerke of the Peace of Middlesex at the Sessions held 6. Oct. 13. Caroli, pag. 261. and in the Crown Office too, where those who please, or doubt of it, may peruse it at their pleasure. 3. This Secretary committed some, and much blamed other Officers only for ap∣prehending & molesting Popish Priests; and released Iames a Priest taken in Execu∣tion for a debt, by commanding an Officer to bring him out of prison to his chamber to examine him, and there by collusion permitted him to escape; for which escape thus fraudulently procured, the Jailor and Officer were inforced to pay the debt. The Warrants to free Priests and Jesuits out of prison before and without In∣dictments, to prohibit them from Indictments, to reprieve and release them after they have been arraigned and condemned, are almost numberlesse. The Jesuits apprehended by Justice Long in their new erected Colledge of Cler∣kenwell, in the third yeere of the Kings Reigne, were all bailed and released before they were Indicted and tried, by speciall directions from the King; which abuse was much complained of, and examined in the Parliament held that yeer: and how many scores of Priests have been since released without any prosecution and Indict∣ment, when apprehended, the premised Warrants and the Goal-books thorowout England will at test; Windebanke releasing above 80. as was proved inNovemb. 11 12. 1640. See the Iournall Book. Parliament. 4. Iunii 1633. A privie Seale reciting that one Iohn Broughton was indicted for a Priest, was directed by the King to the Judges of the Kings Bench to stay procee∣dings against him, which is recorded in the Crowne Office; whereupon this War∣rant was made under the Lord chiefe Justice Richardsons hand. WHereas there is an Indictment remaining upon Record in the Kings Ma∣jesties Court of his Bench at Westminster, against Iohn Broughton of London Clerke, otherwise Iohn Crowder of London Clerk. And whereas His Majestie hath directed his privie Seal to me, and to the rest of the Judges of the said Court, for staying of prosecution of the said Indictment against the said Iohn Broughton, by the name of Iohn Broughton of Ruerdeane in the County of Glou∣cester, the said Iohn Broughton being one and the self-same person, though diversly stiled in the Privie Seale, and in the Indictment. Therefore let the Clerke of the Crown keep the said Privie Seale and stay Processe upon the said Indictment un∣till Further order be taken, and this shall be your Warrant. 4 Iunii 1633. Thomas Richardson Ch. J. This Broughton, at the Sessions of Oyer and Terminer for the City of London, 22. Febr. 7. Car. R. was indicted for a Priest, which Indictment was afterwards re∣moved into the Kings Bench returnable immediately, and there stayed by this for∣mer Order. Anno 1643. Henry Rivers, Francis Foster, William Atkins, Francis Cotes, and George Parret, Priests & Jesuits, were all indicted in the Kings Bench of high Trea∣son
for being Priests. Upon this, George Parret presented this ensuing Petition to the King in the behalfe of himself and his fellowes (recorded in the Crown Office, with the proceedings on it) being the boldest piece, and most presumptuous sawcie affront to the proceedings of Justice against Priests and Papists, that I have met with; and yet receiving such a gracious answer from his Majesty which most would have thought he would have rejected with highest indignation) as may well amaze his Protestant Subjects. To the Kings most Excellent Majesty. The humble Petition of George Parret Gentleman. IN all humility sheweth, That whereas your Petitioner, with other foure ROMAN CATHOLIKES, by EVILL EVIDENCE was in his and their absence indicted the 25. of Iune last, in your Majesties Court of Kings Bench for high Treason, for having taken Orders OF PRIESTHOOD beyond Seas, and returning to England, contrary to the Statutes of this your Highnesse Realme in this case provided. Now for as much as your Petitioner, together with the rest, areSee how holdly they asperse the prosecutors and witnesses that dare ap∣peare against them. PROSECU∣TED UNJUSTLY by SOME MALICIOUS ADVERSARY, in hope to ruine him, or them upon no ground or occasion, but meerly upon surmises, ven∣turing even to sweare, WHATSOEVER THEIR MALICE CAN INVENT, or what they can finde to be for their owne gaine or advantage, being persons easily to be gained with any small summe of money from prose∣cuting whatsoever they pretend BOLDLY to concerne the State and good service to the Crown, as a particular information is readie to be given of such persons ordinarie practices, AND DAYLY VEXATIONS OF RO∣MAN CATHOLIKES, ALTHOVGHNota. CERTAINLY KNOWN AND DESERVED TO BE OF THE NVM∣BER OF YOVR MAJESTIES MOST LOYALL AND OBEDIENT SVBJCTS, if it may please your Majestie to appoint ei∣ther that the Secretaries of State, or any of your Justices of Peace to hear the same. Further sheweth, That the Petitioner and the rest, untill sixe daies after the said Indictment, hadMany who obscure them∣selves, are and may be law∣fully indicted without no∣tice, in cases of Treason or Felony, and thereupon outlawed to being them in no notice of the said proceedings, nor to his knowledge ever saw him that gave such evidence against him: which course as it isMost ordi∣nary, he should have said. most extraordinary, having neither been nor practised neither in the time of Queene Elizabeth, nor of your Majesties Royall Father of blessed memorie in a case of this nature, without speciall order of their Majesties, or of the Lords of their Majesties privie Councell, and the parties so to be indicted, to be actually held, and present; so may it this way happen to any of your Majesties subjects whatsoever, to be in danger of convi∣ction of a Priest by outlary, by means of any malicious adversary, without any notice at all, to their utter ruine, and without all due consideration and respect OF THE WORTHY ESTEEM WHICH YOUR HIGHNESSE MOST GRACIOUS CLEMENCY TOWARDS YOURHe means Romane Priests and Catholikes, now abun∣dantly varifi∣ed in England and Ireland. LOYALL SUBJECTS HATH JUSTLY GAINED EVERY WHERE. The premises considered, and the present danger whereunto your Petitioner, to∣gether with your Majest es LOYAL AND OBEDIENT SUBJECTS, are lyable by such indirect and unaccustomed means: They most humbly beseech your Highnesse would be graciously pleased to give present order, That the pro∣ceedings
upon the said Indictment may be stopped or superseded. AND NO SUCH COURSE HEREAFTER TAKEN AGAINST THEM OR OTHERS, Without expresse Order from your Majesty, or the Lords of your Majesties most honourable privie Councel, as the custome hath formerly been: And your Petitioner, together with the rest, as in duty bound, will daily pray for your Majesties long and happy Raigne. To this insolent Petition, extending to all Roman Priests and Catholiques, and prescribing what proceedings shall be hereafter used against them, this Answer was returned to my Lord Richardson, then chief Iustice, by Windebanck. My Lord, I Send your Lordship herewith a Petition presented to His Majesty by George Parret Gentleman, which His Majesties pleasure is, That your Lordship shall take into consideration: and if you finde undue practice against the Petitioner and the rest, as is suggested in the Petition, then your Lordship is to certifie His Majesty thereof; and howsoever, in the mean time, to stay the Indictment, and any proceedings against the Petitioner and the rest; which is all I have to your Lord∣ship at this time. To my honoured friend, Sir Thomas Richardson, Knight, Chief Iustice of His Majesties Court of King-Bench, Westm. 20. Iuly 1634. Your Lordships loving friend, Fran. Windebank. Hereupon those Indictments were stayed, contrary to Law, Iustice, and the Iudges Oaths. Henry Morse, a Romish Priest, was committed prisoner to Newgate, by a War∣rant from the Lords of the privie Councel, dated March 26. 1637. Iune 20. follow∣ing he was released by vertue of this Royall Warrant, after two Indictments prefer∣red against him, he being a most dangerous seducer, who perverted no lesse then 560. persons in and about Saint Giles parish, as appeared by a Certificat read in Court. Charles R. WHereas at the instance of Our dearest Consort the Queen, We have been pleased to grant, that Henry Morse, lately indicted upon suspition of be∣ing a Priest, and still prisoner in our Goale of Newgate, shall be inlarged, upon sufficient security given to appeare before the Lords of Our privie Councell when he shall be thereto called. And for as much as We understand that he hath given sufficient security for that purpose, Wee do therefore will and command forthwith to inlarge and set at liberty the body of the said Henry Morse, for which this shall be your sufficient Warrant. Greenwitch the 20, day of Iune, in the thirteenth yeer of Our raigne. To the Keeper of the Goale of Newgate, and to his Deputy. Before which, Secretary Windebanke granted this Warrant for him to put in his security. WHereas His Majesty hath been pleased to command, that Henry Morse, pri∣soner in Newgate, shall be discharged from his imprisonment, giving sufficient security to appear before the Lords of His Majesties most Honourable privie Councel, upon 20. dayes warning given him to that purpose. These are therefore to will and require you, to bring the body of the said Henry Morse to my house in Westminster to morrow, being Saturday at eight of the clock in the morning, to
enter security accordingly. And so for doing this shall be your warrant. Dated at Westminster, 16. June 1637. Fr. Windebancke. To the keeper of the prison of Newgate, and his Deputy. What favour and protection the Priests and Jesuits found from Secretary Winde∣banke, and the Archbishop of Canterbury, who brought him into this place; and what discouragement, injuries the prosecutors of them sustained, onely to take off all pro∣secutions of them, will appeare by this subsequent attestation of Mr. Newton and others, both before the wholeSee the Iournal Book Nov. 11, 12. 1640. house of Commons, and a Committee; and now put in writing under their owne hands, who are and will be ready to avow it in all par∣ticulars. FRancis Newton Gentleman, about thirteene yeares last past, obtained a generall Warrant from the Lords of his Majesties Privy Councell, for the apprehending of Jesuits, Seminary-Priests, transporters of children &c. By vertue of which Warrant he the said Newton, together with his servant Iohn Cooke, did apprehend at severall times divers Jesuits and Priests, to the number of 36. at his great charge and hazard of life; who were brought before Secretary Cooke, and others, and by them committed to severall prisons: Whereupon the late Secretary Windebanke discharged the said Jesuits and Priests, and committed New∣ton and Cooke severall times to prison for performing their service, to their great charges and hazard of life. The said Windebanke sending for Newton, tooke from him at severall times eight Watches (formerly taken from Priests, and given to him by the Lords,) to the value of 70. pound. Moreover, the said Windebanke took from Newton two rich units of popish Vest∣ments, formerly given him by the Lords of the Privy Counceil; The said Winde∣banke engaging his Honour to Newton, that he should receive from the Queene 200. pounds or the Vestments againe; Newton often demanded the same of Windebanke, yet could never get them, nor the value of them, but onely threatning words. Divers Jesuits and Priests constantly frequently the said Windebankes house; and amongst the rest one Henry Lloyd, alias Francis Smith, alias Francis Ryvers, alias Francis Simons, a grand Jesuite, a great seducer, and chiefe agent in the great and damnable plot of the Gun-powder-treason, who by the counsell of Windebanke and some of his adherents, gave a judgement of 300. pound to be a prisoner to the Fleet, that the State nor Messengers should take no notice of his Iesuiticall Plot. The said Newton, together with one Thomas Mayo, about August in the tenth yeare of the King, searching the house of one Bartholmen Frumman Esquire, of Cheame, in the County of Surrey, found the said Lloyd, alias Ryvers the Jesuite there; who going to carry him away, the said Jesuit shewed him and two high Con∣stables the said Windebankes Warrant, that no Messenger or any other person should molest him, whereupon they left him there. Moreover the said Jesuite then said to Newton and Mayo and the high Consta∣bles, these words: Are you angry with me for being here? if you will stay till to mor∣row being Monday, you shall see seven more Priests of us here; this he spake in a vaun∣ting way, having a protection from Windebanke. The said Newton and Mayo the Michaelmas-Terme following indicted the said Jesuite and Frumman the harbourer in the Kings-Bench, and proceeded to the Vt∣lary:
whereupon Windebanke sent a Warrant and apprehended Newton and Mayo, and threatned them, that if they did not forthwith forbeare prosecuting the said Jesuit and harbourer, he would immediately lay them by the heels; but the said New∣ton and Mayo proceeded to the Vtlary against them both, notwithstanding: which Windebanke perceiving, caused Justice, Bartlet to stay the proceedings thereupon. This Francis Smith the Jesuit said to M. Waddesworth and M. Taxley these words (in Norfolke) some yeers since, That it is not now a time nor way to bring in their Re∣ligion by disputing or books of Controversie, BVT IT MVST BE DONE BY AN ARMY, AND BY FIRE AND SWORD.Nota. The said Jesuit usually frequented the now Archbishop of Canterbury, and was very seldome from him: which Jesuit perswading Cooke, Newtons servant, to goe with Sir Kenelm Digby into France, that so Cooke might give no more information against Priests; and promising him great preferments there, he did about Christmas was foure yeers, cary Cooke one morning to Sir Kenelms bed-side at M. Burgesses in S. Martins in the Fields, where after some discourse, Smith taking his leave of Sir Kenelm, prayed him in Cookes hearing, to excuse him to my Lord of Canterbury, that he could not dine that day with his Lordship; and prayed him to desire my Lord of Canterbury, to remember the businesse that he last spake with him about. To which Sir Kenelm replied, that he would not faile him to doe it, for he was to dine with my Lord of Canterbury that day. Iohn Gray, a Messenger, took one Fisher a grand Jesuit, who having been severall times examined before the Lords of the Councell, the said Canterbury came from the King, and delivered this sentence against him: viz. Mr. Fisher, fall downe upon your knees, and pray for the King, that he is so mercifull unto you to save your life. It is the Kings pleasure that you must be banished the Kingdome; and be committed to the Gate-house, there to remain, untill you put in good security never to return again. Yet suddenly after the said Fisher his imprisonment, Windebanke released him, and gave him a protection, That no Messenger, nor any other person should molest him, up∣on paine of his displeasure. The said Gray and Cooke afterwards (not knowing of his Protection) apprehen∣ded Fisher; whereupon he shewed him his Protection from Windebanke, and was thereupon discharged. Vpon which Gray and Cook went to Secretary Cook and told him that Fisher was discharged by Windebanke. Whereupon Master Secretary com∣manded Gray to go to my L. of Canterbury, and tell him of Fishers discharge. Vpon this Gray and Cook went accordingly to speak with Canterbury, yet could not have any admittance to him; but spake with M. Dell his Secretary, and demanded a Warrant of him under Canterburies hand to apprehend Fisher the Jesuite: who re∣plied and said to Gray, that he was an idle fellow to come for a Warrant from my Lord, for he would meddle with no such matter as that was; but bid Gray, if he would have a Warrant, he should repaire to the Councell-board; Vpon which Gray answered and said, I see how the game goes now; is not my Lord Metropolitane of England, and ought not he to grant me a Warrant? but I hope eye it be long to see better dayes. Vpon this the next day following Canterbury complained of Gray, and brought him be∣fore the Councell, and committed him to the Fleet, where he remained 14. weeks. After which Canterbury seeing the Lords would discharge Gray, who oft petitio∣ned them by his wife, caused Windebank to lay his Warrant upon him; wherupon he
there remained prisoner 7. weeks more. And upon often petitioning by Grayes wife, Windebanke was at last contented to discharge Gray, so that Gray would put in good security unto him THAT HE WOULD NOT HEREAFTER AP∣PREHEND ANY MORE PRIESTS. The said Newton apprehended Henry Gifford, a dangerous Iesuit, and brought him before Iustice Griffith, where he was tendred the Oath of Supremacy and Allegiance; whereupon the said Iesuite replyed and said these words: I wish to God, that all those who made the Oathes of Allegiance and Supremacie, that their tongues were seered in their mouthes, and all those that gave consent thereto. Whereupon the said Iustice told him, that the King, the Lords, and Commons had made these Oathes, and committed him to prison. The next day following, the Iustice and Newton were intreated to come to Secretary Windebank to speak with him concerning the Iesuit; Which they doing, Windebank said to Newton, Is this a Priest or a Iesuit? Newton answered and said, If he be not a Priest, he is worse than a Priest; and told him the aforesaid dange∣rous words. Then said Windebanke to the Iesuit (be being brought before him by Windebankes direction) I will not baile you for a world; and sent him to prison. But notwithstanding, that night or the next day, he set him at liberty, without giving New∣ton his Fees. Newton and Cook apprehended one Fit-Iames, an Arch-spie for Rome, and brought him before Windebank; yet Drew Lovet an Arch-Papist wrought so with him, that he took Lovets word for his appearance before him, and discharged Newton of him. About foure dayes after Windebank told Newton that Iames had given him good sa∣tisfaction concerning him. Afterwards Iames being arrested upon a Bill of Middle∣sex, at the suit of one Lincoln, upon a debt of 200. l. and put into the Gatehouse, Win∣debanke thereupon hearing of his arrest (and solicited by Lloyd alias Smith, the fore∣named grand Iesuit, and Lovet the Papist) sent for Newton, and gave him a warrant to take the plaintife Lincoln and the Bailiffe, for arresting Iames; who did apprehend and bring them before Windebanke. He thereupon sent for the prisoner Iames to be brought before him, who being brought, he delivered him to Newton, and said, This is your prisoner, for the King shall be served before you, Meaning the plaintife. Newton answered, May it please your Honour, you have discharged him from me these 6. daies agone, and I have nothing to do with him. Windebanke replyed and said, That is all one, you shall take him. And if the plaintif be not contented therewith, I will lay him by the heeles. Whereupon he was delivered to Newton. But immediately upon the plain∣tifs going away, Windebanke caused Newton to deliver him the prisoner, and then Windebanke delivered the prisoner to Lovet, and bid him shift for himselfe. Upon which the plaintif lost his debt, and lay in prison for the monies. Moreover, the said Windebanke at sundry times threatned Cooke, that if ever he did go with Newton or any other to shew them any Priests, he would lay Cook in pri∣son; and that he would take a course that he should never come out. And also said, that he would have Cook whipt about the streets; and caused Cook to fall downe upon his knees to ask forgivenesse for what he had done formerly against Iesuits and Priests, having made a Mittinius to send him to the Gate-house, which he would not revoke, unlesse he would make such submission. Witnessed by Vs Fran. Newton. Thomas Mayo. James Wadsworth. John Cooke.
To this I shall adde two relations more. During my imprisonment in the Tower of London, Captaine Francis Conesby Surveyer of the Ordnance, went one mor∣ning about the yeare 1633. to the New prison to visit one William Drury a Priest (who had formerly brought him a letter from a speciall friend in the Low Coun∣tries being then a prisoner there; comming into the prison and inquiring for his Chamber, he was brought into a large Hall, with sundry partitions on one side (like drinking roomes in an Alchouse or Tavern) and a curtain drawn before each of them; where he saw some walking, others sitting in the Hall; who informed him that Drury in one of those Roomes: and going in order from one of them to the other, he found a Priest and a woman privately together at confession in every one of them, and Drury with a very handsome Chambermaide well clad in the uppermost of them. With whom having some conference about halfe an houre in his Chamber, as he was returning backe through the Hall, hee found a Priest there saying Masse, and the Iaylor himselfe with a Censor persuming the roome, and censing the same, (at they use in Popish Masses) and so many people, men and women, kneeling downe in the Hall, that hee could hardly passe by. At which strange sight he was much amazed, and not long after being in my company, upon a discourse concerning the increase of Popery, and favour shewed to Priests, hee related this story to me with much regrect, avouching the truth thereof upon his credit. Since the sitting of this Parliament, by the houses speciall direction there were severall Priests arraigned and condemned at Newgate much against his Majesties will, who notwithstanding both Houses earnest request to the contrary reprieved them from execution; and after many messages was hardly drawne to condescend to revoke this reprive, and yeeld them up to publike justice: which being gran∣ted, the Parliament out of their lenity spared the lives of some of them, who re∣maine still prisoners in Newgate; where they have gained so much favour and so far corrupted the Keepers, that even since the Covenant and Protestation taken, they have had Masses publikely in their chambers, of which information being gi∣ven, and a warrant made to Master Newton to search their chambers, during the ve∣ry last Sessions but one at Newgate, who searching Peter Milfords chamber (being the most active dangerous seducer of all the rest) found about Masse time an Altar ready furnished in his Chamber, foure severall suites of Massing Vestments, with sundry Crucifixes, Agnus Deies, Reliques, Masse-bookes, and other such Romish trinkets, (all delivered to the late Lord Mayors custodie) with no lesse then eleven persons at Masse, five of them Prisoners in the House, and the other sixe strangers; of which grosse abuse and intollerable connivance at condemned Tray∣tors (under the very Parliaments and Courts of Sessions Noses, in these dangerous times, even since the Covenant and Protestation taken) information was given, and complaint made in open Court, at the Sessions in the Old Bayly, by Master Newton in my hearing, and thereupon order given (if observed) to prevent such licentious abuses for the future, deserving the severast censures for the present. I shall adde one most remarkeable occurrent more, done in one of the highest Courts of publike Iustice, in the Kings owne Name, by his speciall Command, in favour of a great convicted Popish Recusant (now in Armes against the Parlia∣ment) in derogation of his owne royall Iustice and interest.
Hill. 130 Caroli B. R. A Writ of Error was brought by the Kings Attorney, in the Kings owne name, to quashan Indictment of Recufancie against the Mar∣quesse of Winchester, (whiles Lord Seint Iohn in the life of his Father) upon the Statute of 3. Iacobi. cap. 4. For not repairing to Church, &c. which Indictment was found before the Iustices of Assise, almost 20. yeeres before this Writ was brought. Now because this Statue expressely enacts; That the Indictment shall not be reversed, avoyded or discharged by reason of any default, informe, or for lacke of forme, or other defect whatsoever, other then by direct Traverse to the point of not comming to Church, or not receiving the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, but shall stand in force and be proceeded upon, any such default informe, or other efect what so∣euer notwithstanding; unlesse the party indicted first conform; himselfe: Hereupon (to evade this wholesome Law, and doe this grand Recusant an extraordinary Royall favour, transcending all Parallels whatsoever) the King himselfe (the Re∣cusant Marquesse being thus disabled by this Law) brought a Writ of Error in the Kings Bench to reverse this ancient Indictment (upon which the Marquesse was outlawed) and his Attorney Generall (Sir Iohn Bankes) assigned severall Errors to reverse the Kings owne suite and proceedings against this Grand Papist, who had no meanes to avoyd it. And because that learned, stout, upright Iudge; Sir George Crooke, did often declare his opinion in Court; That the King could not bring a Writ of Errour to reverse his owne Iudgement given for him; that it was both a dammage and dishonour to the King, and a meere deluding of this Statute to admit of such an unheard of Writ as this: The Attorney Generall, averred in open Court; THAT THE WRIT WAS BROVGHT BY SPECIALL WARRANT AND COMMAND OF THE KING. Whereupon after∣wards in Trinty Terme 14 Carol; the Indictment was quashed by Iudge Bram∣ston, Iones and Berkely upon this Writ, much against the good will and opinion of Iudge Crooke: and that upon these two rivolous Errours. First, because the Iudgement was that the Marquesse, forisfiat 20. where it ought to be forisfaciat. Secondly, because that in the entry of the Iudgement this word, Capiatur, was omitted. And Iudge Ioanes said; that for want of Addition or other errour in sait the King shall not reverse an Indictment on this Act, but otherwise it was of an Error in Law. But I feare the greatest Error in this Case, was in the King and these Iudges in opening such an illegall gap for Popish Recusants wholy to evade this Law, penned with as much care and judgement as possible upon the horrid Popish plot of the Gunpowder Treason, which would have blowne up this Par∣liament. The record of this notorious case, and the Iudgement given upon it, is ex∣tant in the Crowne Office. In few words: the Papists have lately gained such an high opinion in his Ma∣jesties judgement and affections; that he not onely tiles them, his Loyall, dutifull, trusty and wel-beloved Subjects, in all his forementioned letters of Grace; but even now principally relies upon their forces & contributions; Master Iohn Whites first Century of scandalous malignant Priests, p. 29. 25. as his best and faith∣fullest Subjects and Guard; insomuch that divers of our Prelaticall Clergy have cryed them up in their Pulpits (as well at the King and others in Court) for his Majesties best and most bountifull Leiges, witnesse the speech of Iohn Wells Par∣son or Shimplin in Suffolke, sequestred by the Parliament, who affirmed, THAT THE PAPISTS WERE THE KINGS BEST SVBIECTS. And of Iohn
Squire Vicar of Shorditch; (who in his last Printed Sermons stiles himself Iohn Squire Priest) sequestred, for that he hath publikely Preached in his Sermons That the Papists are the kings best Subiects, for their loalty and for their li∣berality, many of them like Arauna, having given like Kings to the King: and for their patience, that enduring very many grievances under his Majestie; they had buried them all in oblivion: exhorting that none should come to the Sacrament, unlesse they were so affected to his Maiestie as the Papists were. And comparing his Majestie to the man that went from Hierusalem to Ieriche, who fell among theeves, that wounded him in his Honour, robbed him of his Castles, and hearts of his people: he said, that the Priest passing by was the Protestant: the forward Professor, the Levite; but, the Papist was the good Samaritan: Especially the Irish Papist: and that the Subjects and all they have are at the Kings Com∣mand. From all these Premises; compared with the Plot and conspiracy of the Pop. Jesuites, Papists of all sorts against our Religion, discovered in Romes Master∣peece: the Rise and Progresse of the Irish Rebellion: The Articles of Pacifica∣tion made with the Irish Rebels there, stiled neither Rebels nor Traytors, but his MajestiesIn the Cop∣pie printed at Shrewsbury. Good Roman Catholicke Subiects; authorised by Commissions from his Majesty under the great Seale, now at last (if not at first) to take up Armes against all Protestants who shall not submit to this strange Pacification there, after the bloody slaughter, and butchery of above an hundred and forty thousand Inno∣cent Protestant (whose blood must passe altogether unrevenged by the hands of Royall publick justice;) and by speciall Commissions (as we are most certainely informed, a very probable argument they had not onely pretended but reall Com∣missions from the King at first for what they acted against the Protestants in Ire∣land) are now sent for over into England (where thousands of them are lately arri∣ved and more daily expected) to sight against the Parliament, and Massacre English Protestants in their owne Countrey, as freely as they did in Ireland: his Majestie making base Irish monies currant in England by speciall Proclamation, in favour of the Irish rebels, to be transported and made current good Subjects here, to murther us: the late intercepted Bull, with other Papers and Commissions newly intercep∣ted, and ordered to be forthwith published in Print. By all these our whole 3. Kingdomes if not the very blindest, and most incredulous Malignants (unlesse given over to a reprobate sence) must of necessity now see and acknowledge that there is and hath bin all his Majesties Reigne till this instant, a most strong cunning desperate confederacie prosecuted, (wherin the Queens Majestie hath bin cheife) to set up Popery in perfection and extirpate the Protestant party & Religi∣on in all his Majesties Dominions, which plot now visibly appeares above ground, and is almost ripened to perfection, unlesse Gods owne Almighty Power, and our unanimous, vigilant, strenuus opposition, prevent its finall accomplishment. For my owne particular, I many yeeres since through Gods goodnesse to me) by many infallible Symptomes clearely discovered, and to my power pub∣likely detected, oppugned this prevalent growing confederacie in sundry Printed Bookes; especially in my Perpetuity of a Regenerate Mans estate, Anti-Armini∣anisme, Dr. Cosens his Cozening Devotions; Lame Giles his altings; The Vubishop∣ing of Timothy and Titus; The Antipathy of the English Prelacy to unity and Mi∣narchy;
A Looking-glasse for Lordly Prelates; but especially in my Quench Coale, written in the Tower of London; for which good publicke service what a strange ingrate requitall I received, from the pretended Fathers of our Church, and de∣fendors of our faith, is too well knowne to the world. During my Imprisonment in the Tower, I met with some more speciall passages in Popish writers, which much confirmed me in the reality of this Conspiracie against our Religion, and to re-establish Popery; which because then unobvious and unknown to most, I had an intention to have published, as I could gaine oportunity; but my close Impri∣sonment there, and Exile into Wales and Iersie, prevented this designe. Where∣fore I shall for a close of this Narration; present you now, with what I then in∣tended. The first was these ensuing letters of the Pope to the King (when Prince of Wales and in Spaine) and of the King to the Pope, in answer thereof, recorded by Andrew de Chesue, Chronographer to the King of France, in his History of England, Scotland, and Ireland, l. 22. f. 1162. Printed at Paris Cum Privilegio, the last Edition, p. 509. 510, &c. And in the French Mercury, Tom. 9: Which Letters and Articles of the Spanish Match, layd the foundation stone of all his Ma∣jesties ensuing favours to Romish Recusants, Priests, Iesuites, and most punctually discover his good affection and inclination to the Roman Party, if not to that Religion, ever since manifested towards them, and abundantly detected by the premises, I shall here insert the same as I finde them lately printed in French and English, by others. The Popes Letter to the King, when Prince of Wales and in Spaine. MOst Noble Prince, Salutation and light of the divine grace: Foras∣much as great Brittaine, hath alwayes beene fruitfull in Vertues, and in men of great worth, having filled the one and the other world with the glory of her renoune; She doth also very often draw the thoughts of the holy Apostolicall Chaire, to the consideration of her prai∣ses. And indeede the Church was but then in her infancie, when the King of Kings did chuse her for his inheritance, and so affectionately, that we beleeve, the Roman Eagles have hardly outpassed the Banner of the Crosse. Besides that ma∣ny of her kings instructed in the know∣ledge of the true salvation, have prefer∣red the Crosse before the Royall Scepter and the Discipline of Religion before
covetcousnesse, leaving examples of Pie∣ty to other Nations, and to the ages yet o come. So that having merited the Principalities and first places of blessed∣nesse in Heaven, they have obtained on Earth the Triumphant ornaments of true holines. And although now the State of the English Church is altered, we see neverthelesse the Court of Great Brit∣tain, adorned and furnished with morall Vertues which might serve to support the Charity that we beare unto her, and be an Ornament to the name of Christia∣nity, if withall she could have for her defence and protection the Orthodox and Catholike truth. Therefore by how much the more the Glory of your most noble Father, and the apprehension of your Royall inclination, delights us, with so much more zeale, we desire that the gates of the Kingdome of Heaven might be opened unto you, and that you might purchase to your selfe the love of the uni∣versall Church. Moreover it being cer∣taine that Gregory the great, of most blessed memory, hath introduced to the English people, and taught to their Kings the law of the Gospell, and the respect of Apostolicall Authority: We, as inferi∣our to him, in holinesse and vertue, but equall in name and degree of dignity, it is very reasonable that we following his blessed footesteps, should indeavour the salvation of those Provinces, especially at this time, when your designe (Most noble Prince) elevates us to the hope of an extraordinary advantage: Therefore as you have directed your journey to Spaine, towards the Catholicke King, with desire to allie your self to the house of Austria, We do much commend your designe, and indeed doe testifie openly in this present businesse, that you are he that takes the principall care of our Prelacy. For seeing that you desire to take in marriage the daughter of Spaine: from thence we may easily conjecture
that the ancient seedes of Christian Pie∣ty, which have so happily flourished in the hearts of the Kings of great Brittaine may (God prospering them) revive a∣gaine in your soule. And indeed it is not to be beleeved that the same man should love such an alliance, that hates the Catholique Religion, and should take delight to oppresse the holy Chaire. To that purpose we have commanded to make continually most humble prayers to the father of lights, that he would be pleased to put you as a faire Flower of Christendome, and the onely hope of Great Brittain, in possession of that most noble heritage, that your Ancestors have purchased for you, to defend the Authority of the Soveraign High Priest; and to fight against the Monsters of He∣resie. Remember the dayes of old, en∣quire of your Fathers, and they will tell you the way that leads to heaven; and what way the temporall Princes have taken to attaine to the everlasting King∣dome. Behold the gaes of Heaven ope∣ned, the most holy Kings of England, who came from England to Rome ac∣companied with Angels did come to honour and doe homage to the Lord of Lords, and to the Prince of the Apostles in the Apostolicall Chaire: their actions & their examples being as so many voyces of God, speaking and exhorting you to follow the course of the lives of those to whose Empire you shall one day attaine. Is it possible that you can suffer that the Heretiques should hold them for im∣pious, and condemne those that the aith of the Church restifies to reigne in the heavens with Iesus Christ, and have Command and Authority over all Principallities and Empires of the earth? Behold how they tender you the hand of this truely happy inheritance, to conduct you safe and sound to the Court
of the Catholique King, and who desire to bring you back againe into the lap of the Roman Church: Beseeching with unpeakeable sighs and groares the God of all mercy for your Salvation, and do stretch out to you the Armes of the A∣postolicall Charity, to imbrace you with all Christian affection You that are her desired Sonne, in shewing you the happie hope of the Kingdome of Hea∣ven. And indeed you cannot give a grea∣ter consolatiō to al the people of the Chri∣stian Estates, then to put the Prince of the Apostles in possessiō of your most Noble Island, whose authority hath bin held so long in the Kingdome of Brittain, for the defence of Kingdomes, and for a devine Oracle; which will easily arrive, and that without difficulty, if you open your heart to the Lord that knocks, upon which de∣pends at the happinesse of that Kingdom. It is of our great Charity that we cherish the praises of the Royall Name; and that which makes us desire that you and your Royall Father might be stiled with the names of Deliverers, and Restorers of the ancient and paternall Religion of Great Britaine, which we hope for, tru∣sting in the goodnesse of God, in whose hands are the hearts of Kings, and who causeth the people of the Earth to re∣ceive healing, to whom we will alwaies labour with all our power to render you gracious and favourable; In the interim take notice by these Letters of the care of our Charity, which is none other than to procure your happinesse; and it will never grieveus to have written them, if the reading of them stir but the least spark of the Catholique Faith, in the heart of so great a Prince, whom we wish to be fil∣led with long continuance of joy, and flourishing in the glory of all vertues. Given at Rome in the Pallace of S. Peter the 20. of Aprill, 1623. in the Third yeare of our Popedome. TRes-Noble Prince, salut & lumiere de la grace divine: Come ainsi soit que la grand' Bretagne ait tousiours este abondante en vertus, & en personna ges de grand merite & ait remply l' vn & l' autre monde de lo gloire de sa renomme, elle attrire aussi tres souentles pensees du Saint Siege Apostolique a la consideration de ses louanges. Et de fait l' Eglise ue faisoit encore que naistre, quand le Roy des Roys la vlut chosir pour son heritage, & si affectionnement, qu' on tient qu' à peine les Aigles Romoins yont plustost passe que l' ostendart de la Croix. Ioint que plusi∣eurs de ses Roys instruits en la cognoisance du vray salut ont prefere la Croix au Scep∣tre Royal, & la discipline de la Religion a la conuotise: laissants des exemples de piete aux nations estrangeres & aux siceles fu∣turs.
Si bien qu ayans merite dans le Cie'les Principatez, & preeminences de la Beat it udine, ils ont obtenu en terre ds rnaments triomphaux de vraye Saintete. Et ores qu aiourd huyl Estat de l' Eg∣lise Anglicane soit alters, nous voyons neant, mins la Cout de la grand BRE∣TAGNE estre ornee & munle de ver∣tus Morales, qui servirient de consola∣tion à la charitè que nous luy portous & a ornement au nom Chrestien, si conoinct ement elle pouuost aucir pour sa defence & protection la verit orthodoxe & vniuer∣selle. Cest pourquoyd' autast plus quels Gloire de vostre Srenissme Pere, & le ressentiment de vostre Royal naturel, nous delectent, de tant plus grande ardeur resi∣rons nos que les portes du Roiaume Cele∣stes vous soyent ouuertes, & que vous ve∣us acqueriez l' aour de l' Eglise Vniver∣selle. D' ailleurs estant vray que Gregoire le grand de tres-sainte memoire a introduit aux puples d' Angleterre, & enseignè a leurs Rois la Loy de l' Euangile, & le re∣spect de l' auctorit Apostolique: Nous comme inferieurs, a luy en sainte tè & ver∣tu, & pareils en nom & degrè de dignitè, il est bien raisonnable, que suiuans ses Saints vestiges nous procurions le salut de ces Povinces, ommèment aujourd' huy que vostre heureux des∣sein (tres noble Prince) nous eslue â l' esperance  vn bonheur extra ordinaire. Partant, comme vous vous estes acheminè el Espagne versla per∣sonne du Roy Catholique, auec desir de vous allier á la Maison d' Austriche, Nous auons bien voululoüer vestre dessein, voire mesme tesmoigner ouuertement en l' affaire qui se presente, que vous estes celuy que regarde le princi∣pal soin de nostre Prelature. Car ainsi estant que vous desirez pren∣dre en marriage vne Fille d' Espagne, de là pouuors-nous aisement conjecturer, que ces auciennes semnces de la Piete
Chrisienne, lesquelles ont sy heureuse∣ment fleury dans les coeurs des Rois de la grand Bretagne, peuvent (Dieu leur donnant accroissement) reuerdir en vostre ame, Et de fait il ne seroit pas croyable que celuy-lá aimast vne telle alliance, lequel hayroit la Religi∣on Catholique, & se plaroit â opprimer de Saint Siege. Nous auons en suitte de ce commandè de faire continuelle∣ment de tres-humbles prieres au Pere des lumieres, â ce qu'il luy plaise de vous mettre comme une belle fleurdis Christiaisme, & vnique esperance ae la grand' Bretagne, en possession de ce tres noble heritage, que vos ancestres vous ont acquis à deffendre l' ancte∣ritè du souuerain Pontife, & à com∣battre les monstres de l' heresie. Soune∣nezvous des iours anciens, enquerez∣vous de vos Peres, & ils vous di∣ront par quille voye l' on va an Ciel, & quel chemin ont tenu les Princes temporels pour per paruenir au Royau∣me eternel. Voyez les portes du Ciel ouuertes, ces tres Saincts Roys d' Angleterre, qui partans d' Angleterre pour ventr à Rome accompagnez ds An∣ges sont venus honerer & faire hommage au Segneur des Seigneurs, & a prince des Apostris en la Chaire Apostolique Leurs oeuures & leurs exemples sont atant ae voix de Dieu qui parlent; & qui uous exhortent á ce qu ayez á suure la facon de viure de eux à l' Em∣pire des quels vous parviendrez niour. Est-l possibile que vous puissiez souf∣frir, que les Herestiques tiennent pour impies, & condamnent ceux que la soy e l' Eglise tesmoigne regner dant le Ciel auec Iesus. Christ, & avoir com∣mandement & anctoritè sur toutes les Principautsz & Empires de la terre voilà qu' s vous tendent la main d ceste bin∣heueuse Patrie, pour vous conduire sai & sauf a la Cour du Roy Catholique,
& quide siront vous  given de l' Eglise Romaine: laquelle suppliant auec gemissements inenarrables le Dieu de toute Misericorde pour vostre salut, vous tend les bras de la Charite Aposto∣lique pour veus embrasser anec toute affe∣ction Christienne, vous qui estes son de∣sire fils, en vous monstrant l' esperance bien hourese d  des . Pour uray vous ne  donner plu grande consolation a tous les Peuples de l' Estat Chrestien que de mettre en possession de uestre tres-noble Istle Prince des Apo∣stres, l' Auctorite duqla este  long temps en vostre Royaume de la gran Bretagne pour la defense des Roya∣mes, & por oracle de la Divinite. Ce qui arrivera sans difficulte, si vous ouurez vostre eoeur au Sergneur qui frappe, gift toutle bon-heur de ce Royaume. C'est de ceste si grand charie, que fauorisous les loüanges du nom Royal, & qui nous fait desirer que vous & ostre Serinissime pere soyez qualifiez du  de Liberateurs & Restaurateurs de l' an∣cienne & paternelle Religion de la grand Bretagne. Ce quenous esperors, nons cen∣fians en labonte de Dieu es mains duquel sont les ceurs des Roys, & qui fit que les Peuples de la trr puissent guarison, lequell nous tascherons tonsiours de tout nostre ponuoir non  & favourable. Cependant recognoissez ces let∣tres le soing nostre charite qui est autre chose que pour procurer uostre honhour: & iamais il ne nou fea mal de les ∣escrites s la lecture d'icelles vient au moins à exciter quelque petite flamniesche de la Foy Catholique dans le coeurd' unsi grand Prince, lquel nous desirons estre camble a une ioye de longue duree, & fle∣rissant en la gloire de toutes nertus. Donnè à Rome au Palais de Saint Piere le xx. iour d' Aurill 1623. l' an troi∣siesme de nostre Pontificat. Pope Gregory the  having writ the foregoing Letter to the Prince of Wales, it was presented to him by the Nuncio of his Holinesse in Spain, he being accompanied with the Italian Lords that then were in the Court.
The Prince of Wales having received this Letter, made this following Answer, which was after published. MOST Holy Father, I received the dispatch from your Holinesse with great content, and with that respect which the pietie and cre wherewith your Holinesse writes, doth require: It was an unspeakeable pleasure to me to reade the generous exploits of the Kings my Predecessours, in whose memory, posterity hath not given those praises and Elogies of honour, as were due to them: I doe beleeue that your Holinesse hath set their examples before my eyes, [toth' end that I might imitate them in all my actions, for in truth they haue of∣ten exposed their estates and lives for the exaltation of the Holy Chaire;] And the courage with which they have assaulted the enemies of the erosse of Iesus Christ, hath not been lesle than the care and thought which I have, to the end that the peace and intelligence which hath hi∣therto beene wanting in Christendome, might be bound with as true and strong cnord: for as the common enemie of the peace, watcheth alwayes to put ha∣tred and dissention amongst Christian Princes, so I beleeve that the glory of God requires that we should indeavour to unite them; And I do not esteeme it a greater honour to be discended from so great Princes, than to imitate them in the zeale of their piety. In which it helpes me very much to have knowne the minde and will, of our thce hououred Lord and Father, and the holy intentions of his Catholike Maiestie to giue a happie con∣currence to o laudable a designe: for it grieves him extreamely to see the great
evils that grow from the devision of Christian Princes, which the wisedom of your Holines foresaw, when it iudged the Marriage which you pleased to design, be∣tween the Insanta of Spain & myself, to be necessary to procure so great a good; for 'tis very certaine, that I shall neuer be so extreamely affectionate to any thing in the world, as to endeauour allyance with a Prince that hath the same apprehension of the true Religion with myselfe: There∣fore, I intreat your Holinesse to beléeve, that I haue béen alwaies very farOur Reli∣gion deemed but a Novel∣ty or Faction, by the King. from incouraging Nouelties, or to be a partisan of anyTo wit the Roman Ca∣tholique. Faction against the Catholick, A∣postolike Roman Religion: But on the contrary, I haue sought all occasions to take away the suspition that might rest upon me, and that I will imploy my selfe for the time to come, to haue but oneLoe the true cause of the Kings hazar∣ding his Kingdomes state & life in these present Wars against the Parlia∣ment to ad∣vance Popery. Re∣ligion and one faith, séeing that we all beléeue in one Iesus Christ. Hauing re∣solued in my selfe, to spare nothing that I haue in the world, and to * suffer all manner of discommodities, euen to the hazarding of my estate and life, for a thing so pleasing unto God: It rests onely that I thanke your Holinesse, for the permissi∣on you have been pleased to afford me, and I pray God to give you a blessed health and his glory, after so much paines which your Holinesse takes in his Church, Signed, CHARLES STEVVARD.
Le Prince de Galles ayant receu cel Lettres, il fist la Responce suivante, quy fut publiee vn peu apres. TRes-Saint Pere, I ay receu la Depe sche de vostre Saintetè auec un' grand contentment dans le respect que demandent la Pieté & la Bienueillance, auec lesquel∣les uostre Santètè l'a escrice. Ce quin' a estè un plaisir indicible de lire les exploits genereux des Roys mes Predecesseurs, à la memoire desquels la posteritè n'a point donnè les elogesd' honneur qui leur sont deubs. Ie veux croire que vostre Sain∣tetè a mis leur exemple deuant ms yeux, afin que is les imitasse en tou∣tes mes actions. Car à la uerite ils ont exposè souuent leur Estat & leurs vies pour l' exaltation du Saint Siege. De sorte que le courage auec lequell ils ant assailly les ennemis de la Croix de Iesus-Christ, n'a pas esté moindre que le soucy & la penses que ay, afin que la Paix & l Intelligence, qui ont manque iusques à present dans la Chrestiente soient estraintes  li∣end une ueritabile concorde. Car de mesme que l' ennemy common de la Paix ueille tousiours pour mettre la hyne & dissensin parmy les Princes Chrestiens, aussi ie croy que la gloire de Dieu demande qu' or tasche de les unir. Etie  estime pas que i' aye un plus grand houneur d' estre dscendu de fi grands Princes, que de les imi∣ter das le zele de lour Piete. En quoy:  sert grandement à auoir recognu la volonte de nostre tres ho∣nore Seigneur & pere. & les saintes intentions de sa Majeste Catholique, pour faire reussi hurensement ce ∣able dessein, parce qu' elle a un ex∣treme
regret de uoir les grands mal beurs qui naissent de la division des Princes Chrestins. Ce que la prudence de vestre Sanctee a preuein, lors qu' elle a juge que le marriage qu' il luy plaist desseign entre l' Infante a' Espagne & may, est necessaire pour procurer vn si grand bien pur ce qu il est tout certain, que ie ne me porteray iamais si passionement a chose de monde qu' à la recherhe de l' alliance d' un Prince, qui aura le mesme sentiment de la vraye Religion auec moy. C'est purquoy ie prie vostre Saintete decroire que i' ay tousiours estè fort esloigne d' advantager les nouneautez, ni d' estre partisan d' aucune faction contre la Religion Catholique Apostolique Ro∣maine: mais au contraire, que i' ay recherche les occasions, afin que le soupcon qui peut tomber sur moy soit entierement oste, & que is m' employe de tout mon reste pour n' auoir qu' vne Religion, & qu' vne Foy, puis que naus cryons tous ensemble en vne Iesus-Christ. Ayant resolu de ne m' esparg∣ner point en chose du monde, & de souf∣frir toutes sortes d' incommoditez, mesme de hazarder mn Estat & mavie, pour vne oc∣casion si agreable â Dieu. Il reste seule∣ment qe ei remercie vostre Saintete de la permission qu' illuy a pleu de m' accorde, & que ie prie Dieu qu il luy donne une beu∣reuse sante, & sa gloire, aprestant de trau∣aux quae vostre Saintete prend dans son Eglise. Signe, CHARLES STOVARD This Letter printed in Spaine in many Languages, discovers to us the very Root of all our present warres, in which his Majesty hath sustained many incom∣modities, hazarded both his estate, life, and Realms; fully resolves us what Prote∣ction of the Protestant Religion we must now expect from himselfe; and that Armed Catholick party to which he adheares, and more, he here resolves to suf∣fer but one Religion, (to wit the Roman Catholike) only in his Realms intimating our Reformed Religion, to be but Novelty and Faction, against the Roman Ca∣tholike faith.
I have seene a Coppy of these Letters in English, long since; the Kings letter (who perchance writ two of this nature) being some what different from the French in some expressions, though not in substance: Now that such Letters really pasted betweene the King and Pope, during his abode in Spaine, appeares not onely by divers ancient Printed Copies of it in sundry Languages, but is also thus expresse∣ly attested by Master Iames Howell, (an attendant upon his Majestie in that expedi∣tion) no friend to Parliaments, but a Malignant now in custodie, in his Vocall For∣rest, dedicated to the King himselfe, the Queene, and Prince, Printed at London 1640. p. 128. The Holy Sire (the Pope) who was so great a friend to the inten∣ded alliance (who had formerly writ unto, and sent to visite Prince Rocalino (Charles) was taken away by the hand of Fate, &c. Moreover his booke farther informeth us p. 124. That Chenandra (Olivares) the chiefe Ingrosser of the Olives (the King of Spaines) favours, welcomming the Prince into Spaine, said; That he doubted not but he came thither, to be of their Religion. And p. 134. The com∣mon voyce among those of Elaiana (Spaine) was; that Prince Rocalino (Charles) came thither to make himselfe a Christian. But that which is most observable is this passage concerning the Articles in favour of Papists agreed on, and sworne to by King Iames, and his Majestie, by the Popes sollicitation upon the Spanish Treaty: p. 125. 126. 127. when Rocalino (Prince Charles) arrived, matters were brought to that perfection by the strenuous negotiation of Lord Digby who now swayes in his Councels very much. Sophronio, that there wanted nothing for the consummation of all things, but a dispensation from Petropolis (Rome) which at lastAnd after that another from the suc∣ceeding Pope. p. 133. came: and before that time Rocalino (Charls) was not admitted to speake with the Lady Amira in quality of a sutor, but a Prince. Now the said Dispensation came clogged with an unhappy unexpected clause, thrust in of purpose, as it appeares, to retard the proceedings of things; which was;Nota That whereas there were certaine Articles condescen∣ded unto by Druina's Monarke (King Iames) in Fauour of the Petropolitans (Papists) that were in that Kingdome, and other Crownes under his Dominion; the great Arch-flamin (the Pope) demanded caution for the performance of them. The Royall Oake answered, that he could give no other caution then his Word and Oath: and Recalino (Prince Charles) should doe the like, which should be con∣firmed by his Councell of State and exemplified under Druinas (Englands) broad Seale: but this would not satisfie, unlesse somePopish. Petropolitan Soveraigne Prince should ingage himselfe for them. Hereupon all matters were like to goe off the hinges, and a buzze went abroad, that Rocalino intended to get away covertly. In these traverses Chenandra steps forth and said: there were three wayes to con∣clude this businesse, two good and one bad: the first good way was, That Prince Rocalino (Charles) Should become a Petropolitan (Papist.) The second was, That as Elaiana (Spaine) was obliged to him for his free comming thither, so she might as freely deliver to him the Lady Amira, trusting him without further condition. The ill way was, not to trust Rocalino, at all with any thing, but binde him as fast as they could. Whiles matters were thus a canvasing, and gathering ill blood; Elaianas (Spaines) King stepped up, and proffered to engage himselfe by Oath, for the satisfaction of the great Arch flamine, but with this proviso, that he must first consult with his Ghostly Fathers, whether he might doe it Salua Con∣scientia or no. Hereupon the businesse was referred to a Committe of the learnedst
Yewes, (Bishops, Divines) and the State of the Question was. Whether theKing of Spaine. Oliue might with safety of conscence take an Oath in behalfe of The King of England. Druinas Monarke andPrince Charles. Rocalino, for performance of such and such Articles that were agreed upon in fauour of the Pepotrolitans, throughout the Kingdomes of the Papists. Royall Oake? This Assembly long demurr'd and dwelt upon the Question, and after a long prraction of time they concluded at last, affirmatively: and in case the Oake failed to execute what was stipulated, the Olive was to vindicate his Oath, and right him∣selfe By the Sword.King Iames. This difficulty being surmounted, there was exceeding great joy, and all the Capitulations were interchangeably sworne unto, Both by the Oake and Olive: and as Chenandra said in Elaiana; so theKing Iames. Royall Oake himselfe was so confident that he said; All the Devills in hell could not now breake the match: whereto a blunt facetious Knight being by, answered; That there was never a Devill now left in hell, for they were all gone to Spaine to helpe make up the match. By all these observable passages, dedicated so lately to the King himselfe, by one of his owne servants, who was privie to them; it is apparent, that not onely Let∣ters passed betweene the King and Pope whilst he continued in Spaine: but like∣wise, ThatThis Prince Charles ex∣pressed in the English Cop∣pie of the Letter to the Pope, though but implied in the French. Articles in favour of Papists throughout England and all his Maje∣sties Dominions, even such as the Pope himselfe approved, were at the Popes re∣quest condescended unto by King Iames, and caution offered and given to the Pope for the performance of them, even by King Iames, King Charles, and the King of Spaines regall words, Seales, Oathes: That these Articles were to be con∣firmed by the Privie Councell of State, and exemplied under the Great Seale of England, And that the maine end the Pope and Papists aymed at in this Spanish match, was the seducing of the King and Realme to the Romish Religion, and re∣ducing of them to their ancient Vassallage to the Sea of Rome: which will bee more apparent if we adde to this, that Hugh Simple, a Scottish Iesuite, being in the Court of Spaine when the King was there, gave up divers Petitions and Ad∣vertisements to the King and Councell of Spaine, that they should not conclude any match with England, unlesse there should be erected in each Vniversity under our Kings Dominions a Colledge of Iesuites, for the training up of youth in the Roman faith and Doctrine; which Advertisements he printed with his Name subscribed, and delivered to his friends in Court; as Iames Wadsworth, then pre∣sent (whose father was Tutor to Donna Maria the Spanish Lady, and taught her English,) hath published in his English Spanish Pilgrim. ch. 3. p. 30. 31. It is very observable, how King Iames to make the better way for the Popish Spa∣nish Match, to comply with Spaine, and expresse his favour and affection to those of the Romish Religion, sent this ensuing Letter to the Lord Keeper Williams, for the releasing of Imprisoned Recusants throughout England. Trusty and welbeloved, We Greete you well; Whereas we have given you a former warrant and direction for the making of two severall Writs for the inlarge∣ment of such Recusants as are in Prison at this time, either for matters of Recusan∣cie in Generall, or for denying the taking the Oath of Supremacie, according to
the Statute, by removing them from the generall Goales of this Kingdome, to be bailed before the Iustices of our Bench; finding by experience that this course will be very troublesome to the poorer sort of Recusants, and very chargeable unto Vs, who out of our Princely Clemency, and by the mediation of Forraigne Princes were desired to beare out the same. We will and require you to make and issue forth two other Writs, in nature and substance answerable with the former, to be directed to our Iustices of Assises, enabling and requiring them and every of them to inlarge such Recusants, as they shall find in their severall Goales, upon such sure∣ties and recognisance, and other conditions, as they were enlarged by the Iudges of our Bench; and this shall be your Warrant so to doe. Dated at Westminster, Iuly 25. 1622. Hereupon this Lord Keeper (though a Bishop) not onely issued out these Writs, but likewise writ this letter to the Iudges. After my hearty Commendations to you: His Majestie having resolved out of deepe reasons of State, and in expectation of like correspondence from forraigne Princes to the Professors of our Religion) to grant some grace and connivency to the Imprisoned Papists of this Kingdome, hath commanded me to passe some Writs under the Broad Seale for that purpose; Requiring the Iudges of uery Circuit to enlarge the said Prisoners according to the Tenor and effect of the same. I am to give you to understand (for his Majesty) how his Majesties Royall plea∣sure is, that upon receit of these Writs you shall make no nicenesse nor difficul∣tie to extend this his Princely favour to all such Papists as you shall find prisoners in the Goales of your Circuits, for any Church Recusancy whatsoeuer, refusing the Oath of Supremacy, or dispersing Popish Bookes, or hearing saying of Masse, or any other point of Recusancie, which doth touch or concerne Religion onely, and not matters of State, which shall appeare unto you to be Totally Civill and Poli∣ticall; And so Ibid you heartily farewell. Your loving Friend Iohn Lincolne. Westminster Colledge August 2. 1622. By Vertue of these Writs and Letters all the Imprisoned Recusants, and most Se∣minary Priests & Iesuits were every where released who therupon grew very bold, insolent, and had open Masses and Semons in divers places, (wherof that in Black∣friers on the 5. of their Nouember, where so many of them were pressed to death, and Drury his braines who then preached, beaten out with the sodaine miraculous fall of the Roome where they assembled, is most memorable,) in hope of the match with Spaine, and of the publick toleration promised and resolved on; as appeares by King Iames his insuing speech at the Councell Table, upon his proposall of the Spanish Match to the Lords of his Privy Councell. Now because his Majesties and his Royall Fathers intended Popish match with Spaine, and the proceedings thereupon, have beene theMercurie Francois Tom. 9. An. 1624. p. 28. 29. Originall Fountaine, whence all the forementioned favours and suspentions of our Lawes against Pa∣pists Priests, Iesuits, together with the extraordinary increase of them and Po∣pery,
if not our present warres, have proceeded, I shall give you a further true and reall account therof, out of the French Mercury Tome 9. Printed in French at Paris Anno 1624. with speciall priviledge of King Lewis the 13th. Where in all the particulars of the Kings voyage into, his entertainment and proceedings in, and re∣turne from Spaine, with all the Articles and passages touching that marriage, are most punctually and truely related. I shall present you onely with some things in it which are most considerable, and worthy our present publike knowledge. Mercurie Francois Tom. 9. p. 470. &c. An. 1623. Count Gondemar the King of Spaines Embassad or returning to his Master in∣to Spaine in the yeare 1623. with Propositions of a marriage to be made betweene Charles (now King) then Prince of Wales, and the Infanta Mary second sister to the Catholick King of Spain, and the Lord Digby Earle of Bristol long before sent extraordinary Embassador into Spaine to pursue this marriage Treaty; the Prince soone after accompanied with the Duke of Buckingham, the Lord Cottington, and Endymion Porter, departs unexpectedly and secretly (with King Iames his consent) in disguised habits, from England, and posted through France into Spain where he arrived at Madrit; and was there most royally entertained; and all Arts used to engage him not onely to favour, but Embrace the Romish Religion. Among othersIbid p 533 to 539. there was a most solemne Procession instituted, wherein the King of Spaine, and most of his Nobles bare a part; and the Prince with his followers being placed in a Balconee where the Procession passed: they all made very great humiliations and Genuflections when the holy Sacrment passed by. Pope Gregory the 15. likewise writ a solemne Letter to the Prince (the same Verbatim with that orecited, recorded likewise in thisIbid p. 509, 510 &c. Mercury) which was brought and delivered to him by the Popes Nuncio with great solemnity, accompanied with all the Italian Lords then about the Court, and divers Spanish Dons: whom the Prince received with grand courtesie, respect and honour: To which Letter the Prince returned the forementioned answer. This letter of the Pope written in Latin, together with the Princes answer to it, was presently printed in divers Languages, and the Arti∣cles propounded by the King of England, were soon after sent by the King of Spain to the Pope to receive his approbation of them ere they were accorded. The Pope hereupon adviseth with the Cardinalls of his conclave, for the propagation of the Roman Catholick Religion, about these Articles; to some of which he intire∣ly condescended without any alteration; some of them he alters onely in part, and returnes them back with his answers to, and alterations of every of them, writ∣ten under each particular Article; which alterations being sent to King Iames he condescended to most of them in direct termes, to all of them in substance; (which Articles, with the Popes owne answers to, and emendations of them, over tedious to insert, you may read in thisPage 517. to 522. French Mercury.) Most of the ar∣ticles were in favour and advancement of Popery and Papists; and the same almost Verbatim, with the ensuing Articles of the French match, ratified like∣wise by the Pope.Ibid p. 522 523. But the Cardinals of the Propagation of the Faith, not contented with these generall Articles, which tended principally for the assurance onely of the Religion of the Infanta and her family, perswaded the Pope to grant no Dispensation for this marriage,Not. till they had proposed to the King of great Britain, certain Propositions for the right, augmenation, and weale of the Ro∣man Catholicke Religion, to which he must condescend; For the performance
of both which Articles, the King of Spaine demanded not onely the Kings and Princes Oathes, and confirmations under the Great Seale of England, which were accordingly given, but an Act of Parliament, and certaine Cautionary Townes in England when the marriage was accomplished; the first whereof (if not both) were promised. Whiles this match was in agitation King Iames assembled his Privie Councell together 25. of Febr. 1623. before the Princes departure into Spaine, and there made a long Oration to them, as the French Mercury (never controlled) attests, some passages whereof are very observable. That soone after he came to the crowne of England, by the Popes exhortatory Letters to the King of Spaine, and Arch-duke Albertus in Flanders, there ensued a peace betweene the Crownes of England and Spaine.Tom. 9 Page . That shortly after at the instance of many, he caused the Image of the Crosse to be redressed, and that men should not foule it under their seete. That when he came first to the Crowne of England he spake among other points of the Apostolicke and Roman Religion; and although it were the true, yet then to avoyd all sorts of rumors, which might then have risen to the prejudice of peace in the Re-publicke: I said, that in this Religion were many superfluous ceremonies, the which deserved to be refused. At the same time many Roman Catholikes, our Subjects and members of our Realme, presented us their requests, by which they arnestly beseeched us to grant them the liberty of their Conscience, upon the hopes they had to be so much the more comforted under our raigne, as they had beene Dppressed under the raigne of Queene Elizabeth. But as it oft times happens, that those who ardently desire any thing, imagine with themselves, that it is very easie to doe, or to be obtained, and oftentimes prove the contrary: so all the Catholikes who hoped to be relee∣ved by us, and to be disingaged of great and intollerable surcharges which haue beene imposed upon their Goods, Bodies and Soules, during the reigne of the said Elizabeth, requiring onely of our Royall benevolence to be remitted to the enjoy∣ment of their Goods, Honours, and Estates, and to be maintained in the Religion in which all our Predecessours and Kings of Scotland have lived from Donaldus, untill the time of our late beloved Mother, who received Martyrdome in this Realme, For Confession of the said Catholicke Religion. A Religion which hath beene publikely professed so many ages in this Realme of England, and which hath beene confirmed by so many great and excellent Emperours, and hath beene so famous in all Ecclesiasticall Histories, by an infinite number ofNota. Martyrs, who have sealed it with their owne blood in their death,) were then deceived of their hopes, by an apparent feare of certaine commotions which then might have ensued. So that in all our Realmes, for the sole respect of my person, and not by Reason of Religion it selfe, (so as many of the said Catholikes have very well knowne) there was no mutation or change at all had; although they well kew There was in Us a Grand affection to the Catholicke Religion, in so much that they haue beleeued at Rome, that Wee haueNota, Dissembled for to ob∣taine this Crowne of England. But all this hath beene nothing else but the opini∣ons of men, the which one might have discerned in almy comportments during my reigne, in not committing any Offices, nor benefits to others, than to those which have beene formerly purveyed for, (or appointed by the Lawes,) Now after that our bounty hath opened the doore to our Piety, and that wee
have maturely considered all the penuries and calamities that the Roman Catho∣likes have suffered in the exercise of their Religion; seeing that they are of the num∣ber ofThey were not such nor so esteemed when the Gunpowder plot was dis∣covered. Our Faithfull Subiects; We have for this cause resolved to releeve them, For which reason after we have maturely consulted upon this businesse, we haue ordained and doe Ordaine, and haue taken and doe take from henceforth all Rman Catholikes being our Subiects into our Protection, permiting them the Liberty and entire exercise of their Religion, without using in their behalfe and rt of in∣quisition, processe, or other criminall actions by which they may be grieued or mo∣lested from this day forwards, permitting them moreover to celebrate the Masse, and all other Divine Seruices concerning their said Religion. See 3 Iac. c. 1. to 6. and the Kings Proclmati∣ons that year. & 6. Iac. We will also that they shall be reestablished and restored in all their Estates, Lands, Fees and Seigniories; Commanding our Maiestrates and Iustices in this behalfe to hold their hands, in such sort, that none of what quality or condition soever he be, for what cause soever it be, shall not attempt hereafter to Grieue or molest the said Catholikes, neither in publike nor in secret, in that which toucheth the liberty of the exercise of the said Religion, upon paine of being reputed guilty of Nota, the cause why the Parliament are now pro∣claimed trai∣tors by his Majesty. High Treason, and a dissurber of the Peace, and of the repose of the Country: such is our Will and Definitiue sentence. After which he justifies the lawfulnesse of the Spanish match, notwithstanding the difference of Religion, and danger of feminine seduction; relates his resolution to proceede in it, with the reasons of it, prohibiting any under paine of severest censures, to speake against it. Loe here (writes this Mercury) the causes which moved his Majestie of Great Britaine to seeke after the alliance of Spaine by marriages, the which many in England, and especially the Puritans or reformed, and those of the English confes∣sion adhearing to this Sect, were no wayes well pleased with; and cheifely, ha∣ving understood, of the Prince of Wales his honourable entertainement at Ma∣drit, and of the Articles of the Marriage; which were to be cxamined at Rome. So the French Mercury, which thus proceedes. Hereupon two writings ran from hand to hand; the one intituled; A Discourse of the Archbishop of Canterbury (Abbot) to the King of Great Brittaine, and the other Vox Popul: the latter produceth many excellent reasons in point of policie and Religion against the Popish match with Spaine (which you may peruse in the book it selfe, being Common.) The first condemnes his Majesties toleration of the Ro∣man Religion in his Realmes, as being displeasing to God, an anguish and griefe to his best Subjects professing the true reformed religion; a great dishonour to him∣selfe who had publickely Writ and disputed often against that Religion, which he knew in his owne conscience to be false and superstitious. That his Edicts and Proclamations for the tolleration of it, could not be confirmed without a Parlia∣ment (which would never condescend thereunto) unlesse he would openly shew to his Subjects, that he intended to usurpe an absolute liberty, to infringe and null all Lawes of the Country: That it would produce many dangerous consequences, and bring the just Iudgements of God both upon the whole Realme in generall, and himselfe in particular. With all, it censures the ill advise of those who sent the Prince into Spaine without the generall consent of the Realme, which by law had more interest in him, then the King his Father &c. (as you may reade in Mercury.)
Notwithstanding all these andDr. Hackwel and others writ against this Popish match which divers Bishops approved of as lawfull. other contrary advises, this match went on so farre, that the generall Articles of the match, with the Popes alterations, were so∣lemnely sealed and sworne to by the Prince in Spaine, and also by King Iames in the Chappell of Whitehall Iuly 20. 1624. the solemnity whereof you may reade at large in thePage 517. &c. An. 1623. & p. 19. to 30 An. 1624. French Mercury, together with the articles. At the taking of this Oath in the Chappell, there arose these two difficulties: The first about this Title of the POPE, MOST HOLY, which King Iames refused to give to the Pope, in the Oath which he ought to pronounce in the Chappell, alleaging the repug∣nancie thereof to his Religion, and that this would be a reproach, and by con∣sequence prejudiciall to him for the future. But the Spanish Embassadors refused to passe it over, if his Majestie would not consent to give him the foresaid Title; to which in the end he consented. The second difficulty was, that some reported to the Embassadors, that they should have such prayers in the Kings Chappell when they came to see the Articles sealed and sworn to by the King, and such singing of Psalmes as were used in the Protestant Church and Kings Chappell, at which pray∣ers they could not be present since they came thither to no other end but to assure maintaine, and Warrant the Catholike Apostolicall and Roman Church. Where∣upon the King commanded that nothing should be there sung, but what was sung when the Constable of Castile tooke his oath there,Nota. to sweare the peace between the two Crownes, which was an hymne of joy, in praise of peace: and to out all scruple, the King caused the Register of his Chappell to carry the Hymne to the Embassadors to peruse, and so all difficulties were removed: the King yeelding to the Popish Ambassadors, to gratifie the Pope in his Anti-christian Title; but they not yeelding one haires breadth to him, in honour or approbation of our Prayers, Psalmes, or Religion, which must give place to their Catholicke pleasures. The Articles being solemnely sworn in the forenoone; the King made an extra∣ordinary feast to the Embassadors; which ended, the King and they went to the Councell-chamber, where all the Lords of the Councell sealed and subscribed the Generall articles of the marriage. Which done the Embassadors came to the King, who took this solemne Oath, and swore these private articles to them, in favour of Papists and advancement of the Romish Religion: (enough to amaze all Protestant Readers) which I have faithfully translated out of the Latine Cop∣py Printed in the French Mercury. JAMES by the Grace of God of Great Brittain, &c. King; Defender of the Faith, &c. to all to whom this present writing shall come, Greeting: In as much as among many other things, which are contained within the Treaty of Mar∣riage betweene our most deare sonne Charles Prince of Wales, and the most re∣nound Lady Donna Maria, sister of the most renowned Prince, and our well be∣loved Brother, Phillip the fourth King of Spaine it is agreed, that WE BY OVR OATH SHALL APPROVE AND RATIFIE THE ARTICLES under expressed to a Word; 1 That PARTICVLAR LAWES MADE AGAINST ROMAN CATHOLIKES, under which other Vassals of our Realmes are not compre∣ended, and to whose observation all generally are not obliged; and likewise ge∣nerall
Laws under which all are equally comprised, so as they are such which are repug∣nant to the Romish religion, shal not at any time hereafter by any means whatsoever, or case directly or indirectly, Be commanded to be put in execution against the said Romish Catholikes: And we will cause that our Councell shall take the same Oath, as far as it pertaines to them and belongs to the execution, which by the hands of them or their Ministers is to be exercised. 2 That no other Lawes shall hereafter bee made anew against he said Romish Cathlikes,Nota. but that there shall bee a perpetuall soleration of the Romish Catholike Religion within private houses, throughout all our Realmes and Dominiens: which we will have to bee understood as well of our Kingdome of Scotland and Ireland, as in England; which shall bee granted to them in manner and forme, as is capitulated, decreed, and granted in the Articles of the Treaty concer∣ning the marriage. 3 That neither by Us, nor by any other interposed Persons whatsoever,Nota. directly or indirectly, privately or publikely, will we treat (or attempt) any thing with the most Renouned Lady Infanta, Donna Maria, which shall bee repugnant to the Catholike Romish Religion; neither will we by any meanes perswade her, that she should ever renounce or relinguish the same in substance or forme; or that she should do any thing repugnant or contrary to those things which are conteined in the Treaty of Matrimony. 4 That we will interpose our Authority, and doe as much as in Us shall lie, that the Parliament shall approve, confirme, and ratifie, all and singular Articles in fabour of the Romish Catholikes,Nota ben. caputilated between the most Renouncd Kings by reason of this Marriage; and that the said Parliament shall reboke and abro∣gate the particular Lves made against the said Romish Catholikes, to whose observation also the rest of Our Subjects and Vassals are not oblieged, as also the Ge∣nerall Lawes, under which all are equally comprehended, to wit, As to the Romish Catholikes, if so be they be such, as is aforesaid, which are repgnant to the Romish Catholike Religion, And that hereafter We will not consent, that the said Par∣liament should ever at any time, make or write any other new Lawes against Romish Catholikes. We accounting all and singular, the preceding Articles ratified and acceptable, out of Our certain knowledge, as farre as they concerne Vs, Our Heires or Suc∣cessors, approve, ratifie, applaud, and promise bona fide, and in the Word of a king by these presents, inviolably, firmely, well and faithfully to kéep, observe and ful∣fill the same, and to causs them to be kept, observed and fulfilled, without any excep∣tion or contradiction, and doe confirme the same by Our Oath upon the holy ran∣gelists, notwithstanding any opinions, sentences, or laws whatsoever to the contrary; In the presence of the most illustrious Lords Don Iohn de Mendoza, Marquesse of Inojosa, and Don Charles Coloma, Extraordinary Embassadours of the Catholike King; of George Calvert Knight, one of our chiefe Secretaries; of Edward Comvay Knight, another of our chiefe Secretaries; of Francis Cottington Barronet, of the Privie Councell to our Sonne the Prince; of Francis de Corondelet Apostolicall (or the Popes) Prothonotary, and Archdeacon of Cambray; Dated at Our Pa∣lace at Westminster the 20 day of Iuly, Anno Domini, 1623. in the English stile. IACOBVS REX. A compared and true Copy. George Calvert (then chiefe Secretary, who turned soone after, and died a pro∣fessed Papist.)
To these Articles the Prince of Wales likewise sware, and signed them with his hand at Madrit, in the same manner, as King Iames did at Westminster, as this Ibidem, p. 9. Mercury assures us, and I presume, his Majesties own conscience and followers can attest. Before I proceed further, I shall desire thee, kinde Reader, whosoever thou art, espe∣cially if an English, Scotish, or Irish Protestant, to pause a while, and mo seriously to ponder these premised Passages, Articles, Oaths, worthy thy most serious consi∣deration, if not thy admiration; and when thou hast so done, then let me propound these few Queres to thee from them, & to the Honourable House of Parliament too. First, Whether the heart of Kings (as well as of other persons) be not unsearchable; yea, deceitfull above all things, and desperately wicked; So as no man can truly know or discerne it? as Prov. 23. 3. Ier. 17. 9. resolve past all dispute. Secondly, Whether King Iames were really so zealous a Protestant, and Anti-Papist, as the ignorant world reputed him, especially in his declining age? Thirdly, Whether those who have willingly without any compulsion, and (for ought appeares) cordially entred into such Romish Alliances, Articles, Covenants, Oaths, can be ever sincerely affected to the Protestant Party or Religion, or really opposite to Popery or Papists, notwithstanding all outward Protestations, Proclamations or flourishes to the contrary, to blinde the over credulous vulgar; ignorant of the Premises? Fourthly, Whether his Majesty having thus twice taken two solemn Oathes at least, upon both his Treaties of Marriage with Spaine and France, (of which more anon) to protect and maintaine to the utmost throughout his Dominions, the Ro∣man Catholikes, Church and Religion yea, to suspend and abrogate all Lawes against them; and that before ever he made any Promise, or Declaration at all to maintain the Protestant Religion; whether he be not thereby now farre more deeply engaged by vertue of these Oathes and Articles to protect, favour, and defend the Romish Catho∣like Faith, then the Protestant; and his Romish Catholike Subjects in all his Do∣minions, then his Protestant Lieges, having never entred into any such Solemn Ar∣ticles, Oathes and Covenants (unlesse lately in Scotland much against his will, with which his Holinesse of Rome will easily dispence, being quite contrary to his pri∣mitive Articles) to defend and propagate the Protestants, and Protestant Religion, as he hath done to defend Popery and his Popish Subjects? Fifthly, Whether all the premised Letters of Grace, Protection, Indul∣gences to Priests, Iesuites, and Popish Recusants, be not the reall results and effects of these Oathes and Articles, and of the ensuing Articles and match with France? as the French Mercury, Tom. 9. An. 1624. p. 28. 29. expresly resolves. Sixthly, Whether the true and reall designe of the Pope, the Realmes of Spain and France, and all Promoters of these matches, Articles, were not to re-establish Popery in its perfection, and extirpate the Protestant Religion throughout all his Majesties Realmes, by meanes and vertue of them, by degrees? Seventhly, Whether his Majesty doth not hold himselfe now bound in conscience by vertue of these Oathes and Articles, (what ever his outward protestations and pre∣tences be) to side with his Roman Catholike Subjects, both in England, Ireland, Scotland, and Arm them against his Protestant Subjects and Parliaments in all three Kingdomes, of purpose to make good these his Oathes and Articles; and to protect
them against the due execution of all antient Lawes already enacted, and all other new Lawes and prosecutions now really intended against them in England, Scotland, contrary to these his Oathes and Articles? And whether this be not the very true, and proper cause of all his former and present Wars, Proclamations, Declarations, Remon∣strances against the Scots, the former, the present Parliament; yea, the very ground why he proclaimes them Traytors, Rebels, no Parliamment, but a faction? &c. Why he brake up all the former Parliaments since his raign by discontinuances, and endea∣vours to dissolve and cut off this by the sword of Papists and Atheists, against the very Act of Parliament so lately assented to by himselfe? And whether upon this ground, he would not rather his Parliament, his Protestant Subjects, Kingdomes should now perish, then his Catholikes Subjects, or their Religion suffer or miscarry, as he descernes they are like to doe if the Parliament should prevaile of continue? Eightly, Whether these Oathes and Articles bee not the reall ground of the late horrid Irish conspiracy, massacre, Rebellion, Pacification. Toleration, and his Ma∣jesties connivance at, if not approbation of these horrid bloody execrable practises? of the extraordinary favours lately indulged to those cursed barbarous Rebels by his Majesty, and his most gracious entertainement of them, not only into his Royall favour, but Court, Army, and Realme of England, as his securest Life-Guard? Ninthly, whether it be not then high time for the Parliament, and all the Protestants throughout his Dominions to look about them, and enter into solemn Protestations, Covenants, Engagements, mutually to defend themselves, their Religion, Lawes, Liberties, Lives, Estates, when they are thus endangered by the Popish party, and the King himselfe (to omit the Queen) by Oath and Articles, is thus confederated with, and engaged to protect them, and their Religion to the uttermost? Tenthly, Whether these Oathes and Articles considered, it can possibly bee be∣lieved, that his Majesty ever took up Armes and joyned with Papists to maintain the Protestant Religion? Or that if his Majesty by force of Armes should prevaile a∣gainst the Parliament or Protestant party, there be, or can bee any probability or possibility (in humane reason) left us to believe or conceive, that the Protestant Sub∣jects should ever freely enjoy the Profession of their reformed Religion, just Rights, Lawes, Liberties, Estates, or Lives; or Papists be prohibited the free publike tolera∣tion and open practice of their Antichristian-Religion? And whether then it will not inevitably follow by vertue of these Oaths and Articles, that all Lawes whatsoever now in force against the Pope, Popery, Papists, shall and must be presently repea∣led, even by a packed or forced Parliament; and a publike toleration at least of Po∣pery (if not totall suppression of the Protestant Religion) settled by Parliament; and all attempts to draw the Queen, or any else from Popery, be prohibited by Oath to all Protestants, under paine of High Treason, without any restraint at all on Papists, not to endeavour to seduce the King and all his Subjects, by all the wayes and arts that may be? This being the very purport of the premised Letter, the Spanish Oath, Articles, and of the French, here following. If any after the perusall of all these Letters, Articles, Oathes, Queres, will still be wilfully blinde or secure, let them be so at their own utmost perill; and if they suffer, perish through their folly, let them thank themselves: I have freed my own soule, though theirs miscarry through their own sottishnesse or incredulity.
This Spanish Match, after it had been in a manner fully concluded on all hands, unexpectedly breaking off in a moment, to theThe Vocall Forrest, Mercure Fran∣cois, Tom. 9. An. 1624 p. 10. & exceeding dejection of the Papists throughout all England: The Kings Marriage with the Lady Mary of France, (of the same Romish Religion with the Spanish Amira) was soon after concluded; and that (as is more then probable by the Queenes Bishops, Priests, Capuchines, with other such Romane Locusts, who accompanied her Majesty hither, the entertainment of a Popes Nuncio from Rome, and an Agent at Rome;Mercure Francois à Pa∣ris aves Privi∣lege Anno 1625. f. 480. Tom. . & mentioned. Tom. 11. p. 53. &c. Where the whole solem∣nity of this Marriage is de∣scribed. and the subsequent favours, Protections which the Papists and Priests in England, have ever since obtained from the King by Her most prevalent mediation, as is manifest by the premised Letters, Warrants) upon the selfe-same Articles in favour of the Papists, as were assented to in the Spanish nuptiall Treaty: But that which puts it out of question, are the generall and private Articles of agreement (long since published in some French Mercuries, printed at Paris with Royall Priviledge, and passing from hand to hand in private English Manuscripts among the most intelligent men:) some of which Articles I shall here annex, as I finde them in English Manuscripts, agreeing with the French Originall. THat the above named the Lords Embassadours have promised, and doe promise for and on the behalfe of his Majesty of great Britaine, now reigning, that hee shall take to Marriage, for his deare Consort and Wife, the Lady Henretta Maria Daughter of France, and Sister to his foresaid most Excellent Majesty, in person, or otherwise by Proxy, so soone as conveniently the same may be done; and that also the foresaid Lady at the good pleasure and consent of his foresaid Christian Majesty, and of the Queen her Mother, after his FORES AID MAIESTY HATH OB∣TAINED A falloit envoyer à Rome, Mercure Francois, p. 479. DISPENSATION FROM THE POPE, doth promise to take for her deare Consort and Husband, Charles the first, King of Great Britaine, and according to the foresaid reciprocall promise, he shall be affianced and contracted after the manner accustomed in the CATHOLIKE AND ROMISH CHVRCH.Nota. 7 It is likewise agreed upon, that the said Lady and all her Followers, as also the Children which shall be borne to her Officers, shall have free exercise of the Catholike Apostolicall and Roman Religion; and to that end the foresaid Lady shall have a Chappell in each of the Kings Palaces, or Houses, or in any other place of his Majesty of Great Britaine, where she shall chance to come and continue; and that the foresaid Chappell shall bee adorned and dked as it is fitting; and that the keeping thereof shall be committed to whom it shall please the said Lady to appoint; in which the preaching of Gods Word, and the Administration of the Sacraments, the MASSE, and all other Offices shall be freely and solemnly done, according to the use of the Romish Church; yea, all Indulgences and Iubilees which the said Lady shall obtaine or get from THE POPE, may bee done and executed there. There shall bee also one Church-yard in the City of London, given and appointed to interre and bury such of her said Ladiships Followers, as shall chance to depart this life according to the manner and forme of the Church of Rome; and that shall be modestly done: the which Church-yard shall bee in such sort inclosed or walled about, that no person shall come therein to prophane the same. 8 It is also agreed upon, That the said LADY SHALL HAVE A BISHOP
FOR HER GREAT ALMONER, who shall have all Iurisdiction and neces∣sary Authority for all matters or causes concerning Religion, and who shall proceed against the Ecclesiasticall persons which shall be under his charge, accor∣ding to the Canons constituted and appointed. 9 And if it shall at any time happen that any Secular Court shall take any of the foresaid Priests into their power, by reason of any crime or offence against the State by him committed or done,Nota. and do finde him to be guilty thereof, yet shall the said Court send him back to the said Bishop, with the informations which they find by him, because the said Priest is priviledged from their power; and the said Bishop when he shall understand and know so much, shall degrade the said Priest, and afterwards send him back unto the foresaid Secular Court to doe Iustice upon him. And for all kind of other faults, the aforesaid Priests shall be sent to the Bishop, to the end that he may proceed against them according to the Canons in that case provided, and in the absence or sicknesse of the said Bishop, the Priest which is by him appointed to bee his great Vicar, shall have the same power and au∣thority. 10 It is likewise agreed upon, that the said Lady shall have 28 PRIESTS, or Ec∣clesiasticall Persons in her House, comprehending therein her Almoner and Chaplaines, to serve and keepe the foresaid Chappell according as they are appoin∣ted, and if any of them bee a Regular or Canonicall person, living under more pre∣script Rules then the rest, yet he may hold and keep his habit.Nota. The French Coppy in King Iames  time runs thus, Also the KING OF GREAT BRITTAINE,L Ry & le Prince, s' obli∣gent pur ser∣ment e ne tascer pur quelque Voy quee puisse estre, faire Renoncer Madame à la Religion Ca∣tholique, Apo∣stolique & Ro∣maine, ny la poter à ascune chse, quiy soit con∣trarie. is by OATH BOVND NOT TO INDEAVOUR BY ANY MEANES AT ALL TO HAVE HIS SAID QVEENE TO RENOVNCE THE CATHOLIKE APOSTOLIKE AND ROMISH RELIGION, NOR COMPELL HER TO DOE ANY THING WHATSOEVER THAT IS CON∣TRARY TO THE SAME RELIGION. 11 The said Queens House shall bee maintained with so much Dignity, and with so great a number of Officers as ever any had that was Queen of England; all the houshold servants which the said Lady shall carry into England, shall be Priests Catholikes and French by birth, and chosen or appointed by his most Christian Majesty; And if it happen that any of them die, or that the foresaid Lady shall bee willing to change her said Servants, then Shee will take in their steeds other Pa∣pists Catholikes, French or English, alwayes provided that his Majesty of Great Brittaine consent thereunto. 16 The children which shall by reason of the said inter-marriage, be born and live, shall bee nurst and brought up neere unto the said Lady and Queen, from the time of their Birth, untill they come to the age of fourteene yeares. These Articles with others, (agreeing with the Spanish and French printed Copies) were subscribed and signed by the Earles of Carlile and Holland,e have little hopes the of er Coversion to our Religion. Embassadours and Commissioners for King Charles; and by other French Commissioners, and afterward signed and sworn to by King Iames, the French King, and Prince Charles the 10 of November, 1624. and after King Iames his death, new signed, subscribed by these Embassadours, and sworn unto by both these Kings, Thurseday the eighth of May, 1625.
Besides these generall Articles, there were (as theMercurie Francois, Tom. 10. p. 487. A Paris ave Privilege le Ry. An. 1625. French Mercury informes us) these three particular ones condescended unto; Outre ces Articles generalx, il y eu, ceux trois de particuliers; (the same with those of Spaine forementioned.) Le Premier, touchant les Catholiques, tant Ecclesiastiques que Seculiers, Prison∣niers depius le dit dernier Edict, lesquels serroient tous mis en libertè.Le second, à ce que les Catholiques An∣glois ne serroint plus recherchez pour leur Religion: Et le troisiesme; Que ce qui se trouveroit en nature des biens saisis sur les Catholiques tant Ecclesiastiques que seculiers, depuis le dit dernier Edict publi contra eux, leur serroient resti∣tues.The first touching the Catholikes, as well Ecclesiasticks as Seculars, Prisoners since the said last Edict, the which shall be all set at liberty.The second to this effect, That the English Catholiques shall be no more searched after (or troubled) for their Reli∣on: And the third, of this nature, that the goods seised upon the Catholikes, as well Ecclesiastiques as Seculars, since the said Edict published against them, shall be restored. Upon these Articles, Oathes, Proceedings of the King in these Treaties of Marriage with Spaine and France, and his enter-marriage with the Queen, (a most se∣dulous Promoter of the Roman Catholike Religion;) these severall effects ensued. First, an extraordinary great multitude of most dangerous seducing Seminary Priests, Iesuits, Monks of all sorts, especially Benedictines. Nunnes and Iesuitesses came flocking over into England, and other his Majesties Dominions, without any re∣straint or inhibition whatsoever, there being no lesse then 261 Romish Priests, Monks, Iesuites, (besides Popish Physitians, Apothecaries, and Chirurgions) con∣stantly residing in and about London, in the yeare 1624. the Catalogue of whose names you may read in Iohn Gee, (a reclaimed English Priest, by the fall of the Massing-Chamber in Black-Fryers, where he hardly escaped) in his I oot out of the snare, Edit. 4 London 1624. there being, as hee then manifested in this, Book, at least foure times as many more Priests and Iesuits in other parts of England, and well-nigh 300 to his knowledge in one single County alone; and above 60 English Benedictine Monks from Doway, besides those sent from other places. Secondly, There were many new Colledges, Monasteries, and Seminaries erected in Spaine, and other forraign Parts for the training up of English, Irish, and Scottish Priests, Monks, Iesuites. Nunnes, to be sent over into his Majesties Domi∣nions, to reduce England to the Popish faith, and obedience of the Sea of Rome; (as you may read at large in Iohn Gee his Foot out of the snare; Lewis Owen, his Running Register; Iames Wadsworth, his English Spanish Pilgrime, London 1629. Pudesindus Barlo, his ensuing letter; The French Mercury, Tom. 8. 9. & 10. Nichle Maistre, Instauratio Antiqui Episcoporum Principatus, and o∣thers,) and new Chappels built for Masse, and a Cell for Capuchins here. Thirdly, There were many private Societies and Monasteries of Iesuites, Monks, Nunnes, secretly erected and maintained in England, but many more openly built, stocked, and professedly supported in Ireland, as appeares by the Remonstrance and Petition of Grievances touching Religion, presented to the King by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, 3. Caroli: The late Remonstrance of both Houses,
concerning the Rise and Progresse of the late Irish Rebellion, Romes Master-Piece; Romes Inquiry, &c. and other evidences here ensuing. Fourthly, There was a new Popish Hierarchy erected, and Bishops, Arch-Deacons, &c. created by the Pope, both in England and Ireland, to exercise all Episcopall Iurisdiction therein; besides the Queens Bishop mentioned in the former Articles; as is evident by Nich le Maistre his Instauratio Antiqui Episcoporum Principatus, and Rudesindus Barlo his letter recorded in it, by Henry Flood his letter from Rome, to F. Colleton Arch-Priest, alias Arch-Deacon of London, March. 27. 1623. with other letters recorded by Iohn Gee, in his Foot out of the snare, p. 27. &c. The Popes Briefe, and Romes Inquiry: and the evidences hereafter cited. Fifthly, All Lawes and Proceedings against Popish Priests and Iesuits, were sus∣pended by generall and speciall letters, warrants of Grace and Protection fore∣mentioned; and before the Kings marriage by letters sent to all parts by Bishop Williams Lord Keeper, in King Iames his Name, all Priests and Recusants then imprisoned for their Religion wereSee Mercure Francois, Tom. 9. An. 1624. p 28 to 31. released, upon pretence of procuing like favour, and liberty of conscience for the Protestants in France, and other forraign parts: Who soone after were generally persecuted every where in Germany, France, and all their Townes, Forts, demolished in France by force of Armes; yea, many thou∣sands of them massacred; and Rochel it selfe betrayed into their power, by our English ships, and the treachery of the Popish and Court party here. Sixthly, There was a speciall Society erected, not onely in Rome, but likewise here in England, intitled, The Congregation of Propagating the Faith, consisting of foure Orders of most desperate active English and Scotish Iesuites, residing in Lon∣don; of which Society, The Pope himselfe was the head, and Cardinall Barbarino his chiefe substitute. And for the better advancement of this Romish design, to under∣mine the Protestant Religion, and set up Popery in all the Kings Dominions; there was an Agent sent from the King and Queen to lie Leager at Rome (one Hamilton a Scottish Papist) and a speciall Nuncio sent over into England from the Pope, to wit, one Seigneour Georgio Con, a Scot, who kept his Residence here in London, and was President of this new erected Congregation of Iesuites; which held a constant Councell once or twice each week, had weekly dispatches to and from Rome, yea, con∣tinuall free accesse to the King and his Court, to seduce both the King and his Peo∣ple; as you may read more at large in Romes Master-Piece, the English Pope, and The Popes Briefe. Seventhly, All Informers against Priests, Iesuites, Papists, were discountenanced, menaced, and many of them imprisoned, by Secretary Windebanke their Pentioner, who not only released sundry Priests and Iesuites by his Warrants, (as you heard before) but even by word of mouth prohibited the Officers of Iustice to apprehend them, and imprisoned one Robert Horward Vnder-Sheriffe of Southampton, upon a pretence that he had proceeded against some Popish Recusants upon the Kings Writ directed to him to seise their Lands, and Goods, contrary to his Letters of Coun∣termaund (though its true he proceeded not) till he enforced him by his Popish Secre∣tary Read, to enter into a bond of one hundred pounds to Henry Lord, a Papist, Never to prosecute Popish Recusants more, ere he would release him: All which was attested by Horward and others in the Commons House this Parliament, as you may see in the Iournall Book of the House 11, 12, 20. Novemb. and in Mr. Glynnes
Repoentred therein, 1 Decemb. 1640. On the contrary, most of the painfull Or∣thodox Protestant Ministers, Gentlemen and others throughout the Realme were disgraced, persecuted, silenced, fined, imprisoned, banished, and thousands of them enforced to flee the Realme, by the tyrannicall unjust proceedings against them in the High-Commission, Starre-Chamber, Councell-Chamber, Bishops Consistories, and Visitation Courts: the Printing Presses were also shut up against all Books in re∣futation of Popery, and opened to all Impressions in defence or propagation thereof: Popish Doctrines, Superstitions openly maintained, preached in Our Vniversities, Cathedrals, Diocesses, Churches, Chappels, (especially at Court) Lectures suppressed, and none but such as were Popishly affected, advanced to Bishoprikes, Deaneries, Ecclesiasticall Preferments, or admitted into the Ministery, by ourWho would a∣mit none ∣vings or the Ministery, but such who must  subscribe, That the Church of Rome is a true Church, That it is lawfull to how to altars, That all bap∣tized infants are truly regé∣nerated and certainly saved if they d, That Bishops are Iure Divino, That Ministers pow∣er to rem sins is nt meerly declarative. Bishops. Eightly, In pursuance of this design, his Majesties greatest Favourites, and those in highest authority under him, were all either actuall Papists in profession, or well inclined to Popery in affection, & altogether swayed by popish Councels: witnesse the first Grand Favòurite, the Duke of Buckingham, who laid the foundation of the Spa∣nish and French Marriage-Treaties, Articles, and was a chiefe Actor in both; swayed wholly by his Iesuited Mother, and Dutchesse, professed Papists, and their Cabinet counsell of Iesuites; by whose Treachery Rochel was lost. The great Lord Treasurer Weston steared by his Popish Countesse, kindred, Sir Toby Mathews, Sir Basil Brook, and other Papists, whiles he lived, and reconciled to the Church of Rome, receiving extreame Unction and Absolution from the Popish priests and Capuchins, when he died. Besides these they had Windebank a popish Secretary of his Majesties Cabinet Councel for their Intelligencer, Patron, Protector, Liberator, Assi∣stant; the Earle of Arundel, and other friends in his Privie Councell, Endymion Porter in his Bed-Chamber, with many other Agents of all sorts, all Sexes in his Court, mentioned in Romes Master-Piece, to further their design in the State: The Arch-bishop of Canterbury, Wren, Montague, Cozens, with many other Prelates andSee Master hites first Century. Priests to introduce, establish their Popish Doctrines, Ceremonies, Superstitions in the Church of England; the great Lord Strafford Lievtenant of Ire∣land, with sundry others in that Realme, to countenance and protect them in Ireland, where they had absolute toleration, yea, open profession of their Religion: And which was instar omnium, they had Queen Mary her selfe in the Kings own bed and bosome for their most powerfull Mcatrix, of whom they might really affirme in reference to his Majesty, what some of their popishBernardius de Busti. Maral. Pars 3. Ser. 3. exce. 4. pars . ser. 2. Gabrid Biel in Cnoe Msse Lect. 8 c.  Gerson. Tract. 4. Super magni∣ficat. ab. de∣niera. Pleuers des vies des Saincts. Feste de' Assomp∣tion Nostre Dame Anselms Cant. De Laud. Mariae, and o∣thers. Doctors have most blasphe∣mously written of the Virgin Mary in relation to God and Christ, That all things are subject to the command of Mary, even God himselfe: That she is the Empresse and Queen of Heaven, and of greatest Authority in the Kingdome of Heaven, where shee may not only impetrate but command what soever shee pleaseth; That shee sitteth as Chauncellour in the Court of Heaven, and giveth Letters of Grace and Mercy to whom she pleaseth: That shee is the Fountaine, Treasurer and Dispencer of all Gods Graces, Favours; the very neck and conduit-pipe through which they are all conveyed: That God hath freely bestowed on her the better halfe of his Kingdome, to wit, all his mercy, reserving only his Iustice to himselfe, yet so subject to her restaints: That if any (Ro∣man Catholike) doth finde himselfe aggrieved in the Court of Gods (or the Kings) Iu∣stice, (for being prosecuted for his Recusancy or seducing the Kings people) he may safe∣ly appeale to Maries Court of mercy for reliefe, shee being the Throne of Grace,
of which the Apostle speakes, Hebr. 4. 16. Let us go boldly unto the Throne of Grace, that wee (Catholikes) may receive (from her) grace to helpe us in time of need: And to further this Catholike work more effectually, the Queen Mother must be sent over into England, to contribute her assistance to the Catholike party here, which she had so much assisted in France, and forraign parts. No wonder then if the designe succeeded, prevailed so much of late, since assisted, promoted by so many powerfull active agents. 9. By vertue of the former Articles and Oaths, all the Parliaments during his Majesties raigne till now, urging the execution of old Lawes against Recusants, Priests, Iesuites, and endeavouring to make new stricter acts against them, have (contrary to the practice of all former ages,) been broken up and dissolved in dis∣content; And to crosse their execution of Priests and Iesuites in a politicke Pleasing covert way, divers Proclamations have been published every Parliament, to ba∣nish them the Realm by a set day; after which, if they departed not, they should be executed, which the common people, and plaine honest-minded Parliament men conceived, to be done out of rigour and justice against them, and so rested sa∣tisfied with these Proclamations onely, which in truth, were meere policies to free the imprisoned Priests and Iesuites out of prison, under pretext of sending them away, and to stay all proceedings against them, whilst the Parliaments sate, by al∣lowing them so many weeks respite to depart the Realme, before which the Parlia∣ments commonly were dissolved: and so by this policie were secured, inlarged to do more mischief, and either departed not all, or returned presently againe into Eng∣land as soon as the Parliaments ended, as the premisses and experience manifest. 10. By meanes of these Articles, proceedings of the Papists, Priest, and Iesuites have grown so stupendiously powerfull, as during the late Scottish troubles, to hold a Parliament, and generall Councell of State among themselves, even in London, wherein not the King, but the Popes own Nuntio sate President: in which Par∣liament the chief Papists out of all parts of England and Wales assembled, and made severall Lawes and Ordinances for imposing taxes, and raising monies upon all Roman Catholiques, for maintenance of the Scottish wars, which were seconded with the Queens own Letters and Instructions to the Catholikes, reciting, VVhat great liberties and favours her Highnesse had procured for them from his Majesty; and exciting them to a most liberall contribution toward these wars, because the main∣taining thereof, concerned them not onely as they were Subjects, BUT AS THEY WERE ROMAN CATHOLIKES TOO. The verity of which Popish Parliament, orders, instructions, taxes, was fully proved and manifested be∣fore a speciall Committee of the Commons House specially appointed for Recu∣sants, and their Popish Nuncio, Novemb. 9. 1640. and at other dayes of meeting in that and the following moneths, both by the orders, letters and instructions themselves, and the examinations of Sir Kenelm Digby, and many other Popish Knights, chief actors in that Parliament, now remaining in the safe custody of Master Raynolds then Chaire-man. And were not the Papists then, think you, growne to an extraordinary exorbitant power, and the Pope revested in his long exploded usurped supremacie in our Realme; when they should thus be per∣mitted to hold and keepe a Parliament without interruption, when the Protestants and Kingdome might hold none at all, or at least one presently dissolved in dis∣content,
and the Popes owne Nuncio sit Lord President to rule the rost, when they should be thus openly tolerated to hold a Parliament, both to make and maintaine a warre against the religious Protestant Subjects, even with the Kings owne actuall consent, as is cleare by his forementioned answer under his owne hand to Master Pulfords Petition, where he not onely takes notice of these contributions granted him by the Papists, but makes them the ground of his stay of all proceedings against them upon penall Lawes? And that these Scottish wars were then raised by them, to get the king into their power, and extirpate the Protestant Religion, is evident, not only by the plot detected in Romes Master-piece, found in the Archbishops chamber, and the observations on it, but likewise by a little English Booke then published in print by the Iesuits, intituled, The Iubilee of the Iesuites, one copie whereof, Thomas Chaude receiving from a woman-papist in Redriffe, delivered it to Sheriffe Warner, which he attested in the House of Commons, Novemb. 14. 1640. as the journall records: in which booke there was this observable Passage:Nota, That the Papists should fish in troubled waters, whilest the King was ingaged in the wars with the Scots; with some prayers for their good successe; and for THE HOLY MARTYRS THAT SUFFERED IN THE FLEET SENT AGAINST THE HERETIKES OF ENG∣LAND 1639. By which among other circumstances, it is evident, that not onely the Scottish war was plotted, maintained by the Papists, but that the Spanish fleet then happily incountered and vanquished by the Hollanders on our coasts, du∣ring these troubles, was directly designed against the Protestants in England, by the Popish party here, with whom they were to joyne, to cut both the English and Scottish Protestants throats, when all the powder of the Realme, and the traine bands armes in most Counties were ingrossed into his Majesties hands, and they thus incountering one the other; which plot, the unexpected pacification, with the Scots, and Holland fleet most happily prevented. And in truth, the improbabi∣lity of any other likely designe; our harbour and succour of them from the Dutch Fleet in the Downes, our supplying of them with men, victualls, ammunition, our guarding them with our ships against the Hollanders more then was meet, our hin∣dering the Hollanders to burne their ships, which ran upon our shore, the con∣fession of an English man in that Fleet upon his death-bed, out of remoise of con∣science, (when he was brought on shore wounded in the first encounter with the Hollanders) that this Fleet was designed for England; the speeches of some Pa∣pists, that they expected this Navie here about that time; the landing of many hundred Spanish souldiers at Plimmouth in English Ships, but a weeke or two be∣fore this Fleet arrived on our coasts, upon pretence to transport them thence by land towards Flaunders, (designed, as some then feared, to surprise Plimmouth;) the Lord Portlands sudden journey to the Isle of Wight, whereof he was Governour, with the Lord Went worth, Col. Goring, and others, where they shot away all the powder in the Castles, (and their clothes too) in drinking healths in a most Bac∣chanalian fick manner, just when the Spanish Fleet was before that Isle, to the end they might the easier surprise it, when they had no powder to resist them, (as some wise men then conjectred,) are more then probable arguments, that this Fleet was destinated for England, to extirpate the Protestant party; and that by the desperate confederacy of the predominant Popish faction, and their great Pa∣triots
here, who procured them so much favour and protection from us against the Hollanders, and would never permit this mysterie of iniquity to be throughly ex∣amined. No wonder therefore, if we see the Popish Rebels brought over into Eng∣land, to murther Protestants now, since the Spanyards were thus designed, (as is more then probable) for that purpose then: And whether we may not feare the like designe from France, I leave to the grand Councell of the Kingdome to consider. 11. Those Articles, I doubt, have beene the true cause of the late rebellion in Ireland, and the massacres there; of all his Majesties favours to these rebels, of the late pacification Articles granted to them; of his Majesties departing from, taking up armes, arming all English Papists, and sending for Popish Irish rebels into England, to fight against the Parliament, and of his siding with, relying on the Popish party, to whom he is obliged to adhere, and so ingaged against the Parlia∣ment, for feare they should execute all old, and make new. Lawes against Recu∣sants, contrary to his premised Oaths, and Articles. 12. Wee may hence assure our selves, that wee can never have any reall pa∣cification with the King and his Popish party, without a toleration of their re∣ligion, and a suspention, or repeale of all Lawes against them, according to the pre∣ceeding Articles; and in case his Majestie should prevaile against the Parlia∣ment, we must expect an absolute establishing of Popery, and suppression both of the Protestant party and Religion. Yea, seeing His Maiestie is both by Oath and Articles, not to endeavour by any means at all, to withdraw the Queen from the profession of the Romish Religion; whereas she on the other side, is left free, by all meanes and arts that may be, to withdraw the King from the Protestant Religion to her owne, and his children too: Wee have great cause to feare (if Adams, Solomons, or Ahabs seducements by their wives be duly pondered) that his Majesty, (now wholly alienated from his Parliament, and best Pro∣testant Subjects, by the Queen and popish Counsellors, and resigning himselfe up to the Councels, Armies, Forces, Guard of his Roman Catholike Subiects, who have the custody both of his person, and next heires apparant to his Crownes,) may ere long be seduced to their Religion, as well as to their party; especially, since he hath been informed, That they have a poysoned Fig reserved for him, in case he should refuse it; as is more amply manifested in Romes Master-piece. The next Authority of note, which I then intended to publish, was this notable Passage of N. Le Maistre, a Sorbon Priest, in his Instauratio Antiqui Episcoporum Principatus: Parisiis 1633. Cum privilegio Regis, & Approbatine Doctorum. (dedicated to all Cardinalls, Archbishops, Bishops, Priests and Clergie of the Church of France) Lib. 2. p. 273. to 83. cap. 15. Thus intituled: Corolarium libri se∣cundi; Vbi nonnulla de persecutione Episcoporum, & de Illustrissimo Antistite Cal∣cedonensi. For the clearer understanding of which Passage, I must prefix this Pro∣logue; After the death of William Bishop of Calcedon in England, most of the English secular Priests, together with the Benedictines, for the advancement of the Romish Catholike Religion, became suitors to the Pope and his Conclave, to have one or more Popish Bishops, created by the Popes to be sent over into England, to ordaine Priests, give confirmation, and exercise Episcopall jurisdiction there; The Regular Priests, and some others here, did stifly oppose this design; but the Episcopall Secular and Benedictine party prevailing, Pope Urban by his speciall Bull, bearing date, the 4. of
August, An. 1625. (which I finde printed in Censur a propositionum quarundam, &c. per facultatem Theologiae Parisiensis factae, Parisiis, 1635. p. 63. 64, 65.) created See the Popes Briefe. Richard Smith Bishop of Calcedon, and sent him over into England, to exercise Episcopall jurisdiction, and to be superintendent over the Priests within the Eng∣lish Dominions, according to the tenor of his Bull; hereuponSee my Cata∣logue of Testi∣monies in all Ages, to prove the Parity, and Identity of Bi∣shops and Pres∣byters. The 3. Squadron. Nicholas Smith, Da∣niel a Iesu Herman Lomelius, and other Regular Priests, writ divers printed Trea∣tises against Episcopacie, and the inconvenience of having a Bishop in England; whose books were referred to the Examination of the faculty of Paris, and there censured, An. 1630. in the forecited Censure, &c. the Sponge of which Censure, written by Herman Lomelius, was answered by Le Maistre; and withall, they raised up such a faction and persecution against this their new Bishop of Calcedon in Eng∣land, and Ireland among the Popish party, that they chased and banished him out of England into France, where he was entertained by Cardinall Richelleiu. Upon this occasion Le Maistre thus writes in his Defence, and prints the insuing Letter of Rudesindus Barlo, President of the Benedictine English Monkes, in these very termes: Nunc verò Episcopum, &c. But now they see the Bishop of Calcedon, shining on every side round about, with the splendor of Vertue, by whose amiable light and prudence, if the tempest should become more hard, it might have been as∣swaged and calmed; I say, the Bishop of Calcedon, greatly desired by the people, coming FROM THE POPE, most humanely entertained by Christians, not grievous to the enemies of our Faith, some enflamed with private hatreds and grudges, have expelled, have suborned secret accusers and Sycophants, as if them∣selves would urge and imitate an OVER MUCH REMITTED PER∣SECUTION, who cease not to complain of the grievousnesse of persecution. You (will you that I should speake) have made, you have raised a persecution; neither hath Religion ever suffered under a more grievous evill, then by impiety, cloaked under the colours of a religious ruit: For what was there, that might provoke your gall against so great a man, unlesse you purposed to execrate honesty, sanctity, modesty, courtesie, wisdome, with the most filthy kindes of enmities? Unlesse, like the Syberites, you scatter reproaches against the Sunne, and indure not the light of so great innocence, which no man ever ought to shun, but he who would not imitate it? Now all France is overslowed with greatest indignation against your madnesse, from which, since so many mischiefes have proceeded, this one commodity accrues to behold and imbrace so great a man; so illustrious a Champion of the Gospell, so acceptable and lovely to our most eminent Duke and Cardinall; But in the meane time, the filthy patrocination of certaine Writers, may cease to draw clouds over your wickednesse: Did not Bishops heretofore carry divine books with them wheresoever they went, even whiles the persecution was vigorous, &c? Did they not, when driven into caves, hold assemblies, reforme Priests, performe holy duties, dispence sacred mysteries? What then forbids the same things, and others which are not of greater pompe to be performed in England; especially, WHERE THIS HEAT OF PERSECUTIONS HATH CEASED, THROUGH THE DIGNITY OF A MAGNANIMOUS KING; AND MOST INVINCIBLE PRINCE, BY THE
BORBONIAN STAR WHICH HANGS OVER THESE COUNTRIES IN A MOST DEARE WIFE: By which STARS, AS BY THE DIOSCURI, PERADVENTURE THE TEMPEST OF PERSECUTION WILL IN TIME BE APPEASED, and THE GENEROUS PRINCE MAY ACKNOWLEDGE THE SAME CHRIST, UNDER WHOM HIS ANCESTORS HAVE SO GLORIOUSLY TRIUM∣PHED. But that it may appeare, by how many Votes the Bishop of Chalec∣don came desired into that Province, I subjoyne a Copie of a Letter, by which the most noble Society of Benedictines earnestly required Doctor Smith to be given to them for their Bishop, by the Senate of the Church. And hence  will appeare, how deserved their pride may be condemned, who being but few in number, have vexed the Bishop of Chalcedon, against the Votes of so great a Fraternity; with whom alone I am angry, when as in this worke, I complaine of the arrogancie of certaine men, who call themselves Monks: For in others I am alwayes re∣solved to reverence Religion and Modesty. The Letter of Father Rudesind, President of the English Bene∣dictines, to the sacred Congregation, consecrated to the PROPAGATION OF THE FAITH, 12 Decemb. 1624. MOst Illustrious, and most reverend Lords, of the most ancient Senate of the Catholique Church; peradventure we doe a new thing, and hither to unaccustomed; yet (as we hope) neither ingratefull, nor unpleasant to your piety, Monks endeavouring to promote the cause of secular Priests; although truly how∣soever the abusive speech of the vulgar distinguisheth the Clergie from the Regu∣lars; as if the Secular Priests only should constitute the Clergie; but the Regu∣lars should by no means belong to the Body of the Clergie; yet wee Benedictines were alwayes of a far other opinion, esteeming even our selves to be some part of the Clergie, although not a ruling part, yet an assisting part, out of the most an∣cient priviledges of the Sea Apostolike; wee doe not therefore a thing diffe∣rent from our Profession, if wee suffer together in the difficulties of THE ENGLISH CLERGIE, since we judge the same in part to extend unto our selves: verily we should not deserve to be under Christ the head of the Cler∣gie, if we should not suffer together with the Body, especially with the Body of the ENGLISH CLERGIE, of which we remember the greatest-part by far in the Primitive Church of the English, to have been of our Fathers the Monks of Saint Benedict. For that conjunction and participation therefore, which our Body hath alwayes had in England with the Secular Clergie, presuming (most illustrious men) of your benignities to the assistance of the said troubled Clergie, we have thought wee ought to occurre according to our severall abilities; not as ambitiously seeking any authority among them, but as those who judge, that even our tranquility doth de∣pend
on their quietnesse. For we most truely judge, that it is the onely method of Peace and concord, that to every Order may be attributed what is its owne, that due honour and authority may be rendred to the Clergy, and their Priviledges may be preserved inviolable to the Regulars. Hence is it, that under the best and most prudent old man of pious memory, Doctor William Bishop, THE MOST REVEREND ORDINARY OF ENGLAND, and Bishop of Calcedon, the pious foundations of an wholsome concord were laid betweene the Seculars and Regulars, THE WORKE-MEN OF THE MISSION; we Benedictines agreeing, (the Venerable Bishop himselfe exhorting and proposing) upon certaine necessary Articles of Ecclesiasticall Discipline; whence without doubt it would have come to passe, that the other Regulars following our example, would have consented to the same Articles, and a most joyfull face of mutuall peace and love in the whole Clergy of England would have shined forth; but by the death of the holy Bishop intervening, (to him verily mature by reason of his long age, but to us very unseasonable, by reason of the beginnings of peace not yet confirmed) these our endeavours lye in a manner intercepted, and by meanes of the long delay of granting a successor Bishop, almost quite dead. For wee have received (not without great dolor of minde) from two chiefe men, Master Matthew Kellison, and Master Richard Smith, ancient Priests, and old Doctors of Divinity, who among others were nominated to our most Holy Lord, to undergoe the Episcopall charge, that many things are objected by some, onely out of a shew of the zeale of God, but in truth out of a hope of retarding that businesse, then which there is none more necessary for the advancement of Religion, and Piety in England, Wherefore I deemed it appertained to the office of fraternall charity, and to the zeale which I owe to Gods glory, that I, who unworthy pre∣side over a great part of the Regular Priests in the ENGLISH Mission. FOR WEE RECKON ABOVE SIXTY BENEDICTINE MONKES IN ENGLAND, SVBIECT TO OVR CON∣GREGATION (AND WE PREPARE FARRE MORE IN OVR COVENTS TO THE FVNCTIONS OF MISSION,) that I might give testimony to the Truth, and to the innocency and credit of the said Priests. I therefore humbly and sincerely signify to your most Illustrious Lordships, that the said Venerable Priests, Dr. Matthew Kelison, and Doctor Ri∣chard Smith, have been now very familiar known both to me, and to the other bre∣thren of our congregation, by the conversation and experience of many yeares, and that their manners are very well discerned by us. Therefore, before God I testifie, that they, both by us, and ALMOST BY ALL THE CATHO∣LIKES IN ENGLAND are had in so great veneration; whether wee re∣spect their integrity of life, or excellency of learning, that we suppose there can∣not easily be found their Peeres, much lesse their superiours in all the Clergy of England, whether Regular, or secular. And truely the glory of both their lear∣ning is sufficiently knowne to the Catholike world, by the most learned Bookes, set forth by both of them against Hereticks, in Latin and English, but to us it is more specially knowne, who have knowne both of them to have a long time governed the Chaire with great praise of learning, as well in Phylosophy as in Theology; and we know that Dr. Kellion was chiefe Professor of Divinity for many yeares in
the Vniversity of Rhemes, and that Doctor Richard Smith was first conjoyned in the society of Studies, to the most learned Bishop of Lussion, now Cardinall of Richelieu. And concerning the integrity of both their lives, we can say, (seeing both of them are familiar to us and our Brethren by their almost daily conversati∣on,) that we never yet knew any thing in their manners, which might not beseeme grave Bishops, yea that we have alwaies found so great gravity, meekenesse and devotion in them, as that wee may deservedly rejoyce; we have been conjoyned to them in a most firme amity for many yeares. And this our testimony concerning them, is so much the more worthy of acceptation, that whereas we are of that or∣der of Monkes, who had the chiefest power heretofore in England, who had eleaven Bishopricks in their power, and the Regiment of Cathedrall Churches, computing also the Arch-Bishopricke of Canterbury, if we would doe after the man∣ner of men, it is more likely for the desire of ancient power, we would rather re∣sist the secular Clergy as emulous, than give assistance to them. But wee emulating the humanity and sincerity of our Fathers, and seeking the glory of Christ, not our owne honoar, desire the quiet, profit, and encrease of the secular Clergy, as much as our owne tranquility. Therefore we onely affirme, that these things which wee have testified of the fore-named Doctors, are so manifestly knowne to all good men in OVR ENGLAND, that verily they may suffer a great scan∣dall, whosoever shall dare irreverently to back-bite the said Priests of Christ be∣fore your tribunall. Therefore we Benedictines, your humble Servants and Sonnes, beseech you, that rejecting their accusations (who denigrate the same of the best Priests, onely that themselves alone in a Clergy without an head, may shine as it were by an Anteperistisis, that they may seeme Hierarchicall, and by a division of mindes in the Clergy, may thinke that the best way to greatnesse lyeth open to them,) you would be pleased TO GRANT A BISHOP TO OVR ENG∣LAND, seeing that no Province of the Catholike world hath more neede of one, Whether we respect the necessity of the Sacrament of confirmation, whose frequent ministration by the Reverend Bishop of Calcedon, hath wonderfully erected the minds of our Catholikes, or the concord & dignity of the Clergy, and the observance of Ecclesiasticall Discipline, whichseemes by no meanes to be able to be preserved without Episcopall Authority: NEITHER IS IT TO BE DOVBTED (for we have already scene the GOOD SVCCESSE VNDER THE FIRST BISHOP) that ANOTHER BISHOP BEING CONSTITVTED, you WOVLD BEHOLD MORE IOY∣FVLL FRVITES WITHIN ONE TWO YEARES IN THE ENGLISH MISSION, THEN HITHER TO YOV HAVE BEHELD FOR SIXTY YEARES NOW ELAPSED THERE BEING NO BISHOP IN THE SAME.Popish Bishops the greatest and speediest meanes to pro∣mote Popery: Nei∣ther ought the Religious to feare, least Episcopall Authority should be burthensome to them, for the Authority instituted by Christ can hurt none who is truely a Christi∣an: and wee see not why the Regulas with their priviledges, given them by the A∣postolike See for most just Reasons, may not as happily agree with a Bishop and secular Clergy in the English Mission, as well as we see they every where doe out of England, especially seeing a forme is already affected, at least by us, who by the
exhortation of the most Reverend Bishop of Calcedon, conspire in the best con∣cord with the secular Clergie, and in the observance of a uniforme Discipline, sa∣ving our priviledges: And whosoever at last is to be Bishop, but especially if he shall be one of the two here named (whom we know to be very friendly to the Regulars) we doubt not, but that the same sweetnesse of concord, and conformity of Discipline will be continued, God directing the endeavours of us all. These things (most illustrious Cardinals, Patrons, to be especially observed) I have, which in the name of my selfe, and of the whole congregation, I would hum∣bly professe in the cause, and for the cause of our secular Clergie of England; it remaineth that I should earnestly request your most illustrious Lordships, most gratefully to accept of this my service, and that you would vouchsafe by your Au∣thority to foster and corroborate our Congregation, (which neither yeelds, nor will ever yeeld to any Society or Congregation in true observance towards the See Apostolike. Now the God of glory, and our Lord Iesus, blesse your Lordship with perpetuall safety, to the comfort and honour of his Church. From the Covent of Saint Gregory of the Benedictines at Doway in Flanders, the twelfth of De∣cember, 1624. The most humble Servant and unworthy Sonne of your most illustrious Honours; F. Rudesindus Barlo, President of the ENGLISH CONGREGATION of the Order of Saint Benedict. By which passage and Letter it is most apparant: That the Kings match with the Queen was both in design and event, the greatest means to advance Popery in England, to suspend the Laws & proceeding against Popish Priests and Monks; and to reduce both the King and Prince to the entertaining and professing of the Roman Catholike Faith; as Le Maistre his words assure us: and this the Arti∣cles of agreement made and sworn to by the King, upon the marriage with the Queen, confirme. What power these Benedictine Monks have gained in England since this letter, appeares by the Popes new printed Briefe directed to them, and by this memorable story. Anno 1634. Lewes Cooke Generall of the Benedictines dying without issue at Temple Cowly in Oxfordshire, where he had Purchased di∣vers lands and goods; his brother a Civillian in Ireland hearing of it, comes over and claimes his lands as heire, his goods as Administrator to him: the Benedictines withstood his claime to both, alleadging, that he purchased both goods and Lands with the money of the Order, and for their use and maintenance onely. And by Sir William Howard, and their Court friend there, made such a strong party against the heire, that dispairing of his own right, he made his addresses to Sir Iohn Bankes the Kings Attorny, and procures a Commission of inquiry, with a Fiat under his hand, dated 2. Ianuary 1635. to intitle the King to the Lands and goods, as a mortmain purchased to the use of these Monkes; whereupon they compounded with the heire, and gave him 300, l. as I am credibly informed by Mr Bernard, who drew the commission, wherupon it proceeded no further. I shall conclude, with the testimony of two English Iesuites, which I fitted for the Presse, An. 1636. in this ensuing peice, sent lately to me by a friend, who preser∣ved it beyond my expectation, as if Gods providence had reserved it to accompany the Premises.
The Iesuits Looking glasse: OR, The testimony of two late Priests and Iesuits touching the present condition of the Church of England, and the greatest swaying Prelates thereof. CHristian Reader, it is Aquinas his observation, that from the time Bishops were indowed with worldly honours,In Gen. 6. offices, riches, power, and great temporall possessions (the very bane and poison of the Church, asMarius de Schisate l. 4. Polychron. li. 4. c. 36. Iammes de Pa∣risiis c. 22. in vita Sylvestri. Authors stile them) EXTVNC exrti sunt in Ecclesia Gigantes, in magnis & Mirabilibus supra se ambulantes, qui potius videntur Reges vel Marchiones, quam Episcopi: what good fruits their Lordly Princely pompe and greatnesse produced, the same Au∣thor presently subjoynes: Et ideo non mirum si per coserigatur STATVA BA∣BYLONIS, & terrena civitas dilatetur: And therefore (saith he) it is no wonder, if the image and tower of spirituall Babel be erected by them, and the terrene City of Romish Babel inlarged. This being an experimentall verity in Aquinas his age, it makes me the lesse to wonder at the present industry and practice of our Lordly Prelates, who following the footsteps of their Pontificall Predecessrs, bend all their force and power to re-erect the long since demolished Tower of Romish Babel among us, and enlarge this earthly City, though with the utter ruine of our established Reli∣gion (the thing that first advanced them to their Lordly dignities) which they now most ungratefully require. This disperate confused Babel-plot of theirs, long smo∣thered from the vulgars knowledge, is now palpably discovered to the publike view of all men, not onely by the Towers, Statues, and walls of Babel (to wit, high Al∣tars, Crucifixes, Images, Altar-clothes, Tapers, Basons, &c.) lately erected in most Churches (especially Cathedrals) by these Lordly Babel-builders, but likewise by their fellow-labourers, and confederates in this plot and structure, to wit, Popish priests and Iesuits: who now over-joyed with the towardly forwardnesse and maturity of this their cuside, begin in printed Bookes to glory of it, for the better incourage∣ment and increase of their Roman Catholike faction; and being privy both to their Lordships bosome counsels and secrets (which ordinary poore Protestants are alto∣gether ignorant of) thinke all now so cock sure on their party; that they begin to divulge in print our Prelaetes secret aymes and popish designes; yea, to discover and magnifie those Statues and walls of Babel, which their Lordships have already set up in our Church.
Take but two late instance in stead of many, as a most bright Chrystall Locking-glasse, wherein you may exactly behold their Lordships Romish faces and actions, without prejudice or partiality; no Puritans having more lively and truly reflected their true pourtraites or shadows, then these Romish Optick have done. The first booke I shall instance in, is intituled, A direction to be observed by N.N. written by an English Priest or Jesuice (yea, printed here in England in our mother tongue, to the end we might all take notice of it) since Midsomer last. In the 14. page he highly applauds the now Archbishop of Canterbury, for prohibiting and suppressing Bookes in defence of our Protestant Religion (which he there termes, Socinianisme) in these words: Although I ought not to dissmble, by Doe gladly acknowledge, and eserve publish on this occasion, for a patterne for others in this Realme, the care of the highest Prelate in England (in place, grace, favour and authority, not in sta∣ture) in prohibiting the sale (much more then the printing and importing of books tending to Sociniansme, which page 16. he expresly defines and interprets to bee nought else, but Protestantism. O happy Prelate, to merit so great Laud from a Ie∣suits quill, as to be prescribed as a patterne of imitation to other Roman Catholikes and Bishops to follow! having now so farre cut-stripped them in their owne Iesu∣iticall practises and stratagems, to suppresse and undermine our Religion, that he even runs before them as a patterne worthy their imitation. But stops this Iesuit here? No, for pag. 21 22. he thus proceeds. And to speake the truth, what learned judicious man can after unpartial examination, imbrace Protestantisme, which now wareth weary of it selfe? Its Professors, they especially of greatest worth, learn∣ing and authozity (and who are they but our great Achbishops, Bishops, and their Heirs apparent?) declare themselves (you may see now they are past feare, shame, and scorne to keepe counsell any longer) to love temper and moderation. Allow of many things which some yeeres agoe were usually condemned as superstitious and Antichistian: and are at this time (such strong steady pillars, and grounded Fathers of our Church, or rather Romish brothers are their Lordships) more un∣resolved where to fasten (unlesse with Rome) then in the instance of their Church. (For proofe of which he gives us this experimental undable demonstraion.) For doe not the Protestant Churches beginne to looke with another face? their walls to speake (to wit, by late erected Images, Crucifixes, Laymens Books) with another language? their preachers to use a sweertene? (that is, to applaud, not declaime against popery and popish writers:) their annuall publike tenets in the Vniversity, to be of another stile and matter? (to wit, for, not against Popery:) Their Books to appeare with Titles andFor example: The Pope not Antichrist. Prayer for the dead: Limbus Patrum. Pi∣ctures: Cru∣cifixes, Altars to be used and adored: Auri∣cular confessi∣on: Tran∣substantiati∣on: Free∣will; Predesti∣nation: univer∣sall grace. that all our works are not sinnes: Merit of good works: inhe∣rent Justice: Faith alone doth not justi∣fie: Charity is to be preferred before know∣ledge: Tradi∣tions: Coun∣cel. The Law pssible to be kept, &c. Arguments, as Shelfords, Reeves, Pocklingtons. A coale from the Altar, and others) whichonce would have caused much scandall among the brethren? their doctrine to bee altered in many things, and even in those very points (marke it well) for which their progenitors forsooke the then visible Church of Christ? (and is it any wonder then that many hundreds forsake and separate from our Church now?) Their thirty nine Articles, the summe, the confession, and al∣most the Creed of their faith are patient? Patient: that is they are ambitious of some sense wherein they may seeme to be Catholike: (that is, of that Romish contradictory sence which Franciscus de Sancta Clara thrice printed, as they say, in England, and presented by a great Prelate to his Majesty, hath put upon them.) To alleadge wife and children in these dayes, is but a weake plea for a married Minister to compasse a Be∣nefice:
Fiery, Calvinisme, once a darling in England, is at length accounted Here∣sie, yea and a little lesse then Treason (as the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the other Prelates judged in their sentence of Doctor Bastwicke, where they much railed upon worthy Calvin, whose bookes they are unworthy to beare.) Men in word and writing (to wit, in their Sermons and printed books) use willingly the once fearfull names of Priests and Altars: (I would Richard Shelford Priest, and Iohn Squire Priest, with their new fraternity of Priests, would consider this, and those that preach and write for Altars.) Nay, if one doe but mutter against the placing of the Altar after the old fashion, for a warning, he shall be well warmed withA little booke so inti∣tuled, printed 1636. A coale from the Altar. English Protestants areSunday no Sabbath, prin∣ted 1636. now put in minde, that for Exposition of Scripture, by CanonCanons,  1571. Can. 19. they are bound to follow the ancient Fa∣thers. And to conclude all in one maine point. The Protestant Church in England (of whom the premises are spoken) prosesseth so small antiquity and so weake subsistence in it selfe, that they acknowledge no other visible being for many ages, but in the Church of Rome. Thus and much more this Iesuit, from his owne expe∣rimentall observation and reading. Now wellfare thy heart good honest plain-dealing Iesuit, for giving us such a lively Character and representation of the present face of our Church, and practi∣ses of our Lordly Prelates that are of Greatest Authority; and this thy timely dis∣very of their Graces Romish designes, proceedings, Apostacies, for which all England shall con thee thanks. Had any Puritan or Protestant writ or muttered half so much, against these great Lordly Prelates (as appeares by the late handling of worthy M. BurtonFor his God and the King.) he had been haled by head and eares out of his house, committed close prisoner, suspended, persecuted with all violence, complained of to his Majesty as a seditious, factious, rebellious person, pursivanted, pilloryed, condemned for a Scanda∣lum Magaatum long ere this, and made a publike1 Cor. 4. 9. spectacle unto the world, unto men, and unto angels. But thou being a bird of their owne feather, one of their owne fraternity, confederacy, applauding, not condemning these their courses and pro∣ceedings, shat escape scotfree without feare or danger, and perchance have a good boone for thy pains ere long: So much safer and securer is it now, for any man to be a Seminary Priest or Iesuit in England (though therein a27 Eliz. c. 2. Traitor by our Laws) then a faithfull Minister or painfull Preacher of the Gospel, rightly discharging his duty to God and the King. O times! O Lordly Prelates for the Popes owne tooth! The second Booke I shall nominate, is inscribed. Paraphrasticall and divout Dis∣courses upon the Psalme, Miserere, composed by Ch. M. (an English Iesuit, as it should seeme, who hath formerly written atSo he writes p. 257. large of the Masse and Transubstan∣tiation, the Iesuits badge standing in the front of the Epistle to the Reader) Anno 1635. approved by George Colvenerius Chancellour of the University of Doway, and Censor of Books, Duaci 30, Martii 1636. In the Epistle to the Reader, this Iesuit hath this remarkable passage: I have lived long out of my Country, and so know not who are the greater, who the lesser sinners; yet this I know in gene∣rall, that there must needs be many and great sinners in England, because where there are many beleevers (as there are in England) there are many ill beleevers (true faith and beleefe being but one) and consequently many ill livers, true faith being the rule and square of good life, &c. Whereupon these my parahra∣sticall Discourses, and pitifull lamentations of King David, I intend for all sin∣ners,
as well Catholikes as not Catholikes, and of whatsoever Religion;Rom. 1. I be∣ing a debter to all, and because I would have them all peruse these discourses, I abstaine from controversies in Religion, lest I should avert any from the reading of them: onely in paraphrasing the two last verses of this Psalme, occasion be∣ing offered, I speake of the unbloody and daily sacrifice of the Altar, but so, that I rather touch it, the handle it; mention it, then treat of it; suppose it, then prove it in that manner as I might; hoping that this Doctrine now, will not bee distastfull: (and why so? marke it, I beeech you) for seeing that now in Eng∣land in very many Churches, Altars, which here to fore were throwne downe, are againe erected (by whom, I pray, but by Lordly over swaying Prelates and their Creatures?) according to the laudable example and pious use and custome of the Catholique (to wit the Roman) and evenA falshood: for the primi∣tive Church had NO AL∣TARS, as is largely and freshly pro∣ved: in the Quench Coal in The holy Ta∣ble, Name, and Thing, more anciently, pro∣perly, and lite∣rally used un∣der the new Testament then that of an Altar. Writ∣ten in answer to Dr. COAL (alias, A Coal from the Al∣tar) printed for the Dio∣cesse of Lincolne 1636. primitive Church, to aberre a true sacrifice will not be ill taken (to wit, by these Altar errecting Prelates and Priests of ours) because to allow of Altars (marke it) is to allow of a true sacrifice, which useth to be offered on them, an Altar and a true proper sacrifice being Corre∣latives, of which the one inferreth the other, and so the one cannot bee averred without the other, nor the one denied without the other. Thus this Iesuit, almost two yeeres since, who might have said much more had he written now, we ha∣ving many new Altars and Crucifixes since that erected in England, by those Pre∣lates who bow downe devoutly to, if not adore them. See now at last what these great Prelates aime at in erecting Altars in our Churches, in raising and railing in our Tables Altarwise; this Iesuit plainly and truly informes us all, that their direct intention is, To usher in the unbloudy daily sacrifice of the Altar, which to averre a Sacrifice, will not be now ill taken in England, seeing that now in England in very ma∣ny Churches (then but now in farre more) Altars, which heretofore were throwne downe, are againe erected, according to the LaudableOne Knight∣ly, a Popish Priest, directed how the new Altar t Coven∣try should be erected, accor∣ding to the patterne of the popish Altars. example and pious use and custome of the Catholike Church of Rome; yea, and many new Priests (as Richard Shelford Priest, with hundreds more who will now be called by no other name but Priests; I may adde Masse to it for distinction sake) are already prepared for this true Sa∣crifice, there being no other end or use of Priests and Altars but for Sacrifice; an Altar (Yea a Priest) and a true and proper Sacrifice being correlatives, of which the one inferreth the other, and so the one cannot be averred (as it is now in printed Books and Sermons) without the other. This then being most apparent, let us be no lon∣ger deluded with flattering words and fond pretences; but assure our selves that these Court Priests and Prelates who now write and daily preach (even in his Ma∣jesties royall presence, and elsewhere) for Altars, bowing to Altars, Crucifixes, Auri∣cular Confession, bowing to the Name Iesus and the like (the ordinary theams of most Court Sermons) have combined together with Masse-Priests and Iesuits, to bring in the unbloody Sacrifice of the Masse (the Epitome and maine part of Popery) into our Churches, and that very speedily, unlesse manfully resisted and exemplarily pu∣nished for this their execrable conederacy against our established Religion; since Altars, Priests, and all other appurtenances in most Cathedrals, Chappels, and Chur∣ches, are already fitted for it, as this Iesuit truly informs us. If we now compare these passages of the Jesuits with the lateSee Mr. Br∣tons For God and the King. practises and Spec∣ches of some of our great swaying Lord prelates, as namely their corrupting of the Common Prayer-booke for the fifth of November, to acquit Popery from the ble∣mish
of Rebellion and Faction, and Papists from that execrable treason: their purg∣ing of the late Fast-booke, contrary to His Majesties Proclamation; to free Popery from the just imputation of Superstition and Idolatry; and justifie Fasting of it selfe to be a good worke and meritorious, without regard to the end thereof, (which the Arch∣bishop of Canterbury, in his Speech in Starchamber avoucheth to be his own act by speciall command from the King.) Their inhibiting all old English bookes to be reprinted, by a late Decree made in Starchamber, unlesse reviewed, purged, from all passages against popery) and new-licenced by them and their Chaplaines. Their purging of divers passages against Masse, Altars, Massepriests, Sacrifices of the Altar &c. with other points of popery, out of divers bookes lately licensed for the Presse. Their setting up Altars, Images, Crucifies, railing in of Tables, and raising the ground under them Altar-wise, and then adoring and bowing down unto them like Heathenish or Romish-Idolaters; with other particulars specified by these Iesuits, mentioned at large by Mr. Henry Burton in his new printed Appeale, and Sermon on the 5 of Novemb. last, truely entituled, For God and the King; to which I shall referre you) & justified by Richard Shlford Priest, Edmund Reeve, Dr. Iohn Pocklinton, A coale from the Altar, Teddar, Dr. Laurence Brown, and others in their late printed bookes and Sermons; together with their publique Speeches in the High-commission in the late censure of Dr. Bstwicke (whereinCum capitalis sit inimicus, pub∣licusqu hostis, tamen in propria cause actor, restis & judex est, id quod nec apud Turcas, neque Sracenos, neque Samaias fieri solet. Eos qui fi∣dem Caesari ser∣vant & Christo servatori nostro praecipienti ob∣temperant, nec ullam aliam ob causam haereseos no a inurit. Quicquid libet licitum judicas. Divin bumana decreta juxta contemnit alque conturbat. Ius gentium violat. Leges naturae prophanas, sacra polluit, indicta causa, nec dum, reos condeman, Aventinus. Annal. Bejorum l. 7. p. 611. against all Laws, they were both enemies, witnes∣ses, accusers, Iudges, as that Court often is) for the divine authority of their Episcopall primacy; and in derogation of the Scrirtures certainty, authority, related at large in his Apologeticus; the Speeches of Bishop White now prelate of Ely, and his now Arch∣holinesse of Canterbury in the later censure of M. Samuel Ward of Ipswich, where the first of them openly affirmed, That Christ was in the Sacrament more then spiritually and by faith and the latter challenged all Divines to discover the us or manner of his presence, and came up fully to Bishop Andrews his words, for which Mr. Ward was que∣stioned, saying, else it was impossible to answer the Fathers; both of them in a manner maintaining a reall transubstantiation of the Bread and Wine, and determining pointblanke against the 28 Article of our Church (which defines, that Transubstan∣tiation cannot be proved by holy Writ, but is repugnant to the plaine words of Scripture overthroweth the nature of a Sacrament, and hath given occasion to many superstitions; The body of Christ is given, taken, and eaten in the SupperHere is the modus defined which his Arch-grace challenged all Divines to de∣termine. Onely after an heavenly and spirituall manner, and the meane whereby the body of Christ is received, and eaten in the Supper, is faith.) With their High-commission speeches likewise in the severall censures of Mr. Smart, Mr. Workman, and Mr. Chancey, in defence of Images, Cruci∣fixes. Altars, Tapers, Sanctum Sanctorums, bowing to Altars, and the like, point-blank against our Homilies against the perill of Idolatry, and others; and punishing them onely for preaching and maintaining the Doctrine of our Homilies, and Articles, against all late Popish Innovations, (an insolency, a bold impiety not sufferable in our Chri∣stian Church and State, deserving the severest exemplary punishments:) All these, I say, compared with the Iesuits fore-cited passages, are a most pregnant, palpable, visible, convincing Demonstration, to all but such who will be wilfully blind; that these great Lordly Prelates resolved purpose, practise, designe, is speedily to set up the Pope and popery in our Church, and reconcile us once more to Rome, (as theSee Fox Acts and Monu∣ments, and Antiquiates Eccles. Brit. in his life. Cardi∣nall of Canterbury, Poole, with other popish Prelates did in Queen Maries daies.) And therefore the Popes Holinesse hath given these his Vice-popes instructions, Commissions
thus to do; his Majesty and his Honourable councell, may at their best leisure enquire of Seignir Georgio Con, (lately come from Rome, some say, as his Holinesse Nuncie, and with aSee Romes Mster-piece, p. 16. 27. Cardinals cap for Canterburies Grace) with whom our Prelates and court-clergie are over-familiar, to the great scandall and offence of many. To these I could adde some two or three bookes more, of like nature, one of them declaiming much against Puritans, as the only men that are enemies to popery, & hinde∣red the reconciliation of the Church of England to Rome, relating the story of Dr, Theodor Price Subdeane of Westminster his dying a Roman catholique, not long before recommen∣ded earnestly to His Majesty by his Arch-grace for the Bishopricke of angor, but rejected by his Majesty, as a man altogether unworthy, both for his vicious Epicu∣rean life, and unsoundnesse in religion: together with the late speeches of Pierceson and Hodshan, two Papists in Newcastle, brought into the High commission at Durham and there coldly prosecuted, for saying and affirming publickly, that theBish. Neale. Archbishop of York, and Dr. Iohn Consens, were both theirs, and of their religion; which other Papists also have openly averred in England, and more commonly report in forraigne parts; how truely, I refer to themselves and others to determine. From all these we may now clearly discover our great swaying Prelates concea∣led practices and intentions to set up Popery, and easily conjecture that all their late Innovations, Altars, Images, bowing to Altars, raising and railing in Lords Tables Altar-wise, Crucifixer, and new licenced popish Pamphlets, tend onely to this pur∣pose, to bring in the whole body of popery among us, by degrees; which they have well nigh effected, and almost quite accomplished. This therefore being their cleare resolution, intention, confederacy, as most men plainely discerne, and generally complaine of; let us all now at last, before it be too late, ere our Religion be quite lost and betray'd beyond recovery: begin to consi∣der, view, and to the utmost of our powers, by all just and lawfull meanes resolve manfully to oppose, withstand these conspiratours practices, designes, and cry aloud to God, and His Majesty for speedy justice upon them, according to the greatnesse of their Offences, that all others may be terrified from the like perfidious disloyall attempts. O therefore let us now awake out of our drowise security, and be no longer chea∣ted with their faire words or specious pretexts, which have hitherto blinded the eyes of most. Looke but upon their deeds, and these their complices testimonies of them, and then their fained speeches and pretences will vanish into smoke; it being theSee Mr. Tin∣dals practice of popish Prelats. Dr. Barnes his Supplication, & 28 H. 8. c. 10. ancient policy of Lordly Prelates (the readiest men in all ages both to maintaine and set up popery, with the Popes universall authority.) to speake most against popery, when they are busiest to bring it in; and to make the fairest pretences, when they are plot∣ting and executing the foulest designes, of purpose to delude the over-credulous multitude. I shall therefore close up all with the words of old Father Latimer, in his fourth Ser∣mon before King Edward, p. 52, 53. where he writes thus of Lordly unpreaching Pre∣lates, who bore greatest sway in Church and State, but nglected, suppressed prea∣ching. It is to be thought, that some of them would have it so, to bring in popery againe. This I feare me is their intent, and it shall be blowne abroad to our holy Father of Romes eares and he shall send forth his Thunder bolts upon these bruits; and all this doth come to passe through their un-preaching prelacy. Are they not worthy double honour? nay, rather double dishonour, not to be regarded, nor to be esteemed among the people, and
to have no living at their hands: For as good Preachers be worthy double honour, so unpreaching Prelates be worthy double dishonour. They must be at their doublets. But now these two dishonours, what be they? our Saviour Christ doth shew, Si sal, &c. If the Salt be unsavoury, it is good for nothing but to be cast out, and troden under feet of men.Matth. 5. By this Salt is understood Preachers, and such as have cure of soules. What be they worthy then? Wherefore serve they? For nothing else but to be cast out. Make them Quon∣dams, out with them, cast them out of their Office; what should they doe with a Cure that will not looke to it? Another dishonour is this,  conculcentur ab hominibus, to be troden under mens feet, not to be regarded, not to be esteemed. And well may they thus be served, who have troden both the Lawes of God and the King; yea, King, Sub∣jects, Religion, Justice, Rights, Liberties, under foot, and being treacherous both to God himselfe, and that Religion which they would seeme to professe, can never be loyall, faithfull to his Majesty, or His people committed to their care and cure: scarce one of our swaying Lord Prelates being able to say, that he ever converted one Papist to our Religion, or one soule to God, either by life or doctrine, though they have perverted, murthered, starved, destroyed thousands. This was that I then intended for the Presse. If any English Protestant, after all these visible most apparent evidences of the long prosecuted Court-designe, to set up popery, and exirpate the Protestant Religion, and the present proceedings of the Papists in Ireland and England by His Majesties Commissions and authority, (who wholly sides with, and relies upon them, as His best, trustiest, and loyallest Subjects, as they formerly have stiled many of them.) will be yet so wilfully blinded, as to believe, that the Kings and Courts designes are really to maintaine the Protestant Religion, the priviledges of Parliament, the lawes and liberties of the Subject; and still joyne with the  Royall party a∣gainst his Religon, Countrey, Liberties, Priviledges, believing their specious pro∣mises and pretences, before their reall contradictory actions, let him goe on and pe∣rish in his incredulity. However, I hope, all intelligent Protestants, who have hi∣therto sided with his Majesty and that party, out of their overmuch credulity of their upright intentions, and ignorance, of this their secret designe, upon the serious perusall of the premises, and His Majesties late sending of at least 30 saile of ships from Bristol, (a sad effect of its unhappy surrender) besides other ships elsewhere, to bring over Irish rebels, to ruine our Kingdome and cut our throats, (many of which are already arrived, and have committed great murders and insolencies at Bristol, elsewhere without restraint or punishment) will now, upon consideration of all the premises, for ever desert that Atichristian party, and henceforth unite all their hearts, heads, hands, purses, forces, endeavours to the Parliament, to preserve it, our Church, Religion, Laws, Liberties, Kingdom, Nation, from that imminent ruine threat∣ned to them by the malignant popish saction. I shall close up all with these few Queres to all English Protestants, who have any sparks of zeale to the protestant Religion, or their owne deare native dying countrey, remaining in their brests, and yet adhere in person or affection to the Royall Popish party, now in open hostility against our Religion, Laws, Liberties, Parliament, either out of meere ignorance and simplicity, or over-much credulity of his Majesties and that prevailing sactions sincere intentions to our Religion, and the Republique, publi∣shed in so many printed Declarations, protestations, of purpose to delude the world.
First, what certaine or probable assurance they can receive from all his Majesties and his evill Councellours late Declarations and Protestations, not to connive at Popery, but cordially to maintaine the Protestant Religion in its purity and liberty, to the utmost of his Regall power; when as his Majesties ancient engagements by the forecited Articles and Oaths to Spaine and France, his Letters to the Pope, his en∣tertainement of professed Nuncios from the Roman Pontise for sundry yeeres in London, his maintaining of an Agent at Rome, his forecited Letters, Protestations, Warrants, in favour, protection, discharge of the most notorious Papists, Priests, Ie∣suits, his extraordinnry fresh engagements to the Queen and Popish party, his arming of Papists both in Ireland & England against the Parliament and Protestant party, his much distasted Articles of pacification with the Irish Rebels, after their most in∣humane barbarous massacres of so many thousand innocent Protestants, without any provocation, his extraordinary late favours towards Papists, now most predo∣minant in his Councels and Affections his toleration of open Popery in Ireland, in all parts of England, his present war in their behalfe, with his entertaining of sundry Irish Rebels neere him heretofore, and sending forSee the Popes Briefe, p. 35, 36 37. many thousands of themYea, & French Papists too. into England now, as his best and faithfullest Subjects, on whom the most relies, to murther his Protestant Lieges in England as they have done in Ireland, with other his Maje∣sties and his Councellors late proceedings, infallibly proclaime a direct contrary intention, and quite crosse long agitated designe to all the world! Secondly, with what confidence at all can they expect; that his Majesty and his evill Councellours, who have extraordinarily violated, invaded the Subjects, Par∣liaments indubitable just Rights, Lawes, Liberties, Priviledges, Properties, all his reigne (as hath been publikely acknowledged by the King himselfe, and resolved by the Parliam then fullest) and since his departure from this Parliament, pra∣ctised it in farre higher degree then ever (contrary to his owne confirmation of the Petition of right, the very Acts passed by him this present Parliament, his many ancient and late quoted Declarations, Proclamations, Protestations, Speeches, Vowes, Imprecations,) will after his absolute conquest of the Parliament and their Prote∣stant party by force of Armes (in case he should prevaile) inviolably maintaine their Lawes, Liberties, Properties, Parliaments, Priviledges, and Religion, which they have ever heretofore so much infringed, and at this very instant more then ever, even in an open hostile manner? Thirdly, with what conscience, heart, or spirit they can either in point of piety or policy confederate and joyne their forces, heads, or purses with the popish party now in Armes to ruine this present Parliament, their owne native Countrey, Religi∣on, Lawes, Liberties, and promote the Papists most execrable Jesuiticall designes to re-establish popery, and the Popes supramacy in perfection throughout his Majesties Dominions? and how they will be able to answer this their detestable treachery, their desperate impiety before Gods or Mans Tribunals, or their owne self-con∣demning Consciences, at the last? Fourthly, with what stupidity of heart of sottishnesse of spirit they can ever patiently brooke the late stupendious pacification of His Majesty with the barba∣rous bloody popish Irish Rebels, after their treacherous massacring of above one hundred and forty thousand innocent Protestants (most of them English,) who in stead of taking exemplary vengeance of this their inhumane but chery, hath in∣dulged
them many favous, and termed them,So the Shrewsbury Copy stiles them. HIS GOOD ROMAN CATHOLIQUE SUBJECTS. And how they can ever quietly suffer or digest His Majesties entertainment of thousands of them already in His Army; His bringing over the Protestant English souldiers thence, set over by the Parliament, that the Papists there may take all the Forts and places of strength; His proclai∣ming of their Irish embased money to be currant here; but especially His sending over ships, and licences to land many thousand of the popish Irish Rebels speedily on English ground, of purpose to fight against the Parliament, and cut the Protestants throats in England, as they have done in Ireland; Certainly, that English Protestant who can sit still and patiently suffer such bloody, barbaous, popish Irish villaines to set foot on English ground for such a purpose, and not rise up in Armes, siding with the Parliament, and Protestant party, against them, to expulse or cut them off, hath lost both the spirit of an English man, and the zeale of a reall Protestant; yea, he deserves a brand of eternall infamy, and that he and his posterity should be extir∣pated by these outragious beastly monsters of men. Fiftly, whether His Majesties former arming of English Protestants first (with exclusion of Papists) against the Parliament and their Protestant party, and present sending for the Protestant English Souldiers out of Ireland (sent over by the Parlia∣ment against the popish treacherous bloody Rebels there, to subdue them) of pur∣pose to fight against their fellow English Protestants, for to secure the Irish popish Rebels; and his after arming of English Papists, and present sending for popish Irish Rebels as his last and best refuge, to succeed and second his protestant Forces; with the placing of his protestant Commanders, Subjects, since their union with his po∣pish Forces, alwaies in the front of the most dangerous desperate services, but in the reare of his pay, preferments, and Royall favours, and the Papists alwaies in the front of his preferments, and in places, services of least danger (as some intellig men of the Kings owne party have truely observed, and now complaine of;) be not a most apparent Jesuiticall plot to engage the Protestants of either party to weaken, kill, and ruine one and the other, that so the English, Irish, Scottish confederated Papists (who are still kept furthest off from danger, being rather Spectators then Actors in the hottest services) may by this their Romish stratagem, speedily become the strongest or most predominant party, and so easily conquer the Protestants (as well of the Kings as Parliaments side) and utterly extirpate them, with their Religion, at the last, through this their desperate folly, and most unnaturall unchristian discord. Certainely, what ever crafty Jesuited pates may suggest, or impoliticke childish Protestants adhering to them, conceive to the contrary, yet those who have any skill in Politicks or Ma∣chiavilian projects, may most clearely discerne this derestable designe against the Protestants (and our English Nation too, now devoted as a prey to the barbarous Irish, and other forraigne Popelings) without the helpe of a perspective. And can, or dare any Protestants then after this discovery of this plot upon them, be any longer be besotted, as from henceforth to fight for or adhere to those mischievous, treacherous, popish Conspirators, who rejoyce at this their folly, and would thus make them the principall instruments of their religions, Countries, yea, their owne destruction? I shall humbly therefore beseech all protestant Cavaliers, and Anti∣parliamenteers whatsoever, of the contrary party, most seriously to lay this dispe∣rate plot to heart (as some of the very common English Protestant souldiers (trans∣ported
from Ireland hither, to sight against their fellow Protestants and the Parlia∣ment) have already done, and then they cannot but desert that Aich istian side, and for ever insparably adhere to the Parliament,  some of these poore Souldiers have done lately to their eternall honour. Finally, in case the Irish Papists land, and their Faction prevaile, what security or probility can any English Protestants who joyn with them, expect either for the safety or enjoyment of their Religion, Lives, Liberties, or Estates when as those who devoted, designedSee Dr. Iones Booke of ex∣aminations. all the Protestants in Ireland (though allied to them) to the Sword, had their conspiracy taken its full effect, uniesse they would presently re∣nounce their Religion and turne Romish Catholiques; and have long since plotted the See Romes Master-piece. Kings owne death, if He comply not with them; will doubtlesse spare no English Protestants life, liberty, or estate, if they once obtaine the upper hand, unlesse they will become the Popes sworne vassals. And the rather may they and we believe it, because some of the Irish Rebels lately landed at Bristol, where they murthered two Vintners and a Tapster, beating out their braines, upon no just occasion at all, and yet were suffered to goe scotfree, and march up in Sir Ralph Hoptons Army against the Parliament, as I am certainely informed by some lately come from thence) have openly blamed the Cavaliers, for that when Bristol was surrendered, they did not put man, woman, and child therein to the Sword notwith standing their Articles; though pun∣ctually observed in no particular, but violated in every thing, as were the Articles since made with Exceter and Dartmouth; A sufficient evidence how little trust is to be reposed either in the Oathes, Articles, Promises, or Protestations of the malignant Popish party, whose very Religion instructs them, to keepe no faith at all with hereticks, as they account all Protestants. What security the Protestant party and Religion; what restraint, disallowance, the Romish fact, and their Roman Catholicke Errours, Superstins, Idolatries, shall receive, in case His Majesty and the Catholiques prevaile, will appeare by this observable passage in the French Mercury, upon the Kings first Articles with Spaine. From this days (of King Iames and His Majesties swearing the Spanish Articles) (writes theTom. 9 An. 1624. p. 27, 28, 29, 30. Two Acts pianted to the likes: th one in por¦ting a pardon of the penal∣ties which they might have in∣quired by the Lawes of Par∣liaments; and the other for the exercise of their religion, every one by himselfe with∣out scar. dall. Of the repose which the Ca∣tholiques re∣ceived in Eng∣land after that Don Carlo Co∣loma was there extraordinary Ambassadour of his Catho∣lique Majesty. French Mercury) the sayd Spanish Ambassadours, began to solicite the execution and accomplishment of the promises of His Majesty in favour of Catho∣liques; and after many opinions debated for the forme, and the better execution, it was in the end Resolved, that His Majesty should be supplied, to give every Catholique in particular, a pardon under the great Seale, for the penalties which they might have incurred by the Lawes of Parliament made against the Catho∣liques. And that for the time to come His Majesty should likewise by another act under the great Seale also dispence andpermit them to exercise their Religion, every one by himselfe, provided that it were without publique scandall; and that he should exempt them from all the Lawes made against them, by what Parlia∣ment soever it were. The said Acts were delivered to the said Embassadour on the behalfe of His Majesty, by the Lord Bishop of Lincolne Keeper of the Seale, under promises, that they should not all publish them untill that the marriage was ac∣comp hed. See then (writes Mercury) how all things were happily negotiated in England, From this time forwards the Catholiques there were at rest, without feeling any persecution after the arriball of Dan Carlo Coloma; who with a great deale of zeale and diligence obtained the Liberty of Catholiques imprisoned throughout all
England, Ireland, and Scotland. He likewise obtained, that the Informers, Pur∣sivants established to seeke out, accuse, and pursue the Catholiques, were prohibited to attempt any thing against them. The Ingresse and Egresse of the Realme was left free to them without Obligation, or swearing the Dath of Supremacy, having only his Pasport.They shall be no more obli∣ged to take the Oath of Su∣premacy. They might goe freely to heare Masse in his Chappell, in so great number and so publikely, that sometimes there have beene two or three thousand persons at it. I note who durst to speake against the marriage have been punished, amongst the most signall, the Earle of Oxford was sent prisoner to the Tower of London. So as theNote this well. Marquesse of Buckingham writ nto Spain That the Informers, Pursivants Prisons, shall serve no more but onely for their owne Ministers, and other persons zealous of the Protestant Religion; (which we have ever since expe∣rimentally found to be true.) And by the aforesaid Acts, the King permitted them in expresse words, the frée exercise of their Religion. Don Carlo Coloma hath likewise land the first stone of the Chappell which shall be built for the Infanta in the Princes palace, and the building advanceth apace, to the regret, and to the contentment likewise of many, to see the building of a Ca∣tholike Church in the Metropolitane City of the Realme by publique Authori∣ty, after that for an hundred yeers space before they had done nothing else there but destroyed them: I his and much more doth Mercury truly relate, even in the yeere 1624. when the restauration of Popery was but in the Cradle, before the full con∣summation of the Spanish match; to what an altitude of Soveraigne favour, power, authority then will Popery and Papists now arrive unto, after all their expences, ser∣vices, sufferings, engagements for their Majesties? to what an extraordinary low ebbe and miserable condition will the Protestant party and Religion be reduced thorowout his Majesties Dominions, notwithstanding all his Protestations (in case he should now obtaine a conquest over the Parliament and their adherents) now Popery and Papists are almost arrived to their manly growth, vigour, and have both the King, Queene, and their malignant Councell so deeply ingaged to them both by Oathes and Articles; I referre to all Protestants forraigne and esticke, most seriously to determine. These short Queres, with the premises duely pondered, and digested, should then (methinkes) induce every ingenious English Protestant yet adhering to the Court Popish party, speedily to abandon, eternally to desert them, and now cordially to unite themselves to the Parliament, and their Protestant English brethren, to live or die together in the present defence of their endangered Religion, Lawes, Li∣berties, and dearest Country, which they cannot without highest impiety desert, or inhumanely oppose in this time of most apparent dangers, which threaten their subversion. Wherefore, Obesotted Court-protestants, let me here intreat, advise you in Gods owne language. to2 Cor. 6. 11. Num. 16. 21, 24, 26. Isay 52. 11. Rev. 18. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, &c. come out from among these Antichristian Babylonians, to separate your selves spedily from the Congregation, and to depart from the tents of these wicked, bloody men; that ye be not partakers of their sinnes, and that ye receive not of their plagues: For their sinnes (in their most barbarous treacherous butchering of Gods Saints both in Ireland and England) have now reached unto Heaven, and God hath remembred their iniquities. Reward Romish Babylon, and them, as they have re∣warded you, and your Protestant brethren in England, in Ireland; and double unto them double according to their worke; in the Cup which they have filled, fill them double.
How much they have lately glorified themselves, so much sorrow give them: the rather, for that Romish Babylon now saith in heart, I sit as Queene (I would we could not truly complaine, by the underhand practices and conspiracies of Kings and Queens against Gods true Religion, Saints;) and am no widow, I shall see no sorrow: There∣fore shall her plagues (now suddenly) come in one day, and mourning, and famine, and she shall be utterly burnt with fire; at least thorowout his Majesties Dominions, if not the whole world) for strong is the Lord God who judgeth her; And the KINGS OF THE EARTH whoRevel. 17. 13, 14, &c. have now given their strength and power to the beast, and make warre with the Lamb (who shall over come them, for that he is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and they who are with him are called and chosen, and faithfull:) and who have committed fornication, and lived deliciously with her, shall bewaile her and lament for her, when they shall see the smoake of her burning; standing afar off, for the feare of her torment, saying, Alas, alas that great City Babylon, that mighty City, for in one hours is thy judgement come &c. For by her sorceries were all Nations deceived: and in her was found the blood of Prophets and of Saints, and OF ALL THAT WERE SLAIN UPON THE EARTH: and therefore all the late shed Protestant blood in Ireland, in England, was originally shed by her procurement (as appears by the Popes owne Briefe freshly published, For the inquiry after the death of such Catholikes here in England as shall suffer any kinde of death in England for the Catho∣like Faith or Cause during those wars, to the end they may be canonized for glorious Saints and Martyrs at Rome, and by other evidences:) and finally, doubtlesse shall be revenged in her everlasting punishment and subversion. Matth. 18. 26. Mar. 4. 22. Feare them not therefore: for there is nothing covered that shall not be re∣vealed; and hid, that shall not be knowne and come abroad. FINIS.
