r497a 12798460 94022
REASONS for passing a Bill in PARLIAMENT to Erect three Courts of Conscience, in the three seve∣ral Divisions hereafter Named, being within the Bills of Mortality, and without the City of London, and the Liberties thereof; for Relief of poor Debtors and Cre∣ditors, under the Value of Forty Shillings, to prevent vexatious and chargeable Arrests and Suits at Law. FIrst, the Division of the Burrough of Southwark, with the Parishes in the County of Surrey, mentioned in the Bills of Mortality. Secondly, The Division of the Hamlets of the Tower Liberty, with the Pa∣rishes in the Bills of Mortality, contained within the Hamlets of the Tower Li∣berty. Thirdly, The Division called Holborn Division, consisting of the remaining Parishes, and part of Parishes in Middlesex (not comprehending Westminster nor the Liberties thereof) likewise mentioned in the Bills of Mortality. THE Court of Conscience for the City of London, was first erected by an Act of Common Council of the said City, in the Nineteenth Year of King-Henry the Eighth. The said Court being found to be good and Charitable, of great Ease and Be∣nefit both to the poor Debtors and Creditors, as also much tending to the quiet and welfare of the City and Encouragement of Trade, was in the first and Third years of King James the first, established by Parliament, still limiting and con∣fining the Jurisdiction of the said Court to the Citizens and Free-men of the City of London, and other persons that inhabit or shall inhabit within the said City or the Liberties thereof, being a Tradesman, Victualler, or Labourer. Nor did the Jurisdiction of the said Court of Conscience ever yet extend further than the City of London and the Liberties thereof. That the Burrough of Southwark, and the Out-Parishes within the Bills of Mortality, are of late Years vastly increased in Buildings and Inhabitants, and abound in poor Tradesmen, Artificers, Laboures, Victuallers and others, far exceeding the City of London and the Liberties thereof: who for want of the like good Establishment of a Court or Courts of Conscience amongst them, are expo∣sed to many and great Inconveniences tending to the impoverishment and ruine of themselves and Families. As, Many vexatious Suits are daily commenced for inconsiderable Sums, and through extremity of Poverty, usual Exactions, the Implacability of Adversa∣ries, frequent Imprisonments, and cost of Suit, &c. they are often put to six times more Charges than the Debt was; whereby many Families are left to the Parish, the Prisons filled with poor helpless Men and Women, Sicknesses contra∣cted, and Trade in a great measure hindred. All which a Salutary Act for the Courts, of Conscience or Request, above men∣tioned, might in a good part prevent, as hath been experienced in the City of London and Liberties thereof, during the long time the like Court hath been there holden, Which is humbly submitted to the Prudence of this present Parliament.
