S5581 08255928 41236
A DISCOURSE CONCERNING THE ILLEGALITY OF THE LATE Ecclesiastical Commission, In ANSWER to the VINDICATION and DEFENCE of it: Wherein the true Notion of the LEGAL SUPREMACY Is CLEARED; And an Account is given of the Nature, Original, and Mischief OF THE DISPENSING POWER. LONDON, Printed for Henny Mortlock, at the Phoenix in St. Paul's Church-Yard, and at the White Hart in Westminster-Hall, M D C LXXXIX.
AN Advertisement. THIS Discourse concerning the Il∣legality of the Late Ecclesiastical Commission, was written when the Author of it was summoned to appear before it; and was in continual Expectation of undergoing its Censure, for not Complying with the Orders of it. This put him upon an Enquiry into the Grounds on which it stood. From whence he proceeded to search into the True Notion of the Legal Supremacy; and finding it very imperfectly set down in the fa∣mous Fifth Report, De Jure Regis Eccle∣siastico, he took the Pains to Examin it through every Reign, there mentioned; and upon the whole Matter he finds him and his Adversary F. P. equally mistaken. But in the Manage∣ment of it he hath rather endeavoured to give Light to the Thing, than to discover any Mans Errors. And it is hardly possible to settle the
Notion of it aright, without considering the Practice of other Countries, as well as our own: Of both which the Reader will find a short but impartial Account; which I believe the Author could more easily have inlarged, than have brought it into so narrow a Compass. By this, I hope, the World will see, That it was not Humor or Faction, but a real and well∣grounded Dissatisfaction, which made those of the Church of England oppose the Proceed∣ings of that Time; and that such have as great and real a Zeal for the Ancient and Legal Constitution of our Government, as those who make a greater Noise and Clamor about it; and that, not upon any new Notions or Phrases, but upon the very same Grounds which our An∣cestors made use of; and carry in them the true Basis of our English Government. It is pos∣sible some worthy Men may have carried some Notions beyond our Legal Constitution; but the more they search into it, the better Opinion they will have of it. Which, I think, is so well setled, that every Deviation from it tends to our Ruin. As to the Dispensing Power, the Author hath inlarged that Part, since some late Dis∣courses have been published, both for and against it. He hath neglected nothing which hath been most plausibly pleaded for it; but hath given a full Answer to the most material Instances which have been insisted on, in behalf of it. And after all,
I cannot but conclude, That the Dispensing Pow∣er is a kind of Mental Reservation, which quite alters the Meaning and Design of a Law. When the Late Ecclesiastical Commission was superseded (if not dissolved) the Au∣thor laid by these Papers as Useless; but having communicated them to one Particular Friend, (whose Judgment and Authority he had a great Regard to) he hath been prevailed with by him, to make them Publick at this Time: It being still necessary to shew, with what Justice and Reason, we refused to own the Jurisdiction of it. And it seems to me as hard to reconcile it to our Laws, as Liberty of Conscience to the Principles of Popery, or the Worship of Images to the Second Commandment.
THE CONTENTS. CHAP. I. THE State of the Question concerning the Court of the late Ecclesiastical Com∣mission. Pag. 1 CHAP. II. The King's Supremacy by Common-Law enquired into; Coke's fifth Report, de Jure Regis Ec∣clesiastico, examined. p. 8 CHAP. III. Whether the King's Supremacy by Law extends to the Dispensing with Laws: Of the Nature and Original of that Power; The Inconsistency of such a Dispensing Power with the Frame of our Govern∣ment. p. 25 CHAP. IV. Of the Alterations made in the Supremacy, by the Statutes of Henry the Eighth; with an Answer to the Objections. p. 49
THE LEGALITY OF THE COURT OF Ecclesiastical Commission Stated and Argued; In ANSWER to the VINDICATION and DEFENCE of it. CHAP. I. The State of the Question concerning the Court of the late Ecclesiastical Commission. The Case stands thus; BY the Act of 1 Eliz. 1. it was established and enacted, That such Jurisdictions, Priviledges, Superiorities and Prehemi∣nencies Spiritual and Ecclesiastical, as by any Spiritual or Ec∣clesiastical Power or Authority, have heretofore been or may lawfully be exercised or used for the Visitation of the Ecclesiastical State and Persons, and for Reformation, Order and Correction of the same, and of all manner of Errors, Heresies, Schisms, Abu∣ses, Offences, Contempts and Enormities, shall for ever by this present Parliament be united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm.
And that the Kings and Queens of this Realm shall have ful Power and Authority by virtue of this Act by Letters Patents un¦der the great Seal of England, to assign, name and authorize, when and as often as they shall think meet and convenient, and for such and so long time as they shall think meet to exercise, use, occupy and execute all manner of Jurisdictions, Priviledges and Preheminences in any wise, touching or concerning any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction within these Realms; and to visit, reform, redress, order, correct and amend all such Errors, Heresies, Schisms, Abuses, Offences, Contempts and Enormities what soever, which by any manner of Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Power, Authority or Ju∣risdiction can or may lawfully be reformed, ordered, redressed, cor∣rected, restrained or amended to the Pleasure of Almighty God, the increase of Virtue, and the conservation of the Peace and Unity of this Realm: And that such Person and Persons so to be named, authorized and appointed after the said Letters Patents to him or them made and delivered, shall have full Power and Authority, by virtue of this Act, and of the said Letters Patents to exercise, use and execute all the Premises, according to the Tenour and effect of the said Letters Patents, any Matter or Cause to the contrary, in any wise, notwithstanding. But in the Act 17 Car. 1. c. 11. after the recital of this latter Clause, these words follow, And whereas by Colour of some Words in the aforesaid Branch of the said Act, whereby Commissioners areautho∣rized to execute their Commission, according to the Tenor and Effect of the King's Letters Patents, and by Letters Patents grounded thereupon, the said Commissioners have to the great and unsufferable Wrong and Oppression of the King's Subjects, used to fine and impri∣son them, and to exercise Authority not belonging to Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction restored by that Act; and divers other great Mischiefs and Inconveniences have also ensued to the King's Subjects by occasi∣on of the said Branch and Commissions issued thereupon, and the Executions thereof; therefore for the Repressing and Preventing of the aforesaid Abuses, Mischiefs and Inconveniences in time to come, Be it enacted by the King's Most Excellent Majesty and the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That the aforesaid Branch, Clause, Ar∣ticle or Sentence shall from henceforth be repealed, annulled, revok∣ed, annihilated and made void for ever, any thing in the said Act to the contrary, in any wise, notwithstanding. Then after a Clause relating to ordinary Jurisdiction, repealed 13 Car. 2. c. 12. the Act concludes thus, And be it further en∣acted, That from and after the said first Day of August, no new Court shall be erected, ordained or appointed within this Realm of England or Dominion of Wales, which shall or may have the live Power, Jurisdiction or Authority as the said High-Commission-Court now hath or pretendeth to have, but that all and every such Letters Patents, Commissions and Grants made or to be made by his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors; and all Powers and Authorities granted or pretended, or mentioned to be granted thereby, and all Acts,
Sentences and Decrees to be made by virtue or colour thereof, shall be utterly void and of none effect. By the Act, 13 Car. 2. c. 12. This Repeal stands good in the first Proviso; and in the second Clause, where that which concerns Or∣dinary Jurisdictions, is repealed, an Exception is put in, in these Words, Excepting what concerns the High-Commission-Court, or the new erecting some such like Court by Commission. The Case which arises from hence, is, Whether these Acts of Parliament only take away the Power of Fining and Imprison∣ing, from any Ecclesiastical Commission, granted by the King; so that notwithstanding these Repeals, the King may still con∣stitute a Commission proceeding by Ecclesiastical Censures: And for the same Ends which are expresly mentioned in the Statu te repealed, viz. To exercise, use, occupy and execute all manner of Jurisdictions, Privileges and Preheminences in any wise touching or concerning any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction within this Realm of England, and Dominion of Wales, and to visit, reform, order, correct and amend all Abuses, Offences, Contempts and E∣normities whatsoever, which by the Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Laws of this Realm, can or may lawfully be reformed, ordered, redressed, corrected, restrained, or amended, to the Pleasure of Al∣mighty God, the Increase of Vertue, and the Conservation of the Peace and Unity of this Realm. These are the Powers of the pre∣sent Commission, and are the same which are mentioned in the Act of Repeal, 17 Car. 1. c. 11. only Errors, Heresies and Schisms, being left out. It cannot be denied, That the Power of Fining and Imprisoning, is most expresly taken away, and that is assigned as one Reason and Occasion of repealing the Clause of 1 Eliz. 1. which esta∣blishes the Court; but I cannot be satisfied, that this was all that was intended by the Act 17 Car. 1. c. 11. And that for these Reasons: 1. If no more had been intended, then it had been sufficient to have destroyed the Letters Patents by which the Power of Fi∣ning and Imprisoning was granted, without mentioning the Act of Parliament, which gives no such Power. But the Act of Re∣peal, 17 Car. 1. c. 12. begins with the Act of Parliament: Where∣as in the Parliament holden in the first Year of Queen Eliz. there was an Act made and established, &c. In which Act, among other things, there is contained one Clause, Branch, Article or Sentence, whereby it was Enacted to this effect, &c. Then follows all the En∣actin; Clause; and after it, the Abuses of the Power, by the Letters Patents are reckoned up, viz. Fining and Imprisoning, and other great Mischiefs and Inconveniences: Therefore, for the repressing and preventing of them, not meerly the Power to Fine 4 Inst. f. 35. 2 and Imprison; but the whole Clause, and all things contained in it, are from thenceforth repealed, annulled, revoked, annihilated, and utterly made void for ever. What need all this, if no more were designed than to take away the Power of Fining and Im∣prisoning?
It is plausibly argued by the Lord Coke, That the Power to Fine 4 Inst. f. 325. and Imprison, was not agreeable to the Design of the Act. 1. Be∣cause the Title of it is, An Act restoring to the Crown the Ancient Jurisdiction; but the Ancient Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical had not a Power to Fine and Imprison, but proceeded only by Ecclesiastical Cen∣sures. 2. Because the Power to reform, order and correct all Errors, Heresies, &c. was to be such as may be lawfully reformed, corrected, restrained, or amended by any manner of Spiritual, Ecclesiastical Power, Authority or Jurisdiction, which did not extend to Fine and Imprisonment. 3. The Tenor of the Letters Patents was to exercise, use and execute all the Premises. Since therefore the Pre∣mises go no further than Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, the Letters Patents could give no such Power, being in pursuance of the Act. But it is agreed, saith he, That before this Act no Man could be punished by Fine and Imprisonment by any Ecclesiastical Power, un∣less it were by force of some Act of Parliament. But because the Act saith, They are to use and execute all the Premises according to the Tenor and Effect of the Letters Patents; Others have thought, That the Power to Fine and Imprison, being within the Letters Patents, the Act of Parliament did bear them out in pursuing what was in the Tenor of them. But in my Opinion, this Matter ought to be a little further clea∣red; and therefore we must distinguish between the Original Com∣mission, and the Supplemental Power, added to enforce it. The Origi∣nal Commission extended no farther than Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, as is plain from tho reading of the Statute; and that of it self could go no further than Ecclesiastical Censure. But because of the Circumstance of that Time, when (as the Lord Hobart, in a M. S. Discourse of the High Commission observes) The Persons In Bblioth. Cotton. most concerned did slight the Ecclesiastical Censures; therefore it was thought necessary in the Letters Patents to grant them a new Commission to enforce the former, and that extended to Fine and Imprisonment: For in the High Commission for the Province of York, (which is preserved) distinct Powers are granted, which are not in the Act. For, whereas the Act goes no further than the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, the Commission gives them Power to proceed after another manner than by Ecclesiastical Censures; for the Words are, Contumaces autem & Rebelles, si quos invenerint, tam per Censuras Ecclesiasticas, quam Personarum apprehensionem, & Incarcerationem, &c. ac quaecunque alia Juris Regni nostri Reme∣dia compescendum, &c. Here we see plainly a Conjunction of the Power of Common Law, added to that of the High Commission, by virtue of the Act of Parliament, and so in all probability it was in the Letters Patents for the High Commission in this Pro∣vince, which bore equal Date with the former. And although the Date of the High Commission was before the Depriving of the Bishops, I Eliz. Yet I see no ground for my Lord Coke's Assertion, which the Defendant takes for granted, p. 13. That this Commission was first granted for depriving the Popish Bi∣shops, and that about Twenty were deprived by it; whereas in Fact,
there were but Fourteen deprived, and that for not doing what they had done before in Henry the 8th's Time, viz. for refusing to take the Oath of Supremacy, which they had all taken in the time of H. 8. And as far as I can learn, they were not deprived by the High Commission, but by a particular Commission for that pur∣pose; as appears by the best Account we have of it in the Histo∣rians who lived nearest the time. In the Month of July, says Stow, the old Bishops of England, then living, were called and examined by certain of the Queens Majesties Council, where the Bi∣shops of York, Ely and London, with others, to the Number of Thirteen or Fourteen for refusing to take the Oath touching the Queens Supremacy and other Articles, were deprived from their Bi∣shopricks. What he means by the other Articles, I know not; for there seem to be no other at that time, for which they could be deprived by Law, but refusing the Oath of Supremacy (and so much Saunders himself owns) for the other faults were not punishable with deprivation. The Bishops being deprived by Sand. de Schif. 4. 157. a special Commission of the Council, then saith Stow, Commissioners were appointed for all England; For London Sir Richard Sack∣vile, Dr. Horn, Dr. Huick and Mr. Savage, who called before them divers Persons of every Parish, and swore them to enquire and present upon certain Injunctions. With him Hollingshead agrees, only adding that these Commissioners were sent according to an Act passed and confirmed last Parliament. This was the Act for the High-Commission, which then extended to particular Parishes, with such such Powers of the Common Law as are already mentioned, but are not of the Essence of the Commission according to the Act of Parliament, and therefore the taking away those additional Powers doth not destroy the High Commission; but the Repealing the Act of Parliament, on which it was built, takes away any such Court-Proceeding by Ecclesi∣astical Censures. To make this more plain by a Parallel Instance; The Court of Star-Chamber was taken away at the same time the High-Com∣mission was, and both determined the same day, 17 Car. 1. Aug. 1. This Court was erected for extraordinary Civil Jurisdiction, as the High Commission was for Spiritual; but by the Act, 17 Car. 1. c. 10. it was taken away much in the same manner with the Court of High-Commission: For there is a Recital of the Statutes on which it was grounded, 3 Hen. 7. c. 1. 21 Hen. 8. c. 20. And then it is alledged, That they had exceeded the Bounds which the Law had given them, in these Words; But the said Judges have not kept themselves to the Points limited by the said Statute, but have undertaken to punish where no Law doth warrant, and to make Decrees for things having no such Authority, and to inflict heavier punishments, than by any Law is warranted. And so, by this very same way of Reasoning which the Vindicator uses, another Court of Star-Chamber may be set up, if it keeps it self within the Bounds of the Statutes. But we are not to judge of
the force of a Law by the particular Reason assigned, but by the Enacting Clause: Be it Ordained and Enacted by the Authority of this present Parliament, That the said Court, commonly called the Star-Chamber,, and all Jurisdictions, Power and Authority be∣longing unto, or exercised in the same Court, &c. be from the first of August 1641. clearly and absolutely dissolved, taken away and deter∣mined. If another Star-Chamber cannot be set up with some Limitations for Extraordinary Civil Jurisdictions, how can ano∣ther Ecclesiastical Court for extraordinary Spiritual Jurisdiction, which is taken away after the same manner? Only the Act against the High Commission, is more express in the Conclusion, against Setting up any other Court with like Power, Jurisdiction or Authority; for it was then foreseen, that some other Court might be set up, with some Alterations; and to prevent any thing of that Nature, the last Clause was annexed. 2. The prohibiting Clause, 17 Car. 1. c. 11. is very conside∣rable to the purpose. For the Force of the former Act was ta∣ken away by the Repealing Clause; but that was not thought sufficient to prevent another Court rising up, which might be like to it. A Court may be like, although not altogether the same: It may be like in Jurisdiction, although not in a Power to Fine and imprison. But the Act saith, That no new Court shall be Erected which shall or may have the like Power, Jurisdiction, or Authority, as the said High-Commission now hath, or pretendeth to have; but that all and every such Letters Patents made or to be made by his Majesty or Successors, and all Powers and Authorities granted, or pretended, or mentioned to be granted thereby, ana all Asts, Sentences and Decrees to be made by vertue or colour thereof, shall be utterly void and of none effect. Was all this meant only of such a Court as should proceed to Fine and Imprison? Why was not this set down in as plain a manner as such a Law requi∣red? But we are to observe, 1. It not only voids the Letters Patents, but declares the Con∣stitution of the Court it self to be illegal; but that doth not de∣pend upon the Power to Fine and Imprison. If it had been said, No New Court shall be erected with a Power to Fine and Imprison, the Matter had been clear; for a New Court might have been erected proceeding by Ecclesiastical Censures, without a Power to Fine and Imprison. But the Act takes no notice here of any such Power, but absolutely forbids any Court with the like Power, Jurisdiction or Authority. Had the High-Commission no Power, Jurisdiction or Authority, but only to Fine and Imprison? Their Power and Authority by Act of Parliament was general, to reform Abuses, &c. In case there had been no such Clause as Fining and Imprisoning in the Letters Patents, had there been no Court, no Power, Jurisdiction or Authority belonging to it? If then there be a Power, Jurisdiction or Authority of a High Commission Court, without a Power to Fine and Imprison, then all such Power and Authority is taken away by the Prohibiting Clause.
2. It forbids the Jurisdiction of such a Court: But Jurisdicti∣on is quite another thing from a Power to Fine and Imprison. Jurisdictio, saith Bracton, is Authoritas judicandi, sive juris di∣cendi Bract. l. 5. c. 1. inter partes; and to the same purpose Fleta: They both di∣stinguish two kinds of Jurisdiction, Ecclesiastical and Civil. Ec∣clesiastical, Flet. l. 6. c. 37. saith Bracton, is that which belongs to Ecclesiastical Causes: Which shews, That they looked on Ecclesiastical Pro∣ceedings c. 2. by Censures as part of the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. The first General Exception, saith Fleta, is against the Jurisdiction of a Court, which is allowed to be made to those quibus deficit au∣toritas c. 36. sect. 5. judicandi. From hence it appears, That the Power and Authority of medling in Ecclesiastical Causes, is that which is im∣plied in the Jurisdiction of the Court; if it hath no Jurisdiction it is no Court; if it have Jurisdiction, it is void in Law; for the Act of Parliament takes away all Power, Jurisdiction and Autho∣rity from any such Court. 3. The Explanatory Act 13 Car. 2. c. 12. makes this more evident; for there being a Clause inserted 17 Car. 1. c. 11. which seemed to take away the Ordinary Jurisdiction of the Eccle∣siastical Courts, it was thought fit to make that Act on purpose to clear that Matter, by repealing that Clause. But that Clause being part of the Act which took away the High-Commission Court, lest by such a Repeal the Act it self should be thought re∣pealed, therefore there is only an Exception put in, not barely as to the Old High-Commission, but as to the new erecting some such like Court by Commission: And a particular Proviso is added, That neither this Act, nor any thing herein contained shall extend or be construed to revive or give force to the said Branch of the said Statute, made in the said first Year of the Reign of the said late Queen Elizabeth, mentioned in the said Act of Parliament, made in the seventeenth Year of the Reign of the said King Charles; but that the said Branch of the said Statute made in the said first Year of the Reign of the said late Queen Elizabeth, shall stand and be re∣pealed in such sort, as if this Act had never been made. Now it ought to be considered, That even this Parliament doth not fix upon the Power to Fine and Imprison, to take that away; but upon the Original Clause in the Act, which gave Power to erect such a Court. And this Parliament was zealous to assert the Ordinary Jurisdiction, and as zealous to prevent any such extra∣ordinary Jurisdictions, as was in the High-Commission; which it shewed by continuing the Repeal of that Power by which it was established.
CHAP. II. The King's Supremacy by Common-Law enquired into; Coke's fifth Report, de Jure Regis Ecclesi∣astico, examined. BUT against this it is pleaded with some Appearance of Rea∣son, That in Caudry's Case the Judges resolved, That the Act of Defence of Ecclesiastical Commission, p. 8, 9. the first Year of the late Queen was not introductory of a new Law, but declaratory of the Old; and that the King by the Ancient Law might make such an Ecclesiastical Commission. And since the Act 13 Car. 2. c. 12. saith, That we are not to abridg or diminish the King's Supremacy in Ecclesiastical Matters and Affairs; Therefore we are still to suppose, That the King hath a Power by Law to ap∣point such a Commission for Ecclesiastical Matters. This is the Substance of what is pleaded for the Legality of the Court: And since the Argument is confined to Matter of Law, to clear this Matter, it will be necessary to give an Account of these two things, I. What the Ancient Law was as to this Matter. II. How far the Legal Supremacy is abridged by these Statutes. I. As to the Ancient Law in this matter, It's true that the Lord Coke, in Caudry's Case hath endeavoured to prove, That the Statute 1 Eliz. was not introductory of a new Law, but de∣claratory of the Old; but the Instances he produces fall very short of being Demonstrative Proofs, as he calls them: For the true Case is not, (1.) Whether the King ought not to interpose in Ecclesiasti∣cal Matters, so far as the Peace and good Government of his Realm was concerned. Nor, (2.) Whether he might not order things which concerned the Right of Ecclesiastical Possessions; as in Bishopricks, Commen∣dams, Right of Patronage, Pleas of Tiths, &c. Nor, (3.) Whether the King, by his Supreme Authority might not limit the Proceedings of ordinary Ecclesiastical Courts in Mat∣ters concerning his Crown and Dignity, by granting Prohibitions. Nor, (4.) Whether the King by Common Law cannot grant a Com∣mission of Review, after the Proceedings of the Ecclesiastical Courts; which Judge Hutton affirmed, Was all that was determined in Littleton's Rep. 189. Caudry's Case. Nor,
(5.) Whether the King in Parliament may not make Law; for Reformation of Religion and establishing good Order therein. Nor, (6.) Whether the Supreme Coactive Jurisdiction were not always a Right of the Crown, however it were in a great Mea∣sure usurped by the Pope after King John's Resignation. But, Whether our Ancient Law doth give the King a Pow∣er, by virtue of his Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, to appoint Commis∣sioners by an extraordinary way of Jurisdiction to proceed in pri∣ma instantia, against Persons by Ecclesiastical Censures? And to prove this I cannot find one sufficient Example, as I shall make appear by a short Account of the Instances he produces, and the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction exercised at that time. In the Time of the Saxons. In the Saxon Times he brings first an Instance of Kenulphus, King of Mercia, granting an Exemption to the Abbot of Abingdon: But what does this signifie to Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, to prove, That the King gave the Abbot an Exemption from the Temporal Jurisdiction of the Bishops? for, in those Days there were great Disputes between the Bishops and Abbots about the Temporal Ju∣risdiction over the Lands of their Abbies; which the Bishops claimed, and the Abbots refused, and put themselves under the Protection of Princes and Great Men, as appears by the Coun∣cils of Cloveshoo and Becanceld, in the time of Kenulphus. But Stamford puts this Matter out of Dispute in the Confirmation of Stamford, l. 3. f. 111. the Charter of Kenulphus, by Edwin, for the Words are, Quod praefatum Monastrium omnis terrenae servitatis esset liberum: And what is this now to Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction? But we have manifest Proof in the Saxon Times, That the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction was never exercised by such a Com∣mission, but that all extraordinary Cases were dispatched in Parliamentary Assemblies, and the Ordinary Jurisdiction was ex∣ercised by the Archbishop of Canterbury, in Chief, and by the rest of the Bishops. The first extraordinary Instance of proceeding against an Ecclesiastical Person, in the Saxon Times, was that of Wilfred Archbishop of York, who because he would not consent to the making three Bishopricks in his Province, was deposed by Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury, the King himself being pre∣sent, and the great Council of the Nation: For so King Alfrith saith, that he was bis à toto Anglorum Concilio damnatus, as the Words are in Malmsbury; and Eddius, who lived at that time, Malmsb. l. 3. f. 152. Edd. vit. Wil∣fred. c. 55. saith, That King Alfrith gave this Reason against restoring him, because he had been condemned by the Kings his Predecessors, with their Council, the Archbishop assisting, and himself had judged him, cum omnibus pene Britanniae vestrae Praesulibus, all the Bishops, al∣most, being present.
In the Council of Nester field, in his Case, it is said, The King was present and Berthwaldus, Archbishop of Canterbury, cum to∣tius Ibid. c. 45. pene Britanniae Episcopis. In the Council at Nid, it is said, sedentibus Rege & Episcopis, cum Principibus eorum in loco Syno∣dali; c. 57. which was a Parliamentary Assembly. Not long after Tunbert was deposed from his Bishoprick, but it was, saith Florentius Wigorniensis, congregata Synodo sub prae∣sentia Regis Egfridi. The Archbishop Theodore likewise depo∣sed Florent. Wigor. f. 254. Winfred Bishop of the Mercians, saith the same Author, af∣ter Bede, for some Disobedience, and consecrated Saxulphus, the first Abbot of Peterborough, in his Place. This Winfred had been present at the Council at Herudford, and there consented to the Canons then first received in the Spelm. Concil. p. 154. English Church; and there they submitted to Ecclesiastical Censures, upon the Violation of them. At this Council, saith Matt. Westminster, were present not only all the Bishops, but all the Kings and Great Men of the Nation; so that the first Canons Mat. Westm. A. G. 673. were received in a full Parliament. One of these Canons was for increasing the Number of Bishopricks, as the Number of Believ∣ers increased: And upon this Canon Theodore proceeded against both Wilfred and Winfred: For not long after Theodore divided his Bishoprick into five; but it was done, saith Florentius, con∣sensu ejusdem Regis & Principum illius, as Ina divided the We∣stern Florent. p. 559. Province into two Bishopricks, Synodali Decreto, saith Mat. Westminster, which then was the same, as by Act of Parlia∣ment. Mat. Westm. A. G. 711. And the opposing such a Division seems to have been the Crime of Disobedience, for which he was deprived by the Arch∣bishop: For as Bede observes of him, He first exercised Ecclesi∣astical Jurisdiction over all England. Bed. l. 4. c. 2. In the great Council at Beanceld, where King Withred was present, A. D. 694. with his Nobles (Ducibus & Satrapis in unum glomeratis) together with the Clergy: He there disowrs any Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and leaves it to the Archbishop of Canterbury; Metropolitani Episcopi est Ecclesias Dei regere, guber∣nare, &c. and then follows, Presbyteros, Diaconos eligere, sta∣tuere, Spelm. p. 190. sanctificare, firmare & amovere. And he makes this an inviolable Law, as far as his Words could make it, Si quis au∣tem Rex post nos levatus in Regnum, aut Episcopus, aut Abbas vel Comes, vel ulla potestas hominum contradicat huic Chartuae, aut infringere tentaverit, sciat se sequestratum à Corpore & Sanguine Domini, &c. And after it follows, Haec Lex inviolabilis usque ad consummationem Saeculi permaneat, &c. Mr. Prynn, out of his old Kindness to the Archbishops of Can∣terbury, in his vast Heap of Collections, would have this reje∣cted Chronologi∣cal Vindica∣tion. To. I. f. 193. as Spurious; but Sir H. Spelman, whose Judgment was far beyond the others, saith, He had perused five MSS. of i, whereof one was with a mixture of Saxon Letters, and he had o Mistrust of its Sincerity. And the Learned and Judicious Edi∣tors of the Decem Scriptores, Sir Roger Twisden and Mr. Selden have thought fit to insert it after them, out of a MS. in CCC. Decem Script. f. 2209.
But Mr. P. thinks, it is contradicted by the Council of Bergham∣stead, about Ecclesiastical Affairs, under King Withred: But I can find nothing like it. It is true, there are Laws made concerning Ecclesiastical Matters, by common consent of the King, the No∣bles and Bishops; but the very first is Ecclesia libera sit fruaturque suis judiciis, &c. But besides, in the Great Council at Clovesho, where AEthel∣baldus, A. C. 742. King of Mercia, was present, and Cutbert, Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, with the other Bishops, this Charter of Withred's, Decem Script. p. 2209. was read, and approved, and consirmed; with the like San∣ction annexed to it. In the Council at Clovesho, A. C. 787. The extent of the Juris∣diction of the Archbishop of Canterbury was very much lessen∣ed by the means of King Offa, who caused another Archbishop∣rick to be set up in Mercia, and the Archbishop of Canterbury gave his Consent, saith Matt. Paris: But his former Jurisdicti∣on was restored in the Council of Clovesho, A. D. 803. by a ge∣neral Consent. But in the former Council the Ecclesiastical Ju∣risdiction was strenuously asserted, in these Words; Sicut Re∣ges Spelm. p. 296. omnibus dignitatibus praesunt, ita & Episcopi in his quae ad Deum attinent. And in the latter, there is a severe denunciation against all that should lessen the Honour, or take away the Juris∣diction P. 324. of that See. From henceforward I find no Diminution of the Archbishop's Ordinary Jurisdiction through the Saxon times. The King had the Political Supremacy in him, by which he erected and divi∣ded Bishopricks, and nominated Bishops, and summoned Coun∣cils, and confirmed their Proceedings as he saw Cause; but the immediate Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction was left to the Archbishop of Canterbury in the first place, and to the rest of the Bishops As to any Publick Acts which related to Ecclesiastical Affairs, they were not dispatched by particular Commissions, but in the Parliamentary Assemblies; In which, the custom was, to begin with what related to the Church, and then to proceed to other Business. Of this Ingulphus gives us an Instance in Ceolnothus Archbishop of Canterbury; for in the Parliament Assembled at Ingulpb, p. 490. c. Kingsbury, A. C. 851. in Hebdomada Pasch. (which was chiefly assembled pro Regni negotiis) yet even then, he proposed, That Church Affairs might be first dispatched; Divina Negotia debere primitus proponi; to which they all assented. And so Bertulphus his Charter of Crowland then passed; as Withlasius his did before, at a time when the Bishops and Nobles attended the King at London, to consult about the Danish Pyrates, which very much infested our Coasts. Thus AEthelwolfus passed his Famous Grant of the Tenth of all the Lands to the Church, in a Council at Winchester; himself, and the King of Mercia and East-Angles, being present, and all the Nobility and Bishops giving their free Consent; as Ingulphus relates it. Several others might be produced; but these are suf∣ficient. Ingulph. ib. And the Saxon Laws are a plain Evidence, That Church-Matters
were in those times determined in the same Assemblies, wherein the other Laws of the Kingdom were passed. In the Reign of King Edward the Confessor. The next Instance is of Edward the Confessor, who saith in his c. 5. R. Laws, That he is Vicar of the highest King, and he is ordained to this end, that he should Govern and Rule the People of the Land, and above all things, the Holy Church, and that he defend the same from Wrong-doers, and root out Workers of Mischief. F. Parsons saith, All this was by Commission from the Pope, such as the Kings of Sicily had. But in my Opinion, this is a very bad Answer: For it supposes Ans. to Coke's 5th Rep. c. 5. n. 20. Persons otherwise uncapable, to be made capable of the same Jurisdiction, which follows Orders; provided they have a De∣legation from the Pope: Which is in effect, to confound all Ec∣clesiastical Jurisdiction in any, but the Pope himself, and those to whom he commits it. But those who assert the Right of Ju∣risdiction to follow the Power of Order, must first suppose a Person duly qualified, before he can receive from the Pope him∣self the Power of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. If therefore a Prince hath not an inherent Right to it, he cannot receive it by Com∣mission from the Pope. And the Powers which the King of Si∣cily challenges, relating to Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, are either such as other Princes have an equal Right to; or else they must imply such proper Eclesiastical Jurisdiction as follows the Power of Order; and then, how can the Pope give the one without the other? Such a Gift is like an Appropriation of a Benefice with a Cure to a Nunnery, which the Lord Hobart saith is void in Law, by reason of the incapacity of the Persons. But the Supremacy Hob. Rep. f. 148. which our Law gives, is not any proper immediate spiritual Ju∣risdiction, like that of Bishops, but an Authoritative and Legisla∣tive Supremacy without any foreign Appeals, as will appear after∣wards. But the Rights which the Kings of Sicily challenge, are these. 1. That they have the same Powers which Legates a Latere have, and may judge of the same Causes, and proceed in the same manner with Ecclesiastical Censures. 2. That no Appeal lies from the King's Commissioner, even to Rome it self; and it is common to appeal from the Censure of the Bishop to him. The former is a Power, which our Kings never pretended to, by vertue of their Supremacy; for it is a Delegation of the Power of the Keys; which the Legates à Latere exercise by vertue of their Function, as well as their Commission: But the Legal Supremacy with us, is a Right to govern all sorts of Men by our own Laws, without any foreign Jurisdiction, and that with respect to Ecclesiastical Matters as well as Temporal. But to prevent Mistakes and Cavils about this Matter, it will be necessary to clear the Notion of Supremacy; as it hath been owned and received in the Church of England.
And for this we have two Authentic Declarations of it to rely upon. The first is mentioned, 5 Eliz. c. 1. §. 14. Where the Supre∣macy is declared to be taken and expounded in such form as is set forth in the Admonition annexed to the Queens Injunctions pub∣lished in the first year of her Reign. And the Words there are, That the Queen neither doth nor will challenge any Authority, but such as was of ancient time due to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, that is, under God to have the Sovereignty and Rule over all man∣ner of Persons, born within these her Realms, Dominions and Coun∣tries, of what Estates, either Ecclesiastical or Temporal soever they be, so as no other foreign Power shall or ought to have any superio∣rity over them. The Second is in the 37th Article, wherein it is declared, That by the Supremacy is meant, that only Prerogative which we see to have been always given to all Godly Princes in Holy Scriptures by God himself, that is, that they should rule all Estates and Degrees committed to their Charge by God, whether they be Ecclesiastical or Temporal, and restrain with the Civil Sword, the stubborn and evil doers. So that granting a Commission for proceeding by Ecclesiastical Censures, is no part of that Supremacy which our Church owns. And thus the Divines of our Church have understood it. By the Supremacy, saith Bishop Andrews, we do not attribute to the King the Power of the Keys, or Ecclesiastical Censures. Tortura Torti, p. 380. R. Thompson, in his Desence against Becanus, saith, The Su∣premacy is not to be defined by Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, but by Su∣pream Elenebus Re∣fut. Tort. Tor∣ti, p. 80. Government. Becanus urged this as an Argument against the Kings Supre∣macy, That he had no Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. Dr. Burrhil an∣swered, c. Mart. Bec∣pro Tort. Torti, c. 21. p. 234. That the Supremacy implied many other things; as, the Power of calling Convocations, of confirming Canons, of giving Commissions of Delegates, of taking Cognizance of the Misdemean∣ors of Church-men (as well as others;) but for proper Ecclesiasti∣cal Jurisdiction, he denies it to belong to Supremacy. And after, asserts, That the King's Supremacy is preserved, if he takes care that those who have the Power of Ecclesiastical Censures, do exercise them; p. 22. P. 244. and not as though it belonged to the Supremacy to give an im∣mediate Power to proceed by Ecclesiastical Censures; which was not supposed to belong to it, but a supreme Right of governing all sorts of Persons by our Laws. The King's Supremacy in Ecclesiastical Matters, doth not, saith, Mason, imply the Power of the Keys, which the King hath not; Mason, De Minist. Angl. 1. 3. c. 3. p. 271. but he may command those who have them, to use them rightly. All these wrote in King James I. his Reign, when the Point of Supremacy was throughly sifted on both sides. And the King himself, who very well understood these Matters, saith, That Apology, &c. f. 263. the Oath of Supremacy only extended to the King's Power of Judica∣ture, over all Persons as well Civil as Ecclesiastical; excluding all foreign Powers and Potentates to be Judges within his Dominions.
Not as though the King hereby challenged to himself a Power of inflicting Ecclesiastical Censures on Persons; but leaving the Spiritual Jurisdiction to those who have the Power of the Keys, it belonged to him to exercise his Supreme Authority over Eccle∣siastical Persons and Causes, as he did over Temporal. For, saith Archbishop Bramhal, our Laws never invested the King with Bramhal's Works, p. 340. any Spiritual Power or Jurisdiction, witness the Injunctions of Q. Eliz. witness the Publick Articles of Our Church; witness the Pro∣fessions of King James; witness all our Statutes themselves. The King of England, saith he, by the Fundamental Constitu∣tion p. 63. of the Monarchy, hath plenary Power, without the Licence or Help, or Concurrence of any Foreign Prelate or Potentate, to ren∣der final Justice, that is, to receive the last Appeals of his own Sub∣jects, without any Fear of any Review from Rome, or at Rome, for all Matters Ecclesiastical and Temporal; Ecclesiastical by his Bishops, Temporal by his Judges. And thus our Laws were in the Right, when they called the Act of Supremacy, Restoring the Rights of the Crown; for if we take away all the Papal Usurpations as to Appeals, Exemptions of Persons, Dispensations, Provisions, making Canons, sending Legates to hold Courts, to call Convocations, &c. we may easily understand what the Supremacy is, viz. a Power of Governing all Sorts of Men, according to the Laws Ecclesiastical and Temporal, without any Fo∣reign Jurisdiction. But as in Temporal Matters the King's Supreme Authority is exercised in his Ordinary Courts. so likewise in Ecclesiasti∣cal: Which deriving their Jurisdiction from the King as Su∣preme, his Supremacy is preserved in the ordinary Ecclesiasti∣cal Courts; but as to extraordinary Jurisdiction that deper ds on the Legislative Power; And whether that be not now taken away by it, is the thing in Question. Having endeavoured to set this Matter in as clear a Light as I could, I now return to the Instance of Edward the Confessor. And those Words of his, as they are in Hoveden, signifie no more than a General Right of Protecting and Defending the Church, which is not denied to belong to Kings, where the Pope's Au∣thority is the most owned. I cannot but take notice of a different Reading in the Lord Cokes Copy, from all that I have seen; for where he hath it, Sanctam Ecclesiam regat & defendat; Lambard, veneretur & regt; but Hoveden, revereatur & ab injuriatoribus defendat: Which is that Right of Protection which is allowed by all. The Spanish Lawyers hold, That there lies an Appeal to the Kings Courts, by his Covarruvias Pract. Quaest. c. 35. n. 3. Right of Protection, in Case of any violent Proceedings in the Ec∣clesiastical Courts. Which Violences are so many, as make such Appeals so frequent and necessary, that whole Volumes have been written about them. And this they say, Is not Introducto∣ry of a New Law, but only declaratory of a Natural Right. The Salgado, De Regia Prot. part 1. c. 1. n. 23. French Lawyers allow Appeals from the Ecclesiastical Courts, tan∣quam ab abusu; which must be founded on an Original Right in
the King, to defend the Church both from Injuries and Abuses. And as to the Church it self, it is fully expressed in the Writ de Pasq. Recher. l. 3. c. 33. Excommunicato capiendo, in these Words, Quia vero Potestas Regia Sacrosanctae Ecclesiae in querelis suis deesse non debet. But such a Right of Protection and Assistance is different from that of Jurisdiction; unless it be that which is only Coactive; which is not the Jurisdiction we now enquire into. But it is most considerable that King Edward saith, He is God's Vicar, and therefore could not look on himself as acting by Commis∣sion from the Pope. It is true, that in the third Charter of West∣minster there is a Bull of Nicholas the Second, wherein he gives to the King and his Successors the Protection and Defence of that Place, and of all the Churches of England, and a Power, in his stead to make good Laws, with the Advice of the Bishops and Abbots: But I do not find that King Edward owned that he acted in these Matters by any Commission from the Pope, but from God himself: And this Law, in Hoveden and others overthrows any such pretended Commission; And yet the Pope himself doth not give him a Power to delegate his Authority to others, but to act in it himself, and that only with the Advice of Bishops and Abbots. The Point then which was to be proved, was not that the King had a Right to protect the Church from Injuries; but such an Inherent Right of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, which he might delegate to others, whether Bishops or not, and impower them to proceed by Ecclesiastical Censures against Offenders, summoned to appear before them. And the Question now is not, Whether by the Supreme Legislative Power of the Nation such an Authority might not in an extraordinary Case be Committed to particular Persons by Act of Parliament; but Whether such an Act of Par∣liament being granted to be taken away, the King by the An∣cient Law of the Realm may appoint such Commissioners, as he thinks fit, Laymen or Bishops, to proceed against the King's Subjects by Ecclesiastical Censures? And this very stating of the Case, as it ought to be, shews how impertinent the remainder of his Examples are. But to proceed. In the Reign of King William the First. In the time of William the Conqueror, he only mentions a Case out of Fitz-Herbert, That he made an Appropriation of Churches with Cure to Ecclesiastical Persons, viz. to a Prebend of the Church of York; now this, saith he, was agreed by all could not be done without Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. It is too common a Fault in some great Lawyers, that what they find once setled for Law in their Books, they imagine was never otherwise. Thus Appropriations after Diocesses were set∣led, being looked on, as chiefly the Act of the Ordinary, who is to take Care of the whole Diocess; From hence they infer, That in all Times an Appropriation must argue Ecclesiastical Jurisdicti∣on.
But before the Parochial Rights were established, there were many Volantary Appropriations made by particular Persons, who thought there was no more Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in the Appropriation of Churches, than in the Endowments of them, and in the Right of Patronage; only the one is setled on a Spiritual Corporation, as perpetual Incumbent; and the other on particular Persons in Succession. Its true, since the Acts for restoring Ju∣risdiction to the Crown, the Power of making Appropriations in the King, is said to be from his Supreme Ecclesiastical Authority, Grindon's Case, in Pl. f. 448. But then we are told, It was be∣cause the Pope, as Supreme Ordinary, had such a Power without the Bishops; which Reason will not hold as to such Times when the Pope was not owned to be Supreme Ordinary, as he was not in the Conqueror's Time, the Canon-Law not being then received in England. But what a mean Proof is this in such a busie Time as that of William the Frst, when so many great Churchmen were de∣prived of their Bishopricks, being English, and the Normans put in their Places? Was this done by any Commission from William to his Great Lords and others, to proceed against them by Ecclesiastical Censures? nothing like it. Stigand, Archbishop of Canterbury, (if Spot's Story be true) was too great a Friend to the English Liberties to be endured by him: But he was too great a Dissembler to seem to have any thing to do in it himself; and therefore knowing he was of the opposite Party to the pre∣vailing Pope, he privatly sends to him, To send a Legate for that Purpose (wherein the Pope and He had their several Ends); and then in Parliament Time, the King keeping his Easter at Winchester, Stigand was deposed, and Agilmarus, Bishop of the East Angles, and several others, without any evident Reason, saith Hoveden, but only to make way for the Normans: This was in Concilio Magno, saith he and the rest, for Easter was one of Hoveden. f. 259. 2. the three Seasons, for the Parliamentary Meeting, in the Year; which William kept up, in Imitation of the Saxons, who at Christmas, Easter and Pentecost held their Publick Courts, and did wear their Crowns till the Times of H. 2. and then they did dispatch Publick Affairs: Thus far he complied with the Saxon Customs; but he had a new Work to do: The Archbishop he could not rely upon, and therefore was put to find out a new way, by sending for a Legate from the Pope to serve his turn. And thus William, for his own Ends, having so hard a Game to play here, called in the Pope's Assistance; who knew well enough how to draw his own Advantage out of it. But William would go no further than his Interest carried him; for after∣wards he declared, That he would maintain his own Rights, which he enjoyed in Normandy, viz. That nothing should be done without Eadmer. f. 6. him in Convocation; no Legate come but as he pleased, &c. But still he seemed to let them enjoy their Saxon Liberties in Matters of Ecclesiastical Proceedings, so far as to have them debated in Parliament. Thus the Controversie between the two Archbishops
was referred to Parliament, the King and the Great Men, as well Hoveden, f. 260. as the Bishops being present. The Controversie between Lanfrank, Archbishop of Canterbury and Odo, Bishop of Baieux was refer∣red, saith Eadmerus, to a Conventus Principum at Pinnedenen; Eadm. f. 9. and when the King heard their Resolution, cum consensu omnium Principum suorum confirmavit, saith the Textus Roffensis. He likewise confirmed Charters as the Saxons had done; that to Bat∣tel Selden. ad Eadm. f. 165. Abby was Consilio Episcoporum & Baronum meorum. But the most considerable thing he did, as to Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, was separating the Courts Ecclesiastical from the Hundred Courts, by his Charter to Remigius and others; which, he saith, was granted in a great Council, and by the Advice of the Archbishops, Bishops and all the Great Men of his Kingdom: So that still ex∣traordinary Acts relating to Church Matters were passed in Par∣liament by General consent. And what now doth the Appropriation of a Church with a Cure of Souls signifie to prove his Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction? When those things in his Time were not brought under such strict Rules as they were afterwards; but Appropriation might have been made by any Lay Person, that never pretended to the least Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; and he might as well have brought his demolishing so many Churches in the New Forest, for an Instance of his Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. In the Reign of William the Second. In William Rufus his time, a great Heat arose between him and Anselm Archbishop of Canterbury, about owning the Pope, Whether the Archbishop could do it without the King's Consent? the Business was referred to Parliament, which the King called on purpose at Rockingham, saith Eadmerus, who was there pre∣sent; Eadm. f. 26. The Bishops declared they could not deprive him (as the King would have had them) to whom they had promised Obedience. Af∣ter f. 30, 31. 38. which it was again referred to Parliament; but Anselm not yielding, he went out of the Land. In the Reign of King Henry the First. In the Reign of Henry the First a new Controversie arose be∣tween the King and the same Archbishop, about the Ancient Right of the Crown as to Investiture of Bishops; the King calls a Parliament about it, wherein the Bishops and Lords joyned with the King; afterwards Anselm desired, The Advice of the Bishops Id. f. 65, and Nobles might be heard at Easter; which shews that both  Sides referred it to the Parliament. In his Time a Council was called, and several Canons passed, and the Archbishop desired of the King, That the Primates Regni might sit with them; that all things might pass utriusque  Ordinis concordi cura, with the Consent of both Estates. The King afterwards takes the Advantage of these Canons, and prosecutes
the Breakers of them, and raises Money upon Pretence of For∣feitures, f. 85, to the great Grievance of the Clergy. Anselm al∣though then in Disfavour, writes to the King about it; and tells him, This was a new Method of Proceeding, because it be∣longed to the Bishops in their Diocesses to call the Clergy to an Ac∣count; or if they neglected, to the Archbishop and Primate. The  King Answers, That his Barons were to meet him on Ascension∣day, and by their Advice he would give an Answer; but upon An∣selms  Return this Prosecution ceased. Other Affairs of the Church were then referred to the Parliament at Easter, from thence to Pentecost, and by reason of Anselm's Sickness to Au∣gust; and then the Bishops, Abbots and Lords of the Kingdom, met  in the King's Palace at London, and by Consent of Parliament, Investiture was turned into Homage. In his time the Bishoprick of Ely was erected by the King's Con∣sent  in Parliament, Regi, Archiepiscopo, caeterisque Principibus Regni visum fuit, saith Eadmerus. The Consecration of an elect Arch∣bishop of York, was transacted in Parliament, the King advising with the Bishops and Nobles about it; for Anselm, before his Death  had sent an Inhibition to the Bishops, Not to consecrate him un∣less he made the Profession of Obedience to the Archbishop of Canterbury: The Bishops resolved to adhere to Anselm's Inhibi∣tion, and the King yielded. After Anselm's Death, the King advised with his Parliament, at Windsor, about a Successor to him; and the Bishop of Rochester, at the Request of the Bishops,  was agreed upon: And the King filled the Abbies before he went into Normandy, consisto Principum & Episcoporum suorum. In the latter End of Henry the First many Disputes hapned about Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, as between the Bishops of S. Da∣vids and Glamorgan which were debated in magno Placito apud London, saith Henry of Huntingdon: And for such Causes, saith Hen. Hunt. l. 7. f. 220. 2. he, another Assembly was held in the beginning of Lent, and again in Rogation Week. In all this time, when the Norman Kings asserted all the Rights of Sovereignty with great Zeal, yet they never pretended to appoint any Commissioners for Ecclesiastical Causes, but still re∣ferred them to Parliaments. In the Reign of King Henry the Third. The next Instance the Lord Coke brings, falls as low as the Time of Henry the Third. The first whereof is, the King's granting a Writ of Prohibition, if any man sued in the Ecclesiasti∣cal Court for any thing of which by Allowance and Custom, it had not lawful Cognizance. But how doth the King's Power of grant∣ing Prohibitions, prove his Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction? It effectu∣ally proves the King's Right to preserve his Crown and Dignity, as the Prohibition implies; but how doth it hence appear that the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction comes from his Crown and Digni∣ty? The contrary seems rather to follow, viz. That the Ecclesia∣stical Courts were held from another Power; but all Matters of
Temporal Cognizance did belong to the Crown. There is no Question but since the Acts for restoring Jurisdiction to the Crown, the supream Jurisdsction both in the Ecclesiastical and Civil Courts, is derived from the Crown. And in whose-soever Names the Courts are kept, the Authority of keeping them is from the King. For it is declared by Act of Parliament, 1 Eliz. 1. 17. That all Ecclesiastical Power is united and annexed to the Impe∣rial Crown of this Realm; which all Bishops do own, in taking the Oath of Supremacy; and therefore the old Form continuing, can signifie nothing against the Law of this Realm and their own Oaths. But as long as the main Points were secured by the Laws, there was no necessity apprehended of altering the Forms; for, on the other side, it was objected, that since the Laws had placed all Jurisdiction in the Crown, it seemed as unreasonable to continue the old Form of Prohibitions in laesionem Coronae & Dignitatis Regiae; how can this be, say they, when the Juris∣diction Ecclesiastical as well as Civil, is owned to be from the Crown? It is said in Answer, That, a Prohibition implies that the thing is drawn into aliud Examen than it ought to be, and this is contra Coronam & Dignitatem Regiam. Why not then as well when an Ecclesiastical original Cause, is brought into a Tem∣poral Court? for that is aliud Examen then, by Confession on that side; and if Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction be derived from the Crown, the aliud Examen must relate only to the Court, and not to the Crown. All that I infer from hence is, that the old Forms were thought fit to be continued; & both Parties reconciled them as well as they could to the Laws in force. But the Judges Coke 2 Inst. f. 602. confessed, That although de jure both the Jurisdictions were ever in the Crown, yet the one was sometimes usurped by the See of Rome, which is a plain acknowledgment, that by the Matters of Fact in those times, the Right could not be proved; and especially in the times of H. 3. when the Popes Usurpations here, were at so great a height, that the King upon Writs of Enquiry sent into the several Counties, found, That the Revenues of the Roman Court, by Provisions, Extortions, &c. exceeded the Kings. And the Mat. Wesim. f. 320. King had so little Authority left, that the Pope put Bishops up∣on him Rege penitus irrequisito, saith Matt. Westm. so that he was so far from Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, that he had not the No∣mination of his Bishops, nor so much as a Consent to their Electi∣on, unless the Pope thought fit sometimes to gratifie him in it. For the Pope pretended to the Right of Disposal of Church Pre∣ferments, by Vertue of his Ordinary Jurisdiction, which was said to be twofold. 1. Voluntary, in the Collation of Benefices. 2. Ju∣dicial, in the hearing of Causes; the former might be done at Rome, but the other in the Ordinary Ecclesiastical Courts. And Bract. l. 5. p. 5. c. 15. Bracton, who was a Judge in his time, owns the Pope as much to have the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, as the King had the Tem∣poral; but yet he adds, That, if an Ecclesiastical Judge did med∣dle with Matters out of their Cognizance, the King's Prohibition did lye against him, and he ought to supersede his Proceedings till it
were tryed in the King's Court, to whom the Jurisdiction belonged. But it is still harder to prove the King's Ecclesiastical Jurisdicti∣on, because the Spiritual Courts were to certifie the Kings Courts, in case of Bigamy, Bastardy, and such like. For the Question is not about their Temporal Subjection to the King in signifying the Sentence of the Court, but whence they derived their Authority of hold∣ing the Ecclesi astical Courts; over which, Bracton saith the Pope had the ordinary Jurisdiction, & the Power to delegate others to execute it. What doth it signifie to the Kings Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, that the Barons of England would not receive that part of the Canon Law which concerned the Legitimation of Children born before Wed∣lock? For it depended upon the Barons Consent, Whether a Ca∣non of the Church should be made the Law of the Land concern∣ing the Rights of Inheritance. In the Reign of King Edward I. In the Time of Ed. I. we may expect some brisker Sallies to∣wards the Kingdoms Deliverance from the Popes Usurpations, which were thought so intolerable even by the Monkish Histo∣rians, in his Fathers Reign. What that Bull was, the bringing whereof the Law-Books say, was then adjudged Treason, it would have been worth our while L. Assis. 30. E. 3. pl. 19. Brook Tit. Pr. pl. 10. to have known. For it is hard to imagine that at that time, the meer bringing a Bull, should be so Capital a Crime, when so ma∣ny were brought without danger both before and after. But it seems by the Certificate of the Judges concerning it (still in the Tower) the Matter of it was very prejudicial to the Crown. And it argues no Spiritual Jurisdiction for Princes to examine and refuse (when they see cause) Bulls that come from Rome. For this is practised in those Countries which profess Obedience to the Popes Jurisdiction. Covarruvias affirms it of Spain. In Portugal, when John the Second would have given up that Covarruv. Pe∣aut. Q. c. 35. n. 5, 6. Right to the Pope, the Estates of the Kingdom would not permit him. Peter the Second, Duke of Britain forbad receiving any Bull before Examination by his Council, under pain of Corporal Pu∣nishments Jus Belgar. p. 70. and Confiscation of Goods. Ant. Faber saith, in Savoy, No Bulls have Authority there, till they are approved by the Senate, Cod. Fab. ad Tit. Cod. de Appel. ab Abus. Def. 3, 4 and an Appeal lies from them tanquam ab Abusu. Even in Naples it self, Ferdinand the Catholick King, gave a severe Reprimand to his Vice-Roy, for not hanging up a Person who would have ex∣ecuted a Bull without his Authority. The Letter it self is Pub∣lished in the Jus Belgarum; where many other things may be seen to the same purpose. P. 72. The Right of Patronage is a Civil Right in Princes as well as o∣thers; and therefore E. 1. Without pretending to Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, might justly punish the Archbishop of York for his obstinate refusing to admit the Kings Clerk because of a Papal Provision.
The Statute of Bigamy might very well be interpreted in Par∣liament, and yet the King have no Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. For it was no more than declaring in what sense a Law should be ta∣ken, i. e. Whether it should extend to Bigamy before the Consti∣tution of the Council of Lyons, or after. The Act of Parliament made at Carlisle, 35 E. 1. against Aliens possessing Benefices, is no more than hath been done in Countries Covarr. Prat. Q. 35. n. 5. Stat. Polon. p. 207, 208. Pre. de Liher∣tes de l' Eg∣lis. Gal. vol. 2. c. 30. where the Popes Jurisdiction is the most owned. As in Spain, Covarruvias saith, They have Prescription and Pragmatical Sancti∣ons against Aliens possessing Benefices. The Laws of Poland, and many Edicts in France exclude Strangers. But I shall now produce some considerable Precedents in the time of Ed. 1. to shew that the Proceedings against the Arch-Bishops and Bishops for Misdemeanors or Contempts, was in Parlia∣ment, and not by Commissioners (the inferior Clergy being left to the Jurisdiction of their Ordinaries.) 3 Ed. 1. E. Warren complained to the King, That the Archbishop of Canterbury had contemned his Orders in not taking off Excom∣munication from some of his Servants: The King sends to him to proceed no further against the Earl or his Servants usque ad Par∣liamentum, where the Matter of Contempt might be debated. But in the mean time the Archbishop sends to the King a true Ac∣count of the Matter, and how far he was from Contempt; which is still extant in the Records of the Tower. 7 E. 1. John Peckam, Archbishop of Canterbury, was sum∣moned to Parliament, to answer to a Charge of Misdemeanors a∣gainst Claus. 7 E. 1. him, for some Passages in the Council at Reading; which he was fain to revoke, and to declare that no Articles there pas∣sed, should create any Prejudice to the Crown or Kingdom. 8 E. 1. The Archbishop went about to Visit the Kings Free Chap∣pels: The King hearing of it, sent a Writ to him, to forbear usque ad proximum Parliamentum; ut tunc ex unamini & mutuo consensu provideamus quid fieri debeat in Praemissis. 21 E. 1. John Roman, Archbishop of York, was Attached up∣on a Contempt for Excommunicating the Bishop of Durham, Placit. Parl. 21 E. 1. f. 135 while he was in the King's Service. And after a full hearing in pleno Parliamento, he was condemned, and upon Submission, was Fined to the King sour thousand Marks. 28 E. 1. A Controversie arose between the King and the Bi∣shop of Chichester, about his refusing to admit a Person Present∣ed to a Prebend in the Free Chappel of Hastings; the King sends his Writ to the Warden of Cinque-Ports (extant in the Tower among the Writs of that Time) to enquire into this Matter, and to bring an Account next Parliament, ad quod praedictum
Episcopum adjornavimus, are the Words of the Writ: And that the Business was heard in Parliament, appears by the Re∣cords. Placit. Parl. 28 E. 1. f. 227. 31 E 1. The King seized on the Temporalities of the Bishop of Durham, upon a Judgment given against him in Parliament, Claus. 31. E. 1. m. 6. for extending his Spiritual Jurisdiction too far; as appears by the Record of the Concord made between the King and him. In the Reign of King Edward the Second. In the Reign of K. E. 2. nothing is produced but the Statute 9 E. 2. for Regulating the Proceedings between the Civil and Eccle∣siastical Courts. But how the Kings Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction is proved hereby, is hard to understand. It appears indeed that the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction is allowed and limited by Parliament. But from hence, saith he, it follows that these Laws may be called the Kings Eccclesiastical Laws, or the Ecclesiastical Laws of Eng∣land. There is no question but they may: But there is a Difference between Laws, so called by Acceptation and Allowance; and such as have their whole Force and Authority from the King. For otherwise, where the Popes Jurisdiction is owned and received, the Pope must receive his Authority from the King. But a Liber∣ty to exercise Authority, and deriving Authority are two Things. In the Reign of King Edward the Third. In the Time of E. 3. many things are alledged, and to more purpose; but yet a short Answer will serve. If the first Instance doth hold, viz. That the Sentence of Excommunication by the Arch∣bishop, holds against the Sentence of the Pope or his Legate, it only proves that the Eccesiastical Jurisdiction here by Law is in the Archbishop, and not in the Pope or his Legate. But there may be another Reason, mentioned by Fitz Herbert, viz. That the Cer∣tificate 16 E. 3. Tit. E. 1. com. 4. of the Archbishop might be more Authentick than the Seal of a Legate. The second, sixth and eighth only prove the King Supreme Patron; and a Right of Patronage is distinct from a Right of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; and so it was resolved in Grendon's Case, Pl. f. 498. That the King presents by Lapse, as Supreme Patron, and not as Supreme Ordinary; For this belongs to him as King, the Land on which Churches are built being originally held of him: And this Right the King enjoyed when the Pope was owned to be Supreme Ordinary: But in the Case of his own free Chapels Fitz-Herbert saith right, That in Case of Lapse by the Dean, the King presents as Ordinary, the Archbishop and Bi∣shop having no Authority there as Ordinaries.
The third, fourth and fifth are about Exemptions from Episco∣pal Jurisdictions granted by the King, especially in his own free Chapels, which are only visitable by Commission from the King. But this very Pretence of Exemptions from Episcopal Jurisdicti∣on was founded upon the Belief of the Pope's being Supreme Ordi∣nary; for exempt Places were not supposed to be free from all Ordinary Jurisdiction, but from that of Inferior Ordinaries, being immediately subject to the Pope. A Bishop, by the Canon Law, may grant an Exemption from his Right of Jurisdiction, but not Lomed. De ex∣empt. c. 3. n. 7. from his Right of Visitation, but the Pope from both. And in the Grant of Exemption the immediate Subjection to the Roman See is expressed. As to the King's free Chapels, their Exemption was by an express Bull of Innocent III, to King John; and in Chart. 16. Job. m. 9. Pat. 22. H. 3. m. 10. the Case of the free Chapels of S. Martins, Henry III granted a Prohibition, wherein it is inserted, That it was a free Chapel, & ab omni Jurisdictione Episcopali per Sedem Apostolicam exem∣pta. And 45 Hen. 3. in a Prohibition concerning the free Cha∣pel of Wolverhampton, the Grant of Innocent III, is repeated. The Right to extra-parochial Tithes is Provisional, and not by way of Inheritance, and so it may belong to the King, although he have no Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. As to the severe Proceeding about Bulls from Rome, I have given an Account of that already in E. 1. The anointing of Kings proves no more their Capacity of Spi∣ritual Jurisdiction, than it proves the Kings of Israel to have been High Priests. There is no doubt the Ecclesiastical Courts may be limited by the Laws of the Land; and there are some Causes which belong to them not originally of a Spiritual Nature; but they have been a long time possessed of them by Custom, and are allowed by Law; which is well expressed in 24 Hen. 8. c. 12. where it is said, That all Causes Testamentary, Causes of Matrimony and Divorces, Rights of Tithes, Oblations and Obventions (the Knowledge where∣of, by the Goodness of Princes of this Realm, and by the Laws and Customs of the same, appertaineth to the Spiritual Jurisdiction of this Realm) shall be determined within the Kings Jurisdiction and Au∣thority. It doth not seem probable, That the King by his own Authority would remove Secular Canons, and put in Regular; when Hoveden saith, in the same Case, H. 2. did it by the Pope's Authority, and Hoveden, f. 320. with the free Consent of the Parties. The Statutes of Provisors were excellent Statutes; but are said to be enacted for the Good and Tranquility of the Realm, which no doubt the King and his Parliament were bound to take care of. But they prove no more Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction than the Prag∣matick Sanctions of Lewis IX, and Charles VII, in France did; which were of the same nature. The following Instances in other Reigns, are many of them of the same kind with those already answered; but what seems to have any new Force shall be considered.
In the Reign of King Henry the Fourth. 2 H. 4. c. 15. is urged to prove, That the King, by consent of his Parliament, did direct the Proceedings of the Spiritual Courts in Cases of Heresie and other Matters more Spiritual; but it is evident by the Act it self, That the Spiritual Jurisdiction was left wholly to the Ordinaries, and only an Inforcement of it by the Civil Pow∣er was added by the Law then made, for the Words are, Where∣as the Diocesans of the said Realm, cannot by their Jurisdiction Spi∣ritual, without Aid of the said Royal Majesty sufficiently correct, &c. Therefore a Power to Imprison and Fine was given to the Ordinaries; who might before have proceeded by Ecclesiastical Censures; but these being contemned by them, the Ordinaries called in the Assistance of the Civil Power. If there had been a Power before to have proceeded against Hereticks by Common Law, when con∣vict by their Ordinaries, I cannot see any Reason why that Law should be made. In case of Apostacy, i. e. Renouncing Christiani∣ty, Bracton l. 3. c. 9. n. 2. Flet. l. 1. c. 29. n. 7. Brit. c. 9. Horn. ch. 2. Sect. 22. Bracton saith, The Person convict is to be burned, and he instanceth in the Deacon who turned Jew, in the Council of Oxford: And Fleta speaks only of Apostates, whether Clerks or others, and those are the Miscreants in Briton; and in Horn, Heresie was then the same with renouncing Baptism, or turning Jew or Turk, or using Sorcery; but after Wickliff's Time the Ordinaries inlarged the Notion of Heresie, and took upon themselves to be sole Judges in it; and for all that I can see, the Act 2 H. 4. owns this to be part of their Spiritual Jurisdiction. And this is one Reason alledged for the Repeal of this Act, 25 H. 8. c. 14. be∣cause there is no Declaration of Heresie made in it, but it is left to the Judgment of the Ordinary: And therefore this Act was ill thought upon, to prove the King's Ecclesiastical Jurisdicti∣on. In Henry the Seventh's time the King is said to be persona mixta, because he hath both Ecclesiastical and Temporal Jurisdiction. But this Argument is drawn only from some occasional Talk, men∣tioned in the Year Books, 10 Hen. 8. 18. Brian said, That a sage Doctor of Law said one time to him, That Priests might be tried at Common Law, Car il dit quod Rex est persona mixta, car est persona unita cum sacerdotibus saint Eglyse: If all this be granted, it proves no more than that the King hath Jurisdiction by his Law over Ecclesiastical Persons; which is not di∣sputed.
CHAP. III. Whether the King's Supremacy by Law extends to the Dispensing with Laws: Of the Nature and Original of the Power; The Inconsistency of such a Dispen∣sing Power with the Frame of our Government. HAving thus far proceeded in clearing the ancient Legal Supremacy, I am now come to an Instance of greater Weight and Difficulty; and which will therefore require more Pains and Care in the Examination of it, viz. 11 H. 7. 12. By the Ecclesiastical Laws allowed with in this Realm, a Priest cannot have two Benefices, nor a Bastard can be a Priest; but the King may by his Ecclesiastical Power and Jurisdicti∣on dispense with both these, because they be mala prohibita, and not mala per se. Here we are to enquire into these things, (1.) How far the King's Power and Jurisdiction did ex∣tend in the Cases mentioned. (2.) How far the Reason here given will justifie a Power of Dispensing with Laws. (1.) As to the Cases here mentioned; there is no doubt but the Canonists made the Power of Dispensing in these to be an Argument of the Pope's Supremacy, or the Plenitude of his Power: But doth it hence follow, That what Princes did to their own Subjects, as to the qualifying them for a Legal Possession of Be∣nefices, must argue a Supremacy in them over Ecclesiastical Per∣sons and Causes? And there is a difference to be made between not Receiving the Pope's Canons in particular Cases; and a Power of Dispensing with Ecclesiastical Laws. If the Law were so then, as is noted by Fineax, in 11 H. 7. 12. the plain Consequence is, That the contrary were no part of the Ecclesiastical Laws, allowed within this Realm. As in the famous Case about the Canon Law concerning Bastardy, when the Barons said, Nolu∣leges Angliae mutari; no man can say, That the Barons dispensed with the Pope's Ecclesiastical Laws; but that they refused to execute them; for, as it is well observed in Standish's Case, in Kelway's Reports, 7 H. 8. Ecclesiastical Laws have no force, where the General Practice hath been contrary. If this were no more than a private Opinion of Fineux, of what he thought the King might do, although there were no Precedent for it,
then it signifies little; but if from hence it appears, What the Common Law of England was; then it follows, That this was not received at that time for the Ecclesiastical Law of this King∣dom. And so Hobart, in Colt and Glover's Case understands it, f. 147. for he produces this as an Instance, That the Crown always kept a Possession of its Natural Power: And to this he adds a Power of Commendam or Retaining a Benefice with a Bishoprick, 11 H. 4. 60. This he calls a Power of Dispensation in Spirituali∣bus: But with submission to two such great Men in the Law, If the Crown always kept a Possession of these Rights, there could be no Dispensation with the Ecclesiastical Law in these Matters, but an Exclusion of it. As for Instance, The Kings of France do challenge many Priviledges to themselves in their Kingdoms, in plain Derogation to the Canon Law; and for these Priviledges they plead an An∣cient Right of the Crown, or an immemorial Custom: As in the great Controversic of late Years, about the Regale, the Canon Law is express, That upon Pain of Excommunication, no Lay Person what soever shall presume to meddle with the Profits of Vacant Bishop∣ricks; C. 12. q. 2. n. 46, 47. which was decreed by two Popes in several Councils, Ur∣ban II, in a Council at Awergn, MXCV, and Innocent II, in. La∣teran Council MC XXXIX; both entred in the Body of the Ca∣non Law: And yet the Kings of France insist to this Day on the Rights of Vacant Sees, as belonging to them. But can this be pleaded as a Dispensing with the Ecclesiastical Laws allowed in that Realm? No, but that this Part of the Ecclesiastical Law was not received there; for that, partly by the Feudal Right, partly by the Right of the Crown, partly by Immemortal Custom, the Profits of Vacant Bishopricks accrue to the King. It is a harder Point to defend the Regale, where the Custom hath gone along with the Canon; but if the Rights of the Crown be defended in France against Custom and Canon too, our Kings cannot be blamed for resuming other Rights after so long Usur∣pation by the Popes. But where the Canon Law was not receiv∣ed in any Part of it, there it hath no Force to oblige; and where there is no Ecclesiastical Law in Force, there can be no Dispensing with it; for although the later Canon Law, doth void all Customs against the Liberties and Priviledges of the Church, Non debet in hac parte Canonibus, ex aliqua consuetudine praejudiium generari: Yet when these Canonists come to explain it, they tell C. Clerici de Judiciis. C. cum terra declect. C. 1 & ult. de Consuet. us, That an immemorial Custom hath Force against a Canon; but how? Not as a Custom, but as it is a Proof of an Ancient Privi∣ledge granted by the Pope; although there be not the least oot∣steps of it: And so this Instance of H. 7. will prove, according to this Way, only some Ancient Priviledge our Kings had, and no Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction by the Right of the Crown. But whether the King could Dispense with the Ecclesiastical Laws in these Cases, or not, it is certain the Pope challenged to himself the Power of doing it.
For, after that the Third Council of Lateran liad strictly for∣hidden Pluralities (which were then so common and scandalous) upon pain of Forfeiture, Innocent the Third complained in the Fourth Lateran, That he saw little or no Benesit come by that se∣vere Canon; and therefore he seems to make one more severe: That whosoever takes another Benefice, shall be deprived of the for∣mer ipso jure; and if he seeks to keep it, to lose the other. Yet after all, this ends only in the Popes Power to dispense as he saw Cause, with Persons of greater Rank or Merit, and greater Pre∣ferments. The Words are, Circa sublimes tamen & literatas Personas, quae De Multa de Prabend. majoribus Beneficiis sunt honorandae, cum ratio pustulaverit, per Sedem Apostolicam poterit Dispensari. Here the Dispensing Power is fairly owned in the Canon it self. And in the other Case, of the Incapacity of Priesthood by Ille∣gitimation; the same stout Pope declares, That it was in his Power to dispense with that too. The Case was this; The Church of Worcester, upon the Va∣cancy C. Innotuit de Elect. of the See, had chosen the Arch-Deacon of York for their Bishop; he comes to the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury for Confir∣mation; but secretly confesses to him his Illegitimacy; (which came to the Popes Ear.) Upon Application to the Pope for his Confirmation, he demurs upon it. He could not deny that he had all other Qualifications: But there was a Canon of the former Lateran Council, which voided the Election of all Persons Illegitimate. So then the Business is at an end. Not so neither. His Predecessor could not hinder him from Dispensing in this Case; who had equal Power with himself. And there were many Reasons to induce him to grant him a Dispensation. Why then did he not give one? There was something else to be done first. The Dispensing Power must be owned by the Church of Worcester: And therefore they must first intreat the Pope to Dispense with him, by a humble Supplication; and then expect his Favour by Postulation. And so, for the present he voids his Election. Matt. Paris takes particular Notice, That in the Publication Mat. Paris, ad A. D. 1235. of the Decretals by Gregory 9. This Power of Dispensing in these two Cases, was looked on as a great Innovation; but such as brought great Advantages to the Court of Rome. And the same Pope, saith Matt. Westminster, voided the E∣lection of John Bloud to the See of Canterbury, because he had en∣joyed Matt. Wesim. ad A. D. 1233. two Benefices with Cure of Souls, without a Dispensation. And Stephanus de Segrave obtained, he saith, of that Popes Nuncio here, a Dispensation of Tot quot; but it came to nothing by his Sons Death. Here we see a Power of Dispensing with Ecclesiastical Laws, publickly owned and entred in the Body of the Canon-Law; and that by virtue of the Plenitude of the Popes Power, which could not be bounded by the Canons of the Church, nor by the Laws of his Predecessors; nor by the solemn Profession every Pope makes at his Entrance, to preserve inviolably the Canons and Constitutions of his Predecessors.
This made so great an Alteration in the state of the Church, that it is no wonder great Complaints were made of it; consi∣dering that the Consequence of such a Power, could be nothing less than a subversion of all Orders, and Canons, and Privileges; for there could be no security of any of them any longer than it consisted with the Popes Pleasure. Hence came all the Complaints of Non-obstante's, by the whole English Nation in Parliament, That by their means Oaths, Matt. Paris, A. D. 2246. p. 649. A. D. 1251. p. 818. Customs, Charters, Grants, Privileges signified nothing; for the Pope could Dispense with his own Oaths and Promises, as well as other mens; and so there could be no Trust in any thing he said or promised in never so solemn a manner. Which is an effectual course to overthrow any Government in the world. And it is a wonder, that after such gross and avowed violati∣ons of the most solemn Engagements, Mankind did not renounce all kind of Society with him: For that is founded upon Trust in Compacts and Promises; and if those may be dissolved at plea∣sure, there is no foundation of mutual Society left; there being no reason to expect the Performance of that from others, which they do not think them selves obliged to do. And so such a Power of Dispensing with Obligations, naturally tends to a Dissolution of Government. For it is sinking the main Pillars on which the whole Fabrick stands; which will tumble down sooner or later upon the heads of those who do it. But the great Argument then was, That Supreme Power can∣not be bound; and therefore the Popes pleaded, whatsoever Ca∣nons or Laws their Predecessors made, they could not tie up them; because Par in Parem non habet imperium: So we find Innocent 3. argued in the Canon-Law. And to the same purpose Matt. Pa∣ris saith, That his Successor Inneocnt 4. did. But they did not Matt. Paris, A. D. 1253. p. 873. Lib. Diurnus Pontif. 30. attend to their own Professions, still extant in the Liber Diurnus, wherein they did declare in the most solemn manner, That they would maintain the Canons and Constitutions of their Predecessors. Which was an absolute Bar to all Non-obstante's, if they acted upon Principles of common Honesty among Men. But besides this, in Privileges granted to others upon valuable Considerations (which the Popes took care of) the Persons to whom they are granted, become Parties, and have a real Inte∣rest in them; so that they become of the Nature of Contracts; which cannot be broken without plain Injustice, and dissolving that Obligation between them. It is agreed by the most Learned and Judicious Lawyers, That when Grants or Promises do pass into the Nature of Contracts, they Ferrand. Vasq. Cont. Fret. l. 3. c. 51. n. 2. Pet. de Marca, de Concord. Sa∣cerd. & Impe∣rii, l. 3. c. 10. n. 2. are irrevocable by the Parties that made them. And this the best French Canonists do plead against the Popes Power of revoking the Gallican Liberties, supposing them at first to have come from the Popes Condescensions to them. And the same Reason will hold as to other Liberties.
But here lies the main Difficulty, to shew, When the Grants that are made by Superiors, do pass into the Nature of Contracts; so that they cannot be Revoked or Dispensed with. The short of it is, When they are rather Capitulations than Laws. For Laws are properly the Commands of those who have Authority to oblige; and the Reason of the Obligation is drawn from the Authority of the Persons: But Capitulations proceed upon Consent of Parties having differing Interests; and these among Private Persons, are called Contracts; and no one que∣stions, but that such all men are by natural Justice bound to perform. But the Popes insisted on the Plenitude of their Power; and a Question is put among the Canonists, and variously debated: Whether if the Pope swear to some things in the Conclave, as that he will hold a General Council within such a Time, he can Dispense with himself, or not? Some say, he is guilty of Perjury, and cannot absolve him∣self, although he should apprehend that a greater Good would come by not keeping it. For that both Pope and Emperor are bound by their own Contracts; the keeping of them being a Part of Natural Justice: which no Plenitude of Power can Dispense with; since all Contracts giva a Right to the Persons with whom they are made; insomuch that Baldus his Authority is cited by Baldus, in c. 2. §. Siquis vero de Pace Const. In l. Digna vox. In l. 1. F. De Const. Princip. them for these Words, Contractus qui fiunt cum Principe, habent naturam bonae Fidei contra Dominum; and he goes so far as to say, That the Sovereign Power is so obliged by the Contracts made by Princes with their own Subjects, that they are not revocable by themselves or their Successors: And if they were not obliged by their own Contracts, no man could trust them; and consequently all Socie∣ty with them, would be dissolved. And whatever Supreme Power may do as to such Acts as are properly its own, yet where there is Jaeobat. De Conciliis. l. 7. f. 320. C. Jus quaesitum alteri (as in all Contracts there is) that cannot be taken away by it. But all this was answered on the other side, by the Plenitude of the Popes Power; for it was a Contradiction, they said, to own that, and to say, That there was any Engagement by Oath, or other∣wise, which he could not Dispense with. For, as Hank. 11 H. 4. 37. Hob. R. f. 146. says, Papa omnia potest. And therefore all such Oaths and Pro∣mises as limit the Popes Dispensing Power, are void in themselves. And as to Ecclesiastical Laws or Constitutions, they easily resolv∣ed all Difficulties about them, upon such Principles as these. 1. That the Popes have the supreme Power in the Church. 2. That the Ecclesiastical Laws were the Popes Laws. 3. That it is an inseparable Prerogative in the Pope to Dispense with Ecclesiastical Laws upon Necessity and urgent Occasions. 4. That the Pope is the sole Judge of that Necessity. 5. That this was not a Trust given to the Pope by Councils or Conclaves, but by God and St. Peter, and therefore cannot be taken away from her.
But I shall endeavour to give a clearer Light into this Matter, by shewing the several Steps and Degrees how this Dispensing Power came into the World, and how it passed from the Ecclesi∣astical to other Laws, when Princes assumed such a Plenitude of Power in Civils, which the Popes practised in Ecclesiasticals. The first time we read of Dispensations was with respect to the Ancient Canons of the Church; and it implied a Relaxa∣tion C. 1. q. 7. sect. nisi rigor. of the Rigour of them; not with respect to their Force or binding Power, but as to the Penance which Persons were to un∣dergo for the Violation of them. And herein the Notion of Dispensing was very different from what the Canonists made it afterwards, when they declared it to be a Relaxation of the Law it self; so that it should not have that Force upon the Consci∣ence which it otherwise had: For, a Dispensation with them, is a Licence to do that which they cannot lawfully do without it; and that with a non-obstante to that which otherwise makes it Unlawful. De Jure illicitum fit ex Dispensatione licitum, & hic est proprie effectus Dispensationis, saith Pyrrhus Corradus; who Praxis Dis∣pens. Apostoli∣carum Auctore Pyrrho Corra∣do. gives a large Account of the Practice of Dispensations in the Court of Rome, which conclude with a non-obstante to any for∣mer Constitutions or Canons of Councils: But no such thing can be found in the Ancient Practice of the Church, because the Popes themselves were then believed to be under the Canons. But when it was supposed, That the severe Execution of the Canons would rather hinder than advance the Good of the Church, the Governours of it thought they had sufficient Au∣thority to abate the Rigorous Execution of them: As about the Times of Penance, the Translation of Bishops from one See to ano∣ther, the Intervals of Orders, and such like. But the Popes then pretended to be strict Observers of the Canons, when the C. 7. q. 1. c. Petiisti. particular Bishops took upon them to Dispense with the Execution of them; as appears by Ivo's Preface to his Collection of Canons, where he distinguisheth the Immoveable or Moral Precepts from the Canonical; which he calls, Moveable. In the former, saith he, no Dispensation is to be allowed; But in those things which only concern Discipline, the Bishops may Dispense, provided there be a Compensation, i. e. That the Church's Interest may be better secured or advanced thereby, as he there discourses at large; And his Rule is, Ibi Dispensatio admittenda est, ubi rigor pericu∣losus est: But by this means the Severity of the Primitive Dis∣cipline Ivo Epist. 236 was quite lost. The Bishops of Rome observing this, thought it a proper time for them to appear zealous for the Ancient Canons, which gain∣ed them a great Reputation in the World; and by this means the Custody of the Canons was looked on as their particular Pro∣vince: Which they improved so well, that at last they turn∣ed the Guardianship of the Canons into a Power over them; and then they found Fault with the Bishops Dispensing with them, for another Reason, viz. Because the Dispensing Power was a
Prerogative of the Roman See, and Inferior Bishops could act no farther in it than they had Authority from it. We find that in S. Bernard's time, the Pope did take upon him to Dispense too far, to his great Dissatisfaction; for by his Dispensing Power, he saith, he overthrew the Order of the Church; Bernard de consider. ad Eugenium, l. 3. Murmur loquor, saith he, & querimoniam Ecclesiarum. The Pope dispensed with the Ecclesiastical Laws, in Exemptions of Abbots and others from that Subordination, they stood in to their proper Superiors: He saith, He could not see how this Dispensing Power could be justified: You do indeed shew a plenitude of Power, but it may be not of Justice; you shew what you can do, but it is a Question whether you ought or not; and you ought to consider, First, Whether it be lawful; then whether it be decent; and lastly, whether it be expedient. At last, he allows a Dispensing Power in two Cases, Urgent Necessity, and Common Good; otherwise he saith, It is not fidelis Dispensatio, sed crudelis Dissipatio, an over∣throw of all Order and Government. In one of his Epistles he speaks sharply against getting a Dispensation to do that which it was not lawful to do without one: And he thinks he hath dis∣proved Bernard. epist. 7. it by invincible Reason, For a Licence from the Pope can never make that Lawful, which without it were Un∣lawful. When the Practice of the Dispensing Power grew more com∣mon, there were two great Questions raised concerning it; Whether if a Dispensation were granted without Just Cause, it were Lawful or not? And, Whether if it were not Lawful, yet it was valid? There were some who flattered the Dispensing Power so much, that they allowed it in all Cases, whether there were a just Cause or not: These were the high-flown Canonists, who resolved all Laws into Will and Pleasure: But others, who allowed a Dispensing Power upon a Just Cause, yet thought it re∣pugnant to the Original Design of Government, for those who are entrusted with Care of the Laws, to Dispense with them, without such a Cause as answers the End of Government: And some went so far, as to deny any Validity in a Dispensation granted upon Pleasure; for as an unjust Law hath no Force, so, said they, an unjust Dispensation of a Good Law hath none. Upon this Point two great Schoolmen differ. Suarez, whom Suarez de le∣gibus, l. 6. c. 18, 19. Vaugbans Rep. f. 348. Suar. c. 18. n. 6. the Lord Chief Justice Vaughan commends for his Learning in this Matter, goes upon these Grounds, 1. That a Prince is not Dominus, sed Dispensator Legum; although the Force of a Law depends upon his Authority; and therefore in Dispensing with a Law he doth not act by Ab∣solute Power, but by Administration: For he is not Lord over the Community, but Governour. 2. That for him to Dispense in a Law made for the Communi∣ty, without a just Cause, is not only malum quia prohibitum, sed ex se, & ex natura rei & semper malum: Therefore Suarez was n. 26. far from thinking a Prince might Dispense with any thing that
was not malum in se; for he makes it to be so, for him to dis∣pense with a malum quia prohibitum, if it be prohibited by a Law made for a Publick Good, and there be no just Cause for it. 3. That although a Prince sins in Dispensing with such a Law; yet his Dispensation holds as to the Force of the Law; which he supposes to depend on the Will of the Prince, and c. 19. n. 6. therefore his Will being altered, the Obligation ceaseth as to the Persons Dispensed with. 4. That although such a Dispensation holds as to the Law, yet he thinks a Prince bound in Conscience to Revoke such a n. 9. Dispensation, because it is unlawful for him to persist in such a Will, it being repugnant to the Common Good, and the Obliga∣tion of his Duty. 5. That if such a Dispensation be to the Injury of a third Person, then it is void in it self, as being repugnant to Ju∣stice. n. 10. Vasquez saith, They are all agreed, That no Prince hath a Power to Dispense with his Laws according to his Pleasure; or because Vasq. 1. 2. Disp. 178. c. 4. n. 34. they are his Laws: But he saith, There is a Dispute, Whether an unlawful Dispensation be valid or not? And he thinks not, and that a Man's Action after the Dispensation, is as faulty as if there had been none; His Reason is, because a Prince is bound by his own Laws, so that he cannot Dispense with himself as to the Obligation of them; for, if he could at Pleasure Dispense with himself, he could never be bound; for how can a Man be bound to keep a Law, in which he can Dispense with himself when he pleases? And if he cannot Dispense with himself, much less with any under him. Having thus endeavoured to clear the Nature and Original of the Dispensing Power; I now come (2.) To the Reason assigned by Sir E. Coke, from the Year Books, why the King may Dispense with Laws, because they be mala prohibita and not mala per se. My Lord Vaughan said Right concerning it, That this Rule hath more confounded Men's Judgments on this Subject than recti∣fied Vaugh. Rep. f. 332. them: Which I shall make appear by shewing, I. That it alters the Frame of our Government. II. That it takes away all Security by Law. III. That it contradicts the Sense of our Nation in former Ages. IV. That the Rule is contrary to the Precedents in Law. I. That it alters the Frame of our Government. For it goes upon a very false Ground, viz. That the King may Dispense with any thing which is not Evil in its own Na∣ture,
or antecedently to any Human Laws; which is to suppose the whole Legislative Power to be lodged in the Person of the King: For, all who understand these Matters, do agree, That a Power to Dispense with Laws, is the same with a Power to make them. Dispensare, hoc est, lege solvere is solus potest, qui ferendae abro∣gandae{que} Grot. de aquit. Indulg. & faci∣litate, c. 2. n. 10 Suarez de leg. l. 6. c. 14. n. 2. leg is potestatem habet; saith H. Grotius. Suarez saith, He hath the Power of Dispensing, qui legem tulit, quia ab ejus voluntate & potentia pendet. Vasquez, That the Dispensing Power lies in him, qui habet Potestatem condendi & abrogandi legem. Vasquez 1, 2. disp. 178. c. 2. Pusendorf de jure naturae, & gent. l. 1. c. 6. n. 17. Pufendorf, That none can Dispense with a Law, but such as have the Power of making it. But we need no Authorities in this Matter: For to Dispense (in the Sense it is here taken) is to take away the Obligation of a Law; and whoever takes it away must have the Power of laying it on: And there is no Difference between the Dispensation with a Law, and the Abrogation of it; but that a Dispensation is an Abrogation of it to particular Persons, while others are under the Force of it; and an Abrogation is a General Dispensa∣tion, that being no more than a Relaxation of the whole Law, to those Persons who were bound by it before: But if a part of the Law be taken away, as to the whole Community, then it is called a Derogation of it; But if the Law be Relaxed only for a limited Time and under certain Conditions, then it is not an Abrogation, but an Indulgence or Suspension of the Law. To Dispense with a Law is more than to give an Equitable Sense or a Favourable Interpretation of a Law; for he that Inteprets a Law, supposes his Interpretation to agree with the Sense and Design of the Law; he that Dispenses, owns that which he dis∣penses with, to be against the Intention of the Law, but that he hath Power to take away the Force of it, so far as he thinks fit. He that saith, Thou shalt not kill, doth not reach to Legal Executioners of Justice, interprets the Law according to Reason and Equity: But when God said to Abraham, Go and Sacrifice thy Son, he must be supposed, by virtue of his Supreme Authority, to Dispense with the Law in his Case, so as to make that Law∣ful upon his Command, which would not have been so with∣out it. Some will not allow this to be called a Dispensation, but an alteration of the Matter of the Law; but when that Alteration comes from the Authority of the Law Makers, it is the same; so that to Interpret a Law is an Act of Discretion and Judgment; but to Dispense with it, of Authority and Jurisdiction. And none can therefore Dispense in the Law of God, but he that made it; all that the Wisest and greatest Men can justly pretend to, is no more than to give the true Sense of it; and it is intolerable Prsumption for any Creature to pretend to more.
An Equitable Sense, as to Human Law, is not always that which seems to be most favourable to those who go against the Letter of it; but that which most enforces the End and Design of the Law, although it be not comprehended in the Words of it. If a Law mentions a Crime of a lesser nature, in regard of Circumstances, and in regard of those Circumstances, promises some Favour, (as Benefit of the Clergy) it can be no Equitable Sense to extend it to such Acts which have worse Circumstances, because the Ground of the Favour was the extenuation of the Fact by the Circumstances; so that the chief Rule of Equity in the Interpretation of a Law, is to attend to the Intention and Design of it, more than to the bare Words. The Intention and Design of the Law is not to be measured by Particular and Accidental Cases, wherein some Inconveniencies are to be born, but by the Publick and General Good, which more than makes amends for them; which is the Reason of that Maxim, Better a Mischief than an Inconvenience; which is false, unless taken in such an Equitable Sense. There are certain Ways of Reason, which Mankind do allow in the Equitable Interpretation of Laws, as That no positive Law must be interpreted against Natural and Divine Laws: That if Laws contradict each other, one or the other must lose its Force: That no Case which overthrows a Law by necessary Consequence, was ever intended to be allowed by it; For that were to make a Law, and to give a Liberty to break it at the same Time. If a Law be designed for a Publick Good, and an Exception be afterwards made against it, as to the Incapacity of some Persons, by it, for Publick Service, which could not but be foreseen and considered at the Time of making the Law, there is no Reason that should be alledged as a Reason for Dispensing with the Law, which was intended at first by the Law: For however the Case may be put, as to such things which could not be foreseen, at the making of a Law, yet what was intended to be prevented by the making it, cannot in Reason be alledged against it: Because if there had not been other things to have over-ballanced that Inconvenience the Law had never been passed. There is no doubt but the same Power which makes a Law, may Dispense with it, if it sees Cause; for if it can Abrogate a Law, as to the whole Community, it may as well Dispense with it, as to particular Persons, and leave it in Force to all others. The Question then is, Whether a Prince assuming to himself a Dispensing Power, doth not thereby assume the Legislative too? Since it appears, That there can be no Power to take off the Obligation of a Law, but that which causes it; although it be with respect to particular Persons; but if it amount to a General Suspension of a Law, there can be no Question to those who understand what these things mean. Our present Business was to shew, That if the King can dis∣pense with Mala prohibita, as such, the Legislative Power must
be resolved into him; because a Dispensing Power can be refer'd to no other: And if the King may Dispense with all Mala pro∣hibita, he may Dispense with all just human Laws. For no Law can be just, which requires Malum in se; and therefore such a Law being void of it self, there can be no Exercise of a Dispen∣sing Power, but concerning Mala prohibita. And if the King can therefore Dispense, because they are only prohibited, then from a Parity of Reason he may Dispense with all Laws that concern only such things; and we cannot be secure of any Laws, but such as forbid things that are evil in themselves. II. And this is my Second Reason against it, That it takes away all Security by our Laws, both as to our Religion and Li∣berties. 1. As to our Religion: I grant, that, to take away all Reli∣gion, is Malum in se; to take away the true Religion, is Malum in se; but in a Nation divided about the true Religion, and where the Prince is of one Opinion, and the main Body of the Nation of another concerning it, what Security can the People by this Rule have as to the enjoying that which they account the true Religion, but the Prince doth not? The utmost we can suppose in this Case, is, for such Laws to be made, as they ap∣prehend to be most effectual for this Purpose. But what Security can these Laws afford, if the Prince assume a Power of Dispen∣sing with Ecclesiastical Laws? It is not possible they can have any, unless they can be secure he shall never exercise this Dis∣pensing Power; for by it, he may equally suspend all Laws which relate to it; he may give a Dispensation to such as are unquali∣fied by our Laws, and put them not only into Places of Autho∣rity and Trust, but into all Ecclesiastical Preferments, as soon as he thinks fit; and that without any Check upon his Conscience; because those whose Office it is to interpret the Laws, tell him, he hath such a Power by Law to Dispense with Ecclesiastical Laws, although passed in the solemnest manner, and with a Design to give Security to the People concerning the preserving their Reli∣gion. And the higher this Point is carried, still the less Security For, if it be thought such a Prerogative of the Crown, as voids all that is made against it, then Laws signifie just nothing: For, every Law is a Limitation of unbounded Will and Power; and therefore Laws afford no manner of Security; for either they are void of themselves, or may be made void when a Sovereign Prince pleases. And I think (as Men are) meer Will and Plea∣sure will never be taken for an infallible Security. But it may be said, That taking away the true Religion, is Ma∣lum in se; and therefore by this Rule such Laws cannot be dispensed with. Very true; we think so: But suppose a King of another Opinion; and that he should think it good Service to destroy
Heresie and Schism, and those are Mala in se; what Security can there be then from this Rule? For the same Persons who assert the Dispensing Power, make the King to be Judge, not meerly of the Necessity and urgent Occasions, but of what is Ma∣lum in se, and what not? Suppose then, he should look on our Religion as Heresie and Schism, what possible Security can this Distinction afford us? 2. As to our Civil Liberties; Which are founded upon our Laws, made by the Consent of King and People. But if there be such an inseparable Prerogative in the Crown, as enables the King to Dispense with all Mala prohibita, what becomes of all the Ancient Charters of Liberties? For, no one can pretend that the contrary to them all are Mala in se. And if there be no farther Security, than what this Distinction affords, we are in a very precaridus Condition, as to all our Liberties. I confess the Case is different, as to the Ecclesiastical Laws, mentioned in 11 H. 7. 12. and as to our Civil Liberties: be∣cause these Ecclesiastical Laws had their Force as such from a fo∣reign Power; and as far as they were the Laws of the Kingdom, it was by a Tacit Consent and Acceptation; and not by any so∣lemn Enacting of them. And as to such as these, where the Laws were not received, and the things were no farther evil, than as they were prohibited by such a Foregin Power, there is nothing but what is reasonable in the Case of 11 H. 7. 12. as it is in the Books. But when this hath been extended to Laws which have passed in the most solemn manner by the King in Parliament; it is time not only to take notice of, but to set forth the mischievous Consequences of this Distinction, as it is so applied; for it leaves us under no manner of Security by our Laws. 3. It contradicts the Sense of our own Nation in former Ages. Which I shall shew in a remarkable Instance, about the Statutes of Provisors, 35 E. 1. 25 E. 3. 13 R. 2. which were Prohibitory Statutes. And it cannot be supposed that at that time, when the Pope was allowed to be Head of the Church, and consequently Supreme Patron of the Benefices of it, that the Ac∣ceptance of a Title to an Ecclesiastical Benefice from him, should be thought Malum in se. But these Statutes being in force, I shall make it appear that the King did own he had no Power to Dis∣pense with them, but as the Parliament thought fit to allow it. I begin with 15 R. 2 at a time, when the Kingdom was in quiet; and however, could not be in any disturbance on the Ac∣count of the Statute of Provisors, which the Nation desired and only those who depended on the Court of Rome opposed. But the Court-Bishops suggested that it was for the Kings Interest in dealing with the Court of Rome, to have a Power to Relax and to Dispense with these Statutes as he saw Cause. Therefore the
Arch-Bishop of York, then Chancellor, proposed it in the open∣ing of the Parliament, as one of the things for which it was cal∣led, Rot. Parl. 15 R. 2. n. 1. viz. To find out a Temperament in that Matter, so as the Pope might not lose his Right, nor the King his. After this Matter was debated, the Commons declare their Assent en plein Parlia∣ment, That without prejudice to the Rights of those who were in n. 8. Possession by virtue of the Statute, the King by the Advice and Con∣sent of the Lords, might Dispense with the said Statute, so as should seem reasonable and useful till the next Parliament, but so as the said Statute be repealed in no Article of it. And they reserve to themselves the Liberty of disagreeing the next Parliament. And they conclude with a solemn Protestation, That this was a No∣velty not practised before, and ought not to be drawn into an Exam∣ple and Precedent for the future; and they desire this Protestation might be Entred and Recorded in the Rolls of Parliament; which the King commanded to be done. Doth this now look like a Declaratory Act, and made in Affirmance of the Kings Dispensing Power? It might as well be said, That an Act for Restraining the Prerogative, is made in Affirmance of it. It is true, there is a Dispensing Power granted, but with such Restrictions and Limitations as shew, that such a Power was not then thought to be inherent in the Crown. For, 1. Why should it be proposed to the Parliament to grant it, if the King had it before? Did the King ever put it to the Parliament to grant him a Power to Pardon Malefactors? But in the case of Dispensing with a Law, it was not only proposed but assigned, as one Reason of calling the Parliament. 2. Why till the next Parliament, if it were owned to be an inherent Right of the Crown? Would the Parliament go about to bound and limit an inseparable Prerogative in such a manner? 3. Why is it called a Novelty, and a thing not to be drawn into example? Was ever any thing like this said of a Declaratory Act? The Natural Consequence whereof is just contrary; that whereas some just Right of the Crown hath been contested and denied, for the future it ought to be owned and submitted to by all Per∣sons. It is hard to think of Words more inconsistent with a meer Declaratory Act than those, Ne soit trait en ensample nen Conse∣quence en temps avenir. 4. If this were a Declaratory Act, what need it be repeated so often in Parliament afterwards? Were the Commons so forgetful of the Kings Prerogative, as to need making so many Declaratory Acts about the same thing? Yet thus we find it about this Dispensing Power, as to the Statutes of Provisors. For 16 R. 2. The Archbishop of York again declared in the opening of the Parliament, That one Cause of calling it, was to Rot. Parl. 16. R. 2. n. 8. settle this Matter about Provisors. And the Commons again yielded, The King should have such a Power to moderate it, as he should with his Council judge expedient; but so as it be all laid open before the next Parliament, that they might upon good Advice agree to it.
17 R. 2. Tydeman, Abbot of Beauley, was by the Popes Provi∣sion, made Bishop of Landaff. But the King, notwithstanding the Rot. Parl. 17 R. 2. n. 22. former Proceedings, did not take upon him to dispense with the Statute, but left it to the Parliament; and his Dispensation was passed by Act of Parliament, the King, Lords and Commons as∣senting thereto. 20 R. 2. The Commons in Parliament do again Assert de bon Rot. Parl. 20 R. 2. n. 21. gre de leur parte en plein Parlement, That the King with his Coun∣cil may dispense with the Statute of Provisors, as shall seem fit, so as the same be heard and examined the next Parliament, and so corrected as shall be thought convenient by the King, with the Ad∣vice of his Council in Parliament. 1 H. 4. The Commons in like manner give their Assent, That Rot. Parl. 1 H. 4. n. 85. the King should have the same Power of Dispensing with the Sta∣tute, which his Predecessors had, and to Repeal and Annul it, as should seem expedient to him. Which was no more than a Gene∣ral Dispensation. Yet notwithstanding this was recorded in Par∣liament. 2 H. 4. The Commons appearing before the King and the Rot. Parl. 2 H. 4. n. 26. Lords, it was declared, That the Dispensation should not extend to Cardinals or other Strangers. At the same Parliament a Pe∣tition was presented to the King, That if any one did accept a Benefice by Papal Provision, against the Statute, and had his n. 42. Pardon from the King for it; yet if he went about to disturb the present Possessor, by virtue of his Provision, then his Par∣don should be void, and he should incur the Penalty of the Statute. To which the King gave his Assent. 3 H. 4. The King having granted particular Licenses for Dis∣pensations as to this Statute, and finding the great Inconveni∣ences Rot. Parl. 7 H. 4. n. 134. which came by them, he generally and universally revo∣voked them, and promised in Parliament to find out some pro∣per Remedy in this Matter. 7 H. 4. The King was moved in Parliament to confirm that Rot. Parl. ib. Revocation; but he then took time to consider. But 9 H. 4. c. 8. the King reinforced in Parliament all the Statutes against Provisors; as it is in Print. 1 H. 5. The Commons pray, That the Statutes may stand in Rot. Parl. 1 H. 5. n. 22. full force against Provisors; and that no Protection or Grant made by the King to hinder the Execution of the said Statutes, shall be al∣lowable, or of any force; and whatever is done contrary to them, shall be null. The Answer is, Let the Statutes be observed and kept. But if the Statutes were to be strictly observed, what saving can there
be to the King's Prerogative? since the Statutes were Universal, and the King's particular Grants in this Case were the great Mo∣tive of the Commons Desire to have them reinforced, in the be∣ginning of this King's Reign: And these Statutes continued in full Force to the Time of H. 8. insomuch that Cardinal Woolsey was prosecuted by the King's Attorney, for offending against them by his Legatine Power, although he had the King's Assent to it, and he exercised it several Years by his Permission. Stephen Gar∣diner, in his Letter to the Protector, saith, That he obtained his Legatine Power by the King's Assent: From whence he observes, What Danger they may fall in, who break the Law with the King's Consent; for in the Cardinal's Case, he saith, That because his Legatine Power was against the Laws of the Realm, the Judges con∣clude the Offence to be such as incurred the Praemunire: And this he Asserts was the Sense of the Lawyers of that Time; and for confir∣mation of it, he brought the Case of the Lord Tiptoft, who suf∣ferd on Tower-Hill, because in execution of the King's Commission, he had offended against the Laws of the Realm: And of many Judges who had Fines set on their Heads in like Case, for acting against the Law of the Realm by the King's Commandment. But it is pleaded on the other side, That the Commons, 1 H. 5. Short ac∣count, p. 25▪ n. 22. put in the saving the King's Prerogative into their Petition concerning the Statute of Provisors, that it may stand in full Force: And this was an owning the King's Dispensing Power by all the Commons in Parliament, when they were in a high Debate with the Crown. This seems to have a good shew of Reason to any one that doth not consider the Practice of those Times, in Acts of Parliament; for the Petitions of the Commons, before 2 H. 5. were not taken entire and just as they delivered them; but several Clauses were inserted by the Court, especially such as seemed to preserve the King's Prerogative; which the Commons found so inconvenient, Rushworth's Collections, vol. 1. p. 574. That the next Year, as Serjeant Glanvil observed, (and pro∣bably on the Occasion of these Savings, 1 H. 5. n. 15, and n. 22.) the Course was altered, and hath so continued. Therefore methinks so great Weight should not be laid on these Savings, as if they implied the owning the Dispensing Power, when the Design of the Law was against it. And the King's Answer is, Let the Statutes be held and kept. I appeal to any Man's Understanding, whether the saving the King's Prerogative can be any other than a General Clause put in, without respect to the Dispensing Power; since the Pe∣tition is against the Exercise of it, and the Answer, That the Sta∣tutes should be observed? If they were observed, what Use of the Dispensing Power; for that lay in giving leave not to observe them? What strange Sense is this, The King promises, The Sta∣tutes shall be kept, saving his Prerogative, that they may not be kept? for, they feared the not keeping them from such a Pre∣rogative: and when the King therefore Yields they shall be kept, he doth give up any such Prerogative, or else he doth not answer their Petition.
The Truth is, when the Kings had got this Power into their Hands, though it were with such Limitations at first, yet they found Arts from time to time to keep it, till at last they were unwilling to part with it; as appears by H. 4. but upon the restless Importunity of the Commons it was laid down by him. And now in the beginning of H. 5. the Commons took Care to prevent its Rising in a new Reign; but he being a Prince not ready to part with any thing which looked like Power, was in probability, not easie to be brought to confirm the Statute: of Provisors, without some general Words of saving his Preroga∣tive, which the Commons might yield to, that they might gain the main Point; since those Words could signifie nothing against the very Intention and Design of the Law. IV. The Precedents in Law do contradict this Rule; as will appear by those which are produced by the Lord Chief Justice Vaughan, in the Case of Thomas and Sorrel. Vaugh. Rep. f. 337. 1. The King cannot Dispense with a Common Nusance, for The King, he saith, cannot Pardon continuing Nusances; but the Penalty he may. The King cannot Dispense with a Nusance to the High Ways, by 11 H. 7. he cannot Pardon or Discharge the Nusance, or the suit s. 339. for the same, the High-ways being necessary for such as Trawel; but Common Nusances are not mala in se, which are not Evils at Common Law (as some understand them) but things so intrin∣secally Evil, that no Circumstances can make them lawful. Malum in se is a Moral Evil, in its own Nature; and therefore can never be Dispensed with; but a Nusance at Common Law is but a Natural Evil, and all the Moral Evil of it lies in the Prohibi∣tion by Law: And yet in these, it is granted, That the King cannot Dispense: And the Year-Book saith, That a Licence to make a Nusance in the High Way were void: For what Reason? Is it a thing forbidden by the Natural or Divine Law? Cannot the King, for his Will and Pleasure, License the Making a Nusance? and yet is it possible for Men of Sense to imagin, That he can by his Dispensing Power give leave to do such things, as in con∣sequence overthrow our Laws and Religion? Doth the Law take greater Care of the High-Way than of our Liberties and Re∣ligion? This would seem strange Doctrine to People of another Country, viz. That by the Law of England the King hath no Power over the High-Way, to Dispense with a Common Nusance therein, but he hath over the Laws made for the most Publick Good and Security of the Nation. And truly this cannot but seem strange to as many among our selves, as allow themselves the Liber∣ty of thinking; Doth the Law only take care of Oxen and High-Ways? But it is well observed by the Learned Chief Justice Vaughan, That Publick Nusances, are not mala in se, but mala politica & f. 358. introducta; and when a thing is said to be prohibited by the Common
Law, the meaning is no more but that the Ancient Record of such a Prohibition is not to be found 2. The King cannot Pardon the Damage done to particular Per∣sons, f. 333, f. 334. saith the same Chief Justice, where the Suit is only the Kings, but for the Benefit and Safety of a third Person, the King cannot Dispense with the Suit, but by Consent and Agreement of the Party concerned. And again, Penal Laws, the Breach whereof are to Men's particular Damage, cannot be Dispensed with. f. 335. And the Chief Justice Herbert owns, That the King cannot f. 29. Dispense with Laws which vest the least Right or Property in any of his Subjects. Here we see, the Prerogative bounded, where the Interest of particular Persons is concerned; but doth the Law take more Care of them than of the Publick Interest, and the concernment of the whole Nation? But I find another Distinction in this Case, viz. There is Short Ac∣count, p. 21. Bonum Publicum; and Laws made for that may be Dispensed with: And there is Bonum singulorum Populi; and with Laws that concern that the King cannot Dispense. This is admirable Learning, if it be brought out of these Terms: And the meaning is, The King can do nothing to the Prejudice of the People in their Private Capacities, but he can do what he will with the Publick. I had thought, a Prince had been, in the first Place, bound to regard the Good of the Pub∣lick, and to take Care of the salus Populi complicati, (as it is called) i. e. as they are imbodied together, and not of the Pri∣vate Interests of particular Men, which can never be preserved, when the Publick Safety is not secured. 3. It is granted, That in Penal Laws, by Act of Parliament, V. R. f. 342. where the Offenders are punishable at the King's Suit, but where the Offence is to the immediate Wrong of Particular Persons, and for which the Law gives them special Actions, the King cannot Dispense. Never was Law more tender of the Interest of Particular Per∣sons than ours: But suppose a Penal Law by Act of Parliament, relates immediately to the Publick, and gives no particular Per∣sons any Special Actions; is such a Law therefore Dispensable, because only the Publick Good, and the Safety of the Nation are concerned? which are not (it seems) to be valued with the Private Interests of Particular Men. They who affirm such things, may be very learned in Book Cases; but they do not seem to have studied the Jus Publicum, as Bracton calls it, which concerns Statum Reipub. or the Political Law of this Nation; Bract. l. c. 5. n. 2. which shews the great Respect which the Good of the Commu∣nity ought to have above Private Interests: But when Persons take up their Notions and Maxims, from Laws relating to Meum and Tuum, they are very apt to judge of Publick Laws, accord∣ing to those Measures.
4. It is granted, That the King cannot license a Baker, Brewer, f. 349, or Victualler to break the Assize of Bread or Ale, nor a Miller to take more Toll than the Law appoints (therefore these are mala prohibita); nor a Taverner to break the Assize of Wine; Nor a Butcher to sell measled Swines-Flesh or Murrain Flesh; nor any Man to forestal the Market, by a non obstante of the Statute de Pistoribus; which prohibits all these under several Penalties. Nor can he licence Butchers, Fishmongers, Poulterers, or other Sellers of Victuals; nor Hostlers to sell Hay and Oats at what Price they please, by a non obstante of the Statute of 23 E. 3. c. 6. and 13 R. 2. c. 8. Still the Law is extreamly tender of us, as to Meat and Drink, and not only for our selves, but for our Horses too; so that the King cannot Dispense with the Laws about them: And yet can we think so meanly of the Wisdom of our Ancestors, that they would take such Care of Bread, and Wine, and Horse-Meat, that the King himself could not inhance the Price of them; but that as to their Laws, which relate to the Publick, they were content to leave them to the Will and Pleasure of their Prince? No one that reads the History of our Ancestors, and the Contests they had with Kings to obtain their Publick Liberties, could ever entertain such a Thought concerning them. 5. If Foreign Manufactures or Foreign Corn be prohibited for sup∣port of the Natives, a Licence to one or more, to bring them in, if f. 344. General, is void by the Case of Monopolies, notwithstanding a non obstante. This is certainly Malum prohibitum; and yet the King cannot Dispense with it. And it is really a very hard Case, if the King cannot Dispense with a Monopoly in Trade, and may Dispense with a Monopoly in Religion, i. e. That notwithstanding all the Laws for setling our Religion at Home, he may grant a Licence to Foreigners to introduce another, although never so repugnant to our Laws; for none who understood our Affairs, could ima∣gine, That this Dispensing Power was set up for any other End. But what shall we say to the Precedents on the other side? I shall pass by others, which have been sufficiently answered al∣ready, and only speak to that which above all others hath been declared to be the Foundation of the Dispensing Power; and therefore deserves to be farther cleared; and that is, The Case of Dispensing with the Statutes about Men's continuing Sheriffs more than a Year; which is urged as plain and conclud∣ing, Short ac∣count, p. 9. because it was for a Publick Good, and preventing great Mis∣chiefs; yet the King's Power of Dispensing in this Case was allowed by all the Judges of England, 2 H. 7. and this hath been cited as adjudged in several Books of great Authority, Fitz-Herbert, Plowden, Coke, &c. and the Practice hath ever since been ac∣cordingly.
This is the whole strength of the Argument. And I shall not repeat what others have already said, to shew that this was not the Reason of the Judicial Sentence then given; but the particu∣lar Ground of one of the Judges, after they had declared the Patent to be good. But however that were, it cannot be denied, that great Lawyers since that time, have taken it to have been the Sense of the Judges then. For Coke's Words are express in Cal∣vin's Case; It is Enacted by the Parliament of 23. H. 6. That no 7 R. 14. man should serve the King as Sheriff of any County above one Year, and that notwithstanding of any Clause of Non-obstante to the con∣trary, that is to say, notwithstanding that the King should expresly dispense with the said Statute; howbeit, it is agreed in 2 H. 7. That against the express purview of that Act, the King may by a spe∣cial Non-obstante dispense with that Act. Here it is plain, that in Coke's Opinion, at least, the Judges did agree, that although King and Parliament had made an Act which made void any Grant with a Non obstante, yet that such a Grant made afterwards, with a special Non obstante, was good. I am not much concerned, whether it were their Opinion or not; because I think there is much greater Reason, and strong∣er Authority on the other side. 1. As to Reason: If a Non-obstante from the King, be good, when by Act of Parliament a Non-obstante is declared void, what doth an Act of Parliament signifie in such a Case? Must we say, It is a void Clause? But then to what purpose was it put in? Did they who made the Act, understand it to be a void Clause when they put it in? Certainly, it was then thought otherwise; and if it were so, we have the Authority of the Parliament against the Opinion of the Judges. If it were not a void Clause then, how came it to be so afterwards? What Alteration was made in the Law of England in that Interval, and by whom? How comes a Clause that had force in 23 H. 6. to have none, 2 H. 7? Could Radcliff or the rest, by their Opinions, destroy the Force of an Act of Parliament? No; But Coke saith, No Act can bind the King from any Pre∣rogative which is sole and inseparable from his Person; but he may 12 R. f. 18. dispense with it by a Non-obstante, as a Sovereign Power to com∣mand any of his Subjects to serve him for the Publick Weal, and this solely and inseparably is annexed to his Person; and this Roy∣al Power cannot be restrained by any Act of Parliament, neither in Thesi nor in Hypothesi; but that the King by his Royal Power may dispense with it; for upon the Commandment of the King and Obe∣dience of the Subject, does his Government consist; as it is provided by the Statute of 23 H. 6. c. 8. That all Patents made or to be made of any Office of a Sheriff, &c. for Term of years, or for Life, in Fee∣simple or in Tail, are void and of none effect, any Clause or Parol of Non-obstante put or to be put into such Patents to be made not∣withstanding. And further, Whosoever shall take upon him or them to accept or occupy such Office of Sheriff, by vertue of such Grants or
Patents, shall stand perpetually disabled to be or bear the Office of Sheriff within any County of England, by the same Authority. And notwithstanding that by this Act, 1. The Patent is made void. 2. The King is restrained to grant a Non-obstante. 3. The Grantee disabled to take the Office, yet the King by his Royal So∣vereign Power of commanding, may command by his Patent (for such Causes as he in his Wisdom doth think meet and profitable for himself and the Commonwealth, of which he himself is sole Judge) to serve him and the Weal Publick, as Sheriff for such a County, for years or for Life, &c. And so was it resolved by all the Justices of England in the Exchequer Chamber' 2 H. 7. Here the Point is resolved into an inseparable Prerogative in the King; which no Act of Parliament can restrain, although made with his own Consent. Is there no Act of Parliament then, which this great Lawyer will allow to restrain the King's Prerogative, so as he cannot disperse with it? What saith he to the Case of Buying Offices at Court? Cannot the King by vertue of his Prerogative, order his Houshold as he pleases, to dispose of Offices about him, as he thinks fit; No. The same Lawyer saith, That no Non obstante could dispense with the Act against 1 Inst. 234. buying of Offices. And yet one would think that the King had as great a Prerogative in the Court, as over the Kingdom. But how comes he to say, That the King can dispense notwith∣standing the Disability, when elsewhere he saith, The King can∣not dispense in the Case of a Disability by Law? For the Reason he gives why the King cannot present a Man to a Living who is convict of Simony, is, because the Law hath disabled him. Very 1 Inst. 120. 3 Inst. 154. well. And yet in this Case, although the Law hath disabled him, the King may dispense. Where are we now? The King can dispense with a Disability, and he cannot dispense with it. This is indeed a very dark learning of Dispensations, as C. Justice Vaughan well called it; for we cannot yet find the way through it. Can the King dispense with a Disability in Law or not? If not, the Case of Sheriffs is gone. If he can, then why not in the case of Symony? Why not, as to sitting in Parliament without taking the Oaths? No, here is a Disability in Law. What then? Cannot the K. dispense with a Disability in one Case, as well as the other? Bu: the same Person saith, That in that Case, because the Words amount to a Disability, the King cannot dispense, and here, where the 3 Inst. 154. Disability is expressed, he may. But we are lately told, there are two sorts of Disabilities: one is actually incurred, as that upon the Members who sit without Short Account, p. 38. taking the Oaths; and the other is a Disability annexed to the Breach of a Law, as a penalty, and that penalty not to be incurred before a Legal Conviction; and in this Case the King's Dispensation coming before the Conviction doth prevent it, by making that lawful which would not have been so without it. But when a Disability is actually-incurred, it cannot be taken off but by Act of Parliament. P. 30.
I Answer, That if the Law which makes the Disability, doth allow of a Dispensation antecedent to the Conviction, then I grant that the Dispensation before Conviction, prevents the Disability. As in Digby's Case; if the Dispensation had come before Institu∣tion, 4 Rep. the Disability, as to holding the former Living, had been prevented; because the Law doth expresly allow of a Dispen∣sation in the Case. But here is no such thing. The Act of Parliament, supposes no Dispensation, but makes an utter Disability, as to the holding the Office, in Sir Edward Hales his Case; but a dispensing Power is set up against the Act of Parlia∣ment, and such a Dispensation neither before nor after Conviction, can prevent a Disability If it could, I can by no means see why it might not as well hold as to Members of Parliament, (at least as to the Oath of Supremacy) if they take their Dispensa∣tion before Sitting in the House. For the Disability doth not take place till they enter the Parliament, 5 Eliz. c. 1. And he that entreth the Parliament without taking the said Oath, shall be deemed no Knight, Citizen, Burgess, or Baron, nor shall have any Voice, but shall be as if he had been never Returned or Elect∣ed. The Intention of the Law for the Test, was a disability to hold the Office; but it allows time for Persons to qualifie themselves, as appears by the Act for the Test. Is not this plain overthrow∣ing the design of the Law, for Persons instead of doing what the Law requires, to take out a Dispensation for not doing it, and so prevent the Disability? And what doth a Law signifie, when the very design of it is overthrown? And what is the Power of making Laws by common Consent in Parliament, if without such Consent, the whole force of the Law may be ta∣ken away by a dispensing Power? So that this doth not meerly make Laws to signifie nothing but according to Will and Plea∣sure; but it makes our very Constitution insignificant; which requires to every Law the Consent of the People in Parlia∣ment. As for Instance, By the first Constitution of the Roman Go∣vernment, the King had the custody of the Laws, but no Laws were Dionys. Halyc. Arn. l. 2. to be made but by the Consent of the Roman People in the Curiae, (thence called Leges Curiatae) Would any one have thought this any Privilege, if after these Laws were passed, the King should claim an inseparable Prerogative of dispensing with them as he sees Cause? For it is implied in such a Fundamental Contract as this, that Laws when made, should not lose their Force without their Consent who made them. Else it is not Contractus bonae Fidei. I will not dispute whether this were the Original Contract of our Nation or not; but this I may say, That when our Govern∣ment came to a Settlement, after long struglings, this was one of the Fundamental Articles of it, That no Laws should pass, or Burdens should be laid upon the People but by their own Consent in Bract. l. , . 1, c. 3. 1. arliament. Bracton saith, That a Law among us, supposes the
Authority of the Prince and the Council, and Consent of the great Men, and Agreement of the Common-wealth. And he adds further, That our Laws being thus made and established, mutari non poterunt, nec destrui sine communi Consensu L. 1. c. 2. n. 6. & Consilio eorum omnium quorum Consilio & Consensu fuerunt pro∣mulgatae: Which are very remarkable Words against a dispen∣sing power. For that doth imply a Power to change the Law, and in effect, to destroy it, without the Advice or Consent of those that made it. He saith indeed, The Law may be improved without their Consent, i. e. by the Judges Interpretation as to parallel Cases not expressed. But if any new or hard Case happens, it ought, he saith, to be respited usque ad magnam Curiam, i. e. to the Parlia∣ment, ut ibi per Concilium Curiae terminentur; that being the Su∣preme Judicature of the Nation. Fortescue, who very well understood our Constitution, saith, That the King, although he be the Head of the Political Body, Fortescue, 2. c. 13. f. 32. can neither change our Laws, nor take away Property without Con∣sent. And that our Laws are made, not by the Princes Will, but by C. 18. f. 40. General Consent; Totius Regni Assensu: He saith, They may be changed, but it must be, Non sine Communitatis & Procerum Reg∣ni Assensu, quali ipsae primitus emanarunt. He takes notice, That several of our Kings did not like our C. 34. 35. Constitution, but affected a more Arbitrary, and therefore approved the Civil Law, for that Maxim, Quod Principi placuit Legis ha∣bet vigorem. But he shews our Constitution to be better for King and People. For here he saith, The King levies no Taxes, C. 36. f. 84. nor alters Laws, or makes new ones, sine Concessione vel Assensu to∣tius Regni sui in Parliamento suo expresso.. But certainly dispensing with Laws, is altering them; not as to their Words, but as to the Intention and Design of them, which is the main thing in a Law; and he that alters the Law, as to any one, whose Case is common with others, may alter it as to all others in equal Circumstances. And what doth such a Law then signifie? In the Charter of King John, the Commune Consilium Regni, was to pass all Aids; and besides particular Summons to the Great Men, general Summons were to be given to others, to appear with∣in forty days; and if they did not, Matters were to go on however. This very Charter, as appears by Matt. Paris, was renewed, 9 H. 3. But he had learned the Trick of a Non obstante from his good Friend the Pope; and when he was urged with his own Grants, he said, Doth not the Pope void his Grants with a Matt. Paris, f. 854. Non-obstante? Why may not I do the same by the Grants of my Self and my Predecessors? To whom a sharp Reply was made. As long as he observed Justice in his Actings, he would be King, and no longer. Which I only mention to shew, that the Use of a Non obstante was then looked on as a Violation of Justice.
And so it must needs be, if our Laws, as Bracton saith, be Communis Reipub. Sponsio; for then they are of the Nature of Contracts, and when Laws are so, it is agreed by those who write of these Matters, although otherwise no Enemies to a Di∣spensing Power, That they are not to be Dispensed with by a non obstante. If a Prince makes a Grant of any thing wherein he hath Power to oblige himself in Justice, it becomes, saith Baselius Pontius, of the Basel. Pontius De Matr. l. 8. de dispensat. c. 5. n. 7. Nature of a Contract, which gives a Right to those to whom it is made, and lays an Obligation of Justice upon him. Where a Grant is made for the Benefit of others, and is ac Sanchez de matr. l. 8. dispens. c. 17. n. 29. cepted by them, it is not in the Granter's Power to revoke it, as San∣chez shews from many Authorities. And the Lawyers are of the same Mind, as appears by what is already produced out of Baldus and others; but I shall mention some who declare the Opinion of others. Explorati juris est eas Constitutiones quae in contractum transe∣unt Buxtorff. in auream bullam, c. 1. sect. 7. ita ligare Principes ut iis derogare nequeant, saith Gerl. Bux∣torffius. Gail saith, That Princes are bound by all Grants made per mo∣dum contractus de Jure Communi; and that is the general Gail. observ. l. 1. obs. 41. n. 4 Opinion. One of the latest Writers de Jure Gentium, saith, That Prin∣ces are more strongly bound by Laws, which pass by way of Contracts, Job. Wolfg. Textor. de jure gent. c. 11. n. 26. than by any positive Laws made by Absolute Power, Although they relate to the weightiest Points of Government. That a Prince cannot grant a non obstante to such Laws as he Bellug. spic. Princ. rubr. 7. n. 4. Hier. Grat. cons. 41. n. 21. Rol. a valle, cons. 62. n. 5. vol. 2. Celsus Hugo, de clausulis, n. 23. hath sworn to observe; is not only the Opinion of other Lawyers, but of some of the highest Canonists: And it is a Rule among them, That no Clause of non obstante can take away Constitutio∣nem Juratam. Where there is therefore not only a Contract with others in the passing of a Law, but an Oath to observe the Laws, I do not see how a non obstante or a Dispensing Power can take Place. 2. We have the Advantage in Point of Authority as well as Reason, as to this very Case of Dispensing with the Statute of 23 H. 6. For I take it for granted, That the Authority of Parliament is more to be regarded than the Opinion of Judges: And I think we have good Reason to believe, That the Parliament did not think this Act could be voided by a non obstante. (1.) The Parliament that declared, any non obstante against the Act to be void, was certainly of that Opinion; or else they did a ridiculous thing, to put in a Clause which was void of it self. (2.) The Parliament, 28 H. 6. c. 3. was of that Mind; for what need an Indemnity by Act of Parliament, if the King could by his Dispensing Power have made it lawful for the Sheriffs to continue?
(3.) The Parliament, 8 E. 4. 4. continued in the same mind, for, whereas in the beginning of his Reign Sheriffs were continued more than a Year, by reason of the Troubles, it was not then thought, (though in a Case of such Necessity) That the King could Dispense with this Law; but they were indemnified by Act of Parliament, and the Act declared to stand in full Force. (4.) the Parliament, 6 H. 8. c. 18. after the supposed Judg∣ment, 2 H. 7. And in the time of a Prince who would lose none of his Prerogatives, was still of the same Judgment; for it not only recites the Statute, but particularly takes notice of the void∣ing all Pardons and non obstante's; and by Act of Parliament in∣demnisies the Under-Sheriffs of Bristow, and gives them the same Priviledge which those of London had. What need all this, if it had been thought good Law at that time, that the King might by his Dispensing Power have given Sheriffs leave to have acted against that Statute? And now I leave any Man of Reason to judge, Whether this famous Case be a sufficient Foundation for the seting up a Dis∣pensing Power, either as to a Particular Statute made for the Secu∣rity of our Religion, or for a Suspension of our Ecclesiastical Laws.
CHAP. IV. Of the Alterations made in the Supremacy, by the Sta∣tutes of Henry the Eighth; with an Answer to the Objections. I Now come to the Alterations made in our Laws, about the King's Supremacy in the Time of Henry the Eighth. 24 Hen. 8. c. 12. An Act passed for taking away all Appeals to Rome, which is founded on the King's Natural and Independent Right of Governing, and doing Justice to all his People; and the Sufficiency of his own Clergy, for Hearing and Determining such Matters as belonged to their Function; and therefore all Causes are to be Heard, Discussed, Examined, finally and definitively Adjudged and Determined within the King's Jurisdiction and Authority, and not elswhere in the Courts Spiritual and Temporal: But if the King be concerned, then it is referred to the Upper-House of Convo∣cation. The Preamble of this Act against Appeals to Rome, is conside∣rable: Whereas by divers Authentick Histories and Chronicles, it is manifestly declared and expressed, That this Realm of England is an Empire governed by one Supreme Head and King, &c. with plenary, whole and entire Power, Preheminence, Authority, Prerogative and Jurisdiction &c. for final determination of Causes, &c. so that here is an Appeal to Ancient History in this Matter, and we have still sufficient Evidence of it before the Popes Encroachments prevailed. The Bishops and Barons told Anselm, in William Rufus his time, It was a thing unheard of, and contrary to the Custom of his Realm for any one to go to Rome without the King's Leave; which is after explained by way of Appeal: Anselm made but a shuffling Answer to this, although he had sworn to observe the Customs of the Realm, and he could not deny this to be one, but he pretended, It was against S. Peter's Authority, and therefore could not observe it; for this were, saith he, to abjure S. Peter. From whence I infer, That the Custom of the Realm, was then thought by Anselm to be inconsistent with the Pope's Authority: For whatever they talk of S. Peter, it is the Pope they mean. In the Reign of H. 1. the Pope complains grievously, That the King would suffer no Appeals to be made to him; and that due Eadmer. f. 113, 115. Reverence was not shewed to S. Peter in his Kingdom; and that they ended Ecclesiastical Causes at Home, even where Bishops were concerned; and very learnedly quotes the Deretal Epistles against them.
Afterwards, the Pope sent his Legate, and the King denied him f. 118, 121. Entrance, and the whole Parliament rejected it, as contrary to the Ancient Custom and Liberty of England. That Passage in the Laws of H. 1. c. 5. which seems to allow of Appeals, is a mere Forgery, the whole Chapter being a Rapsody taken out of the Canonists. H. Huntingdon saith, That Appeals were brought in in King Stephen's time, by Henry Bishop of Winchester, his Brother be∣ing Hunt. f. 226. the Pope's Legate. By the Constitutions of Clarendon, c. 8. the Appeal lay from the Archbishop to the King, which is well expressed by Robert of Gloucester. And the K. amend solde the Ercbishops deed, And be as in the Pope's sted, and S. Thomas it withsteed. And although H. 2. in his Purgation for the Death of the Archbishop, did swear, That he would hinder no Appeals to Rome in Ecclesiastical Causes; and that he would quit the Ancient Customs of the Realm: Yet Hoveden saith, The Constitutions of Clarendon were renewed in the Parliament at Northampton, and the Justices in Eyre were sworn to observe them, and to make others observe them inviolably: And for those who went out of the Kingdom (in Case of Appeals) the Justices were to enquire per consuetudinem Terrae, according to the Ancient Custom; and if they did not return and stand to the King's Court, they were to be outlawed. In the Time of R. 1. the Popes complained much of Geofry, Archbishop of York, for slighting Appeals made to Rome, and Hoveden, f. 426, 433, 465. imprisoning those that made them. Celestine doth it twice, and in the same Words: And Innocent the Third, in King John's Time, renews the same Complaint of him, That he shewed no regard to Appeals made to the Apostolick See. But when the Rights of the Crown were given up by King John to the Pope, no Wonder if the Liberties of Appeals were granted by him: But yet, in the succeeding Reigns, we have several Instances upon Record of Persons imprisoned by the King, for making Appeals to Rome. John of Ibstock, in the Time of E. 1. The Abbot of Walden, K. James his Premon. p. 300. and a Prebendary of Banbury, in the Reign of E. 2. The Parson of Leighe, Harwoden, and the Prior of Barnwel, in the time of E. 3. So that this Right was still owned by our Princes, when the Matter came into Contest, and therefore the Act of H. 8. against Appeals was but a just Resuming of the Ancient Rights of the Crown. 25 H. 8. c. 19. A Commission is appointed for reviewing the Canons: And it is observable, That because it could not be done in Parliament Time, the King hath Power given him by Act of Parliament to nominate the thirty two Persons to act in this Matter, in these Words; Be it therefore enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the King's Highness shall have Power and Authority to nomi∣nate
and assign at his Pleasure the said thirty two Persons of his Sub∣jects; whereof sixteen to be of the Clergy, and sixteen to be of the Temporality of the Upper and Nether House of Parliament. And because the last Resort was to the Arch-Bishop in the for∣mer Act of Appeals; therefore to prevent any Inconveniences thereby, a new Power is granted by this Act, i. e. Upon an Ap∣peal to the King in Chancery, a Commission is to be directed to such Persons as the King shall appoint, who are to hear and determine such Appeals, and the Causes concerning the same. 25 H. 8. c. 21. After the Submission of the Clergy, and the King being owned Supreme Head, yet the Power of dispensing with the Canons in particular Cases, did not pass by Commission from the King, but by Act of Parliament. The Words are, It standeth therefore with natural Equity and good Reason, that all and every such Laws human, made without this Realm, or induced into this Realm by the said Sufferance, Consents and Custom, Your Royal Majesty, your Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons repre∣senting the whole State of your Realm, in this your High Court of Parliament, have full Power and Authority not only to dispense, but also to Authorize some elect Person or Persons, to dispense, &c. So that the Power of granting Faculties at a time when the Pre∣rogative was highest, was not executed by Commission from the King by vertue of his Supremacy and Prerogative Royal, but was granted to the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, in the manner expres∣sed in that Act. A late Author has stretched this Statute to a Power of dispen∣sing in other Cases, besides those which depended on the Canon-Law. Visitatorial Power, &c. p. 262. For, saith he, the Pope usurped such a Power in derogation of the Authority Royal, and then that Power must be originally in the King; otherwise, in the Construction of the Act, it could be no Usurpation. But this is a very false way of Reasoning; The Pope usurped such a Power on the Crown; therefore the Crown hath it of Right: For the Popes Usurpations were many of them unreasonable (his Primacy, according to Canons, being allowed) and our Law did restore to the King the ancient Right and Juris∣diction of the Crown, and not put him into the Possession of all the extravagant Power which the Pope usurped. For this Law charges the Pope with intolerable Exactions of great Sums of Money, in Pen∣sions, Censes, Peter-Pence, Procurations, Fruits, Suits for Provi∣sions and Expeditions of Bulls, for Arch-Bishopricks and Bishop∣ricks, and for Delegates and Rescripts in Causes of Contentions and Appeals, Jurisdictions Legantine, as well as Dispensations, Licenses, Faculties, Grants, Relaxations, Writs, called Perinde valere, Rehabilitations, Absolutions, &c. Now all these were Usurpa∣tions in Derogation of the Crown; but doth it therefore follow that the Crown hath a Right to them all? But to go no further than the Business of Dispensations; Hath the King a Right by this Statute to dispense as far as the Pope? The Pope
usurped a Power of dispensing in Matrimonial Contracts, in Oaths, in Vows, in some positive Divine Laws, which I suppose H. 8. by vertue of the Supremacy, never pretended to. So that it is a very mistaken Notion of some Men, That the King had all the Power, which the Pope usurped. And as to the Act, it is plain by the Words of it, That the Original Power of Dispensing, was lodged in the King, Lords and Commons, and the Ministerial Ex∣ecution of it with the Arch Bishop of Canterbury, even with re∣spect to the King himself. But if the King had pretended to all the Power which the Pope usurped, he must have dispensed with himself. But this Author offers to Prove, That there is a Power in the Crown to dispense with Acts of Parliament, even such as concern P. 266. the Consecration of Bishops; because it is said, 8 Eliz. That the Queen by her Supreme Authority had dispensed with all causes or Doubts of any Imperfection or Disability in the Persons, &c. To give a clear Answer to this, we must consider these Things; 1. That, 1 Eliz. 1. The Act of 25 H. 8. for the Order and Form of Electing and Making Arch-Bishops and Bishops, was revi∣ved; as appears by the same Act, 8. Eliz. 1. 7. 2. That by another Act, 1 Eliz. 2. The Book of Common-Prayer and Administration of Sacraments and other Rites and Cere∣monies of the Church of England, which were in use in the time of 6 E. and repealed by Queen Mary, were re-inforced, 1 Eliz. 2. 2. and the Repeal annulled. But by the Act 5 and 6 E. 6. c. 1. §. 5. the Form and Manner of making Arch-Bishops, Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, was added to the Book of Prayer, as of like Force and Authority with it. 3. That the Act of E. 6. being revived with the express men∣tion of the Alterations and Additions made to it; there was ro Necessity apprehended, 1 Eliz. to make a distinct Act for that which was in force already by the Name of Additions therein ad∣ded and appointed by that Statute. And this, I conceive, was the true Reason why a Bill did not pass, 1 Eliz. to that purpose: For, I find by the Journals of the House, a Bill was prepared and read the third time in the House of Lords; but upon Con∣sideration, it was laid a side, as superfluous. 4. That the Popish Party took Advantage of this, and pre∣tended, That the Book of Consecration, &c. was not established by Law, being not expresly mentioned, and therefore the Bishops made by it, were not Legal Bishops. And upon this Bonner resolved to stand the Trial against Horn, Bishop of Winchester, as may be seen in Dyer, R. f. 234., So that the Papists then stood upon it, That the Crown could not dispense with Laws; otherwise Bonner's Plea signified nothing. For if there were such an Inherent Right
in the Crown to Dispense with Laws in Ecclesiastical Matters▪ then these were Legal Bishops, having all the Queen's Dispensing Power for them. 5. The Clause in the Queen's Letters Patents for Dispensing with Imperfections and Disability, was put in out of abundant Caution, and not for any Necessity that we can find: But it was Customary in the Popes Bulls to put in such kind of Clauses; and therefore they would omit no Power in that Case, which the Pope did pretend to; which the Act faith, was for avoiding all Ambiguities and Questions. 6. But after all, lest there should be any Colour for Disputing this Matter left, according to the express Letter of the Law, therefore it was declared, 8 Eliz. 1. 3. That not only the Book of Common-Prayer, but the Form of Consecrating Archbishops, Bi∣shops, &c. which was set sorth in Edward the Sixth's Time, and added to the Common Prayer, shall stand and be in full Force and Effect: And all Acts done by it, are declared to be Good and Perfect to all Intents and Purposes: So that this Act of Parliament doth rather overthrow a Dispensing Power; for if there were then such a Supreme and Absolute Power in the Crown, as to Ecclesi∣astical Matters, what need such an Act of Parliament to Con∣firm and Ratifie what our Author supposes done by virtue of it? But to return to the 25th of H. 8. In the same Act of Parlia∣ment, care is taken for the Visiting Exempt Places, as Monasteries, Colledges and Hospitals, by a particular Commission under the Great Seal. But that which comes nearest to our Business is, That 26 H. 8. c. 1. another Act passed, wherein the King's Supremacy is ac∣knowledged, and a Power given by Act of Parliament for him to Visit, Redress and Amend all Errors, Heresies, Abuses, Contempts and Enormities whatsoever, which by any manner of Spiritual Au∣thority or Jurisdiction ought or may lawfully be Reformed in any Usage, Custom, Foreign Laws, Foreign Authority, Prescription, or any Thing or things to the contrary hereof notwithstand∣ing. If the King had this Power by virtue of his Supremacy and Prerogative Royal, can we imagin H. 8. so weak a Prince, and so little a valuer of his own Prerogative, as to have that given him by Act of Parliament, which was acknowledged to be in him before? But the Words are express, And that our Sove∣reign Lord, &c. shall have full Power and Authority from Time to Time to Visit, &c. From whence it follows, That in the Judg∣ment of H. 8. and the Parliament, such a Power was not perso∣nally
inherent in him, but that it did belong to the Legislative Power; and therefore an Act of Parliament was required for it; so that the Supremacy, as then setled by Law, lay in a total re∣jecting any Foreign Jurisdiction, and governing this Church and Kingdom by our own Laws: Which is well expressed in the Preamble to the Act against Appeals, viz. That this Realm of England is an Empire governed by one Supreme Head and King, having the Dignity and Royal Estate of the Imperial Crown of the same, unto whom a Body Politick, compact of all Sorts and Degrees of People, divided in Terms and by Names of Spiritualty and Temporalty, been bounden, and ought to bear, next to God, a Na∣tural and Humble Obedience. By virtue of this Act Cromwel was made Vicegerent and Vicar General, (for both are in the same Commission) and the King gave to him omnem & omnimodam Jurisdictionem, Authoritatem sive Potestatem Ecclesiasticam, quae nobis tanquam supremo Capiti hu∣jusmodi competit, &c. which are the Words of his Commission. It's true, That the Power of granting a Commission to exer∣cise this Power, is not expressed in the Act of Parliament; but it being vested in the King by the Act, he might appoint One or more Commissioners to do it in his name; but the Case is very different where that very Power of Delegation is taken away by Act of Parliament, for that is the present Case. To make this clear, we must consider the Words of this Act, and compare them with 1 Eliz. 1. the 17 Car. 1. 12. and the present Commission. The Words, 26 H. 8. 1. are the same in effect with those 1 Eliz. 1. But with this observable Difference, That whereas the Statute of H. 8. gives the King his Heirs and Successors full Power and Authority from Time to Time to Visit, &c. That of 1 Eliz. 1. unites the Jurisdiction to the Imperial Crown of this Realm; but then it doth not proceed as the other did, To give full Power and Authority to her, her Heirs and Successors, to visit, &c. but the Words are, And that your Highness, your Heirs and Successors Kings or Queens of this Realm shall have full Power and Authority by this Act, by Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England to Assign, Name and Authorise, when and as often as your Highness, your Heirs and Successors shall think meet to Exercise, Use, Occupy and Execute under your Highness, your. Heirs and Successors, all manner of Jurisdictions, Priviledges and Preheminences, in any wise touching or concerning any Spiri∣tual or Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, &c. so that the Administra∣tion of this Extraordinary Jurisdiction is by this Act limited to such who are nominated and appointed by the Letters Patents. The Fountain of all Jurisdiction is acknowledged to be in the
Imperial Crown of this Realm, but the Administration is twofold; Ordinary, in the Archbishops, Bishops and Eccle∣siastical Courts; and to secure their Dependance on the Crown, the Oath of Supremacy is required by this Act to be taken by every Archbishop, Bishop, and all Ecclesiastical Persons and Officers. But besides this, it was then thought fit, That there should be an Extraordinary Administration of it, which is limited by this Act to such as should be nominated and appointed in Letters Patents, &c. and no other Reason can be given of the Change from what it was in the Time of Henry the Eighth, for it is not now placed absolutely, as then, in the Queen, her Heirs and Successors, but the Jurisdiction is annexed to the Crown, and the Extraordinary Administration to be by Commission under the Broad Seal. Now since this Power of nominating Commissioners for Extraordinary Jurisdictions is taken away by Act of Parli∣ament, the only Question is, Whether notwithstanding the Right of Jurisdiction being still in the Crown, a new Com∣mission may not be granted for Extraordinary Jurisdi∣ction? There had been no Question in this Case, if the Ad∣ministration of Extraordinary Jurisdiction had not been set∣led 1 Eliz. 1. to be by Commission, and that very Power of granting such a Commission had not been taken away by Act of Parliament. But as the Matter now stands, the only Pretence left for it is, That the same Act which confirms the Repeal, hath a Salvo for the King's Supremay, in these Words; Provided always, That this Act shall not extend, or be construed to extend to abridg or diminish the King's Supre∣macy in Ecclesiastical Matters or Affairs. If these Words be taken strictly, with Respect to the same Matter, they make the Act inconsistent with it self: For then the mean∣ing would be, The King's Supremacy shall not extend to the setting up such a Court, always provided, that his Su∣premacy, notwithstanding this Act, may extend to the set∣ting up such another Court. Is it consistent with the Wisdom of a Parliament to make such delusory Acts? Therefore we must understand the King's Supremacy in other Matters. And there was this Reason for it, All the Acts of Parliament touching the Supremacy in Henry the Eighth's Time were repealed by Queen Mary, and the Restoring the Supremacy to the Crown was by the same Act which set up the High Commission; and therefore
when part of that Act was Repealed, and that Repeal confirmed, it was fitting to add a Clause, That there was no intention to abridg or diminish the Supremacy setled by Law, especially, since by that Act the Ordinary Juris∣diction of the Bishops in their Courts was revived: And it is very well known, what Clamors had been made, As though the Bishops Courts being held in their own Names were inconsistent with the King's Supremacy; and although the Judges had declared, July the first 1637. That there was no necessity that Processes Ecclesiastical should be in the King's Name; and the King, August the eighteenth, in 13 Car. 1. published a Proclamation to that purpose: Yet all this did not satisfie some, but the Bishops were still thought by them, in their Ordinary Jurisdiction, to usurp upon the King's Supremacy and to abridg and diminish it; therefore when this Act passed to revive their Jurisdiction, it was no more than reasonable to add such a Clause to prevent Misconstruction, viz. That this Act, nor any thing in it, be construed to extend to abridg or diminish the King's Supremacy in Ecclesiastical Matters; as the Ordi∣nary Jurisdiction of the Bishops had been thought to do. And the Vindicator of the Ecclesiastical Commission, could Vindication Eccles. Com. p. 19. not forbear a Marginal Note to that purpose. The Court held by his Majesties Ecclesiastical Commissioners, is more legal than the Bishops Courts; This is in the Kings Name, theirs in their own Name only: As though the new setting up a Court, forbidden by Law, did not make it illegal, in whose Name soever it were; and as though Courts expresly owned and allowed by Law, were illegal, meerly because the Forms of their Proceedings do not run in the Kings Name. But I desire him to take an Answer from his own Oracle the L. Ch. J. Coke, Co. 5. R. f. 39. Now albeit the Proceedings and Process in the Ecclesiastical Courts, be in the Name of the Bishops, &c. it followeth not therefore, that either the Court is not the Kings, or the Law, whereby they pro∣ceed, is not the Kings Law. For taking one Example for many, every Leet or view of Frank Pledge holden by a Subject, is kept in the Lords Name, and yet it is the Kings Court, and all the Proceedings therein are directed by the Kings Laws; and many Subjects in England have and hold Courts of Record, and other Courts, and all their Proceedings be according to the Kings Laws and Customs of the Realm. But there is a Material Objection or two yet to be an∣swered.
1. It is Objected, That 2 Jac. the Judges declared in the Star-Chamber, That the Deprivation of Non-conformists, was 2 Cr. f. 37. Moor, f. 755. Noy, f. 100. lawful, because the King had supreme Ecclesiastical Power, which he hath delegated to the Commissioners, whereby they had Power of Deprivation by the Canon Law of this Realm; and the Statute of 1 Eliz. doth not confer any new Power, but ex∣plain and declare the ancient Power: And therefore they held it clear, that the King without a Parliament might make Orders and Constitutions for the Government of the Clergy, and might deprive them, if they obeyed not. To which I answer, 1. Our Question is not, Whether the King, without a Parliament, may not require the Observation of Canons pas∣sed the Convocation, so as to deprive the Obstinate, by Vertue of his Supreme Power in Ecclesiastical Matters; but whether he may appoint a Commission with Power to deprive against an Act of Parliament; which hath taken away the Legal Power of any such Commission. 2. In matters of this nature, it is safer trusting the Su∣preme Judicature of the Nation in Parliament, than the Extra∣judicial Opinion of the Judges. And in this Case the Parliament hath declared it self ano∣ther way; as appears by the Canons, 1640. which were not only condemned in Parliament afterwards (which then might be imputed to the heat of the Times) but in the most Loyal Parliament after the King's Return, particular care was taken, that neither the Canons of 1640. should be confirmed, nor any other Ecclesiastical Laws or Canons, not formerly con∣firmed, allowed, or enacted by Parliament, or by the Established Laws of the Land as they stood in the Year of the Lord, 1639. Which implies, that the Sense of the Parliament then was, that we are not to own any Canons but such as were confirmed, allowed, or Enacted by Parliament, or by the Established Laws of the Land before 1639. And therefore no new Injunctions without a Parliament or Convocation, can make the Clergy liable to a Legal Deprivation. No, not that which the De∣fender is so pleased with the thoughts of, viz. to give their Assent and Consent to the King's Declaration, on pain of De∣privation. P. 14. 3. The Temporalties of the Clergy, especially the Bishops, are secured by several Acts of Parliament without a Tryal at Law. Which, because I see none of our great Lawyers take notice of, I shall here set down.
14 Edward the Third, c. 3. We Will and Grant for us, Statut. pro Clero. and for our Heirs, that from henceforth We nor Our Heirs shall not take nor cause to be taken into Our Hands, the Temporalties of Archbishops, Bishops, &c. or other People of Holy Church of what Estate or Condition they be, without a true and just Cause, according to the Law of the Land and Judg∣ment thereupon given. 25 Edward the Third, c. 6. The Title of the Statute is, A Bishops Temporalties shall not be seized for a Contempt. And this was received for good Law, 9 E. 4. 28. Br. Ord. 12. Reg. f. 32. But a very late Writer tells the World, That the Pos∣sessions Visitatorial Power, &c. p. 302. of Ecclesiastical Persons are but Conditional Freeholds; and although Absolute Freeholds require a due Course of Law, yet Conditional do not; so that if a Man chance to be de∣prived of his Office, his Freehold is gone. This is touching Clergymen's Freeholds to purpose; and no doubt out of pure Zeal to the Church of England: But see the Equity and Impartiality of this Man! He had undertaken before to give Publick Assurance of Abby-Lands to the present Possessors: And for what Rea∣son? Assurance of Abby-Lands, p. 164, 184. Because the Pope granted a Dispensation with a non obstante to the Canon Law: And yet in this Book he proves, That a non obstante is no ways binding to the Supreme Power; so that no Man could more effectually over∣throw his own Assurance than he hath done himself: For, saith he, Present Sovereigns, whether King or Pope can∣not Visitatorial Power, &c. p. 297, 298. bind their Successors. And again, Acts of Graces and Favours are alterable and suspendible at the Pleasure of the Succeeding Sovereign: Why then should any be so weak as to think the Plenitude of the Pope's Power as to Abby-Lands, can be bound up by the Act of any former Pope? I confess the comparing these two Books together hath extreamly lessened his Assurance of Abby Lands with me. And his Answers to the Power of Revocation are so p. 200. weak, that they come at last to no more than this, It is a thing which cannot well be done at present, there∣fore there is no fear it ever should be done. Here is some Security at least, till it can be done. But as to the Posses∣sions of the Ecclesiastical Persons of the Church of England, he endeavours to prove, That they can have no Security at all of their present Possessions, notwithstanding any Pro∣mise or a Legal Title: For if, as he saith, The King by his
Paramount Jurisdiction can make any Exceptions null; and p. 297, 298. so void a solemn Oath▪ not to accept a Dispensation from that Oath; why should he not as well make void any Pro∣mise of his own; when it hinders (as he thinks) a greater Good, especially if the Prerogative cannot be bound? But then, as to a Legal Title, that is the vainest thing ima∣ginable, as to such Conditional Freeholds which Clergymen have; for if the Commissioners deprive them by their Pow∣er ab Officio & Beneficio, their Attendent Frehold, saith he, is gone, without any Course of Law. And the Defender Defence. p. 24 saith, The Commissioners may deprive if Clergymen should not assent and consent to all contained in the King's Declaration, if he required it. But it is to be hoped, That Princes will not take the Measures of Justice, and Wisdom, and Honour from such Men: We will therefore set aside the Omnipotent Engine of a non obstante, which doth not bat∣ter so much as it undermines, and consider the Legal Se∣curity of these Conditional Freeholds. I. All Freeholds are in some Sense Conditional, or else they could never be forfeited: Which shews, that there are none Absolute, with Respect to the Law. And as to their Original among us, it is agreed, That by the An∣cient Right of Tenures, all Fees are Conditional; for they suppose Fealty, the non-performance whereof is Felony: Which is not that which is done felleo animo, as Sir Ed∣ward Coke trifles, but it is the same with Falshood or Treachery. The Laws of H. 1. c. 5. Si Dominus de Fe∣lonia vel Fide mentitus compellat hominem suum: And in another Law, the punishment of Felony is Forfeiture of the Land, c. 43. and therefore the Feudists say, That Fe∣lony is delictum Vasalli adversus Dominum; From the Go∣thick Fell or Fehl, which signifies in general, a Fault; And in this Case, the Breach of Trust towards his Lord: Of which sort of Felonies the Feudists reckon up some twenty, some thirty, any one of which makes a Forfei∣feiture: So that here is no such mighty Difference, that the poor Clergymen must only have Conditional and Atten∣dant Freeholds, as though other Men's were Absolute, whereas Sir Thomas Smith affirms, all in England are Rep. Angl. l. 3. c. 10. Fiduciary, i. e. Conditional Freeholders, beside the King. It is easie enough for any one to frame such a Distinction of Freeholds; and to say, That these who have but such a Freehold may be ejected, without any Trial at Common Law: But he ought to have shewed, That Magna Charta or the Ancient Laws made such a Difference between Ec∣clesiastical Freeholds and others; which he hath not pre∣ended to do; and therefore such a Distinction ought
not to be allowed, especially since I have produced an Act of Parliament 14 Edward 3. c. 3. which saith, That Instit. 51. Clergymen shall not be ejected out of their Temporalties without a True and Just Cause, according to the Law of the Land: This was none of those Statutes which are in Print, but never enrolled, for Sir Robert Cotton owns Cottons Abr. p. 23. the enrolment of it, and that it was made into a Sta∣tute; and Mr. Pryn himself had nothing to object against it: But now it seems their Conditional Freholds may be ta∣ken from them without any due Course of Law. II. There is more to be said concerning the Rights of Ecclesiastical Persons in Colledges, because they are Lay Mod. Rep. f. 84. Corporations. For in Appleford's Case it was declared to be the Opinion of all the Judges in Pattrick's Case, That a Colledge was a Temporal Corporation: And therefore some notable Difference in Point of Law must be shewed, Why Men may be deprived of some Freeholds without due Course of Law, and not of others; for I cannot ima∣gine, That Colledges being founded for the encourage∣ment of Learning, should lay Men more open to Arbi∣trary Proceedings, than any other Legal Societies are: However, Deprivation, in Coveney's Case, was agreed to be a Temporal Thing; and for that Reason his Appeal Dier, f. 209. was rejected, as not relating to a Matter of Ecclesiastical Ju∣risdiction, which was only provided for 24. and 25. Henr. 8. But it was allowed, That he might bring an Action at p. 320. Common Law. Our Author several times mentions this Case; but puts it off till he comes to Treat of Appeals, i. e. to the Place he knew it to be improper in. For the Question is not, Whether an Appeal doth lie to the King in Chancery in a Case of Deprivation? but, Whether there be not a Remedy at Common Law, if a Person be deprived of a Free-hold without due form of Law? And after a great deal of Impertinency, p. 224. about the manner of Appeals, he at last concludes, The Reme∣dy had been at Common Law only; which is clear giving up the Point. For then, in case a Person be deprived without due course of Law, of his Free-hold, he grants, that he is to have his Remedy at Law; and consequently that a Depriva∣tion of such a Free-hold without due Course of Law, is not sufficient. For the Law provides no Remedy where there is no Injury done, nor just Cause to seek for Redress. And so I come to the second Objection; which is this; 2. That to deny the Jurisdiction of this Court, is to deny the King's Supremacy; and that is a dangerous thing by the Law.
The Case was this; Dr. F. of Magdalen College in Visitatorial Power, p. 313. Oxford, being summoned before the Commissioners, deni∣ed the Authority of the Court, and persisted in so doing; which our Author saith, in another Kings Reign perhaps might have been interpreted a Questioning the very Supremacy it self; which, how fatal it was to John Fisher, Bishop of Rochester, and Sir Thomas Moor, is worthy to be consi∣dered, both as a Demonstration of our Kings Clemency, and that the Doctor hath not so much reason to complain of his hard Usage. The Meaning whereof is this, That if they had proceeded in Justice against him, he ought to have suffered as Bishop Fisher and Sir Thomas Moor did. This is more than a bare In∣sinuation, That to deny the Jurisdiction of this Court, is to deny the Kings Supremacy; and that it is meer Clemency not to deal by them who do it, as H. 8. did by Bishop Fisher and Sir Thomas Moor. But, 1. It is by no means evident, That those two Persons suffered meerly on that Account. For their Attain∣der in Parliament, was for refusing the Oath of Successi∣on; and King James I. mentions the Words of Sir Tho∣mas King James his Works, p. 283. Moor to that purpose, which he spake to the Lords when he was condemned. And their Attainder, if I mi∣stake not, was in the same Parliament which made it Trea∣son to deprive the King of his Dignity, Title or Name of his Royal Estate, and therefore could not be by an Act not then passed. But, 2. Suppose that they were at last proceeded against on the Act then passed, what is this to the present Case? when Coke saith, This Act was twice Repealed. And it is no 4 Inst. f. 42. extraordinary Clemency, not to be proceeded against by a Law that hath no force. 3. The Statute in Force, 5 Eliz. c. 1. is against those who defend or maintain the Authority, Jurisdiction, or Power of the Bishop of Rome, or of his See, heretofore claimed, used, or usurped within this Realm, or by any Speech, open Deed, or Act, advisedly, wittingly attribute any such manner of Ju∣risdiction, Authority, or Preheminence to the said See of Rome, or any Bishop of the same, for the time being, within this
Realm. So that it cannot be denied, that there is occasion for his Majesties Clemency; but it is to another sort of Men. 4. It is very hard straining to make the denying the Jurisdiction of this Court, to be denying the Kings Supremacy, when a Person hath done all which the Law requires him to do towards owning the Supremacy. If he had said Dr. F. had taken Possession of his Fellowship there, without taking the Oath of Supremacy, which the Law requires, he had then indeed given ground to su∣spect him for denying the Kings Supremacy; but to take no notice of those who refused to do as the Law requires, and to talk thus of what Severity might be used to one that hath done it, looks in him neither like Clemency nor Justice. 5. It was always looked on, as a Legal Right to make Exception to the Jurisdiction of a Court, especially when newly established, without Act of Parliament, and to a∣ny ordinary Understanding, in flat Contradiction to it. It is very new Doctrine that in a Legal Government Exceptio Fori shall be interpreted a Denial of supreme Au∣thority, which was not only allowed by the Canon and Civil Laws, but by the most Ancient Common Lawyers we have. Bracton observes several things, which are material to this purpose. 1. The first General Exception which is allowed, he saith, Bract. 1. 5 de Excep. c. 1. is contra Jurisdictionem. Exceptions are either dilatory or Peremptory. Some that are only dilatory, as to the Action, may be peremptory as to the Jurisdicton. And these are to be put in ante Litem contestatam, ad perimendum Judicium, ne procedat. And the first of this sort, are the Exceptions con∣tra Jurisdictionem, & contra Personas Judicantium, quibus deficit Autoritas judicandi. So that he supposes, that such who do not deny the Kings Supreme Authority, may have a Legal and just Exception against the Authority of a Court.
2. It was an allowable Exceptio Fori then, if any Lay-Persons L. 2. c. 8. n. 9. did take upon them to proceed by Ecclesiastical Cen∣sures. In Ecclesiastical Causes, saith he, a Secular Judge hath no Cognizance, because he hath not the Power of Coercion proper to them, viz. by Ecclesiastical Censures; therefore, he saith, in his Causis pertinet Cognitio ad Judices Ecclesiasticos. His Reason is, Because those only are the competent Judges, who have the Power of Coercion proper to the Court. And for the same Cause, Ecclesiastical Judges are not to interpose in Secular Causes, cum jura sint separata & limitata. And although the Exemption of Ecclesiastical Persons from the Civil Courts, be certainly taken away by the Acts of Supremacy; yet it hath been still alledged by our Divines, That the Ecclesiastical Censures were still reser∣ved to the Ecclesiastical Functions; either in the way of Ordinary or Delegate Jurisdiction. If the High Commissi∣on did seem to go further, then that Power being taken away by Act of Parliament, it must return to the Ancient Course. 3. There must be a Legal Authority to constitute a Legal Jurisdiction. L. 5. de Exc. c. 14. Ad hoc quod rata sint judicia, videre oportet a Justic. Warrantum habeat à Rege quod judicare possit. Si Warran∣tum non habuerit, non valebit quod coram eo actum fuerit, quasi coram non suo judice, quia primo legi debet Breve Ori∣ginale, & postmodum Breve per quod Justiciar. constitutus est, & si nullum omnino habuerit, aut si habuerit non tamen ad manum, non erit ei parendum nisi it a forte sit, quod Breve Ori∣ginale de Justiciaria sua faciat mentionem, Bracton, l. 5. De Except. c. 14. 1. There must be a Commission from the King, which must be read; and if either they have it not, or it be not at hand, the Jurisdiction is not to be owned, unless it be mentioned in the Original Writ. For Commissions in those days were most commonly granted by Writ, saith the Lord 2 Inst. f. 418. Coke. But by Bracton's Words, it appears, That commonly there was an Original Writ and a Commission besides; but
sometime the Commission was in the Original Writ, and then the reading of that was sufficient. The Mirror saith, That the Jurisdiction may be denied, Mirror de Ju∣stic. c. 3. §. 16. if the seeing or hearing the Commission be denied. 2. The Bounds of the Jurisdiction must be expressed; and if those be exceeded, he saith an Exception lies. Which signifies nothing unless the Commission be known. 3. The Commission must be according to Law; For that L. 3. de Acti∣on c. 9. n. 3. is Bracton's standing Rule: Nihil aliud potest Rex in Terris, cum sit Dei Minister & Vicarius, nisi id solum quod Jure potest. So that a Commission against Law is void in Law. He mentions the Common Saying in the Ci∣vil Law, Quod Principi placet, Legis habet Vigorem; and answers it thus, Quod Principi placet is not to be under∣stood of his Presumptive, but his Legislative Will (Ani∣mo condendi Jura) and with the Advice of his Magi∣strates, the King himself giving Authority; which is the Description of an Act of Parliament, as we now call it. Which he more fully expresses elsewhere, Legis vigo∣rem L. 1. c. 1. n. 2. habet, quicquid de Consilio & de Consensu Magnatum, & Reipublicae Communi sponsione, Authoritate Regis, sive Principis praecedente, juste fuerit Definitum & Approba∣tum. If this were the Ancient Law of England, how comes the Exception against a Court to be a Denial of the King's Supremacy; unless it be supposed impossible, That there should be an Illegal Court with the King's Commissi∣on? But we may suppose it possible for a new kind of Star-Chamber, or Court of Wards to be set up; must no Man question the Legality of such a Court, without de∣nying the King's Authority? For this is a Question in Point of Law. And the King's Authority always goes with the Law: and therefore to suppose it to be in any thing against Law, is to suppose it to be contradictory to it self.
But our Author saith, It is necessary for every Court to P. 313. assert its own Jurisdiction. Very true, and to clear it too; if it be liable to a just Exception. I am very far from denying the King's Supremacy; yet I may be as far from thinking such a Court to be Legal, if an Act of Parlia∣ment can make a Court Illegal; and to say no more for it, but that every Court must assert its own Jurisdiction, is to level it with the Infamous High Court of Justice; which when King Charles the First, of Blessed Memory, denied their Authority, all the Reply was, That the Court was satisfied of its own Authority; Which could give Satisfa∣ction to no Body else. And if this be all can be said for the Legality of it, for all that I can see, there is just Reason to deny it. FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books Published by the Reverend EDWARD STILLINGFLEET, D. D. Dean of St. Paul's and Sold by Henry Mortlack, at the Phoenix in St. Paul's Church-yard. A Rational Account of the Grounds of the Protestant Religion, being a Vindication of the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury's Relation of a Conference, &c. from the pretended Answer of T. C. Wherein the true Grounds of Faith are cleared, and the False disco∣vered; the Church of England vindicated from the Imputation of Schism; of the most important particular Controversies between us and those of the Church of Rome throughly examined: the Se∣cond Edition: Folio. Sermons Preached upon several Occasions, with a Discourse annex∣ed concerning the true Reasons of the Sufferings of Christ, wherein Crellius his Answer to Grotius, is considered: Folio. Origines Britannicae: Or the Antiquities of the British Churches; with a Preface concerning some pretended Antiquities relating to Britain, in vindication of the Bishop of St. Asaph. By Edward Stillingfleet, D. D. Dean of St. Pauls, Folio. Irenicum, A Weapon-Salve for the Churches Wounds: Quarto Origines Sacrae, or, A Rational Account of the Grounds of Christi∣an Faith, as to the Truth and Divine Authority of the Scriptures, and Matters therein contained: Quarto. The Unreasonableness of Separation, or an impartial Account of the History, Nature and Pleas of the present Separation from the Communion of the Church of England; to which several late Let∣ters are annexed of eminent Protestant Divines abroad concerning the Nature of our Differences, and the way to compose them: Quarto. A Discourse concerning the Idolatry practised in the Church of Rome, and the hazard of Salvation in the Communion of it, in an∣swer to some Papers of a revolted Protestant; wherein a particular Account is given of the Fanaticism and Divisions of that Church: Octavo. An Answer to several late Treatises occasioned by a Book Entitu∣led, A Discourse concerning the Idolatry practised in the Church of Rome, and the hazard of Salvation in the Communion of it; the First Part: Octavo. A Second Discourse in vindication of the Protestant Grounds of Faith, against the Pretence of Infallibility in the Roman Church, in Answer to the Guide in Controversie, by R. H. Protestancy with∣out Principles, and Reason, and Religion; or the certain Rule of Faith, by E. W. with a particular Enquiry into the Miracles of the Roman Church: Octavo. An Answer to Mr. Cressy's Epistle Apologetical to a Person of Honour, touching his Vindication of Dr. Stillingfleet: Octavo.
A Defence of the Discourse concerning the Idolatry practised in the Church of Rome, in Answer to a Book Entituled, Catholicks no Idolaters: Octavo. Several Conferences between a Romish Priest, a Fanatick Chap∣lain, and a Divine of the Church of England; being a full Answer to the late Dialogues of T. G. Octavo. The Grand Question concerning the Bishops Right to vote in Par∣liament in Cases Capital, Stated and Argued, from the Parliament Rolls and the History of former times; with an Enquiry into their Peerage, and the Three Estates in Parliament: Octavo. A Letter to Mr. G, giving a true Account of a late Conference at the D. of Pauls. A second Letter to Mr. G. in answer to two Letters lately published concerning the Conference at the D. of Pauls. A discourse concerning the Nature and Grounds of the Certainty of Faith, in Answer to J. S. his Catholick Letters. By Edward Stil∣lingfleet, D. D. Dean of St. Pauls. The Council of Trent examined and disproved by Catholick Tradition in the main Points in Controversie between us and the Church of Rome; with a particular Account of the Times and Oc∣casions of introducing them. Part I. To which a Preface is pre∣fixed concerning the true Sense of the Council of Trent, and the Notion of Transubstantiation. By Ed. Stillingfleet, D. D. Dean of St. Pauls. The Rule of Faith: Or an Answer to the Treatise of Mr. J. S. Entituled, Sure Footing, &c. By John Tillotson D. D. To which is adjoyned, A reply to Mr. J. S.'s third Appendix, &c. By Edward Stillingfleet, D. D. Octavo. Sermons Preached upon several Occasions, by Edward Stillingfleet, D. D. Dean of St. Paul's, not yet collected into a Volume. THE Reformation justified in a Sermon Preached at Guild-Hall Chappel, Sept. 21. 1673. before the Lord Mayor, &c. upon Acts XXIV. 14. A Sermon Preached Nov. 5. 1673. at St. Margarets Westminster, upon Matt. VII. 15, 16. A Sermon Preached before the King at Whitehall, Feb. 24▪ 1674/5. up∣on Heb. III. 13. A Sermon Preached on the Fast-Day, Nov. 13. 1678. at St. Margarets Westminster, before the Honourable House of Commons, upon 1 Sam. XII. 24, 25. A Sermon Preached before the King at Whitehall, March 7. 1678/9. upon Matt. X. 16. The Mischief of Separation, a Sermon Preached at Guild-hall Chap∣pel, May 11. 1680. before the Lord Mayor, &c. upon Phil. III. 16. Protestant Charity; A Sermon Preached at S. Sepulchres Church on Tuesday in Easter-Week, 1681. before the Lord Mayor, &c. upon Galat. VI. 9.
Of the Nature of Superstition; A Sermon Preached at St. Dun∣stans West, March 31. 1682. upon Col. II. 23. A Sermon Preached before the King, Feb. 15. 1683/4. upon Job XXIII. 15. A Sermon Preached at a Publick Ordination at St. Peter's Cornhil, March 15. 1684/5. upon 1 Tim. V. 22. A Sermon Preached at White-hall, Feb. 19. 1685/6. being the First Fryday in Lent, upon Luke XV. 18. Scripture and Tradition compared, in a Sermon Preached at Guild-hall Chappel, Nov. 27, 1687. upon Col. II. 6. A Sermon Preached before the Queen at White-hall, Feb. 22. 168. upon 1 Pet. IV. 8. THE Antiquities of Notinghamshire, extracted out of Records, Original Evidences, Leiger-Books, and other Manuscripts and Authentick Authorities, beautified with Maps, Prospects and Por∣traictures; By Robert Thoroton, M. D. Folio. A Discourse concerning the Nature of Idolatry; in which a late Authors true and only Notion of Idolatry is considered and confuted. Quarto. Proposals tendered to the Consideration of both Houses of Parlia∣ment, for uniting the Protestant Interest for the present, and pre∣venting Divisions for the future; together with the Declaration of King Charles II. concerning Ecclesiastical Affairs; and some Proposals of Terms of Union between the Church of England and Dissenters; long since Published by the Reverend Dean of St. Paul's: Quarto. Protestant Certainty; Or, A short Treatise, shewing how a Pro∣testant may be well assured of the Articles of his Faith: Quarto.
