T1838 12761902 93517
The Rebels Plea, OR, Mr. Baxters judgement, Concerning the late Wars, in these Particulars: viz. The Originall of Government. Coordinate and Legislative Power in the two Houses. Third Estate. Force upon the Houses in 1642. Principles the Houses went by at the beginning, destructive to Mo∣narchy. Covenant. Reasons for submitting to the late Government. LONDON, Printed by Thomas Mabb, and are to be sold by Henry Brome, at the signe of the Gun in Ivie-lain, 1660.
The Rebel's Plea, Examined. THe Writers of the Parliament side asserting highly, the Liberty of the Subject, think they oppose those of the Kings, who plead strongly for Subjection to Rulers, which are things, no way inconsistent, for it is very evident rulers doe not take away but preserve our Liberty. Men being of the same nature, desire the same things; & what every man desires, none can securely enjoy; the natural inequality between men being so little, the mutuall yeelding would in all likely-hood be little also: The title of the strongest though the best would be too weak to hold long, some one or more would quickly over-match any that could pretend to that, every bodies right was apparently no bodies, if any had the good (or ill shall I call it) luck to have any wealth, it was according to Davids curse, to him an occasion of falling. By the inconveniencies that at∣tend the want of Government, we finde out the nature of it: First, Our inability singly to defend our selves from our own Country-men, and from strangers, made it necessary we should part with all our power into anothers hands, that he might be so able to defend us from both, seeing that from both we were in danger to receive injury in every thing we value. Secondly, Because we are capable of so much wrong, and too apt to apprehend our selves wronged, when we are not, we must resigne whatsoever Power of Judging or Redressing we have in our hands into his hands, and for the Publique safety, are ob∣liged to submit to his, though it may seem to us an erronious and partiall judgment; a thing though highly rationall, and of great import to the generall, yet not to be expected from selfish or opinionative men, unlesse the Magistrate hath a com∣pulsive Power, which alone, though we have no fear of For∣reigners, were ground enough to put the Sword and Scepter into the same Hand.
Supposing therefore Power to have originally been in the People, which shall be afterwards examined; it will not at all upon pretence of misuser entitle them to snatch it back, any more than I can forcibly take away, what I gave; because I can prove it was once mine: If the people are still Judges of what is to the publick good; and have the Power of the Sword, they are what they were before they were no Subjects. But Mr. Baxter tells us not after the rate of Mr. Calvin, who thinks it possible for the tres Ordines Regni to have a Power of re∣sisting Princes, but according to the worst principles of his most Scotized followers: The People may Fight against King and Parliament both, for the Common good, if they be both against it. Thes. 365. Of Obedience and resistance. Kings conditions are very little bettered by those men, who free them from the Popes Supremacy, in ordine ad bonum spirituale, and subject them to the Peoples, in ordine ad bonum Publicum. But it's strange, that the multitude (for what else can the People signifie, distinct from and opposed to the King and Parliament) that the multitude I say, should by Mr. Baxter be thus solemnly invested with the highest piece of Regality, the Judging of the publique good, whose ncapacity, Levity, Ignorance, Naughti∣nesse, Unaptnesse, for even the meanest employment of this na∣ture: In his Book against Harrington, he labours to demonstrate, see his twenty Arguments against Popular Government. King Iames in the Conference at Hampton Court, told us out of expe∣rience, how zealously the Presbyterian Ministers defended the Kings Power in Spirituals, while there was need of it to pull down the Pope; but that being done, more wisely put it into their own hands: So now it seems, it shall fare even with Par∣liaments; While the King could not be pulled down, but by that Assemby, their Omnipotency was every where proclaimed, but now they must learn too, to use the Power the People gave them for their good, or else the people may take it from them. But secondly, This Tenent is destructive of its very pretence, as being extreamly opposite to the publique good, because to
the peace of the Nation, which is the onely time, in which we can securely enjoy the benefit of the Governours care of the publique Affaires by having opportunity of following our pri∣vate ones. There is much fault to be found in the Administra∣tion of (perhaps) every Nation in the world; private men in∣jured by corrupt Officers, &c. But that the inconveniences are so great in any one place, that it should be the concernment of the maority of the Nation, to redresse them by a War, whose effects ae so calamitous and universall, I durst be tryed by any besides the Needy, Ambitious and Discontented men of the same place Man is by Nature a sociable Creature, which though Mr. Hobs denyeth, because another had said it before him, is evi∣dent in this, that if a man were furnished withall the delights, the most wanton can fancy, and freed from the feare of any assaults; yet to be totally debarred the company of men, would make all his pleasures irksome; nor is there any other imagi∣nable reason to be given, how men of even good parts spend a very vast proportion of their time in hearing the flat and imper∣tinent discourses of idle and weak men and women; were there not a sociable principle in our nature, so that we can no more put off our delighting in the company of men, then we can our being men: We are naturally then inclined to society, which society cannot be maintained without Government, nor Government possibly without the power of the Sword, the na∣tural right of Judging for our selves, and maintaining that judgement by what force we can make, being the inconveni∣ence that attended want of Government; and therefore sure laid down in the very Constitution: He therefore that takes up the Sword without, nay against the Command of the Supream Magistrae, resumes that Right which by mutuall consent all had laid down, denies himself his Subject, stands upon terms with him as equall, which is as much as in him lyes to dissolve the Government, reduce all to Anarchy, and is therefore not more inurious to the rince, whose Authority he Usurps, then to the Nation whose peace he thus treacherously disturbs. Publique good and Liberty, are two fine words that engage Na∣tions to their own ruine, alwayes insisted upon by those who
have not so great a share of Wealth or Power in the present state of Affaires, as they think they deserve, or at least hope for in the next Change▪ Their discorses are usually such as these; What is a Prince more than another man? inferiour in parts and piety perhaps to thousands of his own Subjects, we are all equall, though Statesmen make, & fos believe a difference; Peasant is not made of the mould of the Earth, and the Prince of the Stars in Heaven; Though Court Flatterers calls them Gods, we see them dye like men; our obediene consists like the Heathens devotion in their Ignorance, who wor∣ship for a God, which their Priests knew to be but a Cat or Ole. When they have perswaded men out of the reverend esteem of the Magistrates Person and Office, their work is half done: Then the disputers of the Original and nature of Government suffi∣ciently shew their readinesse to pull down the House, that they may prey into the Foundation, and it is resolved, The King is but the Commo Trustee, if he will wound us with that Sword we put into his hands o defend us, let him thank himself, if we wrest it out again; Laws and Magistrates were made for, and cease to be, when they cease to be subservient to the publique good, as the means hath a being onely in relation to the end. No wonder if the people gladly embrace such gay new no∣things, pitty the simplicity of their fore-fathers, who lost their Rights for want of knowing them, the meanest Artisans hug their new-found Prerogative, and are resolved ere long, the Crown and the Scepter, Laws and Magistrates shall doe their du∣ty, and vaile before them. That they may value their new light the more; it shall be shewed how high time it was to discover it, when it was more then time they had made use of it; the Pub∣lique is now in danger, if they will now endure, they then de∣serve to be ruined. There being something amisse in the administration of every Government, Innovators can never want pretence to propose somewhat, the redress of which would be gratefull to the people, who have not the wit to consider the much greater inconveni∣encies of a War, nor the ordinary prudence to observe the con∣ditions of the men which would evince them to mind their own rather then their Countries good. If some Doctors have determined it lawfull to resist in case the
Publique is in evident danger of destruction▪ every grievance shall be the case, not a Tax if unduely as some think leavied, though of a moderated proportion, and employed to the end for which it was raised, highly to the honour and behooe of the Nation, but shall be called its undoing; which is as mad as if a Physitian (nay madder in as much as the con∣cernment is more general, because in desparate cases, he may use desparate remedies, should therefore doe so in all cases. There is another weak part in the people, which gladly yeelds to any assault, which seditious Oratours secure for themselves unperceivably, that is, they naturally love to hear men spoke ill of, but especially they are never so well pleased as when they hear discourses of the failings of good or great men, that ras∣cally pleasure, which their suiteablenesse to this principle pro∣duces in the Vulgar, procures them ready entertainment, and accordingly all the faults and felicities of the Government, shall be exaggerated to the height, improved to the very rigour of the utmost consequence, the dissatisfied, unpreferred part of the Clergy shall obliquely hint them (if the time for direct railing be not come) with a superfectation of fears and jealousies, at every Lecture; and under pretence of confessing and being humbled for the sins of the Nation in Prayer, for the sins of us, our Kings, and our Princes, under that head shall be instilled into the peoples, not affections onely, but onely their very Faith, whatsoever ill of the present Rulers, malice can conceive and impudence utter: If any represent the necessity of those blamed proceedings, they shall be called Time-servers, Courtiers, and so heard if at all with prejudice: When rayling at Government shall be called Freedome of Spirit, and despising authority, fearing not the face of men in their Countries Cause It is a certain signe they desire to be no longer private men, who thus discover publique mindes. By whom and how England was seduced to undoe it self, in order to the publique good we shall enquire hereafter; I will now enter upon the thing it self; and enquire, 1. Whether the War were not the Warr of Subjects against their Soveraign, where we must examine whether the two Houses were coordinate with; or subordinate to the King.
2. Whether there were any just cause for a Warr, supposing they had a right of resisting in some cases. 3 Whether or no, and how far, the alterations that since followed may be deduced, out of the principles of the first be∣ginning of the Warr. 4. Whether the principles and practise of the Presbyterian Ministers are destructive of all Government? Before I enter upon the first Question; I must according to Mr. Baxter's me∣thod, consider his previous argument, who in his judgment of the late Warrs, thus argues: Sect. I. The Malignant hatred of seriousness in Religion, did work so violently in the RABBLE that I could not stay at home. This, Though frequently insisted on in his other books, e∣ven beyond truth or modesty, and hath seduced many well-meaning Zealots, is yet farr from conclusive; suppose some of the meaner sort of his town, thought it enough to honour the King, though they feared not God: must he therefore think it enough to fear God, though he did not honour the King: that many of the Kings party were drunken, or ungodly; is not to the purpose, but sure it is a peice of separatisme beyond Inde∣pendency to neglect a duty, because, wicked men would joyne in the doing, nor is this true, with which this argument is en∣forced. Nor had I any place of safety from their rage, but the Armies and garrisons of the Parliament: Yes you had the garrisons of the King, I am sure it was no part of the Kings cause, to deny his Subjects protection for being peaceable and godly, your questi∣on therefore, Whether those Subjects that are utterly undeservedly deprived of the protection of Magestrates and laws, are not discharged of their Obligations: is extreamly impertinent to the thing in hand, unlesse you had proved your demerits to be none, and you ha∣ving done the duty of a good Subect, upon demand (which you have not once asserted) were denyed the benefit of it by his Maesty, or the Governours of his Garrisons; For sure the un∣rulinesse of what you acknowledge to be the RABLE, is no
sufficient ground to say, you were utterly deprived of the Pro∣tection of MAGITRATES and LAWS. The first capacity of Parliaments, is to represent the people as free, for I take it for undenyable, that the Government is constituted by con∣tract, and in that contract, the People reserved themselves some rights; Parliaments are the trustees for securing those exempted rights, and so re∣present the people as so far free: The rights and freedoms of a people, as a People, are in order of nature before their constitution, and excepted and so secured in it. The first of which assertions: That the Originall of their go∣vernment is by contract being the foundation (though if gran∣ted a weak one) ought in reason to have been backed with some clearer evidence then, I take it for undenyable▪ I shall make it out that the Originall of all Government was not so, which though it is sufficient to overthrow that assertion, there being not so much as an offer of any Argument peculiar to this Realm to evince its being so; yet I shall say something to that particu∣lar. A Nation, is families multiplyed, and a King but the com∣mon Father. Arist. Where the Nations, there the Government began in pri∣vate families, , nor ele∣ction there, The eldest was the Ruler, born not made their Soveraign, and this sufficiently evidenced by the Kingly power, the Power of life and death, which in all antiquity we finde the fathers possessed of, if there were any need of further proof, the small teritories which in all new discovered places of the world Kings enjoy, would easily perswade us their kindred and Sub∣jects to be the same; Joshua beat thirty Kings, Adonizebeck seven∣ty in the small land of Canaan, and there might be more for any thing we know. But secondly, Nations if they chose a King, may submit themselves absolutely to him: Either, 1. to be defended from some potent Adversary they more dread, venture a possible ex∣treamly unlikely to avoid a present imminent destruction; so the Campanians of old to the Romans, Liv. Populum Campanum, Vrbemque Capuam, agros, delubra Deum, divi, umanamque omnia in vestram P. C. ditionem dedimus: Or, 2. Apprehending that
Government to be the best, as knowing that in such a State, the Kings private trest is concerned in the publique, which canot so truly be said of any man, or side in any how well contrived a mixture whatsoever; and withall observing how well other Nations thrive under, the Roman Historian, though a great adorer of a Republique could not deny, but people live very happily; sub imperio plan regio, under one that was a King en∣deed: Vrbis sub Eumene lberae & civitatis fortunam cum suâ mu∣tatam vluisse; let others Cities apprehend themselves free un∣der a great many, they found themselves as free as they desired under one Ruler: It is by this time evident sure, that all Go∣vernment is not by Contract. I shall now resolve the above cited Section into these foure propositions: First, That the Originall of this Government was a bargain between the King and People. Secondly, The People did reserve some Rights to them∣selves. Thirdly, The Parliament are the Trustees for securing those exempted Rights. Fourthly, These Rights of the People, as the people were, be∣fore the Constitution excepted, and so secured in it. Of all which Propositions, there cannot be one true accord∣ing to all the Law and History this Age is acquainted with. In the most tumultuous later ages past, there hath been (perhaps) something of as good Authority to us, as our own proceedings may be to future times. I shall oppose onely this: Because in all the Chronicles that ever I met with, the higher I go, the more absolute I finde the King, an ill signe of Rights exempted in the very Constitution, and the priviledges we now enjoy (as to share in the Govern∣ment) were wrested (and it is easie to track when) by fraud and force from weak or indigent Kings, or given as acts of grace, and acknowledged with thankfulnesse for such: I would desire to be informed, when and where we did meet to chose our King? whether before we lived without any form of Government, o what we had, upon what occasion we changed it? who were wit∣ness to the bargain between the King & us? where the Copy of it
is, where is an exact Catalogue of our Liberties, for the Parlia∣ment being to secure our exempted Rights are (I should think) to know them, Our fundamentall Laws are not (I hope) like the Traditions of the Church of Rome, which no man knows where to find; must we look on Parliaments as they on Councels; be∣lieve what they at present Vote, though we know it then to have beginning, to have been from the beginning. But Mr. Baxter may perhaps startle, if out of this very Section: (as errour and lying frequently are their own confuters) which as it is the foundation of most Seditious Pamphlets deserves to be particu∣larly considered: I can prove the War against his late Majesty to be Rebellion. His Argument runs thus: It was not Rebellion, Because the Parliament are not his Subjects in one case, i. e. as they are the Tru∣stees for the securing those exempted Rights, and represent the people as free, not as wholly free, but as being so far free as that exemption signi∣fies, that is, as to such Rights as were in order of Nature before the Constitution excepted, and so established and so secured in it. From whence I thus argue. The Parliament could not represent us as free, except in those things in which we were free i. e. in respect of those particular priviledges which in the very constitution of the Government were reserved; now if this Parliament did fight for any thing, which was not so reserved, they cannot be upon that head excused, and so it was a War of Subjects against their Soveraign: Ergo. Now whether the Militia, taking away the Kings Negative Vote, according to the Declaration of May 26. 1642. the 19. Propo. were any of those exempted Rights, let any modest man judge. If the people reserved such a power to themselves in this fan∣cied Contract, it is strange it is not totidem verbis expressed? De non apparentibus & non existentibus eadem est ratio; is a rule in law to avoid uncertainty, and dash groundlesse pretences in things of smaller concernment. If we reserved a Power of resisting, what hindred, but our Ancestors who were neither fools nor Complementers, inserted not some such clause in the Corona∣tion Oath at least, as in the King of Poland, Quod si Sacramentum
meum iolavero, incolae Regni nullam nobis obedientiam praestare tene∣buntur. Against this Capacity of Parliaments, of representing the People as free, and that in the very constitution of the Govern∣ment, though it is enough to confute it, that it is not founded upon any thing in our laws or Lawyers: I shall offer briefly these two things. 1. This opinion under the glorious name of Parliament, com∣prehends onely the most inconsiderable part of it, the House of Commons, the Lords representing not the People in any sence, but to this head, I shall say more when I come to examine, how far our late alterations may be maintained out of the principles of those who began the war. 2. It is the jugment of r. Edward Cook in his Preface to . ep. Fitzherbert Natur Brevium; and indeed the  coent of Lawyers, that the best way to understand the nature of a thing, is to consult the Writ that belongs to it, now if the Writ calls them onely to Counsel, Conlm vestrum impensri, &c and De quibusdam arduis negotiis, quibusdam; some, which he was plea∣sed to desire their advice in, not what ever they had a mind to be medling in. There be fresh examples of latter times even in Qu Elizabeth's days, of members sent to prison, for mention∣ing in the House to move the Queen in a thing which highly concerned the peace of the Nation; but a thing above their cognisance, and it was not muttered at as breach of Priviledge. If they had been intended for such sharers in the Soveraignty in the very Constitution of the Government; How are the Bur∣gesses so many more than the Knights of the Shire; are the meanest Tradesmen more capable of ruling then the Gentry, whose thoughts, and education are sure more suitable to it. That alone were enough to make one think, representing to the King, the several Obstructions of Trade in all parts of the Na∣tion, the greatest part of their errant; it being the onely thing they are fit for. Adde to this, Sr. Edward Cook in Pref. to 9. Rep. reckons it p, as one of the Priviledges of Tenants in Antient De∣msne, that they were not to be returned Burgesses to serve in Parliament.
His next work is to Answer two Objections. 1. The Oath of Supremacy, saith he, secureth the Kings Title against all Foraign Claim, either Pope or any other. The words of that Oath are plainly these. I. A. B. Doe utterly testifie and declare in my Conscience, that the Kings Highnesse is the Onely Supream Governour of this Realm, and of all other his Highnesse Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spirituall and Ecclesiasticall things (or causes) as temporall. Thus far it is as clear and positive as words can make it; The Ne∣gative part of the Oath, which because it hinders not mens designes, they are content to take notice of, followes and that no Forraigners, &c. If the King is the onely Su∣pream Governour of this Realm, and the two Houses are equal with him in the Government, and we may swear this, and yet believe that, it is time to change not onely our law, but our language; and the Houses should make us new Dictionaries that we may know, what English words signifie. The second Argument, is one would think convincing, The two Houses acknowledge themselves His Majesties humble and loyall Subjects assembled in Parliaments. They petition the King, the King never them, they cannot come unlesse he cals them, nor choose to come, when he doth call them; nor stay one minuit longer than he pleases, and yet these are his equals, not to say his Superiours; but he that hath an equall during his own pleasure hath none at all. He warns us to take heed of Titles, being it is likely, not igno∣rant that, King, Monarch, Emperor, Supream Lord, Majesty were every where in the law attributed to the Kings person, but of him in his politicall capacity, i e. the Majesty, Regality of the two Houses: There is as little to be found of the Name as the thing. What hath been now said, may evince that proposi∣tion; the Soveraign power is onely in the King to be no ground∣lesse one; but of that more hereafter: The next Objection is, Legislation is the most principall part of the Soveraignes Right▪ But that belongs to the Houses, as well as the King; Be it enacted by the Kings Majesty, Lords and Commons, &c. Ergo: Here Mr Baxter evidently betrays his cause; before, while it was for his turn, the Parliament fought for, and represented us as free in o Rights, exempted in the very Constitution, he referred all to the Originall ontract; but here part of the Soverainty is
proved to be in the Houses by these words; e it enacted by the King, Lords and Commons, termes that came up but yesterday, and he is so conscious to himself of waving his first plea, that he saies, he will not go to records and writings; i. e. he knows the example of all laws, the authority of all lawyers, give judgment against him; if a bargain was made at first, we are obliged to keep it, as well as the King; nor can we encroach with more honesty upon his original priviledges then he on ours. But the King it seems shall be one of the three Estates, and the onely one, whose rights may lawfully be invaded. Neither is it true, that the Legislative power is partly in them, they are (I grant) to consent to the making new, and a∣bolishing old laws; but that is no cogent proof, of the partition of the Supream and Legislative power. It is the interest of Kings as well as their duty, to make and repeale laws, as they suite with, or are repugnant to, the good of their Country, which they can no way be so well informed of, as by an Assembly con∣isting of men, chosen out of all parts of the Realm: And where there are considerable and distinct ranks of men, as the Spiri∣tuall, and Lay Nobility, and the Commons; it was fit they should all be heard, and consulted with; their Interests being divers, and sometimes thwarting, it was very like their desires would be so too: It was this way provided, no one part should get a grant by surprise to the disadvantage of the others, and thus it was in England: and this the reason of demanding the opinion of the two Houses is evident, I appeal to the Body of the Acts themselves, & here I will not insist upon the elder presi∣dents, though I might rationally enough from them, overthrow the fancy of our Rights, secured in the constitution of our Go∣vernment; but that being so universally granted; I shall cite Acts of weak Kings, and later times. Onely desiring this thing of the Reader, that he would not think those I quote to be the onely examples to be produced; and so possibly think, either fraud or force hath caused the people to suppresse their Rights; let him but look upon the Statutes, he will quickly be rid of any such fond imagination. I have therefore purposely pitched up∣on a weak Prince, and insulting Subjects to begin with, Anno de∣cimo Edw▪ 2. For as much as our Soveraign Lord the King, by
the INFORMATION of his Prelates, Earls, Barons, &c. Our Soveraign Lord the King, by the Assent, &c. hath Or∣dained and Established. So, Anno 12. Edw. so in all other. Our Soveraign Lord the King by the Assent of, &c. hath made these Acts following. In the 10. of Edward the 3. where there is expresse mention of Magna Charta, Charta de foresta, which shews that Assembly not unmindfull of their Liberties, or Priviledges; yet the same stile continues: It is established by the King, by the Assent of, &c. and at the request of the said Knights and Commons. In the 25. Edw. 3. The King at the request of the Lords and Commons, &c. 2. H. 5. For as much as divers complaints have been made to our Soveraign Lord the King, by the Commons in this present Parliament: Our Sove∣raign Lord the King hath ordained. This will certainly shew the Legislative power to have been solely in the Kings Majesty in those dayes; and therefore discovers the foolery (to say no worse) of those who upon that head assert a partition of that important piece of Soveraignty between him and the two Houses. Be it enacted by the Authority of this present Parliament or Lords and Commons, began in H. 7. time, but that that va∣riation of phrase should make such a considerable alteration of Government, and no notice taken either by the King that par∣ted, or the people who received by it so large (as is pretended) a share in the Government is not easily imaginable: Sure their apprehensions were very small of it, the notice they took of it being so little. We finde after that, not to insist upon each act or reign, which would be tedious, and he that doubts, may consult the Books, Anno 1. Eliz. The Lords and Commons her majesties humble and faithfull Subjects most humbly beseeching that it may be Enacted, &c. And in the Act of Uniformity (among others) it is. Be it Enacted by the Queens Highnesse, with the assent of the Lords and Commons, &c. to which those words likewise inser∣ted in some places of that Act, by authority of this present Par∣liament cannot be thought without great imputation of folly to those members, to be repugnant; and the straining of those words is all that he can rely on; I might here urge the old form, Anno. 13. Eliz. Be it Enacted by the Queens most Excellent
Majesty with the Assent, &c. among many others, I will onely cite one of 4. Jac cap. 1. Be it Enacted by the Kings most Ex∣cellent Majesty, with the Assent of, &c. Now to speak of the fundamentall partitian of the Soveraignty in the very consti∣titon of the Government, and to make it out by a phrase newly taken up, and to take no notice of the old forms, The King Grants, the King Wils, the King provides, argues one very de∣sirous to say some thing in a bad matter; but when this form is it self varied, and in many Acts both are used, sure the latter was never intended to evacuate the former, and it is very un∣likely; so great a change of the Legislative power would passe without any notice, either of King or People; it deserved at least one Act or Parliament to have transmitted it to posterity: when alas we finde even in King Charls his dayes an Act framed, according to the old regular way, in the Petition of Right; even there when we were not sure giving away, nor unmindfull of our liberties: To the Kings most excellent Majesty, in which the Lords and Commons do humbly pray, that no such thing as they Complained of, &c. To which the answer was, Soi droit come est desire. The Laws are alwayes called the Kings laws, but very improperly, if this new doctrine be true. I conclude all with the words of Bracton, an Author, the Antimonarchical party make much use of. Quod Principi placuit, i. e. non quicquid est à Rege temere & ex animi perturbati impetu quodam & aestu praesum∣ptum, sed quicquid ex Magnatum suorum consilio, [REGIO Assensu Authortatem praestante] & habitâ super hoc deliberatione & tractatu recti fuerit definitum, legis habet vigorem. What the reason and the effect of their assent is, is, not hard now to judge; men have been so often taught to say, that be∣cause they must assent to the making of Laws, they have a part of the Legislative power in them, and will call it non-sense and absurd to think otherwise: I will cite Grotius, cap. 3. de jure belli, Sect. 18. and I the rather cite him, because living in a Popular State, he naturally favoured it so much▪ as in this point especi∣ally of sharing in the Government, he shewed himself tender of the peoples Rights. Multum falunr qui existimant cum Reges acta quaedam sua nolunt esse rata nisi à Senatu probentur, partitionem fieri potestatis: nam quae acta in eum modum rescinduntur, intelligi debent
rescindi regis imperio, qui eo modo sibi cavere voluit, nèquid fallaciter impetratum pro ver ipsius voluntate haberetur; which is not much different from what we cited out of Bracton: The sum of which is this, when the assent of the Senate is necessary to any of the Kings Acts, it is not that they share in the doing, but that they truly nform the Kng what it is he does. He cites the example of Antiochus, who wrote as our Kings use, Nè sibi parerent si∣quid legibus adversum jusssset: They should not obey him in things contrary to law: And Constantine, nè pupilli aut viduae those forlorn people should not lose their priviledges; etiam si Impera∣toris rescriptum proferatur, though by order under the Emperors own hand; and yet the world took never any for their equals, or them for any other then Soveraign Princes. The same Au∣thor Sect. 1 Non desinere summum esse imperium, etiamsi is qui im∣peraturus est promittat aliqua sui ditis aut Deo etiam talia quae ad impe∣rii rationem pertineant. A Soveraign ceases not to be so, though he promise his Subjects not to exercise by himself some parts even of the Sovergn power. Adrian the Emperour swore he neve would punsh a Senato without the assent of the enate, which was a greater priviledge then our members can plead; yet never any was so fond as to take them lesse for Subjects, or him for Soveraign. Princes upon the misinformation of corrupt men, may doe much to the grievance of the Subjects, if they to avoid this in∣convenience to the people, shall provide so for their security, as to promise not to exercise such parts, of their power without their advice and assent, first in a Common Counsell assembled (our old style) they shew themselves unworthy of such an Act or grace, who will interpret it to the disadvantage, nay to the dethroning of him that passed it. To apply it to our particular case, suppose the King hath graciously promised not to leavy money on his Subjects without their assent first had in Parlia∣ment: The King now cannot do it, the King hath so far re∣strained the exercise of his power, but is by this any power pla∣ced in them? grant they had, it will not reach their purpose; The King cannot leavy mony without their assent, but is there any law that gives them power to leavy any without his, though they may give mony to the King, I doubt it will puzzle a good
Lawyer to prove, they can give the Subjects money to them∣selves, without which, I doubt, Contribution, Excise, and those other fine words was but Theft and Robbery. That the assent of the two Houses is required to repeal a law, will by this time, I hope, be a small argument of their partiti∣pation of the Soveraignty; sure I am, the Monarchs of the East were as much limitted, the laws of the Meades and Persians, which change not at the pleasure of the King the Scripture mentions; even those Princes were sworn to observe the Laws: Ahasuerus could not revoke the Decree against the Jews, nor Darius though he passionately desired it of his Nobles, save Daniel, (Dan. 6.) He that would affirm, that to be a mixt Monarchy, or that those Nobles or any else were sharers in the Government; to say no more, would bring a new Doctrine into the world. The next Objection is in short this, In a Declaration set forth in the Kings name, It is acknowledged that the King, Lords, and Commons make the three Estates; and the ballance must hang even between them, &c. To which I shall briefly say this, it were to the purpose, if it could be proved that the King, Lords and Commons make the three Estates: But the truth is, the Lords Spiritual, Temporal and Commons are the three Estates, not to repeat many. In the Act of Recognition of Queen Elizabeth, We your most loving, faithfull and obedient Subjects, representing the Three Estates of this Realme; which evidently shews the Queen was not esteemed one. Anno 8. Eliz. cap. 1. The Clergy being one of the greatest Estates of this Realm, it is clear therefore, that by the law, the Clergy is one estate: So when Hen. 5. Funerals were ended, The Three Estates did assemble and acknowledge his on King. For their right of being the thrid Estate unanswerably acknowledged by Parliament; it might admit a debate, whether any two Estates may conspire to Vote out the third; sure, if the Commons had been so served, Mr. Baxter would have resolved it in the Nega∣tive: How comes it to passe, that that part of Magna Charta which relates to the Clergy should be lesse significant then any other. To the Kings Concession to that illegall Bill, I onely say this, The law takes no notice of an Act, but when it is by the assent of the Three Estates; nor could the Lay Lords and Com∣mons
disoblige the King from his Oath made to the Spiritually; there being a particular clause (besides the general, for securing the Liberty of the Nation) In the Coronation Oath, for the Rights and Priviledges of the Church, nothing but the Church could give them away (if yet the Church it self could.) For it is a thing generally granted, that a generall representative can∣not cancel Obligations to particular Bodies, which truth in any other instance people will acknowledge: The House of Com∣mons are the Representative of all the Commons of this Land; the City of London hath her Burgesses there: If they upon this fancy of involving each ones consent, and so doing injury to none, should Vote the City paid, the money they borrowed of them, I believe every one would quickly discover the fallacy of that Plea, and explode it as illegall, sinfull and rediculous; the other case is much harder; London is the greatest City, the Clergy is one of the greatest Estates in the Nation, according to 8. Eliz. cap. 1. London hath some at least, that there represent her, whereas the Clergy hath not so much as one▪ He saw the impossibility of the Bishops fitting there, their Persons and Friends assaulted, themselves like to be murthered by the rabble (see Bishop Halls Narrative, before his last works, the Lords making an Order to suppresse the tumults, the Com∣mons not concurring but encouraging them; the Bils se∣verall times thrown out of the House of Peeres, and brought in the same Session, contrary to all Order of Parliament, con∣sidering which, I will say onely this: Let any man consider, in what a condition the Kings Majesty was in then, how injuri∣ous to himself, to one of the greatest Estates of this Realm, ac∣cording to 8. Eliz. that grant was; how contrary to Magna (har∣ta, to the Rights of the Church by Law, and his Majesties Oath so much provided for; he will easily finde the Kings consent to be extorted and null. If I should upon their Protestation a∣gainst all Acts passed, during their forced absence, it would not be easily answered. Having now shewed the Clergy to make the third Estate, which is as much as the King hath been allowed to be of late; the main Argument of coordination is thereby removed, I will adde but this, The Oath of Supremacy asserts the King; to be the
sole supream Governour; and therefore sure the two Houses are not coparceners. It is declared in Anno 16. R. 2. c. 5. The Crown of England hath been so free at all times, that it hath been in no earthly subjection, but immediately to God, in all things touching the Regality of the said Crown, and to no o∣ther. And again, The Realm of England is an Empire governed by, One Supream head and King, having the dignity an Royall E∣state of the Imperiall Crown of the same 24. H. 8. c. 12. unto whom a Body Politick, compact of all sorts and degrees of people in terms, and by names of Spiritually and Temporalty been bounden, and ought to bear next to God a natural and hum∣ble obedience. This Body Politick consisting of all sorts and de∣grees, divided into terms, and by names of Spiritualty and Temporalty must necessarily be the Parliament, there being no other body capable of that appellation and description, which here acknowledgeth as such a body it self subject and him Su∣pream. The next is a large quotation out of Grotius in Latine, that in some cases it is lawfull to resist, but they reach not the pre∣sent Question; the first concerns not Supream Magistrates, but such things as Sparta had; the second none at all: the third, If the King aliens the Kingdome, which sure was not our case: fourthly, If the King apparently designes the destruction of the whole people, I will not wrong the King so much as to endea∣vour to clear him from that: fifthly, If there is such a clause, &c. If the King doth this or that, the Subjects are absolved from their Oath, produce such a clause, and shew how the King broke his Trust? Sixth, If there is a division of Supremacy, and the King encroaches, he may beso far resisted. I shall make it out, the Houses encroached upon him; as I have sufficiently evinced the vanity of a coordination. In these cases, Grotius thinks they who at their entring into society, contracted for themselves and posterity, intended not to obliege them so far as to dy, rather then resist, nisi forte cum hoc additamento si resiti nequeat, nisicum maximâ reip; perturbatione, aut exitio plurimorum nocentium, unlesse by resisting they mightily disturbe the Com∣mon wealth, or destroy many innocents; that being the Parlia∣ments case, nothing in Grotius can acquit them from the sin
of Rebellion to their Soveraign, and the duty of restitution to the Subjects they injured. And here are the female and mecha∣nick Readers, amused with that venerable name, when in all these cases there is but one that looks toward the Subect, and that too upon the groundlesse fancy of diviion of Supremacy, and with an exception that reaches the Case. The Laws in England are above the King, because not his Acts alone. Whose Acts the Laws are, hath been above discussed, the con∣sequences of this Proposition, I understand not, because he hath not done us the favour as to let us know its meaning; if it is not more then the words signifie, that the King ought to rule, according to Law, and cannot abrogate Laws at pleasure: the King asserted it in all his Declarations. In the exactest Mo∣narchies I have shewed there were, laws which the Kings were obliged by, might they therefore be resisted if they broke them? Let us blot then all the precepts of Obedience and Submission out of the Bible, as things sit for that pusillanimous if not craf∣ty age: And let that patience of the Primitive Christians which made their persecutors admire and love, be thought want of opportunity, not desire of revenge. The King was to execute judgement by his Iudges in his Court of Iustice, and his Parliaments was his highest Court. By the Parliament, meaning the two Houses, they are no Court of Judicature, the House of Commons have nothing that looks like a Court of Judicature, not the power of administring an Oath, not the power of Imprisoning any but their own Mem∣bers, notwithstanding the contrary proceedings of those ten∣der Gentlemen, of the Liberty of the Subject, the Members of the long-Parliament, whose Committees could contrary to law imprison men, and deny them their Habeas Corpus. The House of Lord it is true, is a Court of Judicature, but that is as they are the Court of the Kings Barons, whose judgment is but ministerial and not soveraign, as appears in this, that though they have power to reverse the Sentence of other Courts, yet they cannot reverse their own judgment; a clear argument their Authority is not soveragn, whose judgement cannot be so far restrained no not by it self.
For the two Houses joyned together (as the ingenious Au∣thor of the Case of our Affaires demonstrates) they cannot so unite or conjoyn, as to be an entire Court, either of soveraign as ministeriall Jurisdicton, no otherwise cooperating then by concurrence of Votes in their severall Houses, for preparing matters in order to an Act; and his Argument is very good, which when they have done, they are so far from having any legall Authority in the State, as that in law there is no stile or or form of their joynt acts, nor doth the law so much as take notice of them, untill they have the Royall Assent. Should it be granted they were, yet it is as evident there was a force upon the House then, as there was in 1648. o that neither the House was full or free; first, for the Commons, a very great number of persons fairly elected, kept out upon pretence they had some Project, Patent, or Monoply, and kept in Sr. Henry Mildmay, Mr. Lawrence, Whitaker; the first, the chief promoter and notorious∣ly known to be so of the businesse of the gold and silver thred, a Commission complained of, viewed and examined, the other as much employed in matters of that nature as any man, but they voted as that party would have them. Secondly, Severall members of their party sate in the House against the consent of the Burroughs they pretended to serve for, when such men were concerned and complaints made, all the answer the honest elected Gentlemen could get was, questions about Elections were of  private a nature to be considered, and would interrupt their proceedings too much. If the Electi∣on of any such persons hath been heard at the Committee, and they voted out of the House, as unduely chosen; that report must not be made, whereby a good member may be lost, as in the case of Mr. Nichols, Mr. Pyms Nephew and others. Thirdly, The Scots Army was not suffered to disband, that they might awe the King and dissenting members, and Mr. Strode blushed not to say openly, They could not yet spare them, the sons of Zerviah were too hard for them. Though the Bishops and Popish Lords had a Legal Right (then at least) to sit; yet they invited tumults to cry, No Bi∣shops, no popish Lords: Nay, made a stand at White-hall, and said, They would have  more Porters lodge, but would speake with the King
when they pleased: Proof was offered against that Captain, who conducted the Rabble, and sollicited them to come with Swords and Pistols; yet he was not suffered to be brought to answer the intollerable violence upon the members of both Houses: The Bishops were threatned to be pulled in pieces, as they came from the House; they were faine to steale: away for feare of their lives, see Bishop Hall's Narrative before his last Work: The Lords made an Order to suppresse the Tumults, but the Commons would not concurr: Severall speeches were made in their Justification; They must not discourage their friends, this being a time they must makeuse of all their friends; Mr. Pym saying, God forbid the house of Commons should pro∣ceed in any way to dishearten the people, to obtain their just desire in such a way. Were not the names of these Gentlemen that voted not according to the sence of the good members po∣sted up, their persons assaulted, did not Alderman Pennington, Captain Ven brings down armed multitudes to terrify the mem∣bers, when the worser party (as they call it) were like to pre∣vaile. That the liberty of the house of Peers was no better preserved, the arguments are too numerous, Mr. Pym could tell the Earle of Doer, if he looked for any preferment, he must com∣ply with them in their wayes, Mr Hollu demanded publickly the Bar, the names of those Lords, who would not consent to some propositions concerning the Militia sent by the Commons, they got multitudes to deliver Petitions to both houses, and to desire leave that they might protest against those Lords-who would not agree to the Votes of the House of Commons, as the Petition of Surrey, Harfordshire. In this Petition of the poor peo∣ple about London, against the Malignant faction, it was desired that those worthies of the Upper house, who concurred with them, in their happy Votes, might sit and Vote in the House of Commons, as one entire house; professing that unlesse obstructi∣ons were removed. They should be enforced to lay hold on the next remedy which was at hand to remove the disturbers of the peace.
5. The four next Sections amount to this. Our Rights were evidently invaded, Ship money, the new Oath a∣gainst Law men punished for preaching Lectures twice on the Lords day. The Parliament remonstrated our danger, we had reason to beleeve them, there was a generall endeavour to change the face of things among us, many new orders brought into the Church, abundance of painfull (though peacable) preachers cast out; ignorant scandalous readers kept in, the Irish Rebells declared for the King, we should have been butch∣red by them when they had conquered Ireland. The Right of the people to resist their Prince, having been examined, we now come to the reasons upon which they did it. 1. Shipmoney, Not to insist upon the frequent practises of our Kings in that nature; the consent of so many venerable judges, the abun∣dant care the King took to be informed, the employments of it to those worthy ends, for which it was raised, were enough with al ingenuous minds (if there were any miscarriages in the getting) at least to excuse them. But some men with their Loyalty put of their good nature, with their Religion loose their civility. But Mr. B. ought to have known, that the King had relin∣quished his claim to Shipmoney before the Warr, and therefore that could not be a cause of it. Kings may confesse and for∣sake their faults, yet some subects will not forget them. Pra∣ticall serious godlinesse, was a scorne. That was not part of the kings cause, but it was very suspicious to see men solemnize a few fasts, and think that entiled them to eat other mens bread all their lives after, to scruple at being like prophane Absalon, who wore long hare, yet immitate that good man Absalon, that could pay his vow and Rebell devoutly. The new Orders in the Church, amount to no more then this, Those to whom the administration of Ecclesiasticall affairs be∣long to by the Laws of this land, observing some neglect order rudeness in the performance of divine service, appointed for its future decency, some ceremonies, neither commanded nor for∣bidden in the word of God, but some of them were used in the
Church of Rome, whereupon they were esteemed (or at least wise called) Popish. All that can possibly be said against this, is, that it is unlawfull to use any thing in Divine Service; for which there is neither command nor example in Scripture, (when by the way, the latter confutes the former, supposing there may be imitable examples in Scripture of things uncom∣manded there) which would make the black and white caps as much Antichristian as the square one: Or, secondly, it is law∣full to use it, but not if it be enjoyned; but this cannot be said by Mr B. who pleades for the Civill Magistrates Power in mat∣ter of Religion, though I think he is scarce resolved to allow him any thing may be called Power; but that sure is of a strange nature that ceases to be lawfull, when it is commaded by a lawfull Magistrate: Or, thirdly, The being used in the Church of Rome, makes it unlawfull to be used in the Church of Eng∣land. A very pretty principle truly, we must differ from them when we have reason, and when we have not reason, when they reproach us with separation out of pride, humour, novelty; the most rationall way to acquit our selves sure, is, to make it ap∣peare, we gladly will come as neare to them in Doctrine and Discipline, as they will to Truth and pure Antiquity. We did not in those things conform to Rome, but to the Primitive Church, and reduce those things as it were ex postlimino, to their native innocent usage, from which no additionall corrup∣tion of any abroad can rationally debarre us. The last is a trim devise, That the King would have destroyed us, by the Irish Rebels, who professed to raise Armes for the King. Sect. 10. I suppose Mr. Baxter can tell of some in England who professed to fight for the King, yet never had his Commission. It seems the King must suffer as the Earle of Strafford was said to doe, not for what he had, but what he possibly might have done hereafter. The War against the Parliament, was just upon as good a ground; we feared they would undo the Church and State, with their Army of Sectaries, whom they countenanced, when he did not the Rebels in Ireland. If the King had made use of the money raised for the relief of Ireland, in the War at home, when the poore Potestants were like to starve for want of it, as the two Houses did; he might have been thought to
have abetted that Rebellion: The Parliament could make such an inhumane Order for divertion of that money from the use it was raised for, and when the King sent to them to revoke it for their own credits sake, if not for the lives of his poor Irish subjects, they according to their usuall rant, Voted his mes∣suage, a breach of priviledge, and made use of that mony to fight against him, and yet they would be thought friends, to the Pro∣testants in Ireland. If inferiour Courts of justice may prosecute the execution of their sen∣tence in severall cases against the Kings will, and the Sheriff may raise the power of the County to assist that execution, much more may the highest Court, but the former is true, ergo. The Argument is this, If the Sheriff may raise the posse Com∣mitatûs when by the law he is enabled so to do, ergo; the two houses, may, though the Law doth not enable them, raise the posse regni. Courts of judicature may use such force as doth not disturbe the peace of the Nation, ergo the two houses may raise a war is a far fetcht consequence. Again, The house of Peers is solely the Court of Judicature, the major part of which were evidently with the King. The summe of the next three leaves is. The warr was not a∣gainst the Kings person, or authority, nor to change the Government of King, Lords, &c. nor to take away the magistrates power in matters of Religion, as appears by Protestation, solemne league Covenant, Decla∣rations. When I consider their Declarations for the King and their actions against him, all I can gather is, that notwithstanding their bitter remonstrances of the State of the Kingdome, their unworthy, unexampled ripping up, and publishing to the vul∣gar all the faults and infelicities of his raigne, (which Parlia∣ments were in a greater measure, the cause of in not yeelding seasonable supply) without taking any notice of the satiafa∣ction made and care taken by him for prevention of the like for the time to come, or the happy dayes men now remember they then enjoyed (by which wayes, it is easily to render any Government odious to the credulous and undiscerning popu∣lacy)
notwithstanding, all this and the seditious invectives of Pen and Pulpit, The King stood so clear in the eyes of all men, that the being against him was a thing that they durst not own. Though they spoyled him of his goods, and endeavoured to do so of his good name; ruined his friends, preferred his most enraged enemies, chased him from place to place, (they said to bring him to his Parliament, & when they caught him, would not let him come thither) though they deprived him of all authority as a King, by taking it into their own hands, his liberty as a man, by imprisonment, as an husband by keeping him from his wife, as a father from his Children, as a Christi∣an from his Chaplaines; (all which was done before the armies purge) though they did all this; yet they said (and which is most rediculous, some of them say so still) they were for the King. Quid verba audiam cum facta videam. Their actions being such, their loyall declarations shew them not more honest, but more dissembling; if they had too openly discovered, they would never have compassed their intentions. For example, one of their first proposals; without which there could be no peace, was, That all officers civill and military, all honours should be conferred on such as were approved by the two houses of Parliament, see 19. Prop. The People were wil∣ling to fight for so gay (as they thought it) a priviledge: Had the English been a little plainer, (and it was, if men had not been besorted plain enough,) viz, Except all the wealth, ho∣nour, power of the Nation be shared among us and our friends, neither King nor people shall be at quiet, in these termes, which differ little in expression, and not at all in sense from the for∣mer; the Nation would scarce have been fond of being un∣done in order to the procuring of it. Some of their Declarations speak very fair, as it was necessary they should, and it is a great wonder how such wise and wary men suffered others to be so plaine, wherein they palpably re∣duce to nothing, the King and Peers To begin with the King, see the Declaration of May 26. 1642. Where they declare, that they have power to depose the King,
and the King had deserved they should do so. We should not want either modesty or duty should we follow the high∣est presidnts of former Parliaments. See exact collection of all Remonstrances. &c. published by order of the house of Commons, p. 265. Now Parliaments have deposed Kings as Edw 2. Rich. 2. and that the authors of that Declaration had a particular eye upon those monstrous proceedings, is evident by the following words All the world knows what they put in act. In the same Declaration they deny the King his Negative Vote, so that he hath no Vote at all in making or repealing laws, which the meanest Burgesse hath, nay the meanest Com∣moner hath at least one that represents him, so that the King is the onely man in the Nation (except I may now reckon the Clergy too) that is in so high a degree of slavery, as to be bound by laws, he in no sence concurrs to the making of. So farr was he in 1642. from being a King, that he was not so much as one of the free-borne people of England. This new Doctrine they can prove (as what could not the two houses do in those dayes,) from the very forme used, by the King to those bills he fancied not [Le Roy Saviserà] which (say they) is a suspension rather then a refusall of assent. A suspension (if it must be called so) was ever heretofore a thing of that validity, that during it, they are not able to quote one law ever reputed in force. If they thought the law to be otherwise, they might have done very well to have declared all the bills dashed, for so many ages, for want of the royall assent to be obliging laws. But (alas) that forme intimates another thing, not so plea∣sing, viz. That notwithstanding the two Houses are the Kings great councill, and have presented their advice in their con∣curring Votes, yet [le Roy Savisera] the King may advise with other men (as it is notorious in all Chronicles to have been the practise) and take their advice if he like it better. How little of a king they intended to leave him, see nineteen Propositions sent the second of June in 1642 (it is to be observed what I cite the Parliament in its purity (as the phrase is, Ex. Col. p. 307.
the summe of all which are, That all Peers, Iudges, Councellers, Of∣ficers, civill and military may be approved by themselves, all Ecclesiasti∣call affairs, Forts, Castles, Pardons, Censures, New Oaths, The Mariage Government of his own Children, may be at the disposall of the two houses. After the forementioned declaration of May 26. the ordinance concerning the Militia, these Propositions, I would willingly know in what consists the authority of the King, which Mr. B. saies, he and they swore, and fought to defend; Cer∣tainly they could not call him Soveraign without a jeere. If the houses have once this Power, let them be sworne to defend us, and no longer let us mock God, the King, and the world with giving an oath to a man to do that we our selves have rendred it as impossible for him to do, as the Chaire in his Presence Chamber. The King complaines in severall of his Declarations, parti∣cularly that of August the 12. 1642. of severall insolent speech∣es which passed in the house of Commons unreproved, as of Mr. Martin That the Kings Office was forfeitable, that the happinesse of this King∣dome did not depend upon him, nor any of the royall branches of that stock, and of Sr. Henry Ludlow, That he was not worthy to be King of England. p. 550. Ex. Coll. He tells them plainly in his an∣swer to their Declaration of May 26. 1642. That of that monstrous language by the help of God and the Law, he must have some examinati∣on. Ex Coll. p 28. But it may be said these things were done in the height of passion, when the sence of those grievances they lately fancied they felt, was fresh upon them. Afterwards they were more mo∣derate: as I have shewed how the Parliament went at the very beginning of the Warr upon those principles, their freinds now would be thought to detest; I will briefly demonstrate they went by the same when the Warr was ended, even whilst it con∣tinued Presbyterian, for I shall not once mention what was done after the seclusion of Members by the Army, and shall quote no Historian but him who wrote alwayes for the Parlia∣ment Mr May who in his Historiae Parl. Breviatium, p. 146 tells us, that on the fiftteenth of July 1646. there were propositions sent by the hands of some Lords, and commons, and Commissioners for the Scots
The King looked upon those proposals as derogatory to his Crown, injuri∣ous to his people, as inconsistent with the quiet of the Nation, as of his own conscience, and therefore demurred upon them. The Earle of Lounden tells the King in a trim Oration, that unlesse he will agree to those propositions which himself ac∣knowledges very hard ones, it is to be feared, he would be de∣posed, and the nation setle in another way of Government without him or any of his Posterity. The King resolved, he would not give them his Crown, they must take it forcibly if they would have it, after that, he was their Prisoner, now he was from his evill Councill, one would have thought they would have desired him at least, not have denyed him to come nere his Parliament. His usage was various, sometimes their malice made him know what it was to be confined, other times more civilly bitter, it allowed him as much ceremonious Royalty as might put him in mind of what he had been. About Dec. 1647 (for want of something else to do) they treat with the King, but he must grant foure previous proposi∣tions, the first and last of which would serve to dethrone him, and the other two to affront him, which certainly they would never have asked, had they not resolved to be denied. But great ills cannot be maintained, but by acting greater, they would not allow the King any power, because they feared what they deserved, as it is usually seen, that they that sin beyond all example, think they sin beyond all possibility of forgive∣nesse, so these (though they might have had the greatest pro∣vision for their safety, themselves could imagine, so that they needed fear nothing, but guilty consciences) thought the King and themselves could not both be secure. Wherefore, on the third of January the Kings refusall to∣figne the bills was wholy debated, & it was strongly urged, how the King by denyall of those bills, had refused to protect his people, (viz.) by denying to part with the Militia, without which it is impossible he should protect them so much as a constable can) up∣on which score their subection was no longer due, it was time for them to think how to settle the Nation without him, ac∣cordingly upon mature deliberation they frantickly resolve up∣on
it, and on the seventeenth of January Vote, They will never make any addresses more to the King, nor receive any message from him] May Breviarium Hist. Parl. p. 18. At the beginning of the War it was necessary for them (though they did act quite contrary) to say they would make the King a great and glorious King, and it was not impossible, but some fools might beleeve them: but that after these Votes passed, publshed and maintained in a declaration set out to that purpose, & suitable usage, they should dare to this day to professe they alwayes were for the King, his Person and Autho∣rity, is arrogantly monstrous, unlesse at the same time they vo∣ted away their Princes liberty they thought they could vote away his Peoples reasons too. It is true, they afterwards recalled those Votes, and sent some termes to the King, which the necessity of affaires caused him to condiscend to, but if it he remembred what previous concessions there were, what an odious preface, how harsh the Propositions were to the disparagement, as well as the undoing of all his friends? what fear themselves were then in of their own army? will think the King obliged to thank them only when he hath nothing else to do? How well the Pretences for the King have been seconded, with unfit performances, hath been in some measure seene, the next enquiry must be about the Peers; whether the pulling the sun out of the firmament, hath been an effectuall way to make the starrs shine more gloriously. The Bishops at the beginning of the Parliament, were at the least so many Barons (if not the third state) and had as undoubted a right to fit there, as the law could give, to any man or men of this Nation, they were a more ancient (I add, and a more considerable part of the Parliament then the whole house of Commons, as having part of the judi∣cative power in them, which the other had not) yet were they affronted, menaced, and endangered by tumults, which the Lords would have suppressed, and the Commons encouraged. But of this before, The Lords (seeing the Commons would not joyne) appoint a writ (by the advice of the Judges) to be di∣rected to the Sheriffs and Justices upon divers statutes (which issued accordingly) to suppresse and hinder all tumultuous re∣sort,
in obedience to which the Justices and other ministers ap∣point the Constables to attend about Westminster, to hinder that unlawfull conflux of people, which the Commons without a∣ny conference with the Lords, to know upon what reason, or what Law that writ was grounded, Vote it a Breach of privi∣ledge, and send one of the Justices to the Tower. Ex. Col. p. 53. The Bill concerning the Militia (a most considerable bill) was sent to the King by the house of Commons alone, notwith∣standing the express refusall of the house of Peers, as themselves confesse. Ex. Col. p. 59. However, they may talk they were for the old constitution of King, Lords and Commons, it is evi∣dent the grandees were for neither full and free; but so ma∣ny of each as would serve their turne. After the bill for the Militia had been rejected twice in the house of Peers, it was con∣trary to all law, reason, Presidents, forced upon them again, and to fright the Peers into agreement, it was said there. [That whoever would not consent, &c. was an enemy to the Commonwealth,] and the same day Mr. Hollis, contrary sure to the freedom of Parliaments, demanded to know who were against it; much to this purpose may be read in Ex. Col. p. 547. 548. What was that ridiculous proposall that the minor part of the Lords might joyn with the Major part of the Commons, That threatning Petition that they might protest against the dissenting Lords, and that other, that the good Lords might sit in the same house with the Commons, but devices to aw the Peers? What was the unparliamentary course of forcing bills upon the House of Lords after severall times being cast out, but a down right tel∣ling them, they were resolved to take no deniall. The House of Commons made an order against an establish∣ed Law, concerning the Common Prayer, the Lords made an order for the observance of it, which the Commons very man∣nerly declare against, the nineth of September, Ex Col p 526. The house of Peers was certainly of very great authority, when an Order of theirs in behalf of an established law, was not equivalent to one of the lower House; in direct opposition to an established law Again, The protestation being so early, whatever the mean∣ing
was, the termes in common prudence ought not to be too offensive, but presently they perceived that their surest friends the haire-brained Sectaryes would not endure to be bound [to observe the Doctrine of the Church of England] Whereupon those words in the protestation were explayned by a declaration of the house of Commons onely, to be intended onely so sar, as it is opposite to Popery, The house of Peers taking an Oath, to be too sacred to admit of so jugling an interpretation, refused to joyn with them in it. Presently the house of Commons (who would accept of the Peers assent, when it might be had, and when it could not, would act without it, so excellent observers were they of the ancient constitution) voted it by their sole autho∣rity, That all people who would not take that Protestation so interpreted, unfit to bear any office in the Common-wealth After all these actions, I hope a few good words will not acquit them: Nor will it signi∣fy any thing with intelligent men, what is next urged. That, The Covenant was for King and Parliament. The Covenant is lyable to more exceptions then at present I am willing to take, the very designe was extreamly scandalous, and as great a blow to Religion, I am perswaded, as it ever re∣ceied in the world, as representing it; to be the parent of the worst of vices, rebellions, sacriledge and perjury: some men have adventured to teach, that God is the author of all sin: these men come very neer them, that can do the worst of Vil∣lanies upon his score, fear God and break his commandements; and all upon the newly revealed Doctrine of Piety and Plun∣der. Surely, Humility, Patience, self-deniall, taking up the Cross, loving enemies, praying for persecutors, are things commen∣ded only to pusillanimous and morrall men. Hath the spirit that came down upon Christ in the forme of a Dove, appeared since in the shape of a Vulture or a Roman Eagle? was it weak∣nesse, not religion, that kept the primitive Chstians obedient; must whatever they said about Rebelion be construed with this tacite reserve, untill we have an opportunity. We read in Scrip∣ture of a blessing laid up for those who in defence of Christ and his truth part with their Lands, Houses or Life; but not of any for those, who upon that score invade other mens▪ That there
were no rewards appointed for those who killed Tyrants, Bu∣chanan esteemed it as a defect in policy, and it is one in religion too. He might as easily observed it to be an omission in the Law of God as man. The quarrel was not then about Doctrine so much as discipline, our articles were esteemed Orthodox, our discipline not appo∣stolick enough: Their discipline in terminis in Scripture, and as a command to introduce it with fire and sword, in defiance of Prince and Laws, are surely to be found in the same chap∣ter. These tender Consciences are very prety things, that dare not conform to an indifferent Ceremony, in obedience to all the authority the law of England takes notice Civill or Eccle∣siasticall, without an expresse command or example of Christ or his Apostles; and yet without either, can take up arms against their Soveraign, plunder and slay all, whose Consciences are not of the same size. The Covenant (not to mention upon what grounds they who at first Idolized it, do now look upon it, as an abominable Idoll) lyes open to very just, and very many material Obecti∣ons; It being my businesse onely by the by; I shall onely inti∣mate those that are so obvious, that they cannot escape a very ordinary observer. First, It is directly contrary to the Oath of Supremacy, for∣merly taken, wherein they swear, the King to be the oely supream Governour in all Causes as well Ecclesiastical as Temporall; which power they there swear to defend; and by resolving to reform the Church without, nay against his direct Command, they now as absolutely (with an Oath too) deny it. Secondly, It is contrary to the Oaths of Canonical obedi∣ence to their Ordinary, Bishops, Chancellors, &c. which those of them which had entered into Orders took, and conscienci∣ously observed by swearing their utter exterpation; a Govern∣ment they by subsciption testified to be lawfull, which judge∣ment many of them were known, never to change till it was their interest (the late usuall season of conversion) so to do. And some think a good Bishoprick would seduce many of them to their old errour again.
Thirdly, Ecclesiasticall affaires never were, nor can be by the law of England (which they broke even in this very act of Covenanting for the laws, as they said) consulted on in Parlia∣ment, but onely to have (the civill Sanction) and that after (the law is expresse) they have been determined by the Clergy in Convocation: See [The Reformation of the Church of England Justified] a whole book to that purpose. Now whether the Assembly of Divines, being not called by the King, who alone hath power by the Law to do it, nor elect∣ed by the Clergy, who alone have power to send (the true Con∣vocation not dissolved) may be called, The Clergy in Convocation: I will leave to any one to determine, and onely observe, that as in other illegall Acts, the late Powers proceeded according to their example; so in this particularly, Their naming what members they pleased, without Election of the Clergy, to sit in the Assembly, was a fit President for Oliver Cromwel to call whom he pleased, without choice of the Country, to sit in the little Parliament. The State and Church was pulled down the same way. Fourthly, The Covenant could not be imposed, according to the Doctrine of the long Parliament, who Ex Col. p. 859. tels us, Men are not to be compelled to be sworn without an Act of Parlia∣ment, which certainly, the Votes of the two Houses are not: I shall not prosecute these things any further, but observe some few particulars in the Covenant it self; and onely wonder, with what face (not to say, with what Conscience) men, the profes∣sed Champions of our Liberty, and of no part, so much as our Consciences, in regard of Oaths, imposed even by an unquesti∣onable Authority, could on the sudden use such barbarous ri∣gour toward the freeborn people of England, for not taking that Oath, which themselves had (according to the fore-cited Do∣ctrine) no power to impose; and the others had the ommand of the Prince, Law, and unanswered Reason to refuse; at least, they could say what themselves once thought enough, it was against their Consciences. We shall now examine, whether there is any amends made in the Materiall Cause, for the faultinesse of the Efficient; and there is a presumption that it is so; sure, such good men would
not involve their Country in the miseries of a War, resist their Prince, but in an order to a thing that was very excellent, if not necessary: That assertion in the Preface which gives chief countenance to the undertaking, is a most horrible falsity, that it was [according to the Commendable practise of these kingdomes in former times, and the example of Gods people in other Nations.] England hath behaved her self so commendably, that it is im∣possible to make it out, to have been her practise: whosoever swears it to have been, untill he can produce his instances, if he doth not meet with very charitable persons will be looked up∣on as one horribly Perjured: The Churches of God (if there were any before Presbytery Rebelled into a being) whose ex∣amples may be Rules to us; must be either the holy men before the law, under the law, or the Primitive Christians, beofore Re∣ligion was made a Bawde to Interest. He that thinks there can be a thing fetcht from their doings in favour of this league, let him serve that cause so far as to attempt [The History of Cove∣nants] and see how many examples he can produce of Fighters with their Prince, for not introducing a form of Worship they better liked of, than what was by law established. The Covenants we read of in Scripture, were not against the King, but with the King, nor when the Kings refused, doe we read that the Prophets ever exhorted the People to such at∣tempts. But no remedy here is, men must be undone, unless they will swear with hands lifted up to Heaven; this matter of fact, though they do not know it to be so; nay, though they know it not to be so; and which is prodigiously strange: One of the first arguents that commended it to the world, is a di∣rect contraiction to this assertion, when the Covenant with a Narrative tells us, that there never was such a Thing seen in the world before. It might be observed, that Errour is far incorporated with her Tenents, that what is true in it self, is false when they speak it; as almost the very first word [All living under one King] ac∣cording to the Declaration of May 26. 1642. and the octrine that ustified the War from being Treason, though against the King, beause he was not King in his Personall but Politique capacity, i. e. the two Houses, to war against whom, by that law
was Treason: according to this, I say we have three Kings in as much as we have three Parliaments in the three Nations; and in my weak judgment, appointing all Officers, Declaring who are Offenders and uncapable of mercy; resolving to reform Church and State according to their own modell, against the Kings expresse Will and Command, are no great evidences of living under him. The first Article is, To endeavour the preservation of the Religion of the Church of Scotland, in Doctrine, Discipline &c. The Reforma∣tion in England, Ireland, according to the word of God, the best ex∣ample of the best Reformed Churches, and to endeavour to bring the three Kingdomes to uniformity in Church Government, &c. By those words, according to the word of God, They use to mean prescribed in it, upon which, where do you finde such or such a Ceremony was the common Question: But so, the forms of worship in Scotland used in Marriage, Burial, Preaching, Disci∣pline by Classes, Assemblies, higher and lower, are not so well known in England; muchlesse so clear in the word of God, that every Artisan can in an instant be so assured, that they are there as to swear it in judgement: this Oath is by so much the more oppressive & intolerable, that it is not satisfied with a quiet sub∣mission to, and a patient enduring of their intollerable inso∣lencies (in which respects it is more barbarous than the Engage∣ment;) but obliges every man zealously and constantly to pre∣mote it. There is in this Article more jugling then is tolerable in so sacred a thing as an Oath; their friends being of so severall parties, neither of which would be content, the Church should be reformed according to the others modell; There are seve∣ral words put in which that party, which wit or strength, or accident shall set uppermost at last; may interpret to their own sense, i e advantage. To please the Presbyterians: The Church of Scotland, Doctrine and Government is sworn to be preser∣ved, and all the three Kingdomes to be brought to the nearest conjun∣ction and uniformity in Confession of aith, Church-Government, Di∣rectory, &c. Now this can be compassed no otherwise, then by reducing all to the pattern of Scotland, that being before sworn to be preserved.
But that the Sectarian Brethren of no sort may be displea∣sed, the word of God is expressely said to be the rule, by which each Sect were sure of carrying the cause their own way; and if any had a peculiar fancy to New-England, or any other Church; he thought better of, the term of the best reformed Church, secu∣red him to them; and he was by that assured the day was ap∣proaching, wherein the men of his perswasion should triumph▪ That the Covenant was taken in the various senses, and with different hopes every one knows, and that the ambiguous pen∣ning gives each party ground for it, it is fondnesse to deny. To please those who were for Church-government, they Covenanted against Schism, but least they should displease those who were against Church Government, they could never be brought to proscribe (nor while they had use of them, to fight against the King, so much as to tell who were) Schisma∣tick. Surely, Conscientious men, who had sworn to extirpate Schisme, Heresie, and whatever was contrary to godlinesse, would have thought Antinomians, Anaaptists, &c. or some o∣ther of those hard names that then swarmed about the City, to have come under that head; but in the same sense, as fighting against the King is being for him; being against Schismaticks, is putting Armes and Offices into their hands. The Common enemies, this Oath engageth men against, must not be explained too far, least it discourage their best friends, Papists and Prelatists may safely be named; for the rest Mr. Henderson explicated them to be the Syrians and the Babylonians. The second Article, is to extirpate, Archbishops, Bishops, &c. whom (there being no need) I shall not at present plead for, on∣ly this, That Government in the judgment of very many Co∣venanters, Clergy and Lay, was inexpedient onely, and not un∣lawfull, upon whom the guilt of Perjury lyes very heavy, for breaking their former Oaths, leavying War against their King, disturbing the peace of the Nation, turning so many gallant men convict of no crime, but their lands, which other men had a minde to be guilty of, and they had as good a right to as the law of England could give; and all upon the sole point of inexpediency: Into this point I shall dive no further; but take
some small notice of the reason here rendred, for this certainly illegall Act of pulling down that Government of the Church, without the Kings Authority, lest they be partakers of other mens sins. I doe not apprehend that ever I read words more destructive to every Government, and to the peace of every Nation in the world, they sound thus; [Whensoever there is a Government or form of worship in the Church, which we doe not believe to be according to the word of God, we are bound in Conscience (nay they of another Nation are, as the Scots were to us, who upon this Reason, Vow to extirpate our Bishops) to take up Arms, though it be against our King, and reform, for if we doe not, we make our selves guilty of other mens sins.] A proposi∣tion that creates a perpetuall Apology for crafty men, and ju∣stifies, nay, necessitates the vilest attempts of deluded ones. The Anabapts in Germany did, the Separatists in Queen Elizabeth's dayes attempted no more then this warrants. If this Doctrine were true, I wonder the Prophets and Priests of old, that lived under Idolatrous Princes were nor carefuller of their own souls, and lift up their voice like a Trumpet in another sense, than the Scripture mentions them to have done. There cannot easi∣ly be imagined greater occasion for such irregular proceedings, if they are at all justifiable in any Nation, then in the Jewish; their Princes being so often and so strangely guilty of Idolatry, (a crime clearly by their law described and forbidden) yet we doe not finde that the People ever thought themselves, or the Prophets ever told them, they were obliged to attempts of that nature. I will use my pen no longer in this Argument, because it ought to be confued by the sword of the Civill Magistrate; sure I am, it will pull down every Government, that doth not pull down it: More especially, by reason of that clause in the Conclusion, wherein, each private man swears to go before other in the work of Reformation, words of very horrid import, as obliging every man to disturb the Nation in pursuit of his own or anothers dreams, if he could but fancy it to be a Reformati∣on; their full latitude might have been understood, if Walling∣ford house men had continued much longer, possibly not to the good liking of the first contrivers, but sure to their eternal in∣famy,
who first infused into men such pernicious doctrine, and then because the horridnesse of it would affright men of any good nature from it, bound them to it by an Oath; and lastly, gave them swords into their hands to justifie the most de∣sperate conclusion, the maddest can draw; and all this, As they shall Answer it at the great Day. A little after, they expresse a right Presbyterian spirit, a ve∣hement desire to see all Christendome in a flame, That, Their proceeding may be encouragement to other Christian Churches growing under, or in danger of the yoake of Antichristian Tyranny to joyn in the same or like Association or Covenant. In which words, all people whose Princes are Papists (or something else, which they did not stick formerly to call Antichristian) are absolved from their obedience and encouraged to Rebell, and those who are not un∣der the yoke yet: if they are in danger of being so (and how small a thing creates such a danger, England may remember) they may be rid of that and their Allegiance together, and pro∣vide for their security as they please. Here is a great want of Prudence to give Forraign Princes such timely notice, of such projected Rebellions, and of the men they are in danger of: And a great want of charity to Forraign Churches, to repre∣sent them all as enemies to the State, whereby they may be put out of their good esteem if not protection. But some men have Preached and Printed, not onely down∣right Poery but Prelacy also, and Ceremonies also to be an Antichristian yoke, and to be in danger of it, hath been formerly ac∣counted to tolerate some things now used; what in their judg∣ment is to be done in such a case, I must not repeat, least they should say I had a design to ender them suspected, and so odi∣ous to the present Government▪ I shall conclude this point with this one note, The Doctrine that allows private men to resist Magistrates, upon the score of Religion, is in it self so horrid & black in its consequences, that none dare own it, that can defend themselves any other way, accordingly the fancy of the coordinate Power of the two Hou∣ses was entertained with mighty applause, by the Brethren of the Presbytery, because it salved this grand Objection of Rebel∣lion; a sin (which after that happy discovery of their being
free from) they disclaimed against, no men more: Prove the King Supream, and then I will yeeld myself a Rebell, so Mr. Baxter in his Preface; And so they all acknowledging it unlawfull for Subjects to resist their Soveraign, contrary to language of the former Pamphlets, Rebellion: they gladly acknowledged to be a sin in all men but themselves; But that device of coordi∣nation, suiting onely to this particular juncture of affaires, by no means serving to acquit the Scots tumults, or Armies, or to incense their brethren beyond Sea, they having no Parliament, or of no such pretence of share in the Government, and very like to oppose such designes, if they had any such power, the Covenant revives the former Doctrine, and advises the Chur∣ches beyond ea to set themselves free, as if errour in points of belief did deprive Princes, (though it doth no man else) of his natural or civill power or rights: Thus are they loath any one Nation should be peaceable or prince happy. We shall now examine that clause of the Covenant, them∣selves so much boast of, viz. that concerning the preservation of the Kings person. To preserve the Kings Person and Authority, in the preservation and defence of the true Religion and Liberties of the Kingdome. That they deprived the King of all Authority, is proved al∣ready, That his person was not the King, themselves acknow∣ledge and contend for, rgo, he is not at all provided for in this Article. That the putting the King to death was no breach of Covenant; I might prove many wayes, but I shall refer Mr. Baxter to Mr. Goodwin his fellow-labourer in the War and Word; who in the defence of the Honourable Sentence, argues thus, shrewdly, I think, ad homines, p. 53. He was not then a King, but a Subject, and so lyable to processe of law; for that blood they so often preached him guilty of, Deposed he was (saith he) by themselves and their party; when they denyed subjection to him, withdrew their obedience from him, acknowledged a power superiour to him, viz the Parliament, leavyed War against him as a Traitor, as an Enemy to the Kingdome, chased him from place to place, and at last imprisoned his person, and there was no clause in the Covenant, for the preservation of a person that onec was King.
Nor doth this Article promise us any thing better, when they shot their Cannons directly at the place where their treache∣rous Informers discovered the King to be; they said, it was in his defence, because in the defence of the two Houses, where his Au∣thority (forsooth) resided. Another cast of the same Logick may make it out, that deposing, nay killing the King, if in the de∣fence of true Religion shall be preserving him too, because in defence of that, where his Person may as properly be said to reside, as his Authority where they placed it. This Article at the best is but conditionall, if he defends what they please to think or call the true Religion, and the Liberties of the King∣dome. And what his performance was in their judgement, I might cite almost all their Sermons, Pamphlets, Declarations; but I will content my self till further provocation, with the Admonition of their gude brethren of the Kyrke of Scotland, May Hist. p. 108 That he was very much guilty of Idolatry, Prophane∣nesse, of the Murder of many thousands of his best Subjects; with much more to that purpose. If I delighted to render the Presbyte∣rians odious, here I might do it to purpose, but transcribe some of their Sermons, and the work were done. I shall for this time forbear, and onely use a little, which is necessary to my purpose, and commonly known, and already taken notice of by Mr. Goodwin, whose book lying under so publick a Censure, is very like to be read by most: Mr. Love in his Sermon at Vx∣bridge, told us, That the late King was the troubler of England s Achan was of Israel, subjoyning, It was the Lord that troubled Achan, because he troubled Israel Oh that in this our State Physitians would resemble God, to cut of those from the Land who have distempered it! Melius est ut pereat VNVS quam Vni∣tas▪ In the same Sermon, Men whly under the guilt of much inno∣cent blood, are not meet persus to be at peace with, till all the guilt of blood be expiated or avenged, either by the sword of th law, or the la of the sword. The Independents  themselves out of the Presbyterians principles and practises, Godw defence p 94. The Ministers of London themselves, and the Church of Scotland, Charge him, being the greatest Delinquent, guilty of the blood of hun∣dreds of thousands of Protestants, the bloodest man under heaven: He was summoned and Arraigned in the sight of God and his people, curst
and  worse than any  or exhortation to curse all those in the name of God, that made not War a∣gainst him, as bitterly as Meroz was to be , that went not out a∣gainst the Canaanitish King: Almost in all the Sermons, Prayers of seven years. He was called, Opprobium generis humani, The most bloody monster and miscreant under heaven. That I am so civill  to spare names, I might use in this argument, I hope, will procure thus much, that Mr. Baxter if he thinks fit to reply will do it fairely and calmely; However, my advantage is not quite lost, but remains still to be used at pleasure over persons, he very much esteems; and for their sakes I believe, I shall fare the bet∣ter. That they preached against putting the King to death, the Presbyterian Ministers urge strongly and with much applause themselves, though indeed it signifies as much as just no∣thing; the reason is clear, while the Parliament Declared, and the Army fought for, Presbytery and the King opposed it, none were more vehement obstructers of all the designes tending to his restitution then the Ministers; for so long they had hopes by that means, that all the Lands, Power of the Bishops, Deans, and Chapters, the best Parsonages should be divided among them: But when the Independents out-witted them, and seem∣ed to have perfectly learned their lesson they taught them of declaiming against something, as an humane invention, in the form of worship of those whose lands they longed for; then and not till then, they would have been content to have joy∣ned with the King against that Army, themselves had joyned with and raised against the King. When the Votes no further Addresse were first passed by men they had hopes of, which of them then abhominated the dethroning of their Prince. I shall make this quere (if it be not absud in so clear a matter to make a quere) Whether if the Parliament and Army had joyned together as one man to set up high Presbytery, divided the Church lands among them, and the King had refused to yeeld his assent to such illegall Acts, they would have pleaded the Covenant in his behalf, and thus loudly talked for his restitution to his Au∣thority, let their friends speak.
That upon such terms as they pleased, they would restore him, is no more then the very Army would have done, who af∣ter the Sentence passed, came and offered him conditions. They merit the lesse by their last appearing (as they call it) for the King, in as much as in that juncture of affaires, it seem∣ed very unlikely they should-subsist without him: The Cove∣ant were exploded every where; the Army called it a Carnal thing; the Sectaries in the City, said it was a thing ridiculous to unhorse Episcopacy and set Presbytery in the Saddle; to be rid of my Lord Bishop, and doe twice the homage to Sr. John Presbyter; their own arguments were retorted upon them: the A∣postles were not Lord Bishops, shew where they had their thou∣sands per annum changed into? the Apostles were not Parochial Ministers, shew where they had tythes that at such a time as this? they would have been content to have been maintained by the Common Enemy against their best friends, is what they think highly obliging? This was that great piece of Loyalty, they would have had the King saved, when it was the onely way to save themselves. A King Deposed is surely not looked upon as a King, by those who depose them; now if imprisoning, passing Votes of no fur∣ther Addresse, doth not depose a King; I would fain know what doth? Being in that condition, and guilty of so much blood as they all along declared him to be, when those words of the Covenant, of Bringing all Delinquents to justice without respect of Per∣sons, should have come to be considered? How much further they might have proceeded, had not the power been snatched out of their hands by their Servants, as themselves had done to their Master; I leave to their past words and works to declare? They did indeed recall those Votes of no Addresse, and Treated with the King, but it was when they could no o∣therwise be rid of the Army, but by joyning with the King and Nation against them; and even then, they so perplexed the King, and protracted time with terms and punctilio's of proce∣dure; and were so dissatisfied, with whatever the King offered, whilest they had the shadow of any power, that the Army had opportunity to break off that Treaty the Houses would not end. That part of the Covenant that concerns the Priviledge of
Parliament, Mr. Baxter and his side are very confident they have inviolably observed; let us and them consider what was before said of the Tumults and the Scots Army, the affronting and assaulting the Bishops, and other Lords; the posting up of the dissenting Members names of both Houses, and which is above all, their illegall turning men out for having a hand in some Patent, Monopoly or other, which they might as well have done, for having been guilty of any fault; having red Hair or a Roman Nose; which action, whether it did not null all their proceedings, eo ipso, as making it no House, by feclding men fairely elected, some make a very great question. Before I take the Covenant, I shall make this one not unrea∣sonable request, that I might know the Priviledges of Parlia∣ment first, and swear to them afterwards; one example may not be tedious. On the 3d. of January 1641. It was declared, To offer to Ar∣rest or detain any member without first acquainting the House, is a breach of Priviledge, Ex. Coll. p. 35. The palpable absurdity of this Doctrine being discovered by the King in one of his Decla∣rations, and other Treatises in Novemb. . 1642. They declare they ave no such priviledge, but that any Minister of Iustice, may Arrest a Member without order from the House, and detain him in custody till be may be brought to parliament. Whereas I represented the Covenanters to be pernicious e∣nemies to every Government, their dealings with our late Ty∣rants, force me to retract part of that Assertion, or at least ex∣plain it, so as to be intended onely of lawfull ones; For to U∣surpers they have shewed themselves friends and true Subjects. They will not molest their Prince, no not for their Covenant; provided he hath but a bad Title, let them see right trampled upon, they are contented, they ask no more. The reasons of which prodigious dealing are these, I am bound in Conscience to submit to the present Government; first, because a full and free Parliament at owned it, which is notoriously, the consent of the people; which is, the evidence former Princes had to justifie their BEST TITLES. Absurd, absurb, absurd! And it is the opinion of Grotius (upon Mat. 22. 20. That private men are not judges of the Controvertible Titles of Princes; And Christ commanded to give
was in . The  Assertion, that the consent of Parliaments was former Princes best Title, hath in it, I know not whether more of non-sense than trea∣son; it sounds certainly strange in the ears of English-men, who have been hitherto told, that there was no interregnum here, the death of the former Prince, being all that was requi∣red to compleat the title of the latter, whom no act, no not an Attainder in Parliament could debar from his Throne, the Parliament deriving its Authority from the Writ of the Prince, without Authority from whom as King already, they could not have met: ut here by the glorious name of Parliament, he means onely the House of Commons, the Other House being not at all elected by the People, and so not involving their con∣sents. Now that the House of Commons may give away, the Heire of the Crown, and all the Peers native Rights, to whom they please, even the meanest and most wicked Varlets is one of their very New Priviledges. But Christ bad us pay tribute to Caesar because he was in Possession. Between which Case and ours, there is this difference: There the lawfull Magistrate receded from his Right, which in our Case was not done; The Romans title to that being not (as in most other places) meer Conquest but dedition. Aristobulus the younger brother getting possession by wrong: Hircanu the el∣der parted with his Right to the Romans, on condition they would conquer it by their Armes: He chose rather by their help to rule as a Deputy of theirs, then to keep a more noble title, he had no likelihood ever to enjoy; see Dr. Hammond on the place: The Romanes then had the right of him who had the very right; the onely remaining difficulty is, how Csar came to have the right of the Romanes, which notoriously was in the nate and People: To which I say this, The Senate and peo∣ple upon what inducement, it concerns me not to enquire at present, laid down their claim, parted with their power, submit∣ted to, and acknowledged the Emperours to be their very good Lords: Pusillanimously I must confesse, and their own Histori∣ans proclaim it, but quilibet post credere juri su; If they parted with their right to Csar, then Csar ad it. King Charls never
did so, and Res inter alios aa  debet; I may now confidently say, this example reacheth not the question; but if it did, paying necessary Tribute is one thing, writing fine dain∣tily fie canting Epistles is another, but this I will not at pre∣sent urge, because Mr. Baxter shall not say I endeavour to dis∣grace him, but onely commend his, or his friends discretion, that one of his Prefaces, viz. that before his book of Church Government is very rarely to be met with of late times. This argument tempts me to put this one question, by what name are those Ministers of this Nation to be known, that had rather Richard Cromwel should have raigned then King Charls I have now gone over so much of Mr. Baters Books, as seem∣ed in any degree argumentative; I have left out much which I might pertinently, and truly have urged, because I would not mention any thing which might seem exasperating: For I could heartily wish the Parliament could passe such an act of Oblivion, that all that is past may be not only pardoned but forgot: There hath certainly so much of folly as well as impie∣ty been seen in our late Proceedings, that it were much for the credit of this present age; if posterity would give as little cre∣dit to those who tell them these things were so, as we fools did to those wise and honest men, who time enough before hand told us they would be so. If any thing in these papers seem offensive (though I have taken all possible care nothing should) to some men, who think the onely way to secure their honour and innocence is to be angry, I do assure them, the rubbing upon the sore places, was not to hinder the healing, or to vex, and inflame the distempred parts, but onely to free them from that errour of taking themselves to be whole already; If any thing here may be of use to any reader, I shall think my pains well bestowed, however I shall at any time gladly hazard, mor then alittle labour in the service of that cause I plead for. FINIS.
Errata.
