T722 12527693 62689
A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL of Her Late MAJESTY QUEEN MARY Of Ever Blessed Memory IN THE ABBEY CHURCH in WESTMINSTER. Upon March 5, 1695. By his Grace THOMAS Lord Archbishop of CANTERBVRY. Edinburgh, Re-printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Ex∣cellent Majesty, 1695.
Die Jovis 7. Martii, 1695. It is Ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Tem∣poral in Parliament assembled, that his Grace the Lord Archbishop of Centerbury be, and he is hereby desired to Print and Publish his Ser∣mon Preached in the Abbey-Church in West∣minster, at the Funeral of Her late Majesty Queen MARY of Blessed Memory. Matth. Johnson, Cler Parliamentor.
ECCLES. vii. 14. Former Part. In the Day of the Prosperity be joyful, but in the Day of Adversity con∣sider. God, also hath set one over against the other.— PRosperity, which carries the Affections outward and dis∣covers them in Joy, is, by no means, a fit Subject to to entertain you with in the House of Mourning. But Adversity, which causeth the Mind to retire, and to consider, is, without peradventure an Argument in Season. And, a Fourfold Consideration, in this day of our Adversity, seems very proper. I. The Greatness of our Loss. II. The Principal Cause of it. III. The Degrees of Good, which God hath temper'd with this sore Evil, for the rendring of it the more supportable. He hath set the one over against the other. IV. The Duty which, upon this whole matter, is required of us, to the end that our Affliction having had its due Effect, we, who, at present sow in Tears, may hereafter reap in Joy. 1. The first Consideration is, the Greatness of our Loss: This will appear▪ 1. From the Excellency of the Person whom God hath taken from us, 2. From some Circumstances of Time by which that loss is further enhaunced. 1. The Greatness of our Loss appears from the Exellency of that Person whom the Goodness, and justice of God (towards Her Goodness, but Justice towards us) has taken away. This is a very copious Subject; and the difficulty consists not in finding out matter, but in keeping a measure in speaking. To that, therefore, I shall have especial regard.
Now, the Excellency of the Person may be represented to you, 1. In Her intellectual Accomplishments; 2. In Her Graces and Vertues. 1. This incomparable Princess was endow'd with more than common Accomplishments of Mind, whether we have respect ei∣ther to Her Knowledge, or Her Wisdom. Towards Her Knowledge Nature hath done a great deal, Edu∣cation and Conversation of the best kind, more still, and most of all the Grace of God. Her Vnderstanding was clear and steddy, and there was a great Compass and Comprehension in it. It reach'd both to the greater Things of Religion, and the lesser of Oeconomy. It was perpetually fed and improved by Reading, by hearing Books read, by Discoursing, by Meditation. Her Books were many and well chosen; much delighted in, and therefore well studied, and well remembred, For Her Majesties Memory was Great, and it was properly exercised by Books of History. One I may name which She much valued, and often took into Her hands Father Paul's Celebrated History of the Couneil of Trent. But the Holy Scriptures were the Oracles which she chiefly consulted. In them if any thing occurred which was not at first so well understood it was, by Her, noted down, as a Subject for after-thoughts, and to be cleared by them, or by some Com∣ment, or some Person of especial Ability. Neither was Her Wisdom and Prudence inferior to Her Know∣ledge; and of this there are many Instances out of which I shall select a few. 1. Her Wisdom shew'd it self in the governing of Her Knowledge She troubled not Her self or others with such curious Questi∣ons which the Prudent neither ask, nor think themselves con∣cern'd to answer. Neither was She wrought up to any Big∣gotory in unnecessary Opinions: She was most Conversant in Books of Practical Divinity, of which some of the latest used
by Her, were certain Sermons, and some Discourses concerning Happiness Death and Iudgment. She knew good things in order to the doing of them. It is true, She read many Volumnes of Controversies betwixt the Reformed and those of the Church of Rome; but it was for the sake of necessary Defence not of vexatious Dispute. 2. Her Wisdom was made known by the wonderful Art she had attain'd to, for the governing of Time, upon which all ma∣nagements do much depend. Her hours were so adjusted to the several Affairs of Her own and others, that notwithstanding the multiplicity of them, She found a season for every thing, and frequently a Time for dispatching many things together. Dres∣sing did not wholly prevent Reading, or Hearing, or Working; and nothing prevented the Service of that God, who gives all time, and expects an Account of it. It was well understood by this wise Princess, that in the Current of time, Affairs meet at last with a stop; if by dispatch some of them are not taken out of the way, but all are suffered to float down together. 3. Her Wisdom shin'd very gloriously in Her Administration of Publick Affairs, for which She has received deservedly the Pub∣lick Thanks, having conducted them with Wisdom and Temper and unwearied Application; Application, which was made a Jest in a late Age, and the want of which is a Lamentation in this. It was an Obeservation of some who were in circumstances to make it, that when secret Difficulties occur'd, this wise Princess had a due sense of them, and together with that, such a Command of her Passions, that there appeared few signs of Trouble, none of Dejectedness in her Countenance; least either the Friends of the Government should be disheartned, or its Enemies encou∣rag'd. Add to all this, that the Wisdom of this Princess was that true Wisdom which chuseth the best things in the first place; the Honour of God before the Pomp of Life; the Sal∣vation of the Soul before the gaining of the World. This Wis∣dom is justified by the genuine Effects of it; of which the Second part of Her Character consists Her Graces and Virtues; which may be laid before you un∣der
these Three great Branches of the Christian Life, Piety, Charity, and Humility. 1. She was a Princess Eminent for Piety; Piety which is ne∣cessary for all, but still more necessary in Her Station, it being the readiest way for those who are to govern the People, to be, first, themselves obedient to God. Her Private Devotions were extraordinary. And tho She shut out the World, yet in her high Circumstances, Her very Re∣tirements could not pass wholly unobserv'd. And it has at last been understood that Her Exercises of Devotion which were known, were not the half of those which were then not known. If all were as diligent in examining and noting down the Condition of their Souls, and comparing the former and the present Estate of them, Heaven would in some measure be upon Earth. In Publick, how pious an Observer of the Lords day was this Religious Princess; how constant at Prayers, at the Blessed Communion, at Sermons; and at all of them how Reverend, how Attentive? Insomuch, that those who gave themselves any Di∣version from their own Duties, to observe the manner in which She performed Hers, found her intent upon them; and no fur∣ther drawn off, than by a solemn Look to check any Interrup∣tion which might sometimes happen. So Judicious and Devout a Saint, the degenerate Church of Rome can by no means shew us; the Zeal of their most pious Recluses, being from the very Rules of their several Orders, embased with Superstition, whilst in Hers appeared no allay of it. 2. The genuine Fruit of the true Devotion of this Princess, was Christian Charity, without which the longest and loudest Prayers are but Pharasaical pretences. For he who loveth God, loveth his brother also. Her Charity was as great as Her Power, and as discreet as it was great. The distressed French, and Scots, and Irish, and the Needy at home, were daily refreshed by it.
It extended to Persons of Condition who were fallen into de∣cay, and to a very great number of meaner People, and especi∣ally (as I am well assur'd) to the Wives and VVidows of inferior Soldiers and Seamen. Her Charity was generous and uncon∣strain'd. When it was ready, nothing was denied which was fit to be asked. It could not be extorted by the Vnworthy, and by the Worthy it needed not. In granting Charities. there appeared in Her Countenance an Air of Satisfaction; and when Supplies were not at hand, it was a Grief to deny, but the mannner of it was obliging; whilst ma∣ny others almost as often as they gave a denial, create a Ene∣my. If God had thought us worthy of Her Life, She had done more publick and lasting Charities, and particularly in an Hos∣pital for Seamen at Greenwich, in which the Wisdom and Good∣ness of the King concurr'd with Hers whilst She was alive; and which at this time His Majesty is going on with, for the En∣couragment of Navigation, which I take to be the English Nerve both of War and Peace. 3. As this Excellent Princess added to Her Knowledge Wisdom and to her Wisdom, Piety, and to Piety, Charity; so to all these, She gave Ornament by Humility, which accord∣ing to St. Peter,1 Pet. 5.5. is the Cloathing, [] the Girdle or Badge of a Servant of Christ. The Haughty and Over-bearing are absurd enough when they have Power,Jul. Poll.  l. 4. c. 18. but when they have it not, they are perfectly ridiculous. In this Prin∣cess, Authority, Majesty, and Humility met to∣gether. That dwelt in Her to such a degree, that in Her Pre∣sensce, or within Her hearing, the speaking of this, which I have said, or any thing like this, would have been exceedingly of∣fensive. But the Justice of Nations gives those praises to the merit of Good Princess, which their own Modesty would not bear. An ordinary instance may suffice for the shewing her Averse∣ness not only to Flattery but to Praise. Of a Book addressed
to Her, She said She had read it, and lik'd it well, but much the better, because the Espistle was a bare Dedication. This Grace of Humility did eminently discover it self, when at any time Her publick Administration was to cease. It was laid down with the like unconcernedness, as one uses when he puts off his Garments, and goes to Rest. It is true, this Grace was accompanied with a remarkable Smoothness of Demeanor; but it was not such as the Artificial use; It was the Effect of an excellent Spirit, and not of world∣ly Craft. It was, also, attended with familiarity, but with such a good sort of it as bred rather Veneration than Contempt; and increas'd the Love and Duty even to her servants, tho' she treated them as her Children: It procur'd that Regularity and Good Order, and Diligence in her greater Family, which, in Private ones, is so much to be desird. Such Accomplishments as these, are, usually, increas'd by Fame but diminished by Presence, which discovers those Imperfections that, at a distance, are not discern'd. But, here the more this Queen was understood, the more she was admir'd; and those who knew her best, could not but most esteem her. After this excellent Princess had been very well known for several Years in a neighbouring Country, she was so extreamly va∣lued, that her removal from it was lamented as a Death, and occasioned a Deep and Universal Sorrow. Concerning Her forementioned Graces and Vertues, they may upon many Accounts, be still further recommended. They were not blemished by Vanity or Affection: Had that been so, she would scarce have made such a Profession as this a little before her Death. I know (said She) what loose People think of those who pretend to Religion: They think it is all Hypocrisie: Let them think what they will, I may now say, and I thank God I can say it, I have not affected to ap∣pear what I was not. Further; Her Vertues were the early Fruits of the Grace of
God; whilest Fear and Impotency are the ordinary Causes of the shews of Piety in aged Sinners. They dwelt in a Person seated in that high Estate which is subject to many and violent Temptations. They were practis'd in conjunction with one another. They were the agreeable parts of an uniform life. They were sincere and unpolluted; and it could not be said of this Princess that She had great Virtues and no less Vices. There was Devotion without Enthusiasm, and Charity without Vain-glory, and Humility without that Censoriousness which tram∣ples upon the Pride of others with a greater Pride of its own. They had their Influence upon her in her several Stations and Capacities. She was a wise and good Queen an incom∣parable Wife, and One who (I'm well assur'd) had all the Duty in the world for other Relations, which after long and la∣borious consideration, she judged consistent with her obliga∣tIons to God and her Country. She was likewise, one of the great Supports of Gods Church establish'd among us, and not with∣out due temper towards the Scrupulous; a Patroness of Religi∣on and Learning, a Mistress whose service was a Pleasure; a True and Certain Friend; and a Christian mild and Merciful to her Enemies. Marvel not that she had some; the Son of God himself was not without them. In fine, there was in her Life a perpetual Course of Christian Practice. She was not distemper'd with fits of unsubstantial Piety, which are suddenly rais'd, and as suddenly vanish. The Spring was in the Judgment and the Heart, and from thence the Exercises of Holy living were regular and constant. O! how good, how happy a Life was this? what a glori∣ous Scene was it, not of vain Pleasure, and soft and unprofit∣able Ease, but of true Usefulness and Comfort? how reason∣able were her very Diversions; such as Building, and Garden∣ing, and contriving, and improving, and adorning, and adjust∣ing every thing thereunto belonging? How does her Life up∣braid theirs, who are at the end of their Race, before they have
set a few wise Steps? Lord, teach us so to husband our Time that we may apply our Hearts unto Wisdom. To have lost a very Wise and Virtuous Friend, tho' of Pri∣vate Condition, had been no small Calamity, but here we la∣ment the Death of a Publick person, who was as Publick a Good and that has made our Loss so much the heavier. There are also, Secondly, Some Circumstances of Time which farther shew the greatness of it. Great is our Loss of a most Pious Queen in an Atheistical and Profane Age, the Seeds of which Impiety have been sowing for some years, and now seem to spring up in greater plenty than ever. Great is our Loss of a most Charitable Queen, in an Age which takes up the Reverse of our Lord's Saying, and declares that it is more blessed to receive than give; of a most Humble Queen at a time when Pride would bring all to such a Level, as is the Parent of Confusion. Again, Great is our Loss with respect to this Iuncture, a time of foreign War, and domestick Discontent reigning in those whose Resentments are stronger than their Reasons. A Person is taken away who was a Partner in all the Joys, and Griefs, and Fortunes of the King; one who could Administer, with the entire Confidence of all the People, and without the Compe∣tition of the Great. Likewise, Great was our Loss by the Death of a matchless Queen as taken away in the midst of her Daies, and in less than half the common standard of Human Life. It is certain, All Princes are Mortal; Dust they are, and to Dust they shal return: But yet Good Princes are the especial care of Providence, which often preserves them by striking a Terror into the Desperate them∣selves; whilst Tyrants, who have not God before their Eyes, and observe not how he rules by the Eternal Laws of Equity, do seldom die an unbloody death. Moreover, this Princess, being a Person of the nicest Modesty, and most regular Life, and free from those uneasie &vexatious Passions, which wear out Nature
before its Time; we had entertained hopes that, under the Sha∣dow of her Protection, we might have sate down many Years with safety and delight. But Man's Expectation is often very vain, and it is as often disappointed; and when it is so. That causeth Grief. And there is a double Grief which it ought to awaken at this time; a Grief for our Loss, and a greater one for, That which is a, II. Second Consideration, the principal, Occasion of it. Natural Causes had their share in this Evil, but it was the Immortality, the Sin of the Nation which hastened it as a Judgment. A Spar∣row falls not to the ground without God's Providence, much less a Crowned Head. God has guided and ordered this Affair as he does all things, most suitable to his own Justice. He is Righteous, but we have been Wicked: He shewed what a mighty Blessing he had for a People, if they would become reform'd; but we were not sufficiently sensible, nor thankful. Their Majesties Letters for Reformation were early issu'd out, but how few had a just regard to them? The Light shone, and we followed not its direction, and God has remov'd one Branch of it; let us sin no more lest (which God avert) those which remain be extinguish'd also. As yet we may be happy, if we will amend; for God hath shewed us by several Tokens, that he has not yet given us up to Destruction. He has afficted us, but in judgment he has remem∣bered Mercy. And, which is, III. A third Consideration, in this Day of our Trouble: He has temper'd Prosperity with Adversity, to make the latter the more supportable; He hath set the One over against the other. And thus much the following Remarks will prove. The King's Life is (blessed be God) preserv'd, and his Health re-established; and is still pursuing the great Design of securing the Liberties of Europe. He was Present in this Kingdom when our Loss happen'd, for the keeping us from that Instability which this Accident might have procur'd.
He still more endear'd himself to his People, by that Tender∣ness which he express'd upon this most sorrowful Occasion. That went as far as Decence would permit, and gave us an Instance of such true Greatness of Mind as is made up of Courage and Humanity. The good Vnion of the Royal Family in this Realm, confut∣ed the Surmizes of Evil minded Men, and disappointed their Devices. The Great Council of the Nation was sitting at this Time, and came to a speedy and seasonable Resolution for the Support of the King and his Government. The Season admitted of little of such Actions as might disturb Affairs abroad. And at the same Time that Foreign Countries had the sad News of the Queens Death they reciv'd Tidings of the Loyalty of the King∣dom. These several Things, by the Conduct of God's wise Provi∣dence, have wrought together for Good. And there is one Thing more to be considered under this Head; that seeing God had determin'd this Good Queen must die, the Christian Manner in which She went out of the World, is, in some sort, an Alleviation of the Grief of those whom She has lef behind Her; who have indeed Reason more than enough to mourn, but yet not as Persons without Hope. Some few Days before the Feast of our Lord's Nativity, She found her Self Indispos'd. That, where it was known, was (I hope) some Check to the Liberties of such who mispend that most Solemn Festival in very improper Mirth. I will not say that of this Affliction She had any formal Pre∣sage: But yet there was something which look'd like an imme∣diate Preparation for it. I mean her chusing to hear read more than once, a little before it, the last Sermon of a Good and Lear∣ned Man now with God, upon this Subject, Iob 2, 10. What! shal we receive Good from the Hand of God, and shal we not receive Evil?
This Indisposition speedily grew up into a dangerous Distem∣per. As soon as that was understood, the earliest Care of this Charitable Mistress was for the removing of such immediate Servants as might, by distance, be preserved in Health. Soon after this, She fix'd the Times of Prayers in that Cham∣ber to which her Sickness had confin'd her. On that very Day She Shewed how sensible She was of Death, and how little she fear'd it. She required him who officiated there, to add that Collect in the Communion of the Sick, in which are these Words— That whensoever the Soul shal depart from the Body, it may be without Spot presented unto thee. I will (said Shee) have this Collect read twice every Day. All have need to be put in mind of Death, and Princes as much as any Body else. On Munday, the Flattering Disease occasioned from Hopes, though they were but faint ones. On the next Day, the Festival of Christ's Birth, those Hopes were raised into a kind of Assurance; and there was Joy, great Joy seen in the Countenances of all good People, and heard from their Mouths; and, I believe, it was very warm in their Hearts. But alas! we saw what a few Hours could bring forth. That Joy endur'd but for a Day; and that Day was clos'd with a very Dismal Night. The Disease shew'd it self in various Forms, and smal Hopes of Life were now left. Then it was that he who perform'd the Holy Offices believ'd himself oblig'd to ac∣quaint the Good Queen with the Apprehensions all had of an unlikelyhood at least of Her recovery. She receiv'd the Ti∣dings with a Courage agreeable to the Strength of Her Faith. Loth She was to terrify those about Her; but for her self She seem'd neither to fear Death, nor to covet Life. There appear'd not the least sign of Regret for the leaving of those Temporal Great∣nesses which make so many of High Estate unwilling to die. It was (you may imagine) high Satisfaction, to hear Her say a great many most Christian Things, and this amongst them; I believe I shal now soon die, and I thank God, I have from
my Youth learned a true Doctrine that Repentance is not to be put of to a Death-bed. That Day she called for Prayers a third Time, fearing She had slept a little when they were the second Time read; for She thought a Duty was not perform'd, if it was not minded. On Thursday She prepared Her self for the bles∣sed Communion, to which She had been no Stranger from the fifteenth Year of Her Age. She was much concern'd that She found Her Self in so dozing a Condition; (So She expressed it). To that She added, Others had need to pray for me, se∣ing I am so little able to pray for my Self. However, She stirred up her Attention, & prayed to God for his asistance, & God heard her, for from thenceforth to the end of the Office She had the perfect Command of her Vnderstanding, and was intent upon the Great Work She was going about: and so intent that when a Second Portion of a certain Draught was offer'd Her, She refuss'd it, saying, I have but a little Time to live & I would spend it a better way. The Holy Elements being ready, and several Bishops coming to be Communicants, she repeated piously and distinctly, but with a low voice, (for such her Weakness had then made it) all parts of the Holy Office which were proper for her, and received with all the Signs of a strong Faith and fervent Devo∣tion, the blessed Pledges of Gods Favour, and thank'd him with a joyful Heart that she was not depriv'd of the Opportunity. She owned also that God had been Good to Her beyond her Ex∣pectation, though in a circumstance of smaller Importance; She having without any Indecence or Difficulty taken down That Bread, when it had not been so easie for her some for time to swallow any other. That Afternoon She called for Prayers somewhat earlier than the time apppointed time, because She feared (that was Her Reason) that She should not long be so well compos'd. And so it came to pass: for every minute after this, 'twas plain Death made nearer and nearer approaches. However, this true Christian kept her Mind as fixed as posibly she could upon the
best things; and there were read, by her direction, several Psalms of David, and also a Chapter of a Pious Book concerning Trust in God. Toward the latter end of it, her Apprehension began to fail, yet not so much but that she could say a devout Amen to that Prayer, in which her Pious Soul was recomended to that God who gave it. During all this time, there appeared nothing of Impatience, nothing of Frowardness, nothing of Anger; there was heard nothing of murmuring, nothing of impertinence, nothing of ill sound, and scarce a number of disjointed words. In all these Afflictions the King was greatly Afflicted; how sensibly, and yet how becomingly, many saw; but few have Skill enough to describe it: I'm satisfyed I have not. At last, The Helps of At, and Prayers and Tears not prevailing, a quar∣ter before One on Friday morning, after two or three smal strug∣lings of Nature, and without such Agonies as in such cases are common, having (like David) serv'd her own Generation by the Will of God, she fell on sleep, Acts. 13.36. Thus piously, thus resignedly, thus calmly departed this Wise, and Great, and Good Princess, who could never have lear∣n'd the Art of Dying so well, if she had not first well understood and duly practis'd, the Art of Living so. What becomes Vs, who are left behind in this troublesome World, is the IV Fourth and last Consideration; And I will detain you with it but a very little Time. Our Duty is manifold; Towards GOD, the King, the Me∣mory of the Queen, (the Blessed Queen!) and our own selves. Towards GOD, our Duty is, to give Him the Glory, Thank∣fully to commemorate the Excellencies of his Grace, which shin'd in the Queen: for by his Grace she was what she was; to give Thanks to him for enjoying so wonderful a Blessing thus long, without any murmuring because He was not pleas'd to continue it longer to us; to own his Justice, to tremble at his Iudgments, to remove the Causes of them, our grievous Sins, and with frequent and earnest Supplication, to cry to Heaven, and say, Spare thy People, Good Lord! spare them, & be not angry with us for ever.
Towards the King; our Duty is, to pray to God to double his Blessings upon him, and to endeavour our selves to support him by the steddiest Loyalty. Towards the Memory of the Queen, our Duty is, to mourn so∣lemnly and deeply, (so much even Foreign Nations have done) and yet to temper our Sorrow with the strong Hopes we have of her Everlasting Felicity; To speak Good of her, to observe and extol the mighty power of her Piety, which conquer'd so many Hearts; so to commend her Virtues, as not to let them cool in our Practice, but, as far as we can and may, to follow her Example, who liv'd more (that is, to more purpose) in three and thirty years, than very many do in Seventy. To conclude our Duty towards our selves is, to weep, not so much for her as for our selves, and for our provoking Iniquities which have drawn down this Calamity upon us, and speedily to amend our Lives; and in order to that, to think daily of Death, and not to suffer the Splendor of any Thing, that is Great, nor the Con∣ceit of any Thing, that Good in us, to divert us from the Con∣sideration of our Mortality. Seing the most VVise, Pious, Charitable, Humble Queen is ta∣ken away in the flour of her Age; how foolish, how wick∣ed is the wilful Forgetfulness of Death in the Dissolute, the Bloody, the Sick, the Aged, the Decrepid, nay, even in the Young and Healthful! Let us consider we are Mortal, (which we must do if we have any Thought that way at all) and let us carry that Thought forward to all the Purposes of the holy living. For, when a Man dies, to concern is not how great or how rich he has been, (all that is come to an end) but how good a Life he hasled. May God give us all Grace to live as this Blessed Princess did, that we may dye like her; that we may fight the good fight, and finish our course by all the Exercises of our Holy Religion, and keep the Faith inviolate, to the last minute of our days, that from thenceforth, there may be laid up for as a Crown of Life, by our Lord Jesus the righteous Judge of all Men; To whom, with the Father, and holy Ghost, be all Honour and Glory world without end Amen. FINIS
