W2213 12125925 54594
SERMONS PREACH'D Upon several Occasions Before the KING AT WHITE-HALL. By the Right Reverend Father in God, JOHN WILKINS, late Lord Bishop of CHESTER. To which is added, A DISCOURSE Concerning the Beauty of Providence. By the same Author. LONDON: Printed by H. Cruttenden for Robert Sollers in St. Pauls Church-Yard. 1677.
TO THE Right Honourable GEORGE Lord BERKELEY, Lord of Berkeley, Mombray, Seagrave, and Bruce, Custos Rotulorum of the Counties of Gloucester and Surrey: and Governour of the LEVANT COM∣PANY. May it please your Lordship, HAving these scat∣tered Discourses in my custody, and
wholly at my dispo∣sal, either to republish, or suffer them to sleep in that darkness where∣in they lay; I thought it very incongruous to the necessities of this degenerate age, to let the excellent works of so learned, pious, and worthy a Prelate be ex∣tinct, and lye hid from the open view of the World; sith they are none of the worst of which this Great Man
was pleased to bless our times with. These Sermons were fram'd for, and prea∣ched before a Great and Regal Auditory; though by their plain, natural, and unaffect∣ed Style (a thing he always delighted in) one would have thought the contrary; since the Chappels as well as Courts of Prin∣ces, are by byass'd and self-interested princi∣ples
so often flatter'd. And now I thought no man so fitting as your Lordship to shel∣ter these Discourses from the rage and fu∣ry of the Atheistical Male-Contents of the Age; they being the Fundamentals of Re∣ligion that he treats of; which I am very sensible your Lordship well knows, are not only slighted, but bid open defiance to, and
the Authority of their Institution call'd in question. That man would cer∣tainly be held a no∣torious Delinquent, that should openly affront the King, and disown that Autho∣rity, and Legislative Power, by which he commands Obedience to his Laws. The Con∣sequent may be just∣ly applicable, in the words of a Reverend
and Learned Dr. Stil∣lingfleet. Writer of our times, But to Blaspheme God, and Deride his Service, seems to have a much greater malignity in it, inasmuch as our obligations to his Ho∣nour and Service, are much greater than they can be to any created Being. And to such kind of men it may be said, in the words of a Morn. Du Pless. de veri∣tat. Re∣lig. Chr. Cap. 1. Noble Au∣thor, Agnoscant vero hanc,
suam formam, tanquam in speculo, miseri & perdi∣ti illi, qui Deum obli∣viscendo, se sui oblitos non vident; quia formam na∣turamque, essentiam, quan∣tum in se est, oblitera∣runt. That I make this DedicatoryEpistle pro∣ceeds not from a desire thus publick∣ly to expose my self, (for as I can have no interest to court the applause, so neither
have I any reason to value the censure of the World) but it is from a sincere prin∣ciple to express that Reverence I bear your Lordship; whom I know as you have Good∣ness to pardon, so I presume to, your Ho∣nour will be both rea∣dy and willing to stand in the defence of this bold Address. That Length of Days may be in your Right
Hand, and in your Left, Riches and Ho∣nour, is the Hearty and Affectionate Pray∣er of him, who desires nothing more, than to subscribe himself, (in all the circumstances of a becoming Devoir.) My LORD, Your Lordship's most Humble and most Obedient Servant, J. G.
TO THE READER. WHen first these Dis∣courses were sent to the Press there was neither Epistle nor Preface design'd, but it being a thing altoge∣ther uncouth and unusual; I was unwilling to affect any thing of singularity, and in this affair (to be so great a friend to the Bookseller and Printer, as) to follow the common Road. If there is any thing in the Publisher that thou maist
call folly or presumption it was done through ignorance or inadvertency; and since I acknowledg my fault, I hope you will pardon it. As for the following Dis∣courses they are so admira∣bly well pen'd, and their contexture so smooth and even that they are beyond all imaginable praise. It would argue nothing less than pre∣sumption to speak in their behalf, and it needs nothing more than the name of its Author to Recommend it to the World. Farewel.
A SERMON Preached before the KING AT WHITE-HALL, In Lent, 1669. PROV. 3. 16, 17. Length of days is in her right hand, and in her left hand Riches and Honour. Her ways are ways of Pleasantness, and all her Paths are Peace. THE chief design of the Wise-man in this Text, is, to set forth the many great advantages that be∣long to Religion; in order to which,
he doth here enumerate those five principal things that must contribute to a compleat state of Happiness in this World, namely, Health, and Riches, and Honour, and Pleasure, and Peace; and asserts concerning them, that they are the proper ef∣fects of that wisdom which consists in being Religious, This he expresses by way of Al∣legory, representing Wisdom (as is usual for other Virtues) in the shape of a Woman, or Queen, with her Arms extended, in the posture of di∣recting and rewarding her Followers; holding in her right-hand the blessing of Health, or length of Days, the great Promise of the Law; to which the Precedence of the right-hand is therefore given, because it is amongst all worldly Blessings the greatest and most desirable; that, without which, a man cannot enjoy any thing else, nor so much as his own self; Length of days is in her right-hand. And then, for those other things, whic the generality of men do so much
covet and labour after, Wealth, and Reputation; these likewise are at her disposal, and must proceed from her gift; And in her left-hand, Riches and Honour. And, as for the Cheer∣fulness of our conditions, he affirms, that the truest Pleasure must be found in those ways that are directed by her; Her ways are ways of Plea∣santness. And because there are se∣veral things which have some present delight in them, seeming to drop as the Honey-comb, and to be smoother Prov. 5. 4. than Oyl, and yet upon trial, do prove in the issue, bitter as Worm∣wood, and sharp as a two-edged Sword; therefore 'tis added, that her ways are not only pleasant, but they are likewise safe and quiet; all her paths are Peace. That these things are the effects of Religion, is here only affirmed, which, to them who believe the Authority of Scripture, is evidence sufficient: But, it were easy to prove this concerning each of them, by all other kinds of evidence,
of which such matters are capa∣ble. I purpose at this time to treat on∣ly concerning the third of them, namely, Honour; as being the most proper Subject for this Presence and Auditory. And that this can only be attain'd by Religion and Virtue, I doubt not but to prove with so much strength and perspicuity, as shall be sufficient to convince any o who will but attend and consi∣dr. In order to this, I shall first endea∣vour  state the true nature of Ho∣, and to shew wherein the most proper Notion of it doth consist; 'tis an equivocal word, and is capable of various sences. First, Sometimes 'tis used to de∣note worthy and creditable Paren∣tage; the being derived from such Ancestors as have been famous in their Generation for some eminent Virtue or Exploit: Wherein there is this benefit, that a man hath great examples in his own Family, and so
much the stronger Obligation not to degenerate from them: But it shews rather what such a man should be, than what he is; and, to a person that is not Virtuous, doth prove a prejudice rather than an advantage. Secondly, Sometimes 'tis used to signify Titles of Place and Digty, according to the various orders and degrees of obility in seval Na∣tions: But, this kind of Honour de∣pending mee upon the Princes Fa∣vour, mu therefore be wholly ex∣trinsecal, and consequenly can have no more due to it than a meer exter∣nal respect. Such persons may chal∣lenge from us, that we should give them their due Titles, and demean our selves towards them with that Observance and Ceremony as be∣comes their Quality: But then, as to inward esteem and affection, they can demand no greater a share of this, than according as their real worth and virtue shall require. The Royal Stamp upon any kind of Metal may be sufficient to give it an extrin∣sick
value, and to determine the Rate at which it is to pass amongst Coins, but it cannot give an intrinsick value, or make that which is but Brass, to be Gold. 'Tis true indeed, there are some Callings and Relations of men, to whom an inward Veneration is due, though the persons themselves should not be Virtuous; namely, Magi∣strates, and Ministers, and Parents, and Benefactors; who, having some∣what of a Divine Stamp and Impress upon them, may therefore challenge from us, that we should demean our selves towards them, both with such an outward Respect as may become their Places, and with such an in∣ward Respect too, as may be sutable to that Image which they bear, our dependance upon them, and obligati∣on to them. But then, we cannot be obliged to think such persons good men, unless we have some evidence to believe them to be so, or at least, not to be otherwise; So that they are beholding to something extrinsical to
their Persons, namely, to their Cal∣lings and Relations, for that Honour which is paid to them. Thirdly, the word Honour is some∣times used for that Esteem and Repu∣tation which a man hath in the World, especially amongst Virtuous Persons; according to which sense 'tis defin'd by Tully to be Consentiens Laus Bo∣norum, Tuscul. Q. 2. the concurrent approbation of good men; when those, who are best able to judg of real worth, shall both think and speak well of others, this is properly honouring of them. And in this sense (which is the most proper notion of the words) it is one of the greatest blessings that this World can afford; much to be pre∣ferred before Riches, or Pleasures, or Life it self. A good Name is rather to be chosen than great Riches, and loving kindness rather than Silver or Gold, Prov. 22. 1. One that is a Generous, Virtuous man, will choose to dye, rather than do any thing that may expose him to Infamy: St. Paul was of this mind; It were better for 1 Cor. 9. 15.
me to dye, than that any should make my glorying void. There have been some wise men, who have neglected and refused that other kind of Ho∣nour, consisting in Titles of Dignity, as conceiving more of burden and temptation in it, than of real advan∣tage; but no man in his wits did ever despise a good name, unless such profligate dissolute wretches, as did either despair of, or resolve against doing any thing that might deserve it. 'Tis not easy to reckon up the many advantages that belong to this kind of Honour: 'Tis Power, inabling a man to do things great and worthy, to be useful to his Friends and his Countrey: 'Tis Safety, and doth give a man such an interest in the esteem and affection of others, as will make them concern'd for his Welfare, ready to stand by him and assist him in any kind of danger; which are so great advantages, that whosoever shall wilfully neglect them, must needs be rendered very con∣temptible.
Having thus Explained the pro∣per Notion of Honour, I proceed in the next place to Prove, that Reli∣gion and Virtue is the only means or the attaining of it. This I shall endeavour to do by Testimony, and by Reason, and by Experience, which  all the kinds of Arguments that such matters are capable of. First, By Testimony. The Scrip∣ture doth abound in divers Asserti∣ons and Promises to this purpose: Such as are Religious are stiled the Excellent of the Earth, Psal. 16. 3. and said to be more excellent than Cap. 12. 26. Deut. 32. 9. Exod. 19. 5. Jer. 12. 7. Psal. 4. 3. their Neighbours, Prov. 17. 27. They are Gods peculiar Treasure. The dearly beloved of his Soul. He sets apart the Man that is Godly for him∣self. Though such persons may be but low, as to their outward Conditi∣on; being put to wander up and down in Sheep-skins and Goat-skins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented, seeking for refuge in Desarts and Mountains, in Dens and Caves of the Earth; yet may they upon the ac∣count
of Religion, be of such excel∣lent value, that in the Judgment of the Holy Ghost, The whole World is not worthy of them, Heb. 11. 37, 38. The Wise-man speaking of Religi∣on, saith, that it shall be an ornament of Grace unto thy head, and as a chain Pro. 1. 9. Chap. 4. 8, 9. about thy neck. Exalt her, and she shall promote thee, and bring thee to honour; She shall give to thy head an ornament of Grace, and a Crown of Glory. God hath ened him∣self by Promise to those at are Religious, that he will set he bove other Nations; they shall be made the Head, and not the Tail, Deut. 28. 13. He hath said, Those that honour me, I will honour, 1 Sam. 2. 30. And cer∣tainly, John 12. 26. he, who is the King of Kings, must needs be the Fountain of Ho∣nour, and able to dispose of it as he pleases. But, because such Persons as are no friends to Religion, may have but a small esteem for the Authority of Scripture: Therefore to these I would
suggest the concurrent Opinion of Wise Men in all former Ages. Though the Ancient Philosophers were divi∣ded into various Sects, and differ'd very much from one another in seve∣ral Opinions; yet, in this they have all agreed, that Honour is due only to Virtue, and doth not properly be∣long to any thing else. It would be tedious to enumerate the several Say∣ings to this purpose, out of Plato, A∣ristotle, Tully, Seneca, and the other Ancients: And certainly, that Man must needs have a very extravagant conceit of his own Abilities, who dares prefer his private Opinion, be∣fore the General Consent of Wise-men in former Ages, such as have been counted the greatest Masters of Reason, and most eminent for their Knowledge and their Wisdom, Secondly, I proceed in the next place to confirm this by the Princi∣ples of Reason, That Religion and Virtue is the cause of Honour. There may be a two-sold Cause of Things
Moral, Natural. That is said to be the Moral Cause, which doth dispose a Man to such a Condition, upon the Account of Fitness and Desert; and in this sence Honour is the Reward of Vir∣tue. There is an equitable right, a suitableness and congruity, that Good Men should be loved and esteemed, and Vitious Men exposed to shame: As Snow in Summer, and as Rain in Harvest, so is Hononr unsuitable for a Fool, Prov. 26. 1. The intermix∣ing of Winter and Summer, would not cause a greater disorder in the Natural World, than the cross dispo∣sal of Honour and contempt would in the Moral World. And hence is it, that the Laws of all Nations and Go∣vernments, have owned it as a Point of Policy, to excite their Subjects un∣to Virtuous and worthy Actions, by the Motive of Honour; and to de∣ter
them from Vitious courses, by the consideration of the shame and contempt which belongs to them. That is said to be the Natural Cause of a thing, which doth by its own immediate efficacy produce the Effect; and in this sence likewise is Virtue the Cause of Honour. The Fire doth not more Naturally pro∣duce heat, than Goodness doth Love and Esteem; Which will appear very plain, if we consider, That Inward Honouring is nothing else, but the Believing a Man to be Worthy and Virtuous; and the Testifying this by our Words and Actions is Out∣ward Honouring. Now, nothing can be more evident, than that the best means for one to be thought good, is to be so. A Man may excel in Strength, Beauty, Riches, Learning, Wit, which are all commendable things, and will contribute to a Man's esteem; But, if we apprehend such a one to be no∣toriously Vitious, This esteem will not be accompanied with Love, but
with Fear, Hate, and Envy; because such a one hath by these things so much the greater advantage of do∣ing Mischief in the World: Whereas on the other side, though a Man should be destitute of all these other advantages, without any Nobility in his Ancestors, but of a small Estate, a low Condition; yet, if we believe him to be a truly Virtuous Man, it cannot be, but that we must pay a Veneration to him. All things whatsoever have some Natural Standard, whereby the Goodness of them is to be measured; namely, their suitableness unto that chief end, for which they are de∣signed. We do not therefore ac∣count a Ship to be good, because 'tis curiously painted and gilded, or car∣ved and inlayed, but because 'tis fit∣ted for all the purposes of Naviga∣tion, which is the proper end and use of a Ship: Nor do we therefore account a Sword to be good, because it hath a rich Hilt, and an Embroi∣dered Scabbard, but because it is fit
for the proper use of a Sword, which is to cut. They are the comparisons of Seneca, speaking of this Subject; In homine quoque, nihil ad rem per∣tinet, quantum aret, quantum foene∣ret, a quam multis salutetur, &c. sed quam bonus sit. It should be so like∣wise in our esteem of men, who are not so much to be valued by the Grandeur of their Estates or Titles, as by their inward goodness. Every man is endowed with a na∣tural Principle, inclining him to a state of Hapness, and hath in some measure, both an ability to judg of, and a freedom and liberty for apply∣ing himself unto those Duties, which are the proper means for the promo∣ting of this end. And this being the peculiar difference of the Humane Nature, therefore a man is not upon any other account to be justly praised or blamed, but according to the right or wrong use of this natural liberty; and consequently as a man doth find either in himself or others, a con∣stant and firm resolution to make a
right use of this, so should he pro∣portion his esteem accordingly; pre∣ferring this inward Greatness, this rectitude of Mind, whereby a man is resolved in every condition to do that which shall appear to be his du∣ty, before any external Greatness whatsoever. There are two kind of Virtues amongst all the rest, which are by ge∣neral consent esteemed Venerable, and such as do advance the Reputa∣tion of those who are endowed with them; namely Wisdom, Courage. Because they have a more intrin∣sick rise, and do less depend upon ex∣ternal advantages, but seem rather to be rooted in the inward frame and temper of mind; and withal, are most beneficial both to our selves and others: The former signifying a man to have those intellectual abilities which are proper to his kind, where∣by
the Humane Nature is to be di∣stinguished from other things: The other, because it argues a Rectitude in the Will, and a Power to subdue the Passion of Fear, which is most na∣tural to our present state of Infirmi∣ty; and withal doth support a man against Difficulties, and inable him for those two Services, of Doing and Suf∣fering as he ought. And, for this Reason, the Vices that are opposite to these, are amongst all others coun∣ted the most shameful; there being no greater Reproach to be cast upon any one, than to be esteemed a Fool, or a Coward. Now a Man that is Irreligious, can∣not justly pretend to either of these Virtues. 1. For Wisdom. This is so essen∣tial to Religion, that in the Scripture∣phrase (especially in the Writings of David and Solomon) they both go under the same Name, and there is very good reason why it should be so; because there is such an intimate agreement between the Natures of
them: The Philosopher doth define Wisdom to consist in an ability and inclination, to make choice of the right Means in the prosecution of our true End. And nothing can inable a Man for this but Religion, both as to the Subordinate End of Temporal Happiness in this World; but chiefly with respect to that great and S∣preme End of Eternal Happiness in the World to come. 2. And then for Courage, 'Tis not possible for a Man to be truly Vali∣ant, unless he be withal truly Religi∣ous: He may be bold and daring, and able (in a fearless manner) to rush upon any danger; but then he must stifle his Reason from considering what the Consequences of things may be, what shall become of him hereafter, if he should miscarry. There being no man whatsoever so to∣tally free from the Apprehension of a future state, but that when he is seri∣ous and considerate, he must be start∣led with Doubts and Fears concern∣ing it: So that there cannot be any
rational, sedate, deliberate courage, but only in such, as have some good hopes of a better Estate in the other World; And, 'tis Religion only that can inable a Man for this, 3. I proceed to the Third kind of Argument to this purpose, from Ex∣perience; By which, I mean that Pra∣ctical Knowledg, which every man may attain by his own Observation of the usual course of things in the World: And, by this, it will appear, that no kind of persons have been more highly reverenced in the Hearts and Consciences of others, than those that have been most emi∣nent for their Virtue and Religion; which hath been always true, both with respect to Publick Communi∣ties, and Private Persons. First, For Nations; If we consult the Stories of former Times, we shall find that saying of Solomon constant∣ly verified, That Righteousness doth Prov. 14. 34. exalt a Nation, but Sin doth prove a reproach to it: And more especially the sin of Irreligion and Prophane∣ness; As this doth increase in any
Nation, so must the Honour and Re∣putation of that Nation decrease. The Roman Empire was then at the high∣est, as to its Name and Greatness, when it was so as to its Virtue; when they were most punctual in observing the Rites of their Religion, (though that were a false way of worship) most Heroical in their Justice, Cou∣rage, Fidelity, Gratitude; then it was that they deserv'd to Govern the World, and to be had in greatest Ho∣nour above all other Nations. And not only Tully and Polybius, two Heathen Writers, who, upon that Account, might be thought more partial; But St. Austin also and La∣ctantius, two of the Fathers, do a∣scribe the flourishing of that Empire, when it was at his height, to the Re∣ligion, and Piety, and Virtue of those times; And, as they did afterward degenerate from this, so did they decline likewise in their Greatness and Honour, 2. Thus also hath it been with particular persons; Amongst the Hea∣then, What Elogies do we find in the
Honour of Socrates, Aristides, Cato Epictetus? The latter of which, though but a poor Slave, had yet such a Veneration paid to his Memo∣ry, that his Earthen Lamp by which he was wont to study, was, after his Death, sold for 3000 Drachms. Nor was it otherwise amongst the Christians; The Apostles were but poor Fisher-men, Illiterate Mecha∣nicks; Many of the Martyrs were but of mean condition, much Oppo∣sed and Persecuted in the World; And yet these Men, during the time of their lives, were highly Reverenced amongst those that knew them; and since their Deaths, what can be more Glorious than that Renown which they have amongst Men, when the greatest Kings and Princes will not mention their Names without Reve∣rence; when whole Nations are wil∣ling to set apart, and to observe So∣lemn Days and Festivals in Honour of their Memories. And, as it hath always been thus formerly, so I appeal to every mans
breast, whether it be not so now: Let them but examine what their Incli∣nations are towards such Persons, whom they believe to be truly Vir∣tuous: Not only to such amongst them as are their particular Aquan∣tance and Friends, but likwise to Srangers, nay, to very Enemies; whether they d not esteem, and love them, and will well to them. I shall crave leave to speak briefly to two Objections, that may be made against what I have been Proving. I. The Scripture saith (speaking of good Men) That the World shall revile and persecute them, and speak all mnner of evil against them: Our Saviour himself was despised and re∣ted of Mn; And his Apostles  used as the rubbish and off-scour∣ of all things. To these two things may be said by way of Answer. First, It cannot otherwise be ex∣pected, but that when a New Religi∣on is to be set up, men must be high∣ly concern'd in their opposing of it,
and of those that promote it: And the fore-cited Texts do particularly relate to this very case; when Chri∣stianity was first introduced into the World, and to be propagated by the Sufferings of those that Professed it; which being an exempt case, and not according to the usual course of things, therefore these Texts are not equally applicable to other Times and Places, when and where the True Religion hath obtained, and the Kings prove Nursing athers to it. Secondly, Those that knew our Saviour and his Followers, did high∣ly Honour them: And, as for others, that were ignorant of them, and not sufficiently convinced of their Good∣ness, 'tis no wonder that they used them accordingly. The most vici∣ous person that is, if he doth either know, or have reason to think ano∣ther to be Virtuous, must of necessi∣ty pay to him an Inward Reverence; Because 'tis not in any mans power▪ so far to offer violence to his own Fa∣culties, as to believe any thing a∣gainst
its Evidence. 'Tis true in∣deed, men have a greater power over their Words and Actions, than they have over their Belief; and there∣fore they may call, and use such a one as they please, they may revile, and persecute him; And, in this sence, Honor est honorante, But, even in so doing, they seem to pay a Venerati∣on to Religion it self, whil'st they are fain to disguise it, under the Names of Hypocrisie, Heresie, Superstition, thereby to justifie themselves in their opposing of it. II. It appears by the Experience of all Ages, that Vitious Men are sometimes had in Honour. To this it may be Answer'd. 1. External Honour may be due to them. 2. Internal Honour may be given to them, by such as do not know them. The meer Opinion of being Virtuous, must of necessity have the same advantage in this respect, with Real Goodness; The main difference is, that it is not like to last, because
is almost Morally impossible, for a Man, who doth only dissemble Virtue, to stand always upon so strict a guard, as not to be discover'd. If it be said, that men, who are No∣toriously Vitious, are sometimes ap∣plauded, and Cry'd-Up for their Vir∣tue; It may be answer'd, That this cannot be so truly stiled Honouring as Flattering; The proper Notion of which doth consist in giving un∣due Commendations; Nor will any contribute to it, but vile Sycophants, the worst kind of Enemies, and the most Incompetent Judges of real worth: Such only being fit to give Praise, who are themselves Praise∣worthy. Now if this be the true state of the Case I have been speaking to; That the generality of Wise and Conside∣rate Men, in all former times, have attested to this Truth, if the Reason of the thing require that it must be so; And if it appear accordingly from Common Experience to be so, If the most Material Objections a∣gainst
it, may be so plainly and ful∣ly satisfied, then there can be no suf∣ficient Reason to doubt of the truth of this Preposition; That Religion and Virtue is the most proper means to promote the Interest of Honour, which is the thing I am to prove. I shall crave leave to suggest two things by way of Application, and I have done. First, this may convince men of olly, who seek for Honour by any other Means. The great Instances which are commonly given, of Mens being Fools, is, from their chusing such Means, as are altogether insuffi∣ent for the End they Design: As the endeavouring to make a Blackamore White, by washing of him, &c. But, the using of such Means, as are not only insufficient for, but opposite un∣to, and Destructive of the End they Propose; this is a degree above Fol∣ly, and may be stiled Madness: 'Tis as if a Man should run into the Wa∣ter to dry himself, and into the Fire to cool himself; And yet this is the
Case of many Men in the World, who propose to themselves such Courses, for the Promoting of their Honour, as are most Destructive of it; namely, Prophaneness and Contempt of Reli∣gion, Despising that which other Men stand in Awe of; by which they think to get the Reputation of Wit, and of Courage; Of Wit, by pretend∣ing to penetrate more deeply into the Nature of things, and to understand them better than others do; not to be so easily imposed upon, as other Credulous People are. Of Courage, by their not being so easily scared at the Apprehension of Danger at a distance. But, the Plain Truth is, such Per∣sons do hereby prove themselves to be both Fools and Cowards. Fools, In mistaking their great In∣terests, in making choice of such means, as can never promote the End they Design; There being no kind of Men that are exposed (what∣soever they themselves may think of it) to Publick Infamy and Hatred,
than those that seek for Credit by despising of Religion. Fools, in ven∣turing their future Estates and their Souls upon such hazards, as all man∣kind would cry-out-upon for the most palpable folly and madness, if they should do the like, towards their Temporal Estates, or their Bodies. Cowards, In being more afraid of little dangers, because they are pre∣sent, than of greater, because they are suture, and at a distance: As that Souldier, who doth more dread the present danger of Fighting, when he is obliged to it, than the future dan∣ger of suffering Martial Law for run∣ning away, may justly be esteemed a notorious Coward; so that man who is more afraid of a present inconve∣nience, by incurring the prejudice and displeasure of his loose Compa∣nions, to whom he would be accep∣table, than of a future mischief from the Judgment of God. No man will esteem another to be truly Valiant, because he is not afraid to do such vile unworthy things as
will expose him to the displeasure and punishment of the Civil Ma∣gistrate; much less should be so ac∣counted, for daring to do such things, as will in the issue expose him to Di∣vine Vengeance. For men of no real worth to ex∣pect the esteem and affection of others, as it is very unequal on their parts, requiring Brick without Straw; so neither is it lawful nor possible for others to allow it them: not lawful, because it is as well a man's duty to contemn a vile person, as to honour them that fear the Lord. Not pos∣sible, Psal. 15. 4. because men must necessarily judg according to the most prevailing Evidence; nor can they esteem such an one to be worthy, whom they know to be otherwise, any more than they can believe that to be white and streight, which they see is black and crooked. Secondly, If these things be so, it will hence follow, that men who have any sense of Honour, should, by these considerations, be excited to a love
of that which is the only means to it, namely, Religion and Virtue. Those of avish, sordid Spirits, may be more easily perswaded by the con∣sideration of Gain; but no motive can be more powerful with noble and generous Minds than that of Honour. That man takes very ill measures of things, who doth not make it one of his principal cares to keep his Name unspotted; it being no easy matter to recover a forfeited Reputation. Such Profligate Wretches, as are without any sense of Honour or Shame, may justly be esteemed the Publick Pests and Mischiefs of Man∣kind, and such as ought to be banished from amongst them, as being the common enemies to Government and Societies. Of all sorts of men, there lies a peculiar Obligation upon them that are in Publick Places, to preserve their Reputations clear, and without blemish: A private Person is not so much concern'd to look after Publick Fame, as that man is, who is ingag'd
in Publick Employment. He that can abundantly satisfy himself, with the Conscience of well-doing, while he is in a Private Station, if once he be called to any such Employment, where he must be useful to others by his Authority; 'Tis most fitting then, that he should seek the Aid of Opi∣nion, and Publick Esteem, because 'tis this which Rules the World, and stamps upon Things the Rates at which they are to pass. There is nothing in this World that we can propose to our selves of greater benefit, than the Love and Esteem of good Men; I have shewed before that it is Power, 'tis Safety: And besides all the Advantages which we have by it whilst we live, 'tis one of those things that will abide after us, when we are gone out of this World; and for that reason a spe∣cial regard is to be had to it: And, the more Wise any Man is, the more Care will he take to transmit a Grate∣ful Memory of himself to future times; And, since he must be spoken
of after his departure, he will take Care that he be well spoken of, that his Name may be as a precious Oint∣ment, leaving a Perfume behind it; That men may rise up at the mention of it, and call him blessed. I shut up all, with that affectionate Exhortation of the Eloquent Apostle, Phil. 4. 8. Finally Brethren, what∣soever things are Venerable, whatso∣ever things are Lovely, whatsoever things are of good Report, If there be any Virtue, if there be any Praise, think of these things. And the Peace of God, which passeth all understand∣ing, shall keep your Hearts and minds through Jesus Christ. FINIS.
A Serm. II. SERMON Preached before the KING AT WHITE-HALL, 1670. ECCLES. 12. 13. Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter; Fear God, and keep his Commandments: for this is the whole duty of man. THis Book is one of Solomon's Philosophical Discourses, con∣taining such principal Observations
about Human Affairs, as are apt t offer themselves to the thoughts of every serious considerate man, espe∣cially concerning those things which may more immediately either pro∣mote or hinder our Happiness. This Text is the Conclusion which he infers upon the whole matter, that which is the most natural result of all such Debates and Enquiries. In the former part he had taken into consideration those several states of life, to which men usually apply themselves for Happiness; namely, Learning and Wisdom, Mirth and Pleasures, Power and Greatness, Riches and Possessions: Each of which he doth by great variety of Arguments, prove to be vanity and vexation, and altogether insufficient to the End for which they are de∣signed. Then he takes notice of the seve∣ral Accidents of life, whether they concern our Endeavours, or our Per∣sons.
1. For our Endeavours. The most likely means are not always effectual for the attaining of their End. The utmost that Human Councils and Prudence can provide for, is to ake care, when they are to contend in a Race, that they be swifter than those who run against them; or when they are to fight a Battel, that they be stronger than those whom they are to encounter. And yet the Race is not always to the swift, nor the Bat∣tel to the strong; neiher yet Bread Chap. 9: 11, 12. to the wise, nor yet Riches to men of understanding, nor Favour to men of skill; but time and chance happens to them all. (i. e.) There is a secret Providence which doth over-rule all those worldly events in such a man∣ner, as is not accountable to Human Reason. Even amongst Secular Bu∣sinesses, which we are apt to think most within our reach and compass, there is nothing so much under the power of the wisest Counsels and Endeavours, but that the Providence of God may interpose for the dis∣appointing
of it, and render it in∣effectual. And then for those Accidents to which our Persons are liable, He ob∣serveth these three things: 1. Our obnoxiousness to Pain and Sickness, which he stiles by the names of Wrath and Sorrow; under which, Ch. 5. 17. when a man lies languishing, none of his Worldly Enjoyments will signify any thing to him; nor will they be able to afford him any such ease or help, but that he may be thereby cut off in the midst of his days, and then all his thoughts perish, or else waste away a great part of his life with much anguish and weariness; and may sometimes, perhaps, be driven to that extremity by noisome and painful Diseases, as to chuse strang∣ling and Death, rather than Life. 2. If it be supposed, that by the strength and cheerfulness of a Man's natural temper, he should escape these, & live many years, and rejoyce in them all; yet he must remember the days of darkness, which shall be many. (i. e.) Ch. 11. 8.
Those who devote themselves to con∣tinual Mirth and Pleasure, cannot yet avoid the thought of their future estates, what shall become of them hereafter, when they are to depart out of this World; but that the re∣membrance of this will be often thrusting into their Minds when ever they are retired and serious. And this being to them a dark obscure condition; concerning their well∣being, in which they can have no reasonable hopes, must needs there∣fore be a great damp and allay to all their other Enjoyments. 3. But in the third place: Suppose a man should be able to avoid sick∣ness, and to put the trouble of these thoghts likewise far from him; yet there is somewhat else which he can∣not possibly decline, Old Age will un∣avoidably steal upon him, with all the infirmities of it; When the grin∣ders shall be few, and appetite cease; Ch. 12. 3. when those who look out of the win∣dows, shall be darkned, and the keep∣ers of the house shall tremble: when
a man shall become a burden to him∣se, and to his riends; when those of his nearest Relations, whom he hath most obliged by kindness, shall think it time for him to depart unto his long home, to creep off the Stage, Ch. 12. 5. and make room for succeeding Gene∣rations; and then, after a little Fu∣neral-pomp of the Mourers going about the streets,, a man shall be bu∣ried out of the way, and forgotten: for there is no remembrance of the Ch. 2. 16. wise, more than of the fool; seeing tht which now is, in the dys to come shall be forgotten. Every Ge∣neration producing somewhat which seems new and srange, to take up Men's talk and wonder, and to drown the Memory of former Persons and Actions. And I appeal to any ratio∣nal man, Whether these are not some of the most material reflections that occur about Human Affairs. Now from all these premises put together, he inserts this Conclusion in the Text, That to fear God, and keep his Commandments, is the Whole
of man (i. e.) To be serious in the matter of Religion, and careful about our future states, is that which eve∣ry considerate man, after all his o∣ther disquisitions and experiments, will find to be his greatest interest, that which doth most of all deserve his care and study. There are these Two parts in the words: 1. A Description of Religion, which in the former Clause is said to consist in fearing God, and keeping his Commandments. An awful apprehen∣sion of the Divine Nature, and an obedient submission to His Will. 2. A Commendation of Religion, in the latter Clause, This is the Whole of man. It is the second of these only, which I purpose to treat of at this time. In the handling of which, the first thing to be enquired into, is, What is the true import and meaning of this phrase in the Original:  for the understanding of which, it
will be proper to consider the seve∣ral ways of expressing it in other Translations. The Septuagint and the Vulgar do render it verbam, This is All, or Every man. The word Duy, which is supplied by our English, being not in the Original, or in other Transla∣tions. This ought to be the way and course of all mankind, so the Targum. This is the course to which every man is designed, so the Syriack. This will be most profitable and advantageous to men, so the Arabik. This is the whole of man; so some of our later Interpreters, most proper to the scope of the place, it being an usual Anala∣logy in the Hebrew, Totius universa∣lis, pro toto integrante, All for Whole. So that according to these various Interpretations of the words, they may contain in them a three-fold re∣ference: To the Essence, the Happi∣ness, the Business of man. According to which, the sence of them must be, That Religon, or the
fearing of God, and keeping his Com∣mandments, is a matter of so great consequence to Human Nature, that 1. The Essence or Being of man, may be said to consist in it. 2. The Happiness or well-being of man doth depend upon it. 3. The great Business or Duty of man, is to be conversant about it, and to labour atter it. These particulars I shall endeavour to make out by such clear Principles of Reason, attested to by several of the wisest Heathen Writers, as may be enough to satistie any serious man who is able to underand the reason and consequence of things, and will but attend and consider. 1. I begin with the first: Religi∣on is of so great importance, that the Essence of man may be said to consist in it. Mankind may be considered under a two-fold notion: 1. More Separately, and by it self, according to that Principle whereby
'tis constituted in such a rank of Creatures. 2. More Complexly, as joyned in Society, for which Man seems to be naturally designed, and without which he could not well subsist. Now Reli∣gion will appear to be Essential to him in both these respects. 1. As considered Sparately, ac∣cording to those Principles by which he is framed. That which doth con∣stitute any thing in its Being, and di∣stinguish it from all other Things, This is that which we call the Form or Essence of a thing. And this, for the Human Nature doth consist in those very things which are the chief Principles and oundations of Reli∣gion; namely, the Apprehensions of a Deity, and an Expectation of a future state after this life: Which no other Creature, below Man, doth partake of; and which are common to all Mankind, notwithstanding the utmost endeavours that can be used for the suppressing of them.
As for what is commonly alledged in the behalf of Reason, it may be observed, that in the Actions of ma∣ny Brute Creatures there are discer∣nable some kind of foot-steps, some impefect strictures and degrees of Racination; such a natural Saga∣city as bears a near resemblance to Reason. rom whence it may fol∣low, that it is not Reason in the ge∣neral, which is the orm of Human Nature; But Reason as it is deter∣mined to Actions of Religion, of which we do not find the least signs or degrees in Brutes. Man being the only Creature in this visible World, that is formed with a Capacity of worshiping and enjoying his Ma∣ker. Nor is this any new Opinion, but such as several of the Ancient Writers, Philosophers, Orators, Po∣ets have attested to; who make this Notion of a Deity, and Adoration of him, to be the the true difference be∣twixt Man and Beast. Plutarch afferts it to be a very im∣proper thing to own such for Men,
who do not acknowledg and adore the Deity. And in another place, he affirms Irreligion to be a kind of Stu∣por, whereby Men are deprived of their Senses. So Tully: Ex tot generibus, nul∣lum est animal, &c. Amongst all the living Creatures that are in the World, there is none but Man that hath any notion of a Deity; and a∣mongst Mankind, there is no Nation so wild and barbarous, but pretends to some Religion. And in another place, Quis unc De leg. l. 1. hominem dixerit? Why should such a one be accounted a Man, who by what he sees in the World, is not convinced of a Deity, and a Provi∣dence, and of that adoration he owes to it? Of the same sense is that of the Satyrist, who speaking of Religi∣on, says this of it: —Separat hac nos Juvenal. Sat. 15. A grege Brutorum, at{que} ideo venerabile soli Sortiti ingenium divinorumque capaces.
'Tis this (saith he) that doth di∣stinguish us from Brute Creatures, That we have Souls capable of Di∣vine Impressions. So hat, by what hath been said, it should appear, that the Definition of Man may be rendered as well by the Difference of Religiosum, as Ra∣tionle. As for that Inconvenience which some may object, That Athe∣istical and Prophane persons will be hereby excluded: Why so they are by other Difference likewise: such persons having no just pretence to Reason, who renounce Religion: and it were well, if they might not only be reckoned amongst Beasts (as they are by the Psalmist, where he stiles them Brutish) but driven out amongst them likewise, and banished from all Human Society▪ as being publick Pess, and Mischiefs of Mankind, such as would debase the Nobility of our Natures, to the condition of Brute Creatures, and therefore fit only to live amongst them. Which brings me to the
2. Consideration of Man as a So∣ciable Creature. Religion is essential to him in this respect also, as being the surest Bond to tye men up to those respective duties towards one another, without which, Government and Society could not subsist. There is a remarkable passage in Plutarch to this purpose, where he stiles Religion, the Cement of all Com∣munities, and the chief Basis of all Legislative Power. And in another place he says, That 'tis much more easy to build a City in the open air, Against Colotes. without any ground to found it up∣on, than to establish a Government without Religion. A City (saith he) may make some shift to subsist with∣out Walls, Schools, Theaters, Houses; nay, without Money, but not without Religion. If it were not for this notion of a Deity, and those natural impressions which we have concerning Justice and Probity, so necessary for the con∣servation of Human Society; instead of those well-ordered Governments
and Cities which are now in the World, Mankind must have lived either wild and solitary in Caves and Dens, like Savage-Beasts: or else in Troops of Robbers, subsiing upon the spoil and rapine of such as were weaker than themselves. Pietate sublata, fides etiam, & So∣cietas Nat. Deor. L. 1. humani generis, & una excel∣lentassima virtus Justitia tollitur, Take but away the awe of Religion, and all that Fidelity and Justice, so necessary for the keeping up of Hu∣man Society, must perish with it. 'Tis this fear of a Deity, and the sense of our obligation to Him, that is the only effectual means to restrain Men within the bounds of Duty. And were this wholly extinguished, there would follow such wild Disor∣ders and Extravagancies amongst men, as would not leave so much as the face or least shadow of Virtue or Honesty in the World: There be∣ing no kind of Vice which men would not abandon themselves unto, considering the impetuousness of
their own natural appetites, and the power of external temptations, were this restraint from Religion once re∣moved or abolished. The two chief Opposites to Re∣ligion, are Profaneness and Supersti∣tion. Both which, are prejudicial to Civil Government: The one by destroy∣ing Conscience, the strongest obliga∣tion to Political Duties: The other by perverting and abusing it; introdu∣cing in the stead it of, a new Primum Mobile, which ravisheth the Spheres of Government, and puts them into a preternatural course, as a Noble Lord Ba∣con's Es∣says. Author hath elegantly expressed it. The two grand Relations that con∣cern Society, are Government and Subjection. And Irreligion doth in∣dispose men for both these. 1. For Government. Without Re∣ligion, Magistrates will lose that Cou∣rage and Confidence belonging to their stations, which they cannot so well exert in punishing the Offences of others, when they are guilty of
the same or the like themselves. Those that sit on the Throne of Judgment should be able to scatter away evil with their eyes, as Solomon speaks, Prov. 20. 8. By their very presence and look, to strike an awe upon Of∣fenders, which will not be so easily done, if they should lye under the same guilt themselves; Sine Bonitate nulla Majestas, saith Seneca: The very nature of Majesty doth denote Goodness as well as Power. And without this, Governours may easily lose that Reverence which is due to them from others, and consequently that Authority which they ought to have over them. When they cease to be Gods in respect of their Good∣ness, they may diminish in their Pow∣er; and though they should be able to keep men under as to their Bodies and Estates, yet will they decline as to that awful Love and Reverence whereby they should sway over the Hearts and Affections of men, The Philosopher in the Fifth Book Cap. 11. of his Politicks, doth lay it down as
a Rule for Magistrates, That they must be careful to give publick Te∣stimonies of their being religious and devout; for which he gives this double reason: Because the people will be less subject to entertain any jealousy or suspition of suffering in∣jury from such whom they be∣lieve to be religious. And withall, they will be less subject to attempt the doing of injury against such; as knowing, that good Magistrates are af∣ter a more especial manner under the Divine Favour and protection having God to fight with them, and for them. 2. The want of Religion will in∣dispose men for the condition of Sub∣jects, and render them loose and un∣stable in those duties of obedience and submission required to that state. How can it be expected from that man who dares affront and despise God himself, that he should have any hearty reverence for his Deputies and Vicegerents? Those who are desti∣tute of Religion and Conscience, as they are not to be trusted in any or∣dinary
private duty towards those with whom they converse, much less can they be useful in any such extra∣ordinary Action, whereby the publick welfare is to be promoted. where there are no seeds of Piety and Vir∣tue, there can be nothing of Honour or Magnanimity. He that is subject only upon the account of Wrath, and the power of the Sword which is over him, will be no longer so, when he hath an op∣portunity of escaping or resisting that Power. Nor is there any pos∣sible way to secure men in their quiet subjection and obedience; but by their being obliged for Conscience sake. And therefore such kind of persons, as by their open profaneness and contempt of Religion, do en∣deavour to destroy Conscience from amongst men, may justly be esteemed as the worst kind of Seditious Per∣sons, and most pernicious to Civil Government. Whatever Disputes have been rai∣sed concerning the lawfulness of
punishing men for their dissenting Consciences in matters of Religion; yet never any man questioned the lawfulness of punishing men for their profaneness and contempt of all Re∣ligion. Such men as renounce Con∣science, cannot pretend that they suffer for it. And certainly this Vice doth upon many accounts deserve the greatest severity of Laws, as be∣ing in its own nature destructive of the very Principles of Government, and the Peace of all Human So∣cieties: Besides the Mischiefs conse∣quent upon it from Divine Ven∣geance, So that upon all these accounts, there is just reason to infer the truth of this Proposition, That Religion is totum hominis in this first sense, as it refers to the Essence of Man con∣sidered either Separately, or as a Member of Society. 2. Tis so likewise with respect to the Happiness and well-being of Man. That is properly said to be the chief End or Happiness of a
thing, which doth raise its nature to the utmost perfection, of which it is capable according to its rank and kind. So the chief good belonging to a Vegetable or Plant, is to grow up to a state of maturity, to continue to its natural period, and to propa∣gate its Kind, which is the utmost perfection that kind of Being is ca∣pable of. And whereas Sensitive Creatures, beside those things which are common to them with Plants, have likewise such faculties, whereby they are able to apprehend external objects, and to receive pain or plea∣sure from them; Therefore the Hap∣piness proper to them, must consist in the Perfection of these Faculties, namely, in sensible pleasures, the en∣joying of such things as may be grateful to their senses. But now Mankind, (if we will allow it to be a distinct rank of Creatures superior to Brutes) being endowed with such Fa∣culties, whereby 'tis made capable of apprehending a Deity, and of ex∣pecting a future state after this life;
It will hence follow, That the proper happiness of man must consist in the perfecting of this Faculty; name∣ly, in such a state as may reconcile him to the Divine Favour and afford him the best assurance of a blessed Immortality hereafter. Which no∣thing else but Religion can so much as pretend to. And that this is most agreeable to Natural Light, may ap∣pear from the Testimonies of several of the Wisest Heathens, Pythagoras, Plato, Epictetus, &c. who assert a Man's Happiness, or chief End, to consist in a likeness or resemblance to the Divine Nature, in following of God, endeavouring to imitate him whom we worship, which are but se∣veral descriptions of Religion. 'Tis true indeed, the nature of Man, by reason of those other Capa∣cities, common to him with Plants and Brutes, may stand in need of se∣veral other things, to render his con∣dition pleasant and comfortable in this World, as Health, Riches, Repu∣tation, Safety, &c, Now herein is the
great advantage of Religion, that be∣sides the principal work which it doth for us, in securing our future Estates in the other World; It is likewise the most effectual means to promote our happiness in this World; and that not only Morally, upon account of that Reward which Virtuous Actions do entitle a man unto from a just and a wise Providence; But Naturally also, by reason of that Physical efficacy which the Duties of Religion have in procuring for us each of those things, wherein our Temporal Happiness doth consist; in promoting the wel∣fare not only of particular persons, but of publick Communities of Man∣kind in general, and of the whole Universe. Insomuch, that if we could suppose our selves in a capacity of capitulating with God, concerning the Terms upon which we would submit to his Government, and to chuse the Laws we would be bound to observe, It were not Possible for us to make any Proposals which up∣on all Accounts should be more ad∣vantageous
to our own Interests, than those very Conditions, to which we are obliged by the Rules of Religion and Vertue. And here∣in doth the reasonableness of Re∣ligion, and the Beauty and Wis∣dom of Providence most eminently appear towards Mankind, in govern∣ing us by such Laws as do most ap∣parently tend to the perfecting of our Natures, and in making that only to be our Duty, which is our Inte∣rest. 3. Religion is Totum hominis, with respect to the chief Business and Du∣ty of man, that which he ought to be most intent upon, and conversant a∣bout, as to his Employment in this World. That General calling to which every man of what rank or quality soever is to be engaged. Men are distributed under other particu∣lar Callings, according as their Edu∣cation, Abilities, Friends, and several Opportunities do dispose of them. But the obligation of Religion, being of universal concernment, doth ex∣tend
to all and every particular, there being none exempted from it, Hoc est omnis homo, Every man is con∣cerned in it. And it is totum homi∣nis likewise, 'Tis his calling, the chief business about which he is to be em∣ployed. I do not say, that a man's thoughts are always to be taken up about the immediate Acts of Religion, any more than a Traveller is always to have his mind actually fixed upon the thought of his Journey's end. This would be inconsistent with the infirmity of our natures, and the necessity of our conditions in this World. But yet, as he that is upon a Journey, doth so order all his Particular Motions, as may be most conducible to his General End; so should men habitually, though they cannot actually, in every affair have respect to their chief End, so as to observe all the duties of Religion, and never to allow themselves in any thing against the rules of it. And he that hath this care continually up∣on
his mind, (though he be but a Se∣cular person) may properly be said to make Religion his Business. The Wise-man in the beginning of this Book, had proposed as his grand Quaery to be discussed, to find out what was that good for the sons of Ch. 2. 3. men, which they should do under the Heavens, all the days of their lives. (i. e.) What was the chief employment or business which they should ap∣ply themselves to in this World. And here in the Text he asserts it to be the business of Religion; Fearing God, and keeping his Commandments: Sui∣table to that Precept of Moses Deut. 10. 12. And now, O Israel, what doth the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in his ways, and to serve the Lord thy God, and keep his Command∣ments: And the Practice of St. Paul, who made this his daily exercise, to keep his Conscience void of offence, both towards God, and towards men. To the Reasonableness of this, se∣veral of the wisest Heathens have at∣tested.
That's a remarkable passage Moral. 1. ad Eudem in fine. in Aristotle to this purpose, where he states that to be the most desirable proportion of all Worldly Felicities and Enjoyments, which is most con∣sistent with men's devoting them∣selves to the business of Religion: And that to be either too much or too lit∣tle of Wealth, or Honour, or Power, &c. whereby men are hindred in their meditating upon God, or their worshipping of him. So Epictetus, discoursing concern∣ing the work and business he was de∣signed to, hath this passage: If I had been made a Nightingale or a Swan, I should have employed the time of my life in such a way as is suitable to the conditions of those Creatures: But being made a Man, capable of serving and worshipping that God from whom I had my Being, it's but reason that I should apply my self to this, as being my proper work and business: . And there∣fore hereunto will I devote my self, as being the chief Employment to which I am designed.
So Antoninus: Evety thing (saith he) is designed for some kind of work; Lib. 8. Sect. 19. Beasts and Plants, the Sun and Stars, . And what do you con∣ceive your business to be? Sensual pleasures? Bethink your self a little better, whether this be suitable to the Nobility of your nature, and those excellent faculties with which you are endowed. Men usually apply themselves to that as their chief busines, which may quit cost and be worth their labour by which their Interest is most pro∣moted. And there is nothing can be more reasonable, than for that to be the chief business of a man's Life, which is the chief end of his Being. Which is the third thing I proposed to speak to. I crave leave to mention two Infe∣rences very briefly by way of Appli∣cation, and I have done. If this be so, that Religion is of so great Importance, that it may be sti∣led the Whole of man, with reference to all those things that are of great∣est
moment, The Essence, the Happi∣ness, the Business of Man: 1. What Monsters of olly, and Madness, and Contradiction, must those men be, who do upon this ac∣count put a greater value upon them∣selves, as being more learned, and wise and better than others, because they can contemn and despise Religi∣on? Certainly, by all the Laws of God and Men, such Miscreants ought to be rendered most vile and con∣temptible themselves. Their Discour∣ses ought not to be listned unto with∣out nauseousness and detestation. Their Persons should be used as the Lepers were under the Law, whose company every one was obliged to avoid, as being unclean infectious per∣sons. And perhaps this might be one good way, if not of curing themselves, yet of hindring their Mischiefs upon others, when they should find themselves abhorred and abandoned by all sober men. 2. How dear should the Concern∣ments of Religion be to every one of
us, How serious should we be in the Profession and Practice of it our selves! How zealous in promoting the Honour and the power of it a∣mongst others! The things of this World are full of uncertainty, and of short continuance, When a few days are past, we must all of us go to the place whence we shall not return- And when we come to die, nothing then will be of any advantage to us, but Religion, The testimony of our Consciences, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, we have had our Con∣versation in this world. Upon which we may confidently expect, that there is laid up for us a Crown of Righte∣ousness, which the Lord the Righte∣ous Judg, will give unto us at the day of his Appearance; when he shall come to bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil. FINIS.
A Serm. III. SERMON Preached before the KING AT WHITE-HALL, In Lent, 1670. ECCLES. 12. 14. For God shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil. THis Book doth contain a Philoso∣phical Disquisition concerning a State of Happiness; wherein the
Wise man doth particularly discuss each of those Subjects, which accord∣ing to the various opinions and tem∣pers of men, are believed to have any pretence to it. The precedent Verse (as I have formerly shewed) doth contain the Conclusion of the whole matter; the chief inference and result ftom all the former Debates and Enquiries; wherein he asserts, that every man's true happiness doth consist in being religious, In fearing God, and keeping his Commandments. And though this Conclusion had been sufficiently proved by great va∣riety of Arguments, in the foregoing Discourse; yet he thinks fit here in the close of all, to back and enforce it with one Argument more; which above all others is most apt to make deep impression upon the minds of men; and (if any thing can) to per∣swade them to the Duties of Religi∣on: And that is the consideration of the last Judgment, in the words of the Text, For God shall bring, &c.
That which I intend from these words, is to prove, against the Infi∣dels and Scoffers of this Age, the Reasonableness and the Credibility of this great Principle of Religion, concerning a future state of Reward and Punishment. Though the Principal Evidence for this do depend upon Scripture, especially the New Testament, where it is said, That life and immortality 2 Tim. 1. 10. is brought to light by the Gospel. Yet in a point of so great moment and consequence as this is, it is not to be imagined, that God should have left himself without a Witness to all the Nations of the World, but that all men should be endowed with such natural Capacities and Notions, as being improved by Consideration, will afford sufficient evidence for the belief of this great Fundamental Principle. As for such men, who live under-the sense of Guilt, whose Interest it is that there should be no future ac∣count, it cannot be otherwise ex∣pected
from such, but that they should be willing to dis-believe this. And from hence it is, that some of the Ancient Philosophers have em∣ployed their Learning and Subtilty, to dispute themselves into some kind of doubts and uncertainty about it. And yet the generality even of these have been forced to acknowledg it much more probable than the contra∣ry. And as for the Vulgar sort of people, who are guided by the more simple dictates of Nature, these have in all Ages and Nations submitted themselves to this Doctrine, and pro∣fessed a firm belief of it. And though Vulgar Opinion be but a very bad To∣pick about such matters as may gra∣tify men in their ease and sensual ap∣petites; yet in such other Opinions as are cross to their Worldly Interests, it may argue such things to be from some natural impression upon their minds, which they must believe, and cannot otherwise chuse. The Arguments I would make use of to this purpose, may be re∣duced
to these three general Heads: 1. From the suitableness of this Principle, to the most natural Notions of our Minds. 2. The Necessity of it, to the Go∣vernment of mens Lives and Actions in this World. 3. The Necessity of it, for the vin∣dication of Divine Providence. 1. I begin with the first: The suitableness of it to the most natural Notions of our Minds, and those kind of Impressions which belong to us, as we are Reasonable Creatures. Wee see by experience, that all other things (so far as we are able to judg) Minerals, Plants, Beasts, &c. are na∣turally endowed with such Princi∣ples, as are most fit to promote the perfection of their natures in their several Kinds. And therefore it is by no means credible, that Mankind on∣ly, the most excellent of all the other Creatures in this visible World, for the service of whom, so many other
things seem to be designed, should have such kind of Principles inter∣woven in his very Nature, as do con∣tain in them meer cheats and delu∣sions. And therefore whatsoever those things are, which the generality of Manknd, espcially the most wise and the most considerate part of them do agree in, ought to be allowed for highly credible; otherwise it must follow, that we are framed with such kind of Faculties, as in our most cau∣tious exercise of them, are more like∣ly to seduce us, and expose us to Er∣ror, than to direct and lead us to the Truth. But I shall endeavour to manifest this more particularly, by these three Considerations. 1. This Principle is most suitable to the general Apprehensions of Man∣kind, concerning the nature of Good and Evil. 2. To those natural Hopes and Expectations, which the generality of good men have, concerning a state of future Happiness.
3. To those natural Fears and Ex∣pectations, which the generality of wicked men are possessed with, con∣cerning a future state of Punishment and Misery. 1. This Principle is most suitable to the general Apprehensions of Man∣kind concerning the nature of Good and Evil. All men heretofore have agreed, that there is such a Thing as the Law of Nature, whereby things are distinguished into Good and Bad; according to which, the Acti∣ons of men are determined to be either Virtuous or Vicious. And as the one of these, doth in the essence of it imply Comeliness and Reward; so doth the other denote Turpitude and Punishment. These things being implied in the very definitions of Vir∣tue and Vice. And from hence it will follow, That as there is some Superior Power who hath put this Law into our Natures; so will he take care to enforce the observance of it, by re∣warding and punishing men accor∣dingly. This being implied in the na∣ture of a Law.
If there be nothing in the naked essence of things that makes them to differ, but what doth meerly arise from Custom and Positive Laws; why then Custom and Law would be able to render it a very virtuous and commendable thing for a man to be ingrateful, a breaker of Compacts, a false Witness, a Perjured person; which is so monstrous a Position, that the common Reason of Mankind will abhor it upon the first proposal. No∣thing is more obvious, than that there is an universal desire amongst men, of seeming honesty: The most impu∣dent and profligate Wretch being loth to be esteemed to be, what really he is. The very Sin of Hypocrisie, so general amongst men, doth give a large Testimony to the Beauty of Goodness, and the Deformity of Vice. Nor is there any account to be given, why there should be impressed upon the nature of men such a value for the one, and dislike for the other, if there were not in the things them∣selves, something suitable to those contrary affections.
We see by experience, that there is such a kind of Rest and Acquiescence in the mind, upon the discovery of Truth, and the doing of Virtuous Actions, as belong to natural Bodies, when they are in their proper places: Which may argue these things to have some peculiar suitableness to the Soul of man, and that the oppo∣sites to them do offer violence to some natural Principle belonging to it. 2. This Principle is most suitable to those natural Hopes and Expecta∣tions which the generality of good men have concerning a state of future Happiness. From whence doth arise that Confidence and Courage, where∣by those of meanest Quality and Abilities (if otherwise Virtuous per∣sons) can support themselves in their sufferings for that which is good: Which doth necessarily suppose in them a strong, and even a natural be∣lief and perswasion of such a future state, wherein their sufferings shall be considered and rewarded.
Besides that, there is a natural de∣sire in all men, after a state of Hap∣piness and Perfection. And if we consider the utter impossibility of at∣taining to any such condition in this life, This will render it highly credi∣ble, That there must be another state wherein this Happiness is attainable: otherwise Mankind must fail of his chief End, being by a natural Prin∣ciple most strongly inclined to such a state of Happiness as he can never attain to. As if he were purposely framed to be tormented betwixt these two Passions, Desire and Despair; an earnest Propension after Happiness, and an utter incapacity of ever en∣joying it. And, which is yet more considerable, the better and the wiser any man is, the more earnest desires and hopes hath he after such a state of Happiness. And if there be no such thing, not only Nature▪ but Vir∣tue likewise must contribute to make men miserable; than which, nothing can seem more unreasonable to those who believe a Just and a Wise Pro∣vidence.
3. This Principle is most suita∣ble to those Fears and Expectations which the generality of wicked men are possessed with, concerning a fu∣ture state of Misery. Witness those natural suggestions of Conscience in the worst of men, that upon any wicked action (though never so pri∣vate) are often-times startling of them, with the apprehensions of another Judicature and Tribunal, before which they shall be called to an account for their closest sins. All that secret regret, and those inward smitings, Laniatus & Ictus, which are so often felt in the Minds of men, upon the commission of any great sin, do argue some common intimations, even in the Light of Nature, of another Judgment after this life, wherein they shall be accountable for such Actions, which men do not punish or take notice of. And these natural Fears do usual∣ly seize upon all kind of men pro∣miscuously, even those who are most
Potent, who by their own Wills can give Laws to Nations, and command mighty Armies, yet cannot they a∣void these Checks and Lashes of Con∣science, but that they will seize up∣on them, and shake them, as well as the poorest meanest Subject. Nor can such as are most obstinately wic∣ked, who with their utmost study and endeavour, apply themselves to the suppressing and disbelief of these Notions, so wholly stifle them, but that they will be continually rising up in their Minds, and pursuing of them. Now as there is no man whatsoe∣ver, that is wholly freed from these fears of future misery after death, so there is no other Creature but Man, that hath any fears of this kind. And if there be no real ground for this, then must it follow, That he who framed all his other Works with such an excellent congruity, did yet so contrive the Nature of Man, the most noble amongst them, as to prove a needless torment and burthen to it self.
If it be said, That these Notions may proceed from such Principles as men have derived from Institution, and the Teaching of others, and do not imply a Necety of any such Na∣tural impressions. To this it may be answered, That it is sufficient to denominate them Natural Notions; if they have such a suitableness to the Minds of men, as makes them to be generally owned by all those who apply their thoughts to the consideration of them. And that they have such a natural suita∣bleness, may appear, Because Institu∣tion cannot so easily eradicate these Notions, as it can fix them. Now if the meer teaching of others were it self sufficient to impress these No∣tions, without any such peculiar con∣gruity in the things themselves, It would be as sufficient to deface them again: Especially considering the ad∣vantage on this side, from that na∣tural repugnancy we have against any thing which brings disquiet to our Minds. And nothing is more trou∣blesom
in this kind, than the Fear which follows upon Guilt. But now, though there have been several men. of no mean Abilities, in several Ages, who have made it their business to root out of the Minds of men all such troublesome Notions a∣bout a futute state, endeavouring to perswade themselves and others, That as there was a time before they were born into the world, when they were not; So at their dying, or going out of it, they shall exist no more. And yet, though it be their interest to be∣lieve this, though they make it their study and business to perswade them∣selves and others to it; It may rea∣sonably be doubted, whether ever yet, there hath been so much as one person that hath hereby become ab∣solutely free from these Fears: But for the most part, Those who would have them esteemed vain and imagi∣nary, without any foundation in Na∣ture, These are the persons who are most assaulted with them. Hi sunt qui trepidant & ad omnia fulgere pallent.
So powerful and unconquerable are these impressions, and therefore natu∣ral. 2. The second Reason I proposed to speak to, was from the Necessity of this Principle, to the right govern∣ment of mens Lives and Actions in this world, and the preserving of So∣ciety amongst them. Nothing can be more evident, than that the Human Nature is so framed, as not to be regulated and kept within due bounds, without Laws; and Laws must be insignificant, with∣out the Sanctions of Rewards and Punishments, whereby men may be necessitated to the observance of them. Now the temporal Rewards and Punishments of this life, can∣not be sufficient to this end; and therefore there is a necessity, that there should be another future state of Happiness and Misery. All the Rewards and Punishments of this life, are to be expected ei∣ther from the Civil Magistrate, who by virtue of his Place and Calling is
obliged to the duty of distributive Justice: Or else from Divine Provi∣dence, according to that most usual course which we find by Experience to be observed by Him, in his di∣spensation of these Temporal things. Now neither of these can afford suf∣ficient Motives for the government of Mens Lives and Actions. 1. Not all that may be expected from the Civil Magistrate, because there may be many good and evil Actions, which they cannot take no∣tice of; and they can reward and pu∣nish only such things as come under their cognizance. And if this were the only restraint upon men, it could be no hindrance from any such Mis∣chief or Villanies which men had the opportunity of committing secretly. Nor would it extend to those who had Power and Strength enough to defend themselves from the Law, and escape the penalty of it, but that such might without any check or fear, fol∣low the inclinations of their own Ap∣petites. Nor would it afford any
remedy in the case of such wicked Magistrates as should invert the or∣der of their Institution, proving Ter∣rors to well-doers, and Encouragers to those that do ill. 2, Not all that may be expected from Common Providence: For though it should be granted, that according to the most usual and general course of things, both Virtuous and Vitious Actions are rewarded and punished in this life; yet there may be many particular cases which this Motive would not reach unto; namely, all such cases where a man's Reason shall inform him, that there is far greater probability of safety and advantage, by committing a sin, than can be rea∣sonably expected, (according to his experience of the usual course of things in the World,) by doing his duty. Suppose the case of the three Children, or of any others called to Martyrdom, who may be threatned with torments and death, unless they will blaspheme God, and renounce their Religion, If it appear to them
very probable, suppose a hundred to one, that upon their refusal, Their Persecutors will really execute what they Threaten: And if on the other side it appear very improbabble, sup∣pose ten thousand to one, that they shall not be delivered by a Miracle: In such cases, it is not to be expected that the consideration of the ordinary course of Providence in the dispen∣sation of Rewards and Punishments, should be sufficient to restrain a man from any kind of Blasphemy or Vil∣lany whatsoever. But the thing I am speaking to, will more fully appear, by considera∣tion of those horrid Mischiefs of all kinds, that would most naturally follow from the denial of this Do∣ctrine. If there be no such thing to be ex∣pected as Happiness or Misery here∣after, Why then the only business that men are to take care of, is their present well-being in this World; There being nothing to be counted either Good or Bad, but in order to
this. Those things which we con∣ceive to be conducible to it, being the only duties; and all other things that are cross to it, being the only sins. And therefore whatever a man's Appetite shall incline him to, he ought not to deny himself in it (be the thing what it will) so he can have it, or do it without probable danger. Suppose it be matter of Gain or Profit he is disposed to, if he can cheat or steal securely, this will be so far from being a fault, that it is plainly his duty, Because it is a pro∣per means to promote his chief End, And so for other cases of Anger, Hatred, Revenge, &c. according to this Principle, a man must take the first opportunity of satisfying these Passions, by doing any kind of mis∣chief to the persons he is offended with, whether by false Accusations and Perjury; or (if need be) by poy∣soning or stabbing of them; provided he can do these things so, as to escape
the suspition of others, and Human Penalty. Now let any man judg what Bears, and Wolves, and Devils, men would prove to one another, if every thing should be not only lawful, but a du∣ty, whereby they might gratifie their impetuous Lusts, if they might ei∣ther perjure themselves, or steal, or murder, as often as they could do it safely, and get any advantage by it. But these things are so very obvi∣ous, and undeniable, that the most prophane Athstical persons do own the truth of them. And upon this, they are willing to acknowledg, That Religion and the belief of another life, is a very politick invention, and needful for the well-governing of the world, and for the keeping men in awe, from the doing any secret mis∣chiefs. Which (by the way) is a concession of no small advantage to the honour of Religion, considering that it proceeds from the greatest professed Enemies to it. Whereby
they grant, that it is fit these things should be true, if they are not; or at least that it is fit, that the generality of men should believe them to be true. And though they themselves pretend to believe otherwise, yet are they not so far out of their wits, as to be willing that those with whom they converse, their Wives, and Chil∣dren, and Servants, should be of the same Opinion with them, Because then they could have no reason to ex∣pect any safety amongst them. What securiry could any man have of his Estate, or Honour, or Life, if such with whom he is most familiar and intimate, might think themselves at liberty to do all the secret mischiefs to them, that they had opportunity to commir? But there is one thing more, which those, who profess to dis-belief this Principle, should do well to consider; and that is this, That there is no imaginable reason, why (amongst those that know them) they should pretend to any kind of Honesty or
Conscience, because they are wholly destitute of all such motives as may be sufficient to oblige them to any thing of this nature. But accord∣ing to them, that which is called Virtue and Religion, must be one of the most silly and useless things in the world. As for the Principle of Honour, which some imagine may supply the room of Conscience, This relates on∣ly to external Reputation, and the esteem which we have amongst o∣thers; And therefore can be of no influence to restrain men from doing any secret mischief. From what hath been said, it will follow, That those who have any re∣gard to their own safeties, ought to abandon all kind of society with such pernicious persons, who accor∣ding to their own Principles, must take all opportunities of doing any mischief to others, which they are able to effect, with any advantage to themselves. Now if this be so (as I have pro∣ved)
that the nature of man is so fra∣med, as not to be effectually perswa∣ded and wrought upon, without the consideration of such a future state. If it be necessary to put in everlasting motives, as the Sanctions of that Law, by which the Human Nature is to be governed; This must render it highly credible, that there is such a state. Because it must needs be very unworthy of God, to conceive of Him, that he hath contrived the nature of one of his best and most noble Creatures, after such a man∣ner, as to make it incapable of be∣ing governed without falshood and deceit. 3. The third and last Argument I proposed to speak to, was from the necessity of this Principle to the vin∣dication of Divine Providence. No∣thing is more universally acknow∣ledged, than that God is Good and Just. That well-doing shall be re∣warded, and evil Actions punished by Him. And yet we see that his Dispensations in this life are many
times promiscuous and uncertain: so tha   jdg of lov or ha∣tred by all tht is before him. The worst men are sometimes in the best condition. If in this life only we had hope, we should be of all men the most 1 Cor. 5. 19. miserabl, saith the Apostle, speaking concerning those primitive times of Persecution, when the better any man was, the more he was exposed to suf∣ferings. Now the greater Uncertainty there is as to the prsent Affairs in this World, by so much greater is the Certainy of a future Jugment. What coud be a greater dsparage∣ment to Divine Providence, than to permit the Calamities and Sufferings which good men undergo in this world, many times upon the account of Religion, to pass unrewarded; and the many Mischiefs and Prophana∣tions, which wicked men take the ad∣vantage of committing, by their Greatness and Prosperity in this world, to go unpunished?
What great glory would it be, to preside over this Material World, Sars, and Meteors, Sea and Land, Plants and Beasts, to put these things into such a regular course, as may be suitable to their natures, and the operations for which they are de∣signed; and in the mean space to have no proportionable regard, ei∣ther for those that reverence the De∣ity, or those who contemn him? 'Tis very well said to this purpose by a late Author, That not to con∣duct Amyraldus the course of Nure in a due manner, might speak some defect of Wisdom in God: but not to compen∣sate Viue and Vice, besides the de∣fect of Wisdom, in not adjusting things suitably to their qualifications, but crosly coupling Prosperity with Vice, and Misery with Virtue, would ar∣gue too great a defect of Goodness and Justice. And perhaps it would be less expedient (saith he) with E∣picurus, to deny all Providence, than to ascribe it to such defects. It be∣ing less unworthy of the Divine Na∣ture,
to neglect the Universe altoge∣ther, than to administer Human Af∣fairs with so much Injustice and Irre∣gularity. And therefore 'tis necessary for the vindication of Divine Providence, that there should be a future state and day of Account, wherein every man shall be forced to acknowledg, that verily there is a reward for the righ∣teous; Psal. 58. 11. doubtless there is a God that judgeth the earth. I crave leave for a word of Appli∣cation, and I have done. If this be so, it will concern us then to en∣quire, 1. Whether we do in good earnest believe this, That there shall be a future state of Reward and Punish∣ment, according as mens Lives and Actions have been in this world. If not, why do we profess our selves to be Christians? Why do we not re∣nounce the Articles of our Creed? Nay, why do we pretend to any Re∣ligion? Nothing can be more false and unworthy, than in a solemn and
religious manner to own that in our Profession, which we do inwardly dis∣believe and deny. 2. Do we at any time seriously consider this? and revolve upon it in our minds? Do we bethink our selves, what our condition is like to be at that time, what preparations we have for it. what grounds we have for hope? There cannot possibly be any greater stupidity, than for a man to be slight and careless in a business of so great moment. 'Tis the want of believing and considering this, that is the chief cause of all the viciousness and disorder in the world. 3. What impression doth the belief and consideration of this make upon our hearts and lives? Doth it stir up in us, vehement desires, and careful∣ness of mind in preparing for that time? If a man were to be tried for life at the next Assizes, How would his thoughts be taken up about his defence, what answer he should make, what the main Plea is which he should insist upon, by what evidence
it might be strenghned and cleared up? He would as soon forget to eat his meat, or to go to bed, as to let a business of this nature slip out of his mind. There is nothing more hard to be restrained, than the Impetuous and wild Exorbitances of Youth; And yet such persons would not, durst not indulge themselves, according to the ways of their own hearts, and the sight of their eyes; If they did really believe and conside, that or all these things God would bg them to Eccl. 11. 9. judgment. The business of Religion, must therefore be above all other things of greatest consequence to us, because 'tis the only means to secure us, as to our future conditions. The af∣fairs of this life are but of short con∣tinuance, and full of uncertainty: And therefore 'tis not much maerial what a man's condition may be in that respect. But there is ano∣ther state and time which will more nearly concern our care; and
that is the great day of Account. And till a man hath in some measure provided for this, he cannot live com∣fortably, or sleey quietly, or have any solid peace in his mind; but must upon every serious reflexion be con∣tinually haunted with frightful ap∣prehensions about his everlasting con∣diion. 'Tis scarce credible that any man should be so sottish, as to think, he shall escape dying: and when we do come to depart out of this world, It will then be no advantage to us, that we have had Riches, or Honour, or Power. These things will then vanish away, as to our Possession of them; and the Remembrance of them may prove a torment to our thoughts, ra∣ther than a comfort; especially if we have reason to suspect, that these things were our portion in his life, and may be reckoned upon as our good things which we had already. Certain It is, that they will render our Accounts the more difficult: For to whom much is given, of them
much shall be required. We must be answerable not only for our doings, but for the fruit of our doings. All Jer. 17. 10 the sins, or evil consequences which have been occasioned by our Miscar∣riages, shall be set upon our score. And if these things be so. What manner of persons ought we to be in 2 Pet. 3. 11, 12. all holy conversation and godliness, looking for, and hastning unto the com∣ing of the day of God. If any thing can prevail with men to live soberly, Tit. 2. 12, 13. righteously, and godly in this world, Ir must be from the consideration of that blessed hope and glorious appear∣ing of the Great God, our Saviour Je∣sus Christ: To whom with the Fa∣ther, &c. FINIS.
A DISCOURSE Concerning the BEAUTY OF Providence. By the Right Reverend Father in God, JOHN WILKINS, late Lord Bishop of Chester. Psal. 25. 10. All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth, to such as keep his Cove∣nant and his Testimonies. The Fifth Edition. LONDON: Printed by Henry Cruttenden, 1677.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER. AMongst all other Doctrines, this of Providence (though it do properly belong to Na∣tural Theology. yet) is of an Universal concernmen both for know∣ldg and practice, as any other point, in Christian Divinity, The very Heathens have acknow∣leaged, only a Universal Providence of Gd, which puts the general kinds of things into a regular way of work∣ing; But his particular Providence likewise, which takes care of Indivi∣dual Persons and Actions. Why else do all Religions oblige men to pray
unto Him, and to expect His special assistance in every kind of want or ne∣cessity? But now, though this common Principle be so universally acknow∣ledged in the Notion of it, yet men are generally very negligent in the practical application of it to particu∣lar times and conditions; and so lose that comfort and satisfaction that may be reaped from it. It is the chief aim and business of this Discourse, To convince and quic∣ken men unto this duty, as being by so much the more seasonable for these times, by how much the present trou∣bles and confusions do now call upon us for it. It cannot but occasion some sugge∣stions of Diffidence and Infidelity, to consider those many strange revoluti∣ons and changes in the world which in outward appearance seem so full of disorder and wild contingencies. And therefore it must needs be of special consequence for a man to have his heart established in the knowledg
and belief of this truth here insisted upon: In all Ages of the world men have Psal. 73. Jer. 12. been much startled in their judgments by that unequal dispensation which seems to be in those outward things, That one event should be to the righ∣teous Eccl. 9. 2. Ch. 5. 15. Ch. 8. 14. and the wicked. Nay, That a just man should perish in his righ∣teousness. and the wicked should prosper in his wickedness. That Ch. 4. v. 11 on the side of the Oppressor there should be might, and the oppressed should have none to comfort them. This hath sometimes so amazed and perplexed the thoughts of considering men, that whilst they looked barely upon events, they could not tell how to extricate themselves from these difficulties; which occasioned that speech of Solomon; Surely oppression Ch. 7. v. 7. makes a wise man mad; that is, puts him to his wits end, transports him with wild imaginations, whilst he knows not readily what to answer in defence of such proceedings.
But now he that shall seriously con∣sider how every thing is managed by an All-seeing Providcnce, which is exactly careful, and infinitely wise, such a man will be easily satisfied, that in all these obscure administra∣tions (which seem unto us so full of casual, negligent, promiscuous Events) there is an admirable (though un∣searchable) contrivance. As for the particular design which Providence may aim at in some di∣spensations, this doth not always fall under our reach. It is the glory of Pro. 25. 2. God to conceal a matter. And ma∣ny of his works are so ordered, that though a man labour to seek them Eccl. 8. 7, 1. out, yet he cannot find out, yet he shall not find them. Yea further, Though a wise man think to know them, yet shall he not be able to find them. And therefore, where we cannot understand his ways, it is there our duty, with an humble reverence to admire the wisdom of them. How would this (if rightly con∣sidered
and applied) silence all those unseemly murmurings and complaints of men in these times? Remember, there is nothing befalls us but what Act. 4. 28. the counsel of God had before dc∣termined to be done. And he can order things for the best, as well when they cross our desires, as when they comply with them. And therefore when you see the violent perverting of judgment and Eccl. 5. 8. justice in a province, marvel not at the matter. That is, Be not trans∣ported with wonder, or impatience, or unbelief, as if the Providence of God were regardless or negligent: For he that is higher than the high∣est regardeth. Though they that have the highest power amongst men may be so far from remedying, that they rather encourage such disorders; yet God hath a strict watchful eye up∣on them. And though men may be apt to secure themselves in such pro∣ceedings, by the greatness of their own strength, as if there were no∣thing above them; yet there are
higher than they. And there is a Ch. 3. 27. time, when God will judg both the righteous and the wicked. Let us be careful of our own du∣ty, to serve Providence in the usual means, and leave the disposal of e∣vents to him. It should be every mans chief business to clear up the evidences of his particular title and relation unto this great Governour of the World; and this will be the surest means to set us above the fear or hurt of all outward changes. We see with what artifice and compliance men will insinuate them∣selves into the affection of those who (according to several revolutions) are advanced into the places of pow∣er. Of how much greater advantage would it be, to get an interest in his favour who doth and shall always rule over the sons of men, having all times at his disposal, out of whose hands no strength or policy shall ever be able to wrest the sway and do∣minion of things?
It cannot but afford strong con∣solation uno every true Believer, to consider, that he who hath the chief influnce in all these great changes and variety of events in the World, is both his God, and his Father. How did this quiet the heart of old Eli? 1 Sam. 3. 18. It is the Lord, let him do what seemeth him good. And David upon the same considera∣tion professeth, I was dumb, and open∣ed Psal. 39. 9. not my mouth, because thou didst it. And our blessed Saviour himself makes use of this argument, The oh. 18. 11. Cup that my Father hath given me, shall I not drink it? Though the portion be bitter and displeasing, yet so long as it comes from a loving and careful Father, we have no reason to fear any hurt by it. And on the other side, much of mens unquietness and dejection, is occasioned either by the want of this evidence, or by the neglect of applying it. When they terminate their thoughts upon secondary instruments, Fearing men Isa. 51. 12, 13. that shall die, and the sons of men
men that shall be made as grass: for∣getting the Lord their Maker, who stretched forth the Heavens, and laid the Foundations of the earth. That is that which makes men to fear con∣tinually, because of the fury of the oppressor. How would it compose all these fears and distempers, if men would but labour after this assurance of their interest in God, with the same zeal and intention of mind where∣with they prosecute their particular engagements and animosities against one another. He that hath God for his strength and refuge, is always sure to be on the strongest side, and need not fear the most tempestuous mutations. Though the earth be re∣moved, and the Mountains should be carried into the midst of the Sea: Though the waters thereof roar, and be troubled; and the Mountains shake with the swelling thereof. Thus much I thought fit to premise in the general, concerning the neces∣sity and seasonableness of this Sub∣ject.
As for the particular occasion of publishing this Discourse, I have no∣thing to say but this; That being so∣licited for a Copy of it by divers per∣sons (and some of eminent quality) bfore whom it was occasionally Preached; I knew not any more con∣venient way to satisfy their desires, than by such a publick communica∣tion of it. I could speak something from my own experience concerning the effica∣cy of this Doctrine, against those damps and dejections of mind unto which such times as these will ex∣pose a man, It is my hearty Prayer, that it may be useful to others also in this respect. Farewel.
THE BEAUTY OF Providence. ECCLES. 3. 11. He hath made every thing beautiful in his time: also He hath set the World in their heart, yet no man can find out the work that God maketh from the beginning to the end. THis Book contains Solomon's Ex∣perience in his search for Con∣tentment; which being not to be found amongst any of the Creatures, he advises never to trouble our selves
in an eager prosecution after them, but to enjoy our possessions with a cheerful, liberal mind, without per∣plexing our selves in such cares and labours, as may defraud us of those honest comforts to be had by them: for there is nothing better for a man, then that he should eat and drink, and make his Soul enjoy good in his labour, ch. 2. v. 24. That is one of the Con∣clusions which Solomon infers from his former discourse, and which he farther amplifies, and confirms in the following parts of his Sermon. It being his chief scope in this Book, to direct men how to behave themselves with cheerfulness and contentment under all those great revolutions, and that variety of eventts which may befall them in the world. This Chapter contains a discourse concerning God's government and disposal of times; and is therefore not unfitly stiled, the Calendar or Ephemerides of seasons: whence the Wise-man with divers arguments ur∣ges upon us what he had before com∣mended,
a cheerful and contented mind. The Text is one of these argu∣ments; God hath made every thing beautiful in his time: that is, there is a wise order and contrivance in all the works of providence: every par∣ticular Event is most seasonable in that time which God appoints: and therefore we have no reason to repine at our condition, as if matters did not go well with us; for 'tis impos∣sible they should have been better than they are: though they do cross our private hopes and desires, yet God best understands the fittest order and season for all things making them beautiful in his time. Also he hath set the World in their heart: by [world] here is not meant this material world; but seculum, the succession and course of things, as the original word  does pro∣perly import. This God hath set in, or  expounded unto mens hearts; that is, he hath endowed us with an ability to descern in some measure
that seasonableness which he observes in the government of the World. Yet there is no man can find out the work that God makes from the be∣ginning to the end: that is, 'tis above humane ability to comprehend the reason of all Divine proceedings; we cannot find them fully out from the beginning to the end. Others conceive that the words may be more properly rendred thus: This very suitable to the O∣riginal. as long as the World shall last, God doth reveal unto mens hearts the work which he makes, from the beginning to the end, excepting only some things unto which man cannot attain. As if he should have said, in all ages of the World there are still some passages of Providence, wherein men may be a∣ble to discern a beauty and comeli∣ness, though there are some other particulars which we cannot under∣stand. The ense of both Interpre∣tations being for the substance much alike. That's the connexion and meaning of the whole verse. The Text, ac∣cording
to its natural fulness, doth comprize in it these three particu∣lars. 1. Every thing has its time. 2. Every thing in its time is beau∣tiful. 3. That is the proper season for all things which God appoints. 1. Every thing has s me. To all things there is an appointed season, ver. 1. Not only for such natural e∣vents as bear in them a kind of ne∣cessity, as a time to be born, and a time to dye, ver. 2. but also for those voluntary actions that seem to be most alterable and contingent; A time to weep, and a time to laugh, ver. 4. The wisdom of Providence in the government of this lower world, hath disposed to every thing its particular season. This is that we call the fulness of time, the ripe∣ness of season. Prov. 27, 1. The Wise man says there, that the day brings forth events, Paritura est dies; al∣luding to a teeming-Mother, to whom.
there is a set date for her delivery. So doth Time travel with the decrees of Providence, and for each several acti∣on there is a pregnancy, and fulness of time. 2. Every thing in its time is beau∣tiful; even such matters as in their own natures are not without some deformity. A time to kill, v. 4. A time to mourn, a time of war, v. 8. The scorching of Summer, and the extream cold of Winter, though both in themselves alike distastful, yet are comely in their seasons; and those times would not be so beautiful with∣out them. Nor is it the natural goodness of any thing that can make it comely out of its proper season. That which Beauty is in Bodies, and Harmony in Sounds, that is Opportu∣nity in Time. Now as White and Red, which are the usual Materials of Beauty, as those particular Notes of which Musick doth consist, may be so disposed of, as to cause deformity and discord: so actions, which in themselves are good, may be depra∣ved
by their unseasonableness. 3. That is the proper season for all things which God appoints: Or thus: Every particular Event, is most beautiful in that time which the Pro∣vidence of God hath allotted to it. 'Tis above the contrivance of Hu∣man Policy to bring matters about in their fittest order. And therefore 'twere but folly to conclude, That things do not fall out well, unless they answer our desires: for God best understands the fittest season for every purpose. And whatsoever, or whensoever he works, you may be sure 'tis both beautiful, and in its time; Even those Events which do most thwart our private Ends (could all circumstances be duly con∣fidered) we should find them to be performed in their most comely or∣der, and best opportunity. As for the two first Particulars, though they are implied in the Text, yet are they most expresly handled in the former verses: And therefore I shall pass them over without any
ther enlargement, insisting only upon this latter, as being more directly a∣greeable to the main scope of the words. And 'tis a Subject that in many re∣spects will deserve your more espe∣cial attention; 'tis not commonly treated of. And besides, it may ve∣ry much conduce to our contentment, to settle our hearts against all those conditions that may befal us in the World. 'Tis of very general use and concernment, suitable to all times and occasions: For times of suffer∣ing, to make us patient and submis∣sive: For times of mercy, to make us cheerful and thankful. In brief, it extends to all persons, relations, businesses, seasons; nothing is more generally useful than this, to have our hearts fully perswaded of that wise order and contrivance which there is in the the disposal of every particular Event in the World. And 'tis more especially seasonable for times of Trouble and Confusion, when men are apt to mistrust the
Government of Providence, as if God neglect the care of this lower world, and leave all things to their own jarring-principles. Then (I say) 'tis more especially seasonable to vindi∣cate the care and wisdom of Provi∣dence; to shew that every thing God doth, is best; and consequent∣ly, that those many distractions and confusions under which we suffer, are far better than any other (though the most flourishing) condition could be. And that's the Subject I am now to insist upon. The point is this: Every particular Event is most Propos. beautiful in that time which the Providence of God hath allotted to it. A Truth, by so much the more seasonable for these times, by how much 'tis now the more difficult to believe it. The Observation lies plainly both in the scope of the place, and the most obvious sense of the words.
The Scripture is copious in other proofs to this purpose. Deut. 32. 4. Confir∣mation by Testimo∣ny Divine. His work is perfect, and his ways are judgment; a God of truth, and without iniquity, just and right. Not only his first work of Creation is exactly good and perfect; but his ways of Province also are dispo∣sed with judgment and righteous∣ness. So again, Isa. 28. 29. The Lord of So Jer. 32. 19. Hosts is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working; that is, every event of Providence is managed and pre-ordained by an admirable Wis∣dom. and therefore must needs be of excellent contrivance. And again, Dan. 2. 20, 21. Wis∣dom and might are his: he changeth the times and the seasons: he remo∣veth Kings, and he setteth up Kings: Those two Attributes of Strength and Wisdom are for the most part Job 36. 5. put together in Scripture. God ne∣ver shews any Argument of his Strength, but his Wisdom is engaged in it also. Those great alterations
and subversions which happen in the world, do not more demonstrate the greatness of his Power in the doing of them, than the greatness of his Wisdom in disposing of them for the best. And again, Psal. 104. 24. O Lord, how manifold are thy works? in wisdom hast thou made them all: the earth is full of thy riches. Which is as well true of the works of Pro∣vidence, as of the works of Crea∣tion. But this Truth is more directly intimated by that Vision of Ezekiel in the Chapter of his Prophecy, wherein he doth express how all Events in the world are wisely dis∣posed of by the care and govern∣ment of Providence. The scope of that Vision was, to confirm the faith of the Prophet in the certainty of those things which he was to fore∣tel; because God himself, by whom he was inspired, had such a special influence in the orderly managing of all inferiour Events.
Though matters might seem to run upon wheels (as we say), to follow their own courses, without any special guidance; to go at ran∣dom; yet these wheels have eyes in them, v. 18. that is, there is the eye of Providence, which directs them in their revolutions. And then be∣sides, 2 Chron. 16. 9. Prov. 15. 3. ver. 10. these wheels are likewise go∣verned by the four living creatures; that is by the Angels of God, who are fitted for all their services, with four remarkable Endowments. 1. With Wisdom and Prudence, typified in that Vision, by the face of a man. 2. Courage and Resolution, the face of a Lion. 3. Sedulity and Diligence, the face of an Ox. 4. Swiftness and Dispatch, the face of an Eagle. In all which, the Prophet doth at large explain unto us, with what de∣liberate care and fore-cast the Pro∣vidence of God doth dispose of all these inferior Events.
This Truth may yet be further e∣videnced, Humane Testimo∣ny. from the very Light of Nature, and the Testimony of the Heathen. Hence was it that the An∣cients did set forth their gods with Harps in their hands, to shew the harmony they observed in the go∣vernment of the world. And Midas Bacon's Sap. Vet. was condemned to wear Asses ears, because he preferred Pan's Pipe be∣fore Apollo's Lte; Humane Policy before Divine Providence. Nay the Devil himself doth ac∣knowledg the wisdom and season∣ableness of Divine proceedings, and therefore would fain have sheltred himself under this pretence: Matth. 8. 29. Art thou come to torment us before our time? Implying, that it would not become the God of Order to do any thing untimely. And doubtless that must needs be an e∣vident and a great Truth which is confessed by the mouth of so great a Liar. For the further confirmation of this, let us a little consider some of
those rugged passages of Providence which seem to be performed with the greatest negligence and defor∣mity. Look upon the History of Joseph: Examples He was (you know) one of the pro∣mised Seed, concerning whom God had foretold a superiority and do∣minion over the rest of his Family. Now, that after this, he should be exposed to the treachery of his ma∣licious Brethren: that besides his nearness to slaughter from their hands, he should be sould into a far Countrey, whence there was no hopes ever to hear on him again: That there he should be so endan∣gered by the rage of a lustful wo∣man, and suffer so tedious and un∣just Imprisonment; all this might seem to be an oversight and neglect of Providence, as if it had forgot∣ten the promotion which Joseph was designed to. And yet do but re∣flect upon the latter part of the sto∣ry, and you shall find, how all these misfortunes did mightily conduce,
not only to his advancement, but all to the safety and preservation of that whole amily, which was then the Visible Church. So that if each of his Brethren had given him as much money as they sold him for, it had not been so great a kindness as he received from their intended Cru∣elty. It is an elegant gloss of St. Gre∣gory upon this Story, Divino ju∣dicio quod declinare conati sunt, re∣nitendo servierunt: Ideo venditus est à fratribus Joseph ne adoraretur, sed ideo est adoratus, quia venditus. It was so ordered by Providence, that what they sought to decline, they did promote, even by their striving a∣gainst it; Joseph was therefore sold by his Brethren, that he might not be worshiped, and yet he was there∣fore worshiped, because he was sold. Sic divinum consilium dum devia∣tur, impltur; sic humana sapientia dum reluctatur, comprehenditur. Even so the Divine Councel is accom∣plished in being opposed; so Hu∣mane
Policy is defeated by the means of promoting it. Thus also is it in the History of David: He was (you know) de∣signed to a Kingdom; but how ma∣ny straits was he put to before he attained it? Being forced into the Wilderness like a wandring Out-law, and followed there by a company of discontented persons, who was as ready (perhaps) upon every tri∣vial occasion to revolt from him, as before from Saul. But, above all the rest, his last distress was the one of the most desperate, when he was spoiled at Ziglag, not only of his goods, but his Wives and Children too, when his own Souldiers in their mutiny and discontent were ready to stone him; there being then but little hopes to save his life, much less to get a Kingdom, And yet this distress also was, in the event of it, contrived to his advantage. For ha∣ving afterwards pursued the Amale∣kites, he not only recovered his own, but got such abundance of other
spoils from them, as served him for rich Presents, whereby he might re∣new and confirm the friendship of his wellwishers in Israel; that af∣ter the death of Saul (which pre∣sently followed) he might by their free votes be chose to succeed him, 1 Sam, 30. and chap. 31. You may observe likewise some∣what to this purpose in the story of Jonah, when he was sent to Nine∣veh Jonah. about so weighty a matter as the safety of that great and popu∣lous City, and that too when their destruction was within ken, but for∣ty days off; that he should now make delays and fly to Tarshish; that upon such a strait he should run him∣self into hazards, might seem to ar∣gue some carelessness and neglect in the Government of Providence. And yet this error of his was so wisely managed in the event, that it pro∣ved a great advantage to the main End of his business. For 'tis a pro∣bable opinion, That these Mariners who cast Jonah into the Sea, were a
special occasion that his Preaching was so succesful afterwards; the Ni∣nevites being by them informed, That this was that Prophet for whom they had lately suffered so violent a Tempest; how the wind ceased, and all was calm again, when they had once cast him into the Sea from whence in was not possible he should be delivered, but by a Miracle. And therefore they concluded, That this must needs be some man extraordi∣narily inspired from above; and that his Preaching was not idle Threats, but such as might justly fright them into that rigorous Fast which after∣wards we read of both for Man and Beast. It being the wisdom of Pro∣vidence so to contrive it that this of∣fence of Jonah should mightily ad∣vantage that End which it did seem most directly to oppose. So likewise for that dissention be∣twixt Paul and Barnabas, Act. 15. Paul and Barnabas. it might seem the most unseasonable breach that could possibly be imagi∣ned; when the Church of the Christi∣ans
was now in its beginning and in∣fancy, that then the two chief Mem∣bers of it should fall at variance a∣mongst themselves, was such an un∣timely dissenion, that an Enemy could not wish them worse.. No∣thing could more thwart the promul∣gation of the Gospel of Peace, than the contentions of those that preach it. If that State which is already established into a Kingdom, divided against it self, cannot stand; much Mat. 12. 25. less could those small beginnings think to encrease into a Church by divisions. And yet this likewise was so dispo∣sed of in the event, that it did mightily conduce to the Gospel thorow the whole world: for by this means those two parted asunder, the one into Cy∣prus, the other into Syria and Cilicia, and like two mighty streams spread Ver. 39, 40, 41. themselves several ways that so they might the better water the barren and thirsty corners of the world. Thus have you seen the Beauty of Providence in some rugged passages
of it. 'Tis so in every other particu∣lar, though seeming unto us never so deformed. But man cannot find out the work of God from the beginning to the end. For the further evidencing of this Confir∣mation by Rea∣son. truth, there are two grounds upon which 'tis bottomed, that being un∣derstood and considered, will make the point very clear. 1. God is exactly careful of every thing. 2. He is infinitely wise, for the dis∣posal of all to the best. Reas. 1. 1. God doth overlook all things by an especial Providence. Eph. 1. 11. He worketh all things after the coun∣sel of his own will. There is no event in the World i is ordered both accor∣ding to God's will, and by his coun∣sel: Psal. 135. 6. Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he both in Hea∣ven, and in Earth, and in the Sea, and in all deep places. Not only in the Heaven, where his glory is more especiolly conspicuous; but in the earth too, where matters seem to be
full of confusion: and in the Sea, and in all deep places, where we cannot so much as take notice of them. There is nothing so great, but is un∣der his Power; nothing so little, but is within his Care. Those actions and events that seem unto us most free, and casual, inconsiderable, are all of them ordered by his Providence. 1. That which is most free, the hearts and affections of men do follow the guidance of his Decrees; Men may do after their own counsels and inclinati∣ons, but they are still suitable to his Providence; there is nothing more in our thoughts and words; and yet both the preparation of the heart, and the answer of the tongue, is from the Lord, Prov. 16. 1. 2. That which seems most casual: The disposing the Lot is from him, Prov. 16. 33. He who is accidentally flain by another, is said to be deliver∣ed into his hands by God, Exod. 21. 13. That casual Arrow shot at random, was directed by Providence to fulfil the prediction of Ahab's death,
1 King. 22. 34. There is no liberty for Causes to operate in a loose and stragling way; but in matters of greatest uncertainty, there is a pre∣ordained course of Effects. 3. The least, most inconsiderable things, are not neglected by Provi∣dence. It was a Like that of the Poet, Non vacat exiguis re∣bus adesse Jovi. prophane speech of the Aramites, That God was the God of the Mountains, not of the Valleys, 1 King. 20. 23. Whereas he regards the lowest, the least thing, as well as the greatest. The young Li∣ons, Psal. 104. 21. The Ravens. Psal. 147. 9. are provided for by him. He feeds the Fowls of the air, adorns the Lillies, and clothes the Grass of the Field, which to day is, and to mor∣row is cast into the Oven. Sparrows (you know) are but cheap Birds; Are not two of them sold for a far∣thing? Mat. 10. 29. And yet not one of these do fall to the ground with∣out your Father. He must give the Fowler leave to kill them; nay, when they are upon the wing in their fre∣quent and often repeated motions;
yet then it is He that must appoint them the time and place when and where they shall settle; and in this sense also, not one of them doth fall to the ground without your father. The hairs of your head are yet less ob∣servable contemptible even to a Proverb, Pili non facio, Ne pilo quidem melius. And yet these, with God, are inter numerata, amongst those things whereof he takes an ex∣act account. That place 1 Cor 9. 9. Doth God take care for Oxen? doth not simply exempt such things from the Law of his providence; but 'tis Argu∣mentum a minori, and doth imply his especial care of that higher rank of creatures to whom these are subor∣dinate, The plain meaning of it is, that if God hath by a particular Law provided, that the Ox should not be muzled that treads out the corn; he will be much more careful of the La∣bourers in his Harvest. 'Tis recorded to the glory of some ancient Generals, that they were able
to call every common Souldier by his own name; and careful to provide not only Pay for their Captains, but Litter also for the meanest Beast that did serve the Camp. Now you know there is not any Creature but is a Souldier to the Lord of Hosts. He doth sometimes muster up an Army of Lice and Flies; and therefore 'tis but reason that his Providence should take care for such things also: why should it not be as great an argument of his Power to preserve and order these lesser Creatures, as it was at first to make them? The Creation of a glorious Angel did not cost him more than that of a despicable Fly. Was it not He that out of the same pri∣mitive nothing put that difference which there is amongst several na∣tures? And if the Painter in the same Piece draw a silken and a woollen garment, why should he value the one above the other, since it was the same Art that did. both make and distinguish them?
2. As his Providence doth extend Reas. 2. to all things, so likewise does his Wis∣dom. As he is exactly careful, so is he infinitely wise; and therefore as able for the contrivance of every the the least particular thing, as he would be if he had nothing but that to look after. If the Providence o God had but one project on foot, we could easi∣ly conceive how he might be able to drive that through all the windings and circumstances of it, with care and wisdom. Nay, we would trust any wise man with the managing of a single business, when he had nothing else to distract his endeavours: But for all those multitude of affairs amongst Men and Angels; nay, for the very circumstances and manner of all those several actions and mo∣tions which are performed in every moment of time through the whole World; we cannot conceive but that in such a tumult of business the eye of Providence may be sometimes overseen. But this arises from our mistake of the Divine Nature; we
measure God by our own finite abi∣lities; whereas we should consider, that that which is infinite, cannot be confined by Time, or Number, or Place; but is as well able at all times to look to all things, in all places, as if there were only one business to be cared for. You may see some imper∣fect resemblance of this amongst the Creatures. Do but consider the Sun, how that at the same time, without labour or confusion, it is employed in divers services for all the Creatures under Heaven; the distinctions of Seasons, the growth of several Plants, its various influence upon Minerals, the cherishing of living Creatures, with sundry other such variety of employments, which we are not able so much as to take notice of. Or else, do but mark the nature of the Soul, which at the same time perhaps doth contemplate Heaven, direct the body in its sundry motions, distribute the food in a wise proportion to the se∣veral parts, not neglecting so much as the least hair about it, but supplying
that with suitable nourishment. And all this it does without weariness or distraction. And if a Creature can do thus, much more then the Crea∣tor, who gives to every thing its pro∣per ability, and doth actuate all things by a more immediate assistance than the Soul it self. So that though we suppose infinite occasions, (which notwithstanding Creatures are not capable of) yet the Providence and Wisdom of God is infinite also; and there is the same proportion of in∣finite to infinite, as of one to one Now put both these Reasons to∣gether: If the Providence of God be thus exactly careful of every the least particular; if he be thus in∣finitely wise for the disposal of all to the best; no wonder then, though every Event in the World be both beautiful, and in its time. For the further clearing of this Vindica∣tion from Doubts and Ob∣jections. Truth, there are two Doubts or Que∣ries to be resolved, that seem to op∣pose it.
1. What's the reason why this Beau∣ty of Providence doth not appear to us; but that many things seem so full of disorder and confusion in the World? 2. How may this consist with the the permission of sinful actions, which can neither be beautiful nor seasona∣ble? I begin with the first, to shew the reason why in so many things we can∣not discern this Beauty of Providence. The verse of the Text tells us, That man cannot find out the work of God from the beginning to the end: That is, 'tis above humane capacity to comprehend the reason of all Divine proceedings; we cannot find them fully out from the beginning to the end, And so Job. 9. 10. He doth great things past finding out. Lo, he goeth by me, and I see him not: He passeth on also, but I perceive him not. And again, Chap. 23. 8, 9. Behold, I go forward, but he is not there; and backward, but I cannot perceive him: on the left hand where he doth work,
but I cannot hehold him; he hideth himself on the right hand, that I can∣not see him. The meaning is, that where ever Job turned his eyes, there were still some passages of Providence which he could not apprehend the meaning of. God hath reserved this as a peculiar prerogative to himself. It is not for us to know the times and the sasons which the Father hath put in his own power, Acts. 1. 7. There may be a two-fold reason of this: 1. The obscurity of the things themselves. There are treasures of wisdom. Col. 2. 3. not only for their preciousnes, but for their privateness too; hiddn wisdom: 2 Cor. 1. 7. se∣crets of wisdom: and these are double to that which is (as Zophar speaks), Job 11. 6. That is, those concealed Providences which we do not discern the reason of, are of much greater proportion than those that appear. We read in that fore-cited place, Ezek. 1, 16. of a wheel within a wheel, signifying those involutions and in∣tricacies
which there are in the ways of Providence. And the Psalmist tells us, that His way is in the sea, and his paths in the great waters: and his foot steps are not known. Psal. 77. 19. As it is in the works of Nature, where there are many common things of excellent beauty, which for their littleness do not fall under our sense: they that have experimented the use of Microscopes, can tell, how in the parts of the most minute creatures there may be discerned such gildings and embroideries, and such curious variety as another would scarce be∣lieve. Why, 'tis so in the works of Providence; there are very many passages of frequent daily occurrence, whose excellent contrivance doth not fall under our sense or observa∣tion. 2. Our own ignorance and short∣sightedness; and that in a two-fold re∣spect: 1. We cannot see that end and drift which Providence aims at in many
particulars; and therefore no won∣der though they seem unto us rude and uncomely. We measure things by this false balance of Opinion, which weighs only their outsides, and doth not look upon their ends and relati∣ons. Now the beauty of things doth consist much in their tendency and re∣ference to their proper ends. If an ignorant man that knows not the rea∣son of a Wind-Mill or Water-Mill should look upon them only as places of habitation, he cannot think them well situated, where they are so much exposed to the violence of winds and waves; whereas he that understands how the wisdom of the Artificer hath contrived those motions unto useful ends▪ must needs confess a beauty and comeliness in the work. 'Tis so like∣wise in the events of Providence, which none can rightly apprehend, but he that understands the special drift and purposes which they are de∣signed to. 2. We cannot see the whole frame of things, how sundry particular Events,
in a mutual relation, do concur to make up the beauty of the whole. He that can discern only two or three wheels in a Clock, how they move one against another, would pre∣sently think, that there were contra∣riety and confusion in the work. Where∣as he that beholds the whole frame, and discerns how all those divers mo∣tions do jointly conduce to the same end cannot chuse but acknowledg a wise order in the contrivance of it. So likewse is it in the frame of times; where he alone is fit to judg of par∣ticulars, who understands how they rter to the general. But now we are but of yesterday, and know nothing, be∣cause our days upon the earth are as a shadow. (saith Bildad) Job. 8. 9. We look upon things according to a short succession, and so are not able to dis∣cern that beauty which there is in their references to other matters afar off. But nw, to God a thousand years Psa. 90. 4. 2 Pet. 3. 8. is but as one day. He beholds all things, wther past or to come, in the same instant. There is no succession in E∣ternity,
but all things within the reach of time are present unto that. Though in the revolution of a Wheel, there be a mutual succession betwixt the parts contained in it; yet an eye that is placed without, can at the same time discern the whole motion. Thus also is it in the revolution of Time; where, though there be a mu∣tual succession betwixt those things that are contained nder time; yet God, who is without and above it, doth at the same view behold all to∣gether. So that 'tis no wonder, though many things seem beautiful to him, which to us who are so short∣sighted, may appear harsh and desor∣med. 2. The second Quaere was this, If there be such an over-ruiing Provi∣dence which doth dispose of all to the best; How comes it to pass that there are so many sinsul actions in the World? To this I answer two things: 1, When men thwart Gods will of Precept, they serve his will of Pro∣vidence.
Those particular Interests of Gain, Honour, Pleasure, Revenge, which sway mens desires and actions, are wisely contrived to the promo∣ting of Gods Decrees and Glory, When Augustus made the general Tax upon the World, His end was to enrich himself, and fill his Coffers But God used it as a means to fulfil the Prophecy of Christ's birth at Bethlehem. Rehoboam, and Jehu, and Cyrus, had all their several aims in those works wherein they were subservient to Providence. And they did still accomplish his counsel in prosecuting their own designs. 2. That which in repect of man's execution is wicked and disorderly, in respect of God's appointment is beautiful and comely. There could not be any more horrid act, than the betraying and Crucifying of our bles∣sed Saviour; and yet even in this (as it was decreed by the determinate counsel and fore-knowledg of God, Acts 2. 23.) there was the greatest Miracle of Divine Wisdom that ever
was extended to the Creature: such depths of Policy, which all the sub∣tilty of Men and Angels was not a∣ble to contrive, no nor to suspect, , as the Apostle calls it, Eph, 3. 10. Interchangeable wis∣dom of curious variety, as the word signifies. Now if God could thus manage the worst action of man to the best advantage of man, well may we conclude, That every event of Providence is Beautiful in its time. I have now done with the Expli∣cation Applicat. and Confimation of the Text. In the Application it may be useful for these lessons: 1. or Information, and that in a twofold respect: 1. It may teach us our duty to take notice of, and observe the works 1. Use For In∣mation. of Providence. 2. It may direct us what to judg of the affairs of these times under which we are fallen. 1. If all the events of Providence be so wisely contrived, 'tis certainly then our duty to consider and to take
notice of them. Psal. 111. 2. The works of the Lord are great sought out of all them that have pleasure therein. And again, v. 4. He hath so done his marvellous works, that they ought to be had in remembrance. Now a man cannot be said to seek out, or to remember that which he doth not carefully observe. 'Tis the chief scope of that Psalm to excite men unto this duty. And David makes it a note of Piety for men to delight themselves in the contempla∣tion of God's works, to remember Him in his ways, as the Prophet I∣saiah Isa. 65. 4. speaks. This Asaph found by experience to be a special Antidote against all diffidence and carnal fears; in the 77 Psalm when he was sur∣prised with those sad thoughts, Will the Lord cast us off for ever? and will he be no more entreated? Hath God forgotten to be gracious? &c. He presently applies himself to this remedy, v. 11, 12. I will remember the works of the Lord; surely I will remember thy wonders of old: I will
meditate also of thy works, and talk of thy doings, If a man were but well read in the story and various passages of his life, he might be able to make an ex∣perimental Divinity of his own. He that is observant of Gods former dealings and dispensations towards him, may be thence furnished with a rich treasury of experience against all future conditions. There are very many duties that depend upon a right understanding of the times. A man knows not how to order his prayer and praises, with∣out some observation and skill in these. It was a great commendation which was given to the men of Issa∣char, that they had under standing in the times to know what Israel ought to do, 1 Chron. 12. 32. and the ig∣norance of these the Wise-man com∣plains of, as being a very great evil, Ecles. 9. 12. For man knoweth not his time; but as fishes are taken in an evil net, and as birds are caught in the snare: so are the sons of men
nared in an evil time, when it falls suddenly upon them. Now this observance of Gods works and dispensations, is a duty always seasonable, but more especi∣ally in such times as these. 'Tis com∣monly observed, that though smooth and peaceable times are best for the Liver, the man that lives in them; yet times that are full of change and vicissitude, are best for the Wer, the Historian that writes of them: so though quiet seasons may best suit with our desires and outward con∣dition; yet these disturbed, confused times, may be the best improved by observation, and do most set forth the wisdom of Providence. The Common Providence of God in the various seasons and order of Nature, may afford excellent matter for contemplation; much more that special Providence of his in the gui∣dance of humane affairs, which have been always managed with various wisdom.
But especially in his dispensations towards these latter ages, wherein there have been many new, unusual emergencies, such as our forefathers have not known. How many strange observable pas∣sages may a considering man pick out amongst the affairs of these few last years? How strangely hath the whole course of things both in Churh and State, been turned about, beyond all mens imaginations? How hath God in every respect, and on all sides, pusled the wisdom of the wise, and enfeebled the strength of the mighty, abating the glory of all hu∣mane power, lifting himself up above others, in those things wherein they dealt most proudly, effecting great matters by despised means! What strange ebbs and flows of hope have we known? When men have been most full of confidence, then some unexpected accident hath ntervened, and disappointed all: so that the wisest men have been often put to stand at a gaze, not knowing what to
judg of the issue of things: And (though we have not had leisure to observe it, yet) there has been some∣thing equivalent to this in other Na∣tions; the whole Christian world being generally full of strange Commotions. Now we may certainly conclude, That all these unusual turns and changes of things, are not for nothing. There is some great design to be accomplished by them; 'tis our duty with dili∣gence to observe the passages, and with patience to attend the issue. 2. This may direct us what to judg of the present times under which we are fallen. If it be so that every particular Event is so ex∣actly regular and beautiful; hence then we may infer, how all that con∣fusion and disorder which seem to be in the affairs of these times is not so much in the things themselves, as in our mistake of them. The Roughest seasons (though they may be unsuitable to our desires) yet have in them a proper comeliness as well as times of the greatest serenity.
True indeed, the Scripture doth sometimes mention evil days; but Eph. 5. 16. this is not so to be understood, as if Time in it self could be evil, either naturally, for so God pronounceth it good; or morally, because 'tis not subjected to any Moral Rule; but only accidentally, in respect of our mistake and abuse of it; when ei∣ther we judg of it according to our own wishes, or mispend it according to our own lusts. 'Tis only unwise, 2 Tim. 3. 1, 2. unholy men, that make unhappy times. As in the works of Creation, no∣thing is properly deformed, but eve∣ry thing hath a peculiar beauty, ac∣cording to that rank and station wherein 'tis placed: though in vul∣gar speech we use to call a Toad and a Serpent ugly; yet that is only in reference to common esteem: where∣as in respect of the Universe they are as regular and comely parts as any of the rest; their outward shapes being suitable to their inward forms, and those purposes for which they
are intended. So it is likewise in the ways of Providence; those designs that in respect of our apprehensions are carried on by a cryptical invol∣ved method, are yet in themselves of as excellent contrivance, as any of those that seem to be of more facil and perspicuous order. If a man in these times shall with his reason consult only the outward face of things they must needs seem full of irregularities and disorder; when the spirits of men in the pro∣secution of the same ends, and the pretence of publick welfare, shall be imbittered against one another, even to publick ruin: when there is a vi∣olent Eccl. 5. 8. perverting of judgment and ju∣stice in a Nation, and on the side of the oppressor is might: but the op∣pressed Chap. 4. 1. have none to comfort them. When there is a total subversion of those degrees in which the order and harmony of things doth confist, Ser∣vants being on horses, & Princes walk∣ing as Eccl. 10. 7 servants on the earth: When Job 9. 5, 6. the mountains are removed, and pil∣lars
of the earth tremble. When Re∣ligion and Laws (which are the foun∣dation of a People) are out of Psal. 11. 6. course. And yet even in all this, there may be a design of Providence for our good. This is certain, All God's Promises to his Church are infallibly true, and all his dispensations (though never so cross in outward appea∣rance) have a tendency towards the fulfilling of those Promises. And why should not a man rest himself in this belief? In our natural enquiries after the efficient cause of things, when our Reason is at a stand, we are fain sometimes to sit down, and satisfie our selves in the notion of occult qualities; and therefore much more should we be content to be ignorant in the final cause of things, which lye more deep and obscure than the other. Let no man then presume to cen∣sure the several vicissitudes and chan∣ges of things, as if they were unsea∣sonable
and ill contrived. Remem∣ber we are but short-sighted, and cannot discern the various reserences and dependences amongst the great affairs in the world, and therefore may be easily mistaken in our opi∣nion of them. We do in this world (for the most part) see only the dark side of Providence. At the last and great day of manifestation, when the whole plot of Divine Love shall be laid open, then we shall be able to discern the Beauty of Providence in all the rugged passages of it; how tribulation, distress, persecution, fa∣mine, nakedness, peril, and the sword, Rom. 8. 28. 35. do all work for the best to those that love God. Judg nothing therefore before its time, 1 Cor. 4. 5. Consider, we can∣not see the works of God from the beginning to the end. And you know there is a vast difference betwixt the beginning and the end of a building. It may be our lots perhaps in these times to see only the beginning of the Fabrick; when the old frame is
demolished, the rubbish lies scattered about, the new materials being ga∣thered into heaps. Posterity per∣haps may see the end of it, when all these confused preparations shall be made up into a beautiful struc∣ture. 2. This may serve for reproof of Use 2. For Re∣proof. two sorts of persons. 1. Those that do not observe or regard the works of the Lord. 2. Those that murmur and repine at them. 1. This may reprove those that do not observe or regard the works of the Lord. 'Tis a great argument of infidelity and irreligion, when men let many remarkable Providences pass by them without notice or ob∣servation: or when they look upon them only in a slight and superficial manner, like those whom the Pro∣phet Isaiah complains of, Seeing ma∣ny Isa. 42. 20. things but observing not. This sin of Inadvertency of God's various Providences, hath been often∣times severely threatned and punished
in Scripture, Isa. 5. 12. Because they regard not the work of the Lord, nor consider the operation of his hands, therefore is my people gone in∣to captivity. And again, Jer. 12. 11. The whole land is made desolate, be∣cause no man layeth it to heart. The heaviest Judgments that can befal a Nation, are Captivity and Desolation. And yet they are both denounced against this stupidity and carelesness of Spirit. And you may guess at the hainousness of the sin, by the greatness of the punish∣ment. 'Tis a sin, that is after a more e∣special manner appropriated to wic∣ked men. Psal. 10. 4, 5. The wicked through the pride of his countenance, will not seek after God: God is not in all his thoughts. Thy judgments are far above, out of his sight. Things that he never enquires after, or re∣gards, as if he were not at all con∣cern'd in them. Quae supra nos ni∣hil ad nos: He looks no further than second Causes, unto which he
ascribes the success or miscarriage of Events; and doth not take notice of that Divine Providence, by whose influence they are guided. You see this is made the note of wicked men. And therefore, as we would avoid that censure, so still it concerns us to avoid the sin. 2. This may serve for the reproof of those that murmour and repine at the works of Providence, that take upon them the Magisterial judg∣ment of events; as if they could tell how to frame things much bet∣ter, and to contrive the issue of things to greater advantage. How ordina∣ry is it for men to discourse thus concerning the great changes of these times? as if the unsearchable ways of God were to be judged before the Tribunal of Humane Reason: Who art thou O man that Disputest with God (saith the Apostle)? How despicable, in comparison to His In∣finite Majesty and Wisdom? If there be a Commonwealth amongst Ants and Bees (as some Naturalists say
there is), 'twould make a man smile to think, that they should take u∣pon them the censure of State-mat∣ters amongst us men: and yet here the disproportion it finite; whereas betwixt God and man 'tis infinite: As the Heavens are higher than the earth, so are my thoughts higher than Is. 55. 8, 9. your thoughts, and my ways than your ways. He that will take upon him to mend the contrivance of things, let him remember (says one of the Sto∣icks) that the first thing he is to do, is to mend God, to teach him wisdom Epictetus. and care. And if he shall think him∣self unfit for that, let him not pre∣sume upon this. For consider, is not the Providence of God exactly care∣ful of every thing? Is not he infi∣nitely wise, to dispose of all to the best? Are not all things subservient to His will? Why certainly then, (however matters may appear to us) yet nothing could have been better than it is. every thing shall prove or the best, in respect of His Glory,
and (if we belong to Him) in re∣spect of our good too. 'Tis an observable check which Solomon gives to such presumptuous persons as are apt to repine at and censure the course of things, Eccl. 7. 10. Say not thou, What is the cause why the former days were better than these? for thou dost not en∣quire wisely concerning concerning this. It should seem, that those flourishing days of Solomon, so very eminent for all kind of plenty and peace (Silver being in Jerusalem as stones, and Cedars as the Sycamore 2 Kings 20. 5. in the vale for abundance), were not yet without some morose repining spirits, who were still maligning the present condition of things; and therefore no wonder if we find the like humour among men in other times. This the wise man doth here re∣prove, both by a prohibition and a reason. 1. A Prohibition, Say not thou, What is the cause why the former
days were better than these? that is, Be not transported with that com∣mon humour of censuring and con∣demning the state of times, and com∣mending the times past; as if the course of Events were not managed by the same wise Providence now, which governed the world before, He doth not forbid men to enquire after the cause of publick sufferings: For this is frequently enjoined in Scriptue, that upon the occasion of any special judgment, we should search and try our hearts, consider our ways, and our doings, labouring to find out the cause of Gods dis∣pleasure, that we may accordingly meet him in his ways. But the mean∣ing is, that we should not take upon us the premptory censure of times and dispensations, presuming to con∣demn those things which we cannot understand. 2. The Reason. For thou dost not enquire wisely concerning this thing. That's a figurative expression, stiled a Meiosis, when a phrase signifies
much more than the naked words do import. The meaning is, 'tis extream folly for men to take upon them the censure of Times and Providences, as if they were competent Judges of such matters. There are two places of Scripture that will make up a Syllogism to prove this Conclusion. He that judgeth of a matter before he hath enquired into, and understands it, it is folly and shame unto him, Prov. 18. 13. But now, It doth not belong unto us to know the times & the seasons which the Father hath kept in his power, Act. 17. And therefore it must needs be folly to take upon us the Magisterial censure of such things. Every day hath its proper evil, as well the former as these; and e∣very Mat. 6. 34. doy hath its proper advantage, as well these as the former. The very dregs of time, if we endea∣vour to make a right use of them, Eph. 5. 16. may be redeemed into opportunity. There are two reasons of mens of∣fending in this kind:
1. When they look only upon some partlculars, without the consideration of their proper end, or general frame. Now 'tis true indeed, that some par∣ticular Events, singly looked upon, may seem very prejudicial; but the whole contexture of affairs in their co-operation, shall prove for the best. All things shall work together  for good to those that love God, Rom. 8. 28. But now 'tis above our capacity to comprehend the whole frame of things: And that is not disorder in respect of the whole which to us may appear so, being compared with some particulars. You know, that in the natural body the variety and dissimi∣litude of parts, is required to the beauty of the whole; the roundness of the head, the length of the arm, the flatness of the hand; blackness in one part, and whiteness in another; all these being singly compared a∣mongst themselves, though they may seem to argue some opposition and de∣formity, yet look upn them as they
stand in relation to the whole frame, and it will appear how in their se∣veral ways they do each of them conduce to its comeliness and order. If this lower World had in it no chan∣ges and varieties, but were in all res∣pects alike, it would not then be so properly , a beautiful World, as , a Lump or Mass. 2. Another occasion of mens offend∣ing in this kind, is, when they will judg of Events according as they suit with their own wishes. And in this case, 'tis impossible that every hu∣mor should be satisfied, because par∣ticular desires (besides their opposi∣tion to one another) will likewise be inconsistent with the general design. It would seem better perhaps to every private man, if he himself were a Magistrate; or a King; and every common Soldier a Commander, or a General. But how could this consist with the exigencies of the Common∣wealth, or an Army, where their must be degrees, and disproportion of pla∣ces, according to the necessity of se∣veral
employments? 'Tis so in the go∣vernment of this great Universe: that difference which their is betwixt par∣ticular things, and times, and persons, doth much conduce to the beauty and conveniency of the whole. 'Tis our safest way then to conclude, that all matters are for the best, beau∣tiful in their times, though to us they may seem full of disorder and contra∣riety. Thus the Apostle in that remar∣kable place, Rom. 11, 33. speaking con∣cerning the rejection of the Jews, when God would cast off and destroy his peculiar people, and that for his own glory and advantage; he concludes, His judgments unsearchable, and his ways past finding out: But of him, and to him are all things: as if he should have said, God will do this strange work; and though for my part I know not the reason of it, His judgments are unsearchable, &c. yet sure I am, that of him and to him are all things; that, is as the making of all things was of his power, so the re∣solution of all things should be to his glory.
Though his judgments are as the great deep, for their obscurity and unmeasurableness, not to be fathomed by our shallow apprehensions, yet his righteousness is as the strong mountains, for their eminency and stableness, Psal. 36. 6. Though clouds and dark∣ness may be round about him, yet righ∣teousness and judgment are the habi∣tation of his throne, Psal. 97. 2. Use 3. For Ex∣hortation 3. This may serve for Exhorta∣tion, to perswade us unto these four duties. 1. Not to be too hasty in our desire or prosecution of any thing. 2. Nor to trouble our selves with any solicitous care about the success of things. 3. To be equally prepared for all future Events. 4. To behave our selves with careful∣ness and contentment in all conditi∣ons. 1. Hence we learn, Not to be too hasty in our desire or prosecution of any thing. God best knows the fit∣est season for every Event; we shall
have it when its time is come; and before that, 'twould not be beautiful: Like Snow in Harvest (as the Wise Prov. 25. 13. man speaks) which though it might possibly be some refreshment to our particular, yet would be a deformity in the course of Nature. There are some men whom the Pro∣phet stiles of a hasty heart,  Transla∣ted Fear∣ful. Isa. 35. 4. who are too heady and impatient in their hopes. And it is a weakness that arises from our infide∣lity and distrust of Providence. For he that believeth, maketh no hast, Chap. 28. 16. 'Tis God's usual course to defer what he promises, thereby to ex∣ercise our faith, to put an edg on our desires, and a value upon the blessing. In natural affairs, we are fain to expect the proper season and maturity of things; the Husbandman will wait for his Harvest; he doth not expect to sow and reap both in a day. It should be so likewise in other matters. And since that is always the fittest time for every thing which God ap∣points, it will become us then pa∣tiently
to wait his leisure, and not with over-hasty desires to run before him. Abraham was fain to tarry a long time for a Son, David for a Kingdom, and the whole World for Christ. He that rightly understands the worth of any blessing, and his own want, can∣not think much to wait for it. The poor man, at the Pool of Bethesda, being sensible of his own lameness, was content to tarry there thirty eight years in hopes of a remedy. Suppose a Promise were deferred to the ut∣most, yet do but compare the short∣ness of our lives with the duration of our souls, and then no delay can seem tedious. Ne{que} enim est aliquid in tam brevibus vitae metis ita serum, quod longum expectare immortalis pu∣tet Boetius Consol. l. 4 animus. A man conscious to him∣self of his own mortality, cannot think any time long which is con∣fined within the narrow bounds of life. Is there then any mercy which thou expectest? Do not over-rashly
hasten it with any indirect project, as if thou wert able to help the Provi∣dence of God with wiles and devices of thine own. Though it be long in coming, yet it will come at last; it cannot be more slow than sure. When Isaac was laid upon the Alter, and bound for a Sacrifice, and his Father's hand lift up for the fatal blow, yet then there came a rescue from Hea∣ven, which would not have been so beautiful, if by any unlawful act it had been hastened before that time, either by Abraham's sparing his Son, or Isaac's resisting his Father. Joseph did undergo a tedious im∣prisonment in the Land of Egypt; 'tis likely, being the Key-keeper, he might have taken his own time, and have scaped when he would; but then he had lost his preferment: where∣as by tarrying God's leisure, he was delivered with advantage. Though David had been a long while anointed to a Kingdom, yet because he did not use any hasty means for the en∣joying of it, therefore did Providence
clear the Passage for him, and prospe∣red it to him afterwards. He might have killed Saul in the Cave, and Ab∣ner 1. Sam. 24 11. 26. 17. too, when he found them sleeping; but then he had been over-hasty; 'twere better they should fall by their Enemies. The Lord shall smite them when their day shall come to dye, 1. Sam. 26. 10. And before that, 'twould be but rashness to attempt it. And so likewise when he stopt himself in his haste after Nabal's life, you know within a while after God took him a∣way by his own immediate hand, and gave both his Wife and Estate to Da∣vid. An over-forwardness in the hasten∣ing of our hopes, is the ready way to imbitter them unto us. You know how much trouble and contention there grew from that hasty act of Sa∣rah, when in her mistrust of the Pro∣mise, and fear of being childless, she must needs give Hagar, to Abra∣ham. So likewise for Jacob's too much haste in getting the blessing by a
wrong means, you know it cost him afterwards many dangers, and a te∣dious exile. Whereas if he had tar∣ried longer, God would have brought it about for him by a more easie and beautiful way. Gods time is the best; and he ne∣ver fails his own season: I the Lord will hasten it in its time, Isa. 60. 22. For us to measure the fitness of seasons by our own weak apprehensions, is not this to set the Sun by our Dial? we are too short-sighted, apt to an∣tedate the Promises. The Lord will arise, and have mercy upon Sion, when the time to favour her, yea, when the set-time is come. Psal. 102, 13. 2. Hence we learn, Not to trouble our selves with any solicitous care a∣bout the success of things. To serve Providence in the usual means, that is our work; but the issue and event of things, that's God's work, we have nothing to do in it. That which is not under our power, should not be under our care. If there be nothing at our disposal, but that all Events do Ver. 9.
depend  upon an higher Provi∣dence, 'twere but a vain thing than to busie our selves with hopes and fears about them. Much of the disquiet∣ness amongst men in the world, arises from hence, that they busie themselves about God's work, and neglect their own. Is there then an evil thou fearest? why, 'tis not in the power of any crea∣ture to hurt thee. Though men should use plots and threats against thee, yet they can do nothing. They sate together, and counselled against Da∣vid, devising to take away his life, Psal. 31. 13. But what was his com∣fort? why, saith he, v. 15. My times are in thy hands, O Lord. He knew that no ill sccess towards him was in the power of others. Or is there an evil thou feelest? why, it comes from the hand of God. Be not then impatient. 'Tis but a child∣ish currish thing to beat the rod or bite the stone that hurt thee. David could quietly vndergo the railing of Shimei, when once he had discer∣ned
in it the Providence of God. Or is there a good thou hopest for? why, it is not within the reach of thy abilities. And therefore 'twere but in vain to think thou couldst command it by thine own endeavours. We would count it a mad thing for one that is naturally low, to busie himself in the study & labour of growing tall, because this is not alterable by any thing in our power; since no man can Eccl. 9. 11. add one cuhit to his stature. Why, 'tis so in other things likewise; God doth as well set bounds to our estates, as to our statures; and of our selves we can as little add one penny to that as one cubit to this. And there∣fore, never let any one think that he can raise himself as he pleases, and be the Master of his own Fortunes. Though he were furnished with the greatest helps and probabilities of advancement; yet the battle is not always to the strong, nor the race to the swift; neither bread to the wise, nor yet riches to men of understan∣ding, nor yet fauour to men of skill;
but time and chance happen to them all, That is, there is a secret Pro∣vidence, which doth so unavoidably dispose of these lower Events, that the likeliest means we can use, can∣not promise us any certain success. They that with a compass-wisdom will delay Events, that with fore∣casts and provisions will bind Provi∣dence; for the most part, are not only disappointed in what they ho∣ped for, but do meet with a curse instead of it. See that place, Isa. 50, 11. Behold all ye that kindle a fire, that compass your selves about with sparks, walk in the light of your fire, and in the sparks that you have kind∣led; this shall you have of my hands, you shall lye down in sorrow. 3. Hence we learn to be equally prepared for all future Events, not wishing for one more than another. Whatever comes to pass shall be beautiful, and therefore should be welcom. All things that befall us, shall lead us on to the same Jour∣ney's end, Happiness. And there∣fore
we should not in our expectati∣on of future matters, engage our selves in the desire of any particular success; but with a Traveller's in∣differency (as Epictetus speaks in Disp. 1. 4. c. 7. Arian) who when he comes to doubtful turnings, doth not desire one way should be true more than another. So should we entertain every thing that we meet with in our passage through this life; espe∣cially since we are sure that there is none of them but (if we belong to God) shall further us in that which is our main business, our journey to Happiness. And therefore to be very solicitous about any particular success, what is it but to limit and confine the power of God? nay, to prefer our own po∣licy before the wisdom of Providence; as if we alone were able to discern what would be the best issue of things; Mark how the same Heathen bespeaks such a person: Thou fool∣ish man (saith he) dost thou not de∣sire that which will be most conve∣nient
for thee? And can there be any thing better than what God ap∣points? . Wherefore by such immoderate and eager de∣sires, thou dost as much as in thee lies to corrupt the Judg, and seduce the Counsellor. The Stoicks have many excellent passages to this purpose: Nunquam sapientem poenitentiae subit (saith Se∣neca) De benef. lib. 4. 34. quia nihil melius illo tempore fieri potuit quam quod factum est. A wise man is never troubled at any cross Event; he knows nothing could have been better than it is. Omnia illi succedunt; nihil preter opinionem accidit. All things are successful to him, he is disappointed in nothing, because indifferent to every thing. Whilst others are tossed up and down betwixt hopes and fears, his mind is established. Now if meer Reason could ad∣vance Heathen men to such resoluti∣ons, much more than should a Chri∣stian's Faith in the Providence of
God, with those many Promises wherein he hath an interest, raise his mind to this Heroick temper, and make him bend himself with a sub∣missive compliance unto every con∣dition. Obj. But what then, may not a Object. man (nay, should he not) be very earnest in his desires and prayers, for some particular deliverance or blessing? I answer, Yes. But in all temporal Sol. matters, it must be still with a tacit submission to the will of God, who knows better what is fit for us, than we do our selves. See the example of David to this purpose, 1 Sam. 15. 25. He was there put to a very great exigence, his Son Absolom had sud∣denly raised a great Army against him, insomuch as he was fain to fly for his life: There were some of the Priests adhered to him, and follow∣ed him with the Ark; but he, upon serious thoughts, desires them to re∣turn
again: For (saith he) if I shall find favour in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me again, and shew me both it, and his habitation. But if he thus say unto me, I have no delight in thee; behold here I am, let him do to me as seemeth good unto him. Here's no deep anxiety or aestuation of Spirit, no bitter exclaiming against his unnatural Son, and difloyal Sub∣jects; but quiet succumbency, an in∣different composure of mind, which resolves to be content in every con∣dition. He puts the case both ways, and is provided for either. If it prove after this manner, why then so; if otherwise, then thus. So true is that common Emblem, That eve∣ry wise man is a Cube or Dye, not to be flung from his bottom. Let him be cast any way, he still lights upon his right basis; whatever his condi∣tion may be, Si fractus illabatur or∣bis, yet his mind is still calm and peaceable.
Obj. But would you have a man Object. turn Stoick? should he not be trou∣bled at the afflictions that befall him? Sol. I answer: Yes: He must be Sol. sensible of his sufferings, and conse∣quently cannot but grieve under them, especially so far as his own sin and neglect hath oceasioned them. But then it should be his care to quiet his heart from immoderate trouble, by the consideration of that wise Providence, who doth dispose of all for the best. 4. Lastly, Hence we learn, To behave our selves with cheerfulness and contentment under all those con∣ditions which the Providence of God shall think fittest for us. 'Tis the Wise-man's own inference from the Text in the Verses immediately af∣ter it: There is nothing better, than for a man to rejoyce, and do good in V. 12, 13. his life; that he should eat and drink, and enjoy the good of his labour. For
if every thing be best which God ap∣points, Aequin est ut ho mini pla∣ceat, quic∣quid placet Do. we have no reason then to be troubled at any Event. What though it do cross our desires, yet 'twould not have been so well, as if it had been otherwise. Things can∣not be better with us than they are. David thought it a hard case, that that his Child by Bathsheba must dye. But did he lose any thing by it? Was it not better for him to have such a legitimate Heir as Solo∣mon was? We are but ill contrivers of our own welfare, and therfore should without murmuring submit our selves and affairs to the govern∣ment of Providence. What though that do straiten us in our desires? you are content to let the Physician bar you of many things, because he hath cast your water, felt your pulse. Consider then, doth it not as much concern us to provide for the salva∣tion of our Souls, as the health of our Bodies? or doth not God under∣stand this, as well as the Physician that? What reason have we then to
repine at his proceedings? He was a wise Son in Plutarch, who being told by a freind that his Father would dis∣inherit him, answered, Non faciet nisi faciendum: He will do nothing but what he should. Thus should a Christian willingly resign up himself in every condition, to the disposal of Providence. Do but apply this Consideration according to the several occasions of your lives. When your hearts are at any times amazed or dejected with the thought of the publick confusi∣ons; remember, that God sits in Heaven, observing and ordering all these inferiour motions for the best. And so too in the case of parti∣cular sufferings, 'tis likely that there is not any amongst you, but hath some kind of private trouble and grievance to which he is more espe∣cially exposed; either weakness of body, or too narrow a fortune, losses in your estates, disappointment in your hopes, unhappy relations, or the like. And these things, as we
are men, cannot chuse but grate u∣pon our spirits with some kind of harshness and discontent. But now as believers, we have a remedy a∣gainst them. For consider, there is nothing befalls us by chance. All things are ordered by the deli∣berate counsel and fore-knowledg of God. He is as exactly careful of every one of us, as if he had nothing else to look after. Do not thinkthat any trouble befals you, because he doth not regard; for his Care and Provi∣dence doth extend to all things: nor because he cannot help; for He is Al∣mighty: nor because he doth not re∣gard; for He is equally infinite in all his Attributes: But because his Wisdom finds that condition to be fittest for thee: there is something amiss which should be mended. When the su∣perfluous humour is corrected, the Physical Potion shall be taken away. And 'tis not reasonable to expect Physick and Health both together. When the wound is healed, the smart∣ing-plaster shall be removed. And
thou mayest confidently say With David, Psal. 119. 75. I know O Lord, that thy judgments are right, and that thou in faithfulness hast afflicted me. How happy might we be, if we could settle our hearts upon these Considerations. FINIS.
