w2408 99830486 34938
His Majesties MOST GRACIOUS SPEECH To both Houses of PARLIAMENT, On Tuesday the Twentieth Day of October, 1696. LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb, deceas'd, Printers to the Kings most Excel∣lent Majesty. 1696.
His Majesties MOST GRACIOUS SPEECH To both HOUSES of PARLIAMENT. My Lords and Gentlemen, I Have Call'd you together as soon as was possible and I Think it a great Hap∣piness that this Year has pass'd without any Disadvantage Abroad, or Disorder at Home, Considering Our great Disap∣pointment in the Foods Given at your last Meeting, and the Difficulties which have arisen upon the Recoining of the Money. This is so convincing a Proof of the good Disposition of My Army, and of the dy Affections of My People, that I cannot but take No∣  it with great Satisfaction. Our Enemies have not been without Hopes, that such a Con∣  might have prov'd Fatal to Us; but as they have failed  Expectations, so I am fully perswaded, that your Unani∣ proceedings in this Session, will make them for ever Despair  Advantage from any Disagreement among Our Selves. It must be confess'd, that the Business which you have before you will be very Great, because of the Necessity of Supplying former Defi, as well as making Provisions for the next Years Service.
And upon this Occasion, it is fit for Me to Acquaint you, that some Overtures have been made, in order to the Entring upon Negotiation for a General Peace: But I am sure We shall all agree in Opinion, That the only way of Treating with France is with Our Swords in Our Hands; and that We can have no Reason to expect a Safe and Honourable Peace, but shewing Our Selves prepar'd to made  Vigorous and Effectual War. In Order to which, I do very earnestly recommend to you, Gen∣tlemen of the House of Commons. That you would consider of Raising the Necessary Supplies, as well for Maintaining the Honour of Parliaments, in making good the Fonds already Granted, as for Carrying on The War the next year; which I think ought not to be less than what was intended to be Raised for that purpose the last Session. I must also put you in mind of the Civil List, which cannot be Supported without your Help; and the Miserable Condition of the French Protestants does oblige Me to mention them to you again. My Lords and Gentlemen, It may deserve your Consideration, whether there do not still remain some Inconveniencies relating to the Coin, which ought to be Remedied. And I hope you'll find out the best Expedients for the Recovery of Credit, which is absolutely Necessary, not only with Respect to the War, but for Carrying on of Trade. I am of Opinion, that there is not one good English Man, who is not intirely convinc'd, how much does depend upon this Ses∣sion: and therefore I cannot but hope for your Unanimity and Dispatch in your Resolutions; which at this time are more ne∣cessary than ever, for the Safety and Honour of England. FINIS.
