W2581 19525211 108966
By the King and Queen, A PROCLAMATION For a Publick THANKSGIVING. WILLIAM R. WHereas Their Majesties having a deep and serious Consideration of the War in which they (together with most of the Princes and States of Europe) were and still are Engaged against the French King, did by Their Royal Proclamation bearing date the Tenth day of May last; as also by another Proclamation bearing date the Sixteenth day of August last, appoint Two General Fasts to be kept throughout this Kingdom, for Imploring the Blessing and Protection of Almighty God in the Preser∣vation of Their Majesties Sacred Persons, and Prosperity of Their Arms both at Land and Sea, which have been Observed accordingly. And forasmuch as it hath pleased Almighty God of His infinite Goodness, in Answer to the Prayers humble and devoutly of offered up to Him, to pre∣serve Their Majesties and Their Government, against the Designs and Attempts of Their Open and Secret Enemies, and to Protect His Ma∣jesties Person from the Danger to which He was Exposed in His late Expedition beyond the Seas, and to Grant such Success to His Majesties Arms both at Sea and Land, and to the Forces of the Confederate Princes and States in several Parts of Europe, as to put a considerable Stop to the Rage and Fury of the Enemy, and to bring Him back in Safety to this Kingdom: Their Majesties therefore Adoring the Divine Goodness, and duly considering, That such Great and Publick Bles∣sings do call for Publick and Solemn Acknowledgments, Have thought fit, and (with the Advice of Their Privy Council) do hereby Appoint and Command, That a General Thanksgiving to Al∣mighty God for these His Mercies be Observed throughout Our Cities of London and Westminster, and elsewhere within the Weékly Bills of Mortality, on Sunday the Second day of December next: And in all other Places throughout this Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick up∣on Tweed, on Sunday the Sixteénth day of December ensuing. And for the better and more orderly So∣lemnizing of the same, Their Majesties have given Directions to the most Reverend Arch-Bishops, and Right Reverend Bishops of this Kingdom, to Compose a Form of Prayer suitable to this Occa∣sion, to be Vsed in all Churches and Chappels, and other Places of Publick Worship, and to take Care for the timely dispersing of the same throughout their respective Diocesses. And Their Majesties do strictly Charge and Command, That the said Publick days of Thanksgiving be Religiously Observed by all Their Loving Subjects, as they tender the Favour of Almighty God, and upon Pain of Suf∣fering such Punishment as Their Majesties can justly inflict for the Contempt or Neglect thereof. Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Fifteenth Day of November, 1694. In the Sixth Year of Our Reign. God save King William and Queen Mary. London, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb, deceas'd; Printers to the King and Queens most Excellent Majesties. 1694.
