W59A 19504531 108905
THE LIFE AND DEATH, Of the Eminently Learned, Pious, and Painful Minister of the Gospel, Dr. SAMƲEL WINTER, Sometime Provest of Trinity Colledge near Dublin in Ireland. Together with some Rare Examples of Gods gracious Answer to his Prayers, upon several Occasions. Prov. 10.7. The memory of the Just is blessed: But the Name of the Wicked shall rot. sal. 34.15. The eyes of the Lord are upon the Righteous: and his eares are open to their Cry. LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the sign of the Bible and three Crowns at the lowe end of Cheapside. 1671.
THE EPISTLE TO THE READER. Reader, THou hast here a true Narrative of the Life and Death of that emi∣nent Servant of Jesus Christ, Samuel Winter Doctor in Di∣vinity, who was for seve∣ral years Provest, or Master
of Trinity Colledge near Dublin in Ireland, published at the desire of his sorrow∣ful Widdow, by a Person who had familiar acquain∣tance with him for about twenty years, as well whilst he was Minister of Cotting∣ham, hereafter mentioned, as whilst he was in Ireland, and since his coming over into England, and was pre∣sent with him in the time of his Sickness, and at his Death, who by reason of his long, and familiar Con∣versation with him, is able, and doth testifie to the Truth of most of the latter passages in the ensuing Discourse,
from his own knowledge; which is thought fit to be Published, not so much to adorn the Name, or to per∣fume the memory of the De∣ceased, as to provoke others (especially Ministers of the Gospel) to a serious imi∣tation of him, to the Glory of God; edification of others, and the comfort of their own Souls here, and at the appear∣ing of Jesus Christ; which effect that it may produce, is the earnest Prayer of the pub¦lisher J. W.
Courteous Reader. HOwever I can have no confi∣dence that my commendation, or attestation to the ensuing Narra∣tive, of the Life and Death of so eminent a Servant of God, can con∣tribute any thing to a work that in∣deed needs it not, being so exactly performed by a friend of approved faithfulness, and endeared affection, and so throughly acquainted with him, who is the Subject of it. Yet the desire of the pious and sorrowful Widdow; and the entire love I had to her dear Husband now with God, hath occasioned the following lines; Which Justice to the dead, I hearti∣ly desire may be beneficial to the liv∣ing, as being not only what I had
from persons of integrity, but of the ost part my own certain knowledge. rely the Doctor was a pattern not unworthy his Brethrens imitation; and there is no cause to doubt but that the ensuing Relation may glad the hearts of Gods people, and stir them up to follow the faith of such lights. He was an other Apollos, mighty in the Scriptures, having made them his particular study above forty years together: upon which, is the read many Expositors, so he chiefly studyed the famous Comenta∣ies of judicious and blessed Calvin, whom of all others he most admir∣ed; and I may truly say, his la∣bour was not in vain: for that he attained to a more than ordinary dexterity, not only of knowing the mind of God in his Word in the ge∣neral, but particularly in the most difficult, which he made suffici∣ent proof of, in his opening of the Types and Prophesies, especially the Reve∣lations,
having expounded a great part thereof in his Divinity Lecture in the Colledge of Dublin, whereof also he was Provest. I have of∣ten heard him Preach excellently of the Types, which he admired for their great usefulness in opening ma∣ny difficulties in the New Testament▪ And for the profitable part of Cri∣tical learning, so far as concerne the Hebrew and Creek text of the Bible, he was very well verst in them especially the latter, insomuch tha howsoever his Sermons were for th most part very plain (for in them he sought not his own glory but his Masters, and the profit of his hear∣ers,) The learned and judicious, by his excellent faculty in opening difficult Scriptures, found that in them wherewith they were benefited and delighted. And some to my knowledge, have heartily wished that his Expositions upon select Scrip∣tures which were not ordinary,
had been collected, digested, and published by himself. But his Ge∣ius being more for the Pulpit than he Press, dashed such expectations. e was a most affectionate Preacher; such was his zeal and fervency, that I may safely allude to that of the Apostle, 1 Thess. 2.8. Being af∣fectionatly desirous of you, we were willing to have imparted to you, not the Gospel of God only, but also our Souls, because ye were dear unto us: Such was his longing after the Salvation of poor Sinners. I have heard him often, with trouble, complain of the cold Preaching of some Ministers, as if Christ were still in his Grave. Nor was the Lord wanting to recom∣pence this his labour of Love with a plentiful Harvest, making him a very happy Instrument in the conver∣sion of very many, and in the build∣ing up of many also. And as his Sermons breathed of his affection,
as is said, so they were with power, for he was a Boenarges: so that notorious Sinners, as not able to resist the spirit by which he spake, have been compelled to yield, and to come unto Christ. He made if his first work whereever he came, to humble sinners, therein following the examples of the servants of God in Scripture, and the grave advice given him by Mr. Dod, or Mr. Thomas Hooker, when he was to enter upon a charge where the people were generally Rude and profane, On the other hand, he was of an exceeding tender spirit towards such a were coming on to Christ, or un∣der spiritual trouble for loss of com∣munion with him, that he would even weep over them: an Argument of much grace thus kindly to bleed in the wounds of grieved Saints. And so good was God to him, that as he sound his assistance wonderful in Preaching what he had afore pre∣pared,
so even in very considerable digressions which he would purposely all into. I doubt not from the motion of the spirit of God and his quickness, to observe the frame and need of his hearers, which made him often say, that somtimes a digressi∣on was no Transgression. And I may say to the glory of God, that however he hath not left many Books to perpetuate his memory, yet he hath left many living Saints whom he did beget unto Christ by the Gospel, the most lively Images of the grace of God in him, and in whom though dead he yet speaketh. His dear love to the people and places where God was pleased most signally to seal to his Ministry, deserves to be remembred, whom I have known him to mention with tears of Joy, And indeed he was so set upon the fulfilling of his Ministry, that no∣thing rejoyced him more than an opportunity of Preaching the Gospel.
He would of ten say, that his oppor∣tunities were his riches, and that his heart has been often exceedingly lifted up at the ringing of the Ser∣mon Bell. Nor was he thus desirous to Preach, but as desirous that the word Preached might not slip out of the hearts or memories of such of the hearers as he conversed with, turn∣ing all discourses to what was late∣ly Preached, saying, that as the Bell when it was done ringing leaves a humming behind it, so should Ser∣mons after they are Preached. He was a man mighty in Prayer: he would often say, a man of much Prayer was a man of much grace, and a man of little Prayer, was a a man of little grace. As he was of a melted spirit in Prayer, so he was another Jacob, a great wrestler with God. His Prayers were not only affectionate, but very argumentative. He had a very great excellency in pleading with God from Scripture
Topicks, which he would wonder∣fully improve. And as his communi∣on with God was great, so the Lord did to admiration let out himself  him, not only eminently answer∣ing his prayers, but revealing many secrets to him in and after prayer; some of which for the encouragement and comfort of the Godly Reader I shall here take the liberty to relate. In his younger years he had a Law-Sute with one about a Living he was possessed of, of good value, at last he was about to resign it as being un∣able to withstand so potent an adver∣sary. The people hearing of his reso∣lution, came to him, and besought him that he would not but consider their precious Souls. His tenderness was such that he held on the Sute to the expending of a very great summ of money, and in the end was over∣come. His then Wife was much cast down for that so great a part of their estate was spent in that Sute;
whereupon being abroad one day, h besought the Lord exceeding earnest∣ly to quiet his and her spirit with hi providence, whereupon he said, h saw the Skie open and heard a voic which said to him, that seeing h was willing to spend his estate for his Glory, neither he nor his should ever want, which when he came home, he told his Wife with great Joy, saying, he would not for  he was worth want that comfortable answer to his prayers. At an other time being without his knowledge no minted in Parliament to go with their Commissioners for Ireland, his wife was unwilling, he having a precious people and great living where he was: Some also of his Wives nearest Relations, coming upon that occasion to visit them, dis∣swaded him from going himself also was fearful of the Sea: in this Streight, as his usual manner was he retired to his Closet, where having
spread the matter before the Lord, and with much earnestness begging Counsel of God, the Lord so satisfied him, that he told his Wife he must go, for he was assured he should be carried thither in safety, and should be an Instrument to convert many Souls there. In both, the Lord was pleased to fulfill his word after a wonderful manner, as there are other Instances at hand, were it needful to multiply: as that of his perswasion of the recovery of Mr. J. Mrs. M. and Mr. J. W. Even when sick in an other Land, and his perswasion of Gods great care over these Nations for the sake of the many thousands of the Righteous in them. Touching which in the close of a day of prayer, he said he had an assur∣ance by an audible voice, and a glo∣rious brightness that shined before him. It is not unknown to some how great an encourager he was of godliness in all, especially in such as, under
his. Government in the Colledge, were designed for the Ministry, whom he would prefer in fellowships or other places before others, And the like tenderness he showed his Brethren in the Ministry, when un∣der any discouragement because of their own weakness, biding them to look up, and telling them that the way to have legs was to use legs. He was very communicative: for he loved to be asked questions, espe∣cially touching the sense of difficult Scriptures, to which, even upon the Sudden, he would answer admirably. His great humility he showed in his delightful Converse with the meanest Saints. What he was in other Re∣lations needs not my recital. As he was a loving Father, so a Husband of many, which leaves the deeper impression upon the heart of his Re∣lict. Surely he was a true friend, an useful Neighbour. But that I may draw to a Conclusion, having
already exceeded the bounds of an Epistle; what I have here spoken I desire may provoke imitation, and that Ministers may thereby be ex∣cited to do all the good they can in their day, seeing the Prophets do not live for ever; that their words may live when they are dead, that having so served Gods provi∣dence in their generation, they may enjoy that Crown of which he is in full possession, and I desire all may seriously consider why the Lord con∣tinues to remove our Lots, and to pluck up our stakes, and to fear lest it may be in Judgement to us of these sinful times, as it is in mercy doubtless to them. And I do heartily wish that these loud Voices of Gods providence might put us upon our Watch, that keeping Faith and a good Conscience we may be in a rea∣diness to enter into the Joy of our Lord, when we shall be
Called off the Stage of this miserable world: Which the great God graciously vouchsafe in and through our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.
The Life and Death of the Reve∣rend, Learned, and holy Doctor Samuel Winter, sometime Pro∣vest of Trinity Colledge by Dublin. DOctor Samuel Winter was born in the year of our Lord 1603. at Balsal,His Birth and educa∣tion. in the wood-land part of Warwickshire, about seven miles from the City of Coventry, of Religious Parents. About the twelfth year of his age it pleased God, by the Ministry of one Mr. Slader, then Preach∣er at the Chappel of Knowl, near unto Balsal, (The Doctors Father having a great hand in bringing him thither) to awaken his conscience, and to make him serious about the things that con∣cerned his everlasting Salvation,His Con∣version. as also to stir up in him earnest desires of doing good to the souls of others; for which
end, one day as he came from School, about a mile from his Fathers house, he retired himself under an hedge to pray; and among other Petitions, he begged of God that he would quallify him for the work of the Ministry, and make his labour effectual, and success∣ful therein; At which time he thought that he heard a voice, saying, God hath heard thy Prayer,Prayer An∣swered. and hath designed thee for that Work, and thou shalt be an Instrument of Converting many Souls to God. This exceedingly chear∣ed up his heart, insomuch as coming home, he applyed himself to his Father, requesting of him that he might be train∣ed up for the work of the Ministry: His Father asked him the reason of his desires? He told him what Prayer he had made, and what return he had from God to it. His Father being much affected here∣with, sent him to the Free-School in Coventry, where through his extraor∣dinary diligence and industry, he made so good a progress in Learning, that though at near fourteen years of Age, he understood nothing or very little of the first rudiments of Grammer, yet,
within a few years he became fit for the University, and accordingly he was sent to Cambridge,He goes to the Uni∣versity. and placed in L. Col∣ledge, and had for some time, that famous Doctor Preston for his Tutor. At the feet of this Gamaliel, those na∣tural and gracious abilities which he brought along with him, were much improved: and partly by the help and directions of so excellent a Guide, and partly by Gods blessing upon his unwearied labours,His profi∣ciency there. he attained to a great measure of knowledge, both in the Tongues and Arts, and also in Di∣vinity. When he had Commenced Master of Arts, being as yet unwilling to enter upon that great and dreadful work of the Ministry, he left Cambridge, and went to Boston in Lincolnshire,He goes to Boston. where he lived under the Ministry of Holy and learned Mr. John Cotton; out of whose Family, after some time, he married a Wife one Mrs. Anne Beeston, a Gentle∣woman of a good extraction,His first Mariage. and one that had a considerable Portion, the match being of Mr. Cottons contri∣vance. After his marriage, and some time
continuance with his Wife, in Mr. Cottons. sick∣ness. Family, he fell into a very vi∣olent. Feavour, which in the Judge∣ment of his Physitians, was desperate, and left no hopes of his recovery: His Wife being much affected, and afflicted herewith, he would oft comfort her, telling her that he should not die at this time, for that God had not yet fulfilled his Promise made to him in his youth, wherein he had assured him that he should be an Instrument of converting many Souls unto him.His reco∣very. And accord∣ingly he recovered, and then resolved to apply himself to the Work of the Mi∣nistry:He enters upon the Ministry. and being more ambitious to do God and his Church service, than to advance himself in the World, he re∣moved from Boston to a small living near Nottingham called Woodborow, where by his painful, and powerful Preach∣ing (many out of neighbouring Towns flocking to his Ministry, as the Doves to their windows) the seeds of Grace through Gods blessing, were sown in the hearts of many, which sprang up, and some of them remain unto this day. This place he alwaies highly esteemed, and would often call it, His First-born.
From Woodborow he was removed to York, where,His re∣move to York. in that great and populous City, he continued a Lecturer for some time, and as there he had great opportunities for service, so had he great success; receiving there a mani∣fest Seal to his Ministry, in the Conver∣sion, and Confirmation of many: But our Civil Wars coming on about that time, he could not stay long at York: Yet, though the door was shut up against him in that place, another large and effectual door was opened for him elsewhere. For Cottingham, a great Town within three miles of Hull,His re∣move to Cottingham being then destitute of a Pastor, thither he was, by a more than ordinary Providence, brought; and in that place, for about the space of eight years he continued to be a burning, and shining Light, as it was said of John the Baptist, burning in his Zeal and Doctrine, and shining in his Life and holy Conversation.His activi∣ty for God. He was exceeding active and industrious for God; He thought no pains too great whereby the peoples Souls might be edified. He Preached to them in pub∣lick twice every Lords Day: He ex∣pounded the Chapters which he read,
and Catechised the Youth. In the even∣ing he repeated his Sermons to his own Family, many of the neighbours also resorting to him. On the week daies he took occasion to go from House to House, instructing the Ignorant, and endeavouring to build up his Parishioners in their most holy Faith. And God was pleased so to bless his labours,The suc∣cess of his inistry. that he became instrumental to the Conver∣sion, and Confirmation of many, who attained (partly by his publick Mini∣stry, and partly by his private pains) a great measure of Grace and Gifts; so that they made Conscience of the strict observation of the Lords Day, of Clo∣set, and Family duties, and other spiritual services required by God as fruits of their Faith. So meek, and affable he was in his carriage towards all men, that his company was pleasing and delightful, even to many of those who had no relish of his Doctrine. At Cottingham he buried his loving,His  des. and dearly beloved Wife, who left him five Sons: which loss was yet (through Gods merciful Providence) abundantly repaired in his second marriage, about three years af∣ter
with Mrs. Elizabeth Weaver,His second marriage. the Daughter of Christopher Weaver Esq with whom he had a good Portion, and she proved excellently quallified for the good and comfort, both of him and his children; and God was pleased so to bless her prudent management of his outward affairs, that when he dyed, he left a plentiful estate to his Children, besides all those Acts of more than or∣dinary bounty, which both in his Life, and at the time of his Death he testified his Faith by. In the year 1650. the Powers that were then in being, resolved to send over four Commissioners into Ireland, for the settlement of that distracted, and almost ruined Kingdom, and judge∣ing it necessary to send along with them a godly, able and Orthodoxe Divine,His call to Ireland. they ordered that Mr. Winter should attend these Commissioners thither: Which Order of theirs being sent to him to Cottingham, where he then lived, he looked upon it as a clear Call from God. Yet for his better satisfaction, he ad∣vised with his Friends, and begged direction from God in a business of so weighty concernment; after which he
chearfully embraced this Call, hoping that God would bring some Glory to his own Name, by the labours of him, his unworthy servant, in that Kingdom. And so, not consulting with flesh and blood, which might have suggested un∣to him, that it would be an unadvised act, and disadvantagious to him, to part with so tractable, and loving a People, and with so good a Rectory, (it being above four hundred pound a year) and to cast himself upon Stran∣gers, neither knowing, nor capitulat∣ing with them what his Salary should be, for the maintenance of himself and Fa∣mily. And so, resigning up his Living, he prepared for his Journey. At his coming over into Ireland,His re∣move to Ireland. the Commissioners allowed him but one 100. l. for the first year, which yet he chearfully accepted, though it did not defray the charges of their Transporta∣tion, with such necessaries as he pro∣vided for the accommodation of himself, and Family: much less did it repair the losses which he sustained shortly af∣ter his Landing,His losses. when the Irish Army took from his divers Horses of good value, which he carried over with him.
A great part of his worldly delight con∣sisting in keeping good Horses. In this his first year,His great pains. he attended the Commissioners in several Journies which they made into the four Provinces of Ireland, was their Houshold Chaplain, performed Family duties, and Preach∣ed in Publick every Lords Day, where∣soever they came. And in the City of Dublin (where they continued the great∣est part of their time) he Preached sometimes twice every Lords Day in Christ-Church, before the Commissio∣ners, the Lord Major, and Aldermen of that City; many Gentlemen, and others resorting to his Ministry. Not long after, some other Ministers coming thither from England, the Commissioners (for the ease of Mr. Winter,) used to request one or other of them to Preach in the morning, reserv∣ing Mr. Winter for the afternoon, at which time was the greatest Auditory: But he not being willing to be out of imployment, set up a Lecture,He sets up a Lecture. which he Preached every Sabbath morning at seven a clock, in the Church of St. Ni∣cholas, within the said City: And this Lecture was frequented by the Commissi∣oners,
City-Magistrates, and many others, so that he had a very frequent Congregation; and to encouragepoor people to come to Church,His pru∣dence. he caused some wite Loaves to be distributed among them alwaies when the Sermon was ended. About this time the Commissioners finding that Trinity Colledge by Dublin, through the iniquity of the times, and distractions of the Kingdom, was left destitute by the Fellows and Students, and thereby brought almost to ruine, they thought it their duty, for the ad∣vancement of Religion and Learning, to endeavour the repair of the same: And for the end they appointed the said Mr. Winter to be the Provest,He is made Provest of the Col∣ledge. or Ma∣ster of it, and where (after a time) he Commenced Doctor in Divinity, having with singular applause, and ap∣probation, performed all Acts and Ex∣ercises requisite thereunto. He also out of his care, and zeal to promote so pi∣ous a work, in a short time encouraged, and procured the return of divers Fel∣lows,It prosper∣ed under him. and Students to the Colledge, as also the coming over from England of several hopeful young Schollars, where∣by
the Colledge was suddenly replenish∣ed with many Religious, and hopeful young men; likely to prove instru∣ments of Gods Glory in the work of the Ministry, and otherwaies. And by the great pains which he took with them, instructing them both in Hu∣mane and Divine learning, Preaching, and expounding the Sacred Scriptures to them, and often praying with them, both in the Colledge Chappel, and sometimes in his own Lodgings, he gave as great hopes of the flourishing of that Seminary in Learning, and Piety, as in any Colledge in Christendom. And they to retaliate his care and pains, gave him an honourable Testimonial under the Colledge Seal, which I have thought fit here to insert. OMNIBƲS Christi fidelibus ad quos praesentes literae pervenerint. Salutem in Christo Domino sempiternam. Nos Vicecancellarius Ʋniversitatis, & Socii seniores Collegii Sanctae & individuae Trinitatis juxta Dublin, Testamur vi∣rum venerabilem Dominum Samuclem Winter Anglum verbi Divini praedicato∣rem fidelem, verae religionis vindicem
acerrimum, & de Collegio S. S. Trinitan in Illustri Academia Cantabrigiensi Li beralium artium, & S. Theologiae oli studiosum, adductum fuisse ad nos cu uberrimis testimoniis ingenuitatis, probi∣tatis, doctrinae, & scientiae Theologicae (quorum meritorum suorum & studioru luculentissimum documentum jampride tam publice quam privatim in celeberrim civitate Dubliniensi laudabiliter & egre∣gie dederit) ad capessendum gradu Doctoratus in Theologia; & illorum plu∣rimorumque doctissimorum de meliori not virorum, optime habilem, idoneum, & dignum testimoniis judicatum fuisse, mu nere, officio, dignitate, & honore Do∣ctoratus in Theologia. Nos itaque quib ejus virtutum excellentia, meritorum copia, diuturna studia, pervigilesque la∣bores innotuerunt, habita rati ne scientiae eloquentiae, doctrinae, facultaetis Theol gicae, peritiae disputandi, interpretandi concionandi, & aliarum virtutum, & morum ejusdem Samuelis Winter, quoru omnium certissimum specimen laudabiliter, egregie, magistraliter, & more Doctore dederit publice è suggesto per tres dies in Collegii sacello. Nos igitur in venerand Ʋniversitatis nostrae Confessu, eundém
Samuelem Winter unanimiter, omnium∣que suffragiis in Christi nomine approba∣tus, & sic approbatum Doctorem in Vniversa Theologia solenniter pronuncia∣imus, declaravimus, ac fecimus. Quod nostrum Testimonium ut omnibus innotescat, subscriptis singulorum nominibus, & pub∣lico Collegii nostri Sigillo corroborari & muniri curavimus. Decimo septimo die Augusti anno Domini Millesimo sexcente∣imo quinguagesimo quarto. Hen. Jones Pro-Cancellarius. Miles Symner Williamson. Nath. Hoyle. Johannes Stearne. Adam Cusacke. Whilst Doctor Winter continued Provest of that Colledge, he had oc∣casion to go to a place called Monouth,He Preaches at Monouth. a populous Town about ten miles from Dublin; where (according to his custom in most places where he came) he Preached, and found the People very attentive to his Ministry, and desirous to be instructed in the way to Heaven: Whereupon, at the earnest request,
both of the Minister, and divers others of the Inhabitants, he rode over to their every three weeks, and Preached which he continued for some years,Gods blesses his labours. and God was pleased to bless his labours for the Conversion of many English, and Irish which flocked to hear him. The reason of his leaving that Univer∣sity and Kingdom is well known to ma∣ny: and he came away to his great out∣ward prejudice, the Colledge being indebted to him in a considerable sum of monies, which he had disbursed for the use thereof, some part whereo they have, since his decease payed t his Son. After his return into England,His return into Eng∣land. He with his Wife, sojourned with some Friends, sometimes in and about West-Chester; sometimes at Coventry; and other sometimes with his Wives Relati∣ons in Hertfordshire, and Rutlandshire. In all which places he became (through Gods blessing) an Instrument of much good, not only in the Families with whom he aboad, but also to seve∣ral Neighbours with whom he convers∣ed. Thus we have a brief account of the
most considerable passages of this Do∣ctors Life, we are now come to the last Scene, wherein we shall find that saying made good; Vita qualis, finis talis: His holy and humble Life, being con∣cluded with a comfortable and glorious Death. His Sun did not set in a Cloud, but shon out with a more bright and greater lustre than is ordinarily seen. It was his work and business to glorifie God in his Life, and God did highly honour him at his Death: as will ap∣pear by that which follows. Whilst he was in Rutlandshire,His last sickness. on Thursday October the thirteenth, in the year 1666. he rode to a Neighbouring Town to assist in carrying on a Day of Humiliation; wherein, having wearied his Body, and spent his spirits, he was fain to defer his return home till the next day: On the Lords Day following he exercised twice for the instruction of the Family with which he then aboad, and at his going to bed, he found him∣self not well. On Munday he continu∣ed ill, yet arose, came down, and performed Family Duties. At dinner he could eat but little, and at night went ill to bed, yet slept pretty well,His sickness encreases.
only both those nights, he complained of a pain on his right side, and he had frquent provocations to vomit, but without effect. Oft he found himself cold: yet when he came a little to the fire, he was too hot in his own senses insomuch as his friends about him judg∣ed that it would turn to an Ague. Wednesday and Thursday has distem∣per continued: and on Friday, finding himself to grow weaker he desired that his Will might be fairly engrossed which lay by him under his own hand ting; and withall he laboured to perswade his Wife to be content to part with him, saying, That it would n be long before they should meet again and then he put up earnest Prayers unto God for her, and some other of his Re∣lations. Upon Friday he sat up all the day, but still continued under his Bodily distem∣pers, and finding his strength to decay, he would often repeat that of the Psalmist, The Zeal of thine House hath eaten me up. On Saturday he sealed, and Pub∣lished his Will,He Pub∣lishes his Will. all the day complain∣ing of the Cramp that was in his left lg. In the evening he went to bed,
and to the apprehension of those about him slept well that night. About six a clock on the Sabbath morning, he raised himself up in his bed, and with a chearful and loud voice called to his Wife, who lay in a bed by him,A forei of Heave say∣ing, Sweet-Heart, I have been this night conversing with Spirits: and as in a Rapture, he cryed out, O ye Glories that are prepared for the Saints of God. The Lord hath been pleased to shew me this night, the exceeding weight of Glo∣ry which is laid up in Heaven for his Chosen ones. Adding farther, That he had studied, and thought that he knew as much what the Glory of Heaven was, as another man: But he now saw, that all the Divines on Earth were but Chil∣dren in the knowledge of that great Mystery of Heavenly Glory, which the Lord had that night given him a clearer sight of, than ever formerly he had. That it was such a Mystery as could not be comprehended by the wit of man; with many other such like expressions, having his Soul so wonderfully elevated, that he could not declare what he found, and felt therein. Then did he desire that his Relations,
and the rest of the Family might be call∣ed up, that so he might make known unto them that immense weight of Glo∣ry, which that night had been revealed unto him. When they were assembled, he did with vehemency, and intention of spirit, endeavour to discover the same unto them in expressions as afore∣said:Jov un∣speakable. But he was so swallowed up in the Contemplations thereof, that he could not utter what he desired: And so he continued all that day, and even till he dyed in very high Raptures, and great acclamations, by way of thank∣fulness unto God for the Lord Jesus Christ, the Fountain of that Glory, and for those evident discoveries of the same unto him. Towards the evening of that Lrd Day, an Honourable Person, together with his Lady and some other Friends came to visit him, with whom he dis∣coursed about Heaven,Heavenly discourse. and the thing of God as understandingly, fervently and fluently, as if he had enjoyed hi best health; His understanding, and memory continuing as strong, and vi∣gorous as ever; in his discourse quoting several places of Scripture, citing the
very Chapter, Verse, and words of the Texts, and explaining the mean∣ing from the Hebrew, and Greek Ori∣ginals. After this discourse, which continu∣ed about the space of two hours, find∣ing himself weary, he betook himself to bed, all the company withdrawing into another Chamber. After an hours repose, he desired that the said Ho∣nourable Person, with his Lady, and other Friends, might be called in again, that he might speak something more unto them, and when they, with the rest of the Family were come into his Chamber, he told them, that he thought he had but a short time to live. That he was going to Jesus Christ, with him to enjoy the fulness of Joy, and those Rivers of pleasure, which God had lately discovered unto him, and which he had laid up in Heaven for such as love him, and keep his Commandments. O said he! If you had but a thorow sight thereof, it would make you all to love Jesus Christ, and holiness, which is the only way prescribed by God to at∣tain to this Happiness. And then he went on to magnifie the riches of free
Grace, through which alone the Saints do come to enjoy that exceeding, ex∣ceeding, eternal weight of Glory, which neither eye hath seen nor eat hath heard, nor can enter into the heart of man to conceive of. He exhorteth them not to trouble themselves so much in labouring to ge assurance of Salvation,Good Counsel. as to exam themselves carefully, and diligently whether they were in the way of Sancti∣fication: And for this nd, he com∣mended two things to their serious medi∣tations, about which, he advised them daily to ask their Souls these two Que∣stions: What am I? And, Where am I? What am I? Am I a New Crea∣ture? Am I born again? I so, then New Thoughts, New Words, New Company, and a New Conversation will appear. All old Thoughts, Words, and Actions will be done away. Secondly, Where am I? Am I in that narrow way that leads to Life Eternal, or in that broad way that leads to Death, and Damnation? He told them that if any there present were still in the broad way, it had been better that they had never been born. And
(said he) If you will make this your continual meditation, you cannot mis∣carry: And if you find yourself to be in the narrow way, the Way of San∣ctification, let God ane with the Rest, to give you an assurance of your future happiness, which he will do in his own time. He farther declared to them,His Per∣severance. that as by  his Preaching through the whole course of his Ministry, he had discover∣ed, and published this way of holiness, through Christ to be the only way to Heaven, so could he now at his death set forth no other way: And that if he were now again to begin his Ministry, he could hold forth no other way to attain unto Glory. And so with much earnestness of spirit, looking up towards Heaven, he begged of God that the words of a dying man might make a deep impression upon the hearts of his Hearers: And that, as God had made him an Instrument of converting many Souls unto him in his Life, so he would bless what he had now spoken, that some one Soul might be brought to Jesus Christ, by this his last Sermon. Then he proceeded to further Heavenly
discourses, and Instructions, quoting sundry Texts of Scripture for the proof of what he spake, naming the Chap∣ters, Verses, and words of the Texts, which he opened, and explained out of the Originals, with that acuteness, and strength of words, with that zeal, and fervency of spirit as was admirable, so that he drew tears from the eyes of all that were present, whether young or old. And left any there present should think that his understanding and memory were grown weak, o that he was overcome through the abundance of Revelation which he had the night before, to let them know that he had spoken to them the words of truth and soberness, and that with a perfect understanding of what he spake, he made this Narrative follow∣ing. He told them the manner of his education in Religion from his child∣hood, and of the vanity which did attend his youthful daies: and where, and how God did appear to him for his Conversion at twelve years of his age, and of the assurance which God had given him (as is before related) that he should be an Instrument of con∣verting
many Souls to God. As also of his proficiency in learning from that ve∣ry time. He farther declared (with tears trickling down his cheeks) that he had many and many a time,A faithfull Pastor. in pri∣vate, before he went to Preach, put God in mind of that Promise so made unto him, and earnestly besought him to make good that Promise, by giving a blessing to that Word of his, which he was then going to deliver, that some Glory might redound to his holy Name thereby: To which his Prayers, God had often been pleased to give a gracious Answer, and to let him know it, by the Conversion of some, by those Sermons. One of his Relations then present, fearing that his Spirits would be weak∣ened and spent by that his continued discourse, desired him to repose him∣self for a while: To whom he replyed, with much earnestness, and strength of voice: No,His Zeal. were I sure that this should be my last night (as indeed it proved) and the last Sermon that I should Preach, I would continue it two hours longer. Adding, that he was not afraid of
Death: And turning his Head back∣ward, he said, Death is a Coward; he comes behind me:His Tri∣umph. He dares not look me in the Face. And farther he said, The Devil hath oft assaulted me in my Life time: But God stod by me, and give me strength to resist him, so that he could never hurt me. All that day following he lay in Hea∣venly Contemplation and Raptares,His Rap∣tures. often breaking forth in Praises unto God for Jesus Christ. And would some∣times desire his Wife, and other Friends to tell him whether he were in the Bo∣dy, or out of the Body: for he could not tell. And a Minister being the in the House, he desired that he might be called in: and when he was come, he propounded the same Question unto him: who answered, That he was in Life, and among his Friends on Earth, and therefore in the Body: To this he replyed, It is true, and therewith rested satisfred, and desired the Mini∣ster to pray with him: which he did accordingly. His Wife told him that some Friends present hoped that he might yet live: To which he answered, Can a Dead
man live? Will God work Miracles? Shortly after he said, God is doing great things in the world: and he much be∣wailed the sad condition of the Church of Christ, &c. In the afternoon,The power of Death. finding Death to approach, he often cryed out, O the power of Death! Not that he feared it; for it shrunk from him: but he found such a Power in Death as none could know but those that were under it. He wished that his Sons had been present, that they might see what the Power of Death was, and what it was to die. He desired also that some Neighbours of the Town might be called in, that he might Preach his last Sermon to them. And indeed, to this very time his spi∣rits, speech, and memory continued very active and strong. About four a clock in the afternoon, his Wife, and his Wives Brother and Sister, standing by his bedside, asked him how he did? He answered: Very Weak: Adding; That he was going to Jesus Christ:Death not to be fear∣ed. Bid them not be afraid of Death: with which words he put forth his hand, and said; Brother, Sister, Take Death by the Hand; Be not afraid,
Death is a coward: He flies from . They found that his Hands were cold and Clammy, whereby they perceived that he grew near to his end. And himself, not long after, feeling that the dissolution of this earthly Tabernacle was now ap∣proaching, lifting up his eyes towards Heaven, he cryed out, Cme Lrd Je∣sus:His blessed Death. And presently, with a smiling countenance, he added, Art thou Cme? And so he breathed out his la. Thus Reader,  through the more considerable passages of this blessed mans Life, and Death Pause here a while, and take a view  all again, and then surely thou canst n but wish (though it is desired for thee that it may be from a better Principle than was in Balaam) Let me die the Death of this blessed man, and let my last end be like his. But in vain shak thou wish for this, if the pattern of his Holy, and Exemplary Life be neglect∣ed by thee. It is Storied that a person of a loose Life, that hearing what a comfortable end St. Bernard made, said to his com∣panions: I would willingly die like St. Bernard, but I would live like you. Its
too certain that many are of the same mind: but as it is impossible, but that an holy Life should have a blessed and happy Death (Mark the perfect man, and behold the Ʋpright: For the end of that man is Peace, Psalm 37.37.) So it is as impossible (in an ordinary way) that a loose and wicked Life should have any other than a miserable and uncom∣fortable Death, though some delusive, fadeing flashes of seeming comfort they may sometimes have, yet are but as a blaze of Thorns, that is suddenly ex∣tinct. For God himself hath said it: There is no Peace to the wicked, Isa. 48.22. And again: The wicked are driven away in their wickedness: But the Righteous hath Hope in his Death: Im∣pius dum spirat sperat: Sed Justus cum exspirat sperat. The wicked Hope while they live, with a vain, un∣grounded Hope: But the Righteous hope when they die, with a lively, and well-grounded Hope, that never leaves them till it brings them to frui∣tion. There yet remain some things, which could not well be reduced to any one part of the Narrative of this worthy
Persons Life, and because they did, like so many Golden Threads, pass through the whole Web; or like the spirits in the blood, which run through the whole Body: and therefore these were thought sit to be reserved to the close of all, that the Reader may have a view of them altogether. And they are such Graces as were very remarkable in this Man of God. For so I call him; no only because he was a Minister, and  Gods Servant in a more  but also in regard of those eminent, and excellent Virtues, appearing in him, by which God did set his Mark,  Seal upon him, as his peculiar Trea∣sure. And these Graces were so con∣spicuous in him, that all that knew, and were acquainted with him, will readily attest to the Truth of them. And they may be thus ranked in Or∣der. 1. His great Humility, and meekness of Spirit. 2. His diligence, and industry in his Calling. 3. His Zeal, and fervor, manifest∣ing it self in his Praying, Preach∣ing, and Conference, and strict
observation of the Ld, Day. 4. His Liberality, and Bounty upon all good occasions. 5. His great Candour, and Ingenui∣ty. 6. His Faith, and Patience. First to begin with his Humility,. as that excellent Grace which embellished, and gave a lustre to all the rst, and is often inculcated, and injoyned in the holy Scriptures, and was most admir∣able in our blessed Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, who proposes himself as a Pattern to us in that grace especially And surely all that knew this worthy Doctor, will readily acknowledge this to have been very eminent in him, and that not only in his words, and Garb, and some trivial actions, which may easily be personated, and counter∣feited: As they were in the Fryer, who went seemingly dejected, and alwaies looking down ward to the Earth, untill he was made an Abbot, and then he altered his Mode, and gave this reason for it: That he had long been looking for the Keyes of the Abbey, and that now having found them, he need no longer do according to his for∣mer
custom. But in this person, Hu∣mility was of an higher strain, and more deeply radicated in his heart. And truly it was the more admirable in him, because he had divers things which might have elevated his thoughts, and puffed up his heart with Pride, as a plentiful estate, a considerable rank in the world, and great abilities: But these were poor things in his esteem. He could condescend to men of the low∣est rank: He used to magnifie the abi∣lities of others, whilst he thought, and spake meanly of his own, and was not offended if others did the like. He could easily bear the Contradictions of others, and stoop to the lowest offices to do good to Souls. Its well known that he would go to the poorest Neigh∣bours houses in his Parish, and there sit, and discourse with them about the great, and weighty concernments  their Souls: Questioning with them, and instructing them: And at his de∣parture would give them some money that by his deeds he might add the greater weight to his words;His . and ma his next return the more welcome And this he did, nor to gain Pre∣selytes
to himself, or a Name among men; but to gain them to Christ, and to be a means in furthering the Salvati∣on of their Souls. Secondly, His diligence,His Indu∣stry. and In∣dustry in his Calling was very great, and exemplary: A hard Student he was, and so continued to the last. It is scarce credible, but to those that saw, and knew it, what a great number of Books were found in his Library, filled with Transcriptions from the Au∣hours he read, besides pieces of Con∣troversie, and observations of his own. And indeed there were few Books that he read, but he drew Notes out of them, and made Marks in them of what was most considerable. To which, if we add all his Manuscripts (which had been the summ of near twenty years study) lost in the time of the late Wars, we cannot but conclude him to have been a most faithful, and painful la∣bourer in Gods Vineyard. His daily ractice declared him to be a person, areful to Redeem Time, and fearfull  lose, or wast it. As soon as he was out of his bed in he morning, whilst he dressed himself,His Stu∣diousness.
his Wife, or a Servant read to him some Chapters in course, out of the Old and New Testament. When he was drest, he retired himself into his Study, where he ordinarily continued till he was called down to Prayer, and Dinner. After which, for better di∣gestion, he intermitted his Studies, and took opportunity of discourse with Friends, and Neighbours that came to visit him, who knew that to be the only time wherein they might find him at leasure. For he used to forbid any to come to him in the forenoon, that his studies might not be interrupted. And after two or three hours intermis∣sion, he returned into his study again, where for the most part,His . he continued, both Summer, and Winter, till about eight a clock at night, seldom eating any Supper, or very sparingly. When he was come down, calling his Family together, he read a Chapter in course, gave the sense of it, went to Prayer, and so to bed; often grudgeing the time that he spent in sleep,Time pre∣cious. and eating. To this may be added, that as it was his care to be well prepared before he went to Preach (for he would
not offer either to God or man that which cost him nothing) so did he strive to get his heart into a right frame for Preaching, that from the heart, he might speake to the hearts of his hearers, as he used often to say: and to obtain assistance from God there∣in, he used by private Prayer to beg Gods blessing upon his labours. It was his frequent saying: That he was as circumspect, and diligent in studying what he was to deliver, as if be expected no assistance from Christ; yet when be came to Preach, disowning his own en∣deavours, he wholly cat himself upon Jesus Christ for strength and assistance, as if he had not stuyed at all: And that God had oftentimes suggested such mat∣ter into his mind, in the delivery of his Sermons, as he had not thought on before, which he observed, God did abundantly bless to the Comfort, and Edification of the Auditors. He would often say: That his op∣ortunities were his Riches; and he was areful to improve them: whence it eldome came to pass that he Preached without making some reall impression upon his hearers, which was discover∣ed
by the Tears that fell from many of them. Thirdly,His Zeal. In the next place his zeal and fervour deserves our consideration. It was the Counsel of a grave Divine, That Christians should take heed that their old judgements, did not abate their youthful affections. And certainly there was in this our old Doctor, such warmth of affections as is seldom seen in so an∣tient a man, and yet was it mannaged with such Christian Prudence, that he exercised it, not about light and tri∣vial matters, but about the greater, and more substantial points of Religion; and that through the whole course of his Life: Whether he Preached, Pray∣ed, or discoursed about Divine things, all was performed with much zeal, and heat of affections. He was fervent in spirit, serving the Lord, Rom. 12.11. How glad was he of an opportunity of Preaching, and if his liberty could have been purchased with money, what would he not have given for it? He was very affectionate in Prayer,His Pru∣dence. and yet were his affections so tempered with Prudence, and Judgement, that
though upon extraordinary occasions he would dlarge himself therein, yet in his Family Prayers, he was usually short, that so he might not make Reli∣gious duties a burthen to those that joyn∣ed with him. And as his Prayers were fervent, so he had this honour from God, that he had many signal returns, and answers to his Prayers, as we shall hear afterwards, and as can be attested by many who received benefit by them both for Soul, and Bodily distempers, and affections. He was conscienciously strict in the observation of the Lords Daies;The Sab∣bath San∣ctified. not permitting any discourses in his presence, but such as were sui∣table to the Day, and to the Duties thereof: Rebuking, and reproving such as would take liberty to discourse about their worldly businesses upon Gods Day. Fourthly, His liberality and bounty were as eminent,His boun∣ty and cha∣rity. and exemplary as any of his other Graces. God gave him a good Estate, so a large heart, which was a double mercy. He was rich in good works, ready to distribute, will∣ing to communicate: Laying up in store for himself a good Foundation against the
time to come, 1 Tim. 6.18, 19. He hath been often heard to say: That he could fare hardly, and go meanly, that he might be the better enabled thereby to be charitable unto others that were in want: And it is believed that few of his estate and rank exceeded him herein. Seldom did any necessitous Persons come to him, seldom did he hear of the necessitis of others, though at a distance from him, but they tasted of his Bounty. He gave large summs of money every year, for divers years together, to pious and charitable uses, as his Wife can testifie, who kept an account in writing of the several summs so disburs∣ed by him. Towards the relief of the poor, persecuted Protestants in Pimont, he gave thirty pounds; and as much the same year to another charitable use. He gave also several considerable summs yearly for the support and encourage∣ment of some poor Schollars in the University of Dublin, besides a large summ of money disbursed out of his own purse towards furnishing the Li∣brary there with Books. And as he had thus sundry waies exercised his Bounty
whilst he lived, so at his Death, he gave large Legacies to pious and charitable uses: and God made good that Pro∣mise to him, Isa. 58.10. If thou draw out thy Soul to the hungry, and sa∣tisfie the afflicted Soul: Then shall thy Light rise in obscurity, and thy dark∣ness be as the Noon-day. 5. To this Grace of Charity may be added his Candour,His Can∣dour. and courteous de∣portment, which gave a lustre to his Bounty; according to that of the Po∣et, Dat benè, dat multum, Qui dat cum munere vultum. He was not apt to be offended with others, much less apt to offend others.His Meek∣ness. He alwaies interpreted to the best sense that which might seemingly have mini∣stred occasion of offence; by which ex∣cellent temper, he drew love and res∣pect to himself wheresoever he came, and with whomsoever he conversed, whether in private Families, or in his more publick imployments. Sixthly, In the last place his Faith,His Faith, and Pati∣ence. and Patience calls for our consideration:
of which, as he had given good proof in the whole course of his Life, so they eminently shon forth when he came to die. In the time of his sickness he shewed an holy, humble, and chear∣ful resignation of himself to the wife and merciful disposal of God his Hea∣venly Father: Not one repining word was heard to proceed out of his mouth. He was dumb, and opened not his mouth, because it was the Lord that did it, Psalm 39.9. There was not any impatient, or uncomly motion seen in him: but being full of Faith, of Christian Patience and courage, he feared not Death, but was well pre∣pared, and resolved against that stroke of it: And would often say, O how happy a thing is it by Death to be about a possibility of Sinning! The Heathen Philosophers called Death, The most terrible of all terribles: and the Sacred Scripture calls it, The King of terrours. It is Storied, that one hearing a person highly commend∣ed for his excellent Virtues, said, Let us stay till his Death, and then we shall be the better able to judge of all these things which make such a glittering
shew in him for the present. And cer∣tainly, to be able to look the King of Terrous in the Face, without con∣sternation, and to meet the last enemy [Death] with Joy, and consolation,His Perse∣verance. is no small evidence of a true, and strong Faith: and this was evidently seen, and discerned in this worthy Doctor at the time of his Death. He often declared in his health, that in his younger daies he had been sorely vexed, and pestered with Satans Temp∣tations: but at last, meeting with a plain, honest Christian (such an other, probably, as the Shepherd was with whom Junius met) to whom, complaining of his fears, he first rebuk∣ed him, and then instructed him,Good Counsel. saying, You look at the reward, with∣out minding, and intending the Work, in that you desire, and expect Assur∣ance, before you have well resolved upon doing your Duty. My advice therefore is, to mind what God requires of you in your present station, and be serious, and diligent therein, and the other will come in Gods due time. This ad∣vice, he professed, was of great use to him all his Life after: so that after that
time he was not troubled with such perplexing thoughts as formerly he had been: but lived, and dyed in Peace, both with God and man, in the great Climacterical year of his Age: October 22. 1666. Examples of his power, and preva∣lency in Prayer. The wise Solomon tells us, Prov. 12.2. That a good man obtaineth favour of the Lord: That is, He hath what he will of God. Id quod vult, à Domino impetrat; quia eius voluntas est ipsissima Dei voluntas; nec aliud vult: As Mercer hath it, out of Rabi Levi. It is written of Luther, e vir potuit à Deo quicquid voluit: That by his Prayers he could prevail with God at his pleasure. Melancthon, and Myconius, being sick of desperate dis∣eases, were both recovered by Luthers Prayers. Sozomen saith of Apollonius, that he never asked any thing of God in all his Life which he obtained not Blessed is he that hath what he will, and wills nothing but what he should. The Persons of Saints (saith a Reve∣rend Divine) are like secret pledges of common quiet, and their mediations
are a Shield to the Earth against the wrath of Heaven. We have many ex∣amples in Scripture of the power, and ef∣ficacy of Prayer; and lest any should think that those were extraordinary, and that the like are not to be found in our daies, take notice of these instances following. I. When Mr. Winter in his younger daies was cast out of his living, his first Wife, having many Children, fell into great grief, and perplexity, fear∣ing that the, and hers would come to want. Mr. Winter was much troubled to see his Wives discontents, and there∣upon plyed the Throne of Grace for cure thereof: and one day, as he was riding abroad, and crying earnestly un∣to God about this matter, he thought that he heard a voice saying unto him, Because thou hast not spared thine estate for my glory, neither thou, nor any of thine shall want. At his return home he told this to his Wife with Joy, saying, That he would not for all he was worth want that comfortable answer to his Prayers. II. When an Order was sent to Mr. Winter from the Parliament to go with
their Commissioners into Ireland; his Wife was very unwilling thereunto; and some of their near Relations came on purpose to disswade him from it, himself also was very fearful of the Seas. In this his great streight, he retired into his Study (as his usual manner was in the like Cases) and there with much earnestness he spread the matter before God, craving  guidance, and direction therein: And the Lord was pleased to set it upon his spirit, that he should go, and be carryed in safety thiner, and there become an Instrument of converting many Souls to God. When he had declared this to his Wife and Friends, they acqui∣esced, and resolved upon that Journey. And according to this gracious Promise of God, though they took Shipping in the midst of Winter, and went with a Master that was not very well acquaint∣ed with those Seas, yet they found the Seas Calme, and their passage so speedy, that whereas some other great Persons went out before them, and with a more experienced Master, yet they ar∣rived in safety, about four and twenty hours before them, insomuch as the
Captain of the Ship said, That in his whole life he had never known so speedy, and calme a passage before. III. Not long after Mr. Winters coming into Ireland, he went with the Commissioners unto Kilkenny, in which place Collonel Jones his Wife fell very sick of the Yellow Jandise, and some other distempers: For which cause her Husband called together some Ministers, and other Friends to spend some hours in prayer unto God on her behalf: Mr. Winter was the last man that prayed: but before he began, he went to her, and asked her, Whether she had Faith to be healed? She answered, She thought she had: Then he went to prayer, and wrestled exceedingly with God for her recovery: And when he had done, he went to her, and advised her to be careful, and diligent in the use of all good means for the recovery of health, adding, That she should live, and not die at that time. At this saying, his Wife, and her Sister were much trou∣bled, telling him in private, that they had rather have given much money than that he should have spoken so confident∣ly of her recovery among so many Ana∣baptists:
Fearing that if this words proved true, they might be confirmed in their Enthusiastical conceits: if other∣wise, then that they might take oc∣casion to scandalize his Person, and Ministry: but he again affirmed, that she would not die of that sickness. Yet after this she continued very weak for a month, or mo: Her Doctors gave her up for a dead woman: whereupon Mr. Winters Wife again blamed him for his confident saying, that she must live: To which he smil∣ingly answered, Well, she is not yet dead. At length her disease so prevailed, that she lost the use of her senses; and her Servants weeping about her, said, now she i near death indeed. The Saturday following, as Mr. Winter sat at dinner, a messenger came to him from Collonel Jones, to tell him, That if he would see his Wife alive, he must come away presently, for that she was now a dying. At this Mrs. Winter was much troubled, because of her Husbands former confi∣dence in premising her Life. But Mr. Winter made no great hast to be gone, saying, That he well knew when God an∣swered his Prayers, and when no.
After he had dined, he went to the House, where he found the Collonel sitting by her, ready to close her eies so soon as breath departed out of her bo∣dy: for so she had enjoyned him in the time of her health. She lay speechless and without sense; not answering, nor moving her eyes, though her Husband, and Mr. Winter called unto her: where∣upon her Husband thought that she had lost her hearing. Mr. Winter desired that he might pray with her, but her Hus∣band refused, saying, that she was sens∣less, and had been a dying all that morn∣ing. Mr. Winter again urged that he might pray with her. No, (said the Collonel) it is to no purpose: She is now a dead woman. And Mr. Winter urged the third time that he might pray, saying, Her life is yet in her, and so he went to prayer, which he performed with much earnestness, and with many tars. When Prayer was ended, Mr. Winter oing to her Bedside, she looked upon m, and with a smiling countenance, id, O! See the fruit of Prayer! O! e the fruit of Prayer! Set me up, and ve me something to eat: I am cured;
but not by Doctors: Only Free-Grace, and Prayers have prevailed with God for me. They asked her what she could eat? She answered, any thing. They gave her some bread and butter, of which she did eat pretty heartily. Then did her Hus∣band send for her Doctors: But she bad them not to provide any more Physick for her, saying, She would take none: For she would not dishonour God, and wrong Prayer so much (by which she was now cured) as to take any more Physick: nor could she be by any means perswaded to it. On Munday following in the after∣noon, Mrs. Winter heard that Mrs. Jones was walking in her Garden, which she wondring at, went to see her, and found her there. So soon as she saw Mrs. Win∣ter, she went to meet her, and said. Oh! See the fruit of Prayer! Mrs Win∣ter blessed God for her recovery: where∣upon She said, My Doctors would b me take some more Physick of them: B it is God that hath cured me, and he  shall have the praise of it. I will take n thing of them. They shall not say, the they have cured me: For God by Pray hath done it. Its prayer alone that
done it. And indeed herein God made good that gracious Promise of his, Jam. 5.15. The Prayer of Faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up. IV. Some months after Mr. Winter, with his Family, removed to Dublin, and after some time, the aforesaid Mrs. Jones fell sick again, and her sickness prevailed so far upon her, that growing very weak, she was confined to her bed. whereupon, on a Lords Day, Mr. Win∣ter and his wife went to visit her: when they came, they found another Mini∣ster with her, but she called for Mr. Win∣ter to pray with her. A Lady that was present, coming to Mrs. Winters Sister, said, O! Do you think this good woman will recover or not? She answered, I know not yet; but when my Brother Winter hath done praying I shall tell you more. When Mr. Winter had ended his prayer, this Lady came to her again, saying, What do you think now? She answered; She believed that she would not recover: and so said Mrs. Winter al∣so: the reason whereof was, because they observed that in his prayer he was more earnest in praying for the spiri∣tual and Eternal wellfare of her Soul,
than for her Bodily Health. When they were returned home, Mrs. Winter asked her Husband what he thought of her? He answered, that she would dye: For that when in prayer he would have begged of God the restore of her to health, he could not do it, but could only pray for her eternal happiness. Faithful Prayer is ordained of God to be a means to obtain what we desire, and pray for and therefore is never put up in vain, but shall have an answer, 1 Joh. 5.14, 15. For where God gives an heart to speak, he hath an ear to hear. And it is the ob∣servation of a Reverend Divine of our own: That when God intends not to hear, he layes the Key of prayer out of the way, as being loth that such precious breath as that of prayer is, should be without its full, and dearest success. After this Mrs. Jones grew worse and worse, and continued in a languishing condition for some months. She had several Doctors, who still gave her hopes of recovery. Mr. Winter prayed oft with her, but still after the same manner, insomuch as his Wife told him, that she thought he did not love Mrs. Jones as formerly, because he prayed not for
her life: he answered, that his love was the same, but he was so bound up in his spirit that he could not pray for her recovery, and therefore conceived that she would die. At length Mrs. Jones finding herself very weak, sent for Mr. Winter to pray with her, and after prayer, she said un∣to him, Sir, I hear you love me not so much as formerly. God heard your prayers for me when I was a dying at Kilkenny: but now you do not pray so earnestly for my Life as you did then. No (said he) I neither do, nor can do it, though I love you as well as ever. For when I would pray for your life, my Tongue is turned to pray for your Eternal walfare: there∣fore I do believe you are not for this world, but will soon be in a better. Think you so? Said she. Hereupon she sent for a Collonels Wife, between whom and herself there was some difference, and they were reconciled together. She sent also for her Husband, and imparted her mind to him: Adding, that she saw she must die, for that Mr. Winter could not pray for her as he did in her former sickness; and it pleased God presently after to take her to himself.
V. At an other time Mrs. Winters Sister going for England, left her only Son with her; and after awhile the Child fell into a high Feavour, and one morn∣ing the Maid, with whom the Child lay, came to her Mistriss, and told her, She feared the Child had the Plague, for that he had many spots on his bosom. And the Plague at this time was in Dub∣lin. Mrs. Winter sent for a Doctor, who when he had seen the Child, said, that they were either Plague spots, or Feavour spots, and that he much feared the Childs Life. Mrs. Winter went to her Husband into his Study, and ac∣quainted him with these things, request∣ing him that he would be earnest with God in begging the Childs Life. At Noon, when her  nd came down, she asked him what he thought? He bad her not to perplex, and trouble herself, for the Child would live: And before the next day the Child began to amend, and within a few Daies was perfectly well. VI. Mrs. Winter herself was once un∣der a strong Temptation to become an Anabaptist, being perswaded that it was the way of God, and she had been dip∣ped
but that she feared in would reflect upon her Husbands credit. Her Hus∣band took much pains with her, yet could she not be convinced of her error, but was both night and day in great per∣plexity of spirit: Only she relyed upon that gracious Promise of Christ, John 7.17. If any man will do his Will, he shall know of the Doctrine whether it be of God. And at last she resolved to set a day apart to seek unto God for satisfaction in this doubtful case. But it fell out that that very day, they were earnestly invited to Dine with Doctor Jones, and her Hus∣band had promised to go: she said, she could not go, because she had set that day apart upon such an occasion: Her Husband answered her; Thou must go, for I have been praying for thee, and God hath assured me, that thou shalt be satisfied, and that quickly too; and accordingly it came to pass: for she was so resolved, and satisfied from Heaven, that afterwards she was able to Dispute with the Female Anabaptists, and to confute them; insomuch as some of the Officers would let their Wives come no more at her. VII. Whilst they were in Dublin Mrs. Winters Sisters Husband, being up∣on
occasion in London, fell dangerous sick: Sir Francis Pridjean, and an other Doctor were his Physitians, who, af∣ter a time gave him up for Dead. An other of Mrs. Winters Sisters, wrote her word of it, adding, That she believed that before that letter came to her hands, he would be dead, and buried. Here∣upon his Wife desired that that afternoon might be set apart to seek unto God in his behalf: and accordingly some Mi∣nisters and Christians were invited to meet together for that end. When the time was come, Mrs. Winter requested her Husband that he would come away; for that the company was met. He had her go before; for he must endeavour to know of the Lord whether he was yet living or no: For (said he) d you think that I will pray for a dead man? When some of the Ministers had prayed, Do∣ctor Winter came in. They prayed with submission, that if he was yet in the Land of the Living, the Lord would be pleased to be his Physitian, and to direct, and bless all good means to him, for the re∣covery of his health But in the close of the day, when Doctor Winter came to pray, he shewed much confidence that he was yet alive, and that he should live
and recover, to the amazement of all that were present: But his Sister, who knew his manner, and had experience of the successfulness of his Prayers, between hope and fear, could not contain herself from crying out. When the Doctor had done and was risen from his knees, he went to her, and took her by the hand, saying, Be of good comfort, for your Hus∣band is alive, and shall recover, and you shall see him again with comfort. She cry∣ing out aloud said, Ah Brother! I fear he is dead. Do you think he is alive? I know (said he) that he is: and re∣peated over his former words: And ac∣cordingly, in their next letters, they heard of his amendment. VIII. At another time Mrs. Winters Sister (who was with them in Ireland) fell into a relaps after a Feaver, being great with Child, and within two months of her time: at which time she fell into a great bleeding at the Nose. She had three Doctors, and Surgeons which us∣ed all their Art, and yet could not stop it. At length she fell into Travel, and two Midwives were sent for to her. She was fain to sit upright in her Bed, and could not lie down because of her vio∣lent bleeding. Her Midwives, and Do∣ctors
gave her up for dead. And she grew so weak that Mrs. Winter not being able to see her die, left her, and went to her own lodgeing, where she found that her Sisters Husband had caused her Hus∣band to  and pray for his Wife, which he did with much earnestness; and it pleased God that presently after, news was brought them that she was safely delivered of a dead Child. Here∣upon Doctor Winter and his Wife went to see her, and found her still bleeding; and the Doctors, and Surgeons were sent for again, who agreed to open a Vein, and let her blood. The Surgeon struck her right arm, but no blood came. The Doctors bid him try the other arm, he answered, that it was to no purpose, for she had no Pulse for some hours be∣fore; yet the Doctors made him do it, and then some few drops of blood came: but most of this time Doctor Winter was praying for her in the next room, and she sometimes over-heard him, but could not speak. Afterwards she told them that these thoughts were in her Head: Yonder good man, would have me live: but is will not be. one of her Midwives bid her  Death, for she could not
live. To which one of the Doctors said, that sure she had forgotten Lazarus. No, replyed the Midwife; I have not forgotten him; but God must work as great a Miracle now as he did then if she recovers. Yet it pleased God that she did recover, and afterwards one of the Doctors told Mrs. Winter, that he never saw one so near unto death, to live; and that to him it was a Miracle. Here was another sweet return to Doctor Winters Prayers, and his Sister would often acknowledge that it was by the power of his Prayers that she was re∣stored to life, and so others thought also. IX. The last time that the Soldiery pulled the English Parliament in pieces, Doctor Winter, and his friends in Dub∣lin, were in great fears of the confu∣sions which were like to follow: For which cause Doctor Winter kept Fasts Weekly with his Congregation, for a great while together. One time as he was praying, in imitation of Abrahams Intercession for Sodom, he used such like expressions. Lord wilt thou also destroy the Righteous with the wicked? Peradven∣ture there be fifty thousand Righteous with∣in these three Kingdoms: wilt thou also destroy, and not spare these Nations for
fifty thousand Righteous that are therein? &c. And when he came to the last num∣ber of ten Thousand, as he kneeled against a Post in the room, he saw a great shining Light about him, and heard perfectly a voice saying: The Na∣tions shall be spared for ten thousand Righ∣teous Persons sake. Upon this gracious answer, he turned his prayers into praises and Thanksgiv∣ing unto God for this speedy answer to his rnest requests, insomuch as all the company could not but take notice of it thought none of them heard the voice but himself only. Mrs. Winter, upon some occasion was from home at this time: Yet a Gentlewoman that was presen told her afterwards, that her Husband that day was so levated in prayer, that he exceeded himself; and she never heard him better, and that he was ans∣wered in his Petitions before he ose from his knees. Mrs. Winter asked her, how the knew that? She answered, By his large thanksgivings after he had done pleading with the Lord: Also a while after a Gentlman coming to see him, that had been present that day, embrac∣ed him, saying, That he was a man, greatly beloved of the Lord, for that
he could no sooner ask, but he was ans∣wered, and his Petitions granted. And the week after they heard that the pride of the souldiery had met with a great check. Doctor Winter afterwards told his Wife that he now perceived that a voice might be spoken to one in a Room, and none else hear it. When he lay upon his death-bed, his Wife again asked him about it, and he said, he did as plainly hear the Voice, as he heard her speak. She asked him, If the Voice was like to hers? He said, No, it was another kind of Voice. Thus we read, Acts 22.9. That the men that went with Saul to Damascus, Saw indeed the Light, and were afraid: but they heard not the Voice that spake to him. X. At Dublin there was one Mrs Smith, a Merchants Wife, which had been many daies in labour: Her Child was dead within her. She had good experienced Midwives, and one Man-Midwife, and yet she could not be deli∣vered. At last, one morning they sent for Doctor Winter to pray with her, saying, that she could not live till night, being so far spent. But it fell out that he was out of Town. At night he came
home, and then they sent an other mes∣senger for him, (her Husband saying, that she was not yet dead, but very near unto it) Doctor Winter (though very weary) went to the house, and prayed very earnestly unto God for her. When his prayer was ended, he spake to the good women about her to raise her up, and to use all good means for her help, saying that she should live. But they (being hopeless of her Life, and delivery) desired that she might be no more tor∣tured, but that she might die in peace. Yet Doctor Winter perswaded them to make one further tryall, which at last they assented to, and had good success: for in a short time she was safely deli∣vered of her dead Child. This Mrs. Smith, proving afterwards with Child again, a Friend said to her, She hoped it would be now better with her, than it was the time before: No (said she) Doctor Winter is gone, and I must now die; which also came to pass: for she could not be delivered. XI. After Doctor Winters return in∣to England, he, with his Wife, came to London, and for a month sojourned in Doctor Drakes House: In which time his second Daughter fell sick of the
Twisting of the Guts. She had two able Physitians, Doctor French, and Doctor Cox. She lay in very great tor∣ture from Munday till Saturday night, and the Doctors had very little hope of her Life. On Saturday evening Doctor Winter came in, and meeting with her Sister, asked how she did? Her Sister answered, she thought that now she was very near unto death: For that the Do∣ctors, having prescribed something to be given her in a Spoon, her teeth were so set, that her Aunt and she had much ado to open them to put it into her mouth. But said she, Sir, what do you think of her? Give me (said he) a can∣dle, that I may go into my chamber, and anon I will tell you whether she shall live or die. When he came down, she met him at the foot of the stairs, and asked him what he thought of her now? He ans∣wered, Your Sister will live. And go∣ing up into her Chamber, he spake to his Wife, and bid her to use all means possible for her recovery: For (said he) she must not dye this time. His Wife beg∣ged of him not to be so confident, for that she was very near unto Death, and no hopes of Life remained. Yet he
told her Mother, and Aunts that she should recover, and live. His Wife was much troubled at it, notwithstanding all her former experiences: But the next day, signs of her recovery began to appear, and within a little space she was per∣fectly well. Some other instances might be given, but these may suffice, as evi∣dently demonstrating that the Lord is a Prayer-hearing God, That never saith to the seed o Jacob, Seek ye my Face in vain. Probably, the incredulous World will not believe these things to btrue but judge them rather to be Romances, and fancies than realities: But there are so many Consciencious Persons, and of Good credit yet living, who can, and will attest the Truth of them, that there is no place left to distrust, or doubting, among those that are sober, and judicious. Amos 3.7. Surely the Lord God will d nothing, but he revealeth his secret un his Servants the Prophets. John 16.23.—Whatsoever you shall ask the Father in my Name; He will give it you, v. 24. Hitherto have you asked no∣thing in my Name. Ask, and ye shall receive that you Joy may be full.
A Letter written by Doctor Winter, to a Gentle∣man desiring of him a short and plain account of what was necessary to the Person that would be saved. THough many things in Scripture be required of a Christian which he is bound to observe, not to tain any Truth in unrighteousness, for whosoever prsisteth in any sinful course against his light of Conscience, without remorse, and hearty sorrow for the same sinneth fundamentally, Rom 1.18. For the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against a ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth in unrighteousness. Yet there are not many things in themselves absolutely necessary to selvation, without which no man can be Saved. These God in much mercie hath set down in holy itt, that the meanest and weakest Christians may understand, Luke 19.42. If thou hadst known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things which belong unto thy peace! &c. From whence  may observe that a man may know many things, d yet not know the thing which concerns his ever∣lasting
peace. The understanding is the first that lives, and the last that dies. I say then, 1. First, It is absolutely necessary that there be a work of illumination and conviction, and that a clear, full, particular, and through work be upon the under∣standing: which must be renewed and sanctified as well as the will, John 16.9. when the Spirit is come he will reprove the world of Sin, because they believe not on me, Eph. 4.23. And be re∣newed in the Spirit of your minds, so that the soul see sin to be the greatest evil in the world, and Christ the greatest good, the only excellent and desireable thing, Psal. 73.25. Whom have I in Heaven but Thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee, Philip. 3.8. Yea doubtless, and I count all things but loss, for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord: for whom I have suffered to loss of all things, and do coun them but Dung that I may win Christ. In the the young man in the Gospel failed, for though  came running to Christ, yea kneeled down to him, Himself being a Ruler, he thought he had kept the Commandments from his youth; he thought he saw a excellency in Christ; else why went he away sorrow∣ful: yet because he saw a greater excellency in the world, and Embraced that rather than Christ,  perished, Mark 10.17. Luke 18.18. 2 Secondly, It is necessary that the heart be broken. Psal. 51.17. A broken and a contrite heart, O
God, thou wilt not despise. A broken heart is the sound heart, the oyl of Grace is poured into the broken Vessel: as first the heart must be broken with hearty sorrow for sin, as sin; as it is a breach of the Law and Command of God, 1 John 3.4. Whosoever committeth Sin, Transgresseth the Law: for Sin is the transgression of the Law. We must grieve for Christ Crucified by and for us, Zech. 12.10. They shall look upon me whom they have Pierced, and they shall mourn, as one mourn∣eth for his only Son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his first-born. Till Sin is bitter to us, Christ will not be sweet to us. Again he must be broken down, 2 Cor. 10.5. That all the strong holds of Sin be tumbled down, and all those high thoughts, and strong imaginations be laid low, that those invincible forts of sin be level'd, and the will subdued to the will of Christ. Again third∣ly, the heart must be broken through, that the heart be contrite, Psal. 51.17. A Contrite heart, O God, thou wilt not despise. The heart must be as it were shivered in pieces, and melted before the Lord; not like an Earthen Jugg, that is broken indeed, but the pieces remain hard as before; and thus it was with Pharaoh King of Egypt. Again fourthly, its necessary the heart be broken from Sin, as well as for sin, its called Repentance from dead works, Heb. 6.1. He that doth not break off his former sins, and bid adiew to
them, no more to act sin, and live in sin, as far∣merly, cannot expect to be saved in the day of Christ 1 Pet. 2.24. Who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the Tree, that we being dead to sins, should live unto righteousness. 3. Thirdly, Its necessary that we should be emptied of all self righteousness, so that we rest not in any thing wrought in us, or by us as meritorious. Paul is this sense looks it all as drss, and dung, and at the last day when perfect, desires only to be found in Christ, not having his own righteousness, which is of the Law, hut that which is of Faith by Jesus Christ, Philip. 3.9. And as when a man gives possession, to another of an house, he turns all out, no qui thing must be there; so all Sin, and all confidence i our own righteousness turn out, that Christ aln may take possession of the Soul, which he hath pur∣chased long ago at so dear a rate. 4. Fourthly, Its necessary that we he regenerate, and born from above, John 3.3, 5. Jesus said  Nidmns, except a man be born again, he can∣not enter into the Kingdom of God. Old things are past away, and all things become now. W mut have new thoughts, new desires, new sea new sorrows, new Joys, new speeches, new compa∣ny, new objects, a new conversation: in a word that  live frm Christ, according to Christ, and for Christ ends; and not contend with Christ any more, ab the preeminence of the first cause, and the last end;
but make Christ the Alpha and Omega in all things 5. Fifthly, That we close with Christ by faith, as our Lord and Saviour, John 1.12. But as many as received him, to them he gave power to be∣come the sons of God, even to them that believe in his name. The soul being first sensible of its lst estate, and secondly seeing a necessity of a Sa∣viour, Acts 4.12. And thirdly being taken with the beauty and excellency of Christ, then faith closeth with Christ as Lord and Saviour; takes Christ as a Prophet to instruct him, and as a Priest to save him, and as a King to rule over him: And after∣ward the soul attaines to assurance of his Love, 1 John 5.13. These things have I written to you, that you believe on the name of the Son of God; that ye may know that ye have Eternal Life, by a holy walking with God, for in that sense good works justifie Faith declaratively, as faith doth the sinner. 6. Sixthly and lastly, that we be sincere: that is, first to hate all sin and loth it. Secondly, perform, or endeavour to perform all known duties, Psal. 119.6. I shall not be ashamed, when I have respect to all thy Commandments. Thirdly, to walk as in the sight of God, Esa. 48 3. Remem∣ber now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walk∣ed before thee in truth and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight. Fourth∣ly, That though we do but little, yet what we do, we do for Gods ends, that he may be glorified, 1
Cor. 10.31. Whether therefore ye eat or drink, or whatever you do, do all to the glory of God. O then let us be sincere, else we shall lose the things that we have wrought, 2. John 8. Look to your selves, that we lose not these things which we have wrought, but that you receive a full reward. For this heaven of hypocrisie spreads, swells, and sowres all we do, and so mas all. It spreads and sowrs, then it puffs up the Soul with spiritual pride, and no sin more dangerous than this. Hypocrisie makes all we do, but as shining sins, as the gilded Mice of the Philistins, that were sightly in the eyes of men; but of no value with God. Jehu did many glorious things but all was nothing, because his heart was not upright with God or before God. These are the things that accompany Salvation, which whoever attains unto shall certainly be Saved; without which the Lord according to Scripture rule will not Save you; if they be not really, and effectu∣ally wrought in you, by the holy spirit. Oh! then let me beseech you to whom these lines shall come, Strive to enter in at the straight gate: be sure you build not upon a sandy foundation, Mat. 7.26. But upon the rock Jesus Christ, Mat. 7.24. Rest not in any thing short of Christ. Take heed you perish not near the City of refuge, but consider that saying of Christ, Mat. 7.22. Many will say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord have we not
Prophesied in thy name, open to us, to whom Christ will say depart from me I never knew you. Now to attain to what is here said; is daily to seek to the Lord, who turns the hearts, as rivers of Waters, Prov. 21.1. And hath Promised to take away the hearts of Stone and give hearts of Flesh, and to put his spirit in us and cause us to walk in his wayes, Ezek. 36.26, 27. We must attend in all holy ordinances; as constant prayer in secret and with others: In hearing and daily reading the holy Scriptures, some part of them. Also the Sacraments must not be neglected. Christ is a Prince and a Saviour: He gives Repen∣tance and remission of sins: Acts 5.31. He is a God hearing Prayers; to him must all flesh come saith the Psalmist, and those that come unto him he will in no wise cast off, John 6.37. Christ will forgive iniquities, transgressions and sins. For this purpose the Son of God was manifested that he might destroy the works of the Devil, 1 John 3.8. Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will ease you, and you shall find rest to your Souls, Mat. 11.28. Christ is our Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30.
A Letter written by Doctor Winter, to a Gentle∣woman who was under great Trouble of mind. My dear Friend and Sister in Christ, I Received your welcome Letter, and return you ma∣ny thanks for your dear affections, and fervent Prayers for me an unworthy Instrument in the hands of Christ. But am very sorry that you are re∣lapsed into your former doubting thoughts, which I entreat you to wave and lay aside, lest Christ upbraid you as he did his Disciples, Mark 16. with your unbelief and hardness of heart. When Christ was risen from the dead, and his work was done, he doth not go to Heaven, but staies on Earth (a place not fit for a glorified Body) and conversa with his Disciples, and that not so much for his  Honour to prove himself not to be held by the hs of death, as to strengthen our Faith; and in the day of his Resurrection he appeared five times, like one that cannot endure to be out of our company, though he ever finds something among us, that might justly make him withdraw, as he did among
them; therefore the Lord upbraids them, for want (1) of clearness of faith, Luke 24.26. (2) of fulness of faith, ver. 25. Slow of heart to believe (all) that the Prophets have spoken, (3) of comfort of faith ver. 17. And are sad. (4) Of not owning their faith. ver. 21. We trusted that it had been he that should have de∣livered Israel. (5) Of readiness of faith. Ver. 25. O fools [and slow of heart] to believe: He had expressed abundance of love in satisfying all the claimes that Justice would make; and when Satan verily thought he had dispatched him out of the way (He being buryed and that as a malefactor) so that either he should not rise at all, or not in glory and reputation among men; now Christ riseth in despight of Hell, and the Father gives him glory, 2 Pet. 1.17. That our faith and hope may be in God, and therefore Christ expresseth a dissatisfaction, and discontent at them for their unkindness, and unthankfulness, as if he had said, Time was when you were glad to know any thing that concerned me, when you hung upon me, and whatever I said to you was a Law, and catertained with greediness, Why then are ye so backward now? Are my merits ere a whit the less? Or are you not sensible of your need, that you are so slow of heart to believe in me your everlast∣ing Redeemer? Now consider what Christ spake to them, He speakes to you (for all Scripture is
writt for our Learning) and though Christ will not condemn you; yet he may and he doth (it seems) upbraid you; and such upbraidings and frowns of Christ, are or should be as much as death, yea Hell it self to a believer, as Hell was before we believed: For the Conscience is mn wounded by way of Gods special love as a Friend, than by his hatred as an Enemy. If it were possible for a man to be thrown out of Gods arm of Love into Hell, Hell would be more to him than any other. For this made Christs sufferings so great, because he was so infinitely beloved of the Father as alwaies lying in his bsome. Con∣sider what I say, as Christ takes it ill that we should question his Love; so of all sins he will bear with none less than that of Ʋnbelief. The Dis∣ciples had many failings, but he upbraids them with no sin so much as Unbelief, as being of all sins the most grievou to him; therefore as you would make Conscience of any other sin, see that you make Conscience of this, namely of not believ∣ing in the Son of God, 1 John 3 23. Consider further why were these doubtings of Thomas and the Disciples ecorded, but to streng∣then our faith, they doubted of the Resurrecti∣on of Christ that the world might not doubt; and tis observable, that Thomas doubted more than all the rest; therefore he bore a more emi∣nent testimony to Christ than they did; crying
out My Lord and my God, being the first that wned Christ as God; Go you and do likewise. Trust perfectly in the grace of the Lord Jesus; and to encourage you, remember (1) you have his Word for salvation, and that Word to us surer than that voice from Heaven; This is my well beloved Son, hear Him, 2 Pet. 1.19. And the Earth shall sooner reel, than the Word and Promise of God fail. (2) You have his Covenant the sure mer∣cies of David, Jer. 31.3, 17. If Heaven above can be measured, and the foundations of the Earth searched out beneath. I will also cast off all the seed of Israel, for all that which they have done. (3) You have the Attributes of God for you, the Pillars of Heaven, yea the Pillars of God, and are not these sufficient to support your soul? There is not one Attribute of God against you, but all for you, yea Justice it self; so that you may plead with God, not only in point of mercy, but of Justice also; for Christ hath satisfied for all your sins, therefore (with reverence be it spoken) God cannot in justice require the same debt twice of your Surety, and of you also, see Rom. 3.2. (4) You have this attested by the broad Seal of Heaven, namely the Sacrament and Privy Seal of the spirit, called the Earnest of the Spirit against that day, and then there will be no
need of that Earnest, when we have the pur∣chased possession; but his Earnest shewes you, that he is in Earnest, not in Jest and Gd will not assuredly lose his Earnest, which is pare of the bargain and confirms it to you. (5) Consider all the glory of the Father  upon Christ was, that our faith and hope might be in God; the Jews slighted Christ,  him, but had they seen him in glory they would have believed on him. (6) Christ should not discharge his office, if he should not reeive such as you, and do you think that Christ will be unfaithful to his Father, or to poor souls that come unto God by him? I tell you the Lord hath made two sorts of Promises (1) of Faith, John 6.37. All that the Father giveth me, shall come to me, namely, by Faith. (2) To Faith as it Follows in the same verse, [and he that cometh I will in no wise cast out.] (1) Of the Church, (2) Of my heart, (3) Of Heaven: Therefore make a venture and cast your soul on him, who will not sail to keep safely that which is committed to his trust. And let me tell you farther, we are the Embassadours of Christ to treat with sinners in Christs name, upon his own terms, and there∣fore if you come in upon the terms of the Gos∣spel, out of the sense of the poverty of your spirit,
and close with Christ, as seeing an excellency in him, above all the world, so as to give your self to him, and never to part with him, I say then that Christ is bound, and must of necessity make good, what his Embassadours have propounded and concluded in his name, in whose name according to the contents of your Letter, and the former know∣ledge I have had of you, I do declare as a Minister of Christ that all your sins are forgiven you, and therefore I charge you that you rowle your self upon the Lord, the burden is too heavy for you to bear, but what you cannot bear that rowle upon the Lord, and know assuredly though we be unfaithful, yet he abideth faithful and cannot deny himself; the Promise is made to the truth and not to the degrees of grace. Lastly, if you persist in unbelief, consider how grievous this is to Christ: forget not what was said before, that Christ upbraided the Disciples, and doubtless the anger of Christ was never greater than the offence, nor the reproof unsutable unto the fault, therefore chide your soul; Why dost thou cast down thy self (O my soul?) Why art thou disquieted within me; still trust in God, who is the help of my faces, that is, who saves eminently, perspicuously, so that a man may see Salvation in the face. If all that I have said will not prevail, know I have your Hand and Seal against you, and
must needs witness against you in that day; but I hope better things of you, that the Bowels of Christ will melt you, and his arms open'd upon the Cross allure you to run to him, who never rejected any that came to him; and do you think that you shall be the first? As to that Query What is the lowest de∣gree of faith? I answer, some say the lowest act of faith is to see a possibility of mercy, but if I should say so, I should exclude many a pre∣cious Saint out of Heaven: I say then the lowest act of faith is to put a high estimate upon Christ as the chiefest of ten thousand, Cant. 5.10. So as to cleave to him, and not to part with him for ever, though the soul see no probability, no not possibility of mercy, this is poverty of spirit, the lowest round of Jacobs Ladder. To make this plain suppose such a Maid hath strong affections to such a Person, but he is otherwise inclined, yea ingaged, so that there is no possibility of obtaining him, yet there is true Love: The Case suits with many a soul, that cannot see any possibility of enjoying Christ, yet Loves him dearly, could be content to begg with him, why here is true Love, and therefore faith; for faith worketh by Love. Wherefore I say look after Christ with a wishly eye, with a long look, and you shall be saved, Isa. 45. For the prayers made toward Christ the living Temple, are heard
as well as the prayers that are made in the Temple, though they cannot evidence their union with Christ. My Dear Friend I commend these lines to you. The Pin of the Dyall points at the hour of the day, but cannot tell what a Clock 'tis, unless the Sun shine: unless the Lord shine upon your heart you can see no light of grace, or comfort, The Lord create the fruit of the lips peace, which I begg for you. Pray for me still, as I desire to do for You, Your assured Friend, S. W.
