B4774 11781974 49120
THE SPEECHES OF THE LORD DIGBY IN THE HIGH Court of Parliament, CONCERNING GRIEVANCES, and the Trienniall PARLIAMENT. Printed for Thomas Walkely, 1641.
THE LORD DIGBYES SPEECH, the 9th of Novem. 1640. Mr. Speaker, YOU have received now a so∣lemne accompt from most of the Shires of England, of the severall grievances and oppressions they sustaine, and nothing as yet from Dorset-shire; Sir, I would not have you thinke that I serve for a Land of Goshen, that we live there in Sunshine, whilest darknes and plagues overspread the rest of the Land: As little would I have you thinke, that being under the same sharpe measure that the rest, we are either insensible and benummed, or that that
Shire wanteth a servant to represent its suf∣ferings bouldly. It is true Mr. Speaker, the County of Dorset hath not digested its Complaints into that formall way of Petition, which others (I see) have done; but have intrusted them to my Partners and my delivery of them by word of mouth unto this Honourable house. And there was given uuto us in the County Court, the day of our Election, a short memoriall of the heads of them, which was read in the hearing of the Free-holders there present, who all unanimously with one voyce signifi∣ed upon each particular, that it was their desire that we should represent them to the Parliament, which with your leave, I shall do, And these they are. 1. The great and intollerable burthen of Ship-money, touching the legality whereof they are unsatisfied. 2. The many great abuses in pressing of Souldiers, and raysing Moneys concerning the Same. 3. The multitude of Monopolies. 4. The new Canon, and the Oath to be taken by Lawyers, Divines, &c.
5. The Oath required to be taken by Church Officers to present according to Ar∣ticles new and unusuall. Besides this, there was likewise presented to us by a very considerable part of the Cler∣gie of that County a note of remembrance containing these two particulars. First, the imposition of a new Oath requi∣red to be taken by all Ministers and others, which they conceive to be illegall, and such as they cannot take with a good Consci∣ence. Secondly, the requiring of a pretended Benevolence, but in effect a Subsidy, under the penalty of Suspension, Excommunicati∣on, and Deprivation, all benefit of appeale excluded. This is all we had particularly in Charge: But that I may not appeare a remisse servant of my Countrey, and of this House; give me leave to adde somwhat of my own Sense. Truly Mr. Speaker, the injurious sufferings of some worthy members of this House, since the dissolution of the two last Parliaments, are so fresh in my memory, that I was resol∣ved not to open my Mouth, in any businesse wherein freedome and plaine dealing were requisite, untill such time, as the breach of our priviledges were vindicated, and the safety of speech setled.
But since such excellent Members of our House thought fit the other day to lay aside that Caution, and to discharge their soules so freely in the way of zeale to his Majesties service, and their Countries good: I shall in∣terpret that confidence of theirs for a lucky Omen to this Parliament, and with your per∣mission licence my thoughts too, a little. Mr. Speaker, under those heads which I proposed to you, as the grievances of Dorset-shire, I suppose are comprised the greatest part of the mischiefs which have of late yeers layed battery either to our Estates, or Con∣sciences. Sir, I doe not conceive this the fit season to search and ventilate particulars, yet I pro∣fesse I cannot forbeare to adde somwhat, to what was said the last day by a learned Gen∣tleman of the long Robe, concerning the acts of that reverend new Synod, made of an old Convocation. Doth not every Parliament mans heart rise to see the Prelats thus usurpe to themselves the Grand Preeminence of Parliament? The granting of Subsidies, and that under so preposterous a name as of a Benevolence, for that which is a Malevolence indeed; A Malevolence I am confident in those that granted it, against Parliaments: and a Malevolence surely in those that refuse it, against those that granted it: for how can
it incite lesse? when they see wrested from them what they are not willing to part with, under no lesse a penalty then the losse both of Heaven and Earth: of Heaven, by Excommu∣nication; and of the Earth by Deprivation; and this without Redemption by appeale. What good Christian can think with patience on such an insnaring Oath, as that which is by the new Canons enjoyned to be taken by all Ministers, Lawyers, Physicians, and Gra∣duates in the Universities? where, besides the swearing such an impertinence, as that things necessary to salvation are contained in Dis∣cipline; besides the swearing those to be of Divine right, which amongst the learned, never pretended to it, as the Arch things in our Hierarchy. Besides, the swearing not to consent to the change of that, which the State may upon great reason think fit to al∣ter; Besides the bottomlesse perjury of an &c. Besides all this Mr. Speaker, men must sweare that they sweare freely and voluntarily what they are compelled unto; and lastly, that they sweare that Oath in the literall sence, wher∣of no two of the makers themselves, that I have heard of, could ever agree in the under∣standing. In a word, Mr. Speaker, to tell you my opi∣nion of this Oath, it is a Covenant against the King, for Bishops and the Hierarchie; as
the Scottish Covenants is against them, only so much worse then the Scottish, as they ad∣mit not of the Supremacy in Ecclesiasticall Affaires, and we are sworne unto it. Now Mr. Speaker, for those particular heads of grievances whereby our estates and pro∣perties are so radically invaded; I suppose, (as I said before) that it is no season now to enter into a strict discussion of them; only thus much I shall say of them, with appli∣cation to the Countrey for which I serve, that none can more justly complaine, since none can more justly challenge exemption from such burthens then Dorset-shire; whe∣ther you consider it is a Countrey subsisting much by Trade; or as none of the most po∣pulous; or as exposed as much as any to for∣raigne Invasion. But alasse Mr. Speaker, particular lamen∣tations are hardly distinguishable in univer∣sall groanes. Mr. Speaker, it hath bin a Metaphor fre∣quent in Parliament, and if my memory faile me not, was made use of in the Lord Keepers Speech at the opening of the last, that what money Kings raised from their Subjects, they were but as vapours drawne up from the Earth by the Sunne, to be distilled upon it
againe in fructifying showers: The Compa∣rison Mr. Speaker, hath held of late yeares in this Kingdome too unluckily: what hath bin raysed from the Subject by those violent attractions, hath bin formed, it is true, into Clouds, but how? to darken the Sunnes own lustre, and hath fallen againe upon the Land only in Haylstones and Milldews, to batter and prostrate still more and more our liber∣ties, to blast and wither our affections; had not the later of these bin still kept alive by our Kings owne personall vertues, which will ever preserve him in spight of ill Counsel∣lors, a sacred object, both of our admiration and loves. Mr. Speaker, It hath bin often said in this House, and I think can never be too often repeated, That the Kings of England can doe no wrong; but though they could Mr. Speaker, yet Princes have no part in the ill of those actions which their Judges assure them to be Just, their Counsellors that they are Pru∣dent, and their Divines that they are Con∣scientious. This Consideration Mr. Speaker, leadeth me to that which is more necessary farre, at this season, then any farther laying open of our miseries, that is, the way to the reme¦dy,
by seeking to remove from our Sove∣raigne, such unjust Judges, such pernitious Counsellours, and such disconscient Divines, as have of late yeares, by their wicked pra∣ctises, provoked aspersions upon the govern∣ment of the gratiousest and best of Kings. Mr. Speaker, let me not be misunderstood, I levell at no man with a forelayd designe▪ let the faults and those well proved lead us to the men: It is the only true Parliamentary method, and the only fit one to incline our Soveraigne. For it can no more consist with a gracious and righteous Prince to expose his servants upon irregular prejudices; then with a wise Prince to withhold Malefactors how great soever from the Course of orderly Justice. Let me acquaint you Mr. Speaker, with an Aphorisme in Hippocrates, no lesse Authentick (I think) in the Body politike, then in the na∣turall. This it is Mr. Speaker, Bodyes to be throughly and effectually purged must have their humours first made fluid and movea∣able. The Humours that I understand to have caused all the desperate maladies of this Nation, are the ill Ministers. To purge them away cleerly, they must be first loosened, un∣setled, and extenuated, which can no way be
effected with a gracious Master, but by truly representing them unworthy of his protecti∣on. And this leadeth me to my motion, which is, that a select Comittee may be appointed to draw out of all that hath bin here represen∣ted, such a Remonstrance as may be a faithfull and lively representation unto his Majestie of the deplorable estate of this his Kingdome, and such as may happily point out unto his cleere and excellent judgement, the perniti∣ous Authors of it. And that this Remon∣strance being drawn, we may with all speed repayre to the Lords, and desire them to joyn with us in it; And this is my humble motion.
THE LORD DIGBYES SPEECH IN THE HOVSE OF Commons, to the Bill for trienniall PARLIAMENTS. Jan. 19. 1640. Mr. Speaker, I Rise not now with an intent to speake to the frame and structure of this Bill, nor much by way of answer to objections that may be made; I hope there will bee no occasion of that, but that we shall concurre all unanimously in what concerneth all so uni∣versally. Only Sir, by way of preparation, to the end that we may not be discouraged in this great
worke by difficulties that may appeare in the way of it, I shall deliver unto you my appre∣hensions in generall of the vast importance and necessity that wee should goe thorow with it. The Result of my sence is in short this. That unlesse for the frequent convening of Parliaments there be some such Course setled, as may not be eluded; neither the people can be prosperous and secure, nor the King him∣selfe solidly happy. I take this to be the V∣num necessarium: Let us procure this, and all our other desires will effect themselves: if this Bill miscarry, I shall have left me no publique hopes, and once past, I shall bee freed of all publique feares. The Essentialnes Sir of frequent Parlia∣ments to the happinesse of this Kingdome, might be inferr'd unto you, by the reason of contraries, from the wofull experience which former times have had of the mischievous ef∣fects of any long intermission of them? But Mr. Speaker, why should we clime high∣er then the levell wee are on, or thinke fur∣ther then our owne Horizon, or have recourse for examples in this businesse, to any other promptuary then our owne memories; nay then the experience almost of the youngest heere?
The reflection backward on the distractions of former times upon intermission of Parlia∣ment, and the consideration forward of the mischiefes likely still to grow from the same cause if not removed, doubtlesly gave first life and being to those two dormant Statutes of Edward the 3d, for the yearly holding of Parliament: And shall not the fresh and bleeding experience in the present age of miseries from the same spring, not to be pa∣ralleld in any other, obtaine a wakening, resurrection for them? The Intestine distempers Sir, of former ages upon the want of Parliaments, may ap∣peare to have had some other cooperative causes, as somtimes, unsuccessefull Warres abroad; somtimes, the absence of the Prince; somtimes, Competitions of Titles to the Crown; somtimes, perhaps the vices of the King himselfe. But let us but consider the posture, the aspect of this state, both toward it selfe, and the rest of the world, the person of our So∣veraigne, and the nature of our sufferings▪ since the third of his Reigne. And there can be no cause colourably inventable, wher∣unto to attribute them, but the intermission, or which is worse, the undue frustration of
Parliament, by the unlucky use, if not abuse of Prerogative in the dissolving them. Take into your view Gentlemen, a State in a state of the greatest quiet and security that can be fancyed, not only injoying the calmest peace it selfe, but to improve and secure its happy condition, all the rest of the world at the same time in Tempest, in Com∣bustions, in uncomposable Warres. Take into your view Sir, a King Sove∣raigne to three Kingdomes, by a Concen∣tring of all the Royall lynes in his Person, as undisputably as any Mathematicall ones in Euclide. A King firme and knowing in his Religion, eminent in vertue; A King that had in his own time given all the Rights and Liberties of his Subjects a more cleare and ample confirmation freely and gratiously, then any of his Predecessors (when the peo∣ple had them at advantage) extortedly, I mean in the Petition of Right. This is one Mappe of England, Mr Speaker, A man Sir, that should present unto you now, a Kingdome, groaning under that supreme Law, which Salus populi periclitata would enact. The liberty, the property of the Sub∣ject fundamentally subverted, ravisht away
by the violence of a pretended necessity; a triple Crown shaking with distempers; men of the best Conscience ready to fly into the wildernesse for Religion. Would not one sweare that this were the Antipodes to the other; and yet let me tell you Mr. Speaker, this is a Mappe of England too, and both at the same time true. As it cannot be denyed Mr. Speaker, that since the Conquest there hath not bin in this Kingdome a fuller concurrence of all cir∣cumstances in the former Caracter, to have made a Kingdome happy, then for these 12 yeares last past; so it is most certaine, that there hath not bin in all that deduction of ages, such a Conspiracie, if one may so say of all the Elements of mischiefe in the second Caracter, to bring a flourishing Kingdome if it were possible, to swift ruine and deso∣lation. I will be bold to say, Mr. Speaker, and I thanke God, we have so good a King, under whom we may speak boldly of the abuse of his power by ill Ministers, without reflexion upon his person. That an Accumulation of all the publique Grievances since Magna Carta, one upon
another, unto that houre in which the Pe∣tition of Right past into an Act of Parliament, would not amount to so oppressive; I am sure not to so destructive a height and magnitude to the rights and property of the Subject, as one branch of our beslaving since the Petition of Right. The branch I meane is the judgement con∣cerning Ship-money. This being a true re∣presentation of England in both aspects. Let him Mr. Speaker, that for the unmatcht oppression and enthralling of free Subjects in a time of the best Kings raigne, and in memory of the best Laws enacting in favour of Subjects liberty, can find a truer Cause then the ruptures and intermission of Par∣liaments. Let him, and him alone be against the setling of this inevitable way for the fre∣quent holding of them. 'Tis true Sir, wicked Ministers have bin the proximate causes of our miseries, but the want of Parliaments the primary, the efficient Cause. Ill Ministers have made ill times, but that Sir, hath made ill Ministers.
I have read among the Laws of the Athe∣nians, a forme of recourse in their Oaths and vows of greatest and most publique concern∣ment to a three-fold Deity, Supplicum Exau∣ditori, Purgatori, Malorum depulsori. I doubt not but we here assembled for the Common-wealth in this Parliament, shall meet with all these Attributes in our Sove∣raigne. I make no question, but he will gratiously heare our Supplications. Purge away our Grievances, and expell Malefactors, that is, remove ill Ministers, and put good in their places. No lesse can be expected from his wisdome and goodnesse. But let me tell you Mr. Speaker, if we par∣take not of one Attribute more in him; if we addresse not our selves unto that, I meane Bonorum Conservatori; we can have no solid, no durable Comfort in all the rest. Let his Majesty heare our Complaint never so Compassionatly.
Let him purge away our Grievances never so efficaciously. Let him punish and dispell ill Ministers never so exemplarily. Let him make choyce of good ones never so exactly. If there be not a way settled to preserve and keep them good; the mischiefes and they will all grow againe like Sampsons Locks, and pull down the House upon our heads. Beleeve it Mr. Speaker, they will. It hath bin a Maxime among the wisest Legislators, that whosoever meanes to settle good Laws, must proceed in them, with a sinister opinion of all Mankind; and suppose that whosoever is not wicked, it is for want only of the opportunity. It is that opportu∣nity of being ill Mr. Speaker, that we must take away, if ever we meane to be happy, which can never be done, but by the frequencie of Parliaments. No State can wisely be confident of any publique Ministers continuing good, longer then the Rod is over him.
Let me appeale to all those that were present in this House at the agitation of the Petition of Right. And let them tell them∣selves truly, of whose promotion to the ma∣nagement of affaires doe they think the ge∣nerality would at that time have had better hopes then of Mr. Noy, and Sir Thomas Went∣worth, both having bin at that time, and in that businesse as I have heard, most keen and active Patriots, and the later of them to the e∣ternall aggravation of his Infamous treachery to the Common-wealth be it spoken, the first mover, and insiister to have this clause added to the Petition of Right, that for the comfort and safety of his Subjects, his Majestie would be pleased to declare his will and pleasure, that all his Ministers should serve him ac∣cording to the Laws and Statutes of the Realme. And yet Mr. Speaker, to whom now can all the inundations upon our liberties under pretence of Law, and the late shipwrack at once of all our propertie, be attributed more then to Noy, and those, and all other mis∣chiefes whereby this Monarchy hath bin brought almost to the brinke of destruction, so much to any as to that Grand Apostate to the Common-wealth, the now Lievtenant of Ireland?
The first I hope God hath forgiven in the other world; and the later must not hope to be pardoned it in this, till he be dispatcht to the other. Let every man but consider those men as once they were. The excellent Law for the security of the Subject enacted immediatly before their com∣ing to imployment, in the contriving wher∣of themselves were principall Actors. The goodnesse and vertue of the King they served, and yet the high and publique op∣pressions that in his time they have wrought. And surely there is no man but will conclude with me, that as the deficience of Parliament hath bin the Causa Causarum of all the mis∣chiefes and distempers of the present times: so the frequencie of them is the sole Catho∣lique Antidote that can preserve and secure the future from the like. Mr. Speaker, let me yet draw my Discourse a little nearer to his Majesty himselfe, and tell you, that the frequencie of Parliament is most essentially necessary to the power, the security, the glory of the King.
There are two wayes Mr. Speaker, of pow∣erfull Rule, either by Feare, or Love, but one of happy and safe Rule, that is, by Love, that firmissimum Imperium quo obedientes gau∣dent. To which Camillus advised the Romans. Let a Prince consider what it is that moves a people principally to affection, and dear∣nesse, towards their Soveraigne, He shall see that there needs no other Artifice in it, then to let them injoy unmolestedly, what be∣longs unto them of right; If that have bin invaded and violated in any kind, whereby affections are alienated, the next considera∣tion for a wise Prince that would be happy, is how to regaine them, to which three things are equally necessary. Renistating them in their former liber∣ty. Revenging them of the Authors of those violations. And secureing them from Apprehensions of the like againe. The first God be thanked, we are in a good way of. The second in warme pursuit of.
But the third as essentiall as all the rest, till we be certaine of trienniall Parliament, at the least; I professe I can have but cold hopes of. I beseech you then Gentlemen, since that security for the future is so necessary to that blessed union of affections, and this Bill so necessary to that security. Let us not be so wanting to our selves; let us not be so wanting to our Soveraigne, as to forbeare to offer unto him, this power∣full, this everlasting Philter to Charme unto him the hearts of his people, whose vertue can never evaporate. There is no man Mr. Speaker, so secure of anothers friendship, but will thinke fre∣quent intercourse and accesse very requisite to the support, to the Confirmation of it: Especially if ill offices have bin done between them; if the raysing of jealousies hath bin attempted. There is no Friend but would be impati∣ent to be debarred from giving his Friend succour and reliefe in his necessities.
Mr. Speaker, permit me the comparison of great things with little, what friendship, what union can there be so comfortable, so happy, as between a gracious Soveraigne and his people, and what greater misfortune can there be to both, then for them to be kept from intercourse, from the meanes of clearing misunderstandings from interchange of mutuall benefits. The people of England Sir, cannot open their Eares, their Hearts, their Mouthes, nor their Purses, to his Majestie, but in Parlia∣ment. We can neither heare him, nor complain, nor acknowledge, nor give, but there. This Bill Sir, is the sole Key that can open the way to a frequencie of those reciprocall endeerments, which must make and perpe∣tuate the happinesse of the King and King∣dome. Let no man object any derogation from the Kings Prerogative by it. We doe but present the Bill, 'tis to be made a Law by
him, his honour, his power, will be as conspi∣cuous, in commanding at once that Parlia∣ment shall assemble every third yeare, as in commanding a Parliament to be called this or that yeare: there is more of Majestie in ordaining primary and universall Causes, then in the actuating particularly of subor∣dinate effects. I doubt not but that glorious King Ed∣ward the third, when he made those Laws for the yearly Calling of Parliament, did it with a right sence of his dignity, and honour. The truth is Sir, the Kings of England are never in their glory, in their splendor, in their Majestique Soveraignty, but in Parlia∣ments. Where is the power of imposing Taxes? Where is the power of restoring from inca∣pacites? Where is the legislative Authori∣ty? Marry in the King, Mr. Speaker. But how? in the King circled in, fortified and evirtua∣ted by his Parliament. The King out of Parliament hath a limit∣ted, a circumscribed Jurisdiction. But wayted on by his Parliament, no Monarch of the East is so absolute in dispelling Grievances.
Mr. Speaker, in chasing ill Ministers, we doe but dissipate Clouds that may gather againe, but in voting this Bill, we shall contribute, as much as in us lyes to the perpetuating our Sun, our Soveraigne, in his vesticall in his noon day lustre. FINIS.
