P2468A R226459 12369303 60519
The Dancing Master: Or, plain and easie Rules for the Dancing of Country Dances, with the Tune to each Dance, to be playd on the Treble Violin. The second Edition, Enlarged and Corrected from many grosse Errors which were in the former Edition. London, Printed for John Playford at his shop in the Inner Temple near the Church Door. 1652.
To the Ingenious Reader. THe Art of Dancing called by the Ancient Greeks Orchestice, and Orchestis, is a commendable and rare Quality fit for yong Gentlemen, if opportunely and civilly used. And Plato, that Fa∣mous Philosopher thought it meet, that yong Ingenious Children be taught to Dance. It is a Qua∣lity that has been formerly honoured in the Courts of Princes, when performed by the most Noble Heroes of the Times! The Gentlemen of the Innes of Court, whose sweet and ayry Activity has crowned their Grand Solemnities with admiration to all Spectators. This Art has been anciently handled by Athenaus, Julius Pollux, Caelius Rhodiginus, and others, and much commend it to be Excellent for Recreation, af∣ter more serious Studies, making the body active and strong, gracefull in deportment, and a quaity very much beseeming a Gentleman. Yet all this should not have been an Incitement to me for Publication of th Work (knowing these Times, and the Nature of it do not agree,) But that there was then a false and surrupti∣cious Copy at the Printing Presse, which if it had been published, would have been a disparagement to the ¦lity, and the Professors thereof, and a hinderance to the Learner: Therefore for prevention of all  having at that time an Excellent Copy by me, and the assistance of a knowing Friend; I did venture th e¦suing Work to the publick view, and gentle censure of all ingenious Gentlemen, lovers of this Quality; whse favourable acceptance, has moved me to a second Edition, in which I have indeavoured to expunge those m∣ny gross Errors, which were by oversight committed in the former. Craving your favourable acceptance, I rest ever, Your servant to command, J. P.
A TABLE of the Dances contained in this Booke. ALl in a Garden green. p. 1 Adsons Saraband. p. 2 All a Mode de France. p. 3 Ay me, or the Simphony. p. 4 Argeers. p. 5 An old man is a bed full of bones. p. 6 Blew Cap. p. 7 Boat-man. p. 8 Begger Boy. p. 9 Bobbing Joe. p. 10 Bath. p. 11 Broome. p. 12 Confesse. p. 13 Chirping of the Larke. p. 14 Cast a Bell. p. 15 Chirping of the Nightingale. p. 16 Cherrily and merrily. p. 17 Country Coll. p. 18 Cuckolds all a Row. p. 19 Chestnut, or Doves Figary. p. 20 Daphne. p. 21 Drive the cold Winter away. p. 22 Dissembling Love. p. 23 Dargason, or Sedany. p. 24 Dull Sir John. p. 25 Fine Companion. p. 26 Fain I would. p. 27 Fryar and the Nun. p. 28 Grimstock. p. 29 Greenwood. p. 30 Gun. p. 31 Goddesses. p. 32 Grayes Inne Mask. p. 33 Gathering Peascods. p. 34 Glory of the West. p. 35 Hit and misse. p. 36 Health to Betty. p. 37 Have at thy Coat old Woman. p. 38 Halfe Hannikin. p. 39 Hearts Ease. p. 40 Health. p. 41 Hockley in the Hole. p. 42 Hide Parke. p. 43 If all the World were Paper. p. 44 Irish Trot. p. 45 Irish Lady, or Anniseed Robin. p. 46 Jog on. p. 47 Jack Pudding. p. 48 Jack a Lent. p. 49 Jenny pluck Pears. p. 50 I loved thee once, I love no more. p. 51 Kemps Jegg. p. 52 Kettle Drum. p. 53 Lady Spellor. p. 54
Lord of Carnarvans Jegg. p. 55 Lady Cullen. p. 56 London Gentlewoman, Or the Hemp-Dresser. p. 57 Lavena. p. 58 Lady lye near me. p. 59 Lulle me beyond thee p. 60 Mage on a Cree. p. 61 Millisons Jegg. p. 62 Merry Milk Maids. p. 63 Mill-field. p. 64 Mayd peept out at the Window. p. 65 Mayden Lane. p. 66 Milk-Mayds Bobb. p. 67 Mundesse. p. 68 Night Peece. p. 69 New Exchange. p. 70 None such. p. 71 Newcastle. p. 72 New New Nothing. p. 73 New Boe peep. p. 74 Old Mole. p. 75 Once I lov'd a Maiden fair. p. 76 Parsons farewell. p. 77 Picking of sticks. p. 78 Peppers Black. p. 79 Petticoat wag. p. 80 Pauls Steeple. p. 81 Punks Delight. p. 82 Parson upon Dorothy. p. 83 Pauls Wharfe. p. 84 Rose is white and Rose is red. p. 85 Row well ye Marriners. p. 86 Stingo, or the Oyle of Barley. p. 87 Saraband. p. 88 Spanish Jeepsie. p. 89 Skellamefago. p. 90 Spanyard. p. 91 Souldiers life. p. 92 Saint Martins. p. 93 Saturday night and Sunday morn. p. 94 Stains Morris. p. 95 Scotch Cap. p. 96 Step Stately. p. 97 Solomons Jegg. p. 98 Shepheards Holyday. p. 99 Slip. p. 100 Tom Tinker p. 101 Tutch and take. p. 102 Trenchmore. p. 103 Upon a Summers Day. p. 104 Up Tails all. p. 105 Whish. p. 106 Whirligig. p. 107 Woodicock. p. 108 Under and over. p. 109 Winif: or open the door to three. p. 110 Mr. Webs Fancy. p. 111 The Silver Faulken. p. 112
A TABLE Explaining the Characters which are set down in the Dances. A Double is four steps forward or back, closing both feet. A Single is two steps, closing both feet. Set and turn single, is a single to one hand, and a single to the other, and turn single. D. Is for a Double. S. Is for a Single. Wo. Stands for Woman. We. Stands for Women. Cu. Stands for Couple. Co. Stands for Contrary. 2. Stands for second. 3. Stands for third. 4. Stands for fourth. Stands for a strain playd once. Stands for a strain playd twice. Stands for a strain playd thrice, &c.   These Characters Expresse the Figure of the Dance. ☽ This stands for the Men. ☉ This for the Women.
All in a Garden green Longwayes for six Lead up all a D. forwards and back, set and turn S.  That again First man shake his own Wo. by the hand, then the 2. then the 3. by one hand, then by the other, kisse her twice and turn her  Shake her by the hand, then the 2. then your own by one hand, then by the other; kisse her twice and turn her Sides all, set and turn S.  That again This as before, the We. doing it Arms all, set and turn S.  That again This as before, the man doing it
Adsons Saraband Longwayes for six Lead up a D. forward and back, set and turn S.  That again  Men go a D. from your We. to the wall, come back to your We set and turn single  Then the Women as much Men go all down while the Women go up, men slip to the right hand, and We. to the left, fall even to the Co. side, set and turn S.  All this again, the Co. way to your places, set and turn single First Cu. go down betwixt the 2. they coming up, the third come up between the first, then the 2. come to their places between the third, set and turn S.  All this back again, to your places Go all to the left hand crosse the Room, set and turn S.  First and last on each side meet and go back, turn each other, the second turning his own  Change all places with your own, set and turn single  First Cu. lead down between the rest, come with a Compasse to your places, the rest following
All a Mode de France Longwayes for as many as will Lead up all a D. and back, this again  Set and turn singl, this again First Cu. meet, take both hands, and fall in between the 2. Cu. each of you turn your face towards them, and put them back, you meet the two men and We. all four fall back, and turn your Woman, so to all. Sides all to the right and left, set and turn S. this again  Then fall all into one File, each Wo. behind her own man ☉ ☽ ☉ ☽ ☉ ☽ ☉ ☽  Then armes all with your own by the right and left, and remain in the same Figure, then men fall off to the right, and We. to the left hand, fall back into the same Figure, then men to the left, and We. to the right, and back again into the same Figure, then the first man fall into his first place, and his Wo. the like, so the rest one after another, then the first man takes his Wo. by the hand, his left hand to the 2. Women, th right to the 3. and so forward, his Woman doing the like on the other side, untill you all meet again in your pla∣ces.
Aye me, Or the Simphony Longwayes for eight Lead up all a D. forward and back, back men, back We. turn S.  All that again First Cu. and last cast off and fall into the 2 and 3. place, change with your own, go on the outside into the first and last place again, then crossing over, go on the outside into the 2. and 3. place, and in doing it the men take the other men by the hands, and turn them about into the first and last place, We. doing the like with the We. the other four as much Sides all into each others places, back men, back We. turn S.  This again The first Cu. open, the 2. close, the 3. open, the 4. close, all at once, the first Cu. fall back into the 2. place, whilst the 3. fals back into the 4. the 2. slipping up into the first, and the 4. into the 3. place, thus back again into your own places: Face downward, and all this again Armes as you sided First Cu. and last meet, go through, change places with your own, the first man take the 4. by the left with his right, and turning off to the left, change places with him, and stay in the 2. and 3. place, change with your own whilst the We. do the like  The other four as much
Argeers For foure Meet all, take each others Wo. by both hands, two slips to the left, and two to the right, change places, turn your own once and a halfe  Meet again, turn each others Wo. to your places, turn your own Men change places, We. change places, set and turn S.  We. change places, men change places, set and turn S. Lead each others Wo. to the left hand, fall a D. back, and turn your own  Back, all meet again, set and turn S. Men go to the right hand, and back again, the We. going to the left, turn each others We.  We. meet and back, men go the S. Hey, and to your places Put each others Wo. back by both hands, slip to the right hand; fall down on the contrary side, set and turn S.  slip between each other to your places, put them backward and forward by both hands, set and turn S. One man cast off with the Co. Wo. the other following then they cast off the other way, the other following, to your places  Then halfe the S. Hey, turn your own, fall all a brest to the presence
An Old man is a Bed full of bones Longwayes for as many as will Lead up all a D. forward and back, set and turn S.  That again First man lead down his Wo. between the rest a D. forward and back, then lead her to the lower end, and turn her and leave her  Bring up the last Wo. in the same maner  Then the last man do the like, and fetch his own Sides all, set and turn S.  That again This as before, only crossing both hands in the mid∣dle Arms all, set and turn S.  That again This as before, holding your Wo. by one hand, and let her turn under your arm, and kisse her
Blew Cap Longwayes for six Lead up a D. forwards and back  That again First man set to his own, the last man set to his own, the 2. man salute his own and turn her  That again, the last man beginning Sides all  That again First man set to his Wo. the 2. as much, third man salute his own and turn her  That again, last man beginning Arms all  That again First man and last Wo. change places, first Wo. and last man change, middle man salute, and turn his own  All this again, to your places
Boat-man Longwayes for six Lead up a D. forwards and back, set and turn single  That again First Cu. and 2. man the S. Hey, while the other three do the like, come to your places, and turn your own  All that again, the 2. Cu. changing their ends Sides all, set and turn S.  That again The 2. man and first Cu. hands and go halfe round, while the other do the like, fall all back, then turn your own  That again, the 2. Cu. changing their ends Arms all, set and turn S.  That again First and last man and 2 Wo. hands and go round, the 2. man turn his own Wo.  First and last We. and 2. man hands and go round, the 2. man turn his Wo.
The Begger Boy Longwayes for six Lead up all forwards and back  That again First and last on each side to the wall, while the 2. Cu. meet, back all to your places, men hands and go halfe round, We. doing the like  All that again Sides all  That again First and last meet and change places, while the 2. Cu. goes back and meet; first four hands and go round, while the other set and turn S.  All this again Arms all  That againe Back all a D. meet again halfe the S. Hey  That again
Bobbing Joe Longwayes for as many as will Lead up forwards and back  That again Set and turn S.  That again First Cu. slip down between the 2. they slipping up  Then they slippe down  Hands and goe round The first two men snap their fingers, and change places  Your We. as much  Do these two changes to the last the rest following. Sides all  That again Set and turn S.  That again First two on each side, hands and go back, meet a∣gain  Cast off and come to your places First four change places with your own  Hands and go halfe round  These changes to the last. Arms all  That again Set and turn single  That again Men back a D. meet again  We. as much First Cu. change with the 2. on the same side  Then change with your own  These changes to the last.
The Bath Longwayes for as many as will Lead up all forwards and back, set and turn S.  That again  First Cu. back a D. slip into the 2. place on the out side, hands all four, and go round, do thus to the last. Sides all, set and turn S.  That again  The first four meet and crosse over, go halfe round to the right hand into each others places  Do thus to the last. Armes all, set and turn single  That again  The two first men meet and change places, the We. as much, the 2. slip down, and the first up, then the first down, and the 2. up  Do thus to the last, the rest following in or∣der.
Broome  The bonny bonny Broome For eight Lead up all a D. forwards and back, the first foure cast off and come to your places, the last foure doe the like  Lead down and as much  First and 3. Cu. meet and go back, hands and go round  The other foure redge much Sides all, set and turn S.  That again  The two first men hands and change places, and the last two men change, We. doing the same, set and turn S.  All that again Arms all, set and turn S.  That again  The 2. and 3. on each side lead to each wall, while the first Cu. leredge up, and the last lead down: change hands and meet; hands all and halfe round  All that again
Confesse Longwayes for six Meet all a D. back again  That again Men go between the We. on your left hand, leading them from the other, change hands, meet again, turn them you meet  Lead your own Wo. from each other, meet again, turn them as you meet Go all crosse the Roome to the left hand  Back again One man go forwards alone, take one Wo. with one hand, then the other hands all four, and go round  The other man as much Go all crosse the Room to the right hand  Back again The two We. at each end lead to each wall, while one man go up and the o∣ther down, the four We. meet hands and go round, men turning S.  Go all as before, men hands and go round, We. turning single Meet all as at the first The men lead the We. at one end to the wall and back, while the other We. go up on the out side, and come each under the others arms, and turn each o∣ther, men turning each a Wo. As much with the other We.
The Chirping of the Larke Longwayes for eight Lead up all a D. forwards and back  That again Set and turn S.  That again First man sides with his own Wo.  Sides with the Co. Turn the third Wo.  Bring up the last Lead up as at the first time As the first time This as the 2. time As the 2. time Lead up as the first time As the first time This as the 2. time As the 2. time Lead up as the first time As the first time This as the 2. time As the 2. time
Cast a Bell Longwayes for as many as will Leading all a D. forwards and back, se and turn S.  That again First Cu. change places, set and turn S.  First mn lead your own, and the 2. Wo. forwards and back, bring the 2. Wo. under your arms, leaue her, and turn you own  Do thus to the last, the rest following, and do∣ing the like. Sides all, set and turn S.  That again First Cu. change places, set and turn S.  First Cu. meet the 2. Cu. lead each others Wo. to each wall m your own and turn them  Do thus to the last the rash following. Arms all, set and turn S.  That again First Cu. take both hands, slip down between the 2. C. crosse and turn each one of them with your right hands, fall to your own side in the 2. place  Do ths to the last, the rest following.
Chirping of the Nightingale Round for as many as will Take hands and 2. D. round  Back again First man lead his We. a D. forwards to the man on your right hand, let go your Wo. and the man with your left hand, she go∣ing back, then go back your selfe, they two leading to you, and turn all three single Then you three take hands and go round  Back again This as before Then lead a D. forward, and back to the Wo.  That again This as before Then you three hands and go round  Back a∣gain This as before Do thus to all the rest, they following and doing the like.
Cherrily and merrily Longwayes for eight Lead up all a D. forwards and back  That again Set and turn S.  That again The 2. man and 3. Wo. change places, the 3. man and 2. Wo. change  The first four and last four hands and go round Then change as before, and hands round as before Sides all  That again Set and turn single  That again First and last Cu. meet your own, while the other four go back, first and last Cu. meet, while the 2. slip up, and the 3. down  First and last Cu. hands and go round, while the other turn their own Then do the same again Armes all  That again Set and turn S.  That again Men hands and go round  We. as much Men the S. Hey, while the We. do as much
The Country Coll. Longwayes for as many at will Lead up all forwards and back  That again Set and turn S.  That again First four meet your own, change places with them  First man change with the 2. Wo. first Wo. change with the 2. man As before  Do this change to all. Sides all  That again Set and turn S.  That again First Cu. fall into the 2. place, change places with your own  Then turn each the 2. change with your own a∣gain As before  Do this to the last. Arms all  That again Set and turn S.  That again First foure go back from your own, meet again, take both hands  First man put his Wo. back, the other going Co. all into each others places As before  Do this change to all.
Cuckolds all a row For four Meet all forwards and back  That again Turn back to back to the Co. We. faces again, go about the Co. We. not turning your faces  Turn back to back to your own, faces again, go a∣bout your own not turning faces Sides all with your own  Sides with the Co. Men change places, We. change places, hands all, go round  We chang places, men change places, hands all and go round, to your places Arms all with your own  Arms with the Co. Men put the Co. We. back by both hands, fall even on the Co. side, men, cast off to the right hand, your We. following, come to the same place a∣gain  put them back again, fall on your own side, men cast off to the left hand, and come to your places, the We. following
Chestnut (or Doves Figary) Longwayes for six Lead up all a D. and back  That again Men fall back, and We. at the same time, change places each with his own, men hands round, to your places, and We. at the same time, men being on the We. side, and We. on the mens side  Back again to your places Arms all  That again Fall back and change places as before, men the Hey, and We. at the same time the first Cu. staying in the last place  This back again Sides all  That again Fall back and change places as before, the first man lead down his Wo. the rest following him, stay in the last place  This back again, but cast off in∣stead of leading between the rest
Daphne Longwayes for eight Lead up all a D. forwards and back  That again First man put back his Wo. by both hands down be∣tween the rest  That back again First Cu. crosse over, fall into the 2. place, crosse again, fall into the third place, crosse again, fall to the lower end  All this back again Sides all  That again As before As before Armes all  That again As before As before
Drive the cold Winter away Longwayes for as many as will Lead up all forwards and back  That a∣gain First man back a D. then go down between the rest, and turn the last Wo. but one, then turn the last, and stay there while the other men go between the 2. and the third We. and go toward the left hand, and fall down to the first man  First man back, then go up be∣tween the rest, turn the second Wo. then the first, while the men go between the two last We. turn towards the right hand, and go up to your places Sides all  That again This as before, the We. doing it Armes all  That again As at the first
Dissembling Love Longwayes for six Lead up forward and back  That a∣gain First Cu. crosse over, and fall into the 2. place, crosse again and fall in∣to the last place  Every Cu. do thus Sides all  That again Halfe the single Hey on each side, set and turn S.  All do this change Arms All  That again Men hands and go halfe round, Women as much  All do this change
Dargason, or Sedany For as many as will standing thus ☉ ☉ ☉ ☉ ☽ ☽ ☽ ☽ First man and Wo. sides once, set and turn S.  Passe forward each to the next sides, set and turn S.  As much to the next  And so forward and back till you come to your places where you began. Arms all as you sided, till you come to your own places. The single Hey all handing as you passe till you come to your places.
Dull Sir John A square Dance for eight thus, The first Cu. lead in and cast off to your places, the man go∣ing between the a. Cu. and the Wo. between the 4, a d 3. Cu. as much  The 2. as much, and the 4. as much The first and 3. man change places a crosse, their We. as much, hands all four either round or a crosse, and go round to your places  The 2. and 4. Cu. as much  And fall the last four the men be¦hind the Wo. The 4. and 2. men standing behind their We. the first Cu. passe into the 3. place, the man going between the 2. Cu. and the Wo. between the 4. whilst the 3. Cu. lead right over and fall into the first place, this back again to your places, the first C. doing as the 3. did, and the third as the first, the 4. as much Then the first and 3. Cu. the S. Hey twice to your places, the We. who stand before their men leading it  The other four as much Men cast off, and going on the out side your own We. fall into each others places, We. as much, men as much, again We. as much First and 3. Cu. meet, go about each other, We. back to back, not turning your faces, give right hands in the Co. Wo. and left hands to your own, and so stay in your own places as at first, the other fo doing the like
The fine Companion Round for eight Hands all and meet a D. back again, set and turn S.  That again Men meet and go back again, We. as much, men meet hands and go round  We. meet and go back, men as much, We. hands and go round Sides all, set and turn S.  That again The two Cu. against each other meet and back, the other foure as much. The first foure hands and go round  That again, the last four beginning Ar all, set and turn S.  That again Men meet turn back to back, the We. go round about, the men to their places  We. meet, turn back to back, men go about the We.
Faine I would, A square Dance for eight thus, Lead all out, lead all in again, 1. man and 4. Wo. the 1. Wo. and 2. man change places by both hands, the other four do∣ing the like, then the 1, man and 1. Wo. the 2. and 4. Wo. change by both hands, the other four doing the like  then each man hands with the Wo. on his left hand, lead out and in as before, changing places, back again as before The 1. and 3. Cu. meet, the 2. and 4. falling back, the 1. and 3. Cu. fall back, four a breast, the 2. man and 4. Wo. with the 1. Cu. the 4. man and 2. Wo. with the 3. the 1. man and 3. Wo. the 3. man and 1. Wo. armes and fall into the 4. and 2. places, whilst she 2. man and 4. Wo. the 4. man and 2. Wo. armes behind, and fall into the 1. and 3. places  The other as much  As in Oxford Sides and change places as be∣fore  Sides again, and change places, back again The 1. and 3. Cu cast off, and come into your places all again, the 4. Wo. following the 1. man, the 2. man the 1. Wo. the 2. Wo. the 3. man, the 4. man the 3. Wo. the uppermost and lowermost foure, hands round, to your places  The 2. and 4. Cu. cast off, and the other follow, to your places, foure and foure of each side, nds round, to your places. Armes and change as you side∣ed  That againe, to your places The 1. and 3. Cu. meet, turn back to back, the other foure hands abou them, and go round to the right, and fall into each others places, the 2. man and 4. Wo. into the 1. place, the 4. man and 2. Wo. into the 3. place, the 1. man and 3. Wo. into the 4. place, the 3. man and 1. Wo. into the 2. place  The other foure as much
The Fryar and the Nun Longwayes for as many as will Lead up men a D. turn round, We. go up a D. and turn single: We. go down a D. and turn single, men down and turn S. The two uppermost men fall back and turn S. We. as much, changing over with your own, men change, We change at the same time, then each change places with his own  Do thus to all, the rest following First and 2. man change places by both hands, We. as much, men and We. meet side wayes, turn all S. hand and go halfe round, turn S. hands a crosse and go halfe round, turn S.
Grimstock Longwayes for six Lead up all a D. forwards and back, set and turn S.  That a∣gain First Cu. go down between the 2. the third come up between the first  This forwards and back, to your places Sides all, set and turn S.  That again First Cu. go down under the 2. Cupples arms, the third come up under the first  This for∣wards and back, to your places Arms all, set and turn single  That again First Cu. change places, and go down the S. Hey  And come up the S. Hey on her own side
Greenwood For six Meet all back again, set and turn S.  Lead from each other, change hands, meet again, set and turn S. The middle Cu. sides, while the two men side with each other, and the two We. sides, set all and turn S.  Men sides with the We. on the left hands, set and turn S.  As much with the We▪ on their right hands, set and turn S. Meet all as at first  Arms all as you sided Meet all as at the first  Each three as you stand, hands and go round, set and turn S.  The middle man take the two on hi left hand and go round, while the other do the like, set and turn S.   As much with the two on the right hand, the other doing the like Meet all as at first  Then the S. Hey all as ye handed round Meet all as at the first  Men hands and go round, set and turn S.  We. as much Meet all as at the first  Mn the S. Hey  We. as much Meet all as at the first
The Gun Longwayes for as many as will Lead up all a D. forwards and back, set and turn S.  That again First four go back from your own, meet again, first man and second Wo. change places, first Wo. and second man change, then change both with your own  As much with the next, and so to all. Sides all, set and turn S.  That again First four hands and go round, first Cu. meet, slip down be∣tween the second, turn S. Do thus to the last, the rest follow∣ing. Arms all, set and turn S.  That again First two men hands and change places. We. as much, take right hands a crosse and go round  Do thus to the last, the rest fol∣lowing.
Goddesses Longwayes for as many as will Lead up all a D. forward and back  That again Cast off, meet below  Cast off below, meet above Men go down on the outsides of the We.  Back again This as before We. as much This as before Men go quite round about the We. This as before We. as much This as before Men take hands and go round  Back again This as before We. as much This as before Take all hands and go halfe round, back again This as before Men the S. Hey This as before We as much This as before Then D. Hey This as before
Grayes Inne Maske Longwayes for eight Lead up all forwards and back, set and turn S.  That again All a D. to the left hand  Back again Back all  Change pla∣ces Sides all, set and turn S.  That again As before As before Arms all, set and turn S.  That again As before As before Honor all, salute Turn your own  Then change places Men the S. Hey  We. as much As before As before As before As before As before As before
Gathering Peascods Round for as many as will Go all two Dubles round, turn S.  That back again Men hands, and go round in the inside, and come to your places  We. as much Men meet and clap hands, We. as much, while the men go back, men meet again and turn S.  We meet, men meet, while the We go back, We. meet again and turn S. Sides, turn S.  That a∣gain As before, the We. going first As before the We. meeting first Armes all, turn S.  That again Men hands as at the first. Men meet as at the first time
The Glory of the West For four Meet a D. fall back, open and close  fall back a D. meet, open and close Back men, We. turn S. back We. men turn S. men crosse over, We. crosse over, hands round and go halfe to your places. Sides with the Co. We. set to them  ledgeides with your own Wo. set to her Men turn off to the left hand, and fall behind your We. back to back, turn back again to your places, We. as much, change places round till you come to your own places, then take right hands a crosse, and go round to your places Arms as you sided Men meet, We. meet, and give right hands a crosse, men go under their arms to your own places, men hands a crosse, and We, go under as the men did, men right hands to the Co. We. then left hands to their own, and fall into the contrary places, hand in a ring and go halfe round to your places, fal∣ling all a brest to the presence
Hit and misse For foure Meet all a D. back again  That again Meet all again, lead each others Wo∣man a D. to the left hand  Change hands, meet again, take your own We. and to your places The single Hey all four Sides all  That again As before As before Arms all  That again As before As before
A Health to Betty Longwayes for as many as will Lead up all a D. forwards and back, set and turn S.  That again  First Cu. sides, turn her once and a halfe about  Sides each with the 2. and turn them  Do thus to the last, the rest following and doing the like. Sides all, set and turn S.  That again  First Cu. meet a D. back again, fall into the 2. place and turn your own  Do this change to the last, the rest following. Arms all, set and turn S.  That again  First Cu. go. a D. back, meet again, take both hands, slip down be∣tween the 2. turn S.  Do thus to the last, the rest following.
Have at thy Coat old Woman Longwayes for as many as will Led up forwards and back, set and turn single  Tht again  First Cu. lead a D. forwards and back to the 2. cross and n each the 2. then turn your own in the 2. place  Do this change to the last, the rest following and doing the like. Sides all, set and turn S.  That again  First Cu. crosse over, and go each behind the 2. and Peep three times, then turn your own in the 2. place  Do this change to the last, the rest following. Arm all, set and turn S.  Tht again  First Cu. crosse over, and go between the 2. then crosse over again lke the Figure of eight, falling into the 2. place  Do thus to the last, the rest following.
Halfe Hannikin Longwayes for as many as will Led up all a D. forwards and back  That again Sides all  Turn your own  First man stand alone, and the l Wo. stand alone, the rest of the men take all the next We. Lead up all as before Sides all  Turn your We.  First men take the 2. man with his left hand, last We. taking the next We. with her right hand. Lead up as before Sides all  Turn your We.  Then the 2. man , the first taking the third man, the last Wo. take the next. C thus every time till you come to your own places.
Hearts Ease For foure Meet all a D. fall back a D.  That again Men fall back from your We. meet again and turn Co. once round with their right hand  All fall back from the Co. they turn, meet again and turn your own with the left hand. Sides all with your own, then with the Co.  That again As before Arms all with your own  That a∣gain with the Co. and fall back from your own first, as before As before
The Health Longwayes for eight Lead up all a D. and back, set  That again First Cu. and last meet, turn back to back, cast off, and going on the outside, the other four come to your places on the inside, the other as much Hands all backwards, and go halfe round to the right, set  That back again First Cu. and last meet, turn back to back, hands backward round to your places  The other four as much Change places with your own by both hands, then 1. and 2. the 3. and 4. man change, so the Wo. doing the like, set  Change back again to your places First and last Cu. meet, clap hands, hands a crosse round to your places  The other four as much  (Or this last passage thus) First man and last Wo. meet, and give right hands, first Wo. and last man the like, then holding hands a crosse, go round to your places  The other four as much
Hockley in the hole Longwayes for as many as will Lead up all forwards and back  That again Set and turn S.  That again First man and last Wo. meet, and go back  The first Wo. and last man as much This as the first time First man arms with the last Wo. and back again to his place  First Wo. and last man as much As before First go down to the last Wo.  Bring her up As before Last man come up to his own Wo.  Lead her down, the first Cu. following, and fall hindermost As before
Hide Parke A square Dance for eight th, First and 3. Cu. meet, and full back  The 2. and fourth as much First and third men take their Wo. by both hands, and mt side  the first man take the third Wo. by both hands, and side through the  Cu. and cast off to your places, whilst the first Wo. and the third man do the like  The 2. and 4. Cu. the same. This as before The second and fourth man change places with their We holding hands, whilst the first man and Wo. crosse over, and going on the de under their arms, come the man into the Wo. place, and Wo. into the m place, the third Cu. doing the like at the same time  Then the other four do∣ing the like Thi as before Men go on the inside of your own We. and on the side of the , and so round to your places  Then the Wo. as much
If all the World were Paper Round for eight Hands all and meet a D. back again, set and turn S.  That again  The two men against each other change pla¦ces, you We. as much, the S. Hey, back to your places  The other four as much Sdes all, set and turn S.  That again  The first four meet, lead each others Wo. between the Cu. on your left hands, cast off, go to your places and turn your own  The other four as much Am all, set and turn S.  That again  The first four change places, then change with your own men, cros  taking left hands and right with the We. To your places  The other four as much .
Irish Trot Longwayes for as many as will Lead up all a D and back, set and turn S.  Lead down all a D. and back, set and turn S.  The first man take his We. with his right hand, then with his left, and so holding hands a crosse change places, fall back from each o∣ther, meet again, fall back, then arms with your Wo. and stay in your places, the man on the Wo. side, and his Wo. on the mens side  hands in like maner with the 2. Wo. changing places with her on the right hand, while the Wo. doth the like with the 2. man, holding him in her left hand, both Cu. fall back from each other, meet again, ledgeall back, arms with your own, and so forward to the rest, who following do the like. Take your own Wo. in your right hand, and the 2. Wo. on your left, meet the 2. man, fall back, each man honour to his own Wo. then to each others Wo. take them by the right hands, then your own by the left hands, the first Cu. into the 2. place, and the 2. into the first place. The rest following Lead up all a D. and back, cast off all and meet, the first Cu. bw, and the last Cu. above, take your We. in your left hand, and lead them all to the left round about to the sa places. Lead down all a D. and back, cast off and meet in your own places, as at the first, take your We. in your right hands, and lead them round about to the right hand, to your own places
The Irish Lady, or Anniseed-water Robin Longwayes for as many as will Lead up all a D. and back  That again Set and turn S  That again First man and 2. Wo. go about into each others places  First Wo. and 2. man as much First man and 2. Wo. change places, the other much  Cast off and fall into the . place First Cu. crosse over, the man going on the inside, the 2. Wo. into the first Wo. place, and the Wo. on the outside, the 2. man into the 2. place  Crosse over, and go the man about the 2. man, and the Wo. about the 2. Wo. into your places Hands a crosse, round in your places  First  cast off, leading the 2 man about, and fall into  place, the first Wo. doing the like The first and 2. men change places by the right hands, We. do∣ing as much, fall all four a brest, and lead up to the presence  Fall back a D. the first man cast off to the left, and fall into his own place, the 2. man following him. We. do the like at the same time First and third Cu. change places each with redge own, the first man and 2. Wo. change places  First Wo. and 2. man change places, set and redge S.
Jog on Longwayes for as many as will Lead up all a D. forward and back, set and turn S.  That again The first man with his back to the presence take his Wo. by both hands, pull her to him, then put her back between the 2. Cu. the first man and 2. Cu. hands and go round, the first Wo. to the left  This forward, &c. The first man take his Wo. by both hands, put her back on the out side, the 2. Wo. into the 2. place, and there turn ledgeer  Then into the third place on the outside the third man, and so forward, &c. The first Cu. crosse over, go behind the 2. Cu. put them together that they may salute, then arm in the 2. place  This forward to the rest. The first Cu. cast off and go on the outside, the 2. Cu. walk forward and back, as in Lavena, arm in the 2. place  This forward to the rest, they doing the like, &c.
Jack Pudding Longwayes for sin First and 2. Cu. lead up a D. and fall back, whilst the 3. Cu. lead up to the top be∣tween the other, first and 2. Cu. lead up again and back, whilst the 3. lead down. Third Cu. lead up between the other, and casting off, go on the out redge under their arms, crosse over and under their arms, and fall to the redge tome as at first, then the first four hands and round, and fit whilst redge third do as much. Sides all  That again Men round and hold up their hands, We. under their arms, and turn tredge own, We. go round, and each man turn his own. Arms all  That again Third Cu. lead under the first Cu. arms, and come face to the We. haredge you four and round, the first Cu. fall into the 2. place, the third Cu. leredge under the 2. Cu arms, and hands round, the third Cu. fall into the 2. redge the 2. into the first place
Jack a Lent Longwayes for six Lead up all a D. forward and back  That a∣gain First man change places with the 2. Wo. turn S. change with the last man, and turn S.  After lead up, the Wo. do the like too, every Cu. doing the same Lead up as before First Cu. crosse over, fall into the 2. place, crosse again, fall into the last place  All do this change Lead up as before First Cu. go under the . Cu. arms, the last come up under the first, this forward and back to your places, cast off  Every Cu. do this change Lead up as before First Cu. go down and turn each the last, then each the 2.  Cast off, every Cu. doing the same Lead up as before Set and turn S.  That again First man turn the last Wo. and to his place a∣gain  First Wo. as much with the last man The first on each side go down to the last, take them by both hands, go once and a halfe about, and stay below, the 2. turning his own  All do this change
Jenny pluck Pears Round Dance for six Hands and 2. D. round, set and turn S.  That again First man set his Wo. in the midst with her f to him, the 2. man set in his Wo. the 3. as muc, Honor all Men go round about the We. back again  Back again First man take out his Wo. 2 as much, 3. as much. Honor all Sides all, set and turn S.  That again As at the first, We. setting in the men  Then We. go round and take them out. Arms all, set and turn S.  That again As the first time Men go round  Back again First man take out his Wo. 2. as much, 3. as much. Honor all
I loved thee once, I love no more Longwayes for as many as will Lead up all forwards and back  That again Men turn S. We. as much, men go about your We. to your places  We. turn S. men turn S. We. go about your men, and to your places Sides all  That again First man set to the 2. Wo. and fall back, while your Wo turns the 2. man as much to the third  As much to the fourth, turn your own below Arms all  That again First Cu. being below, take both hands, slp up between the 4. Cu. crosse and turn each one of them with your right hands: As much to the third  As much with the 2. turn your own above
Kemps Jegg Round Dance for six One man lead in two We. forwards and back twice: Honor to one, honor to the other, then turn the third  Lead your own with your left hand, and the Woman you turned, and as much  Then as much with the other two We. turning your own  The next man as much  Then the third man as much First man lead the We. as before: Turn halfe round, holding both hands, and his own as much to the other, tu the third Wo.  Do thus to all, the rest following and doing the like. First man take the We. as before by the Co. hands behind, then lead them forwards and back, pull one halfe about and kisse her, as much with the other, turn the third  Do thus to all, the rest following and doing the like.
Kettle Drum A round Dance for eight Meet all, and back  That again We. meet, giving their right hands, men meet, giving their right hands, then turn every man his own Wo by the right hand, then men the left hands, We. their left hands, then turn every Wo. her own man by the left hand Sides all, back again  That again The 2. Cu. meet and fall back, then the next Cu. meet, and take each others Wo. by the right hand, and fall into the Co. places, then the other Cu. meet and fall back, and the first Cu. the like, then lead in, taking the We. by the right hand, and cast off to your places Arms all  That again All joyn both hands with you We. swing with your hands all inward, then break off your hands inward, then turn back to back, and kisse the Co. Wo twice, then swing with the Co. We. all outwards, then break off your hands outwards, then turn kissing every one his own Wo. turn and so end
Lady Spellor Longwayes for eight Led up all a D. frwards and back, set and turn S.  That again Go all to the left hand, crosse the Room, faces all, set and turn S.  Change places all with your own We. set and turn S.  First Cu. go down between the rest, they fol∣lowing, come towards the left hand, to your places Sides all, set and turn single  That again As before Arms all, set and turn S.  That again As before
Lord of Carnarvans Jegg Longwayes for eight Lead up all a D. forwards and back  That again Each man and Wo. go about each other, not running your faces  That again First Cu. crosse over and fall into the 2. place on the out side, the 2. Cu. the man on the out side of the Wo. and the Wo on the mens side  Crosse over again and fall into the third place Take hands with your Wo. and leadig her down betwixt the last Cu. cast off all, and mee above the first Cu. in the first place, and the last Cu. in the 2. place, the third Cu. in the last place  Arms all Lead down forwards and back  That again Go about each other as before  That again The lowest Cu. crosse over as before Cast off as before. Lead up all a D. and back  That again Go about each other as before  That again The uppermost Cu. crosse over as before Cast off as before. Lead down forwards and back  That again Go about each other as before  That again The lowest Cu. crosse over as before Cast off as before.
My Lady Cullen Longwayes for as many as will Lead up all a D. and back  That again Set and turn S.  That again First Cu. crosse over and fall on the outside into the 2. place, and change places  The first four hands all a brest, and lead up to the presence, and fall back Right hands a crosse, and go round all four  Left hands a crosse, and go round back again First Cu. cast off and falling into the 2. place, slip between the 2. Cu. the first man standing before the 2. man, and the first Wo. before the 2. Wo.  The 2. Cu. cast off, and falling between the first, stand as before The 2. Cu. take both hands and slip up, whilst the first Cu. take both hands and slip down, holding hands so still, both Cu. slip together  Set and turn S. First Cu. crosse over and fall on the outside into the 2. place  The first four hands a brest and lead up to the presence, and back again Each face to his own and clap your hands. We. Arms, whilst the men arms  Arms each other with his own, the first Cu. in the 2. place, and the 2. Cu. in the first place
The London Gentlewoman, Or the Hemp-Dresser Longwayes for as many as will Lead up all a D. forward and back  That again First man change places with the 2. Wo  Then with the 3. man  Then with the 4. Wo  Then with the fift man   Then with the sixt, and so to the last. Sides all  Lead up as before. As before the doing it   All do this, changing as be∣fore Sides all  That again First Cu. crosse over, fall into the 2. place  Crosse again, fall into the 3. place  Crosse again, fall into the fourth place  And so to the end, every Cu. doing the like. Arms all  That again Turn your own Wo. changing places  Turn each the 2.  Turn each the 3.  Turn each the fourth, and so to the last, the rest following.
Lavena Longwayes for as many as will Ld up all a D. forwards and back, set and turn S.  That again  The first Cu. go down between the 2. c off and come to your places on the out side of the 2. turn your own, fall into the 2. place again  As much to the 3. place, and so to the last, the rest following. Sides all, set and turn S.  That again  First Cu. go down on the out side each on the 2. back again, fall into the 2. place again, and turn your own  Do thus to the last, the rest following and doing the like. Arms all, set and turn S.  That again  First Cu. cast off, fall into the 2. place, come up between the 2. cast of again, fall into the 2. place, turn your own  Do this to the last, the rest following.
Lady lye near me Longwayes for as many as will Lead up forwards and back  That ledgegain Set and turn S.  That again First two on each side hands and go back, meet again Go each behind the 2. and turn your own in the 2. place, do thus to the last, &c. Sides all, that again Set and turn S. that again First man and 2. Wo. meet and take right hands  The other as much Go halfe round, change places with your own in the Co. place  Thus to the last Arms all  That again Set and turn S.  That again First Cu. meet, turn back to back  Go from each other, faces again Meet again, take both hands, slip between the 2. Cu. and fall back, do thus to the last, the rest following
Lulle me beyond thee For eight thus Meet a D. and back  That again First man and 2. Wo. the 2. man and first Wo. lead out to the wall, while the .  4. meet, the 1. and 3. Cu. fall back from the 2. and 4. Cu. four and four a br meet all and turn each his opposite  This again, those leading out that led in, sl∣ling back to the wall, each turn his own First and 3. Cu. sides with your own, then with each o∣thers, whilst the other side with their own First man and 3. man, the 2. Wo. and 4. Wo. lead a brest to the wall, fall back and hands round to your places, the other four doing the like at the same time  Tredge first and 3 Cu lead a breast to the presence, fall back, and hands round to your pla∣ces, the other four doing the like downward at the same time Arms as you sided. First man and 2 Wo. the 2. man and first Wo. lead out to the wall, and fall back again, while the other four crosse over each with his own, and meeting each others W lead them under the first and 2. Cu. arms, falling into your places, and turn h own  That again, the last four doing what the first four did
Mage on a Cree A round Dance for eight Hands and meet a D. back again, set and turn S.  That again  Men meet in the midst, turn back to back, come to your places, and turn the Co. We.  We. meet, turn back to back, come to your places and turn your own Sides all, set and turn S.  That again  Men go towards the left hand before the Co. We. and behind the next, We. meet and turn S.  That again, to your places   Then the We. as much Arms all, set and turn S.  That again  Turn all the Co. We. turn all the next We.  Turn all the next, turn all your own
Millisons Jegg Longwayes for six Lead up all a D. forwards and back  That again First man take his Wo. by both hands, and four slips up, and stand, the 2. as much, the third as much, turn all S.  Third Cu. four slips down, the 2. as much, first as much, turn all single Sides all  That again First Cu. change places, the 2. as much, third as much, turn S.  Third Cu. change places, the 2. as much, first as much, turn all single Arms all  That again First man change places with the 2. Wo. first Wo. change with 2. the last change with his own, turn S.  First man change with last Wo. first Wo. change with the last man, tother change, turn all single
The merry merry Milk Maids Longwayes for eight   Lead up all a D. forwards and back, set and turn S.  That again First and third Cu meet your own, slip between the other take hands a crosse and go round each four  The other four as much Sides all, set and turn S.  That again First man cast off, go to the lower end and stay, the rest following. The We. as much, set and turn S.  All that back again Arms all, set and turn S.  That again Men back, and go the single Hey  Women as much
Mill-field Round for as many as will Hands and go 2. D. round  Back again Set and turn S.  That again First Cu. lead to the man on your right hand, he going under your arms, turn your own  That again All three set and turn S.  That again The two men take hands and lead to your Wo. she going under your arms, the two men arms  That again All three set and turn S.  That again The 2. man and first Wo. lead to the first man, he go∣ing under their arms  That again All three set and turn S.  That again Do thus to the next Wo. and so to all the rest.  
The Maid peept out at the window, Or the Frier in the Well For as many as will Lead up a D. forwards and back  That again First Cu. cast off, and go to the lower end, and stay there, the rest fol∣lowing, set and turn S.  All this back again to your places Sides all  That again Men slip just before your We. and go a D. up, and fall on the Womens sides, set and turn S.  We. slip before your We. go up, fall all to your own places, set and turn S. Arms all  That again First man put back the 2. Wo. by both hands, while the 2. man puts back the first Wo. fall into each others places, all the rest doing the like, set and turn S.  All this again to your own places
Mayden Lane Longwayes for six Lead up a D. forwards and back  That again All a D. to the left hand, back again  The single Hey on each side Set and turn S.  That a∣gain Sides all  That again Back all, change places  That a∣gain As before Arms all  That again First man change with the 2. Wo. first Wo. change with the 2. man, while the last changes with his own Wo.  First man change with the last Wo. your Wo. change with the last man, while the 2. changes with his own Wo. As before
The Milk-Mayds Bobb Longwayes for eight Lead up all a D. forwards and back  That a∣gain First four the S. Hey, while the last four do the like Sides all  That again First Cu. slip between the 2. while the third does the like with the last, change places with your own  That again Arms all  That again First man change places with the 2. Wo. taking by the right hand, change places with the 2. man, the 3. man doing the like, then the other four as much
Mundesse Round Dance for six     Hands and two D. round, set and turn S.  That again First man set and turn S.  His Wo. as much First man honor to his Wo. 2. as much, 3. as much, all em∣bace. Turn your ow  Turn Co. First man lead his Wo. 2. D forwards and back  Lead forwards again, go each between the 2. Cu. and come back again in the same. First Wo. set and turn S.  To the Co. man  The man as much Honor to her next man, honor to the Co. Wo. 3. honor, embrace all. As before First Wo. lead the Co. man as before Second man set and turn S. to his own Wo.  The Wo. as much Honor to her next man, first honor, imbrace all your We. As before Lead in, every man doing as the first did.      
The Night Peece Longwayes for six Lead up a D. forwards and back  That again The middle Cu. fall back and slip up, while the first and last Cu. change places. That again. That again Sides all  That again First Cu. crosse over, fall into the 2. place, crosse again, fall into the last, the next Cu. as much, the next Cu. as much Arms all  That again First man change places with the 2. Wo. first Wo. change with the 2. man, while the last changes with his own: Then change with the last Wo. your Wo. change with the last man, while the other changes with his own: Set all and turn single
The New Exchange Longwayes for six Lead up all forwards and back, set and change places  That again  First man set to his own Wo. the 2. as much, the third turn his own  Third man set to his ow, the 2. as much, the first man turn his own Sides all, set and change places  That again  First man and last Wo. meet and stand, first Wo. and last man as much, first man and last Wo. change places, the other change, the 2. change with his own  This change back a∣gain to your places Arms all, set and change places  That again  First Cu. go down between the 2. the third come up between the first, the 2. come down between the third, set and turn S.  All this again, to your places
None such Longwayes for eight Lead up forwards and back  That again, set and turn single, that again  First Cu. slip just between the 2. Cu. turn your faces to them, put them back by both hands, and halfe turn them, put them back, and set them as they were, turn your own in the 2. place  Do thus to the last. Sides all that again, set and turn S. that again  First man slip before, and stand with his face downwards, the Wo. slip before him and stand faces to your own, the 2. Cu. as much, the third Cu. as much, the last Cu. as much Arms all as you stand, that again, slip all to the left hand, and back to your places, then as much to the right hand  First man slip to the left hand, and stand, the Wo. as much to her left hand, the 2. Cu. as much, third as much, fourth ledges much  Then the single Hey, all handing down, and come up on your own side.
Newcastle Round for eight Meet all, back again, set to your own, and to the next  That again Arms all with your own by the right, men all fall with your left hands into the middle, We. go round them to your places  Arms again with your own, and We. left hands in, men go about them to∣wards the left to your places Sides all with your own, and change places with them  Sides with the next, and change places with them The first man and 3. Wo. take hands and meet, the first Wo. and 3. man, lead out again, then holding up your hands, the other four cast off and come under your arms to their places  The other four the like Arms all with your We. and change places  Arms with the next, and change places  Now every man is with his own Wo. in the Co. place. Fall back from each other, four and four a brest to each wall, turn and change places with your opposites  Fall back from each other four and four along the Room, turn S. change places with your op∣posite  So each falls into his place as at first.
New New Nothing Longwayes for as many as will Lead up all a D. back all, profer a little to slip to the left, each change places with his Wo. Lead down, back all, slip a little to the right, change places First man change with the 2. Wo. and the 2. Wo. with the first Wo. then the first man with the 2. man, and the 2. man with the first Wo. First and 2. man change places by both hands, then the We. as much, first man and Wo. lead up between the 2. Cu. into the first place, crosse over, and go on the outside into the 2. place, change places.
New Boe peep Longwayes for as many as will Lead up all a D. forward and back  That again We. go all to the wall and stand, men go up to your own We. and peep four times on each side behind them, fall to your places all and turn S.  Then men go to the wall and stand, We. go up to your backs and peep four times, then fall to your places and turn S. Sides all  That again As before the men going first. Arms all  That again As the first time.
The Old Mole Longwayes for six Lead up all a D. forwards and back, set and turn S.  That again  All a D. to the left hand back again, set and turn S.  As much to the right  First man and last Woman meet a D. back again, meet again and change places  First Wo. and last man as much  The second man as much with his own The two first We. hands, and the two last men hands, lead forwards and back to the odd one against them, let the odd ones go under your arms  Do this change four times, over to the place where you began it  Then first and last change as before to your places All the men hands, and all the We. hands, meet all forwards and back the first and last, last on each side, turn each other, the 2. turning his own  Sides where you turned and turn your own  Men the S. Hey  We. as much  The D. Hey twice over  Cast off all and come to your places. That again.
Once I lov'd a Maiden fair Long for as many as will Lead up all a D. and back  That again Set and turn S.  That again First man and 2. Wo. meet a D. and back  then the first Wo. and 2. man as much The first man change with the 2. Wo. he into her place, and she into his  The first Wo. and 2. man as much  Doe thus to all, the rest following. The first man take the 2. man in his right hand, and the first Wo. the 2. Wo. in her left hand and meet a D. and backe  That a∣gaine Then meet and go through between each other, the uppermost man about his Wo. and the 2. man between the first Wo. and his owne, and turne your faces each to your owne being in the Co. places  Then take hands and go halfe round, and fall the first Cu. in the 2. place  Do thus to all, the rest following. The first man take his Wo. in his left hand and the 2. man take his Wo. in his right hand and fall back a D. and meet againe  That againe First man cast off his Wo. casting off at the same time into the 2. place, the 2. Cu. following them, till they come to their owne places  Cast off again, and stay the first Cu in the 2. Cu. place  Do thus to all, the rest following.
Parsons farewell For foure Meet all, foure slips to the left hand  Back all, four slips to the right hand Men rise once, We. rise once, rise all foure times, turne each others Wo.  We rise once, men once, rise all foure times, turn each others Woman Meet all, lead each others Wo. a D. to the left hand  Change hands meet againe, take your own We. and to your places Men meet, crosse right hands, then left passe over, turne each others W. with your right hand, crosse to your place againe, and turn your owne  We. as much with the Co. hands Take your own by both hands, and meet with four slips, take the Co. We. four slips to the left hand  Meet again, take your owne, and to your places Turne your owne with your right hands, men crosse, and goe all the S. Hey to the Co. side and turne your owne  Turne your owne with the left hands, We. crosse, go the single Hey to your places, and turne your owne
Picking of sticks Longwayes for six Lead up all a D. forwards and back  That again  First man change places with the 2. Wo. then with the last man  Lead up as before, then the Wo. change as the man did, every Cu. doing thus. Sides all  That again  The first Cu. slip down between the 2. they slipping up, then the 2. slip down, and the first up  All this again the last Cu. crossing over below, go up and crosse above, fall to your places   Thn the four last slip, and first Cu. crosse about Arms all  That again  The We. stand still, men going the Hey between them, the last man going about the middle Wo. do thus three times over, then go quite round about all the We. to your places   The We. as much
Peppers Black Round for as many as will Take hands and go twice round  Back again All set and turn S.  That again First Cu. lead a D. forward and back to the 2.  That again Turn each others Wo.  Turn your own  Do this change to all, the rest doing the like First Cu. lead to the 2. Cu. as before The S. Hey all four  Do this change to all, the rest do∣ing the like First Cu. and 2. man take hands, take the man on your left hand, lead a D. forward and back again Bring your Wo. under your left arm, holding both fast turn your body halfe round to the left hand  Bring your man under your right arm, turn halfe about to your right hand  Do thus to all.
Petticoat wag Longwayes for as many as will Lead up forwards and back, turn back to back, faces a∣gain  All that again First man crosse and go behind the 2. Wo. the first Wo. going behind the second man, peep twice at each other, fall into the 2. place on your own side  Do thus to the last, the rest following in order. Sides all, and as before  That again First Cu. crosse between the 2. fall into the 2. place, crosse again, fall into the 2. place on your own side  Do thus to the last, the rest following in order Arms all as before  That again The two first men take both hands, change places, the We. as much, set and turn S.  Do thus to the last, the rest following.
Pauls Steeple Longwayes for as many as will Lead up all a D. forward and back, set and turn S.  That again First man take his Wo. in his left hand, lead her down to the 2. Wo. take the 2. Wo. in his right, and flip up with them into the first place, cast off the 2. Wo. and then his own, and turn off into his place  This forward to all the We. Sides all and turn S.  That again First man take his Wo. in his left hand, lead her down to the 2. Wo. take the 2. Wo. in his right hand, and slide up with them, kisse the 2. Wo. hand then with your own Wo. hand and let them go, turning off into your place.  This forward to the rest Arms, set and turn S.  That again First man take his Wo. in his left hand, lead her down to the 2. Wo. take the 2. Wo. in your right hand, and setting them back to back in the middle, kisse the 2. then your own Wo. turning off into your places, this forward to the rest.
The Punks Delight (The new way) Longwayes for as many as will Lead up all a D. forward and back, that again. Set, that again First crosse over, and taking the 2. Wo. by both hands, turn her halfe about with her back inwards, then put her back in the 2. place, while your We. do the like with the 2. man in the first place, slip through each other, hands all four round, then the first Cu. arms in the 2. place while the 2. Cu. arms in the first First man going on the outside, and his Wo. on the inside, the 2. Wo. meet behind her, then the first man going on the inside his Wo. on the outside the 2. man, meet behind him, then the first Cu. and the 2. man right hands a crosse and go round, then the first Cu. and 2. Wo. right hands a crosse and go round, the first Cu. falling into the 2. place. First man going on the outside the first Wo. the 2. man following him, the first man go through between the first and 2. We. and march to the wall, the two We. taking hands and following him, the 2. man behind them then fa∣cing back, follow the 2. man to the other wall, then men cast off to the right, your own We. following you, and stay the men in We. places, and the We. in their mens places by the right hands, We. doing the like, each change with his own by the left
Parson upon Dorothy Longwayes for eight Lead up forwards and back  That a∣gain First two men and last two men hands, and lead to each wall. We. doing the same, change hands and meet all  First and 3. men lead up, the other lead∣ing down, change hands, and lead the Co. way Turne each others We.  Turn your own Sides all  That again As before As before Arms all  That again As before As before
Pauls Wharfe Longwayes for as many as will Lead up forwards and back  That againe Set and turn S.  That againe First foure hand and go round  Then crosse over between the 2. place. As before Sides all  That againe As before First two on each side hands and goe back a D. then meet and crosse over  Then goe halfe round towards the right hand into each others places As before Armes all  That againe As before The first two men take both hands and change places, the We. as much  Cast off all foure, and come to your places  Do thus to all. As before
Rose is white and Rose is red Round for as many as will Hands, and meet all a D. back again, set and turn S.  That again  First Cu. lead forwards and back to the man on your right hand. Then all three hands and go round  Then as much to his Wo.  Then as much to the next man, and so to all till you come to your own places, the rest following and doing the like. Sides all, set and turn S.  That again  They lead forwards and back as before, and go the single Hey all three  Do this change to all, the rest following and doing the like. Arms all, set and turn S.  That again  First Cu lead forwards and back as before, let the man go under your arms, turn your own  Do thus to all the rest following.
Row well ye Marriners Longwayes for as many as will Lead up a D. forward and back  That again First man two slips crosse the roome one way, the Wo. the o∣ther  Back againe to your places Fall backe both  Meet againe Clap both your own hands, then clap each others right hands against one anothers, clap both your owne hands againe, then clap left hands, then clap both hands againe, then clap your brests, then meet both your hands against one anothers  The same a∣gaine only clap left hands first First man sides with the next Wo. and his Wo. with the next man, doing the like till you come to your own places, the rest following and doing the same
Stingo, or the Oyle of Barley Longwayes for fix Back all, meet againe  Lead up a D. forwards and back Men take right hands a crosse and go round, set and turne single  We. as much with the left hand Sides all  That againe All a D. to the left hand, back again, set and turn single  As much to the right hand Armes all  That againe First Cu. Crosse and set each to the 2. then to the third, come to your places on the out side of the second  First Cu. Cast off, turne short to your places, turne your owne, cast off againe, all fall to the lower end
The Saraband Longwayes for as many as will Lead up forwards and back, that again, set and turn S. that again  The two first on each side hands and go a D. back, meet again, go all a D. crosse over forwards and back, then go round towards the right hand, falling into each others places, set and turn S.  Do this change to the last, the rest following. Sides all, that again, set and turn S. that again  First Cu. slip down between the 2. change all four with your own, cast off all four the Co. way, come to the same places again, and change with your own, set and turn S.  Do thus to the last, the rest following. Arms all, that again, set and turn S. that again  The first four change places with their own, then change with the 2. on the same side, then take right hands a crosse, and go a quarter round, first Cu. fall into the 2. place, set and turn S.  Do thus to the last, the rest following.
The Spanish Jeepsie Longwayes for eight Lead up forwards and back  That again  Turn all back to back, faces again, go all about your We. not turn∣ing your faces. That again the tother way  First and last Cu. meet a D. back again, turn all back to back, faces again, go about each other not turning your faces, the other way as much  The other four as much Sides all  That again  Turn back to back, faces again, go about your own as before  First and last Cu. meet and go back, turn back to back, faces again, take hands and go round, back again  Then the other four as much Arms all  That again  Turn back to back, faces again, go about your own as before  First and last Cu. meet, back again, turn back to back, faces again, right hands a crosse and go round, then left round  The other four as much
Skellamefago Longwayes for as many as will Lead up all a D. forwards and back, set and turn S.  That again  First Cu. arms once and a halfe between the 2. into the second place, set each to the 2. Cu. and change places with your own  Do this change to the last, the rest following. Sides all, set and turn S.  That again  First Cu. slip down between the 2. turn each your own, then turn each others Wo. turn your own again  Do thus to the last, the rest following. Arms all, set and turn S.  That again  First four take hands a crosse and go round, first man change places with the 2. Wo. first Wo. change with the 2. man, then change both with your own  Do this change to the last, the rest following.
The Spanyard Longwayes for eight Lead up all a D. forwards, four slips to the right hand, set and turn S.  Lead down, and as much  First and last Cu. fall back, while the other meet and take both hands, the 2. Cu. slip up, and the third down, set and turn S.  All this again, to your places Sides all, set and S.  That again  First and third put your We. by both hands back, the other going the Co. way, fall into each others places, set and turn S.  All that again the Co. way Arms all, set and turn S.  That again  First man and 2. Wo. and third man and last Wo. meet and go back, take hands and go round once and a halfe, changing places  The other four as much  All that again, to your places
Souldiers life Longwayes for as many as will Lead up all a D. forwards and backe, set and turne S.  That againe  First man set to his own Wo. then set to the 2. man, turne the 2. Wo.  Set to the 2. Wo. then to the 3. man, turne to the 3. Wo.  Set to the 3. Wo. then to the 4. man, turne the 4. Wo.   Do thus to the last, your Wo. following you in the same manner. Every Cu. do thus. First man lead down his Wo a D. then give his right hand to the 2. Wo. while his Wo. do the like to the 2. man, turn them and then your own with your left hand; the same forward, till you come to the bottome. First man go about the 2. Wo. while his Wo. doth the like to the 2. man, they meet, and goe about one another and turne, taking hands, the same againe till they come to the bottome.
Saint Martins For foure Meet all, two slips to the left hand, and two to the right, men turn single to the left hand and back again, while the We. turn the Co. way  Meet again, change places, then change with your own and turn S. Men back a D. We. turn S. men cross over, taking left hands, turne the Co. We. with the right and stay there  We. goe backe, men turn S. We. cross over, handing right hands, turn your own with the left Meet all a D. change places, Set and turne S.  That againe Men meet and stand, We. as much, hands all, four slips half round and turn S.  We. meet, men meet, and four slips to your places, and turn S. Meet all, take each others We. by both hands, two slips to the left, and two to the right, men cast off to yours, come to your places, We. following  Back all, change places with your own, men cross about each other, and fall back to your first places, We doing the like, not turn your faces Men honour, We. honour, right hands a crosse and go round  We. honour, men honour; left hands a crosse and goe half round  Fall all a brest to the presence.
Saturday night and Sunday morn Long for as many as will Lead up all a D. forwards and backe  That againe Set and turn S.  That againe First and second Cu. goe about your owne, not turning your faces  men the like about each other, and We. about each other First man and 2. Wo. change a cross, first Wo. and 2. man as much  Each change with his owne set  And so forward, the rest following in order. First man take his Wo. in his left hand and lead her down∣ward under the 2. Cu. Armes, lead up again, the 2. Cu com∣ming under your Armes  First man take the 2. man by the left with his right, and casting off, come to your places, We. doing the like at the same time Change places with your owne, men change places, We. changing at the same time  Change each with his owne Set  And forward to the rest First Cu. and 2. meet, men hands, We. hands, lead to the wall  Meet again, take your own We. and lead from each other. Change with your owne, men change, and We. change at the same time  Change again with your own set  and so forward to the rest
Stanes Morris Longwayes for as many as will Lead up all a D. forward and back  That again. All a D. to the left hand  Back a∣gaine Set and turn S.  that again First man goe downe between the rest to the last Wo.  Sides once with her Take her by one hand  Then by the other Turne her halfe about, holding both hands and salute her, as much the other way  Bring her up Lead up as at the first As at the 1 time As at the first time This as the 2. time As the 2. time As the 2. time Do thus till you have fetcht up all the We.    
Scotch Cap Longwayes for six Lead up, back again  That again The two upper We. fall back, and the two lower men fall back, crosse over, then the first man and the lower Wo. crosse over, then the two upper men fall back, and the two lower We. crosse over, then the other crosse over as before, this three times ovr Sides  That again Three men and 3. We. joyning hands, fall all back, and meet all, men turn your faces one towards another, We. doing the like, the two ends on each side arms, while the middle with his own, then fall back, then turn your backs together, and every one turn his own. Arms  That again Three men slip up, and 3. We. slip down, then the lower man give his right hand to the first Wo. and so go into your places by hands, then the We. slip up, and the men slip down, the first and last give hands, to your places as before
Step Stately A long Dance for 3, 5, 7, or 9. Couple Lead up all a D change places each with his owne, keeping your faces still to the presence, the men slipping behind the We. and the We. before the men, face all to the Wall  Men hands, and We. hands, first man and 2. Wo. lead all the rest round to the bottome, facing all to the presence The first man and Wo. being in the middle, lead up all a brest a D. and back  We. slip before the men to the right, and men behind the We. to the left, go∣ing a compasse to their places, as at first The first Cu. lead up a D. change hands, and lead down a D.  Take hands with the 2. Cu. and all four halfe round, first man and 2. Wo. change places The 2. We. lead up between the second, then crossing over, the first Wo. go behind the 2. man and the 2. behind the first  Men change over by the right hands, then giving left hands to their owne We. turn the first Cu in the 2. place, and the 2. in the first First Cu. crosse over, meet in the 2. place, change places  The three uppermost men, and the three We. hands, fall a D. backe, 2. and 3. Cu. change each with his own, while the 1. Cu. meet, then fall a D. back againe three and three Now standing as in Greenwood, the first man between the 2. and 3. Wo. and the first Wo between the 2. and 3. man, the first Cu. lead up, cast off and meet below, whilst the 2. and 3. We. and the 2. and 3. man change places  The 1. Cu. bing in the 3. place, armes whilst the other four take hands and go half round to the left
Solomons Jigge Longwayes for eight Lead up ll forward and backe, turne S.  That againe First C. cast off, meet below and come to your places between the rest  Last Cu. go up on the out side, and come downe to your places between the rest Sides all, and turn single  That again First Cu. go downe between the rest, and come up on the out∣side  The last Cu. goe up between the rest, goe down on the outside Armes all, and turne S.  That againe First Cu. go down the S. Hey on their own sides, and come up againe, the rest standing still
Shepheards Holyday, or Labour in Vain Longwayes for six   Lead up all a D. back, crosse over  Lead down, back again, crosse over The first man slip before the 2. man. while his first Wo. before the 2. Wo. then the last man slip behind the 2. man, while his Wo. behind the 2. Wo. then all six turn round about to the left hand into their places, then the last Cu. do as the first, and first as the last Sides, back again, crosse over  That again Three men and 3. We. back, joyning hands, meet 3. men, hands and go round, We. doing the like, men and We. back as before and meet, hands backward and go round as before. Arms as you sided The first man crosse into the 2. Wo. place, and his Wo. in∣to the 2. mans place, &c.
The Slip Longwayes for as many as will Honour to the presence all  Honour to your owne The two first men hands, and the 2. first We. hands and fall back from each other, men and We. open, close againe, and change places each with his own  Fall back againe, open, close, and change places as before First man lead his Wo. down halfe way and honour to her  Lead her to the bottome, and honour to her Then take hands with the last man, his Wo. taking hands with the last Wo. fall back from each other, open, close, and change places as before, the foure upermost doing the like at the same time  That again as at first The 2. man lead down his Wo as before This as before, the rest following in order.
Tom Tinker Longwayes for as many as will Lead up all a D. change places with your We. keeping them still in your hand, faces downward  Lead downe a D. change places as before, facing to the presence First man slip down before the 2. man, then the 1. Wo slip downe behind the 2. Wo. the 1. Cu. turn off round into the 2. place, and the 2. into the 1. place  The 2. Cu. do as much, to their places First man march toward the wall, his Wo. following him, while the 2. Wo. marches towards the other wall, the man following her, 1. man take his Wo. in his right hand facing to the presence, fall back a D. while the 2. man takes his Wo. in his left hand fa∣cing downward, fals backe a D. now the 1. Cu. being in the 2. place, and the 2. in the 1. meet and pass through, the 1. man cast off to the left hand, and fall into the 2. place of the two, side, his Wo. following him, while the 2. Wo. casteth off, and falls into the 1. place, her man following her First man and 2. Wo. crosse over, the first man going about the 2. man to his place, and the 2. Wo about the 1. Wo.  First man and 2. Wo. take both hands, the 1. Wo. come in betweene your arms, the 2. man as much, kiss and arm each with his owne, the 1. Cu. in the 2. place, and the 2. in the first place
Tutch and take Longwayes for as many as will Lead up all forwards and back, set and turn S.  That again  First Cu. crosse over, and go each behind the 2. tutch them, set and turn single to them Lead them a D. downwards, back again, set and turn single  Then set the 2. Cu. face to face as they were be∣fore, and tutch each the third, set and turn S. to them  Then lead them down forwards and back, set and turn S. Then set them face to face, and tutch the next, do thus to the last, the rest follow and do the like.
Trenchmore Longwayes for as many as will Lead up all a D. forward and back 3. times, cast off, meet below and come up, do so 3. times. First Cu. go down under the 2. Cu. arms, the 3. come up under the first, do this forward and back twice or thrice. First man set to the 2. Wo. then to his own, then to the 3. Wo. then to his own, then to the 4. Wo. then to his own, and so to all the We. and men, then your Wo. do the same: then arm them as you set to them arming your Wo. then your Wo. as much. Lead up again, then turn your Wo. with your right hand, and the 2. with your left, your Wo. falling as you turn, till you come to your place, then your Wo. do the same, you following her, the rest doing these changes.
Upon a Summers Day Longwayes for six L ad up all a D forwards and back, set and turn S.  That agan The men take all hands, and the women hands, meet all a D. back again; the first on each side go under the others arms on their own side, and meet below  Hands again, and the next Cu. as much  Hands a∣gain, and the next Cu. as much set and turn single  That again As before et and turn single  That again As before
Up Tails all Round for as many as will Lead in all a D. and back again, set and turn S.  That again First Cu. lead through the 2. Cu. cast off and meet within, clap hands and arms  And so forward to the next, the rest following in order First Cu. lead through the 2. cast off and meet within, clap hands all four, hands a crosse all four, and round to your places, and so forward, &c. First Cu. lead through the 2. Cu. cast off and meet within, clap hands all four, and hand round all four to your pla∣ces, and so forward, &c.
The Whish Longwayes for six Lead up a D. forward and back, set and fall back  That againe The 2. man lead in the first man between the two first We. cast off, fall to your places, and armes  Then lead in the last man between the two last We. fall to your places, and armes  Then the middle Wo. do as much Sides alli Set and fall back  That againe The 2. Cu. lead up betwen the first, cast off, fall to your places, turn your own  As much betwen the last Cu.  Then lead  between them as before. Armes all, Set and fall back  That againe The 2. Cu. crosse over between the first Cu. crosse over a∣gaine between them, fall to your places  Then as much between the last  Then lead in between them, as at the first.
The Whirligig Longwayes for six Lead up all a D. forwards and back  That again The middle Cu. go up between the first, cast off, and come to your places again, then crosse over between them like the Figure of 8. to your places  Then as much with the last Cu.  Cast off all, do thus. Sides all  That again The 2. man arms with the first Wo. and they three go the S. Hey, while the 2. Wo. turns the last man, and do the like with them  That again, the 2. Cu. changing their ends  Cast off all, do thus. Arms all  That again First four cast and come to your places, then take right hands a crosse, and go round to your places  As much with the last Cu.  Cast off all, do this change.
Woodicock Longwayes for six Lead up a D. forwards and back  That again Set and turn S.  That again The 2. Cu. lead up between the first, cast off and come to your pla∣ces  Lead down between the last Cu. and as much As before Sides all  That again As before The 2. man crosse over, and go about the first Wo. while the 2. Wo. goes about the last man, and to your places  Then the 2. man a∣bout the last Wo. while the 2. Wo. goes about the first man, and to your places As before Arms all  That again As before Men the single Hey As before Women the single Hey As before The D. Hey all As before
Under and over Longwayes for as many as will Lead up a D. forwards and back, Set and turn S.  That again First Cu. meet and back, turn once and a halfe by both hands  Set each to the 2. and go back, turn by both hands  Do thus to the last, the rest following. Sides all, Set and turn S.  That again The first and 2. on each side hands and go back, meet and crosse o∣over, take hands behind you, go halfe round into each others pla∣ces  Do thus to the last. Armes all, Set and turn S.  That again First Cu. meet, fall back, and fall to the 2. place, Crosse over be∣tween the 2. C.  Do thus to the last, the rest following.
Winifreds Knot, or Open the door to three Round for as many as will Hands and 2. D. ound, Set and turn S.  That againe  M meet, back again, go all to the left hand on the out side of the Co. We.  Meet all again, back again, and g all on the outside of the next We.   Doe thus till you come to your own places: then the We. as much. Sides all, Set and turn S.  That again  As before. W ginning. Armes all, Set and turn S  That again  As at the
Mr. Webbs Fancy Longwayes for eight Lead up a D. forwards and back  That again Set and turn S.  That again The 2. man and 3. Wo. change places, the 3. man and 2. Wo. change  The first foure and last foure hands and go round Then change as before, and hands round as before Sides all  That again Set and turn S.  That again First and last Cu. meet your owne, while the other four go back, first and last Cu. meet, while the 2. Cu. slip up and the 3. down  First and last Cu. hands and goe round, while the other turn their own Then do the same again Armes ll  That again Set and turn S.  That again Men hands and go round  We. as much Men the S. Hey, while the We. do the like
The Silver Faulken Longwayes for as many as will Lead up forwards and back. Set and turn single  That again  First Cu. go the S. Hey between the 2. and on the outside of the 3. come back between them into the 2. place turn  As much with the next going on the outside first, do thus to the last, the rest following. Sides all, set and turn S.  That again  First Cu. change places, meet the 2. let them go between you, change with your own again  Do thus to the last, the rest following. Arms all, set and turn S.  That again  The 2. Cu. meet, while the first and 3. meet, the 2. meeting you, each three hands and go halfe round into each others places  Do thus to the last, the rest following. FINIS.
