E186_11 53403934 97700
Numb. 27. THE Parliamentary Intelligencer, COMPRISING The Sum of Forraign Intelligence, with the Affairs now in Agitation in England, Scotland, and Ireland. For Information of the People. Published by Order of the late Council of State From Monday June 25. to Monday July 2. 1660. From Bury in Lancashire. AMongst all the publique expressions of Joy every where manifested at his Majesties happy Proclamation, though the Weekly News book made no mention of it, I have not heard the Ceremony was more solemnly or handsomly managed any where, then by us; which (o the credit of the Gentleman I cannot but speak it) was Mr. Lightfoot our Ministers contrivance; who during these hazardous times constantly owned his Majsties cause; aid though may with the world an round, he still persisted to be homo qua∣dratus, and as often as the least opportunity seemed to favor his inclination he publiquely made profession of his Loyalty to his Soveraign; wiss his bold and frequent mention of his present Majsty  in his publique prayers in Sir George Boh
Expedition, for which he suffered the deprivation of his Benefice. I had not insisted so long upon this Gentlemans gallant carriage, had he not been eminently both active and passive, as the Scene varied, for the same Interest; and were not a large share of the loyal expressions in the ensuing Narrative justly due to him. In short, the ceremony was so splendid, sumptuous, and regular, that it will almost seem incredible that a place comparatively so little, should equal many more considerable Towns; and that our Minister having satisfied his duty in Divine offices, (and which is more, the expecta∣tions of so numerous n appearance of Gentry) should prove so ingenious a Master of Ceremonies: For though many more hands and purses went to the managing of that affair, yet we were beholding to our Ministers head for much of the contrivance. And as there was cause of an universal joy, so there were large manifestations almost of a general resentment of it, and effects truly worthy of so noble a cause; the Country-Gentlemen, neighboring Clergy, and Soldiers both foot and horse, each in their several stations being very cheerful and forward to perform the office of Auxiliaries upon so good an occasion, and mutual emulation did pro∣voke all of them to outvie each other in expressions of a hearty obedience to so grateful commands. After the cere∣monies in proclaiming his Majesty were ended, we caused a Crown which was all that day carried before us, to be placed on the top of a Red cross erected over the Town-ll, where it now remains; and then feasted all the Gentry which came to see the solemnity, the Waits with loud musick ushering in the solemnity; and we gave the Irish Brigade which quar∣ter in our town, a sum of monies, and distributed others to the Ringers, Garland and Bonfire-makers, and also bestowed the Kings colors on all the horse and foot, and in fine such rude expressions as Bells, Guns and Bonfires could afford, were abundantly during that day (and the Fires continued fourteen days and nights after) and the next day the joy was shewn by all the women in the parish, who spent it in dancing and other monuments.
From Stockholm, May 10. The 23 Instant, about eleven a clock at night, the corps of the late deceased King, was brought hither, at the light of above 400 Torches, and very magnificent Pompe. There went first a great number of Horsemen, after whom marched the said Kings Guards; then the Marshall of the Kingdome, the Count of Levenhaupt, the Deputy of the Nobility, and all the Senators. Then came the Chariot upon which was the Corps covered with a large cloth of black Velvet, where∣of the Corners were borne by 4 Gentlemen of the deceased Kings Bed-Chamber, many Hlbrders being round about it, each of them with a Taper of White Wax, immediatly after marched the young King, with Prince Adolphe his Uncle; and last of all the Queen Regent his Mother, ac∣companied by all the Court Ladies; the Corps having been conducted through this Citty, was deposited in the Church of the Castle, there to remain until it be transported to Up∣sal, which is the place where it is to be buried. From Vienna, June 5. The 2 Instant, an Express arived here from Pressbug, who confirmed the bloody battel lately fought between Prince Ragotzy and the Turkish Forces, about Hermstt, but with a success much different from what we heard before The sad Prince had five orses killed under him, and lost most of his Infantry and all his Bggag: so that there is no hope now that he can maintain himself by force, in the possession of Transylvania, and much less that he can reco∣ver the good will or the Grand Seignior who hath refused to accept of the offer he made to him of 500000 Rixdollers yearly, and to jyn his Forces to the Turkish Army, for the execution of the said Grand Seigniors designes against Hun∣gary; which hath incensed against him his Imperial Majesty, that it is reported he hath refused him the investiture of some
Bawicks he holds in those parts. The Leavys are continuing thoroughout the Hereditary Dominions; and as soon as any number of them are compleated, they are presently sent a∣way towards the Kingdome of Hungary, to keep the Turks in awe, who doe continue their devastations, although the Bashaw of Bua hath sent again to give assurance to the Em∣peror, that the Sultan doth desire to live in good correspon∣dnce with him; and that very suddenly an Ambassador would be sent to renue the alliance betwixt the two Empires Hs Imperial Majsties departure for Stiria hath been put off till the 20 Instant, because of the indisposition of the Arch∣duke Leopold, who is to accompany him in that journey. In the mean time his Majesty hath given Audience to the Envoy of the Tartars, who tooke his leave of him, and departed laden with presents; and the Investiure hath beene given to to the Deputies of Hlstein for the Lands their Master the Duke dth hold of the Empire. Konigsbergh June 7. 1660. By Letters from Mittaw we have, that the Nobility of Curland hath nominated two of the chiefest of their body, to go and meet the Duke their Prince, and accompany him hither, where great preparations are a making for his recep∣tion, and that the Swedish forces were begining to remove the Quarters, and leave that Country, marching towards . Plensburg 15 June 1660. The Governor of Tonningen having received the news of the conclusion of the Treaty between Swedland and Den∣mark, on the 13 instant, caused thanks to be publickly returned to God for it, and all his Ordnance to be  off. The same day all the Danish ships retired to Gluckstad, by order of the Count Eberstain, who likewise removed his forces from about this place, which thereby is now free from the blocking up which hath so long anoyed it.
Berlin 13 June 1660. The Elector of Bramdenburgh hath ordered a publick Thanksgiving to be kept throughout all his dominions for the Peace, which now proves to be generall, and for the happy restoration of the King of England, to whom we heire he hath sent Monsieur Polnitz his Master of the Horse, who, we heare▪ hath orders to propound unto his Majesty the marriage betwixt the Prince Radzivill with the Princess of Orange. Our forces are yet in their former Quarters, but s they are like to be hereafter useless, his Electorall High∣ness hath caused most of them to be disbanded. Lubeck June 18. 1660. The Letters from Copenhagen being not yet arrived, we cannot heare any thing concerning the execution of the last Treaty, but only we are informed that the Swedes were be∣gining to transport the Booty they had in Zealand, and that their German forces had received orders to retire into the places of the Archbishoprick of Bremen, Pomerania and Mecklburgh, and that the rest was to be transported into Swedland. And that in consequence of the subscription of the peace, the Swedish Admiral, who was abord Vice-Ad∣miral Ruyters Ship, had leave to go and kiss the hands of the King and Queen of Denmark at Copenhagen, where great rejocings were made, but greater were yet preparing, for the said Peace. From Edinburg June 19. 166. Out of the affection I have for you, I have with every conveniency q¦ted you with what passeth here worthie of your Knowledge or observation and at this time especially, I have made hold to borrow a few minutes from the publick solemnities to give you that in brief which we are celebrating wih that splendor and affection and unfained token of joy, that the like hath not been seen before in this Nation; for great and wonderfull is the Lords work of deliverance in that day, when we expected to be overturned with cnfus and covered with desolation. The Magistra of this City and our Prebyry, bring most sensible of  great mercy received, did appoint this the day of their publick thanksgiving to God for his signal love and kindness showed to them in investing our most gracious Soveraigne wth his Troane of England and Ireland, and for restor∣ing him to his Goverment ove this hs ancient Ntion, that for twenty hun∣dred ye , unle the Sceper of his Royall ancesto and
have given notice of this their resolution to all the Burghs and Presbyteres of Scotland, desiring their concurrence That s the cause is so their joy may be universall; Our Ministers  then Sermons with so much fervency and passionat expressions delivered what great kindenes the Lord had frn, in restoring to us our good King, that it hath nt been observed that at any time their ex∣hortations have been entertained wth such attention, and so plentifull tears by their Auditory. The English Officers of State and War, observed the Thank giving with no less joy and devotion after Sermon, and afer we had all dined togther, we all marched from the Councell-house to the Cross, in this o, the Town Councel in their Gowns, with thir Trumpets su∣ing before them, went first; then two Blles before the English Commissio∣ned and Officers, and two behind them went next: The Provost all alone before the Scotch Nobility and Gentry that are in Town, and two uiies with the Dean o God and Theaurer followed after; their Guards neer six hundred Citzens in comly apparel, armed with Swords and Partisans, the Cross was covered with artificial Vis loaden with Grapes, both good are wne▪ plentiuly springing out from all its Channels, on its Heads a Bacchus bestding a Horshad, with two or three Satyres, dd with then mick gestures and jests, enertain the beholders,  little below the Cr within a Ra, was erected a cuffld six foot high, on which was pld a large Table covered with a rich Banquet, served up in glss, and representing divers forms and devices: As His ajesties Arms, the Arms o the City, and divers Exo∣tick res were raised, loaden with their Leaves and Fruits, &c. the Table being surrounded with above one hundred persons of eminency. The Musick and breaking of Glasses were seconded by three gneral Vollies of the Horse and Foot, who receied an handsom answer from the great Guns of the Ca∣stle, Citadel and Shps in the Road, and all were ooed by oyful Acclama∣tions of the people. After this the forces drew off, affording the civilities of view to the pople, amongst whom the dishes and banquet were hurled, and so arose and march∣ed down to the Pizzo of the Palace of Holy: o house, first the Commioners next the Mayor General with his Army, and af them th City agistrates with their guards; whence after the muskets had luted the there wh h∣vers vollies and had receaved a returne from the great guns of the Castle, cita∣del and sea as frmerly they marched back againe quite thorough the City  to the Castle-hill from whence everie oe apart returne  spend the rest of the evening with their friends in mrth and muall Joy and entertainements. But now begin the Bells and the Fireworks, therefore I must be gone to assist in the dances of our Magistrates and citizens about the bonfires, and on my knees to remember the health of my Soveraign, and his royal , and the prosperity of his Excelleny and all those Heroes and Nobles who have been instrumental, or do rejoice wish us in this our great deliverance and happiness. Whitehall. His Sacred Majesty, our of a sense of the high deferes of Col. John Covert of Slaugham in the county of Sussex, (who formerly served in the Army of his late Majesty of ever blessed memory with much courage and fidelity, and ath since that, notwithstanding the cruelty of his enemies, and their perecuring of him for continuing his allegiance to his present Majesty, still remained un∣shaken i his resolutions to perform his duty, for which he was by Oliver Cromwell imprisoned in the Tower) was graciously pleased first to Knight him, and then give him a Patent for Barone.
His Majesty conferred the honor of Knighthood on VVilliam Poultney, a person that ever had a great civility for all that were for the Royal cause, and a loyal heart for his Majesties service. Col. Roger Mostyn is made Gentleman of the privychamber to his Majesty to enjoy all priviledges, &c. On Monday, the right honorable the Earl of Shrewsbury presented to his Majesty an Address of the Nobility and Gentry of the County of VVorcester, entituled, To the Kings most Excellent Majesty, The Humble Adddress of the Nobility and Gentry in the County of Worcester. The Address was subscribed, Tho. VVindsor, Tho. Coventry, VVill Russell, and above fifty ▪ His Majesty returned them his hearty thanks telling them he was well assured of their loyalty and affection, and should ever have a good esteem of them. One Payne, formerly a Messenger of Oliver Cromwell, is secured; there be∣ng information against him, that he was the Executioner of that execrable murder of his late Majesty. On Monday, Serjeant Atkins, a person of known integrity and great learn∣ing in the Law, sate Baron of the Exchequer. It being prohibited by the House of Commons, upon the miscarriage and abuses of some idle Pamphleters▪ that any of the Votes of that House should be printed without special Order, the Reader is desired to excuse us, if in obedience to them we cannot yet give him so full satisfaction. Books from the Office of Intelligence having formerly given you an ac∣count that Mr Scot one of the late pretended High Court of Justice for trial of his late Majesty was brought to Westminster; I must confess, though enquired of by many, I could not give satisfaction therein, being tender to gainsay any thing I did not well know especially in a matter concerning Mr. Scot, with who in the Pamphleret formerly kept such constnt intelligence, till meeting with a meer notation of his, I was informed that he was at Brussels, where he had rendred himself o Sir Henry de V▪ till his Majesties pleasure should be further known concerning him, laying himself now at last at the feet of his Majesties mercy as his onely security. Naples May 29. Ten ships, whereof six do belong to the Princ of Mon∣tesarchio his Squadron, wer from hence this we, with the 2000 Napolitan oot, that were in our Arsenal, command∣ed by Don Emanuel Caraffa, their Master of campe, and a German Regiment of about 1000 Soldiers, who are all to
be transported into Spain. They do also carry thither a great quantity of Provisions and Ammunitions for the War against Portugal. Madrid June 2. We hear by Letters from Cadiz, that our Fleet was gone from thence the Fourteenth of the last month; consisting is two Men of War, laden with silver, and twenty four laden with Merchandizes. We have heard likewise, that the Por∣tugais, to the number of 500 horse and 2000 foot, with two small Field pieces, had under  somthing upon Alegais, but that they were stoutly repulsed by the Garrison, and the Inhabitants of that place▪ and the Governor of  Ro∣drigo being gone  their relief with the , had so hotg charged the Enemies as they were retiring, that he killed 200 of them, and took 100 Prisoners. The States of both the Castilles have been summoned against the 15. instant. Rome June . This week Prince Ludovisio went from hence to take shipping at Civitta Vecchia, upon the Captain Galley of the Duke of , which is to carry into Arragon. Genoa June 12. The Seventh instant, the Sieurs Francesco Maria Lomel∣lino, Gio Butista Giovo, and Giaccomo Maria Garbarino were elected Senators, and the Sieurs Pietro Maria Gentile, and Francesco Maria Spinola Procurators, for the Supream Government of this Common wealth for two years. Turin June 19. The 17 instant, this Court went from hence for Frone, where they are to remain, during the great heat of Summer. The two Foot Regiments whom his Royal Highness hath given to the Venetians, are likewise gone from Trin, to go down upon the Po to Venice. The Governor of Milan hath demanded leave to ras here a Regiment of Horse of 500 men to serve against Portugal, under such Officers as his said Highness will be pleased hi¦self to appoint.
St. John de Luz, June 21. 1660. Two dayes afore the departure of the Court from hence, the Count of Fuensaldagne arrived here with a fine equipage, having eight Coaches, each with six hor∣ses, three Litters, twenty four Mules with Coverts of Crimson Velvet, imbroidered with gold and silver, two hundred horses all gallantly furnished, thirty pages, and many footmen, all in rich cloaths, laced with gold and silver lace. The Duke of Crequi was sent to complement him from the King and Queen, and afterwards was carri∣ed to his audience, where the Duke of Espenon put on his hat as soon as that Ambassador covered himself, which caused the Dukes of Sossons and Armagnac to absent themselves from that ceremony. The King expressed to the said Ambassador his great satisfaction of the Queen, and that he was much beholding to the King his Brother, his Unckle, and his Father-in-law, for bestowing on him that Princess. From thence the Ambassador went to the Queen-Mother, where at first having covered himself, he ood bae during all the rest of the time of his audience, afterwards he went to see the Queen. The King enter∣tained him at night with a Spanish Comedy, where he had a place under the Canopy, three places lower then Mon∣sieur the Kings Brother: All the time of the Comedy the King did nothing but whisper to the Queen. I hath been observed by the whole Court, that the King and Queen are extremely fond one of the other, and can hardly part. It is reported, that the first thing the Queen asked of the King, hath been, that she might alwayes go with him wheresoever he should go either to any journey, or to hunt, assuring his Majesty that she may very well follow him on horseback. She hath sent back again all the Spa∣nish Ladies that came along with her into France, except only two Maids of Honor, Chamber maid, a Dwarf,
and two other Servants. The King having asked of her Majesty whom of the servants she would keep; she an∣swered, she would keep none except his Majesty would give her leave. St. Sebastian, June 21. 1660. Don Lewis d' Aro is to go from hence this day for Ma∣drid. We hear that his Catholick Majesty intends to send the Marquess of Constans to congratulate the King of England for his happy restauration, and that he hath de∣signed the Baron of Battevil to be Ambassador Extraordi∣nary to the said King. We hear from Flanders that all the Spanish Forces that were in the Garrisons and places, and such as were under the pay of the Flemish, amounting to fifteen or sixteen Regiments, both horse and foot, were commanded to draw about Mardike; it is not known whe∣ther it be upon an intention to disband them, or for some other design. Marseilles, June 22. 1660. The 16 instant, the Chiaux of Tunis lately returned hither from the Court, went away with his Majesties De∣puty, who is sent about the liberty of the French Slaves. The twenty, the Switzers remaining here, were drawn out to quarter beyond the Port, by the order of the Duke of Mercoeur, who went yesterday for Aix. A Bark lately come from Barbary doth relate, that twenty Men of War from Algier, having met with a Merchant Ship of ours going towards the Levant, have taken her, and made slaves all the men that were aboard of her. Cahrs the same date. M. Sevin our Bishop, since his return from Toulouse,
where he was gone to be sworn to his Majesty, hath whol∣ly applyed himself to the holding of a Synod here. The 17 instant, he caused the funeral ceremonies to be per∣formed in his Cathedral for his Predecessor. There were present to the ceremony all the Corporations of this City, and most part of the Nobility and Gentry of Qercy, with above eight hundred Churchmen, Secular and Regular. The Bishop of Montauban made the Funeral Sermon with great applause. Bourdeaux, June 24 1660. The 21 instant, the Duke of Espernon, Governour of this Province, being arrived here to give the necessary or∣ders for the reception of the Court, was received upon the Port, with the noyse of our Artillery, by our Jurates, in whose name the Count d' Estrades our Major, made a speech to him. He was after complemented in his own house by the Deputies of the Parliament, and of the Court of Aydes, and by the Treasurers of France, the Senechal, and the other Corporations of this City, who hath expressed much joy for his return. The 23, their Majesties having received the first respects of our Jurates, by their Deputies at Bazas, and of the Parliament, by theirs at Langon, arrived here yesterday upon a very gallant boat they had taken about Cadillac. At their lighting, the Duke of Espernon, followed by abundance of Nobility, presented them the Jurates, and after their speeches, the Keys unto t Queen, by order of the King. Their Majesties were conducted afterwards through the streets richly hung, and at the noyse of the Canons to their lodgings, where all the Corporation, presented also by the Duke of Espernon, waited upon their Majesties this day, and made them their submissions. The 21, a∣bout four a clock in the morning, we were much affrighted here by an Earthquake, which caused some stones to fall
down from one of our Steeples. We have heard that the sune hath happened about the same time in several pla∣ces hereabouts. ADVERTISEMENTS. THe Reader is desired to take notice, that some unwor∣thy person hah so mangled that Excellent Poem that was lately set forth (call∣ed Iter Boreale) by a Rural pen (as the ingenious Author was pleased to  him∣self) you may know it by the Effigy of the Lord General Monck affixed with it in the same leaf, tending to the wrong of the Author, and the abuse of the buyer, by taking here a line or two, and there a line or two, and forward and backward in a confused manner, so that the sense of the Author is (as much as in him lies) to∣tally perverted. Advertisements of Books. The Extravagant Shepherd; or the History of the Shepherd Lysis, an Anti-Ro∣mance, in fourteen books; written originally in French, now made English, and published the second time. To be sold by Thoms Basset in St. Danstans Church∣yard in Fleetstreet. Celestial Amitles, or a Soul sighing for the love of her Saviour, by Edward Rey∣ll. The benefit of affliction, by the same Author. An Advice against Libertinism, shewing the great danger thereof, and exhort∣ing all to zeal for the truth, by the same Author. All three sold by Abel Roper at the Sun against St. Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet. Confirmation and Restauation the necessary means of Reformation and Reconci∣liation, for the healing of the corruptions and divisions of the Churches, submis∣sively but earnestly endered to the consideration of the Soveraign Powers, Magi∣strates, Ministers, and People &c. By Richard Baxter, an unworthy Minister of Christ, that longeth to see the healing of the Churches. Sold by Joseph Cranford at the Castle and Lyon in St. Pauls Church-yard. ☞ There is now Published that long expected and much admired Piece, Intituled, The World Surveyed: or, The Famous Voyages and Travels of Vincent le Blanc, or, White of Marscilles; who from the age of 14 years, to 78. travelled through most parts of the World; Containing a more exact description thereof, then hath hitherto been done by any other Author. The whole Work en∣riched with many authentick Histories. Originally written in French, and falt∣fully rendered into English. By F. B. Gent Aminta, The famous Pastoral. Written in Italian by the Exquisite Pn of the ad∣mired Poet Signor' Torquato Tasss; and Translated into English Verse, by Iohn Dancer, with divers other Poems. Both Printed for Iohn Starkey at the Miter in Fleet-street, betwixt the Middle Temple Gate, and Temple Barre.
The Character of Italy, or the Ireland Anatemized by an English Chyrugion▪ The Character of Spain, or an Epitemie of their Vertues and Vices. Both sold by Nathaniel Brook at the Angel in Cornhil. All Tenants for Lives, or for Years, which old of the Bishops, or Dns, and Chapters, are desired to meet on Tuesdaies and Saturdaies, at eight of the clock in the morning, at the Sign of the Legg at Westminster, in the Palace-yard, to consi∣der of their respective interests. A smooth black dog, less then a Greyhound, with white under his brest, belong∣ing to the Kings Majesty, was taken from Whitehall the eighteenth day of this instant June, or thereabout. If any one can give notice to John Ellis, one of his Majesties Servants, or to his Majesties back-stairs, shall be will rewarded for their labour. Whereas Tho. Rawlins, chief Graver of his Majesties Mint and Seals, by reason of his sufferings occasioned by graving of a Seal for his late Majesty of ever blessed memory, has not kept any certain lodgings; these are therefore to let all know that are in any office, that have seals from his Majesty, that they must pss by Warrant to him, and that at present he lives in Long Acre, next door to the Pestle and Morter, but shall speedily remove to the Mint within the Tower of London. Tho. Rawlins, chief Graver to his Majesty. Amsterdam, Iune 24. 1660. The 21 instant, the Royal Princess having been enter∣tained with rich Presents by the Chamber of the East In∣dia Company, went away from hence towards Harlem. The affairs of the Prince her Son go on very well in our Provinces, the States of Zealand having appointed Commissioners to draw a List of the charges and places formerly possessed by his Predecessors, and settle all things again as they were in 1651. By Letters from Edinborough of the 21, we have this further accompt of the solemnity, That the Major Gene∣ral, after his remembrance of his Majesty to the Earl of Seaford, fired the great Cannon called Monnce Megg (a Cannon never fired but on extraordinary occasions) af∣ter which followed all the Guns in Edinborough Castle, Leith Cittadel, and the ships in the Road. A plentiful Largess was bestowed amongst the Souldiery to heighten them in their joyes; about fifteen hundred bonfires were made on Arthurs Seat, one of forty load of coals, and at the Major Generals door one almost as big. After this
was variety of fire-works, some burned in the water, other flew in the ayr, two Castles firing one against the other, then several sorts of boxes thrown into the ayr, and fall∣ing in several shapes, which with divers others, gave great content to the spectators. My Correspondent there did further inform me, that what he vvrit concerning Major Abernthey, vvas too gree∣dily taken up bp him from a brisk report that vvas raised by some ill people, and desires it may be amended in the next Print, vvhich for his and the Readers satisfaction I have done accordingly. As for Major Aberin, my friend of the Intelligence Office, hath not yet told me vvhere he lives, till which time I must desire that Gentlemans pardon. As for what concerns Captain Rolle, I confess I had such a paper left at my house, and so subscribd, as he puts in his Pamphlet, but whether Mr. Calmady's hand or no I know not; I shall suddenly endeavour to wait upon him, and on Thursday next in Publicus will give a faithful accompt of it. For the rest of his pittiful foolery, to those that know me, I need make no Apo∣logy, to those that do not, it will be enough to tell them, that I never  any thing of this sort till entreated to it, for a just vindication of his Excellency, and his Army, to give faithful intelligence of their transactions, which were at that time so basely and falsly represented here by the Pamphleteers then in being. His Excellency was pleased then to send me several of his papers to commit to the Press, which when known to the world, any sober discreet man may judge with what cautiousness and design I must behave my self, with what reluctancy to my self I was forc'd some∣times to imitate this very fellow (I man no further, though then in writing) to free my self from the inquisiion of his prying Master, who employed such busie instruments to intrap men; how could I then safely represent the mmbs that desir'd a Free Parliament, if not in a disguize, which however was necessary should be done to balance those things he so often foisted in, and crowded week after week into his books, such as his Dare-bones Petition, and that pretended to be the Waterms, which suspition might not a naked simplicity have cast upon the Master I wrote for? This though his sdowness cannot reach, wise men have though meritorious, and in consideration of my service, the late Council of State ordered me one day i the week  be the intelligence, and none else on the same day, which I must tell my Gntleman I think of as sufficient power, as to the writing of  I confess I have never yet seen his power, but because the Gentleman in some of his former papers hath  I knew it, I'le tell him my opinion of it, that he may have paper to keep a  to give information of mone to be laid ou in Binaia, or where a  with st security venture o have his corns , w the Rearcher livs,  is to be let on the Be-side, where young mn and old Mrrons , and that bargains are made to be thee▪ bu how this entitles ; I leave it to himself to discount.  is by Nethmi∣zing , they are hi Tides that honor him; he  made like  of
Offal, had he not crept into his Livery, he might have gone thred-bare  this time, and yee I do not say he Nedhamizes, cloath him in purple, and he will pass but so the same creature still. The Maxime in this is true, Corruptio uius est generati alte∣rius, Sir Politick would be, might have been diviller to his Godfather, for surely he gave him his name; but no wonder if he be irseverent to him, that shew'd so much ingratitude to his late Patron. I will not trouble my self any more with his impeti∣nencies, as to what he can say of me in relation to my writing, I think him soberly answered, for his follies slightly. Whitehall. On Thursday, being the day appointed for the Thanksgiving for his sacred Maje∣sties restauration, in his Majesties passge between the Guard-chamber, and his Clo∣set, stood a person neer up to the wall with a drawn sword under his cloak, which was not for some time discovered; but his Majesty passing to te Closet, George Char∣nock, Serjeant at Arms, casting his eye about for the security of his Majesties person, discovered the glittering of the Sword, and thereupon presently with his Mace seized on the person, took from him th said naked sword, and upon view found the same to be a short sword, back ilted, hacked half way down from the point, a weapon fit for a dangerous design, but by the care and prudence of that Gentleman, his Majesties faithful servant, all intended mischief was prevented, the person secured, and his Ma∣jesty informed thereof by the Right Honorable and truly Noble Lord, the Earl of Pembroke, and the party remains under examination. Friday. His Majesty with his two Royal Brothers, the Dukes of York and Gloce∣ster, with several of the Nobility and Gentry, went to Copt-hall, where they were highly treated by the Earl of Middlesex. On Saturday his Majesty, with their Royal Highnesses his Brothers, his Excel∣lency, with divers of the Nobility and Gentry, were highly entertained at Pe∣hampton. From his Excellencies Quarters at the Cock-pit. On Munday his Excellency granted a Commissin to Major Richard Fincher, to be Major to Col. Nortons Regiment at Portsmouth. Also a Commission to Captain Potts, son to Sir John Potts, to be a Captain in the same Regiment. Sir John Mennes having a Patent from his Majesty to be Governour of Deal Ca∣stle, his Excellency ordered the present Governour forthwish to surrender it to him. William Bing Esq hauing a Patent for Weymouth Castle, his Excellency ordered the psent Governour forthwith to surrender it to him. His Excellency hath by Commission given the Command of the Regiment which was lately Col. Hackers, to Francis Lord Hawley, Viscount Duncannn. He hath ikewise given a Commission to Sir Chichester Wrey, to be Major of that Regiment, to Sir Francis Vincent Baronet, Sir Thomas Sinkeley, James Muddifor, and  Sherard, to be Captains in the same Regiment. On Friday his Excellency sate in the House of Commons, and  his leave of them, having such Honours conferred on him by his Majesty, as puts him in an high capacity. Major Abr. Holmes, Timothy Clare, Nicholas Lockyer, R Jones, Anth Spinage, and  Gregory Captains, Commissary Everard, Lievt. Hendly Lievtenant Geff, and one Corporal Brown, formerly committed to the custody of the Marshal-General, and being no Officers in this present Army, were on Saturday by his Ex∣cellencies
Order discharged of their imprisonments; upon giving security to be  and loyal Subjects to our Soveraign Lord the King, and not to disturb the public peace of his Majesties Kingdomes. London. The Artillery Company meeting on Tuesday the 26 of June, 1660. at a general Court then held in the Artillery yard, did unanimously make choice of his Highness the Duke of York to be their Commander in chief, and made choice of twelve of the Court of Assistants, to acquaint his Highness therewith, and desire his accep∣tance. On Saturday the 30th of June, the Lord Lucas, Sir John Robinson, Liev∣tenant of the Tower, their Deputy President, with Col. Shepherd, and others of the Assistants accordingly, went to Whitehall, to attend his Highness, and being com∣manded by him to come into his Bed-chamber, the L. Lucas acquainted the Duke that these Gentlemen of the Artillery Company were come to tender their services unto his Highness, and to acquaint him what they had done in reference to his Election to be their Commander in chief; then Col. Shepherd was desired to declare the mind of the Company, which he did in these words following: May it please your Highness, WE are commanded by the Artillery Company to acquaint you, that at our General Court your Highness was with one heart and one hand freely chosen to be our Commander in chief; but we durst not have so presumed, had we not known that your Highness was a Lover of Arms in general, and that in the year 1641. you mani∣fested so much love to that Company in particular, that you honored us so far, as to enter your self to be a member of it; and is being the ancient custome of our Company still to have liberty to make choice of one of the members of it to be our Com∣mander, we do humbly pray your Highness will pardon our boldness, and be pleased to own us as your own Company, and to accept of our earnest request to be our Com∣mander in chief, and we shall be ready to yeild obedience to your Highness Commands. And humbly pray for the encrease of your Highness prosperity and happiness. Upon which motion his Highness did very lovingly accept of it, and them, and promised they should still continue their ancient priviledges and customes, and he would be ready to do what he could for them: Then he asked what number they might be, it was answered, about four hundred or five hundred, and that they hoped they should be above three hundred in Arms on Thursday next to attend him, and if they were commanded, should be ready to wait upon him that very day at White∣hall▪ and when the Company was drawn up, they should deliver unto him their leading staff, according to custome: To which he replyed, He would accept of it, and re∣turned them hearty thanks. On Friday the 29th, a Committee of Aldermen and Common-Council went to invite the Lords of his Majesties Privy-Council to dinner with them at Guild-hall, July 5. the day appointed by his Majesty, which they were pleased accept of: They likewise made a particular invitation to the Lord Chancellor, and several other per∣sons of Honor, which they were pleased to accept. His Sacred Majesty in conside∣ration of the eminent services and constant loyalty of Sir John Robinson Knight and Baronet, Aldermn of London, made him Lievtenant of the Tower, which on Friday he took possession of. To morrow Doctor Reynolds is to preach before his Majesty in his Chappel at Whitehall. London, Printed by John Macock, and Thomas Newcomb, 1660.
