B1813 E1651_3 99868018 170221
Incomparable COMPANY-KEEPING, OR A conversation on Earth in HEAVEN. Held forth in sundry Sermos which are now digested into A TREATISE. By WILLIAM BELL, Mr of arts, and Pastor of the Church at Highton in Lancashire. MICAH 4.5. All people will walk every one in the Name of his God, and wee will walke in the Name of the Lord our God for ever and ever. And as many as walk according to this Rule, peace be on them and mercie, and upon the Israel of God. GAL. 6.16. LONDON, Printed by M.S. for George Eversden at the Maiden-head in Pauls Church-yard, 1657.
TO THE WORSHIPFULL and his worthy Friend, Gilbert Irland Esquire; Grace and Peace be multiplied. SIR, I Well-remember, that in the beginning of these Times, it was the won∣der of these parts to see so self-denying both a Mother and a Son! other parents, that had moe Children, and lesse for them were more sparing of them, then either yours was of you, or you of your self, though an onely Son, and of so-great expectation! Since there has been no Cause, blessed be God, to repent that free-will-offering, amid bullets flying there has been
a distinguishing and securing Pro∣vidence, so as now after warre you live in perce, Enjoying those large possessions, which Birth and Mar∣riage have devovl'd upon you. I am not unknowing, that Great Houses are not without their spa∣cious and pleasant Walks, but yet Enoch's excells those as-farre and more then they doe others. And therefore I take the boldnesse to minde you of it, and in this Trea∣tise, which, such as it is, is a signall of my many Obligations to you, and may by God's blessing serve as some hint and help of your walk∣ing, whiles in your Gardens with your God, which is the desire and prayer of Sir, your reall and readie servant, WILLIAM BELL.
TO THE WORSHIPFULL AND HIS HONORED FATHER-IN-LAW ROBERT HYDE, Esquire; The Good Will of Him that dwelt in the Bush. SIR; WHat favourer and honourer of the Ministerie you have been, is well-knowne by your hyding heretofore of the Lord's Prophets, Joyning of late in takeing Care of the Church, Encourageing at this day a faithfull Minister of Christ in the place where you live. And unto all this, your not disdaining, though the Mini∣sterie was under a Cloud, to become Re∣lated
to it, and to have your Daugh∣ters numbred amongst those Women, which laboured with Th'Apostle in the Gospel. I hope, God will not forget your worke, and labour of love; and if these poore labours of mine, which I praesent you with as a testimonie of my Gratitude, shall thorough Gods giving the increase, be any furtherance to you in Heaven's way, I shall rejoyce, that I have not Run in vaine, neither la∣boured in vaine; in the meane time I rest Sir, Your not more son then servant, WILLIAM BELL.
TO HIS DEARELY LOVED AND LOVING CHARGE, The Congregation of Hyton; Things pertaining to life and Godlinesse. SIRS; IT cannot be unseasonable in a time of so great Wan∣dring from, to treate of Walking with God. A Walk here is, that bodily Infirmitie disables not from, and the more a man do's stirre in it, and the more he may; other Walks you may have observed with their seats at the end, and concerning this I may boldly say, Walk with God, and Rest with Him. You have hereto∣fore in some measure, received, how
yee ought to walk, and to please God, and Note, I put you in re∣membrance of these Things; Let your Eye take at your Eare, and your Heart at both, and your life at all; for what is my hope, or joy, or Crown of rejoycing? Are not yee in the presence of our Lord Je∣sus Christ at His Coming? Yee are the glory and joy of, Sirs, Your servant for Jesus sake, WILLIAM BELL.
To the Reader. SIth to please, glorifie, and en∣joy God is the maine end of man, those books that are most helpfull to the attain∣ing thereof, exactly, plainly, and fully, guiding us in the way to that blessed∣nesse, doe above others deserve our fre∣quent and diligent perusall. Such is the Treatise here presented to thee, for the subject of it, being walking with God, is the direct way to communion with him, not onely on earth, in peace and joy passing understanding, unspeakea∣ble, and glorious; which may much strengthen and refresh us in our passage through this world, an uncomfortable Wildernesse, a labyrinth of vanities, vexations and heart-peirceing mise∣ries: but also in heaven, in aeternall, un∣conceiveable,
and ravishing pleasures, and glories. In these times there is much vaine talking about Religion, but little, strict, circumspect, humble, upright, holy, and stedfast walking with God: needfull therefore and seasonable is this dis∣course, to teach us to use our tongues lesse, and our feete more; to turne our talking into walking, our saying into doing; that so peace may be on us, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God, Gal. 6.16. Concerning the learned and religi∣ous Author of this Treatise, my reverend and much honoured friend and brother in the service of Christ, I need not to speake any thing in particalar: for this laborious and accurate worke will say enough for it selse and him; and make him sufficiently knowne: by the read∣ing of it, all that are judicious and learned will easily discerne, that God hath given him large ministeriall abi∣lities; and stirred him up to very great
diligence in the exercise of them: and be forced to acknowledge, that he is none of those, that offer that to God, which cost them naught. Although ma∣ny Divines, both ancient and moderne, eminent for learning and piety, have written on this subject; and thereby much edifyed the Church; yet these notes may be very usefull; for many witnesses render the truth more resplen∣dent and glorious: God is much honou∣red, and his people much refreshed by variety of gifts: and such is our dulnes, sloathfulnesse, and unsteadfastnesse in reference to this duty, that we need many goads to quicken us, and many nayles to fasten, strengthen, and keepe us in the wayes of heaven. Duties that are never sufficiently learned, are never too often taught. Besides this tract in my opinion, for exactnesse of method, lively quickening expressions, and ful∣nesse of matter, without defect or su∣perfluous redundancie, exceeds all, that I have hitherto seene on this argument.
The way of God, in which wee are to walke all our dayes, is the way of peace, Rom. 3.17. the good, the old way, Jer. 6.16. the way everla∣sting, Psal. 139. l.v. the way of plea∣santnesse, Prov. 3.17. the way of life, Prov. 15.24. the way of un∣derstanding, For the mean∣ing of that phrase, the Con∣gregati∣on of the dead, see Mr. Mede Diatri. par. 1. p. 132. from which they that wander, shall remaine in the Con∣gregation of the dead, that is, in hell, Prov. 21.16. O what folly is it, to neglect walking in such a way! Me∣thinks these Scripture expressions, if well considered, should perswade thee to walke in it without wearinesse, to run in it without fainting; for these move∣ings will not lessen, but increase thy strength, Prov. 10.29. the way of the Lord is strength to the upright. But take heed of walking in thy owne strength: for the way of man is not in himselfe, it is not in man that walketh to direct his steps, Jer. 10.23. God is the light, whereby we see, & the strength whereby we walke; in all thy wayes ac∣knowledge
him, and he will direct thy paths, Prov. 3.6. Be continually sensi∣ble of thy own blindnesse and weakness, and pray fervently, as David did; Lord cause me to know the way, wherein I should walke, Psal. 143.8. Lead me in the way everlasting, Psal. 139. l.v. quicken thou me in thy way, Psal. 119.37. Thou may'st aske in faith without doubting; for the Lord hath promised to give power to the faint, and to increase strength to those, that have no might: hee hath said, that they that waite upon him shall renew their strength; they shall mount up with wings, as Ea∣gles, they shall run and not be wea∣ry, and they shall walke, and not faint, Isai. 40.29.31. Naturall mo∣tions increase in swiftnesse, but violent soone decline, and come to nothing: if thy moveings toward heaven proceed from the divine nature, from principles of true life and godlinesse, they will be more swift and vigorous at the last,
then at the first; walking will increase to running, and running to mounting up with wings, as Eagles; The path of the just is as the shining light, that shineth more and more unto the perfect day, Prov. 4.18. This slender tast, I have given thee, of some pretious truths, concerning walking with God, fully and excel∣lently prosecuted in the Treatise, may serve to whet thy appetite to the reading of it, from which I will detaine thee no longer. The Lord send his Spirit with it to the hearts of his people, and to this watering give a plentifull increase, that through the good done by it, many thankesgivings may be returned to his Name. Halsall May 140. 1656. Thine in the Lord, THO: JOHNSON.
ENOCH'S WALK. GENESIS 5.24. And Enoch walked with God— A Part the Text is of such a Chap∣ter, as consists of two generall parts; an Inscription and a De∣scription; the Inscription is in the two leading verses [This is the booke of the generations of Adam—] in which secti∣on is also a Repetition of Man's Creation in diverse particulars. The Description is from the beginning of the third verse to the end of the Chapter, and is especially of the mul∣tiplication of Man, Procreation as before Creation, in order indeed unto them that lived before the flood, and they are Ten, that are named here; Adam to the 6th vers. Seth to the 9th; Enos to the 12th; Cainan to the 15th; Mahalaleel to the 18th; Jared to the 21t; Enoch to the 25t; Methuselah to the 28t; Lamech to the 32d; and Noah
in that 32d, which is the last verse. Now though this Chapter is Infended, as you heard from Generation; and accordingly the same, as you see is described, how one man descended of another: Yet it is not onely Genealogie, that's spoken-to, but like∣wise their age and death, yea and in the case of Enoch, partie to the Text, both his con∣versation and translation are reported, and his conversation twice, for the Text resu∣meth, what the 22d verse had mentioned, his Walking with God. This for Depen∣dance. As to Sense in a second place. And] is a copulative particle, and cou∣ples Enoch's Deeds and Dayes together; In the verse praecedent is told How long he lived [All the dayes of Enoch were 365 yeares] in this before us, How well (And Enoch walked with God) Indeed, as I was observing erst, this good Conversation of his is reported in so many words in the 22d verse, and is resumed in this 24th, which re∣sumption is not as Mr Calvin well, to the disadvantage at all of other godly persons; but, as to famouse this man for godlinesse, so to make way for the report of his Tran∣slation; and oh! how aptly do's so religi∣ous a Conversation usher in so marvailous a
Translation. [Enoch walked with God, and he was not, for God tooke him] so much for the perticle of Copulation. Enoch] The Name is from a root, which signifies to dedicate; and the Man, as you perceive, was religiously devoted. Another Enoch you reade of in the foregoing Chap∣ter, at the 17th verse, but that was a sonne borne to Cain, and this is the son of Jared, as you finde in the 18th verse of this Chap∣ter; Also in the third of Luke 37. [Which was the son of Enoch, which was the son of Jared. This our Enoch was the 7th from Adam, Jude ver. 14. which is to be taken Inclusively, as Piscator takes good notice, scil: Adamo Connumerato, Adam being counted one of the seaven, as do's appeare by this present Chapter. Enoch's prophesie Jude in the fore-cited place mentions; E∣ncch's pietie the Author to the Hebrews speakes to, together with Moses here, who sayes, [Enoch walked with God.] Walked] This word is us'd in the Word sometimes properly, concerning the Motion of the body, as in the 13 of Gen. 17. and o∣ther places [Arise, walke thorough the land in the length of it, and in the breadth of it, for I will give it unto thee.] Sometimes Im∣properly, and so it speakes of one's conver∣sation,
after the manner of the Hebrewes, with whom it is ordinarie to call men's Works their Wayes; see the 21 Prov. 8. Cum multis alijs. And in this sense and ac∣ception of the termes we meete with many Scripture phrases, amongst which is this in the Text of Walking. With God] In the 26 Levit. 23. we reade of Walking contrarie to Him, and indeed such Walking is contrary to Enoch's Some∣times wee reade of Walking After God, Deut. 13.4. Sometimes of Walking Before Him, Gen. 17.1. Sometimes of Walking in His Name, Micah 4.5. And, truth is, such Expressions are a kinne to this in the Text; for he walks with God, that walks After Him, yeelding Conscionable obedi∣ence; That walks Before Him, maintaining a due sense of His presence — and the like, as I shall have abundant occasion hereafter to speake; In the meane time let me adde, That God, as some doe well observe, is not here so opposed to Man, as excluding Con∣verse with men, and commending a Mona∣sticall Course; No, no, the people of God knew how to live Among men, and yet To God; see the 1 Cor. 5.10. Thus farre De∣pendance and Sense. Then, for parts in a third place.
The Text is in nature of a Testimonie, and so containes; 1. The Person, to whom Testimony is given. 2. The Thing, about which Testimony is given. The Person is Enoch, and the Thing, Walking with God; Which two parts might lead us into more then two doctrinall Pro∣positions; especially did I stand to Compare this verse with the precedent, which both together tell us, as I began before to hint. How well Enoch lived, aswell as How long. Non quàm multam, sed quàm bene, It's not a long life, so much as a good, that is so good; Or did I stay to lay this verse by the 22d, which together yeeld a double Menti∣on of Enoch's walking with God. Oh! the Honourablenes, as even-now the Comfor∣tablenesse of a well-lead life! Godlinesse is the life of our life! But, passing over all o∣ther, yet with due respect thereto, I betake me onely to one Doctrine, which the Text, assisted indeed with that harmonicall place, the 2 Heb. 5. will set before us; It would be observed, that the Author to the He∣brews speaking of the well-lead life of Enoch sayes, He pleased God whereas Moses here, that hee walked with God; Now put toge∣ther,
and what is it you spell-out? Sure, this precious and savourie truth, that Walking with God is pleasing to God. I say, walking with God is pleasing to God; in pursuance whereof see the 6 Micah 8. [He hath shewed thee O man, what is good, and what doth the Lord require of thee, but to doe justly, and to love mercie, and to walk humbly with thy God?] What doth the Lord require of thee? — Questions have their quicknes, especially in the Scriptures. Also see the 2 Mal. 6. Where the Lord Com∣mends this in Levi [He walked with me, sayes he, in peace and equitie. Hezekiah is heard to say, & when he was told, he should dye, in the 38 Isai. 3. [Remember Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee] I have set the Lord alwayes before me, sayes David in the 16 Psal. 8. Moses, it's said of him, in the 11 Heb. 27. That he saw Him, who is invisible. And Noah receives the same Testimonie Enoch do's, in the 6 Gen. 9. [Noah was a just man, and perfect in his ge∣nerations, and Noah walked with God.] This walking with Him, how pleasing to Him, will now in another section be evinced by diverse Arguments, derived from a di∣verse
sopick, and that I reason from Contraries; for consider, how it is with Walking Contrarie to him; do's not the Lord, as highly-displeased, Threatens to walk Contrarie to such, as so walk? Levit. 26.23, 24 [If yee will not be reformed by these things, but will walk Contrary unto me, then will I also walk Contrary unto you] yea [in furie] So He addes at the 28 ver. A ter∣rible Threat indeed! It were sad-enough to have men like unto our selves, crossing us at each step and turne. The men of Tyre and Sidon could not rest under Herod's displea∣sure, Act. 12.20. And yet what was Herod to God? God, that knowes how to oppose to purpose, that wants neither wisdome nor power for meeting with a man. There's a great deale of terror upon the face of that Scripture, that 63 Isai. 10. [He was turned to be their Enemie] None so deare a friend, and therefore none so dreadfull an Enemie; which Jeremie knew well, and deprecated it in the 17.17. [Be not a Terrour unto mee] Secondly, Consider The Issue; for, what I pray comes of This Walking? Do's not this walking with God, prove at length a walk∣ing To Him? It is a sure and sweet truth, Walk with Him, and Rest with Him. Such Peripateticks Change their place, but not
their Companie; as one of them said, when a dying. Enoch walked with God, sayes the Text; and what sayes the Context? And he was not, for God tooke him. Indeed I grant, every Saint is not sure to be Transla∣ted after the same manner Enoch was, but hee's sure of being Translated from Earth to Heaven, from Men to God; See the 73 Psal. 24. The Lord is so well-pleas'd with such, as Hee'l have them with him. Thirdly, His well-pleasednes is Concludible from the Adjunct, which is at least foure-fold; First, The Commandnes; Secondly, The Com∣mendednes; Thirdly, The Encouragednes; And lastly, The Benefittednes of this walk∣ing with God; and First, Commandednes; Never was one man so much in hand with another for his Companie, as the Lord is with man for his; Not yet, that Hee needs it; No, wee need His; wee are better, and not Hee for this Societie, yet He Calls to it, Calls for it; as one friend or neighbour sayes to another, Will you walke? So the Lord oftener then once speakes of This Walking; resume the fore cited Scriptures, Gen. 17.1. [I am the almightie God, Walk before me.] Deut. 13.4. [Yee shall walk after the Lord your God] Micah 6.8. [What doth the Lord require of
thee, but to—Walk humbly with thy God.] Secondly, Commendednes; Men tell and glorie of having been in better men's com∣panie then their own; and, as I shall speake more anon, never was it such an honour to the meanest man to be great with great men, as this Walking with God is, and, who is not aware, that This, This is the Testimo∣nie Enoch received, and twice-over; and neare together? Under this name it is, that the Spirit of God renownes Enoch; Do's He say, Enoch was rich, learned, honourably descended, lived long? Indeed something is partly said, and partly Insinuated in all these respects; but this is the Testimonie, That he pleased God, sayes Th'Apostle; That hee walked with God, sayes Moses. Thirdly, Encouragednes; The Lord said to Abram in that 17 Gen. 1. Walk before mee; But, what a Preface is there to the Precept? I am the Almightie God. Abram is minded, that Walking with God has no fel∣low! Hee's the Almightie! where is there Companie so good, so great in all the world againe? Almightines gives full satisfaction, serves to answer and expell all doubts and feares. What though walking with God did get a man ill will of the world, and that it was sure to doe; for loosenesse cannot
endure strictnesse, 1 Pet. 4.4? Yet, what of all that? may not a good man let them be talking? who may comfort himselfe with God against men, against sillie men with God Almightie! This Almightie God can, at pleasure, stop a foule mouth, and Hee will in Death at furthest, when the Wormes shall as much gnaw their Tongues, as with these they did the Good Names of His ser∣vants, Psal. 107.42. This Almightie God can open, as well as shutt the mouths of such, yea and to the Condemning of them∣selves, and Justifying of those that once they condemned, 1 Sam. 24.17. This Almigh∣tie God can sett the mouths of others as wide open in the praise of a good man, as ever the mouths of any were to his disgrace, Matth. 11.19. 2 Sam. 6.22. Lastly, Benefittednesse; a man that walks with God, the Lord lets not such a man lose it. Great men have great respect to their associates, favourites, and such, as are great with the great God, may hope First, That preservation others cannot; heare the Psalmist, in the 16.8. [I have set the Lord alwayes before mee, because Hee is at my right hand I shall not be mooved.] What Bailiffe dares arrest, or Enemie assault a fa∣vourite at an earthly Princes elbow?
Secondly, As preservation, so successe. The Lord, sayes Abraham to his servant, in the 24 Gen. 40. before whom I walk, will send his Angel with thee, and prosper thy way; Who, that's great with great men, but hopes their help? Thirdly, As successe, so accesse; such as waite upon the great men of the Earth, as they have great opportunitie for, so they use confidence in making their Addresses both in their own and others behalfs; and so a soule that walks with God, what a price is put into his hand in order to prayer? Gen. 48.15, 16. Fourthly, As accesse, so comfort; Chil∣dren that have their father by the hand, are quiet, though they goe in the dark; and it's not to say how enduring the seeing of Him who is Invisible, will make a Moses, Heb. 11.27. Lastly, Light, as well as Comfort; In∣timate friends know more of one anothers minds, then others doe; generally, The se∣cret of the Lord is with them that feare Him, Psal. 25.14. Even as, said one of the Aun∣cients a man that is acquainted with a man, is likeliest to understand any dark phrase in any of his Letters. Thus farre the argument from the Adjunct. A fourth followeth, and
from Effect; for judge, how pleasing to God is Walking with Him, which is of so pleasing operation, as it is, and in regard both of sin and dutie. Dutie; first, whether wee Consider Do∣ing or Suffering service; and First, Suffering; let a Captaine looke at his Souldier, and the Souldier shall not look at his life; and I had occasion even now to note, how enduring Moses was, who saw Him that is Invisible, Heb. 11.27. Secondly, Doing; Schollers under the eye of their Tutors loyter not, servants stirre, though they stood still before, when their Masters come: and accordingly Da∣vid, in the 26 Psal. 3. that sayes, Thy loving kindnesse is before mine eyes; sayes also [I have walked in thy feare.] Yea, This keeping with God, what an helper-on it is of secret Duties, inasmuch, as Hee sees in secret? This for dutie; then Secondly, As to sinne, Walking with God is notably-good against it; as good Jo∣seph found by sweet experience in the 39 Gen. 9. Hee, who thought on God, would not heare of Doing that great wickednesse; no, not he, who first was not super-annua∣ted, but so-farre from that, as it's said in the 7 v. [His Masters wife cast her eyes on him,
and said, lye with mee] Secondly, Was not un-importuned; it's said in the 8 v. [Hee refused] Many a lustfull yongster would have made the motion hee rejected. Third∣ly, Not altogether unforced! Shee caught him by his garment, ver. the 12th; the im∣pudent woman would have ravished the man! Lastly, Not unaccommodated, with season I meane [None of the men of the house were within ver. 11th. Though Time fa∣vour'd, yet his honest heart did not, the sin, but hee with the same breath speakes of God, and against it [How can I doe this great wickednesse, and sin against God?] Yea this keeping to God is good, as you see, against secret sins, as erst I said, for secret Duties. And now I have done with the Amplifica∣tion, and goe-on to the Application of the Doctrine, which will be diversly of use; and First, By way of Instruction; for, if this be thus, That walking with God, is pleasing to God, then we learne, and First, How-much wee are concerned to be well-instructed, and as wee could desire to please God, in this walking with Him. Yee have received of us, sayes th'Apostle, in the 1 Thes. 4.1. how yee ought to walk, and to please God; Yee have received of us — The pleasure of Earthly Greatnes is greatly
inquired-into, and behold a greater then So∣lomon is here. Now you may please to know, That as Walking is a large word, so its not a little goes to the walking with God; This is a pleasant Walk, and also aspacious; as appeares by these particulars. First, Walking with God is in both our Callings; Not onely doth he carry-on with God that carries-on Prayer, Meditation, and other Religious Exercises, though this is, I confesse, a principall part thereof; but hee also walks with God, who walks Con∣scionably in an honest particular Calling, spending his time, and laying-forth his Gifts of body, of mind, suppose as a Minister, or other labourer, out of obedience to God, who hath commanded in the sweat of the face to eate bread, till wee returne unto the ground. The account which Jude gives of Enoch, in the 14 v. is, That hee Prophesied, saying, Behold, the Lord cometh: Doth hee say, hee prayed? hee sayes, hee prophesied; Hee that served God, served his Generati∣on, had somewhat to say to them. Goe to then all those, that pretend to Religion without a vocation; Is this Walking? or not Halting rather? Secondly, Walking with God has re∣spect both to God and man. Not onely do
hee walk with Him; that gives unto God the things that are Gods, though this is a principall part thereof; but he also walks with God, that has respect to doing man right; out of feare of God feares to doe, but as he would be done-to. The account, which is given of Noah, yea where he recei∣ved the same Testimonie Enoch do's, That hee walked with God, is in the 6 Gen. 9. That hee was a just man; just as well as religious. Goe to then all those, that pretend to bring the one without the other, possibly have duties in the house, and deceit'ith shopp; is this to goe on both legges? will you call this Walking? Thirdly, Walking with God is both in publick and private! Not onely he, that at∣tends upon open vision, frequents the so∣lemne Assembly, comes as and when the people cometh, and is right herein for end and ground, walketh with God, though this is a grand ingredient hereof! but he also is such a Walker, that walketh in the midst of his house with a perfect heart, dwelleth with those under his roofe, as a man of knowledge, as heires together of the grace of life. The account, which is given of David, that professed to have set the Lord alwayes before him! in the 16 Psal. 8.
is in the 2 Sam. 6.20. That hee returned to blesse his Houshold.] Goe to, then all those, that, yea and under a colour of more sanc∣titie, have lesser Religion in the familie, yea Closet as well as familie is emptie! there's no Morning or Evening Sacrifice. Fourthly, Walking with God is in the Exercise of Graces: according to that in the 6 Micah 8. [He hath shewed thee ô man! what is good, and what doth the Lord require of thee, but to doe justice, and to love mercie, and to walk humbly with thy God?] Humbly; hee, that speaks of Walking with God, had need to look to Humblenes, for God resisteth the proud, and dos by them, as they doe by others, knowes them a farre off, Psal. 138.6. Holines, for this is the thing, that the Lord spake, saying, I will be sanctified in them, that come nigh mee, Levit. 10.3. Neate men cannot endure a sloven. Uprightnes, for the God of Truth is all for truth, and they that are otherwise can∣not be hid, Matth. 15.8. Wee say speak∣ing to Men-ward, Thought's free, to God-ward wee cannot say so. I might have ad∣ded other things. Fifthly, Walking with God is in the sense of Attributes; The Lord, in the 17
Gen. 1. bidding Abram walk before Him, tells him, Hee was the Almightie God. Then doe we walk with God, when we maintaine a good sense, First, Of His Omnipotence, how able Hee is to save as to destroy, to reward our obedience, or otherwise, Gen. 17.1. Secondly, Of His Omnipresence, That wee cannot at any time be where He is not, Psal. 139.7. Thirdly, Of His Omniscience, what an Eye-witnesse Hee is, who one day shall be Judge of all our Actions; even secret sins, being no secrets to Him, Psal. 90.8. Fourthly, Of His Soveraignenes, of what Authoritie He is, that it is a righteous thing, that Hee goe before us in one Com∣mand and another, and that wee be followers of God as deare Children, Jac: 4.12. I might have mentioned other Attributes. Sixthly, Walking with God, speakes Constantnesse; even as in bodily walking there is the adding of step to step, hee walks with a man, that keepes to him; and accor∣dingly David is heard to say, [I have set the Lord alwayes before mee] Alwayes. Not yet, but that the best here in this life have their failings. [If we say, sayes St John, in the 1.1.8. wee have no sinne, wee deceive
our selves, and the truth is not in us] Dos hee say, if you say so? he sayes, if we say. One man that walks with another, may be, stumbles, falls, lookes back steps out of the way, but hee's presently in againe; So, good men doe not make every step right, but the Bent of their heart and Generalitie of their Course is Sion-wards: That's a very notable and comfortable place, the 1 Kings 15.14. [The high places were not removed, Never∣thelesse, Asa his heart was perfect with the Lord all his dayes] q. d. for all the slips and faileings were in him, this man was a good man; good men are like light gold, must have their graines of allowance. Seventhly, Walking with God respects Relations. Levi, that is said to walk with God, it's said of him in the 2 Mal. 6, 7. That the Law of truth was in his mouth, for the Priests lipps should keepe knowledge —. They, that are the men they should be, are the Ministers they should be, and so the Ma∣gistrates, Masters, Husbands, and so forth; Homo quadratus, a good man is compared to a foure square peece of timber, that turne it, which way you will, is like it selfe still; If any man tell then of walking with God, inquire how he walks in his Relation, how towards his Children, whether he provide
honestly for them, or whether he layes not up their portions with th'Ale-wife, where neither hee nor they shall ever see them a∣gaine, unlesse it be upon the backs of such; it's very-sure, some could not doe as they doe, if others did as they should. I might have been larger in this section. Eightly, and lastly, Walking with God has respect to Providences, as well as Ordi∣nances. Not onely do's he carry-on with God, that carries-on prayer, as I was saying before, Meditation, and other Duties, but hee also, that acknowledges God in all oc∣currences, whether Crosses or Comforts. Crosses; what-ever or who-ever be the Instrument, God's is the Blow, and accord∣ingly the people of God have been wont, not like the dog, to run onely after the stone, but to regard the hand, that hurl'd it. Thus Job, in the 1.21. who had been told of the Sabaeans and Chaldaeans, yet is heard to tell of God. (The Lord hath taken.) Hee do's not say, the Lord hath Given, and they taken; he sayes, the Lord hath given, and the Lord hath taken; not yet, as if he either Accused Him, or Excused Them. This for Crosses; then for Comforts. Wee cannot think, Job was like many at this day, who live, as if they
had been borne to no purpose, or but to live by the sweat of other men's browes, and yet, as if he had done nothing, he sayes, The Lord gave, Job 1.21. What comes by the blessing of God upon our lawfull Endea∣vours, comes from God, is His Mediate Gift, and should be lookt-upon under that notion, wee should not be so full of our pollicie, power, as to leave God out. Then doe we rightly enjoy our enjoyments, when we enjoy God in them, and them in God. And now I have done with the first Instru∣ction. A second cometh-on; for, if this be thus, That walking with God is pleasing to God, Then wee also learne, what a Gratious God the Lord is, and the rather if wee Consider God, with whom man walks; and man, that walks with Him; and First, God; and in regard either of His Gloriousnes, or of His Blessednes; and First, His Gloriousnes; for, what? do's the Almightie God say, Walk before mee?] Gen. 17.1. Is He pleas'd to be so familiar with a poore creature? that's a sweet place, the 138 Psal. 6. (Though the Lord be high, yet hath Hee respect to the lowly) You know, First, It's thought great grace in Earth∣ly Greatnes, when a meaner man is per∣mitted
to walk and talk with them. Haman in the 5 Esth. 12. is over-heard to tell his wife and friends, that Esther the Queene let no man but him come in with the King. Secondly, The Societie and Ministerie of Angells is no small matter sure. Jacob in the 32 Gen. 1, 2. when the hoast of God mett him, presently set down that in the name of the place; and yet as men, great men fall short of Angell, so both fall farre enough short of God, and therefore what a graci∣ous Condescension is it in Him to receive man into Communion with Him? And so you'l say, if you Consider now Secondly, His Blessednes, as erst His Gloriousnes; for I demand, Who has Bene∣fit by this Walk? Hee or wee? Great men are oft great with meaner men, but usually upon some account, haply, they are helpfull to their minds, as Counsellers, Tutors; to their Bodies, as Physicians, to their Estates, as Politicians; but can a man be profitable unto God? is not Hee God over all, Blessed for ever? Job 22.2. Rom. 9.5. Hee is First, Out of the reach of all evill, yea sin, that hurts the sinner, and oft his neigh∣bour, yet Hee receives no diminution by in Himselfe, Job 35.6. Even as the Arrow, that's shott towards the Clouds, pierceth
not them, but him that shott it; let men doe their worst, yet God is not the worse. Secondly, Our Goodnes extendeth not to Him, Psal. 16.2. It is true indeed, wee are said oft to Blesse the Lord] but our mag∣nificous is magnum significare, our Benedi∣cere dicere bene; Hee so blesseth us, as Hee doth well to us and for us, Gen. 12.2. Our blessing Him is a speaking well of Him, 2 Sam. 7.26. God has no need of us, Hee was blessed ere ever wee were, and will be, when wee shall be dead and gone, and yet this blessed God would have us with Him; oh! what great grace is this? and so it will appeare also, if now in a second place Man be Considered, as before God; and First, Comparatively; if an Earthly Majestie, that had of the Nobilitie about him, should yet take a poore peasant by the hand, walk and talk with him, how great a vouchsafement were that? well land behold a greater King admits ast and ashes to fel∣lowship with Him, who yet is not without the Elect and holy Angells, beholding His face alwayes, Math. 18.10. Who is not without the soules and spirits of just men made perfect] Heb. 12.23. Who sees not, it is not for want of companie, yea and bet∣ter company too, that yet the Lord is plea∣sed
with mortall man? oh! gratious Lord! gratious indeed, when man is Considered by Himselfe, as afore with others. By himselfe in order either to States or Priviledges; and first states; as First, What he is by nature, [Wee were by nature, sayes th' Apostle, the Children of wrath, even as others Eph. 2.3. If Earthly Greatnes should be great with the sons of rebellious Auncestors, were not that great grace? Well, and are not they that doe and should walk with God, the sons and daugh∣ters of fallen Adam? Is it not a great mercy therefore that any descended of him [in ordinarie] should be received into favour? and still, the rather while wee Consider, how it is with lapsed Angells; for, where they fell, they lye! and say, did man, fallen man deserve any better then they? Who wonders not to see sometimes golden ves∣sels, yet when they were fouled, broken to peeces, and thrown upon the dunghill; and the Earthen pott, when it had contracted filth, to be cleansed and made meete for the Master's use? Secondly, Consider man, not onely what by Nature, but in the state of Grace, and so there will appeare great grace againe, in his Walking with God, and God's pleasednes
therewith; for I demand, whether there be a just man upon earth, that doth good, and sinneth not? See the 7 Eccles. 20. The Preacher said, There is not; oh! alas! for the iniquitie, yea of holy things, and yet for all this iniquity man is not debarred society, no not by Him, that's glorious in Holines, sure, Hee's Glorious in Goodnes too, is Hee not? And yet the glorie of His Grace ap∣peareth, if wee Consider Man as thus in regard of States, so Secondly, Of Priviledges; I meane, that waite upon them, that waite upon God. Now these Priviledges would be spoken-to, either praeparatively, or profestly and par∣ticularly; and First, Praeparatively, and may that pre∣pare us for hearing of priviledges by telling us, of our undestroyednes. Men that are intimate with one another, doe oft walk and talk together, they see much into one another, yea as they discerne the Commen∣dable, so other things, that are in one ano∣ther; and God, with whom a poore soule walketh, is a thousand times more aware of all its infirmities. Is it not then of the Lords mercies that we are not even consumed? Lam. 3.22. And if un-consumednes speake mer∣cies, what doe priviledgednes? Thus prae∣paratively; then
Secondly, Profestly; and the priviledges that waite upon them, who waite upon God are either here, or hereafter; and First, Here; and I shall give them forth with allusion to bodily walking, or one man's walking with another; and First, You know, when one man walkes with another, either walks upon his owne leggs. Yea but now tell mee, what walking there could be With God Without God? Heare Th' Apostle in the 2 Eph. 10. [Wee are His workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good workes, which God hath before or∣dained, that wee should walk in them] Good works as they are prepar'd for us, so are we for them; and therefore the Psalmist prayes in the 119 Psal. 5. [Oh! that my wayes were directed to keepe thy statutes] directed] by whom? he tells you in the fore-going verse [Thou hast Commanded us to keepe Thy pre∣cepts diligently] oh! that — Hee that is the Commander, is pray'd to be the dire∣cter! Which calls to minde a prayer of one of the Auncients, Da Domine, quod jubes, & jube, quod vis; Give Lord, what Thou Commandest, and Command what Thou pleasest. It is God (so in the 2 Phil. 13.) which worketh in you both to will and to doe of His good pleasure This for the first Privi∣ledge, or Advantage.
A second followeth: As unto one man's walking with another, you know, a man has not his friend or neighbour alwayes readie to walke with him, possibly hee's not at home, or not at hand, or not in a condition to walk, is not well and the like; Yea but you may heare the Psalmist speaking of set∣ting the Lord alwayes before him] Psal. 16.8. If the fault be not in our selves, wee may still be with the Lord, may enjoy Him in health and sicknesse, in libertie, and under restraint, at home and abroad, in publick, private, secret. Yea, a man may have His Companie in other companie, and they know nothing of the matter neither; see the 2 Nehem. 4. [The King said unto mee, for what dost thou make request? so I prayed to the God of Heaven] did Nehemiah now turne aside into another roome? or did hee take unto him words in the hearing of the King? Nay, the present addition of the sub∣sequent words [And I said unto the King] tells us; it was an Ejaculation, and lifting-up of his heart to God. Thirdly, A man that walks with another man, may come to be troubled with him, hee may faint upon his hands, or lay-on violent hands— But as for God, Hee's the best Companie in the world, best for
comfort, yea though times should be never so uncomfortable. Moses endured, as seeing Him, who is invisible] Heb. 11.27. Best for faithfulnesse, you may trust your selves with Him, Hee neither doth deceive, nor is deceiv'd; nor is there any danger of the Creator of the ends of the Earth, faintnes or being wearie, Isa. 40.28. Yea Fourthly, Whereas in man's walking with man, the way may come to wearie them both: What doe you say to This walk, wherein the more a man dos stirre, and the more hee may? [The way of the Lord, sayes Solomon, is strength to the upright] Pro. 10.29. See also 15 Joh. 2. They that waite upon the Lord, have a promise of renewing their strength, Isa. 40. ult.] The trees in our Orchards growing old give-over bear∣ing; but [those that be planted in the house of the Lord, shall flourish in the Courts of our God, they shall bring forth fruit in old age] Psal. 92.13, 14. Yea it is oft with them as with the setting Sunne, which shines glori∣ously then; witnesse the living speeches of dying Christians; that was a savourie saying of a good Gentlewoman, when lying a dy∣ing, Lord, let mee not goe to hell now, where the wicked are; for thou knowest here upon Earth I loved not their companic.
Fifthly, The way one man walks with another in, may prove dangerous to them both; by the way as they walk theeves or other sons of Belial may on-sett them, and over-power them; but here remember, how the Lord, in the 6 Gen. 1. tells Abram, whom hee walkt before, when hee walkt before Him, why! The Almightie God] And shall any thing be too hard for, or in∣deed hard to the Almightie? I said hereto∣fore, that Walking with God will get th'ill will of the world, for indeed it is a Walking Contrarie to them, a Condemning of them; and doe you think, they'l dye in your debt? no, they are, I warrant you, more malicious then so; but, though they shew their teeth, yet if the Almightie but speak the word, they shall not bite, yea Hee can knock-out the teeth of them. Carnall people looke upon God's people as a most exposed and imperilled people, because of their opposed∣nes to the sins of the Times and places they live-in; Yet it's verie-sure, they goe under a stronger Guard then the world wotts-of; An Almightie Protectour, oh! what a Pro∣tectour is Hee? Sixthly, In one man's walking with ano∣ther, they may misse the way both of them, rather Wander than Walk! But hee, that
walks with God, walks with the onely wise, 1 Tim. 1.17.] There is not such another Guide, so skilfull, like as nor so faithfull, so cheerfull, so mercifull! Seventhly, Doe men take it for an ho∣nour to walk and talk with great men? to be Great with them? oh! then! how much more shining of face is i to poore creatures to be great with the Greatest? No doubt, a mad bad world will not onely strange at it, that they run not with them, but speake like themselves Naught, but, they may be talking, for besides that their tongue is no slaunder. God is Lord of Glorie, none need to shame with His Companie! The Church, in the 4 Mic. 5. speakes, as not careing, who knew with whom shee walkt; All people will walk every one in the Name of his God, and wee will walk in the Name of the Lord our God for ever and ever] Indeed they had Cause to be confounded, not shee! Eighthly, Is it any Refreshment to men their walking and talking together, accord∣ingly as wee say, Facundus Comes pro vehi∣culo? Then how much more may a soule delight it selfe in the Lord, and have the de∣sire of his heart? Yea and whereas men, that are intimate with a man, may in time disco∣ver some undesireable thing in him, which
may cause them to turne away from him. The Lord, with whom thou walkst, is Totus desiderabilis, Altogether lovely] Cant. 5. ult.] Ninthly, Do's a man's being among great men, hearing their wisdome, seeing their state, disingratiate the societie of the baser sort to him? How much-more serves this Communion with God to discommend vaine Companie to us, so as not to rellish drunkards, swearers, and other prophane persons, as Esau, so savourily as some doe, who, alas! know no better? David, in the 26 Psal. 3.4, 5. that had the Lord's loving kindnes before his Eyes, professes not to have sate with vaine persons, yea to have hated the Congregation of Evill doers.] Tenthly, Do's a man's being great with great men Commend him to the respects and fellowship of others, so as they to think it well, that they can get him amongst them? Then how much-more dos walking with God open a doore to the Communion of Saints, so as a man, whom th'Lord hath ad∣mitted, servants, sure, may well receive. You finde in the 9 Act. 26.— That when Saul assayed to joyne himselfe to the Disciples, they were afraid of him, and beleeved not, that hee was a Disciple. But Barnabas tooke him,
and brought him to th' Apostles, and declared unto them, how hee had seene the Lord in the way: and it's added, Hee was with them, coming-in and going out at Jerusalem] Even as at the Courts of earthly Princes, their fa∣vourites want no favourers. This for Privi∣ledges here: Then Secondly, As to Priviledges hereafter; and they are either Negative or Affirma∣tive; and First, Negative; The portion of them that walk with God, what is it not? why! it is not Condemnation! Rom. 8.1. no! no! Condemnation is the World's portion! [When wee are judged, sayes th'Apostle, wee are chastened of the Lord, that wee should not be condemned with the world] Two Scrip∣tures would be laid together, this 1 Cor. 11.32 and the 2 Eph. 2. In the one you reade of the Course of the world, and in the o∣ther of the Condemnation of the World; and looking at both you see, What the Course of the world Comes-to, ends-in; Condemnation! oh! fearfull Course! for oh! fearfull Condemnation! Who, that thinks at the end, trembles not at the Course? You know, how it is with Con∣demned men, men condemned to death, to a temporall death; they are lookt upon, as
wofull men, men shrinke away from them, are loath to tarrie long with them: But what's the Condition then of damned men? men, whose judgement is Eternall death? Who would for a world be one of th'world in the great day? So little cause, indeed none at all, have they to be so jocund and joviall in the meane time; when Condem∣nation overtakes this course of their's then, I trow, will appeare what a difference there is 'twixt Walking with God, and walking after the world; Walking with God is no walking towards Hell, so as they may walk on with comfort, that walk with Him, and cause they have to acknowledge free grace, the riches of His Grace, that ever received them into Communion with Him. This for Negative Priviledge, concerning which I might have spoken largelier, such a terror there is upon the damnation of Hell, did wee rifle Hell, and consider the Entertaine∣ment there, fire] prepared fire] Math. 25.41. The companie there, the Devill and his Angells] The continuance there, for wee heare of Everlasting fire] but, in one word, the greater miserie it is to be damned, and the greater their Priviledge is, to whom there is no Condemnation. I goe-on to Affirmative Priviledges, the
hint whereof is given in this 5 Gen. 24. in the words next after the Text, where it is said of Enoch, Who walked with God, that God tooke him] Wee have a word in our generation, that God has taken such a man, such a woman; and though it be true, which I did timously advertise us of, that every Saint of God is not sure to be taken-away after the same marveilous manner, which I need not now to speake to; yet it is very-sure, that God will take them! [Thou shalt — Receive mee to Glorie] sayes the Psalmist in the 73.24. And now that it may better appeare, what a Priviledge this Taking is, the termes of it shall be Consi∣dered; and First, The terminus a quô; or, what a man that walks with God, is taken from, when God takes him. Hee's taken from Evill, yea, and as Evill is double. And first the Evill of sin, which is the grand Evill indeed. Now this I would consider. First, In order to Temptation to it. Secondly, Perpetration of it. Temptation is either from within, or from without. From within, according to that in the
1 Jac: 14. [Every man is tempted when hee is drawn-away of his own lust and enticed] Quis{que} sibi satan, said one, there is that within us, that is against us; that helps to make the Devills market; yea indeed what could suggestion doe without lust? what would it availe Satan to strike fire, if man did not finde tinder? There's a body of death, a masse of Corruption, that a good man goes heavily under, while hee is here. [O wretched man, that I am, who shall deli∣ver mee from the body of this death?] Rom. 7.24. So sweet a thing it is to be delivered I Well now, Come Death, and Goe Lust; according to that in the 2 Tit. 11. where they are called Worldly lusts] Thus for temptation, from within. Secondly, As for temptation from with∣out. First, Wee know, who is term'd the tempter] as wee say, the Philosopher! [The Tempter, so in the 4 Matth. 3. came to Him] is it said, the Devill came? it's said, The Tempter came] hee makes a trade of tempting, and hath done long, and how skilfull in the trade may hee be presumed by this time of day? The rather, while wee Consider, that the old Serpent, when hee was yong could goe cunningly to worke,
as wee see in the 3. Gen.] I might say much of his Assiduitie, how that hee's not easily shakt-off, but will have th'other bout! In the 4 Luc. 13. it's said, Hee departed for a season] much, of his Impudencie, for what so horrible and execrable a thing, which hee has not the face to moove for? Whose heart rises not to heare of worshipping the De∣vill? and yet very this did he speake to our Lord Christ about! Math. 4.9.] Shortly! the more I might say of Satan's Tempting, and the more is to be said what a priviledge it is to be gotten out of th'gate of him! but now Come Death, and Goe Devill, Joh. 14.30. When God has taken a good man once, the Devill may putt up his pipes. Thus for The Tempter! Secondly, There are Others, that are found tempting too: And first, Wicked men, the Devill's journey-men, factors for him; oh! what service these doe him? and concerning Tempting. It's said of those Christian suf∣ferers, in the 11 Heb. 37. That they were Tempted] yea, aswell as stoned, sawn-asun∣der —] Persecutors have gone all wayes to worke, used foule meanes and faire; they that wandred about in sheep-skins and goat-skins, might have gone ruffling and ruffling
in silkes and velvets. In this section what might be said of the corrupt Examples? of the carnall Counsells? of the Insinuati∣ons and flatteries of corrupt men? and in∣deed more might be said, and more it do's appeare, what a priviledge it is to be from amongst these Naughtie-packs. But now, Come Death, and Goe Naughtie-packs. Not one of these shall follow a good man, when and where he goes] No, no, Heaven is no place for them, 1 Cor. 6.9. Thus for the Badd. Then secondly, For the Good, It's a truth, though indeed a sad truth, even good men are Instruments sometimes in tempta∣tions] It was Peter, to whom Christ said, Get thee behinde mee Satan] Math. 16.23. Loe Satan's Counsell in Peter's words, as ere now cunning knaves have ingaged in a busines of their own a man of better repute then themselves, that it might the better take; and oh! who is not aware, how a temptation handled by a good hand has prov'd too-succesfull? Thus, in the 2 Gal. 13. Peter wanted not others to dissemble with him; yea and Barnabas also was car∣ried-away with their dissimulation. Good men, but too-oft, are misguiding enough, and therefore what a priviledge is it to be
out of the reach of their Infirmities? But now, Come Death, and Goe Infirmities, Heb. 12.23.] In Heaven, whither a good man goes, when he goes hence, are the soules and spirits of just men made perfect. I have done with sinne, in order to tempta∣tion to it; it followes in regard of perre∣tration, which may be Considered two wayes. First, In regard of One's selfe. Secondly, In regard of Others. First, One's selfe; and so I say, Good men are taken from Evill, as unto perpe∣trating it themselves. Th'Apostle, in the 2 Cor. 5.10. speakes of Evill things being done in the Bodie] and in the 3 Col. 5. [For∣nicaters, uncleanenesse, — Covetousnesse, are termed Your Members, which are upon the earth] Then what a priviledge it is to be taken unto a Condition of being un∣finn'd, will appeare, if wee consider, how it is with good men concerning sinne, while they are here: For first, There is not upon Earth a just man, that doth good, and sinneth not] Eccles. 7.20. In Heaven it is otherwise with good men, There they doe good, and sinne not; but here they doe both; not onely doe wicked men doe wickedly, but
good men get it mist. It was the observa∣tion of a late learned Divine, that the Pre∣sent tense is accompanied with the Imper∣fect and the Future with the Praeterpluper∣fect; and that such is the Condition of our praesent, and of our future Holines. Indeed, while the people of God are here, there's danger of the Child's offending the Father, yea the Children of the bigger end, and greatly too; David was a precious man, yet Nathan tells him, in the 2 Sam. 12.14. hee had done a deed, by which he had given great occasion to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme] And besides Iniquitie thus generally, what might be said of the Iniqui∣tie of holy things? Exod. 28.38. Oh! alas! for our Sabbath-sins, Sermon-sins, Prayer∣sins, the sin, that do's so easily beset us, when wee set our selves in God's praesence, and upon occasion of his service; as if a man should be somewhat-slovenly, when he had his best Clothes on. You see, how it is with God's servants concerning sin, till Hee takes them, and so cannot but see also, what a priviledge it is to be taken; and still you would the more plainely see, should I stand to shew the fruits and effects of sin, how it defileth, there's no filth like it; disgraceth, sin grounds shame, Grieveth, for this some
have wept rivers; with much more might be spoken, but let this suffice for the perpe∣tration of sin in regard of One's selfe. I come now in a second place to speake of it in regard of others; now these sustaine a double consideration, for they are within, or without, 1 Cor. 5.12. And first, if they be within, then wee heare, out of that 1 Cor. 5.2. what a good man's duty is in case of the sins of such, why I to Mourne] And, no doubt, there are in one generatiō after another, that sigh for all the abominations, that are done in the midst of Jerusalem] Ezek. 9.4. and not without cause, so scandalous are the grosse sins of profes∣sors, while wee Consider, First, God, for is it not ordinarie, the world upon observation of such sins within the pale of the Church to fall foule even upon Religion? yea though the professor that's such an offender, be one of the lower sort, suppose a servant; [such need had ser∣vants as well as Masters, inferiors as well as superiors, that make profession, to looke about them] See the 1 Tim. 6.1. [Let as ma∣ny servants, as are under the yoak count their Masters worthy of all honour, that the Name of God, and his Doctrine be not blasphemed] Who has not heard it said, Yea, this is their
Religion; wee see what comes of following Sermons? and so forth. Secondly, While wee consider the God∣ly; for how common is it, the World, when such sins are in the Church, to fall foule up∣on all for some? What's that you heare Ja∣cob say to Simeon and Levi, in the 34 Gen. 30, who had dealt so, as they had done, so treacherously, so cruelly? [Yee have trou∣bled mee, to make mee to stinke among the In∣habitants of the Land] Though with God the soule of the son shall not beare the ini∣quitie of the father, nor the father of the son, yet with men they usually doe; disaf∣fected men, as to Religion disaffected; as I was saying-erst, they'l fall foule upon one for another, upon all for some; who hath not heard it said? Yea, these are your pro∣fessors, they are all alike, never a barrell better herring, and the like. Thirdly, While wee Consider the un∣godly; for the grosse sinnes of professors, how pitifully-aedifying are they of them? They serve First, To Confirme them; according to that in the 23. Jer. 14. [I have scene in the Prophets of Jerusalem an horrible thing, they commit adultery, and walk in lies, they streng∣then also the hands of evill doers, that none
doth returne from his wickednes] One grosse sin in any, that professe to know somewhat of thmatter, as wee say, hardens them more in sin, then one and twentie in others that are no more professors then themselves; and in such a Case they are readie to say, What need wee to Goe to them, they are Coming to us? Secondly, They serve as to Confirme, so to Comfort them; never did Catt so watch Mouse, or Dogg Catt, as the World dos the Church, to have an hole in her Coate! now how can wee but think, they'l be glad to see, what they looked for? See the 2 Cor. 11.12. Upon so many accounts are the grosse sins of professors, scandalous sins, and so great matter of mourning to Sions mourners; Wee say, is it nothing to have teares wip'd away from our eyes? nothing to be taken away from such eye∣soares? This for the sins of those Within. Then secondly, for the sins of those Without. You may assure your selves, my Beloved, it is not onely what the Church hath done amisse, but even the World too, that good men had wont to be troubled at  I beheld the transgressors, sayes the Psalmist, in the 119.158. and was grieved, because they kept
not Thy Word] Compare this with the 53 v. [Horrour hath taken hold upon mee, be∣cause of the wicked that forsake Thy Law] And both these with the 139. v. [My zeale hath consumed mee, because mine Enemies have forgotten thy Words] I am sensible, what a speciall poynt I am fallen-upon, the Churches sense of the World's sinne, and therefore shall speake somewhat largely to it, yet in a method; speaking First, To the Grounds of it. Secondly, The Properties of it. Grounds first; for, that good men doe not causelesly grieve at wicked men, is evi∣dent upon diverse Considerations; as, First, The sinnes of such cannot but be some thing, and a sad thing to them, nothing but if their God be any thing to them! when you returne to the Psalmist in the fore-cited Psalme, you'l observe him in ta∣king to heart the wickednes of the wicked, to take notice of God's Interest, what wrong, what affront was done to Him the whiles [They kept not, sayes hee, Thy Word] They have forsaken Thy Law] have forgot∣ten Thy Words] Thy] Thy] Thy] Men's servants have some sense of their Masters matters, Men's Children of Parents Con∣cernments! Yea I reade of the son of Crae∣sus,
that perceiving some thing a doing against his father, though hee had been dumb before, hee could cry-out then, ô man kill not Croesus! And shall wee think, that onely the Children of the Heavenly Father kinde not? are unkinde? have no sense of Father's Interest? Yea, how should it but trouble a good soule to see. First, His Authoritie so affronted? what was that, which erst Horrour tooke hold on the Psalmist for? why! because the Wicked forsooke God's Law: His Word is a Law! that it is! Hee is a great King, and greatest of Kings! and sin is the transgression of the Law, of the Royall Law! how then should an honest heart, so farr as it is selfe, but rise at the thought, at the sight of just Power & Greatnes receiving such affronts? that ever dust and ashes should dare to flie in the face of the most high God? oppose His Crown and Dignity, as they doe? You reade in the 2 Sam. 16.9. That when Shi∣mei Cursed David, Abishai said, Why should this dead dog Curse my Lord the King?] Oh! then, what is a servant of God, and consumed of zeale, readie to say, when hee heares Curses, Blasphemies, Oaths fly out of the mouths of miscreants, as Chipps from the hand of the Carpenter?
Secondly, How should it but trouble a good soule to see, s His Highnes affronted, so His Holines provoked? The friends of God are not un-knowing, how Contrarie to the nature and pleasure of their loving God and Father sin is, and Grosse sin! [Thou art of purer Eyes, sayes the Prophet in the 1 Habac. 13. then to behold Evill, and canst not looke upon iniquitie] Indeed, in the sense of Apprehension Hee cannot looke off; for, all things are naked and open before His Eyes, and secret sins are no secrets to Him! But in the sense of Approbation the sense of that place] Hee cannot looke-on! Like as wee are heard to say of Persons or Things wee like not, that wee Cannot endure to looke on them. Looking with liking, look∣ing upon sin with liking is one of the things Hee Cannot doe, who yet is Omnipotent! No! no! This is that, which Hee is said to Hate, to be Grieved-at, vexed and fretted with, Ezek. 16.43. [Thou hast fretted mee in all these things] A neate man cannot a∣way with filthines; well! God is glorious in Holines, and therefore how should ever so much Puritie be pleas'd with the veriest filth? Oh! there's no myre, muck, vomit to sin! Now, my Brethren! you know, what you say upon occasion of a friend of yours,
doe not grieve him so, I am griev'd to see him griev'd —! and can you think then, but such, as love God, will be vexed to see Him provoked? Thirdly, How should it but trouble a good soule to observe, as His Puritie, so His Privitie no more regarded! A man's friend would be vexed to understand of his being unworthily dealt-with either in one kinde or another, but it would trouble him more to know, that he knew of it; When one, wee wish well to, is ill done or said by you, care is to keepe it from him; Well, the friends of God are not to learne, that, as I was saying afore, Hee, that in one sense cannot looke-on, yet in another cannot looke off iniquitie! There's no sinning at God's back; all that is done against Him is done before Him; according to that in the 51 Psal. 4. [Against thee, thee onely have I sinned, and done this Evill in thy sight] Here's what I say, Against] and, Before] Now you all know, what a sense wee have of a friend being wrong'd to his face, wee tell with trouble, how such and such went not behinde his back, when they did and said so basely; what impression then, may wee think, it may have upon a good man, when hee Considers, how the wickednesse
of the wicked stares God in the face? how all their blasphemous Belchings are in His Hearing, all their filthy Actings in His Sight; shortly, when hee considers the Im∣pudencie of Iniquitie, that there was no more sense and consideration of divine In∣spection, that this was not a Retentive to them. This for the first Ground. Secondly, The sin of th'World cannot but be some thing, and a sad thing to the Church, nothing but if the Church be any thing to her selfe; I meane, if shee matter her own either Innocencie, or Safetie. First, Innocencie; Mr. Bradford prayd God to forgive him his other men's sins! and Consider, if wee doe not in some sort make those sins ours, which wee mourne not for in others! See the 1 Cor. 5.1.—! One way of keeping our selves from parta∣king with men in their misdeeds is lament∣ing them; now, what Comfort there is in freenesse, especially from great offences, is visible in the Psalmist, who pleaseth himselfe much with this, in the 19.13. [Then] as if this were some great matter! Then] sayes he, shall I be innocent from the great trans∣gression] Even as great blotts, and foule spotts, which wee can see in other folks gar∣ments,
wee rejoyce, that none of them are to be seene on ours! Secondly, Safetie; Hee knowes nothing, that knowes not how fruitfull of Grievous Judgements are grosse sins, and how gene∣rative of generall judgements, when such sins grow generall once. The Preacher in the 9.18. tells us one sinner destroyeth much good] what dos many an one then? when one customarie swearer, one common drunkard, one ordinarie Sabbath-breaker—is so ill a member, in a Citie, Towne, fami∣lie, what are many such? and what danger is house, place in, where they are? in what danger of the plague, where so many have bann'd and curs'd with it? and so concerning other Judgements, as well as the Pestilence? Now, in dangerous times I would know, what a Mourner's Mark's worth! In the 9. Ezek. 6. You finde a Mark was sett upon the fore-heads of those, that did sigh and cry for th'abominations were done in those dayes, and what, I pray, were they markt∣for? why! for Safetie; [Slay utterly, sayes the Lord in the 6 verse, old and yong, but come not neare any man, upon whom is the mark] Mourning for the sins of the times and places they live in, loses good men no∣thing; No! these are the men, that in the
worst of times are likeliest to fare best; God, you see, remembred the Mourners, so as good men in Mourning doe well re∣member themselves. I have done with the Grounds; and proceede To Properties; Properties of the Chur∣ches sense of the World's sins; and First, Wee can finde, that Good men have Grieved Indeed, and not onely made a shew of sorrow; Psal. 119.158. All that are in Blacks, are not ever in Mourning, but the Psalmist was no Counterfeit; while the sins of Men are the sport of Devills, they were his Heart-breake; his spirit was trou∣bled to see God dishonoured, soules defiled, endangered. Secondly, As good men have been Grie∣ved Indeed, so in Great Measure; it's said of Lt, in the 2 Pet. 2.8. That hee vexed his righteous soule with their unlawfull deedes] The word in the Greeke Text for vexing is a Metaphor from Torture! so far the righte∣ous man was from taking Content in their abominable Courses, as they were to him, what dagger-poynts at the heart of ano∣ther, what pinns and bodkins thrust into the flesh, what the Rack to the Bodie! Yea, doe you not remember the word Horrour which you heard of afore? Horrour hath
taken hold upon mee, because of the wicked—] Psal. 119.53. Lastly, Wee finde good men to have been grieved upon this account, as in great measure, so for no small time; it was a stick∣ing griefe! Lot, whom I named erst, vexed his righteous soule from day to day] Thus you see, what a Trouble to good men Evill has been, and that who cannot but see also, what a Priviledge there is in Being Taken from it. Thus farr Evill in the first sense, as it is the Evill of doing It followes in the later sense, as it is the Evill of Suffering: Now this may be conceived either in the sense of Passion, or of Compassion. In the sense of Feeling, or of Fellow-feeling. And first, of Feeling, in order to one's own miseries and distresses; [If in this life onely, sayes th'Apostle, in the 1 Cor. 15.19. wee have hope in Christ, wee are of all men most miserable] Hardly any out of hell suf∣fer more then Gods people; [Thorough many tribulations wee must enter into the kingdome of God] Acts 14.22. The king∣dome of God is like unto a stately house, that has a deep and rough way leading to it; Tribulation] is the way to th'king∣dome;
and much tribulation] and this much tribulation is a way, that will not be miss'd, this way wee must enter] Yea Kings and Princes in their generations have not known how to putt by; David was a good man, and a great man, yet hee had many a wea∣rie heart, as is well-known to them, that know his Historie; Nor Eminencie of place, nor of Grace has shielded-off sufferings, but rather, as men lay the greatest load up∣on the ablest horse; and as rich men, that have a great deale of this world's goods, oft have a great deale to doe with it; So the notablest amongst God's servants, have bin notably putt to it, been tryed to the bot∣tome. You heare Job say, in the 7.20. [Why hast thou sett mee as a Mark?] Here one of God's white boyes was His White! When Peter should be old, our Lord tells, foretells, what would betide him, Joh. 21.18.] Old Disciples may expect deep Exer∣cises. Againe, What might be said of the sorts of sufferings, varietie of misery? Laza∣rus was poore, and Lazarus of Bethania was sick, such as the World was not wor∣thy of, wandred about in sheep-skins, and goats-skins, in deserts, and in Mountaines, and in dens, and caves of the earth! And what might be added concerning Reproach,
as well as Banishment? Desertion also by friends, accordingly as was said once, Amice, non est amicus; yea spirituall Desertion, when God hides His face a child of light walks in darknes? Did wee pursue suffering in the latitude of it, it would appeare a pri∣viledge with a witnesse to be out of the reach of it. I have done with Feeling, and goe-on In a second place to Fellow-feeling, which respects the miseries and distresses of others; and now while I shew you what a sympathizing people the people of God are, I in effect shew, what an Advantage againe it is to be tooke out of the walk of others afflictions, as well as their own] Indeed, wee have an untoward Proverb in our generation, Each man for himselfe, and God for us all; Oh! how can they looke, the Lord should be for them, who are for no bodie but themselves? the rather, while wee Consider, that Hee, who professeth to be afflicted Himselfe in all the afflictions of His people, Isai. 63.9.] Hath also given Command concerning Compassion, Rom. 12.15. [Weepe with them that weepe, as or∣der's given in that very place for Rejoycing in one another's joy, so for condoleing one another's griefe; Not yet, as if wee were
hand over head to be grieved in the griefe of others; for as St James sayes of some, Their Rejoycing is Evill] so I may say of some's Grieving! There are, that in stead of Weeping with, wee have cause to Weepe for! as your Envious ones, who are as much troubled at the Good overtakes others, as the Evill befalls themselves; and others I might instance-in! Truth is, The Lord hath in His Word Condemned stoicall stupiditie, and given order for a Well-grounded sym∣pathie, and accordingly wee can finde, which is the Thing I intend, onely I thought to usher-in their Compassionatenes somewhat honorably, by giving account of their Rule, as well as their practise! I say, we can finde His servants in the dayes of their flesh to have bin touched with the feeling of others distresses, and touched to the quick! Did not I, sayes Job, in the 30.25. weepe for him, that was in trouble? Was not my soule grieved for the poore?] The interrogative is strongly affirmative! The Saints sympathie, or Chri∣stians Compassion is a theame of good note, I'l therefore speake the more to it, and First, In order to the subject of it, or in whom wee finde it to have been; for this is well-worthy our consideration, as ap∣peares,
First, In that such, as one would have thought least-subject unto sorrow, yet would weepe with them that wept! As first, Such, as were men of Great spi∣rits; Wee speake as of a strange thing, when wee tell of a Man weeping like a childe, he wept like a childe, wee say; Well! and be∣hold, Great men, that were Good men, whose hearts wee may praesume suited to their Greatness, yet were tender-hearted men; Job, that I named but-now, when you looke him in the 29 Chap. 7 v. you see him sitting upon the Bench, hee was a man of place, and hee was a man of Bowells also, Did not I, sayes hee in that fore-cited 30.25. weepe for him, that was in trouble? was not my soule grieved for the poore?] Secondly, Such, as were men of great personall Comforts and accommodations! What will you say, if I shew you a Courtier a Condoler? Nehemiah was in Shushan the Pallace, and there as the Kings Cup-bearer, hee sate warme, wanted nothing, Courts a∣bound with Contents, what needs hee to trouble himselfe about others, who saw his own Condition so good? Yea but looke the 1 Nehem. 2. and loe, as soone, as hee has an opportunitie of intelligence, hee stayes not till a Relation be offer'd him, but the
Text tells us, Hee asked concerning the Jewes that had escaped] And that this Enquiry was not an emptie Complement, though yet Courts are oft full of Cōplements, appeares by the sequele; for, in the 4. v.] As one, that felt, what hee heard, Nehemiah mour∣ner-like sitts him down] and behold, hee weepes, and certaine dayes] This for the first account of the subject. A second is, That such, as wanted not matter of their own to mourne-over, yet had some Teares for others too; Naomi, in the 1 Ruth 13. it was a sad time with in her own particular, for the hand of the Lord was gone-out against her] as shee speakes there; and yet in that very place shee pro∣fesses, shee was grieved much for her daugh∣ters-sakes. Naomi was Mother to these, that there shee calls daughters, by marriage, Ruth 1.3, 4.] and her sons, that had marri∣ed these women, were dead, 5 v.] It's ordi∣nary at this day, when friends dye, friend∣ship to dye, possiblie to turne into envie, despight, and the like; yea but with Naomi it was not so; after the death of her sonnes, shee has a sense of her daughters, and in a sad time was not so full of griefe for her selfe, but shee can grieve also for them, grieve over her own affliction the more
because of them. Here, here's a Glasse for father-in-laws and mother-in-laws to looke in. Let this suffice to have been spoken of the subject. Next is the Object, or whom the servants of God have had Compassion on; and First, Not onely on such, as were neare Neighbours; wee have a saying, What the eye sees not, the heart grieves not; but, good men have Croft the Proverb, Nehemiah even-now felt, what hee heard; Reports, that were sad, being Credible, were wont to have a sad impression. Wee have some men, that will beleeve nothing but what they see, either of one poore body or ano∣ther, and when they see, may be as little mooved. Secondly, As not onely upon such, as were neare in scituation, so nor onely neare in Nature! Indeed the people of God have had a great sense of their own flesh and blood; thus, Jacob mourned for the suppo∣sed death of his son Joseph, Gen. 37.33, 34.] Yea the best men are observed not least-passionate. But behold, they had bowells for their kindred according to faith, as well as flesh; see the 1 Rev. 9. Communion of Saints is partly with respect to sufferings; It is in some measure in the Mysticall, as in
the Naturall Bodie; in the Naturall, if the foot be prick'd and hurt, the head stoopes, the eye lookes, the hand pulls out the thorne, and applyes a remedie, which possi∣blie the tongue had enquired-out! and here in this section I might have been more par∣ticular, and tooke notice of the tender re∣spect holy men of God have had to their Converts, even as men love all children, but especially their own; what a sense had Paul of Onesimus? and in regard of his outward Condition? if hee had been his own natu∣rall son, how could hee have intreated, and interposed more for him? And now that I have spoken thus of friends, naturall and Christian friends! what might I have added In a third place touching Enemies? Da∣vid in the 35 Psal. 14, 15. When such were sick, behaved himselfe as though they had been his Brethren] Wee know, who Causes His Sunne to shine upon the Evill and un∣thankfull] and what it is, speakes us That Father's Children, why! Loving our Ene∣mies] But, this for the Object. It remaines In a third place to speake of the occasi∣on, or what good men have had Compassi∣on on men for; and here I might speake of many things, as First, They have been Grieved both up∣on
Outward and spirituall accounts, as men that had respect both to the Bodies and Soules of men; see the 2 Cor. 11.29. Cum 35 Psal. 14, 15. Secondly, Upon Greater and lesser ac∣counts, as those, whose bowells were indeed tender, Phil. 2.26. Thirdly, Upon publick and private, as those, whose hearts God had inlarged, Psal. 102.13, 14. Fourthly; Upon some such accounts, as some men would rather have rejoyced over; you heard erst how David behaved himself in time of his Enemies sicknes, as if it had been a friend or brother had not been well, Psal. 35.] A carnall heart is readie to say in such a case, A great matter of him; good shuttance, and so forth. Lastly, Upon the account of others in their own cases, yea and where the world is not wont to mixe interests; here remember Naomi, and what hath been said of her; friends were dead, but friendship liv'd. After the Occasion I might have gone on to the Manner, also the Measure of Christi∣an Compassion, might have shew'd, both How, and How-much good men have laid Evills to heart, Others Evills! But you see clearely, what an Heart-broken people the
people of God have been, and so cannot looke-off their priviledge in being taken∣away from the Evill to Come. Now whereas I have been speaking all this while of being taken from Evill, haply some, that would seeme to take off some∣what from the priviledge I have shew'd there is in their being Taken, are readie to say, But, are not good men taken-away from some Good, as well as all Evill? Hezekiah, in the 38 Isa. 10, 11, 12. looking upon him∣selfe as a dead man, speakes of being Depri∣ved] I am deprived, sayes he, of the Residue of my yeares Hee addeth [I shall not see the Lord even the Lord in the land of the living, I shall behold man no more—. Unto whom, and unto which I make this Returne, That it's true indeed, In death there is some de∣privation! but it's true also, there want not answerable Consolations to and for the re∣spective deprivations; as, First. To name some of them; Perad∣venture as a Good man is a Great man, but Come Death, and Goe Greatnesse! [His glory shall not descend after him] Psal. 49.17. No, it shall not; but let not your heart be troubled, for Consider, Great men have other Attendants, besides their men, that
waite on them. I remember a King said of a Crown, that was down, Hee, that knew what was under it, would not take it up! Honours have their Cares, Feares, for indeed their Envies, I meane Enviednes; such as the Corruptnes of man, as hee's apt to think, hee, that stands above him, stands in his light. In the 6 Dan. 1, 2, 3, 4. It pleased Darius to preferre Daniel, yea but this plea∣sed not the Praesidents and Princes, witnesse their conspirings and practisings. It's rare to be praeferred, and not maligned, to sit high and fast. So as you see now, it is not onely Honour, that a good man is taken from, when hee's taken, but Care as well as Honour, Feare as well as Honour, Envie as well as Honour; and as for the Honour that is before him, wee reade of a farr more Ex∣ceeding, and Eternall waight of Glorie] see the 2 Cor. 4.17. Secondly, May be, a Good man is a Rich man, as Job one while was; But Come death, and Goe Riches; Wee brought nothing into this world, and it is certaine wee can carrie nothing out] It's true, the living indeed will looke to that; but did you never Consider what goes to this Worlds Goods? Besides Labour in Getting, what Care in Keeping, what Grief
for Losing? Yea, and who is not aware from the 1 Job 14, 15. That it is not all our care and diligence, that can at all times secure our Havings? [The Oxen, sayes the Text, were plowing, and the Asses were feeding be∣side them, and the Sabaeans fell upon them, and tooke them away, yea they slew the servants-] Job had provided servants to see to his Goods, and you see, the servants were with them! and yet for all that, Hee that had Goods, according to our Proverb, lost Goods. Rich men are rich oft in some thing els then Riches! When wee Consider the matter, it's not barely Riches, that a good man is taken away from, when hee's taken, but Paines, as well as Riches. Care, as well as Riches, Grief, as well as Riches; and as for the Riches before him, much might be said of the Treasure in Heaven, such a safe place Heaven is, out of all danger of Invasion and Plunder; see the 12 Luc. 33. Thirdly, Possibly a good man is of great use in his generation, as Paul was, To a∣bide in the flesh is more needfull for you] sayes hee, Phil. 1.24. But Come Death, and Goe Work] [In the Grave, whither a man goes there is no Work, nor Devill—]. Indeed there is not! But consider well, what goes to Work, and from the 2 Rev. 2.
[I know thy Worke, and thy Labour and thy Patience] Work requires paines, oft pati∣ence; yea a good man may come to have his patience exercis'd, even by them, that ought to have bin a strengthening of hand to him; Paul, though a precious man, is heard to say, The more abundantly I love you, the lesse I am loved] 2 Cor. 12.15. Even as the in∣dulgent Nurse has some cryes and wrangles, as well as smiles and kisses, at the hands of the little one. I might have spoken in this Section of the malice of Satan, malignancie of the World, self-suspition and jealousie, what care and feare an honest heart is in, lest his Works should not be as many at last, as first; so as it is not meerely Work, that a good man is taken from, when hee's taken, but Labour as well as Work, Patience, as well as either; Opposition, as well as any thing els. And then, in Death servants draw wages, doe they not? I confesse there is Praemium ante praemium! a blessednes In, and not onely after deed; and, while a good man's Reward is not little upon Earth, yet wee know who said, Great is your Reward in Heaven] Math. 5.12. Fourthly, Wee may suppose a good man to be of large Relation, Behold the vine up∣on the house-side, and Olive-branches about
the Table; but, Come Death, and Goe Friends! [I shall behold man no more with the inhabitants of the world] said Hezekiah erst; Isai. 38. Hee said true; but yet there's much in Relation; indeed neare and deare Relation is capable of very great affliction, and how afflicting is such affliction? Children are certaine Cares, and uncertaine Comforts; Job's wife was a griefe of heart to him; and you heard even now the words of Paul to his people! So as it's not onely Relation, that a good man is taken from, when hee's taken, but Affliction, as well as Relation; and as for Relations before him, what ho∣nest heart is not ravished to think of Being with Christ, which is far better? Phil. 1.23. Fifthly, To be taken indeed from the spectacle and bearing staffe, from weaknes, witherdnes, from a time & condition a man should say, hee had no pleasure in, this pri∣mâ facie, were a priviledge; but what doe you say to one thing Hezekiah spake of, I am deprived of the residue of my yeares) Isa. 38.10? Why! I say well to it; and that you may the better see into the wellnesse of it, Con∣sider these particulars. First, Whether a Good life be not in
effect a long, even as one piece of gold vir∣tually containes many pieces of silver; hee has liv'd to purpose, has hee not, whether hee has liv'd more, or lesse, that has liv'd well, for hee dyes well, Phil. 1.21. Secondly, Is there any Cause to Com∣plaine of being Happie too soone? Phil. 1.23. Thirdly, Is it not a priviledge to be hous'd, when a storme's towards? 2 Kings 22. ult.] Fourthly, What would length of dayes have brought with it? Eccles. 12.1. and in regard both of Person, and Relation. First, Relation; for such, as live, till they be very-old, out-live most of their friends, are ingag'd in many Funeralls; you may have heard of some Parents, that have Bu∣ried all their Children; and when there is such joy, as there is, for a man's being borne into the World, what sorrow is there at their carrying-out? See the 16 Joh. 21. Cum 2 Math. 18. Secondly, As for Person; oh! the de∣cayes, diseases, Aches, that are incident to old Age; resume the 12 Eccles. 1.—They, that live till they be very old are commonly blinde, deaf, lame. Barzillai, that was foure∣score
yeares old, tells of being a Burden to the King] Sixthly, What doe you say to being Taken away in the midst of a Work, as erst of one's dayes? is it not all the pitie in the world, that a Good hand, and when the hand is in, that it should be taken-off? I have this to say, that it is one thing a Work to be finished, and another thing our Work to be finished; but now, they, that dye in the Lord, rest from their labours] Rev. 14.13. The Lord Jesus attained not the one half of the ordinarie age of man, yet is heard to say, in the 17 Joh. 4. [I have fini∣shed the Work which thou gavest mee to doe] Seventhly, Peradventure a good man is in Arrear, but if hee did live, in a way to pay every one his own; It cannot be denied; but a man, that feares God may both be, and dye Indebted. But it would be observed how the providence of God has favour'd such a case, as this; 2 Kings 4.1.— As for the dead, hee is honourable men∣tion made of, [Thy servant did feare the Lord] For all the widow was left, as shee was, yet shee do's her husband right; it is not onely men, whose wives and children expect great matters from them, that may
hope to have their good word being gone. Then, for the living; why! behold, the Woman has an Elisha to goe to, every one was not so harsh, as the Creditor; and course is taken, not onely for paying debts, but for a livelihood afterwards. Eighthly, May be a good man is taken away from the Freedome and Fulness of Ordinances [I said, said Hezekiah, I shall not see the Lord, even the Lord in the land of the living] Isa. 38.] The Lord] even the Lord] I grant, first, it's a great Comfort to live in a time when Religion flourished, when a great deale of Sanctuary-glorie is stirring, when All Ordinances are on foot, Word, Sacraments—Psal. 42.4. Secondly, It well becomes a servant of God to rellish savourily the Things of God, to account it an Heaven upon Earth to Enjoy Sabbaths, solemne Meetings, Psal. 63.1, 2, 3. But then, thirdly, if Heaven upon Earth be such an Heaven, what's Heaven in Heaven? if the way be so pleasant, what's the Coun∣trey? if the Meanes, what the End? if Glimpses, what Sun-shine? if the Lesse, what the More? 2 Cor. 5.5, 6, 7, 8. And one word further, Is it not hard to Enjoy Ordinances, and especially Constantly, and
not miscarry about them? not wantonnize in the Plentifull times of the Gospel? Even as in poynt of outward store we say prover∣bially, Plentie is no daintie. When there were Paul, Apollo, Cephas; oh! what Contenti∣ons there were? what Emulations among the people? what partialnes of respect to∣wards Teachers? 1 Cor. 1.12. So as when wee have lookt into the matter, it is not meerely Ordinances, freedome and fulnesse of Ordinances, varietie of sweet Instruments that a good man is taken from, but from those Weaknesses, which wee are apt to put forth in such a time as that. And thus I have done with the Terminus a Quô, what a good man is taken from, and both by way of Indication and Vindication. I proceed, and in the same method to the other Terme. The Terminus ad Quem, or, what a good man is taken to; for thus againe his taking will appeare a priviledge; now this terme the Psalmist speakes-to in the 73.24. [Thou wilt guide mee with thy Counsell, and after∣ward receive mee to Glorie] That I may the more fully, and yet unconfusedly speake to the Terme, I would divide it into Persons, and Things. First, Things; and these I would sub∣divide into Place, and Case.
By Case, I meane the Blessed Condition, to which a good man is taken; which will begin to appeare even while First, The Place is considered; for oh! Whither? Whither is a good man taken, when hee's taken? Heare our Saviour in the 23 Luc. 43. [To day shalt thou be with mee in Paradise] Compare this with another Scripture, the 2 Cor. 12.4. and Paradise is Heaven] whereof the Earthly Paradise was a shadow; The Earthly Paradise wanted not it's Accommodations and Comforts, and Heaven even abounds! which is called some∣times also, The Better Countrey] Heb. 11.26. Indeed these Low Countreys have ma∣ny good things in them, but yet as our say∣ing is, Better were better! now wee tell of life being sweet, but I say then, how sweet is Eternall life? now wee speake of Good Companie, as indeed your good men are your truely-so call'd good fellowes, but yet is not Being with Christ a great deale better then being Here? the Heavenly is the Bet∣ter Countrey, better for honour, for plea∣sure, for profit, for any thing a wise man would have, and an happy man should have. What House to be compared with the Fa∣ther's house? according as you have it term'd in the 14 Joh. 2. That's the House with
Mansions] and many Mansions] Wee tell here below of Mansion-houses, but wee doe but tell, either wee tarry not long by them, or they by us; some fathers here have moe Children, then the house will well hold! And then again to heare of Father's house] what a joyfull hearing is it? our Children, when they have been abroad, are glad to re∣turne home; suppose from Universitie, Sea, or other places! how well and Comfortable is it then with the Heavenly Father's Chil∣dren, with what joy unspeakeable, and full of glorie may they thinke of their Father's House? whose Father setts His feet, where others have their heads, & Crowned heads, [Thus saith the Lord, the Heaven is my throne, and the Earth is my foot-stoole] Isai. 66.1. I might be large in recounting the severall sweet Appellations Heaven has, and in descanting upon them! but I shall close this Section with some Observations concerning Heaven. First, That the Spirit of God in the Word of God speaking of Heaven, speakes of the most excellent Thing upon Earth as King∣dome] Paradise] and the like, 2 Cor. 12.4. Secondly, Setts Heaven over anent the saddest things upon Earth, as a Countervaile to them, Math. 5.11, 12.
Thirdly, That the people of God, while yet upon Earth were wont co be Much in Heaven! could send before them of their Meditations, Desires, Delights, Heb. 11.16. Phil. 3.20. Lastly; Could, at that distance Earth set them at, yet be so carried-out in their hearts after Heaven, as verily to be Transported therewith; ravished in Contemplation of the powers and pleasures of the world to come 2 Cor. 5.2. I have said concerning Place. Case followes! the Condition that God's taking of a good man setts him in; and this is sweet upon a manifold account; for First, It is a Case of Home-dwelling; a good man, while hee is here, is a stranger, Psal. 119.19. a stranger in his own house, at his own Table, by his own fire, in his own bed! but once gotten to Heaven, and gotten Home; Advena in terris, in coelis civis, 2 Cor. 5.2. In Heaven, as at Home, is most of our Meanes, top of our kinne, our longest continuance. Secondly, As it is a Case of Residence, so of Rest; a good man, while hee is here, has a great deale of labour awaiting him! yea but what sayes the voice from Heaven, [Blessed are the dead, that dye in the Lord
from henceforth; yea saith the Spirit, that they may rest —] Rev. 14.13. And if now in these dayes Rest at a night be sweet, what will one day the Heavenly Rest be? yea, and if now the more paines a servant takes 'ith day, the sweetlier hee sleepes and rests at night; what will Heaven's Rest be after∣all the toyle, turmoyle, trouble a servant of God has upon Earth? Yea, and whereas the Rest wee take now is subject to interrupti∣on, men tell of being hindered, disturbed, as of or in their Naturall Rest, Heaven yeelds Rest without molestation at all. Thirdly, It is a Case, as of Resting, so of Reaping! this life-time is a good man's seede-time, and though it be true, that here first-fruits are had, yet Heaven brings with it, Gal. 6.9. Fourthly, A Case as of Reaping, so of Triumphing! good men now are carrying∣on a Warr against the Enemies of God's Glorie, and their own salvation; yea but Heaven putts Palmes into their hands] Rev. 7.9. And by how much the bicker∣ings and buffettings they now meete-with, are moe, and sadder, by so much the victo∣rie will be the greater, gladsomer. Fifthly, As a Case of Triumph, so of Perfection! Now wee see thorough a glasse
darkly, but then face to face; 1 Cor. 13.9, 10, 11, 12. Lastly, A Case as of Perfection, so of Communion! indeed now wee Enjoy such fellowship as is fitt, hereafter we shall such, as is full. Whiles wee are at home in the bo∣dy, sayes th'Apostle, wee are absent from the Lord — Wee are willing rather to be absent from the Body, and to be praesent with the Lord] Shortly, this being such a Case in one respect and another, as wee have heard it is, how should it but be a Case of Blessed∣nes? Now the World lookes upon the peo∣ple of God, as a miserable people, and, not to matter their judgement much, wee know, who said, If in this life onely wee have hope in Christ, wee are of all men most miserable] And I had occasion in another part of this Discourse to say, That hardly any out of hell suffer more then God's people! Yea but the sufferings of this praesent time are not worthy to be compared with the glorie, that shall be revealed in us] Thus farr things. It is next to speake of Persons! You have seene To What, now Consider, To Whom a good man is taken, when hee is taken; and of these I shall give First, A Generall account. Secondly, A Speciall account.
Generall first; as First, Hee is taken To none but the Good! according to that in the 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. [Know yee not, that the unrighteous shall not inherite the kingdome of God? —] Heaven is an undefiled Inheritance, no dir∣tie dogg tramples upon that golden pave∣ment; Now what a Comfort it is to be, where they are not is legible-enough in all that heart-breake, whch, as I have shewed, a good man here has because of them! 2 Pet. 2.7. Secondly, To none but Friends! here the friends of God meete with Enemies, men that cannot let their good names a∣lone, let their good Conversations in Christ be by them; but, as the dogg barks at the Moone that shines; so they call good Evill! Yea but God has promised the kingdome to them that love Him and every one that loves Him that begate, loves him also that is begot∣ten of Him] 1 Joh. 5.1. Cum 1 Jac: 12. Thirdly, To none, but the Perfect; Heb. 12.23. Now the finest cloth hath a course list, the purest wine some dreggs the Mem∣bers of Christ their Earthly members; and these infirmities, that are found in Saints, what a sad exercise, exercise of their pati∣ence, are they to their brethren, as well as
they cause themselves many an heavy heart? Doe not you think, that Aaron and Miri∣am, when they spake against Moses, try'd him, what mettall he was made of? Num. 12.1, 2, 3. Yea but, Persecution is a flower, that growes in Heaven's Garden! you meete with no Infirmities there, no infirmities in any you meete-with there; what a Meeting therefore is it? Fourthly, To no-small Companie! wee have a proverb, Moe, and merrier! what doe you say then to the Generall Assembly, Church of the first-borne, an Innumerable Companie of Angels? Heb. 12.22, 23. Now a good man thinks it an happines to get two or three good men to him, but then what a joy will it be to enjoy so many? Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, the brethren and sisters, that have dyed in the Lord? This for the Generall account. The Speciall followeth, and First, A good man is Taken To God, Heb. 12.23. Paul spoke of Being with Christ, when he departed] Phil▪ 1.23.] and, First, What an Heaven upon Earth is it to have any fellowship with Him now? Job 22.21. Secondly, What a Takeing are they in, miserable takeing, whom Hee receiveth not? Heb. 12.14.
Thirdly, Wee now think the Commu∣nion of His people Comfortable, judge then of the Fountaine by the streame, of the Sun by the Beames, what Companie Himself is, who hath made them so good Companie! Psal. 16.3. Secondly, As a good man is Taken To God, so to Elect Angells, Zech. 3.7. And here Consider, First, What a Comfort Angell-Ministe∣rie now is, and therefore what will Angell-societie one day be? Gen. 32.1, 2. Secondly, Angell-Convoy, what a pri∣viledge it is! and therefore what is Angell-Communion for ever? Luc. 16.22. Thirdly, When the Communion of god∣ly wise men is such a Refreshment now to us even in a sad time and condition; accor∣ding as I reade of one of the Martyrs, that hee rejoyced, hee came into Prison where that Angell Bradford, as hee call'd him, was: What blessed, sweet Companie will the ho∣ly Angells be, those pure and sweet Crea∣tures, that never did, nor ever shall sinne against God? that abound so in wisdome, as they doe? 2 Sam. 14.20. Cum Math. 25.31. Thirdly, As a good man is Taken to the Elect Angells, so to the soules and spi∣rits
of just men made perfect, Luc. 16.23. And here Meditate, First, What difference there is between Being amongst Saints, and Being with the Devill and his Angells! Oh! the wofull, fearfull Companie Hell yeelds; is it not an Heaven to be from amongst them? Math. 25 41. Secondly, What a difference between Being amongst Saints, and Being with the Wicked! Lot had no joy of the Sodomites, 2 Pet. 2.7. And at this day how doe righ∣teous persons vexe their soules with the Oathes, they heare? Excesse, they see? Thirdly, What a difference between Be∣ing with Saints Here, and Being with them Hereafter; for First, Now Saints meete and part, but Then wee shall ever be with the Lord] Enjoy Him, and one another to all eternitie! 1 Thes. 4.17. Secondly, Here we have Others, and not onely Saints, oft with us; Yea but there'l not be one Naughtie-packe in Heaven! 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Thirdly, Here wee have but a few Saints to Converse with; Yea but how-many by this day have dyed in the faith? how many of our fathers are there to be gathered to? Heb. 11.32.
Lastly, Here, as I have said, the Members of Christ have their Earthly Members, so as there's oft sad differences among Saints; But Perfection, and so Peace is found in Heaven; there they live in peace, and with the God of love and peace, are all friends, are at Rest, Rev. 14.13. What a societie is that? and what a priviledge to be taken To them? You have had the Terminus ad Quem in an Judicative sense. I now come to speake to it in a Vindica∣tive; I meane, to take-off some Exceptions, as in the other Terme afore, that possibly would be taken to it! and Either more Generally, or more Particularly. Generally first! as, That this Taking is a perishing, Isa. 57.1. And so good men are Taken To Nothing, reduc'd in Nihi∣lum! I answer, it cannot be denied, but the Prophet, where he speakes of mercifull men being taken away, speakes of the Righteous perishing! but, Sensu suo & sano! heare him out, for what's that hee addeth, in the 2 v.] [Hee shall enter into peace] it's evident, hee meanes not utter perishing, for these perish∣ers hee calls Enterers! indeed, it may well be conceived, that the Prophet us'd the word
perishing] with respect to the carnall, care∣lesse men hee speakes of, who Considered not] laid not to heart] the taking away of righteous and mercifull men] What perisht men, lost men are good men to such men? to men, that never matter the losse, feare not the sequele? but, as they were regard∣lesse of their well-lead lives, so their deaths are no more Considered by them. Thus Generally. Secondly, Particularly; When man is cast into parts, Bodie and Soule; may be, some would say, and first, Concerning the Bodie, why! in death the dust returnes To the Earth, as it was, and while wee think of what belongs to the Grave, how can wee think Taking a priviledge? yea, were it not a priviledge rather Not to see Corruption? I returne, the dust indeed returnes to the Earth, as it was, Eccles. 12.7.] and there belongs to the Grave. First, Nakednes, Job 1.21.] But what needs a good man to trouble himselfe about this? For first, doe wee not carrie as much out of the World, as we brought-in? Job 1.21. Secondly, to what purpose were it to carry the world out of the world? of what use are the things of this life, when this life is ended? Math. 6.25.]
Secondly, Separatednesse; Abraham speakes of burying his dead out of his sight, Gen. 23.4.] But, is not the Grave a meet∣ing-place, as well as a parting —? the dead are not without their bedfellowes, and of all ranks, Job 3.13, 14. And besides, dos not Separation suite well to Corruption? of which anon. Thirdly, Supersedednes! [Whatsoever, saith the Preacher, in the 9.10. thy hand findeth to doe, doe it with thy might, for there is no work in the grave, whither thou goest] There's no stirring of either hand or foot,] And though there be not, for at death a good man's work is done, Rev. 14.13. it's stirring in the time of stirring, that is to be lookt-after. Fourthly, Rottennesse; wee have a word of dead and Rotten] Lord, sayes Martha, in the 11 Joh. 39. by this time hee stinketh, for hee hath been dead foure dayes] But, why should wee be troubled to think at that, which shall not trouble us? And as for o∣thers, the grave drawes a Curtaine between the dead and the living, Gen. 23.4. Fifthly, Confusednes; Job 10. ult] the grave mingles men's dusts, Well! but where men cannot make a distinction God can, and Hee will, so as a good man may boldly
say, This Crrruptible must put on incorrup∣tion] This] as if hee clapt himselfe on the breast, while hee spoke! Sixthly, Continuednes; the grave is man's long home] Eccles. 12.5.] Yea, till the Re∣surrection! let Wormes doe what they can, they cannot praevent that, Job 19.22. And thus having taken-off some Excepti∣ons, I might have given-in also some Con∣solations, as that the Grave is a Resting place, an Hiding place, yet no Losing place; a place, that so-farr Conformes Members to Head, and cannot wee be content to follow, as our Lord has lead? indeed Hee, though Hee dyed and was buried, saw no corrupti∣on; well! and wee shall see thorough it; Corruption praevents not Resurrection, as I have been saying. But let it suffice to have spoken thus farr of the Bodie. Secondly, As for the Soule, and any Ex∣ceptions anent that, I shall onely say, That the Papists ignis fatuus, or fire of praetended Purgatorie, needs not afray or astumble such, as know and beleeve the Scriptures, which hold-forth an Heaven for the godly, like as an Hell for the wicked; a Third place they know not, nor therefore may wee acknowledge, Luc. 16.22, 23 It has been said prettily of Purgatorie, That it's a
fire for warming the Pope's Kitchin: Indeed the Papists wrest many Scriptures in this, as in other cases, which diverse Orthodoxe, have in their Polemicall discourses suffici∣ently vindicated from their false Glosses; so as I shall onely produce one Testimony in the Case, indeed a voice from Heaven, which speakes not like one of them, in the 14 Rev. 13. Blessed are the dead, that dye in the Lord from henceforth, yea saith the Spirit, that they may rest— [Wee heare here, what the Spirit speakes of, Rest] what the voyce from Heaven proclaimeth, Blessednes and whether it's fitter to beleeve God, or them, judge! them I say, that teach a certaine place, in which as in a prison soules are pur∣ged after this life, which were not fully pur∣ged in this life, that so being so cleansed they may enter into Heaven, yea this place they make a place of torment for the time; But, how can consist Torment and Blessed∣nes? Torment and Rest? I have done with the Terminus ad Quem, as afore a Quô, of a good man's taking! As also with the first sort of Uses, to wit, of Instruction! I goe-on now to a second, and it is of Re∣prehension; for, if this be thus, That walk∣ing with God is pleasing to God, why then how Culpable is both Better and Worser sort of people? and
First, Worser? whom this Walk plea∣seth not; and in a double sense, first, as con∣cerning Themselves; secondly, Others! Themselves first; according to that in the 21 Job 14. [They say unto God, depart from us, for wee desire not the knowledge of thy wayes] They say unto God, depart from us] Oh! fearfull saying! for, they say not thus to the Devill; no! his wayes please them well; [Yee are, sayes our Saviour, in the 8 Joh. 44. of your father the Devill, and the lusts of your father you will doe] will doe] Oh! wilfull, fearfull soule, is it not? that in effect sayes, Goe God, and Come De∣vill! And alas, there's many such desperate soules: [Many walk, sayes th'Apostle in the 3 Phil. 18. of whom I have told you be∣fore, and now tell you weeping, that they are the Enemies of the Crosse of Christ] Ene∣mies] so farr from walking with God as friends! Oh! some live, as it even feares those, that feare God; like as it did the Psalmist, as you have heard, Horrour hath taken hold upon mee, because of the wicked that forsake thy Law] Psal. 119 53. There was cause for the wicked to have feared, was there not? Yea but the good man trembled; trembled to think, what Courses they runne, how provoking of God, how
imperilling of themselves, for indeed such, as so walk, whither are they walking the whiles? Why! towards destruction as fast as they can! There is a word of Men run∣ning upon their own death; and, truth is, many a soule even poasts to Hell; men, that Ride poast, change their horses, now they ride one, then another; and so, wicked men vary their sins, when they are weary of one, they fall to another; now they are for company as vaine and idle as themselves; anon one of the Devill's Catechisms in a corner pleases them, I meane loose, licenti∣ous Pamphlets; one while they spend at no ayme, another while make a Tenant pay for that! upon the Lords-day they are not to be seene, and all the weeke after you may heare of them: Oh! the varietie of Iniqui∣tie! This riding poast to the Devill, as if one sort of grosse sin would not bring them to Hell soone-enough; but, where's walk∣ing with God all this while? Nay! doe not such walk with such an one, as if they could see, they could not but have cause to be a∣fraid-of? Th'Apostle in the 2 Eph. 2. speaks of Walking according to the Prince of the power of the aire] This is their walk, and if the Devill leade them any whither but to Hell, let him lose his name, and never more
be called Adversarie] roaring Lyon] Possi∣bly, these wicked wretches will think much to heare so much of the Devill and not stick to defie him, and to spitt at the naming of him, but they spitt not deep-enough, they spitt him not out of their hearts, his wayes like them well, as I was saying, but the waies of God not at all: No! These are thought First, Too strict; They, in the 2 Psal. 3. that would not have Christ to raigne over them, tell of Bands and Coards] of breaking them asunder] Casting them off] Oh! alas! They looke upon men that looke towards God, as men in fetters shackles, such as had no libertie, but were in bondage onely! The Broad Way has roomth in it, and this they like dearely, they would be free to say and doe what they pleas'd; [Wee will cer∣tainly doe, say they, in the 44 Jer. 17. whatsoever thing goeth-forth out of our own mouth] Secondly, The wayes of God are thought as too Strict, so too Solitary; The Broad way is like a Road way, and a carnall heart goes more by number then waight, 1 King. 22.13. Thirdly, Are thought, as too Strict and Solitary, so too Rough and Craggie; Car∣nall hearts make an Idoll of Ease, Safetie,
Estate, Name —, Cannot Burne, as he said in the Martyr's time; love to hold what they have, to have every bodie's good word, to sleepe in a whole skin, not to be drawn in quaestion, and they see Religion and Afflicti∣on oft together, Religion and Persecution, and therefore Vadet Christus Cum suo E∣vangelio, let Christ and Gospell goe, for they'l not goe-after. Demas, saith St Paul, 2 Tim. 4.10. hath forsaken mee] how came that about? The world was in it! You see, what offence some take at the Wayes of God! I may well say Take, for that none is Given, will, in The next place, appeare, and as an Ag∣gravation of their sin; for First, Whereas they cry out of so much strictnes and straitenes, what is it the wayes of God doe abridge a man of? is it not, what hee cannot without danger take liber∣tie to? Heare St. Peter, in the 1.2.11. I beseech you — abstaine from fleshly lusts, which warr against the soule] Sure! a faire motion; for who would take part with his Enemy? and what's an Enemy to th'soule is an Enemy to purpose! Secondly, Whereas they tell of Solita∣rines, whether's better, Great Companie, or Good? and, were it not better to goe to
Heaven though alone, then to Hell with Company? the damned rich man, what car'd hee for Company? Luc. 16.28. Lastly, Whereas they spoke of Afflicted∣nes! Is not all well, that Ends well? yea, and do's not the Roughness of the Way Commend the Countrey, as a storme the Haven, Acts 14.22. Thus farr of the Wor∣ser sort concerning Themselves. Secondly, They beare blame from the Doctrine; as this Walking with God is dis∣pleasing to them in regard of Others; ac∣cording to that in the 2 Tim. 3.12. [All that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suf∣fer persecution] This Godlines the world has all along had a dislike-of. Witnesse first, their strangeing at it, 1 Pet. 4.4. It's ordinary for carnall peo∣ple to marvell, what's the matter, when a soule breakes off from them; when they see not his face as formerly at every vaine meet∣ing, in every idle house! Secondly, As strangeing, so despising, 2 Sam. 6.16. Oh! the Disesteeme, that a carnall heart has the Wayes and servants of God in! they think, it's more adoe then needs, that such are more nice, then wise. Thirdly, As Despising, so Dispraising, 1 Pet. 4.4. For out of th'abundance of the
heart the mouth speaketh; Such stuffe, as is in the Warehouse, comes into the Shop; Men, whose hearts are not right towards the wayes of God, what words they have for them? which I shall not so farr honour as with the Naming. Fourthly, As Dispraising, so Discourage∣ing, Ezra 4.4. As in a Towne, when fire breakes forth in any house, the people rise, and bring water to quench it; So suppose a spark of Heaven's kindling to appeare in fa∣milies, relations, how many are readie to doe their best, their worst for putting of it out, if it were possible? Many a bold Hus∣band, Father, Master — would chill any holy heate they discerne in any. Fifthly, As Discourageing, so Destroy∣ing, Joh. 1.3.12. The Serpent's Brood is bloodie; the theef would be blowing out the Candle, which at once shewes him and shames him! And I have not sooner spoken this word, then I am hinted thereby to look into the Occasion the world takes against such, as Walk with God. First, Walking with God turnes a man's back upon the world, and this the world likes not; no! the world would be fol∣low'd; 1 Pet. 4.4. [You run not with them into the same excesse of riot, speaking Evill of you.]
Secondly, Walking with God condemnes the World, Gen. 6.9. Cum 11 Heb. 7. A light sett up in a roome, discovers the sluttish Corners in it; and will the World take it well to have any to think better of themselves, or to be better Thought-of then they? to have any to Ecclipse their shine∣ing? The world would carry it, and where they doe not, care not whom they beare∣down, Gen. 4.5. You see, what occasion the world takes. But now in the next place, that there is no Reason for such their Dis∣pleasednes at such, if wee Consider, that First, Sure! it is not for Man to disgust, what the most High approveth! Regis ad exemplum — Acts 5.29. Secondly, Why should the World be displeased to have a pleasure done them? for, besides all that might be said of the Good Examples good men give them, and the manifest and faithfull witnes they beare against other wayes and walkings! What sayes the World to this, that Saints are Shields? these Walkers with God, stave-off many judgements from the places where they live, Gen. 18.32. Isa. 65.8. Let this suffice for the Worser sort. Secondly, The Better sort of people will be found in some sort culpable; for, if Walk∣ing
with God, be pleasing to God, then, how is it they wander so often? Wandring is not walking and who is it, but must Confesse and mourne over his strayings? yea, what saith the Psalmist? [Who can understand his Errors? Psal. 19.12. Quoties & quanto∣perè] sayes Piscator upon the place. I have alreadie spoken, that here Saints are not un∣sinn'd, no not the Greater sort of Saints; yea, and in order to Great sinnes! I have shew'd, what Temptation to sin there is both from Within and from Without. I will now sett my selfe to help to lay our Aberrations to heart; and to this end I of∣fer to be Considered. First, What wayes wee stepped out of, when wee went astray; why! wayes of plea∣santnesse, for so are Wisdomes wayes, yea all all paths are peace] Pro. 3.17. As if a man should over-goe the pleasantst Mea∣dows, Orchards, Gardens; as if a beast should leap out of field into lane. Secondly, What wayes wee stepped as Out of, so Into; as there is a sin of deceit∣fulnes, so a deceitfulnes of sin; it promises one thing, performes another, like a Thief, that undertakes to bring the Traveller a nearer and fairer way, but by and by behold a wood, or other desert place, where hee
rifles and robbs him; with such an allusion is that expression, when the word in the Greeke text is waighed, in the 3 Heb. 13. Thirdly, What either good men or bad said to it; as for the world, that watched for our halting, it pleas'd them well-enough, and serv'd them t'talk-of, 2 Sam. 12.14. And how should it grieve us to have rejoy∣ced God's enemies? Then for the Church, that has such a sense, as I have shew'd, of God's Interest, His pleasure, His Honour; how would they be troubled? and may it not trouble us to think of Sadding friends, as erst Gladding Enemies? Ezek. 13.22. This for the first poynt of Blame. Secondly, There is another I deale a∣mong good people; for, if walking with God be pleasing to God, then how is it, that as be∣fore wee wander our selves oft, so now that wee oft either Hinder, or doe not Further Others in this Walk? First, Our Examples have they not ma∣ny times been misguiding-enough? Peter, as wee have heard, Mis-carried Barnabas, Gal. 2.11, 12, 13. Secondly, Our Counsells have not they been upon occasion carnall enough? They in the 21 Acts 12. what would they have perswaded Paul into? and it's well-known,
what Peter Rebuk'd Christ for, Math. 16.21, 22, 23. That it may to purpose trouble us, that wee have been stumbling blockes, where wee ought to have been shooing-hornes! Let us Consider the Rebuke Peter had, that Rebuked Christ, [Get thee behinde mee Satan, thou art an offnce unto mee] Pe∣ter here playing Satan's part, is call'd by Sa∣tan's Name; and, called so by Christ; Goe Christians, goe, weepe over these words given Peter, you have deserv'd them many a time! and, if the Lord had from Heaven said as much to you, as Hee did to him, when you stood in the way of any Dutie, if you then had heard Him saying, oh Satan! Satan! would it not have made your eares to have tingled? Would you not have been pricked at your heart? well! I say no more, but consider, under what a notion the Lord has lookt upon you many a time! For Re∣prehension thus farr. The Doctrine is of use, in a third place, as to Instruct, and to Rebuke, so also To Exhort; for, if this be thus, That Walking with God is pleasing to God, why then, Brethren, How should wee be dealt∣with, and as wee tender pleasing of God, to have a care of Walking with Him? Ac∣cording to that in the 1 Thes. 4.1. [Wee
beseech you — and Exhort you, by the Lord Jesus, that as yee have received of us, how yee ought to walk and to please God, so yee would abound more and more] No words are want∣ing, as the matter of the Exhortation is waightie, so the manner is grave and pier∣cing! Walking with God deserves all can be said of it and for it. Two things I intend, first, to provoke us, Then to direct us concerning it. The provocatives will be very many, and they derive themselves two wayes. Partly from walking with God. Partly from pleasing of God. Pleasing first; for this pleasing of Him how well it may and should please us, will appeare upon diverse Considerations, as First, Please Him, and please Others; This is the way to approve your selves to such as are wise and godly in their genera∣tions; for, First, What is that they desire? [Wee cease not, said a good man, in the 1 Col. 9.10. to desire, that yee might walke worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing] Good children would have their parents pleas'd, and so good servants their Masters, and shall wee think, that God's children, servants are like to no one's else?
Secondly, What is that they Endeavour? their desire before is no lazie velleitie, when you resume that 1 Col. 9, 10. [Wee cease not to pray for you, that yee might walk—] and so forth! Prayer is a sort of Effectuall Desire; wee may assure our selves, there are some so studious of Father's Glory, and Brethrens good, as they beg hard of God, that men might stand perfect and Compleat in all His will] Col. 4.12. Thirdly, What is that, wherein they de∣light? This third is consequentiall from the two other particulars, for how can wee think, but good men, so farr as they act like themselves, will be glad to see their Pray∣ers? to sett their eyes upon their desires? Will be ready to say, Now I see what I have looked-for, looked-up for; I wisht, yea of God I wisht, that such and such might walk in well-pleasing, and now to my Comfort I observe, that they ply Heavens way! keepe Innocence from great transgressions, Give diligence in Carrying-on dayes and duties. This for the first Provocative. A second is, Please God, and please your selves! yea this is the high and readie way to true Contentment, this will yeeld Hearts∣ease; according to that in the 30 Psal. 5. [In His favour is life] a smile of His face
is enough to put life into us; what a foun∣dation of pleasing one's self the pleasing of God laies, is plaine-enough, nothing, but First, If peace will please us! Wee, that are so troubled, if a meane man, and much-more a great doe frown on us, sit upon our skirt, how would wee like it to see men looke as pleasantly, as ever they did other∣wise? Well! doe you please God, and they are the likelier to please you; as the place is expresse and precious, the 16 Pro. 7. [When a man's wayes please the Lord, Hee maketh even his enemies to be at peace with him] take notice of the Emphasis, Even his Enemies It is not onely friends, that may be hoped to continue friendly; as strangers, that tooke no notice afore to begin to fa∣vour; but those, even those, that bore us ill will, shall, if God see it good for us, beare us good. Secondly, If Innocence, as before peace, will please us; I have alreadie taken notice, what Content the Psalmist tooke in free∣dome from great transgression, 19.13.] Now compare this with another Scripture, the 7 Eccles. 26. [Who so pleaseth God, shall escape from her] The forepart of the verse is this, [I finde more bitter then death the wo∣man, whose heart is snares and netts, and her
hands as bands] It followes [Who so plea∣seth God shall escape from her] a blessed es∣cape indeed! to escape snares, netts, bands: God dos much for the man, Hee dos this for! as might be shew'd in diverse respects. I was speaking erst of peace with men, and what might be said now of peace of Consci∣ence? the Bird in the bosome sings sweetly. Lastly, If Eternall Happines, as before Peace and Innocence will please us; what sayes th'Apostle in the 11 Heb. 5.] Before his translation hee had this Testimonie, that hee pleased God Pleasing God went before, and Translation follow'd after; Oh! plea∣sant pleasing! for oh! Happie Translation! You have the second Provocative. A third is; Please God, and Countervaile Men's displeasure. I spake before, how well some would take it to see the Lord had con∣tent given Him, but! oh! alas! there are other some, of whom I may say with th'A∣postle, in the 1 Thes. 2.15. [They please not God, and are contrarie to all men] A good man is oft in this strait, that he cannot give both God and Man Content! Well; sup∣pose he cannot, whether's to be pleas'd in such a Case? why! Sr. Peter tells us, whe∣ther, in the 5 Acts 29. [Wee ought to obey God rather then Men] And what Comfort
this will yeeld us, is cleare by the same Pe∣ter; for, being Converted, Changed, hee opposes this to his opposers, Wee ought to obey God, rather then Men] This was his Defence, Comfort, Confidence, that what they call'd Disobedience to them was Obe∣dience to Godwards. You remember, what the Psalmist said, In His favour is life] Wee call it day, when wee see the Sunne! Indeed Creature-Respect cannot Counter∣vaile divine displeasure, yea how shall they beare us out, who are not able to beare up themselves in such a Case? no not the big∣gest in the bunch; see the 6 Rev. 15, 16, 17. But on the other hand, Please God, and all's well, for either our Enemies shall be at peace with us, as wee have heard, or if they be not, Yet the peace of God, which passeth all un∣derstanding, shall keep your hearts and minds] Keepe as with a Guard, as in a Garrison, as the word signifies, Phil. 4.3. Fourthly, Please God, and please Him, that doth whatsoever Hee pleaseth, Psal. 115.3. Many, sayes Solomon in the 29 Pro. 26. seeke the Ruler's favour] There's great stri∣ving to finde grace in the eyes of Earthly Greatnes! and yet, what's that hee addeth? But every man's judgement cometh from the Lord] Hee can incline the Judge to passe
sentence, as Hee pleases! Oh! this over∣ruling Ruler! Kings are God's Kingdoms, they raigne over their people, and Hee over them; they sitt upon their thrones, and Hee upon their hearts! Who would not seeke This Ruler's favour? Fifthly, Please God, and please Him, that hath no pleasure in wickednesse, Psal. 5.4.] Sometimes the pleasures of Earthly Princes have been bad-enough; as Saul's indeed was, when he bad slay the Priests of the Lord] in the 1 Sam. 22.17. The ful∣filling of men's minds dos not ever please a man, when hee lookes againe; nor indeed is there ever cause! But as for the will of God, it is both Good and Acceptable, Hee Com∣mands us what's good, and for our good al∣wayes] Deut. 6.24. Sixthly, Please God, and please Him, whom Christ pleased; The Father, sayes Hee, in the 8 Joh. 29. hath not left mee alone, for I doe alwayes those things, that please Him] Did Christ please the Father? and shouldst not thou? Thou, that namest the name of Christ; thou that hast the same Fa∣ther Christ has; yea, what is that wee reade of Christ, in the 15. Rom. 3. That Hee plea∣sed not Himselfe, but, as it is written, The Reproaches of them, that Reproached thee, fell
on mee] Though the pleasing of God should cost a Christian deare, suppose Cruell Mock∣ings▪ yet hee should not think it an hard matter, but be well-pleas'd, that God is pleas'd at any rate. Seventhly, Please God, and difference your selves from unbeleevers; for, what sayes th'Apostle in the 11. Heb. 6? Without faith it is impossible to please Him] Dos hee say, it is hard? hee sayes, it is impossible] In other kindes wee are ambitious of acting above others To choose wee would be do∣ing some thing, that were not within the sphere of every one's Activitie. Eightly, Please God, and please Him, that's carefull of His peoples pleasednes, who is not aware, how Hee professes not to have made sad the heart of the righte∣ous? and to reckon with them that had? Ezek. 13.22. How Hee Exhorts servants to please their Masters in all things? Tit. 2.9.] And when Hee Commands Children Obedience to their Parents, Commends it to them upon this account, that it is well-pleasing unto the Lord Col. 3.20. Children, that please father and mother, please God the whiles! and what say Parents to this? And why doe they not say within them∣selves, as poore a man, as I am, yet the great
God hath given a charge to the Children, Hee hath given mee, that they shall obey mee, please mee, and should not I then please Him? and so Masters might say the same thing; and so for other relations. Ninthly, Please God, and please Him, whom the godly-wise have been studious of pleasing! Wot you not, what the Spouse sayes, in the 3. Cant. 5? [I charge you ô yee daughters of Jerusalem, by the roes, and by the hindes of the field, that yee stirre not up, nor awake my Love, till Hee please] And heare th'Apostle in the 1 Thes. 2.4. So wee speake, not as pleasing man but God] Yea, this plea∣sing of God you may observe so pleasing to them; as First, They would upon occasion prae∣ferre it, and First, To Men-pleasing; when men's pleasure and God's did not consist, why then, as wee say, uncavenly-dealt soone cho∣sen, so they could part with man, where hee parted from God! Acts 4.18.19. Secondly, To self-pleasing! Peter and John, when they were prohibited & threat∣ned, as they were, how might they have gratified naturall inclination, which abhor∣reth danger? how might they have provided for their own safetie, and possibly, further
and higher then so, by doing, as they had been Bidden? By letting and laying down the preaching of the Gospell: but behold! th'Apostles stood not upon perills, but told plainely the prohibiters, Wee cannot but speake the things, which wee have seene and heard] Acts 4.20. Secondly, As they would upon occasion praeferre Gods pleasure, so also please Him they would in very great matters; Abraham in the 22. Gen stood not with the Lord for an Isaac! They, that count Abrahams tri∣alls to ten, account this the soarest, and how great an one it was, would appeare, did wee stay to consider Abraham as a man, a fa∣ther, an husband, a professor, a beleever! under all these names he was putt to't. Thirdly, I might have shew'd, how ab∣solutely they have pleased; it's said of the partie named but-now, that when hee was called, he went-out not knowing whither hee went] Heb. 11.8. Obedientia caeca is God's due! As a blinde man followes his guide, so the good man put his hand into God's hand to leade him, whither he pleas'd; Abraham wanted not the wit to have said, Lord, here I know and am known; elsewhere I shall be a stranger! but indeed he had the Grace to follow his leader.
Tenthly, Please God, and please Him, that may be pleas'd; one thing, that many object against some, and in relation, is, that they are never pleas'd, but whatever a man dos, all's alike! But now, as to God-ward, th'Apostle doubts not to say, in the 2 Cor. 8.12. If there be first a willing minde, it is Ac∣cepted according to that a man hath, and not according to that hee hath not] Never did the most indulgent father take in so good part the prettie offices done by one of his little ones, as the Lord shines upon the weake but honest Endeavours and doings of his ser∣vants! Yea, and whereas some Masters hardly take notice of what a servant dos, the Lord both sees, what His servants would have done and Accepts it, 2 Chr. 6.8. Eleventhly, Please God, is not Satan pleas'd? The lusts of your father, said our Saviour in the 8. Joh. 44. yee will doe] There's great walking according to the Prince of the power of the ayre, and shall there be little, or no walking with God? Twelfthly, Please God, is not the world pleas'd? Herod the King killed James with the sword, and, sayes the Text, because hee saw, it pleased the Jewes, hee proceed further] Acts 12.1, 2, 3. Oh! fearfull procedure! but alas! such wicked Complying there has
been of men with men, not onely of meane men with great, but of great, with the mul∣titude, how then should the servants of God much-more observe their God? Thirteenthly, Please God, Hee is dis∣pleased] The Psalmist in the 119 Psalm had no-sooner said in the 126 verse, They have made voide thy Law] But hee addeth in the 127. Therefore I love thy Commande∣ments above Gold] Worser times are, and Better Good men should be; oh! for an holy Antiperistasis! that there were such an heart in us, as to say, This offended and provoked God, oh! that I now could walk worthy of unto all pleasing! To men-wards, more appearing Enemies are, and the more friends shew themselves, quantò magis—. I might in this Section for rendring this provocative the more provoking, have shew'd, first, how the Lord carries in the Case of His servants; why indeed the more disrespect, that others doe them, and the more kindely Hee useth them! That's a notable passage in the 12. Num:] for, when Moses was so spoken-a∣gainst, how did the Lord speake for him? yea for him, who said nothing for himself! Secondly, how well the Lord takes the Counter-Carriages of His servants; when they are so farr from swimming with the
streame, as they are so many Antipodes to a multitude of Evill-doers. Those were ve∣ry blaspheming times, in the 3. Mal. 13, 14. Oh! the Stout words, as there they are call'd, that were walking against the Lord! how was it Now with them, that feared the Lord? why! They spake often one to another] what they said, is not set down, but it's e∣vident out of the Cohaerence, that they said not as the Blasphemers did, yea it may be gathered thence, that they spake to the Strengthening of one another against those temptations. Then, what sayes the Lord or dos to that, which His servants said? why! it's said, Hee hearkened and heard] Hee had an Eare for them that had a Mouth for Him! And as great men sett down their names whom they intend in time to prae∣ferre, so it's added, And a booke of remem∣brance was written before Him for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon His Name] The Lord remembers those, that forget not Him. Fourteenthly, Please God, you have displeased Him; [Hee no longer should live, sayes St. Peter, to the lusts of men, but to the will of God, for the time past of our life may suffice us] 1.4.2, 3. Did an honest heart looke back, and see, for how long a time in
the time of unregeneracie, God was not well-pleased with him, they, that are in the flesh cannot please God, Rom. 8.8.] Such an heart could not but discerne cause for Re∣deeming time; for thinking the time once too long, & all the time after short-enough for so walking, as unto all pleasing; even as a man that takes his journey at farr of the day, will ride for it all day after. Fifteenthly, Please God, and partake in precious promises; What's that the Lord sayes to the Eunuches, that chuse the things, that please Him? in the 56. Isa. 4.5. Even to them, sayes Hee, will I give within mine house and within my walls a place and a name better then of sons and of daughters, I will give them an Everlasting name, that shall ne∣ver be cutt-off] The promise is both part and precious! how right did it suite to Eunuches, to tell them of Giving them a Name? and a name better then of sons and of daughters; yea, and an everlasting name? And now, my Beloved, I have no sooner Converst with this sweet Scripture, but I am readie to say to such amongst God's ser∣vants, as think they labour under some no∣table Want; possibly they Want Children, have a vast Estate, but no body begotten of their own body to give it to! haply, they
have Children, but want portions for them; and so for other deficiencies! I say, to such I would say, Have you a care, as is said of the Eunuches, To chuse the things, that please God] and you need not to seare, but the Lord will have respect to please you; some way or another Hee'le please you. I reade of Mr. Calvin, that when the Papists up∣braided him with his Orbitie in a state of Marriage, hee said, God had in stead of na∣turall Children given him other of a more excellent sort, speaking of the blessing Hee had Crown'd His Ministerie with. Sixteenthly, Please God, and escape the dint of Divine displeasure. What became of them, in the 1 Cor. 10.5. With whom the Lord was not well-pleased?] Were they not overthrown in the Wildernesse?] Oh! who can stand before His Indignation? Kings, Captaines, rich men, great men have not been able to stand, Rev. 6.15, 16, 17. Nor Order, nor Number has been able to beare-up; a man feares to set his back to a crowd, lest it should be known, yea but though hand joyne in hand, yet when the Lord takes them in hand, the wicked goe not un∣punished. Seventeenthly, Please God, and have your pleasure; according to that in the 1.
Joh. 3.22. Whatsoever wee ask, wee receive of Him, because wee doe those things, that are pleasing in His sight] You know, how it is with us towards a Childe, that pleaseth us, wee say him nay of nothing; a thousand times more indulgent is the Heavenly Fa∣ther towards His dutifull Children! Indeed a Child of ours may, possibly, ask, what wee cannot give, but the Heavenly Father sayes to his, Open thy mouth, and I will fill it] And what a Comfort is this to them, who like men's Children are ever wanting some∣thing? Besides, what is there in the Returne of Prayer? Ask, and yee shall Receive, that your joy may be full] Joh. 16.24. Even as one of our Children is joy'd of a Letter from father or mother. Eighteenthly, Please God, and please Him, that hath pleasure in the prosperitie of His servants, Psal. 35.27. Masters, that can well finde in their hearts to see their ser∣vants thrive under them, servants are the more observant of; well! and what an ex∣pression is that, in the 30. Deut. 9? The Lord shall Rejoyce over thee for good] And if any say, a great deale of Evill overtakes good people, it would be considered, That Gods faithfulnes is in His peoples Afflicti∣ons; even as it is a faithfull part in a parent
to provide Physicke as well as Food, a Rod as well as Bread for his Child, Ps. 119.75. Nineteenthly, Please God, and please Him, whom Angells please; according to that in the 103. Psal. 20, 21. Blesse the Lord yee His Angells — Yee Ministers of His, that doe His pleasure] Did a plaine Coun∣trey man goe to the Court of an Earthly King, & see the Nobilitie bare to the King, the Court generally to observe him, what would hee thinke were his part to doe? Semblablie, concerning the King of Kings, if the most excellent order of Creatures be ministring Spirits, what Dutie is due at the hands of men, that dwell in houses of clay? And one word more, How doe we pray? is not this one Petition? Thy will he done in earth, as it is in Heaven] Math. 6.10. Twentithly, Please God, and please Him, whom yet thou canst not pleasure; Is it any pleasure, so in the 22. Job 3. to the Almigh∣tie, that thou art righteous? or is it Gaine to Him, that thou makest thy wayes perfect?] is it?] as much as to say, it is not; Oh! This good God! that's pleas'd with that which indeed dos us the pleasure, us the Gaine; wee are Blessed in our deed; as for Him, Hee was Blessed before ever wee were; and shall be, when wee shall be dead and
gone, as I have formerly spoken! Who, who would not be observant of such a Lord, as is no gainer by us, & yet by whom we gaine? wee are unprofitable servants, but His ser∣vice is not unprofitable Jac: 1.25. Twentithonely, Please God, you know His pleasure; The Exception, that's taken by some against some, and in relation is, that they cannot know their minds, els they hop'd they should fit their turnes; some Masters and Mistrisses will not so much as say, How they would have things done, and, may be, some cannot tell how; Yea, but Hee hath shewed thee ô man! what is good, and what doth the Lord require of thee, but to doe justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? Mic: 6.8. Here's no shooting at a blinde mark; Here servants may know, when they doe well. As God is onely wise, and knew best what would please Him best, so Hee hath made His plea∣sure known, hath written to us the Great Things of His Law, and His Law is some∣times call'd His Testimony] Psal. 19.7. Yea, it Testifies, dos His Word, as what good Hee Intends us, so Requires of us. Twenty secondly, Please God, and walk worthy of Him; according to that in the 1. Col. 10. That yee might walk worthy of
the Lord unto all pleasing] But, is it possible to walk worthy of the Lord? of such Worth Hee is and such poore Creatures wee are!] I answer, Dignitatis vocabulum—the terme [Worthines] doth not here denote Equa∣litie, but sometimes takes away Repugnan∣cie! as in the 3. Math. 8. where fruit is call'd for worthie; So the word in the Originall is, of Repentance] The word is well rendred Meete-for. You shall heare men's servants professe they would be ashamed not to car∣rie as servants, and towards their Masters as Masters; Oh! Then what should be in the hearts and Mouths of Gods servants? sure! Yo carry Becomingly; aud how's that? why! Ʋnto all pleasing; you doe not walk worthie, unlesse you walk pleasingly. And thus at the long length, I have dispatched the Motives, with the first Reference; such, as respect pleasing of God! I proceed now to such, as referre To Walking with Him; as First, Walk with God, and indeed you Walk, otherwise you but Wander; accord∣ing to that in the 119. Psal. 10. Let mee not Wander from thy Commandements.] Out of His way, and out of the way. Devill, World, Flesh, are false Guides, every one of them; indeed they will not spare to Com∣mend
their wayes, what wayes of profit, pleasure, Honour they are, what Beaten paths; yea but onely God deserves the name of a Guide! His paths are right, are paths of life, the old way, and the good way, that leades into Heaven at last. In other kindes, you know, how it troubles us to have mist our way, to ride back again; well! the best that can come of other wayes is to gett out of them; yea, but Walk with God, and Walk on. This is the first Mooving Considera∣tion. Secondly, Walk with God, and Antedate Heaven, 1 Thes. 4.17. Hereafter wee shall Ever be with the Lord, and Here wee may be much with Him! Then enjoy such Com∣munion, as is full, and Now such as is fitt, as I have alreadie said; and oh! This Being in Heaven, before-hand is sweet? is it not? Even as a Crum of sugar is sweet, a drop of honey sweet; a man's in a sweet way, is hee not, when hee may say, as you have heard, a good man did, I shall change my place, but not my Companie! an Earlier Hell is fearfull, how Comfortable an Earlier Heaven? sure; It's Comfortable the keeping of such Com∣panie Now, as wee shall be Ravished with to all Eternitie, Psal. 16. ult.] Thirdly, Walk with God, and you shall
have good men to walk with you. I obser∣ved once before, out of the 9. Acts 26, 27, 28. That, Saul assayed to joyne himselfe with the Disciples, and they were afraid of him; but Barnabas tooke him, and brought him to th' Apostles, and declared unto them, how hee had seene the Lord in the way, and then hee was with them Coming-in and Going out] As at the Courts of Earthly Princes, such as are in favour with their Majesties, are fa∣vour'd and honour'd by the Court. Good men will hold it their duty to looke upon those, whom the Lord hath lookt towards. The Psalmist in the 119.63. Professes, what a great Company-keeper hee was, yea, but it was of good Companie! I am a Compani∣on, sayes hee, of All them that feare Thee] Many a man would be proud of being where Knights and Lords were, especially if all men might not be admitted; well! you know, who are said, Kings and Priests unto God, good men are great men. These now, that are so great, yea, and that will not be great with every body, some they withdraw from as no Company for them, yet will be, and will delight to be great with you, if you be observed great with God, Psal. 16.3. Fourthly, Walk with God, and you shall
not minde vaine Company much; one of the Witches of our age is Companie, you heare daily Ale-goers say, It is not so much drink, as Companie they goe for; alas! frothie Companie! the hearing of one idle storie, and the telling of another; a signe, they are stranges to the Walk in the Text; else as I have also shewed, such sweet so∣cietie would dis-sweeten such vaine Con∣verse; Schollers, that usually are where parts are, care not for coming, where Rusticitie and ignorance is; such as have liv'd in great Townes and Cities, cannot skill so well of the Countrey, where the myrie lanes are farr unlike their cleanly streets; the more a man is with God, and the lesse hee'l care for being amongst th'ungodly. Fifthly, Walk with God, and Improve Time! according to that in the 84. Psal. 10. One day in Thy Courts is better then a thou∣sand] Time is a precious Commoditie, for it has Eternitie in the heele of it, must be account given of, tarries for no man, doe not time, and tyde; and few use it, as they ought; Usurers sell time, unthrifts wast time, Idlebies lose time; yea but, Time spent with God is well-spent time, best-spent time! it's time spent with the best friend, for the best friend; it's such a spending of
time as is a Redeeming of it, as is a praepa∣ring for Eternitie: Time in some Compa∣nie a man might name, onely begets matter of Repentance, and this Breaking of the Heart is the best can come of it, a man's la∣menting the houres, nay the dayes, yea the Nights; for alas! some part not till both Cocks Crow, and Braines Crow; I say, la∣menting the time, has been lost, lavisht! and, Oh! that they had been under the Word that while, or in Conference that while— and oh! that ever they were such fooles and beasts, —! Yea, yea, such ahs! and ohs! as these, will follow, and well too, the following of such vaine Courses and Companie! But now, the time a man has had with God, will not feare to looke sick∣nes in the face, death in the face Hezekiah, in the 38. Isa. 3. that had received the sen∣tence of death, what is he heard to say? why! Remember Lord, I beseech thee, how I have Walkt before thee] When a man lookes upon himselfe as a gone man, then to looke back upon a well-led life is a Comfort! Then hee takes more Comfort in time re∣deem'd for Prayer, Reading, Hearing, Me∣ditation —! Then in time spent between Glasse and Comb, spent upon greenes, allies, alehouses; did you ever heare or reade of a
man, that had the Confidence, impudence when hee was upon sick-bed, death-bed to say, Remember Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walkt one day after another, from one Taverne or Alehouse to another; Remem∣ber, how idly, scandalously I have walkt-! no! no! I warrant you; the feare of death fixes a terror upon an ill-lead-life. Sixthly, Walk with God, and Walk with a Guard; What an Hedge dos the Devill confesse, he found about Job? 1.10. Yea, and dos he not speake as one, that had both lookt the fence, & would gladly have made a breach? The people of God are not so exposed a people, as other people think, and truly, it is a Weaknes in good people at any time to think, that their Duties ex∣pose them; no! these hide them, put them within protection, accordingly, as you have it, in the 91. Psal. 11. Hee shall give His Angells charge over thee, to keepe thee in All Thy Wayes] Seventhly, Walk with God, and Walk with a Friend! yea the best friend, as I was saying erst. Wee say proverbially, There's falsehood in fellowship; and David found it so; for how dos hee complaine of his Com∣panion and of his familiar? Psal. 55.13, 14. Cum 41.9. Yea, but God is faithfull, lo∣ving,
delights those, that delight in Him! how has a soule ere now been Ravished un∣der Ordinances? in carrying-on of Duties; Yea, and in sad times what proportioned Consolations is this loving God wont to Come-in with? So as some have been mer∣ry in misery, kist stakes, embrac'd flames, been as willing to die, as to dine; see the 2 Cor. 1.5. Eightly, Walk with God, and Walk with your superiour! yea with the Su∣preame, Gen. 17.1. You that love to be among your Betters, Come hither! Here's the great King, Mal. 1. ult.] that King, by whom Kings raigne, that raignes over Kings, that setts His feete, as I have said, where they have their Crowned heads, that raignes Universally, Eternally, Righteously, with much-more might be said of this King's Raigne. Ninthly, Walk with God, and Walk with the Onely-wise, 1 Tim. 1.17.] You know, what a journey a Queene made to a King to heae his Wisdome! and men, as they walk together, are wont to talke toge∣ther, and Communicate secrets; But what are men's Notions to Divine Manifestati∣ons? The secret of the Lord shall take at it, Psal. 25.14. And oh! is not this with them
that feare him? Yes! to them it is given to know the Mysteries of the Kingdome! To them, and not to others; This onely-wise God enwiseth them touching the Glorie of His Majestie, preciousnesse of Christ, Fel∣lowship of the Spirit, Deceitfulnes of sin, maliciousnesse of Satan, spottingnes of the world, vilenesse of self — These things they are taught to purpose, and added, Where shall be light, if not where the Fa∣ther of lights is? Tenthly, Walk with God, and Walk with Him, whom your Fathers walked-with! yea, this is th'Old Walk, that it is! And you finde the Lord telling Solomon so, in the 1 Kings 9.4. [If, sayes Hee, thou wilt walk before Mee, as David thy Father walked] This walk David frequented, and so did Abraham, and Noah, and Enoch—! If wee would follow them, that have led even into Heaven, this is the way; and in∣deed, this were to make a right use of the Examples of the Righteous. Brethren, sayes, th' Apostle in the 3. Phil. 17. Be yee followers of mee, and marke them, which walk so, as yee have us for an Ensample As in the Scrip∣tures the Evill Deeds of some are noted, like quagg-myres, that have a stick stuck in them to warne passengers to putt-by, Nun∣tiantur,
ut renuntientur! So also are the laudable actions of others recorded, as so many Shooing-hornes for drawing of us on; so as now I am readie to say; well! the Lord had Enoch's Companie, Noahs Com∣panie, Abraham's, David's, shall Hee not have yours? Eleventhly, Walk with God, and Walk praecedentially to posteritie; according to that, in that fore-cited 1 Kings 9.4. where you heare the Lord commending to th'son th'fathers doings; [If thou wilt walk before mee, as David thy father walked] Yea this is the Walk for neare and deare Relations to Commend to one another; Fathers to Children, and these to their Children; it's the honour and comfort of Parents, when they can truly say of any vile in any of their's, Hoc me non Commonstrante, hee learn'd not this of mee, yea, it is not the least Legacie, the Good Example a good Father leaves behinde him. I was speak∣ing in the other Section of Taking good Example, and now I am speaking of Gi∣ving it; and, in the name of God what portions soever els you give your Children, give them This; for, are you not aware, how the Lord improves David's Exempla∣rines? Do's Hee say, If thou wilt walk be∣fore
mee? Hee sayes, as provoking Emula∣tion by Relation, If thou wilt walk before mee, as David thy father walked] Consider Parents, and as you love your Children, what a spurre in their side it might be, if they might say; well! I had a good father, a gracious mother, and therefore how good should I be? and ere I leave this Section let mee adde, what a doore parents open to the Lord's saying unto their seed, as erst in effect hee said to Solomon? Well! I had your fathers Companie, shall I not have yours? Twelfthly, Walk with God, and walk as every one walks not, Phil. 3.18. No! no! This walk is the Narrow way, which few finde; and let mee adde, if the Com∣panie here be not so great, I meane, so throng as you may see in the Devill's walk, in the World's walk, yet here's the Good Companie, yea here's the best; hee cannot want Companie, that walks with God; hee cannot want the Rest. Thirteenthly, Walk with God, and walk as you have not ever walked, no not the best of you, Eph. 2.1, 2. Indeed you walkt wofully one while, the Devill lead you, World lead you, you danc'd after their pipe, and were dancing towards Hell that
while! say, was it not a mercie, that the Lord turnd you? and taught you to make right stepps? and should you not now ply the right way, and after having gone wrong so-long? here comes-in Time-Redemption, spoken of in the 5. Eph. 16. And oh! if Time were a peice of land it would be Re∣deem'd, or wee would lay the worst sheet under, and yet bring what it is; it is a more precious Commoditie, and therefore what should be done concerning it? yea and con∣sidering, what has been done with it? A Master of familie, that calls-up servants, or children in a morning, tells them, it's high time they were up, since they went to bed; and how might a soule say, it's high time, that I were up and doing, I that, time was, did onely mis-spend time? My Beloved, wee complaine oft, that wee want time, time to Reade, Meditate, Conferre, and so forth, when, alas! wee doe not so much want time, as wast time! are not so good hus∣bands with it, as wee should be, and the rather considering our former unthriftines! why is there not an heart to say, by this time it's farr of the day with mee, my mor∣ning and Noone are both past, and Night is drawing-on? Fourteenthly, Walk with God, doe not
others so by their gods? [All people will walk, sayes the Church in the 4. Mic. 5. every one in the Name of his God, and wee will walk in the Name of the Lord our God for ever and ever] You see the use shee makes of others peremptorines, shee'l see, if shee can bee as Resolute, as they for the heart of them! and indeed shee onely has Reason; Idoll gods are not worth the go∣ing-after! Men, that are ingaged in inge∣nuous Courses of life, possibly, are Students, while others Handie-Crafts-men; should follow their Booke, while others Horse and Cart! would not such men have indignati∣on to Consider, that those other men did over-doe them? I reade of Demosthenes, that hee was angrie, if in a Morning the Smith had been sooner at his anvile, then hee at his Desk! What is that I would say then to a good man? and while wee Con∣sider, what diligence is given by wicked men? what? shall the fairer way be lesse-travail'd? the better work be lesse-done in? the better Master have the lesse-labourious servants? Let it never be told in Gath, that pott-Companions are more in walking the Alehouses, then wee in walking with God, that idle fellows are more in walking the streets, then wee in walking with God.
Fifteenthly, Walk with God, and leane on Him! That's a sweet place, the 8. Cant. 5. Who is this, that Cometh up from the Wil∣dernes, leaning on her Beloved?] Another friend you walk with, would be loath to be your leaning-stock; what? must hee finde you legges? cannot you goe upon your selfe? I was touching such a notion, as this, before] Yea but, God, whom a soule walks-with, hee may leane upon; the po∣sture of leaning speakes many things, Con∣fidence, wee are wont to leane upon what wee make account will beare us; well! and the Lord, that upholds all things, Cannot Hee uphold us? and may not wee promise our selves so much? 1 Pet. 5.7. Familia∣ritie, friends use to leane upon their friends, Joh. 13.23. Well! and what a sweet In∣timacie, and what a loving respect may a soule hope with and from God? Psal. 25.14. Cum 37.4. Support, that upholds us, wee leane upon; wee rest our selves upon it! and I pray, what sustentation, what strengthening, what help may be expected at God's hands? Though wee be Weak∣lings, Nothings, yet His Grace is sufficient; and for our Doing all things, Phil. 4.13. Lastly, Walk with God Now, and Here∣after Rest with Him; a man that calls out
his friend to walk with him, usually take him home after, sayes, You may be wearie, sit you down a while, Eate, drink, and so forth! What doe you think, God will one day say to a soule, that has kept Him Com∣panie? doe you think, Hee'l part with such an one? did hee part with Enoch? is it not said of him, That God took him] I have done with the Motives! and proceed to the Di∣rectives, and they concerne Meanes, and Markes. Meanes first; and either of Entring or Carrying-on this Walk. Entring first! Walking supposes Life, the dead stirre not, so as now how doe the Meanes of Grace come to be Commended? the rather while wee consider the 5. Joh. 25. Verily, verily, I say unto you, sayes our Saviour, the houre is Coming, and now is, when the dead shall heare the voyce of the Son of God, and they that heare shall live] What Hearing should there be therefore? yea what pressing to heare? alas! many looke upon Jordan with Syrian eyes, make ac∣count, it's to no great purpose to goe, and heare for an houre a man like unto them∣selves; But what knowest thou O man, whether Christ will concurre with the spea∣ker, so as they that heare shall live? should
not God be waited-on in His own way? Will not His Meanes prove succesfull in His time? Do's Hee blesse Creatures to the Bodie, and cannot Hee Ordinances to the soule? What though hee, that planteth be nothing, and hee that watereth? is it not with God to give the Increase? What dili∣gence therefore should be given to the Meanes? How should the Congregations be thronger, and other Meetings thinner one Sabbath after another, one opportuni∣tie after another? What hopes of their Walking with God, who are dead, and keepe out of the way of Life? This for Entring! Then Secondly, for Carrying-on; Walking first, especially any whit lustily requires Livelines, Healthfulnes; Men that are sick∣ly and weakly in Body, stand still, or turne againe, or sit down, or fall down; Accor∣dingly the soules prosperitie would be an eye had to. Which you finde, St. John men∣tioning in the 3. Ep: 2. v.] Beloved, sayes hee, I will above all things that thou maiest prosper, and be in health, even as thy soule prospereth] And, what's that in the 3. v? I rejoyced greatly, when the brethren came, and testified of the truth that is in thee, even as thou walkest in the truth] Looke you
what Walking here was, what notable wal∣king, to the observation and attestation of the brethren, where a prospering soule was; looke to your soules therefore, as diligent∣ly as others doe to their Bodies, to keepe the Bodie in health, men see that it want neither food, nor physick, nor recreation, nor other Comforts and Accommodations! Well! doe you, As new-borne babes desire the sincere milk of the Word, that yee may grow thereby; ply Ordinances Duties, Op∣portunities! many an one would goe-farre for a good meales-meat, and shall we starve our soules, pinch our soules? oh! for a well-liking soule, and that were in a way to be kept so. Secondly, Walking especially in a Nar∣row way, which is easie to misse, and not easie to hitt; And againe, if a man have cause to feare false guides offering them∣selves, requires Circumspectnes; accord∣ingly a Christian is call'd-to for Circum∣spection, and for Seeing to it, in the 5. Eph. 15. And a good man is heard to pray; Oh! that my wayes were directed] Psal. 119.5. And in the 10. v. Let mee not wander from thy Commandements] Omne, quod rutilat, non est aurum; all's not gold, that glitters; and so, every way is not the way of God,
which yet, may be, may seeme so; the Prince of Darknes can transforme himselfe into an Angel of light; wee have heard of poyson in a golden Cup; Christians had need be wise, Satan's wilie. Thirdly, To walking especially any way, that a man may feare Discouragements in is requir'd Resolutenes, that Come what can, Goe-on hee will! Well! The wayes of God are in all ages opposed, persecuted, dogs will be barking, and faster a man goes, and more they'l bark, 2 Tim. 3.12. And therefore what Christian Wisdome were it to cleave unto the Lord with purpose of heart? Acts 11.23. Fast binde, fast finde! What wisdome were it to put on the whole Armour of God, that wee may be able to with∣stand in the Evill day, and having done all to stand? Fourthly, To Walking especially any long way is requir'd a Viaticum, something to bite or supp-on, to refresh nature-with! Travellers have their aqua vitae-bottles, Souldiers their Knap-sacks; Well! Walk with God wee should day by day, sett the Lord Alwayes before us, Psal. 16.8. It's a long walk, This! and therefore how should wee store our soules with Comforts and Encouragements? and against all that op∣position,
that erst was spoken-of? Store is no soare; Mr. Latimer found so, that at the stake had a Consolatorie Scripture so rea∣die, Fidelis est Deus — God is faithfull, who will not suffer you to be Tempted above that you are able] 1 Cor. 10.13. As you reade, or heare the Scriptures, Treasure-up heart-holding passages, together with your own, and others Experiences; Those that walk with God there are so many enrag'd against, as a Christian may need all the Con∣solation hee can lay-in. Lastly, To walking especially in Com∣panie, is required Peace and Correspon∣dence; Can two walk together, except they be agreed? Amos 3.3.] Now what Agreeing with God First, Without Christ? for Hee it is, not onely With Whom, but In Whom the Father is well-pleased, Col. 1.13. Cum 3. Math. ult.] So much a Christian is con∣cern'd to be much in Beleeving, in acting faith upon Christ, in living the life of faith, concern'd to do all his duties in the strength of Christ, to praesent all his Requests in the Name of Christ —! Gal. 2.20. Secondly, What agreeing with God without disagreeing with Sin? see the 8. Zeck. 17. also the 97. Psal. 10. Men will
exspect, that such as are intimate with them should not be so-familiar with their ene∣mies; Sin is opposite to the pure Nature, to the revealed will and pleasure of God; it is not enough in a servant of God to for∣beare some sinnes, but hee should abhorre all, and out of pure love to God. Thirdly, What agreeing with God with∣out agreeing with His servants? Fathers of your flesh cannot endure distances among their Children, they tell them soone, there are others enough, to wrangle with them, they need not to wrangle with one ano∣ther: and can wee think, the Father of Spirits will take it well to see His Children at odds? Aaron and Miriam were preci∣ous ones, yet speaking ag inst a precious man, [though Moses, as I noted before, would have put it up, yet they were sodain∣ly Convented, and soundly Checked, Wherefore, sayes the Lord, in the 12. Num. 8. were yee not afraid to speake against my servant Moses?] Dos Hee say, Wherefore did yee? Hee sayes, Werefore were yee not afraid to speake?] Lastly, What agreeing with God with∣out feare of disagreeing, and prizing prae∣sent peace? Wee like it well in our Chil∣dren, not onely to see them please us, but
to be studious of pleasing, and carefull to praevent a frown from us! And what's that you heare Solomon say? Happie is the man, that feareth alwayes] Pro. 28.14. A blessed thing it is not to feed our selves without feare, to Rejoyce in feare, to maintaine an holy Jealousie over our selves, lest wee should provoke. Let this suffice for Meanes; It followes to speake of Markes, What signes and tokens there are of Walking with God; and, First, You may assure your selves, that Walking with God, is walking according to Rule; according to that in the 6. Mic. 8. Hee hath shewed thee ô man, what is good, and what doth the Lord require of thee, but to doe justly, and to love mercy, and to Walk humbly with thy God?] What can be more cleare, then that Walking with God is a Re∣quired Walking? If any then shall tram∣ple the Scriptures, and praetend to the Spi∣rit of God against the Word of God, it's not hard to say, who such doe not walk with. To the Law, and to the Testimonie] Isa. 8.20. If they speake not according to this Word, it is because there is no light in them] is it said, Because there is New light in them? it's said, Because there is No light in them.]
Secondly, Such as Walk with God, have left off their Old Walk, Rom. 8.1. Cum 2 Eph. 1, 2. [You hath Hee quickened, who were dead in trespasses and sins, wherein in time past yee walked according to the Course of this World, according to the Prince of the power of the aire] In time past yee walked] yea time was, they walkt wofully, fearfully, the Devill led them, the world led them, as I have formerly spoken. But Now, though indeed there be flesh in them, yet they walk not after it; and, though sometimes they stepp aside, yet they walk after the Spirit. If any then shall praetend to Godlines with∣out a Change, do remaine the same World∣lings, meere Civilists, old Companie-kee∣pers they had wont to be, it's not hard to say, who these men doe not Walk with. Thirdly, They that Walk with God, can be troubled to think, how they walkt once; 1 Pet. 4.3. You may observe St. Paul in the 1 Cor. 15.9. when hee tells what a persecutor hee had been, to hang down the head, I am not worthie, sayes he, to be called an Apostle, because I persecuted the Church of God] If any then like their old sinnes well-enough, delight to tell of them, yea and now that thorough age, or otherwise they are Disabled, yet they are not Disin∣clined,
but their minds are as canker'd as ever; such sins have left them, and not they such sins, it's not hard to say, who these men doe not walk with. Fourthly, Such as Walk with God can be grieved not onely to remember, how themselves sometimes walked, but also to Consider, how others doe walke. Th'Apo∣stle, in the 3. Phil. 18. could not hold him uncry'd, good man! when he thought, and told, what a life some lead, what a grace∣lesse shamelesse life: and the Prophet pro∣fesseth, in the 13. Jer. 17. to have Teares for them, had none for themselves! If any then take pleasure in Evill-doers, and, wor∣ser men are better they are with them, it's not hard to say, with whom they walke not. Lastly, Such, as Walk with God, can skill to walk with the godly! Psal. 16.3. Cum 8. I observed afore, what a great Compa∣nie-keeper the Psalmist was, but it was of good Companie; good men were the good fellowes with him! If any then be enemies of all righteousnesse, good men are not good with them, but they deride them, would think a familie, a Town — well ridd of them; it's not hard to say, with Whom they walk not. And thus I have dispatcht the Use of Exhortation.
A fourth and last followeth, and it is an Use of Consolation; for, if this be thus, that Walking with God is pleasing to God, then with what Comfort may all such, as so Walk, Walk on? Accordingly as th'A∣postle would hearten the people to doe, in the 1. Thes. 4.1. Non hortatur ut Am∣bulent, sed Abundent! Do's hee in that place speake simplie of Walking? hee speakes of Abounding, and so of Walking with a witnesse! That as in other Walking there seemes to be a strife 'twixt the two feet, whether shall be before; so those Christian Walkers to strive with them∣selves, to excell themselves, to be better each day then other! and oh! now for this Walking even to Abouding! Nor let us be Discouraged, Though, First, Some that are our flesh and blood, yet doe not take this way! Rom. 9.1, 2, 3. Many a good man has a carnall man to his father, brother — But what of that? can hee, that walks with God, want friends? has not hee the Best friend with him? as I have also shew'd. Secondly, Though some, that are no Want-witts, take quite another Course! Matth. 11.25. Not alwayes where Parts are, Grace is! but what of that? The feare
of God is the Beginning of Wisdome. Thirdly, Though some Grandees refuse us to goe with us, 1 Cor. 1.26. Great men are not ever good men! but what of that? good men are great men! Lastly, Though Multitudes turne their back on us, Math. 7.14. Commonly the worser Pannier is the fuller! but, what of that? Good Companie is better then Great! as hath been said; Werefore Com∣fort one another with these words! Detur, ut debetur, Soli Deo gloria.
A Table of the Contents. COhaerence of the Text. Sense of the Text. Parts of the Text. Doct: Walking with God is pleasing to God. Reason first, From Contraries, for Hee Walks Contrarie to them, that walk Contrarie to Him. 2. From the Issue, for Walk with God, and Rest with Him. 3. From Adjunct, fourfold. 1. The Commandednes of this Walk. 2. The Commendednes of this Walk. 3. The Encouragednes of this Walk. 4. The Benefittedness of this Walk. 4. From Effect; for, This Walking is of pleasing Opperation, in re∣gard both of Sin, and Dutie.
Use first, Of Instruction, and first, How much wee are Concerned, and as wee could desire to please God, to be well seene in this Walking with Him. Eight things shew'd, wherein it espe∣cially Consists. 2. What a Gracious God the Lord is, that's so well pleas'd with Man's Walking with Him; the rather while wee Consider, First, God, and in regard of his Gloriousnesse. Blessednesse. Secondly; Man; first, in order to Others. Secondly, By himselfe in regard of States of Nature. Grace. Priviledges, that waite upon them, that waite upon God, and either Here, ten are named; Or Hereaf∣ter! which are Negative or Affirmative. Secondly, Of Reprehension; and First, Of Carnall people, whom this Walk pleaseth not either
Concerning Themselves or Others. Secondly, Of Good people; so farre, as they are found, Wan∣dring themselves; Hindering or not Furthering this Walk in others. Thirdly, Of Exhortation, as wee tender pleasing of God to have a Care of Walking with Him. This is Carried-on with Motives. Carried-on with Directives. And the Dire∣ctives Concerne Meanes. And the Dire∣ctives Concerne Markes. Fourthly, Of Consolation; Wherein they are Encouraged, that walk with God, to walk-on, and notwithstanding foure seem∣ing Discouragements.
The Printer to the Reader. COurteous Reader, by rea∣son of the Authors absence severall faults have escaped the Presse, which thou art desired to amend with thy Pen.
Severall Books sould by George Eversden at the Maiden-head in Pauls Church-yard. AN Exposition on the whole Booke of Canticles, by John Robotham, Preacher at Dover, in 40. An Exposition with practicall Observa∣tions on the nine first Chapters of the Pro∣verbs, by Francis Taylor, B.D. in 40. The life of Sir Thomas Moore, sometimes Lord Chancellor of England. The Naturall Mans case stated, in 17 Ser∣mons, by Mr. Christopher Love, late Mini∣ster of Laurence Jury, London; together with a Sermon Preached at his funerall by Mr. Thomas Manton. As also the Doctrine of Mortification with the hearers Dutie, by Mr. Christopher Lve, in 80. A Comment on the 11 first verses of the 4th Chapter of St. Mathew, concerning Christs Temptations, by Thomas Fuller, B. D. and Minister of Waltham Abbey in Essex, in 80. Also a Comment on the first and second
Chapters of Ruth, by Mr. Thomas Fuller, in 80. Ʋnum necessarium, or the Doctrine and practice of Repentance, by Jer: Taylor, D.D. The Mystery of Rhetorick unvailed, where∣in above 130 Tropes and Figures are seve∣rally derived from the Greeke into English, with lively definitions of Latine, English, and Scripturall examples, pertinent to each of them apart, by John Smith, Gent. The Grand Triall of true Conversion; A Treatise of the Thoughts, by John Bisco, Minister at Tho: Southwarke. Parnassus Biceps, or severall choyce pei∣ces of Poetry, composed by the best witts of both Universities before their dissolution; faithfully collected by A. W. Mr. Culpeppers Treatise of Aurum Pota∣bile, in 80. FINIS.
