c318aa 45097595 171205
THE Biggest IDOL IN THE WORLD Knock'd i'th Head. The Verb's Triumph: Or the Second Part of Calverley's Notes. Which NOTES rightly Distinguish the hitherto horribly misdistinguished Grounds of Speech; And proveth the Rules of the Common Grammar so false and ridiculous, that it's Dishonour for any Learned Nation to Teach or Account them for RULES: Therefore all Grammarians and Lovers of True Distinction are desired to stand up quickly in Vindication of the Common Grammar, or else to procure a Grammar sensible, brief and pleasant, lest (by our slighting of this Method) other Lands entertain it first, and we (for our Ingratitude) be forced to learn it of them, to our grief and shame. Be not to God s' ingrate, of th' World the scorn, But let's th' whole World with this bright Gem adorn. Then England's th' Mistris, sole Emperess, None but her self distinct Rules doth express, For th' Grounds of Speech, wherein both great and small Learn'd but to go, t' creep Babe-like by the wall, Till she them taught to walk, nimbly to run, As Innocence when th' World at first begun. London; Printed for the Author. 1681.
A VERB is the Queen or Grace of Eloquence, relating the action of something; as, To love. A Verb (in Latin) endeth prin∣cipally in re; as Amare, or in i, as Dignari. A Verb is distinguished by Noti∣fication, Illustration, and Person∣ation. There be Four Families of Verbs; And Notification shews of what Fa∣mily each Verb is, by the vowel long or short preceeding the said re or i in the Verbs Palace, as, Verbs of the first Family have a long before re, or i; as Amare, Dignari. Verbs of the second Family have e long before re, or i; as Latere, Tueri. Verbs of the third Family have e short before re, or i; as Bibere, Gradi. Verbs of the fourth Family have i long before re, and i; as Audire, Oriri. Illustration is the mustering up of the Verbs, Dignities, or several Endings, which are Eight, and or∣derly shewed in and by the Queen∣dom of the Verb; which Queendom consists of a Royal Palace and Seven flourishing Principalities or Ladies, as follow: viz. Amare, amavisse, amatum, amans, amandi, amando, amandum, amatu, amaturus. Latere, latuisse, latium, latens, latendi, latendo, latendum, latitu, latiturus. Bibere, bibisse, bi∣bitum, bibens, bibendi, bibendo, biben∣dum, bibitu, bibiturus. Audire, au∣divisse, auditum, audiens, audiendi, audiendo, audiendum, auditu, audi∣turus. The first in each Family, is the Queen-Verb, as Amare. The next is the Sister, as Ama∣visse; they two live and cohabit together in the Palace. The Seven Ladies of Honour each in her peculiar Principality as they stand directly in the Queen∣dom or Illustration, which is that which is mistakingly called the In∣finitive Mood. England be th' first these vast Mi∣stakes t' amend, So shall thy Fame spread World without end. Verbs which have any difference from the Examples in the Illustra∣tion are Irregulars. The Irregularity of Verbs is two-fold, viz. Natural and Illu∣strative. The Natural Irregularity of Verbs is first by exchange of the
first Letter in the Queen-Verb into another Letter in the Sister, as Age∣re, Egisse. 2. By changing the first Syllable into another Syllable, as Ferre, Tu∣lisse. 3. By change of a Letter in the midst of a Word into another Letter in the Sister, as Incipere, In∣cepisse. 4. By a Letter in the Queen whereof the Sister doth not accept, as Cumbere, Cubuisse. The Illustrative Irregularity is, 1. When the last Consonant in the body of the Verb is changed into some other Consonant or Con∣sonants, as Dicere, dixisse. Scribere, scripsisse. Sinere, sivisse. Flectere, flexisse. 2. When the said Consonant doth (in the Sister) assume to take the Vowel is after it, as Vomere, vomu∣isse. 3. When the Queen's Sister swerves from her Rule, as Tonuisse of Tonare, Jussisse of Jubere, Cu∣buisse of Cumbere, Campsisse of Cam∣bire. 4. When the first Lady swerves from her Rule, as Sepultum of Sepe∣lire. The sixth and seventh Ladies are after the first, as Sepultu, sepulturus, of Sepultum. The first, second, and seventh Ladies are changable from Verbs to Adjuncts whensoever the significa∣tion requires. Be ready to tell on; demand what, and where the Ir∣regularity is, for Radical Under∣standing renders that infinitely de∣lightful which Ignorance and mis∣ordering render grievous and irk∣som. So th' Verb for prime Use and De∣light is crown'd; Late Ignorance therein our Senses drown'd. Here follow the Irregular Verbs hitherto called, As in Prae∣senti. Irregular Verbs of the first Family. LAvare, juvare, nexare, secare, necare, micare, plicare, fricare, domare, tonare, sonare, crepare, ve∣tare, cubare, dare, stare. Irregulars of the Second Family. JƲbere, sorbere, mulcere, videre, prandere, stridere, suadere, ridere, lucere, sedere, ardere, pendere, mor∣dere, spondere, tondere, urgere, mul∣gere, frigere, augere, flere, lere, plere, nere, manere, torquere, herere, fervere, nivere, siere, viere. Irregulars of the Third Family. B. CƲmbere, nubere, scribere. C. Vincere, parcere, dicere, ducere. D. Scindere, findere, fundere,
pendere, tendere, pedere, cadere, cae∣dere, cedere, vadere, radere, laedere, ludere, dividere, trudere, claudere, plaudere, rodere. G. Jungere, legere, agere, tangere, pungere, frangere, pangere, spargere. H. Trhre, vehere. L. Colere, sallere, psallere, vellere, fallere, cellere, pellere. M. Vomere, comee, promere, de∣mere, sumere, premere. N. Temnere, sternere, spernere, linere, cernere, gignere, ponere, canere. P. Scalpere, rumpere, strepere, crepere. Q. Linquere, coquere. R. Serere, serere, verrere, urere, gerere, querere, terere, currere. S. Accersere, arcessere, incessere, lacessere, capessre, facessere. SC. Pascere, poscere, discere, qui∣niscere. T. Vertere, sistere, mittere, petere, stertere. Ct. Flectere, pectere, nectere. V. Volvere, vivere. U. Statuere, pluere, struere. X. Texere. Facere, specere, fodere, fugere, ca∣pers, cupere, rapere, sapere, parere, quatere. Irregulars of the Fourth Family. VEnire, cambire, farcire, sartire, sepire, sentire, fulcire, amicire, vincire, salire, sepelire. Of above One Hundred and Fifty pretended Verbs preceeding Praete∣ritum dat idem, in that called, As in presenti, in the Common Grammar, not one of them is a Verb; there be so many Nouns indeed there, for every Final o there is a Noun, and the rest of the pretended Verbs are but remnants of dismembred Bo∣dies, wofully weltering in their goar, so that its an admiration that Grammar Teachers can have the hearts so needlesly to tossicate such multitudes of mangled Ladies, whose sufferings in the Personation are sufficiently lamentable. Add not affliction to afflictions any more for shame. No less ridiculously stands o in the pretended Rules bo, co, do, go, &c. for the o is useless there, for it is the Consonant only which is concerned there, and fully per∣forms, as is plainly shewed in the Exceptions aforesaid. And in like manner in Dictiona∣ries, Vocabularies, &c. o is nonsen∣sically set, as in Abigo, abigis egi, abactum ere, and the like; for three of those five supposed Termina∣tions of a Verb, are not any thing of a Verb, but plainly Nouns. And the fifth is misplaced; set the Queen first, as Abigere. She shews the Fa∣mily, and how to personate. Next set down the Sister, as Abe∣gisse: she (the noble Verb, not the Preter, a Noun) ought to stand there. And thirdly and lastly, Set down the first Lady, as Abactum. She unlocks and leads into the spacious walks of the most harmonious Ad∣juncts. And by these three we have
all which we would have had by those five. Learn to muster up Regulars and Irregulars so readily as can be. The Illustration is no more, nor other but only that (mistakingly) called Infinitive Mood. Adds not any labour, but the apprehend∣ing it rightly brings aboundant knowledge and delight. So that what hath heretofore been trouble∣som and irksom, will now be done with ease and recreating pleasure. For he goes merrily on that knows his way, Whilst Ignorance (in doubts and fears) must stray. Personation is the joyning and expessing of the person of a Noun together or in one with a Verb, so that the World hath (through all Ages hitherto) taken it for one word, which are (indeed) two distinct words and Parts of Speech, as Amabam. The abam is Ego's se∣cond Lord Lieutenant, and also the distinction of time, signifying I did, and am is the remainder of the captiv'd and wofully dismem∣bred Queen. She and her English stand invariably, whilst the Per∣son's Lieutenants skip nimbly a∣bout in joylly triumph, making her serve their humours at their becks; for she is (when personated) a slave, not a Verb, but a personated or Noun-Verb; for there being not any Verb personal, and the Verb (Ipsa pietas) having not any Mood, the Noun (to force the Verb to an∣swer to the humour of any of his three persons singularly and plurally) sent for two hundred and sixty of the wildest and fiercest Barbarians, by whom he made War on the Verb, took her and her Sister and Ladies Prisoners, barbarously mur∣dered or dismembred each one of them. And so, subjecting them to Personation, constituted the Con∣querours Lords Lieutenants of his Persons, placing and uniting those his so victorious Vassals with the Verb in pretence of the Verb's Terminations, though the Verb hath not any Termination, but only those eight in the Illustration. The Personation is performed by cutting away from Ʋerbs of the first and third Families the two last Syllables, and in place thereof set∣ting the pretended Termination, as Am-are Amo, Leg-ere Lego. From Ʋerbs of the second and fourth Families, cut away the last Syllable, and in place thereof set the pretended Termination, as late-re lateo, audi-re audio. Yea cut away head, body and all, save only the feet, and add the pretended Termi∣nation after the Reservation, as Ir-e Eo. A Noun will have his Action ex∣pressed in three Moods, viz. Indi∣cative, Imparative and Potential.
Indicative Mood in the first Family. ret. o I love, as thou lovest, at he loveth; Pluraliter, amus we love, atis ye love, ant they love. res. abam I loved, abas thou loved, abat he loved; Pluraliter, abamus we loved, abatis ye loved, abant they loved. Am avi I have loved, avisti thon hast loved, avit he hath loved, Pluraliter, avimus we have loved, avistis ye have loved, averunt vel avere they have loved. averam I had loved, averas thou hadst loved, averat he had loved, Pluraliter, averamus we had loved, averatis averant. ut. abo I shall love, abis thou shalt love, abit he shall love; Pluraliter, abimus we shall love, abitis ye shall love, abunt they shall love. Imparative Mood. a ato love thou, et ato let him love; Pluraliter, emus let us love, ate atote love ye, ent anto let them love. Potential Mood. em I may love, es thou maist love, et he may love; Pluraliter, emus we may love, etis ye may love, ent they may love. arem I might love, ares thou mightst love, aret he might love; Pluraliter, aremus we might love, aretis ye might love, arent they might love. Am averim I might have loved, averis thou might have loved, averit he might have loved; Pluraliter, averimus we might have lo∣ved, averitis ye might have loved, averint they might have loved. avissem I might have had loved, avisses, avisset; Pluraliter, avissemus, avissetis, avissent, they might have had loved. avero I may or can love hereafter, averis thou maist love hereaf∣ter; averit, Pluraliter, averimus, averitis, averint, they may love hereafter. Indicative Mood in the second, third and fourth Families. Late o, s, t, Pl. mus, tis, nt, Bib o, is, it, Pl. imus, itis, unt. Audi o, s, t, Pl. mus, tis, unt.
The Personation is all one with that in the Common Accidence or Grammar, as if those pretended Terminations and these Distincti∣ons had been made at once, only here abbreviated, right titled, and radically understood. O strange, that the World should not distin∣guish such notable Roisters, de∣boist Murderers and Usurpers, as the Personating Nouns be from Ʋerbs! Here's the Plot of Plots disco∣vered indeed, the late tedious and irksom way made brief, easie, and pleasant, by throwing away what∣soever was burthensom to memo∣ry, As Propria quae Maribus (so imperfect and difficult, that not any yet in the known World, un∣less by these Notes) is perfectly Master hereof) is now made an easie Lesson for the  reading Child, and that within compass of a Crown-piece. Even so is all the woful clutter about formation of Preter and Supine found to be vain, sensless and ridiculous, for that called Supine, is the first Lady, form∣ed from all eternity. And as for the Preter the Personation doth it; Besides, do but cut away sse from the Sister, with a dash of a Pen, or thought thereof, and the remain∣der is (in any Verb) the Preter, as Amavi-sse, Docui-sse. Furthermore, to shew the In∣comprehensibility of the Ʋerb, you may (of any Ʋerb) make all the Parts and Particles of Speech, as is taught in the thirteenth Page of the first Part hereof. Also the Ʋerb hath the honour to be natural Mother of the most noble and graceful Nouns as of the sixth Lady, by change of u for or comes Amator, Doctor, Creator, &c. as is also at large shewed in the first Part hereof. And so that you (af∣ter you perceive these Distin∣ctions, and what a learned Synod will make thereof) will say, That former Ages have seen nothing but Dreams in the Grounds of Speech. For this Great Bliss, England, give God due praise, Who thee 'bove other People high doth raise. FINIS. If other Nations you desire to Teach Th' most glorious things of th' Grounds of their own Speech, Me buy, and quickly you'l their Master be, So England triumph in God's love to thee, For th' World Distinction true ne're found before, So England's Glory's now (by much) the more.
