C4085B R223925 99899913 170816
ARTICLES OF VISITATION and INQUIRY CONCERNING Matters Ecclesiastical. Exhibted to the Ministers, Church-wardens, and Side-men, of every Parish within the Arch-Deaconry of WELLS. In the Diocess of BATH and WELLS. And is very useful for all the Diocesses in England. The Tenour of the Oath of the Church-wardens, and Sworn Men. YOU shall swear, that you, and every of you, shall faithfully Execute your several Offices of Church-wardens and Side-men, according to Law, to the best of your Skill and Knowledge. So help you God, and the Contents of his Holy Gospel. Printed, and sold by A. Baldwin in Warwick∣lane, 1700.
ARTICLES OF VISITATION and INQUIRY Within the Diocess of BATH and WELLS. TIT. I. Concerning Churches, Chappels, with the Orna∣ments and Furniture thereunto belonging. 1. Can. 2. IS your Parish-Church or Chappel, in good and sufficient Repair, both for the Roof, Windows, Floor and Seats? 2. Hath any part of your Church or Chappel, or Steeple been demolished or pulled down? What part, and how long since? Or any of the Lead, Timber, or Bells thereunto formerly belonging, any way im∣bezeled or sold, and by whom? 3. 28. Is there a decent Font of Stone with a Cover? Doth the Minister Baptize publickly only in the Font?
Is there a decent Communion-Table in your Chancel, with a decent Carpet, and another covering of white Linnen, to be spread thereon at the time of the Admi∣nistration of the Lords Supper? And have you a fair Chalice, or Communion Cup, with a Cover, and one or more Flagons? Have they been profaned by com∣mon use? Or detain'd from their Sacred uses by any Persons? And by whom? 4. 20. 82. 83. 80. Have you a convenient Seat or Pew wherein to read Divine Service, a Pulpit with a decent Cloath or Cushion, a large Bible of the last Translation, and a Book of Common-Prayer lately Published, Anno 1662. the Book of Homilies set forth by Authority, and a Printed Table of the degrees wherein Marriages are prohibited, Stat. 99. and a Book of Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiastical, and a decent Surplice? 5. 58. 87. 70. 52. Have you a Register Book in Parchment of Christnings, Burials, and Marriages? And is the same kept in all points according to the Ancient use? 6. Have you a Book of Paper, to Record the Names and Licences of such Strangers as are admitted to Preach in your Church or Chappel? And do such Strangers subscribe their Names? As also a Book for the Church-Wardens Accompts? As also a Chest with Locks and Keys, wherein to keep the said Books, and the afore-mentioned Furniture?
TIT. II. Concerning the Church-yard, the Houses, Glebes, and Tithes, belonging to the Church. 1. IS your Church-yard sufficiently fenced, and decent∣ly kept? Hath any Person encroached upon the same, or made any door in it? And how long since? 2. Is the House of your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, and the Out-houses in good repair? Have any of them been defaced or pulled down without Licence? Have there been any encroachments made upon the same? Or any of the Ancient Marks or Bounds remo∣ved or changed? And by, whom? 3. Can. 87. Have you a true and perfect Terrier of all the Glebe-Lands, Gardens, Orchards, Tenements, or Cottages belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage? As also a Note of such Pensions, Rate Tithes, and Por∣tions of Tithes, or other yearly Profits, (either with∣in or without your Parish) as belong thereunto? Have any of the same been with-held from your Minister? And by whom, as you know, or have heard? TIT. III. Concerning Ministers. 1. IS your Minister resident among you? How many Weeks hath he been absent from you without urgent necessity? 2. Can. 47, 48. Hath your Minister a Curate resident in your Pa∣rish? Is he in Holy Orders, and conformable to the Laws of the Church?
3. 58. Doth your Minister at the reading of Divine Ser∣vice, or administrating the Sacraments, wear a Sur∣plice? 45, 46. Doth he constantly (not having reasonable Im∣pediment) Preach one Sermon in your Church or Chappel every Sunday? Or if he be hindred, 47. doth he procure one to supply his Office, by Preaching or Reading one of the Homilies? 4. Can. 89. Rubr. be∣fore Con∣firmat: Doth your Minister instruct the Youth in your Parish in the Church-Catechism, and prepare them to be confirmed by the Bishop. 5. Doth he neglect or delay to visit the sick, or to Baptize any Infant that is in danger of Death? 67. 69. Doth he Baptize any without God-fathers and Godmothers, or admit either of the Parents to be Godfather or God∣mother to their own Children? 6. 62. Hath your Minister married any Persons with∣out publishing the Banes on three Sundays or Holi∣days, unless he had a Licence or Dispensation so to do? Or hath he married any in private Houses, or not between the Hours of Eight and Twelve in the Morning? 7. Is your Parson, Vicar, Curate, or Lecturer, 75. a man of sober Life and Conversation? Or is his carri∣age in any kind disorderly or scandalous, and un∣beseeming a Minister? TIT. IV. Concerning the Parishioners. 1. Can. 109. IS there any Person in your Parish that lieth under a common Fame or Suspicion of Adultery, For∣nication, or Incest? Are there any common Drunk∣ards within your Parish, or common Swearers, or
Blasphemers of Gods Name; or any that are noted to be Railers, unclean and filthy Talkers, or Sowers of Sedition, Faction and Discord among their Neighbours? 2. Exprest in a Ta∣ble set forth by Authority. An∣no Dom. 1563. Are there any living in your Parish, who have been unlawfully married, 39. con∣trary to the Laws of God? Or any that being lawfully married, and not separa∣ted or divorced by course of Law, do not Cohabit together? 3. Rubr. Can. 85. Are there any, that refuse to pay their Duty for Easter Offerings? Or refuse to contribute to the Rates made for the Repair of your Church or Chappel, or any thing thereunto belonging? 4. Rubr. 6. Are there any Wills or Testaments of Persons dead in your Parish, that are yet unproved? Or any Goods Administred without a due Grant from the Or∣dinary? Did any dying in your Parish, or elsewhere, leave any Legacy to your Church or Chappel, or to the use of the Poor, or any other Pious and Chari∣table purposes? What were those Legacies? And how have they been bestowed? 5. Is there any Strife and Contention among any of your Parish for their Pews or Seats in your Church? Have any new Pew been erected in your Chancel, or in the Body of your Church or Chappel, without leave from the Ordinary? TIT. V. Concerning the Parish Clerks and Sextons. 1. Can. 91. HAve you belonging to your Church or Chappel a Parish-Clerk aged Twenty one Years at the least? Is he of honest life and conversation, and suffi∣cient
or able to perform his duty in reading, writing and singing? Is he chosen by your Minister? And doth he duely attend him in all Divine Services at the Church? Are his Wages duely paid him, or who with-holdeth the same from him? 2. Doth he diligently do his duty in keeping the Church clean and decent? In tolling and ringing the Bells before Divine Service? And when any Person is passing out of this Life, doth he upon notice, toll a Bell, that the Neighbours may thereby be warned to recommend the dying Person to the grace and favour of God? TIT. VI. Concerning School-Masters, Schools, Physicians, Chyrurgeons and Midwives. 1. Can. 77.79. DOth any man keep a publick or private School in your Parish who is not allowed thereunto by your Ordinary? 2. Doth any in your Parish practise Physick or Chy∣rurgery? Doth any Woman take upon her to exercise the Office of a Midwife, without licence from the Or∣dinary? TIT. VII. Concerning Church-wardens and Side-men. 1. Can. 89. ARE the Church-wardens of your Parish yearly and duely chosen by the joynt consent of your Minister and Parishioners? Or one of them by the Mi∣nister, and the other by the Church-wardens?
2. Have the former and last Church-wardens given up their Accounts to the Parish? And delivered up to the succeeding Church-wardens the Moneys remaining in their Hands, together with the Common Plate, and all other things belonging to your Church or Chap∣pel? Rubr. at the Com∣munion. 3. You are farther to understand, that according to your Office, you are to provide against every commu∣nion appointed in your Church or Chappel sufficient quantity of fine white Bread, and of good Wine, ac∣cording to the number of the Communicants. 4. You the Church-wardens and Side-men, are to maintain the Church in sufficient repair, which is to be done by a Tax made by the Church-wardens and Parish Overseers, and publick notice given of the time and place where they meet, and those that refuse, are to be sued in the Ecclesiastical Court only. 5. You are also to exhibit a bill of presentments to the Court, of the offenders in your Parish, and there∣in to take the assistance of your Minister. FINIS.
