C453 E421_22 99864227 161372
CANTERBVRY CHRISTMAS: OR, A True Relation of the Insurrection in CANTERBƲRY on Christmas day last, with the great hurt that befell divers per∣sons thereby. Written by a Cittizen there, to his friend in London. LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Harward. 1648.
CANTERBVRY CHRISTMAS: OR, A True Relation of the Insurrection in Canterbury on Christmas Day last, with the great hurt that befell divers persons thereby. VPon Wednesday, Decemb. 22. the Cry∣er of Canterbury by the appointment of Master Major, openly proclaimed, that Christmas day, and all other Superstiti∣ous Festivals should be put downe, and that a Market should be kept upon Christ∣mas day. Which being not observed, (but very ill taken by the Country) the towne was thereby unserved with pro∣vision & trading very much hindered; which occasioned great discontent among the people, caused them to rise in a Rebellious way. The Major being slighted, & his Commands obser∣ved (only of a few) who opened their Shops, to the num∣ber of 12 at the most: They were commanded by the multitude to shut up again, but refusing to obey, their ware was thrown up and down, and they at last forced to shut in.
The Major and his assistants used their best endea∣vour to qualifie the tumult, but the fire-being once kind∣led, was not easily quenched. The Sheriffe laying hold of a fellow, was stoutly re∣sisted; which the Major perceiving, took a Cudgell, and strook the man: who being: now puny, pulled up his spirit, and knockt down the Major, whereby his Cloak was much torne and durty, besides the hurt he received. The Major hereupon made strict Proclamation for keeping the Peace, and that every man depart to his own house. The multitude hollowing thereat, in disorderly man∣ner; the Aldermen and Constables caught two or three of the rout, and sent them to the Jaile, but they soon broke loose, and Jeered Master Alderman. Soone after issued forth the Commanders of this Rabble, with an addition of Souldiers into the high street, and brought with them two Foot-bales, whereby their company increased. Which the Major and Al∣dermen perceiving took what prisoners they had got, and would have carried them to the Jayle. But the mul∣titude following after to the Kings Bench, were opposed by Captain Bridg, who was straight knockt down and had his head broke in two places, not being able to withstand the multitude, who getting betwixt him and the Jayle, rescued their fellowes, and beat the Major and Aldermen into their houses, and then cried conquest. Where leaving them to breath a while, they went to one Whites a Barber, (a man noted to be a busie fel∣low) whose windowes they pulled downe to the ground: The like they did to divers others, till night over∣took
them, and they were forced to depart, continu∣ing peaceable the next day, it being the Saboth. On Munday morning the Multitude comming, the Major set a strong watch with Muskers and Holbards in the City, both at the Gates and at S. Andrews Church, the Captaine of the Guard was White the Bar∣ber. Till noon they were quiet, then came one Joyce a Hackney man, whom White bid stand, the fellow asked what the matter was, and withall called him Round∣head; whereat White being moved, cocked his Pistoll and would have shot him, but the Major wisht him to hold: Neverthelesse he shot, and the fellow fell down but was not dead. Whence arose a sunden clamour that a man was murdered, whereupon the people came forth with clubs, The Major and Aldermen made haste away; the Towne Rose againe and the Country came in, took possession of the Gates, and made enquiry for White, they found him in a hay-loft, where they broke his head, and drag'd him in the streets, setting open the Prison dores and releasing those that were in hold. Next they vowed revenge on the Major, pulling up his posts, breaking his windowes, but at last, being perswaded by Sir William Man, Master Lovelise, Master Harris, and Master Purser had much a doe to per∣swade them from taking of his Person; so came tumul∣tuously into the high street, and their demands were so high, that those Gentlemen could not per∣swade them. Afterward meeting Master Burly the Town Clark, demanded the Keyes of the Prison from him, which being granted, they with those Gentlemen formerly named, went again to the Town Hall to Treat,
and came to an agreement, which was, that forty or fifty of their own men should keep the Town that night, being compleatly armed, which being performed (the morning issued) and they continued in arms till Tuesday morning: There are none as yet dead, but diverse dan∣gerously hurt. Master Sheriffe taking Whites part, and striving to keep the Peace, was knockt down, and his head fear∣fully broke, it was Gods mercy his braines were not beat out, but it should seeme he had a clung pate of own. They went also without S. Georges-gate, and did much injury to M. Lee. As I am credibly informed, the injuries that are done are these. They have beat down all the windowes of M. Majors House, burnt the Stoups at the comming in of his dore. Master Reeves windowes were broke. Master Page, and Master Pollen, one Buchurst, Captaine Bridge, Thomas Harris, a busie prating fellow, and others were sorely wounded. It is Ordered, that Richard White and Robert Hues, being in fetters, be tryed according to the Law, and upon faire Composition, the multitude have delivered their Armes into the Hands of the City, upon engagements of the best of the City, that no man shall further question or trouble them. FINIS.
