C5560 E467_4 99864654 116886
THE Commissioners last Desires to the King, FOR THE Setling of Religion WITH His Majesties Answer delivered on Sa∣turday last. And his Majesties Engage∣ment to a positive Answer on Munday October 9. 1648. With some other Overtures betweene the King and the Commissioners. depiction of enthroned king with orb and scepter Printed for the generall satisfaction of moderate men.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon surmounted by a crown and flanked by the English lion and Tudor rose on one side and the Scottish unicorn and thistle on the other A LETTER FROM The ISLE of WIGHT Concerning the TREATY Sir, THE Commissioners presented to the King, the desires inclosed for setling of Religion, desiring his Majesty to passe them. There hath been great arguing about them on both sides, some of the particulars whereof I have formerly given you.
In summe, his Majesty hath strove much for the Bishops, and (I hope) hath received satisfaction therein. The greatest matter herein, seems (now) to bee about the taking of the Covenant, wherein much hath been said to satisfie his Majesty. And His Majesty hath now pro∣mised to deliver in His Positive An∣swer on Munday next, by nine of the Clock. If we were but got over this rub, I beleeve there would not bee such another in all the rest. I am perswaded that the Bishops, and Doctors being about his Majesty, hath cau∣sed this long dispute, about the Church: for they are very loath to have their Diana goe downe. Sir Peter Killigrew stayes here rea∣dy to come away on Sunday, if his Ma∣jesty give a satisfactory Answer. If His Majesty give us but a good
Answer on Munday, I hope (yet) that there will be a good conclusion of all, to an happy peace. Newport 7 October, 1648. THE Commissioners Desires presented to the Kings Majesty. THat your Majesty, according to the lau∣dable example of your Royall Father of happy memory, may be pleased to swear and signe the late Solemn League and Covenant; And that an Act of Parliament be passed, for enjoyning the taking thereof by all the Sub∣jects of the Kingdome; And the Ordinan∣ces concerning the maner of taking the same, be confirmed by Acts of Parliament, with such penalties as by mutuall advice of Par∣liament shall be agreed upon. That a Bill be passed for the utter a∣bolishing & taking away of all Arch-Bishops,
Bishops, their Chancellors, and Comissaries, Deanes, and Sub-Deanes, Deanes and Chapters, Arch-Deacons, Cannons, and Prebenda∣ries; and all Chaunters, Chancellors, Treasurers, Sub-Treasurers, and Suc∣centors, and Sacrists, and all Vicars Chorill, and Choresters, old Vic∣ars, and new Vicars of any Cathedrall or Collegiate Church, and all other their under Officers, out of the Church of England and Dominion of Wales; And out of the Church of Ireland. That the Ordinances concerning the calling and sitting of the Assem∣bly of Divines, be confirmed by Act of Parliament. That Reformation of Religion ac∣cording to the Covenant, be setled by Act of Parliament, in such man∣ner
as both Houses have agreed, or shall agree upon, after consultation had with the Assembly of Divines. That for the more effectual disable∣ing Jesuits, Priests, Papists, and Po∣pish Recusants from disturbing the State, and deluding the Laws; and for the better discovering, and speedy conviction of Popish Recusants, an Oath be established by Act of Parlia∣ment to bee administred to them, wherein they abjure and renounce the Popes Supremacy, the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, Purgatory, VVorshipping of the Consecrated Hoast, Crucifixes and Images, and all Popish Superstitions and Errors; and refusing the said Oath, being tend∣red in such manner as shall be appoin∣ted by the said Act, to be a sufficient Conviction of Popish Recusancy.
An Act or Acts of Parliament for educa∣tion of the Children of Papists by Prote∣stants, in the Protestant Religion. An Act or Acts for the true Leavie of the Penalties against them, which penalties to be leavied and disposed in such manner as both Houses shall agree on, wherein to be provided that His Majesty shal have no losse. That an Act or Acts bee passed in Parlia∣ment, wherby the practises of Papists against the State may be prevented, and the Lawes against them duly executed, and a stricter course taken for to prevent the Saying or Hearing of Masse in the Court, or any o∣ther part of this Kingdome, or the King∣dome of Ireland. FINIS.
