H11 E128_19 99871867 156244
THE ENGLISH INTELLIGENCER; Shewing the most Remarkable Pas∣sages which have hapned from Saturday the nineteenth, till Saturday the six and twen∣tieth of this present November in these follo∣wing places; NAMELY, At Darby. Durham. New-Castle. Yorke. Oxford. London. Middlesex. Excester. Norwich. Lincolne-shire. Faithfully collected by C. H. nou: 26 London, Printed for Francis Wright.
DOCTRINA PARIT VIRTVTEM a device with an open book, a sword, and surrounding motto The English Intelligencer. Saturday, Novemb. 19. THis day from Boulfouer a House of the Earle of New-Castles, came into the Towne of Derby certaine Gentlemen as Agents to the said Earle, deman∣ding the Armes which were in the Towne to be lent to their Master, which the Townes-men slatly denyed them, being resolved to continue in their due obedience to the order of Parliament. This day also in the same Towne was a mutiny made by some Malignants who would have had the Armes delivered to the Gentlemen, wherein one Frost a principall Malignant and a Papist is reported to be slaine. In London there was a great rumor that they were up in Armes in Kent to defend the County against the entrance of Prince Robert; but neither did the Prince advance that way further then Kingston, nor did they ever put themselves into a posture of defence. To day there was a Post came from Chester that brought certaine newes that the Lords Justices of Ireland, Sir William Parsons, and Sir Iohn Borlace had instituted a solemne Fast to be held on every Wednesday the last of each Moneth in imi∣tation of the Fast ordained here in England by the High
Court of Parliament, the said Expresse declaring also the growing miseries of that unhappy Kingdome, and that God had pleased to shew his mercy towards them in the midst of their miseries, by granting a great and glorious victory to the Marquesse of Ormond against the Munster Rebels, wherein three thousand of them were slaine, and twelve hundred ta∣ken prisoners, with divers Priests and Jesuites. From Yarmouth it is certified that the Mary Rose, a good stout Ship of theirs at Sea, bound from France homeward, was set upon by two Pyrats men of War, with whom after a long and desperate cruell fight, Mary Rose sunke one of them and layd the other aboard, which was found to be when they had taken her an Argier Vessell laden with Am∣munition, most of her men being Irish, and bound for Bere∣haven. In the City of Coventry there hapned a sudden accident this day, some popishly affected Malignants of Stratford upon Avon, being at the Signe of the Bull at one Ellis Iones his house, in their cups began to speake ill of the Proceedings of the Parliament. Iones being an honest man, and a true honou∣rer of the Parliament, told them it was uncivill in them to speake ill of their betters, and that for his part he did not de∣sire any such discourse should be in his house, at which word one of them with a Damme stab'd the poore man to the heart, and getting to their horses, all of them escaped out of the City. Sunday, Novemb: 20. THis day there hapned in the afternoone a shrewd dis∣sention in the Parish Church of Saint Andrewes Hol∣borne in London. Divers over precise Zelots in the Divine Service-time pulling the Minister out of his Pue, and rending off his Surplice; but by the mediation and help of some good religious persons the said Fray was appeased, the Minister defended from danger, and those tumultuous fellowes turn'd out of the Church. This day arrived near Minehead in Sommerset-shire, in a little by creeke, a Fisher-boat with some Cavaliers, sent out
of South-Wales by the Marquesse Hertford, with Letters to his old confederate Sir Ralph Hopton, they being in the course habit of Fishermen came to the Towne and went to a poore blinde Ale-house, where they lustily carowsed, and in their drinke spoke divers reproachfull words against the Parli∣ament; the Host went and informed the Constable, who with a sufficient guard made stay of them, they being foure in number, and searching them found their Letters; which testi∣fied what they were: Which Letters with the said Cavaliers, he caused to be safely conveyed to Taunton, where the Cava∣liers are in custody till further order be taken for their dipo∣sall. In Yorke this day there was a mutiny in the Earle of Cum∣berlands Army for want of pay, plundring divers mens hou∣ses of worth in the time of Divine Service, which the said Earle could not, or at leastwise would not punish; so that he and his Cavaliers are growne very odious to the Citisens. Munday, Novemb. 21. THis day came forth an Order from the High Court of Parliament, for restraining the misdemeanour of the souldiers, prohibiting them under pain of death to forbeare plundring any Houses in or about the City of London. This day an aviso from Holland testified that the Queen is instantly to take shipping thence, but not as it was reported with any forces: The States being carefull lest any detriment should arrive to the kingdome of England, either by their permission or furtherance. It was absolutely certified from Excester, that that rich and good City had resolved to send up to the Parliament a very large quantity of Plate, amounting to at least 20000 l. to be secured them in the publicke faith for the defence of the sub∣ject. In Norfolke divers Malignants (as it is informed)) striv'd to seduce the Country people Gentlemen and others, to raise moneyes for the support, as they pretended, of the King and Protestant Religion; but their endeavours by the wisedome and care of some well affected persons of quality was fru∣strated, and they laid hold of, are at Norwich in safe custody.
Divers of the Essex men that came up to attend his Excel∣lence the Earle of Warwicke out of that County this day with many thanks for their forwardnesse, had licence to de∣part home for the security of that Country, lest any danger should arise there through the absence of the said Forces. Tuesday. November. 22. HIs Majesty this day arriv'd at Oxfard, wheras 'tis credi∣bly believed he intends to reside all this Winter at that noble and famous University, the fountaine of learning and piety, being converted into a receptacle for those mischie∣vous Cavaliers, who lye at racke and manger at the ablest Citizens houses, without paying a penny, either for meate, drinke, or lodging. This day the Earle of Cumberland, with some thousand men, made a sally upon Master Hothams trenches, but he was bravely repulst with the losse of 200 of his men; our souldiers pursuing them to the very gates, and entred with them, had not they within dischargeh their Ordnance, which lighted more on their owne then on our souldiers. It is a lamentable estate that flourishing City is reduc'd into, Wheat being already at a mark a bushell, and the poore people ready to starve; so that if the Earle of Newcastle relieve it not, who hath been long looked for there, but dares not come, it must be surrendred within a week at most. This day my Lord of Newcastle, with a considerable strength of horse and foot, came into Durham, his army being one halfe Papists. It is thought here hee intends to billef some part of his forces about this City all this Win∣ter, God deliver us from them, they doe more mischiefe by one halfe then the Scots. This day also was driven into Boston in Lincolnshire by rea∣son of her leaks, an Esterling of Lubeck of four hundred tun, her lading being most part Ammunition, and sent out of the same to Newcastle, of which stay is made, till the order of the higher powers shall dispose on it.
Wednesday, November. 23. This day in Fter Lane, some rude souldiers plundred the s  a Papist an Apothecary, it being against the  igh Court of Parliament; divers of them were , and committed to prison, till they receive punish∣. rumour was abroad that the King of Denmarke was a¦ with a great fleet, whereupon his Excellency, the noble Earle of Warwicke, and to prevent all dangers that might happen by sea, having before surrendred his charge of Ge∣nerall, is, as it is believed; bound againe for the narrow seas as Admirall of the Navie. Report was in this City, that his Excellence the Earle of Essex, was to advance towards Oxford, to fetch in the Cava∣liers and Malignants; and that Serjeant Major Skippon, that should have commanded the foure thousand horses raised by the City for that purpose, hath command of greater honour and trust conferr'd on him by his Excellence. Colonell Hur∣rey having command of those forces in his stread. It was also rumor'd, that new Propositions were in agita∣tion in the honourable the high Court of Parliament to be drawne up and sent to his Majesty to Oxford for an accom∣modation of peace; so willing and ready is that wise and sa∣cred Senat, to seeke peace for the good of the people, though they have beene so injur'd by the malignants on the Kings party. Thursday, Novemb. 24. THis day Letters came from Newcastle, that testified that there lately, since the last newes arriv'd there two more ships with Ammunition, and that the Queene is expected there daily. This afternoone came out a Declaration of seven sheets of paper, printed at Oxford by his Majesties command, in an∣swer to the late Observations upon his Majesties former De∣clarations, but nothing in it to any great purpose, but contro∣verting the Kings prerogative with the power and privi∣ledges of Parliament.
This day also it was assured from Excester, that Sir Ralph Hopton being well beaten with his Cavaliers from that City, was retir'd againe with Sir Bevil Greenvill into Cornwall. A memorable accident hapned at Norwich, certaine Ca∣valiers comming into that City, and one of them drinking a health to the confusion of the Parliament, was choak'd with his sudden draught, and fell downe dead. Divers Cavaliers were this day brought up to Newgate, and other prisons, that were taken roming in the County of Middlesex, by some of his Excellence the Earle of Essex his forces. It was credibly reported, that the Earle of Cumber∣land had proffered to deliver up the City to Sir Edw. Rhodes and Master Hotham conditionally he and his Cavaliers might depart with drums beating and slying colours; but his propo∣sition would not be accepted, it proceeding out of meere necessity. Friday, Novemb. 25. THis morning came out an Order and Declaration from the high Court of Parliament, instituting and confirming the Lord Fairsax Generall of the forces in Yorkeshire. This day also were brought to towne five or six Cavaliers, and committed to safe custody. There came newes to towne from Yorke, that the City was surrendred by the Earle of Cumberland to Master Hotham and the Parliaments Forces, upon what condition is not yet knowne. It was reported that the Scots in Ireland have had a great victory over Sir Philim O-Neale the arch Rebell, and that Rori Mac∣Guire is there prisoner. It was also reported, that the plate which the City of Excester proffered to lend the Parliament on the publique faith, is with a sufficient guard comming up to Guild-Hall, and is credibly believ'd, that the good Cities of Norwich and Bristoll, in an emulous imitation of Excester, will also lend on the same terms good store of plate to the Common-welth. Certainly it was affirmed this day, that some ships laden with ammunition were taken in the narrow seas, and are at Margate to come up the River. FINIS.
