G868 E129_17 99863989 156281
A Glorious and Happy VICTORY Obtained by the Volluntiers of Buck∣ingham, Bedford, Hartford, Cambridge, Hun∣tington, and Northamptonshire, being almost seven thousand able souldiers Against the Lord Wentworth, Sonne to the Earle of Strafford, with 8000. Horse and Foot, nere Alesbury and Wickham, in Buckinghamshire, December 6. 1642. Declaring the manner of the Bataile, which lasted five houres, and the number that was slain on both sides, being the greatest Victory that hath beene obtained since the begining of these Warres. LONDON, Printed for I. H. and J. Wright, December 8. 164.
A glorious victory obtained against the Cavaliers, by the Volluntiers of the County of Buckingham, &c. THe Cavaliers having of late days plundered and pillaged many wealthy and godly mens Hou∣ses, in severall parts of this King∣dome, especially in Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire. But not being content, or satisfied with that which they have most wickedly and barbarously taken, they beginne to thirst af∣ter the County of Cambridge, and had a great desire to visite the said County, and so they concluded to have done, for about 3000. of their Horse and Foot, consented together, and marched towards Cambridge, where they had thought to have inriched themselves very much, but their hopes were quite frustrated, neither could their designes take any effect.
For when the Jnhabitants of the said Shire had information, and saw that the Cavaliers were resolved to come into their County, they with all expedition raysed the Trayned-Bands and all other Forces that possibly they could, and also sent to all the other adjoyning Coun∣ties to aid and assist them in this Designe a∣gainst the Cavaliers, that were comming to ransacke and pillage them of all they had, and for feare they should have a feeling of their miseries, which they were like to undergo, if that the Designe of the Cavaliers tooke effect. But before they could come to Cambridge, the Jnhabitants thereof had raysed a great Power, insomuch that they did not feare the Cavaliers, nor all their threatning speeches, but at last about fifteen-hundred made their approach nere to the said County, and began to put in execution their most damnable and wicked projects, whereupon the Jnhabitants having raysed a great strength, to the number of two thouland, advanced toward the Cava∣liers, but no sooner did these wicked catiffs se the Forces of the said County comming, but they beganne to retreate, and betake them∣selves to slight, not daring to give Battaile to
the Parliaments Forces, whereupon the Vol∣luntiers seeing that they begaune to fly, set spurres to their Horses and hasted after them and in the overtaking of them, they let flye their piercing messengers, and sent roring bul∣lets after them, insomuch that they flew some three hundred of them, the rest were glad to save themselves by flight,. Jn Hartfordshire at VVatford, they made the like attemt, but their designe could not take effect, for the inhabitants of the said Towne and County, arose and mustered their Forces together, and advanced toward their Enemies and gave them the same entertainment, that their confederates had about Cambridgeshire, for when they thought that they were not a∣ble to incounter with them, they likewise betooke themselves to their Heels. The Counties of Hartford and Cambridge, have joyned themselves in a Covenant of Asso∣ciation, with these following Counties, (viz) Buckingham, Bedford, Huntington, and North∣hampton,, and such is the forwardnesse of these Counties, that they have already 8000. men, and every man contributes acording to his estate, for the maintenance of the said Forces.
The Kings party haveing information of these proceedings, the Lord wentworth, Sonne to the late deceased Earle of Straford, with about five thousand horse advanced toward the said forces at Wickham and Alsbury in buckinghamshire, where they lay billited, but out forces having information of their com∣ming, with all the speed that they possibly could make, they began to make breast-workes, and made two halfe Moones where they had planted seven Peeces of ordnance haveing received them from his Excellence, and upon the sixt of this month the Lord Wentworth arived neere the said forces at als∣bury and VVickham where he sounded his trumpets and made a glorious shew upon the tops of two great hils thinkeing the day to be his owne, for he had information that the forces which lay there about, did not a∣mount to above, foure or five thousand and indeed well might he receive this newes, for one Captaine Hayes, which commanded the greatest part of these forces, had drawn out neare upon foure thousand of them and had set them in two vayllyes one the left side of VVickham, carrying their Colours low, and
every man trayling his Pike because the ene∣my should not discry them, and gave them strict charge that every man should be silent, when they see the enemy advance towards VVickham, they should fall on so soone as they hard the ordnance fly, which command they very diligently observed, no sooner had the ordnance dischrrged but they fell on fighting with extrordinary courage and much polli∣cy which when the enemy seing were amased to se such a company behind them and ano∣ther before them, the ordnance playd very last, and the Commanders of the volunteers shewed very much discretion, so that for the space of foure houres they fought very vali∣antly, till at last the enemy retreated leaving behind them at least nine hundred of their confederates slaine and mamed in the field, the yong Lord VVentworth being dangerously wounded all this was done with losse of three hundred men. A Declaration of the Lords and Commons Whereas diverse souldiers have in a tu∣multuous and violent manner broken
into diverse of the Kings Subjects Houses, pillaged and ransacked them, under colour that they are Papist-houses, or the houses of persons disaffected; The Lords and Com∣mons taking the premisses into consideration, doe declare and order, that whatsoever Soul∣dier, or Souldiers, shall without the com∣mand of the Captaines of their respective Com∣panies, or the Officers of the Field, attempt upon, or breake open any houses whatsoever, or pillage ot ransacke any house, shall be pursued and punished, according to the law as a fellon; And the Lords and Commons doe require all Officers of the Army, to im∣ploy their best endeavours, for the bringing of any souldiers that shall commit any of the insolencies aforesaid, to condigne punishment that they may be severely and effectually pro∣ceeded against, according to Law. And the Lord Generall is desired, that this may be duely published in the Army, in the head of each particular Company. Joh. Browne, Cler. Parliamentorum. FINIS.
