H2565 e1341_3 99868035 120372
GOD, A rich supply OF ALL GOOD. SETTING FORTH, I. The Beleevers interest in it. II. The riches of it in quantity. III. The gloriousnesse of it in quality. IV. The meanes sealing up all: Namely, CHRIST. All illustrated, with many won∣derfull and remarkable spirituall experiences, not onely of former, but of later Christians. By Doctor NATHANAEL HOMES. LONDON, Printed by Tho: Roycroft, in Gold-smiths Alley neer Creple Gate, 1650.
PHILIP. 4.19. But my GOD shall supply all your need, according to his riches in glory, by Christ Jesus. HERE is a rich and glorious Text; for it containes riches and glory. A comprehensive Text, for it holds forth a supply of all need. The Fountaine is infinite, Viz. God. God shall thus sup∣ply. The conveyance and insurance infallible, Christ Jesus. And the impression that all these make upon the heart of a Beleever first or last, is very great. For this Text is spoken out of much confidence, and experience: My God shall supply. My God that hath supplyed me, Vers. 12, 13. shall supply you. So that the But in our English translation, may be better turned into And (as the Greek well beares it) thus: God hath heretofore supplyed me, Vers. 13. now you have supplyed me, Vers. 14, 16. AND God shall supply you. Qu. Why did not Paul refuse the Philippians benevolence, and turne YOUR into MY, and his words to others, into Faith for himselfe, saying, My God shall supply all my need. Ans. Paul could, and hath, and would againe have done this, if God had denyed all meanes, but
for him to refuse means, when meanes are offered, had been to tempt God, not to trust in him. The Philippians had well to spare, and (contrary to the gripple Corinthians) were willing to spare; and Pauls hands could not make up his need; hee must fulfill his Ministry, what ever was layd by, and he had been rich in Doctrines to the Philip∣pians, therefore the Philippians did well to give, and he did well to receive. Besides Pauls Faith here ingageth for more to the Philippians, then his sense had received. He, one, had received from them a great many, some small contribution of some temporall things; but hee promiseth them that his God should supply all the need of them all, spiritually and temporally. My God shall sup∣ply all your NEED, according to his riches by Christ Jesus. Shall supply, Greek , shall fill, or will fill. He shall, because he will. His good will puts a ne∣cessity on his great power to doe great things for his people. See the great things, the fundamen∣tals of salvation, of grace and glory that God doth for his in and by Christ Jesus, Ephes. 1. first ten Verses. And Why? Because he had taken counsell with his will so to doe, Vers. 13. So in all Provi∣dences, yea in all things, Rom. 8.28, 29. Mark well the FOR that knits the two Verses together. And as his will is a good will, so a rich good will. Ac∣cording to his riches (saith the Text.) He is rich for our need; and hath riches for every need. And
richly shall he proportion the allowance viz. Ac∣cording to his riches in glory. The adjoining glory to riches signifies (as som, name∣ly Beza, will) that God wil supply according to his riches gloriously; or rather it signifies more, to wit, that he will supply according to his glorious riches. For all the supplyes that come from God through Christ to one in Christ, come tipt, guilt, with a glory upon them; a centro ad caelum. Pro∣vidences below, graces within, Heaven above, as they have a lovely scarlet blush of Christs blood upon them, so they are rayed upon with a beame of divine love to them that are in Christ. And whether we render the text in Christ, or by Christ, or with Christ, it makes no great matter, see the Scripturs. For according to Scripture all are true, and apt, yea all will well concur to make forth the all of the way, how all things are ours through Christ. In regard of Christs Passion, we have all by Christ; namely by purchase. Ephes. 1.11.12. In regard of Christs incarnation, we have all in Christ, namely in our union with him, 1 Cor. 1.5. Ioh. 15.5. Colos. 2.10. In regard of dona∣tion, we have all with Christ. That is God giving us Christ in spirituall marriage, with him he gives all he is worth, all his estate with him. Transit res cum persona. Rom. 8.32. D. Beleivers have assurance and experience that their God will fully supply all their need accord∣ing to his glorious riches through Christ Jesus.
There are 4 things to be explained in order as they lye in the doctrine for the manifestation, and so confirmation thereof. 1 The beleivers interest in the Supplyer, that makes him so bold and confident as to say, My God shall do so and so. 2 The exten∣sion in quantity of the supply: to supply all need. 3 The intension in quallity, According to his glorious riches. 4 The medium or means, Christ Jesus. 1. The interest. The beleiver hath a God, the onely true God, truly; who is the originall of all. All goodnesses but coppies taken out of, and accor∣ding to that originall. All streames of goodnesse are from that Ocean of Nectar. All my springs (saith the Psalmist Psal. 87. ult.) are in thee. i.e. From God giving forth himselfe in the Church. All things are in God, either formally or causal∣ly, or eminently. Wisedom, power, &c. are so for∣mally in God, that they are essentially God. All the creatures are causally in God. That is, they have moving and being from an efficacy proceed∣ing from him. And all the rest are eminently in God; whatsoever is excellent below; is in God in a more excellent manner. As light is more ex∣cellent in the Sun, then in the fire or candle. God is the divine Artist to know all. He is the divine Artificer, facere to make, all. Heb. 11. And he is the divine vertuous one, Agere, to do all. As it is said of Christ, he did all things well. Acti agimus we act well, being well acted of him. His omnipo∣tent power upholds all. His all-loving heart gives
all. And his allwise-hand dispenceth all. His power is above all difficulties. And his good will above all our unworthynesse. You see the world below is vertually in the Sun; and the Sun a more ex∣cellent thing then al on which it hath an influence: So all things are much more eminently in God, but God himselfe is more excellent then all. Psal. 84.11. His nature is unaccessable. He dwels in light that none can approach unto. His love incomprehensible. Ephes. 3. And his wayes of works and providences past finding out, Rom. 11. He supplyeth the Angels with power that fell not, that they might never fall. He supplyed Christ; filling him with the Spi∣rit above measure, and raising him from the dead. Therefore much more can he supply us that Be∣leive. In this God, hath the beleiver his interest, he can confidently call him my God; mine by creation. And not onely of being, as the lapsed Angels, but of his well being, of a gracious heart, and gracious quali∣ties in that heart, Psal. 51.10. Ephes. 4.24. Ephes. 2.10. Mine by preservation, and not onely in com∣mon providences, as he is the Saviour of all men; but in preservation of the soule from sin, of the af∣fections from prevayling temptations, and graces from deadnesse. Mine by redemption. Sutably to that specially here meant, is here mention of Christ Jesus. According to that, Christ is made of God to us redemption; 1 Cor. 1. He hath payd a price to justice to redeem us from vengeance; and
hath gained the actual love of mercy to bestow all good upon us. * The same Fine and Recovery cuts of the entayle of evill, and conveighes the good estate to us. Upon these grounds, and in this man∣ner doth the beleiver challenge God to be his God. If you will have the measure and graduall; then thus. The beleiver saith, God is my God, funda∣mentally by the promise. As that, I will be your God, and you shall be my people. Formally and pro∣perly by faith, my beloved is mine, and I am his. Cant. 2. And Thomas, my Lord and my God. Ef∣fectually, and feelingly, by the operations of love, joy, &c. As Mary-sayd, my spirit hath rejoy∣ced in God my Saviour. And as the beleiving Iewes did. 1 Pet. 1.8. Compleatly, (in parts) when we own God, and own our selves to be none but his. Faith drawing down Christ to us. And that faith working by love, carryes us up to Christ. Cant. 2, My BELOVED is mine, and I am HIS, he feed∣eth among the Lillies, untill the day breake, and the shaddowes flee away, turn my beloved, &c. 2 Extension in quantity. God shall supply, even to a fulsilling all needs. The word , here ren∣dered need: 1. Signifies want, necessity. So that whatsoever is necessary to supply, God will supply. A sinlesse wanting, viz. of such things without which we cannot answer to Gods ends, God will be sure to supply. But a sinfull wanting, a moral aguish dropsy thirst of such things, and so much, as will rather hurt then help; a wantonnesse rather
then a want, God doth best supply rather by keep∣ing us in that want then supplying; rather by withholding then by giving. Psal. 119. It is good for me that I was afflicted. For in this case we more want soule health then bodily supplyes; therefore God withholding the drink of creature-comforts, is best to cure our spiritual ague or dropsie appe∣tite. So then our desires must be natural, not un∣natural, either after things in kinde, not good for us, or in degrees unsutable for our condition. As on the otherside our wanting must be real, not ima∣ginary as the dream of thirst in the Prophet. Such an imaginary want was in Rachel when she phanti∣sied that her life depended upon having children. Give me children (sayd she) or I dye. 2. The Greek word signifies use, that which is usefull, and instrumental to act and doe. Now that is for our true use, that more fits us for Gods use. For (as the Philosopher called Servants) we are Gods, instrumenta rationalia; his reasonable tools or houshold goods. Revel. 4. All is made for Gods end and use; Therefore without all faile God will so supply and serve our need, as may fit us best to serve him. And in relation to both sig∣nifications of the Word, remember that I told you that the word supply in the original, signifies to fill; God will at least fill the true useful need. He may and doth oft make our cup to overflow, gives a mea∣sure running over; but that is of superabundant kindnesse. But this he will do, and is, tyed under
hand and seale, in Word and Sacraments; viz. to fill such wants. He will fill every size of vessel, replenish every capacity to its proportion. He will ballast and tackle every ship, as it may safelyest swim and ride out every storme. He clothes lambs and sheep with a fleece they may best bear, and get away from the thornes. 3. Intention in qualities, one way or other, first or last he will supply according to his glorious riches. God is glorious, and so will dole out your share according to your proportion, you shall con∣fesse it when the total is cast up. In comparison of others nothing, or your own former small thing, you shall have great things. God hath chosen the poore in regard of the world, (saith Iames) rich in faith. And (saith Paul) Godlinesse is great gaine with contentment. For it brings contentment, hearts ease; more satisfied then Alexander with a world. The Godly man hath two worlds entayled upon him. Godlinesse hath the promise of this world, and that to come. So that the Godly man can say, I have enough; He is rich that thinks he wants no∣thing; that hath as much as he can aske, or tell what well to doe with; give us, , bread sufficient for our substance. A mans estate is to be valued according to the use, not the bulke, according to the efficacy not the quantity. What are tooles of which one hath no use or benefit? Green hearbs if they give content (saith Solomon) ex∣ceed a stalled Oxe. If a mans estate serve his use,
is effectual to a quietation of spirit, he hath the greatest ENOUGH that can be desired. The whole of a beleivers estate is very rich, thus: 1. The least mercy is greater then he (as Iacob confessed) for a man is all misery in himselfe. 2. The least that he hath, as to him, that it might be a mercy (not a snare) cost the value of Christs blood. A little Diamond costs more then a load of quarry stones. 3. If the stream of mercies be small, yet great is the continuance, from the fountaine. A little free-hold is better then more by short lease. 4. Besides all, he hath the fountaine it selfe; God himselfe. The heavenly man, hath not onely the light, but the Sun it selfe fixed in him as in its Orb. The Christian and God are one, as Christ and God are one. Ioh. 14.20. Ioh. 17.21. All that God gives to beleivers, intends, & ends in this, to lead them to God. (Judge your condition by this) God is a wooer, that gives tokens to his love with an intent to give himselfe. You see then God doth many wayes supply richly. That richnesse according to which God will sup∣ply is a glorious richnesse. The glory is three-fold; as the riches are three-fold. 1. There is a glory upon the temporalls of a be∣leiver. They come from Gods right hand. See the difference, Pro. 3. and in the Patriarks blessing.
The right hand blessings perfected the left. They come from Gods good wil, not from meer com∣mon providence. They all taste lovish; they are varnished with love; polished with a beauty as given to Christ for us, as the world was made ex∣ceeding good; that is, beautiful, useful, &c. for the first Adam in innocency. Again, there is a glory in the seasonable giving of temporals to beleivers, So like apples of gold with picturs of silver. Striped with the blood of Christ, inlayed with the opera∣tion of spirit sanctifying them unto us. Yea, there is somewhat of God himselfe stamped upon every creature, which onely the beleeving eye can see. On vegetables, life, on Animals, understanding and wisdome. And so much of God as is in a creature is most glorious. And God that is in them hath layd his Command upon them, to doe us good (if we beleive) and goodnesse is glorious. If there were but the divine order in Gods dis∣pensations of outward things, first this, then that as is best for our welfare; this were glorious. He first provides for us the breast, then bread. He dispenseth as the parent doth clothes, suites fit for our age, and so they sit handsomely. Look how grimme disorder is, so comely and glorious is or∣der. He gives not all at once to over-whelm us; nor the last thing first, or the first last. 2. There is a glory in spirituals. In gifts some as in knowledge, elocution, &c. but in grace and
graces more. For the grace of favour; It clothes us with Christs righteousnesse: This must needs be glorious. (2 Cor. 5. la) it being the righteous∣nesse of God. You may perceive it, by considering how grimme the sight of sin was to you, before you saw that glorious clothing upon you. Whiles ye see not your selves in Christ, mantled in, and clothed with his righteousnesse, you are an abhor∣ring to your selves. But when you behold your selves (yea and as beheld of God in Christs righte∣ousnesse) you see your glory, so that you can glo∣ry. 1 Cor. 1. two la. Christ is made to us righte∣ousnesse, &c. that he that glorieth may glory in the Lord. The Apostle adds, 1 Cor. 3. that the very ministry that holds forth this righteousnesse to us is far more glorious then the glorious giving of that glorious fierie Law, as it is set forth and cal∣led, Deut. 33.2. The Lord came from Sinai, and rose up from Seir, and shone forth from mount Pa∣ran, and he came with ten thousand of his Saints, from his right hand went a FIERIE Law for them. And then too, the graces of the Saints are glori∣ous. They are the spiritual creation of God. Eph. 2.10. The purchase of Christs blood, Eph. 1.7, 8. The breathings of the Spirit, Ioh. 20.22. The I∣mage of God in us. Eph. 4.24. They make the soule of man (in the bent of it) like Adams soule; yea it is another divine soule, in our natural soule. So that by all glories aforesayd, a Saint is made
most glorious within his own court or habitation. He dwels in Christ, glorious in his garments, glo∣rious in his complexion; he is ful of righteous∣nesse and holinesse. Solomon was glorious; the Lillies (saith Christ) are more glorious then he, but Christ most glorious; and spiritually and imputa∣tively, as he was, so are we in this world. 1 Iohn 4.17. 3. There is the glory of heaven; which is the plat-forme of all our happinesse. I need not argue this glory, but rather declare it, if I (or any else) could. Here below we have a glory, but it is like the glory of a glow-worme, brightened at the night-shining of the stars, in comparison of hea∣ven, which is as the glaring of Diamonds, or spark∣ling of Chrystal looking-glasses, the glosse of cloth of gold, and Tissu, at the sight of the noon-sun. In heaven every glory is lightened and hightened to a transcendency of translucidation and lustre. Our natural bodies shall glitter above the face of Mo∣ses, Stephen, or innocent Adam; namely, like the body of Christ, 1 Cor. 15. which was most glori∣ous on Tabor. Our reason shall be equalized too, if not made superlative above the highest intel∣lectuals of Angels (forasmuch as we are neerer in union with God through Christ they.) And as for our graces, every grace shall be raised to the highest perfection, and actings that graces can be extended, or exalted. There in glory, we have
the sight of God; either by some extraordinary Species representing the divine essence, a light of glory the mean while elevating the understanding with a supernatural strength, to behold the repre∣sentation; or by the light of glory, elevating and strengthening the understanding to the highest, pitch of apprehension, to behold the divine es∣sence immediately presented without any Species, or by any immediate clear vision of God without. Species or elevation by any light, more then is in∣nate in the glorified intellectuals. Doubtlesse by unspeakable union with Christ, in him we shall ap∣prehend God, as he (so far forth as he is man) doth apprehend him, to our utmost proportion. In heaven the fountain of our happinesse is sub∣stantial glory. Namely, God himselfe, perfecting our substances to the highest of our kinde; our company the Angels, ful of superlative glorious qualities, the place filled with rayes of both, and we perfected and polished in all things to a glori∣ous hue and luster. The floure coloured shining spring, the Golden sea (as Homer calls it) with morning beames, or the spangsed starry heavens, in a serene evening, are but shaddows to this glo∣ry in Heaven. Our communion there is like the most ravishing musick, our sights all of admiration, and our thoughts seraphical raptures. The fourth thing to be explained is, the means, viz. Christ Jesus. God considered in himself, is able to
supply, being infinite rich and glorious. And na∣turally he is willing as the chiefe good to commu∣nicate his goodness to his creatures, considered in their meer and pure naturals; but there is not in him a moral willingnesse (as we may say) a wil∣lingnesse of free choise to be communicative of himselfe to fallen man, but through Jesus Christ. God foreseeing what was wisedome and justice to himselfe, chose us in Christ. And now in time com∣municates himselfe no other way, but through Je∣sus Christ. He is fixt in, and shines through the Orbe of Christ Jesus, 2 Cor. 4. Shines to us in the face of Christ Jesus; even as after the Sun was made upon the fourth day, (though there was some general light afore, as innocent Adam had a legal light) there was no light to be communica∣ted to the world but through the Sun. The sum of all we wil say of this is briefly this. 1. That Christs incarnation is the fundamental insurance of our assurance of our neerernesse to God then Angels, Heb. 2. That he wil be our Immanuel. Matth. 1. Applyed, Rom. 8. to our justification and salvation. And so wil doe by us as he did by Christ, in all excellencies whereof we may be ca∣pable. 2. The perfecting and formal act of the vertue of this incarnation to communicate himselfe to us, is our actual union with Christ by the Spirit. 3. That Christ is the pattern to which we must in all things, according to our proportion be con∣formed
to; and is the beginning of the reassimila∣ting and making us like to Gods image in the first Innocent Adam, Christ therefore is called, the first borne of every creature, &c. Useful is this Doctrine, 1. For invitation of all that stand off at a difference with Christ, total∣ly holding off, or stand off at a distance from Christ, as in a degree strange, fearing to come neer and close to Christ; in doubt whether to throw them∣selves into Christs armes, fully to trust themselves with him. Come saith this Doctrine, come in, come neer, own God in Christ, and rejoyce in him as thine own, that thou maist come up to this pri∣viledge, viz. with assurance of faith to say, My God shall supply all wants. Mine and thine in tem∣porals, set all the world together by the ears; Kings say, that is mine, nay say Parliaments, that is mine; nay say the people, that is mine. But in spirituals they set all in tune. Therefore of all things learne to MINE the Lord, to cry by faith, thou art mine, as Thomas, My Lord and my God; and as Mary, My God and my Saviour. You may as they (but more spiritually) rely on him, for you have him held forth to you not onely as borne, but as cruci∣fied for you before your eyes. Gal. 3.1. That is, in the preaching of the Gospel; which continual∣ly beseecheth us to receive Christ. 2 Cor. 5. Why therefore do not men come in and come up closer to Christ Jesus, through whom God will be such a
rich supply? And therefore if ye be poore like Laodi∣cea, it is because ye do not com on through profes∣sion of Christ close to Christ himselfe. If ye be rich, yet ye are not rich indeed, if ye close not with Christ. If ye be honourable; yet ye are not right hon∣ourable, unlesse ye put on Christ. Come therefore, come, come to God in Christ. Hear those glorious invitations, Isa. 55.1. to the end of the Chap∣ter. And Revel. 22.17. turn to them, reade them, weigh them; they wooe thee imphatically and pathetically; and answer all scruples. Come there∣fore to Christ. The promise is to you, for it is to all the Lord shall call; that is to all that obey his Call, Act. 2.39. He dyed for the ungodly, Rom. 5. And he came with an intent not to condemne the world, but that the world might be saved, Joh. 3. Oh therefore close with Christ, throw your selves into his armes. Let thine heart say, he is mine by faith, mine in hope; I love him, I give up my selfe to him, I will lye in his armes, lean on his bosome, live in and upon his heart of love, there I will expect all incomes from God. Close with God in Christ, for here in the Text and Doctrine he doth as it were call to you in the marker place of wisdome, come see what ye lack, see what ye want, do ye want riches, honour, comfort, any thing, all things, See what ye want, come buy, and buy with∣out money or moneys worth. Isa. 55.1. Revel. 22.27. And in the Text. He will supply all your
wants. Do ye want a comfortable habitation? Ps. 90.1. Lord thou hast been our dwelling place in all generations. Do ye want riches? Solomon tells you The blessing of the Lord maketh rich. And Paul tells you that Godlinesse is great gaine. And so we might run over all things, His power shall be your chambers to hide in, Isa. 26.20. His love and u∣nion shall be your chamber (your Bride chamber) to rejoyce in. Cant. 1.4. Do ye want peace. The Apostle calls God, the God of peace. And he pro∣miseth, Isa. 26.3. He will keep them in perfect peace, whose mindes are stayd on him. Do ye want friends? By Faith Abraham was called the friend of God; that is, passively God was a friend to him; for God justified him by faith, Jam. 2.25. And by obedience (flowing from faith) we manifest we are Christs friends, Joh. 15.24. Do ye want wisedome? And what to do? To bear afflictions (that perhapps arise from wants)? If any man lack wisedome, (and for such a purpose) let him ask it of God who gives it liberally. Jam. 1. If any man out of a willingnesse to follow Christ looseth all, he shall finde all, with addition above that he lost. Matth. 19.28, 29. Object. For spirituals, God doth easily supply them, by immediate infusion. But how can he sup∣ply temporal, when they are not in being? Answ. This is our fault. God provided Manna; But say they, can he provide flesh in the Wilder∣nesse?
Sure saith that great man, 2 Kin. 7.2. he cannot send plenty into besieged Samaria, by to morrow, if the windows of heaven should rain down bread. This or the like, is the language of our un∣beleeving hearts, and the censures we passe upon divine providence, as if we would provoke God to do nothing for us. Why, God hath, and can do strange things, so that they seem to be done by creation. How wonderfully did he lead his peo∣ple from Egypt into Canaan. And he will create Hierusalem (a sad City) into joy. He will create peace. Come therefore yee disputers, attend upon the words of his mouth, rely on him by faith, he will be true, he must be true to you, according to this Text, To supply all your wants according to his rich∣es in glory by Christ Jesus. Can ye finde a want, a need of spirituals? Do ye feele your need? Seek first the Kingdome of God, and the righteousnesse of him, and all other things shall be added unto you. Go close with Christ, and then go to God and aske and have any thing that you truly need that may do you good. By this you shall know whether your outward wants be a true and right need, by what and how ye dare aske them of God in prayer. That is not a true need which you dare not ask boldly of God in prayer. And so much is not needful which you dare not confidently begge of God in prayer. And that way or manner, or meanes of attaining
any thing is not needful, for which you dare not with a free heart petition to God for his blessing on the same. When God hath a minde to bend his eare, he will prepare the heart to pray. Psal. 10.17. Therefore go to God by faith, make your addresses to him by prayer in faith for a supply of whatsoever ye need. Say here it is, here it is to be had, I wil go no further then this doore, here I wil stay, and begg till I receive. The Devil, and sin wil tel us they wil supply our need, so they told the Angels (that fel) and Adam, Belzebub seduced the rest, and one of them seduced Adam. The politick world wil bear us in hand, that they wil supply all our need. Do but come (say they) over to us, go our way, come plot in our Plot, co-operate, and comply in our designe and ye are made, we wil make you men for ever. And the creatures with their beau∣tiful looks wil smilingly seeme to promise much: And our owne corrupt hearts, and carnal reasons wil tell us many faire tales. But whom and with what wil these supply? onely our senses with sensible things, and leave our inward man to faint and faile; or they wil supply our lusts, with impure objects, which are worse then no∣thing, to poison and pain us to all degrees of mi∣sery. They wil supply (they say) but according to what? even quite contrary to the text. viz. they wil supply according to the abundance and
basenesse of evil, that is in sin, and the Devil. But the voice of the text is life, the voice of God in∣deed. He will supply all your need according to the riches of his glory by Christ Jesus. Second Use is, for improvement of God in Christ Jesus unto all consolation, to them that can closely close with, and own God in Christ: to say, My God by the blood of Christ, My God by the spirit of faith. These men shall be able to say, My God shall supply all my wants; yea mine and others that are beleivers, as Paul speaks in the text, for himselfe and other Saints. God shal supply all, Widdows, Orphans, Prisoners; and with all; of which we have absolute need, with∣out all faile; of what is also convenient for us, when it is convenient. First, We have absolute need of grace, with∣out faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11. And God tells us we have need of patience, Heb. 10.36. Therefore that God must needs supply: according to his promise; he will poure out his Spirit, Act. 2. And according to his insurance, having filled Christ, that of his fulnesse we might receive. Ioh. 1. Secondly, There is an absolute necessity of what is altogether necessary to gracious actings in all conditions. Heb. 4.16. Let us come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and
finde grace in the time of NEED. And my grace shall be sufficient for thee, even in thy wraft∣ling with Satan, 2 Cor. 12. Compare diligently, 1 Cor. 10.13. Therefore this also God must needs supply. Thirdly, That is of absolute necessity that con∣currs to our natural being and life, whiles God wil have us to be on earth for his service. In this respect Christ saith of outward things, Your hea∣venly Father knows you have NEED of these things. Therefore so much of food, of clothes, of liberty, of peace, &c. as whereby we may be a∣ble to be, and act according to Gods minde, God must needs supply. Fourthly, There is an absolute need that God should be glorified by us. He must attaine his end. All things was made for his glory, Revel. 4. Therefore whatsoever is needful for us to fur∣ther Gods glory, that God must needs supply. All these are but absolute necessary supplyes. But God supplyes somtimes, ex superabundan∣ti, good measure pressed down, and running over: not onely for necessity, but for delight. And he wil so supply us at present need in some things, that we shall be able out of experience to speake with confidence, of futures, My God shall supply all needs. As Paul speaks, 1 Cor. 1.10. Who de∣livered us from so great a death, and doth deliver; in whom we trust he will yet deliver. And Rom. 5.
Tribulation worketh patience, patience experience, experience hope. Past mercyes are the first fruits of future. As the Apostle argues, Rom. 11. That God hath more mercy for the Jews whom he calls the lump, because the first-fruits of the fathers afore the floud, and the Patriarks after the floud were holy by mercy received from God. And as God supplyes all, with all (as we have sayd) so also sutably to the Saints condition in this world wil he supply. For Hel, and the world indeavour to put the Saints into need, and all manner of wants. But, saith the text, God will supply all your need. Hel and the world labour to make them poor, and scanty, and miserable; but saith the text, God wil supply all your need according to his riches. Hel and the world, do no∣thing but render them contemptible, and igno∣minious. (But saith the text) God wil supply ac∣cording to his riches in glory. Hel and the world labour if it were possible to divide them from Christ. But (saith the text) God wil supply them by Christ Jesus. Object. But how wil God supply us? Answ. Either ordinarily, or extraordinarily, God is pleased (when he sees good) to use means, but he is not tyed to means, method, or manner of acting. When Moses was much with God on the mount he could fast forty dayes,
when Peter had a vision (Act. 10.) he forgate his hunger. When Paul was in a rapture, he knew not whether he was in the body or no, and there∣fore minded not bodily wants. When we consi∣der our clothing with Christs righteousnesse, and eternal glory, we shall more minde our clothing upon with them, then moth-eatable garments. 2 Cor. 5. Whiles Adam injoyed God, he minded not his nakednesse. There are no per∣plexities can enwrap and hamper and seize upon Pauls spirit, whiles he considers Christs fulnesse; through whom he can do all things. Phil. 4. A word from Christs mouth stils him in a great fight of temptations. 2 Cor. 12. Distractions there may be in States, and upon Churches, and every one enquires what wil things come to? But the consideration of these, Christ must reign, Psal. 2. Heb. 2. The four mettalled Image of all humane power opposing him, must be broken before him, Dan. 2. And Antichrist must down, as sure as if down already, Revel. 18. Christs Church must be set up in glory, Revel. 21. The Saints must rule, chap. 20: these I say will qui∣et our mindes. Object. But my heart hath many doubtings in it. Answ. Dost thou call him my God? and hast had some former experiences what he hath done for thee? then mayest thou boldly, as Paul, say in
the text; My God shall supply all my wants: Yea the same God that makes any promise wil give to thee lying under the serious consideration of that promise, assurance through that promise, that he wil performe it; and make thee wait till thine eyes see it done. In waiting with hope up∣on God, a soule oft times hath much communi∣on with God. And in this communion, God doth make admirable impressions on Saints spirits, touching assurance, Psal. 130.5, 6, 7. So that if all the world should perswade them it were in vaine to waite, they could not be taken off. Yea some Saints waiting upon God unto, and in great sufferings, have little lesse then an impression of Prophesie made upon their spirits. Hus a Bohe∣mian, signifying a Goose in his language, sayd, that if they costed him in the fire, within an hundred years should rise a Swan that should carry the cause on for which he suffered. And according∣ly, Luther, (signifying a Swan) rose up, and did so most successefully. The Martyr that last was burnt in Smithfield, told the people they should be of a good comfort, for he was perswaded he was the last that should suffer under Queen Mary; And so he was. The world doth not con∣sider this of secret impressions. And therefore they plot sometimes great plots, thinking to have the people to side with them: But God makes contrary impressions, and so all falls to nothing.
Quest. When wil God supply? Answ. When his time is come; As he wil not stay a minuit longer then the fittest time; so nor wil he act a minuit afore the time. But just at his time to a minuit he wil do it; Ioh. 2. There want∣ed wine; His mother tells him of it. He answers, his houre was not yet come. And there were but a very few sands to run. Those being out, he turns water into wine; which was presently af∣ter his mother spake to him. See Christ wil be punctual at the instant of the fittest season to do us good. Object. There are many great men and means to hinder those supplyes we want. Answ. What are mountaines before Zerub∣babel (saith Zechary) what can let God to make his way plaine, yea who can resist God when he wil make impressions on great mens hearts, that they shall not hurt, nor hinder? Both Laban and Esau came out in fury against Jacob, but God made impressions on their hearts that they should not hurt him, and they became as tame and gentle as lambs. Plots have been against us, as we sayd afore, by great ones, but God made impressions on the Commonalty, that they could not act, nor execute any thing. Object. But I am full of unworthynesse. Answ. So thou art in thy selfe, but seeing it, and acknowledging it, is the way to remove
that, that it be not an impediment. Especially if thou lookest from thy self to Gods free mercy through Christ, Psal. 130.4. And the text gives thee a ful answer. God will supply all thy need ac∣cording to his riches in glory BY CHRIST JE∣SƲS. Though thou art unworthy, beleive in, and hope on Christ, who is worthy. He accepts of us in him the BELOVED, Eph. 1. O therefore that men would not take up Religion in the outside, or in the Gallantry of wit, parts, repute, and favour of great men, but in the kernel, faith, hope, communion with God. By these to lye in Gods bosome wil quiet, when all helps are su∣spended. Object. I am in such a state, and condition, as of afflictions, imprisonments, &c. as are quite contrary, to any probability of supplys of my wants. Answ. God to shew his wisedome, and power, and to exercise our faith, doth oft times take contrary courses to supply us. As in the Creation, being about to make a beautiful lightsome world, he first created a Chaos lying in darknesse; so in his providence, he works oft by contraryes. Israel must go out of Canaan into Egypt to be preserved for Canaan. And when at first he sent Moses and Aaron to treat with Pharaoh to let them goe, things went worse with them. God
doth of purpose sometimes cast us into afflicti∣ons, and seem to hide himselfe, that we might pray, and beleive, and hope, till he returne and help, Hos. 5. la. And for the particular of being in prison: As touching thy inward condition, The Heathen could say, Solus sapiens est liber. That is, A wise man is the onely free-man; freer in prison, then a foole at large, most gloriously true spiritually. If Christ hath made us free, we are free indeed. Its a brave freedome to go to prison to be free in conscience. As touching thy outward condition of imprisonment, Ioseph must through a prison be advanced. The Lord wil car∣ry down Jeremiah to the Potters house, and there teach him the lesson he is to learn of free grace, that God will have mercy, because he will. Once a prisoner in this place spake a glorious sentence, when condemned to have his head taken off. He spake it on the scaffold. If there had been (saith he) an easier way for me to heaven then this, I should have found it: But God would lead me this way rather then no way, thither. Object. You have given many faire words, but they seeme to be but notions. Answ. Thus our megrom giddy heads think substances to be but shaddowes. I say to you, as Paul once to the Corinthians, God or his Gos∣pel-ministers are not streitned, but ye are streit∣ned in your owne bowels. Else we might come to
that as other Saints attaine to: as a woman of late of mean estate sayd, I want nothing, I have all things in Christ. Are these onely noti∣ons, which hold forth to us, that which is the re∣sult of all. viz. contentment, For God in Christ is the onely contentment, which evidently ap∣pears by comparing a poore beleever and a rich unbeleever together: The one hath much con∣tentment, the other hath none. Is this a meere notion? If he spared not his own Son, how shall he not WITH him freely give us all things, Rom. 8. And Psal. 37. I have been young and now am old, yet I never saw the righteous forsaken, &c. Is Gods taking care of crowes, sparrowes and ra∣vens, notions? From thence our Saviour argues, how much more will God take care of men that trust in him? Are those notions, that prove most real in event? A woman in these hard times having lost her estate and yearning over her children, wanting clothes, fel down before the Lord in prayer, mourning thus, Lord such a childe wants a coat, and such a childe wants such a garment, what shall I do, my eyes and hopes are upon, and to thee to help. And sud∣denly the Lord strangely provided for them. Two other being in distresse, the one in torment of paine, the other greatly afflicted with compas∣sion. Come sayd the husband to the wife, if it be the will of God, that thus this extremity
must lye upon us, we wil even hire more help to attend, and settle to the affliction. And be∣hold presently the Lord took away the affliction. I have known a stock of prayer driven for diverse years for a mercy; and oft the deliverance came to the birth, and was not brought forth. At last it was given in as in a dreame. The thing done, when scarce any means used. Therefore I conclude, Beleeve, pray, hope, and waite on God, and he shall (according to the in∣fallible truth of this text) supply all your need ac∣cording to his riches in glory, by Christ Jesus. Amen. FINIS.
