J818 E383_6 99861941 114087
Die Mercurii ultimo Martii. 1647. ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament: That Sr Henry Mildmay, do from this House give thanks unto Mr Iohnson, for the great pains he took, in the Sermon he Preach∣ed on this day at Margarets West∣minster, before the House of Commons (it being a day of Publick Humiliati∣on) and that he do desire him to print his Sermon. Wherein he is to have the like Priviledge in printing thereof as others in like kinde usually have had. H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.
LƲX & LEX, OR THE LIGHT AND THE LAW OF Jacobs House: HELD FORTH IN A SERMON Before the Honourable House of COMMONS at St Margarets Westminster March 31. 1647. being the day of publike Humiliation. By ROBERT JOHNSON Eboraicus, One of the Assembly of Divines. ISAIAH 8 20. To the Law and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them. 1 PETER 1. 19. We have also a more sure word of prophecie, whereunto ye do well that ye take heed as unto a light that shineth in a dark place. . Chrysost LONDON, Printed by A. Miller, for Philemon Stephens, at the Signe of the Gilded Lion in Pauls Church-yard. 1647.
priviledges of Jacobs spirituall houshold, and to draw from you (in these hum∣bling times) expressions of sorrow most sutable to those who walk so unsutably to celestiall favours; (many priding them∣selves in an imaginary title to the bene∣ficium Jer 7. 9. 10 Putant eim Hypocritae si modo externas u'tus divini cerni quasan obser∣vent, tunc on∣nia tecte babe∣re, quamvis ip∣si in sceleribus praefrate per∣gu it Os and in loc. of the family, who are wholly neglective of the officium) this being of concernment to all Christians (to whom—are also some directions hinted) so chiefly to governours and all Reformers, that they partake not in other mens sins. 1 Tim 5 22.  Ne{que} te participem constitue ali∣rum peccat um. I have endeavoured to incite you who are Masters in our Israel, to improve your diligence in the discharge of that trust and office in this family, wherewith above others you are honoured by God; who ha∣ving 1 Sam. 2 30. manifested his bounty to this house∣hold no lesse, if not much more then to Exod. 10 23. s. 8 19. psul. 147 19. Act. 14. 16. those our forefathers, in vouchsafing light to us, when others of our Allies sit
in darknesse blacker then Egyptian, is pleased to direct us to our work and walk by a pillar at his own charges, holding forth to us a light so much the more ne∣cessary, by how much the Princes of this world, who know not the Gospel, cruci∣fie 1 Cor. 2. 8. to themselves the Lord of glory: And as those venemous serpents in Sardi∣nia, Solin. poybist. cap 9. Accendunt quo∣tidie lucernas, quib nulla lux est: illis cope∣tunt test imonis teebrarum. Tet. Apol 10. Igne fatunm qui sequmuntur in avia abdu∣cuntur & in prcipitia fossa que saepe numero runt. Kek Syst. Rhys. lib. 6. mentioned in stories, either hate and flie the light, or like those in Tertullians time, bear a lanthorn profession without light, or as another sort by an ignis fatu∣us, are led into dangerous precipices and by-waies, and with Ixion in the Poet, embrace a cloud for the true Iuno, sha∣dows in the room of orthodox and substan∣tiall truths. The scope of all is to unde∣ceive you in pointing to that only light of truth which is able to lead you to eternall light, and in the interim to afford di∣rection in managing the whole businesse of
this house, by which all other lights are to be examined, whereto if disagreeing, it is Isa. 8. 20. because there is no light in them. Lo Cook. ju∣risdiction of Courts. According to which that you may act to the houses welfare, Gos glory; and therein as your Noble predecessours, ap∣pear Doctum, pium & benedictum Parliamentum, and not otherwise, to your own comfort in the great day, when the great Bishop and King of heaven and earth shall appear clothed with the robes of glory, as it is the endeavour, so the prayer of YoursRobert Iohn son.
Lux & Lex, OR THE LIGHT AND THE LAW OF Jacobs House. ISAIAH 2. 6. O house of Jacob, Come ye and let us walk in the light of the Lord. WHilst I reade this Scripture, I cannot forget Pes enim Ille in quo claulica∣bat, Iudaeos qui in Christum non crediderunt, fi∣gurabat, ille ve∣ro qui sanus re∣mansit, illorum typum gessit qui Christum Do∣minum recipe∣runt. to remember that of divine Austin in one of those Sermons de tempore, which goe under his name (though indeed the authour is doubtfull,) who speaking of Jacobs halting, understands by his feet two sorts of people among the Jews. By his halting, the unbeleevers, who in faith did not receive Christ. By his going upright, he conceives In co quod vincit Iacob, Iudaeos Christum persecuturos significabat: in co quod benedictionem petebat, illum populum figurabat qui in Christum Domioum credituru erat. Serm. 80. de Temp. is meant those which beleeved in him. Jacob overcoming (saith he) signifies the Jews who prevailed against Christ in putting him to death. In being blessed, he sheweth those who wor∣shiped him, and were of him blessed. We will not contend with Austin (or who ever is the authour) for the propriety of the allusion; the truth of this assertion is clearly manifest.
Jacobs family had Mepiosheths halters in it. Those who came of Jacobs loins were fouly tainted, yea overgrown with unbe∣lief. When Christ came they did not receive him. His own house∣hold, Jacobs posterity, did not acknowledge him. They put∣ting falvation away from themselves, he turnes to the Gentiles, who embrace him. The Jews, Jacobs posterity, for a long time of blindenesse, stand back through unbelief. This our Prophet Isaiah, a noble mans sonne, extraordinarily raised to reform the house of God, doth observe what should Propheta igi∣tur verè regis ex regio ut ple∣{que} veterum tradiderunt ge¦nere oriudu, &c Ep Nu cup. ad H. Mo. Com. in sl. & Hieron. come to passe in these latter daies of the Gospel, when Gods Mountain, the Church, was to be advanced in the top of mountains, and all Nations, even the Gentiles (heretofore an abject people) (the partition wall being pulled down) should flock unto it. This he mentions as a strong argument to perswade the Jews Abra∣hams seed, Isaacks posterity, Jacobs house, to come in and re∣ceive Christ. Which (saith he,) shall the Lords Mountain be advanced in the top of ountains? shall many Nations flock unto it? shall it repent them of their rigor against Gods people? that they shall break their swords into plowshares, and spears into pruning hooks; if strangers be so inclinable to conformity, surely children of the family should manifest themselves in actions of so high concernment much more zealous. The Pro∣phet seems to ewail the Jews, as Monica her sonne Austin be∣fore his conversion with many tears: or as the Apostle Paul Aug. confest. Rom. 9. 3. his countrey-men and kindred after the flesh, who remained in naturall impiety and obstinacy; or as our Saviour Christ his auditors, that Publicanes and Harlots should receive the king∣dome, Matth▪ 8. 11, 12. Mat. 2. 31, . and the children of the house-hold be shut out. Oh house of Jacob. Here is a holy Apostrophe. He turns himself to the Jews, who were (notwithstanding what ever plenty of ordinances God vouchsafed them) obstinate and reellious, though Ja∣cobs house. Nor is that meant only of those in after ages, when Christ came in the flesh: The particular applications mentio∣ned, the kindes of sinners reprehended, the nature of duties whereto they are exhorted, manifest his scope is to teach the people of his own time. In the words you may ote three particulars.
1. The persons concerned in the duty required. viz. The house of Jacob. 2. The nature of the office from them expected, which is 1prefaced, Come ye, let us. 2Expressed, walk. 3. The certainty of that directory, whereby every thing is to be managed. The light of the Lord. From which he draweth three arguments of perswasion to godlinesse. 1. A fontibus honesti. You are the house and family of father Jacob, who prophecied of Christs manifestation in the flesh, of Theod. Snepf. in locum. whose line he was to come; you have been educated ab incu∣nabulis in the laws and statutes of the Lord: Shall you suffer Gentiles to go before you, O house of Jacob? 2. Ab inhonesto. How unseemly and base is it, that others who are strangers to God and Christ, without knowledge, hope, all, should walk in the Lords way, and you stand idle all the day long? O come let us. 3. Ab occasion facili. You have now a more fair opportu∣nity of Reformation then ever. You cannot pretend igno∣rance, through want of means to instruct you. You cannot de∣ny but the Lord hath kindely invited you with tender of himself and salvation. You cannot alledge that you are strangers and in darknesse: Here is a light of truth, a light of Scripture mani∣festation, a light of Gospel revelation sent and set up by God himself, that Light of the Lord. O house of Jacob. Why house? why house of Jacob? It were too tedious and happily not countervail the charge and labour, to rear up a large structure of the various significations and ac∣ceptions of the word, House. In Scripture language 'tis a work Flac. Illiric, in verbo do. perfected already by our Divines in their writings; you may please to take notice onely, how it's squared to our present purpose. That the Church of God is often deciphered by this name, is not unknown to those who are competently versed in facred writ; which because used both materially and formally, be pleased to remember, that its taken specilly for sons or a posterity of those whom God would make happy with such a blessing. As when God is said to be favourable to the Egyptian Midwives, that he made them a house, concerning Exod. 1. 21.
which, though in severall glosses there be variety of opinions, occasioned by the changing of the gender masculine for femi∣nine, and feminine for masculine. As also that some of the Hebrew Doctors conceive it meant of their preservation from the rage of Pharaoh; Others with Tostatus take it for her in∣corporating into the Nation and Commonwealth of Israel, as Rabab, though its not improbable they were Hebrew women. Others with Hierom and Rupertus, think it meant of the Hea∣venly mansions in future glory. And some with Theoderet and Augustine apply it to those houses of wealth and riches the Lord for that service gave them. In this variety we may not exclud that sence which the foregoing words do reade, of a numerous family and posterity wherewith God blessed them, notwithstanding Pharaohs rage very great against them. To the like purpose is that phrase, in Gen. 16 2. in the story of  Sarah when she gave Hagar to Abraham. I may (saith she) be builded by her. So Rachel and Leah are said to build the house Ibbanerb. Fortassis aedifi∣caborex ea. Fortassis liberos consequar ex . Ju. Tr. of Israel, Ruth 4. 11. And in Davids story you have that, 2 Sam. 7. 11, 27. and in other places. The reason whereof is manifest by the Etymologie. The Hebrew word  signifying a sonne comes of the word  Banah, and is of the same root with  Eben a stone, and  Beth a house, that as one stone built on another, ariseth up to a house or building, so of one sonne or childe (by the blessing of God on the parents) a family ari∣seth. Neither is it to be restrained to this posterity as such on∣ly: He mentions them as a select house, a chosen people amongst 1 Cor. 3 9. Heb. 3. 6. whom God had set his name and worship, as the Church of God is set forth often in the new Testament, Heb 3. 16. But Why Jacobs house? You know (beloved) that Abra∣ham had but one sonne by Sarah. Isaak indeed had two sons, but one of them was rejected and cast out of the family. But Jacob was honoured with twelve sonnes, all which as they were members, so were they sharers in the heirship and benefits of the temporall and spirituall family, and did joyn in enlarging his house: whence it is that Abraham and Isaak are silenced, and so often mention is made of Jacob or Israels posterity, doubtlesse they did much glory in this prerogative: the pro∣phet therefore being to deal with them takes his rise hence to perswade them to duty.
A priviledged people should walk sutable to those priviledges God vouchsafes them. Doctr. To which purpose its observable in Scripture how frequently we are exhorted to walk worthy of the Lord: which sheweth, Col 1. 10. 1 Thes. 2. 12. that when God hath made large manifestations of favour to his Church, it ought to correspond in behaviour to those be∣nefits. Hence are those connexions, Deut. 6. 10, 11, 12. And it shall be when the Lord thy God hath brought thee into the land which he sware unto thy fathers, to Abraham to Isaac and to Ja∣cob, to give thee great and goodly cities which thou buildedst not, and houses full of all good things which thou filledst not, and wels digged which thou diggedst not: Vineyards and olive-trees which thou plantedst not: When thou shalt have eaten and be full, then beware lest thou forget the Lord which brought thee forth out of the land of Egypt from the house of bondage. You see their priviledges are many: And the last wherein he instanceth, is deliverance from Egypt, of which the Jews made yearly mention, when Deur 16. 5, 6. they presented their first fruits unto God: the intent of all which is to endear then, that seeing the hearts of men are so Deut 3. 13, 14, 15, 16. corrupt, as easily to abuse Gods bounty to wantonnesse, that they would be so much more heedfull (being a priviledged peo∣ple) that they forget not the service of the Lord, his worship and Religion: thats his meaning surely, for in Scripture men Judg. 37. Psal 44. 21. Ps. 106. 20, 21. Jer. 3. 21. Jer. 18. 25. are said to forget the Lord, when they corrupt Religion, or suffer it to be corrupted also, in 1 Sam. 12. 29. onely fear the Lord and serve him in truth with all your heart, for consider how great things he hath done for you. He might have said as the men of our times. God hath done great things for us, great delive∣rances, great preservations, he will not now fail us, though we be not so holy. Oh saith he, this priviledge must binde you to Exod. 19 4, 5. Heb. 13, 1. duty, consider what he hath done for you. This is the constant language of the Scriptures. But I need not compasse this truth with a greater cloud of witnesses. You will say, what were the priviledges of Jacobs house, that Object. he insists so much upon them? Truly they were great and many, both to Church and state, Resol. and in them as in a mappe we may behold our own priviledges represented, as St Austin saies, priores omnei quotquot  Aug.
habuerunt Christiani dicendi sunt. Israelites were Christians (in his sence) Christians Israelites. 1. They came of Jacob eternally famous for his great strength manifested in his wrastling by faith, with Christ, and overcom∣ing Tenes in lacta  hc tibi ono Deus est. Hilar.  5 de Trnit Eph. 2. 18. . 12. him, as Hilary notes; for his familiarity with God, talk∣ing with him face to face, Gen. 32. 30. That he was to God a consilijs, and long before the incarnation of Christ revealed to him that mistery. Nor do we come short in this favour, we have by Christ accesse to the throne of grace, we have power with Christ, and by our faith conquer the world, and are of Gods coun∣sell, Heb 4. 16. 1 Co. 2 ult. knowing the minde of Christ. 2. God did separate Jacobs family as a peculiar people to him∣self, from all the nations of the earth, on whom he would chuse to set his love and do them good, Deut. 7. 6. they were a peculiar Exod. 19 . Peculium Abu∣les in locu, as the. Cldea. observes. Speed. treasure of Jewels, in which God took pleasure. In this hap∣pinesse are we also sharers as children of the spirituall family: who knows not that we were a wilde and barbarous people, who painted and flashed our flesh? God vouchsafed at that time to send his word amongst us to reclaim us of that barba∣rous paganisme, after that we fell to popery and superstition, the Lord was pleased by a further manifestation of his son Christ Jesus to call us to himself, that we should be a peculiar people to him, zealous of good works. Titus 2. 11. 3. Of Jacobs family Christ came as the Apostle witnesseth, Rom 9. 5. It was no small honour to that house, from which the Lord Jesus as man descended. Is not Christ our kinsman, our elder brother? is he not flesh of our flesh, bone of our bone? did he take the nature of Angels on him? No, he is made Heb. 2 16, 17. Heb. 4. 15. Aug. in Joh. 3. 16. 17. like to us in all things, finne onely excepted. I cannot but with divine Austin admire the incomprehensible love of God to us in this, of clothing his divine nature with the rags of our hu∣mane flesh, when he came to make himself a sacrifice for sinne. . It was a great priviledge of this family that God commit∣ted to them, only the keeping of his Oracles, as the Apostle Theophil vir Senatorij ordi∣nie Aret.  Act. 1. 1. speaketh, Rom. 3. 2. if it were an honour to Theophilus, though a Senaour, as a learned Divine doth stile him, that Luke the authour of the holy story containing the birth, preaching-life,
and death of Christ in the Gospel of Luke and the Acts of Apostles, after Christs departure to heaven, was dedicated Hac lege evan∣gelium  Theopb nuu∣pat Luas ut si∣deliter ejus cu∣stodiam suscipi∣at. Calv. in loc. to him, that he should faithfully preserve it for the Church of Gods use and benefit: how great a favour was it to the Jews, Jacobs house, to have the sacred story, mysterious books of the Prophets in their keeping? Nor are Christians behinde in this mercy, and we of this Land being a part of the family, have ex∣perienced this bounty in a very great measure. Time was, when our condition resembled theirs in Samuels daies; that the word 1 Sam 31. Sermo Iehovae suerat rarus temporibus illis, Tremel. & Jun Heb preti∣osus. Nan omne rarum . See Iohn  his story in Act. and Mon. of the Church pag. 1941. of God was exceeding precious: Time was, when we had small vision and the blinde lead the blinde, and through lack of it, people were in a perishing condition: Time was, when to have an English bible, or any part of old or new Testament in our own language without licence was capitall. But God of his infinite mercy hath for many years shewed us in this parti∣cular the light of his countenance: We have the sacred Oracles (notwithstanding the projects and plots of all Atheisticall and popish men) in a large and plentifull measure. We have Moses and the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles, holding out the doctrine of the covenant in the Lord Jesus for the foundation of our faith, direction of our manners; if by our unworthinesse we provoke him not to deprive us Exod 10. 4. Psal. 91. 4. Psal. 10. 14. Deut. 7. 17. Jer. 30. 10 12. 13. of them. 5. This family had the Lord his speciall protection against forreign and domestick enemies, he did bear them on Eagles wings, he covered and defended them under the feathers of his providence, he suffered no man to do them wrong: but repro∣ved Kings for their sakes; though as it seems, they were in a Isa. 16. 19. Psal 8.  Sol qui rereat pios beneficij sis, ut sol plan∣tas & anima∣lia suo calore & splendore: scutum nostrum, id est, quod de∣fendit nos, nem∣pe me & comi∣tatum meum Pilcat. low condition, having seven mighty states to deal withall. Beloved we are equally partakers (as members of the family) in this favour. God hath been a Sunne to us, inlightning our understandings with the knowledge of himself, a shield, a pro∣tection to us against the most nefarious and bloudy assaults of homebred and forreign enemies: How hath he turned the counsells of crafty Ahitophels into foolishnesse? How hath he shattered the forces of bloudy Esaus? How hath he discom∣fited yea routed the Annies of proud Philistines and confoun∣ded swelling Pharaohs in the red sea? He hath broken their bow,
and knapt their spear in sunder, and burnt their chariots in the fire: He hath raised up the Heroick spirits of those worthies (not as the heathen fain by transmigration of souls) but by re∣doubling the same spirit on them more powerfull then a drum of dead Ziscaes skin: on one he hath put Sampsons spirit, on another, Davids spirit, on another Samuels spirit: He hath for us men and our safety, subdued Kingdoms, wrought righte∣ousnesse, performed promises, stopped the mouths of Lions, quenched the violence of fire, made us escape the edge of the sword: of Heb. 1 34. 35. weaknesse made us strong, we have waxed valiant in fight; hath turned to flight the Armies of the Alions, both in this and in other Kingdoms. I pray God, our private differences (after the influence of so great mercies) which hath in severall ages of Saxons, Danes, Normans, been fatall to this Nation, prove Quantos vide∣mus humiliatos sed non humiles Bern not a sad omen to us, who live no better, if not worse then for∣merly; in blasphemies, in contempt of ordinances, and abo∣minable idolatries, as if with Theramines in the story, we judge our selves reserved to some further evil of misery, by our trading 1 Pet 4. 3. in that of sin. 6. God seated Jacobs family on a most fertile soil. The ground sometimes is of much advantage to that people, which Exod. 3 8. Deut. 8. 7, 8, 9. Deut 11. . 12. Ezek. 0. 6. called Jehova's land, Hos. 9. 3. and the holy land, Zac. 22. the land of Immanuel, that is, of Christ, Isa 8 8. a figure of an heavenly coun∣trey, Heb. 11. 9 10. being accuntrey in Asia the lesse, possessed by Canaan the son of Cam the son of Noab, and his sons, but for their wickednesse the Land was to spue them out, Lev. 18. 25. Gen. 12. 5. doth inhabit such a peece of earth: 'Tis observed by our lear∣ned historian Mr Camden, that the Religious houses so called (built by our predecessours, in the founders intentions, nurseries of learning and piety) were placed in the most fruitfull parts of the countrey: And may not Christians, and more particu∣larly we of this Nation, say as the Psalmist, Psal. 16. 6. The lines are fallen to us in a pleasant place, or as the Greek, , in optimis seu praestantissimis. We have a goodly heritage, or, as is fair for me, or unto me, it pleaseth me well, such an he∣ritage as is a little paradise on earth, to the admiration of our friends and emulation of our enemies. Worthy patriots, you have heard the beneficium and privi∣ledge of Jacobs familie; having been somewhat large in it, I shall now briefly shew the officium or duty on our part, cor∣respondent
to so high a favour. In opening whereof I tremble to tell you; I may  indeed, vox faucibus haeret. I shall rather (such is our ingratefull Accipiendis be∣neficijs indignus est qui suert de accept ingra∣tus Bern Serm. 4. in  90. Isa. 1. v. . behaviour) point at the unworthy carriage of this generation to our heavenly father (as Polycarpus said) that ever hath followed vs with good, never did us evil. May I not take up Isaiahs complaint, he hath nourished up children, and they have rebelled against him? may I not too truly lament our times, in the language of Ezekiel, that we are a rebellious house? may I not as Moses, complain of this family in that sad expression, Ezek. 2. 5. Oh foolish nation and unwise, doe we thus requite the Lord? He sharpens his speech with an Interrogation, to shew the grievous∣nesse Deut. 32. 6. of their offence, that it might work in them a deeper impression: And in the Hebrew he useth the word Nabal, sig∣nifying a fool that hath his judgement and understanding faded from him, whereupon he becomes wilde and wicked, not∣withstanding the riches of his heavenly fathers bounty to∣wards him: Such Nabals, such arrant fools, are we of this Jacobs house; as may be manifested, if we make an impartiall scrutiny. 1. How do children of this house undervalue the benefits conferred on them? At how low and mean a rate doe they set them? how vilely do most men esteem them? As he in the Proverbs, it's naught, it's naught, saith the buyer. It's mean, it's not of that worth, saith a carnall heart, there is not that ex∣cellencie Prov. 20. 14. Pessimum est Trem. &. Iun. in the favours that men talk of. If a man should set a poor rate on a Shop commodity, how would the owners frown at him? Think you when God hath bestowed all his cost and labour on us, his enemies by nature, he will take it well we so underprize his bounty, and yet of his family? O that any could so value the Lord and his goodnesse, as they ought to do! But as those in the Gospel, being invited to the feast (saith the text) they made light of it, and went their way: Matth. 22. 5. , illi vero haec non curantes abicrunt. the Greek signifies a disdainfull neglect, as some base thing not worth the while, and therefore bestow themselves otherwise: So do we disesteem (chiefly) spirituall favours: the people of God may by experience finde it in themselves too true, that of the two, their hearts are most inclined to beat down the
price of soul-mercies, whereas God looks we should prize mercy t its worth. Hence, Psal. 150. 2. praise him according to  , propter amp . his excellent greatnesse, as he riseth to us in favours, our hearts should be raised to him in Magnificates. I may not unfitly in this case phrase it with Moses, Numb. 16. 9. Seemeth it a small thin unto you, that the God of Israel hath separated you from the congregation of Israel, to bring you neer to himself, to do the service of the Tabernacle of the Lord, and to stand before the congregation to minister unto them? His intent is to shew the Levites their sinne, in undervaluing the kindenesse of God in the function he had put them. As Israel was separated from all other people to be the Lords peculiar, Leviticus 20. 26. 1 King. 8. 33▪ 34, 36. So were the Levites separated from the sons of Israel to be the Lords, as Numb. 8. 19 hereupon the Scripture speaks of them as distinct from the Israelites, 1 Chron. 9. 2. Psal. 135. 19, 20. And this was their sinne, that they bore so mean thoughts of it: So God having taken us Gentiles, wilde Olives by nature, put us into the true Olive, called us to Rom. . 4. himself, and of all people, us of this nation, by severall remar∣kable acts of providence, hath he severed to be his peculiar portion. Shall we suffer our hearts now to be low in regard of him? this is the way to forfeit all: Oh take heed of a scorn∣full undervaluing Gods mercies. Hos. 2. 6. 2. How is it that our affections are not drawn to God by his favours? We love and rejoyce in him nothing the more since we received them. These would (if our spirits were rightly tempered) be as a load-stone to draw us to God the donor of them, as it was with David, Whom have I in heaven but thee, and in earth none in comparison of thee: As St Austin his heart Psal 7. . Iquum est cor  do nec ine requi∣est A. Spe in   of Rsamon. Gen 32 0. could not be quiet, but on all occasions of Gods dispensing his bounties mounts up to heaven. Were our souls in right frame, these bounds of God would be to us as that clew or thred (pardon the expression) to carry us thorough all mazes and labyrinths to finde out the Lord. So were they to Jacob in a straight: he called to minde the promise, that God had past his word to him, he would do him good, he with that sets before his eyes his own unworthinesse of the least of all Gods mercies, he considers how God brought him over Jordan with a
staffe only, he remembers also, how great the goodnesse of God had made him, having now two compleat bands, and like Moses, looks on him thats invisible, through all these perspe∣ctives, Heb 1 27. . Gen . 11. and so gathers assurance of Gods assistance against the rage of his mercilesse brother Esau, who is ready to slay the mo∣ther upon the childe: So the Apostle in that place to the He∣brews, where he setteth down the goodnesse of God to our fathers, besides other things, in making the promise to them (saith) they embraced the promises, the Originall word signifies as much, as they saluted the promises, not in a vain frothy . Heb. 11. 13. complement, as gallants of the times, but in earnest, heartily, drawn in affection to him, and affiance for him that made the promises. Its an evil verily to be lamented, that this goodnesse of our heavenly father is no more prevalent to allure our hearts to Godwards: this being one speciall means to ingage God, as in Jacobs case. God is by Jeremy setting forth the return of the Israelites from Captivity, Jer. 30. 2. See how he doth it, in the 10th verse you read, fear not O my servant Jacob, saith the Lord. In the 18th verse, Behold I will bring again the captivity of Jacobs tents, and have mercy on his dwelling-places, and their nobles shall be of themselves (strangers shall not be their ma∣sters) And their Governours shall proceed from the midst of them, and I will cause him to draw near and he shall approach unto me, for who is this that engaged his heart to approach unto me, saith the Lord. It's an heart-engagement, not tongue only; when Pellioit vel devovebit cor suum ut mea semper perficiat voluntatem. Osiand & Va∣tab. in loc. the very soul of a man is devoted to the Lord. I know some take it to be meant of Christ, but it must be extended also to his members, the spirituall posterity of Jacob, as the scope of the words shew. O if we could ingage our hearts to God on mercies received, he would count no favour too dear for us. Why doe we not imploy and improve our time and abilities to the benefit and advantage of the family? Is any man born Cicero. Cato cujus mo∣res erant, Luca∣no reserente, toti genitum se cre∣dere mundo. Gerson. for himself? Do we injoy guifts of nature, learning or for∣tune (as I may so call them) for our ease, honour, wealth on∣ly? The heathen will, if we look into their writings, teach us another lesson: A good man, saith our English Seneca, should be a common fountain, at which all may freely come to receive
water of comfort and assistance: those who are in a family should be instrumentall to the advantage of all, chiefly of the Gal. 6. 0. Gen. 4. 35. Gen. 7. , 2, 13, 14. Ambr. in vita Theodos. family and houshold of faith, as Joseph in Pharaohs house. What a world of good did he upon every occasion to those who stood in need of his help? what an admirable testimony is it which Ambrose gives of Theodosius the Emperour, who to his last, was solicitous for the publike with neglect of his own private interests? God hath put (Noble Senators) such a price into your hands, hath given you so many, so great opportunities (besides the deliverances vouchsafed beyond expression) for raising and making happy Church and state, as never to any Parliament under the cope of heaven. He looks for more (without doubt) from you then others: It will not satisfie him in the great Assise, that any of you have been quiet and Seneca Aliud are, ale agee. forborn to meddle much, as the heathen complained of some; Nor that others of you have been doing some other work then family businesse; Least of all that any of you should doe evil offices though never so closely to this family: As if you accor∣ding to that opinion of the Florentine, should imagine, that great persons were made for their pleasures only. He hath be∣trusted Ma av, de instuone principis. Aetrus Hadria the Emperour used to say, Non mbi sed popuo prae¦es, nunqud ut de subdetis res casequaqua se ut ipse de e Ber. de consed l. 3. you with his house, be not deceived, no pretences will satisfie him when he calls his stewards to an after reckoning. Saul you know was taken of God and imployed about this house, but came short in his improvement. He perhaps prided himself in his greatnesse, and thought his Psal. 30 6. 7. 1 Sam. 15 23, 26, 7, 2 1 Sam 15, 33. mountain, like Da∣vid sometimes, so strong as never to be moved: made light of admonitions, sieighted opportunities, lost advantages, pleased himself, but provoked God to the confusion of himself, and rending of the Kingdome from him: yea though, perhaps in tendernesse or policy, he spared Agag and the fat cattell (it being con∣trary to the word of the Lord) God makes Samuel his execu∣tioner to do his pleasure on him in Gilgal: that as his sword had made many mothers childlesse, so should his mother be childlesse. Jehu you know (honourable and beloved) was advanced to govern the family, he had a price put into his hands, and did something in the Lords cause: He set on a parcell Reformation, and God therefore assures him the kingdome to a fourth gene∣ration. He went so far as by-ends and self principles would 2 King. 10. 16.
carry him, but he did not all that the necessities of Gods fa∣mily, and the high calling he was honoured with, challenged at his hands: Jehu took no heed (saith the holy Ghost) to walk in all the Law of the Lord God of Israel, as Hezekiah did with all his heart (it was but in a corner of his heart) for he departed 2 Chron. 31. 21. 2 King. 10. 29. not from the sinnes of Jeroboam, which made Israel sinne: and therefore you read in Hosea of him (though it may be at first Hos. 1. 4. sight you would take him to be a true Israelite of the family in whom is no guile) how God is resolved to repay his partia∣lity and insincerity in that very service, the matter of which so far as he went, God approves; for yet a little while (saith he) and I will avenge the blood of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu, and will cause to cease the kingdome of the house of Israel. Think with your selves (beloved) what a terrible curse it is that lieth on Coniah a broken despised vessell wherein God takes no pleasure, such was his disrespect of Gods house in which he lived: the Prophet Jeremy opens it fully, thus saith the Lord, write this man Jer. 22. 4. 28. childlesse, a man that shall not prosper in his daies, for no man of his seed shall prosper sitting upon the throne of David and ruling any more in Judah. You know that, ut crescunt dona, sic crescunt donorum rationes, where the Lord bestows great gifts he will call for a proportionable account, and will exact it in one kinde or another, he looks we should walk sutable to favours; if we doe not, Hear what he saith by his messengers: The glory of Jacob Isa. 17. 4. Jer. 33. Amos 6. 8, Lament. 2. 3. shall be made thin. Hear Jeremy, I will cast away the seed of Jacob; Hear Amos, it will make God abhor the excellencie of Jacob; yea further he will burn against Jacob like a flaming fire, which shall devour round about. Surely we desire not that Jacobs house should be worn thin, that it be cast off, or the excellencie abhorred and burnt round about with fire from God, who (being angry) is no less then a con∣suming Heb. 12 29. fire; Oh then how are we concerned to be carefull, being thus priviledged (as we have heard) that the house of Jacob walk in the light of the Lord. Let us now consider the nature of the duty thats presented to us, with its introduction and description, the former in, Come ye, the latter in the words, Let us walk. Some perhaps conceive this spoken by the Jews mutually
exhorting one another as the Gentiles who were without the Church, doe in the precedent verses perswade their fellows to goe up to the mount of the Lord. No they are within the Temples view, they want hearts to go, rather then an opportu∣nity. I suppose their Prophet Gods vicegerent would mould into a better form. The Papists and Arminians abuse this and the like places to e∣stablish the power of free will; but who knows not the severall Sulum esst  aut  ei qu . Arb . 6. cap 10. ends God hath in expressions of this nature, as 1. To shew what is our duty, rather then our naturall ability to perform. 2. To humble men in consideration of their present condi∣tion of opposing and standing out against the Lord. 3. That such as are elect (the holy Ghost setting on the ex∣hortation) may by grace perform what is required of them in nature. 4. That all excuse may be taken away from profane persons, who cannot deny but a Prophet hath been amongst them, and hath invited them to return. 5. Hereby God would shew that we are not moved as stocks Calv instit l. 2. cap. 5. Austin. and stones; but as such who work ex consilio, by consent of will, God having made us ex nolentibus volentes. Is it not remarkable, think you, that I say a reformer of the Church and state, setting to the work, calls on himself as on them? he doth not as the Scribes and Pharisees binde heavy burdens on other mens shoulders, himself not touch them with one of his fingers: he is not as those sea Marks pointing a pas∣sage to Marriners, and themselves move not: he, as a good Ge∣nerall, saith in effect to them, you are not to go one foot further then your leader shall break the way before you. He puts on the same resolution in Jacobs house, as Joshuah did in his own, I and my house will serve the Lord. Josh 24. 15. Teaching us, that those who are reformers of others, must not exempt themselves from Reformation; it's not enough Observ. Matth 8. . Facere recte ci∣ves suos prin∣ceps optimus sa¦endo docet. Paterculus. that you be such as the Centurion to those under him, saying go and he goeth, come and he cometh, doe this and he doth it. You should as Admirals in a fleet be as examples in the voyage, as one saith, teaching others to do right by your own examples,
which clearly is the reason why God would have us punctuall in the choice of rectors, Exod the 18. 21. Moreover thou shalt provide out of all the people, able men, such as fear God, men of truth, hating covetousnesse. The Hebrews describe them in this manner, Men of ability and such as be mighty in the command∣ments, exactly look to themselves, and subdue their affections, so that there be no dishonest or contemptible thing in them. And generally able men are such as have a strong (or coura∣gious) heart to deliver the oppressed out of the oppressours hands; as it is said of Moses, he stood up and defended or saved them. To the same purpose is that charge, in Numb. 11. 17. Exod. . 17. Gather unto me (saith God) seventy Elders, and I will take the spirit which is upon the, and will put it upon them: thereby God sheweth that none without the guifts of the spirit, are fit for government, as is frequently taught in Gods book: By the Deut. 1. 13. spirit here is meant spirituall guifts, as in Scripture language frequently, neither was Moses his spirit hereby diminished. 2 King. 2. 15. 1 Cor 14 12. 32. Joh 7. 30. Act. 19. 2. 6. Moses in that hour was like unto the lamp left (burning) on the candlestick in the Sanctuary, from which all the other lamps were lighted, yet the light thereof was not lessened any whit. A like place you have, in 2 Sam. 23. 30. He that ruleth over men must be just, ruling in the fear of God; he must have justice both of the first and second table, that his Actons may read a lecture of both to the people; and may in sincerity with comfort give the like charge which the Apostle doth to his Philippians; those things that you have learned and seen in me, doe, and the God Phil. 4. 9 of peace shall be with you. Give me leave (honourable Sena∣tours) (being one of your remembrancers from the Lord this day) to stirre up your pure mindes, though happily you have been taught in the present truth; Isaiah was a Noble person and Prophet of Gods sending, he was not ashamed to inte∣resse himself in the work of Reformation: 'tis your duties (as Abimelech did in another case) (that I may use the holy Ghosts Judg. 9. 48. words) to invite the people, propounding your selves a pat∣tern, as you have seen us doe, so doe you as we have done. I must confesse that naturall abilities are of great advantage in government and state-policie, and where men are defective in them, they are exposed to contempt and hazard; Learning is
of great worth, and without it, counsells are (in some sort) blinde and lame. But what if we have abilities of both very eminently? what trust can we repose in such? If there be not up∣right lives, integrity, godlinesse, we may truly say of such men, as of him in the story; He hath navim bonam, Gubernatorem Qui  in  ide∣ls esse non os∣sunt. . ap  1. cap. . malum, a good ship, but an evil pilot, and on the other hand, probè doctus est qui probus est, he is intirely learned, who to his learning hath added integrity. Oh that all the Magistrates, Committees, Commissio∣ners, Benches of justice, which are under you, were of this constitution? how well should it be then with Gods people! this is no more then what we have covenanted in the very set∣ting See Nationall Covenant. on the work of Reformation, and yet its strange to see and hear in all places, pretenders to the settlement of the common wealth, sticklers (as they would perswade us) for regularity and government in the Church, Antagonists of He∣reticks, Sectaries, and Scismaticks, zealous against Malignants, as the Covenant obliges them: Yet how few are there that conscientiously make use of that other branch, touching Refor∣mation of our own waies, without which what is the best even in Reformers but meer hypocrisie? Worthy Senatours, let this sink into your hearts, as men by imploiment in Reformation, and obligement in covenants draw neerer to God then others; so should they manifest more holi∣nesse in their conversation to God and his people. 1. Reformers (such as I say here) do stand in a neerer re∣lation to the work, it being the fruit of their own womb: that it be not defective or ill shapen: 'tis very requisite themselves be of an handsome and comely feature, when parents are de∣formed, children oftimes resemble them; if Reformers be li∣centious and loose, the product of their endeavours will be a loose Reformation. 2. Reformation takes best with the people, when those who commend it to them are themselves active in what is good, common people look much into the lives of their rulers, how they move, what course they stear, and are not perswaded that you are in earnest, if your selves act not: And indeed if we in∣tend a Reformation to the purpose, it must be laid in the great
ones, that are or should be the Reformers of Israel: when in the Counsell of Constance, there was a speech had concerning Reformation, some saying, quod oporteat incipere 4 minoritis, M Fox Hist of the councell of onstanc Anno 144. the Reformation must begin at the Friers, no saith Sigismond, Non a Minoritis, sed a Majoritis incipienda est Reformatio, sig∣nifying that the Reformation should first begin with the Pope, Cardinalls and Bishops, and so descend to inferiours: and in∣deed mutato nomine, de nobis, change but the name and it's a good history, shewing us a rule of our Reformation, as he in the comedy said, Loquere ut videam, so speak as I may see it abroad, so expresse in words, that our conversation give not a lie to our language, least we be not unjustly taxed, as those who say and do not. The Lords expectations are higher and greater from Refor∣mers then others. Where God gives much of power, honour, estate, opportunities, of them he requires the more duty, Primum viden∣dum, quid sit▪ quod sacrum ap∣pellat st au∣tem illud sa∣crum quod sa∣cris ufibus vel Dei instituto & jussa vel hominum vo∣luntaria &  spontanea lagitione ad lictum & devotum est. Ob eam{que} causam horum aut sublatio, aut etiam imminutio, sacrilegij rimine damnatur, Deut. 23. 21, 22, 23. Hec corruptela cum omnibus saeculis huit, tu ex omni memoria nunquam magis grassat est quam hoc nostro ta infaelic saeulo, in quo peri{que} non mo lo  largiuntur sed etiam, qu▪ adpossunt, dat operam ut ex illo aliquid resecent & arrdant, quod a su major bus ad  Dei & scholarum & pauperam suste aionem collatum est. Exaggeratur hoc scelu apud Prophet. Mal. 3. 8, 9. qui hanc injuriam on tam hominibus quam psi Deo sactam esse queritur. Quod si illis mortale & perniciosum sit qui bis bonis fruntur, quid illis fie qui alioru Av rit tantum a ainistri fugruat, qui ipsiullum inde fractum perceperunt, & qui spe tantum praedae deiuceps consequendae a hoc sacrilegium pertracti sunt. M Cart. on Prov. 20. 2. Rom. 2. 21. Thou that saiest a man should not steal, doest thou steal? thou who professest to abhor Idols, doest thou commit sa∣criledge? Thou who framest to the Nation a Covenant, for pre∣serving Gods worship in purity, setling the Church in a doctrine and discipline agreeable to the word, reforming thy own waies, doest thou by starting aside, throwing it behinde thy back, as an obsolete ceremony, or using it as an engine for a particular project, to advance the designes of a deceitfull heart, not to make thee more humble, holy, or watchfull in thy walk, Jer 7. 24. Jer. 17. 9. 2 Sam. 1. 20. before God and man, dishonorest thou the Lord? O tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets of Askelon. Let not the Phili∣stines triumph: All Christians (Hon.) are bound to walk with
God, you more as being Reformers of Church and state. Isaiah is a good pattern, who prescribes to others what himself is ready to perform, requiring not profession only but action. O house of Jacob (saith he) come ye, let us walk in the light of the Lord. And so I passe to the next words, setting forth the nature of the duty, Walk ye. There are two sorts of walkers our law mentioneth. 1. Night Walkers, And those the Scripture nameth such as walk in the flesh, Rom. 8. 2. and in darknesse, 1 Thes 5. 3. 2. Day Walkers, who move to Godward after the direction of the word, and strength of grace received from Christ, the Sonne of God, and Ad Deum non acceditur passi∣bus corporalibu cum ubi{que} sit, ped affectibus mentis: & co∣dem modo ab eo eced tur & sic accsssus & recessus sab fimili udine localis motus defignunt spiritualem affe∣ctum. Tho. Aquin.  q. . 5. m. light of the world, of such the Prophet here speaketh. He perswadeth not the Jews to speculation, painted profession, vain-glorious, empty ostentation: reality and active walking in Gods waies, is that to which they are invited. Reall holinesse consists in action, not profession only. The Apostle prescribing rules to servants, how they should as Observ. Ephel. . 6. Christians behave themselves to their Masters, saith; it must not be , service to the eye. If men will not accept a perfunctory performance, much lesse can we expect that God take such feigned holinesse well at our hands, it being simulata Cypr. Serm de Mortal. sanctitas, and so duplex iniquitas, which occasioned Cyprian to crie out: Quid prodest verbis proferre veritatem, & factis destru∣ere virtutem? To hold out this truth more fully it is that the holy Ghost makes use of such phrases as require a most industri∣ous Luk. 13. 24. . Phil. 2. 12.  1 Cor. 9. 24. . Revel. 3. . and solicitous behaviour to Godward; strive to enter in at the strait gate; sometime, work out your own salvation with fear and trembling; sometime, so run that you may obtain: all which do shew the earnestnesse of endeavour after that godli∣nesse which should be in all Christians. Its not enough that we be as those St John mentioneth, who have a name to live and in truth are dead; Nor as such St Hierom remembreth, Qui sub Christiano nomine, under the vizard of Christians, in all their deportments towards Church and state, walk as Gentiles; Nor as that Indian figtree in Pliny, having leaves as large as Targets, the fruit o bigger then a bean.
O Honourable and beloved, consider there must be reality in our godlinesse, verball shews are not sufficient: My request to Zanch. 9. you is (that with more certainty and comfort you may walk in this way of the Lord) the ordinary tract, the terminus a quo, and terminus ad quem (being passed by,) frequent in our Di∣vines, treating on this subject, you would give me leave to pro∣pound to you some objects, on which in this walk all Gods peo∣ple must fix their eyes; within which limits I shall bound my discourse; Take them in these succinct following conside∣rations. 1. Let your aim be in every undertaking to honour your heavenly father, whose will is, that we should in these Scrip∣ture revelations of duty, glorifie him. And whilst I say so, take notice, that we must honour God for himself: We may not seek him for base ends; We should see an excellencie in him, above all persons, and things else, so as we can rest satisfied with God alone, yea with outward crosses and troubles: In a word, honour him not as those, who sought after, and follow∣ed Jesus, induced thereto, by mercinary, base, and by respects of loaves and fishes and perishing things; as the Glosse saith, Quae∣rebnt Joh. 6. to. Ord. Gloss. in loc. Jesum sed non propter Jesum. 2. In our walk we must propound to our selves this likewise, to help forward the salvation of our brethren, by exhortation, example, or what way providence offereth; after the Apostle Pauls president. It's a vain imagination of those who conceive 1 Cor. 9. 22. that we must walk only to our own ends and interests, to our own honour, vain pleasure, observance of carnall friends, with neglect of the Saints, and their common cause: Woe be to such a man, when his Master cometh, and shall finde him so walking. It's one of the saddest spectacles our times presents us with, and which doth threaten and may draw down a greater judgement then we are aware of, that men will not walk nor stirre one foot (be the affair of never so great importance to the publike,) unlesse the golden ball run before them. I have read of a bloud-stone, which having an excellent quality to stanch bloud, the Jewellers say, it seldome or never exerts Mazarinus. Psal. 50. its force, if not set in or covered over with silver. We have too many who have good parts, but if not silvered, you shall
be poorly helped, perhaps rather mischieved by them. Another object in our walk, we are to look on; is Gods likenesse, that we may come as fully up to it, as possible. We are children of a holy and heavenly father, and endeavour to bear his image; that as when the question was, whose is this 1 Pet. 1. 16. image and superscription, they answer, Caesari; so, when one shall say, whose is such a states-man, such a Divine, such a Ma∣gistrate, Matth. 22. 20. such a Councellor? it may be answered, he hath Gods image in all his deportments, he walks up to God, he breaths out piety in all his enterprises and imploiments. But alas that evil which a father complain'd of in his time, is too rife among us, Omnes ad Deum, pauci post Deum ir volunt, All men would go to God that they may receive glory, few Bern. would go after him in a holy and divine imitation. Let us that have given our names to Christ; minate on this: As we are called to a state of grace, let us walk answerably. The Philo∣sopers used to say, if thou beest a Philosopher, thou must live Philosophores? Philosophe i gitur tibi vi∣vendum est. as such an one; So I, if thou beest a Saint, walk up to Gods image and likenesse, shew what thou art. There is another mark on which we must set our eies, in this walk, viz, to ascertain our selves that we are in Christ, and so shall with him partake of future glory; which is that very les∣son the Apostle Peter so plainly teacheth the Saints. Although 2 Pet. 1. 11. (as the learned Zanchius observes) holinesse and good works are not requisite ad promerendam, that we can by them merit everlasting happinesse, yet ad possidendem vitam aeternam, they are necessary. 5. The increase of grace received (in this walk we now treat of) is also carefully to be looked unto; and is one end that in our heavenly course we must aim at. You know diverse after sicknesse by moderate walking do get strength: use hands (we say) and have hands; its a very usefull lesson that of im∣ploying graces, philosophicall habits are augmented by putting them forth into exercise, and the spirituall endowments God vouchsafeth us, if we suffer not, what we have received, to im∣pair Gen 5. 24. vvith Heb. 11. 5. by disuse, will receive much advantage; if we would learn with Henock, to walk with God, I doubt not but we should gain much strength by that divine exercise of spirituall walking.
6. Briefly this must be our scope and desire to please God; in which as we are to imitate the Lord Jesus; so s our parts to draw power from Christ, strengthening us to walk accepta∣bly Phil. 4 13. 1 Cor. 7. 32. before him; that of us it may be said truly in some sort, as he of himself, Joh 8. 20. I doe all things that please him▪ and in∣deed otherwise to what purpose is our walk? God hath coup∣led, walk, and pleasing him together, 1 Thes. 4 1 how you ought to walk, and please God; It's possible to walk and not to please . him; many walk and are enemies to Christ, but then we are not in Christ or walk not with God, holily and in faith; with∣out 1 Thes. 2. 4. which it's impossible to please God. It was  his care in his walk to please God, and should be ours also; he Rom 8. 8. Heb 6 11. Gen. 5 22. Heb. 1 5. behaved himself as in Gods sight, had a regard to the rule, that all performances were warranted by it, and with the eye of faith looked on Christ, who was to come, his desires were to advance the Lord in every thing; whom that we may please, take heed of, 1. Pleasing our selves in satisfying our own corrupt humours: as Christ pleased not himself in his walk, otherwise then might Col 1. 10. Col. 3. 0. Rom. 15. 3. stand with Gods pleasure: So neither may we as Brutus and Cassius, wedded to our own wills and corrupt lusts. 2. Of pleasing men, to whose vain fancy it is a sin for us to comply. When God calleth us to him; if so, we are not the servants of Christ. This of pleasing God in our walk, is both a duty and a speciall prerogative of Gods people, that when un∣godly Gal. 1. 10. 1 Thes 3 4. naturall men with the richest habiliments, and sweetest accommodations nature can afford them, are distastfull, yea odious to God; yet the upright (their actions being died in Zancby. the bloud of Christ) being acted by Gods own spirit, their works are Gods in them, their walking in a holy sutablenesse to his word, intending sincerely his glory, their persons being in Phil. 2. 13. 1 Joh. 3. 22. Christ, their performances please him; mistake me not, as if in every thing a childe of God, pleased God; though his person be accepted, yet not all his actions, as in David and Peter case, though the person as in Christ be well pleasing, yet not as in a trade of sin; for which God doth justly correct such with the 2 Sam. 7. 14. 15. rods of men, from whom he taketh not his mercy for ever. That we may please God in our walk before him, observe only these three rules.
1. Walk so as to avoid every extream, not to fall into one evil whilst we decline another: as some even of the primitive Fathers and Modern Divines through inanimadvertency in the heat of disputation have not avoided; John Wickliffe though a good and learned man, seeing the abuse of Church goods to Scieba horri∣dus scripturu Letherum quam sent. Phil. Melanct . ep ad Acum. Anno 1544. Fox Martyr. excesse, riot, wantonnesse, and Gods dishonour, cries down Church revenues, and opens unawares a gap that he never in∣tended, to sacrilegious practises of covetous worldings, who soon after took the advantage of his errour to enrich them∣selves, to the discountenancing of learning, and discourage∣ment of the Ministry, and their own ruine; Others there have been endeavouring to shun the pressures of Episcopall tyranny, giving too much the rains, to novell opinions, self conceipts and interests, unawares run headlong into confusion and irre∣gularity. And some there be who so highly advancing the love and free-grace of God to man; Others pleading strongly for Christian liberty (forgetting the golden mean) treading the morall law under foot, as an uselesse ceremony after men are in Christ, hurry themselves from Christian liberty into Anti-Christian libertinisme. 2. Walk cautelously that we be not consened with the falsities and deceits of the devil, oftentimes changing himself into an 2 Cor. 11. 14. Angel of light, sophisticating his wares, and dying vice with vertues colours, suggesting under glorious shews, such notions, of which we may say, as Osiander of the German Interim, there Osiander. Ep. cen. was plus veneni, more poyson by many degrees then wholesome nourishment in it. I desire not to raise old errours from the dead, to engender new ones. Westminster Hall, every street in London buy and sell them; so as we may say of those Cities Lond. Westm. as sometimes of Rome, omnia vaenalia Rome, ther's not an old fashion but its new dressed and set to sale, not an ancient errour in Austin or Epiphanius his time, which is not set forth as gain∣full Merchandise: every countrey town almost in the land, is thereby infected. Nor would I be mistaken in this, as if no distinction were to be made betwixt fundamentalls and prater-fundamentalls, if that difference take not place, it may be pre∣judiciall Polan. B. Hell. . Dvena. to the foundation upon which we all are builded. 3. Walk providently, so to manage things present as to
have an eye behind to discern what may follow, how by such an enterprize much good may be hindered, enemies of the truth may gain advantage, thou maiest unwittingly play thine adver∣saries game: there is a time (saith Solomon) for all purposes: Christ himself did not many things which afterwards he put in Eccles 3. . practise, his hour was not yet come; Mary was deceived, and for it justly by Christ blamed, in hasting him to turn water into Joh. 2. 4. wine before the time; The Disciples were in an errour, requi∣ring fire from heaven as Elias did, it was not time; The tares in the Gospell (saith he) are to be rooted up, but not at all Luk. 9 54. Matth. 13. 30. times, if more detriment come to the good corn by taking them away (though in themselves unsufferable) then by their awhile standing, let them alone to a fit harvest; All actions are not fit for all times.  in Greek is tempus, and temporis opportu∣nitas, Gal 6 10. . time and the seasonablenesse of it: We must in our pro∣ceeding look to both significations, if we mean to be conforma∣ble to the rule, or profitable to our selves or others; Cyprians advise is of good use here, who reproved some Christians that would needs intempestivè professe the faith, Confiteri nos volit (saith he) magis Christus quam profiteri. Let us (Honble) in this case walk providently, or as the Apostle hath it exactly, : which that we may do, go to the light, for to walk in Eph. 5. 15. darknesse is dangerous; And the rather let us be induced here∣to by the consideration of Gods bounty to us, no lesse then to our forefathers of Jacobs house, who had a light fiery pillar to direct them through the wildernesse to Canaan; So we have a light here sent from the father of lights with whom is no varia∣blenesse nor shadow of turning; it's the Lords light (saith the James 1. 17. text) Oh house of Jacob, come ya, and let us walk in the light of the Lord. Having much ground to walk over, I shall spare needlessely to stay my self or you in a review of the various acceptations of this word Light in holy writ, this task having been perfor∣med I lliricus. frequently by the Learned: its observable that the Hebrew word.  for light here used, is of near kin to the word  thereby shewing it to be a metaphoricall expression, in which the Lord would let himself down to mans capacity. Nor need we be curious in this variety of significations whether to chuse,
the ten Commandments delivered by Moses, or the Gospel of Christ, or indeed the whole word of God. Neither is this to 2 Pet. 1. 19. be omitted, that the Prophet speaking of the word, calleth it the Lords light, as the Hebrews) used by way of emphasis to en∣title, things of more then ordinary worth; or else as Oecolam∣padius noteth, to shew that there is one God of the Jews and Oecolampad. in locu Gentiles; Yet he saith not your Lord, nor Jacobs Lord, nor thy Lord, as insome other Scriptures; but the Lord; haply for that they having forsaken him, would not with that assurance and confidence of interest goe to him as their Lord. The holy Scriptures (this is that Isaiah would teach them) are a light to all Gods people, and that it is so, there are these evi∣dences. Observ. Spabem dub. Eang parte 3. dab minima 94 1. The Scripture is a full and perfect light, there is no defect in it, no rules wanting, none insufficient, we cannot say as of the Oratours works desunt nonnusla, nor as the Schools, of Tully. P. Lombard, hic Magister non tenetur; No, the law of the Lord is perfect, it's sine vitio, it hath no faule in the least measure. Psal. 19 . Piscat. in loc. 2. It is a clear and shining light, manifesting a sufficiency of instruction and direction in all the waies of God, so as the man of God may be made perfect; As it hath light in it self; So doth 1 Tim. 3. 16. it convey the same to others, making them wise to satuation▪ if you say there be many in darknesse and ignorance to this very hour, who walk in by-waies. I desire you to consider, M. Downames warfre part 4 lib. . cap. 4. that God is pleased to clear to such as be his people, all truths necessary to salvation; if any of his children be in an errour against fundamentalls, God who hath promised to lead his Joh. 16. 13. Phil. 3. 15. Saints into all truth, will discover this unto them in due time. 3. As light is pure and clean, you cannot fasten any dirt or uncleannesse on it; So is the word of God, there is no drosse in it, so thorowly is it purged, saith a learned Divine. Men may Psal. 11. 140. Piscat. Pugaturur an∣rum in catino. cast disgracefull speeches and aspertions on it, as doe Papists, Atheists, and Enthusiasts, but there you can fasten no evil. The word, as the light, is a comfortable creature, how pleasant is it to behold the light (saith the wise man) the expressions Eccles. 11. 7. of Gods free-grace, the promises of mercy, the doctrine of
the covenant in Christ made with Gods people, the future glory and happinesse herein held forth, and reserved to all Gods elect. How doth the hearing, reading, meditating of the same, put life into the hearts of Gods children in the midst of their hottest afflictions: as David; I had fainted in my trouble, but thy Ps. 119 50. 93. word hath quickned me. Light is smart and painfull to all blear-eyed persons, who cannot endure the force and efficacie of it; which comes to passe by reason of the weaknesse or imperfection of the eies: So the word of God (especially when powerfully preached) doth exasperate and enrage ungodly men, desirous to sleep in the dark dungeon of hellish sins, who like Cerberus Plutoes dog drawn from hell, belch and vomit at the light; So were the Pharisees at Christs Sermon, They were scandalized Matth 1 12. . at him. Lastly as the light hath its being and rise from the Sunne the fountain and originall of it (there is lux and lumen, as the Philosophers distinguish, as cause and effect:) So God who is light it self and dwelleth in light, in whom is no darknesse at all, the father and fountain of light, is the originall of this Scripture light, which is a ray or beam of his sunne in heaven. It is of his enspiring: holy men (saith the Apostle) spake, as moved by the Spirit, the word is not  of their own 2 Pet. 1. 20. interpretation; but as they were moved by the holy Ghost. Honourable and beloved, seeing it's the light of the Lord that hath all this day, this day said I? yea so many Sermon daies, Ʋse. yea so many scores of years shined to this Nation: Let us to whom of late more fully God hath vouchsafed so imparallelld a mercy (our forefathers, and many of our dear brethren in other countries, as those in Egyptian darknesse, desiring to see Exod. 10. 23. one of these daies of the sonne of man and cannot injoy them) let us (I say) endeavour to walk answerable to so high a fa∣vour. Oh that I were worthy to fasten on you the exhortation of the prophet Isaiah cap. 60. 1. 2. wherin is a promise also and seemes in our times to be fullfilled. Arise, shine, for thy light is Gloria Iebovae doctrine evan∣gelij per quam glorificatur Ie∣vab. Piscat. come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee; for behold the darknesse shall cover the earth, and grosse darknesse the peo∣ple, but the Lord shall arise upon thee, and his glory shall be upon thee.
Take notice therefore of these rules. Bring your actions to this light and make triall whether or no they be wrought in God, both your private emploimen Joh. 3. 21. as men, and your publike undertakings in your respective ∣ions to Church and state. The King (as we read, in Deu. 17. 18, 19.) When he sat upon the throne of his Kingdome, was to write him a coppy of the Law in a book ont of that which is before Some read it his Deutero∣nomy. H Airs¦worth. the Priests the Levites, and it was to be with him, and he was to read therein all the daies of his life, that he might learn the fear of the Lord his God, to keep all the words of this law, and these statutes to doe them. Yea say some Hebrew Doctors, he was so carefully to look to this rule, that if his fathers had left him none (viz no book of the law) or if that be lost, he is to write him two books of the law, the one he is to reserve in his house, for so he is com∣manded, as every one of Israel: the other is not to depart from before him; if he goeth out to warre, it goeth with him, if he sit in judgement, it is to be with him. They knew of old this most certain principle (as Luther calleth it) that Gods word will not attemper it self or condescend to Princes and states; but they are to frame themselves and imploiments unto it, though never so crosse to their malignant and corrupted hu∣mours: which gives me occasion to remember that worthy speech of famous Queen Elizabeth, when passing in roiall state to her coronation through the streets of London, the Bible being presented to her, which with both hands taking she kissed, and laying to her breast, she said that the same had ever been her chiefest delight, and should be a rule by which she meane to frame her government. In this case it's true what Casuists teach concerning the Cannon law, that in materia ad acclesiam pertinento, where the civill and Canon law disagree, We must Sartily Fu vill. uren c∣lex. Leggs civi les sequuntur canonum dis∣iioem. Gal 4. 16. . be ordered by the Canon: So if we could be willing (when laws fright and oppose one the other) to stad to the deter∣mination of Gods Canon without prejudice or partiality, suffering our selves to be directed by the light of holy Scrip∣ture, it would soon put a period to the most unkindely dif∣ferences. 2. Beware of the pretended new lights so much sought after by
these times, that our holy zeal for God is almost extinct. When God sets up a pillar as a direction to his people, he expects that Jer. 6. 16. no ignis fatus or lanthorn-man should steal away his follow∣ers, yet such is the mad instability of these times, that what ever presents it self new to us is welcome, though unsound and rotten. God hath shut up the Canon of Scripture, your ex∣pectations Gal. 18. will be frustrate if you look for another Gospel. There may be new lights respectu actus revelandi, enlightning both the organ and the object, but these revelations are not new, respectu doctrinae revelatae: this were to set up another Gospel then what you have received; which whosoever shall presume to bring, we may not (saith John) bid him God speed, least we Ioh. 2. 10, 11. pertake of his evil deeds. We must as Martin Luther said he would do, if any spirit suggest to us any opinion, for which he hath not Scripture, spit in his face, yea if an Angel from hea∣ven (as the Apostle long since taught us) should preach any Gal. 1. . other Gospel (let him prate as much as he will of new lights) he is accursed. 3. Suffer not men in these times of light, to walk in dark∣nesse, compell them to come in at least to an outward obser∣vance Bald cas. lib. 2. cap. 6 p. 104. in horum locum adigantur ad sacra Christia∣norum i e. jube∣antur templa ipsorum igre∣di, Concionibus & precibus in∣teresse, &c. of ordinances. Some have doubted, though all are not of that opinion, whether the Jews living in a Christian common∣wealth, ought not to be forced to an outward conformity; but that such as are Christians by profession should not by the civil Magistrate be brought to ordinances, seemeth to be out of question. I move not this as supposing an outward com∣pliance sufficient to the compleating of a Christian, which is done in the work of grace upon the heart, however when men come to, and live within the reach of the word solidly preach∣ed, they are more like to be enlightned and converted. Bishop Latimer used to say, he would have men come to the Church In his Serm. though to take a nap, it may be God would take them npping; who knows Gods time of saving souls? We read of one in those bloudy Marian times, who when the Protestants had a M. Fox in the life of Q Mary. meeting in Tems-street in London to hear a Sermon, came in with a purpose to have informed the persecuting Bishop Bnner against them; he went away by that Sermon converted, and became one of them. And who knoweth what God may do,
though men come to his word out of bie respects? We have ma∣ny good and wholesome laws made by former Parliaments to this very purpose; it were much to be wished, they were revi∣ved and put in execution, that those mulcts and punishments in them were inflicted: that so ungodly men might not dare with that frequency and audaciousnesse to disfrequent the publick places of Gods worship (where the light is set up) under speci∣ous and coloured pretences, when perhaps much worse im∣ploied to the corrupting their weak mindes by seducers, whose labour and ambition is to draw disciples after them and subvert unstable souls. 4. Let it be your chief care (ever Honoured Senators) to set up and maintain this light of the Lord in all places of the Kingdom, there being thousands of Parishes in England and Wales, which are miserably destitute of this light, wanting a∣ble Preachers to hold it out to them; as Cumberland, Northum∣berland, Westmorland, the Bishoprick, yea and a very great part of Yorkeshire, who like Pagans scarse know whether there be a God, a Christ, a holy Ghost or no. Take therefore good King Jehoshaphat for an example, who sent Priests and Levites in great plenty throughout all Judah, and they had the 2 Chron. 17 9. Law of the Lord with them, and went about throughout the Cities of Judah, and taught the people. He was carefull to ad∣vance the light of the Lord, that his subjects might not remain in darknesse; and you see in the following part of the story, how the Lord remembred him for it, and (saith he) the fear of the Lord fell upon all the Kingdomes of the land that were round about Judah, so that they made no warre against Jehosha∣phat. And verely had more care (since all the opportunities of advancing light from the beginning of these distracted times, till now) been taken, had the people been taught by 2 Chron. 17. 11. Phil. 2▪ 21. Learned, Orthodox, Godly, discreet, painfull Divines, in the dark corners of this nation, where very little or no light shi∣neth; by Gods blessing we should not have lost by that charge, Speed in the succession of Saxon Mo∣narks. lib. 7. cat 21. Bde hist Angl. lib. 3. cap. 3. what ever covetous self-ended persons (who seek their own, not God or his people) may suggest to the contrary. Famous Oswald King of Northumberland gave testimony of his zeal for Gods glory, and love to his people in the same sort, by setting
up a light of truth in those very dark times, he sent for one Aiden a Scottish Bishop (saith Beda) to instruct his people, who not well understanding nor pronouncing our language, was not so intelligible to the hearers, the King himself therefore used to interpret his Sermons as the Bishop preached. But it's not said that the King presumed to take on him the Preachers office, he did not preach, only (which indeed was an excellen∣cy in him) he interpreted to them the Preachers Sermons. He well apprehended how much it concerned himself and King∣dome to advance the light of life, without which they should all remain in darknesse and irregularity. Which light of the Lord, that it may be set up and become usefull, I commend to your consideration four short directions. 1. Be regardfull of the nurseries of good learning, that by the means of them such students as shall de futuro be sent a∣broad, may be compleated with knowledge in languages, skil∣fullnesse Isa. 49. 23. of arts and sciences, well read in story politicall and ecclesiasticall, and indeed accomplisht in all good literature requisite to so high an imploiment, that he may shew himself a 2 Tim. 2 5. Sir Hen. Spd. Tom. 1. Concil. Britan. 1 Tim. 5 17▪ . workman which needs not be ashamed; Let these Schools of the Prophets receive their due revenues, and other incouragements which their pious founders and benefactours vouchsafed them: Let no man have just cause to divert his childes studies to secular imploiments, either for want of means, conveniences or ho∣nour by which the mindes of men are much invited to study. Let that other sister which hath no breasts be timely remembred, of which I may say, as King James said in the starre-chamber King Iames his speech in star-chamber. to the Judges, in that of Pauls steeple, that in time may be done at a lesse, which afterwards cannot be at a greater charge. 2. See that the places of Gods worship be maintained; the neglect of which as it gives occasion to our Romane adversaries to speak evil, so doth it not passe without suspition amongst the vulgar sort, as if with the outward fabrick and structure your intention was to demolish worship and Religion it self. Truth Ridley his view of the civil law. p. 19. is, the complaint now is no lesse just (and I hope free from Ro∣mish tincture) then it was in King Alured his daies, when in most places they were exceedingly gon to wrack; I am confi∣dent
you conceive me not to perswade to a popish supesitions garnishing of Churches, walls, nor of a foolish opinion that prayers are heard propter snctitatem loci, which yet was the Th. Aqui. fancy of some Schoolmen: but only that such places should be conveniently repaired, and where they want, more built for receiving the people of God to worship him, for neglect of which we are justly culpable, as they who did not build the Temple of Jerusalem, a type of the Church, Gods people. So is it time for us to mend our own houses demolished by war, and Hab. 1. 9. shall these houses lye wast? 3. Let the Discipline of the Church, according to the word of God, best reformed Churches and fundamentalls of our own Nation be established; it will be a notable means to pre∣serve the light, and to keep of such as endeavour (like as they did that candle, Luther, in the beginning of the German Refor∣mation lighted) to blow it out. The goodnesse of God (saith one in his book wherein this controversie of Discipline is pur∣posely and largely discussed) hath provided in his word a To this pur∣pose M. Tham. Carthwright in his cont. with Arch B. Whit-gist. Discipline for his Church, which if he had not done, he should have been lesse carefull of it then of the commonwealth, of which in that regard he is not unmindfull. Neither is this any other then you have covenanted, and was there ever a Parlia∣ment as of more prayers, fastings, preachings, deliverances, victories, so of more vows, covenants, leagues, and solemn protestations, with eyes hands and all lift up to heaven, then this is: Well, of all sins, to falsifie Covenant is one of the greatest, Eccles. 5 5. Dut 23. 21. better not promise, then having vowed, not perform. In your first Declaration there is this memorable passage. It is far from our purpose or desire to let loose the golden reins of Discipline and government in the Church, to leave private per∣sons or particular congregations, to take up what form of di∣vine service they please, for we hold it requisite that there should be through the whole realm a conformity to that order which the laws enjoyn according to the word of God. O that we had not started aside from this like a deceitfull bow, then surely had we wounded the hairy scalp of many Church ene∣mies, that break the bonds asunder and cast the cords away from them. O that the husbandman had not slept, the enemy
could not with that advantage have sown so many ares of er∣rours in Gods field. O that this guard were set, so the foxes might be taken, even those little foxes which do spoil the vines that are full of grapes. 4. Take order that such Divines as in severall parts of the Kingdome have or shall conscionably hold forth this light of truth in their charges respectively to the edification of their peo∣ple 1 Cor. . . and not to yours or the Commonwealths disadvantage, be plentifully provided of comfortable maintenance and due en∣couragement; Gal. 6. 6. Sir Ed. Cook in second part of Iust on Magna Charta. pag. 3, 4. So in the story of Lucius, Ebel∣bert Eghert. Al¦fred Ehelwol. Edgar Edward the confeour with divers o∣thers more in old Histories. Numb. 4. 14. else how can you expect an exact performance of that trust of beating the light you require from them, you may not muzzle the Oxe that treadeth out the corn. The labouror is worthy of his hire. He that is instructed must make him that instructeth him, partaker of all good things. Our forefathers brought honour to God, happinesse to the Church, to them∣selves a glorious name by their foundations and contributions to the maintenance of his light. Oh let not us grudge that the oyl bestowed at their charge, should run in the same pipe to keep in his lamp and not into our private cruses. You (Honou∣rable) are the repairers of our breaches in Church and state; You are the Physitians of the body politick and ecclesiastick. We dare not prejudge you. Of all injustice its the worst when men take wrongfully from Mala 3 8, 6. Dan Ethic. Christ. 12 c 15. Princeps jure non potest res sacra, & bona cut divino etiam in genere destira etiam ea quae uli superstitioso forvit in ∣sum profanu transferere. Keh Syst Po. l. 1 cap 21. sic polan. in Synt. & in Dan 5. 4, 5. Isa. 50. 4. the publike charge of commonwealth, and that wrong done to the Church is a sinne greater then that which is against the commonwealth, the Church of the two standing in a nearer relation to God, and to injure the Church, though it be a very great sin under the law, as may appear by the expression in Ma∣lachy, Will a man rob God? Ye have robbed me, even this whole naion: Yet is it more hainous, if committed in the light of the glorious Gospel, by how much the Gospels Ministry is more excellent then that of the law: which is the reason why some learned and godly Divines have concluded it unlawfull to ali∣enate the revenus of Gods worship, though given in supersti∣tious times much of it, and haply to some superstitious uses, but rather conceive it ought to be imployed to the service of God, incouraging of learning and godlinesse, which was the main scope of the donours, though some of them might fail in par∣ticular,
Circa fundamentall tenets. But certainly it must needs heighten the sinne of those who detain the revenue of the Church, under the specious shew of lay-tenements. In the mean while there is none to bear the light of truth before the people, none to instruct them; the key of knowledge being wholy taken away, some aumb dog is set over the flock of Christ for a mean salary, whereas they should be instructed by one, as Isaiah saith that hath the tongue of the learned. And to deprive the people of such tongues that we may enrich our selves with the revenue that should maintain them, is a sin no lesse, if not much more, culpable, then that of Achan, who stole a wedge, or as the He∣brew Qui causam  ip∣sum damn disse vidur Ioph . de beno uaico hath it, a tongue of gold, but in the end paid a rate dear enough for it, as many of his successours have since done, and more (if timely repentance and restitution prevent not) may buy the gold of the Temple at a high price. It seems the ve∣ry heathen, who had no other pilot then natures law, stood in fear to runne this hazard, of splitting themselves on this rock of sacriledge, and so make shipwrack of a good conscience to Gen 47. 2, Puherri us igitur his texs est ed nos non sequmur nec a ittims in Germania, &c Phara b Rex ae∣gypti conjuget in judicio prox io & contra priacipes & magistraus Germanie, propterea quod ille suos sacer∣does coluit a∣lut & abstieu it a hois  ea u∣ssino contra∣cta in su po∣telatem rei gere patusset. Luth. the losse of the soul, the most precious lading, which if once gone, is irrecoverable. Doe we not read of Pharaoh King of Egypt, in that great famine mentioned by Moses, how that when all the people were necessitated to sell their lands to make provision for themselves and families that they perished not in the dearth, that he provided a portion for the Priests, that so their lands might be preserved to the uses they were de∣dicated? He might with as much ease, as little charge, have entered on the Priests possession, as the whole land, and so have been sole Lord, that no man (as our great land-Lords use to say) should have a foot within his territories. No, he durst not enterprise it, Wherefore the Priests land became not Pharaohs: He does not drive them (as some have done) to an exigent that he might gain the more by them, he provides, to prevent that mischief, portions, at his own charges for those who are disabled by the penury of the times, to make provision for themselves. And in that generall seisure of all estates there is this clause of exception in the deed concerning the Priests, to except before excepted, the land of the Priests only, which became not Pharaohs. I know that some do endeavour to evade
this place alledgeing the Hebrew word,  Cohen signifieth a Prince, and so take it of the chief officers about the King; but Hieronymus. Chrysostomus. Seb Munster. Ar. Montanus. Vatablus. Ant. Honcala. Leon Marius. Seleccerus. Stella. the word signifies both Priest and Prince, and because in one person it sets forth both, haply by one word, and the circumstan∣ces shew a distinction betwixt them and the rest of the land, which occasions the Learned generally to read it as our Transla∣tours have done. So the Chaldee, the Septuagint, Tostatus, Pere∣rius, Cornelius a Lapide, Mercerus, Calvin, Musculus, And all our English Translatours I have met with. Noble Senatours, let it be your honour (as he said) to leave M. Lutherus. Luc. Osiander. Ioh. Brentius. Dav. Paraeus. H. Ainsworth. Doway Bib. Hen 4. 0. Engl. the Church in a richer condition then you found it, yea though in most places it complains of poverty (it being torn and beg∣gerly) endeavour to restore it; it will be your comfort when you lye on your last pillow, if in this case you can sincerely say to God, as Augustus of Rome repaired by him, inveni lateriti∣am, reliqui marmoream. Remember that this light, the word, held forth to the people is not maintained (since that extraor∣dinary apostolicall gifts are ceased) without vast expence; those who are in this imploiment (that their office may be more acceptable, gracefull and profitable) have severall lights, none of them to be suffered to die, which they must maintain at great expence. 1. A light of knowledge in the study by books of all kindes 2 Tim 2. 13. Floreatissima Anglia, ocellas ille ecclesiarum peculium certis∣mi gulare. Deodatus. of learning, that so they may be able Ministers rightly dividing the word in truth; this (blessed be God) is one cause why the Divines of this land have been so famous to the admira∣tion of forreigners: whereas if this light be extinct, there will be a want of the other light in knowledge and doctrine also; as one, a great Schollar, long since observed: poor beggerly Ex tenuitat beneficiorum necessarò se∣quitur ignoran∣tia sacerdtum. Panermit. maintenance will have but a poor contemptible Ministry; Scan∣dalous maintenance, scandalous Ministry. 2. A light in the family: he must maintain those whose sub∣sistance is from him: which sometimes are exceeding many; if he should be deficient in providing for them, you would condemn him worse then an infidel: It is a pretty observation that one hath, The Table of shew bread (saith he) was set in the midst of the Temple to signifie thus much, Quod Sacerdotes in Templo servientes, de Templo victum habere debent. Is it not Aquin.
much to be lamented think you, that the oyl in the first institu∣tion of it appointed to preserve light to Gods people, is powred Indicandus est fur serilegu qui as fuerit non uudequa. que tollere, sed de ecclesia tollere Aug tr 50 in Joh out to other purposes, Ye that are Lords and Burgesses of the Parliament house, I require of you in the name of all my poor brethren that are English men and members of Christs body, that ye consi∣der well (as ye will answer before the face of Almighty God in the day of judgement) this abuse, and see it amended. When as antichrist of Rome durst openly without any vi∣zard, walk up and down thorowout England, he had so great favour there, and his children had such craty wits (for the children of this world are wiser in their generation then the children of light) that they had not onely almost gotte  all the best lands of England into their hands, but also the most part of all the best benefices, both parsonages and vicraged, which were for the most part all impropred unto them. And when they had the gifts of any not impropered, they gave them unto their friends, of the which alwaies some were lear∣ned, for the monks found of their friends children at school. And though they were not learned, yet they kept hospitality, and helped their poor friends. And if the personage were improprated, the monks were bound to deal almes to the poor, and to keep hospita∣lity, as the wriings of the gifts of such personages and lands do planly declare in these words, in puram eleofom. And as touching the les that they deale and the hospitality that they kept, every man knoweth that many thousands were well releeved of them, and might have been better, if they had not had so many great mens horses to feed, and had not been overcharged with such idle gentlemen, as were never out of the abbeys. And if they had any vicarage in their hands, they set in sometime some sufficient  (though it were but seldome) to preach and to teach. But now that all the abbeys with their  goods and impropriated personages be in temporall mens hands, I doe not here tell, that one halfepenny worth of almes, or any other profit cometh unto the people of those parishes. Your pretence of putting down abbies, was to amend that was amisse in them. It was far amisse that a great part of the lands of the abbies (which were given to bring up learned men, that might be Preachers to keep hospitality, and to give almes to the poor) should be spent upon a few superstitious monks, which gave no fourty pound in almes, when they should have given two hundred. It was amisse that the monks should have personages in their hands, and deal but the twentieth part thereof to the poor, and preached but once in a year to them that paid the tithes of the personages. It was amisse that they scarcely a∣mong twenty set not one sufficient vicar to preach for the tthes that they received. But see now, how t that was amisse, is amended for all the godly pretence. It is amended even as the devil amended his dames legge (as it is in the proverb) when he should have set it right, he brke it quite in peecet. The monks gave too little lm, and set unable persons many times in their benefices. But now where twenty pound was given yearly to the poor, in more then in a hundred places in England, is not one meal mt given. This is a fa amendment. Where they had alwaies one or other vicar, that tither preached or hired some to preach, now is there no vicar at all, but the farme is vicar and parson alltogether, and onely an old castaway monk or  which can scarcely say his mattens, is  for twen∣ty or thirty shillings meat and drink, yea in some places for meat and drink alone without any wages. I know, and not I alone, but twenty thousand more know more then five hundred vi∣carages and parsonages, thus well and gospelly ferved, after the new Gospel of England. And if a man say to the farmers, why have the people no preachers? seeing ye have the tithes and offerings ye should finde Preachers. They will answer, we have hired the per∣sonages of this or that Lord, and he or he is parson or vicar, we pay for the tithes and of∣ferings to the Lord that is person. Well then, I say unto thee my Lord, parson, and vicar, thou doest wrong, to have personages and vicarages, to have the tenth pig, the tenth lamb, goose, fleece, and so of all other things, seeing that thou art no Minister nor no priest of Christs Church; teach, nor do any office of a parson or of a vicar, but polle and pille. What canst thou say of thy self my Lord parson and vicar? thou wilt say peradventure, the King gave me the abbey and all that belongeth thereto, which had then given him by the Parliament, Therefore if thou speak against my being person and vicar though I neither preach nor teach, nor yet procure none to do it for me, thou art a traitour, for this the thirteenth article of our creed added of late, that whatsoever the Parliament doth, must needs be well done, and the Parliament, or any proclamation out of the Parliament time, cannot erre. But to you my Lord parsons, how can ye defend your selves if a man should bring this argument against you, and prove you all the theeves, that have personages and vica∣rages in your hands, and cannot preach. Christ saith Iohn 10. he that entreth not into the sheepfold by the door, but climbeth in an other way is a thief and a murtherer, but ye entred in an other way, wherefore ye are theeves and murtherers. That you come not in by the door, I will prove it thus, Christ is the door, but by Christ ye came not into the sheepfold, that is, to be parsons and vicars, for ye grant that ye came in by the act of Parliament, and the act of Parliament is not Christ, for it is not confirmed by Christs word, therefore ye came not by Christ, and so be ye theeves and murtherers, as your works proved of late, in shed∣ding of the bloud of so many true preachers and shepheards, which spent their lives for their sheep. If this argument be not strong enough, what say you by this? All they that come before me (saith Christ) are theeves and robbers, ye come into the sheepfold, before Christ, ergo ye be theeves and robbers. To come in before Christ, is to be a parson or a vicar before Christ send him▪ and ye came in before Christ sent you, for he sendeth none to be sheep∣heards, but such as he knoweth to be able to feed his flook, ergo he never sent you, for he knoweth you unable to do that office. And thus to conclude, ye be theeves and robbers, for a theef cometh not but to steal and to kill. Wherefore give over your parsonages to learned men, and enter not into other mens vocations, to rob the Ministers both of their office and of their living, that ye be not punished of God. But if ye will needs be parsons and vicars still, and have all the profits of the parsonages, and will have all, even to the tithe egge of a poor woman that hath but two hens, ye must have the pains that belong to such persons as you be. Hear what Almighty God saith unto you, my Lords. which will be parsons and pastors, Ezek 3 If I say unto the wicked thou shalt die the death, and thou speak not unto him, to keep the wicked from his way, the wicked his own self shall dye in his wickednesse, but his bloud shall I require of thy hand. Mark well, Lord parson, for this is said to all them that are parsons, and take wages, and living of the people, as tithes and offerings, for feeding of them with Gods word, or else by what title canst thou challenge the tithes? look well upon this matter, and build thy conscience upon Gods word. The complaint of Roderick Mors to the Parliament in Edw 6. time. as former times have complained, lusts
of men, yea the worst lusts of the worst men that are enemies to God and the Church. In the mean time those and their posterity,
who attend on his light, whilst others have food enough and to spare, are in hazard to perish with hunger. 3. A light in the town and countrey where they live: its a light of good works, in shewing mercy to the poor, being help∣full to the needy, as Job saith of himself, he was eyes to the Job 29, 15. Job 31. 20 blinde, feeet to the lame; this would have covered them, to the cre∣dit of Religion, inciting others to the like, he did not put his light under a bushell, So (praised be God) in this nation, where the revenues of the Church were great (though some did spend much in vanity and excessive courses as the profuse vulgar) all did not so: much hath been given by Divines to Colledges, Hospitalls, Libraries and other pious works. And indeed D. Willet, the end of his Synopsis. Schollars best knowing to set a price on learning, have been most beneficiall this way. The Apostles exhortation to Ministers is that they be given to hospitality. Surely then they must have ability else they should 1 Tim. 3. 2. stand in need of other mens hospitality, be fitter to receive then give, as God knows it is the case of many a learned, god∣ly and painfull Divine at this day (as sometimes it was the con∣dition of learned men, beware the fears where Church reve∣nues Musculus. Io. Drusius. Amesius. H. Ainsworth. Iohn Knox. August 3. 1571. are devoured) who have great charges of children and nothing wherewith to bring them up, or place them out, while the ancient Church-revenue is in the hands of many that worse deserve it. This made the mighty godly Divine of Scotland (as I am informed) lying on his death bed (and the words of The mighty spirit of com∣fort wisedome and concord remain with you Dear bre∣thren, if abili∣ty of body would have suffered, I should not have troubled you with this my indictment. I have not forgot that was laid to my charge by famous libels the last Assembly, which I pray you patiently to hear, and judge of me as you will answer to God: for unto you that hear I submit my self, being assured that I neither offended God nor good men in any thing that hitherto hath been laid to my charge. And now, brethren, because the daily decay of na∣turall strength threatens unto me certain and sudden departing from the misery of this life, of love and conscience I exhort you, yea in the fear of God I charge and command you, that ye take heed to your selves and to the flock over the which God hath placed you Pastours. To discourse of the behaviour of your selves I may not, but to command you to be faithfull to the flock I dare not forget Unfaithfull and traitours to the flock shall you be before the Lord Jesus, if that with your consent, directly or indirectly ye suffer unworthy men to be thrust into the Ministry of the Church, under what pretene that ever it be. Remember the judge before whom you must make an account, and resist that tyranny as you would avoid hell fire; this battell I grant will be hard, but the second part will be harder, that is, that with the like uprightnesse and strength in God, ye gain-stand the mercilesse devourers of the patrimony of the Church: if men will spoil, let them doe it at their own perill and condemnation, but communicate not yee with their sins of whatsoever estate they be, nei∣ther by consent, nor yet by silence; but with publike protestation, make this known to the world, that ye are innocent of such robberies, which will, ere it be long, provoke Gods ven∣geance upon the committers thereof, whereof you will seek redresse of God and man▪ God give you wisedome, strength and courage in so just a cause, and me a happy end. Of St Andrews, Aug 3. 1571. sic subscribitur, Your brother in Christ Jesus, Knox. dying men should make a deeper impression) so earnest in his exhortatory letter writ from St Andrews to the Assembly at Sterling. There are two branches of his exhortation, one to keep out of the Church scandalous Ministers, the other to pre∣vent a scandalous maintenance.
Noble Patriots, as it belonged to Eliazer to provide oyl for Isa. 49. 23. Magni rege ac principes non solum Chri∣sti jugum sub∣ierunt, sed e∣tiam facultates suas contuerunt ad erigendam & fovendam Christi Ecclesi∣am ut se patro∣nos & tutores ejus praestarent. Cal. in loc. the lights of the Temple, so to you it appertains, as nurserers of the Church, to see that these lights of the Church have oyl to feed them as Hezekiah did, 2 Chron. 31 4. I can present you with no arguments more constringent then those in the text before you. 1. You have many priviledges, God expects this as a testi∣mony of thankfulnesse. Those who gain by sea-trade are not unwilling to be at the charge of land-light. The children of light should be as wise as the men of the world. 2. You are reformers in Israel, this is one speciall point of your work, to see that Gods house be not as a dark room, the light removed. 3. You know that Religion is not in shew, but in deed, it's A brief repeti∣tion of the heads of the Sermon. James 2. 16. not sufficient to say as those St James mentioneth, goe and be warmed, unlesse also you make provision for them. 4. It's the Lords light that affords direction to your souls for the obtaining eternall light, which by how much the more excellent it is then that under the law, so much the more liberall we should be in providing for it, as that fa∣mous servant of God long since taught us, with whose words B. Babington on Gen. 47 7. except the land of the Priests. pag. 146. I shall crave leave to close this imploiment. Had the Priests of the law the tenth part, and shall not the Ministers of a better testament have any part? Such maintenance will have such Ministers in time out of question, to the utter decay of learning piety and Religion, and to the bringing of all barbarisme and errour as Satan wisheth.
Worthy is the vertue of Nehemiah touching this matter, ever∣lasting remembrance and imitation of them that have like authority and fear God; he finding that the Priest Eliashib Nehem 13. 14. (who had the oversight of what belonged to the maintenance of the Priests, being joyned in affinity with Tobiah the Am∣monite, an enemy of the Jews, the portions of the Levites were not given them, but every man was fled to shift for him∣self amongst his friends) most zealously reformed it as you may see; threw out Tobias vessels, thrust out Eliashib, and placed them that were accounted faithfull, and brought the tithes of corn and wine and oyl into the house of the Lord: again mark the state of our times, and see if such Tobias be not yet amongst us, and such Eliashibs, who dealing in all un∣righteousnesse, convey the portions of the Levites by little and little from the Church that all may come to ruine and utter confusion in time. They must have the tithe corn and gleab land, peradventure the house also for a dairy, and then cosen Eliashib the Minister shall have the tithe geese, and the egges at Easter: But shall not God visit this great impiety? O Lord, O Lord, in mercy forgive the sinnes of the land, and the ini∣quity of thy people deserving justly the losse of thy word and sweet liberty of their consciences, and yet, yet shew favour, for thy mercy raise up men that are able to feed thy people as they ought, and either convert or confound Church-robbers that savour nothing but their own gain, that take thus daily away the reward of knowledge, endeavour the death of thou∣sand thousands of souls, which thou hast created. Stirre up Nehemiah thy faithfull servant to redresse this sin, and to settle things carnall as shall be fit for them that sow spirituall, that God be not mocked: So we that be thy people and the sheep of thy pasture, shall give thee praise for ever, for so great a mercy. Amen, Amen.
