P1761 E382_4 R201423 99861934 160173
THE PETITION OF Colonels, Lieutenant-Colonells, Ma∣jors, and other Officers, that have faithfully served the GREAT CAUSE OF THE KINGDOME Under the Authority of PARLIAMENT. Presented to both HOUSES, with the severall Answers of the Lords and Com∣mons in Parliament. LONDON, Printed for Robert Bostocke. March. 27. 1647.
TO The Right Honourable the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, The humble Petition of Colonels, Lieutenant Colonels, Majors and other Officers that have faithfully served the great Cause of the Kingdome, under the Autho∣rity of Parliament, Sheweth, THat your Petitioners having faithfully served you in the maintenance and settle∣ment of Religion, the liberty of the Subjects, and the Privileges of Parlia∣ment, according to the tenor of the nati∣onall Covenant taken by them, in the time of the Kingdomes greatest exigence (which were the princi∣pall
ends for which they were at first ingaged) and cannot but hold themselves bound in honour and con∣science, in concurrence with many others, to tender to your Honours Considerations, such things as they in all submission do conceive exceedingly conducing to the speedy effecting of the said ends, togethe with their owne sad and neglected condition, humbly desi∣ring your Honours favourable construction of their good intentions therein, and opportune and timely an∣swer unto these ensuing particulars, viz as followeth. 1. That the publique worship of God may spee∣dily be setled, according to the word of God, and the example of the best Reformed-Churches. 2. That the Subject may have the benefit of Mag∣na Charta, and the Petition of Right, so farre forth as may comport with the necessity of the Kingdome. 3. That all Committees in the severall Counties may be removed, and that they, the Treasurers, and Se∣questrators of the said Counties may be called to a speedy and strict account, for the better satisfaction and ease of the Kingdome. 4. That the Arreares of such Officers as have ser∣ved under any generall Command, may have their ac∣counts speedily audited in London, and that a speciall Order may be issued to te severall Committees of accounts residing in other Counties, forthwith to au∣dit the accounts of such Officers as have been subser∣vient to the Orders of the Committees of the said Counties. 5. That such pay as shall appeare due unto the said Officers under the hands of the Committees of Ac∣counts, according to the establishment, may be forth∣with
paid unto them with interest, and the Ordinance upon the Bishops Lands, with the security of the Ex∣cise may be revived for the discharge thereof; that for such part as is respited upon the publique faith, it may be discharged with interest, at the end of six moneths deducting the surcharges of the severall Counties, and that an Order may be issued to the said severall Coun∣ties to bring in their surcharges within the time of three moneths, or otherwaies they shall not be char∣ged on our Accounts; that so all of us may not be ut∣terly ruined as some of us already are, by long and te∣dious sollicitation, nor your justice blemished tho∣rough our necessities and sufferings. 6. That all such Officers and Souldiers as have con∣tracted any Debt since this Warre began, in order to the carrying on of the publique Service, either for the want of the payment of their due Sallary, or by reason of their own disbursment, may have their persons free from all Processes, Arrests, or Molestations, until their Arreares shal be discharged, and that then their Credi∣tors shall be proportionably satisfied, and the said Officers left to the usuall course and full power of the Law as formerly. 7. That an Act of Indemnitie may be passed for all Officers and Souldiers, for such actions as have bin done by them in reference to the publique Service since the beginning of this Warre. 8. That all such Officers as have lost the benefit o their Estates, and have disbursed divers summes o Money for the raysing of Men, Horses, Armes, o Ammunition, or in the management of their pub¦lique trusts, shall be considered for their said losses
and allowed for their said disbursments upon just proofe thereof made before the Committee of Ac∣compts; And that the said Committee shall have spe∣ciall Order given them to audite such disbursments when they shall be brought unto them. 9. That not forgetting your Honours tender care of the sad condition of bleeding Ireland, and that no∣thing may be wanting on our parts towards the pro∣moting of so honourable and pious a worke, some of us have ingaged our selves already, and the rest are most willing to contribute their best assistance thereunto, when as your Honours shall be pleased to command us. And in pursuance of a full Establishment of the particulars aforesaid, as in your great Wisedome shall be thought most convenient, Your Petitioners doe offer their utmost service and assistance, with their Lives and Fortunes. And shall ever pray, &c.
Die Lunae 22. Martii. 1646. THE Right Honourable House of Lords being informed, that divers Officers that have served the Parliament and Kingdome were at the doore, desing to preferre a Petition to them, they were called in, and Colonell Richard Sandys did present the same, stiled, The Humble Petition of Colonells, Lieutenant Colonells, Majors, and other Officers that have faithfully served the great Cause of the Kingdome under the Authority of Parliament: which being read, the Petitioners were commanded to withdraw, and after debate they were called in againe, and the Speaker gave them the Answer of the House, viz. The House gives you thanks for your Affections to thi House. They give you thanks for your good Services done for the Parliament and Kingdome. They give you thanks for your Constancy and Perseverance in your Affections to the well-f of the Kingdome. They give you thanks for your Readinesse to serve the Par∣liament in the Irish Warre, and doe promise when they have occasion to imploy you. For your Arreares, they will use their utmost endeavours, that you may be speedily satisfied. And for the other particulars, they will take them into spee∣dy Consideration.
Die Lunae 22 Martii. 1646. THe House being informed that divers Officers that hae served the Parliament were at the doore, desiring to pre∣erre a Petition to the House, they were called in, and Sir Tho∣mas Essex did preferre a Petition, stiled, The Humble Petition, of Colonells, Lieutenant Colonells, Majors, and other Officers, that have faithfully served the great Cause of the Kingdome under the Authority of Parliament; the which, the Peti∣tioners being withdrawne, was read: And it is Ordered, that Master Hollis, Sir Philip Stapleton, Master Reynolds, and Col. Bossevile, do from this House acquaint the Petitioners, That as to their Arreers, the House hath, and will take them into Consi∣deration with others, in such manner as they shall think fit; and for their desire of imployment, they will take them into Consi∣deration, as occasion shall be. The rest of the Petition, which concernes the mannagement of the Affaires of the Publique, it does not concerne any to give Instructions to the Houses therein: Yet in consideration the Petitioners are men that have done Service to the Parliament, and in regard of their Profes∣sions may have done this meerely out of inadvertency, they are, willing to passe by it. Hen. Elsyng Cler. Parl. D. Com. FINIS.
