P2604 E63_20 R8796 99873403 125873
THE PLOTTS REVEALED, AND THE PARLIAMENT VINDICATED: Or a full discovery of the wicked designes, plotts, and conspiracies of Iesuites, Papists, popish Prelates, and o∣ther popishly affected persons, from before the beginning of His now Majesties Raigne, unto this present, for the rooting out of the true Prote∣stant Religion, and to establish Popery in this Kingdome; with the severall waies and meanes this designe hath beene prosecuted. Setting forth the true causes and end of this uniust Warre against the Parliament; and the point fully proved, that this Warre is no new quarrell, nor caused by the Militia, but devillish malice against the inten∣ded reformation of the true Protestant Religion, plotted by Jesuites, and now managed by English and Irish Papists and their Abbettors. With a briefe Narration and Vindication of the whole proceeding of this Parliament, from the beginning to this present; Justified by Nature, Law and Religion, against the false Calumniations of all Malignants, and sundry Scurrilous and abusive Pamphlets, of late Printed to delude and deceive the Kingdome: And lastly, may serve as a sufficient encouragement to all the people o this Kingdome, to be no longer gazers on, but put their hands to the worke, b a speedy uniting, with the hazard of life and fortune, in defence of Gods true worship, your owne Rights, Liberties, and this present PARLIAMENT. Printed by Order. London Printed for F. Coles, and F. Leach, and are to be sold in the Old-baily. 164
The Plotts discovered, and the Parliament Vindicated. WE all complaite of our present miseries by the bloody distractions of the Kingdome, by this unnaturall war; But few of us consider-seriously of the cause whence these distractions come. For information herein, take notice that sinne is the only cause of every affliction, and of all punish∣ments, whether to private men, or whole Kingdomes. We by our sins have provoked God to anger, and God sheweth his anger by his judg∣ments upon us. King and Subject have sinned, and now King and Sub∣ject are punished. God causeth us to punish one another; hee doth it either to reforme us, or to destroy us. But God is the efficient cause of all, the cause of all causes: all o∣ther causes are but Gods instruments. Now the instrumentall cause of ur distractions, is wicked men. God useth one sinner to punish ano∣ther, as Israels sins were punished by wicked Shishacke, and by Ido∣latrous Ashur, whom God calleth the rod of his anger, and the staffe in his hand. So God punished Davids finne by wicked Absolom, and King Rehoboams sinne by his rebellious people, and the sinnes of the people by their King Iereboam. Yet be informed, that though God doe use wicked men for his in∣struments; wicked men do wickedly even in the things in which God useth them to doe his will, for they are naturally the Devills instru∣ments to execute his will, and their owne devillish malice; as wee see in Iob. That which God doth by wicked men is just, but that which wicked men doe is unjust: for they have no eye to the doing of Gods will, but to their owne wicked end, which is alwaies unjust and sinfull. For example, It was just with God to punish Davids bloud-guiltinesse & Adultery by Absoloms rebellion, and defiling of Davids Concubines:
But it was unjust and wicked in Absolom to doe it: it was just with God to punish Rehoboam by the revolt of his people, but injust in them to cast him off from being their King. So it is st with God to punish us at this day by these distractions, and unnaturall Warres, and to suffer the King to be misled by a wic∣ked Councell, to afflict and spoyle his people: but it is unjust in that Councell, and error in the King to be led by them to doe such things. For their aime is wicked and devillish, and are naturally the devills instruments to make warre against Christ: their end is to destroy the true Protestant Religion, to subvert our good Lawes, and to establish Popery, and bring us and our posterities, our bodies and soules into spirituall and slavish bondage for ever: and to root out Protestant Religion from all places in Christendome. This is a certaine truth, and will clearely appeare to any rationall man that will but take a view of their forepast proceedings, their pre∣sent warre, and the persons contriving, and acting it. First, take a view of their fore-past proceedings, and consider (not to look so farre, as to the Raigne of Queene Elizabeth, or King Iames, both of blessed memory) in whose times that Jesuiticall faction were active in Treasons, by poyson, stabbing, blowing up Parliaments, de∣stroying posterities of Kings, Nobles, and massacring whole King∣domes. Onely note their proceedings in the passages of things since the first of His Majesties Raigne, at which time we may remember, the Duke of Buckingham was the great favorite: who (by confederacy which Je∣suites and Priests, first in Spaine, and afterwards in France, when his Majesty married with the French Kings Sister) gave great incourage∣ment to the Popish partie in all places, and furthered their designes in England by uncontrolled power: for through the favour and authori∣ty the Duke had from the King, he ruled, and swayed the course of things in the Kingdome: and it was evident by those times, that the Jesuites swayed him, and by his greatnesse brought many of their own faction, into the greatest places of command, whom they desired, he put in, and whom they disliked, he put out: that most at the Councell-Table were their friends, or such as durst not oppose them. And to make way for their disigne upon England, they set upon the Protestants in France, to weaken them, and to that end His Majesties ships were lent against Rochell, which destroyed their shipping, and blocked up the passage: and when the Duke was questioned in Parli∣ament,
the answer was, the shippes were not lent with intention to hurt Rochell but in complement to the King of France. Then a Fleet was prepared, the Duke himselfe would goe with it, pretending to relieve Rochell: but when they came to Isle of Ree, all our brave Souldiers were betrayed to the sword, Rochell robbed of their provision, and the Protestants sold into their enemies hands. What other voyages were made (to Cadis and other places, wee re∣member too) & observed then that their end was nothing but to weaken the Kingdome, and prepare to the enfuing treason against our Religion, and Lawes. Then they began the worke of England, by crying up Arminianisme defending those tenents, patronizing their writings, printing and pub∣lishing those dangerous bookes of Mountagues: which (before King Iames had seene, disallowed, condemned, and forbid to be printed) Mountague was made a Bishop, and Doctor White also, for defending those bookes at a pact conference: All oters were presently preferred, that favored those tennts, as Cozens, Wren, Corbart, &c. Thus they sowed the seedes of Popery thoughout the whole Kingdome, which shewed they expected to have a crop of pure Popery. To bring this forward, the power and professors of Protestant Reli∣gion were disgraced and persecuted. I will onely give you a view of some particulars: and you may judge of the whole, as the Geometrician did at the body of Hercules by his foot. We can remember (it is so lately) that all our best Divines, and ho∣nest Orthodox professors of Religion, of the Laiety were by authori∣ty scoffed at, and persecuted in the High-Commission, and all other Courts of that nature, if it were but for going from a dumbe Arminian Reader out of his owne Parish to heare an Orthodox Preacher: All laborious Orthodox Preachers were pecked at, and by some soule mouthes almost devoured: I am sure very many suffered under the little Wren: for he peckt up all those precious plants out of his Diocesse. Then Lectures were put downe in all places, and afternoone Ser∣mons forbidden on the Lords day: Bookes were also published and commanded to bee read in all Churches, giving liberty to prophane that holy day, contrary to the expresse command of God, and against the enacted law of the Kingdome; all Ministers that refused to reade these bookes were suspended: Thus good men were weeded out in all Countreys and all to displant Religion, and plant popery. The Arminian Priests and Court Chapleins cryed out against the
Sanctifying of the Lords day, called Sunday no Sabboth, and denyed the morality of the fourth Commandement, &c. And these men would not be called Preachers, nor Ministers (names that Saint Paul gloried in) but called themselves Priests: the holy Ta∣ble might no longer be called Table, but Altar: and the standing of it was altered, and it made a reall Altar, ascended to by steps, with bow∣ing, cringing, and reverence to it Crucifixes set up, Basons and Tapers were set upon it: nothing was wanting of Popery, but the name Po∣pery and the Idoll-Sacrifice of the Masse. Nor was that Idoll altogether wanting, for it was daily in Somerset-House, St. Iames-house, and divers other places; common to all that would goe to it: nor durst any man question those that went, though they were seene to goe every day. Priests frequented Papists houses in all Counties, and no man might question them; if any by lawfull authority did apprehend a Priest, they were checked for it, and the Priest discharged by speciall command from the Queene, or under some Privie Councellors hands. Court Chaplaines and Bishops preached Iustification by workes, Free-will, seven Sacraments, and Consubstantiation: (a faire way to Transubstantiation) with a number of other popish Doctrines; and maintained, that there might easily be a conjunction betweene the Pa∣pist and us: so it is plaine that wee must have gone wholly to them: for they professe they will not come one jot to us. The Presses were allowed to Arminians, and the Popish faction, to print any popish tenents, but forbid to the good Protestants: none might preach against their positions, much lesse print any thing for confuta∣tion of their errours or heresies, upon paine of imprisonment, fining, sus∣pension, pilloring, cutting off eares, slitting of noses, banishment, &c. more cruelty then hath beene inflicted upon any Protestant among the Turks: when these and more have beene questioned in Parliament, our Parliaments were broken, the evils increased. Yea, Parliament men were disgraced and imprisoned: and because Parliamets would not give the Kingdomes money without redresse of these and other evils: they devised waies to wrest by force great summes of money out of the subjects purse, by illegall and unsufferable taxati∣ons. First by loane, and the refusers were imprisoned, or put to intole∣rable charges by continuall attendace at the Councell Table: and many eminent Gentlemen died without mercy in the prisons: others
were sent into remote Counties. Then Souldiers were billeted in all Councies, and many Horses with their riders were sent for from be∣yond the Seas, to awe and subdue the Kingdome, and by strong hand to wrest from us our Religion, and Lawes. But Divine providence, (by Feltons hand) cut off the actor of that designe at that time. Here observe and clearely see, that this warre is no new or sudden thing, nor occasioned by the Militia, as they now pretend; but the same in effect that was intended fifteene or sixteene yeares agoe. After this another Parliament was called, voyces were forced, and illegall meanes used, but when this would not serve to their purpose, that Par∣liament as others was dissolved. Se the first Remonstrance of both Hous∣es.Then came other taxes for non-knight-hood; who and what per∣sons were brought within this taxation we all know, and the multitudes that were imprisoned, and made to attend the Councell-Table, wee cannot forget. If this Par∣liament had not taken a∣way those Mo∣nopolies and taxes, the Kingdome had suffered as much by this time in their estates, as they have by this war, (except the spoyle by plundering) which is not the Parlia∣ments fault.After that came Shipmoney; a boundlesse and endlesse taxe; also taxes for compositions for Cottages, for Forest Lands, Timber, Woods, &c. mighty exactions upon Customes, and Monopolies, almost of all things of necessary use; thereby inhaunsing the prices, to the pre∣judice of the whole Kingdome, yea, to the utter ruine of divers Trades, and Corporations: So that multitudes of Masters and Prenti∣ses cryed out of the burthens, which is now forgotten by them, and no thankfulnes is returned by them, either to God or the Parliament: other cruell taxes were imposed upon bulidings, together with many other oppressions, all against law, and yet law could not helpe us; all Courts of Law, and our Courts of Justice were corrupted; Judges and great Officers bought places deare, and sold their service in them dearer, to make themselves gayners; besides many Judges were displaced for doing justice, or for refusing to judge unjustly: the whole Kingdome was oppressed, all were wronged, and all left without remedy: Gun∣powder and other Ammunition was taken from us, and wee left desti∣tute of necessary defence: Popery broke in upon us: Parliaments were neglected: Prerogative was set up, and they began to promise to them∣selves a speedy accomplishment of all their designes: onely they had some feare that Scotland might bee some obstacle in their way (as in∣deede it proved) God infatuating their Counsells, to thrust upon the Scots their new Liturgy and Popish Canons, before they had fallie finished the worke in England: (though under a faire pretence of a glorious uniformity, which our brethren of Scotland did not so well
fancy as we; nor did they give Land any great praise for the present; but refused it, though it was manifest that it was no worse, than wa contrived at Rome, and from thence sent into England. The the little (great) Bishop (like a Pope) sent his commands by his Legats and Commissioners, that they should receive that Liturgy, but not obeyed: the honest Scots were proclaimed Rebells and Traitors, and an Army raised to compell them: His Majesty was incensed and perswaded (with his Army) to advance to Barwicke; but by Gods providence there was a pacification, and His Majestie returned home in peace, though quickly after he returned to that wicked counsell of Bishops, and Popish affected, (all promises buried in oblivion) was perswaded to raise another Army: New Proclamations and Declara∣tions was printed, full of bitternesse against the Scots: and a Parlia∣ment called to raise monies for that warre: the Parliament refusing, was presently dissolved: but the warre notwithstanding went forward: then the Scots (as we all know) entred Newcastle, standing upon their just defence. Then this Parliament was called to debate of the Warre, which tho∣rough Gods goodnesse they againe pacified to the great content of both Kingdomes; onely Bishops, Papists, and Popish affected, stormed at the peace, especially, that His Majesty had gratiously signed the Bill (bcause of the many great affaires in hand) that this Parliament should not be broken without the consent of both Houses, and presently they plotted how to breake it. First, they endeavoured to bring the Kings Army from Yorke against it, the Earle of Strafford having in readinesse 8000. Souldiers in Ireland, to be brought hither to assist that worke, and to subdue the Kingdome, as was before intended by the Duke of Buckingham: But this plott being (by Gods mercy) discovered, Lictrs axe tooke off this actor, as Feltons knife the other: then they laboured to hinder the proceedings in Parliament by their Votes (as wee are in∣formed by the Parliaments first Remonstrance) when Votes could no longer hinder, they bred devision in both Houses: and then between the King and both Houses, caused His Majestie to accuse ome of both Houses of treason:Honour blinds the eyes, and corrupts Iu∣stice, as Solo∣man spaketh of gifts. but could never shew what the treason was, though desired by both Houses. But indeede they thought to have put all in a present uproare, and so to have broke the Parliament: having during the time they were with the King in Scotland (as they hoped) made a partie there: and by the honours which they had perswaded the King to bestow upon some of
the Citizens, they thought they had blinded the City too: and then having actually raised that bloody Rebellion in Ireland, intending the same in Eng∣land; they prevailed with His Majesty to come in hostile manner against his Parliament, to take thence by force those members before accused; having in a scroll divers others they likewise intended to accuse: so to have bro∣ken the Parliament, or forced it to their owne ends; which Gods providence and the Parliaments wisedome prevented. Then presently they endeavored to make themselves Masters and posses∣sors of all the Armes and strong holds of the Kingdome: First, they bought out sir William Belford out of his place in the Tower, whom they knew to be uncorrupted and no instrument for their treason, and put Colonell Luns∣ford in his place; after him Sir Iohn Byrone, & Captaine Leg to be governour of Hull, then the Earle of Newcastle, all very fit men to betray a Kingdome. These passages declare evidently their intention was to make warre against the Parliament and subjects. And hence it was that the Parliament desires to settle the Militia of the Kingdome in safe hands; and for this cause most Counties petitioned to have it so: So that the Militia was not the cause of their warre, but their preparation caused the Militia. They also made mutinies and tumults against the Citizens: First, Luns∣ford began in Westminster Hall, then others of that faction in Westminster, and after at Whitehall-gate and the Strand, cutting and slashing unarmed harmelesse Citizens: and then they perswaded they King from London, pre∣tending danger to his Majesties person by tumults, when indeede there was no tumults but what themselves caused. But it is a paradox,The letter tha came frō L. D to the King makes it cleare, wishin the King to b take him to a strong hold. if his Majestie left London because of tumults, that they should endeavour (as they have done) to make mutinies and tumults in the City to bring him thiher againe. But it is manifest that his Majestie was not (indeed) afraid of any hurt by the City, for then hee would not have gone thorow the City (with onely one Coach, and a lesse attendance than Ordinary) to Guild-Hall a little before his going from London; and it is cleare there was no cause of feare, because his Maiesty had no affront, but supplications and prayers from the people. But we now see they had another end in perswading his Majestie away,The answer  the London P¦tition in par promiseth so much. as well as in sending the Queene beyond the Sea, as also the Lord Digby and others to trafficke for men and Armes to assist their bloody designes: then they might not be suffered to gather an Army at Kingston, Windsor, &c. Then they perswaded they King to Yorke, where they also pretend danger (where there was no tumults but what they made in abuse to good Prote∣stants) and provide a guard of armed men and trained bands, which (as wee have seene) quickly grew to an Army of offence first to Hull, and since to the whole Kingdome; and thus you see what their preparations were.
Now let us consider ad see what their warre is; They told us they would make no warre against the Parliament, but they told us of the Kings rights and Prerogatives, which they would maintaine, and defend the Prote∣stant Religion, the priviledges of Parliament, and the rights and librties of the subject, against Innovations, and arbitrary Government. But if that were the cause of their warre, they would not fight against the Parliament, f r all these the Parliament would have to bee established for ever: First, for his Majesties just rights and Prerogative they offer to con∣firme to Him and his posterity; yea more, to make him the happiest of all his Progenitors. And for the establishing the Protestant Religion, together with the con∣tinuance of the just and ancient priviledges of Parliament, and the knowne rights of the subject, it is all the Parliament desires of the King; that which they from the beginning (as still) doe humbly supplicate his Majesty for, a∣gainst all Innovations and Arbitrary Governement: therefore that can bee no case of their warre. Besides, I thinke no man needs information to assure him, that the cause why Popery is so farre broken in upon us, and so much innovation and ar∣bitrary governement as of late yeares, hath beene want of Parliaments, and would with greater violence breake in if this Parliament were not. Nor was it ever knowne, that any free elected Parliament of 500 or 600 Lords and Gentlemen of severall Counties and families, were the cause of a∣ny innovation or arbitrary governement, nor is it likely can be; but contra∣ry have ever beene, and at this day are the security of this Kingdome against both: and therefore it is that this warre is made against this Parliament to destroy it, & with it all other and to bring in an Arbitrary Government, &c. It is true, particular men and private counsells may be corrupted to please Kings (in hope of present honours, and great estates) to betray a Kingdome, as private counsells at this day. And particular men, lately fled from this Par∣liament to atchiefe their private ends, care not to destroy the priviliges of Par∣liament, or to take away all Parliaments; (or which is worse) by the same Army they breake this, to force a pact Parliament of their owne choyce, and so make us slaves by act of Parliament, set up Popery by the Authority that hrew it downe, and kill us with our owne weapons. This is cleare as the ligh, yet men will not see it, but are willingly held in the fooles paradise, and suffer themselves to be deluded by Proclamations, Declarations and Prote∣stations, which are but the snares of the wicked to catch simple men: all which though they have passed under the Kings Name, I hope his Majesty never saw nor heard of, because they have beene all satisfied, and their actions quite  ry to their promises and protestations, like Owers,
who set their faces Eastward, when they meane to row Westward. Therefore it will be the wisedome of every man to make his eyes Judge in this cause rather than his eares; actions best shew the intentions; every tree is knowne by his fruit. At the entrance of Queene Mary to the Crowne, great protestations were made to maintaine the Protestant Religion, but we see her actions were de∣structive to it. The like Protestations we have heard concerning Ireland, and great caling upon the Parlliament for assistance of that Kingdeme, but as often as preparations were made, all assistance and helpe was hindred, and the Rebells were from hence strengthened. Wee have heard severall Proclamations to put Lawes in execution against Papists: but wee see that the Parliament themselves were restrained, and might not execute the knowne lawes upon them, though they by humble pe∣titions sought it, and now we see them in best esteeme, and most trusted. We have heard great promises that there was no intention to make warre against the Parliament, and seene it testified under many Lords hands (now in the Kings Army) onely a guard for the Kings person: but wee see a miserable and bloody warre to destroy the Parliament. We heard great protestations that no Papist should bee admitted into the Army: but we may see Papists swarme in that Army (yea in the Kings Court) like waspes about a honey pott, and in the North under the Command of the Earle of Newcastle, you may see 8000. professed Papists on a cluster. We heard heaven & earth called to witnesse, that their warre was to defend Protestant Religion: but it were strange to see so many papists fight for it; but if it were so, why doe they set up publike Masse in Yorke and other places where that Army is? and imprison Protestant Ministers, and all others that doe but say they fight for the Protestant Religion? We have heard protesta∣tions that priviledges of Parliament should be maintained, and the liberty of the subject, but if a Parliament may be broken by force, how can priviledges and liberties be preserved? You will say we have Trienniall Parliaments: I answer, that it is nothing, for the King is no more bound to be present at any Trienniall Parliament to confirme any Act (if it be called) than at this; besides the King is no more bound to call any Trienniall Parliament, than he is bound to preserve this. We have heard Proclamations prohibiting plundering by the Kings Army, and molesting his good subjects: but we see they doe plunder daily in all pla∣ces except where they cannot overcome, or where nothing is to be had. We have heard of an acceptation of an accommodation, and seene it pub∣lished by their owne faction: but we see them the next day come furiously and treacherously upon part of the Parliaments Army at Brainford, and barba∣rously
slew many men, more righteous than themselves, an act like themselves We have heard of a gratious acceptance of the City Petition, and a readi∣nesse to imbrace propositions of peace, but we have seene some of the ptiti∣onnes excepted against, and accused of Treason; he that hath but halfe an eye may see their aime when they flatter, and animate the rudest of men to rebell against authority, and overthrow the Governement of the great City, to make way to overthrow the Lawes of the Kingdome. Skilfull fishers will fish in troubled waters, and bankrupt Cavaliers can make best pillage in a divided City;Se the Re∣monstrance of both Houses of the expen∣ding the Trea∣ty of peace at Oxford. and this is their aime without difference to friend or foe, the pillage of one is as sweet as the other: propositions of peace have beene sent as we desired, and they expected, with an humble petition of both Houses to the King to remove the cause of the warre, and accept of their propositions: what effect it hath wrought let the world judge. But the people of this kingdome ever have, and I hope ever will account Parliaments the fittest and best expounders of the Law, and judges of offen∣ders, either to acquit or condemne them: they never wrest the Lawes for private ends, as other expounders (or rather forgetters) of law have lately done: when the subject (had lesse use of the law, and lesse liberty) were im∣prisoned contrary to law, beyond the knowne power and rights of any King of England, their habeas corpusses and all baile denied them. Nor knew we by what Law to proceede against any Papist, though the Lawes were knowne to us. And by the discipline of our Church Government, we could not well di∣stinguish betweene Protestant Religion and Popery; the booke of Common Prayer (though no idoll, was idolized) which hath in it good and holy, things may be, and was abused, contrary to the institution & meaning of the Parlia∣ment first instituting it. Things ceremoniall were urged as substantiall, what the Archbishop and his Romish pensioners pleased, and yet be no innovator: but for the Parliament to desir any diminution (though of things offensive) is innovation: whatsoever makes for Popery may be added, but nothing po∣pish taken away. For my part, I protest before God the searcher of all hearts, that I am no Sectary, (so called) but a true Protestant, according to that established Do∣ctrine of Queene Elizabeth and King Iames of blessed memory:t is a great isquiet and rouble to a tate, whē men ill goe before e Law, and ot follow the aw in obedi∣nc. I disallow the opinion of the Brownists, and I condemne the opinion, doctrine and pra∣ctice of Papists or Annabaptists, and never contemned, or (wilfully) neg∣lected the common prayer in any assembly. Yet I am confident (and I think upon good ground) that the common prayer hath some needlesse things in it, and some offensiue, (as they may be in the worst sense interpreted: thus much for information of the present warre.
Lastly, consider who, and what persons are the contrivers and actors in this warre: which are all of one of these sixe kinds. First, Jesuites and professed Papists. Secondly, Bishops and corrupt Clergy. Thirdly, Lords and Gentlemen, popishly affected. Fourthly, Delinquents and Patentees. Fiftly, men of broken fortunes. Sixtly, Atheists, and extreame deboyst men. And these all agree in one finall end (viz.) to betray Protestant Religion, Lawes, and the just Liberties of the Subject. But the three last sorts named, have each a particular end to themselves. The Delinquents aime is, their owne present preservation, to rescue their persons and estates from the justice of the Law, preferring themselves before Religion, Law, or posterity. Those of broken fortunes aime at pillage, to make themselves great e∣states out of the ruines of the Kingdome, which they cannot doe if Law bee not destroyed. The deboyst Atheists seeke to enjoy their licentious liberty, which they pre∣ferre before Law or Religion. They hate the very name of reformation in others, yet these are the men that tell us they fight for the protestant Religion, priviledges of Parliament, and the subjects Liberty: But wee must beleeve that they have learned that damnable art of equivocation, or mentall reser∣vation of the Jesuites. That when they protest to fight for the Protestant Religion, priviledges of Parliament, and the subjects Liberty, their meaning is, that they fight for all these as ours, to take them from us as they doe our estates, or as a theefe fights for a true mans purse, and this is these mens warre. Now if we examine why the Parliament and Kingdome have raised an Ar∣my, and consider their forepast proceedings, their present actions, and the persons engaged in their warre, wee shall plainely see that they aime at no∣thing but Gods glory, the safety of the Kings person and posterity, the de∣fence of the true Protestant Religion, Parliament priviledges, and the just Li∣bertie of the subject against those that (say they fight for them) and would take them from us: all which are at once assaulted by the severall armies of the Cavaliers. 1. In their proceedings in this Parliament, consider the declined and adul∣terated condition of things in Church and State, as they found them when the Parliament began. And then take notice of their care and wisedome to make peace betweene the two Nations, England and Scotland, His Majesty being then (by a Malignant counsell) engaged in a warre against his good subjects
of Scotland, which that Councell could not mannage for him, nor his Maje∣stie desert with honour, they vindicated his Majesty, stayed bloodshed, re∣conciled the Nations, satisfied the wronged Scots, payed the Kings Army, disbursed great summes out of their owne purses, and ingaged themselves for much more. 2. Consider their pious care for the setling good Order and Governement in the Church presenting their mst humble desires to the King, that learned and godly Divines might consider of it, and his Majesty passe a Bill to that purpse, declaring their purpose was not to destroy our Liturgy, onely take away unnecessry Ceremonies, but were denied. 3. Their diligence to suppresse, and take away our many oppressions, and free us from the vexations of them. 4. Their Iustice and good endeavour to put the Lawes in execution against Jesuites, Priests, and Papists, addressing themselves in all humly to his Majestie for the same, but cold not prevai. 5. Their industry in providing severall Billes for the good of the subject, besides those his Majestie was graciously pleased to sig, (as they made knowne to us, by their first Remonstrance.) 6. Their thankefull gratitude in readinesse to raise monies for his present occasions, and future store, promising to make him the richest King in Chri∣stendome. 7. Their unwearied paines for above two yeares and an halfe in spending their time, strength and estates, neglecting whatsoever was their owne for the common good. 8. Their carefull provision for the safety of the Kingdome against Papists, and popish affected, by putting the Melitia of the Kingdome into trustie hnds, when they saw eminent danger which hath hitherto preserved us, and disappointed them, which till they saw eminent danger they medled not with, nor desired a Guard for their owne safety in sitting; but his Majestie then promised they should neede no guard, but should bee as safe as his Qeene or Children; yet within very few dayes after, hee came in person, with about foure hundred desperate Cavalieres, armed with swords, pistolls, &c. against some of them; therefore no marvell if the Parliament doubt to trust the King with all out Rightes, Religion, Lawes, and Liberties; Kings are not Gods, but men, and subject to mens infirmities: yet I say not, the King is not to be trusted, (God forbid) I am bound to judge the best, and beleeve when his Majestie promised safety to his Parliament, he intended it; and was thrust upon that breach in some violent passion, caused by that wic∣ked Counsell on purpose. You will say the King hath acknowledged that fault, and it is no more to
be thought on. Answer, acknowledgement is nothing without repaire, but no repaire is made. Saul confessed his fa in seeking Davids life, and con∣fessed it with teares; yea, Saul by the wicked counsell of the Ziphites sought it againe. And whilest his Majestie still retaines such Counsellors, hee may still forget his promises. That which hath beene, may be againe. Who is that man for his owne particular, that would bee willing at the Kings request, to cancell all his evidences for his Lands and inheritance, and rest onely upon a bare word to posterities? much lesse a Parliament to trust all the rights and inheritance of a Kingdome, upon the bare word of a King, when guided by a Malignant Counsell, who seekes the Kingdomes ruine. 9. Consider also their tender care of Ireland, to suppresse that bloody re∣bellion so soone as it was discovered, earnestly supplicating his Majestie to joyne with them, by passing a Bill for a speedy and sufficient expedition thi∣ther, which was gratiously promised, why not performed, let the world judge. 10. Their many Messages and Petitions to the King sent from place to place, till (at Yorke) their Messengers were beaten, Parliament men threatned; their houses beseiged, plundered, their friends abused and pillaged before the Parliament had any Army on foote, and after they had an Army they never struck before they were stricken: such was their backwardnesse to warre, else they might have easily fetch all that Malignant Counsell from Yorke and prevented all the mischiefe they have since made and done in the Kingdome; which if the Parliament had foreseene and prevented, men would not have beleeved what now they see, but would have blamed the Parliaments for∣wardnesse more than now. That the Parliament have no end to themselves in this warre, but onely Gods glory and the publique good, is manifest in their contempt of dishono∣rable honours and corrupt dignities: doe but consider what some of them have lost, and what others of them might have if they were or would be cor∣rupted; some have lost the favour of their King, and the highest plce of Ho∣nour and profit, others might receive what favours, honours, and dignities a King can give if they would betray Gods truth and the Kingdomes trust. Yea, those very men that are for this cse hated, dish oured and proclai∣med Traytors and Rebells, should not bee denied what outward honours a King could bestow upon them. And shall not we honour such Champions for Christ and such Patriarches of their Countrey, and defend them while the , to the hazard of our lives and best fortunes with them who bly sacrifice themselves to honourable deaths, rather than to preserve their  ny dishonorable act to prodite their trust reposed by God and Men? To all the former, adde this; that (after their offers, petitions, and propo∣sitions,
formerly for peace were all rejected) they, at the request and humble petitions of many of us in the City of London and other Counties, willingly offered againe new propositions more low than the former, accompanied with the humble Petition of both Houses to be accepted, a manifest testimo∣ny of their desires of peace, and unwillingnesse to warre, if necessity constray∣ned not. In the second place, consider their present actions in the managing of this their defensive warre, having no other choyse but two extreames, either to fight or lose all, all being challenged, and at once assaulted by menacing armies. Now we know that nature hath taught all creatures to defend their lives, but nature, law, and Religion teach and allow men to defend themselves from unjust violence, the law of the Kingdome allowes a man to kill rather then to be killed; and Religion restrained not that Kingly Prophet David to take Armes in defence of his life against Saul his King: if David might de∣fend himselfe against Saul, then much more against Sauls evill Counsellors. But it is objected, that David would not lay his hand upon Saul (the Lords anoynted) when hee had twice opportunity put into his hands. An∣swer. It is true David would not, nor might not kill Saul in a treacherous manner; But if Saul would wilfully thrust himselfe into battell against in∣nocent David and perish, David would have beene guiltlesse, as appeareth 1 Sam. 26.9, 10. David tooke Armes in his owne defence: The Parlia∣ment and Kingdome in defence of their Religion and Hereditary rights, not onely so, but to defend the Kings person, and to rescue him from the hands of cursed Dam-my Rammy Cavaliers: Therefore scandalous are those mouthes that report the Parliament takes Armes against the King. Wee have made choice of the men, and have trusted them with all our rights: the King hath accepted of them, and acknowledged them his great Councell, and they according to their trust, defend our Rights and his person and posterity. They freely venture their lives and estates for us, and for our King against wicked Councellors, who seeke his Majesties ruine as well as ours; There∣fore we are bound by conscience, law, and Religion to defend them: should we neglect them because they doe his Majesty and us right, or shall wee de∣sert them because they will not betray us. Though Saul had sworne that Ionathan should die, the people would rescue him, and said, Ionathan should not die. Much more would they have rescued Saul against wicked Counsel∣lors that sought his ruine? our Parliament is not onely in danger, and with it, all that is ours: but the person of our Soveraigne Lord King Charles, by Jesuites and popish Traytors, who if they cannot poyson his soule, will poy∣son,
stab, or destroy his body? we cannot thinke they will deale better with him than they did with Henry the third, and Henry the fourth of France, whom they slew; the one, because hee would not suffer them to sway the Scepter; the other, because he refused to breake his Covenants with the Pro∣testant Princes. If these men should prevaile in their warre, and afterward be denied any thing what they wi l frther desire for the establishment of Popery, they will as treacherously end his dayes, whose Religion allowes it,These words are by the Archbisop minced and altered, as may appeare by comparing the first copie with the late edition. and commends us meritorious to kill any King that is a Protestant or favourer of Protestants. Therefore we may in this see how farre our clergie is fal∣len towards popery, who now defend them, and most confide in them, who of late they declared to be Idolaters, tearming their Religion rebellion, their faith faction, and their practice the murthering of bodies and soules: God in mercy deliver his Majesty from their Doctrines and treasons. Thirdly, consider the persons ingaged in this defensive warre, and it will appeare, that they are all his Majesties best and most faithfull subjcts, true Protestants, yea, a Parliament, the Kings great (and knowne) Councell able honest, and godly men, not corrupted by flattery, nor misled by the hopes of fleeting honour, but like Nehemiah and Ezra, stout in the cause of God, hold the sword in the one hand, whilest they build the decayed wales of Ie∣rusalem with the other: Men that feare God, and honour the King: Not Papists, Anabaptists, nor Atheists, as some falsly have caled them; except any such have disguised,All of upright intentions will ingage them∣selves for their just rights a∣gainst arbitra∣ry Governe∣ment, and the profest ene∣mies of all Christendom, the Papists. and treacherously intruded themselves to rob the Kingdome of their money, & betray their Army to the Enemy, and would be a most acceptable service of any that could discover any such: If any Brow∣nist be accepted in the Army (which is not by me denied) they cannot be said to have beene incendiaries in the state; nor are they disconsonant from us in any fundamentalls, onely they differ in Ceremonies, nor are there many of broken fortunes, nor deboyst Dammys, though some such (too many) have intruded themselves into the Army, (none engaged into the warre, but) as Mercenaries, such as love the war for the pay, but pay nothing to the warre, and as backward to fight as unwilling to be disbanded: These by their feare∣full oathes dishonour God, and cause the land to mourne, and by deferring battle, and preferring plunder, prejudice their just warre; as Achon in the Army of Gods people. There was one Iudas amongst Christs twelve Apo∣stles, and one Achon in the Campe of God. I pray God to purge such out of his and our Armies. Now having informed you of the Kingdomes danger, and the justnesse of the Kingdomes defensive warre; for the Parliaments Army is the King∣domes, for God, the King, and the Kingdome, the other is the Cavaleers Ar∣my,
against God, the King, in future, (though hid by present flattery;) and the Kingdome which they would destroy (as wee by woefull experience see) where ever they come, or can prevaile. Be therefore exhorted to be corragi∣ous in this cause, for God, the King, and your posterity; wisemen forewar∣ned, will be forearmed; if through our credulity to deceivers we suffer our selves to be destroyed, or if wee beleeve our danger and doe nothing to pre∣vent it, our misery will be the greater, and we most miserable under it. Con∣sider what Mordecai in such a case said to Ester, and the same I say to thee: If thou helpe not at this time according to thy ability, place, and degree, de∣liverance shall arise some other way, but thou shalt perish. Destructive war is now in the land, such a war as is against God, therefore sit not still and say with thy selfe, let others fight, give, pray, &c. and thinke to bee safe thy selfe, like Gilead, Dan, and Asher, and all reproved; But Zebulon and Nephtali are commended, who jeoparded their lives in the fields against the enemy: In the meane time Meroz a people able to helpe, and neere at hand stood neuters: but Meroz is therefore cursed, and that bitterly, because the Inha∣bitants came not to the helpe of the Lord and his people. Therefore all that are Gods people, or looke to have part in Christ, will now come forth to the helpe of the Lord against Baal. Halt not between two opinions. If thou be a Protestant, defend thy Religion against them that say they are Protestants, but are not. If thou be a Papist, why dost thou dissemble; professe ot bee what thou art, & be what thou professest: A profest Papist is in a better condition, & more to be trusted then a lukewarm Neuter. There is but one God, on truth, & one faith, in which men can be saved: The Parliament professe that one God truth, and true faith of Jesus Christ; and that they and all Gods elect (ex∣cept such as are yet ignorant) defend, the other Army say the like, (but tis to deceive us,) and say they take Armes to defend that which none oppose but themselves: They make Protestation and urge it upon men by force, wherein they call God to witnesse, and so doe wee. But they have now brought the controversie to a desired Issue, for surely the Judge of all the world will doe right, and though hee now afflict his people, and for a time suspend sentence, it will be alwaies so. But he will not shew wonders in the world, and declare to the eyes of men who speake the truth, and who dissem∣ble; a considerate man may see the Parliaments reality, and the others dissi∣mulation, by the mercies of the one even to their professed enemies, and the barbarous cruelty of the other, not only to us, but to their owne friends, spoy∣ling & plundering all, one as well as another, witnesse Banbury, Brainford, Reading, Newbery & all Townes & places where by force or fraud, they have entered, which the Parliament forces have not done in any Towne or place
where they have entred, with the hazard of their lives. Thus men consider not, nor compare their barbarous cruelty to our men their prisoners, whom they beate, wound, and sterve, with the good usage their. Cavaliers have, which are the Parliament prisoers, who are allowed good lodging, fire, foode of all sorts, Beere, Wine, and what not? They want nothing but ho∣nesty;And libert to act more mischeife, but  ours are deni¦ed all things  but honesty. which they cannot take from them. All this God beholds, whose eyes runne to and fro thorow the Earth, beholding the good and the bad, and will recompence all according to their doings; God is the righteous Judge of all men, he is unchangeable, his power is not weakened, his eyes not shat, nor his eares heavie to heare, his justice and his mercy is the same as in former ages; On him our eyes waite to see his judgements upon our enemies, and his deliverance to his people: wee know there is a mistery in the working of Antichrist, and he a monster having many heads and hornes; but we are sure that Antichrist shall fall, and it is probable that this is the time and warre in which England shall cut off one of those heads. This war is his warre against Christ; and now Christ calls all that are his to stand for him. If now you denie your helpe, you denie Christ; and therefore give me leave to remember you of Christs words, (spoken to you in this case) That if you deny him before men he will deny you before his father: If you by Neutrality thinke to save your lives, you will indanger to lose your soules for ever. But if in this case for Christ and his Gospells sake wee lose our lives, we shall surely save our soules, and procure a blessing upon our Poste∣rities: every man is willing to enjoy the propriety of his goods, and his liber∣ty and peace, &c. But are unwilling to be at any paines or cost to preserve or procure it; but contrary, many at this dy are so extremely stupid, and grosely sordid, that they take more paines to run into greater danger,Your charge for wives, be∣vers, and Taf¦fiy Gownes, and your own expence in T¦vernes would quickly rec¦ver that char and be∣stow more cost to betray their rights and liberties, &c. than is by the Par∣liament required of them for their present and future security. The twenti∣eth part is the most they require, and that but lent; what may wee thinke of such men, but as men void of naturall affection, much more destitute and empty of Religion, love, or charity, who disobey or refuse such an order, see∣ing by lending a twentieth part, the other nineteene may be preserved, or else without order or parts, those Cavaliers will by force take altogether, and by it strengthen themselves to continue a warre to destroy our Lawes and posterities: And if the Parliament have reqired more by a weekely as∣sesment, the present necessity hath enforced them to it, and it is but to defend against their rage and rapine. But you will say (and thinke you hit the naile on the head) that it is against Law. Answ. If it be not against law to defend thy selfe against violence, or to
preserve the Law it selfe from violation, then it is not against law to contribut money as a meanes. But a man in case of necessity in his just defence may kill, although the Law say he shall not kill; much more a Parliament (who are providers main∣tainers, and best judges of the Law) may by their order lawfully: in case of necessiy, to defend the Law, cesse the subject at their discretion. The whole Kingdome have trusted them with Religion, Lawes, and estates, which they are to maintaine and defend at the Kingdomes charge. If the sword, in opposition against the Law, will force, and destroy the Ordinance of the Law; the sword by the equality of the Law, may defend the Law. But you will say you desire peace. Answere, So doe all good men; cursed be the man that desires it not, so that it be such a peace as hath assurance of truth joyned with it: But to desire peace, or to accept a peace without truth will prove a cursed bondage, a remedy worse then the disease. Although warre be a great punishment, and the effects miserable; yet a just warre is better then a unjust peace, a just warre will be established a true peace, but an unjust peace will prove a more destructive warre, our peace with Idola∣ters hath caused this warre; but to have a peace with their Idols too, will be our present ruine: can we expect any good and happy peace so long as the whoredomes of Iezebell are so many: when Israel chose new Gods, then warre was in the gates, when Israel followed the Gods of the Nations and worshipped Baalim; God brought upon them the sword of the Nations, and delivered them into the hands of the spoylers that spoyled them. But England hath followed the Idols of the Papists, and worshipped Ba∣alim; therefore God hath brought upon England the sword of the Papists, and may most justly deliver us up into their hands to be spoyled and ruined. Eighteene yeares agoe the Lord delivered them into our hands (as his and our enemies) to be destroyed for their Idolatry, or at least to be banished for their Treason; but wee spared and cherished them; to be as thornes in our sides, and their Gods to be a snare unto us: wee have spared them as Benha∣dad was spared by mercifull (though wicked) Acha; and as God punished Aahab and his people by the hand of Benhadad, and his people: so is the King and the people of England punished at this day by the hands and plots of blo∣dy Iesuits, and Papists. Their designe is great upon our King, upon us, and upon all his Majesties Kindomes, God rebuke them and deliver us, and that we may not faile of deliverance, (in due time) let us all of all sorts, Sexes, and conditions seeke the Lord by hearty humiliation and resolved reformation; and in the,
first place, with zeale and detestation, set our selves against that sinne of Ido∣latrie, as Phinehas did against Zimri and Cozbi, that so we may appease Gods anger; if wee withall our hearts seeke truth, it will bring us to true peace with God and men. We have sought to the Parl. for peace, but they cannot give it us, we have sought by a humble Petition to the King for peace, and that procured our further prejudice; for while we sought for the peace of the whole Kingdome, we received (from some of that Malignant bloody Councel) an Answer alto∣gether contrary to our expectation, & after it a letter to the same effect, both tending to stirr up Warre, (where yet by Gods mercy none is) in the great & populous City (London) And since that a late horrid conspiracy: That because they cannot destroy us themselves, they would sett us to destroy one another, (which God forbid) we know that while we hould the band of Uniy, wee are able (by Gods assistance) to defend our selves: But if we be once divid∣ed, we lay our selves open to every adversary without resistance, to be de∣vouted, we will be warned by Ierusalems misery, (that once famous City of the World) by such sedition brought to be a heape of stones;See Iosephus in warre Ieru∣salem. And by the experiences of the bloody crueltyes, and mercilesse Plunderings or all those Townes that have, or do (by such division) give them entrance, Banbury had as much securing as King could give them, and yet Plundered; and the man (Master Vivrs by name) who was the Cheifest agent to bring them in, was most Plundered. But we will honour our King, and hazard our selves, and fortunes for his Person, Posterity, and Parliament, to rescue them from the bloody hands of that Malignant Councell, and Army of Cavaliers, and will assure his Majesty of safety and security in this Cirty, if his Majesty will be pleased to come to his Parliament, and to us peaceably, as our King; and to the Parliament, as his great and faithful Councell, and besides them we know no other, though some who seeke honour from the King, rather then honour to the King, divide between his Majesty and them. Many Proct∣ers Prebends &c. mercinary trades-men, for profits and favour care neither for the welfare of King nor Kingdome. If wee lose this Parlia∣ment, we must expect to have greater with∣out all reme∣dy.We cannot forget how much we all groaned under the burthens of op∣presions late laid upon us by the hard talk Masters, that were set over us; and then we all cryed for a Parliament to ease us; Our bondage had some re∣semblance to that of the people of Israel in Egpt (& so hath our ingratitude) for whilest their deliverance was working, their burthens grew greater, and then they murmured, and so have some of us. They cryed for deliverance, and God heard their cry, we cryed for a Parliament, and God graciously, yea miraculously gave us a Parliament. But because Malignant Councellors, as the Magicians of Egypt, have hindered our present deliverance, we mur∣mure
against the Parliament as they against Moses & Aaron, God led them thorow the wildernesse to prove them, and they said, they had rather have dyed in Egypt &c. Thus God proves us by some opposition, and some say, It was better with us when we endured out former oppressions: but consider not that our sinnes have provoked God, and therefore he suffers our King to be misled, for a great punishment to us, nor understand that our impenitency hinders good things from us, and stop the Parliaments proceedings: we are a foolish and sinfull people, that love our sinns, and lose our liberty, we pre∣fer, the twentieth part of our mony; or the weekly assessment before our Religion, as the Gudarers their Swine before Christ. But let us not tempt God, as the Israelites did, nor with the multi∣tude of Atheisticall Libertines, revile our Moses and Aarons, much lesse give assistance to destroy them and our selves, left we be found to fight against God, we know what became of those wicked men that cast an evill report upon the Land of Promise, and discouraged the people, saying, mighty men were in the Land, that could not be overcome. But thus some doe by reproachfull speeches, and spreading venemous Pamphlets, and lying fictions to the dishonor of the thrice honourable Parliament, as if the Parliament had brought these things to this passe, to make us die by the sword, and our Chil∣dren to be a prey &c. This the Israelites murmured, and were destroyed by the plague, before the Lord, and all their Carcases fell in the Wildernesse, but their Children, whom they said should be a prey to their enemyes (toge∣ther with Caleb & Ioshuah who speak well of the Land, enjoyed the promis∣ed blessing, when all else were cut off. Those dammy swearers, and theevish plun∣derers.And wee need not doubt (if once those Achans that are in our Armies were cast out) but God will doe the like for our Calebs and Ioshuah's, and all the rest of his people, that couragiously oppose the wickednesse and Idolatry of these times, and unfainedly seeke unto God by fasting and prayer, as Est∣her did; in whose time the people of God were sold to be destroyed, under Ahasuerus as we are at this day: they by the Counsell of wicked Haman; wee by the wicked Counsell of Iesuites, Papists &c. They by the Kings misled Authority against the Queene and her people,Wicked Coun∣sellors under pretence of good service to Kings, de∣stroy Kings and whole Kingdomes. wee by the King misled in his Authority, by his Queene and her people. Ahasuerus was guided by his councell (and so are all Kings) he looked upon the Councell (in the presence) as profitable, but considered not so farre as the end and intent of Human, which was destructive. Surely there was no thought in Ahasuerus to destroy Esther nor her people; but Haman inten∣ded both, he thought it not revenge to destroy part, but all the people of the
Jews (as they doe this day in Ireland, and re about to doe in England) he craftily accuseth them under a Generall Notion, and tells the King; There was a certaine people scattered and dispersed amongst his people, and their Laws divers from all people, neither keepe they the Kings Lawes, therefore not for the Kings profit to suffer them; and to put a fairer glosse upon the obscured Treason, he offers to give unto the Kings Treasure ten thousand Ta∣lents of Silver. Thus are we (all that are true Protestants) accused to the King, under the name Round-heads, having lawes and opinions divers from other people,By the name Roundhead, they doe not onely meane Brownists and Anabaptists, but all that are godly men & good Prote∣stant. Esth. 8.11. The many peeces of Gods providence working for our delive∣rance should strengthen our faith in all fu∣ture dangers. nor keepe the Kings lawes, &c. when indeede and in truth wee are the best observers and keepers of the Kings Lawes, and have no lawes divers from any but Idolaters, and prophane riotous persons, who therefore (as the Apo∣stle Peter saith) speake evill of us because wee refuse to partake with them: for this name Round-head is new sprung from hell, and all they are so called who refuse any of these particulars, (viz.) to drinke drunke, to whore, to sweare God-dam-my, to scorne at purity, to take Armes (or contribute) a∣gainst the Parliament, to abuse, cut, or kill the Ministers of Christ and other his members, or in a word, he that doth not professe and doe all things that these cursed Cavaliers doe, is a Round-head; against these (by the Coun∣sell of the Jesuites and Papists) is past the Edict of destruction; by which we had perished, had not the over-ruling and over-working providence of God caused a contrary decree (by a better Counsell) enabling us to stand in the defence of our lives, as the Jewes did in Shushan, and all the Provinces of the King, which is a pledge unto us of our future deliverance, for where God giveth the meanes, he intends the end; and they that now refuse to use the meanes, are guiltie of their own blood, and of the treason intended against the King and his Kingdome. God in mercy open the Kings eyes, that hee may see the treason and bloody designes of those Counsellors, and bring his Majesty againe to consult with his Parliament, his great and faithfull Coun∣cell, and besides which we know (at this time) no other. We know wise Kings have been misled, as Solomon the wisest, holy Kings have erred, as David the holiest, the one by the seducement of outlandish wives, the other by some remissenesse in his duty; But God opened the eyes of Solomon, and shewed David his sinne. But Rehoboam was misled by the Counsell of his young Councellors, and repented not, therefore was punished without repaire: And Achab misled by the flatteries of foure hundred Court false Prophets, was slaine at Ramoth Gilead, in a battell which they would have him under∣take, contrary to that good Prophet (though hated) Micaiah.
Now my prayer is, and ever shall be, to the great and Almighty Iehovah (King of all Kings) for my gracious Soveraigne King Charles, that God will shew him the error of all his Malignant Councellors, and as holy David, turne wholly to God by repentance, that so He, His, & their Posterities, may to Gods glory weare the Crownes of all His Three Kingdomes, and defend the truly Christian and Apostolike faith against Popery and all superstition, untill the end of all time; and receive the Crowne of glory for His and their Reward when time shall be no more: In the meane time, let all true Prote∣stants pray for the peace of Ierusalem, and for the prosperity of her, and of her King and people. FINIS. This is Licenced and entred into the Register Booke of the Company of Stationers according to Order.
