P4129 669.f.13[67] 99869867 162963
THE VINDICATION OF VVILLIAM PRYNNE Esquire, From some scandalous Papers and Imputations, nevvly Printed and Published, to traduce and defame him in his REPUTATION. WHere as A scandalous Paper have been newly printed and published in my Name by some of the imprisoned Stage-Players, or Agents of the Army, intituled Mr. William Prynne his Defence of Stage-Playes, Or, A Restraction of a for∣mer Book of his called HIS TRIOMASTIX, of purpose to traduce and defame me: I do hereby publikely de∣clare to all the world, the same to be a meere Forgery and imposture, and that my judgement and opinion concerning Stage Playes and the Common Actors of them, and their intollerble mischeivousness in any Christian state, is still the same, as I have more amply manifested it to be in my HISTRIOMASTIX. And whereas another Pamphlet hath been printed and publi∣shed, with this title. The examination of Mr. Wil. Prynne by order of the House of Commons, with his Answer: wherein is related. That the two Members appointed to know Mr. Prynnes Answer, whether the scandalous Pamphlet to which his Name was set was his? and whether he would owne it? repored this answer, That when a sufficient authority sent to Him, he would returne a speedy answer; Which answer is to be considered of on Thursday-next: that there is a mistake in this Report: which I conceive my selfe bound to rectifie, by rela∣ting the whole truth, which is as followeth. That on Friday last about five of the clock at night, Mr. Humphrey Edwards, and Iohn Fry, came to my Chamber, to the Kings head in the Strand, & without shewing me any order, or commission; told me: that they were sent to me by the house of Commons to aske me a question: which was, Whether a Booke they then produced, and held in their hands, were mine, or not? not reading the Title, nor any part of it; but J conceived it was the Memento, To whom J returned this answer. That I knew of no authority they had to demand this question of me; that I neither knew nor took them to be Members, their elections being both void and illegall, and so proved at the Committees which examined them, who had voted them such, and therefore they ought not to sit, being voted out of the House. And that this was all the answer J should returne them: Who should be alwayes ready to give an answer to any question, con∣cerning any book I had written in a legall way, when it should be demanded by a lawfull authority. M. Fry answered, that though his Electi∣on was voted voyd by the Committee, that it was not reported to, nor voted void by the House, and therefore he might sit, TO which I replied, That no man after his election was unanimously voted voyd by the whole Committee, being so foul as his and Mr. Edmonds were, had the impudency to sit and vote in the house, til they made the president. Whereupon they departed somewhat disconted. This is the reall truth of all that passed between me & them, Which I thought it my duty to publish to the world to avoid mistakes: & so much the rather, because the Gen▪ counsell of the Army in their Answer of Jan 3, touching the secured and secluded Members: p, 4, 5, complain of many abuses in the New Elections; and that the elections of many honest men have been long suspended under examination, and kept off from tryall by practise of the secluded Members, when as in verity, the greatest abuses of this kind that ever were, have proceeded from the Officers and their parties; most of the elections of their adherents being very foule and void, & petitioned against, being kept off by their parry, from examination, and report: by reason whereof, the two forementioned Gentlemen, Mr. Blagrave, (whose Election is voted void long since) and divers others now sitting, have been kept in the house against al right and justice, when as there is not one secluded Member for ought J can learn whose election is not fair and legall. In witnesse whereof I have hereunto subscribed my Name; WILLIAM PRYNNE. From the Kings head in the Strand, Ian. 10 1648, Esay 57, 4 None calleth for justice; nor any pleadeth for truth: they trust in vanity and speak Eyes: they conceive mischief and bring forth iniquity their works are works of iniquity, and the act of violence is in their hands. Titus 1. 12 the Cretians are alwayes lyars, evill beasts, slow bellies, FINIS.
