P4151 669.f.8[2] 99870696 123091
The Publick Faith. SOme tll of Affrick Monsters, which of old Vaine superstition did for Godheads hold. How the Egyptians, who first knowledge spred Ador'd their Apis with the white Buls head: Apis still fed with Serpents that do hisse, Hamon, Osyris, Monster Anubis. But sun burnt Affrick never had nor hath A Monster like our English publicke Faith. Those fed on snakes and satisfied did rest, This like the Curtian gulfe will have the best Thing in the City, to appease its still Increasing hunger, gluiting its lewd will With families, whose substance it devours, Perverting Iustice and the higher powers Contemning, without sear of any law, Preying on all to fill its ravenous maw; Whose Estridge stomack which no steel can sate Has swallowed down Indies of gold and plate: This is the publick Faith which being fed Byth City's wealth, has in this Kingdome bred Such various mischiefes with its viperous breath, Blastings its peace and happinesse to death: And yet this Idol which out world adores Has made men prostitute their truth like whores To its foule lust; which surely may as well And soon be satisfied as the grave or hell: This preys on Horses, yet that will not do, Unlesse it may devoure the Riderstoo: This takes up all the riches of the land, Not by intreaty, but unjust command; Borrowing extortively, without any day But the Greek Calends, then it means to pay. This 'gainst the law of Nations does surprise The goods of strangers, Kings, and in its wise Discretion, (thinks though its not worth their note) They'r bound to take the publick Faiths trim vote For their security, when this publick Faith Has broke more Merchants then ere riot hath: And yet, good men oth' City, you are proud To have this bankerupt publick Faith alowd More credit then your King: to this youl lend More willingly then ever you did spend Money to buy your wives and children bread; By such a strange inchantment being misled To your undoings, you (who upon bond) Nay scarsly upon morgage of that land Treble your money's value, would not part With your lov'd coine vanquished by th'powerful art. Of this Magitian pubiick Faith justly install Him master of your bags, the Divell and all That taught you get them by deceitfull wares, And sucking in (like mornings draughts) young heirs: Well certainly if this fine humour hold Your Aldermen will have no other gold But whats in thumb rings for their pondrous chaines, They'l be the publick Faiths just lawfull gains; And have the honour afterwards to be Hang'd in them for its publick treachery. What will become of you then, grave and wirty Inhabitants of this inchanted City? Who is't shall those vast sums to you repay When master publick Faith is run away? Or who shall those prodigious heaps renew Which were so prodigally decreas'd by you? Whom the whole world imagin'd men of thrift▪ What will your Orphants do, how will they Whose whole estates ith' City chamber hath Been given a spoile to ruin'd publick Faith: Perhaps you'l pawne your Charter to supply The worthy wants of your necessty: Who is't will tak't when all (but men misled Like you) know 'tis already forfeited? Who is't will then into now coin translate Such monstrous cupbords of huge anticke plate To publick Faiths vast treasury, bringing in From the guilt goblet, to the silver pin. All that was coinable and what to do Even to create you knaves and traitors too. Faith if you chance to come off with your lives, Your way will be to live upon you wives: Their trading will be good when fortune weares Your colours in the caps oth'Cavaliers; Whose Cuckcolds you'l be then, and on your bier Weare their horns, as you publick Faiths do no Then then you'l howle when you shall clearly That publick Faith was publick treachery: Then you'l confesse your selves to've bin undone By publick Faithsman Isaack Pennington: Then you'l repent that ever you did fling Such monstrous sums away against your King. When he in triumph with his warlike traine Shall to your terror view your Town again. Unlesse his mercy mittigate his wrath Justly conceiv'd 'gainst you and publick Faith. That reverent Alderman which did defile His breeches at the mustering, ere while Shall then againe those volvet slops bewray Cause publick Faith did make him goe astray Pauls shall be open'd then, and you conspire No more against the Organs in the quire: Nor threat the Saints ith'windows, nor repai In troops to kill the booke of Common Prayer Nor drunk with zeale endeavour to engrosse To your owne use the stones of Chepside Crosse: Then then you'l bow your heads your horns and all That so exalted were to save from thrall Your ruin'd liberties; and humbly pray For mercy more then upon each Fast day. (When your seditious Preachers to the throg Make prayers extempore of five houres long.) Lest you by early penitence prevent Your certaine danger, if not punishment; Which you by no means may so safely do As quitting publick Faith and treason too. Then then though late you to your griefe will find That you have walk'd (as moles ith'earth do) blind Of your faire reason, and obedience light, Involv'd in mists of blacke rebellious night. If these instructions will not make you see Your error, may you perish in't for me; And to your ruine walke in death full path That leads toth'gallows with the publick Faith. FINIS.
