P4292 E200_26 99859090 157567
Mr. PYM, HIS SPEECH. On Tuesday the 8th of February, To the LORDS, at a Conferrence of both Houses, concerning the Petition of the Knights and Gentry of the County of Kent. Delivered to the Lords, February the Ninth, Anno Domini, 1642. LONDON, Printed for Iohn Hammond, 1641.
Mr. PYM, HIS Speech to the Lords, at a Con∣ferrence of both Houses, Concerning the Petition of the Knights and Gentry of the County of Kent, on Tuesday the 8. of February, delivered to the Lords: February 9. 1641. My LORDS, THE Bill which by both Houses is passed for the taking away the Votes of the Prelates in this Honourable House, and dissabling them from temporall Employment; and for the setting the King∣dome into a Posture of War, for its defence, hath occasioned this present Petition of the Knights and Gentry of the County of Kent; In which is fully expressed their great ioy and thankfulnesse, for the happy Congruity, and Concurrence between both Houses, in passing the said Bills; desiring also therein this Ho∣norable House to goe on with the House of
Commons to a through reformation in Reli∣gion, according to the Word of God, To di∣spatch aide for Ireland; To expedite procee∣dings against desinquents, to vindicate Parlia∣ment Priviledges, to discover, remove and pu∣nish evill Counsellors: to deprive the Popish Lords of their Votes; to disarme and search out Papists, and put them into safe custody, to suppresse Masse both in publike and private; To cast out scandalous Minister, plant pain∣full Preachers every where, And discover who are Church Papists, as well as knowne Recu∣sants. MY LORDS, This Briefe Catalogue of all the Businesse we have in agitation for the good government, and setling peace and tranquility both in Church and Common-wealth, I desire un∣der favour to speake somewhat to every par∣ticular, shewing the great necessity to bring to a happy Conclusion our endeavors and intentions concerning the same. MY LORDS, 1 Religion is the first thing is desired to be setled and established in such a manner and forme, as may agree with the pure and Sacred Word of God; there hath been many orders made by this present Parliament, whereby ma∣ny corruptions in the Ministery and dispensa∣tion
of the Word and Sacraments, are in some good measure purged, Many scandalous and vitious Teachers, in their lives and conversati∣ons, removed; and many painfull and Learned men restored againe to their offices in the Mi∣nistery, whereby the Word of God hath been purely taught since the sitting of this happy Parliament, wee have now by this Bill regula∣ted the chiefest of the Clergie; But yet is there not a through Reformation; the proceeding of the Parliament, therein having been so much opposed by the Votes of Bishops and Popish Lords, which inconveniency by the blessing and good Providence of God, and wisdome of this great and high Court, is for future time, pre∣vented by this Bill, and proceeded against, as touching the Prelates opposition; The evills that have happened for want of through Re∣formation, is too apparant, men give them∣selves to all manner of vice and uncleannesse; practising nor professing rightly, but loosely and profanely any Religion; Multitudes have forsaken the Protestant, and ioyned themselves to the Romish Religion, Many have forsaken our Church, & become Separatists, Brownists and Annabaptists; yet this whole state seems as it were composed of naught else but of di∣vers factions, sects & schismes, and all through want of a full Reformation of Religion, and setled establishment thereof, whereby God is highly dishonoured, the Gospel shaddowed
and eclipsed, publike profanation encreaseth, Division and distractions by this means raised in the State, there being so many severall opi∣nions, that it is unpossible to please all, or know how to discover disaffected to the True Reli∣gion, till the same be really established. 2. Ireland that distressed Kingdom lies gas∣ping, even as it were ready to yeeld up it selfe into the hands and power of mercilesse and Cruell Miscreants, Rebels, and Traitors to their King and Countrey, enemies to God and his true Religion; It is high time to put to our helping hand for their aid and reliefe: I beseech you, my Lords, let us have a fellow fee∣ling of our brethrens miseries, let us bezealous for the cause of God and true Religion; let not the bloud of the slaine bee a stumbling-blocke to our peace and safety, being united brethren under one God, in one religion, faith∣full subiects under one Soveraigne, if while it is time we goe not out to their defence, to fight the battels of the Lord, and his annointed a∣gainst their wicked and rebellious enemies. 3. To proceed to the punishment of delin∣quents; My Lords, so long as ill instruments remain unpunished, we cannot expect either peace or safety, they still working and endea∣vouring their owne liberties and inlargement to the destruction and confusion of all that la∣bour to bring them to deserved punishment for their evill and notorious crimes, be it King
or Parliament: wherefore i is of necessity to expedite our proceedings against them, est protraction of time in the same, produce farre more evils and troubles in this Common∣wealth then hitherto. 4. To vindicate Parliament priviledges, my Lords, if the members of the Parliament may not freely vote, freely debate and dispute con∣cerning such things as are by them in agitati∣on for the safety, peace and prosperity of true Religion, his sacred Maiestiy and his King∣domes, without reprehension, accusation or impeachment for the same, then will Parlia∣ments prove uselesse and of no validity in this Kingdome, which have been ever esteemed the best and safest way of government that ever was, or could be for the same. 5. To remove evill Councellors: So long as such remaine about the Court, wee cannot expect any good issue of our proceedings in the great affaires of this Kingdome. 6. The daily examples of the evill practi∣ces of Papists and Recusants to disturbe our peace, I hope is sufficient to make us carefull and willing to prevent the same in time by dis∣arming them, and putting the Lawes in execu∣tion against obstinate and wilfull Recusants, against Priests and Iesuits that shall be found any where lurking in this Kingdome, seducing his Maiesties good subiects in their Religion, and alienating their hearts and affections from
due obedience to his Maiesty, and the Lawes and Ordinances of the Kingdome, made and enacted by the whole State of the Kingdome, and confirmed by his most excellent Maiesty. 7. To remove Popish Lords from sitting, or having any voyce in this honourable House, to suppresse Masse in publicke and private, to cast out scandalous Ministers out of the Church, and to place good ones in their roomes, to discover who are Church Papists, and knowne Recusants. The necessity of all which is grounded upon the same reasons as are the other particulars. These being remo∣ved and avoyded, the rough way of our procee∣dings in the great affaires of the State, will bee made plaine. Through these difficulties we must passe unanimously with one consent, in the name and feare of God, in obedience and dutifull affection to our gracious Sove∣raigne, and in faithfull integrity to the peace and safety of our Countrey, of whom wee are intrusted to counsell, determine, and conclude of all things that may tend to the eerlasting peace and tranquility of both Church and State: Which that we may doe, God grant us unity of hearts, and magnanimity and courage of minde, to bring to a happy conclusion all things we have in hand for the quiet and peace of King and People. FINIS.
