P4304 E199_49 99871240 157542
A WORTHY SPEECH made by Master Pym, TO THE LORDS ON FRYDAY THE thirty one of December con∣cerning an Information against the Lord DIGBY. Wherein is discovered the dan∣gerous effects of the said Information, if not suddenly prevented, against the Royall power Prerogative of the King, and privi∣ledges of Parliament. In the free votes and proceedings thereof. London, Printed for Thomas Banckes. and F. Coles. 1641.
MASTER Pym his Speech to the Lords, at a conference on Friday the the 31 of December concerning an Information against the Lord DIGBY. My Lords, THe Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons now assembled in Parliament, have commanded me to pre∣sent to your Lorships this Information which they have received against the Right Honorable George Lord Digby, of dangerous consequence, that if not prevented, evill and troublesome events may in∣sue, to the great hazarding of the peace of this Kingdome, and a great hindrance of the happy proceedings of this Parliament. My Lords, I humbly crave your patience to declare to your Lordships what I am commanded concerning the said Information, which is that hee the said Lord Digby should give forth report upon reading of the Petition and Protestation of the 12 Bishops, That this Present Parliament was a forced one, That the Act, vote, and Laes that shall bee En∣acted herein without the votes and assent of the Bi∣shops
are void and of none effect, and not binding to the Subject. My Lords, This report is of great danger to the State if proved against the said Lord, in these three re∣spects as I under your Lordships favour con∣ceives. First, It is a great breach of the Rights and Pri∣viledges of Parliament. Secondly, It intrencheth much on the preroga∣tive of the King, and abridges his Royall Power. Thirdly, it is the first steppe to bring into this State an Arbitrary and Tyrannicall forme of Go∣vernement. First my Lords it is a breach of the priviledges of Parliament for these reasons. First, it is against the free votes of Parliamenta∣ry proceedings, which ought to bee reserved and unquestionable, during the free sitting thereof. Secondly, It is aginst an Act of Parliament in that case provided for not adjourneing or abrupt breaking off of the same. These Acts my Lords was freely voted by both houses freely and wil∣lingly passed by his Majestie without any force or compulsary meanes used in any, or private working or inducing his Majesty by any of the Members of either of the Houses to doe the same: An Act vo∣ted aswell by the said Lord as the rest of this Ho∣norable House; this report now of his must needs be against his knowledge and former free consent in passing that Act contrary to this Informati∣on. 3. One Priviledge of Parliament, and that is
one of the greatest is to accuse and freely proceed to the punishment of delinquents, that have caused the troubles in this State, both in Church, and Common-wealth; this report is against this Pri∣viledge, It opposes altogether our Proceeding a∣gainst the Bishops, accused as the greatest delin∣quents both in Church and State; for my Lords if a Parliament is forced in the absence of the Bi∣shops, how may then the Parliament proceed lawfully against them; If the Bishops sit and have their votes (although delinquents) in Parliament how can wee proceed (I beseech you) against their votes, therefore under favour I conclude this re∣poer of the said Lord is against this Priviledge of Parliament. 4. To redresse the greivances of the Common∣wealth, is a Priviledge of Parliament, this report is against this Priviledge, how I pray you my Lords can our greivances be redressed, when the oppressions, Iniustice and vexations, troub∣ling of his Majesties loyall Subjects, may not by the Bishops, may not be called in qutstion, nor the mis-doers herein prosecuted and punished for the same. 5. This report is against divers acts of Parlia∣ment in this Kingdome, that have beene made without the voice or Bishops in Parliament, as is on record in the Iournalls of those, and thus my Lords, I have shewed you that how this report is against the priviledges of Parliament. 2. My Lords, this information intrencheth on the royall power and Prerogative of the King, And that in two respects.
1. His royall Prerogative in making, and enact∣ing lawes by Parliament, it resting onely in his Power to passe or, refuse the votes of Parliament. My Lords. The King of this kingdome have the greatest perogative (to require the Councell an assistance the whole state upon any occasion whatsoever, when pleaseth him) of any Prince in the world unlesse France, and under favour my Lords, I con∣ceive a Parliament cannot be termed forced, when it is freely called, and willingly continued by the King, I conceive my Lords a forced Parliament (is) when against the free consent of a King and his Lords without lawfull called by wtit men assembleth themselves, and by force of armes sit in Councell and inact lawes, not tending to the welfarre of the Kingdome. The Parliament holden at Oxford in the raigne of Edward 2. after the un∣happy dissolution of the Parliament at Westminster, in the 10. yeare of that Kings raigne, was a forced Parliament, compelling by undue meanes, the King and that Parliament to inact lawes tending to the ruine of the whole state of this Kingdome. 2 My Lords, this Information intrencheth on the Royall power of the King in makeing of Laws, for as before I haue touched Parliaments haue biue with out Bishopps Lawes made and enacted without their vots, then by this supersiou my Lords should they be of no validitie the King re∣strained in his power, and let Bishops be never so vile and dissaffected to the tranquillitie and secure∣ty of the state yet must they have votes in rectifiing and setting in order such things as are amsse in the
same, (aswell by their owne procureing as others) which is not then likely to take any good effect, nay my Lords it is too Apparant they haue beene the greatest opposers of our proceedings in ths Parliament the Cheifest cause noe more is doue by the same. 3 Lastly my Lords this Information is the first stepp to bring in an Arbitrary and tiranicall forme of Government, and that under favour for these reasons. 1 Free Parliaments are the securest and safest Government that euer could be found for this na∣tion, and that in respect of the power and wis∣dom theirof, it is vpholden defended atd preseru∣ed by the whole body of the kingdome, therfore powerfull, the members therof are men elected, one of tenn thousand by the whole state, therfore the wise, then to oppose the proceeding there of to deny the Government therof is, to the intent to change the same and if charged to another forme (None being soe secure, soe powerfull and so wise) must needs be Arbitrary and soe, Tiranicall. 2. My Lords, I no lawes can be binding to the subject, but such as are voted and assented to by the Bishops, then none can be expected, but such as are destructive to the state, their affections being altogether aberted from free Parliamentary pro∣ceedings and their designes, onely agitated, for the oppossing the government thereof, and wee cannot but dayly feare thereby the utter confusi∣on thereof, of the same. Now my Lords having to my weake Abillity
fulfilled the command of the House, in speaking somewhat of this Information I am to desire your Lordships from them, that the said George Lord Digby may answere the said Infor∣mation, or other∣wise be proceeded against, as the Parliament shall think fit. FINIS.
