P500 669.f.23[56] 99870322 163712
THE Parliament-Complement, OR THE RE-ADMISSION OF THE SECLUDED-MEMBERS To the Discharge of their long retarded TRƲST. SInce sixteen hundred forty and odd, We have soundly been lasht with our own rod, And have bow'd our selves down at a Tyrants nod, Which no body can deny. We have seen a new thing cal'd a Council of State, Upheld by a power that's now out of date, Put to th' question, by'th members of forty eight; Which no body can deny. We have seen what we hope, we shall ne're see agin, Now Lambert and Desbrow, are snar'd in the gin, The Tail cunningly pieced unto the skin, Which no body can deny. A Sword that has frighted our Laws out of dore, A Back-sword I wot, that must cut so no more, By th' Honour of Monck, now quitting that score, Which no body can deny. A Vote lately called the judgment ofth' house, To be esteem'd and reputed not worth a Louse, And the Grandee of Portsmouth made a fine Chouse, Which no body can deny. We have seen an Assessement, a Thing for Taxes, Though the Common-wealth waine, the Private waxes: Swords into Plowshares, and such bills to axes, Which no body can deny. Another new story of Qualification, That belong'd to no honest man of the Nation, Like the ill contriv'd Authors, quite out of Fashion. Which no body can deny. Original sin, was damn'd by that Law, The son of a Cavalier made a Jack-straw, To be chewed again by their rav'nous jaw, Which no body can deny. To fill up the House, and to shuffle the deal, New writs issued out, for there new Commonweal, But its not worth asking who is't payes the seal, Which no body can deny. I wonder who pays the late Parliament Printers, That place they may hold as many Summers as Winters And wish their Presses were broken in splinters, Which no body can deny. A great many Traytors by them lately made, Makes Treason be thought a common Trade, Sir George Booth and Jack Lambert a while in the shade Which no body can deny. We shall now sure give over that word Sequester, Now the Tail is cured of their ranckling fester, The twentieth of April is much about Easter, Which no body can deny. How many Thanks of the House have been idlely spent Upon People that still have been malecontent, But they must fast from those dainties in this shriving Lent Which no body can deny. That honorable favour no more shall be given To the factious merit of a party Hell-driven, For now our twenty years odds will be even, Which no body can deny. Then room for our Prisoners detain'd in the Tower And away with the new Lieutenants power, Who's minting the widdowed good old causes Dower, Which no body can deny. Sir George Booth, shall not think this a hit of fate, Nor excuse his keeper, whose warrants out 'f date, We shall see them all cry Peccavi too late, Which no body can deny. Eleven years mischiefs, tumults and rage, Are the only memorials, of this Common-wealths age, And all to be thank't, be Hazilrigg the sage, Which no body can deny. Let our Liberty-keepers be chang'd to Restorer Let our Peace carry Truth and Duty before her, He's a Fool and a Knave that else will adore her, Which no body can deny. This Janus like Freedom, though it please not us all And aversly doth look on the Scepter and Ball Will shut up its Temple at next Common-Hall, Which no body can deny. Then lets pray to Great Jove, that made Monck so kind, To our desperate Estate, to put him in mind, With the rest of our Worthies, of the Great Thing behind, Which no body can deny. LONDON, Printed for Iames Nidale. 1660.
