R1403 E812_18 99866919 167940
AN APOLOGY FOR THE Present Government, AND GOVERNOUR: WITH An Answer to severall Objections against them; and twenty Queries propounded for those who are unsatisfied, to consider, and answer, if they please. I am for Peace, Psal. 120. 7. Caleb stilled the People before Moses, Numb. 13. 30. Let us follow after things that make for peace, and things wherof we may edifie another, Rom. 14. 19. The fruit of Righteousnesse is sowen in peace of them that make peace, James 3. 18. Follow peace with all men, Heb. 12. 14. Seek peace and pursue it, Psal. 34. 14. By SAMUEL RICHARDSON. LONDON, Printed and are to be sold by Gyles Calvert, at a this shop the West end of Pauls. 1654.
Severall Objections against the present Government, answered. Obj. THis government in the hand of one single person, is in effect a kingly government. Answ. If so: that will not prove it unlawfull, also when the power is in one or a few, sooner and easier dipatch of businesse is had. Obj. We have fought against kingly government. Answ. If so: that were in effect to fight against Christ, for his govern∣ment is kingly. 2. We did not fight against kingly government, but against Tyranny and oppression, but we most especially for freedom in matter of Religion. Obj. We are to have no King but Jesus Christ, hee is to bee our onely lawgiver. Jam, 4. 12. Answ. I grant it, in matters of Religion his kingdome is spirituall and not of this world. Obj. This kingly government hinders Christ from reigning. Ans. This is a great mistake, the government of the world, concer∣ning the bodies and estates of men, is another government, and requires another King, and this hindreth not the government of Christ, but may both in their place well agree together. I grant the Kings of the earth have opposed Jesus Christ and his king∣dome, and persecuted his people, but that was not from their government as kingly, but by mixing with their civill government matters of Religi∣on, and made lawes in matters meerly Religious; and so persecuted Christ and his people: which was from their ignorance and wickednesse of them who were Kings. Psal, 2. 2 Yet are they not forbid to bee Kings, but bid to be wise, Be wise therefore O Kings, be instructed. vers. 10. (that is) let Christ and his lawes, and his people alone meddle not with them inflict no corporall punishment upon them, nor meddle not with their persons and estates for things meerely Religious for that belongeth not to you. In matters Religious no man may make a law, the opinions that the magist∣rate hath a power from God to punish Hereticks with corporall punnish∣ments hath cost the blood and lives of many thousands of the precious Saints and People of God.
There must of necessity be a government and a law in things civill, else there will be great confusion. Men say they know not what, when they say this government hinders Christ from raigning; for if wee speake of Christ raigning in his people by his Spirit, can that bee hindered by Souldiers, or Kings, no, none can hinder or suppresse that. If they meane Christs personall raigne, neither can all the power of this world hinder that, seeing he is God, he can with ease breake in peeces all that oppose him, like a potters vessel, as Psal. 2. 9. We desire Christ may come, we trust we shall lovingly embrace him when he comes, wee desire you to agree with us and to this government but till he come. It is no treason against Christ to adhear to this government in things civill▪ see∣ing God hath in no place in his word condemned the same, if hee hath I pray you shew us where? Obj. If this government bee continued, to what purpose hath so much blood been spent? Ans. It is to very great purpose, for now wee enjoy freedome from persecution in matters of Religion, which is the greatest outward blessing wee can enjoy; this alone is worth all the blood and treasure that hath been spent. And what good would all outward things in this world doe us without this, the Lord make us more sensible and thankfull for this mercy. I am perswaded that since this Nation hath beene a Nation, it ne∣ver did injoy so much freedome in this kind as now it doth. If you could repeat 1000 things one after another that we want, to every one we would cry, but we have liberty in matters of Religion; & give me leave to say the want of this hath forced me to leave father & mother, wife & friends, and native Country, and to wander desolately alone, as forsaken, and almost stript of all outward comforts, and in a strange land, and not knowing how to live, and not willing to beg, nor to endure the want I have beene in, have sate down alone and wept bitterly, and not able to speak, because my griefe was so great; I have wandred and hidde my selfe in holes and caves of the earth, and knew not where to bestow my selfe; and those who are not satisfied with the liberty we now enjoy, (excepting only the busines of Tithes) never knew what it was to be persecuted, undone, or banished, or to leave their native Country to wander a far off in desolate wildernesses, or have forgot, I am perswaded, the Martyrs in Q. Maries dayes; if they could have enjoyed the liberty wee doe, though they should have had only bread and water, would have been content, and
blessed God with all their hearts every day for the same. And the maine thing I ever expected and ok the Armies part was, because by them I expected freedome in matters of Religion, and with them that stand for that, I am resolved to stand and fall, and if we have it not from this govern∣ment and Army, I expect it from none else. Obj. The Saints of God are now imprisoned and persecuted, witnesse Mr. Feak. Ans. Their imprisonment is not for Religion, but for the safety of the Civill peace: therefore I wonder how M Feak dare write of his suffrings as he doth, his words are, I forewarned yu of this houre of temptation: I prisoner for the cause of Christ: I suffer for his sake in bonds for the testimony of the kingdome of the Lord Jesus. This honorable cause of Jesus Christ and the Gospel, in bonds for the service of all the saints, in bonds for Christ: now in prison for the good old cause; I am a sufferer for the Gospel, suffer upon that account: the brethren will be confident for my bonds. Yet he saith hee hath been imprisoned 7 or 8 months, and knows not what his crime is; if hee knows it not, how can he, how dares he say, it is for Religion? and it ap∣pears by his mittimus, that it is not for Religion, nor for Christ, nor for the Gospel, nor for any of the Saints, much lesse for all the Saints: for the words of the mittimus, as he sayth, are to commit and in order to the peace and safety of this Nation. If it be for the Civill peace, how is it for Christ and the Gospel &c. Is this equall and fair dealing? Bluh heavens, and be greatly astonished at this. Moreover, if it were for Christ and the Gos∣pel, how is it that there is no more in prison? is there but one or two in England, or London, that will owne Christ and his Gospel? how is it that all those called the seperation Bownist, Independant. Anabaptist, &c. are out of Prison? and which is more meet, freely and openly, and quiet∣ly: Surely something is the matter, that Mr. FEAK and Mr▪ ROGERS are in Prison, have they not instead of preaching Christ and the Gospel, in the Pulpit medled with wordly matters, and things not fit for that place? which did (or might at least) tend to a breach of peace, if it did in the least degree tend to stir up sedition, it was wel don to imprison them, to prevent further danger: and if they will not be peaceable, and preach Christ and him crucified, and not meddle with other matters, let them lie there till they will be quiet: and if this be persecution, then let all that are im∣prisoned triumph, and say, they suffer for Jesus Christ, and the Gospel. But what if it wil appear, that Mr. FEAK hath persecuted him, & the way God & Christ? for while his Highness was in the discharge of his duty, in
taking care for the safety & welfare of the Army & people of God, he smits him with reproaches and hard words▪ when he was effecting his safety a∣mong the rest, he suffers as a Christian, 1 Pet. 4 16. and is persecuted; for when the Sonne of Hagar spake against Isaac. Gen. 21. 8, 9, 10. this God cals persecution hee that was born after the flesh persecuted him, &c. Gal. 3. 29. 30. When Jobs friends spake unjustly against Job, it is called persecu∣tion, Why persecute you me? Job 19. 19. 21 22. hath not Mr. FEAK spo∣ken and written more bitter things against him, as being a Persecutor of Christ and of his Gospel, and of his people? what could bee said worse, and more grievous and dishonourable? also hee hath persecuted the way God hath taken to carry on his work in these dayes, in speaking against it, as Paul said, I persecuted that way, Acts 22. 14. in opposing it; and Christ saith he was persecuted in it, saying, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Acts 9. 4. and 5. 1. So that it appeares, that Mr. FEAK is the persecuter. Obj. We ought to witness against this Government, because it is an arbitrary Government, we know not what is our own, we are inslaved to his will and power, he may levy money according to his will and pleasure, and is not accountable, &c. Answ. This is not so; but if so, may not the same be said against any forme of Government that is supream, instance that of Parliaments, are they not as absolute, and every way as arbitrary? are they not above Law to the annulling Lawes, alter and make what Lawes they please? are not our Persons and Estates at their pleasure? and have levied what money they please, which they call the prerogative power, or priviledge of Par∣liament? If he hath a greater power to hurt that doth not hurt, unless he hath a will to hurt the happiness of a People, lieth not in the having this or that Government, but in the justice and righteousness of those that governe, and in the faithfull and righteous dispencing of the same, there be that have met with harder measure under that Government they call the best, then under this which they call the worst. Obj. The Army hath declared against Kingly Government, and in ha∣ving the power in one single person, and now they are for it; therefore they have broke all their Declarations and ingagements. Answ. 1. It may be they in their understandings have performed them, though it doth not appeare to you.
2. If in some thing they did declare, they think not fit to keep being better informed: in charity we are bound to believe that their judge∣ments are changed, they may see Reason to the contrary. 3. If a lawful thing be not also expedient for the inexpediency of it, it is to be laid aside. 4. David did say that he would destroy Nabal and all his house, after he saw his error, he und it, and broke his engagement, and thanked God he did it not: do ye think he was to be charged with hypocrisie and dis∣sembling? 5. Man is changeable, and when mens conditions change, commonly their mindes change, there is no better to bee expected from man; the more wee consider our selves, the more we see the truth of this; at one time we are of one opinion, and judgement, and soone after of another: we may well say, O Lord, what is Man? a very vanity. 6. To be unchangeable is to be attributed onely to God, Job saith, he is of one minde, and is not turned, Job 23. 13. this God challengeth as pro∣per onely to himselfe, saying, I am the Lord, I change not, Mal. 3. 6. hee saith, My counsel shall stand. We may not say so. 7. Sometimes mens purposes are changed, because they cannot effect them; man is often crossed in his way, because there is another Orderer above him: Mans goings are of the Lord, Prov. 20. 24. O Lord, I know the way of Man is not in himselfe, it is not in man that walketh to direct his steps, Jer. 10. 23. We quarrell at men, because we do not see God in things. Obj. Tithe is still continued and some imprisoned for them. Ans. Indeed the late Act for Tithe is very grievous to us, and the more because we expected before this day some other way instead therof. The maintenance of the Ministry by Tithe, is a great trouble to the con∣sciences of many, because Tithe are sayd to be holy, Lv. 27 30. 32 33. and were a heave offering Nu. 18. 24. 26. and the maintenance of the Le∣viticall Priesthood: and seeing that Ministery is done away, the mainte∣nance of that Ministery is to be done away, as appears H. b. 7. 1. to 24. And Christ being offered, all the Leviticall offerings which were types and shadowes of him are to cease: upon this ground a Martyr sayd, hee that payd Tithe, did deny Christ to bee come in the flesh, because Christ com∣ming in the flesh, was to put an end to Tithes. I heard a good man say, he desired to starve, rather then to take for preaching one halfe penny of Tithes. I have lately heard that his Highness did promise to remove them. I hope ere long something will be done therein, to ease the consciences of
many. I long to see it, and that they doe as 1. Cor. 10. 24. and that the poore be set to work, and the oppressed be relieved, and their Petitions an∣swered, and that Iustice may bee more easily had, as it will, when it runs downe like a mighty streame. And although it doth not appeare in Christs Testament that the maintenance of Christs Ministers is to bee by Tithes, nor by any other forced maintenance, yet this hinders not but the States Ministers may have a forced maintenance: for though those that God cals and sends will trust God and preach, without hier, yet those men sent have no reason to doe so, because they are not willing to doe so. 2. And those who have freely received, are freely to give, Mat. 10. 8. 2. Cor. 11. 7. This doth not concerne them: for their learning &c. cost their Parents much Money, besides their owne industry. And it is not to be denied, but that a man honestly buyeth and payeth for, he may Justly sell. 3. It cannot be denied but the Magistrate is to take care of that which is for the good of the Common-wealth, and the charge thereof is to bee born by the Common wealth as men. Also it cannot truely bee denied, but that it tends to the peace and well-being of the nation as civill, that there be a Ministry of it, if onely as morrall men, to teach men to agree, to doe justly and live peacibly, and be subject to authority: if there were no Ministers, the people in many places would grow more heathenish and unfit to bee governed: besides the State hath somthing for them to doe: upon which account it appeares there is need of them; and if so, there is ne∣cessity that they bee maintained by some tax, and if any refuse to pay it they may be forced therto as they are other taxes. Obj. They have set up a new Court of Tryars of worldly Ministers for worldly ends. Ans. 1. What if they have, they have reason to approve and ap∣point those they meane to pay? 2. Why dost thou find fault, so long as you and others have liberty to teach freely without their pay, that is liberty enough for us if wee cannot have the States pupits, other places are to be had. 3. You need not com∣plaine, seeing you are not forced to heare them. 4. If they approve of all the ministers of England, there is besides many places destitute and they are not supplied there is roome for you. 5. It is necessary that the people have some, besides many of them I hope are good men and may do much good. 6. Why should not wee allow the State and others the same liberty
that we desire for our selves, as to approve of whom they please? 7. They doe not preach now by vertue of the ordination they had of the Bishops, but by parts and approbation, and now those are appro∣ved to preach who have had no officiall ordination. Obj. Now we see his aim was onely to set up himselfe and his pri∣vate interest. Ans. That which hee hath done herein tends more for the safety and welfare of the people of God, then his owne which hee hath greatly ha∣zarded: and though he hath the power, the danger, hazard and burthen is so great that it were a benefit for him to be without it, and there is reason to conceive he would gladly lay it downe, if it were for the welfare of the people of God and the peace of the Nation. 2 Seing he hath often deprived himselfe of some of the sweetest com∣forts of this life, and often adventured his life for the cause and interest of the people of God, is a sufficient ground for us to believe that hee doth prefer the welfare of Gods people, and of this Nation, above his owne life or family. Neither doe I know of any of these actions hee hath done but it tends to our welfare (except the ordinance for Tiths) which we ex∣pect will not continue long. 3. His pretestations before God and man, that what he did was for the welfare of others which caused him to do that he hath done, is of waight to cause beliefe. 4 As the interest and welfare of the People of God, and the good of this Nation is to be preferred before a personall interest, and is so preferred by every good man; Therefore wee ought to believe hee did prefer it be∣fore his owne, wee are bound by the law of love to judge the best; love thinketh no evill, and so long as way is given to evill surmises and wick∣ed imaginations, and take every thing in evill part, wee are sensuall and serve divers lusts and meddle with secret things that belong to God. Deu. 29 29, and no good will come of it. 5. The form of the government being framed for the welfare of the people of God and the good of the Nation, is a certaine proofe of his desires of our good, as I know not what could be more. This is very unnaturall dealing, that after much suffering hardship, diligence and care to preserve your lives, the thankfulnesse and requi∣tal yee give him, is to count him your enemy, reproach him with many complaints and count it a great part of Religion to do so: and then ye cry the Gospell suffers: it suffers indeed by the unchristian carriages of
one of you, where envie and strife is, there is confusion and every evill worke. Iam. 3. 16. those fruits of the flesh are so manifest that it cau∣seth the Gospell to suffer. Obj. The pomp and vanity in Court is now up againe, Pride and worldly things are embraced &c. Ans Many things are reported of him, that are not true Joh. 8. 7. He that is withou sin let him cast the first stone. Rom. 2. 1. Thou art in excusable, O man, whosoever thou art that con∣demnest another and doest the same thing. Humane frailties no one is free from. Queries propounded to those who are dis-satisfied with the present Government, to consider, and answer, if they please. VVHether this present Government is not as much to be owned, and is as much according to Law, as the Armies refusing to disband, and their dissolving the long Parliament, and their chusing another: all which some of the chiefe of those who now dissent, have publickly approved of, and did not reckon it among their offences against God; why may they not as well own this present Government and Governour, and not reckon it any offence a∣gainst God? and if they are so set upon their will without reason, that rather then they will own this latter, they will disown and pull down that which they have owned and built up, whether they are not bound in reason and conscience to publish that their disowning, with their names and reasons why they so dis∣own, and also to pay back to the State all the money they have received as soul∣diers, since that day that they were by authority commanded to disband. 2. VVHether there be not sufficient ground to believe, that the major part of the free people of this Nation, 1 By their silence, Num. 30. 14. Lev. 5. 1. when the Instrument of government was held forth to them?
2. By their owning, accepting, and acknowledging the Justices of peace made by the said authority? 3. By paying the Taxes levied by the said authority? 4. By submitting to chuse Parliament men, in the same day, and in the same way in signing and sealing according to the appointment of the said Au∣thority, and in binding themselves, and those they chose, not to alter the govern∣ment? Whether these actions of obedience doe not amount unto a full close with the said government, and a sufficient testimony of their owning and accep∣tance thereof, and that in a full and large manner? For if the lifting up of a hand in token of consent, is interpreted a consent; and if in Law acceptance and submission doth make him a King, which was not so before, then surely these actions of theirs cannot in reason but amount to a free acceptance of the Government and Governour. And if so, whether the fewer number who dis∣cent are not concluded, and ought now to be satisfied, so as to owne and submit to the said government? 3. Whether this Government, as it is, and in the hands it is be not the best government for the whole people of this Nation, in that all the people doe, and may live peaceably under it; whereas if it were altered, or in the hands of the Kings Party, the Independant Party were like to bee imprisoned and sequestred, because wee have served them so; and if it were in the hands of the Presbyters, their principle is to imprison and persecute for Religion, and therefore all interst could not live so quietly as now they doe? 4. Whether the Kings Party, who have fought against us, have any reason to reckon themselves among the free people of this Nation, seeing they have beene subdued and conquered? and whether there bee any reason for us to conceive, that if they had conquered us, that they would have acknowledged us to bee a free pople, and consented to, and suffered us to disarm them, and to rule over them? and if no, what reason have they to desire or expect we should do so to them? 5. Whether the Restrictions and which is condemned in this Government, be not a great part of the excellency of it, for that Government which allow∣eth the least freedome to the Enemies thereof where by they are disabled to doe hurts, that Government is the safest and best for the Army and People? and if so, whether we have not cause to justifie and thanke those who drew up the forme of government with these restrictions? The more I consider the
Government, the more I see a good minde towards the people in the framing of it. 6. Whether in the beginning of this Parliament the actions of some did not declare that the Army and their Party should not have the Government, or the power of the sword in their hands: and if the Army had submitted therto, whether not only many of the lives of the Army and of their party were not hazarded? and what security could they give us, that the Kings party should not have the Militia, and should not get the upper hand of us, and use us at their pleasure, and so put us in as bad or worser condition then when under the King and Bishops tyranny. 7. Whether wee have cause to count them our friends, whatsoever they say, that would disarme us, and leave us naked to our Enemies, Though they should tell us it is for our good? 8. If the Army should part with the Militia, as some desire, whe∣ther it might not make void and fruitless the many Victories God hath given us, and the liberty we now injoy, and be brought into bondage againe? and whether it were lawfull for us to submit thereto, and so to be the cause of our own ruine, and if it be our duty to submit to Au∣thority herein, why did we it not at first, and so never have fought for our freedoms? to what purpose have we come out of Aegypt, if we are to returne thither again? 9. Whether the actions of the Army doe not declare, that wee doe fully believe, that it is the will of God, that we should keep the power he hath given us, and put into our hands, else to what purpose was it given? and if any say otherwise, what signe shew they us, that wee may believe them? 10. Whether the 52 Ministers appoynted by the Parliament, did not give us cause to expect a persecution to follow? what should they doe, unlesse it were to finde out the true Religion, and to measure it out to us how much every one is to have? and if so, whether there is not
some ground to feare that the Religion that the former Synod found out, is lost, or not counted good enough, though some say, it cost the Common-wealth seventeene thousand l.? 11. Whether the Article in the Instrument of Government for free∣dome in matters of Religion, bee not the likeliest meanes to prevent persecution, as thins are? 12. If there be any honour, preferment, and profit to bee had by having the Power, and Government, whether they doe not most de∣serve it both in reason and conscience, who have adventured their lives, and lost their blood for us, and saved our estates and lives? whe∣ther in reason we may not expect a continued safety from them who have been a means to procure the liberty we injoy, rather then from a∣ny others? 13. Whether it be not better for this Nation that this Government be as it is, and in these hands it is, then to begin a new War; for we see they will not part with it, and I suppose, that if any others will have it, they must fight for it, and if they should, it is not certaine they shal prevaile, our enemies plots have been fruitlesse; they have had fair play for it, they have had pitch'd field-battels severall times in severall yeares, yet they have alwayes lost it; if we should fight it over again, we have reason to believe, they shall not prevaile, ser. 1. 9. for God is with us: as also it is some incouragement unto us that we are to fight with them that we have with the help of God alwayes beaten and over∣come, though they have been more in number, and they well, and wee sick and weak; and also we know the cause being the same, we may well expect the successe shall be the same: and though some of us doe differ, and not love one another as we should, there is no cause to believe that any good man will fight against the Army, seeing the Army hath ad∣ventured their lives to save theirs, also our interest being one, a selfe-love will make us agree in one, against the common enemy, at
home and abroad, who desire and hope is that wee will fall out among our selves, and then they shall have what they desire. 14. If there should be any more war begun amongst us, whether it would not indanger the ruine of the whole land? 15. Whether the wayes some take in opposing the present Govern∣ment, doth not declare their opposition is not from God, witness the pub∣lishing of a Libel, called A Declaration in the names of severall Churches, with severall hands to it, as if it were signed by those said Churches, and upon examination it is proved false and counter∣feit. I hope many that oppose this Government shall see their errour, and be ashamed, if his Highness depart not from this Government, nor from those who are called Sectaries, who have been faithful & owned him, and the welfare of this Nation; whereas the Kings Party, and the rigid Presbyters, though they feare and flatter him, they doe not, nor cannot love him, nor never were (nor haue we any reason to believe they ever will bee) true to him and the publick welfare of this Na∣tion? 16. Whether if things were worser then they are, to what purpose is it to murmure and finde fault, for that which cannot be helped, wee quarrell at a man, when it is God that setteth up whom he will, Luk. 1. 52. Dan. 4. 17. consider Jam. 4. 5. & 3. 15, 16. 17. Ex. 16. , 8, 9. Jud. 16. 17. Whether it be not better for us to be content with what we have, and hope, and wait for more, then by discontent to make our selvs worse, in losing what we have? for if we should fall out among our selves, and destroy one another, the Kings party are like to possesse all, then it will be worse. 18. What one thing hath this Nation beene oppressed with, more then it was afore, and if so, what reason have any to make such an out∣cry,
as they do against the present Government and Governor? 19. Whether there be any Government or Governors, but have some faults? 20. Whether those who like not this Gouernment, have not as much reason to like it as I, seeing they injoy as much benefit by it as I, for I have nothing by this Government but what I pay for, and so much they have. I doe from my heart believe, that it is best for this whole Nation, to bee content with this Government, and quietly to sit down under it, and to thanke God that things are no worse then they are; indeed I look upon this Government in which we enjoy liberty in matters of Religion, to be a blessed Government, if the offence of Tith were removed, I believe wee should injoy as much free∣dome and liberty under it, as any doe under any Government in all the whole world. FINIS.
