R573 E27_14 99868825 121181
THE REASONS OF THE Dissenting Brethren against the Third Proposition, CONCERNING PRESBYTERIAL GOVERNMENT. Humbly presented. LONDON, Printed by G. M. for Ralph Smith at the Bible in Corne-Hill. 1645.
Die Lunae, 23. Decemb. 1644. ORdered by the Commons assembled in Par∣liament, That three hundred and no more, of The Reasons of the dissenting Brethren against the third Proposition touching Presbyteriall Go∣vernment, and The Answer and Solution of the Assembly to the said Reasons, be forthwith Print∣ed; And that the care of the exact Printing thereof be referred to Mr Byfield: And the Printer is injoyned (at his perill) not to Print more then Three hundred of them. It is further Ordered, That no man presume to Re-print, Divulge or Publish the said Rea∣sons and Answers, or any part of them, till fur∣ther order be taken herein by either or both Houses of Parliament. H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.
REASONS against the Third Proposition, concerning Presbyteriall Government, and the Proofes thereof: Viz. The Scripture holds forth, that many particular Congregations may be under one Presbyteriall Governement. Humbly Presented. If many Congregations having all Elders already affixed respectively unto them, may be under a Presbyteriall government: Then all those Elders must sustaine a speciall relation of Elders to all the people of those Congre∣gations as one Church and to every one as a Member thereof. But for a company of such Elders already affixed, &c. to sustaine such a re∣lation, carries with it so great and manifold incongruities, and inconsisten∣cies, with what the Scripture speaks of Elders in their relation to a Church committed to them, and likewise with the Principles of the Reformed Churches themselves, as cannot be admitted. And therefore such a Government may not be. The first Proposition. THat according to the Scriptures, such a Presbyteriall Government necessarily drawes such a speciall relation, is evinced by parts thus. 1. They must have the relation of Elders to all and every one of the Members; for Church and Elders are Relatives. And the Argument for the Presbyteriall government is taken by the Pres∣byteriall Divines from this; That many Congregations in Scripture, are made one Church, and the Elders thereof Elders of that Church. 2. That relation they have, must be a more speciall relation, as is evident from the practise and principles of this government. For when the Congrega∣tions in Shires are divided into severall Presbyteries or Deanries, the Elders (though Neighbours) of a bordering Presbyterie, intermeddle not with the Congregations under another Presbyterie, and yet Neighbour Elders. It is
therefore a speciall relation puts the difference, that those of these Presbyteries do judge the Congregations under them, as having a speciall relation to them, such as not to other Congregations. The minor Proposition. For the proofe of which, we present these incongruities as follow. First, this breeds many incongruous disproportions to the Order set by Christ, about the Officers of the Church. 1. To extend a Pastors power of ordinary ruling beyond the extent of his ordinary teaching, is against the order which Christ hath set (and all extent of power must as well have an Institution of Christ, as the power or office it selfe, the difference of Evangelists and ordinary Pastors lay in extent of power,) but the extent of a Pastors ordinary ruling power, is but to that Flock as his whole Flock which he is able to feed. The first Proposition is confirmed, first by Scripture, secondly by Reason. First by Scripture, Acts Chap. 20. Verse 28. Take heed to your selves and to all the flock over the which the Holy Ghost hath made you Overseers to feed the flock of God, which he hath purchased with his own blood. Whence first we see the speciall limitation of their extensive power and relation [to a flock] and [all in that flock] is by the Holy Ghost, and not by man, and therefore is not to be extended by man, further then the Holy Ghost hath appointed. 2. The extent of that relation to that flock, and the whole flock they feed, and to feed all that flock alike. And if they be preaching Elders, then to feed by preaching, and therefore are Overseers to them to feed them, and this because they feed them. 3. He speaks to preaching Elders especially, that feed by doctrine: for he propounds his own example to them, Verse 20. That he had revealed the whole counsell of God. And Peter seconds Paul in this, 1 Peter, Chap. 5. Verse 2. Feed the flock of God which is among you, taking the oversight thereof. The flock  among you: is that flock any of them had relation to as his flock respectively. Peter here writing unto the Churches in severall Nations Chap. 1. Verse 1. whereas in Acts 20▪ and Verse 28. the charge is to the particular El∣ders of Ephesus to that whole flock; therefore that note of respectivenesse is here put  among you: that is, that flock which respectively belongs to you, as Colossians Chap. 1. Verse 17. Who is for you a faithfull Minister, that is, your proper Pastor: So the flock  is your severall proper flocks that belong to you. And hereby it appears that their oversight is not extendible be∣yond their feeding. Thus also Heb. 13. Verse 7. Remember them that have the rule over you, and have spoken to you the word of God; which he speaks of preaching Elders, and of ruling Elders (of whom he speaks Verse 17.) Obey
them that have the rule over you, for they watch for your soules, as those that must give an accompt. And whether these places note out two sort of Offi∣cers, Preaching Elders, ver. 7. and Ruling Elders, ver. 17. or but one sort, and so but severall acts of the same Office, however if but one, yet still the ordinary rule over them was not farther extendible then their ordinary preaching; if two sorts of Officers, they being Officers together in the same Church, if the Pastors power of ruling extends no farther then his preaching, then the meere ruling Elders power, or his that is assistant to him, must extend no farther then the Pastors also; this is the naturall obligation to obedience, and so is the mea∣sure to set the bounds of the extent of ordinary Church power. 'Tis one ar∣gument used against Episcopall power, that they are inforced to obey him that speakes not the word to them, nor watches over their soules; And this holds as well against these Presbyteriall Officers, when a man to be excommunicated comes before such, if he sayes I am not bound to obey you in such authoritative way, nor doe I owe a subjection as to a power of censure in you, for many, yea most of you, never spake the word unto me, nor did watch over my soule; nay, perhaps the man can say, he never saw their faces afore. And it availes not to say that they may occasionally preach; for take two places more, the 1 to the Thes. chap. 5. ver. 12. speaking of respect to their Officers, Know them that labour among you, and are over you in the Lord and admonish you: These two labour, and are over you, are commensurable; that is, who make it their calling to have the care of you, which the many Pa∣stors and Elders in a common Presbyterie cannot. And labour, in what? Tim. Epist. 1. chap. 1. ver. 17. expounds it, That labour in the word and Doctrine: The Elders that rule well, are worthy of double honour, especially those that labour in the word and Doctrine. And expound this latter known place, whe∣ther of Teaching Elders only, or ruling and teaching both (as the Reformed Churches doe) however it affords this to us; that the extent of ruling in either the one or the other, is but as large as teaching: And if it be meant of Teaching Elders only, that both rule and labour in the word and Doctrine, yet if they be limited in labouring in the word (as they are being fixed Pastors to their own Congregations) then in ruling. And if it be meant of ruling Elders (as di∣stinct from them) yet their ruling is but of the same extent, that the others la∣bouring in the word is, and that is extended but to one Congregation. And secondly, Reason is for this; For in a Pastors Office in which Preaching and Ruling are joyned, yet his power of ruling flowes in him from, and is the adjunct of his power to preach, and to be sure it is not extendible further; and however yet there is the same proportion of either, and then by just reason the extent of the Church which is the subject of his ordinary ruling cannot be ex∣tended larger then what is the ordinary subject of his preaching, and so these
relations are of equall limits; If a father hath the power of governing, as a fa∣ther, then it is extendible only to those he is a father to. And that a Pastor hath his ordinary ruling power annexed to his ordinary power of preaching, is pro∣ved by these reasons. First, If not upon this ground, then upon some other, not by any speciall fa∣culty or Office, over and above this of preaching, for then he should be ordained a ruling Elder over and above his being first a Preaching Elder as a new faculty given him, or by being made a Ruler first, and then this of preaching superadded, as the Bishops first made Deacons then Presbyters. But Secondly, All the keyes are given him at once, the keyes of ruling with the keyes of knowledge, the power of the staffe intrinsecally followes, his being a Pastor or Shepheard; and though the one is a power of meere order, namely that of Preaching, and that of his Ruling be a power of jurisdiction (to be exercised with others and not alone) yet still his receiving power to joyne with others in those acts of Rule of jurisdiction is from this his power of Order, and the ordinary extent of his authority therein, is extendible no farther then his or∣dinary call to preach. Yea Thirdly, The extent of the power of the Apostles themselvs, in ruling in all the Churches was founded upon, and extendible with their commission to preach in all Churches, and their very call and obligation being not to preach in a set fixed relation, as ordinary Pastors calling is, but to all Churches in all Na∣tions: Hence their power of ruling was answerable; It was their very call to be universall Pastors, and therefore universall Rulers; yea and in reference to those that are without, their authority of ruling was narrower in the extent of it then of their preaching. The Apostles might preach to Heathens, and their call was so to doe, to convert them, but they had not power to rule all men: what have I to doe to judge them that are without? But in this way of Pres∣byteriall governement, though they also may occasionally preach where they may not rule, yet the proportion of their ordinary ruling, is extended beyond the proportion of their ordinary preaching, which it was not in the Apostles themselves. Secondly, It breeds an incongruous disproportion between the Offices of Ru∣ling and Preaching Elders compared among themselves, for this Governement makes the Extent of the Ruling Elders Office and relation, to be larger then that of their Teachers or Pastors; For the Pastor, quâ Pastor, is limited to his particu∣lar Congregation he is fixed to for the ordinary performance of his Office, as the Deacons also are; but the Ruling Elders Office, quâ Ruling Elder, is exten∣ded over all these Congregations in this Presbyterie. The Ruling Elder per∣formes his Office in the highest perfection of it, as to admonish, excommunicate in all these Churches, but the Pastors are limited in the highest work of their
Callings, Preaching being more excellent then Ruling, yea then baptizing unto one Congregation; That in the first Epistle to Tim. Chap. 5. Ver. 17. (interpret it as you will) justifies this. Thirdly, It perverts the order and distinction of Teaching Elders, and meere Ruling Elders (as the reformed Churches call them) or Church Governours (as the Assembly) That whereas Christ hath made some Teaching Elders, and some Ruling Elders, and these distinct in this, that the Preaching Elders Of∣fice is to preach and rule, the Ruling Elders Office only to rule: this frame of Presbyteriall government, makes one person not only to doe both these works, (which in a particular Congregation every Pastor doth) but formally to be both those Offices, in respect of a double relation he doth susteine, namely, a Pastor to be a Preaching Elder to the Congregation where he is fixed, and a meere ru∣ling Elder to the rest of the Congregations of a Classicall Church: for it is de∣manded, when a Pastor in a particular Congregation is in this common Presby∣terie, what sort of Officer he is to that Presbyteriall Church? An Elder he is, because he doth the work of an Elder; A Teaching Elder to that Church he is not, for to that whole Church he labours not in the word and Doctrine. Ti∣mothy, Epist. 1. Chap. 5. ver. 17. Therefore a meere ruling Elder he must be, and so the same man beares two sorts of Offices, and by this meanes there are two sorts of meere ruling Elders, whereas in a particular Congregation, a Pa∣stor though he rules, yet he ruleth as a Pastor to that Congregation. And this disorder and confusion is further set out, in that, by this meanes the same Of∣ficer hath a full relation to one Church, and but halfe a relation to another, and causeth him to performe the whole of his Office to one Church (the particular Church) he hath relation to, and but the halfe thereof to the other. Fourthly, It makes an incongruous disproportion between the Extent of the relation of those two Offices of Elders and Deacons unto a Church. If the Scriptures had intended many Churches making one Church, and the Elders of those many Churchers to have been Elders in common to those Churches as one Church, then in like manner the Deacons of all those Churches should make up a common Deaconrie, and be Deacons in common unto all those Churches in an ordinary way as the other are Elders: But this is contrary to the practise of the Reformed Churches, though subject to the Presbyteriall Go∣vernment, in which the Deacons have the ordinary relation of Deacons in no respect extended further then to a particular Congregation, nor doe they ex∣ercise Acts of that Office in an ordinary way to other Congregations, nor o∣therwise to neighbour Congregations then to any other; much lesse is there a common Deaconship of them all, and why should not the later be erected over all those Churches as one Church, as well as a common Eldership? especially if in matters of this nature, par ratio should carry it; every Church, quâ
Church, being a body, hath relation to all its Officers as Organicall members thereof; So. Rom. 12th. and the 4th. And the Apostle writing to Philippi, a Church in a City, he writes to the Bishops [the Elders] and the Deacons as both alike Officers of that Church. And Acts Chap. 6th. The Deacons of the Church of Jerusalem (if there were many Congregations as our brethren suppose) were chosen by the whole multitude when gathered together by the 12. And therefore were Deacons of that whole Church as well as the Elders, Elders thereof. Now if the Deacons Office should thus be extended to all the Congregations as the Elders is, then why should not each Church be bound to bring contributions to the Deacons of each Church, and to be distributed in common? and so our purses should be subject to the Deacons in common, as farre as our persons to the Elders in common, and they might challenge the same power in their Office over the one that the Elders doe over the other, and then also each Congregation were in an ordinary and standing obligation bound to releeve all the Poore in those Churches, as well as those in their own Parishes, not only by the common law of Charity, but by virtue of speciall re∣lation of their being one Church, which relation in all these things, doth beget the like Obligation that it doth in government, and so all things of this nature should be alike common to all and each, and there should be a common Trea∣sury for this one great Diaconat Church, as we may in a paralell allusion to that other name of Presbyteriall call it. A second head of Incongruities and Inconsistencies which will follow upon it, are in the mutuall duties required, and that doe necessarily follow upon this standing relation for a constant government of these Elders to all this people of these Churches, and of the people to these Elders. 1. From the People to all these Elders, according unto what the Scripture speakes of as due to standing Elders, they owe at least honour and esteeme; yea, maintenance to all their Elders, whether those that ordinarily rule them or preach to them, and they owe it for both, Tim. Epist. 1. Chap. 5. ver. 17. and 18. Let the Elders that rule well, be counted worthy of double honour, espe∣cially those that labour in the word and Doctrine. Which honour is expressed by the Analogie of that law, ver. 18. not to musle up the mouth of the Oxe that treadeth out the corne. And this is certainly due to Elders, for all, that is the work or Elders, whether performed apart or together by way of jurisdi∣ction in a Presbyterie; And it cannot be denied, but that their constant ruling as in the Presbyterie, is one great part of the work of Elders, and so must be here intended, for which an especiall honour is due. And as they are to feed all and every one in the flock, as Acts 20. ver. 28. so maintenance and honour is due from all this people to all and every one of these Elders, as well to those that rule, as those that labour in the word and Doctrine. And in reason, if the
Elders that rule well (and performe the lesser acts of ruling) in their parti∣cular Congregations, and the Presbyteries thereof are to have this honour in their relations, then all those Elders that rule well in the common Presbyterie (and performe the greatest acts of ruling) are to have the like from all that Classicall Church, the emphasis being put upon ruling well, and in those acts done by them the excellency of ruling consisteth, and the precept is not to ho∣nour Presbyteries in some abstract notion, but Elders: because the particular persons of the Elders are to be the object of it, and those most who excell most in that rule, that rule well or best; but when there are many Congregations that have their proper fixed Pastors and Elders whom they maintaine for per∣forming one part of the Elders worke (for they performe but one part of it) how shall they performe this due to all the rest for that other part of it? and it is due from every person as he is able, or he cannot performe his duty, how bur∣thensome, how confused would this be? And then how to proportion this, suppose it should not be maintenance, but honour and esteeme, this people will not be able to judge, not only for that they cannot be present at their worke and so cannot judge of it, but because either it must be proportioned to them as constant Preaching-Elders, or as Ruling; not as to Preaching Elders, for they labour not to them as such; the ground upon which it is required is, That they tread out their Corne, and to honour and esteeme them as Ruling Elders only, were to honour preaching Elders below the ranke and degree of their Of∣fice. So Secondly, It brings the like Incongruities upon the performance of those du∣ties of Elders, which the New Testament indifferently requires of all those that it acknowledgeth to be Elders unto a people, and therefore no such constant relation of Elders to so many Churches may be. As first, Praying with the sick, Send for the Elders of the Church to pray for them, James chap. 5. ver. 14. What, are these Elders of a Presbyteriall Church bound hereto? this duty lyes in common upon Elders of Churches, and how shall we distinguish when the Scripture doth not. Secondly, Visiting from house to house, as Paul in his ex∣ample instructs the Elders of Ephesus, Acts chap. 20. ver. 20. Thirdly, Watch∣ing over mens soules, as those that must give an accompt, Heb. chap. 13. ver. 17. To watch, is not to stay till causes are brought by appeales or so from the Con∣gregations, but personally to observe and oversee them, as soules committed to them, which they must give an accompt for. Fourthly, Of Preaching, If Prea∣ching Elders in season and out of season. The Bishops, they said the flock was theirs, and the whole care committed to them: and to salve the incongruity of not being able to preach themselves to them, they professed a derivative dele∣gated power to inferior Pastors, whom they called their Curats. This was plaine dealing: but these Elders make all the whole flock theirs, and this from those
Scriptures that speake of Elders and flock, and themselves not Curats, and so personally obliged according to the rules in Scripture, and yet cannot performe it, which is a worse Incongruitie. If it be said, that they may part these duties among them, ubi Scriptura non distinguit, nec nos debemus distinguere. Now all those duties that are spoken of Elders to the flocks, they are without distinction, as in respect of the object to whom they are extended. Paul saith to those of Ephesus, Feed the flock. Peter the like to those he writes to, The flock,  respectively, To feed and to take the oversight of them. The author to the Hebrewes, To watch over their soules; And to the Thessalonians, he describes them to be those that are over them, and labour and admonish them. When those Injunctions are thus laid up∣on all, how shall the conscience of Elders be able to part and distinguish their discharge of them, and to say, though I am an Elder in common to all in these Congregations, yet I am bound but to governe them in greater matters, and to admonish them as with others, when publickly met in a Consistorie, and am bound to no other acts of Eldership; and yet to this particular Congregation, I am obliged to private admonition, rule, watchfulnesse, &c. Where hath the Scripture set these bounds, or thus parted them? And therfore certainly all these places hold forth singly, only the Elders and their duties of a particular Church fixed thereto, as knowing no other: 'Twas necessary Christ should have set the bounds and given the distinction, and not indifferently lay all these upon all. And either in these places the duties of Elders in a common Presbyterie are contained, and that, under the notion of Elders to those, or they are not to be found in the New Testament; And all these may be brought in severall Argu∣ments alone by themselves against the maine Proposition, though here they come in only as branches of the Minor. Lastly, This is inconsistent with the ordinary way of the Call of Elders held forth in the word, and the Principles of the Reformed Churches. There are two parts of this Call. First, Choice. Secondly, Ordination. First for Choice, Chamier in the name of all the Reformed Churches, allowes the people this, the approbation of their Elders, and so in Scotland. And if the Apostles themselves allowed them the choice of the Deacons that had the charge of the Church treasury, and took care of their bodies; then much more of their Elders that have to doe with their consciences. Looke what ever right of the people is in the choice of them that should preach to them, there is as much reason they should have the exercise of it in the choice of those Elders that in a common Presbyterie doe rule over them, for they performe one part of the Elders duty, namely Ruling, as the Preaching Elders doe the other; and there∣fore by the equity of the same law, that speakes of Elders indefinitely, if they choose any Elders as Elders to them, they are to choose these also, there being
no distinction put of choosing Preaching Elders only, but Elders indefinitely▪ And further, the greatest and highest acts of power over them, are committed in an ordinary way unto them, as of Excommunication, of all punishments the most formidable, there is put as much, if not more then every mans life (that is a member of that Classicall Church) into their hands, the enjoyment of all Ordi∣nances for ever: And so the power of deposing their Ministers already fix'd to them, and of refusing to ordaine them, they shall approve; And therefore in an∣tiquity, of all other the persons of the Bishops, who had the power of all those, were chosen by all the people, and by Panegyricall meetings▪ And it is streng∣thened by this further paralell; A Ministers Call hath two parts, first, Ordina∣tion, which belongs to the Elders. Secondly Choice, in which the people have some interest: These Elders as Elders in common, and these Congregations as one Church be relatives, and so that interest which a Church, quâ Church hath, is commensurable to the interest of these Elders, quâ Elders: If therefore in or∣daining, all the Elders in a common Presbyterie, doe joyne to ordaine an Officer, then all the people, quâ Church, must joyne in choosing or approving him; nei∣ther can their common right of chusing be swallowed up by the interest of their Elders ordaining him. And if it be said they all choose by vertue of the generall law of combination, as in the Shires Parliament men; The constitution of the State makes the one, if the like be found in Scripture it will be sufficient; but if not, but that this interest must be common to the people of the Classicall Church, it is asked when a fix'd Pastor is to be chosen to a particular charge, what Office he shall be chosen to by the people of the other Congregation? Not to a Pastors Office, he is not to be such to them; if to be a Ruling Elder only, then besides that he hath two Offices as afore; so now he must have two choi∣ces and two Ordinations: We choose him for our Pastor, sayes the particular Church he belongs to, and we, say the other, to Ruling. And besides, in his Ordi∣nation, the people have an interest of presence and joyning in the fasting and prayer at his Ordination: and this therefore must be performed, either in a pane∣gyricall meeting of all, which cannot be, or in all the severall Churches, which will multiply the Ordination of them. The major Proposition confirmed. IN regard that the maine Argumentation of such as contend for a Presbyteriall government (as in their writings and otherwayes appeares) is from the mention of the Elders of such and such a Church as, Jerusalem, &c. having many Congregations (as they suppose) the consequence of the Major was taken so much for granted as on all sides agreed on, as it was lesse insisted upon the first day; but being denied and answered thus, that they bear not the relation
of Elders, but of a Presbyterie, because, quod convenit toti quâ toti non convenit cuilibet parti; And that if Elders, yet in sensu composito non diviso, As a Colo∣nell is a Colonell to a particular Regiment, but in a Councell of War, not so to all Regiments: A head of a particular Tribe is an head to his own Tribe divi∣sively, but not so to all the Tribes, and the like. For that Logicall Axiome, 'tis true, quod convenit toti quâ toti non convenit cuilibet parti, and so here, that which doth competere toti, to the whole of these Elders, belongs not to every part; for take them all as met together, they are a Presbyterie, and accordingly each Elder is not a Presbyterie to all these Con∣gregations, nor doth the Argument suppose it, but only that if they be a com∣mon Presbyterie to all these Congregations, that they then beare the relation of Elders. As take an heape of stones, 'tis true each stone is not an heape of stones, but each stone is a stone in that heape. So this Company of Elders, must be sup∣posed both a Presbyterie, and also Elders to this whole people and every mem∣ber of them: which is farther proved thus; 1. The Scriptures would have the people looke at them and honour them as Elders in all acts of ruling as well as in preaching, and especially wherein the most and chiefe of ruling lyes, and wherein the excellency of their ruling is seen; They rule most and best when met in this common Presbyterie; upon that re∣lation we are to honour them, as performing this rule, and under that relation they must be said to performe it: The Elders that rule well, are worthy of double honour, especially those that labour in the word and Doctrine. Tim. Epist. 1. chap. 5. ver. 17. And besides, otherwise we destroy the relation of Elders, quâ Elders, in the highest acts of governing, which are exercised only in a Pres∣byterie. 2. The New Testament doth indifferently and promiscuously use the word Presbyterie and the word Elders, of the same persons in relation to the same people; and therefore to whom these Elders are supposed to be a Presbyterie, they must beare the relation of Elders, Matthew chap. 21. 23. those that are called Elders of the people, are called, Luke 22. , the Presby∣terie of the people: so as if they related as a Presbyterie to the people, to the same people they related as Elders. Secondly, For that distinction of their being Elders only in a community to all those Congregations as one Church, in sensu aggregato, but not in sensu di∣viso, to every person thereof, as was instanced in Burgesses, &c. First, This Church as it is totum aggregatum, is but an abstract notion, but the rule and government of the Elders in a Presbyterie, falls upon persons in particular, and every member of that Church; if therefore they be Elders in the Presbyterie to that Church, it must be that they are Elders to every person therein. Againe it must be remembred where we are, namely upon what the Scriptures hold
forth, so the Proposition runneth. And if there had been those differing relations of Elders, which from those similitudes in Common-wealths, Armies, and the Universities are given, it were necessary the Scripture should have held it forth by like differing names and respects, or by differing charges whereby it might ap∣peare that this relation obligeth them to this duty, and this other relation to that, which being not done is therefore to us a fiction. That it was necessary ap∣pears from the instances themselves, As in that of the Tribes, there were gene∣rall Elders of all the Tribes, and there were (and perhaps some of them the same men) that were Heads and Elders of the particular Tribes. But as this was a differing relation and respect in the same, or diverse persons, so they had names and titles of difference and distinction: For the Heads generall as we may call them, were called Elders of the people. The particular Elders of particularMatth. 21. 33. Tribes, were called by way of distinction from them, Elders of such Cities, Families, &c. And there were as distinct lawes given in such cases, the Elders of the severall Tribes did such and such particulars in their Tribes respectively, and the generall Elders had reserved cases of Blasphemy, &c. set downe by the Law. So in that instance of the Heads of Colledges, and Heads of the University, there is as a differing, so a distinguishing Character: the names are changed, the particular bodies are called Colledges, the gene∣rall Body the University, and their severall speciall relations to their Col∣ledges is expressed by the Title of Masters of such and such Colledges, and the other by the title of Heads to the University. Yea, and accordingly there are differing statutes, the locall statutes for each Colledge a part, or for Colledges as Colledges, and the duties of Masters in their speciall relations, and there are statutes for the University and their duties as Heads thereof: and this distincti∣on and difference was necessary, if there were this differing relation. But for the case in hand, if we come to the New Testament to finde out these severall juris∣dictions and relations of Elders, therein we still reade but simply and singly El∣ders and Churches as Relatives, no such note of distinction. And also speaking of the duties of Elders to the people, and people to Elders, it speaks simularly and univocally: so as whoever will take upon them to be Elders, all those duties fall upon them, let them distinguish how they can. And to confirme this, the Instances in the Minor serve. And where the Scripture doth not distinguish, we are not to distinguish. And if the Elders of a particular Congregation are Elders to that Church, both in sensu diviso and every member thereof, and also in sensu composito, in their Presbyteries unto the whole, then those generall Elders must bear the like relation to that Classicall Church and every Member of it, else the difference is so vast, and the consequent difference of duties thereupon depend∣ing such, as it was necessary a distinction should have been made in Scripture, that each might know their duties.
If all the Records, Lawes, and Ruled cases of this Kingdome, should in set∣ting downe the ordinary government thereof, have made mention only and singly of Burgesses (as the Rulers) and of Corporations (as the Correlate to them) and used no other distinguishing word, and there were undeniably Bur∣gesses of every Incorporate Towne continued from antiquity: if any would af∣terwards pretend that this word Corporation was intended by our Ancestors to import an Association or Community of many of these Corporations into one Shire, and that by Burgesses of those Corporations were meant a com∣munity of all those Burgesses in one body for government, and so pretend the same names without distinction, and say they were also meant: yea, and fur∣ther, if the Lawes and Charters concerning such Burgesses in each Corporation, the duties given them in charge by the lawes in their relations to their Corpo∣rations, did runne without any distinction of what the Burgesses in the supposed greater Corporation should doe, in that relation and community from what the same Burgesses in their lesser Corporations in a more proper relation: Yea, and if the Duties set downe in those lawes mutually betweene Corporations and those Burgesses should argue an inconsistency with the governement of Burgesses over many Corporations in common (as the minor here shewes it to be in our case) but all naturally fall in with that of Burgesses over single Corpo∣rations: In this case to say that therefore this Kingdome did hold forth, there might not be (that is according to the lawes thereof) such a government of the Burgesses of Corporations over many, were not this a right way of arguing to overthrow such a pretence. And if in answer to such arguments it should be said, that both these might be consistent: For that in forein States, and Kingdomes, and Societies, there are Burgesses of particular Corporations, and there are Burgesses in an Assem∣bly of Parliament, so called by way of distinction, met in common, for the ordinary government of all those Corporations in common, and therefore the like may be here in this. The reply were easie, that what ever such distinction there is in other States, yet the question is of such Burgesses as the Lawes of this State hold forth, the question is of such Burgesses as this Kingdome hath set up, where there is no distinction of Burgesses of Corporations, and Burgesses in Parliament mentioned. But on the contrary only, one single uniforme stile and title in the lawes, namely, Burgesses of the Corporation, and duties suited thereunto. Now parallel to this case are our Arguments, and the Answers gi∣ven thereto. Lastly, if they be Elders only in sensu aggregato, yet so farre as they are acknowledged thus Elders, so farre will many of the incongruities in the minor follow them, and fall upon them, as that still they are but meerly ru∣ling Elders, and that there be Deacons in sensu aggregato.
Reasons against, and exceptions to the first proofe of the first Assertion. viz. That the Church of Jerusalem consisteth of more Congregations then one from the multitude of Believers. FIrst Reasons to shew there were not more then could meet in one place. The Holy Ghost hath from first to last as on purpose shewed this, as if his scope had been aforehand to prevent and to preclude all reasonings to the contrary. 1. In the beginnings of that Church, their meetings are set out to us by two Adjuncts. First, that they met , with one accord in the same duty of prayer, Acts Chap. 1. Verse 14. And secondly, , together in one and the same company, Verse 15. Which therefore is there and usually transla∣ted in one place. And that here by these words the intent of the Holy Ghost is to shew their meeting in one and the same Assembly, is evident. For whereas in the 15 Verse 'tis said, Peter stood up in the middest of them, as therefore be∣ing present together in one company, he addes, And the number of them that were , that is, Present together in company, were an hundred and twenty. 2. Then Chap. 2. Verse 1. Another meeting of theirs for worship at Pen∣tecost is continued to be expressed in the same phrases a second time, They were all with one accord in one place. 3. Then when about three thousand, yet still some of their meetings then for some acts of worship are recorded to have been as before with one accord, as joyning unanimously in the same duty, and in stead of that former expression  used of the former meetings, there is the mention of the place it selfe, where they met, set downe to supply it, and so to interpret it, and shewes it was still in one Assembly, Verse 46. They continued daily with one accord in the Temple, as mentioning the very place where they had their most frequent meetings which were for hearing, as being there altogether in one Assembly; and not as comming thither only for Jewish worship: For it is said of these as of the former meetings mentioned, which were proper to themselves, That they continued with one accord. And though they held these meetings in this place for preaching, that the Jewes might be present to hear, &c. Yet that hin∣dred not, but it was a Church meeting to them, wherein they continued with one accord; which expression is stil used of al their Christian meetings through∣out this Story, Acts 1. 14. Acts 4. 24. Acts 5. 12. Acts 15. 25.
4. When there was a further addition to these, Chap. 5. Verse 1. (whether to five thousand or no is spoken to afterwards) yet in that Chapter, he making a description of their State, in almost all the very same particulars by which he had done it before, Chap. 2. from Verse 43. unto the end (as by the paralell com∣paring of these two passages of the Story will appear;) he lastly speaking of a meeting of theirs (which is the point in hand) as carefully puts in, as in the former. Verse 14. And they were all with one accord in Solomons Porch, the same words he had used Chap. 2. Verse 46. Their union and joyning together with one accord being carefully indigitated, and the place named in stead of , as was observed before. And that the [All that met] were not the Apo∣stles only, appears not only by the forementioned paralell of this with Chap. 2. Verse 46. where their being with one accord in the Temple, is spoken of all the multitude, and so here. But secondly, that all the Apostles should be met with one accord in any duty, and not the people who are said to continue in the Apostles Doctrine and Prayer, and  or with one accord still in the story of this Church referring to communion in some holy duty, as Chap. 1. Verse 14. and Chap. 4. Verse 24. is most unlikely. And Solomons Porch was a place large enough to hold them, and fitted for preaching and to hear, which in John 10. Verse 22. is called the Temple; and so is the place intended in Acts 2. Verse 46. They met in the Temple, that is, in the Porch of Solomon. It was the outer Court as Josephus lib. 20. cap. 8. It was the place where CHRIST used to walk and preach, and the Apostles also, Chap. 3. Verse 11. The multi∣tude ran to Solomons Porch. 5. When againe upon mention of this multiplication of Disciples, the Dea∣cons are to be chosen, the Apostles called the multitude Chap. 6. Ver. 2. and not persons selected, but all; for Verse 5. they are called the whole multitude, and they are spoken to as together, For the saying pleased the whole, and the whole chose seven men out from among them, and set them before the Apostles, Ver▪ 6. as being in one place together, and they prayed (in which the multitude had an interest to joyne with them) and laid on them hands. And this meeting was certainly a Church meeting, and yet still in some one place; and therefore though it might follow that alwayes they should not have met together in one, yet they both did and could. 6. After that great dispersion mentioned Chap. 8. ver. 1. Then as they might more conveniently meet in one place and assembly, so that they did so, it is as carefully recorded, that so the Holy Ghost might hold forth this from the first unto the last mention of this Church, Acts 15. Acts 21. 22. The multitude must needs come together. And to interpret , or with one accord, which the Holy Ghost carries through all, to be intended of the joyning of the same persons in the same act of worship (for which they still did meet)
is genuine; for it imports that which is the spirit and life of publick wor∣ship, which of all other actions done by a multitude is to have the nearest union of spirits, as that wherein the Communion of Saints in worship con∣sists. And then naming the place where they met also it must needs import Onenesse of Assembly, which also holds forth in this example this duty▪ That as Saints when met in worship should joyne with one accord, so li∣ving in a place together, should as farre as possibly may, joyne themselves to one Assembly; and this carries with it such an appearance as is not in the other sense. And that the Holy Ghost should in the same Story of the same Church set forth the unity of their first meetings, as in one and the same individuall Assembly, by this expression of being in one, and with one ac∣cord, Acts▪ Chap. 1. Chap. 2. and in the next mention not farre off, carry along one of the same expressions, namely [with one accord] and together therewith shall name the place of their meeting, and yet in the latter intend not One, but meetings in severall companies in that place. This we hum∣bly submit to better judgements. Secondly Exceptions. 1. For the mention of five thousand, Chap. 4. Verse 4. This cannot be evinced from that place that the five thousand were a new number added to the three thousand. The words are these, Howbeit many of them that heard the word, believed, and the number of the men was about five thou∣sand. But that this number of five thousand should refer to them that be∣lieved, is not certaine; seeing both the Greek will bear it and favour it, as well to be meant of the number that heard, as of the men that believed; and of the two, that former is the more probable, that he should say of the men that heard they were five thousand, and that of them that heard many believed, this sounds well, and is no way forced; but five thousand men to be converted at once, is that which was never afore nor since. And the great conversion that our Divines have instanced in, is the three thousand, Acts Chap. 2. and not in this five thousand. And if the scope of the Holy Ghost therein, why the number of the men that heard should be here recko∣ned to be five thousand be asked after, it was to shew what had occasioned the persecution which he had spoken of in the Verse before. Namely this, that such a multitude of the people should be taught and preached to; this fretted the Pharisees that came upon Peter and John; and with this agreesBeza in 2 Cor. . 3 Steph. Budeus, Euath. the second Verse, that they were grieved they taught the people; the effect whereof is, that many of them that heard believed, notwithstanding this persecution, but how many of these is not certaine. And Beza and Calvin
and many others of our protestant Writers judge this number not to be of this new accession of Converts, but the totall number including the former, and the , although translated men, is when put alone (as there) all one with  Females, as well as Males, which especially may be so taken, because it is spoken of such a promiscuous auditory. And if any should affirme it meant of Males only, and them now converted, it would make a greater Miracle then any other recorded, especially when the peo∣ple are said to be converted, Verse 2. that did alike runne to see the Miracle. 2 Exception is, That it may be supposed that all that are mentioned to be converted remained not constant members of that Church abiding at Jerusalem untill the dispersion; and so, though the Holy Ghosts scope may be to shew the increase of Converts to the faith, yet not of such as continued all that while at Jerusalem; and our reasons for that are these. First those three thousand who were converted, Chap. 2. were not set∣led dwellers at Jerusalem, but strangers, Commorants of the ten Tribes, which were dispersed in all those Countries mentioned in the 2 Chapter, Verse 9. who came up to the feast of Pentecost, as the manner of the Jewes was, Acts 21. 20, 27, 28. Jewes that lived in Asia came to the feast of Pentecost as Paul also did, compared with Acts 20. 16. And the word which is translated Dwellers at Jerusalem, is interpreted by an eminent Critick, Sojourners at Jerusalem during this Feast, although the wordMede Di∣atribe. signifies both, and to that end quotes the Septuagint in 1. Kings 17. 20. where Elijah cries unto the Lord, saying, O Lord my God hast thou also brought evill upon the Widow,  with whom I sojourne onely? and that which confirmes it is, that they are said to be dwellers or in∣habitants of Mesopotamia and Judea, and Capadocea, Verse 9. They could not fixedly belong as dwellers to both, they were therefore rather sojourners in Jerusalem now at the Feast, though fixed dwellers in all those places: For if they were fixed dwellers in Jerusalem, to what end whilest they were at Jerusalem should the Evangelist tell us they were so∣journers in Mesopotamia; and they must needs rather be dwellers there, because they are said to understand every one his own language. And that which strengthens this is, that in the Greek there is this difference in the words in Verses 5 and 9. in that they are said  in Hierusalem. As for the present there, yea, and as to come  from out of every Nation: but in the 9 Verse he changeth it, and saies, , as inhabiters of Mesopotamia, and those other Countries
where their fixed possessions were. And therefore Verse 14. he cals them Men, Jewes and Dwellers at Jerusalem, as two sorts, and Verse 22. Men of Israel; the stile given those of the ten Tribes scattered, Men devout, as Verse 5. who came up at those solemne times, having wives and children and their families at home, to whom they used after a time to returne. Now although these were added and made members of that Church, and are said to continue in the Apostles doctrine: yet that will not necessarily imply that they continued all the time till the dispersion at Jerusalem; but whilest they were there, they were , that is, they cleaved to the Apostles: but to think that many of them comming as strangers should not go downe to their wives and children, which Nature taught them to provide for, and religion taught them to take care of their soules, or fetch them up to them: so as this might well be a fluid Church, ebbing and flowing as touching the residence of its members: yea, some of these were of Judea, Verse 9. and so of the Country about; and of them might be Churches erected in their proper dwellings is rationally supposable. For in that persecution in Acts 8. 1. it is said that Paul persecuted Disciples in other places then at Hierusalem, Acts 26. 10. Which things I also did at Hierusalem, (saies he) and in other places at Damascus. And also it is con∣firmed by this, that upon the ceasing of Pauls persecution it is said Acts 9. 31. then had the Churches rest through Judea and Galilee, and are said to be at rest in distinction from the persecution raised, Chap. 8. 1. 3 Exception is, that they in those Countries and times had often great Assemblies consisting of many thousands hearers at once, that did and could heare, Luke 12. 1. Christ preached to Myriads, many thousands; and Acts 13. 45. almost a whole City came to heare the word of God by Paul. And at Charenton, how many thousands may and do heare, is well knowne; and so in many places of England. And Moses sometime spake in the eares of all the people, and so Ezra Chapter 10. Verse 9. and 10. And 'tis knowne by experience, that as in hot Countries they may see as far againe, through the purenesse of the aire, so they may heare at a farre greater distance, then in our colder Climate. 4 Exception is, that this being the first Church, and whereof all the Apostles were the Officers, those therefore that dwelt there would cer∣tainly abide together as one Church without parting or dividing, even till they came to the utmost proportion that the constitution of a Church was capable of; and so Maximum quod sic, And continue together in one, for the more united strength and glory of holding forth the name of Christ in
one body, united for the honour of Religion and communicating in Ordi∣nances together. 5 Exception is, that they had during all this time of their multitudes untill the persecution of Paul arose, the greatest freedome and liberty even to the utmost; for the people magnified them, Chap. 5. Verse 12. they had favour with all the people, Chap. 2. Verse 47. Insomuch, that although the Rulers fell upon two of them, John and Peter, yet they were enforced to let them go, finding nothing how to punish them, because of the peo∣ple, Chapter 4. 21. Besides that, it was no new thing amongst the Jewes for Sects to have great multitudes to follow and cleave to them, and to preach in any place, as in Spaine and Italy, and to baptize openly as John and Christ did. Reasons and Answers to the Appendix added to the former Proofes, viz. That the dispersion mentioned in Acts 8. 1. doth not simply prove such a scattering, as that there might not remaine more Congregations then one in that Church, Acts 9. 31. Acts 12. 24. Acts 21. 20. THus having shewed the multitudes not arising to that number, but, that they might meet in one, now after the dispersion much lesse, and to that end let the greatnesse of the Persecution be considered to demon∣strate the greatnesse of this dispersion; Its called not a Persecution only, but a great Persecution, both extensively and intensively, for the extent of it to all sorts of persons, entring into every house, vers 3. and for the height of it, it being to imprisonment, even unto death, Chap. 22. 4. Acts 26. 10. It is also called, a making havock of the Church, vers. 9. The object of this Persecution was not Preachers only but Christians of all sorts in∣differently, for it is said indefinitely to be upon the Church, vers. 1. and vers. 3. It is call'd an entring into every house, hayling men and women: and in Chap. 26. Paul speaking of this very Persecution (where∣in he had a speciall hand) sayes vers. 10. that hee imprisoned many of the Saints (not Preachers only) and ver. 9. his aime was promiscuous∣ly against the Name of Jesus, and so any that professed his Name: Unto this end compare the varying the expression used by the Holy Ghost,
when speaking of this Persecution, and of another mentioned Acts 12. 1. there it is said, Herod stretched forth his hand to vexe certaine of the Church; but here it is against the Church in Jerusalem, Men and women in every house, and all except the Apostles; the word  [except] there is to shew, that none of the Apostles were scattered, though the genera∣lity of others were; if men guifted fled away, then others also, except we suppose the people more couragious to stay by it then the Teachers. And whereas it is said, that these that were dispersed, went about prea∣ching the word, vers. 4. First, It argueth not that Preachers only or chiefe∣ly were dispersed; for (as Calvin saith) it comes in to shew what was the fruit of the dispersion; and we may well suppose women and whole families to have been scattered abroad, who yet preached not: And se∣condly, It was ordinary in those times, for men that were not by Office Ministers, occasionally to teach the word in private wayes of converse, yea and otherwise; And that is not call'd teaching, which is by way of Sermon to a multitude, for vers. 25. of this chap. Philip in private con∣ference taught the Eunuch, as Aquila and Priscilla taught Apollos; and they are not called , as having an Office, but , as referring to the act, the work they did; And that the word seemes to sound as if they made it their worke. It may well be attributed to the zeale of those dayes to gaine Proselites, and not to an Office committed to them; they went not forth by mission but persecution; And here the many Congregations are brought but to an (it might be) and the grand Proposition it selfe, is but an (it may be,) And how can it may be, be proved by an it might be? especially in such things as need have a strong foundation for matters upon which so great alterations are like to be made: But it is said, that it appeares that there were multitudes of beleevers there after that time, by Acts 9. 31. Acts 12. 24. Acts 21. 20. First, For Acts 9. 31. , signifies not ordinarily a great number made up, but an increase (Matth. 21. 12. & 1 Pet. 1. 2. Grace be mul∣tiplied, it is the same word) not in number, but in measure. Againe they are the Churches of Judea, Galilee, and of Samaria; But what is all this to prove that there were so many in the Church of Hierusalem as could not meet in one? For Acts 21. 20.  how many thousands doth not argue it; For first it was the Feast of Pentecost, when Paul came now up to Hierusalem in Acts 20. 16. it is said of this journey, that he asted if possible, to be at Hierusalem upon the day of Pentecost: When the Jewes out of all quarters came to Hierusalem, and the great concourse
that then would be there at the Feast, moved him to aime to be there at that time; And by the journall of Paul thither, from his first setting out from Philippi, chap. 20. ver. 6. which was when the Passeover was ended, eight weekes before this ensuing Feast of Pentecost, and also by compu∣ting the dayes of his travailing, which the Holy Ghost hath recorded, vers. 16. 21. Acts 21. 2. it appeares he came in few weekes unto Tyre, but 40. miles off from Hierusalem, time enough to come to the Feast; and no wonder if at the Feast he found thousands of the Jewes, and this is con∣firmed by the 27 verse, for the Jewes which laid hold on him in the Tem∣ple, were as it is said, Jewes of Asia, not of Judea. Secondly, The word , being put without any other word of number, signifies no more then a great multitude; as , or a greatnesse, as  as Plato hath it; and being put indefinitely, is all one to say thousands, or many; as the Latins also use a definite for an indefinite, as Sexcenta possum proferr decreta, as Tully speakes. To the second Proofe of the first Head. By the many Apostles and other Preachers in this Church of Hierusa∣lem; For if there were but one Congregation, then each Apostle preached but seldome, which will not stand with Acts 6. 2. First, For the Apostles. THey tooke all opportunities to fill their hands with worke, preaching daily in the Temple and in every house, Acts 5. 42. Chap. 2. 46. Paul also taught in Ephesus, as publickly in the Congregation, so from house to house, Acts 20. 20. Also when any in the places abroad in Judea, or else where, were converted (and many Churches were then erected in Judea) the Apostles went abroad, as Chap. 8. shewes; and besides, how were the twelve imployed, when for forty dayes they met in an upper roome, Acts 1. and had but an hundred and twenty for their flock. Secondly, For the many Teachers. In those times there were many guifted men that were not Officers, who occasionally instructed others, as Aquila did Apollos, yea those guifts were so plentifull, that in that one Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 14. 23.
almost all of them had Doctrines, Prophecying, speaking with tongues, and yet these were not Officers, so as if Congregations should be multi∣plied according to the number of such guifted men, then there would have been almost as many Teachers as members of Congregations. And the powring out of the Holy Ghost, which was more ordinary then, did not make every man a Teacher by Office, for then all those in Samaria should have been made teachers, Acts 8. And that not any of those were in Of∣fice, seemes evident by this; That when the Deacons were chosen, Chap. 6. there is no mention made of Elders in their Ordination, in which if any Elders had been, they had had an interest: We reade Acts 15. When there were Elders, though Apostles were also then in that Church, both are mentioned together. And it appeares the Apostles had managed all the affaires of that Church untill then; those Deacons being the first choice of any sort of Officers, the work of Administration of all sorts having layen on the Apostles hands. To the third Proofe of the first Head. The diversitie of Languages amongst the Beleevers, Acts 2. 8, 9, 10, 11. and Acts the 6. doth argue more Congregations then one in the Church of Hierusalem. FIrst, 'Tis true, there were in that second of the Acts, Out of all Na∣tions that heard the Apostles speake in the severall Languages of the Countries they were borne in; but yet these were all either Jewes or Proselites, , worshippers, as ver. 5. who came up to worship, and some parts of the worship were audible; and though borne in other Countries (the Jewes being dispersed) yet all were generally learned, and understood the Hebrew tongue, the language of their own Nation, even as to this day the Jewes and their Children doe; which seemes evi∣dent from the story in the 20, 21, and 22. Chapters of the Acts, Paul came up with divers Grecians to the Feast of Pentecost, Chap. 20. ver. 4. unto which the Jewes out of all quarters came, and being all at a so∣lemne meeting in the Temple, chap. 21. ver. 27. The Jewes out of Asia, strangers, stirred up all the people against him, and when, chap. 22. ver. 2. He made a speech to them, and they heard he spake the Hebrew tongue, they kept silence and heard him patiently: And further those mentioned
Acts 2. did understand all of them Peters Sermon; and though others spake besides Peter to them in their own language, the wonderfull things of God, yet that was but a preparatorie signe to them; as 1 Cor. 14. 22. making way for their Conversion, vers. 11, 12, and 13. but the meanes of their Conversion was Peters Sermon after; and it was he also, that gave direction to them all what to doe to be saved: and therefore it must be spo∣ken of some one common tongue, they all understood, and those gifts of languages given to the Apostles, were not out of a necessity to instruct those new Converts only, but to fit them when they should goe abroad into all the world, and to be a signe to the Jewes at present to convince them. Secondly, for the Grecian Widdowes, Acts 6. the Hellenists that lived amongst the Jewes, might well be supposed to understand Hebrew; and that these had not severall Congregations from the rest, appeares by this; That the whole multitude together met, and chose the Deacons, It was a joint act, and if of differing languages, wherein the one understand not the other, occasioning such a distinction of Congregations (as the Proofe would hold forth) how could they all have agreed in one meeting on the same man? but the argument as well holds against the Pres∣byteriall Association of those Congregations into one Church, people and Elders, unto which and in the communion and exercise whereof such Correspondencies and Intercourses are needfull, as they require one com∣mon language.
To the second Branch of this Argument. That all these Congregations were under one Presbyteriall GOVERNMENT. PROOFES. 1. Because they were but one Church. Though it bee one, yet they not beeing more then could meet in one, the Argument concludes not. 2 Proofe. The Elders of that Church are mentioned. There is no mention of any Elders in this Church, untill after the afore∣said Dispersion, Act. 8. And so the weight of this Argument will depend upon the proofe of this; That after the dispersion there were many Con∣gregations, which the Reverend Assembly doth not so positively affirme. The proofe of their being such a Presbytery as the Proposition intends, doth depend upon this their being called Elders to that Church, wee no where read them called a Presbytery, and that therefore they are Elders, but they are therefore a Presbytery (as here it is argued) because they are Elders to that Church; Now if they bee Elders in common, because a Presbytery, (as was said in answer to the first Argument) then they are not to bee argu∣ed a Presbytery onely, because they are Elders in Common; For then the Argument runnes in Circulo; And the chiefe and first reason of their being Elders (for no other is mentioned) is accordingly held forth in their be∣ing Elders to that Church in common, whereas according to Presbyteriall Principles, there is a primary relation of Elders, quà Elders, to their parti∣cular fixed Congregations. Reasons against the third Proofe of the second Branch, viz. That the Apostles did the ordinary Acts of Presbyters as Presbyters in the Church of Hierusalem, doth prove a Presbyteriall Government in that Church before the dispersion. The Proofe of the whole depends upon this Proposition: for though be∣fore the dispersion there had been many Congregations, yet not under El∣ders, but Apostles: Now it is granted that the substance of Ministeriall Acts were one and the same in Apostles and Evangelists who were extraordinary, and in other ordinary Ministers. But first, though for the Act of Ministeri∣all
power, it was the same in the Apostles, and them, yet in the extent of power (which is the point in question) therein the Apostles Jurisdiction over many Congregations is not the patterne of Presbyteriall Elders over many, for the Apostles power was universall over all Churches, and upon that was founded their power over those Congregations supposed many; And Episcopacie may as strongly argue and inferre, that because in Crete (by Apostolicall warrant) One man [Titus] did ordaine Elders, &c. That there∣fore there may bee one man [a Bishop] that hath power to ordaine, &c. in and over severall Churches. And this Argument will bee stronger from the instance of an Evangelist, for Episcopall power then this of Apostolicall▪ government, for the Presbyteriall, by how much it is the more inferior Office, but that of the Apostles is more immediate and transcendent, and so the power of an Evangelist is neerer to an ordinary succession, and it will as well follow, that any one Presbyter alone might governe many Con∣gregations, because one of these Apostles might, as that because the Apo∣stles did governe these joyntly, that therefore many Presbyters over severall Congregations may. Secondly, each of these Apostles, as hee had by vertue of his Apostoli∣call Commission the power of them all, so hee had relation of Ministerie un∣to all these supposed Congregations unto every person thereof for the per∣formance of all sorts of duties, of preaching to them, admonishing them, &c. But thus in the Presbyteriall government over many Congregations fixed, and their Pastors and Elders fixed to them, the severall Elders are de∣nied to have the relation of Elders to each Congregation, but make up one∣ly an Eldership in common as united over all these. But the Apostles here have the relation to both, and therefore if this Apostolicall frame bee made a Patterne, then it followes that all the Elders of these Congregations were directly and immediatly Elders to each Congregation and every member of them, and not onely of a common Presbytery, for so the Apostles were. If it bee alledged that those acts of government, performed by them in that Church, were for the substance of them ordinary Acts, such as Presbyters per∣forme, and that therefore answerably their persons themselves are in them to bee considered as Elders, because that the Apostles were not onely Apostles, but Elders also, as John Epistle 2. Verse 1. And Peter Epist. 1. Chap. 5. Vers. 1. and there∣fore might and did act as Elders in ordinary Acts of Church government, and are therefore therein to bee look't at, as a just patterne to us, and to have ruled these Congregations of Jerusalem as a Colledge or body of Elders united, conedscen∣ding so to act as common Presbyters taking the consent of the Church, as Acts. 6. as like∣wise they did in every Church where they came joyning with the Eldership thereof,
as Elders, and not as Apostles, and therefore that they might give a patterne, and Example of an ordinary Presbytery, especially seeing that what they thus did, they did as an united body to many Congregations considered as one Church. It is answered to the first, that although the Apostles are called Elders, yet they are so called virtually, not formally, and but because Apostle∣ship containes all Offices in it, so as they are Elders but upon this ground, that they are Apostles, and therefore John in that very Epistle where hee stiles himselfe an Elder, hee yet writes Canonicall Scripture as an Apostle, and takes on him to threaten Diotrephes as an Apostle, to remember him, which as a formall Elder hee could not have done; and surely those Offi∣ces which Christ distinguisheth, Ephesians 4. Hee gave some Apostles, some Pa∣stors and Teachers, the same person is not formally both, though virtually he may bee; All that they did in that Church of Hierusalem they are said to act as Apostles, their preaching is called the Apostles doctrine, their bringing their monies to them, as to the Officers of that Church, is to them not as Elders, but as Apostles, They laid it downe at the Apostles feet; yea in that Act of ordaining the seven Deacons, it is said, They set them afore the Apostles, (Chap. 6. Vers. 6.) and they laid on their hands; And it is very hard to distin∣guish and say that the men were Apostles, but the power they acted by was as Elders, when the name of an Apostle imports the Office; Yea in that very Act of government about Deacons they must needs act as Apostles, for they doe not simply ordaine the men, but doe anew, by vertue of Aposto∣licall authoritie, institute the Office of Deacons by declaring Christs mind, which none but Apostles could immediatly and at first have done, so as the same persons in this same Act instanced in, must act partly as Apo∣stles, and partly as Elders, and by what infallible rule shall wee distin∣guish. To the second, viz. that they acted here as it were in a joynt body or in Collegio over these many Congregations. It is answered, that an Association of Elders in an Eldership over many is not argued from hence. For first, they had all singly the same power which they exercised joyntly, and that they should ex∣ercise it joyntly here to that end to give a patterne for Eldership, is not easy to prove; they exercised it together, because it fell out that they were toge∣ther, and it was fit none of them should bee excluded, but it depended not upon this union of all in a body, as Acts of Elders in a Presbytery do, as Parliamentary power is not the result of Parliament men, but as assembled in Parliament; yea and the authoritie of Jurisdiction thence ariseth, not so here; Our Apostle might have done that which all here did, yea may it not bee said that because two Apostles, Paul and Barnabas, ordained Elders in
every Church, Acts 14. as joyned in the same Act, and so acting not as Apo∣stles, but joyntly, that therefore two Elders associated may doe the like? Secondly, it is hard to suppose that these Apostles, when all together, should act with an inferiour power to what they put forth in a like case alone. If Peter had beene himselfe alone in a Church new planted then and there, hee must bee supposed to act as an Apostle, because hee alone governed; And shall these Apostles, when they are all in one and joyne all together in one Act, bee yet supposed to fall lower in their power under the formall exercise of it? Thirdly, if they had acted as Elders in a Colledge, they might mis∣carry as Elders doe; and so the minor part of them have been subject to Excommunication of the greater. And what power was there on earth to have excommunicated an Apostle who held his Office immediately from Christ, and who whilst hee was in that Office had power over all Churches? To the third, viz. That they in their Proceedings did joyne with others. As in this choyce of the Deacons they did joyne with the multitude, as al∣so when they came to any other Churches they used to doe. Neither doth that argue, that they acted not as Apostles but as Elders. For first, they joyned in Acts with others, and joyned others with themselves, wherein they yet acted as Apostles; thus in writing Scripture they joyned others with them, as Paul joyned Silvanus and Timotheus in his Epistle to the Thes∣salonians; and not meerely in the salutation, for the expressions runne in their names also in that Epistle, and Act. 15. The Apostles, Elders, yea and Brethren joyned in a Letter to the Churches; But these as Apostles (there∣fore so called in distinction from the Elders) and the rest according to their severall interests, as the Brethren did all according to their interests, so the Elders and the Apostles in theirs. So in ordaining Timothy the Presbytery laid on hands, yet they as a Presbytery and Paul as an Apostle, for else a Presbytery had not had power to ordaine an Evangelist. Yet secondly, the Apostles did where ever they came leave the Elders and people to the exer∣cise of that right belonged to them, although they joyned with them; nei∣ther did therein lie their Apostolicall authority, to doe all alone; for then they seldome or never acted as Apostles in Churches: Paul alone excom∣municated not that Corinthian, and yet as an Apostle wrote to have it done by them, (for it was Canonicall Scripture) and therefore although that this Church of Hierusalem should choose their Deacons, is a just exam∣ple of the priviledge of a Church (for if the Apostles when they were pre∣sent allowed this interest to Churches, then Elders should much more) yet what the Apostles did by an Apostolicall power in these Congregations▪ can∣not bee drawn into example for Officers in that thing wherein their power Apostolicall lay, which was to exercise acts of jurisdiction in severall Churches▪
Neither fourthly, will that helpe it, That they exercised this Government in these Congregations (supposed many) as considered to bee one Church. For if they acted not as Elders, then the correlate to it, namely, Church, could not bee considered as Presbyteriall. Reasons against the fourth and last Proofe of the second Branch. Viz. That the Elders did meet together for Acts of Government, Act. 11. ult. Act. 15. 4. 6. 22. Act. 21. 17, 18. First, the Argument from Acts 11. ult. lies thus, There were Elders in Ju∣dea that received Almes, verse 29▪ 30. compared; Therefore the Elders of Jeru∣salem did meet together for Acts of Government. In this Argument, as the persons are mistaken, so the Act for the Elders of Hierusalem are not menti∣oned, but of Iudea, as by comparing verses 29, 30. it appeares. And by this it might bee as well argued, that the Elders in Judea met for Presbyteriall Government, as that the Elders of Jerusalem, seeing their Almes were car∣ryed to the Elders of Judea, as it is there said. The receiving Almes (which is the onely Act that is mentioned) was not an Act of Government, for Deacons may meet to receive Almes, and yet meet not for Acts of govern∣ment. For that second place mentioned, Acts 21. 20. where it is said, Paul came in to James, and all the Elders were present: although wee read that all the Elders were present, yet that they met for Acts of Presbyteriall government, appeares not; the occasion of the meeting was Pauls entertainment, whom some of the brethren had received at his first comming, verse 17. and now the Elders meet to receive him also. A Christian duty of love and respect due to so great and famous an Apostle, and Paul went not as cited, but to vi∣sit and salute them, as vers. 19. Secondly, The Acts that passed were none of them Presbyteriall, for Paul gave them an Historicall relation of what things God had wrought by his Ministery, the matter of which relation was intended to provoke them as Brethren and fellow-labourers, to glorify God (as ver. 20. is said they did) and not to give them an account, as to a Consistory, that met for Government. Such narrations the Apostles made even to whole Chur∣ches, as Paul and Barnabas at Antioch, Act. 14. 27. When they had gathered the whole Church together (which Church was of no more then to meet in one Assembly) they rehearsed in like manner, as here, all that God had done by them; and how hee had opened a doore of Faith to the Gentiles. Neither
will the advice they gave to Paul to prevent the scandall and offence the peo∣ple would take at him, argue authority, much lesse government: Neither was there any Act of Government put forth over their own Churches if sup∣posed many. Reasons against the alledging, Act. 15. for the meeting of the El∣ders of Jerusalem, for Presbyteriall Acts of Government. 1. If it were a meeting of Elders for Acts of Government, then it was a Presbyteriall meeting for Acts of Government: But that it was no such meeting appeares, because there was nothing done in it, that may seem to have any bond in it, but such as bound the Churches of Antioch, Syria, Ci∣licia, as much as Jerusalem, but this cannot bee in any Presbyteriall meet∣ing, for Acts of Government: For such meetings have onely authoritative power over their own Church. 2. The scope and end of this meeting was to give satisfaction to the of∣fended Brethren of Antioch, and dogmatically to declare their judgements in a difficult case of Conscience, not to put forth any Act of Juridicall pow∣er upon any, as appeares in the matter of their debate, and the issue of all. Of which more fully afterward. And if it bee said that Peter reproved some of their own Members present, such as had taught the necessity of the Ce∣remoniall Law, Why tempt you God, &c. This was not delivered as an Act of Government formally, by any vote of the Presbytery, but in the way of Discourse. But it was affirmed to bee sufficient to confirme the Proposition, if it bee a Synodicall meeting. Presbyteriall and Synodicall, both it cannot bee; for Synods, they are or ought to bee extraordinary and occasionall, Pres∣byteries are standing and ordinary, Synods are made up of Commissioners sent from Presbyteries, and Presbyteries are made up of the Elders of par∣ticular Congregations. The Members of Synods are Elders of such Chur∣ches which are (according to the principles of Presbyteriall Government) compleat Churches, having full power of jurisdiction for all Acts of Go∣vernment within themselves; but the members of Presbyteries are Elders of such Congregations which are neither compleat Churches, nor have within themselves full and compleat power. And these cannot bee one. The Elders of the Presbytery of Jerusalem, (when this once became a Sy∣nod by the addition of the Elders of other Churches) ceased to bee any longer a Presbytery to that Church, and must become with them a new bo∣dy to all the Churches, these other Elders did come from. And then to
argue these Acts done by these (because the Elders of Jerusalem were present and Members of this Synod) were Presbyteriall Acts of the Elders of Je∣rusalem, is all one as to go about to argue from the Acts of Government put forth by a Parliament at Westminster, to the power of the Burgesses and Common Councell of the City of Westminster, because there the Parliament sits, and the Burgesses of that City are parts and members of that Parlia∣ment. Or, as if the Kingdome were governed by County Courts, and out of those County Courts, Knights, and Burgesses should bee chosen to make up a Parliament, when the Parliament is met, there can be no Ar∣gument drawn from the power of a Parliament to prove the power of a County Court. Or from the power of a County Court to prove the pow∣er of a Parliament. Thus Synods are made out of Presbyteries, therefore wee cannot argue from the power of Synods to the power of Presbyteries; or from the power of Presbyteries to the power of Synods. But secondly, wee deny it to have been such an ordinary formall Synod. The jurisdiction of Synods is founded upon this necessary requisite there∣unto, That there bee Commissioners from all those Churches representing them, present, or called to bee so. And the power of the jurisdiction can∣not reach nor extend further then to such Churches as have sent Commis∣sioners thereunto. The weight then of this Synodicall power depends on the proofe of this, That all those Churches sent Commissioners to this As∣sembly, which if either it bee not proved, or the contrary thereunto found true, the authority of those decrees (as from those Elders here) will prove not to have been Acts of Government, further then the Apostles authority, who joyned in it, was stamped on it; to affirme that Commissioners from them all were present, because the decrees did binde them, is to begge what is denyed, when another just reason may bee given of their binding, if any such authority were in them: and our reasons to the contrary are these. First, Wee finde a deepe silence about it: For wee read but onely of two Churches between whom it was transacted, they of Antioch sending to Je∣rusalem, and their Elders there, Chap. 14. 27, 28. compared with chap. 15. 2, 3. and the Messengers which were sent from this Assembly going onely to Antioch, ver. 30. 31. as those who were chiefely troubled; onely the be∣nefit redounded to all they wrote to, yea, although Paul came through Phenice and Samaria, ver. 3. yet wee read not a word of any of the Chur∣ches of those parts, their sending of any Commissioners unto this Synod, as had it been intended such certainly they would, and there was this spe∣ciall reason, why those of this Church were thus electively sent unto, be∣cause they were the Mother Church from whom the Word of God came, and from whom those men that troubled them had gone forth, and had
pretended to teach what they had received from them; and besides they were in an especiall manner versed in this question, it being about the ob∣servation of their law; and there also some of the Apostles were present, (how many wee know not, for dispersed they had been long before) and if any number of others out of those other parts of Judea, had come up hi∣ther, it would have been said, as Act. 11. ult. The Elders of Judea, not onely of Jerusalem; yea, it is not so much as said, that they that were sent from Antioch were of the Elders of that Church, but that they sent Paul and Barnabas, and certain others of them. And secondly, the contrary seemes cleere, namely, that those Letters and Decrees were written and sent onely from the Elders of Jerusalem, and not from all those Churches: For first, the Decrees are every where attributed to the Elders in Jerusalem, So Chap. 16. 4. The Decrees of the Apostles and Elders in Jerusalem. . Now the usuall stile of the New Testament, is by way of distinction of Churches to say the Church in such a place, the Elders in such a place, as the Church of Antioch, Act. 13. 1. and the Church at Corinth, 1 Cor. 1. 1. and by the like reason the Elders in such a place doe signifie the proper Elders of the Church in that place or City, whilest but one, and therefore, if by the Elders in Jerusalem, had been meant in this place onely the Elders met from all Quarters at Je∣rusalem, as the place of that Assembly, there had been a great ambiguity, seeing the more usuall and proper import of that expression is to note out the fixed standing Elders of a place, and the Church in a place. Again, secondly, in the fourth verse Paul and Barnabas are said to bee received of the Church and Apostles and Elders, namely of Jerusalem, as in particu∣lar relation to it. Yea, thirdly, the standing Elders of that place assumed to themselves to have written the Decrees, Chap. 21. 25. As touching the Gentiles wee have written and concluded. Fourthly, and accordingly the con∣clusion of their Letter is made the speciall Act of that Church, and the El∣ders thereof, ver. 22. It pleased the Apostles and Elders with the whole Church (that is) of Jerusalem, as verse 4. to send chosen men, and the Letters run thus, The Apostles, Elders and Brethren. Fifthly, the matter of the Letter ar∣gues it, ver. 24. Forasmuch as certain that went out from us have troubled you with words, to whom wee gave no such Commandement. How could this bee said by a Synod of the Elders of those Churches, which were themselves trou∣bled by them? It is manifest therefore they came out from this Church of Jerusalem, who wrote this, and they pretended the Apostles Doctrine; which is called a Commandement, because the Apostles taught no other, then what Christ commanded, as Matth. 28. ult. And to say the Denomina∣tion was from the more eminent part, namely, the Elders of that Church
had been derogatory to the Synod, if it had been such a meeting. And sixth∣ly, if the Elders of all those Churches had been present, there had been lesse need for the Apostles and Elders of Jerusalem to have sent chosen men to carry the Letters, and withall to shew the grounds of those their judgements by word of mouth, ver. 23. 27. 31. This needed not, if their own Elders had been present, and so had been to have returned; and if they were sent as Messengers from the Synod, then to all the Churches as well as to Antioch, and why doe they then goe no further then unto An∣tioch? ver. 33. Yea, and although Paul and Barnabas delivered those results to all the Cities, yet, as it should seem accidentally and not principally in∣tended, they goe not on purpose chiefely to deliver those decrees, but ver. 36. of chap. 15. it was Pauls motion upon other grounds to go visit the Chur∣ches in every City, where they had Preached, and so but occasionally deli∣vered these Decrees, Chap. 16. 4. So as they came to them not as sent in a mandatory way, as to Churches subject to that Synod by a Synodical Law, (as such Canons are used to bee sent) but as the judgement onely of this Church, and the Apostles delivered them for their edification. And in the third place, If there were any further authority or jurisdicti∣on in their Decrees, it was from the Apostles, who were present and con∣curred in it, and who had power over all the Churches; and accordingly though the Elders in the whole Church were present and joyned with the Apostles, Quantum in se, to consent and approve their Decrees with that severall respective kinde of judgment proper unto them, yet all the au∣thority put forth over these Churches was that transcendent authority of the Apostles, which is not now left in all the Elders of the world joyned together; and that therefore these Decrees made, and the decision of these questions here, were by infallible Apostolicall authority, and to that end they subjoyned that Apostolicall Seale, It seemed good to us and the Holy Ghost. And although the ordinary Elders, yea, and the whole Church joyned in this, yet but according to their Measure, Analogy, and Proportion of their faith, even as in writing some Epistles Timothy and Silvanus joyned with Paul, but yet Paul onely wrote Apostolically, and the authority in them is looked at as his; or else because perhaps they ha∣ving the Holy Ghost falne on them through the Apostles Doctrine then de∣livered (which was then usuall) perswading their hearts unanimously (though afore dissenting, as ver. 25.) to accord, in that respect they might speak this in such a sense, that no assembly of men wanting Apostolicall presence and instruction, may now speak. And although it may bee object∣ed, That then this Letter and these Decrees should bee formall Scripture, and so binde us still, it is answered; That they are Scripture, and written for our learning; and if the case were the same upon which they obliged
them then, (viz. matter of offence) that then they would binde us now: but the things being enjoyned, but as , things of a super∣added casuall necessity and not absolute, in case of offence onely and not simply for the things themselves, therefore now the necessity being ceased, the obligation ceaseth, yet so as the equity of the rule and ground these were commanded upon, to abstain from things that will offend our brethren, doth hold in like cases to the end of the world. And last of all, there is no act of such authority and government put forth in it, which the Proposition intendeth; which will appeare, if wee ei∣ther consider the occasion and rise of it, or the issue and result of it. It was not a set or stated meeting by common agreement of the Chur∣ches, but Antioch sends to Jerusalem unknowne to them; there are no summons sent to send up Delinquents, nor can wee finde these distur∣bers are sent to Jerusalem to bee censured by those Ecclesiasticall pu∣punishments in which, Government doth properly lye and consist; The subject matter sent to them for their decision was meerely matter of Do∣ctrine, about this question, verse 2. and about this word, verse 5. Namely, whether the Ceremoniall Law was to bee observed? Concerning which they wrote their judgements dogmatically, which they were called to doe, being thus sent unto; Neither doth it argue that it was more then to de∣termine this question doctrinally they came up for, because that Paul and Barnabas could have decided that before, being themselves Apostles, and that therefore their comming up was for discipline against Delinquents; for as the case stood, they listened not to Paul and Barnabas as Apostles, but pre∣tended the judgment of the other Apostles; For indeed Paul and Barnabas did declare their judgements, the , or contention, ver. 3. being attri∣buted unto them as contending against the false Teachers for the Truth; and so as even the Church of Antioch rested not in their decision: Other∣wise Paul and Barnabas might have as Apostles censured those Delinquents without comming to Jerusalem, as wel as by Apostolique authority have deci∣ded the question. For Apostolicall power extended to Discipline as well as Doctrine. If it bee said That even doctrinally to deliver the truth when it is done by a company of Elders hath authority or power in it, as when Christ said, Goe and teach, all power is given unto mee: It is granted an Authoritie exerci∣sed in doctrine and so to bee in Synods, but yet not Jurisdiction, which the Proposition intends, which is when doctrines are delivered sub paena, under the penaltie of that Ecclesiasticall punishment of Excommunication if not received. One Minister alone hath a dogmaticall authoritie as a Mi∣nister to rebuke, exhort, and yet acts of Jurisdiction are not his alone, but of others conjoyned with him. Neither, secondly, doth the titles given to these results of theirs argue a Jurisdiction
in that they are called  and , Act. 16. 4. For although the word  is used for an Imperiall decree Luke 2. 1. yet but rarely, and more commonly (as Stephanus and Budaeus observe) for do∣ctrine & opinion in matters morall or speculative, as Platonis Dogma, &c. and thence is translated to import the Judgements of Divines given in matters Theologicall although delivered with certaintie. And so the using of this word implyeth the subject to have beene doctrinall onely and so delivered. And further the subject matter of this decision being about rules and cere∣monies, and the not observation of them, the [Dogma] is elegantly, and per∣haps on purpose, given to these Apostolicall Canons by way of opposition and contradiction to those that taught and observed such rules, who are said  in so doing, Colossians 2. 20. being led away by the false Dogmata, or Heterodox theses of false Teachers that enjoyned them. And for that other word  translated [ordained,] it plainely notes out but this, that these doctrinall Theses were the joynt declared and avowed Judgement and conclusions of these (and so answereth to those other words in their letters (It seemeth good unto us, being with one accord, &c.) Apostles and El∣ders thus met with one accord agreeing therein, and particularly and una∣nimously so judging; and therefore when James gives his judgement hee useth the same word  (Verse 19. of this 15. Chap.) This is my judgement, which being voted and agreed upon by the rest they are called . Neither doth this argue any act of authoritie that the things here declared to bee observed are indifferent, for some of them come under a morall con∣sideration, and all come under the case of offence. Neither doth the language they commend those to them in, sound of that Jurisdiction or government intended in the proposition; for although they seeme to speake as guided infallibly in their resolution, [it seemed good to us and to the holy Ghost] yet their expressions are carried so as to avoyd Ju∣risdiction, those words, To lay no other burthen, if any, must import this Ju∣risdiction; but these words, as Ludovicus de Dieu hath well observed, are (as they may bee) taken passively, therein agreeing with the Syriack tran∣slation; It seemed good to and the holy Ghost, that no other burthen bee laid on you, that whereas these Teachers of the circumcision had gone about by their doctrine to bind the Law of Moses upon mens consciences, and to put on them a burthen too heavy for them to beare, as Peter speakes Vers. 9. and had taught this to bee the commands of Christ and his Apostles, and the judgement of the Church of Jerusalem; They disclaime this, and professe they would have no such burthen put upon them, and that they gave these Teachers no such commandement, that is, never delivered or uttered any such Doctrine to bee commanded. And if it bee taken actively, yet the declaring it to bee the command of Christ is the imposition here in∣tended,
for the same words are used of the Teachers who yet had not assumed by vertue of an Ecclesiasticall authority to impose these things but by way of Doctrine, So Verse the tenth, Why tempt you God to put a yoake upon the necke of the Disciples? Vers. 5. And it is well knowne that in the Scripture phrase to teach and to declare, though by way of Doctrine, and to presse mens consciences with things as the commands of God, is said to bee a binding and imposing a burthen on them. So of the Pharisees (and these were of the sect of the Pharisees, of whom, and to whom that was spoken, Verse 5.) it is said, Matth. 23. 4. that the Pharisees bind heavy burthens and grievous to bee borne, and lay them on mens shoulders; which is spoken but of a doctrinall declaring and pressing mens consciences with the rigour of the Law; and this is so well knowne to bee the Language of the Jewes, that it need not bee insisted on. Neither doth it follow that if they may lay these burthens by way of Do∣ctrine, they may censure for the neglect of them, for every Minister in his Sermon imposeth those burthens whilst they urge and declare these duties to men, and yet have not power Ecclesiastically to censure them, for though it being a command of Christ they could not but hold it forth as such and so urge it; yet not by way of Jurisdiction, but with these soft words, which if you observe you doe well. Lastly, although these false Teachers had subverted their faith, and against their owne light, had avouched their Doctrine to bee the doctrine of the Apostles, which deserved the highest censure being a sinne so scandalous, yet they proceeded not to censure them by way of admonition or excom∣munication (which are acts of government) but onely do declare their sinne and errour, and give their Judgement of it. Whereas in the close of the proofe from the Church of Jerusalem for many Congregations to bee under one Presbyteriall government, it is asserted whether these Congregations bee fixed or not fixed it is all one to the truth of the proposition; this reason is offered against it. There is this difference, every Congregation having Elders fixed to it is a Church; for the relation of Elders and Church is mutu∣all, Acts 14. 23. They ordained Elders in every Church; This relation of El∣ders to a Church is a speciall distinct relation to that Congregation of which they are Elders, so as they are not related to other Congregations, and these Congregations are Ecclesiae primae, Churches formed up though uncompleat, as being according to our Brethrens opinion, members of a more generall Presbyteriall Church. But if Congregations have no fixed Officers they are not Churches ac∣cording to their Principles. Now it makes a great difference as to the truth of the Proposition, whether many Churches may bee under the govern∣ment of one, or whether many Congregations which to them are no Chur∣ches
may bee under the government of one? Whatsoever our Brethren shew of divers Congregations to bee under the government of a Church Presbyte∣riall, yet they no where shew any one patterne or example in Scripture wherein many Churches were under the power of one, nay nor where any one Church was under the power of another. And lastly, if there were many Congregations in Jerusalem, having their Officers fixed to them, and not in common, then during the time before the dispersion the Apostles must bee those Officers that were thus fixedly dis∣posed of to those severall Congregations, some over one, others over ano∣ther, as ordinary Elders now are. Now suppose this number of Beleevers to have beene as many thousands as is argued, at 10. or 12000. soules, and these to bee divided into as many Congregations as might bee divided to twelve Apostles severally to watch over; Or suppose the severall Congrega∣tions made up of 2000. (which is an alotment small enough to bee set apart for the paines of two Apostles. Hereupon great incongruitie doth follow, that Apostles are brought to the state and condition and worke of Parish Ministers, to whom yet it was committed, and inseparably annexed to their Office, yea and constituted it, as Apostles, to have the care of all Churches; and if when the Churches were multiplyed and dispersed into severall Countries, they were to have the care of them, then much more when they were in one Citie. Some of the writers against Episcopacie, (when those that write for it alledg the instance of James abiding at Jerusalem, as the Bishop of that Church) have judged it a debasing of the Apostolicall power to limit it to one Diocesan Church: but this position doth debase all the Apostles at once, much more it makes them not Bishops to many Churches, but ordinary Elders, in that one or two of them perhaps, are over one single Church; yea, and which is yet more in∣credible, if these Churches and their government were like to those under the Presbytery, and no materiall difference betweene them and ours, these Apostles were in their severall Parishes not onely subordinate in their go∣vernment to the common Presbytery of all the Apostles, but limited to lesser Acts of government, for so the lesser Elderships in the Churches under the Presbyteriall government are confined onely to examine, and admonish, and prepare for the greater Presbytery, and therein not enabled to ordaine Elders over the Congregation, or excommunicate a member: Peter and John joyned together were by this principle not enabled to it. And yet if we doe not suppose such a limited government in those severall Congregations, here can bee no patterne for the Presbyterian government as it is practised. Or if otherwise wee should suppose them fixed Officers for teaching onely to one of those Congregations, and to have no government at all over it, but
to bring all to the common Presbytery of Apostles, that is a greater in∣congruitie then the former; for this casts them below the condition of our Parish Elders, for unto them the greater Presbytery doth allow some measure and part of the Government, but such a supposition would allow Apostles none in their severall Congregations. The Scripture holds forth that many Congregations may be under one Presbyteriall Government. Sect. 1. BY particular Congregations either first an Assembly of Christians meet∣ing for worship onely, as to heare, pray, &c. or secondly, an Assembly so furnished with Officers as fit for Discipline having a Presbytery, is meant; in the latter sense, which is that the proofs are brought to confirme, and that that is practised where this government is set up, the proposition is equivalent to such an assertion as this▪ Many Presbyteries may bee under one Presbyteriall government, as thus, many Parochiall Presbyteries may bee under one Classicall, many Classicall, under one Provinciall, &c. which is the same as to affirme that one Presbytery may bee over another, as the Bishops affirme. That one Presbyter may bee over another, this is evident, if you assert a Presbyteriall government may bee over a Congrega∣tion that is composed of a Presbytery and people: for it cannot bee said to bee over a Congregation, if it bee over the people onely, that is not over their Presbytery also, for then the Presbytery will be Independent, and the people under two Presbyteries coordinate and not subordinate, which stands not with common reason. Sect. 2. This then being the Assertion, it is thus argued against. A Presbytery over a Presbytery, or power over power necessarily implyeth two sorts of Pres∣byteries, or Ecclesiasticall Jurisdictions, specifically distinct or at least more then numerically. A greater or lesser vary not the kind in a Physicall or The∣ologicall consideration, but in a Politicall it doth; Hee that hath a grea∣ter power then I have, that is a power over my power, a power to order, direct or correct the power I have, this mans power and mine differ as two sorts or kinds of power. And although this superior Presbytery bee made up of Presbyters sent as Commissioners from the congregationall or paro∣chiall Presbyteries, yet this hinders not at all but that they may bee thus
distinct; For some Cities and townes corporate their Officers are sent up, & sit as Members of Parliament, yet this Honorable House hath a power di∣stinct▪ and superior to that which is in London or Yorke, though the superior Presbytery bee made up of Presbyters from severall Congregations, yet it is not made up of Presbyteries, it hath the persons materially considered, but not that power formally considered: for as while the Parliament sits and cer∣taine Burgesses from Burrough townes sit as Members in it, these Townes notwithstanding still retaine all the power those Corporations were ever in∣vested with; so particular Congregations whilst some of their Elders sit in the Classicall Presbytery, have Elderships or a Presbytery still. Now that it is very probable the Scripture holds not forth two sorts of Presbyteries thus specifically distinct, may bee thus argued. Sect. 3. First, where the Scripture holds forth distinct sorts in any kinde, there will bee found either distinct and proper names and titles, or at least some adjunct or difference added to that which is common or generall; In the Apostles times there were Presbyters over Presbyters, Apostles were superior to Prophets, and Prophets a distinct order from Teachers▪ Therefore in 1▪ Corinth. 12. God hath set some in the Church: First Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers, after that Miracles, then gifts of Healings, &c. They have not onely particular names and titles, but speciall notes of di∣stinction added, , as in Genesis 1. where no distinction in names is given, The Sunne, Moon, and Starres of Heaven, are all called Lights, yet there are termes of difference added, they are called first great Lights, and then the greater to rule the day, and the lesser to rule the night. Throughout the New Testament wee finde this word , but in three places, whereof there is but one that holdeth out the Government in hand, and in that place you have the naked word onely without the ad∣dition of any such expression, greater, lesser, superiour, inferior, or any kinde of adjunct, that can possibly put a thought in us, of more Presbyte∣ries then one. Notwithstanding so usefull are peculiar distinct names where there are distinct sorts or kindes of administration, as it is not omitted by any Church in their Ordinances for Government; in Scotland the lowest is termed a Consistory, the next a Classis or Presbytery, the third a Provin∣ciall Synod, the fourth a Generall Assembly. The French in these termes, Consistories, and Colloquel, and Synods: so in the Episcopall Republique there was the like varietie. Sect. 4. Secondly, As the Scriptures hold forth nothing in any title or name to
distinguish, no more can wee thence discover any sorts of Government dif∣ferent in nature; for tryall of this, let it bee supposed there is a Parochiall or Consistorian Presbytery for one sort, there is another sort wee call Clas∣sicall, what Scripture gives light by any kinde of reasoning to warrant the setting up one of those above, or over the other? Doe you read any where God hath set in his Church, first Presbyteries, secondarily Classes, then Consistories? Or is there any thing in the word directing a different composition or constitution in these? Sect. 5. First, For the materiale, the Persons that these Presbyteries are made up of, are the same; The Consistory hath gifted men set apart to the Office of the Ministery; Those that are in a Classicall Presbytery are no other∣wise qualifyed, nor indeed doth the Scripture require any thing but a Pres∣byteration to qualifie men for any sort, if there were sorts of Presbytery. That there is a greater number of Presbyters in the one then in the other, this alters not the state in respect of the matter; for if the number bee com∣petent, that is, so many as two or three may agree, Matth. 18. it sufficeth. The Honourable House of Commons, is to all Parliamentary purposes as much a House, when but two or three above forty, as when foure hundred. Nor doth this alwayes fall out that all Classicall Presbyteries have a greater number then some Parochiall. Scriptures have determined neither how few will constitute a Classicall Presbytery, nor how many may bee in a Paro∣chiall: Practice many times maketh them equall. Sect. 6. Secondly, Now for the Formale, the uniting of this matter into a Conses∣sus or Caetus, Presbyters become united into a Presbytery in the Classicall, by having Pastorall charges in such a division, whosoever commeth so to be disposed of, hee is no sooner Pastor to such a Parish, but hee is eo nomi∣ne, Member of such a Classis. The Presbyters of a Parochiall Presbytery are as neerely united and more: They are united in the choyce and call of the same Congregation they governe, and united in the whole work of the Ministery over the same people; so that they are not onely fellow Gover∣nours, but fellow Labourers in the same Vineyard. There is therefore no just ground for such a distinction or difference between Presbytery and Pres∣bytery in respect either of the matter or the forme. Sect. 7. Thirdly, Nor thirdly, do wee finde any thing in the Scriptures making them, as from different imployments, or functions, to differ; first, wee pre∣tend and so it is in the proposition, the one is superiour, the other inferi∣our; But how can you say the Scriptures have made this difference, when
there is not a word spoken this way in any place. Presbyterian Writers themselves in some expressions seem to take away utterly such difference as this; in one place you shall read the Classis can doe nothing, renitente Ec∣clesia, but it is null and invalid; Thus the Assertion for Discipline, and a∣vouches Zepperus, Zanchy, and others as of this opinion. The Congrega∣tion, though but minima Ecclesiola, yet may reforme, that is, suspend, ex∣communicate, &c. Renitentibus correspondentiis. So Voetius in his Theses, & desperata causa Papatus, lib. 2. Sect. 2. c. 12. Surely according to what these Reverend Divines have expressed, it is hard to bee said, which of these Presbyteries hath the greater or superiour power. Sect. 8. Secondly, the imployment or work of a Presbytery is to ordain, excom∣municate, suspend, admit Members, appoint times for worship and the like. The Classicall Presbytery reserve ordination, and excommunication to themselves, but the other are left to the Parochiall Presbytery: Thus some Presbyterians divide the work. Others possibly otherwise. But how can wee affirm any such designment from the Scriptures, if you have not two sorts, either in name or nature to bee found there? and none of these Acts or Administrations but may bee done by that one the Scripture mention∣eth, which doubtlesse they may, seeing Ordination seemeth to bee specifyed in the Text; if the greater, then doubtlesse the lesser. The Pastor in one place is said to exhort, in another to comfort, in another to visit the sicke, this will not warrant distinct sorts of Pastors, for there being but one sort spoken of in Scriptures, wee must interpret all these severall Administrations to belong to that one. Sect. 9. It was not found an easie work in this Assembly to finde two sorts of El∣ders, teaching, and ruling. Notwithstanding all the Scripture hath said of these, and in some places, so plaine, as if of purpose to distinguish them▪ If it bee so hard a matter by Scripture light to hold forth two sorts of Pres∣byters, it must needs bee more difficult to finde out two sorts of Presbyteries, especially seeing (as it is generally granted, and this by the Presbyterians themselves) that for above fifty yeeres after Christ, and in the Apostles times, there was but one kinde of Presbytery. Sect. 10. It hath been the wisdome of States to keep and preserve the bounds and limits of their Judicatures evident, and distinct, and as free from contro∣versie as may bee. If Laws and Ordinances about matters of mum and u∣um, and such inferiour claimes should not bee so evident, the authority of these Courts will bee in a readinesse to relieve wrongs and injuries through
such mistakings. But Controversies and clashings about these high and publique interests are no other in the issue then the dividing of a Kingdome within it selfe. Is man wiser in his Generation then Jesus Christ? Hee is our Law-giver, the Government is laid upon his shoulders; hee is the wonderfull Counsellor, the Prince of Peace. And therefore surely though other matters of practice and duty should have obscurity in the rule. Yet it is most probable hee hath ordered Authority and Jurisdiction with the Officers and Offices, for the managing of it so evident, as not to put us to search in a dark corner for directions. Wee cannot bee said to bee cleere in our rule when wee are thus inforced out of one word, and but once used, to raise so many Thrones, or Formes of Government, especially it being foreseen by Christ that such is the nature of man as nothing occasions more bitter contention then that lusting which is in us to have Authority and jurisdiction over others. Sic subscribitur: Tho. Goodwin, Philip Nye. Jer. Burroughes, Sidrach Sympson. William Bridge, William Greenhill, William Carter. Concordat cum Originali. Adoniram Byfield, Scriba.
