R561S 36273478 150207
REASONS Humbly offered to the Right Honourable the Lords Spiritual and Temporal Assembled in Parliament, to induce the speedy passing an Act for further encouraging Privateers. 1. THat it is manifest the Privateers have (during the War) not only taken and retaken many Prizes from the French, but have burnt, sunk, and destroyed, a great Number of the Enemies Ships on the Coasts of France; which as it hath much impoverished and weakened the Enemy, and annoy'd them in their Trade, so it has enriched this Nation to the Value of the Prizes taken, and by that means becomes a double Advantage to the Kingdom. 2. That by the Privateers Cruising, the French are so interrupted, or impeded in their Coasting Trade, That Provision and other Goods are already treble the Value, in the Eastern parts of France, than otherwise they would be; and if further Encourage∣ment be given to Privateers, the French Army in Flanders will not be able to subsist. 3. That Privateers often meet with Wool Vessels, and other Advice-Boats going to France, and thereby prevent the giving Intelligence to the Enemy. 4. That Privateers are an excellent Nursery of Seamen, by manning their Vessels with so many Landmen as they do, and making them the best of Seamen, fit for any Service. 5. That the Prizes and Recaptures made by Privateers pay great Sums of Money to his Majesty for Customs, and very often secure and rescue our English Shipping from the Enemy. 6. That the Privateers being encouraged by the Bill that is offered, will be a means to put a stop to the French infesting our Coast, as they daily do, to the great loss of our Mer∣chants. So that it may be truly said of the Owners of Privateers, that they are useful to his Majesty, and all his Subjects; and prejudicial to none but the Common Enemy. And therefore 'tis hoped such an Undertaking will be Encouraged. Obj. If it be objected, That the Encouraging Privateers may open a Trade with France, by taking Ships collusively. Answ. The perusal of the following Account, made up of a Ship supposed to be loaden with Wines, and taken by Collusion, will sufficiently evince the weakness os such an Objection. The Owners and Freighters of the Wine-Ship are Debtors To the first Cost, foreign Customes, and Charges of 100 Tuns of Wine 1500 To the Freight thereof 0300 To the Kings Custome and Prizage of 90 Tun, 10 Tun being allow'd for Leakage at 23 l. per Tun 2070 To one third of Ship and Cargo, (after Custom paid) which al∣ways goes to the Captains, Offi¦cers and Seamen of the Privateers 0800 To Charges of Condemning, Sel∣ling, &c. 0100 To the maintenance of the Master and Marriners belonging to the Prize, during their Imprison∣ment, till they are either return∣ed or hanged 0120   4890 Per Contra Creditor By 90 Tuns of Wines at 45 l. per Tun, 10 Tun being allow'd for Leakage 4050 By Ballance of this Account, where∣by the Owners will be found to be losers 0840   4890 This modest Calculation may serve for any other Merchandize, and demonstrate the apparent loss that must be sustained by such Methods of Trading; besides these Incon∣veniences and Hazards following are likewise run thereby, viz. 1. If but one Officer or Mariner of either Ship, or any other, happen to discover the Collusion, which is almost impossible to be avoided, then both Privateer and Prize are wholly forfeited. The Captains are to suffer Imprisonment, and be incapable of serving the King. 2. The Owners hazard sufficiently, being thereby guilty of Treason, besides Loss of Privateer and Prize. 3. If the Winds prove not fair to a Miracle, the Privateer must probably miss of the Prize, and some other Ship get her, or at least come in with her, and have a share, which will sufficiently Ruine the Voyage. Note, The lst Act, instead of being an Incouragement, was so great a Discouragement to Privateers, that above half of them immediately laid down thereupon, and others since have followed their Example; and if further Encouragement be not now given they all must lay down: Whereas if Encouragement be given, there will thereupon be fitted out such Privateers, as may do considerable Service to the Nation.
