R489A 36273454 150189
REASONS FOR CROWNING THE Prince and Princess of Orange KING and QVEEN joyntly, And for placing the Executive Power in the Prince alone. WHereas the Grand Convention of the Estates of England, have asserted the Peoples Right by declaring, That the late King James the Second, having endeavoured to Subvert the Constitution of the Kingdom, by breaking the Original Contract between King and People: And by advice of Jesuits, and other wicked Persons, having Violated the Fundamental Laws: And having withdrawn himself out of this Kingdom, has abdicated the Go∣vernment, and that the Throne is thereby Vacant. For which Mis-government He has for∣feited the Trust of the Regal Inheritance of the Executive Power, both in Himself, and in His Heirs, Lineal and Collateral; so that the same is devolved back to the People, who have also the Legislative Authority; and consequently may of Right Give and Dispose thereof, by heir Representatives, for their future Peace, Benefit, Security, and Government, according to their good Will and Pleasure. And forasmuch as it is absolutely Necessary, that the Govern∣ment be speedily settled on sure and lasting Foundations, and consequently, that such Person or Persons be immediatly placed in the Throne, in whom the Nation has most reason to repose an entire Confidence: It therefore now lies upon Us to make so Judicious a choice, that we may, in all Humane Probability, thereby render Our selves a Happy People, and give our Posterity cause to rejoyce, when they shal Read the Proceedings of this Wise and Grand CONVEN∣TION. Who is it therefore, that has so highly Merited, the Love and good Opinion of the People? the Honour of Wearing the Crown, and Swaying the Scepter of this Land? As His illustrious Highness the Prince of Orange, who with so great Expence, Hazard, Conduct, Courage, and Generosity, has happily Rescued Us from Popery and Slavery; and with so much Gallantry Restored Us to our ancient Rights, Religion, Laws, Liberties, and Properties: for which Heroick Action, we can do no less, in Prudence, Honour, and Gratitude, than pray Him to Accept Our Crown. II. It is better to settle the Exercise of the Government in One who is not immediat in the Line, than in One that is, (1,) Because it is a clear Asserting of a Fundamental Right that ma∣nifests the Constitution of the English Government, and covers the Subjects from Tyranny and Sla∣very. (2.) It cuts off the Dispute of the pretended Prince of Wales. (3.) The old Succes∣sion being legally Dissolved, and a new one made, the Government is secured from falling into the hands of a Papist. III. The making the Prince and Princess of Orange King and Queen joyntly, is the Nation's Gratitude and Generosity: And by re-continuing the Line in Remainder, is manifested the inesteemable Value the People have for the two Princesses, notwithstanding the Male-Administra∣tion of their Unhappy Father. IV. The present State of Europe in General, and of these Kingdoms in particular, require a Vigorous and Masculine Administration. To recover what's lost, rescue what's in danger, and recti∣fie what's amiss, cannot be effected but by a Prince that is consummat in the Art both of Peace and War. Tho' the Prince and Princess be King and Queen joyntly, and will equally share the Glory of a Crown, and we the Happiness of their Auspicious Reign: yet the wisdom of the Grand Convention is manifested, (1st.) In placing the Executive Power in one of them, and not in both; for two persons, equal in Authority, may differ in Opinion, and consequently in Command; and it is evident no Man can serve two Masters. (2ly.) It's highly necessary and prudent, rather to vest the Administration in the Husband than in the Wife: (1.) Because a Man, by Nature, Education and Experi∣ence, is generally rendered more capable to Govern than the Woman. Therefore, (2.) the Husband ought rather to Rule the Wife, than the Wife the Husband, especially Considering the Vow in Matrimony. (3.) The Prince of Orange is not more proper to Govern as he's Man, and Husband only, but as he is a Man, a Hus∣band, and a Prince of known Honour, profound wisdom, undaunted Courage, and incomparable Merit; as he's a Person that's naturally inclin'd to be just, Merciful and Peaceable, and to do all publick Acts of Generosi∣ty for the Advancement of the Interest and happiness of Humane Societies, and therefore most fit under Heaven, to have the sole Executive Power. Re-printed in the Year, 1689.
