R965 669.f.6[65] 99873124 160926
THE REMONSTRANCE OR DECLARATION Of Vs The Inhabitants of the County Palatine of Chester, whose Names are subscribed, and of many more. WE most humbly declare and remonstrate, That we are, our lives, li∣berties, our selves, and whatsoever we can stile ours, (next to Gods infinite mcrcies) to the goodnesse of His Majestie, and to the great care and indefatigable pains of the Honourable Parliament; To the one for discovering the variety of oppressions, that had almost over-whelmed us, and for preparing and advising apt remedies; To the other, for craving their wholsome Councells with a blessed Fiat, wherein the joynt Acts of a good King and faithfull Councell, have so apparantly concurr'd to the ge∣nerall good, that we cannot but look upon all such (as unworthy of future happinesse) who do admit for currant, that dangerous and disloyall distin∣ction; viz. For the King, or for the Parliament. Our loyall affections and judgements will not permit us to stile them true Patriots, and lovers of their Countrie, that are not cordially affected to our Gracious Soveraign, nor them good Subjects, that disaffect Parlia∣ments; The King and Parliament being like Hipocrates twins, they must laugh and cry, live and die together, and both of them are so rooted in our hearts, that we cannot disjoyn them. Wherefore we declare, That according to our Allegiance, and our solemn Protestation (our voices being in Heaven) we are resolved to spend our lives and fortunes, in the defence and service of both, in maintenance of His Majesties Royall Person, Honour and Prerogative, and in preservation of the Parliament, and just Priviledges thereof, of our true and undoubted Religion, Laws, Proprieties, and Liberties, which are deposited for our use and avail in that great and wise Councell, we being confident, that neither King, nor Subject, nor Religion, nor Liberty can comfortably survive the ruine and destruction of that great Body. And we further professe our selves Enemies to all those (whoever they be) who shall be found Agents in making our wounds deeper, by festring and fomenting the unfortunate Mistakes, and fearfull Jealousies betwixt the head and body, His Majestie and His Parliament; And which (continuing at this distance) doth threaten the fabrick of this blessed Government, with the losse of all His Majesties Kingdoms and Dominions. London, Printed by L. N. and J. F. for E. Husbands and J. Franck, and are to be sold at their shops in the Middle-Temple, and the next door to the Kings-head in Fleetstreet. August 12. 1642.
