S1672 99899463 153561
C R royal blazon or coat of arms A PROCLAMATION Anent the Mint, and declaring Spanish Ryals current, at fifty six shilling Scots. CHARLES by the Grace of God, King of great Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, to Our Lovits Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Armes, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting; whereas several abusses are creep'd into the Mint of this Our ancient Kingdom, which necessarly requires Amendements, for securing the Fynness, and Weight of Our Coyn, and Reducing it again to its state and condition appointed by Our Laws, and Acts of Parliament: and since several Difficulties do occur herein, which can best be remeeded by Ʋs, with advice of Our Parliament. We therefore, with Advice of Our Privy Council, Have thought fit to stop all Coynage in this Our Kingdom, until the first Meeting of Our Parliament: and in the mean time, We Require and Command all persons lyable in payment of Bullion, to pay in the same as formerly, to Our Thesaurer, or Thesaurer Depute, or any who shall be appointed by them to Receive in the same: And further it is Our Will and Pleasure, that all Spainish Ryals, being of the Weight of fourteen drop shall be current within this Our Kingdom, at Fifty six shilling Scots each Ryal, until We declare Our further Pleasure: and to the effect all Our Subjects may have notice hereof. Our Will is, and We Charge you strictly, and Command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye passe to the Mercat Crosse of Edinburgh, and Mercat Crosses of the several Head Burghs of this Our Kingdom, and other places needful; and thereat by open Proclamation, make publication of the premisses, that obedience may be given thereto accordingly. Given under our Signet at Edinburgh the Fourth day of July, 1683. and of Our Reign the 35th year. Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilij. WILL. PATERSON Cls. Sti. Concilij. God save the King. Edinburgh Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred Majesty. Anno Dom. 1683.
