S1331 E608_1 R205891 99865124 165689
THE REMONSTRANCE AND RESOLUTION OF THE Parlament of SCOTLAND, and their Proposals concerning their young King; And sending for him from St. Johnstons to Edenborough, to be immediatly crowned: With the manner of his Entertain∣ment. ALSO, The present Proceedings of the Scotch Armies, under the Conduct of General Leven, General Lesley, Lieutenant-General Massey, and Major General Holbourn. TOGETHER, With their designe to Rendezvous in Dunslaw field (near the Borders of England) and there to oppose His Excellency the Lord General Cromwel, now at Berwick. LONDON, Printed for G. Horton. 1650.
The Remonstrance and Resolution of the Parliament of SCOTLAND, con∣cerning the Covenant. ALthough the injuries done, and provocations offered to this Na∣tion, by the Kingdom of Scotland, as well precedent, as subsequent to their last years invasion; hath been such, as might in reason have shut the door upon all amicable offers, to have arisen, especially on the Parliament of Englands part: Yet to manifest how unwilling they were to forget their former con∣junxion with the Scots, in the assenting and defending of Religion, and the publike rights and liberties of both Nations, against the common enemy; and how ready they have been in prosecution of the same cause to maintain a firm friendship with them, that thereby the enemies of our Religion and liberties, might be disappointed of their wicked and dangerous designes, long since contrived, and to this day dexterously pur∣sued, to the utter ruining of both Nations, at least the wel-affected and conscientious party in both, through
the dividing them, and engaging them in irreconcile∣able animosities and differences among themselves, For prevention whereof, the Parlament of England were pleased to propound unto the Parlament of Scotland, that Commissioners might be respectively appointed, as well on the behalf of this Common∣wealth, as of the Kingdom of Scotland, to meet with what convenient speed might be; at which meeting, the particulars of that just resentment for which the Parliament of England demanded satisfaction, should be produced, and if satisfaction were therein given, they should be further willing to treat, and conclude a firm league and friendship with them. But unto this fair and friendly overture of the Parlament, no return would serve the Parlament of that Kingdom, but that which lays an incapacity upon the Representatives at Westminster, casting an aspersion upon their proceed∣ings, and publikely professing a dis-acknowledgment of their present Government; refusing to treat upon any other terms, then a return back to the former Go∣vernment of King, Lords, and Commons; as will evi∣dently appear by their former Letter to the Parla∣ment, a Copy whereof followeth. Sir, THe Estates of the Parlament of this King∣dom have received your Letter, signed by you as Speaker of the Parliament, and written in the name of the Commonwealth of England; which Titles, in regard of the Solemn League and Covenant, and Trea∣ties, and the many Declarations of the Parlaments of of both Kingdoms, are such as they may not acknow∣ledg. And for the matter therein conteined, Those many things of just Resentment, wherein Satisfaction is demanded from this Kingdom, are onely mentio∣ned
in the general, and therfore cannot so well receive a particular Answer; but if by those general expres∣sions, the late Ʋnlawful Engagement against England be understood, they desire that their Protestation a∣gainst the same in Parlament, and the opposition made thereunto by them afterwards in Arms (which they never laid down until the Garisons of Berwick and Carlisle were restored to the Kingdom of England) may be remembred, together with the Letter of the House of Commons, to the General Assembly of the Kirk: And that Lieutenant General Cromwel, autori∣zed from both Houses of Parlament, did upon the fifth of October last, represent to the Committee of Estates of this Kingdom of England in that Engage∣ment, and thereupon did demand that they would give assurance, in the Name of the Kingdom of Scot∣land, not to admit to suffer any, who have been active in, or consenting to that Engagement, to be imployed in any publike place, or trust whatsoever; which was not only granted and confirmed in Parlament, but all Acts for prosecution of that Engagement have been repealed, and all proceedings tending thereto, publikely disclaimed; And if any other wrongs shall be made known to us, we shall be ready to return such an answer as may give just satisfaction. If the Bonds of Religion, Loyalty to the King, and mutual Amitie and Friendship betwixt the Kingdoms be impartially con∣sidered, according to the Solemn League and Cove∣nant, and the Professions and Declarations of both Kingdoms, The Estates of Parlament think they have just cause to complain of the late proceedings in Eng∣land, in reference to Religion, the taking away the Kings life, and the change of the government of that Kingdom.
Against which this Kirk and Kingdom and their Com∣missioners have protested and given testimony, where∣unto they do still adhere, And since it is apparent there hath been of late in England a back-sliding and departure from the grounds and Principles wherein the two Kingdoms have bin engaged; The Parlament of this Kingdom doth propound, that the late proceed∣ings there, against Covenant and Treaties, may be dis∣claimed and dis-avowed, as the prosecution of the late unlawful Engagement against England hath been disclaimed and disavowed here: And that such as have departed from these Principles, and their former Pro∣fessions, may return to the same. Upon which grounds they are content to autorize Commissioners on behalf of this Kingdom, to Treat with Commis∣sioners from both Houses of the Parlament of Eng∣land sitting in freedom, concerning all Matters of just complaint, which either Nation may have against the other; and for redress and reparation thereof, and to do every thing that may further conduce, for continu∣ing the happy Peace and Union betwixt the King∣doms, which can never be setled on so sure a founda∣tion as the former Treaties, and the solemn League and Covenant, from which, as no Alteration, or Revo∣lution of affairs can absolve either Kingdom; so wee trust in God, that no success whatsoever, whether good or bad, shall be able to divert us; but as it hath been our care in times past, it shall, with the Lords assistance, still be our reall endeavors for the future, to keep our selvs free of all compliance with, or decli∣ning to the Popish, Prelatical, or Malignant party up∣on the one hand; or to those that are Enemies to the Fundamental Government, by King and Parlament;
and countenance and maintain Errors, Heresie, and Schism, upon the other. I have no other thing in com∣mand from the Parlament of this Kingdom, but to take notice, that there is no answer returned to their Letter of the fifth of March. And so rests Your humble Servant, Loudoun, Cancel. Praeses Parlamenti. And in another paper likewise, they further repre∣sent other additional Proposals; viz. First, That there may be no toleration of Idolatry, Popery, Prelacy, Heresie, Schism, or Prophaness. Secondly, That there be no change of the Fundamental Constitution and Government of this Kingdom, by King, Lords, and Commons. Thirdly, That there may be nothing done which may wrong King Charls the Second, in his Succession, as righ∣teous heir of the Crown of these Kingdoms; but that by the free Councils of both Houses of Parlament, Reformation of, and Ʋniformity in Religion, may be setled according to the Covenant; and particularly, that Presbyterial Government, the Confession of Faith, Directory for Worship, and Cate∣chism, may be established; That the just Right and Title of King Charls the Second to the Crown of these Kingdoms, may be acknowledged; And upon just satisfaction given to both Kingdoms, he may be received and admitted to the ex∣ercise of his Government: And if, notwithstanding all our earnest desires and endeavors to the contrary, the Commons now sitting at Westminster shall proceed otherwise, in all, or in any of the particulars aforesaid, We do hereby in the Name of the Parlament and Kingdom of Scotland, dissent from the same; and solemnly protest, That they may be free before God and Man, of the guiltiness, evils, confu∣sions,
miseries and calamities, that may follow thereupon to these distracted Kingdoms. Subscribed, Lothian. Jo: Cheifly. Will. Glendoning. An Abstract from Newcastle. Sir, ON the 9th instant, His Excellency the Lord General Cromwel, advanced as far as Durham, where he was met by Col. Pride, Col. Hacker, and Sir Arthur Hasterig, from thence he took his journey to∣wards Berwick, where he intends to keep his head∣quarters; it is confidently reported here, that about the 25 the Army intends to march over Berwick bridg, and are unanimously resolved, to give the Scots battle; who are (if you will give credit to John Presbyters re∣port) about 30000 horse and foot, and are divided into three several Brigades, the manner thus; The old standing Kirk-Army, commanded by General Leven in chief, David Lesley remains Leiutenant Gen. and Hol∣bourn is Major General: the second, consists of English, and is said to be commanded by Col. Massey, who is made their Lieut. General; the third, are Hilanders, and Lieut. General Douglas commands in chief; they are to rendezvous in Dunslaw field, and there the Com∣mittee of Estates have appointed they shall fight the English-Army; but we hope the Lord Generals spee∣dy march will prevent the conjunxion of their new Levies. The last news from Edenborough we thus re∣ceived, That the King of Scots came thither the sixt of June from St. Johnstons, to be crowned with all ex∣pedition; he was received in great triumph, some streets being adorned with rich hangings; with bone∣sires blazing and bels ringing, the like hath not been seen these many years. FINIS.
