S2263 E615_3 R206540 99858756 165751
THE SECOND CHARACTER OF Mercurius Politicus. — Pudet haec opprobria Needham, Et dici potuisse & non potuisse refelli. MErcurius Politicus is our Sir Roger the School-ma∣ster, playing at Tre-trip. It is the third foot of our State-Tripos, from whence you are to expect, the Oracles and wit of the Com∣mon-wealth: Or rather he is the Cerberus of Hell with those three heads of Britannicus, Pragmaticus, and Politicus, howling against Religion, barking against Monarchy, and biting wheresoever he can get a dinner. Thus being but one Dunghill-Cock, yet he makes up the number of a Battell-Royall, and fights it with himselfe with two or three Clinches to jingle like Bells in his Cox∣combe. Vitellius had a Dish provided at an entertainment, in
which was nothing but the brains of Pheasants, and tongues of Phaenicepteri. This on the contrary is a Biske made of the brains and tongues of Vipers and Aspicks, and serv'd up in the Platter of our Mercuries mouth. 'Tis the Iliack Passion of a wit overturn'd, who strai∣ning for a conceit, doth voyd his owne Excrements up∣ward. After all this I must avow him to be a most ingenious Person, and the greatest friend to Justice that I know, for he doth onely upbraid weekly the Blockishnesse and sloth of our Nation, that suffers such a Monster to live with∣in it. Thus we speak promiscuously of his Booke and him, for why should we separate that neer relation? and being to dresse the Devill like Cooke-Ruffian, we chuse to scald him in his Feathers. Or if you will like the Ox, now at Saint James his Faire, we will rost him whole, and pinne him over with his owne Politicusses. But let every other person exercise his invention, and fury upon him, in what manner he pleases. What he may expect from me is, that shall be so branded, that no Romish Sacra∣ment could give him so Indeleble a Character. I will shave him, and pounce the Letters in underneath his Periwig. I will write him all over so thick, that he shall be fit to be hang'd up in a Library like an Homers Iliads up∣on the Skinne of a Serpent. Not that I interesse my selfe in his quarrell with Sir Bal∣thazar Gerbier, against whom he bears so implacable a ma∣lice, onely because he thought him not worthy to be the Rhetorique Lecturer in his Academy. Nor that it offends me particularly to heare his bitternesse
against the Scots, it being so naturall a thing to see an Asse eat Thistles. Much lesse will I set up this Paper-standard to the Royall party, if there be any such thing left in our Nation. For I know that Politicus is now a Mercury of his word, and will performe punctually the Articles of his Agreement. Onely out of a just resentment, and the universall Cause, I have once more taken upon me the office to remember him in the Triumphs of his penne, that he is but Mortall. For whither else would the Pride and Impudence of this fellow carry him? who imagines that he hath now totally vanquisht the Independent, Royal, and Presbyterian Parties, and accordingly hath assum'd the Titles of Britanicus, Prag∣maticus, and Politicus, as the Roman Emperours did the names of the Nations they had conquer'd? How fit a Medall his Face would make in Brasse, where he should add the third time of his Mercuriall in stead of the Consular power, and at the conclusion P. P. for Pragmati∣cus and Politicus as they did for Pater Patriae. For even this Title too the sawcy Pedant pretends to, and therefore writes himselfe Mercurius Politicus in defence of the Common-wealth. What doth he say? of the Com∣mon wealth? Rather in Defence of Pepper, and assistance of Virginia Tobacco. God forbid that our Common-wealth should ever be reduc'd to such a Defendor. I have heard it indeed said of England, that it is walld in with the Sea, and that Friar Bacon should have walld it with Brasse, but this is that mira∣culous Engineer whom we onely wanted to wall it about with Diurnall. For this is all the defence and Patronage which he affords us against all the Princes of Europe, whom as much as in
him is, he hath drawn about our ears, speaking of them with the same liberty, as if they had been drunk and in a Bawdy∣house together, upon one of whom the clownish Coward durst not once attempt to looke if they were present. Thus he thinks that as one King of the Persians was elect∣ed by the neighing of an horse, so now all the Christian Monarks may be depos'd by the braying of an Asse, and that of Master Balaam Politicus. And for the most learned men of his Age, they serve but to carry his Pamphlets after him, and Salmasius and Master Hobbs conclude his Triumph, whom he hath confuted in one sheet, as well as a thousand, like a Veni, Vidi, Vici. So Cesar Triumph'd in three words, and so our Mercury doth in four, Exit Tyrannus Regum Ultimus. O'tis a Pithy Poet! and fit to continue the Mottos for such a piece of Architecture. But there is a necessity in it, that the best writers should be answered by him in one sheet: Seeing as his wit is always tir'd in the first halfe page, So for the most part all his Stock and Credit can scarce furnish him with so much in Gray-Paper. This whole sheet it seems is a new kind of Torture, with which he threatens the world, but something like the Bed of that Robber whom he imitates in racking writers of a shorter dimension unto its length, but meeting with Taller men, he cuts off as much of them as reaches beyond it. But O! it is a sheet-fulminant, and our Bedlam-Antichrist thinks that with it, as by one of the Romish Bulls, he can depose Monarchs, and interdict Kingdomes. How is it then that I may hope for that honour which he promiseth me, that I too shall be answered in a whole sheet? But indeed, to speak to his capacity, he may well allow me a
whole Sheet, who have already presented him with a paire of Blankets, and I think tost him in them. And as far as I perceive the State likes it very well, and rather then want the sport, would hold up at one of the corners, it being indeed but too slight a torment for that Dogge, whom they entertained not to teare open againe, but to lick over the wounds and sores of the Common∣wealth. For what can he expect otherwise? there being not in all History the example of one man, who by such qualities could make himselfe a fortune. Onely the Emperour Ru∣dolphus his Mastiffe had a Pension allow'd him for the same Abilities. Let him enjoy his Title of Politicus, which yet Tacitus nor Richelieu did ever presume to, but for certain he hath chosen none of the wisest employments. If as he pretends to defend the Common-wealth, he could prevaile with the Common-wealth to defend him, I would call him even Aristotles Politiques, and not once speak of him in the singular number. But Alas, as soon as he is blowne, he is unhearded, and I will undertake that any man may shoot him, without ever being question'd by the Keeper. I aske pardon for so unequall a comparison. As the Dane upon Barclay for the ill character of his Country, so I war∣rant you, you may draw upon him in the Presence, and he shall run behind the Hangings. But in vaine doth he cling to the publique, and skulke behind its Authority, I can teare off the Ivy without felling the Tree, and if it were needfull I can runne him through without ever wounding the State. The folly of such men, who when they have once cast
away all Conscience, and all respect of humane and Divine things, imagine forthwith that they are arrived at the very height of Policy, not considering that those which would attend upon a State, must always have at least a Cloke of Religion, though the Suit be not of the same. And hence it is that he being so wickedly out of the Fashion, they are as ashamed of his company, as of a Pedagogue in Cuerpo. Or if they have as upon Cain, set a marke upon this vaga∣bond Writer, lest every one that meets him should slay him, yet it is not so much a badge of his safety, as a Cha∣racter of his Infamy. And to speak properly, they have at once burn'd him in the hand, for his murtherous Writing, and made him cry, God save the Common wealth. Do you think then that his Title doth become him? or is he not rather instead of Politicus a very Politique would be? and in stead of a Mercurius, a very Moderate-Intellegencer? So he is truly for matter of wit, for having trepand out his whole braine in his two first Politicusses, he is now grown such a Dillingham, such a Taylor of news, as if there had but gone a paire of Sheers betwixt them. And therefore all his tackling being spent, and he being shot so often by me betwixt wind and water, I will for a farewell give him this one Broad-side more, and so make an end to sinke him. Mercurius Politicus is the Storke of the Common-wealth, strutting before White-hall, and feeding upon the Garbidge of the weekly Intelligence. And with the same Diet he keeps his Doxy, Mistresse Poli∣tica, and the young Politiculi his By-blows, who by that means are always furnisht with meat of the season, and upon Munday eate Munday, and upon Tuesday Tuesday, and
so to the end of the Weeke, there being no Table so constant as that of a Diurnall. It seemes as if he had boarded them out in the Lords prayer, they being the onely Family that eate their Daily Bread. Mercurius Politicus is a Seian Pen, fatall to all the three Parties, upon which he hath written. He is the Author of our small Philippicks, poysoning him∣selfe out of his owne Quill. He is a new Engine of State to conquer France withall, that as the whore of Orlcons first attempted to expell us thence, so a Pimpe of Westminster may againe restore us thither. He is an Atheist possest; roaring out more Villanies, and Blasphemy, then ever could be suggested by Asmodeus or Ashtaroth, and whose mouth can not be inhabited by any other Devill but Legion. He is the Sphinxses Riddle, for he went upon four leggs like a beast in his Britannicus, he stood upon two leggs as a man in his Pragmaticus, and at the last is come to live in three-leg'd-Ally a pimping Politicus. In conclusion, that we may dismisse him with an honou∣rable Character, he shall have that which was heretofore given to a Pope, that he enterd like a Fox, he proceeded like a Lion, and ended like a Dog. For such an one he is, a very Doggs nose of wax, as ugly, and as easie to be wrought from one side to the other; And what is now his condition, will hereafter be his destiny, he must expect to dye like a Dog, to be filed up for a memoriall of the Gallows, to hang to the wind like a Kings-Fisher, and serve for one of Gregories weathercocks.
All which is more demonstratively true, according to a Sylogisme in Physiognomy. For is not his head already elevated with the same grace, as if it were pearcht upon a Pole to be the Watermens Land∣mark to Westminster Abby? Are not his Limms so strangly set, as if they would quar∣ter themselves, and were gibbetted upon one another? These being the Premises, it followes that hanging must be his Conclusion. When all those whom he hath defam'd shall gather the Mosse from his Scull, and with that Usnea compound the powder to cure the wounds of their Reputation. For he must not think that the rest of the world will be content with so cheap a Satisfaction, as I, who have onely made use of this spetting Stile against him, as I have seen men ordinarily killing Mercury with their Spittle. Such Shimei curst, and stones did fling, And then askt pardon of the King. But though mild David him forgave, Yet Solomon did pay the Knave. FINIS.
