S3562 E21_4 R15856 99859932 112036
A SHORT ANSVVER TO SOME OBIECTIONS against the practises of those who are called Independents, and a de∣claration against the things they are supposed to hold. 1 PET. 3. 41. 15. But and if yee suffer for righteousnesse ske, happy are yee and be not afraid of their terrour, neither be troubled. But sanctifie the Lord in your hearts, and bee ready alwaies to give an answer to every man that asketh you a reason of the hope that is in you, with meekenesse, and seare. GALAT. 5. 1. Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free, and be not intangled againe with the yoake of bondage. EPHES. 6. 14. Stand therefore having your loynes girt about with truth, and having on the brest-plate of righteousnesse. Printed in the yeare. 1644.
A Short Answer to some Objections against the practises of those who are called Independents, and a Declaration a∣gainst the things they are sup∣posed to hold. THere being many mistakes of the practise and judgement of those that are slande∣rously called Independents, amongst which are these. First, some say by our hearing of those that say they are Officers of the Church of England, Ordained, and made Ministers by the Bishops, we doe justifie the Kingdom of England, to be a true Church, a body politicke, and the Officers thereof true Offi∣cers, and also that all their Parish assemblies are true Churches, which we doe not. Others say of us that we sin in not holding Com∣munion with the Parish assemblies in all Church Or∣dinances, but that we leave them to joyne with Inde∣pendent Churches, and that we gather Churches out of Churches, and that wee chuse such men to bee our Officers as were never Ordained by the Bishops. This they say, though they have beene declared as Anti∣christian roote and branch, and pernitious to Church
and State where they are, and the Lord would not have us so much as take out of Babilon a stone fo a foundation, or for a Corner. ler. 51. 26. They say also that wee sinne in meeting in private houses, and that it is sit we should meete in publique in Churches that are consecrated for that purpose. We shall answer their charge on both sides very briefly: that we may not be charged with sinne on ether side while we doe but that which is our duty, but untill the truth be made manifest, there is a shew of an appearance of evill. WE ought to give no offence to Jew nor Gentile, nor to the Church of God, 1 Cor. 10. 3. no not that which hath an appearance of evill; 1 Thes. 5. 22. though while we are here below we fall short in many things, Rom. 3. 23. but condemne us not in those things you have not the word for; for hee that judgeth his brother, judgeth the Law, Jam. 4. 11. That is, if you condemne where the law doth not, it is a judging the Law imperfect. Be not wiser then it is written, for where a good construction can bee put on things truely, do it, Love thinkes no evill. 1 Cor. 13. 5. Let us not smite fellow servants. Mat. 24. 4. Let wickednesse proceed from the wicked. 1 Sam. 24. 13. The time will come (let us all pray for it) that the envi of Ephraim shall depart, & the adversaries of Judah shall bee ut off. Ephraim shall not envie Judah, and Judah shall not vex
Ephraim▪ They shall not hurt, nor destroy in all my holy mountaine, for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the Sea. Isa. 11. 1. 9. In the meane time wee desire to hold forth the truth in love according to what we haver eceived And for answer to those that take offence on both sides, we answer: For the first, that say by our hearing those that say they are Officers of the Church of England, we justifie the whole King∣dome to be a true Church, and all the Parish As∣semblies true Churches, we doe desire to testifie the contrary, that wee may give no offence. For first in the New Testament, we read of no Church, a body Politique, but such as mett toge∣ther in one place, that for the matter were to be e∣steemed Saints, Though this is the greatest Church wee reade of, the Holy Ghost saith they met in one place. Acts 1. 15. c 2. 6. 44. 46. c. 4. 23. 24. 31. c. 5. 12. c. 6. 2. 5. and joyned together by their voluntary consent. It appeares none could force them. Paul offered himselfe vo∣luntarily. Acts 5. 13. c. 9. 26▪ to walke together according to the rules of the New Testament Isa. 33. 22. Mat. 28. 20. Iam. 4. 12. Heb. 3. 2. 5. 6. 1 Cor. 14. 33. 37. and to such a Church, a body politique. Christ hath given his power to doe all things that ought to bee done in a Church, Mat 16. 19. c. 18.Without A∣postles no power but of advice, who else can say it seemeth good to the Holy Ghost and to us. 17 18. 1 Cor. 5. 4. 2 Cor. 2▪ 6. 7. only that they should hearken to the advice of other Chur ches, but over a true Church Politique, no Church hath power of Iurisdiction. Acts 15. 2. 22. 23. 28. But we never read of Prophecie, or promise that
God will take any whole nation to be his Church but Israel, but of every Nation they, and they onely that feare him, and worke righteousnes are accepted of him, Act 10. 35. though all beleevers are members of the invisible Church, wherof all the believers in England are a part, but al in England together not a visible Church, that is a body Politique, in which collectively the Governe∣ment of Christ lieth. Secondly, the Kingdome of England, being no true Church Politique, then the ministry of it as such is no true ministry. But it is no true Church. Therefore the Officers therof no true Officers. What cannot bee proved out of the Word to be a true Church is none. But this can∣not bee proved out of the Word. Therefore is it none. It was not the Church of Asia but the seven Churches of Asia that were bodies Poli∣tique. The power lay not in them together, but particularly, each Church commended for its owne vertues, and reproved for its own faults, but not all joyned together in the fault: or in the power of making the cure. Revel. 2. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. 13. 14. 15. 16. Thirdly, we say Parish congregations are not true Churches, unlesse for the matter they are vi∣sible Saints, (Philip. 1. 1. 6, 7. 1 Cor. 1. 2.) and for the forme gathered together, and joyned by volun∣tary consent to worship God according to the rule of the New Testament. 1 Pet. 2. 5.
Secondly, for answer to the second sort of ob∣jections against us, wee answer. First, leaving those Parish Assemblies that say they are Churches, and are not to joyne to a true Church, a body Poli∣tique, is undoubtedly necessary, and wee may not have Communion with them in all Church Ordinances. 2 Cor. 6. 14. 15. 16. 17. Secondly, Churches may bee gathered out of such as were true Churches, but have Apostatized, and live in sinfull practises, and having beene dealt withall according to the rule of the Word remaine obstinate, one ought to separate from them, 2 Cor. 6. 14. 15. Revel. 18. 4. or from any Church, when I cannot have communion with them, but I shall contract personall defilement. Thirdly, we doe heare none as Officers that preach, but as gifted men, unlesse it bee such as are chosen by a true Church, a body Politique, and they when they exercise in their owne Church, but in all other places we heare them but as gifted men, though we acknowledge their Office else where; And so those that are slanderously called Independent Ministers do preach, and their people heare in all places where they come. And none of them doe hold their Ordination by the Bishops, or any other false power to their Ministry, for they doe in no sense make a man a Minister, either in his owne Church, or else where, but onely the call of a true Church, a body Politique. Though otherwise Churches may, and ought to advise and
bee advised by each other in their choise, yet they have no power, if they dissent to make the call of the Officer so chosen void. Fourthly, though wee thinke it convenient to meete with our Churches in publique places, by some called Churches (if we might have liberty) yet we account no holinesse to be in the places Though it is fit to meete in convenient places, yet God lookes rather at the persons than the place. Pauls preach∣ing neither ju∣stified the place nor their wor∣ship he decla∣ring against it: Acts. 17. 22. John 4. 20. 23.) and that the consecration thereof was sinfull, though in regard of their roomh, and seates, and publikenesse we judge them con∣venient. We have done this that we may not bee par∣takers of other mens sinnes, but keepe our selves pure, 1 Tim. 5. 22. that by our presence in hearing, or preaching we may not lay a stumbling blocke before the eyes of the blinde Lev. 19. 14. Rom. 14. 13. c. 14. 20., or offend any of our brethren, in giving them occasion to thinke we sinne while we doe but what is our duty. FINIS.
