S4015 E390_20 99862038 160257
A COPY OF A LETTER FROM The Generals Excellency Sir Thomas Fair fax his Quarrers; Concerning the Amies not disbanding; the Votes of the Councell o War, And the proceedings of te Committees o the Souldiers. With the Answer to the Parliamets Message of sending fr the Monies ac again: And the proceedings of the Committee o Lord and Commons with the ARMY. June 30 London Printed for R Smpson, 1647.
NEVVES FROM THE ARMY Worthy Sir, I Am much sadded to view the present affaires of England. Have we not had bloud enough, yet I feare there are Horse leaches in England, that will never be satisfied, till they see fresh
broyles (which God forbid) Have we oney sheathed the sword to draw it againe in a field of bloud? Must we needs run all mad∣ding to spill more, when every family (al∣most) is still uncured of the former sores, in one relation, or other. Oh that a wise man could be found to save this poor (nay all these three sad) gas∣ping Kingdomes. But why should English people be still discontented under so many mercies. Hath not God subdued the common Enemy? why then are we not satisfied? Hath not God given us peace, why then should we go about new proyles? Hath not God delivered us from the pestilence, why should we goe a∣bout to bring a plague upon our selves? Hath not the Lord kept us from the Famine why should we seek to devour one another? Hath not the Lord spared a remuant of Us, why should we that are left (to praise God for his mercies) bring judgments upon our heads: the Lord settle us in a firme and la∣sting peace. For newes thus:
ON Tuesday May 25, 1647. his Excel∣lency Sir Thomas Fairfax came hither to Bury from Saffoin walden to order and set¦tle things, it being the chiefe place where the grand Committee of the Souldiers met, which meetings, as also other meetings of sub Committees, and others, in this kind) his Excellency hath endeavoured to prevent, and field Marshal Generall Skippon, and o∣thers have laboured what they can to satis∣fie the souldiers of the good affections of the arliament towards them. Wdnesday May 26, his Excellency made inquirey into the state of things here, and after what condition the souldiers were in, and finding them very high upon termes & pleading to be much unchtisfied, his Excel∣lency considered with some of his chiefe o∣fficers, what course to take; for the com∣posing of those differances, and discontents, so much as possibly he could, and then ad∣vice had with his Officers, his Excellency seriously considering the great weight of the businesse resolved to call a Councell of War of all his Officers in Commission to
consider what to doe there. Thursday May 27, his Excellency sum∣moned his Officers to meet at Bury, at a Councell of Warre, and by this time the votes of the houses were come to the Army, for their disbanding, at the severall places of their severall Regiments of foot as is exprest in the said votes. Fryday May 28, divers of the Officers came to the generalls quarters, and that night, they had notice that Commissioners were comming down from both houses of Parliament, with monies and Instructions for their disbanding, and that they were a∣bout to goe to Chelmsford, to disband the generalls owne Regiment there; but they stayed not, declaring much dislike to be so disbanded; saying, that they expected their Arrears to be payd; answer was made that care was taken to secure their arrears. Saturday May 29. the Councell of Warre met and sat here at Burey very late that day, and considred of all the proceedigns of the souldiers in general & compared them with what they are commanded by both houses
Parliament, and the Councell of war made severall votes the Copies whereof are sent to both the Speakers of the two houses of Lords and Commons in Parliament, with a letter from the generals Excellency adver∣tising of the state of the armyes & disband∣ing that some things therein mentioned may be taken into consideration, before the disbanding. For the Souldiers are generally against disbanding, thus pleading for vindication, monies, and other things expressed in their desires, God grant that this great differance be composed in a settled, and sure Peace. Munday 31, the Commissioners from the Paliament, viz. the E. of Warwick, and the rest of the Commissioners came to Chelmsford, intending according to their instructions, to disband the Gen. Regiment there, & so from thence to proceed to disband Col. Hewsons, &c. But the Comis. found not only that Re∣giment, bue the whole Army in a condition not to disband, the monies was also brought by Capt. Blackwell. The Gen. Excellency hath resolved to have a generall Kandezvouz of his whole Army, and to impart to them his mind, &c.
Yesterday being Iune the 1, F. M. Gen. Skippon re∣ceived orders to return to the Parliament and Capt. Blacswell received order to send back the monies. And this present wednsday Iune 2, F. M. Generl Skippon is gone to London accordingly as Capt. Black¦well is sending of the monies back againe, the soldiers none of them (let me say that for them) so much as o∣ffering to meddle with any of it, but as they let it come, so they let it be carried quietly back againe. The Generall will sudenly have a randezvouse and every chiefe Officers (as take i) wil have instructions for the moving of the Regiments to Conply with the Parliament orders and disband. God grant that these differences may be soon com∣posed and that we may all apply our selves to peace, and unity, & lay bitternesse of speare aside so prayes, Burey this 2 of Iune, 1647. Your most hum∣ble servant Roger Smart. FINIS
