S5189 E154_25 99871289 156830
THE EARLE OF STAMFORDS RESOLVTION. Expressed in his faithfull execution of the trust imposed upon him concerning the Militia of Leicester-shire. Who notwithstanding hee was often opposed, yet did not desist, but did pro∣ceed in the performance of his trust. And also did certifie his faith and fidelity to the HOUSE OF PARLIAMENT. With a most remakable passage concer∣ning the besieging of Hull, and how Sir John Hotham hath let out the waters three miles about the Towne for the defence thereof. Joh. Brown Cler. Par. Hen. Elsyng Cler. Par. D. Com. London, Printed for A. Coe, 1642.
THE EARLE OF STAMFORDS RESOLVTION. Expressed in his faithfull execution of the trust imposed upon him concerning the Militia of Leicester-shire. HOw terrible a thing private dissen∣tion is, and of what great danger and consequence, even to the ru∣ine of whole Kingdomes; civill warres have beene the fearefull and lamentable example of anci∣ent times, may give us warning, for feare lest we being led on by the same spirit, be∣come as miserable as they were, and are like them, made the subjects of future contempts and scorne. No∣thing doth more enervate and weaken the strength and sinewes of a Common-wealth, then division; nothing doth more assist them for opposition against forraigne invasions, then unity and concord within themselves, The consideration of the former state of this land with
what it now is, is most lamentable: who can without teares consider that this Nation, which not many years since was the pride and glory of all Europe, the admi∣rations and terrors of other Countries, should now be∣come so despicable, that now even those who durst not name this Nation without a trembling heart and reve∣rence, now dare to make of us a despicable proverb, and the contemptible object of their ordinary dis∣course? And all this misery hath taken possession of us onely by the ill counsells of the malignant party, who by their evill and wicked suggestions, still anima∣ting his Majesty to beleeve what they only advise to the ruine of his Majesties Kingdome, have wrought this mischiefe which now hangs over our heads threatning distruction, unlesse by the mercy of God there be some speedy meanes taken for prevention thereof; and a∣mong all the difference wherewith this Kingdome hath been distracted none hath more troubled the peace thereof, then that concerning the Militia, it being of it selfe indeed a consideration of most great weight and consequence. The Houses of Parliament have been very carefull, in these dangerous and pernicious times so to dispose of and settle the Militia of this Kingdome, that the invasion of any forraine Nation which may be attempted, being induced by the apprehension of an opportunity, by reason of our owne dissentions, and the defigns of the malignant party, which daily wait an occasion to set on foot their hatcht mischiefe, may bee prevented, the King and Countrey from both those as∣saults secured, and the subjects remaine in peace and tranquility; yet notwithstanding all the faithfull care
and industry of the House of Parliament to setle and secure the Magazine of this Kingdome, they have found in all their resolutions many and strong oppositi∣ons, for they whom they have thought worthy of so great a trust, have in the execution of their trust found very strange and violent opposition, and their best en∣deavours, which have laboured for the publicke be∣nefit, have beene very much misconstrued, whereby if it might be, they would have beene discouraged from the prosecution of so good a worke, which did tend to and aime at the benefit and security of the whole King∣dome. The Earle of Stamford was by the House of Par∣liament elected and chose Lieutenant for Leicester; and it was thought fit, by the wisdome of the same House, that the Militia, and training up of the Traine Bands, should be at his power and command: he went down to take possession of the Magazine of that Coun∣ty, and also to execute and perform that trust which the Parliament had conferred on him; but his proceedings were oposed in their veryinfancy, & his care was coun∣termanded by a company of Cavaliers, who did endea∣vour by all meanes possible to hinder the Earle in the performance of what the house of Parliament did ex∣pect from him; yet notwithstanding these oppositions the Earle doth proceed, and doth labour by his wis∣dome and gravity to suppresse the Actors and their insolencie, to take away the causers of those insurre∣ctions, and tumults. Hee is very constant and vigilant of the charge imposed upon him, and as he thought it did befit him: Hee sent to the House the condition of
the Countrey as it then stood in, together with his owne Resolution. That he went on with the Militia, notwithstanding hee had received some opposition by one Master Henry Hstings, son to the Earle of Hun∣tington, who brought the Kings Proclamation, and Commission of Array, by vertue whereof he mustered up an hundred horse, a hundred and twenty Musketiers, and fourescore Pikes, and said that hee had power by that Proclamation and Commission to muster up the Traine Bands. A true Relation of the care and fide∣lity of Sir Iohn Hotham concerning the trust which he is put into in the Towne of Hull by the honourable Court of Parliament, how he hath for∣tified it for the defence thereof. THe care and fidelity of Sir Iohn Hotham, exprel sed in the execution of his trust imposed upon, con∣cerning the Towne of Hull, is manifest unto all; who hath now so fortified that Towne that there is no force to be apprehended of any taking of it. He hath et in the water three miles round the said Towne, which water
runs in a Current two foot deepe at the least, so that without a great hazzard and dangers of the attempters, there is no approach to bee made neere the Towne: Yet notwithstanding this provided defence, there are daily many aslaults made against the said Towne, for by the assistance of some of the Malignant party, there are now great forces drawing down to the said Town, and three, field pieces, with which they doe intend, for all the defence provided, to batter downe the said Towne, and so to gaine admittance. There are drums daily beat thereabouts for the raising of Volunteers, by reason that the Traine Bands in most places refuse to come in, and so great the difference is thereabouts, that there is a continuall and daily expectation of war, so that the whole Countrey is in a continuall perplexi∣ty. These times, God knowes, are very dangerous, which God of his infinite mercy amend and settle; and grant that the King and Parliament may be united in a most inseparable unity in affeions, that so both their Counsells being unanimously united, to the glory of God, this Kingdome may flourish, and peace and pro∣sperity bee established within the wall of this our Sion.
That if in case of necessity, if his Maiesty shall deny his assent, the Ordinance agreed on by boh Houses of Parliament, doth obliege the People, dnd oght to bee obeyed, being warranted by the Fundamentall Laws of the Kingdome. Both Houses of Parliament hath took into their se∣rious considetation the Occasion and Reason why the Members of the said Houses should absent themselves upon their sommoning in, Wherupon they hath drawn up a Charge against them, and are resolvd that they shall pay 100 l a man, and to be examined by the Com∣mittee before the next sitting. Iohn Brown Cler Parl. Hen Elsing Cler▪ Parl D Com. FINIS.
