S6258 669.f.19[32] 99870959 163370
At a Councel of War held aboard, the 17 of October, 1654. Swiftsure. Present Vice-Admiral John Lawson, Rear Admiral Dakins, Capt. Jonas Poole, Capt. Benjamin Blake, Capt. Iohn Lambert, Capt. Leon Harris, Capt. William Crispin, Capt. Rich. Lions, Capt. Edward Morcock, Capt. Iohn White, Capt. Richard Hodges, Capt. William Hannum, Capt. Clark, Capt. William Vessey, Capt. Henry Fen, Capt. Robert Story, Capt. Hawkes, Capt. Lightfoot, Capt. Hubart, Lieut. Haward, Lieut. Pride, Lieut. Trafford, Lieut. Hall, Lieut. Wilkinson, and Mr. Iohn Bear Master of the Fal∣mouth. UPon notice had of a certain Petition drawn and signed by many Sea∣men of the Fleet at this place, and intended to be presented to the Lord Protector; as also, of several Petitions presented by certain Ships Companies, to their respective Commanders; it was debated of, and resolved as followeth. Quest. 1. Whether it be lawful for Sea-men to tender their grievances by way of Pe∣tion? Resolved in the affirmitive, none dissenting. Quest. 2. Whether the things alleadged in the Petition be real grievances, or no? Resolved in the affirmative, none dissenting, that we own them for grievances, except that clause in the fifth head, concerning forraigne service, which we take for no grievance; in case provision be made for them, as is desired: onely Capt. Poole, Capt. Blake, Capt. Lambert, and Lieut. Haward, are not satisfied that impres∣sing is a grievance. Quest. 3. The Question being put, Whether the Sea-men Petitioning their private Commanders, and delivering their forementioned Petition, with desires that they would please to move the Generals and chief-Officers, be so far owned by us, as to present the same to our Generals with these foregoing votes, leaving it to their Honours consideration for proceeding in it as they shall see cause. Resolved in the affirmative by all; onely Capt. Blake, and Capt. Lambert, are not satisfied as to the Sea-mens presumption, in Petitioning the Lord Protector; all the rest understand the Lord Protector is not immediately Petitioned by the same. Resolved, That the Vice Admiral of the Fleet be desired to send these Votes, together with the said Petition and subscriptions, to the Generals. This was signed by all the abovesaid Persons.
