t2439 e112_33 99860559 112682
August 19th. A True and Exact Relation Of all the Proceedings of Marquesse Hartford, Lord Pawlet, Lord Seymor, Lord Coventry, Sir Ralph Hopton, and other His Maiesties Commissioners in the publishing of the Commission of Array in his Maiesties County of SOMERSET. Brought over by a Gentleman who was an Eye witnesse of all the Passages and Proceedings there. Wherunto is added True Newes from Yorke, Hull, Newcastle and Darbyshire. Also a List of the Horse under the Com∣mand of WILLIAM Earle of Bedford, Lord Generall. With the Names of the Captaines of every Troope; each Troope containing sixty Horse, besides one Livetenant, one Ensigne, one Coronet, one Quarter-master, two Trumpeters, three Corporals, one Sadler, one Farrier. London Printed, 1642. Aug. 19.
A TRVE RELATION Of all the proceedings of the Lord Marquesse Hartford, Lord Paulet, Lord Coven∣try, Sir Ralph Hopton, and other His Majesties Commissioners in the County of Somerset. Somersetshire. MUnday the first of August the Lord Marquesse be∣ing then in Wells, was informed that Sir Francis Popham, S. Edward Baynton, Sr Edward Hungerford, and M. Iohn Ashe did intend by force of armes to oppose them in the executing of the Commission of Array, and to that intent had commanded the Trained-bands of that part of Somersetshire, and the North west part of Wilts, to attend them on Mendeep, in the meane time Sir Ralph Hopton publishing the Commission of Array in Shep∣ton-mallet was opposed by M. Stroude, who came with 700. men and would not suffer Sir Ralph Hopton to read it; upon which, though his company was but small, not amounting to above 24 Horse, or thereabout, yet he so valiantly behaved himselfe, that amidst all M. Strouds company he unhorst him (though to the great hazzard of his life) for he had no sooner laid hands on him but a man of M. Strouds presented a Pistoll to him ready cockt, and had kild that
Noble Gentleman, had it not been prevented by one M. White then waiting no him, who snacht the Pistoll out of this fellowes hands. Sir Ralph having taken M. Stroud prisoner, deliveed him into the Constable of Shepton-mallets hands, who was compelled by the mul∣titude after Sr Rlphs departu e to release him or lose his own life. By Wednesday night the Gentlemen of the County had sent in∣to Wels to attend the Marquesse two or three hundred Horse very well provided, and Sir Iohn Horner with some of the other side, were met at M. Alexander Pophams House, whose company amounted to 1000. armed mn, besides the multitudes that came flocking from every house upon Letters that were sent some Gentlemen of that County, stuft with so many doubts and feares that the people thought if they did not now play the men, they should be utterly undone forever. This caused their army to increase, so that by thursday night their company consisted of 8000 people, at which time the Marquesse perceiving the danger he with the rest of his company were in by reason of this multitude, thought fit to send out Scouts, 60. Horse or upward, to guard the west part of the Towne, which ac∣cordingly they did, but roving somewhat farther then they had in∣tended, the evening being very silent they might heare not farre di∣stant a Troop of Horse and Foot, as they guest, which made them to be very earnest to be satisfied in the thing, therefore with a joynt consent they marched forward till they found this conjecture to be true, the company as they conceived could not be lesse the 500. and therefore thought, their owne company being so small, they should be forc'd to give them way; but see the brave resolution of these brave Cavaleers who thought it more glory to die Honourably, then to purchase a life by a cowardly flight, therefore they chose three of their fellows to treate with them and to know what their intentions were; their answer was they intended to march for Men∣deep that night; the Gentlemen hearing their answer, told them that by the Lord Marquesse appointment they were set to guard that peece of that County, and keep peace, if by any meanes possible they might, and with all desired their Captaines, M. Pine, and M. Prstle, that they would returne every man to his owne home, this could by no meanes be granted, but if they could not have their way by faire meanes they would have it by foule. This answer being re∣turned to the Gentlemen they provided themselves for the encounter, Collonell Lunsford with 20 of the Troopers armed with Carbines,
by the helpe of a ditch joyning to the highway lay undiscovered, and commanded the Souldiers that none should stirre till they saw him with his company come forth of this pit shouting and dischar∣ging there Carbines, which being done they all should doe the like, by the time they had set themselves in oder these people were come within a Musket shot, and discharged against the Gentlemen forty Muskets or more, but were not as yet come so neere Collonell Luns∣ford as he wisht them, who was forced as yet to lie still, but com∣ming on thinking to make their way (through their supposed weake adversary) at length came within the reach of his Carbines, who presently shouted and discharged amongst the people, who being hurt by they knew not whom, nor hardly from whence, and the Ca∣valeers with the same expression comming in their faces, were so distracted that they knew not which way to flie, some throwing downe their armes and running into Corners, others fled, some ran into the Corne to hid? themselves, for next day in the afternoone two of them were found dead in the Corne, (yet note the goodnesse of these Gentlemen Cavaleers) they did not offer to strike one man to hurt him after they were routed, onely tooke Captaine Prestle prisoner, who was as well intreated with the Marquesse as any one of his own servants. There were killed of these people foure, and foure∣teen that are desperarely wounded; they tooke from them 15 Horse, and 30 Muskets with some other Ammunition to no great valew, which they ranne away from. Well, now to my Mendeep Gentlemen, who (as some say) were no sooner upon the hill in the sight of Wells, but their number increa∣sed to 40000. fighting men, and women, some bringing Pitchforkes, Dungpeeks, and such like weapons, not knowing (poore soules) whom to fight against, but afraid they were of the Papists. Now in the sight of this great Army there appeared some forty Horse or there abouts, which so frighted them that they knew not what to doe, nor whether to flie, a confused noise was heard in the Campe, crying the enemy was commings; well, to be short the Ca∣valeers left the hill, informing the Lord Marquesse of the multitude, desiring he would be pleased to suffer 500 Troopers to encounter with them (if they could) but he out of his goodnesse towards them would by no meanes grant their desires therein, but resolved rather then spill blood to leave the Town next morning, which according-he did; no sooner were these Gentlemen gone, but these people came
into the Town with such expression of joy for their supposed con∣quest as is hardly imaginable, tearing downe the painted Glasse out of the windows of the Church, and in the height of their zeale gloried in that action more then in vanquishing of the Papists; and having found a picture, that pleased them so well that they plac'd it upon the point of a Speare, whether in adoration or derision I cannot tell. So I leave thē departing home with that great trophe of their victory. As for the Lord Marquesse and the rest of the Gentlemen, I heare they are at Sherburne with a guard of 2000 men compleatly armed, with two Pistols before them, a Carbine in one hand, and a Lance in the other. Farewell. Yorke. THursday the fifth of August, there was a meeting of the whole County of Yorke, where his Majesty made a speech desiring their assistance to serve him in person, or upon condition that they would tender their Horse and Armes, &c. His Majesty would finde men, but they Petition the contrary desiring they might not be dis∣armed, but that they might keepe their armes for the defence of the County, which His Majesty was gratiously pleased to grant; in the West riding of this County the Commission of Array hath been put in execution, and they have deducted men out of every band which are to goe towards Yorke for his Majesties service. Friday 6 of August there landed at Hartle-Poole a Ship laden with great store of Amu∣nition and money for His Majesties service, and were safe conveyed to York: Our Souldiers here are very serviceably set forth thought not so fine a those in London, but our Cavaleers are exceeding brave. His Majesty hath given Commission to Colonell Lunsford to raise a 1000 Volunteers in Yorke, or else where with all speed. Hull. THe Cavaleers have left the siege against the Towne, the market is kept openly, but there is a strong Garison kept here still. Sir Iohn issue out of the Towne divers times, and hath taken divers horse and foote, and likewise he hath taken on Master Booth a recusant,
but Colonell Ashbournham is escaped from thence in a disguise, and is fled to his Majsty which pleaseth not Sir John, the Yorkeshire men have promised His Majesty to send 500 Horse to lye before Hull, to stop all passages and hinder Sir Iohns roving out on the Country. Sir Thomas Instam with his assistance hath quartered his Souldiers in the road. Colonell Lunsford is neare Doncaster, and other Cava∣leers have dispersed themselves in severall troopes to hinder all pas∣sages to or from London. New-Castle. THe Earle of New-Castele hath strongly fortified New-Castle, with above a 100 peeces of Ordnance, and keepes a strong Garison there. Also there is great store of Amunition landed there from Holland or other parts. Darbyshire. THere hath beene here a great robbery committed lately by the Cavaleers upon a poore man, who had received 50. l. upon a bond, and being returning home was set upon by 7 Cavaleers, who held their Pistols at him ready cockt, demanding his money, saying they were His Majesties servants, and they must have money, and ha∣ving gotten the money, shot and kild his Horse, but spared the per∣son alive, who when they were gone he made speed unto the Towne, and sent hue and cry after them, and two of them were taken in an Inne neere the high way, and were brought before the Justice and committed to prison, but they found very little money they had, for they who were the purse-bearers are not as yet cought. At a mustering of the trayned bands here, there was a great division among the Souldiers, for some were for the Commission of Array, and others stood for the Ordinance of Parliament, the contention grew so hot that there was a great slaughter on both sides, there was 19 slayne of those that were for the Commission of Array, and five of those which stood for the Ordinance of Parliament, there was a Justice of peace of this County a very able man, who made a speech in the defence of the Ordinance of Parliament which gave the people great sa∣tisfaction.
A list of the Horse under the command of William Earle of Bedford, Lord Generall of the horse, with the names of the Captaines, each Troop containing 60 Horse, besides 1 Lievtenant, 1 Coronet, 1 Ensigne, 1 Quarter master, 2 Trumpeters, 3 Corperalls, a Sadler and a Farrier. Troope. 1. Lord Generall, 2. Sir William Balfoore Leiut. Ge. 3. Lord Gray. 4. Lord Brooke. 5. Lord Hasting. 6. Lord St. Iohn. 7. Lord Stanford. 8. Lord Feilding. 9. Lord Wharton. 10. L. Willoughby of Parh. 11. Iames Sheffield. 12. Sir William Waller. 13. Iohn Gunter. 14. William Pretty. 15. Robert Burrell. 16. Francis Dowet. 17. — Temple. 18. Iohn Bird. 19. Mathew Draper. 20. — Dimock. 21. Hor. Cary. 22. Iohn Aluered. 23. Iohn Neale. 24. Iohn Hammond. 25. Ed. Ayscough. 26. Alexander Pim. 27. Iohn Hotham. 28. Arthur Evelin. 29. Geor. Tompson. 30. Edwin Sandys. 31. Antony Milemay. 32. Ed. Kighly. 33. Nathaniel Fines. 34. Ed. Berry. 35. Alex. Douglas. 36. Tho. Lidcot. 37. Tho. Hammond. 38. Iohn Dulbeir. 39. Fean. Fines. 40. Sir Arth. Haselwrick. 41. Sir Walt. Earle. 42. John Fleming. 43. Arthur Goodwin. 44. Rich. Grinvil. 45. Tho. Terrill. 46. Iohn Hale. 47. Hen. Milemay of Gr. 48. Will. Balfoore. 49. George Austen. 50. Adrian Scroope. 51. Herc. Langrishe. 52. Ed. Wingate. 53. Ed. Babington. 54. Charles Chichester. 55. Hen. Treton. 56. Wilter Long. 57. Ihn Fines. 58. Fran. Thompson. 59. Edmund West. Captaines of the foure Troopes of Dragooners each Troop 100. 1. Sir Iohn Brown. 2. Nathan. Gordon. 3. Iohn Browne. 4 Will. Buchan. FINIS.
