t3252a 99898087 133424
THE INFORMATION OF Edward Turbervill Of SKERR in the County of GLAMORGAN, Gent. Delivered at the BAR of the HOƲSE of COMMONS, Tuesday the Ninth day of November, 1680. Perused and Signed to be Printed, according to the Ord∣ of the House of Commons, By me WILLIAM WILLIAMS, Speaker. Reprinted 1680.
THE INFORMATION OF Edw. Turbervill Of SKERR in the County OF GLAMORGAN, Gent. WHo saith, That being a younger Brother, about the year 1673. he became Gentleman Usher to the Lady Ma∣ry Molineux, Daughter to the Earl of Powis; and by that means lived in the House of the said Earl about three years: and by serving and assisting at Mass there, grew intimate with William Morgan Confessor to the Earl and his Family: who was a Jesuit, and Rector over all the Jesuits in North-Wales, Shropshire, and Staffordshire. And he du∣ring the three years time often heard the said Morgan tell the said Earl and his Lady, That the Kingdom was in a high Feaver, and that no∣thing but Blood-letting could restore it to Health; and then the Catho∣lick Religion would flourish. Whereunto the said Earl many times re∣plied, It was not yet time; but he doubted not but such means should be used in due time, or words to that effect. And he heard the Lady Powis tell the said Morgan and others publickly and privately, That when Religion should be Restored in England (which she doubted not but would be in a very short time) she would perswade her Hus∣band to give Three hundred pound per annum for a Foundation to maintain a Nunnery. And this Informant was perswaded by the Lady Powis and the said Morgan, to become a Fryer; the said Lady encouraging this Informant thereunto, by saying, That if he would follow his Studies, and make himself capable, she questioned not but he might shortly be made a Bishop, by her Interest in England: because upon Restauration of the Catholick Religion, there would want peo∣ple fit to make Bishops, and to do the business of the Church. And thereupon she gave this Informant Ten pound to carry him to Doway where this Informant entred the Monastry, and continued about three weeks, and with much difficulty made his escape thence, and return∣ed
for England; For which the said Earl and his Lady, and all the rest that encouraged him to go to the Monastery, became his utter E∣nemies; threatning to take away his life, and to get his Brother to dis∣inherit him. Which last is compassed against him; and Father Cudworth who was then Guardian of the Fryers at Doway, some days before his Escape thence, told this Informant, That if he should not persevere with them, he should lose his Life and Friends: And farther added, That this King should not last long: and that his Successour should be wholly for their purpose. And Father Cross, Provincial of the Fryers told this Informant, that had he been at Doway when this Informant made his Escape thence, he should never have come to England. And this Informant finding himself friendless, and in danger in England, went to Paris, where one of his Brothers is a Benedictine Monk, who perswaded this Informant to return for England. And in order there∣unto, about the latter end of November 1675, he was introduced into the Aquaintance of the Lord Stafford, that he might go for England with his Lordship. And three Weeks he attended his Lordship, and had great access and freedom with his Lordship, who gave him great assurances of his favour and interest to restore him to his Relations esteem again: and said, He had a piece of Service to propose to this In∣formant, that would not onely retrieve his Reputation with his own Relations, but also oblige both them and their Party, to make him hap∣py as long as he lived: And this Informant being desirous to em∣brace so Happy an Opertunity, was very inquisitive after the means But the said Lord Stafford being somewhat difficult to repose so great a Trust as he was to Communicate to him, exacted all the Obligations and promises of Secresie, which this Informant gave his Lordship in the most solemn manner he could invent, Then his Lordship laboured to make this Informant sensible of all the advan∣tages that would accrue to this Informant, and the Catholick cause. And then told this Informant in Direct Tearms, that he might make himself and the Nation happy, by taking away the Life of the King of England, who was a Heretick, and consequently a Rebel against God Almighty. Of which this Informant desired his, Lordship to give him time to consider: and told his Lordship. That he would give him his answer at Diepe, where his Lordship intended to Ship for England, and to take this Informant with him. But this Informant going before to Diepe, the Lord Staf∣ford went with Count Grammont by Calis, and sent this Informant Orders to go for England; and to attend his Lordship at London. But this Informant did not attend his Lordship at London, but went into the French Service; and so avoided the Lord Staffords further importunities in that affair. And this Informant further saith, That one Remige a French Woman, and vehement Papish, who marri∣ed this Informants Brother, lived with the Lady P all the time
this Informant resided there, and some years since; and was the great consident of the said Lady. And the said Remige was for the most part taken with her Ladyship into Morgans Chamber, when the Consults were hold there; where he hath often seen Father Gavan, Father Tower's, Father Evans, Father Tylliard, Roberts, White, Owens, ary, and the Earl of of Castlemain, and other Priests and Jesuits meer, and shut themselves up in the said Morgans Chamber, sometimes for one hour, sometimes for Two hours, more or less; and at the breaking up of the said Consults, have broke out into an Extasie of joy saying, They hoped ere long the Catholick Religion would be Established in England, and that they did not doubt to bring about their Design, notwithstanding they had met with one great Disapointment, which was, the Peace struck up with Holland: saying, That if the Army at Black-Heath had been sent into Holland to Assist the French King, when he was with his Army near Am∣sterdam, Holland had certainly been Conquered; and then the French King would have been able to Assist us with an Army, to Estab∣lish Religion in England. Which expressions, with many others, importing their confidence to set up the Romish Religion, they fre∣quently communicated to this Informant. And the said, Morgan went several times into Ireland, to London, and several other parts of Eng∣land, as this Informant hath just cause to believe, to give and take Measures for carrying on the Design. And the said Remige and her Husband, having first Clandestinely sold there Estate, are sled into France, about May or June last for fear of Discovery: This In∣formant by many Circumstances being assured, that the said Mis∣tress Remige was Privy to all or most of the Transactions of the Plot And he saith, That about May last was two years, he was present at Mass with the Lord Powis in Vere-street, when the Earl of Cas∣tlemain did say Mass in his Priestly Habit, after the Rites and Ce¦remonies of the Church of Rome. Edward Turbervill. Sworn the Ninth of November 1680. Before Thomas Stringer. William Pulteney Edmond Warcupp, FINIS.
