w2135 e1032_6 99867842 168901
AN ESSAY TO A Continuation OF ITER BOREALE; Attempting something upon the happy influ∣ence, which that seasonable and successefull march OF THE LORD Generall Monck Out of the North, had upon the Arts and Sciences. BY a LOVER of LEARNING. LONDON, Printed for Robert Smith, and are to be sold at the Crane in Pauls Church-yard. 1660.
An Essay to a Continuation OF ITER BOREALE. COme, come my Muse away, make hast to greet Great General Monck, go kiss his welcome feet; Indeed th' art something tardy but however The Proverb holds, 'tis better, late then never. Some Candid Reader will suppose the lack Of generous Wine, might set thy fancy back. Excuses may be found for coming late, For thankfulnesse is seldome out of date: What Art or Science shall not stoop to the Great Hero, Patron of their liberty. Lilly and Cambden both, had ta'ne their flight From British-coasts, and left a shady night, But for thy coming, they had packt away Their Parts of speech, and durst no longer stay: The Nouns were frighted at the Martiall brood, And fear'd Declension as the Cases stood;
The Substantives began to make their moan, They must have help, they could not stand alone; The Adjective that could not stand before, Did never look to be supported more; The Numbers were too weak to keep the field, And with the fifteen Pronouns meant to yield. Comparisons grew odious, what degree. Can be expected from an Anarchy? The Verb and Participle found no fence, That might secure them in the Future-Tence POSSƲM was cal'd with all his force, but he Confest he wanted possibility. The other Parts of speech did want protection, Witnesse the sighing of the Interjection. SYNTAX dispair'd, saying, will they spare A quiet place where any concords are; And poor Prosodia all besmears her eye With weeping to her mournfull Elegies. But thou hast wip't them, and she means to raise Her highest note to celebrate thy praise.
SECT. 2. RHetorick that pleasant Mistrisse, Learnings grace Whose gaudy Varnish wont to hide the face Of horrid Acts, grows mute, and doth deny To colour treason by an Encomy. Her smoother stile was turnd to Haesitation, Stifled with guilt, it mar'd her pronunciation. But by thy coming, thou hast rais'd the hopes Of fainting Suada, and redeem'd her Tropes By casting subtle figures, so that all She speaks of thee, must be Myoticall. Now may she speak her mind and may declare What kind of Mushroms our late Courtiers were; That NOL a Brewer was, and PRIDE his Dray man, HEWSON a Cobler, PACKER but a Lay-man The Rump forlorn, and of that cursed Crew Some lose their pelf, some bid the World adieu. Thus hast thou furnisht Pytho with a spring, To curse the wicked, and salute a King.
SECT. 3. LOgick, the Queen of Reason, to whose bent All power stoopt by force of Argument, Is now so baffled, that she prostrate lies A Captive Vassell to absurdities. 'Twould melt your heart to hear the dolefull story And sad complaint from every Catagory; SƲBSTANTIA lost her substance, and she meant, Hadst thou not come to turn an accident; 'Twas well poor QƲANTITY was so discreet, To stay her time, thy kind accesse to greet. All QƲALITY was so transform'd of late, She lost her skill, nor could denominate: Princes, must go on foot and beggars ride, Coblers turn Peers, and Carters magnifi'd; The noble qualitie which wont t' adorn The Courts of Princes now become a scorn To base Plebeians, you would spue to see A stinking Rump drest up in Majestie. RELATIONS all grew heavie and each eie Was turnd a Fount by kinder sympathie Nor do I wonder when all Royall ACTION
Is solely manag'd by a cursed faction. PASSION grew high, and could not brook such things As mounting Beggars and deposing Kings. ƲBI looks out in hope she might descry Some kinder succor in extremity. QƲANDO thinks long, and saith, what shall I be Servant of Servants to eternity. SITƲS was restless; while she makes a moan, The worst of Varlets did prophane the Throne. The HABITS were so wicked in the Nation, That now Rebellion calls for abjuration, 'Twas God that sent thee in this doubtfull season, To make us men and bring us to our reason, The ill bred genus thou hast packt from hence, Defining Kingdomes by a difference; The cursed Juncto of Hypocrisie, Themselves are baffl'd by a fallicy: The World could not have found so fit a pate, In such a nick of time to moderate. SECT 4. MOralls that wont to guide us heretofore, A crowd of Clowns had voted out of door. The vertuer hide themselves while bolder Vice
Hath friends at Court, and is upon her rise. 'What need is there of Ethicks, why should we 'Consult the heathen for felicity. 'Alas! Their summum bonum is a toy 'Compar'd with ours; three Kingdomes we enjoy, 'And can we keep them we shall not envy 'The great Mogoll in all his Majesty: 'Why should we Christians stoop to higher powers, 'Adam their Grandsire was, and so is ours. Thou heardst our rudenesse, and couldst easily spy Our great defect in this Phylosophie. Thou readst an Ethick Lecture, we encline And prove proficients in thy discipline: The great usurping Dons which governd ail, Were Taught a Lesson more Monasticall. Thy precept and thy practice both do ply The strictest lessons of Oeconomie, And where thou find'st a student is for tricks, Thou shewst thy skill as well in politicks. The saucy Rump who scornd the best of Kings, In lower Congies broke her twatling strings To entertain thee, while a Chair of State Must be prepar'd and all that's delicate. Thou taught'st the Court, the Camp, and all to crie, ong live KING CHARLES God bless his Majesty. ext under God we owe thy conquering banners, he late Edition of our English manners.
SECT. 5. PHYSICKS had lost their Science, whiles that all Was out of course, and turn'd unnatural; In vain their Students shall hereafter pry In Natures Secrets, alls a prodigie; Materia prima like, poor England stood For some Impression, give it what you wood. Natures best friend thou camest and found us thus, And brought a Form, by bringing Carolus. The Causes all conspire, and God direct The blest production of this good effect; Thou hast ingaged the Sophister to ply The choicest tracts in this Philosophy. SECT. 6. THe Metaphysicks fear'd their tender Ens With verum bonum would be banisht hence;
The Angels could not save, although they lent, The strongest force of each intelligent: It was the In-created substance staid The spitefull hands, and made them all afraid, By sending great St. George, who by his might, Did banish darkness, and recover light. SECT. 7. THe Law's a Kingdoms Bulwark, and the Fence, The two edg'd Sword that keeps from violence, Lost both their tongue and sence, so that the wise Call'd all oppression, in a Legal guise; Our Lives, our Fortunes, Names and all must be Poor fetter'd Prisoners to necessity. What dolefull sound was heard, what lamentation Of Plunders, Thefts, of Rapes, and sequestration? Here sits a weeping Orphan, and anon We meet another ruin'd and undone. Astrea went her way, but (O the pity) She left her business with a dull Committee. TheMeaning pretenders without the practice of godliness. godly mend their pack, the Saint inherit Not by the Norman Law, but seeming merit; Each place of Trust and profit that way ran,
And lo, the Saint is turned a Publican. High Courts of Justice never known before. Must be erected as a Postern▪ door For King and Peers, and to stop the ery Of Royal blood, they cloak their Butchery By seeming Law; and by a strange pretence All that was done was done by providence: And wilt, O God, endure so great affront From Hypocrites, and stand no more upon't? What shall the worst, and greatest of Impiety Acted by men, be charged upon the Deity? Shall such unheard of mischief still be hie, Under Religions Cloak? let God forbid: Thou heardst our suit, and sent great Monk to chase The Rumpant Rebell and Redeem the Mace. SECT. 8. MFdicks whose skill was wont to bring again A swooning Patient and remove the pain, Consults her Herbal, but could not descry, A proper Plant for Englands malady; The bolder Emprick comes, and for his Fee, Prescribes Purgation and Phlebotomy;
The Noblest blood runs out, the dregs remain, And still the Patient doth encrease her pain; Now giving up the Ghost she was heard to cry, O give me something Soveraign, or I die, Thou heardst, and dost employ thy utmost skill To give her ease by giving her her will. A Colledge of Physicians do consent She must be pleas'd, her Cure is content. Then hoist up sail, and lets not spare for cst, Bring home that Drug, or England will be lost, She gladly takes it, and anon her dolour Ceast, looks fresh, and gains her colour Nay, then great Sir, since we are saved thus, Wee I gil thy Shrine, Great Esculapius. SECT. 9. ARITHMATICK whose chiefest skill doth lie In total Sums, forgot to multiply; There was so much Division and Substraction, Her total Numbers mouldred into fraction. Her eager Students cry, when shall we be Past Subdivision, at the Rule of three. The Cheating Treasurers began to boast,
Th' had past accounts, but reckt without their Host. What do I stand for Cyphers? Reach a Pen, There must be more, you must account agen: Thus didst thou teach the cheating Knave a trick, And taught him better in Arithmatick. SECT. 10. ASTRONOMY whose Lectures made us wise In Revolution, and to read the Skies, Now curse the Stars, and do conclude from thence Her ruine came, Malignant Influence Became her bane, and now she must deny To Court the Planets, all's Inconstancy. The new erected Lights eclipse the Sun; Prodigious Comet ay we are undone. Lillie was non-plust, and at last he sell From Reading Heaven to consult with Hell▪ But stay, me thinks a glorious star appear From Northen parts, presage a happy year; This Star Rise higher, and at length obtain The wished sight of Charls the seconds Wain. Now thanks to Heaven, all the Stars conspire To give poor England in, her hearts desire.
SECT. 11. THEOLOGIE which teach us to adore One only God, and to admit no more, Bids us to rear an Altar, and to pay Our thankfulness, befitting such a day: A day, whose brighter beams did put to flight Those Owls and Bats that Revel'd in the night: A glorious Church was brought to meer Confusion, Undoubted truth, expel'd by strong delusion, Unhallowed hands prophane the Sacred Rite, And Ignorance pretend to greatest light, The Cobler lays aside the old Translation, Puts up his Tools, and works by Inspiration. The Canting Quaker makes a hideous cry, England Repent, Repent or else you die: The Dipper counts the wicked world unclean, And must be damn'd, or dipped once again: Now Englands Ark may fear destructive Rocks, Whose only Sin was to be Orthodox But is there any hope some man of Order Will sympathize, and look upon our border? At length Religious Monk, was heard to say,
Quaker be gone, Phanaticks all away. Thus didst thou give our Church a better face, And given hopes to see her wonted GRACE. SECT. 12. MVSICK whose Noble Science did inspire, Diviner souls, and rais'd the fancie higher, Her self was out of Tune by raging Billows, And hangs her warbling Harp upon the Willows, Is this a time for mirth? May every eye Keep time in tears, and weep by sympathie. Are Law and Gospel both turn'd out of door? Put up the Viol bring the Lute no more. Thus lay the mournfull Virgin like to die, But now recovered to an extasie: Now doth she choose her most delightfull ayres, And tunes her Song according to affairs; Now doth she make the Christian world to ring Thy great atchievements for thy exile King: Shee'l serve the here, and when thou shalt expire, Shee'l raise her Heavenly Note a great deal higher, She may attend the in the Angels Quie. FINIS.
