W2996 E121_17 99864667 116899
THE TRVE COPIE OF A LETTER WRITTEN By Captaine Wingate, now Prisoner in Ludlow, taken by the Malignant Partie, in the late Battaile fought at Worcester; and sent to a Member of the Hoble house of Commons. Setting forth The inhumane, barbarous and savage Cruelties towards him, and how he was compelled to ride through the Army naked: with his Resolution to die in the PARLIAMENTS Cause. Whereunto is added The Kings Majesties Speech at Shrewsbury, on Michaelmas Eve last, to the Gentry and Commons of the County of SALLOP, there assembled. LONDON, Printed for WILLIAM LEY, at Pauls-Chaine. October, the 7th. MDCXLII.
The true Copy of a Letter, written by Captain WINGATE, now prisoner in Lud∣low; taken by the Malignant party, in the late Battell fought at Worcester, and sent to a Worthy Member of the Honourable House of Commons: setting forth the Inhumane, Barbarous, and Savage Cruelties towards him and some other Prisoners, also taken by the said Malignants, and his resolution to dye in the Parliaments cause. SIR: MY unfortunate estate and sorrowfull condition, into which I am now plun∣ged, maketh me almost uncapable of writing the true sense thereof. But ever having found you a constant and faith∣full friend to me in time of prosperi∣ty, and opportunity now favouring me, by Gods mercy I am encouraged, in what measure I am able, to ac∣quaint you with my sufferings, hoping you will so farre condole with me my misfortunes, as to present them on my behalfe to the Honourable House of Commons. When I came from Oxford with that worthy Com∣mander Collonell Sands (whose unfortunate death I much lament) under Collonell Brown, our Comman∣der in Chiele, to Worcester, we had a long and doubtfull skermish, which I verily perswade my selfe is already made known both to the High Court of Parliament,
and most part of the Kingdome. Therefore I forbeare to mention any thing further touching the same, but only to informe you of mine own particular sufferings since I have been in their barbarous custody. When I was by them brought into Worcester, I was brought before Prince Robert, and Lord Maurice his Brother, and some other of their Commanders, and was with much scornfull and opprobrious reproch exami∣ned the cause of my resistance against the Kings Maje∣stie, my Liege Lord and Soveraigne; To which I an∣swered; I never resisted or attempted to doe any thing against His Majesties Person or lawfull commands joyned with consent of his great Councel, both Houses of Parliament, whose Edicts and Ordinances I concei∣ved (so long as they tended to the preservation of His Majesties Person, Honour and Dignity, and peace of His Majesties Kingdomes, and establishment of Reli∣gion) ought to be observed and obeyed. Then was I de∣manded if the Parliament command one thing, and His Majesty expresly commands the contrary, whether I ought not to obey the King before the Parliament. To which I answered, that I conceived the High Court of Parliament being the representative body of the whole Kingdome, and so the greatest Councell, and elected of the choisest and learnedst persons in the Kingdome, and so the wisest; of the most aged and experienced mem∣bers, and so the greatest could best judge of the affaires, and of such Lawes and ordinances which might most tend to the safety and tranquility of this State and Common-wealth. Therefore I conceived I ought in conscience to obey their commands; In which opinion I resolve to live and die; and now I am fallen into your
hands, I must submit my selfe to your mercy or cruel∣ty, either of which shall be welcome to me for the ma∣nifestation of my loyalty to both King and Parliament conjunctly, but not divided. The Prince was much enraged at my so peremptory answers, calling me Parliament-dog, Round-head, and the like, and if I had the gift of patience to suffer, I should in short time be made a rare Martyr. To which I answered, Gods will be done: Then was I comman∣ded out of his presence, and kept in safe custody, til fur∣ther order from him, giving command for present pre∣paration for all his souldiers to leave the Town, and ad∣vance towards Ludlow, where Prince Charles keepes his Court, and to leave behind them Colonell Brown, Co∣lonell Sands, and Captain Berry, being sore wounded that they could not goe along with them without dan∣ger of death. About three of the clock in the morning they went from the Town, having bound my hands-behind mee, commanding me to be set on horse-back, and bound to the horse, and to ride before them, only one Trooper before, and one on each side mee for my guard, who rode with their Pistols in their hands ready charged, turning them often towards mee, swearing dam them, and perish them (if I would not turne on the Kings side) they would shoot me to the heart, to which I an∣swered nothing, but that time should make known my further intention. Being come about five or six miles from Worcester, be∣ginning to be day-light, command was gsven by Prince Robert, that unlesse I would presently renounce the cause that I endevoured to defend on the behalfe of the
Parliament, and declare that I conceived their Procee∣dings to be against the Lawes of the Land, and disho∣nourable to the King, I should be presently stripped out of all my garments, and ride bound naked before them to Ludlow; which I refusing to doe, was most barbarously and inhumanely according to the Princes command effected. The scornfull reproches of those wicked Miscreants which I in that way sustained did not trouble nor dnt my mind so much, as the harme and cold I caught by the weather being sharp, injured my Body. Then comming to Ludlow, after they had exercised themselves with reviling and scorning of me, causing me so to ride through the Towne, command was given I should be taken off my horse and my clothes put on and brought before Prince Robert, who in a reviling manner asked mee if I had learned to beare and suffer, and if I would not yet recant and turne to them, they would proceed to judgement against me, with the cru∣ellest torments they could devise to put mee to death, giving mee ten dayes libertie to consider with my selfe and returne my full Resolution at the time prefixed, commanding me to be againe put into Prison, and to be allowed necessary meat and drinke for preservation of my health, that thereby if I would joyne with them I might be the better able to doe them service. Some other Prisoners which here they have also put into a close Prison, using them in the extreamest cruel∣tie that may be devised, allowing them only bread and warer for their sustentation, and so little, that if they long continue there, they will be starved to death. Thus (Sir) having rudely given you to understand
my present estate at this time, having opportunlty, and obtained so much favour of the Keeper of the Prison, being somewhat well affected to the proceedings of the Parliament, but constrained to execute that place, who provided me of a trusty friend that I might confide in to deliver you this Letter, which if I shall be so happy before my death (which I expect at the day appointed as to heare that you have received my Letter, I shall be glad; for no tortures, torments or savage cruelties with Gods assistance shall alter or change my Loyalty to that grand and grave Senate the High Court of Par∣liament. Thus hoping you will present my sufferings accor∣dingly, and praying that God of his infinite mercy will be graciously pleased to prosper and protect the Pro∣ceedings of the high Court of Parliament, to the pre∣servation of Peace, establishing of Religion, defending of the Liberties and Priviledges of Parliament, and of the Subject, and inthronizing his Majestie with ho∣nour and dignity, and his Posterity successively, to the joy of all true hearted Subjects. From Ludlow Castle, October 1. 1642. Your observant friend, and a most dolefull Prisoner, Capt. WINGATE. FINIS.
HIS MAIESTIES SPEECH at SHREVVSBVRY on MICHAELMAS Eve last, to the Gentry and Commons of the Countie of SALLOP, there assembled. GENTLEMEN; IT is some benefit to me from the Insolencies, and misfortunes which have driven me abont, that they have brought me to so good a part of my Kingdome, and to so faithfull a part of my people; I hope neither you nor I shall repent my comming hither; I will doe my part that you may not: And of you, I was confident before I came: the residence of an Army is not usually pleasant to any place, and mine may carry more feare with it, since it may be thought (being Robbed and spoiled of all my owne, and such terror used to fright and keep all men from supplying me) I must only live upon the ayd and reliefe of my people; but bee not affraid, I would to God my poore Sub∣iects sufferred no more by the Insolence and violence of that Army raised against me (though they have made themselves wanton even with plentis, then you shall doe by mine, and yet I feare I cannot prevent all disorders; I will doe my best; and this Ile promise you, no man shall bee a looser by  if I can helpe it; I have sent hither for a Mint, and will melt downe all my owne Plate, and expose my Land to sale or morgage, that if it bee possible I may bring the least pressure upon you. In the meane time I have sum∣moned you hither to invite you to doe that for me and your selves, for the maintenance of your Religion, the law of the Land (by which you inioy all that you have) which other men doe against Vs: Doe not suffer so good a cause to be lost for want of supplying mee with that, which will bee taken from you by those who pursue me with this violence, and whilst these ill men sacrifice their mony Plate and utmost industry to destroy the Common wealth, be you no lesse liberall to preserve it. And assure your selves if it please God to blesse me with successe I shall remember the particular assi∣stance every man heere gives me to his advantage: However, it will here∣after (how furiously the minds of men are now possessed) be honour and comfort to you, that with some charge and trouble to your selves, you did your part to support your King and preserve the Kingdome. I desire M. Sheriffe, and the rest of the Gentlemen, to distribute themselves in that Method, that they may best receive the expressions which you shall make of your best affections, the which I will have particularly presented to me.
