W3142 E884_4* 99866367 118638
Boni ominis Votum: A GOOD OMEN To the next PARLIAMENT, Expressed upon occasion of those extra∣ordinary Grand Juries, lately summoned out of the most eminent Baronets, Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen, in some Counties, to serve at the summer Assises, this year, 1656. By a faithfull Servant to this Republick. London, Printed for John Hardesty, at the black Spread-Eagle in Duck Lane, or at his shop in the Strand nigh Worcester House.
Boni ominis Votum. A good Omen to the next Parliament, &c. GOod speed to this Republike; and, increase Of happinesse, to those who seek her peace. Sad things are threatned, and a lowring sky Seems to portend, great storms are drawing nigh: But look above them, and good courage take, The Sunne still shines, although the clouds be black, And beamings through their darkest parts appeare, Whereby, discernable good Omens are, With Symptoms of the Blessing we expect, If, we our selves, obstruct not their effect, And turne them to ill signes: which to prevent, That, which here followes, gives a needfull hint. As both abroad, and here within this Land, Publike and private mens affaires, now stand.
This year is likely to be criticall, About the time in which the leaves will fall, If, preconjectures, may be builded on Things put in action, with things left undone, Speld both together; and from some of these, We may deduce good cautions, if we please. Whether it were the policy of some, In hope, it an Obstruction might become To Concord; or, the prudence of the Shreeve, Or, speciall providence, which did contrive Those Grand-grand Iuries, that must represent Their Counties, we, shall best know by th' event: For, whether cheerfully they come to doe That service which their Call invites them to, Or, by a wilfull non-appearance, wave That duty, which the common cause doth crave, It will be signall; and, to many a one, A Test, as virtuall as the Lydian stone: And, also, give an intellectuall view, Of some Results, which thereon will ensue At their next meeting, who, to represent This Nation, shall be summoned and sent. For, those Grand Iurors, are now chosen forth Of them, whose gifts, estates, degree, or birth, Hath ranck'd them with the best: yea, out of those (Excepting such as have been open foes To this Republike) who, have been suspected Meer Newters, or, else, persons disaffected, As well, as from among them, whose true zeale Hath kept them constant to this Common-weale; That, they, whose faiths yet questionable are, May to this Government themselves indear
Some way; and, from henceforth, enrolled stand Among the noblest Patr'ots of the Land, Endow'd with all their Liberties, and freed From those distinguishments, which, either breed Or nourish secret hat red, to th' increase Of Quarrels, and deminishment of Peace; If, they, shall not imprudently contemn That meanes thereof, which, now, is offred them. And, who can tell, what providence, by these (Though some dissent in judgement) will now please, In season to effect, for preservation, Or settlement of Peace throughout this Nation? When things are acted, by a moderate Expostulation, in a joint debate, Where, ev'ry one, may freely speak his thought; And, when it is considered, as it ought, That, no man can of safety be assur'd, Untill the Publike wel-fare be secur'd. We know, that diffring simples put together To qualifie, and to correct each other, (Though some of them be poison) purge away Malignant humours, which would else destroy The life of man: So, they, who formerly Did in their singular capacity And private judgement, sometimes, act or speake, What might, at least, indanger, if not breake The Common peace, may, when they gathered are Into one fellowship, be helpfull there, Both to themselves and Countries, ten times more Then they have been, or could be, heretofore. Yea, as the fat Lime and the barren Sand, When they are mixed, make a stronger band To binde together rough or hewed stone, Then either of them could have done alone;
So, may by them who are dissenters, now, Our publike buildings much the stronger grow, When, they, into one Structure shall be fixt Well qualifi'd, and rationally mixt; And, prove a happy Omen and presage, To those, who, now are summon'd to engage Within a higher Orbe, and, shortly must Become our Trustees, in a higher trust. For, he, who hath consider'd it, beleeves That, if those petty-Representatives, By loving prudence, shall prepare a way Thereto (as in good likelihood they may) That nobler Body, which to its perfection, Must (for the most part) rise by their election, Will be so moduliz'd, and temper'd so, That, discords, into sympathy shall grow: And, all our feares and dangers, in the close, Quite vanish, to the terrour of our foes. We see, unlike and disagreeing matter, Such as the earth and aire, the fire and water, Makes perfect naturall bodies: wherefore, then, May we not hope, that diffring minded men Themselves, may reason forth, out of a sick Into a healthy body-politick By GOD's assistance (when our discontent Is cur'd, and, our malignant humour spent) Before we feelingly, by Sense perceive, What, Reason, cannot make us yet believe? It may be thus, and will be thus, if, yet Mens Wilfulnesse hath left them any wit: For, why should they, who now may be at rest, Run hazards to advance their interest, Whom nothing else could satisfie, but powre, All others, at their pleasure to devoure,
And spoilers of their own estates become, To make a fortune, for they know not whom? Why should they venture, their respects to lose, Who, have been antient friends, to get new Foes? Or, seek to have that game afresh begun, By which, all may be lost, and, nothing won? I hope we shall be wiser, and, that wee, Whose weal and safeties much concerned be In this expedient, shall so cautiously Proceed; and, act with so much prudency, That, whatsoever others do intend, Or put in practice, we, shall seek that end We ought to prosecute; and, at the last, Our Anchor in a peacefull harbour cast. I wish it heartily; and (since I see, Wishings in vaine, without endeavours be) That, those whom it concernes, provoke I may To seek this blessing, and help make the way To what I wish for, I, compos'd this SPELL: Let him, who moov'd me to it, speed it well; And, make it so considered by this Nation, (Before things grow beyond consideration) That, words, which to their safety do pertain, May not be alway spoke to them in vaine; For, they are fools, who, still pursue a course Which makes a sickly-being to be worse. And, they are also, somewhat more then mad, Who would exchange a good-one for a bad, Or, put in hazard, a possessed LOT, In hope to get, what never can be got. So thinks Geo. Wither.
