12385 99884369 183076
A most execellent and vertuous Ballad of the Patient Grissell. To the tune of The Brides good morrow. three separate biblical or apocryphal scenes with bibliographical labels 3 ELIA. 18 3. AHA 20 4 ELIA. 2 A Noble Marquesse, As he did ride a hunting hard by a Forrest side, A faire and comely Maiden, As she did sit a spinning, his gentle eye espide: Most faire and louely, And of comely grace was she, although in simple attire; She sung full sweetly, With pleasant voyce melodiously, which set the Lords heart on fire; The more he lookt, the more he might, Beauty bred his hearts delight, And to this Damsell then he went. God speed (quoth he) thou famous flower, Faire Mistris of this homely Bower, Where loue and vertue dwels with sweet content. With comely gesture, And modest mild behauiour she bade him welcome then, She entertain'd him In faithfull friendly manner, and all his Gentlemen. The Noble Marquesse In's heart felt such a flame, which set his senses at strife, Quoth he, faire Maiden, Shew me soone what is thy name, I meane to make thee my wife. Grissell is my name quoth she, Farre vnfit for your degree, silly Maiden, and of Parents poore. Nay, Grissell, thou art rich, he said, A vertuous, faire, and comely Maid, Grant me thy loue, and I will aske no more. At length she consented, And being both contented, they married were with speed: Her Countrey Russet Was chang'd to Silke and Veluet, as to her state agreed: And when that she Was trimly tired in the same, her beauty shined bright, Farre staining euery Other faire and Princely Dame that did appeare in her sight. Many enuied her therefore, Because she was of Parents poore, And t'wixt her Lord and she great strife did raise: Some said this, and some said that, And some did call her Beggers brat, And to her Lord they would her oft dispraise. O Noble Marquesse, Quoth they, why dost thou wrong vs, thus basely for to wed, That might haue gotten An honorable Lady into your Princely bed? Who will not now Your Noble Issue still deride, which shall hereafter be borne, That are of bloud so base, Borne by the Mothers side, the which will bring them in scorne. Put her therefore quite away, And take to you a Lady gay, Whereby your Linage may renowned be. Thus euery day they seem'd to prate, That malic'd Grissells good estate, Who all this while tooke it most patiently. When that the Marquesse Did see that they were bent thus against his faithfull Wife, Whom he most dearely, Tenderly, and intirely, beloued as his life, Minding in secret For to proue her patient heart thereby her foes to disgrace, Thinking to shew her A hard discourteous part, that men might pitty her case: Great with child this Lady was, And at last it came to passe, Two goodly children at one birth she had, A Son and Daughter God had sent, Which did their Father well content, And which did make their Mothers heart full glad, Great royall Feasting Was at these Childrens Christning, and Princely triumph made, Sixe weekes together, All Nobles that came thither were entertain'd and staid, And when all these pleasant Sportings quite were done, the Marquesse a Messenger sent For his young Daughter, And his pretty smiling Son, declaring his full intent, How that the Babes must murdred be, For so the Marquesse did decree: Come, let me haue the Children, than he said. With that faire Grissel wept full sore, She wrung her hands & said no more, My gracious Lord must haue his will obeyd.
The second part To the same tune. depiction of a biblical or apocryphal scene SHe tooke the Babies, Euen from the nursing Ladies, betweene her tender armes, She often wishes With many sorrowfull kisses, that she might ease their harmes: Farewell, farewell A thousand times my children deare, neuer shall I sée you againe; 'Tis long of me Your sad and wofull mother here, for whose sake both must be slaine; Had I béene borne of Royall race, You might haue béene in happy case, But you must dye for my vnworthinesse. Come messenger of death (quoth she) Take my dearest Babes to thee, And to their Father my complaints expresse. He tooke the Children, And to his Noble Master he brought them both with spéed, Who in secret sent them Vnto a Noble Lady to be brought vp indeed. Then to faire Grissell With a heavy heart he goes where she sate mildly all alone, A pleasant gesture, And a louely looke she shewes, as if no griefe she had knowne. (Qd. he) my children now are slaine, What thinks faire Grissell of the same, Sweet Grissell now declare thy mind to me. Sith you, my Lord are pleas'd with it, Poore Grissell thinks the action fit, Both I and mine at your command will be. My Nobles murmur, Faire Grissell at thy honour, and I no ioy can haue Till thou be banisht Both from my Court and presence, as they vniustly craue, Thou must be stript Out of thy stately garments all, and as thou cam'st to me In homely gray In stead of Bisse and purest Pall, now all thy clothing must be. My Lady thou must be no more, Nor I thy Lord, which grieues me sore, The poorest life must now content thy mind. A groat to thee I must not giue, Thee to maintaine while I doe liue, Against my Grissell such great foes I find. When gentle Grissell Did heare these wofull tidings, the teares stood in her eyes, Nothing she answered, No words of discontentment did from her lips arise; Her Velvet Gowne Most patiently she slipped off, her Kirtle of Silke with the same, Her Russet Gowne Was brought againe with many a scoffe to beare them her selfe she did frame, When she was drest in this array, And was ready to part away, God send long life vnto my Lord (quoth she) Let no offence be found in this, To giue my Lord a parting kisse, With watry eyes, farewell my deare, he said. From Princely Palace, Vnto her Fathers Cottage, poore Grissell now is gone: Full sixteene Winters She liued there contented, no wrong she thought vpon: And at that time through All the Land the speeches went, the Marquesse should married be, Vnto a Noble Lady great, Of high discent, and to the same all parties did agr The Marquesse sent for Grissell faire The Brides bed-chamber to prepare That nothing therein might be found awry; The Bride was with her Brother com Which was great ioy to all and som But Grissell tooke all this most patiently. And in the morning, When as they should be wedded, her patience then was tride; Grissell was charged, Her selfe in friendly manner, for to attire the Bride, Most willingly She gaue consent to doe the same, the Bride in her brauery was dres And presently The Noble Marquesse thither came with all his Lords at his request, O Grissell, I would aske of thee, If to this match thou wilt agree, Me thinks thy lookes are waxed wondrous coy. With that they all began to smile, And Grissell she replide the while, God send Lord Marquesse many yeares of ioy. The Marquesse was moued To see his best beloued thus patient in distresse, He stept vnto her, And by the hand he tooke her, these words he did expresse, Thou art my Bride, And all the Brides I meane to haue, these two thine owne children be, The youthfull Lady On her knees did blessing craue, her brother as well as she. And you tht enuied her estate, Whom I haue made my louing Now blush for shame, and honour vertuous life. The Chronicles of lasting fame Shall euermore extoll the name Of Patient Grissell my most constant Wife. FINIS. London Printed for Iohn Wright.
