T2746 99887322 182033
The true Lovers Happiness Or, Nothing venture, Nothing have. Shewing how an Apprentice made bold to court his Masters Daughter, got her good will, and married her unknown to her Parents yet afterwards her father seeing they loved each other so intirely, he gave them a con∣siderable portion of money to set up with, and now they live in a happy condition; this may serve for a pattern for others. Their complements to you I will rehearse According as they are printed down in verse. Tune of, Amintas on the new-made Hay, or Loyal Lovers. Man. OH my Dearest come away, and hearken what thy love doth say As I am here I vow and swear I kindly will embrace thee; Thou need not fear my only dear that I shall e'er disgrace thee. I'le be as honest as the day, thy vertues I will not bewray, No face alive shall e're deprive me of my dearest jewel, If thou deny I sure shall dye, then ve no thou so cruel. many years I loved thee therefore dearest pitty me, Thy very frown doth cast me down, thy smiles again revive me: Thou hast my heart where'r thou art then don't of love dprive me. Maid. O fie thou simple Prentice boy, how durst thou with me tick & toy? Or be so bold this to unfold unto thy mastes Daughter? If he should know, 'twould breed thy woe then what will follow after. I am my Fathers own delight This you may understand aright, No Daughter he hath else but me, which makes him highly prize me; Therefore be mute, leave off thy suit I friendly do advise thee. My Fathers anger pray you shun, Least you are utterly undone, The prison-grate will be your fate, if you run such adventures, Besides all this, if maids you kiss you forfeit your indentures. Man. Prithee dearest do not flout, At Easter next my time is out, And then I swear I will not care for master nor such Histories: But a wife i'le have my life to save, and you'r my only mistriss. Blame me not for sa ing so, For love will creep where it cannot go Had I not spoke, my heart had broke I could indure no longer: Though I did fight both day & night Yet Cupid grew the stronger. Methinks I see thy lovely face As I do walk in any place, Thy chrystal eyes where Cupid lies, thy cheeks are like to Roses: Thy lips are sweet, when as we meet all vertue there incloses. Though I am poor and thou art rich Slight me not I thee beseech, You know my trade will keep a maid as well as yeoman Jarvis, If I get Pearl my dearest Girl, it shall be at thy service. Maid. Thy speeches I do much commend, Yet dare I not to condescend For fear I lose as I suppose, my fathers dear affection. Or else i'd yield to you the field, if I might have my election. Man. Never stand to complement, This doth give me no content, Tho' father frown & mother frown, yet none of them shall rout me, I am not in jest I do protest I cannot live without thée. Thus he gain'd the Damsels love, And honest to her he did prove, He wedded her and bedded her although his Master's Daughter; He pleas'd her well te truth to tell, and parents love came after. For they gave them eightscore pound wherby this couples joys were crownd Thus may you see in each degree this youth was well friended, They live in peace, their goods increase and thus my Song is ended. Printed for W Thackeray, E. M. and A. M.
