W921 99884564 183184
A Warning for Maidens To the Tune of, The Ladies fall. YOu daintie Dames so finely fram'd in beauties chiefest mold nd you that trip it up and down, like lambs in Cupids fold; Here is a lesson to be learn'd, a lesson my mind, For such as will prove false in love, and bear a faithless mind. Not far from Notingham of late, in Clifton as I hear, There dwelt a fair and comelie maid, for beautie without peer; Her cheeks were like the Crimson rose, yet well we may perceive, The fairest Dame the falsest heart, and soonest will deceive. This gallant Damsel was belov'd by manie in that place; And manie sought in marriage bed, her bodie to embrace; At last a comelie proper youth. young Bateman call'd by name, In hope to have a married wife, unto this maiden came. Such love and liking soon he found, that he from all the rest, Had stoln awaie the Damsels heart, and she did like him best; Then plighted promise secretlie, did pass between them two; That nothing could but death it self, their true loves knot undo. A piece of gold he brake in twain, one half to her he gave; The other as a pledge quoth he. dear heart myself shall have; And if I break my vow, quoth she, while I remain alive, May never thing I take in hand, be seen at all to thrive. This passed one for two months space, and then this maid began, To setle love and liking too, upon another man. Old Jerman who a widower was he husband needs must be, Because he was of greater wealth, and better of degree. Her vowe and promise latelie past to Bateman she deny'd, And in despight both him and his, she utterlie defy'd. Well then quoth he if it be so, that thou wilt me forsake, And like a false and forsworn wretch, another husband take. Thou shalt not live one quiet day, for surelie I will have Thee either now alive or dead, when I am laid in grave, Thy faithlesse mind thou shalt repent. therefore be well assur'd, When for thy sake thou hear'st report, what torments I endur'd. But mark how Bateman died for love, he finisht up his life, The verie day she married was, and made old Jermans wife; For with a strangling cord God wts, (great moan was made therefore) He hang'd himself in desperat sort before the brides own door. At which, such sorrow pierc'd her heart, and troubled sore her mind, That she could never after that, our hour of comfort find; For wheresoever that she went, her fancy did surmize, Young Bateman's pale and gashlie ghost, appeared before her eyes, When she in bed at night did lie, betwixt her husbands arms, In hope therein to sleep and rest, in safetie without harms; Great cries & grievous groans she heard, a voice that sometime said, O thou art she that I must have, and will not be deni'd. But she as then being with child, was for the infants sake Preserved from the spirits power, no vengeance could it take; The Babe unborn did safeie shield, (as God appointed is) His mothers bodie from the Fiend, that sought her overthrow. But being of her burthen eas'd, and safelie brought to bed: Her cares and griefs began anew, and fresh her sorrows bred, And hereupon she call'd her friends, desiring them to staie; This night quoth she out of my bed, I shall be born awaie. Here comes the spirit of my love, with pale and gashlie face, Who, till he take me hence with him, will not depart this place; Alive or dead I am his right, and he will surelie have, In spight of me and all the world, what I by promise gave. O watch with me all night, dear friends but see ye do not sleep; No longer then ye be awake, my bodie can ye keep: All promised to do their best; yet nothing could suffice, In middle of the night to keep, sad slumber from their eyes. And being all full fast on sleep, as all unknown which waie: This child-bed wife, that woful wight from thence was born awaie: But to what place no creature knew, nor to this daie can tell: As strange a thing as ever yet, in anie age befll. Ye Maidens that desire to love. and will good husbands choose, To him that ye have vow'd your love, by no means do refuse: For God that hears all secret oaths, wil dreadful vengeance take, On such as on a wilful vow, do slender reckning make. FINIS. A GODLY BALLAD To the same Tune ONe year begins, another ends, our time doth pass and go, And this to our instruction ends, if we could take it so; The Summer's hot, the Winter's cold, whose sson lets us see W outh is gone and we wax old, like flowrs we  and die. Men for the most part do rejoice, when sons are to them born; Whose weeping eyes bewail their woes our sinfulnesse to scorn: They are the messengers of death, our time is passing fast; Tl the hour of fading breath, then death us parts at last. Thus must we learn to spend our dayes in vertue as we ought: In doing good make no delaies, let sloath out of our thought: The sloathful man yet ne're attain'd to honour, wealth nor fame; But manie have by vertue gain'd a ong long lasting name, In prime tme of our youth we should, the seds of learning sow, our vices, if we could, and sinful lusts down throw He that in time of youth takes pain, his vertue to bestow In harvest of his age again, he grapes of grace shal mow. Since all things creat have an end, nothing but fame remains: Happie is he can wiselie spend his time in vertuous pins: For soon the time shal pass awaie, and pleasures shal abide O happie happie thrice are they, who takes time at the tide. The tide of time doth flow full fast, and quicklie ebs awaie: And if our ship lack sail or mast, our voyage must delaie: Our bodies are the brittle bark, which sails the flods of fame; But if through sloath we miss the mark, we sink in seas of shame. Occasion she hath bair before, but she is held behind; Lost time no travel can restore, as many fools do find: The little ants and honey bees, in Summer laie up store, For to provide for Winter strms, men ought to do much more. This have I done to please your will, now let me have my ire; I have bewra'd my want of skil in doing your desire: The weakness of a womans wit, is not through natures fault, But lack of education fit makes nature oft to alt FINIS
