A588a R175342 [ocm]64550760 184291
The Battel at SEA. THursday in the Morn the Ides of May, Recorded for ever the famous Ninety-Two, Brave Russel did discern by dawn of day The lofty Sails of France advancing now, All hands aloft, aloft, let English valour shine, Let fly a Culverine, the signal of the Line, Let ev'ry hand supply his Gun, Follow me, and you'll see That the Battle will be soon begun, &c. Turville o'er the Main triumphant Rowld, To meet the gallant Russel in Combat on the deep, He led the noble Train of Hero's bold, To sink the English Admiral at his Feet Now ev'ry valiant Mind to Victory doth aspire, The bloudy Fight's begun, the Sea it self on Fire, And mighty Fate stood looking on, Whilst a Floud all of Bloud Fill'd the Portholes of the Royal Sun. Sulphur, Smoak and Fire desturb'd the Air, With Thunder & Wonder t'affright the Gallie Shoar, Their regulated Bands stood trembling near, To see their lofty Streamers now no more: At Six a Clock the Red the smiling Victor led, To give a second Blow, the fatal overthrow: Now Death and Horror equal Reighn▪ Now they cry, Run, or Dye, British Colours Ride the vanquish'd Main. See they fly amaz'd through Rocks and Sands; One danger they grasp at to shun a greater Fate▪ In vain they cry for aid to weeping Lands, The Nymphs & Sea Gods mourn their lost Estate, For evermore adieu thou Royal dazling Sun, From thy untimely end thy Master's Fate's begun Enough thou mighty God of War, Now we sing, Bless the King, Let us drink to ev'ry English Tar. Come jolly Seamen all, with Russel go. And sail on the Main, proud Monsieur for to gr And give our Enemy a second Blow, And fight Turville if that he dare to meet, Come brother Tar, what chear? let each his Gun supply And thump 'em off this year or make Mon▪ to fly, While we do range the Ocean round, Day or Night we will fight, When our Enemy is to be sound. Let it ne'er be said that English Boys Should ere stay behind when our Admiral does go But let each honest Lad Cry with one Voice, Brave Russel leads us on to fight, the Foe. We'll give them Gun for Gun, some sink & others burn, Broadsides we'll give them too, till Monsieur crys Morble De Engletars vill kill us all, Whilst they scower, we will pour, Thick as Hail amongst them, Cannon Ball. London, Printed and Soll by T. Moore. 1694.
