A3110A R172305 [ocm]64550865 184324
A SOVERAIGN REMEDY AGAINST ATHEISM and Heresy. FITTED FOR THE VVIT and vvant of the British Nations. BY M. THOMAS ANDERTON, aliás BARTON. PVBLISHED AFTER HIS DEATH, and Dedicated to the Lady Frances Hamil∣ton, By her humble Chaplin E. G. An. 1672.
TO THE MOST ILLVSTRIOVS LADY THE LADY FRANCES HAMILTON. MADAM, England your natiue soil, once so much celebrated throughout all Christendom for an Istand of Saints and Angels, is novv censured, euen by its ovvn Parliament, as a Nursery of Atheism and Heresy, and therfore that great Represen∣tatiue of the Nation is no less so∣licitous
for a cure, than sensible of a disease so dangerous and destructi∣ue not only to the soul, but to the bo∣dy politik of the Commonvvealth. And yet either our misfortune or their mistake hath renderd all reme∣dies hitherto ineffectual. This Trea∣tise, MADAM, composed by Mr. Thomas Barton (vvhose Vvit must be admired so long as there vvill be any in the vvorld) vvas found vvith his Geometry in Hol∣land (vvhere he had designed to print both) and bestovvd upon me by one that understood not the En∣glish language, nor the ualue of his Present. In my iudgment 'tis one of the best Antidotes against the spiri∣tual plagues vvervvith England is infected. I publish it under your Ladps patronage (and beg pardon for
doing so vvithout your Knovv∣ledge) because you are not only a perfect Pattern of that ancient Faith and Virtue vvhich it asserts, but a particular Instance, and a conuincing Proof, that Heresy and Atheism haue not so vvholly chan∣ged the nature of old England, but that euen novv it produceth Angels. I Knovv, MADAM, these Tru∣ths vvill offend your modesty and Humility, your greatest care being to conceal your natural and super∣natural Gifts, and to eclipse to the eyes of men your spiritual exercises and deuotion, feigning to be as vvell pleased vvith the vvorld, as the vvorld is vvith you. But that vvhich hath exalted you aboue the vvorld, and (I hope) vvrit your na∣me
in the book of life, is your extra∣ordinary Charity. You are not in the list of those vvho hope to be saued by charitable indiscretions; No, MADAM, Prudence directs your almes as vvell as your other actiōs: Humor hath no share in your di∣stributions, Vanity no influence upon your liberality; partiality no suffrage in the choice of the poor you relieue. You stretch your piety to the support of merit (vvheresoeuer it is) iniured by Fortune; and to the de∣fence of Virtue oppressed by perse∣cution. And though you do it vvith so great caution as to disguise su∣pernatural Charity vvith that no∣ble ayr of generosity, so natural and peculiar to your self; yet your deuo∣ut design is discouered, and your re∣vvard before God, as vvell as the
relieued persons obligation to you, infinitly multiplied. Pardon me, MADAM, if I trespass upon your Reseruedness, and choose rather to incurr your Ladps displeasure, than concurr to preiudice Mankind, by depriuing it of so great an encou∣ragement to Virtue as the Knovv∣ledge of your perfections. I speak, MADAM, of those hidden in your soul, not of those vvhich shine outvvardly, and can not be con∣cealed, as your matchless beauty, and charming graces. These, MA∣DAM, are but fading and falla∣cious Ornaments that set out Mor∣tality in a deluding dress, vvith gay and liuely colours, vvhich a litle tyme vvill deface; the sad fate of the greatest beautyes, as vvell as of the fairest flovvers.
I need not inculcat this Truth to your Ladp. tis so deeply printed in your soul, that others are odious to you, if they but touch upon any of those rare qualities vvhervvith Nature (by straining its povver to the utmost) hath made you a Mi∣racle of itself, and plac't you in the vvorld as a Model, not to be imi∣tated, (much less paralelled) but to be admired, euen by those most emulous and enuious of your ovvn sex vvhich fancy themselues ought to be adored by ours. But that vvhich most surpriseth the vvorld is, that so enuied a Miracle of Na∣ture as your Ladp. could neuer yet be censured or obserued of hauing any Kind of inclination to be admired or applauded. This is a Miracle of Gods grace, and an effect of that
natural modesty and eminent ho∣nor vvherby you alvvayes haue preserued your unspotted reputa∣tion in the tvvo most dangerous Courts of Christendom; to both vvhich you are in this particular the best example, as in all other things the greatest Ornament. This auersion to your ovvn prai∣ses is the only reason vvhy I da∣re not mention the great Antiqui∣ty and high Alliance of your il∣lustrious Family, the most pro∣per and usual Ingredient in all Dedicatories. I should uentu∣re though to say somthing of your acute VVit, profound iudgment, agreable humor, gracefull utteran∣ce, becomming behauior, and dis∣creet conduct, but that these are abuious and obserued by all the
VVorld, and particularly by the greatest Court and best Iudge ther∣of; vvhich giues your Ladp this Character, That you are an exact English Beauty, naturaly adorned vvith all the graces of France, and an abridgment of the purest per∣fections of both Nations. But be∣cause euen this authentik and un∣deniable Testimony is not grate∣full to your Ladp. and that it is impossible to speak any truth of you vvithout commending and offending you, I am forc't to cut off a long Panegyrik of your de∣serued praises, and conclude vvith this one (vvhich I hope vvill not be offensiue) that you are the only person vvho thinks you are unvvorthy of that litle I haue sayd heer, or that can
command me to say no more but that I am vvith all reality and respect, MADAM, Your Ladps most obedient and most humble seruant. E. G.
THE PREFACE. WIth no less humility than charity I will propose my thoughts con∣cerning the Atheism and Heresy of our Countrey, hoping that if my sense differs from that of others, I shall not be blamed for offering and submitting my opinion to better iudgments. I shall endeauor to ground mine upon Scripture and reason. Scripture compares Heresy to that crafty serpent, which deceiued our Mother Eue with the curiosity of Knowing the cause and reasons of Gods reuelations; persuading her that human vnderstandings ought not be satisfied with any thing less than cleer euidence, as if it were beneath men to submit to authority. Vvhen our curiosity and pride preuails with us to contemn the testimony and tradition of the Church, and to preferr our priuat opi∣nions before the publik doctrin and prac∣tise therof, and that we are obstinat in that way, we becom heretiks, and in pro∣gress of time Atheists: So filth and cor∣ruption becoms first a creeping serpent, and afterwards a flying Dragon. For, as
this Vermin is engendred by the heat of the sun in marish grounds, and dirty sinks, so Heresy and Atheism haue their first being from the influence, which heate of passion, height of pride, and sensual plea∣sures haue vpon vicious souls. These wal∣lowing in the mire of sin, and sucking up its venom, beget the priuat spirit, which is a serpent that with hissing whispers in∣fects the brain by asking why God gaue men their senses, if it was not to be direc∣ted wholy by them in iudging euen of mysteries of Faith. And though God tells us that the euidence of sense is fallacious, when it agrees not with his word, as it proued when Eue tasted the forbidden fruit, yet Heretiks despising that truth, and imitating her example, prefer the ser∣pent or the priuat spirits suggestions, and their own appetit before Gods reuela∣tion; and interpret the Scriptures after a new manner, contrary to the testimony, tradition, and practise of the Church, in fauor of liberty and sensuality. Heresy hauing thus slighted Ecclesiasti∣cal authority, and the supernatural signs or Miracles of the Roman Catholik Church, as fables or frauds of interested persons; and finding no signs or seales
of a Deity in any other Congregation, it begins to doubt of Gods prouidence; and after many windings and turnings from one Sect to an other, deuoring most gross absurdities, euen against the Diuinity of Christ, and immortality of the Soul, it growes at length to be a Dragon, which armed with scales of obstinat incredulity, and wingd with unbridled liberty and pri∣de, flyes at the Deity itself, like that seuen headed Beast of the Reuelations. So that Atheism is nothing but ouergrown He∣resy, as the Dragon is an ouergrown ser∣pent. Both agree in making sensuality the soul of man, and the rule of Faith. The Heretik, by submitting his Faith and Soul to euidence of sense against Gods war∣ning and word; the Atheist by maintai∣ning men haue no Faith or soul but sense. This last error seemes to som the more iu∣dicious, it being most euidently certain, that if there be a spiritual Soul, it must be su∣perior and ought to command sense, cur∣bing its inclinations as foolish, and cor∣recting its euidence as fallacious. Against this vermin and venom of Atheism and Heresy I haue prepared the Antidot I heer present you with; its chief ingredients are strength of reason, and
supernaturality of Miracles; it is as natural for reason to submit to Miracles, as it is for sense to submit to reason. For, what greater violence can be offered to Reason, than to rebell, or resist against authority, signd by Gods hand and seale, Miracles? Or to deny a Deity and spirits, because they com not under the Kenning of our senses? Is it not against the first principles of reason and morality, to iudge otherwise of things and persons, than they seem to be, when neither the word of God, nor any thing else appears to the contrary? Though we do not see spirits, or the Deity, yet we see effects a∣boue the sphere and power of bodyes, and Nature, which can not be attributed to any other causes but Spirits, and a Deity. So that we must grant the existence of these, or maintain an impossibility, which is, that there can be an effect without a cause. Vvhat effect this Antidot will work upon the minds of the Readers, God only Knowes. I haue endeuored to express my thoughts in the cleerest termes I could, and in ordinary English the highest my∣steries of Christianity. Others may excell in the quaintness of expression; I desire no such commendation; neither is that
manner of writing so proper in matters of Faith, which limits our vvords as well as our opinions. And though the latitude were greater, I should choose those ex∣pressions which are best vnderstood, my design being to inform all sorts of peo∣ple. Yet I would haue our vvits Know (and I hope they will find it so by expe∣rience) that Atheism and Heresy, how new and subtile so euer, may be solidly confuted in ordinary and old English.
A SOVERAIGN REMEDY against Heresy, and Atheism, Fitted for the wit and want of the British Nations. CHAP. I. OF THE EXISTENCE, VNITY, and Trinity of God. Q. Is there any such thing as God? I knowthere is such a notion, and that men fancy (when they speake of God) an vnlimited being, including in it self infinit excellencies, and all perfections. My que∣stion is, whether this Deity of all and infi∣nit perfections be only a meer notion, or a real obiect? A. it is a real obiect. Q. How proue you that: for, we haue notions not only of things that do not exist, as Vtopia, but of things that can not possibly exist, as Chimeras, Centaures, &c. How therfore wil you make it appeare that the notion of an infinitly perfect Deity is not the bare notion of an impossibility?
A. Many proofes there are of Gods real existence, but (in my opinion) the cleerest of all must be grounded vpon the expe∣rience euery man hath of his own nothing. For, the only thing we know cleerly euen of our selues is, that we do exist and are our selues, and yet that there was a tyme we did not exist, nor were our selues, or (which is the same) that we were nothing. From hence necessarily follow these conclusions. 1. that we can not haue our being or existence from our selves; be∣cause that which at any tyme hath bin no∣thing, or did not exist, can no more giue a being or existence to it self, then nothing can produce somthing. 2. that there must of necessity be somthing which did al∣wayes exist, otherwise nothing did pro∣duce all things. 3. that the somthing which did alwayes exist, must include all and in∣finit perfections; because hauing its being or perfection only from it self, as none could giue it a being but it self, so none but it self could set a limit to its being or perfections; and that thing must haue bin naturaly auers to it self, and by conse∣quence, not it self, which would wave, hinder, or enuy its own happiness, or its hauing all perfections.
4. As it is impossible that a thing which hath its being from it self, should want, or waue any perfection, so is it impossible there should be two or more distinct things infinitly perfect. Because that which is the source of its own being, must ne∣cessarily include in it self all being, or all perfections; seing there can be no cause or reason why it should haue one perfe∣ction, and not all, vnless you wil fancy that a thing before it exists, or is any thing, can limit it self, or (out of a pik to it self) would pick and choose out of infinit per∣fections only such as Atheists attribute to that which they call Nature. If therfore all perfections must be included in that one thing which hath its own being from it self, no other thing of infinit perfections can be as much as fancied to be distinct from it. Therfore it must be the same: and consequently there can be but one thing, or one God, including in it self, or iden∣tifying with it self, all perfections. So that you see how little wit Atheists do shew, in denying a Deity of infinit perfections; because they must either grant it, or con∣fess that we men (or any thing els) when we did not exist, and were nothing, did or could produce our selues. Or that this world,
with all its imperfections, is God; or that, the world before its existence, when it was nothing was also somthing; and so against the first and cleerest notions and princi∣ples of mankind, it must be sayd, that no∣thing hath not only proportion with som∣thing, but also that nothing and somthing haue the same properties, and work the same effects, and by consequence that there is no difference or distance between such contradictions, as nothing and som∣thing, being and not being, existent and not existent. Q. I see that the existence and vnity of God is much more cleere than Atheists pretend; but me thinks the same argument wherby you proue Gods vnity, conclu∣des the impossibility of the Trinity: for if there can not be two or more things infi∣nitly perfect, it must be granted that ei∣ther the Father, son, and holy Ghost, are not things, or beings distinct one from the other; or if they be, that they are not infinitly perfect. A. To this question, or obiection there are two answers. The first and best is, that God were not infinitly perfect, if such imperfect creatures as we know our selues to be, could comprehend his excellencies
and mysteries. And though as rational crea∣tures, we ought (euen in what we belieue) be directed by reason, yet that reason which is our guide, can lead us no further in many things than to persuade vs submit to credible authority, which is the testi∣mony of a Church or Congregation au∣thentikly authorised by God to beare witness that he reuealed such and such mysteries. Though the truth of these my∣steries be not intelligible or visible to our human, vnderstandings, it were want of vnderstanding to doubt of them, or to deny them: because there is not any one truth more cleer to vs, nor more obuious (by vndeniable experiments) to all man∣kind than this, that there are many truthes wherof our human vnderstandings can giue no reason. Now if this be so in hu∣man and ordinary things, why should we presume or pretend that the mystery of the Trinity is not true, because we forsooth, can not comprehend its truth? The second answer is this, the Father, the son, and holy Ghost, haue but one being, or nature, common to all three, and therfore they are equaly powerfull, equaly wise, equaly good, and eternall, and by consequence but one God. But because
this diuine nature, or essence hath three different manners of being, and that eue∣ry one of these three manners is identified with, and inseparable from the Deity, though distinct one from the other, there must be three distinct persons; the first is called the Father, the second is called the son, the third is called the holy Ghost. This may be explained by two similitudes. 1. is that of a body, which hath three di∣mensions, longitude, latitude and profun∣dity, distinct one from the other, but not from the body. 2. is that ordinary example of our soul, which is but one being, though it hath three different manners of being: the first manner is to know, the second is to wish, or wil, the third is to remember. Though these three manners or modes of being, are very different in themselues, yet they are not things distinct from the soul. Q. But how can this be applyed to the Trinity? A. Thus. It must be granted that in the Deity we may consider (and truly tis so) the Diuine nature, first, as hauing from it∣self alone all knowledge, and all perfe∣ctions. 2. this same Deity may be consi∣dered as knowing or reflecting vpon its own knowledge, and perfections. 3. it may
be considered, as infinitly louing itself and its infinit perfections. The Deity therfore or the Divine nature as it is the fountain of infinit fecundity, and the original prin∣ciple, or giuer, is called the Father. The same Deity as it is considered not the foun∣tain, but as if it were the riuer that flowes from that fountain, or the chanel that rece∣iues its own knowledge and perfections, is called the son; The same Deity as it is infinitly beloued by the Father and the son, is called the holy Ghost; which holy Ghost proceedeth as wel from the son as from the Father, because each of those two persons equaly loue one an other, and the Deity: whence it followeth, that the Greekes error of the procession of the ho∣ly Ghost from the Father alone, and not from the son, is not only blasphemy, but nonsense; because it is impossible that such a Father should not loue such a son, and that such a son should not loue his Fa∣ther, they both hauing the same nature, and the same perfections. This is sufficient of so sublime a mystery, the truth wherof though it can not be cleerly comprehen∣ded by so imperfect creatures as we are, yet our human reason may with some pro∣bability and proportion shew that the
vnity of the Diuine nature doth no more exclude the Trinity of persons, than the vnity of a body doth exclude its three di∣mensions, or the vnity of the soul its three faculties. CHAP. II. OF THE IMMORTALITY of the soul. Q. Is the immortality of the soul an article of Christian Religion? A. Yes, because in the Creed we belieue the life euerlasting. Q. May this article be proued by natural reason? A. yes, if you will admit there is any such thing as reason in man. For, reason is that faculty wherby a man finds himself natu∣raly directed and inclined to raise his thoughts aboue and beyond the reach of his senses; and to correct and contradict his own sensations, when he discouers that they are as false and fallacious as dayly ex∣perience doth manifest in familiar exam∣ples v. g. of oares that seem to bend or break in the water; of sophisticated wine
that seemes to be natural; of false colours; of mad dreames, and imaginations that in our sleep or in a melancoly humor seem to be rational discourses and real obiects; and other innumerable mistakes, which are rectified either by reflexions of our own, or by the rules of perspectiue phi∣losophy, and other sciences, inuented by men to discern the difference that is bet∣ween the true existence, and the false ap∣pearance of things. Q. How do you inferr that the soul is im∣mortal, because reason (which is the soul, or a faculty therof) doth direct and incline men to correct the fallacy of their sensa∣tions, and to raise their thoughts aboue, and carry them beyond the reach of our senses? A. Sensation being a cooperation, or a ioynt operation of the body and soul, through the organization or ministery of our senses, if the soul (or its faculty of reason) doth correct and contradict som of these sensations, and finds them to be false or fallacious, it is manifest that the soul may and sometimes doth, operat not only independently of the body, but con∣trary to those appearances which seemd to be real, whilst we were in it, and were
directed by them, or belieued our senses; and by consequence the soul is immortal, because the immortality of the soul is no∣thing else but its independency of the bo∣by in acting and existing: and if it acts a∣gainst our sensations when it is in the bo∣dy, questionless it may act without them, or independently of the help of the body; and if it can act independently of the help of the body, it may exist also without help of the same; and so the soul is proued to be immortal, or not to dye with the bo∣dy, by its acting in the body, contrary to the dictamen, or appearence of our senses. Q. Methinks this argument only proues that the soul may act (and by consequence exist) independently of the body for som ryme, but proueth not that it may exist for euer independently of the body; and the immortality of the soul is not euery existen ce, but an euerlasting existence indepen∣dent of the boby. A. True it is that the immortality of the soul is an euerlasting existence without necessity of the bodyes help or support; and as true it is, that reason, as soon as the soul knowes it self, doth direct it to desire and endeauour its own happiness, which
nuolues not only a perpetuity of existen∣ce, but an euerlasting felicity in the same existence. That reasons cleerest act (after the soul knowes its own existence) is, to direct and inspire into the soul a desire and endeauours of its own happiness, is ma∣nifest not only by that regret and remorse of conscience which men feel when they deuiat from the direction or dictamen of reason, but also by the loue which men bear to themselues; which loue being con∣fessed to be most euidently rational, can not but be directed by the cleerest princi∣ple of reason. Vvherfore this desire of the souls happiness being directed by the clee∣rest principle of reason, can not be pre∣tended to be a dreame, or delusion, vnless you will maintain that the cleerest reason is the greatest folly, and by consequence destroy the fundamental ground of all human discourse and rational endeauours; If therfore the souls desire of euerlasting happiness be grounded vpon so cleer a principle of reason, this (if it be not folly) must haue a real obiect wherunto we are directed, and wherwith we may be sa∣tisfied, without any possibility of mistake; and if so, 'tis as demonstrable that the soul is immortal, as it is that the most rational
desires and endeauours, are not manifest follies; and that the fundamental and ex∣perimental principles of reason can not be false, or fallacious. But if any one will be so mad as to grant that the first and fundamental principles of human reason are false and fallacious; be∣sides that herin he reflects vpon Gods wis∣dom, goodness, and gouernment, wher∣with such a supposition is not compati∣ble, he must grant that there are som other contrary fundamental principles true, in opposition wherunto ours are false and fallacious. Let him therfore produce them, and maintain that it is reasonable in lieu of honoring our parents, to hate them, in lieu of desiring our happiness, to wish our misery, &c. and if he can not produce any others besides these, he can not think it reasonnable we should credit these, or feare our selues can be misled so long as we stick close to our own principles of reason, and follow that light which shines, and euery man sees in certain actions ne∣cessarily and naturally assented vnto, and therfore common to all mankind.
CHAP. III. OF THE VVORSHIP OF GOD, and the sacrifice due to him. Q. Seing you haue proued that there is a God, and that the soul is im∣mortal, I would willingly know how God ought to be worshipt. A. God being the Author of all good, Mr Beacoz a learned Protestāt, in his Tra∣tise inti∣tuled the reliues of Rome, edit 1560. f. 344 saith, the Mass vvas begotten, conceiued, and born anone af∣ter the A∣postles ty∣me, if all be true that Histo∣riogra∣phers vvrite. Sebastia∣nus Fran∣cus an o∣ther lear∣ned Prote∣stant in his Epistle for abrgating all he Ca∣non lavv, sayth, im∣diatly after the Apostles all things vvere tur∣nd vpside dovvn, &c. The Lords supper vvas trans formed in∣to a sacri∣fice. Mr Ascham in his Apo∣logy for the Lords supper, p. 31. doth acknovv∣ledge that no begin∣ning of this chan∣ge can be chevved. The anciēt rathers call the Mass, the visible sacrifice, the true sa∣crifice, the dayly sa∣crifice, the sacrifice according to the order of Melchisedech, the sacrifice of the body and bloud of Christ, the sacrifice of the Altar, the sacrifice of the Church, and the sacrifice of the nevv Testament. See St Ignatius the Apostles Scholar in his Epistle to the Church of Smirna. St Irenaeus. l. 4. c. 32. of vvhom the Centurists say that he speakes very in comodiously vvhen he sayes that Christ tanght a nevv oblation, vvhich the Church receiuing from the Apostles, doth offer to God in all the vvorld. See Cent. c. 4. col. 63. and Cent. 2. cap. 10. col. 167. they affirm St Ignatius his vvords to bee dangerous, and quasi errorum semina. See also Terrul ad sca∣pul. cap. 2. Origen. in numer. hom 23. St Cyprian lib. 2. & 3. vers. fin. St Ambr∣lib. 5. Ep. 33. Missam facere coepit, &c. St Leo Ep. 81. ad Dioscor. St August. term 91. de Temp. & lib. 9. Confess. cap. 12. & in Enchird. cap. 110. &c. Sayes that the Sacrifice of our price vvas offerd for his mother Monica, being dead; and that it is not to be doubted but that the souls of the dead are relieued vvhen for them is offered the sacrifice of our Mediator, &c. the only beginning and cause of our exi∣stence, the end and hopes of our happiness, it is fit we exhibit vnto him the greatest honor we can, not only euery one in par∣ticular, by an inward submission of our souls acknowledging his infinit excellen∣cies, and our own nothing, and imperfe∣ctions; but also by an outward offering or oblation of som visible thing that ought to be consumed, or changed; therby to own Gods infinit power and Dominion ouer his creatures, and consecrated to his Diuine maiesty by a solemn ceremony, and publik Minister. This way of worship is called a Sacrifice, and the publik Minister who offers it, is called a Priest. It hath bin practised since the beginning of the world, as appeareth in the sacrifices of Abel, Noe,
Melchisedech, Abraham, Isaac, Iacob, Iob. and others in the law of nature, and in the written law of Moyses, great part the∣rof is nothing but rules and ceremonies concerning the manner of sacrificing, and the habit and method which the Priest ought to obserue in performing that pu∣blik ministery. Q. Vvhat is the sacrifice of the Christians, or of the law of grace? A. It is the sacrifice of Christs body and bloud, offerd for the liuing and for the dead, vnder the species or appearence of bread and wine; and is commonly called the Mass. Q. Is not the sacrifice of Christs body and bloud, as it was offerd vpon the Cross, the proper sacrifice of Christians, or of the Catholik Church?
A. It is the most excellent sacrifice that euer was offered; nay all other sacrifices in the law of nature, of Moyses, and of grace, did and do deriue their virtue and efficaciousness from the sacrifice of the Cross; but because Christ, as offered vpon the Cross, is a general fountain of graces, and pardons, and the foundation of the sacrifices of the old (as well as of the new) Testament, wherof they all were but ty∣pes, or figures, therfore that Diuine and bloudy sacrifice of the Cross can not be so peculiarly attributed to the law of grace, as to be called the proper sacrifice of the Christian and Catholik Church. Q. Is not the sacrifice of the Cross, and the sacrifice of the Mass, the same sacrifice? A. They differ not in the substance, be∣cause the same Christ is offerd in both, and Christ himself is the chief Priest in Both. But they differ in the manner, for in the sacri∣fice of the Mass Christ is offered vnder the species or appearance of bread and wine, and in the Cross he was offered in his own shape. Q. If the substance of the sacrifice be the same, what need is there of that of the Mass? is it not sufficient that Christ offered himself vpon the Cross once for all?
A. It is a general rule grounded vpon reason, and the concurrence or custom of all Nations which euer professed any Re∣ligion, that euery particular Religion must haue its sacrifice peculiar to itself; because Religion being Diuine worship, and sacri∣fice being an action professing the Diuini∣ty of that which is worshipt, it inuolues a contradiction to say Religion, and no sa∣crifice, or to say, that a religion can conti∣nue, and the sacrifice therof not continue. Seing therfore the Christian and Catholik Religion doth continue, and that the blou∣dy sacrifice of the Cross, or Christs passion, doth not continue, the sacrifice of the Cross can not be the proper and peculiar sacrifice of the Christian Religion, and Ca∣tholik Church. Q. It is not sufficient that the effects of the sacrifice of the Cross continue in the Church though Christ suffered but once; for the cause may be sayd to continue in its effects? A. It can not be properly sayd that the cause continues in its effects. Otherwise it might be properly sayd, that the Priestood and sacrifice of Noe after the deluge (chap. 8. Gen) doth yet continue, because the effect therof (viz. the assurance of not
suffering an other deluge) doth and will continue vntill the end of the world. Q. If all the sins of the world be pardo∣ned (or at least be sufficiently satisfied for) by the sacrifice of the Cross, what vse is there for the sacrifice of the Mass? or how can it be a propitiatory sacrifice, in vir∣tue wherof sins are pardon'd and satis∣fied for? A. It is not against the sufficiency or in∣finitness of the sacrifice of the Cross, that sins be forguien, and satisfied for by the sacrifice of the Mass; not only because the same Christ is offered in both sacrifices, but because the sacrifice of the Mass is a commemoration of that of the Cross, and doth apply the sufficiency of the same to the pardon of particular sins, that were not committed before Christs passion, as we say of Baptism and other Sacraments. And if the sacrifices of the old testament were propitiatory, in virtue of Christs passion, before he came to the world, there can be no ground to deny that the sacrifice of the Mass is a Propitiatory sacrifice, in virtue of the same passion after that he sufferd.
CHAP. IV. OF THE CHVRCH OF GOD, and of Diuine faith. Q. Though I know that they who worship God as he commands, are his Church, yet there being so many Con∣gregations of Christians pretending them∣selues alone to be those worshipers, and the true Church, or at least a part therof, I would willingly know whether there be any certain and cleer signes wherby the true Church and its members may be dis∣cerned from all false and heretical Con∣gregations? and what signes these are? I am satisfied that any two or more Congre∣gations dissenting in any doctrin, can not constitute that Catholik Church, out of which there is no saluation; because such Congregations can not haue either vnity, or verity in that doctrin wherin they disa∣gree; and by consequence, seing God (who is truth itself and infinitly auers from falsood) can no more countenance, or confirm with supernatural signs the least, than the greatest falsood, that Church or Churches which propose contradictory
Tenets (whether fundamental or not fun∣damental) can no more be the Catholik or part therof, than God can forfeit his vera∣city, or incline and oblige men to belieue contradictory points, wherof one must needs be false. A. That there are certain and cleer signes wherby the true Catholik Church of God may be discerned from all false and here∣tical Congregations, is as euident as Gods veracity, and his inclination to truth; or as it is, that God did not institute a Church wherin there could be no peace, concord, or order; but all must haue bin disorder, confusion and dissention; For, if the testi∣mony of euery of those Congregations were as credible (by supernatural signs of their being the true Church) as they are confident in their pretentions of being so, the most learned and prudent men might liue and dye safely in the state of perplexi∣ty; and all the world (at best) must haue bin seekers, or sceptiks; and there being no reason (in such a case) to belieue, why rather one sect than an other should be the true Church. Therfore God being the Author of truth, peace, order, and vnity, his Church can not be a Congregation of dissenting, or perplexed people, changing
from one faith to an other, for want o discernable and supernatural signes, which none but the true Church ought to haue, to the end all men may find it out, and therby be directed to embrace the true Diuine worship and doctrin. These signes must be supernatural; that is, signes, aboue the sphere and power of natural causes; at least they must seem so, not only to the vulgar people, but to the wisest men and greatest Doctors, after a diligent scrutiny, and mature considera∣tion of all causes, and circumstances: be∣cause they must be such as produce in us an euident obligation of belieuing that God alone is the Author of the Doctrin propo∣sed as Diuine, and that he hath authorised that Church to propose the same. The signs must not only be obseruable, but obuious to euery vulgar comprehension, and perceptible euen by our senses. The reason is, because many, of the mysteries which are to be belieued with Diuine faith, exceed human capacity, and ther∣fore as well the learned as the ignorant are to be instructed therin by the Church, and must take its testimony for a sufficient proof of their obligation to belieue (with∣out doubting) that God reuealed those
things which it proposeth in his name, and they can not comprehend; though they be credibly reuealed. Now to belieue that things so difficult as many mysteries which the Church proposeth, are true, and re∣uealed by God; and that any man or Con∣gregation of men is authorised by his Di∣uine authority to propose and press such things vpon our vnderstandings, this belief I say, can not be a prudent or pious act, without seing seeiming supernatural si∣gnes, so obuious to all kind of people, that they may (if reflected vpon) exclude all prudent doubts of our being mistaken, because they must dispose us to fix our thoughts so firmly vpon Gods goodness and veracity, that we assent with greater assurance to what the Church sayes, and its signes shew, than if we had seen it; not because the Church sayes it, or because the signs confirm its testimony, but because we rationaly iudge it impossible, that God would permit such an appearance and te∣stimony to be falsly fathered vpon himself, or permit vs to be deceiued by signs so li∣kely to be supernatural. Q. How can a certainty only moral of God being the Author of the commission and doctrin of the Church, be a solid and
sufficient ground for acts of Christian faith, wherby we belieue without the least doubt, and by consequence with more than moral certainty or assurance, that God is Author of the commission and doc∣trin of the Church? How can any pru∣dent act of our vnderstanding assent to more than it doth see? or assent with grea∣ter assurance, than there is appearance of the truth? An intellectual act or assent being an intellectual sight of the truth of the obiect. To say therfore that by acts of faith we assent to more than we see, or with greater assurance then there is appea∣rance of the truth, is as much as to say, that by acts of faith we see more than we see; and belieue more firmly than we can? A. The answer of this obiection is, that assent being no more than an interior yeel∣ding a thing to be (as dissent is an interior denying it to be) the assent of the mind is not alwayes an intellectual sight of the truth of its obiect. It is not alwayes the same thing in the soul to say a thing is so, and to see it is so. For, if these two were the same, the soul could neuer assent or rely vpon authority, nor be mistaken in any assent, because it is neuer mistaken in
its sight of the truth. Besides, this opinion that confounds the assent of faith with the sight of the truth (whether it be in proper causes, or by its connexion with the eui∣dence of Gods reuelation) takes away the obscurity, liberty and merit of Christian faith; because à cleer sight of the truth (by whatsoeuer means it coms) is not compatible with those attributes. St Paul tells vs that faith is an argument of things not appearing; and surely if they do not appeare by faith, they are not seen by an act of faith. More. A great proportion of the supernaturality of faith and of its me∣rit consists in ouer comming the difficulty we find not only in examining the moti∣ues, and in adhering with the will, but in assenting with the vnderstanding to the truth, and to the existence of its reuela∣tion; as, to that of the Trinity, Incarna∣tion, &c. But if our assent of faith were an intellectual sight of the truth, or of the existence of Diuine reuelation of those my∣steries, such an assent could not inuolue, nor we find therin, any intellectual diffi∣culty: for, what intellectual difficulty can there be in saying inwardly, it is so, if we see it is so. There is rather a necessity (in such a case) of saying, it is so. Faith is so
far from being an intellectual sight of the verities belieued or assented vnto, that the less cleerly you see the truth, or the reue∣lation credited (so it be prudently credi∣ble) the greater your faith is. Therfore Christ reproacht St Thomas for not be∣lieuing the Resurrection vntill he had seen with his eyes Christ resuscitated. oan. 20. And told him, they were happy that belieued, and did not see what they believed. Now the reason why faith and sight or knowledge are so opposit, is; because the nature and notion of faith is, to supply (and by con∣sequence it doth suppose) the want of sight or knowledge. Hence it is that many say faith and knowledge are no more consistent one with the other, than the want and not want of the same thing. And indeed this notion of faith is well groun∣ded; because experience doth conuince, and all confess, our human nature to be so imperfect, that it stands in need of Christian faith to supply the want of kno∣wledge touching Diuine mysteries. And euen in worldly affairs we must in most rely (for want of cleerer knowledge) vpon the authority and testimony of law∣full witnesses, and take their word for legal euidence; which, as it is a sufficient
proof of what they testify, so is it a de∣monstration of the imperfection of our vnderstandings; and that most of our hu∣man assents and iudicial sentences are not intellectual sights of the truth itself, but humble submissions to the authority and knowledge of others which we belieue, though for ought we euidently know, we may be misinformed by their mistake or malice. But the supernatural signes of the Catholik Church do shine so cleerly vpon the same, that not any who reflects vpon them, and relyes vpon Gods veracity, can prudently entertain the least feare or doubt of being mistaken in its authority, or misled by its doctrin, notwithstanding that we do not cleerly see the Diuine trust of the Church, or the infallible truth of its Tenets. But though the assent of Christian faith be not an intellectuall sight of the truth re∣uealed, or of the Diuine reuelation, it doth suppose (at least in our Predecessors) sen∣sations, or an intellectual sight of som seemingly supernatural signs, which being credibly reported to us by Tradition, are sufficient to gain so much credit and au∣thority for the Church wherin they ap∣pear'd, as that whoeuer doth not belieue
its testimony, and assenteth or yeeldeth not to its doctrin as Diuine, is iustly con∣demned by Christ himself in his last words to the Apostles; Marc. 16. v. 16. and therfore tells them that his Church shall haue visible and su∣pernatural signes, wherby it may be easi∣ly discerned from all heretical Assemblies, som wherof he specified, as power to cast out Deuills, to cure diseases, to speak vnknowen languages, to rid people of ser∣pents; These, besides others related in Scripture, as the Conuersion of Nations to Christianity, the continual succession and sanctity of Doctrin and Doctors, the spi∣rit of profecy, and many such miraculous marks, ioyned with profound humility, and eminent virtues, are so far aboue all heathens and heretiks pretended morality and sanctity, that when their saints are compared with canonized Catholiks, they appeare to be but hypocritical sycophants, puff'd vp with that secret pride, so proper to all sectaries, preferring their own pri∣uat interpretation of scripture before the publik sense, and practise of a visible and miraculous Church. Vve conclude therfore that an assent of Christian faith is not an intellectuall sight of the truth reuealed, nor of the reuela∣tion;
and yet the faithfull do assent to both with no less assurance than if it had bin a cleer sight of both; because euery assent of Christian faith is grounded vpon and directed by this truth, Gods goodness and veracity will neuer countenance falsood with miracles, nor permit errors in a Church, whose authority and testimony is confirmed with such marks of his Diui∣ne ministery and fauor, as the Congre∣gation of the Roman Catholiks is. This shall be in the ensuing section more par∣ticularly proued. SECT. VNICA. OF THE RESOLVTION, AND RVLE of Catholik faith, and vvhether this, or Heresy, be consistent vvith a cleer euidence of Gods revelation. Q. Notwithstanding you haue told me that the assent of faith is rather a submission or yeelding of our vnderstan∣ding to the Diuine authority, than a sight or euidence of the same authority or reue∣lation, yet other Roman Catholik Authors hold the contrary, because they say that the tradition or testimony of the Church
is the rule or motiue of Catholik Faith. Now this tradition affirming that the faith∣full deliuered to one an other from age to age, from yeare to yeare, the same doctrin in euery particular, which the Ro∣man Catholiks now hold, and that they deliuered that doctrin not as the doctrin or opinions of men, but as the word and reuelation of God, it is as impossible we should not see this doctrin to haue bin reuealed by God, as it is, that a tradition so vniuersal, wherin euery man was so particularly concerned, and which hath bin conueyed by such euident sensations, (as that of hearing, preaching, seing, practi∣sing, and professing our faith by the most si∣gnificant words and actions) can be fal∣lacious, or false, or that such multitudes could forget, or would alter the doctrin of this year, which they had receiued as Diuine the yeare before. A. I know that the Author of sure footing hath writ with great zeal som Treatises vpon this subiect, and hath so confounded those who assert only a moral certainty in Faith, that they can not vindicat them∣selues from the Atheism wherunto their principles and bare probability of Chri∣stianity leads, and wherwith the aforesaid
Author doth vnanswerably charge them. But because he took or reuiued this way, thinking that by no other the certainty of Christian faith can be made out, nor the Socinians argument (against the possibility of assenting by an act of faith with more assurance than appearance of the truth) answered; and that I belieue both these difficulties may, and ought to be solued otherwise, I make vse of other principles for the resolution and rule of faith. Q. Vvhat is the resolution of faith? A. It is an orderly retrogradation from the assent or act of faith to its first motiue, or to that which moued, or made vs assent. Q. Vvhat is the Rule of faith? A. It is that which directs vs to that motiue, and to assent or belieue as Chri∣stians. Q. Is not the rule and the motiue of faith, the same thing? A. Many confound the one with the other. But they are diferent things; The motiue of faith is Gods veracity. The rule of faith is the Testimony or Tradition of the Church. Faith doth not fallow the na∣ture of its rule; if it did, we could not call it a Diuine virtue, because the testimo∣ny
or Tradition of the Church (which is its rule) is human. Its called Diuine faith, because it is specified by, and relyes wholy vpon Gods veracity, and therfore is a Diuine virtue. Q. Ought not the rule of faith be an in∣fallible direction to the motiue of faith? Ought it not also be of such a nature as to manifest cleerly its own infallibility to euery one that will examin the nature of Tradition, which is the rule of faith? A. It ought to be an infallible direction in itself (otherwise it might lead vs out of the way) but that infallibility ought not be more manifest to vs than the infallibili∣ty of faith itself. The reason is, because a Rule, as such, is but a direction; and one may be infallibly directed though himself doth not Know it; as a seaman who obeyes the Pilot commanding him to steer his ship by such and such land marks. It is no ne∣cessary part or property of a Rule, to eui∣dence its own infallibility, unless the thing wherunto we are directed be self euident and uisible, as we see in the rules and instruments of Mecanik arts. But if the truth of that obiect or act wherunto a Rule directs us, be of its own nature obscure, and not obuious to our senses, but rather
aboue the reach and sight of our under∣standing, then the truth or infallibility of the Rule ought not to appeare cleerly to us; for, if it did, the Rule hauing a neces∣sary connexion (a parte rei) with the act or obiect wherunto it directs, it would cleer∣ly discouer to us the truth of that obiect or act, which is supposed to be obscure. This is explained by examples. A man that is purblind, or trauells by night, may be safely and infallibly directed or led be∣tween precipices, or through an vncouth and vnknown path, though he doth not see his own safety, nor the skil of his Gui∣de, or the certainty of his way. Tis suffi∣cient for his satisfaction, and encourage∣ment to beare patiently the incommo∣diousness of his iourney, that being cre∣dibly informed he belieues his Guide is skilfull and honest. Tis so in our iourney to Heauen. Vve do belieue that the rule of our faith (which is Catholik Tradition) is infallible (by virtue of Gods particular assistance and protection) though we do not cleerly see or know it is so. Vve be∣lieue also that euery assent of Christian Faith is infallibly true though we can no more see its infallibility than we can the truth of its obiect, v. g. of the Trinity, Di∣uinity
of Christ, Transubstantiation, &c. So that there ought not be greater or clee∣rer euidence required for the infallibility of the rule of faith, than for the infallibi∣lity of the truth of faith; this being the end, and the other but subseruient to it. Tradition therfore (euen as it is sealed with all the signs of the Church) doth not make cleerly euident to us that God re∣uealed any article of faith, or any point of Christianity, nay not that fundamental one of Christs Diuinity; for, though Ca∣tholik Tradition and the signes and mira∣cles of the Church may make it cleerly euident to us that Christ reuealed our faith and doctrin, yet they do not make it cleer∣ly euident to us that Christ was God, or that God reuealed Christianity: witness all the heresies of witty and learned men in all ages against Christs Diuinity; and euery one Knowes that against cleer eui∣dence their can be no heresy. Q. The Church being our Guide of faith, if som Doctors therof do not see cleerly the way, how can we be led to heauen? How can they induce heretiks to follow them, or assure them that the saying of our sauior will not be verified in us, si caecus caecum ducat, or that our
Doctors are not like the Scribes and Pha∣risies, caeci estis & duces coecorum? A. The greatest blindness in faith is to pretend a cleer sight of its rules infallibili∣ty. The Catholik Church (acording to St Paul and the Scriptures) is a Congregation of men who do not see what they belieue, and are led and directed by the holy Ghost in matters of doctrin. This Church is euery particular mans immediat Guide, because we follow it, and hold fast to its testimo∣ny and tradition; but this Church also hath a Guide (the holy Spirit) which leads it (as Christ sayes) into all truth by continualy directing it, and assisting in its definitions and decrees. Vvhen the four first general Councells defin'd the Diuinity of Christ and of the holy Ghost, they did not cleerly see nor demonstrat against heretiks the truth of that doctrin, or that God reuealed it. For if they had, the heretiks could not haue continued heretiks in their iudg∣ments. Its therfore fufficient that in the Catholik Church there be Doctors and arguments to demonstrat that all Dissenters or heretiks (by not submitting to its doc∣trin and authority) go against reason, and the obligation all men haue to embrace that religion, which is most likely to be
Diuine, in regard of greater appearance therin of supernatural signs (which Christ sayd his Church should haue) than in any other. To ground therfore the certainty of Christian Faith, or of its rule, vpon any euidence which faith itself declares to be fallacious and fallible (as it doth declare the euidence of our senses and sensations is in the article of Transubstantiation) is to de∣stroy Christianity; and therfore Tradition as receiuing its certainty from our sensa∣tions, can not be a sufficient ground for the certainty of Christian faith. Q. I pray resolue your Catholik faith vnto its motiue. A. That is don by answering questions, Thus. Vvhy do you belieue the mystery of the Trinity, or Transubstantiation? Be∣cause God, who can not deceiue nor be deceiued, reuealed it. How do you know God reuealed it? If you speake of cleer knowledge, I do not know that God re∣uealed it. But if you will speake properly as a Christian, or as a man that vnderstands what we mean by Faith, you must not ask how I know, but how, or why do I be∣lieue that God reuealed it? Then I will answer, that the testimony or tradition of the Church, confirmed with seemingly
supernatural signs, testifying that God re∣uealed those mysteries, makes it euidently credible he did reueal them. But because I know my vnderstanding is so imperfect, that I can not pretend to infallibility, and my senses are so fallacious, that by our sen∣sations we are often mistaken, and that faith itself tells us so (in the article of Transubstantiation) I cant no assent to this article, or to the mystery of the Trinity, or to any other (pretended to be euident∣ly reuealed by virtue of self euident Tra∣dition and infallible sensations) with that certainty which Christianity requires, vn∣till I reflect and rely altogether vpon Gods veracity, and apply it to the afore∣said testimony and Tradition of the Ro∣man Catholik Church; which declares that itself is authorised by God (and shews for that authority seemingly supernatural signs) to propose as reuealed by him those mysteries and all the other particulars of our Faith. Vvhen I compare and apply the Diuine veracity to this testimony of the Church authorised by those signs, I assent to all shee proposeth as reuealed by God, by this act. Notvvithstanding I do not see any cleer euidence or infallible connexion betvven
the testimony or signs of the Church, and Gods reuealing its doctrin, yet because Gods veracity and his auersion from falsood is infinit, I do belieue as certainly as I do that God is infinitly inclined to truth, that he neuer did nor neuer vvill permit the least falsood to be so authen∣ticaly proposed as his reuelation, or vvord, as I see euery point of the Roman Catholick doc∣trin is proposed by the tradition and signs of that Church. This general assent is applyed to euery particular article. Heer you see that the motiue of our Chatholik Faith is not the Tradition or testimony of the Church, but only Gods veracity. You see also that the tradition of the Church is the rule of our Faith, because it helps and di∣rects vs to reflect and rely more vpon the motiue, which is Gods veracity, than upon Tradition itself. Lastly you see there is no impossibility in assenting (by an act of faith) with more assurance than there is appearance or euidence of the truth assen∣ted vnto; because the assurance is not ta∣ken from, nor grounded vpon the appea∣rance, but vpon Gods veracity and his infinit inclination to truth. Hence fol∣loweth. 1. That whosoeuer denyes any one article of Faith, (whether fundamen∣tal, or not fundamental) belieueth none at
all with Diuine or Christian Faith; becau∣se he slights the motiue therof (which is Gods infinit inclination to truth, and auer∣sion from falsood) to that degree, as to be persuaded the Diuinity can permit fal∣sood to be so credibly fatherd vpon itself, as the Roman Catholik Church doth its doctrin, with so seeming supernatural si∣gns, and so constant a Tradition. The mo∣tiue of Faith being thus once slighted, none that so slights it, can belieue any thing for its sake, or upon its score. 2. It followeth, That the Tradition and Miracles of the Catholik Church do not make it cleerly euident to us that God reuealed any one article of Christian Faith, nay not that fundamental one of the Diuinity of Christ. For, though Tradition makes it cleerly eui∣dent to us there was such a man as Christ, and such prodigies as his Miracles, and that him self say'd he was God, yet that Tra∣dition and those prodigies do not make it cleerly euident to us, (as it did not to the Iewes) that Christ was realy God. For, if this had bin cleerly euidenc'd to them or us, neither Iewes nor Socinians or any o∣ther ancient heretiks, could haue bin obsti∣nat or heretiks in their iudgments against Christs Diuinity.
Q. If I do not see an infallible conne∣xion between the assent or rule of Faith and Gods reuelation, I must needs see there is no infallible connexion, and may say, the assent of Faith may be false, seing Tradition, which is the rule of that assent, is fallible. On the other side I must sayt he assent of Faith can not be false. So that if Tradition be not so self euident as from it to conclude cleerly the impossibility of Faiths falsood, it must be granted that I see Faith is, and is not, infallible: and that Tradition is, and is not, an infallible Rule. A. Though I do not see any infallible connexion between Gods reuelation and the Tradition of the Church, or any other rule directing to belieue what he realy eueald, or (which is the same) between the assent of Faith, and the rule of Faith; yet it doth not follow that I must see, or say there is no necessary connexion between them. For at the same time I do not see that necessary connexion, or infallibility, I do belieue there is that connexion, though I see it not: nay tis therfore I can belieue it because I do not see it: Faith requiring that what is belieued, be not seen. It would indeed be a contradiction to say, I see and
do not see the infallibility of Tradition, or of Faith; but tis not any to say, I do not see, and do belieue that infallibility. It may be as well sayd a man who is blind, and infallibly or securely led by a knowing Guide through a dangerous way, doth see his ruin or danger, because he doth not see his own safety, or the infallibility of his Guide, though he belieues himself secure from all danger. Q. Is it not cleerly euident that God can not permit falfood to be so authenticaly proposed in his name, as the Roman Ca∣tholik Church doth her doctrin, by so con∣tinued a tradition, and so surprising signs, as her miracles, sanctity, conuersion of Na∣tions, &c. A. Though I am of opinion God can not permit such an appearance of Diuine truth to be a mistake, yet our vnderstan∣dings being so imperfect, it would be pre∣sumption in vs to define, or pretend to demonstrat what God can do, or not do. Vve only know he can not sin. But we do ot know scientificaly whether he may not  to punish the sins of some) permit the Church to err, and the world to be delu∣ded by their cleerest and most frequent ensations, wherupon (as our Aduersary
sayeth) the certainty of Catholik Tradition is grounded. And though both Scripture and Tradition say, the Church shall neuer fail or err, yet we do not pretend to cleer euidence that either Scripture or Tradi∣tion is Gods word. SVBSECT. HOVV A MAN MAY ASSENT in matters of Faith, vvith more assurance than there is appearance of the truth. Q. If it be not cleerly euident to us by the tradition of the Roman Ca∣tholik Church, nor by Gods veracity, that he reuealed its doctrin, how can we assent or belieue with infallible certainty or as∣surance, that God reuealed it? Is it in our power, or euen in Gods power, to make vs affirm inwardly and certainly any thing, we not knowing whether it be so, or no? How therfore can we affirm inward∣ly and certainly the truth of the Trinity, or that God reueald it, if we know it not cleerly either by Gods veracity, or by the tradition of the Church? A. Assents grounded vpon authority differ in this from assents grounded vpon
cleer knowledge, that the certainty of these are deriued from, and measured by the cleer sight and euidence we haue of their truth, or of the obiects being as they are affirm'd to be. But the certainty of as∣sents grounded vpon authority, is not de∣riued from, or measured by any cleer eui∣dence or sight of their truth, but by the persuasion we haue of the persons we be∣lieue his knowledge and inclination to truth. Now all men who admit of a God, being most certainly persuaded that he is infinitly inclined to truth, they may, and ought, to assent with the greatest assuran∣ce and certainty imaginable, that God did realy reueale all that which the Church proposeth as Diuine doctrin; for, though wee do not see this truth in the mystery or matter deliuered by Catholik tradition, nor in that euidence which our sensations giue to tradition itself; yet by reflecting vpon Gods infinit auersion from falsood, and vpon our own persuasion of his infinit veracity, and seing so great an appearance of his being deeply engaged and concer∣ned for the truth of a Churches testimony that lookes so like his own, affirming the doctrin to be Diuine, we are bound in conscience to belieue without the least
doubt, or at least we are bound to en∣deauor to belieue without doubt (which must be a rational endeauor seing our obligation of endeauoring is so euident to us) that God is the Author of the Roman Catholik doctrin, and hath reueald it; for, if he had not, he would neuer permit the same to be so plausibly and probably proposed as Diuine by Miracles and other signs of the Church, that prudent and learned men must sin in being obstinat against its doctrin and testimony. And this is that we mean when we say that we ap∣ply the Diuine veracity to euery particular point of faith; not by seing the reuela∣tion itself in the tradition or testimony of the Church (for then we could not deny its doctrin was reueald, nor be heretiks) but by hauing so much veneration for Gods veracity, that whensoeuer it seemes to be so publikly engaged, and prudently be∣lieued as we see it is in the Roman Catho∣lik Church, God speakes, or reuealeth, what it proposeth as his word. Q. Methinks the veneration we haue for God and his veracity, ought rather oblige vs not to assent to any doctrin as spoken or reuealed by him, vnless it be cleerly euident to vs, that he spoke or
reuealed it; for, if we do otherwise, we expose his holy name to contempt, and ourselues to damnation: by uenturing to father what we fancy vpon God, when perhaps he neuer sayd or reuealed what we imagined. A. Its a prerogatiue due to soueraignty (and a fortiori to the Deity) to speake and command by Ministers and inferior offi∣cers, which beare the badges of the royal authority. And it is not only a disrespect, but obstinacy and rebellion, not to obey lawes and commands so authenticaly pro∣posed. So likewise it must be not only a sin of disrespect and contempt, but of he∣retical obstinacy, not to belieue that God speakes or commands by the Roman Ca∣tholik Church; when its testimony and tradition of hauing Gods trust and autho∣rity to declare that he speakes or reueales its doctrin, is authenticaly proposed by si∣gns so supernatural in appearance that no human authority is so authentik, and no other Church can or dares pretend to the like. The more soueraign is any superio∣rity and veracity, the greater obligation there is in subiects not to exact for their obedience therunto, or belief therof, cleerer euidence of its commanding, than
is usual and sufficient in human affairs when Princes proclaim or command. And the more infallible the veracity of him is who claimes the authority (if this be authenticaly proposed) the greater is the obligation of assenting inwardly therunto, without cleerer euidence that it proceeds from the infallible Author of the same, than such a moral certainty as the signs of the Church create: this being the cleerest that is con∣sistent with the nature, liberty, obscurity and obsequiousness of Christian Faith. Q. Ought there not to be in the true Church an euident and conclusiue argu∣ment against heretiks and Pagans, to let them see their obstinacy, by shewing cleer∣ly to them that God reuealed what they deny to be true, or to be matter of Faith? A. If men were to be saued by Demon.strations or cleer knowledges, deduced one from the other, what you say, were fit and necessary. But God hauing decreed to saue men by Faith, rather than by scien∣ce, by a meritorious and free, rather than a necessary or demonstratiue assent of him self being the Author and Reuealer of the Christian doctrin, it is so far from being fit the Doctors of his Church should con∣uict
Pagans or heretiks by cleerly euiden∣cing to them God reuealed the sauing tru∣thes, that it is not possible. For, though som Diuines haue sayd, Faith is consistent with cleer euidence of God hauing reuealed the truth of its obiect, because forsooth, though the belieuer doth see the truth (and by consequence can not doubt of it, or be an heretik) yet he doth not see it in its proper causes, but only in Gods reuela∣tion; notwithstanding I say this vnwary opinion of som schoolmen, themselues can not well reconcile with it the merit, obscurity, liberty, and obsequiousness of Christian Faith, nor shew how 'tis possible for any learned Catholik or other man to be an heretik in his iudgment, because the malice of Heresy (this being an error in the understanding, as well as obstinacy in the will) consists in doubting or denying inwardly that God did reueal such an arti∣cle of Faith; but if euery learned Catholik doth see (by virtue of tradition) that he did realy reueal it, he can not see nor say the contrary in his mind, and by conse∣quence can not be an heretik. And yet its granted on all sides that any learned man without forgetting any part of his learning or knowledge may be an heretik.
Besides, the assent and certainty of Chri∣stian Faith doth not enter further vpon its obiect than to say it exists, or that the act of Faith is true, it medles not with why it exists, or with any of its proper or particu∣lar causes, that is, with any reasons why the obiect exists, or why the act of Faith is true; it is grounded only vpon Gods re∣uelation, and this sayes no more than it is so, all other reasons and causes are imper∣tinent, as to the nature and vse of Faith; Faith being an imperfect knowledge and a total relying vpon the Diuine authority, and not vpon the knowledge of proper or any other causes. Now, it is impossible that the obscurity and nature of Faith can be more (or so much) destroyd by subse∣quent euidence, impertinent to its end and nature, than by an euidence that imme∣diatly and directly opposeth and is incon∣sistent with its motiue, its merit, and na∣ture. If the act of Faith be not consistent with the cleer sight or euidence of its truth in the proper and particular causes, notwithstanding those causes are not its motiue, nor considered or toucht by the act, or assent of Faith; how can its merit, obscurity, or nature consist and continue with a cleer sight of its truth, or of its
motiue, or (which is the same) with eui∣dence of the Diuine reuelation? This sight or euidence being as destructiue of the obscurity and difficulty wee meet with in assenting to the mysteries and of the trust we repose in God by belieuing (which is no less essential to Faith than its truth) as it is directly oppofit to the state of obscu∣rity wherin we must be, if we trust his word deliuered to vs by the Church, as also to the darkness and desguise he must speake to vs in, if he will haue vs trust him and merit by Faith, or indeed belieue him at all; for, men do not belieue when they assent to a truth they see or can not deny. And it is impossible for them to see that God (who is truth itself) speakes or reuealeth any mystery, without seing also tis truth he speakes or reueals. Our aduer∣saries seem to make the Montebanks say∣ing, seing is belieuing, the rule of Diuine Faith. Q. Vvhy should not the merit of Faith be consistent with the cleer euidence of the truth therof in its proper causes; or with cleer euidence of Gods reuealing the mystery belieued? Is it not sufficient for a meritorious assent that the VVill applyed the vnderstanding to cleer the difficulties
which might retard or suspend the act of Faith before its actual assent? Must this as∣sent also meet with obscurity, and ouercom a difficulty in saying (and not seing) that God reuealed what it assents vnto, after all our former pains taken in finding out the rule of Faith, and examining the nature of Catholik Tradition? A. The chief merit of Christian Faith con∣sists in ouercomming the difficulty we find in assenting to more than we see, or with more assurāce than wee see there is euiden∣ce of truth. If we did see, or certainly know that God reuealed what we assent vnto by the act of Faith, we could not haue that dif∣ficulty in assenting to the mysteries therof which we find by experiēce: for, what diffi∣culty can there be in saying inwardly, God reuealed the Trinity, or the Trinity is true, if we see that God reuealed that mystery, and (by an immediat consequence) that it is true? Therfore the proper and imme∣diat merit of an act of Faith (as such) doth consist in ouercoming the difficulty of actualy assenting that God reuealed the mystery or matter we belieue he did re∣ueale, though we see not his reuelation, nor any necessary connexion between it and the doctrin, tradition, or testimony of
the Church. As for those other difficulties antecedent to this (and to the act of Faith) which we ouercom, and are rather dispo∣sitions to make our selues fit to belieue (by remouing the obstacles of education and custom, or by examining the nature of Tradition, and the motiues of credibility) than immediat acts of Faith; the merit that re∣sults from ouercoming those difficulties, is not the proper and immediat merit of Faith itself, because it is antecedent to it, for after all our aforesaid inquiry and examination of the rule and motiues of Faith, we find still a great difficulty in as∣senting actualy or belieuing, that God re∣uealed what Tradition affirms he did; this, our own experience doth demonstrat, and it may be proued by diuers places of holy Scripture, as that of Luc. 19. when one hauing bin credibly informed (and perhaps seen) how Christ wrought many miracles, he desired Christ to dispossess his son of a dumb Deuil: Christ told him if he could belieue, he would deliuer his son from that spirit. Vvithout doubt the Fa∣ther found great difficulty in the very act of Faith whereby he belieued Christs po∣wer; for though he sayd, I do belieue, yet he cried out, adding, Lord help my incredulity.
And yet this man was very well disposed, and informed of Christs power and mira∣cles before he brought his son to him, otherwise he would not have taken so much pains to follow him, and present his son before him. And indeed incredulity (as obstinacy also) doth suppose as much information and euidence of the motiues of credibility, and of the rule of Faith, or Tradition, as is re∣quisit for the actual assent of Faith; other∣wise none could be called incredulous or obstinat for not belieuing. The faithfull therfore merit and ouercom a great diffi∣culty by the very act of Faith, after that all other difficulties precedent to it, are clee∣red or ouercom. And in ouercoming this last great difficulty consists chiefly the su∣pernaturality which is most peculiar to the act of Faith. Heretiks therfore may be conuicted of obstinacy and heresy, though they do not cleerly see, nor we euidently conclude (by tradition, or any thing else) that God reuealed what they deny or doubt of, and the Church proposeth as re∣uealed by him: For, heresy doth not consist in an impossibility, but it would be one if it were requisit that learned heretiks be obstinat against a cleer and conclusiue
euidence of God hauing reuealed what they deny or doubt of. How can any pas∣sion or pride blind a learned heretik (if it depriues him not wholy of his wits, and then he can not sin, or be an heretik) so far, as to make him deny or doubt of what he sees euidently concluded God sayd, or reuealed? That were to deny God is God, or the existence of a Deity. A learned here∣tik therfore can not be better or more cleerly conuicted of heretical obstinacy, than by our euidently concluding against him, that he is obliged in conscience (to auoyd the threatned danger of damnation if he doth not belieue the Church, whose testimony is confirmed with Miracles) to assent to that doctrin as Diuine, which is deliuered by Catholik Tradition and con∣firmed by the motiues of credibility, though it be not cleerly euident that its doctrin is Diuine, or its tradition infallible. More of this hereafter. Now I will proue the euident obligation all men (who are informed of our Faith) haue to belieue the doctrin of the Roman Catholik Church as Diuine, as also how they are obliged in conscience to inform themselues ther∣of.
CHAP. V. HOVV THE MIRACLES OF THE Roman Church euidently conuict all its Ad∣uersaries of damnable obstinacy; and hovv a credible report of them obligeth all men to inform themselues of those miracles, and doctrin confirmed by them; and that of all Christian Congregations the Roman Catholik alone is the true Catholik Church. Q. Supposing the Catholik Church can not be composed of all or any two Congregations dissenting in the least point of doctrin, as hath bin proued in the pre∣cedent Chapter, I desire to know which of them all is that one true Catholik Church we ought to belieue, according to that article of the Apostles Creed I belieue in the holy Catholik Church, and out of which there is no saluation? A. You know the true Catholik Church is only that Congregation of Christians which hath the signs Christ sayd (Marc. 16.) should follow the true belieuers: and that those signes are, the casting out of Deuills (not by coniuring, but) in the name of
Christ; the gift of tongues, the conuersion of Nations to Christianity, the curing of di∣seases, raising of the dead, and other su∣pernatural marks of Gods trust and truth committed only to the ministery of that Church, and by which marks i must be discerned from all false Congregations, pretending to be either the whole, or a part of the Catholik Church. Q. Out of your discourse I gather that all the markes of the true Catholik Church are reduced to miracles; because super∣natural sanctity, the conuersion of Nations to Christianity, the gift of profecy, &c. are as great miracles, as the casting out of Deuills, curing diseases, raising the dead, and the gift of tongues. But it is a common saying among Protestants, that miracles are ceased in the Church; and som Catho∣liks grant they are so few, and wrought in those remote regions of Iapan and China, that you can hardly meet with one who did euer see a miracle. How therfore can miracles be the marks wherby euery man may be directed to know the true Ca∣tholik Church, if few or none see them? A. I grant that all the marks of the Ca∣tholik Church must be miraculous; other∣wise
they were not fit motiues for pru∣dent men to submit their iudgments to the testimony or ministery of that Church, as to the Church of God. But miracles are not ceased, nor confind to those remo∣te regions of Iapan and China: There is not a Catholik Nation in the world which doth not shew som things at least so like supernatural miracles, that as wise and wary men as any in Christendom, belieue them to be so. And such Protestants as pretend they are not, can not with any probability shew that the matter of fact is false, or that the manner of working them is fraudulent or natural; seing therfore Christ himself assures vs that supernatural miracles shall follow the true belieuers, and that vntill the end of the world there will be true belieuers, and by consequen∣ce a Catholik Church, we are bound in conscience to belieue, that only is the true Church, wherin we see (or at least heare credibly reported) there are true miracles, or things so like true miracles, that as wise and as wary men as any in the world (after a seuere scrutiny, and serious study) mistake them for true miracles, notwithstanding they know that vpon their not being mistaken in so important a
matter doth depend their euerlasting hap∣piness, or misery. Dr Dovvn∣ham in hi Treatise of Antichrist l. 1. c. 9. pag. 111. saith, neither Turks, nor Ievves, nor any other Churches of Christi∣ans, but only the Pope and Church of Rome do vaunt of miracles. Q. Is there but one Congregation of Christians that pretends to such miracles? A. No. Q. Vvhich is that? A. The Roman Catholik. Q. If all other Christian Congregations be against the Roman Catholik, and that in euery Christian Congregation there be as wise and wary men, and as willing to be saued, as any Roman Catholiks; why should any man be bound in conscience to belieue the Roman Catholik miracles are true, when as great, or a greater num∣ber of wise and learned men do maintain they are not true miracles? A. Vvhen learned parties agree in the fact of an accident so extraordinary, that no natural cause therof (after diligent scarch) can be knowen, but seemes to be aboue the power of all natural causes and human industry, doubtless the party which belieues the fact to be supernatural, or a miracle, deserues to be credited before all which contradict the same, and can giue no good reason for their contradi∣ction. 1. Because in som Christian Congre∣gation or other there must be true miracles,
otherwise Christs words, Marc. 16. can not be verified. And seing no other Christian Congregation but the Roman Catholik pretends (at least vpon so publik and pro∣bable grounds) to haue true miracles, the Roman Catholik is to be credited in this point before all others. 2. It is not con∣sistent with Gods infinit veracity to per∣mit so publik and probable an appearance of true miracles for confirming falsood, as the appearance of miracles in the Roman Catholik Church is. For that, veracity is an inclination to truth, and an auersion from falsood; and by consequence, the Diuine veracity (being infinit) inuolues an infinit auersion from falsood. But an infinit auer∣sion from falsood is not consistent with Gods permission of so probable and plau∣sible an appearance of true miracles to confirm any false doctrin, as we see in the Roman Catholik Church. Therfore if the miracles of the Roman Catholik Church be not true, Gods infinit veracity (as also his goodness and prouidence) may be questioned. This may be explained to the vulgar sort by a similitude. Suppose there were in som shire or town of England or Scot∣land a company of men acting in the
Kings name, as his priuy or great Councell, with all the formes and formalities therof, as a Lord Chancellor, or Commissioner, Tresurer, Secretaries, members of Par∣liament, Clerks, &c. and that a considera∣ble part of the Nation obeyed their orders and commands, as men authorised by the King, who is not ignorant of these publik proceedings, and by consequence can not be rationaly thought auerse, but rather seem to approue of them, especialy if he be able (without danger of disturbance) to hinder and humble this pretended Coun∣cell, by declaring them to be but a coun∣terfeit Assembly of Cheats and Rebells, and by punishing them accordingly. A King I say that might hinder such a coun∣terfeit Parliament or Councell from abu∣sing himself and his subiects by so seeming a legal authority, and yet would not, can not be thought to haue any truth, goodness, or iustice; because by his conniuance at those impostures, which he might haue discouerd without trouble or inconuenien∣cies, he doth countenance, and confirm that Councell as commissioned by himself. This may be easily and aptly applied to the Roman Catholik Church, which is inue∣sted with so many miraculous marks of
Gods authority, and therfore doth act by a warant so seemingly Diuine, that Gods bare permission of such a cheat as Prote∣stants suppose the Roman Catholik Church to be, would conclude his want of proui∣dence, goodness, and veracity, and by consequence there can be no excuse or ra∣tional hopes of saluation for Protestants, or any others that will not submit their iudg∣ment to a Church and doctrin so publikly commissioned and confirmed by Gods great seal, Miracles; as yet shall more par∣ticularly appeare in the ensuing sections. SECT. I. VVHETHER THE CREDIBLE and constant report there is of true miracles vvrought in the Roman Catholik Church, be a sufficient euidence to conuict of damnable obstinacy and heresy such as stight them or vvill not heare of them. Q. Is it then vpon this ground of not belieuing the Roman Catholik mi∣racles, which are recounted by the ancient Fathers or others, Roman Catholiks say, that we Protestants are obstinat heretiks,
and that such of vs as dye not members of your Church, are damned? Is not this a foolish and vncharitable opinion? A. One of the grounds of that censure is the Definition of Heresy, which is, an error in the understanding, and obstinacy in the vvill against any truth or authority that is suf∣ficienly proposed as Diuine. Now the great appearance and moral euidence there is of the Roman Catholik Church (together with its tradition) doth sufficiently propose or declare its doctrine and authority to be Diuine. For, though it be not demonstra∣tiuely euident that the Roman Catholik miracles are true miracles, nor that its tra∣dition and testimony is infallible, yet it is moraly euident (and by consequence suffi∣ciently euident) that its doctrin is Diuine, and that God is Author of the same, it being confirmed by such Miracles, and that by them he doth authorise that Church, as Princes do their officers by letters patents under their great seale; Miracles being the great seale wherwith Gods Ministery and doctrin is made authentik. Q. Vvhat is moral euidence of a miracle! A. Moral euidence of a miracle is, so credible and so constant a report therof, that to deny or doubt of the fact reported,
argues imprudence in the dissenter, and renders his caution of not belieuing, both rash and ridiculous; because it destroyes (at least) all historical and human Faith. Q. May not a man belieue History, and rely vpon human authority, though he belieues not the stories of the most authen∣tik Roman Catholik miracles? A. No, if he discourseth consequently, and according to the rules of reason, wher∣of one principal is, that the same cause produceth the same effects; and the same authority the same assent or belief. If ther∣fore the same ancient Fathers or Authors vpon whose testimony or tradition you rely for belieuing a miracle of Christian religion in genral, or of the Trinity or Incarnation in particular, recount the like miracles of Transubstantiation, prayer to Saints, or Purgatory, you are rash and ir∣rational in contemning that same autho∣rity, which you credited in as difficult a subiect, and as much aboue your com∣prehension: for, you ought to belieue both the miracles and mysteries, or nei∣ther. Q. Is moral euidence of true miracles sufficient to conuict of damnable obstina∣cy and heresy all such as slight that euiden∣ce,
and will not examin the grounds and effects therof? A. Yes The reason is; 1. because they are a sufficient euidence that the doctrin confirmed by them is Diuine. 2. because Christs miracles were only moraly (not demonstratiuely) euident as miracles; for, if they had bin demonstratiuely euident as such, none of the Iewes could deny them to be Diuine, or could think they were wrought by the power of Beelzebub. And though it was but moraly euident that Christs miracles were true miracles, yet that moral euidence was sufficient to con∣uict the incredulous Iewes of damnable obstinacy and heresy. Q. I desire to Know what it is you call damnable obstinacy? A. Damnable obstinacy is a setled reso∣lution of remaining in your own opinion of religion, or a neglect of inquiring into the grounds of any other, notwithstanding the prudent doubts you haue, or would haue had (if you had not bin carless) of being saued in the way wherin you haue bin educated, or made choice of. Q. I do agree with you that if one doubts of the truth of his own religion, he will be damnd unless he inquires into
it, or som other, untill he doth what he can to be satisfied; but I can not be per∣suaded that a man is bound to doubt of that religion wherin he hath bin bred, be∣cause he heares of miracles wrought in an other, unless his own be so absurd, or in∣consequent, that he must doubt of its truth whether he will or no. A. There are two sorts of doubts. 1. is a doubt which occurrs to ourselues by our own observation. 2. is a doubt not started by ourselues, but by som other more lear∣ned in matters of religion, and as much to be credited, and as litle to be suspected of hauing any design (but our saluation) in our change of opinion, as he whom we most confide in. Doubts of our own ob∣seruation are very ordinary, being groun∣ded vpon the most obuious occurrences, as a publik change of Religion, either vpon the score of conscience, or interest: this last is as suspicious (euen to the dullest comprehensions) as the other is edifying. Not only the change into a thriuing reli∣gion, but constancy in a persecuted one, doth make great impression vpon all sorts of people, as also relations of miracles cre∣dibly reported. These impressions, and the inspirations which follow them, raise
doubts; and these) if not endeuored to be cleered) are a sufficient cause of damnation. The doubts which are raised in ourse∣lues by the example, or the discourse of others, who haue no design vpon us but the saluation of our souls, are also damnable to us, if we neglect the cleering of them by all the wayes that a buisness of so great importance doth require. And the more diligent we must be in the search, by how much more the persons interested in main∣taining our persuasion (I mean such as liue by the ministery therof) deterr us from so rational a scrutiny; which they would ne∣uer dissuade us from, if they did not feare a discouery of their own wickedness, and of their causes weakness. Q. I pray sir, apply this discourse to the Protestants, and Roman Catholiks of En∣gland. A. I beg your pardon sir, I am loath to offend the Parliament. But I will apply it to the Arians and Roman Catholiks of Spain. The Heir of that Croun, Prince Hermenegild, hauing bin bred an Arian, doubted of the truth of that pretended reformation; this doubt was ocasioned by the discourse he had with St Leander Arch∣bishop of Seuil. At length he was conuinc't
of the falsood of that Arian heresy, and reconciled to the Roman Catholik Church. The King his Father would needs haue him receiue the Arian communion, which the Prince refusing to do, the wicked Father (for fear of his people) sacrified the Heir apparent of the Croun to their fury, and caused him to be murthered. This change to, and constancy in the Roman Catholik Religion (together with a report of som miracles) wrought so much upon all the people of Spain, that a litle after, they all turned Catholiks; and a law was made, that none but Catholiks should haue em∣ployment in that Kingdom. Hence you may inferr what strong influence the exam∣ple of a religious and resolute Prince hath euen vpon the most uulgar iudgments, and how damnable it is in all people, not to examin the motiues of so edifying a conuersion as that wherby one hazards and waues the greatest temporal interest; and how certain it is that God will punish as well in this world as in the next, all such as resist or neglect the impressions and inspirations which men feel in them∣selues to follow a religion so generously professed, and preferrd before all the great∣ness and glory of an Imperial Croun.
Q. If Princely suffering vpon the score of conscience be so great a miracle, why shall not the Lady Iane Grayes suffering (and Queen Elizabeths also) for the Protestant religion, be miracles; and confirm that pro∣fession as the true Catholik? Add to these the patience and constancy of those glo∣rious Protestant Martyrs recounted by Iohn Fox in his Acts and Monuments. SECT. II. OF THE DIFFERENCE BETVVEEN Catholik constancy, and heretical obstinacy: and vvherin doth each consist. A Your obiection is material, and I shal endeuor to answer it as cleerly and in as few words as I can: but depen∣ding of a proper notion of heresy, it in∣uolues som difficulty. Experience and hi∣story hath proued (almost in euery age) that som heretiks suffer with as great re∣solution all Kind of torments (and death itself) for their false religion, as Catho∣liks do for the true one. And yet we all agree in terming the heretiks resolution, obstinacy, and the Catholiks constancy. The
reason is, because the heretik suffers for adhering to a particular opinion, and to his own priuat iudgment; The Catholik for conforming himself to the belief of the uniuersal Church, and for submitting his iudgement to the same. Therfore St Paul sayes that an heretik is condemned by his own proper iudgment; 2. Petr. 1. 2. No pro∣fecy of Scripture is made by priuat interpre∣tation. and St Peter tells us that the true interpretation of Scriptu∣re is not that of a priuat man, but of the Church. And the very word Heresy, signi∣fies a particular choyce, or a wilfull di∣uision and declining from the first doc∣trin. This supposed, there can be no diffi∣culty in declaring why an heretik may without any miracle suffer with great re∣solution the greatest torments for main∣taining his heresy; Because men are natura∣ly inclined to follow their own opinions, and to maintain their own choice, and therfore we see what endeuors are used in vain, to persuade an humorsom and wilfull man or woman, to recall any foo∣lish Act they did of their own heads; and how hard it is to conuince them that it was ill don. Now, euery heretik makes his religion his own act, not by an hum∣ble submission of his iudgment to the
Church (as Catholiks do) but by a proud preference of his own vnderstanding be∣fore that of all others. This needs no other proof than that pitty which euery pitti∣full Protestant (euen the women) hath of the most learned Roman Catholiks ignorance and Idolatry. In this pride and preference of their proper iudgment, and in the wilfulness of continuing in their own choice, doth consist the obstinacy of heretiks; as the constancy of Catholiks takes its denomination from that reli∣gious perseuerance which is grounded vpon so rational a resolution as it is to submit and stick to the doctrin of a Church signalised with so many supernatural and uisible marks of being trusted by God, to teach and preach the true Catholik Faith, as hath bin demonstrated in the 5. Chap. Q. I grant that the difference between Catholik constancy and heretical obstinacy is, that this is a more wilfull than rational adherency to a mans proper opinion, or to a priuat interpretation, of Scripture against the testimony and tradition of the Church; and Catholik constancy is a religious perse∣uerance in a resolution of submitting our iudgments to the same Church: but how will you make it appeare that our Prote∣stant
interpretation of Scripture is a priuat one or that we are guilty of pride, seing we follow the interpretation of the Church of England, and submit our iudgments therunto? A. I will make that heretical obstinacy appeare in those very Protestant Saints and Martyrs which Iohn Fox doth celebrat for their constancy. And to begin (as you do) with the most innocent of them all, the Lady Iane Grey, shee did wilfully choose, and preferr before the Catholik, a new religion, or an interpretation of Scripture that was not as old as herself, though she was very yong. It had bin hat∣cht by Cranmer, and confirmed by the Parliament of Ed. 6. but some fiue years before she suffered: and was then Known and declared by an other Parliament (1. Mar.) to be heresy, and contrary to the publik sense and continual tradition of the Catholik Church, and therfore was called by the Protestants themselues a Reformation of the old doctrin. So that though the Church and Parliament of England in the reign of K. Ed. 6. called it à Common prayer, or a publik worship, yet was it declared by the Parliament of Q. Mary a bundel of Cran∣mers errers, and priuat opinions, which
himself and som few others inuented, or borrowed from Luther and Caluin, and other Innouators, who had resolued to make themselues popular and powerfull by setting vp their own priuat interpreta∣tions of Scripture, and opinions for points of Religion. So that though all England, or a greater part of the world than En∣gland is, should embrace that Reforma∣tion, and submit their iudgments to that Church, their protestant Tenets are still priuat opinions, and the submission of their iudgments to the same doth still inuolue that pride and preference of their own choice of a nouelty, or new interpreta∣tion of Scripture before the ancient doe∣trin and against the publik testimony of all precedent English Parliaments, as also a∣gainst the tradition of the Catholik Church. As for Queen Elizabeth, shee accommo∣dated her religion to the times, untill shee got the Croun; and then shee made use of the new Faith to serue her turn, and secure her interest. Indeed Iohn Fox his Martyrs were great but foolish sufferers; their ignorance was proportion'd to their ob∣stinacy; they cast themselues into the fire without Knowing wherfore. And yet Iohn Fox sayes those Tinkers, Tanners,
and silly women confuted the Bishops that endeuored to saue their liues, which them∣selues had forfeited acording to the an∣cient lawes of the land. And though they dyed not Martyrs, yet they dyed like En∣glishmen, that is, with as litle concern and as great courage, as if their cause had bin better. But this is no miracle in England, though the foolish partiality of Iohn Fox his pen doth endeuor to make his Prote∣stant Readers mistake those proud mad fellows for pious Martyrs. Q. Though I do approue of your diffe∣rence between heretical obstinacy, and Catholik constancy, yet I must still con∣demn your application therof to prote∣stancy and popery, for an other reason; which is, that Protestancy is so far from inuoluing pride, that the Church of En∣gland doth not as much as pretend to be infallible in its doctrin; neither doth it exact from its children a submission of their iudgments to itself, but only to Scri∣pture. And I hope there is as much humi∣lity (I am sure there is more safety) in sub∣mitting our iudgments to Gods written word, as to the tradition of the Roma Ca∣tholik Church. A. As I commend the Church of En∣glands
modesty and ingenuity in acknow∣ledging its fallibility, and in dispensing with the submission of your iudgments to the same (no fallible Church can exact or expect a submission of iudgment in any points of doctrin) so must I continue in my opinion of the pride and obstinacy of protestancy. 1. Because you will not be∣lieue any thing inculcated to you by God, vnless it be deliuered to you in writing, as if the Diuine maiesty had not as much right to command by orders intimated to us by word of mouth, as by his writing. All the true belieuers of the world vntill Moyses his law, were gouernd by the te∣stimony and tradition of the Church, wi∣thout any writing or Scriptures: neither is any thing written in the old or new Te∣stament wherupon Protestants may with any color of probability ground their pre∣tended priuilege of not belieuing any thing but Scripture; and this doth in many places tell them, they are as much obliged to belieue Tradition, or Gods unwritten word, as the written. Now, why English∣men, and som Northen people alone, should refuse to obey the Catholik Church, vnless it shewes for euery particular Gods order in writing, is not intelligible, them∣selues
and all other Nations owning the contrary to be prudently practised in all human gouernments? This must be pride and obstinacy. 2. The pride and obstinacy of this their pretended priuilege (which is the life and fundation of all Protestant Reformations) is further discouered by the practise of aprin∣ciple wherin all Protestants agree: which is, that not one of them thinks he is bound in conscience to submit his iudgment to any of their own or any other Congrega∣tions sense of Scripture in controuerted texts, if that sense agreeth not with his own priuat interpretation; If that of his Church agree not with his own sense, he may stick to his own, and reiect the other. And this is the reason why Protestants are diuided into so many sects. How this prin∣ciple and practise may be excused from heretical pride and obstinacy, I know not: For, they stand at a defiance with all Chur∣ches, and will as litle submit their iudg∣ments to their own, as to that of Rome. Euery Protestant is by the fundamental Tenet of the Reformation his own Master, and a supreme Iudge of Gods written law. Doth not this demonstrat how those Re∣formations are founded vpon pride and
obstinacy? Can there be greater, than that simple men and silly women should presu∣me to be Masters and Iudges of those Di∣uine and incomprehensible mysteries? That they should preferr their priuat iudgments before that of their own Church, and of ours, vnto which the greatest Doctors in all ages haue submitted? Vvhat a proud, foolish, insolent, and obstinat people would the English conclude any other to be, wherof not one would acquiesce in the iudgment or sentence of the Courts of Iudicature, but euery one assume to him∣self the power of deciding his own law suites, and of appealing from the Chancery, or euen from the Parliament, to his own priuat opinion and iudgment? Let euery Protestant know this is his own case in matters of religion. He appeals in what concerns Faith and the sense of Scripture, from his own Church and the Catholik, and general Councells, to his own proper iudgment. Doth he think that Christ would institute so absurd a spiritual gouernment? Can any man of sense imagin it agrees with Scripture? To what purpose then should the Scriptures and St Paul bid us be of one belief, peaceable, and humble? Is any of these virtues, or that of Catholik Faith,
consistent with such pride, obstinacy, and dissentions, as this principle must inspire, and we see in all the reformed Churches, and in that of our own Countrey? You see therfore that your reformed Churches and interpretations of Scripture haue so litle in them of the vnity, obsequiousness, and humility of Christian Faith so much recom∣mended to us by St Paul, that they seeme to the most learned Roman Catholiks not only to sauor of heresy, but to be the very source of heretical pride, and damnable obstinacy, so far are they from hauing the least smack of the fundation or fruit of Christianity. SECT. III. SOM INFERENCES FIT TO BE considered by all Protestants, and vvhether any may be saued if they dye in that per∣suasion. IF Protestancy doth inuolue that pride and obstinacy which I haue endeuored to proue, and deduce from its principles, without doubt he who dyes a Protestant, is damn'd. But Because som are called
Protestants, and yet know not what prote∣stancy is, I will deliuer my opinion how far their ignorance may excuse them from being damnd by their profession. 1. No Protestant Bishop or Minister can be saued, if they repent not their hauing bin of that religion. The reason is; though many of them were more ignorant than they are, yet that ignorance can not excu∣se them, because their calling doth oblige them to be at least so learned in History (if not in Diuinity) as to know the no∣uelty of their own reformed Tenets, and the manners and motiues of the Authors of their Reformations. These hauing bin so contrary to Christianity and morality, the Preachers and Promoters deserue no∣thing so well as damnation, either for damning others, or for not knowing they will be damn'd themselues. 2. No man or woman that hath read, or heard the contents of Doctor Heylins Hi∣story of the Church of England, or of any such Protestant Author, relating the change of Religion, and the causes of that change in our Countrey, can be saued, if they continue and dye Protestants. For, the cheat of that change is so visible, the mo∣tiues so wicked, and the practises of the
Authors and Actors so abominable, that there is not the least room left for a to∣lerable excuse, or conscientious mistake. The spiritual supremacy of a layman doth not only inuolue a contradiction, but the occasion of King Henry 8. assuming it, was so scandalous, and the way of exercising it so ridiculous, that euery one was as much offended at his presumption in making himself Christs Vicar in spiritualibus, as they were at his profaness in making Cromuel of Putney his own Vicar general ouer the Clergy. And all this confusion was raised, because the Pope would not comply with his lust in diuorcing him from his lawfull wife, and marrying him to An Bullen. There was not a man in En∣gland then, who did not see and say from whence the Kings spiritual supremacy (the fundation and distinction of prelatik Pro∣testancy) had its rise, and their saying is to this day continued, and growen a rude Prouerb. As for the change of the Mass into the Common prayer, it seemed euen to all the poor Countrey folks so absurd, that they took up arms against it in K. Ed. 6. reign: and both it and the whole prote∣stant Reformation was condemned as
heresy by Act of Parliament, 1. Mar. And though the same Reformation was again restored by an other Act of Q. Eliz. som fiue years after, yet euery one Knew that the very same persons who voted for re∣storing it were they who had condemn'd it, and now went against their conscience for Q. Elizabeths sake, who not only pro∣mised rewards, but gaue hopes (as Doctor Heylin Confesseth) of marrying herself to diuers persons (euen of the lower House) vvho vvere instrumental in getting Votes, and securing her interest by reuiuing and setling that Religion vvhich themselues had cryed dovvn as heresy in Q. Maries dayes. Vvhat ploughman or Ditcher in any part of England hath not vvit and learning enough to confute and contemn such a change, and such a reformation? There needs no Logik or Diuinity. A bare Knovvledge of the fact is sufficient to discouer the fraud. Fevv in England are so ignorant as not to Knovv that Henry 8. turnd avvay Q. Katherin for his loue to An Bullen, and that Q. Elizabeth brought in the nevv Religion to strengthen her vveake title to the Croun against the Knovvn right of the Steuards. 3. Though it vvere granted that the
Knowledge of this change of Religion doth not quite conuince the most illiterat and dull people of its falsood, yet it can not be denyed but that it must of neces∣sity raise prudent doubts against its being Diuinely inspired; and that whosoeuer is careless in cleering those doubts, doth sin mortaly, and will be damn'd, if he dyes in that sin. For, a prudent doubt is as if it were the twilight of reason, discouering som absurdity in that which formerly we unwarily belieued, not reflecting upon the same untill som new chance, or circum∣stance made it appear more cleerly unto us. Vvhen this new chance or circumstance doth make an impression upon our mind and conscience, we are bound to inquire after the cause and cure of that impression and remorse; if not, the sore will turn in∣to a canker, which can not be otherwise preuented than by a conscientious curio∣sity, according to euery ones capacity. The illiterat person is not bound to learn to read, or to study Philosophy, but he is bound to repair to his honest neighbors, to inquire and hear what the Papists can say for their Religion, as well as the Pro∣testants. And if he doth this without preiudice, and with a good intention,
he will cleer his doubt and conscience. Q. I am confident there are many poor Countrey fellows in England who neuer heard of King Henry 8. amours with An Bullen, nor of his assuming the spiritual supremacy, nor of Q. Elizabeths reuiuing protestancy to salue her own illegitimacy, or to secure her interest against the Queen of Scots right. How then can these men doubt or discourse of what they neuer heard? must they also be damn'd? A. There is not one in England who hath not heard of Persecution and Proclama∣tions against Papists, and that these men suffer for their conscience, and the old Religion. This can not but excite a curio∣sity to Know what men these are, and why they should be so foolish, as to suffer for so ridiculous a Religion, and so strange a Beast as the Parson describeth both the Pope and Popery to be, when he forgets his sermon, or hath a mind to diuert his Audience, or incense them against Catho∣liks. By these and other such wayes the most dull men com to heare, and may be informed, of the Roman Catholik Reli∣gions antiquity, as of the nouelty of the Protestant, and how this came to be in∣troduced; this once Knowen, all the
industry and artifices of the Protestant par∣ty will neuer be able to preuent, or root out of mens minds those rational doubts which are grounded vpon the light of common sense, when it discouers (as it must in this case) the least deformity or dissonancy against reason in any obiect whatsoeuer. For, what can be more disso∣nant to the very first principles of reason, than to preferr a priuat new and interested sense of Scripture before that old one which the Church stuck to as authentik for so many ages? The English Bible or Translation, before that which all Chri∣stendom hath bin say'd by aboue 1200. years? An Act of Parliament of Queen Elizabeth and the Abettors of her interest, before all other Acts of English Parlia∣ments, and all general Councells? The authority of such debaucht Friers and Priests as Luther, Caluin, and the first Pro∣testant Reformers, before that of all the holy Doctors and the whole body of the Roman visible Church since the Apostles? In a word, new fancies called a Reformation, before that old Christianity wherin our Ancestors, as also our Kings, liued and dyed so happily? and wherin (as the learned Protestants themselues confess) they were
saued; wheras we all deny that they can be saued by Protestancy. Q. I see you are of opinion that no Protestant at all can be saued. Vvhat? Can none of them haue inuincible ignorance? Is there so cleer and obuious an euidence of the Roman Catholik being the true Church, that none can pretend nor plead ignorance of that truth? A. That out of the true Church there is no saluation, is a maxim of Faith wherin the holy Fathers agree. That the same Church is so visible and preferable before all others, that euen the most stupid may as easily see it, as a Citty vpon a mountain, and therfore are commanded to repair to it, is manifest in Scripture. That the Ro∣man Catholik hath those cleer marks of Gods fauor, which persuade the most scru∣pulous it is the true Church of God, hath bin in the 4. Chapter demonstrated by us, and appeareth by those supernatural signs of miracles, sanctity, conuersion of Nations to Christianity, &c. which shine in it, and haue set it out so gloriously in all ages and places of the world since the preaching of the Apostles. That in England there is any corner or person wherin common sense can be so burried, or curiosity so
dead, as to be ignorant of these things, and others deliuered by tradition from age to age, and year to year, is not credible. But in case there be any Protestant so neer a beast as not to reflect vpon any thing he sees or heareth of his own or of our Reli∣gion; his Baptisme will saue him, if he did not loose, by a mortal sin the grace which he receiued in and by that Sacra∣ment. And this is all the comfort I can giue my Protestant friends, whose saluation I more heartily wish, than those do, who de∣lude them with larger opinions. Q. This is but very cold comfort. Vvill not God grant to som poor ignorant Pro∣testant an act of contrition, at least in the last hour? A. I think not. But if he doth to any, it is to som of those stupid Creatures I last spoke of. As for others, who haue wit and wayes to consider and reflect vpon those doubts which occurr to themselues, or are raised in them by the discourse of others, their obstinacy or affected igno∣rance in not listening, or inquiring into a matter so important, and so easily re∣solued, makes them incapable of so great a fauor as an act of contrition. And as for those ernest or bigot Protestants, they are in
greatest danger of any, and furthest from contrition; because hauing a cleerer Kno∣wledge of their own religion, and spen∣ding much time in the meditation therof, they must needs haue great doubts, if they do not stifle them in their first birth, by diuerting their thoughts to more pleasing obiects, and by auoyding all occasions of discoursing of protestancy, as commonly they do, especialy when they perceiue there is any likelihood of laying open the weakness of its principles, and the wic∣kedness of the first Reformers. Besides, an act of contrition inuolues Faith, hope, and charity, and these Protestants not hauing Faith, but rather an auersion against hea∣ring of it, are not in a disposition fit for contrition, which is the greatest grace God doth to his most eminent seruants, and the Saints of his own Church. Q. Methinks this is very hard. I can not as yet comprehend why a deuout Pro∣testant may not be capable of an act of contrition. Is protestancy so abominable in the sight of God, that he will not turn his mercifull eye towards Protestants? Is it wors than other great sins which God doth pardon? Is it heresy? And if it be, may not an heretik haue an act of contri∣tion?
Is the malice of heresy so great as to exclude Gods mercy? A. Vvithout doubt Heresy is the greatest of sins, and yet excludes not Gods mercy; but an Heretiks conuersion precedes con∣trition, this not being compatible vvith heresy. I vvill briefly tell you vvherin con∣sists the malice of heresy, and leaue your∣self to iudge vvhether protestancy be He∣resy. The malice of Heresy consists in the contempt of Gods veracity. And Gods ve∣racity consists in an infinit inclination to truth. An infinit inclination to truth is not consistent vvith a permission of falsood credibly fathered and fastned upon him that permits it, if he can easily hinder the same. Now, the malice of heresy consists in hauing so mean an opinion of Gods veracity, or of his inclination to truth, that he vvould permit a Church so credibly pretending to be his own, as the Roman Catholik doth (by its miracles, its sanctity its conuersion of Nations to Christianity, and other supernatural marks) to impose upon the vvorld (in his name) for so many ages, false doctrin for true; vvheras it vvas in his power euery moment of all that time to discouer and declare the cheat, and disown the doctrin. And yet he did
not either. That our miracles father our doctrin upon God, is easily proued; for, though the first Protestant Reformers and their successors cry out against som of our miracles as false, yet they are forc't to con∣fess som of them are true; and vve joyn with them in censuring false miracles as such, and punish them who feign them as Malefactors. Against our conuersion of Na∣tions to Christianity (a confessed mark of the true Church) they haue nothing to say; and as litle against the succession and sanc∣tity of our Doctrin and Doctors. Notwith∣standing this credible (and indeed con∣uincing) appearance of our miracles, and of the Roman Catholik Church being the true one, commissioned by God to instruct his people, yet the Protestants will not be∣lieue it, nor submit their iudgments to so authentik an authority, nor hearken to the Diuine voice manifesting itself by the clee∣rest signs and euidence that is consistent with the freedom, merit, and obscurity of Christian Faith. Vvhether this obstinacy be not heresy, let the Protestants them∣selues iudge; and examin whether to slight the testimony and signs of such a Church, be not a contempt of Gods veracity, as supposing he can permit falsood to be so
plausibly fatherd upon him as wee see the Roman Catholik doctrin hath bin for so many ages, and throughout all parts of the world. CHAP. VII. OF THE MINISTERY OF THE Church, and of the nullity of that of England. AS it is necessary that Gods Church should haue visible signs wherby it may be discerned from all heretical Con∣gregations, so it is acknowledged that in the same there is a Ministery caracterised with such publik ceremonies and authen∣tik testimonies, that there can be no dan∣ger of counterfeiting a mission or voca∣tion so sacred. In the Christian Church the Ministers are called Bishops and Priests. Both are consecrated by a real imposition of Episcopal hands, and other ceremonies which haue bin practised in the Church euer since the Apostles, from whom by a continual succession the Epis∣copal caracter must descend, and be pro∣ued; otherwise no credit is to be giuen
to any persons claiming to be Bishops of whose ordination Priestood depen∣deth. It was the misfortune of the Protestant Reformations, that the Authors therof were not Bishops, and, by consequence, could not transmit either that caracter, or that of Priestood to their successors, as they did their doctrin. This defect they endeuored to supply by persuading such as belieued them, that no indelible carac∣ter or visible ceremony of imposition of Episcopal hands, was necessary for a Mi∣nister of the Ghospel. And euen the Church of England was necessitaded to approue of this desperat doctrin (in the 25. of its 39. articles of Religion) because it was then well Knowen, the Consecrators of her first Bishops were no real Bishops, though they were called so for reason of state. One is, that the constitution of En∣glish Parliaments requiring Bishops as one of the three estates of the Kingdom, and their votes being a considerable addition to the soueraigns authority, of which alone their nomination dependeth, Q. Elizabeth in this particular of Episcopacy went against the principles of other Re∣formations, and would needs Keep vp the
name of Bishops in her Church. But it hap∣pened very cross to her design, that none of the Catholik Bishops of England (no others were then there liuing) would lay hands upon, or consecrate any of those new ones which she named to that digni∣ty. See the cōmission and dis∣pensation in Doctor Bramhall the Prote∣stant Bis∣hop of Derry, his vindica∣tion of the Episcopa∣cy of En∣gland. See the statut. 8. Eliz. 1. Therfore she was forc't to issue forth a second commission for that purpose and therin to dispense (by virtue of her supre∣me spiritual iurisdiction) vvith the very state and condition of the Consecrators. And this power and practise hauing bin publik∣ly excepted against (by Catholik Authors in print) as null, and ridiculous, it was confirmed and declared by Act of Parlia∣ment (8. Eliz. 1.) that whatsoeuer had bin don untill then in making of Bishops, Archbishops, &c. by the Queens commis∣sion under the great seal of England, should stand as ualid, whether the Consecrators were Bishops or no Bishops; any person or persons vvhatsoeuer, hauing bin declared capable of giuing that caracter to any o∣ther, prouided they were authorised ther∣unto by her Maiesties commission under the great seal. This occasioned great disputes between Doctor Haiding and Doctor Iuel, one of the first Protestant Bishops. Doctor Haiding
in his printed bookes desired Mr Iuel to name the Bishop that consecrated him, Parker, and the rest of Queen Elizabeths first Bishops; and was content to submit to Iuel, and own the validity of his and the other protestant Bishops consecration, if he would name Parkers Consecrator. A man would think this was no such intricat matter, nor strong argument, if euer Parker had bin consecrated by a Bishop. And yet Iuel hauing bin thus prouoked by his in∣sulting Aduersary, could neuer name Par∣kers Consecrator, of whose consecration depended that of the rest; nor produce Registers of that consecration, when Har∣ding called for them, though som 50. years after, appear'd in print a very formal Re∣gister of Parkers consecration, copied for∣sooth out of Records Kept in Lauander at Lambeth. The unseasonable appearan∣ce of this new found Register occasioned much laughter, and new disputes which haue continued vntill these times. And in∣deed it can not well enter into any consi∣dering mens heads, that Parker, Iuel, and the first protestant Bishops (who were called by Catholiks no Bishops in print, for want of a right Consecrater, and challen∣ged to name the Bishops that consecrated
them or Parker, their aduersaries setting their stress vpon that only argument) would not take the pains to see and search their Registers of Lambeth for a Bishops name that imported them so much to na∣me, if any such Bishop had euer bin, or any such Records had bin then extant. Be∣sides, sure their memories were not so short, as not to remember without the help of Registers and Records the name of a man that their Successors pretended (fifty years after the time of answering was past) had made Parker a Bishop but fiue years before they were askt the question, with so much ceremony and solemnity. For, Hardings book and Iuells answer were printed an. 1565. or therabouts. An other thing made the prelatik Cler∣gies caracter absolutly null. And that was the Form which they used in the consecra∣tion of their Bishops and Priests. This Form was iudged essentialy defectiue, be∣cause not one word therof did express or mention the caracter pretended to be gi∣uen therby. And though the Church of England for neer one hundred years had defended and practised this Form, yet at length they were forc't to submit to their Aduersaries exceptions and reasons against
it, and to change and correct the Form, as wee directed in the bookes we writ against the same. Vpon the Kings restaura∣tion they printed their Ritual and therin you may see the words Bishop and Priest ad∣ded vnto the Form of their consecrations, which (or their equiualent) are absolutly necessary; and yet nothing like them was in the old Forms, and former editions. This humility of theirs is to be commen∣ded, though it be to no purpose, seing the change made not them who went before it, Bishops; and though their late refor∣med Form be valid, yet when pronounced by men that are not Bishops, it works no effect, nor giues any caracter either of Priestood or Episcopacy to themselues or their Successors. And none of the Prote∣stant Clergy hath bin consecrated by a true Bishop since the change of their old Form. Let the Protestant Layty now reflect vpon the caracter and conscience of their Clergy, as being men who take vpon them∣selues the administration of Sacraments, absolution from sins, spiritual jurisdiction, and all functions belonging to true Bis∣hops and Priests; though themselues can not but know there is no probable ground
to belieue they are such. I say nothing of the reuenues they are possessed of vpon the account of being Churchmen; but I can not be so uncharitable as not to aduertise my Countreymen of the danger they are in, and of the damnation which will follow, if by timely repentance and a generous re∣solution they do not withdraw themselues from the direction of such Teachers, and from the Ministery of such a Clergy. Vvhat can they answer to the, obiection we bor∣row from the statut 8. Eliz. Can they ima∣gin that the Queen would dispense with the state and condition of the Consecraters, if they had had the Episcopal caracter? Vvhat need was there of a dispensation with their state and condition, if they were real Bishops? Vvhy should the Parlament con∣firm this dispensation, and enact by law, that whatsoeuer was don by this commis∣sion of the Queens, should be valid, whe∣ther the Consecraters were Bishops or not; the words are, by any person, or persons vvhatsoeuer. All that my Countreymen can say, is, that they haue an Act of Parlia∣ment for the caracter of their Clergy, and for the saluation of their souls. Vvhat that will auail them in the other world, I wish they did consider. Surely they can not but
know that such Acts, will be no excuse before that dreadfull Iudge, who takes no other euidence but that of our own conscience. This only we must consult in matters of Eternity, and not think that a Clergy or Religion established by a tem∣poral law, is lawfull, though it should be called legal by an Act of Parlament. Q. Sir, I haue seen the Registers of Lam∣beth you would haue me suspect as forged. I assure you I see no sign of forgery in them. And as for Bishop Iuels not answe∣ring Doctor Harding demand, concerning the first Protestant Bishops (and particu∣larly Parkers) Consecrator, perhaps he thought it an idle question, and underua∣lued so weak an obiection. A. Forged Registers are often the most formal, all counterfeit ware standing in need of being set forth with great artifice. Vve haue seen Registers and Records of publik Courts of Iudicature so artificialy changed and corrupted, that nothing but their not being produced many years be∣fore, when they were called for, could conclude the forgery. Doctor Harding cal∣led for the Registers of the first protestant Bishops Consecration, as well as for the Consecraters name: Neither did B. Iuel
contemn this demand, as you imagin. He went as far in the answer as he durst. He answered, 1. that the first protestant Bishops in the beginning of Queen Elizabeths rei∣gn, were consecrated in due form by Ar∣chbishop Parker their Metropolitan: But being again pressed by Harding to name Parkers Consecrator, he put off that imper∣tinent question (wherof the whole con∣trouersy and the credit of the Church of England depended) by a wild digression and long discourse of the ancient Bishops being consecrated without aquainting the Pope. But sure Mr Iuel might aquaint Doc∣tor Harding with the name of him who consecrated Parker, as well as he named Parker for Consecrator of the other Bis∣hops; and certainly would, if Parker him∣self had bin realy consecrated by a Bishop. If you do not belieue my relation, read Doctor Hargings bookes against Iuel, and Iuels own Apology for the Church of En∣gland, where they treat of this parti∣cular. Q. Gentlemen, I would to God you did agree among yourselues, and not break the Layties heads with your dispu∣tes. You haue put so many doubts into mine, that I can hardly belieue any thing.
On both sides you seem to bee honest and learned men; therfore I think my best way is, to continue in the Church of England, and trust in God, that I shall not be dam∣n'd for not being of that of Rome, untill I be better satisfied that the points wher∣in it differs from ours are necessary for sal∣uation. And this requiring longer time, (the particulars being so many) than I am like to liue, t'is not credible God would oblige me, or any other illiterat person, to spend our dayes rather in controuersies than in prayer and good works; and in the end be as litle satisfied with ourselues as our and your Clergy are with one an other. Yourselues grant that implicit Faith is sufficient for such ignorant people as I am, that Faith, I am sure I haue; for I do belieue all that God reuealed, though I do not know what it is he reuealed, or whe∣ther he hath apointed the Church of Ro∣me, rather than that of England, to in∣struct the world, and inform us of his re∣uelations. And truly I belieue a man may be saued without troubling himself to know which of them it is that God hath apointed for our instruction, prouided we be redy to be members therof when that shall be made cleer to us by better
arguments than I am able to inquire after. A. This is so dangerous doctrin, that I iudge it worth my pains to shew yet fur∣ther the obligation the most illiterat men haue to search after the true Church, and how easiy they may find it out by visible signs; and how you may without any help, but that of common sense, be satisfied of the truth of euery particular point of doc∣trin wherin Roman Catholiks differ from Protestants: And all this in the space of less than two houres time. Q. Nay Sir, if you perform your under∣taking, I deserue to be damn'd for all Eeter∣nity, if I will nor hear you for so short a time as two hours. I pray Sir proceed. CHAP. VIII. HOVV EVERY ILLITERAT PERSON may easily and in the space of two houres, find out the true Church, and the truth of euery point of doctrin controuerted betvveen Ca∣tholiks and Protestants. VVHen the people of Israel were most diuided in matters of Reli∣gion, 3. Reg. 8. the Prophet Elias made a motion to
them of cleering the truth by that famous dogmatical Miracle of burning an Ox upon the Altar without kindling the fire under it. This cleer and compendious way was hugely approued of by the multitude, as suting best with their capacities, for, they needed not learning to dispute, their eyes were sufficient Iudges, and they had so much common sense as to know, that God would not permit a falsood to be confir∣md by a miracle in so publik a trial, wher∣in his Veracity was so particularly con∣cerned. The Prophets therfore of Baal durst not refuse so fair an offer as Elias made in their presence, and I hope the Protestant Clergy will be ashamed to refu∣se mine. Let us not delude the people with school subtilities, or obscure texts of scrip∣ture. If the Church of England or Scot∣land or any other reformed one be the true Church, and its doctrin the true doc∣trin, let that be tried by miracles. I shall try ours of Rome by that test. I challenge then all the Bishops and Ministers of the Church of England and all others of the Reformation, or all the Protestants of the world, to work, or mention any one mi∣racle euer yet wrought by any Protestant to confirm any one point of doctrin
wherin they differ from the Roman Ca∣tholik. Gentlemen, summon your Sinods, search into all histories, profane, and sa∣cred, set your heads together, and pro∣duce at least som probable testimony of as much as one miracle to grace your Refor∣mations. And if you can not find undoub∣ted miracles, at least shew som thing that lookes like a miracle; som thing that may be mistaken for one, wherof the falsood or fraud hath not bin as yet discoured: such as you say many of ours are. Perhaps you will pretend that your Protestants are not so easily foold with false miracles, as our Roman Catholiks. But this must be a gift and priuilege of your priuat spirit; for, the Spaniards, Italians, and French, are not by nature so dull as our Northen Pro∣testants, and are as loath to be cheated out of their moneys by Masses, Miracles, Pilgrimages, and other pretexts of deuo∣tion, as you are. And yet they belieue such Miracles, as haue bin motiues for the Po∣pes, or people, to Canonize our Saints, and those also wherby Heathens and heretiks haue bin conuerted to our Religion. Q. I doubt not Sir, but that the Catho∣liks are as unlikely and loath to be imposed vpon, as Protestants; therfore I would
fain heare som of those undeniable mira∣cles you pretend to haue in your Church, and for confirmation of the doctrin wher∣in you differ from us. But I pray let them be Miracles like those of Christ, for I will not belieue any others. I giue you this cau∣tion for feare you should trouble me with Mother Iulianas fits, and one Finaghtyes triks, wherwith he deluded the common people heer in England and Ireland, where that mans Miracles (as I heare) are mighti∣ly cryed up. A. Sir, you haue reason to expect I should relate unto you Miracles like those of Christ, seing himself hath sayd (Iohn. 14.22.) Luther to 7. l. de Iu∣daeis. &c. fol. 210. A Deo didi∣cimus, & accepim{us}, aeternum verbū & veritatem Dei hacte∣nus mille quingentio annis mi∣raculis & signis con∣fessam & confirma∣tam. he that belieueth in me, the vvorks that I do, he shall do, and greater. Vvhich words not only Luther the first Protestant Reformer, but your English Bibles (edit. 1576.) in the marginal notes, referr to the vvhole body of the Church, in vvhom this virtue doth shine for euer. Though I must confess, both Lu∣ther, and our English Protestant writers contradict themselues again in this particu∣lar (as all men must who maintain errors) and say, when we press them to relate som of their Miracles, that Miracles are now su∣perfluous, and therfore none wrought in the Church. But I shall deal so impartialy
with Protestants in this matter, that I will not mention any miracle for confirmation of the Roman Catholik Church and doctrin, which the best Protestant writers them∣selues do not confess to be miracles, though others of them attribute the wor∣king therof to the power of Beelzebub (as the obstinat Iewes did of Christs) and that, for no other reason but because the mira∣cles were wrought by Papists, and to con∣firm Popery. As for Finaghtyes miracles, I made it my buisness to inquire after them, and him also; and do find, that so soon as he began to work his miracles, the Popish Archbis∣hop of Tuam in Ireland (who was his Ordinary) questioned him for that pre∣sumption, and finding him both ignorant and obstinat, he forbid him the further tempting of God, and scandalizing the Church by his foolish attempts. But the mans zeal or vanity preuailing more vpon his Spirit, than his Superiors commands, he continued his ridiculous course, and ther∣upon was commanded out of the Arch∣bishops Prouince. After that vigilant Pre∣lats death, Finaghty lurking for som time in other places, came into England, and from thence returned to Dublin, where he playd
the fool with breathing, and beating the Deuil in good ernest; one Stanton (an other mad Priest of his Countrey) printed many of his rash attempts for great miracles. Finaghty, after that his manner of exor∣cisms had hin examind, and found to be different from those of the Church, and his dispossessing of Deuils to be without any visible marke or sign of the Deuils possession, or at least departure, was silenc't by the Clergy of Dublin, and commanded out of that Province. From thence he went to his own (Conaght) and falling again to his old miracles, he was by the Popish Bis∣hop of Elfin depriued of his general Vi∣carship, and that extraordinary respect for∣got which the simplicity of the people had offered to his supposed sanctity; by vvhom now he is much slighted. My cha∣rity inclineth me to belieue, that his grea∣test fault was folly, and that he was more cheated by the Deuil, than so simple a man could design to cheat others. I haue bin more diffuse upon this subiect than you may think it deserues, because the world may be satisfied None suspects the truth of miracles, nor corrects the foolish Pretenders of working them more, than we Roman Catholiks; it being one of the
greatest cares of our Bishops and Pastors, to preuent such impostures, and to punish the Impostors, And this hath bin the con∣tinual practise of our Church, euer since the beginning of Christianity. Q. You haue giuen me great satisfac∣tion by your relation and opinion of Fi∣naghty, and his miracles. If they had not bin so soon, and sesonably condemn'd by his own party, I should suspect that all your other miracles reported in Legends and Saints liues, were of the same natu∣re. But now I see that miracles which were neuer contradicted or suspected by yourselues are credible. I pray therfore relate those, which you say are confes∣sed or allowed of by the learned Prote∣stants, and yet confirm your doctrin in op∣position to theirs.
SECT. I. THE CONVERSION OF THE Heathen Kings and Nations from Paga∣nism to Christianity, and Popery, is an euident miracle and mark of the truth of the Roman Catholik Church and doctrin, in opposition to that of all Protestant Refor∣mations. Its continuance euen from the Apostles to this present demonstrated, as also the impossibi∣lity of its pretended insensible change. THe greatest of all miracles (it being the end for which they haue bin wrought, and the Christian Church insti∣tuted) is the conuersion of the Heathen Kings and Nations to Christianity. If ther∣fore it be proued, that all the Heathen Kings and Nations which haue bin con∣uerted from Paganism to Christianity, we∣re conuerted to no other but to that Chri∣stianity which Protestants call Popery, and that the sayd conuersions were perfor∣med by knowen Papists, and confessed miracles, our Aduersaries must acknow∣ledge that the Roman Catholik Church,
(and it alone) is the true Church of God; otherwise it will follow, that Christ in∣stituted his Church to no purpose; and that his design and desire of the conuer∣sion of Nations, and sauing their souls, came to nothing. Nay it will follow, that Christ is not the Messias, to vvhose doctrin and Church (as the Scriptures and Pro∣phets foretell) all Nations shall flovv, and their Kings Minister, the multitude of the seas shall be conuerted, the Iles shall vvayt for, and the Heathens be its inheritance, and the end of the earth its possession. All this the Protestants themselues confess to be pro∣phecied of the true Christian Church, as you may see in their marginal notes upon the English Bible edit. 1576. in Esay 60. vers. ult. And in Daniel 2. vers. 45. This argu∣ment made so great impression upon ma∣ny of the most learned Protestant writers, (who had resolued not to be Papists) that som of them turned Iewes, others Atheists, others Turks; as Bernardin Ochin, Seba∣stian Castalio, Dauid George, Adam Neuserus, Allemanus, and others. Q. Sir though I doubt not of your sincere dealing, yet I must not take upon your single credit, that learned Protestants
could turn Turks and Iewes, vpon the score you mention. A. Sir I hope you will belieue them∣selues. Read Bernardin Ochins Preface to his Dialogues, wherin you will find these words, vvhen I did consider hovv Christ by his povver, vvisdom, and goodness had foun∣ded and established his Church, &c. and again discerned hovv the same vvas utterly ouer∣throvvn, I could not but vvonder, and being desirous to knovv the cause, I found there had bin Popes. From this conceit of the Popes preuailing against Christs Church, he con∣cluded there had bin no such thing as Christs Diuinity, and proceeded to teach Circumcision, and Poligamy; and at length came to be an impure Apostata, as the famous Beza doth term him in his Trea∣tise de Poligam. pag. 4. Impurus ille Apo∣stata Bernardinus Ochinus. Read likewise Sebastian Castalios' own words in his Pre∣face of the great Latin Bible dedicated to King Eduard 6. which are, The more I do peruse the Scriptures, the less do I find the same (he meanes the profecies of the con∣uersion of Kings and Nations) performed, hovvsoeuer you understand the same profecies. Dauid George (say the Protestant Diuines of Basil in their History of him edit. 1568.)
discoursed thus, If the doctrin of Christ and his Apostles had bin true and perfect, the Church vvhich they planted, &c. should haue continued, &c. But novv it is manifest that Antichrist hath subuerted the doctrin of the Apostles, and the Church by them begun, as is euident in the Papacy: therfore the doctrin of the Apostles vvas false, and imperfect And so this protestant Apostle of Basil, by re∣flecting vpon the fundamental principle of the Reformation (which is a supposition that the true Church and doctrin had bin inuisible or destroyd for many ages by Popery) became a blasphemous Apostat, affirming that our Sauior was a seducer. In like manner Adam Neuserus, the chief Pastor of Heidelberg, turnd Turk and was circumcised at Constantinople. See Osian∣der in his Epitom. Centur. 16. pag. 818. The like fate had Alemannus, Beza his bosom friend, as Conradus Schlusserburg sayes in Theol. Caluin. fol. 9. and Beza confesseth ep. 65. pag. 108. Alemannum affirmant ad Iudaismum defecisse. And all their conuer∣sions to so damn'd sects, were grounded vpon their not finding any pagan Kings or Nations to haue bin euer conuerted to protestancy, but all wayes to popery. Q. I must confess Sir, that if all the
Heathen Kings and Nations haue bin con∣uerted to that Christianity which we call popery, and this was performed by Papists (which could not be don without mira∣cles) and no pagan Kings and Nations haue bin euer conuerted to Protestancy, nor by Protestants, yee haue much more to say for yourselues than euer I heard be∣fore, and we much less. But I doubt you will hardly proue that untill the end of the first 600. years, there were any Kings or Nations conuerted to Popery; though afterwards I must own, that profession was spread ouer the world, and reignd untill our Protestant Reformation began in the year 1517. And to auoyd prolixity, I desire you to rosolue me this one question, whether Constantin the great the first Chri∣stian Emperor was a Papist? Vve belieue that he, and the Church of his time, was Protestant, because the purest Christianity, (Protestancy) was then in vogue; though afterwards it degenerated insensibly into Popery. A. Euseb. de Vita Con∣stantini l. 3. c. 47. & lib. 4. cap. 38. S. Hieron. contra Vi∣gilant. an∣te med. Costanti∣nus Impe¦rator sāc∣tas reli∣quias An∣dreae, Lu∣cae, & Ti∣mothei transtulit Constan∣tinopolim, apud quas Daemones rugiunt. And ibid. Si reliqui∣us Sancto∣rum trās∣ferre, & in aureos loculos re condere non licet, sacrilegus fuit cum Constan∣tino Arca∣dius, om∣nes Epis∣copi non solum sa∣crilegi, sed & fatui iudicandi, qui rem vilissimā & cineres dissoluts n seric, vase au∣reo porta∣uerunt, &c. S. August. tom. 39. d Sanctis, saith, Crucis caracter Basilicae dedicantur, altaria consecrantur. S. Greg. apud Bedam hist. lib. 1. c. 30. Euseb. de vitâ Constantini. l 3. c. 2. atque interdum vultum salutari illa passionis signavit nota. Zozomen. hist. l. 1. c. 8. Sanctae Crucis plurimum tribuit honoris. Prudentius in Apotheosi, vexillum{que} Crucis summus Dominator adorat. S. Chrysostom. in ep. 2. Cor. hom. 26. versus fin. Nam & ipse qui pur∣puram indutus est, accedit illa amplexus sepulchra, & fastu deposito, sta Sanctis supplicaturus, ut pro se ad Dominum intercedant. See the same also in S. Chrysost ad pop. hom. 60. versus finem. That Constantin the great was a Pa∣pist, and the Religion then in vogue (and the only then called Catholik) was Pope∣ry, is euident by Eusebius his Ecclesiastical History written a litle after Constantins
death, as also, by what the Centurists of Magdeburg and all other learned Prote∣stants confess. For, it is euident by their writings, that Constantin erected Temples in memory of Martyrs, and the Apostles; prouided his Sepulchre there, to the end that after his death he might be made par∣taker of the prayers there offered: He translated to Constantinople the reliques of St Andrew, Luke, and Timothy, at which the Deuil did roare, which parti∣cular circumstance St Hierom presseth a∣gainst Vigilantius, whom he concludeth an heretik, for being against the praying to Saints, and worshiping their reliques. St Augustin and St Gregory (two other Doctors of the Church) defend the prac∣tise of consecrating Churches (when Con∣stantin built them) with the sign of the Cross, and sprinkling of holy water, which I belieue the protestant Clergy of Dublin were ignorant of, when (as I haue bin credibly informed) they framed (very la∣tely) a new form of their own heads, to consecrat Mr Lingars oual Temple, with such hatred to the Cross, that they would not make use of the sign therof in the Con∣secration, nor bless themselues in the be∣ginning, or throughout the whole work,
nor place any Cross in the top of the Church, for fear of profaning it, or trou∣bling the Spirit of that peaceble Minister, not long before departed: Nay Crosses we∣re pull'd down in that Diocess, and Catho∣liks punished for opposing them who committed such sacrileges. Vvithout doubt Constantin the great was one of the most rank Papists, and though he was the man who pulled down Idols, and established Christianity in the world with its splendor, and publik exercise, yet I feare our Zealous Dublinian Clergy will protest against his Religion as supersti∣tious, and censure him guilty of Idolatry, when they heare how often he blest him∣self, making the sign of the Cross in his forhead, nay (which is worse) not only adorning, but adoring (with an inferior religious worship) the Cross; and (which is worst of all) praying to St Peter and Paul
that they vvould be Intercessors for him to God. At least the Church of England will not challenge him, as a member of theirs, he being so auerse to the spiritual supremacy, and Ecclesiastical iurisdiction of temporal soueraigns, that he would not sit down at the Councell of Nice, untill the Bishops had therto giuen their assent, nor would he take vpon him to iudge of Ecclesiastical causes, saying, God hath ordained you Bishops, and hath giuen you povver to iudge of your∣selues, by meanes vvherof vve yeeld ourselues to your iudgment. So Crispinus in his book of the estate of the Church pag. 99. and Zozomen hist. l. c. 10. post med. sets down these popish vvords of Constantin. Mihi vero non est fas, cum homo sim, ciusmodi cau∣sarum cognitionem arrogare, &c. He is ther∣fore cursed by the Protestant vvriters, as bearing the mark of the beast, in acknow∣ledging the Popes supremacy, and for subduing all Christian Churches to his iu∣risdiction; so Frigiuillaeus in his palma Chri∣stiana dedicated to Q. Elizabeth pag. 35. saying, that Constantin, preferred the Bishops of Rome, and Constantinople before others, yet attributed the Primacy before all to the Roman. And pag. 34. saith, that Constantin gaue the povver of the beast to Pope Iulius, vvhich
Iulius presently exercised; for Constantin also carried the mark of the Dragon in his armes, &c. And Mr Napper in his Treatise vpon th Reuelations dedicated to King Iames, saith, After the year of God 300. the Emperor Constantin subdued all Christian Churches to Pope Siluester; from vvhich time till these our dayes the Pope and his Clergy hath possessed the outvvard and visible Church. Q. Pardon Sir, that I interrupt you from proceeding further in the Proof of Con∣stantins being a Papist. I am fully conuinc't he was of your Popish Religion, and seing Mr Napper sayes to King Iames, that Po∣pery possessed and gouerned the visible Church euer since that time, I would wil∣lingly know whether it was so before Constantins time, or whether that Emperor bestowed this supremacy vpon the Pope, and pulld down Protestancy to set up Popery? A. To satisfy your curiosity I will re∣mit you to your own Protestant writers, the Centurists and others. I will only tell you that one of the most learnest prote∣stant writers called Philip Nicolai, took great pains in this matter, in his work de regno Christi, undertaking to discouer the first beginning and increase of the papal
dignity, or supremacy, and concludeth at last with these words pag. 221. Primatus af∣fectatio, communis fuit infirmitas Apostolorum, ac etiam primorum Vrbis Romae Episcoporum. The affectation of the Primacy was an in∣firmity common to the Apostles, as also to the first Bishops of Rome. Mr Midleton likewise in his Papistomastix, pag. 193. saith, that perusing Councells, Fathers, and stories from the Apostles forvvord, vve find the print of the Popes feet. Vve may therfore follow securely steps so ancient and so au∣thentik. If Popery were not the right way to heauen, certainly the ancient Councells would haue condemn'd it, the Fathers would haue declin'd it, and the Histories would haue recounted how it entred into the Church, and supplanted the former Religion that Christ and the Apostles had preach't. And yet not a vvord of this chan∣ge, or corruption in Councells, Fathers, or any History. This is the greatest of Mi∣racles, that the doctrin and publik profes∣sion of Popery, being in itself so contra∣ry to Protestancy (vvhich is supposed by its Professors to haue bin the pure and primitiue Christianity) should steale so early, and so insensibly into the Church, notwithstanding the vigilancy of those
primitiue Pastors, and the great concern of euery faithfull, to obserue and oppose the least nouelty whatsoeuer in matters of doctrin; any change or corruption therof inuoluing a damnable heresy. Q. Though the conuersion of all hea∣then Kings and Nations were as you say to Popery, and performed by Papists; and that it is not credible God vvould permit so general a peruersion, vvherby the end of instituting his Church would be frustra∣ted, yet I vvould vvillingly know vvhether you can produce any Miracles against our Protestant doctrin vvherby we differ from the Papists. A. See D Humfry in Iesuiti∣smi p. 2 rat. 5. p. 5. & 627. Bishop Bale in Act. Rom. Pont. pag. 44.45. & 46. Osiand. in Epit. Cēt. 6. p. 289. & 288. And the Magdeb. Centur. 6. cap. 20. All the Miracles that moued the Pa∣gans to be Papists, were wrought against Protestancy. I will instance it in the conuer¦sion of our Saxon Ancestors, vvho vvere Pagans, and made Papists by the preaching and Miracles of St Austin the Monk, Apostle of England. The Protestant writers con∣fess he conuerted the Saxons to the Chaos of Popish Ceremonies, and superstition, and specify worship of Images, praying to Saints, Purgatory, Mass, Transubstantia∣tiation, holy water, &c. And yet them∣selues confess with St Bede, that his doctrin and that of the ancient Britans of that
time, Bp. Iuel in his pa∣geant of Popes. Bp. God∣uin in his Catalogue of Bishops p. 1. Fox in his Acts and Mo∣num. printed 1576. pag. 463. difered only in a ceremony of Bap∣tism, and in the day of celebrating Easter, St Austin confirming his own practise therin, by a confessed Miracle of restoring sight to a blind man. Now it being eui∣dent by our English Chronicles, and the Protestant vvriters (vvherof Mr Iohn Fox, Bishop Goduin, and Bishop Iuel are to be particularly noted, as being most eminent) that the ancient Britans after receiuing the Catholik Faith in the Apostles time, held the sa∣me untill Austins coming, and neuer forsook it for any manner of false preaching of other, nor for torments, &c. It must be concluded that the ancient Britans were first conuerted to Popery, and so continued untill Austins time, and that his and their doctrin was the same in all particulars contrary to Prote∣stancy, and confirmed by Miracles. But because you seem to desire a dogmatical Miracle, that is, one vvrought in confirma∣tion of Popery; not only as it is Christiani∣ty in general, but at it is Christianity in par∣ticular, and opposit to Protestancy, I will endeu or to satisfy your curiosity, hoping therby to setle your conscience.
CHAP. IX. St. BERNARDS VNDENIABLE Miracles vvrought by God to confound Pro∣testants, and confirm the doctrin of the Sa∣crifice of the Mass, Transubstantiation, Pur∣gatory, Prayer for the dead, Prayer to Saints, their vvorship, and that of Images, Chrisme, the Popes supremacy, &c. SAint Bernards learning, sanctity, and Miracles are so generaly confessed by all Protestant writers that Doctor Stilling∣fleet in his late Comedy of the Idolatry and Fanaticism of the Church of Rome, durst not bring him vpon the stage. Vvhitaker de Ecclesiâ, pag. 369. saith of him, I do realy belieue Bernard vvas a true Saint. Osiander cent. 12. saith, Saint Bernard Abot of Clare∣ual vvas a uery pious man, &c. Gomarus in spe∣culo Ecclesiae, pag. 23. saith, one pious man your Church had in many years. Bernard your Saint. And Pasquils return into England pag. 8. & 13. saith, he vvas a good Father and one of the lamps of Gods Church. He was so famous for his learning, humility, deuotion, and Miracles, that after his refusal of all Ec∣clesiastical
dignities, he gouerned not on∣ly the Church, but the temporal Princes were sayd by him, and submitted to his iudgment. King Henry 2. of England for∣sook a Schismatical Pope (which he had supported against the King of France) by saint Bernards persuasion. The King of France gaue ouer troubling the Bishops for his sake. VVilliam the Duke of Aqui∣tain was conuerted from a deuouring wolf to a meek Lamb by his words. All the world lookt upon saint Bernard as the Apostle of that age, wherin diuers here∣sies were broacht by the VValdenses, S. Bern. Ep. 241. ad Tolos saith, vve thank God for that our comming to you vvas not in uain, our stay indeed vvas short vvith you, but not nn∣fruitfull; the truth being by us made manifest (non so∣lū in Ser∣mone sed etiam in vi tute) not only by prea∣ching, but also by povver of vvorking Miracles the Vvol∣ues are depren∣ded. Apo∣stolici, Henricians, and others. These two last Sects had infected a great part of France, especialy about Tolouse; their chief errors vvere against Transubstantiation, Prayers to Saints, and the same vvhich Protestants hold in our dayes, and we haue mentioned in the title of this Chapter. The Pope sent a Legat, and St Bernard, to con∣fute them. In this Mission, amongst innu∣merable others, he vvrought the ensuing Miracle, not only vvritten by his Disciple Godifridus, who was an eye witness ther of, but recorded in the other Histories of that time, and insinuated by St Bernard himself in his 241. Epistle to the people of Tolouse,
to the end they might be constant in the manifest doctrin vvhich he had preacht against the Henricians, vvhom Protestants challenge as members and Martyrs of the Protestant Church, as euery one may see in their Catalogue of the vvitnesses of truth, printed 1597. and in M. Symondes upon the Reue∣lations, pag. 142. and 143. The Miracle is recounted by Godefridus invitâ Bern. l. 3. c. 5. and by others of the same time, as follo∣weth. There is a place in the Country of Tolo∣sa, called Sarlatum, vvhere after the Ser∣mon vvas don, they offerd to he seruant of God (as euery vvhere the use vvas) many loaues to bless, vvihich he, lifting up his hand, and making the sign of the Cross, in Gods name blessing, sayd thus. In this you shall Knovv that these things are true vvhich vvee, and that those other are false vvhich the heretiks labor to persuade you; that vvhosoeuer they be (of your diseased persons) that tast the loaues: they shall be healed, to the end you may Knovv us to be the true Minister of God. The Bishop of Chartres (a great friend to the Saint) thinking this proposition too general, told the people, they vvere to understand, it conditionaly, so they did cate of the loaues vvith Faith. St Bernard
sudenly replied, My Lord, I do not mean so, my meaning and saying is, that all sick folks vvho vvill eat of those loaues, shall recouer their health, to the end it may be Knovven vve are Gods true Ministers. And acordingly it fell out, not one diseased person, that did eat of the bread, mist of being eured; and the Miracle being thus diuulged, by its ef∣fects, so huge a multitude of people came to thank and admire the Saint; that he de∣clined the common roads, and vvent by by wayes to Tolouse; vvhere at the in∣stance of the Catholiks, and to further confute the aforesaid hetesies against Tran∣substantiation, Mass, Purgatory, prayer to Saints, vvorship of Images, &c. he vvith giuing his benediction to a paralitik priest that lay a dying in the College of St Satur∣nin, restored him to so perfect health, that the Priest (vvho also vvas called Bernard) sudenly rose out of his bed vvhere he had bin immoueable a long time, followed the Saint, and begd of him to be admitted into the number of his Monks; vvhich vvas granted, and afterwards liued amongst them very religiously, and vvas at length Abot of Valdeau. Vvith these Miracles the heretiks vvere confounded, and so many conuerted, that their seducer Henricus hid
himself, and finding no refuge among those who formerly had followed him, he was taken prisoner, and presented in chains before the Bishop. Q. If God wrought such Miracles as these for the conuersion of the Henricians and other heretiks (as you call them) of that age, why may not we Protestants ex∣pect that he will do the same for our con∣uersion, if we be in errors. I am sure we desire to saue our Souls: And certainly God is as willing to saue us as any others. I wish we could see such Miracles wrought by any Bernard, or other Saint. Vve should soon be Papists. A. One of the reasons vvhy God doth not vvork now such Miracles for the con∣uersion of Protestants, is, because he hath vvrought them for the Henricians: For, the same errors against Transubstantiation, Mass, Prayer to Saints, Vvorship of Images, &c. being common to both sects, the same Miracles confute both equaly, and may now conuince Protestants, as vvell as they did anciently the Henricians, of heretical and damnable obstinacy. And therfore its not likely Protestants vvould becom Pa∣pists, though they had seen an other St Bernard work the same Miracles to con∣firm
the Roman Catholik Faith against Protestancy; that in effect hauing bin don against it in the case of the Henricians. I am the more apt to belieue the sight of such Prodigies vvould not conuert you, because your Protestant Authors grant the matter of fact of St Bernards Miracles against the Henricias doctrin, and of S. Dominik against the Albigēses Tenets (wherin these also agre∣ed vvith Protestants) and only answer that they vvere Antichristian Miracles, wrought by the Deuills power to confirm the Idola∣try of the Mass, and Images, &c. or at least they were feigned by idle Monks. Take it in their own words. See the Cēturists, and O∣siander in Epitom. cent. 9.10.11. pag. 213. The Miracles vvhich superstitious Monks relate, are either feigned by themselues, or vvrought by Satans en∣chantments, and therfore ought to be enlisted amongst Antichrists Miracles because they vvere vvrought to confirm manifest Idolatry, and to establish the vvicked vvorship of Images, ve∣neration of Reliques, Inuocation of Saints, sa∣crifice of Mass, &c. True it is that Osian∣der speaking of Saint Bernards Miracles, Cent. 12. pag. 310. saith, Not that I think St Bernard vvas a Magitian, but that I think it probable Satan vvrought the Miracles, vvherby the Saint himself and others vvere deceiued. And this is the common answer
all Protestants giue to our Miracles, when they can not deny the fact, nor discouer any fraud. And certaintly they would giue now the same answer to the most euident and undeniable Miracles, if any were wrought before theyr eyes. Q. Am I who can not read, or under∣stand Latin and other languages, wherin all this you say and quote, is written, bound to belieue the matter of fact, and conform therunto my Faith? Vvhat if a Protestant Minister or Bishop tells me all you say are lyes? Vvhom must I belieue? Or am I obliged under pain of damnation to su∣spect his sincerity and doctrin, if he will not encounter you, or any other who of∣fers to make good vvhat you say, by she∣wing the passages in the books them∣selues? I confess I think I am. Howeuer I pray tell me vvhat I ought to do in such a case. A. You see how in less than two hours time you may know by your Bishops or Ministers carriage and courage in exami∣ning any plain book that relates Miracles and matter of fact, vvhether the Protestant Religion be true or false. If he will resolue to conferr, or rather to conster the vvords of the book, you vvill easily iudge of the
truth by their sense: to which you must keep him (and the Catholik also) without any other digressions, or discourses: all your buisness must be, to know vvhether the Miracle or matter of fact be so in the book as I told you; and that, you may know from any honest man vvho can read and understand it, as vvell (perhaps bet∣ter) than from your Protestant Minister or Bishop. As for the answers vvhich the most learned Protestants giue to the argument of our miracles, they are so vveak, that no∣ne but vvicked and obstinat persons can be satisfied ther with. Their first answer is, that our miracles haue bin feigned by idle Monks. This is so damnd an answer that they dare not stick to it, because it is not possible that such publik transactions as St Bernards, or St Dominiks preaching, and Miracles against the Henricians and Al∣bigenses, could be imposed vpon the world, there being as many Obseruers as there vvere persons either curious, or concernd in two so contrary parties. Vvhy did not som one of the Henricians, or Albigenses publish and declare the imposture, vvhen their Religion vvas so discredited therby? Vvhy should Pope Alexander 3. venter to
be laught at, and deposed from the Apo∣stolik see for canonizing St Bernard, 12. years after his death, if his Miracles vvere not so authentik, that they could not be contradicted? Vvhat design could the world and that age haue in conspiring to impose such Miracles vpon their friends and posterity, and in damning themselues therby, for St Bernards sake? The same argument may be applied to St Dominik, St Francis, St Vincent Ferrer, St Francis Xauier, or to any other of our Roman Church, vvhose miracles haue bin vvrought in publik assemblies, and not contradicted as false or fraudulent by any of those ages that vvere vvitnesses to them, or vvherin they vvere first spoke of. And this is of such force, that our Protestant. Aduersa∣ries grant it to be true, and therfore re∣curr to the Deuills power for their answer, and the confutation of our Miracles, as the obstinat Iewes did against them of Christ.
VVHETHER TRADITION, TOGETHER vvith the Miracles of Christ and of the Church do demonstrat or undeniably conclude that God reueald the articles of Christian Faith; Or vvhether they only demonstrat, or cleerly proue, that vve are obliged under pain of damnation to belieue that God reuea∣led them? And vvhether it be cleerly eui∣dent, or more than moraly euident, that they are true supernatural Miracles? Q. I do think the Parallell between Christs Miracles and those of the Roman Catholik Church, or between the obstinat Iewes and the Protestants, doth not hold. Christs Miracles vvere so eui∣dently supernatural or Diuine, that if the obstinat Iewes vvould consider the visible circumstances therof, they could not de∣ny them to be true and Diuine Miracles. But the Miracles of the Roman Catholik Church (I speake of the most authentik) are no such; for, vve Protestants examin and consider all the circumstances of them, and yet vve can, and do deny them to be true Diuine Miracles. A. The parallell doth hold, and you will
think so if you reflect upon it. 1. It is a mistake to belieue that Christs Miracles were so cleerly supernatural and Diuine as to force an assent or acknowledgment of their being so, from the Iewes and Gentils that saw them (and therfore could not but admire them, and consider their sur∣prising circumstances.) For, if the Miracles had appeared to them supernatural and undeniably true, no assent of their Faith could be a free act; and that vvherwith St Peter own'd Christs Diuinity, Math. 16. and for vvhich he deserued to be made the Rock or foundation of the Church, vvould not haue bin so particularly applauded, and rewarded by Christ himself; the other Apostles hauing seen and considered as much as he the Miracles of Christ vvhich moued St Peter to that Confession of Faith, and yet no assent of Christs Diuinity flowed necessarily from that their sight and confi∣deration; neither vvas it forc't from St Peter; but vvas a free act and assent of his (after seing all the Miracles and conside∣ring their circumstances) to say, Thou art Christ, Son of the liuing God. The obsti∣nat Iewes therfore did consider all cir∣cumstances of Christs person and Mira∣cles as much as those vvho belieued them
to be Diuine, nay more, because the Scri∣bes, Pharisees, and the Doctors of the law searcht and pry'd more narowly into his actions, and were better able to iudge of their being natural or supernatural, than most of those, who belieued his Miracles vvere Diuine, and himself the Messias. And this appeareth in many passages, as in that of the blind man, vvhom they cast out of the Synagogue; for they understood the Miracle better than himself, and vvere sufficiently conuinc't of the cure, and mat∣ter of fact. It vvas not therfore vvant of consideration of the circumstances of Christs person and Miracles that made the learned Iewes obstinat, but their abundan∣ce of pride, vvhich made them auerse from submitting their iudgments to Christs doctrin, notwithstanding they had moral euidence of the Diuinity of his person and of the supernaturality of his Mi∣racles. Q. I can not comprehend how Christs Miracles or any others, can oblige men to belieue his doctrin, or conuince them of obstinacy and heresy, for not belieuing it and his Diuinity, unless it be first made cleerly and undeniably euident to them, that the Miracles are true and superna∣tural.
As for your Moral euidence of their being true Miracles, it is not strong en∣ough to build therupon so absolute an assurance as is requisit in our acts or assents of Christian Faith, vvhich excludes all doubts, and euen all moral possibility of falsood. A. I often told you that the certainty and assurance of Christian Faith is not grounded vpon the euidence of Christs Miracles (or any others of his Church) being true Miracles; or of its Tradition being infallible; but upon Gods Veracity, vvhich is so infinitly auers from all Kind of falsood, that he will no more permit any to be so probably and plausibly fa∣thered upon him as the Roman doctrin is, than positiuely promote it. Now, Christs Diuinity and the doctrin of the Roman Catholik Church being confir∣med by such prodigies and signs as haue a moral euidence of being supernatural and true Miracles, this makes it moraly euident to all men, that none but God is Author of that doctrin and of the prodi∣gies which confirm it. This moral euiden∣ce of God being the Author, is not indeed (as you say) strong enough to beare and ground upon itself the assurance of an
assent or act of Christian Faith; but it is a prudent and sufficient inducement to be∣lieue most certaintly, and without any Kind of doubt, that God would not per∣mit so great an appearance of his autho∣rity as the miracles of Christ and of the Roman Church manifestly shew to all the world, to be a cheat, or any thing less than his own great Seal; wherfore at the sight therof all men are bound under pain of damnation to belieue God alone is the Author of Christs and the Roman Chur∣ches Miracles and doctrin, iust as subiects are bound under pain of death to obey the King and Magistrats Orders, when signed and sealed with the usual and authentik marks of their supreme authority. They are bound I say to obey, though they haue only moral euidence that he is King, and that his Seal and Orders are true, and not conterfeit. Q. Methinks this argument may be re∣torted against your self. For, if notwith∣standing the moral euidence we haue of such persons being our Parents, or law∣full Kings; and of their seales and Orders not being counterfeit, we are bound on∣ly to honor, and obey them in our outward actions; but wee are not bound to assent
inwardly without any Kind of doubt, that such men are our Parents, or our legiti∣mat Kings; or that their hands and seales are not counterfeit: If, I say, this moral euidence can not oblige us to such inward assurances and assents, how can the moral euidence of Christs and the Roman Chur∣ches Miracles being true and supernatural Miracles, oblige us under pain of damna∣tion to belieue (vvithout any Kind of doubt) Christs Diuinity, and the Roman Catholik doctrin? At least this much fol∣loweth from hence, that the moral euiden∣ce of the aforsaid Miracles and signs of the Church, can only exact from us an outward conformity to its decrees, not an inward assent to its doctrin. A. The extent of euery authority ought to be measured by its appearance. If its appearance be only human or natural, it reacheth no further than to regular those outward moral actions which are necessa∣ry for the gouernment and peace of the Commonwealth; it hath not any thing to do vvith directing the soul by inward acts and undoubted assents to its supernatural end. If the appearence of the authority be supernatural, and moraly euident to us, (by prodigies, profecies, or other visible
signs) that it is so, then it claimes a iuris∣diction ouer the soul, and may exact from it such inward acts and assents as are pro∣portionable to that supernatural end for vvhich God hath instituted his Church, and adornd it vvith those Diuine marks and miracles vvhich Christ himself mentions, Marc. 16. and haue bin visible in the Ro∣man Catholik euer since the Apostles. This undeniable Maxim being layd as a foundation, there can be no difficulty in seing the disparity there is between the human authority of Commonwealths, and the spiritual and supernatural of the Church, by virtue of their different ap∣pearances; the miracles and signs of the Church making so supernatural a shew as to declare God alone is the Author of its doctrin and authority, is extended to the soul, and to the inward acts and assents therof, regulating them as it is fit for the saluation of mankind. No human or natu∣ral authority of Kings or temporal Princes can reach so far, because the appearance therof is only natural. Q. Vvill not the appearance of Anti-Christs Miracles be supernatural? Did not those of the Magitians of Egipt look like supernatural, and indiscernable from tho∣se
of Moyses? How then can a supernatu∣ral appearance, or a moral euidence of prodigies being true Miracles, exact or pretend to any authority ouer our inward acts of the will and understanding? shall we submit our iudgments to Anti-Christs doctrin, because his Miracles will seem to be supernatural. If not, why should we submit our iudgments to the Roman Ca∣tholik Church, because its most authentik Miracles seem to be supernatural? A. This argument only proues that true Miracles (euen those of Christ) do not cleerly euidence or conclude their own supernaturality, or their being true Mira∣cles. It is so hard a matter to distinguish between true and false or Anti Christian Miracles, that our Sauior sayes, euen the elect would be seduced by the last, if for their sake, and by Gods particular proui∣dence those dayes would not be short∣ned; and therfore he warnes his Disci∣ples and all the faithfull to beware of Anti-Christs Miracles, for ressembling so much his own; and giues certain signs wherby men may discouer that he who works them, is Anti-Christ. Christs Miracles therfore (as those also of the Church) being first, and as it were in possession
of Gods authority, by being his great seale, and confirming his doctrin, do by that precedency and Christs prediction of conterfeit Miracles, manifest their supernaturality in a different manner from Antichrists and all other lying pro∣digies, which haue bin or will be wrought to confirm any doctrin contrary to that of the Catholik Church. Out of all which we conclude that euen Christs Miracles, and à fortiori those of the Church (if ta∣ken without his prediction and their own precedency) do not cleerly euidence to us that they are true Miracles, and by conse∣quence can not cleerly euidence to us the Diuinity of Christ, or that God reuealed the articles of Christian Religion. And the same must be sayd of Catholik Tradition, euen as it is confirmed by these Miracles of the Church. So that this Tradition is not the Motiue, but the Rule of Faith, vvhich directs us infallibly (though not cleerly) to Gods reuelations; and therfore doth not demonstrat, or undeniably conclude that euer God reuealed any one article of that Faith; though the same Tradition, as confirmed by the signs of the Church, doth demonstrat or at least undeniably proue, that we are obliged under pain of
damnation to belieue (and that most cer∣tainly) that God reuealed euery point which the Roman Catholik Church doth propose as an article of Faith. This much of Miracles in general. Now let us return to Saint Bernards, and consider it in par∣ticular. St Bernard makes the same proposal to the Henricians and people about Tolouse, that Elias made to the Iewes, and Baalists. He appeald to Gods omnipotency for the manifestation of the truth. And spoke with such confidence of success, as if the attempt of the miracle had not only bin consulted with God, but had bin com∣manded by him. Consider now, I pray, whether it be credible to any person that hath common sense, or whether it be consistent with Gods infinit veracity and goodness, that vpon so publik a trial of both, and wherof depended the damna∣tion or saluation of so many Souls, God would play the Neuter, and permit the Deuill abuse the sincerity and sanctity of Saint Bernard to seduce the poor simple people by working Miracles, which saint Bernard himself and the wisest of that age took to be Diuine, and were in appearan∣ce as much aboue the power of nature, as
those were which Christ wrought? If this be as inconsistent with common sense, as it is with Christianity, not one illiterat Pro∣testant in the world who hath any sense, can be excused by inuincible ignorance from damnation, no learned Protestant from heresy. For, heresy is obstinacy a∣gainst doctrin sufficiently proposed as Di∣uine. And if Transubstantiation, the Mass, Intercession of Saints, worship of Images, Purgatory, &c. be not sufficiently proposed as Diuine doctrin by the testimony of the Church, and these Miracles of St Bernard, and other Roman Catholik Saints; and in a coniuncture that the same doctrin was as much questioned by the Henricians, Aug. l. 22. de Ciuit. Dei c. 8. ad sanctū Martyrem orare per∣rexerunt, &c. He that belieueth in me, the vvorks, that I do, he shall do, and greater. Ioan. 14. Nazian. in Epitaph. Gorgoniae. Orat. II. saith, Prostra∣ting her∣self before the Altar, and cal∣ling upon him vvho vvas honoured and vvor∣shipt ther∣upon, O admirable thing! she presently felt her self de∣liuered from her siness, and so she returned eased both in body and mind &c. as now it is by Protestants, neuer any doctrin hath bin yet sufficiently proposed as Diuine; nay not the doctrin of Elias, nor of Christ himself; because neither hath bin confirmed by greater Miracles than ours. I need not repeat others more ancient, as that (which St Austin sayes he was wit∣ness of) when Palladia recouered her sight by praying to St Steuen; or that vvhich St Gregory Nazianzen recounts of his sister Gorgonia recouering sudenly her health, by adoring the blessed Sacrament vpon the Altar; or that of the Image of Christ
erected by the woman he cured of her flux, wherof see Eusebius hist. lib. 7. c. 14. or that of the Crucifix in Berito, alleged in 2. Concill. Nissen. act. 4. or that recounted by Optatus, l, 1. contra Donatistas, to con∣firm the reseruing and taking the Com∣munion in one Kind; as also the holy oyle, or Chrisme; or that of the person raised from death to receiue the extreme Vnction, mentioned by St Bernard in vit. Malach. Or that of Confession related by St Bede hist. l. 5. cap. 14. These and innumerable others, are superfluous, seing those of St Bernard are sufficient to conuince that no Protestant, who hath so much sense as to belieue Gods goodness and veracity, can be saued, if he denyes any one particu∣lar of the Roman Catholik doctrin, when he is credibly informed that this authori∣ty is confirmed by such Miracles as those of Saint Bernard, and other Saints of our Church, which are related in the pu∣blik Acts and Process of their Canoni∣zation.
AN HVMBLE ADRESS To the Honorable House of Commons. MAy it please you, Honorable Sirs, who are the Preseruers of our li∣berties (except the chief, which is that of conscience) to take in good part, that the meanest of his Maiesties subiects hum∣bly beg of you to consider, whether it be not a damnable sin, to persecute Souls for professing the Religion of your Chri∣stian Ancestors, confirmed by so many credible signs of Gods approbation and protection, that the wisest and wariest men of the whole world (both in this and former ages) were conuinc't they were true Miracles; and yourselues haue no rea∣son to belieue the contrary, but that pre∣iudice wherunto the principles of your education from your infancy, and the in∣terest of your Teachers led you, before you could discern the truth of their doc∣trin, or the intricacy of their design. Re∣flect I beseech you, upon the frailty of your Ministers, and the fallibility of your Church, and weigh with yourselues, whe∣ther it be not more credible that your
English Congregation seasoned with two such Ingredients as frailty and fallibility, may be mistaken in mysteries of Faith, than that God would permit the whole Catholik world, and such men as Saint Bernard, and the other Roman Catholik Saints, to be deluded and seduced by the Deuils lying prodigies; and that, in a con∣juncture when Gods veracity and honor Iay at the stake in a publik trial of true and false doctrin. Vvould any of yourselues stand by in such an occasion as an idle spec∣tator, or unconcerned person, and per∣mit a Rogue or a Fool clad in your liuery, produce counterfeit letters, and deliuer seditious orders in your name? Vvould any of you suffer poor people who wish you well, to be destroyd by such wicked practises? Vvould you condescend so far with your greatest Ennemy, as to wink at his malice, and at the uniust meanes he applied to ruin your well meaning Te∣nants; or friends? Certainly you would disclaim in the fourbery, and neuer wink at a fraud so preiudicial to the people, and as contrary to your noble inclinations, as to the principles of honor, and truth which you profess. Be pleased then to haue as good an opi∣nion
of Gods inclination to honor and truth, as of your own. Let not the first im∣pressions vpon your tender undiscerning years, grown at unawares into a settleness through education and custom blind your riper and more manly iudgments to be per∣suaded, God can permit such Miracles as we haue recounted, to be only mistakes of the Roman Church, and human or Dia∣bolical artifices; or that he would suffer his greatest Enemy to seduce innocent Souls by cheats so like supernatural seales of the Diuine doctrin and ministery, that such prudent, learned, and conscientious men as the Roman Catholik Church hath had in all ages, could (after a seuere scru∣tiny) conclude to be the work of Gods omnipotency, and aboue the power of all natural causes. This well considered, will, I hope, make you more Kind to your Ro∣man Catholik Kindred and Neighbors, and to the Religion of all your Ancestors before Queen Elizabeths reign. But if you slight this humble aduice, grounded vpon so cleer euidence, I feare that God, who is a jealous God, and no less concerned for his honor, and veracity, than infinit good∣ness, and an infinit auersion from falsood inclines him to be, will visit you in the
fury of his iustice, and deny to you in your greatest need, that mercy which yee deny to tender consciences; he will heare the loud cryes of innocent bloud which pene∣trat the Heauens, when they find no relief vpon earth. God direct you in all your wayes, and resolutions; and make us ei∣ther thankfull for your moderation, or strengthen us with constancy and patience against your persecution. FINIS.
AN APPENDIX. HOVV RATIONAL IT IS NOT to exact more then moral euidence in mat∣ters of Faith. The Author of Sure footings doctrin în that particular explaind by him∣self, and vindicated from the Censure of the deceased Author of Religion and Go∣uernment. Q. No body questions but that Gods reuelation and authority if it appea∣res sufficiently applyed to the Church pro∣posing and deciding matters of Faith, doth oblige all men (euen the most scru∣pulous and subtile Doubters and Dissen∣ters) to submit their iudgments and inward assents therunto. My doubt is, whether the Diuine reuelation and authority can be sufficiently applyed to the Church un∣less we see that application proued by cleer and conclusiue euidence? As for your often repeated Parallell between God and Soueraings, there is a uast dis∣parity between the Royal and Diuine au∣thority as to the sufficiency of their pro∣posal.
The Royal authority is sufficiently proposed, as such, by a moral euidence of its application to such as claim to be the Kings Ministers and Messengers; be∣cause a King can not giue to his subiects greater euidence then moral, that he trusts and employs such men with declaring his pleasure and commands. But God (wi∣thout any inconueniency to himself) may giue cleer and conclusiue euidence to eue∣ry indiuidual person that himself reueald the doctrin which the Church proposeth as Diuine. And therfore it seems to be uery agreable to reason, that in the Church there be som Doctors who may demonstrat, or proue by conclusiue eui∣dence against the wittiest Doubters, that he hath don so de facto, by virtue of Tra∣dition: seing cleer knowledge is not only the surest but the most connatural way for rational Creatures to arriue to the happy end we all ayme at by our Faith and actions. A. If God can iustly oblige the wittiest men of the vvorld underpain of damna∣tion, to content themselues with moral euidence (when they haue no greater) of such and such men being their Princes and Parents, and (in consequence therof)
to submit unto them, and their Ministers or Messengers, their outward actions of greatest importance; sure he may justly oblige under pain of damnation the same men to content themselues with a moral euidence (if he be pleased to giue no grea∣ter) for submitting their iudgments (by a most certain belief) to his reuelations and authority claimd by the Church, and she∣wing for it marks so supernatural of the Diuine trust and truth, that they can not be prudently questioned as counterfeit. For, as the imperfection of our human nature and Knowledge (as also the Pre∣rogatiue of Soueraignty and superiority) makes it uery reasonable, and natural enough to us, to be subiect and directed in our outward actions by a sole moral euidence, when we haue no greater; so the same imperfection (and Gods infinit Excellency) doth demonstrat that it is most reasonable, and natural to us, to be directed in our inward acts and assents by supernatural moral euidence, when God is pleased to giue us no greater, seing we haue no right or reason to exact it in tru∣ths which are obscure to us, and the Knowledge of them is aboue our merit and capacity. Such are, not only the my∣steries
of our Faith, but the Diuine reue∣lation of them, or (vvhich is the same) Gods communication of his thoughts and Councells to such slaues and pittifull Crea∣tures as we are. Christ told the Apostles, (Ioan. 15.) he called them his friends, because he communicated to them all vvhich he had heard from his Father. And euery Catholik Knowes that Gods friendship or fauor is a supernatural gift which human nature could not expect as due to it. We haue no right or reason therfore to exact or expect that God would not haue us be∣lieue whatsoeuer the Church proposeth with moral euidence as being reuealed by him, unless wee see the Diuine reuelation applyd to that proposal by cleer and con∣clusiue euidence; Moral euidence is suf∣ficient to damn us if we deny to proceed therupon in order to a most certain (though not cleer) assent of the truth of the mystery, (Marc. vlt.) as well as of the existence of the revelation. As for what you say concerning the nature of Tradition, viz. that it may with conclusiue euidence manifest and demon∣strat (if the dispute be managed by a wit∣ty man) an infallible and cleer conne∣xion with the Diuine reuelation of the
Roman Catholik Faith, because it leads us from age to age, and yeare to yeare up along to Christ, who is God, and pre∣acht our Faith, to this I answer two things. 1. That the Tradition of the Ca∣tholik Church (whether we speake of it as it is a Congregation of Knowing and honest men, before we believe or sup∣pose it assisted by the holy Ghost, or whe∣ther we speake of it euen after we sup∣pose it to be so assisted) it can not de∣monstrat or proue by conclusiue euiden∣ce that God reuealed any one article of our Catholik Faith, though it may proue by conclusiue euidence that Christ did; because that Tradition only proues that Christ sayd he was God, and that the A∣postles belieued so, but goes no further in prouing Christs Diuinity than by testifying his Miracles, which do not demonstrat, or euidently conclude his Diuinity, though they demonstrat our obligation of belie∣uing it. 2. I answer that though Tradi∣tion doth not demonstrat or euidently conclude Christs Diuinity, and by conse∣quence can not demonstrat or cleerly conclude that his reuelation of our Faith was Diuine, yet it is a conclusiue argu∣ment ad hominem against Protestants and
all who confess Christs Diuinity, that God reuealed all the articles of the Roman Catholik Church, because they confess Christ is God. And in this sense the Au∣thor of the sure footing, of Faith vindica∣ted, &c. argues unanswerably against his Aduersaries for the conclusiue euidence (by virtue of Tradition) of Gods reueal∣ing (supposing Christ to be God) euery article of the Roman Catholik Faith. And therfore seing he hath (as I am credibly informed) thus explaind himself, he de∣serues rather great commendation than that seuere Censure which the Author of Religion and Gouernment giues of his doc∣trin, thinking he agreed with Manicheans and Protestants in making cleer euidence the motiue and rule of Christian belief. For, the Author of sure footing utterly di∣sauowes and abhorres as leading to He∣resy and Atheism this Proposition (which som imagined he maintained, as following out of his Principles.) No Catholik, or at least no learned or vvitty person is bound to assent or belieue vvith Christian Faith any article the Catholik Church proposeth as reuealed by God, unless it be demonstrated, or concluded by cleer and euident reason, that God re∣uealed the same article.
Q. Do not som Catholik Diuines teach that cleer Euidence of the Reuelation is consistent vvith our Catholik Faith? A. No. Som of them teach the Angels before their fall, and Adam in the state of innocency had (and euen the Deuils now haue) euidence that it was God who reuealed to them the supernatural Myste∣ries they belieued, and few extend this priuilege to the Prophets and Apostles inspired immediatly by God without out∣ward preaching. See Fr. Dominic. Bannes 2.2 q. . a. 1. Estius in 4. lib. Sen∣tent. lib. 2. dist. 23. paragr. 6. But not any one Diuine I could see, or heare of, sayes that cleer euidence of God reuealing our Catholik Faith, (which according to Saint Paul. Rom. 10. coms by hearing (Fides ex auditu) and the preaching or testimony of the Church) is consistent with the same. OF THE DIFFERENCE BETVVEN certainty sprung from the sight of Truth; and certainty grounded upon Trust. The later, excludes cleer enidence of the truth; and is the certainty required in Christian Faith. Q. I find it uery reasonable (if possi∣ble) all men should belieue with the greatest assurance and certainty imagi∣nable,
that God reuealed euery article both great and smale which the Church doth propose as reuealed by him, though there were no cleerer euidence than moral for such a reuelation. But how is it possible that scrupulous and acute Wits, or Doub∣ters, can assent to Gods reuealing the arti∣cles of Christianity, or to any truth, with greater assurance then there is appearance and euidence of the same? Is not euidence and assurance (or certainty) the same thing in our intellectual assents? At least are they not so connected with one an other, that they can not be separated, or one be grea∣ter then the other? A. Any thing which is uery reasonable, must be possible, because reason can not lead to, or approue of an impossibility. How possible and feasible it is to assent with infallible assurance and the greatest certainty (for so we must assent in matters of Faith) with only moral euidence, is cleer in the scriptures especialy Iohn. 20. where Christ our Sauior reprehended St Thomas for not belieuing with the assurance and certainty of Diuine Faith the mystery of the Resurrection, though he had but moral euidence for it (the testimony of the Apo∣stles, not as yet confirmed in grace) Christ
also (Marc. ult.) reproacht with obstinacy and incredulity against Faith the Apostles themselues, for not being content with that sole moral euidence of the Resurrec∣tion which they had from the testimony of the three Maries, and the two Disciples of Emaus. And certainly Christ would not find fault with St Thomas or the Apostles, for not doing an impossibility. Its possible therfore to belieue by an assent of Faith with more assurance and certainty then there is appearance of the truth, or euiden∣ce of the Reuelation. I confess it is uery difficult to shew how this is don. But if wee distinguish the assuran∣ce or certainty we haue of truth by seing the truth in itself, from the assurance or cer∣tainty we haue therof, by putting our trust in an other, or relying upon his knowledge and integrity, we shall find this point much more easy then hitherto hath appeard to most both Diuines and Philosophers. The assurance and certainty of our intellectual assents which is produced by the sight ei∣ther intellectual or sensual of the Truth it∣self, inuolues cleer euidence therof. But the assurance and certainty of the Truth, which is an effect of the Trust and esteem we haue of an others Veracity, integrity,
power and wisdom, is so farr from inclu∣ding a cleer sight or euidence of the truth, that it excludes it. For, Trust is no more consistent with our exacting the possession, sight, or cleer euidence of that vvherwith vve trust an other, than it is vvith doubts, cautions, and suspitions of his integrity or power. Vpon this notion and the true na∣ture of Trust (excluding sight or cleer eui∣dence of the thing trusted) is grounded that saying. Ile trust such a man no further than I see him, that is, I vvill not trust him at all. This supposed, We may easily compre∣hend how its possible to belieue, or to assent by an act of our Christian Faith with more assurance then appearance, or eui∣dence either of the truth, or of the Diui∣ne Reuelation. Because to belieue, or to as∣sent by an act of our Christian Faith, is to trust God for his reuelation as well as for the truth reuealed (for we belieue God did reueal the mystery and so we must trust him for the reuelation also.) But if we see the reuelation euidently applied to the mystery reuealed, we can not trust him for either, seing the truth of the mystery is inseparable, and necessarily connected with Gods reuelation therof: and we
can not trust God for the truth of one of two things that vve know are necessarily connected, unless vve trust him for both. Therfore if the reuelation be cleerly eui∣dent to us by Tradition, vve can not trust God for it, nor for the truth of the my∣stery we know is necessarily connected therwith. Hence doth follow, 1. that seing vve can not trust God for the truth of the mystery reuealed, unless vve trust him also for the reuelation, vve can not belieue either, or any thing the Catholik Church proposeth as matter of Faith, if vve exact for that belief conclusiue and cleer euidence that God reuealed the same. It followeth. 2. That by exacting cleer or conclusiue eui∣dence of the Reuelation to belieue the my∣stery or matter proposed by the Church, we do not only mistrust Gods veracity and goodness, but preferr the vvord and veracity of euery honest man before his as it is proposed to us by the Church. For, vvhen vve heare any honest man speak, though vvee do not see the truth of his vvords, nor any thing else necessarily con∣nected vvith that truth, yet vve belieue him, and take his bare vvord for our as∣sent and assurance of the truth. But vve
will not take Gods word deliuered to us by the Church, unless vve see his reuela∣tion which is necessarily connected with the truth of the mystery proposed. And in this consists most of the obstinacy and malice of Heresy. It followeth 3. That the obstinacy of Heresy is not alwayes grounded upon the passion or inclination of men to sensual pleasures and those nices which Christian Faith shocks, and condemns; but takes its rise also from the difficulty we find in as∣senting to any thing without euidence, or in trusting, euen God, for the truth of things vvhich seem to be unlikely. Christs Resurrection vvas a thing much desired by Saint Thomas, and the Apo∣stles, and by consequence they vvere wil∣ling enough to belieue it: And yet be∣cause they thought it an unlikely matter, St Thomas vvould not belieue the other Apostles, nor these the Disciples of Emaus and the three Maries, vvhen they assured them Christ vvas resuscitated. And this is the reason why there haue bin so many speculatiue heresies, as that of the Arrians against Christs consubstantiality; and that of the Greekes against the procession of the holy Ghost, &c. True it is that the
Lutheran and other modern Heresies haue their principal source from sensual plea∣sures, and lendness of life; yet no liberty is more bewitching then that of opining, euen in speculation: and therfore the Church hath bin troubled with confuting many speculatiue heresies in former ages. I conclude this Appendix with this ad∣uertisment, that many mistakes among Controuersors are occasioned by their not being vvell grounded in School Diuinity, especialy in that part of it which treates of the Nature of Faith and Heresy. Som confound the Motiues of Faith vvith the Motiues of Credibility, as they do the eui∣dence of these vvith that of the Diuine Reuelation, and the euidence of this with that of our obligation to belieue it: and fancy that the Authors who pretend to de∣monstrat Christianity, or the truth of the Roman Catholik Religion, intend to de∣monstrat God reuealed those mysteries and doctrin; vvheras they go no further than to endeauor to demonstrat the reasona∣bleness and obligation of belieuing the same, by the euidence of the Motiues of credibility. Some of late (as Fisher, Rushworth, and others in England) haue attempted to
demonstrat or cleerly conclude the euiden∣ce of the Diuine reuelation by the certain∣ty of the human Tradition of the Church, and therupon ground the certainty of Di∣uine Faith. As their zeal is to be commen∣ded, so they are to be aduertised, that the certainty of Faith must be supernatural, and by consequence must haue a higher and more infallible Motiue than the eui∣dence of human Tradition grounded upon that of our senses; as all Diuines confess and euen these modern Authors seem to grant. I heare a bold Spaniard went fur∣ther, and pretends that Christian Faith is science, because the reuelation is euidently concluded from the Motiues of credibility, Miracles, &c. and because St Paul sayes, Scio cui credidi, & certus sum. This is but a Spanish conceit. Perhaps Saint Paul in his rapt to the third Heauen might haue eui∣dence of the Diuine Reuelation. But vve heare of no others that went so far to find out that knowledge. I see there are Esco∣bars and Dianas in speculatiue Theology, as vvell as in Moral; and I think specu∣latiue errors are more dangerous than large cases of conscience; because these carry a certain horror and discredit a long vvith them; but erroneous speculations,
if new, seem to vulgar comprehensions (especialy of the weaker sex) to sauor of wit; and many would fain seem witty upon any score, euen in matters of Faith, wherin the greatest wits must submit to authority, and be commanded by the vvill (piously affected, and supernaturaly assi∣sted) to belieue more than we see, or com∣prehend. Yet the Spaniard is consequent enough in his error, by saying Faith is science. For, if it be euident that whatsoeuer God re∣uealed is true; and it be euident that God reuealed the Trinity, or Transubstantiation, it must needs be euident (and by consequ∣ence Science) that these mysteries are true; and therfore no man who penetrats these termes can deny their Truth. For my part, I wish this opinion were true; it would be a great ease to all Catholiks vvho find much difficulty in belieuing the articles of Faith. So that the Authors and Abettors of Traditionary euidence haue this aduan∣tage of their Aduersaries, that we desire they may haue the better of us in this Dispute; and if they haue not, it must be want of Reason on their side, not any preiudice or obstinacy on ours. But vve haue this aduantage of them, that we may
with more ease conuince heretiks (euen the wittiest) of heresy and obstinacy than they can: because its easier to demonstrat or euidently conclude that a man is bound to bilieue God reuealed a mystery of Faith, than it is to demonstrat or euidently conclude he did actualy reueale it (as it is easier to proue you are bound to belieue this man is your Father, than that realy he is so.) And if we conclude euidently the first we convince the wittiest Diffenters or Disputers in the world, of heresy and obstinacy, if they do not submit their iudg∣ments and belief to that of the Church.
