C2686 21.h.1[83] R225509 99886140 188237
crowned blazon or coat of arms of the British royal family HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE C. R. BY THE KING. ¶ A Proclamation prohibiting Free-Quarter, or taking any Provisions in the Counties of Oxford, Berks, and Wilts, without paying upon paine of death. WHEREAS the Gentlemen, and other the inhabitants of Our Counties of Oxford, Berks, and Wilts, have out of their affection to Our Service, and for the benefit and advantage of all the Inhabitants therein, entred into an Agreement to pay Us by way of Loane, or Contribu∣tion, the summe of Twelve Hundred pounds weekly, out of Oxford-shire, One Thousand Pounds weekly, out of Berkshire; and Twelve Hundred Pounds weekly, out of Wiltshire, to be issued towards the payment of the Horse of Our Army; and for the same to be freed from all Free-Quarter, or any violence whatsoever. And seeing the Counties of Berks, and Oxford, have with all cheerefullnesse, made good the said Agreement, and paid in their monyes, and We expect the same from Wilt-shire, We are Gratiously pleased to give them all the ease, and satisfaction they can desire. And do therefore straitly charge and command, all the respective Officers, and Souldiers, of any Regements of Our Army Quartered in the said Counties, that from henceforth they, nor any of them, presume to aske, demand, or take any Free-Quarter, or Billet, from, or upon any the Inhabitants of the said Counties, (as soone as they shall have paid the said Contribution) nor any manner of Victualls, or Provisions, for man or Horse, from any of them, with out making due and reasonable payment for the same upon paine of death. And if hereafter any prejudice be done to any of Our good Subjects by any of Our Forces, and the same really appearing, defalcation shall be made, and allovved to every of them the week following out of the said Contributions, and upon certificate of the names of such offenders, they shall be speedily apprehended and punished without favour or connivance to the terror of others, and prevention of future disorders. This Our Grace and Favour Our will is, shall immediatly be pub∣lished in all the Hundreds and parishes of the said Counties, that so it may be observed accordingly. Given un∣der Our Signe Manuall at Our Court at Oxford, this first day of December. 1643. GOD SAVE THE KING. Printed at Oxford, by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the University.
