D1543 [ocm]17009276 206275
A Directory for the Female-Sex: BEING A Father's Advice to his Daughter: Wherein all Young Ones (especially those of that Sex) are directed how they may obtain the greatest Beauty, and Adorn themselves with a Holy Conversation. DEar child, These words which briefly I declare, Let them not hang like Jewels in thine Ear; But in the Secret Closet of thy Heart Lock them up safe, that they may ne'er depart. Give first to God the flower of thy Youth. Take Scripture for thy Guide, that word of Truth: Adorn thy Soul with Grace; prize Wisdom more Then all the Pearls upon the Indian Shore. Think not to live still free from Grief and Sorrow; That man that laughs to day, may weep to morrow. Nor dream of Joys unmixed, here below; No Roses here, but what on Thorns do grow. Scorn this deluding World, that most bewitches; And place thy hopes in Everlasting Riches. Make room for Christ; Let not so base a Guest As Earth, have any Lodging in thy Brest. Bad Company (as deadly Poyson) shun; Thousands by that are Ruin'd and Undone. The giddy Multitude still goes astray; Turn from the Road, and choose the Narrow way. Keep Death and Judgment always in thine Eye; None's fit to live, but who are fit to die, Make use of present time, because thou must Shortly take up thy Lodging in the Dust: 'Tis dreadful to behold the Setting Sun, And Night approaching, ere our work be done. Let not thy winged days be spent in vain; When gone, no Gold will call them back again. Strive to subdue thy sin, when first beginning; Custom (when once confirm'd) is strangely winning Be much in Prayer; it is the begging Trade By which true Christians are the Richest made. Of Meditation get the blessed art; And often search thy own deceitful heart. Fret not with Envy at thy Neighbours Wealth, Preferment, Learning, Beauty, Strength, or Health Abhor the Lying Tongue: vile Fraud detest; Plain-hearted men by Providence are blest. Take heed of Idleness, the cursed Nurse And Mother of all Vice: There's nothing worse. And fly from Pride: High Hills are barren found; But lowly Valleys with choice Fruits are crown'd. Short sinful Pleasures and Delights, eschew; Eternal Torment is their Wages due. The Rules of Temperance observe and keep; That thou offend not in Meat Drink, or Sleep. Nor costly Garments wear; Let men admire Thy Person, rather then thy rich Attire. Get a good Treasure laid up in thy heart, Which by discourse thou wisely may'st impart To profit others: Holy Thoughts within Will guide thy Tongue, and guard thy Lips from sin? Learn to distinguish between faithful Friends, And fawning Flatterers; which for base Ends Will speak thee fair, in words as soft as Oyl, And make a shew of Friendship, to beguile. The Secrets of thy Friend do not disclose; Lest by so doing, thou resemble those Whose Ears are leaking Vessels; which contain Nothing but what pour'd in, runs out again Straight at their mouths, proclaiming them unfit For any Trust, and to be void of Wit. If thou resolve to change a single Life, And hast a Purpose to become a Wife; Then chuse thy Husband not for worldly gain, Nor for his comely Shape, nor Beauty vain: If Money make the Match, or Lust impure, Both Bride and Bridegroom shall to weep be sure: But if the fear of God most excellent, Be chiefly minded, look for true Content. Cast off all needless and distrustful Care: A little is enough; too much, a Snare. Our Journey from our Cradle to our Grave, Can be but short; no large Provision crave. For such Conven'encies as must be had, Trust in that God who hath so richly clad The laughing Meadows with fresh silver show'rs, Sent down to nurse up tender Plants and Flow'rs: He for each chirping Bird provides a Nest, And gives all Creatures that which feeds them best. To Him give thanks for Mercy which before Thou hast receiv'd, and that makes way for more. For Faults, before his Face reprove thy Friend; But all good Deeds behind his Back commend. Labour for Peace; choose to contend with None; Let Reason, with sweet Calmness, keep the Throne; Treading fierce Wrath and lawless Passion down: The Grace of Meekness is a Womans Crown. Be Loving, Patient, Courteous and Kind; So doing thou shalt Praise and Honour find Here upon Earth; and when All-conqu'ring Death Thy Body shall Dissolve, and stop thy Breath; Upon the Golden Wings of Faith and Love, Thy Soul shall fly to Paradice above; (VVhere Sin and Sorrow shall for ever cease) And there be crown'd with Endless Joy and Peace Entred according to Order. London, Printed by George Larkin, at the lower End of Broadstreet, next to London-Wall. 1684.
