F1125 [ocm]19530942 205546
5. Wonders  Month of July 169 A Faithful NARRATIVE Of the Several Strange Prodigious Signs, AND Wonderful Appearances & Accidents, Which have lately hapned in Several Parts of England, Both from the Heavens, Earth, and Water: Being a Relation of I. A Prodigious Thunder and Lightning, at a Place call'd Everton, near Daventry in Northampton∣shire; which sad Accident kill'd Four Persons; the Names of which were, Mr. Simon Marriot, Mr. Robert Marriot his Son, Mr. Richard Wills, and Mr. Thomas Burroughs; and wounded Ten Persons more, Mr. Tho∣mas Gregory and his Wife (the Owners of the Field) were two of them: Which sad Relation is attested by Mr. William Needler of Tatnam, Mr. Thomas Hog∣gins, of St. Martins, Mr. Tulse in Foster-Lane, and Mr. Lovett, a Grocer, in Daventry in Northampton-shire. II. A Whale, or Sea-Monster, of a Prodigi∣ous Size, near New-Castle; with the strange Actions it perform'd. III. Of a Strange and Wonderful Appariti∣on of Armies on the Land, near the City of Exeter; which appeard the very Evening before the late Famous Battle in IRELAND. IV. Of a Terrible Tempest, which hapned in several Counties, (particularly in the Isle of Ely) with the Damage it did. V. Of a most Strange and Wonderful Ap∣parition of Armies in the Air, near Malden in Essex. Licensed according to Order. London, Printed for H. Jones, in the Strand, 1691.
A Faithful NARRATIVE Of the Several Strange, and Prodigious Signs, AND Wonderful Appearances & Accidents Which have happned in several Parts of England, both from the Heavens, Earth, and Waters, &c. THERE is no Person of a∣ny Age or Understanding, but must needs acknowledge that the last Four, if not Twelve Years, has been, as it were, an Age of Prodigies and Wonders, in these three Kingdoms; so that, it may be, no former time can parallel, so many strange Transactions, as have happened in so little space; and there∣fore, as an ingenious Person says, A Book of Wonders is most fit, In wondrous Times for to be writ. And another Learned Author says, The Wise Creator of Heaven and Earth is wont, when the measure of our Wick∣edness
comes to the heigth, rather to in∣flect upon us Temporal, than Eternal Pu∣nishments; and to use for our Amend∣ment, the occasion of these Natural Ef∣fects, thereby to affright us, from the terror of those Sights, to a Repentance, and dutiful Respect of him. And if we consult History, we shall find, that there hath never been any notable Ap∣parition or Prodigy, seen in the Hea∣vens, on the Water, or the Earth, but it hath been attended, in the sequel, with more than ordinary Occurances here on Earth: Neither is there any one, except he hath no Religion, who is not affrighted at Lightning, the clashing noise of Thunder, or an hor∣rible Comet; for God speaks to Men, not only with the Tongues of Men by Prophets, Apostles, and Teachers, but sometime also by the Elements, and other extraordinary Signs in the Heavens, Earth, or Sea. In order whereunro, it cannot sure∣ly be unreasonable, nor unprofitable, to publish to the World, what has lately happened in several parts of England; of which I shall therefore proceed to give an Account as fol∣loweth:
Of a prodigious Clap of Thunder and Lightning, near Daintry in Northamp∣ton-shire; Killing four Persons, &c. WE have of late, had great Thunders and Lightning, ac∣companied with terrible Storns of Rain; whose suddain violence over∣flowed divers Places, to the great Damage: among others of this kind, of the sad effects of the Storms, we have a particular Account in the fol∣lowing manner, attested by Credible Witness. At a Place near Badby, a Mile from Daventry in Northampton-shire, on Mon∣day the 27th. of July 1691. 16 Persons being in a Field (called Everton Field) at Harvest-Work, The Sky immediate∣ly overcasting with black and dismal Clouds, prodigious Thunders & Light∣ning ensued, which accompanied with extraordinary Showers of Rain, made them seek shelter under the Trees and Hedges; but they proved no safe re∣treat; for immediately a Flash of Fire broke from a Cloud, and falling a∣mongst them with a very sudden mo∣tion, struck four of them dead; they not having leisure to utter one word;
and Burnt Ten of the rest in so terri¦ble a manner, that their Lives are dispaired of: Amongst the Wounded, are the Master of the Ground, and his Wife. And it is remarkable, that one of those Killed, held in his Hand a Snush-box, just putting it to his Nose; and another had a little Dog between his Legs, holding him by the Ears, as if at play; which Dog was likewise found Dead. The Fire likewise split an Ash-tree (under which they sat) all in pieces; many Splinters of which are brought to London, as a testimony of this sad and deplorable Disaster. The Storm continued a long time, making the Earth, and the neighbour∣ing Villages, to tremble. The Names of the Persons Killed (being Four) which were as followeth, viz. Mr. Simon Marriot; Mr. Robert Marriot his Son: Mr. Richard Wills, who was found Dead with a little Dog in his Lap; who was also Kill'd. Mr. Thomas Burrough, who was found Dead with Snush in his Hand, just putting it to his Nose. The Confirmation of this Relation (if any Doubt the Truth thereof) may be had from divers Creditable Persons in the City of Lon∣don, as well as in the Country where it hapened; particularly from Mr. William Needler of Tatnam:
Mr. Thomas Hoggins, of St. Martins: Mr. Tulse, a Goldsmith, in Foster-Lane. Mr. Lovert, a Grocer, in Daventry: Of a Whale, or Sea-monster, near Newcastle. ON Saturday the Fourth of this in∣stant July, 1691. Between the hours of Nine and Ten in the Morn∣ing, there appear'd off of a small Sea∣port, in the County of Cumberland, called Gossforth (which place is situate not far from Newcastle, and within Three Miles of Sea Scale) a Whale, or some other most strange and wonderful Sea Monster, in the shape of a Whale, being of a prodigious and unheard of length and breadth: he was visible to great numbers of Spectators, for a∣bove three hours, very near the Shoar, during which time, by his often mo∣ving his Body, and flounching up and down in the Sea, he made so prodi∣gious a Noise (infinitely exceeding that of the coming in, or going out of the Tide at any Bridge, or on the greatest Flood) that it Allarm'd the Inhabi∣tants that were in the Neighbouring Villages, and others that were at Work in the Fields, for near Ten Miles round.
Of an Apparition of Land Soldiers, near the City of Exeter. ON Saturday the Eleventh of this instant July, 1691. In the Af∣ternoon of the same day, several Country-Men being at Work, in a Mea∣dow belonging to a small Village, near the City of Exon▪ in the County of Devon, as they were busily em∣ployed in Loading, or as they call it, Housing their Hay, one of them plain∣ly descryed at some distance, a great Body of Armed Men, moving to∣wards them, most of which seemed to be mounted on large White Horses; the Country-man informing the rest of the Company of it, they plainly saw the same as well as himself: The Men that were mounted on the Horses, had their Swords drawn, and Pieces, like Carbines, hanging on their Shoul∣ders. After some short time, this seeming Body of Men, marched them∣selves on the Left of them, clear out of Sight; four of the Persons that saw this Sight or Apparition returning home, went before one Mr. F— an Honourable Justice of the Peace of that County, and made Affidavit of
e same; what may be thought not a tle Remarkable in this Apparition  that on the very next day being unday the 12th. the late Famous Bat∣e in Ireland was Fought, in which heir Majesties Forces obtain'd a Sig∣al Victory over the French and Irish apists; in which Action the Earl of ortland's Regiment (who were all hite Horse, and but just Arrived in e Camp from England) were consi∣erably Engaged▪ much the same Ap∣arition, or like Body of Men, were  some Days before in Pembrook∣ire in Wales, and in Cheshire; in the ormer of which Places, several Per∣ons likewise made Affidavit of the uth, of it before an Honourable ustice of the Peace of the said Coun∣y, who sent up an Account of the ame to a Relation of his in Grays-nn London. The foregoing Relations of Armed Men, and what ensued thereupon in Ireland, brings to my remembrance,  Relation given by Mr. Hamilton in is Account of the Actions of the In∣niskilling Men, that just before the Famous Defeat given to Mac-Carty's Army, killing of his Men, and taking
himself Prisoner; there was see strange Apparitions of Bodies of Me &c. in the Adjacent Neighbourhoo Of a Terrible Tempest in the Isle  ELY. ON Thursday the 15th. instant, the fell a mighty Tempest of Rai Hail, Lightning, and Thunder in t Isle of Ely, Cambridge-shire, and so parts of Hartford-shire; before t Tempest began, the Sky was for  considerable time Black and Dar when on a suddain there happened  great Storm of Hail, which by t assistance of of an East-Wind, fell wi such violence, that the Hail-Sto rebounded two Foot high from t ground, after which followed a fier showre of Rain, which seemed rath to come down in Pailfuls, than in t common way, and so affrighted the I¦habitants, that they ran immediate into the Fields to save the Sheep a Lambs, and other small Cattle; du¦ing this dreadful Storm, the Heave sent forth such huge and freque flashes of Fire, that the Firmame seemed to be in a Flame; some  the Hail-Stones that fell, were of
very large Size; the Rain caused so great a Torrent of Water, that in se∣veral parts great Quantities of Sheep and Lambs, &c. were drowned, which with several considerable quantities of Hay were carried away with the Tor∣rent. Of strange Apparitions in the Air, near Maldon in Essex. IN the first Week of July, 1691. At a small place near the Town of Maldon, in the County of Essex, there was seen the following Apparitions, or Appearance: Just about twy light, or the shutting up of the Evening, at the House of the Vicker of the Pa∣rish, which is situate near half a mile from the Church, at a time when the Gentleman and his Family was at Supper, a great Dog that belonged to the House, was observed to make a very great and unusual Barking, as if the House had been beset with Thieves; upon which a Servant was ordered to go into the Yard, to find out the occasion of the Dogs Barking, who coming to the place, saw, to his great Admiration, a strange and unusual Light in the Sky, upon
which, giving information thereof to his Master, &c. they all came out, and looking in the Sky, they all soon after, saw the plain likeness or appearance of a Body of Men in the Air, divided into two Bodies▪ and soon after tha, they heard th plain noise or report of Guns, grea and small, and to their thinking, Me droping down from both Parties; a¦ter some time, these Bodies of Me vanished, and they saw the appea¦rance of only two Men on Horse-back▪ Engaged with Pistols, and to thei thinking, the one killed the other, an then vanished. FINIS. ADVERTISEMENT. ☞ An Impartial Journal of all the Tran¦actions of Their Majesties Forces, and th of the Irish Rebels, both Regular Troops an Rapparees. With an exact List of all t Irish Rebels, that have been Kill'd, or tak Prisoners in each Action: with the Names  the English Officers that Commanded, the D when, and Place where each Action was pe¦form'd. Printed for Rob. Hayhurst in Li¦tle-Brittain.
