N982 99827900 198069
Newes from More-lane; OR, A mad knavish an vncivil Frolick of a Tapster dwelling there, who buying a fat Coult for eigh∣teen pnce, the Mare being dead, & he not knowing how to bring the Coult up by hand, killed it and had it baked in a Pastie, and invited n any of his Neighbours to the Feast; and telling of them what it was; the Conceit thereof made them all Sick; as by this following Dirty you shall hear. The Tapster fil'd the Cup up to the brim, And all to make the little Coult to swim; But all that heares it, sayes that for his gaine, He is no better then a Wagg in graine. The Tune is, A Health to the best of Men. woodcut of gentleman woodcut of gentleman THere is a Tapster in More-lane, that did a Pasty make, All People doe of him complaine, now for his grosse mistake, Hée instead of Wenson fine a good fat Coult did kill, And put in store of Clarret Wine, his humour to fullfill. A peck of Flower at the least, with six pound of Butter. Hée made his Nighbours such a Feast, and bid them all to Supper: A curious fine fat Colt it was, and handled daintily: The Tapster prov'd himself an Asse. for this his knavery. Likewise there was a Baker too that lived in that place, And he was a pertaker too, I speak in his disgrace, For he found Flower to make it, I speak not in his praise, And afterwards did bake it, his knavery for to raise. Likewise there was a Car-man too, and he found Butter for it; But when the knavery Neighbors knew, they could not but abhor it: And then there was a Cooke Sir, at More-gate doth he dwell, And he then under tooke Sir; to make the Pasty well. Some say it eate as mellow then as any little Chick: But I tell thée good-fellow then, it made the Neighbuors sick: The Lapster had his humour, but the Neighbours had the worst, Yet I doe hear they bad good Béere, and danty Pasty-crust Then every joviall Blade Sir, that lived in that place; They Money fréely paid Sir, they scorned to be bace. They cal'd for Béere, likewise for Ale, because the Coult should swim, And of the Cup they would not faile. but fil'd it to the brim.
The second part, to the same tune. woodcut of three gentlemen around a table THe Car-mans Wife cry'd out and said troah 'tis good Meat indéed, So likewise said the chamber-Maid, when she on it did féed, The Lapster bid them welcome then, and Wea-hae did he cry, You are all welcome Gentlemen, you'r welcome hartily. The Glovers Wife was in a heat, and did both pout and mump, Because they would not let her eate the Butok and the Rump. As for the merry Weavers Wife, I will give her, her due She spent her coyne to end the strife, among that joviall Crew. This Colt was not so wholsome though as was a good fat Hogg. Yet one came in and told the crew it was a mangie Dogg? But he that told them was too blame, and was but a silly Dolt. The Tapster hid him peace for shame, for twas a good fat Colt. The Colt be cost me eightéen pence, the Tapster be did say, I hope good Folks ere you goe hence, you for your meate will pay. Pox take you for a Roague quoth one, another he fel'd oaks, Another said he was vndone? twas worse then Harty-choaks. The Porter he did give nine pence, to have it in a Pye. The People ere they went from thence, did féed most hartily. It was the joviall Baker, the knavish Tapster too, The Car-n was pertaker, was not this a Iovial Crew The Potecary he was there, Farr, and the Sexton too: The Tapster put them in great fear, He made them for to spue. Now was not this a Knave in grain to use his Neighbours so. When Knave are scarce, hee,l go for twan, good People what think you. The Tapster he came in at last, and gave the People vomits: I hope (quoth he) the worst is past, I have eased your soule Stomacks, Wea-hea, cry'd the Tapster then, how doe you like my sport: The Women said, so did the Men, the Devill take you for't. At Brainford as I heard some say, a mangie Dog was eate: This was not halfe so bad as that, and yet the fault was great; Men of good fashon then was there, that went both fine and brave. Now all do say, that this doth heare, the Tapster is a Knave. FINIS. London, Printed for William Gammon, and to be sould in Smithfield.
