10265.5 24438958 27666
ARTICLES TO BE INQVIRED OF IN THE METROPOLITICALL VISITATION OF THE MOST REVEREND FATHER, VVILLIAM, By GODS Providence, Lord Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, Primate of all England; and METROPOLITAN: In and for the Dioces of LONDON, In the yeere of our LORD GOD 163, And in the  yeere of his Graces Translation. EX IGNE RESVRGIT VIRTVS Printed at London, by Richard Badger. 163.
The Tenour of the Oath, to be Ministred to the Church-wardens and Side-men. YOu shall sweare, that you, and every of you, shall duly consi∣der and diligently enquire, of all and every of these Articles given you in charge; and that all affection, favour, hatred, hope of reward and gaine, or feare of displeasure, or malice set aside; you shall present all and every such person, that now is, or of late was with∣in your parish, as hath committed any offence, or made any default mentioned in these, or any of these Articles; or which are vehemently suspected or defamed of any such offence or default: Wherein you shall deale uprightly and fully; neither presenting, nor sparing to pre∣sent any, contrary to truth: having in this action GOD before your eyes, with an earnest zeale to maintaine truth, and to suppresse vice. So helpe you GOD, and the holy Contents of this Booke.
Concerning the Church, the Ornaments thereof and the Churches possessions. IMprimis, Whether haue you in your seuerall Churches, and Chappels, the whole Bible of the largest volume, and the Booke of Common Prayer, both fairely and substantially bound. A Font of stone, set vp in the anci∣ent vsuall place: A conuenient and decent Communion Table, with a Carpet of silke, or some other decent stuffe, continually laid vpon the same at time of diuine seruice, and a faire linnen cloth thereon, at the time of the receiuing of the holy Communion. And whether is the same Table placed in such conuenient sort within the Chancell or Church, as that the Minister may bee best heard in his Prayer and Administration: and that the greatest number may communi∣cate. And whether is it so used out of time of diuine seruice, as is not agréeable to the holy use of it; as by sitting on it, throwing hats on it, writing on it, or is it abused to other prophaner vses: and are the ten Commandements set vpon the East end of your Church or Chappell where the people may best sée and reade them, and other sentences of holy Scripture, written on the walles likewise for that purpose? 2 Whether are the afternoones Sermons, in your seuerall Parishes, turned into Catechizing by question and answer; according to the forme prescribed in the Booke of Common Praier? and whether doth euery Lecturer reade diuine Seruice, according to the Liturgy printed by authority, in his Surplice and Hood before the Lecture? And whether are his Maiesties Instructions in all things duly obserued? 3 Whether haue you in your said Church or Chappel, a conuenient seat for your Mini∣ster to read Seruice in, together with a comly pulpet set vp in a conuenient place, with a decent cloath or cufhion for the same, a comely large Surplice, a faire Communion Cup, with a couer of siluer, a Flagon of siluer, tinne, or pewter, to put the Wine in, whereby it may be set vpon the Communion Table, at the time of the blessing thereof, with all other things and ornaments necessary for the celebration of Diuine Seruice, and administration of the Sacraments? And whether haue you a strong Chest for Almes for the poore, with thrée Lockes and Keies, and another Chest for kéeping the Bookes, and Ornaments of the Church, and the Register Book? And whether haue you a Register Booke in Parchment, for Christnings, Weddings, and Burials, and we∣ther the same be kept in all points, according to the Canons in that behalfe prouided? And is the Mothers Christian name therein Registred as well as the Fathers, and a transcript thereof brought in yearely within one moneth after the 25 of March into the Lord Archbishop or Bishop of the Diocesse his principall Register? And whether haue you in your said Church or Chancell, a Table set, of the degrées wherein by Law men are prohibited to marry? 4 Whether are your Church and Chappels, with the Chancels thereof, and your pr∣sonage or vicarage house, your parish Almes-house and Church-house, in good repara∣tions: and are they imployed to godly, and their right holy vses? Is your Church, Chan∣cell, and Chappell decently and comly kept, as well within as without, and the seats well maintained, according to the 85. Canon, in that behalfe provided? Or haue any
Patrons or others decayed the Parsonage, houses, and keepe a stipendary Priest or Cu∣rate, in place where an incumbent should be possessed? Whether is your Church-yard well fenced with walles, railes, or pales, and by whom: and if not, in whose default the same is, and what the defect or fault is? And whether any person haue incroached vp∣on the ground of the Church-yard, or whether any person or persons, haue vsed any thing or place consecrated to holy vse, prophanely or wickedly? 5 Is your Church or Chappell decently paued, and is your Church-yard well and or∣derly kept without abuse? Are the bones of the dead decently interred, or laid vp in ome fit place as beseemeth Christians? And is the whole consecrated ground kept free from Swine and all other nastinesse, as becommeth the place so dedicated? 6 Whether haue any ancient Monuments or Glasse-windowes béen defaced, or any rasse Inscriptions, Lead, Stones, or any thing else belonging to your Church or Chap∣ell, beène at any time purloyned, and by whom? 7 Whether haue you the Terrier of all the Gleabe Lands, Medowes, Gardens, Or∣chards, Houses, Stockes, Implements, Tenements, and portions of Tithes (whether wihin your Parish or without) belonging vnto your parsonage or vicarage, taken by the vsew of honest men in your said Parish? And whether the same Terrier be laid vp in the Bishops Registery, and in whose hands any of them are now? And if you haue no Terrier already made in Parchment, you the Church-wardens and Sidemen, together wih your Parson or Uicar, or in his absence with your Minister, are to make diligent inuiry and presentment of the seuerall particulars following, and make, subscribe, and signe the said Terrier, as aforesaid. 1 How many seuerall parcelis of Glebe-land, doe you know, or haue you credibly heard to belong vnto your Rectory, Church, Parsonadge, Uicaridge &c. and by what Names are they (or any of them) commonly called and knowne; And what yearly Rent haue you knowne or heard to haue beene paid, vnto the Parson, Uicar, or to his or their Asignes, for euery, or any of the said parcels? In Whose occupation, are the said parcells at this present? How much doth each pacell conteyne by measure of the 16. foote Poale? How is each parcell Butted, on eury parte? And who is to repaire the Fences on each side thereof? 3 What hedge, ditch méere, trée, thorne, doole or distination, is there now, at this prsent, whereby the said parcells of Church-lands may bee apparentlie knowne and diinguished, from the lands of other men, vpon whom they doe abutt? 4 What Cart-way, Horse way, foote way, Gates or Styles doe leade from your Parsonadge or Uicaridge-House, vnto euerie of the said parcells of Gleab-land? De∣clre your knowledge therein. 5 Whether doe you know, or haue you crediblie heard, that some Styles, gates, hed∣ges, ditch, méere, Trée, Thorne, or other Doole (formerlie growing or being, betwéene the said parcells of Gleabe (or some of them) and the Landes of other men) haue bin dig∣gd vp, felled downe, destroied, put by or defaced? And who had the said parcell (so wron∣gd) in occupation, when the said Style, Gate, hedge, ditch, méere, Tree, Thorne, or oher antient Doole, was so digged vp, felled downe, destroyed, put by or defaced? Concerning the Clergy. 1 VVHether doth your Parson, Uicar, or Curate, distinctlie and reuerently say Di∣uine seruice vpon Sundayes and Holidayes, and other dayes appointed to bee oserued by the book of Common Prayer; as Wednesdayes, nd Fridayes, and the Eues of euery Sunday and Holiday, at fit and vsuall times? And doth he dulie ob∣serue the Orders, Kites and Ceremonies, prescribed in the said Booke of Common Prayer, as well in reading publike prayers and the Letanie, as also in administring the
Sacraments, solemnization of Matrimony, visiting the sicke, burying the dead, Church∣ing of Women, and all other like Rites and Offices of the Church, in such manner and forme as in the said Booke of Common prayer he is inioyned, without any omission or addition. And doth he reade the Book of the last Canons yearely, and weare a Surplice according to the said Canons? 2 Whether haue you any Lecturer in your Parish, who hath preached in his Clake and not in his Gowne, and whether haue you any Lecturer who will not professe his willingnesse and readinesse to take vpon him a Liuing or Benefice, with cure of sotles, or who hath refused a Benefice when it hath béene offered vnto him? 3 Doth your Minister bid Holidayes and Fasting-dayes, as by the Booke of Com∣mon prayer is appointed? And doth he giue warning beforehand to the Parishioners, for the receiuing of the holy Communion, as the two and twentieth Canon requith: and whether hée doth administer the holy Communion so often, and at such times as that euery Parishioner may receiue the same, at the least thrice in euery yéere: wheeof once at Easter, as by the Booke of Common prayer is appointed? And doth your Mi∣nister receiue the same himselfe, on euery day that he administreth it to others, and vse the words of institution according to the Booke, at euery time that the Bread and Wine is renewed, accordingly as by the prouiso of the 21. Canon, is directed: And doth he deliuer the Bread and Wine to euery Communicant seuerally, and knéelig? Whether he hath admitted to the holy Communion, any notorious Offender or Shis∣maticke, contrary to the 26. and 27. constitutions, or receiued any to the Communon, being not of his owne Cure, or put any from the Communion, who are not publck∣ly infamous for any notorious crime? Doth he use the signe of the Crosse in Bap∣tisme, or baptise in any bason, or other vessell, and not in the vsuall Font, Or ad∣mit any Father to be God-father to his owne Child, or such who haue not receiued the holy Communion, or baptize any Children that were not borne in the parish, or wilflly refuse to Baptise any infant in his Parish, being in danger, hauing béene enformed of the weaknesse of the said child: and whether the child dieth through his default without Baptisme? 4 Whether hath your Minister married any without a Ring, or without Banes pb∣lithed thrée seuerall Sundayes or Holidayes in time of Diuine seruice, in the seuerall Churches or Chappels of their seuerall abode, according to the book of Common pay∣er, or in times prohibited, albeit the Banes were thrice published, without a Licens or dispensation from the Archbishop, the Byshop of the Diocesse, or his Chancellor, rst obtained in that behalfe? Or not betwixt the houres of eight and twelue in the fre∣noone, or haue maried any in any priuate house, or if the parties be under the age of 21. yéeres, before their Parents or gouernours haue signified their consent vnto him? 5 Doth he refuse to bury any, which ought to be interred in Christian buriall, or de∣fer the same longer than he should, or bury any in Christian buriall, which by the consttu∣tions of the Church of England, or lawes of the Land, ought not to be so interred? 6 Is your Minister a Preacher allowed? If yea, then by whom? If not, whether dth he procure some who are lawfully licensed, to preach monethly amongst you at the least? 7 Doth your Minister (being licensed,) preach vsually according to the Canois, either in his owne Cure, or in some other Church or Chappell neare adioyning, whre no other Preacher is, and how often he hath beèn negligent in that behalfe, and dot he preach standing, and with his Hat off? Or whether doth he or his Curate vpon eury Sunday, when there is no Sermon, reade an homilie, or some part thereof, accordng as hée ought to doe: or in case he bee not licensed to preach, doth he take vpon him to Preach or expound the Scriptures in his owne Cure, or elsewhere? If so, then you e
to present the same, the time and place, when, and where he did it? 8 Doth your Minister use to pray for the Kings Majesty, King Charles, and for the Queenes Majesty, Prince Charles, and all the royall Progeny, with addition of such Stile and Titles as are due to his Highnesse, and exhort the people to obedience to his Majesty, and all Magistrates in authoritie vnder him: And doth he also pray for all Archbishops, Bishops, and other Ecclesiasticall persons? 9 Is your Minister continually resident vpon his benefice, and how long time hath he in absent, and in case he be licensed to be absent, wheher doth he cause his Cure to be sfficiently supplied, according to the Canons? Or in case he hath another Benefice, wheher doth he supply his absence by a Curate sufficiently licensed to preach in that Cue where he himselfe is not resident? Or otherwise, in case the smalnesse of the liuing canot find a preaching Minister, doth he preach at both his benefices vsually? 10 Doth your Minister or Curate, serue any more cures than one: If yea, then what othr Cure doth he serue, and how farre are they distant? 11 Doth your Minister or Curate euery Sunday and Holiday, before Euening praer, for halfe an houre or more, examine and instruct the youth and ignorant persons of is Parish in the Tenne Commandements, Articles of the Beliefe, and in the Lods Prayer, and the Sacraments, according as it is prescribed in the Catechisme, set forh in the booke of Common prayer only? And if he doe not, where is the fault, either in he Parents and Masters of the children, or in the Curate neglecting his duty? And in e carefull to tender all such youth of his Parish as haue béene well instructed in ther Catechisme to be confirmed by the Bishop in his Uisitation, or any other conue∣niet time, as is appointed by the booke aforesaid? 12 Doth your Minister in the Rogation dayes, goe in perambulation of the circuit of the Parish, saying and vsing the prayers, Suffrages, and Thankesgiuing to God, ap∣ponted by Law, according to his duty, thanking GOD for his blessings, if there be plenty on the earth: Or otherwise, to pray for his grace and fauour, if there be a feare of carcity? 13 Hath your Minister admitted any Woman, begotten with childe in adultery or forication, to be Churched without licence of the Ordinary? 14 Hath your Minister, or any other Preacher, baptized children, churched any wo∣man, or ministred the holy Communion in any priuate house, otherwise than by Law is allowed? 15 Doth your Minister endeuour and labour diligently to reclaime the popish Recu∣sats in his parish from their errors (if there be any such abiding in your parish.) Or whether is your Parson, Uicar, or curate, ouer conuersant wish, or a fauourer of Recu∣sats, whereby he is suspected not to be sincere in Religion? 16 Hath your Minister taken vpon him, to appoint any publike or priuate Fasts, Pophestes, or exercises, not approued by Law, or publike authority, or hath vsed to met in any priuate house or place, with any person or persons, there to consult how to impeach or depraue the Booke of Common Prayer, or the doctrine or discipline of the Curch of England: If yea, then you shall present them all? 17 Hath your Minister staied the publication of any excommunications or suspenti∣os, or doth he euery halfe yéere denounce in his Parish Church, all such of his parish a are excommunicated, and perseuere therein without seeking to be absolued, or doth he vittingly and willingly kéep company with such as are excommunicate: And hath hee amitted into your Church any person excommunicate, without a certificate of his ab∣sution from the Ordinary, or other competent Iudge? 18 Doth your Minister carefully looke to the reléefe of the poore, and from time to
time call vpon his Parishioners to giue some what, as they can spare to godly and ch∣ritable vses, especially when they make their Testaments. 19 Whether your Minister or any, hauing taken holy Orders, being now silenced or suspended, or any other person of your knowledge, or as you haue heard, hold any co∣uenticles, or doth preach in any place, or vse any other forme of Diuine Seruice has appointed in the Book of Common prayer: If yea, then you are to present their name, and with whom? 20 Whether is your Curate licensed to serue, by the Bishop of this Diocesse, or b any other, and by whom? 21 Doth your Minister vse such decencie and comelinesse in his apparell, as by e 47. Cannon is enjoyned: is he of sober behauiour, and one that doth not vse such bodlie labour, as is not seemelie for his function and calling? 22 Is your Minister noted or defamed, to haue obtained his Benefice or his orde, by Symonie, or any other way defamed, to be a Symoniacall person, or any way nod to be a Schismaticke, or schismatically affected, or reputed to be an incontinent perso, or doth table or lodge any such in his house: or is he a frequenter of Tauernes, Inns, or Ale-houses, or any place suspected for ill rule: Or is he a common Drunkard, a co∣mon Gamester, or player at Dice, a Swearer, or one that applieth himselfe not at hs studie, or is otherwise offensiue and scandalous to his function or Ministerie? 23 Doth your Preacher or Lecturer reade Diuine seruice, before his Sermon, r Lecture, and Minister the Sacraments twice a yeere at least in his owne person, acc∣ding to the Canons? 24 When any person hath béene dangerously sicke in your Parish, hath he neglectd o visit him, and when any haue béene parting out of this life, hath he omitted to doe s last dutie in that behalfe? 25 Doth your Minister, Curate, or Lecturer, in his or their Sermons deliuer suh doctrine as tends to obedience and the edifying of their Auditorie in faith and Religio, without intermedling with matters of State, not fit to be handled in the pulpit, but o be discussed by the wisdome of his Maiesty and his Councell. And if you find any faulte herein, you shall present them? Schoole-Masters. DOth any in your Parish openlie or priuatelie take vpon him to teach Schoole, wi∣out license of the Ordinarie, and is he conformable to the Religion now establishe? And doth he bring his Schollers to the Church, to heare diuine Seruice and Sermons? And doth he instruct his Schollers in the grounds of the Religion now established n this Church of England, and is he carefull and diligent to benefit his Schollers in lear∣ning? 2 Doth your Schoole master teach and instruct his youth in any other Catechisme than is allowed by publike authoritie? And what Catechisme it is that he so teacheth? 3 Is any Living or meanes giuen towards the erection or maintenance of any Schoole withholden backe or otherwise imployed, and by whom? 4 Doth any kéepe Schoole in the Chancell or Church, by which meanes, that hoy place, and the Communion Table are many waies profaned, and the windowes brok? Parish Clarke and Sextons. 1 HAue you a fit Parish Clarke, aged twentie yeeres at least, of honest conuersati, able to reade and write? Whether are his and the Sxtons wages paid w∣out fraud, according to the ancient custome of your Parish: if not, then by whom are they so defrauded or denied? by whom are they chosen? and whether the said Clarke bee approued by the Ordinarie? And hath hee taken an Oath, as in such cases is fit and quired and is he diligent in his Office, and seruiceable to the Minister, and doth he
tale vpon him to meddle with any thing aboue his Office: as Churching of Women, burying the dead, or such like? Doth your Clark or Sexton kéep the Church cleane, the doores locked at fit times? Is any thing lost or spoiled in the Church, through his default? are the Communion Tble, Font, Books, and other Ornaments of the Church kept faire and cleane? doth he suffer any unseasonable ringing, or any prophane exercise in your Church? Or doth he (wen any is passing out of this life) neglect to toll a bell, hauing notice thereof? Concerning the Parishioners. 1 VVHether any of your Parishioners, being sixtéene yéeres of age or upwards, or others lodging or commonly resorting to any House within your Parish. de wilfully absent themselues from your parish Church, vpon Sundayes or Holidayes a Morning and Euening prayers? Or who come late to Church, and depart from Church before seruice be done vpon the said dayes? Or who doe not reuerently behaue thmselues during the time of Diuine seruice, deuoutly knéeling, when the generall confession of sins, the Letany, the tenne Commandements, and all Prayers and Col∣lets are read, and using all due and lowly reuerence, when the blessed name of the Lord esus Christ is mentioned, and standing vp when the Articles of the Beliefe are read;  who doe couer their heads in the Church during the time of Diuine Seruice, vnlesse  be in case of necessity, in which case they may weare a Night cap or Coyfe? Or who e giue themselues to babbling, talking, or walking, and are not attentiue to heare the word preached, or read? Whether any of your Parish, being of sixtéene yéeres of age o vpwards, doe not receiue the holy Communion in your Church thrice euery yéere: ereof once at Easter, and whether they doe not deuoutly knéele at the receiuing there∣o? And whether any hauing diuerse houses of remoue, doe shift from place to place of prpose to defeat the performance of their Christian duties in that behalfe? 2 Whether any of your parishioners, being admonished therof, do not send their Chil∣den, Seruants, and Apprentices, to the Minister, to be catechized vpon such Sundayes d Holydayes as are appointed? Or whether any of them do refuse to come; or if they cme, refuse to learne those instructions set forth in the Book of Common prayer? 3 Whether any of your Parish doe entertaine within their house, any soiourner, cmmon guests, or other persons, who refuse to frequent Diuine Seruice, or receiue  holy Communion, as aforesaid, present their names, their qualities, or conditions? 4 What Recusant Papists are there in your Parish, or other Sectaries? present teir names, qualities, or conditions? whether they keep any Schoole master in their huse, which commeth not to Church to heare Diuine Seruice and receiue the Com∣unin? What is his Name, and how long hath he taught there, or elsewhere? 5 Whether any of the said Popish Recusants, or other Schismaticks, doe labour to ouce and with-draw others from the Religion now established? Or instruct their fami∣les or children in Popish religion: or refuse to entertaine any, especially in place of geatest seruice, or trust, but such as tnture with them in their opinions? 6 How long haue the said popish Recusants abstained from Diuine Seruice; or from the Communion, as aforesaid? 7 Is there any in your Parish that retaine, sell, vtter, or disperse, any Popish bookes. o Writings, or other Bookes, Libraries, or witings of any Sectaries, touching the Religion, State, or Gouernement Ecclesiastical of this Kingdom of England, or kéep any Monuments of Superstition vncancelled or vndefaced? 8 Whether haue you any in your Parish, which heretofore being popish Recusants or Sectaries, haue since reformed themselues, and come to Church to heare Diuine Ser∣uice, and receiue the Sacraments: If yea, then who are they? And how long since haue they so reformed themselues? And whether they still remaine and abide in that confor∣mitie?
9 Is there any in your Parish that refuse to haue heir Children Baptised, or the∣selues to receiue the Communion at the hands of your Minister, taking excepion a∣gainst him, and what causes or exceptions doe they alleage; or haue any maried Wiues refused to come to Church, according to the Booke of Common Prayer, to giue Gd thankes after their child-birth, for their safe deliuerance? And whether doe any of, or n your Parish, refuse to haue their children Bapized in your Parish Church, according o the forme prescribed in the booke of common Prayer? 10 Doe any of your Parish usually goe to other Parish Churches to heare Diuine Seruice or Sermons? Or doe they communicate, or Baptize their Children in any ∣ther Parish? 11 Whether there be any in your Parish who will come to heare the Sermon, bt will not come to publike prayers apointed by the Book of Common Prayer, making Schisme or diuision (as it were) betwéene the use of publike prayer and preaching? 12 What persons within your Parish, for any offence, contumacy, or crime,  Ecclesiasticall Conusance doe stand excommunicate? present their names, and for wh cause they are excommunicated, and how long they haue so stood, and what person  persons doe wittingly and usually kéepe them company? 13 Whether any, not being in Orders, doe execute any Priestly or Ministeriall ofice, in your Church, Chappell, or Church-yard, and what be their names? 14 Whether any in your Parish, that hauing heretofore taken vpon him the orde of Priest-hood or Deacon, hath since relinquished the same, and liues as a Lay-ma neglecting his vocation? 15 Hath any person in your Parish quarrelled, or stricken, or vsed any violence  your Minister, or haue stricken or quarrelled with any other person within your Chur or Church yard, or demeaned himselfe disorderly in the Church, by filthie or prophan talke, or any other base or immodest behauiour? Or hath disturbed the Minister in tim of Diuine Seruice or Sermon, or hath libelled or spoken slanderous words again your Minister, to the scandall of his vocation, or defaed any of his Neighbours, toching any crime of Ecclesiasticall Conusance? 16 Whether any of, or in your Parish, without consent of the Ordinarie, or othe lawfull authoritie, haue caused any to do pennance, or to be censured or punished for an matter of Ecclesiasticall Conusance, by any Uestrie méetings, or otherwise by thei own authoritie? Or haue taken any mony or commutation for the same? Present thei names that haue done it? And who haue beene so punished? In what manner, and vpo what cause? 17 Whether any person in your Parish, doe exercise any Trade or labour, buy o sell, or kéepe open Shops or Ware-houses vpon any Sunday or Holiday by themselues their Seruants, or Apprentices, or haue otherwise prophaned the said dayes, contrar to the orders of the Church of England? And whether there be any Inne-kéepers, Ale house-kéepers, Uictuallers or other persons, that permit any persons in their houses, t eate, drink or play, during the time of Diuine Seruice or Sermon, or reading the Homilies in the forenoone or afternoone, vpon those dayes? 18 Whether the fifth day of Nouember, be kept holie, and thankesgiuing made t God, for his Maiesties and this States happy deliuerance, according to the Ordinanc in that behalfe? 19 Whether any of your Parish hold or frequent any conuencles or priuate Congregations, or make or maintaine any constitutions, agréed vpon in any such assemblies? Or any that doe write, or publikely or priuately speake against the Booke o Common prayer, or any thing therein contained, or against any of the Articles of Religion agréed vpon, in Anno 1562 or against the Kings Supremacie, in causes Eccless¦sticall,
or against the Oath of Supremacie, or of Allegiance, as pretending the same t be vnlawfull and not warrantable by the Word of GOD? Or against any of the ites or Ceremonies of the Church of England, now established? Or against the Go∣uernment of the Church of England vnder the Kings most excellent Majesty, by Arch-Bishops, Deanes, Arch-Deacons, and other Officers of the same: affirming; hat the same is repugnant to the Word of God, and that the said Ecclesiasticall Offi∣rs, are not lawfully ordained? Or whether there be any Authors, Maintainers or Fa∣urers of Heresie or Schisme, or that be suspected to be Anabaptists, Libertines, rownists, of the Familie of Loue, or of any other Heresie or Schisme? present their ms? 20 Whether any in your Parish haue maried within the degrées by Law prohibited, d where, and by whom? And whether any couple in your Parish being lawfullie ma∣ed, liue apart one from the other, without due separation by the Law, or any that haue bene diuorced, which kéepe company with any other at Bedde or at Boord? 21 Whether doe any persons administer the goods of the dead without lawfull autho∣ty, or suppresse the last will of the dead? Or are there in your Parish any wils not yet oued, or goods of the dead (dying intestate) left vnadministred? By authority in that halfe, you shall not faile to present the Executors and all others faultie therein: and o how many persons being possessed of any goods and chattels, haue died within your arish, since the x. day of Februarie? 1635. 22 Whether any with-hold the Stocke of the Church, or any goods or other things, euen to good and charitable vses? 23 Whether your Hospitals and Almes-houses, and other such houses and corporati∣s, founded to good and charitable vses, and the lands, possessions and goods of the same,  ordered and disposed of as they should be? And doe the Masters, Gouernours, Fel∣lwes, and others of the said Houses and Corporations, behaue and demeane themselues acording to the godly Ordinances and statutes of their seuerall Foundations? 24 Whether haue you any in your Parish to your knowledge or by common fame or port, which haue committed Adultery, Fornication, or Incest: or any which haue im∣dently bragged or boasted, that he or they haue liued incontinently with any person or rsons whatsoeuer: or any that haue attempted the chastity of any Woman, or solici∣ any Woman to haue the carnall knowledge of her bodie, or which are commonly puted to bee common Drunkards, Blasphemers of Gods holy Name; common wearers, common Slanderers of their Neighbours, and sowers of discord, filthy and sciuious Talkers, Usurers, Symoniac all Persons, Bawdes, or Harborers of Wo∣en with childe, which be vnmaried, or Conueying or suffering them to goe away be∣e they haue made satisfaction to the Church, or any that hauing heretofore béene pre∣nted, or suspected of any the aforesaid crimes, haue for that cause departed your Pa∣h, and are now returned againe? Or any which haue vsed any inchantments, sorce∣es, incantations, or witchcrafts, which are not made felony by the Statutes of this ealme, or any which haue committed any perjurie in any Ecclesiasticall Court, in an cclesiasticall cause, or which haue committed any forgerie, punishable by the Ecclesi∣icall Lawes, and the procurors and abettors of the said offences: you shall truly pre∣st the names of all, and singular the said offendors, and with whom they haue commit∣td the said offences, in case they haue not béene publikely punished to your knowledge  the same crimes? Physitions, Chirrgions, and Mid-wives. 2 HOw many Physitions, Chirurgions or Mid-Wiues, haue you in your Parish? How long haue they vsed their seuerall Sciences or Offices, and by what authori∣te? And how haue they demeaned themselues therein, and of what skil are they accoun∣td to be in their profession?
Touching the Church-wardens and Side-men. 1 VVHether you and the Church-wardens, Quest-men, or Side-men from tine to time, doe, and haue done their diligence, in not suffering any idle persor to a∣bide either in the Church-yard, or Church-porch, in Seruice or Sermon time, bu cau∣sing them either to come into the Church to heare Diuine Seruice, or to depart, an not disturbe such as be hearers there? And whether they haue, and you doe diligently se the parishioners duely resort to the Church euery Sunday and Holiday and there to renaine during diuine Seruice and Sermon? And whether you or your predecessors, Chrch-Wardens there, suffer any playes, Feasts, drinkings, or any other prophane vsags, to be kept in your Church, Chappell, or Church-yards, or haue suffered to your and heir vttermost power and endeauour, any person or persons to be tipling or drinking in any Inne or Uictualling house in your Parish, during the time of Diuine Seruice or er∣mon, on Sundayes and Holidayes? 1 Whether, and how often haue you admitted any to preach within your Churh or Chappell, which was not sufficientlie licensed? And whether you together with your Mi∣nister, haue not taken diligent héed and care, that euerie parishioner being of sixtene yéeres of age or vpwards, haue receiued thrice euerie yéere, as aforesaid: and also hat no stranger haue vsuallie come to your Church, from their owne Parish-Church? 3 Whether haue there béene prouided against euerie Communion, a sufficient qan∣titie of fine white bread, and good and wholesome wine for the communicants that all receiue? And whether that wine be brought in a cleane and swéet standing pot of pew∣ter, or of other purer mettall? 4 Whether were you chosen by the consent of the Minister and the Parishiones And haue the late Church-wardens giuen vp a just account for their time, and deliured to their successors by Bill indented the money, nd other things belonging to the Church which was in their hands? And are the Almes of the Church faithfullie distributed to the vse of the poore? 5 Whether doe you sée the names of all Preachers which are strangers and prech in your Parish Churches, to be noted in a Booke for that purpose, and whether euie Preacher doe subscribe his name, and of whom he had his License? 6 Whether any man doe trouble or molest you for doing your duties? 7 Whether there be any Legacies witholden giuen to the Church or poore people o to the mending of Highwayes, or otherwise by the Testators? In whose hands it is, by whom it was giuen, and by whom it is with-holden? 8 Do you know of any thing that hath béene complained of, that is not yet redresse? Concerning Ecclesiasticall Magistrates and Officers. 1 VVHether doe you know or haue heard of any payment, composition or agre∣ment, to, or with any Ecclesiasticall Magistrate, Iudge, or Officer, for wil∣ing at or sparing to punish any person for any offence of Ecclesiasticall Conusance, r for suppressing or concealing of any excommunication, or any other Ecclesiasticall C∣sure, of or against any Recusant, or any other offendor in the cases aforesaid? Wht summe of money, or other consideration hath béene receiued or promised, by, or to any f them, in that respect, by whom, and with whom? 2 Hath any person within your Parish, paid or promised any summe of money or ∣ther reward, for commutation of pennance, for any crime of Ecclesiasticall Conusance? If so, then with whom? When, and for what, and how hath the same beéne implyed? 3 Are your Ecclesiasticall Iudges and their substitutes Masters of Arts, or Batc∣ellors of the Lawes at the least, Learned and practised in the Ciuill and Ecclesiasticl Lawes: Men of good life and fame, zealously affected in Religion, and iust and v∣right in executing their Offices? Haue they heard any matter of Office priuatele
in th Chambers, without their sworne Registers, or their Deputies presence 4 Doe you know, or haue you heard, that any Ecclesiasticall Iudge, Officer or Minister hath receiued or taken any extraordinarie fées, or other rewards or promises, b any vayes or meanes, directly or indirectlie, of any person or persons whatsoeuer, eithe for th granting of the administration of the Goods and Chattels of those that haue die intete, to one before another, or for allotting of larger portions of the Gods and Chatels of those that haue died itestate, to one more than to another: or for allowing large and vnreasonable accounts, made by Excutors or administrators: or for giuing them Quietus est, or discharges, without Inuentory or account, to defraude Creditors, Legaries, or those who are to haue portions. And what summs of money doe you knov, or haue you heard, that any Ecclesiasticall Iudge or Officer hath taken out of the ste of any dying intestat, vpon pretence to bestow the same, in Pios vsus: and how aue the same béene bestowed? 5 Hath any Ecclesiasticall Magistrate, Iudge, Officer, or any oher exercising Ec∣clesiastical Iurisdiction within this your Diocesse: Or any Aduocate, Register, Procter, Clakes, Apparators, or other Minister belonging to the same Ecclesiasticall Courts exaced or taken by any wayes or meanes, directly or indirectly, extraordinarie or grea∣ter Fées than are due & accustomed? And whether is there a Table for the rates of all Fée, set vp in their seuerall Courts and Offices? And whether they haue sent or suffe∣red my Processe to goe out of the Ecclesiasticall Courts otherwise than by Law they ougt? Or haue they taken vpon them the Offices of Informers or Promoters to the said Courts, or any other way abused themselues in their Offices, contrarie to the Law and Canons in that behalfe prouided? 6 What number of Apparators haue euery seuerall Iudge Ecclesiasticall? And wheein, and in what manner is the Countrey ouerburthened by them? And wherein hau they caused or summoned any to appeare in the said Courts, without a present∣met or Citation first had? Or whether haue they threatned any to prosecute them in the said Courts if they would not giue them some rewards, and what bribes in that be∣hal haue they taken? 7 What reward or fees hath any of the Apparators taken, to saue the iournies to the Ecesiasticall Court of any persons, & what (after composition so made) haue they or any of hem taken and receiued, and what acquittance or discharge haue they giuen or promi∣sed them, and whether haue they not cited some to appeare before the Arch-Deacon, or his Officiall, after they haue béene ordered by the Commissary, and done their pennance accrdingly, and whom haue they so cited and troubled, and what hath it cost them, as you  or haue heard, or by inquiry can finde? I you know of any other default or crime of Ecclesiasticall Conusance, you are to ent the same by vertue of your Oathes? he Minister of euerie Parish, may and ought to ioyne in presentment with the Chrch-wardens, and Side men, and if they will not present, the Minister may and ouht himselfe to present the defaults and crimes aforesaid: and there must be seuerall prentments made to euery seuerall article: and the Minister, Church-wardens, and Swrne-men, are to méete and conferre about the said presentments, and answering of eury of the aforesaid Articles? FINIS.
