11279.5 99838350 2725
NEWES FROM FRANCE. GOD, whose goodnesse and cle∣mencie is incomprehensible, to our humane thoughts and ima∣ginations, doth not alwayes dis∣charge the arrowes of his wrath vpon miserable sinners; who by the innume∣rablenesse of their offences, haue stirred vp and prouoked his wrath against them, because he desireth not the death of a sinner, but ra∣ther that he should conuert and be saued: But when he seeth that they waxe worse, and are hardened in their sinnes, and lull themselues asleepe in humane delights: Then he rouzeth vp himselfe with the scourge of aduersitie, and dischargeth the furie of his wrath against them, to make them turne vnto him, who is the Soueraigne Ruler, of whome they hold their being, and all their power. Then (I say) he employeth the great forces of the heauens,
and the Elements, thereby to heale the vlcer of their vices, that wallow and take pleasure in sinne, as a Sow delighteth to wallow in the mire. Which plainely appeareth by the deplora∣ble accident happened of late in the Citie of Paris, where the force and furie of fire strucke such an astonishment in all the inhabitants, that they thought the Towne, like a second Sodome, would suddenly haue beene consu∣med to ashes, by the impetuous flames of fire that threatned them; and yet could not truely know the truth how it began: For it is so di∣uersly reported, that men cannot assuredly de∣clare any truth thereof: And it is prohibited by a Decree made in Court of Parliament, in any sort to speake thereof, to shunne and auoid the tumult and commotion of the people. But so it is, that vpon Saturday the 23. of Octo∣ber, about one of the clocke after midnight, the fire began in such manner to flame out vpon the Merchants Bridge, that the inhabi∣tants thereof were surprized sleeping in their beds, before they heard or perceiued it: for the fire (which met with nothing else but that which was combustible) increased with such
impetuositie, that in a short time, all the hou∣ses that stood vpon the said Bridge on both sides, were on fire, by meanes of certaine beames that lay crosse ouer one to another. The Change Bridge did no lesse feele the force and vigour which the said fire vomited out, by meanes of the flames issuing from the same: for that descending downe to the foun∣dations thereof, in the end it burnt and cast it into the water, with all the houses standing thereon, together with the great riches of the inhabitants, that by no meanes could saue any thing thereof, by reason of the smoake and heate, that hurt and choked diuers of the peo∣ple, and some men that were burnt, fell down with the beames and peeces of wood all bur∣ning into the riuer. You may iudge how many children and poore innocent soules were buried in that im∣piteous fire, for that their fathers and mothers had worke enough to doe, to saue themselues. Many women newly brought in bed, and o∣thers that were sicke in their beds, payd that debt to nature, which all of vs one day must doe, neither hauing that force nor dexteritie sufficient to saue themselues. It was most la∣mentable
to heare the wofull cries and sigh∣ings, not onely of those that were afflicted, but also of the spectators of that miserable ac∣cident: The men in great feare saued them∣selues from that vnexpected deluge, in a man∣ner halfe dead, blaming the heauens for their disaster, and not knowing how to bee reuen∣ged for their losse, tooke reuenge vpon them∣selues; and men were as much troubled to comfort them, as to saue the rest of those that were within their houses. Women in extreme discomfort, their haire hanging about their heades, and in a manner naked, beholding that horrible spectacle, bathing their faces with teares, and casting a thousand sighes vp into the ayre, swouned, and in a manner fell into despaire. Diuers seruants, both maides and men, as well as their masters and mistres∣ses, induring and feeling the rigor of that mis∣chance, stood in the like manner as others did, ready to pay their debt to cruell destiny. The fire still waxing greater and greater, mounted vp into the ayre with mighty flames, and cast such and so great a light ouer all the Citie, that those which knew nothing of that vnfortunate mischance, being awaked
by the popular rumour, were in a maze, to i∣magine from whence that light should come, not knowing the cause; but as others did, in great feare ranne vnto the place. The Bels in diuers Churches began to ring, the noyse whereof astonishing diuers Citi∣zens of the sayd Towne, caused them to arme themselues: at which time Paris began to en∣ter into a great tumult. When the Duke de Monbason, Gouernour of the City, hauing in∣telligence thereof, came vnto the place with his Company of souldiers, the Watch, and di∣uers others; all in Armes, placing a Court of guard at both ends of the Bridges, and other places. From thence he went to possesse the strongest and most eminent places, as the Ba∣stille, the Kings Court called the Louure, the Towne house, and diuers places of note; which done, he caused fires to be made tho∣rowout all the Citie, and Lanternes to bee hung out of euery window, in so great quan∣tity, that it was as light as at noone-day: and caused foure Culuerins to be brought to both the ends of the said Bridges: and to conclude, vsed such diligence in that imminent danger, still keeping good watch, doubting some
treason, that he is perpetually to be commen∣ded for the same. In the meane time, while he was thus pro∣uidently busied about that publike care, so necessary in such an extremitie: The fire, that like a tempest, deuoured and spoyled all that it tooke hold on, was not content with that whereon it had first seized, but hauing satis∣fied the greedie desire thereof, and brought all the houses and dwelling places vpon the sayd two Bridges, into vtter ruine and desola∣tion, and layd them in the valley of miserie, encreased more and more, and carried her flames into the Galue place; and if it had not beene for some artificiall trenches, and mens helpe, who in great numbers ranne thither, the great Castle, and the gate of Paris, was in danger to haue felt the furie thereof. On the other side, in the extremitie of the raging flames, at the other end of the Bridges afore∣said, the fire was no lesse furious: for hauing seized vpon all the houses and shops neere vn∣to it, as farre as before the Pallace, it tooke hold on the Dyall, and beganne to melt the Lead that couered it, vntill a great number of nimble and couragious men, ran thither, and
employed all their forces and industries, to saue that admirable worke. The Duke de Monbason, while euery man was busied about that pitifull and most lamen∣table busines, on Sunday in the morning, cau∣sed commandement to bee made by sound of Trumpet, that all the Citizens should fill and set diuers tubs full of water at all the corners of the streetes. And it is an incredible thing to re∣port, how great a number of people from all places ranne vnto that place, to satisfie them∣selues with the sight of that horrible fire, which filled their eyes with teares, and their brests with sighes. This (friendly Reader) in briefe is the true relation that I can make vnto thee, to let thee know and vnderstand this lamentable action: from whence the same proceeded no man knowes. Neuerthelesse, the Court, by a Decree made the 25. day of Octob. hath commanded all Iudges and Officers to make an exact enqui∣rie of those, that wickedly haue committed that disorder; and that the knowledge thereof being had, so good Iustice may be vsed therein, that such as they may take example thereby.
A Decree made by the Court of Par∣liament in PARIS, whereby Order is taken for prouiding for the Merchants, that haue lost their goods by the said fire, and to preuent the like mischance in time to come. VPon the Declaration made by the Kings Atturney General, touching the fire hap∣pened by night, betweene Saturday and Sunday, the 24. of this moneth of October, which burnt and consumed the Changers and the Merchants Bridges, and some houses neere vnto them, as well on the Palace side, vnto the Leather street, as on the great Castle side, re∣quiring, That the Court would be pleased, to giue him Commission to make information of the beginning of that fire, considering the di∣uers reports that were spred abroad in the Towne, that might bee a meanes to procure great trouble in the same, and to make speedie prouision for the necessitie of those, that haue lost their goods by the said Fire, as also that the like inconuenience may not happen. After the Lieutenant ciuill, and the substitute of the sayd
Atturney generall had audience, being for that cause sent for, vpon information that they had begunne to make inquirie thereof. The Court hath enjoyned and enioyneth the Prouost of Paris, or his Lieutenants ciuill or cri∣minall, diligently to continue the information by them begun, touching the originall of that Fire, and to make and finish the inditement of the authours of the same, and their adherents, ready for the definitiue sentence, notwithstan∣ding any oppositions, or appeales whatsoeuer: and to the Substitute of the sayd Atturney gene∣rall to be assistant vnto them, and with all dili∣gence to certifie this Court thereof. And with∣all, expressely command and prohibite (vpon paine of death) all persons, of what qualities or conditions soeuer they be, to assemble toge∣ther either by day or by night, vnlesse it bee by commandement of the Magistrate, nor yet to mis behaue themselues by words, nor to vse any reproches, vnder pretence of diuersitie of Religions, or to sow or cast foorth any bruites or rumours touching the inconuenience of the sayd Fire, tending to the disquietnesse of the Ci∣tie; but to liue peaceably and quietly, vnder the Kings Authority and Edicts. Commanding
all vagrant persons, and men that are of lewde conuersation, liuing idlely, presently, without any delay, to depart out of the Citie, after the publication of these presents: And their Oasts, and such as harbour them, to disclose them, vp∣on paine personally to answere for them: And to prouide for the necessitie and reliefe of the poore inhabitants, vtterly vndone and begge∣red by the sayd Fire: Humble supplication shall be made vnto the King, to be pleased to bestow His gracious liberalitie vpon them. And in the meane time it is ordeined, That the said Attur∣ney generall shall make a note of the names of those, that haue endured the said losses; and what trades and occupations they were of, as also of the number of their children and fami∣lies, who may be put into Saint Louis House, there to be lodged and nourished for the space of sixe moneths: and to that end, there shall be ten thousand Frankes put into the hands of Per∣rot and Sainctot, Ouerseers of the Hospitall. And further, that gatherings shall be made through∣out all the Parishes of this Citie, to ayde the said distressed people. And to that end, the people shall be exhorted by the Vicars: and Officers of the sayd Parishes, to appoint certaine persons of
good qualitie, from month to month, to make the sayd Gatherings. Commanding the Pro∣uost of Merchants and Sheriffes, to set men on worke continually, to take vp, and rid away the ruines of the said Fire fallen into the water, that the course of the same may not be hindred, and to make it nauigable: and in the meane time, to appoint honest men of good credit, and well experienced, for the space of a whole yeere, to search in the bottome of the water, for the goods and merchandizes, that shall be found to haue beene drowned; and the same to bee brought into the common Hospitall of the said Citie; whereof an Inuentorie shall bee made by one of the sayd Sheriffes, that they may bee re∣stored to the owners thereof. And also that all Boatmen, and such as vse to saile vp and downe the riuer; and all others, that shall haue found any thing of the same, to bring them to the said Hospitall of the Towne, and to bring a certifi∣cate thereof, vpon paine of hanging. We like∣wise command the Prouost of Merchants, and the Sheriffes, to keepe and hold within the sayd Hospitall of the Towne, and the Towne-house, as also in euery Ward, such a quantity of hooks,
buckets of lether, and other such necessaries as shall be needfull in time to come, to serue for such inconueniences of Fire, and to certifie the same vnto the Clerke of the said Court. And the Captaine of the Watch, to keepe good watch by night in the Palace, and other vsuall places. And to the end, in time to come, that the dan∣ger of Fire may not take in the Palace, by rea∣son of the shoppes that are built vp against the same, We ordeine and command, that the new shops built from the Dyall Tower, to the bail∣liage Gate, on the Quay-side of the riuer, shall be pulled downe; and none of them to be built vp againe for any cause or reason whatsoeuer. And further, that all Processes sued out against the bodies of those that dwelt vpon the sayd Bridges, by reason of any Obligations, Iudge∣ments, or Arrests, in what manner soeuer they be done, shall surcease for the space of a yeere: and that by the ordinarie Iudges there shall bee sufficient delay made, considering their losse; and whatsoeuer shall by them bee ordeined, to be put in execution; notwithstanding any op∣positions or appeales whatsoeuer. And this pre∣sent Decree shall, by the diligence of the Attur∣ney
generall, bee published, as well in the Church Porches, as openly by sound of Trum∣pet, and set vp vpon the corners of the streetes. Giuen in the Parliament the 26. of October. 1621. Signed Du Tillet.
