11895 99838920 3311
Vera effigies Gildae qui ob insignem Prudentiam, Morum{que} Severitatem Cognominatus est Sapiens Floruit anno reparationis humanae DXXXXVI Will: Marshall-sculp: portrait of Gildas
THE EPISTLE of GILDAS, The most Ancient BRITISH Author: Who flourished in the yeere of our Lord, 546. And who by his great Erudi∣tion, Sanctitie, and Wisedome, acquired the name of Sapiens. Faithfully Translated out of the Originall Latine. LONDON, Printed by T. Cotes, for William Cooke and are to be sold at his shop neere Furnivalls-Inne gate in Holborne. 1638.
Imprimatur, Tho. Wykes▪ R. P. Episc. Lond. Capell. domest.
Of Gildas and the Translation. THE age of bookes shows the strength of their composition; Weake or a∣bortive births, perishing in the infancy, scarce num∣bred among the workes of Time. This Author lived neere the so memorable de∣solation of this Island, when the Saxons, under the con∣duct of Hengist and Hor∣sus, forc't the natives to
cold and inaccessible moun∣taines, and conquered the Country so farre, that they left it not the empty honour of the former name. The causes of their ruine, he passionately, but faithful∣ly, attributes to the misgo∣vernment of evill govern'd Princes, ignorance of a li∣centious Clergy, and an universall laps of the people into impiety. Against these as a zealous Citizen of the world, and a most particu∣lar, but sad lover of his Country; this Reverend Father inveighes, and pro∣fitably
instructs the pre∣sent, by correcting the enor∣mities of the age hee lived n. The Translation was made neere the first en∣trance of the Scottish line upon the Throne of Eng∣land. To the continuance f which the Preface con∣urres with most zealous ishes. In rendring this to English, much faith th beene observed; by hich you may discover, the uthor still the same▪ ough in his apparell fashi∣ed to the time. In peru∣ng whom, the Reader
shall finde, that impiety is the great destroyer of Em∣pires; and that kingdome that remaynes most emma∣culate from sinne, stands safest from ruine.
TO THE INHABI∣TANTS OF THE Island of great BRI∣TAINE, Vnitie and Felicity. IF all men are generally so much addi∣cted unto the monuments of fore∣passed ages, and every Country particularly
unto the antiquities of the Land wherein they inhabit, which is the reason that this our owne Island so much delighteth in behol∣ding the ruines of Vero∣lamium, the renowned Towne of the Romans, the huge and wonder∣full stones on Salisburies plaine, the remem∣brance of the Britanes, Thonge Castle the first seate of the Saxons, the trenches and Fortresses of the Danes, and the Abbey of Battaile the
trophey of the Nor∣manes, that I may omit the quoines of the old. Emperours, the tombs of conquering Kings, with the Armes, swords and Launces of famous men, being all held in estimation, of purpose to reward with conti∣nuall commendation the worthy actions of deceased persons, and to leave us examples to imitate their right No∣ble enterprises: How much more are wee then bound with affe∣ctionate
eyes to behold this ancient Author Gildas, who doth not onely present unto our view the lively Image of this Land, how in glory of beautifull Cit∣ties, in pollished order of good husbandry, & in industrious trafficke of merchandise, shee shined above a thou∣sand yeeres agoe (at which time some ig∣norant men suppose she was onely over∣growne with a wilder∣nesse, and overwhel∣med
with Barbarisme) but also that she did as then bring forth unto the world learning, wisdome and true re∣ligious vertue, which above all these are most highly to bee honou∣red. And although some fresh water soul∣diers (who never saw the large Sea of ancient writers) may imagine every shallow brooke of our late pamphle∣ters, to bee the very Ocean of learning, yet when overpassing our
mechanical Chroniclers I looke into Malmsbury and Hungtington, and others such as these, yea and above them in∣to venerable Bede and Gildas, me seemeth that traveiling over the bar∣ren Alpes I descend downe into pleasant and fruitfull Italy, or sayling beyond the rude Ethiopians and In∣dians, I arrive on the coasts of the incompa∣rable Country of China. But falling on this trea∣sure of antiquitie (Gil∣das
I meane) I found my selfe instantly so de∣voted unto him, that what for mine owne recreation, and what to deceive the tedious∣nesse of my lingring imprisonment: and lastly, that they who are not able, for want of the tongue to pur∣chase the knowledge of him in his owne na∣turall Latine, should not remaine altoge∣ther destitute of so great riches, I painted him out though un∣skilfully,
yet howsoever in our English language: In wch attempt, I found two especiall difficul∣ties, the one he was in many places (through the negligence of them in whose hands he re∣sted) so over-eaten with the rust of time, that I could scarcely discerne his lively Portrature, the other his sentences were so long and ob∣scure, that they would be harsh and disliking to the reader, yet love overcomming all, and
pleasure drawing mee forward, I adventured as touching the first, to ayme at this Image, & give a guesse where I could not determine the certainety, and for the last to set himselfe (as neere as I could) according to his pro∣per fashion, knowing it to be as undecent to turne his grave spee∣ches into idle words, and his long periods into short sentences, as to picture a sad man with a pleasant looke,
and to draw the coun∣terfet of a reverent Iudge not in his robes but in some light at∣tire: Wherefore I must intreate for the obscu∣ritie the readers atten∣tion, for the tedious∣nesse his patience, and for mine owne enter∣prise his pardon. The cause why Gildas alledgeth almost only the Scrip∣tures.One silly writer un∣skilfully noteth how Gildas (leaving all au∣thorities of men) fol∣loweth only the Scrip∣tures, little conside∣ring that he intending
to reproove the de∣praved lives of Prin∣ces and Prelates, could finde no Patrons so worthy and able to protect him, as the vo∣lumes of the holy Pro∣phets, who bent all their powers to batter downe the enormous offences of Gover∣nours; as for the Church having not long before (by the conclusion of the pri∣mitive persecution) o∣vercome her most grie∣vous enemies, and in∣stantly
afterwards in∣countring with her un∣naturall rebells, the horrible Arians and o∣thers, she could hardly yet finde a time to sup∣presse these abuses, and for the Doctors who were some of them but lately dead, and o∣thers as yet unborne, the later were not ex∣tant, and the former had not by continu∣ance of time received their strength and glo∣ry; for if I may compare small things unto great
Authors are like coates of Armes, which by antiquitie purchase commendations.Gildas ci∣teth Scrip∣tures not after the vulgar Transla∣tion. Another matter not onely cavilled at by the former carper, but ob∣served also by Pollidor Virgill is, that in most of the citations of the ho∣ly Scripture, he very farre differeth from the vulgar translation; a thing not much to bee merveiled at, for it is not unknowne unto the learned, how in old time there were many
Translations of the Bible, for extingui∣shing of which dan∣gerous varietie, and establishing of Gods Word in one per∣fect uniformitie, Saint Ierome at the com∣mandement of Pope Damasus, Translated the Old Testament out of the Hebrew, and also the New Testament out of the Greeke, whereof Gildas could not be ignorant, sithence he flourished about one hunded
yeeres afterwards, and was a man of great knowledge and wise∣dome; but in respect this Island had beene long corrupted with Heretickes, and now oppressed with Infi∣dels, it is likely that the Church in Britaine (by reason of the tumults of such rebellious and outragious enemies) wanting her due pre∣eminence, could not as yet display the banner of this reformed Bible, but marched under the
Ensigne of some other Translation which our Authour speaking ge∣nerally to the whole Land) hath for con∣formitie unto the com∣mon fashion (as it see∣meth) vouchsafed here to use, being especially as apt as any other to reprove the disorders of the Iland, and no way patronizing ei∣ther the Arians or Pella∣gians (the most deadly cankers as then of the Christian Common∣wealth) or any other
heresie, that hath ever since lifted up her vi∣perous head against the Church of God. Another thing very much to bee lamented and merveiled at is,The reasons why Bri∣taine was at this time so defiled with vices. that not onely the tem∣porall Princes, but al∣so the Spirituall Rulers (whose lives should be a light unto the rest, and salt to preserve the soules of men from corruption) had at this time many of them so degenerated from all goodnes, as not only it
provoked the justice of God to dispossesse them of their Country and give it to their deadly foes the Saxons, but also made Pollidor Virgill suppose that Bri∣taine did never after the persecution of Dioclesi∣an perfectly returne unto the unity of the Catholicke Church againe; an opinion by Gildasses owne words refelled, for he sheweth how after the stormy winter (as hee calleth, it of this persecution,
succeeded the flouri∣shing spring of true Christian and Catho∣licke religion; but the Author himselfe decla∣reth some notorious causes of the ruine of as well Civill as Ecclesi∣asticall discipline, and the first was heresies, for upon this fruitfull seede of the Gospell, came the Arians, and scattered the darnell of their detestable do∣ctrine, yea (as he saith) all other damnable Sectaries breathed out
upon the Land, their venemous poyson, and not onely this, but also from the very bowels of Britaine was borne that accursed wretch Pellagius, and shortly after the death of Gildas were the Britaines over∣whelmed with the darkesome cloud of the Quartodecimani (who varied frō the Church of God in celebrating the feast of Easter, these truely were the mothes that did eate the gar∣ment of the governmēt
of the realme. Another was bloudy warre (the depraver of Civill dis∣cipline, and the Author of disorder, that for many yeeres built here his Fortresse, who as hee commandeth for the time all Spirituall and nationall Lawes to silence, so hee corrup∣teth the manners of all Countries through which hee marcheth; by the power of warre were Infidels planted in the Land, who as they were professed
foes of the faith of God, so were their lives defiled with all offen∣ces; and these also in all likelihood infe∣cted the Britaines with the plague of their vi∣ces. After the warres were ended, and Bri∣taines together with the Saxons (like Sheepe and Goates) continued in one fold, altogether for a while the scourge of misery (which cha∣stised the Christian Bri∣tanes) terrified them from transgressing the
Commandements of God, yet plentifull peace (the Nurse of sen∣suality) so lulled them afterwards asleepe in her lap with a seeming but deceitfull security, that hereupon sprung the last cause of their confusion (to wit) ex∣ceeding wickednesse sprouting out from the roote of abundant wealth: For according unto Moses; Incrassatus est dilectus, & recalcitra∣vit; incrassatus, impin∣guatus, dilatatus dereliquit
Deum factorem suum, &c. and even as the Chil∣dren of Israel did sit them downe to eate and drinke, and then arose to play, untill the fury of our Lord was pawred out upon them; so the Britaines growing fat in worldly pleasures, and foule in hidious sinnes, con∣tinued on in their earthly contentments, untill the sword of the Saxons (which was scarcely as yet put in the sheath againe) was by
the sufferance of God drawne out afresh to deprive them of their pleasant Country. But although mine Author Gildas discovereth the defects of Princes and Prelates, yet let no man thinke that any Subjects can for the deadly sinnes of their Superiours, either de∣prive or disobey them, since neither David did for his adultery with Bersabee, and murther of his faithfull servant Vrias, lose his royal∣ty,
nor yet the Autho∣rity of the chaire of Moses, was any whit diminished, although Scribes and Pharisees for a time possessed the same, but that the Lea∣pers who were clensed were sent to the Priests (although unworthy of their Primacy) and Caiphas himselfe (albe∣it he was the persecu∣tor of Christ Iesus) pro∣phesied, because he was high Priest of that yeere; all which I pro∣fesse against the Here∣tickes
who have per∣versely maintained the contrary. Neither yet let any man falsly imagine, that the Land was wholly as then drow∣ned in iniquities, for (as Gildas doth in 2 places apparantly manifest) there were diverse at that very time, whose vertues he doth most highly commend and reverence. Now before I doe harbour in the Haven of my desired end, I must of necessitie passe
by three rockes of ex∣ceeding danger, the in∣vectives (I meane) of Gildas, against some sorts of people most happily combined un∣der his Majesties go∣vernment, the first the Britanes, the most aun∣cient inhabitantes of this Island, the other the Irish together with the Scottish, and Pictes who next possessed part of the Land, and last the Saxons and Eng∣lish who have very long enjoyed the most
large and fruitfull por∣tion of the Country. The Britaines not one∣ly by the pen of Sir Iohn Price (a learned Knight and writer of theirs) suspect Gildas for a Libeller, but doe hardly also sustaine o∣ther Authors, who al∣leadge also out of him any thing that may seeme disgracefull to the Nation, unto whom truely as I have ever borne all due re∣spect and tender affe∣ction, so doe I most
humbly crave their pardon in a word or two without offence, to defend their wise and worthy Countrey∣men whom I may well compare unto a father who (correcting his childe) telleth him one∣ly of his faults and im∣perfections, or unto the Prophets who in old time reproving the Israelites did lay no∣thing before their eyes but their sinnes and offences, or to the man in the Gospell who
labouring to make his vine bring forth the desired fruit; dresseth the roote with unsavo∣ry dung. He doth not declare as now (O re∣nowned Britaines) how yee releived your friends the Galles a∣gainst the invincible Legions of Caesar, how valiently yee defended your Land against his conquering army, how one King of a little cor∣ner of your Island (Si∣lures or South-Wales I meane) maintained
warre against the whole power of Rome and the world, and af∣terwards onely by mis∣fortune falling into the hands of his honorable enemies, was by them held in equall estima∣tion for worthinesse, with Perses the succes∣sour of Alexander▪ but for valour with Alexan∣der the great himselfe, he nameth not your victorious Vortimer, nor yet your invincible Arthur who in twelve foughten fields over∣threw
your cruell enemies the Saxons, he leaveth those discour∣ses to his Chro∣nicle which Henry of Huntinton in the actions of Arthur ci∣teth, hee revealeth now onely your re∣proaches, but why? because hee would re∣forme your abuses; hee chasticeth your vices, because hee would cherish your vertues; he aggravateth your offences ut sugeret mel de petra oleumque de
saxo durissimo, that hee may strike the fire of grace out of flinty hearts, and bring the oyle of Charity out of stony minds; he saith the Romanes did con∣quor yee, not so much with Armes as with the threates of their countenances, but tel∣leth not how before that yee encountred (as most true it is) with their puissant power, and what was it (alas) for the naked to re∣sist the armed, for them
who were altogether unskilfull in the or∣der of fight to joyne in battell with the best practised souldiers, and one little Island to con∣tend with the whole world? Yee fell with the generall calamity of the earth, into the subjection of the Ro∣maine Empire. But af∣terwards (they say) ye were unfaithfull be∣cause yee killed them who were left in au∣thoritie over yee: And who can tell what oc∣casion
they offered yee to execute that slaugh∣ter upon them: wee see the cruelty that commonly all Con∣querous exercise on their subjects; experi∣ence teacheth that all almost are tyrannous, and few or none mo∣derate; yee wrought the like stratagem as the Cecilians did, after∣wards on the French∣men; why are yee so soulely condemned as unfaithfull, but be∣cause it succeeded un∣happily?
For ye were upon this occasion troden under the feete of your enemies; it is a Proverbe that never Rebell prevaileth a∣gainst his Prince, and what is the reason? but this, if hee prevai∣leth hee is no Rebell, but usurpeth rather the title of a reformer of the Common∣wealth, I doubt not but King Iohn and Henry the fourth, if they had not obtained the roy∣all garland, had beene
registred for rebellious traytors, although now they are ranked among the famous Princes: so actions are measu∣red not according to the intents, but after the events. But hereupon ensued your misery and reproach, ye were againe overcome (as he saith) without re∣sistance, and therefore not accounted valiant! and did not the Iewes (who were truely as couragious a Nation as ever was on the
earth) open the gates of Ierusalem to Alexan∣der, because they could notwithstand him? did not the Persians (those conquerours of the world) flye the face of the Macedonians? and the Persians and mighty Macedonians▪ submit themselves to the Ro∣maines? did not those nations who for war-like glory excel∣led all others, runne away as sheepe before these Italian Lyons? and why
should we then accuse the Britaines, (who were in respect a small handfull and never knew the Art of war) if they resisted not the Romanes who had three parts of the world at their commandment, and were the most ex∣pert souldiers that ever marched on the earth? The Britaines upon this became captives! and what Nation was not in subjection to the Romaines who held the earth as a slave in bon∣dage
and ruled her Kings as if they were but servants? These things (noble Britaines) Gildas somewhat bit∣terly recounteth, but why? that he may with the knife of correcti∣on, pruine avvay your superfluous and dead branches and leaves of vaine glory and other vices. But although he swayeth throughout his vvorke in great au∣steritie, yet can he not so conceale the fire of his fatherly affection,
but that it flameth ou very often to your sin∣gular commendation. Yee were at the first termed unfaithfull, up∣on what occasion I have declared; but af∣terwards hee showeth your faith in the high∣est degree, in professi∣on (I meane) of the Christian religion, in suffering terrible perse∣cution, in obtaining most glorious martyr∣dome: your flight is objected as reprochfull vnto ye, but when?
before yee had the knowledge of warfare, but after ye had atchie∣ved the art thereof, hee writeth how under the cōduction of Maximus, ye overthrew, though unjustly, yet most vali∣antly two Emperours of the world: but the lively blood of Britaine being extended into forraigne Nations, and there extenuated, and lastly, by misfortune extinguished, the en∣trailes and heart of the Island began at home
to grow weake and cold, which made her body so long oppressed with the invading dis∣eases of the Scottish, Pictes, and Irish, and lastly, almost killed with the deadly plague of the Saxons: and did not the like befall unto the Romanes themselves who having wasted their strength in over∣comming and keeping other Countries in o∣bedience, became in the same sort weakned at home, and so fell in
he end to be a prey, nd spoile unto o∣hers? All this is but he course and chance of fortune, or rather the high pleasure of God, to teach us that in this world there is nothing permanent. And againe our Authour not con∣tayning himselfe, brea∣keth out into a singular report of your vallor, when (in the reproofe of Maglocune) hee saith that your Souldiers were so couragious, as their countenances in
battle were not unlike the terrible lookes of young Lions. But that I may passe to the rest, and so conclude this point, he doth so high∣ly extoll the Country, Castles, and Cities of Britaine, as truely I am out of doubt the Island hath never since that time flourished in the like glory as then it did: and who so think∣eth mee deceived, let him but looke into the histories of the Romans, where he shall reade of
he Emperors, that did n this land of Britaine ontinue or finish their ives, where among he rest hee shineth in most eminent Majesty, who shutting up the temple of hellish ido∣atry, did first set open the gates of the Catho∣like Church, and of her peaceable God, Iesus, I meane that Constantine, vvho being borne in Britaine, & of a Britaine Saintly Mother, tooke on him the Emperiall dignity, in this very
Island, vvhere so many governors of the vvorld vvould never have made their royall resi∣dence, had not the Country beene both fruitfull and civill, but barren and barbarous as the Romanes at their first entrance supposed the same to be. Lastly, he manifestly declareth that the land vvas as then also furnished vvith learning, because (vvriting generally an epistle unto the Coun∣try) he useth the Latine
tongue, which as it had beene a great folly in him to doe, if the same had not beene univer∣sally understood, so doe I verily thinke if the like worke in La∣tine were at this time presented unto the realme, it would little profit without an In∣terpreter. The next sort some∣what bitterly taxed by Gildas,The excuse of the in∣vective of Gildas a∣gainst the Scottish and Irish. are the Scottish, Pictes, and Irish, who are reproved as blou∣dy and barbarous: but
when? before ever they received the light and heate of civility, which from the Sunne of the Romane Empire did spread throughout all Countries, and un∣doubtedly made a sin∣gular preparation to the Almighty Grace of the holy Ghost, that afterwards replenished the whole world; but after they had accepted discipline, and were reduced into better or∣der, and cheefely above all had imbraced Chri∣stian
and Catholike re∣ligion, then behold what these Benjamins proved, who by the British Iacob (Gildas I meane) are termed Lu∣pi  rapaces ravenous Wolves? see if that was not truely fulfilled in them which was right∣ly prophesied of that worthy Benjamin S. Paul, which is Mane rapit ves∣pere dividit escas, in the morning or at the first they gained their boo∣ties by spoyling, but in the evening or at the
last they distributed their foode or baites; what foode? but to satisfie the hungry soules of men: what baites? but to catch such fish as might serve for the festivall table of our Saviour: Looke into Wales and Cornewall, and see how many Townes beare yet the names of Irish Saints, who harboured there, not as before to punish the Britaines with death, but to draw them to the re∣wards
of eternall life! Peruse the histories of the Countries beyond Humber, you shall read how the Pictes, and in∣habitants of Scotland, who sometimes broke downe the Northerne fortifications, and in∣vaded the Land, did afterwards beate down the Bulwarke of hell, delivered the soules which sinne did with∣hold in bondage, and made them the blessed captives of Christ, men undoubtedly of rare
holinesse, and unspot∣ted conversation, had they not beene a little blemished with an er∣ronious opinion, about the celebration of Ea∣ster, which as venerable Bede signifieth continu∣ed the longer among them, because inhabi∣ting in a farre removed region of the world, they had not heard of the Cannons of the Church which com∣manded the contrary. Moreover as our Savi∣our did feede them bo∣dily,
whom before he refreshed spiritually, so did they of Scotland, not onely with the bread of life, releeve their neighbours, but also received the Britaines (when they were ex∣pulsed out of their Country by the Saxons) into their bosome, and suffered them quietly to inhabit by them in Cumberland; and with like charitable affecti∣on entertained also the Saxons with their Prince Edgar, when they fled
from the countenance of the victorius Nor∣man, William the Con∣queror. And as tou∣ching their old barba∣rous misbehaviour (which Gildas here mentioneth) we have no more reason to upbraide the Scottish therewith, then to cast in the teethes of the re∣fined Italians, what their Country was be∣fore Saturne did first instruct them in civili∣ty, being a time so overgrowne with rud∣nesse
as the Poets doe thereupon wittily de∣scant, that men of that age were borne out of the trunckes of trees. For in processe of time by carefull diligence commeth the corre∣ction and amendment of Countries, and by carelesse negligence fal∣leth the corruption and destruction of Na∣tions. The last are the Sax∣ons and English,The excuse of his se∣veare cen∣suring of the English. called by him a people odious to God and man, to
God, because they were Idolatrous Infidels, to man, because they mur∣thered and oppressed the Christian Britaines, and although he enlar∣geth himselfe in the dispraise of the Nati∣on, let no man never∣thelesse suppose that he uttereth this of any malice as stung with the dreadfull miseries with the which they vexed his Country: For who knoweth not that the English were in his age ene∣mies
of Christ, religi∣on, and the Land: But according to Esay, In the dennes wherein dragons did formerly dwell, greene reedes and rushes did af∣terwards grow; and after the sentence of Hosea; Where it was sayd ye were no people of mine, there shall the same persons bee named the sonnes of the li∣ving God. Yea the Ly∣ons, the Liberds, the Beares, and the Wolves shall (as the Prophet writeth) quietly lodge and live with Oxen,
Sheepe, Kiddes, and Calves, and a little child (no doubt the Sonne of the Virgin) shall go∣verne them all. For if ever the wilde Olive were changed into the rightfull Olive of our Lord, or if ever tree brought forth the true fruits of goodnesse, then were both these undoubtedly verified in the Saxons: For al∣though they came but lately into the Vine∣yard, yet having en∣tred, they laboured di∣ligently,
and underta∣king the race of a Chri∣stian life, they ranne most swiftly, and gai∣ned the garland victo∣riously; and who so thinketh I exceede in their commendation, let him but cast his eyes round about this Realme, and hee shall see the Churches and Monuments of religi∣on (some fevv onely excepted) altogether founded by them; and that vve may leave the dead buildings, and
come to the lively stones of the heavenly Ierusalem; how are the Provinces, shires, and Parishes of the Land se∣verally adorned with mighty number of English Saints, and if we may measure by the Governours, what the people were (since un∣to the examples of their Rulers, the sub∣jects are commonly conformable) let us but consider the royall off∣spring of the Saxons, and we shall finde that
never in any land so many Princes left their worldly estates to em∣brace Christian pover∣ty, and draw in the Yoake of our Saviour, and never so many of Kingly blood were canonised in the hea∣venly Register, as in this our Country; what shall I say more, In om∣nem terram exivit sonus eorum, their renowne is spread over the whole world, and their glory fixed above the firma∣ment; in so much as
William of Malmsbury deriving the Pedegree of holy Edward the Confessour, sheweth a descent, not onely of Kings but also of Saints so as to the Church then among us those Words of Esay may be fitly applyed, Reges ser∣vient tibi: and againe, Mamilla regum lactaberis, Kings shall doe service unto thee, and with the teates of Princes thou shalt be nourished. Let us leave the heavens and returne to the
earth, was the glory of the Saxons, which now mounted in blessed vertues aboue the Skie, bounded here below, onely in the Cloystures of Monasteries? No, but as the shaddow fol∣loweth the body, so likewise ensued all commodities requisite in a well ordered regi∣ment, and first as tou∣ching learning (which manureth the mindes of men, and maketh them in due season bring forth their time∣ly
fruites) they founded both the Vniversities of Oxford and Cambridge: For the ancien lawes, the most excellent helme which stea∣red the state, the bridle which restrayned di∣stempered wils, and the very soule of the body of the Common∣wealth, they were by them chiefely framed: and did their prayse onely consist in mat∣ters of pietie and peace? and was not their war∣like glory equall to
their civill govern∣ment? not so truely: but as a well compa∣cted body hath bones and sinewes sutable to the head, so was their powerfull strength an∣swerable to their other vertues, and not-onely of singular proofe at home; but also obtai∣ned a most high com∣mendation abroad in forraigne Countries: All which heroicall actions they accompli∣shed in lesse than five hundred yeeres not∣withstanding
they were during the same time almost continually ei∣ther invaded by stran∣gers, or molested by unquiet neighbours. And thus have I somewhat inlarged my selfe in declaring the undoubted worthi∣nesse of these three Na¦tions, because I shall be enforced in this my translation to discover their ancient imper∣fections; neither have I used this commen∣dation as sugar; Where∣by
these distastfull pills may bee the better swallowed, but of purpose to shut up their mouths who otherwise might per∣haps despightfully up∣braide them with these old offences; which truely they have no more reason to doe, than those irreligious tongues who (audaci∣ously talking of the blessed Apostles) call Saint Peter the denyer of his Master, Saint Paul the Persecu∣tor,
Saint Matthew the Publican, for if wee should be esteemed as we have beene, what were we other than the children of wrath; but by the grace of God we are as we are, and I beseech Christ his grace may not be voyd in us. How the Kings Ma∣jestie is de∣scended of the blood royall of these three Nations.And now verily it is with great applause to be received, that it hath pleased God to make the royall lines of these three severall people to meete in the
Center of his Majesties person: For of the first I meane the Britaines) he is come by his last and best knowne de∣scent out of our Coun∣try, to wit the daughter of Henry the seventh, whose Grandfather Owen Theoder was of their Princely blood: For the second, as cleere as the Sunne, hee is by due originall lawfull King of Scotland: and for the third, it is knowne to those who have any experience
in antiquities, tha Margaret (from whom all the Kings of Scotland have these fiv hundred yeeres issued) was the onely true in heritrice unto her great Vncle Edward the Confessour, and her Grandfather Edmund Ironside; and in one word to all the Saintly Saxon Kings of Eng∣land, so as a lineall right hath from that time hitherto remai∣ned in Scotland, al∣though William the con∣quering
Norman did by the sword (as especiall descider of kingdomes) not onely obtaine the actuall possession of the Realme, but also ever since leave the same unto his posteri∣tie. And yet moreover that none of the Nor∣man race may in his Majesties enjoying of the Kingdome, finde themselves agrieved, God in his wisedome also disposeth (as to the whole realme it is most apparent) that he
likewise rightly deri∣veth his title from the off-spring of the Con∣querour. Yea and that the Danish too (if any now remaine who were planted here by their puissant Lords) may have no cause to repine, behold the Queene his Majesties Wife and their Sonne our Prince, or excee∣ding hope, are come of the Danish, among whom that renowned Canatus was sometimes King of this Land, in
whom it is hard to de∣termine whether, his devotion to God, his great conquests, or his generall clemeney de∣served highst com∣mendation: In all which is to be consi∣dered hovv God of his goodnesse hath in one man conjoyned these mighty houses, vvhich were not onely for de∣scent and Country sometimes so diverse, but also in deadly ha∣tred so far disagreeing, and in bloody wars so
violent and contenti∣ous, not unlike the frame of a perfect bo∣dy, which is contrived of the foure contrary and repugnant ele∣ments; and also that those people which since the confusion of Babylon were ever seve∣rall, should as loving brethren be now uni∣ted in his Majesties Kingdome, even as the Rivers which arising from contrary regions of North and South doe notwithstanding
fall into one maine Sea, and are made in the end one mighty wa∣ter;How the Saxons and Britaines are united in this Realme. For as you shall perceive in this ensu∣ing treatise, the Britaines and Saxons were not onely sundry Nations, but also in discord most dissenting: to number the battailes that were fought be∣tweene them, were an endlesse labour, they confronted either o∣thers many hundred yeeres in continuall hatred, three Langua∣ges
were most diffe∣rent, their lawes & cu∣stomes divers; the Bri∣taines distressed and dis∣possessed of their no∣ble, fertile, and Native soyle, and driven by the power of their ad∣versaries to live poore∣ly in the barren moun∣taines of Cambria or Wales, the English in∣vaders raigned and dis∣posed freely of all the rest of the Land, untill it pleased the God of peace to make an end of all controversies.
The English in time having overcome them received the Britaine into the body of their Common-wealth and kingdome, they never excepted at the diver∣sitie that had beene betweene their lawes and ours, they saw how in this very realme the Normanes had agreed before under one selfe-same rule and regiment with the Kentish Sax∣ons, notwithstanding their legall customes were of another fa∣shion:
For as by skil∣full Musitians is made of sundry instruments one delightfull con∣sort, and as by Lapida∣ries of diverse colou∣red stones, one most rich Iewell, and as of the Starres (which va∣ry in severall motions) proceedeth the perfect harmony of the hea∣vens: So of these sun∣dry Countries, and customes of Britaines, Saxons, Danes, and Nor∣mans, is now framed one most excellent
Commonwealth: Nei∣ther yet was it object∣ed that the Britaines having beene long star∣ved with oppressing povertie, would gree∣dily raven on the Eng∣lish riches and Posses∣sions, for they were then neerer the time of Christ, and so more perfectly instructed with his Charity, who received the needy and sometimes prodigall child, to bee partaker with his wealthy elder brother, who rewar∣ded
him that entred into his worke at the latter end of the day, with as large hire as the other, who labou∣red from the morning, who accepted into his favour as well the Gen∣tiles as the Iewes. And what insued hereupon? hath any English-man beene hereby deprived of his profit? No sure∣ly; but although there have reigned 5 Kings and Queenes succes∣sively descended of the Britaine Nation, al∣though
wee have had Generalls, Councel∣lours, Iudges, and Ma∣gistrates of that Coun∣try, there was never as yet any Welchman (as we call him) boulstred out by their authority to afflict the English with any injuries. The cōmodities that flow∣ed from this blessed union were many: first the charitie betweene both Nations, a thing most acceptable in the sight of God; the en∣larging of the king∣dome
with the addi∣tion of so worthy a people; the enriching of the same by making the marches and bor∣ders of the Country (which heretofore lay waste by reason of the warre) now subject to industrious husban∣dry: the incorporating of that Land as a limbe now of England, which was not onely some∣times a continuall ad∣versary, but also ever ready to entertaine and assist any forraigne in∣vasion:
the fortifying of the power of the realme with the forces of those vvho deteined them before vvith dis∣cord at home from augmenting their do∣minion abroad: the finishing of the un∣speakeable charges of vvarre and expenses in maintaining garrisons on the fronteyres: the stincking of all spoyle and stuffe; and the ending of the ef∣fusion of Christian blood.
And novv if it bee easier to imitate a for∣mer example, than bee the beginner of any action; vvhy then doe not the English and Scottish seeing this vvith farre more rea∣dinesse conjoyne in one? If discorde hath heretofore raigned be∣tweene them, the like hath also raged be∣tweene the Saxons and Britaines; if the Lawes of the one are diverse from us, the Lawes of the other have beene
as different, if the dis∣commodities of warre with the Britaines have beene so great and grievous, no lesse have also beene those with the Scottish; if the com∣modities of peace be∣tweene the Britaines and us, are so great and gracious, why should not the same be also in like sort betweene us and the Scottish? the English and Britaines were in language most unlike, the English and Scottish are of one
tongue; and if the names of persons and places doe not much deceive us, the Sou∣therne people of Scot∣land are either descen∣ded of the Saxons, or at the least very much in∣termingled with the English blood, besides that, it is to be suppo∣sed that many of them are issued from the Britaines, since their confiners in Cumber∣land (which was a part sometimes of Scotland) have heretofore beene
Cambro or Welch Bri∣taines: For Nations by Neighbourhood passe one into another, even as wee perceive by neerenesse of property the purest of the water to become ayre, and the finest of the ayre to change into fire; the English might also have justly conceived a jea∣lousie against the Bri∣taines in admitting them into the commu∣nitie of the kingdome, least (as the Lawyers say) they should have accoun∣ted
themselves in their remitter, and upon this occasion have claimed their ancient possessi∣on of the Land where∣of in fore passed ages they were (as they thought) wrongfully deprived; which can no way be objected a∣gainst the realme of Scotland who (saving the most righteous ti∣tle of our Soveraigne Lord to the Crowne) can make no lawfull challenge of her fore∣fathers inheritance, but
commeth as a Prince∣ly Virgin with the royall portion of a Kingdome, to bee joy∣ned in marriage with her husband England; the banes betweene England and Wales were bid with many a terri∣ble battaile, and the match was made with blood shed; but the union of England and Scotland was begun in loving wedlocke, and established in lawfull descending issue; Since it hath therefore plea∣sed
God to graft them both in one stocke, let no man seeke to rent them into two sundry trees, or rather breake them a sunder, since he hath formed them into one body, let none la∣bour to dissever the members of the same; since hee hath created them into one little world, and encom∣passed it about with one mighty sea, and now after thousands of yeeres reduced into one entire regiment,
let none presume to cut in two that webbe which God hath wea∣ued in one, or separate what hee hath joyned, or spurne against his providence. It is no new thing to see the greatnesse of Kingdomes encrease by the union of Coun∣tries;How other Kingdomes have in∣creased by Vnions. for to omit the Assirians, Persians, and Macedonians, who not onely flourished in the former and more un∣knowne ages of the world, but also for the
situation of the regions are farre distant from us, and to consider a little of the Romanes and other more fami∣liar and adjoyning Na∣tions who have in latter dayes growne to the height of their re∣nowne, did not those Iron legges of Daniels statue, the Cittie I meane that swayed o∣ver the universall world, gather her first arising strength, by re∣ceiving divers Territo∣ries (which shee sub∣dued)
into the corpo∣ration of her common∣wealth? did not the French by combining sundry Dukedomes and Earledomes toge∣ther (of which some to our cost and losse we have good cause to remember) become the most ample and fruitfull Kingdome of all Christendome? was not Spaine within these few hundred yeeres distracted in severall pettie Dominions, the beames of whose glo∣ry
by intermariages conjoyning in one are growne, doe not one∣ly shine through many parts of Europe, but al∣so to the East and West Indians? The Dutchy of Burgundy the gar∣den of Christendome, was not sometimes di∣vided in the small prin∣cipalities of Flanders, Henault, Holland, and the rest, all which are now by uniting of houses gathered into one Co∣ronet of exceeding beauty? But let us
leave travailing abroad and returne home in∣to our owne Country; were not the Saxons and English severed in seven smal kingdomes, and afterwards by con∣quest brought into one whole Monarchie? Were not the Britaines or Welch divided in three sundry regi∣ments, and hath not the force of the English fornace melted all their crownes into one mighty streame of gold, and like the rod
of Moses devoured all the rods of the Magici∣ans: and if we but enter into the histories ei∣ther of our owne Iland or otherwise of these forraigne Nations, shal we not every where easily finde, that as by divided Kingdomes there came nothing but discord, poverty, and debasements, so from united powers groweth tranquility, plenty, and magnifi∣cence: we see the wa∣ter of a great poole
conserveth it selfe, which if it were sepa∣rated in small plashes would be quickely ei∣ther dryed up with the sunne, or soked downe in the earth, and it is well noted by Saint Gregory, writing upon Saint Luke, that at the comming of our Savi∣our, the Common∣wealth of Rome was in her perfection, be∣cause shee was contei∣ned under the govern∣ment of one Empe∣rour, and how the
Kingdome of the Iewes ranne then to confusi∣on, in regard it was distributed into sundry Seignories, grounding his reason on those words of Christ, with which I will end this point, Omne regnum in se divisum desolabitur, Eve∣ry Kingdome divided in it selfe shall fall to desolation. Shew not therefore your selves (as the Poet saith) so farre removed from the Sunne (which is the authour of wise∣dome)
that ye should seeke with envie to hinder the raysing of that frame which God hath so charitably buil∣ded, but rather as the same Poet in the per∣son of Dido uttereth, that a Trojan and Tirian, shall by her with e∣quall affection bee re∣spected, so let us all with one voyce, pro∣nounce that English and Scottish shall by us now with love alike be en∣tertained. Neither yet if the matter it selfe can
be concluded, let there bee any difference a∣bout the name of this Kingdome:How uni∣ted nations have beene called by one gene∣rall name. for as it hath beene usuall to unite Nations, so hath it beene as common to call united Nations by one name; Al∣though Greece had in times past beene divi∣ded into many Com∣monwealths and Prin∣cipalities, yet being all subjected afterwards under the dominion of one, the former names vanished away,
and the whole was re∣nowned by the name of the Empire of Greece, the like was of Italy, whose severall governments being gathered into one were all intituled by one name; the Aquitanes, Celtes, and Belgickes were in former ages comprised under the name of Galles, and having beene after∣wards severed in sun∣dry Provinces, are now almost all conjoyned in one entire famous
Kingdome, which af∣ter the name of the most puissant part thereof is termed France; our Ancestors not many yeeres since did familiarly know Castil, Arragon, and o∣thers, which are all now universally con∣verted into one migh∣ty name of Spaine; so were the West Saxons, Mercians, Norfolcians, Northumbers, and the rest of the Saxon Sove∣raignties, changed by our Monarch Egbert
into the potent and glorious name of Eng∣land: and Scottland doth in like sort not onely comprehend the Scots but also the Hebri∣des and others;How con∣veniently the name of Britaine agreeth to the King∣dome of the whole Is∣land. If therefore this hath beene so greatly pra∣ctised, let us not refuse to follow so many worthy presidents, e∣specially since it is not required at our hands that we should assume a newfound name, but the most ancient name of the whole Island,
the most famous name by which it hath beene knowne to all the mighty Emperours of Rome, and blazed throughout the world, the most learned name as the bookes of the Latines, and all other tongues and languages doe largely witnesse, and lastly the most ge∣nerall name of all the inhabitants, for what are the English, Scottish, and Welch, but three parts of the whole large and most beauti∣full
Island of Britaine? And surely as it were absurd in familiar speech of London to tearme it after the names of the particular Wards or companies of the City, and not according to the entire Corporation, or to call any Shire of the Realme, after the Hun∣dreds or divisions of the same, and not ac∣cording to the well knowne title of the whole Country, so is it as farre against all
reason that our little world of Britaine being now included in one Kingdome, should be disevered in names that would but ever rubbe up the remembrance of former injuries, and be Nurses of dissenti∣on, which his Majestie not unlike that anci∣ent Romulus seeketh providently to abolish, and making a skilfull mixture of the English, Scottish, and Welch, la∣boureth now to severe them all into three di∣stinct
orders, of the Nobility, Gentry, and Cominalty, of his en∣tire Realme of great Britaine, vvhich being of three sundry people framed into one happy Soveraigntie, I beseech the Almighty Trinity, to bring to a most per∣fect Vnitie. Thus have I vvithThe Con∣clusion. more good vvill than good skill presumed upon the mention of these three people to leape rashly into the matter of the union,
vvherein although I may bee condemned for vvant of discre∣tion, yet no man shall ever accuse mee for lacke of indifferen∣cie.
Here beginneth the Prologue of Gildas, sur∣named the Wise, as touching the overthrow of Britaine, with his lamenta∣tion upon the same: be∣ing a sharpe reprehen∣sion of the Princes and people of the Land. WHatsoever I shall throughout this Epistle of mine, rather by way of lamentation than declamati∣on prosecute with mine un∣worthy, but wellwishing pen; let no man suppose I declare
the same with any affectation of dspising others, or vaine∣ly esteeming my selfe better than all the rest, (being alasse the man, who with weeping complaints bewayleth the common losse of all goodnesse, and the increasing heape of mischiefes)▪ but rather com∣municating my sorrow on the discommodities and misries of my Country; and on the contraryside my comfort on the reformation of the same. Because it is not now my de∣termination somuch to report the dangers of the bloody bat∣tailes of most valiant souldi∣ers, as the perils of slothfull men. In silence have I (I confesse) with exceeding greefe of my heart (as God the sear∣cher of all secrets is my wit∣nesse)
passed and overslipped full tenne yeeres space or more, mine unskilfullnesse, together with my vile basenesse ever (as at this instant) curbing me that I should not presume to write any so little an admo∣nition. I did notwithstanding reade how the admirable Lawgiver for the misdoubt∣ing of one onely word never entred into the desired land.Moses Num. 20.12. Levit. 10.1.How the sonnes of the Priest for offering with other fire than was commanded, by a sudden death perished; how the people that broke the word of God, being Num. 14.28. six hun∣dred thousands, yea, and they most deare to him, (Exod. 14.22. as whose smoothest way, was the sands of the deepe red sea, whose meate Exod. 16.14. the heavenly bread,
whose Exod. 17.6. drinke, the new water passing out of the Rocke, Exod. 17.11. whose invincible army, but onely the stretching up of hand,) all these (two upright men excepted) to have dyed through Num. 21.6. serpents, Num. 14.45. sword, and Deut. 1.45. fire, here and there a∣long the desarts of Arabia; yea, after the entrance of the unknowne Num. 11.1. gate (as it were) of Iordan, and their Iosu. 3.16. adverse Cities wals, by the onely sound of trumpets through the com∣mandement of God ouer∣throwne,Ios. 6.20. one silly cloake,Ios. 21.24 and a little gold presumptuously taken of the accursed spoile, to have beene the slaughter of many men; how the breaking of the league made with the 2 Sam. 21.1. Gibionites (yea though the same were through subtil∣ty
extorted) was also to some their destruction. I have read the complaining cryes of the holy Prophets poured out for the sinnes of men, and e∣specially those of Ieremie, with his fourefold Ieremies foure La∣mentations written with the order of the Hebrew Alphabet. Alpha∣bet, lamenting the ruine of his Citie. I saw moreover in this our time (as he in former bewailed) Thren. 1.1. The widow City now sit alone, sometimes re∣plenished with people. The Lady of nations, the Prince of Provinces, (to wit the Church) to be made tributa∣ry; Thren. 4.1. The gold obscured the most excellent colour (which is the beauty of the word of God) changed.Thren. 4.2. The sonnes of Sion, (that is of our holy mother the Church) some∣times famous and clothed
in the purest gold, to have embraced dung; And that which to him as a principall man to me also (though an ab∣ject yet howsoever) encreased this mountaine of sorrow, whilest beforehand hee lamen∣ted them, living as yet so fa∣mous in their flowing prospe∣rity that he said, Thren. 4.7. Her Na∣zarens were whiter than snow, redder than the anci∣ent Ivory, fairer than the Sa∣phire. Beholding in the old Testament, these and many o∣thers as certaine looking glas∣ses of our life, I turned me al∣so to the new, and there the shadow now ceasing, and the light more clearely shining, more plainely did I reade, what before perchance was ob∣scure unto me; I did reade (I
say) that our Lord hath said, Math. 15.24. I came not but to the lost sheepe of the house o Isra∣el; and yet on the other side, Mat. 8.12. But the children of this kingdome shall bee cast into outward darknesse, there shall bee weeping and gna∣shing of teeth. And againe, Mat. 15.26. It is not good to take the bread of the children, and cast it unto dogs. And also, Mat. 23.13. Woe be unto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites. I heard, Mat. 8.11. Many shall come from the East and the West, and sit with Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, in the king∣dome of heauen: And on the contrary part, Mat. 7.23. And then shal I say unto them, Depart from me yee workers of ini∣quity. I have read, Luc. 23.29. Blessed
are the barren, and the teats that have not given sucke; And in contrary position, Mat. 25.10. They who were ready entred with him to the ma∣riage, afterwards came also the other Virgins, saying, Lord, Lord, open unto us, to whom it was answered; I know yee not. I did truely heare, Mat. 16.16. Who so shall be∣leeve, and be baptised, shall be saved, but who shall not beleeve, shall bee damned. I did reade from the penne of the Apostle,Rom. 11.17. that the branch of the wilde Olive was graffed on the good Olive, but not∣withstanding should be cut off from the community of the roote of his fruitfull fatnesse, if hee carry not himselfe in feare, but rashly entred into
high secrets. I knew the mer∣cy of our Lord, but dreaded his judgements. I praised his grace, but trembled, that eve∣ry man shall receive according to his workes. Seeing the sheep of one folde, unlike in fashion, worthily I commended the most blessed Peter for his full confession of Christ, and con∣demned most miserable Iudas for his thirsting covetousnes. I praysed Stephen for his glo∣rious crowne of martyrdome, but reproved Nicholas as miserable in respect of the shamefull marke of his un∣cleane heresie. I did assuredly reade, Act. 4.32. They had all things in common: but likewise, Act. 5.9. Why have yee conspired to tempt the spirit of God. I did on the other side behold
to how great a security men of our age were growne, as if there rested no cause at all of feare. Wherefore considering with some, whatsoever com∣punction of heart, full often in my amazed minde these things, and very many other, which because of briefenesse I have determined to omit. If (quoth I) our Lord hath not spared his people so peculiar∣ly chosen out of all Nations, his royall race, and his solely Country, (to whom hee said, Exod. 4.22. My first begotten Israel,) If not her Priests, Prophets, Kings, throughout the revo∣lution of so many Ages, if not his servant and Apostle, and members of his primitive Church, when they wandred from the right way: what will
he then doe against such de∣formity of this of our present time, on the which, besides the unspeakable and monstrous sinnes that it hath in common with all the wicked of the world, have also fallen, that naturall quality (as it were) and irrecoverable and inevi∣table burden of folly and in∣constrncy? What? (I speake to my selfe) hast thou (oh wretch) so great a care cast up∣on thee (as though thou wert some eminent and most high Doctor) that thou shouldest withstand the bllowes of so violent a streame, and keepe the charge committed into thy hands, against this race of in∣vetrate vices, which through∣out the space of so many yeeres, have without interruption
beene spread and continued? Hold therefore thy peace, for otherwise thou wilt bid the foote see, and the hand speake. Behold and plainely confesse. Britaine hath rulers, she hath watchmen. Why dost thou goe about thus trifling to mutter? Shee hath (I say) shee hath if not more, not lesse then a just number, but because overpres∣sed with so great a weight they bend under their burthens, they have not left them a time of breathing, My sences there∣fore as debtors joyned in one obligation with these and such like objections yea rather more biting mutually forebusted themselues, they (as I have said) no small time (ha∣ving read there is a time of speaking, and a time of hol∣ding
ones peace) as it were in a cumbersome narrow passage of feare,Eccles. 3.7. with wrastling strived, the Creditor notwithstanding at the last prevailed and gained the victory, saying, If thou art not of that audacity that (a∣mong the prosetical creatures, who in regard of the gift of reason, have the next roome to the Angelicall messengers) thou dost not feare to bee mar∣ked with the comely note of golden liberty, refuse not yet at least the affection of the un∣derstanding Asse,The histo∣ry of Baa∣lam and his Asse. to that dy dumbe, but then inspired with the Spirit of God, deny∣ing to carry the mitred Ma∣gician who went to accurse the people of God,Num. 22.23. and dashing in the streights of the vineyards his loosned foote, albeit shee
therefore did feele his most cruell blowes, to whom al∣though unthankfull and furi∣ously in the meane time bea∣ting against all right and rea∣son her innocent sides, she did as it were with a finger shew the heavenly Angell threat∣ning with a naked sword, and crossing his course, whom he blinded with dull folly, did not behold. Wherefore in the zeale of the house of our Lord and of his holy law, be it that I am constrained either by the accounts of mine owne con∣its, or the religious prayers of my brethren, I doe now sa∣tisfie the debt long challenged at my hands, worthlesse truely, yet faithfull (as I suppose) and friendly to all renouned Soul∣diers of Christs band, but grie∣vous
and in supportable to foo∣lish Apostataes; of whom the first, (unlesse I am deceived) will with teares perchance that flow from the charity of God, receive the same, and the last with sorrow, but such as is outwrested from the in∣dignation and pusillanimity of an attainted conscience. But before the performance of my promise, I will (God willing) in few words endeavor to dis∣course, 1. Of our Countries situation. 2. Of her disobedi∣ence. 3. Subjection. 4. And rebellion. 5. Of her second subjection, and dreadfull sla∣very. 6. Of her Religion. 7. Persecution. 8. Holy Mar∣tyrs. 9. And divers here∣sies. 10. Of her Tyrants. 11. Of two her wastfull adverse
Nations. 12. Of her defence. 13. And also of her spoile. 14. Of the second revenge taken on her enemies. 15. then of her third confusion. 16. Of her famine. 17. Of the Let∣ters writen to Agitius. 18. Of her victory. 19. Of her villa∣nies. 20. Of the suddaine ru∣mour of her approaching ene∣mies. 21. Of the faminous plague. 22. Of her Counsell. 23. Of a foe farre more cruell then the first. 24. Of the over∣throw of the Cities. 25. Of the remnants of our Countri∣men. 26. And of the last victory obtained by our Nati∣on▪ which was through the goodnesse of God bestowed on us in our time.
THE EPISTLE of GILDAS: THE Iland ofOf the situation of the Iland. Britaine pla∣ced in the bal∣lance of the divine poising hand (as they call it) which weigheth the whole world, almost the uttermost bound of this earth towards the South and West; extending it selfe from the South West,
out towards the North Pole, eight hundred miles in length, and containing two hundred in bredth, be∣sides the farre outstretched Forelands of sundry Pro∣montaries, embraced by the embowed bosomes of the Ocean Sea; with whose most spacious, and on every side (saving only the Southerne streights, by which we saile to Gallebelgicke) unpassable enclosure (as I may call it) shee is strongly defended; enriched with the mouths of 2. noble Floods, Thames and Severne, as it were two armes (by which outlandish commodities have in times past beene transported into the same) besides other Ri∣vers of lesser account,
strengthned with eight and twenty Cities, and some o∣ther Castles, not meanely fenced with Fortresses of Wals, embattelled Towers, Gates, & buildings (whose roofes being raised aloft with threatning hugenesse, were mightily in their aspi∣ring toppes compacted) a∣dorned with her large spreading fields, pleasant seated hils, even framed for good husbandry, which o∣vermastereth the ground, and mountaines most con∣venient for the changeable Pastures of cattell, (whose flowers of sundry collours, troden by the feete of men, imprint no unseemely pi∣cture on the same) as a spouse of choice, decked
with divers jewels; wate∣red with cleere Fountaines, and sundry Brookes, beating on the snow white sands to∣gether with silver streames sliding forth with soft soun∣ding noise, and leaving a pledge of sweet savours on their bordering bankes, and lakes gushing out abundant∣ly in cold running Rivers. Of her disobedi∣ence.Secondly, this Land with a stiffe proud necke, and stubborne minde from the time since shee was first inhabited, hath ungrateful∣ly rebelled sometimes a∣gainst God, other whiles a∣gainst her owne Country∣men, and at other seasons also against outlandish Kings and their Subjects. For what matter of fowler
deformity, or what greater injustice can in the attempts of men, either be, or ever be committed, then to de∣ny God of that awful feare, honest Countrymen of that charity, and those who are placed in higher authority (without impeachment of faith) of that honour due unto them, to breake allea∣geance to divine and hu∣mane reason, and casting a∣way all dread of Heaven and Earth, to be ruled by their owne inventions and sensualities? Omitting ther∣fore those ancient errours common to all nations of the earth, with the which before the comming of Christ in our flesh, all man∣kinde was entangled and
bound, nor yet recounting up the monstrous Idols of our Country, surpassing al∣most in number the very devilish devises themselves of Egypt, (of the which we behold as yet some, both within and without the wals of their forsaken Temples, with deformed portratures, and terrible countenances after the accustomed man∣ner, now mouldring away) neither yet crying out, namely one after another on the mountaines them∣selves, or hils, or floods, damnable sometimes, as to the which divine honour, by the people then blinded was yeelded, though now truely profitable to the use of mankinde: and letting
passe in silence those old outworne ages of our de∣testable Tyrants, who in other far remooved regions were infamous (in so much as Porphyrie that outragious easterling dogge, who bar∣ked against the Church, hath in the stile of his mad∣nesse and vanity also added this; That Britaine is a fruit∣full Province of Tyrants.) I will onely endeavour to set forth to the world those mi∣series, which in the time of the Romane Emperours she suffered, and likewise hea∣ped on the heads of others, as well her Countrymen, as Strangers, and not farther neverthelesse then I am well able to declare, nei∣ther yet so much out of the
Chronicles of our Country, or the monuments of our owne Authors (for why these truely if any such there have beene, are ei∣ther now devoured with the fires of our foes, or be∣ing transported into for∣raigne Nations by the meanes of our banished Countrymen, are quite va∣nished away) as by the re∣lation of outlandish writers which broken off with ma∣ny interruptions doth not sufficiently appeare. Of the subjection of the Iland.Thirdly, for when the Rulers of Rome, had obtai∣ned the Empire of the world, and now having brought under their go∣vernement, all their next neighbours, Nations and I∣lands)
had towards the East confirmed with the power of their encreasing renown, the first peace of the Parhians who confine on the In∣dians) which being finished warres thenceased through out almost the whole earth, the fury in a sort of this flame towards the West, could no with the blewish billows of the cold Ocean Seas be suppressed or extinguish∣ed; but passing over without resistance drew our Iland to the lawes of obedience, and subdued absolutely to their command, the weake but unstable people not like other nations so much with sword, fire, and warlike en∣gines, as with threats, or amazing their mindes with
the superficious frownes of their countenances, so deep∣ly were their hearts in∣wardly dismayed. Of her Rebellion▪Fourthly, after whose re∣turne unto Rome, which for want of pay (as they said) was present suspecting no∣thing lesse then rebellion, the subtil Queene Voadit slew with the power of her Country∣men the Britanes threescore and ten or fourescore thousand Romanes. Lioness murthred the Rulers, who were left behinde of purpose more fully to show; or rather to confirme the enterprises of the Romane Empire. Which being so done, when the report thereof was decla∣red unto the Senate, and they with a speedy army made all haste to be reven∣ged on the crafty foxes cubbs (as they called them) there appeared no warlike
Navy on the Seas prepa∣red valiantly to encounter for our Country, nor yet a square mustered army, nei∣ther the right wing of the battaile, nor other order of fight to withstand on the shore but backes in place of sheilds were turned to the pursuing foes, neckes subjected to the conque∣ring swords, cold feare in∣vading all their limbs, and supplyant hands stretched out▪ womn-like▪ to be bound; so that it was bru∣ted farre and neere, as a pro∣verbe and scornefull re∣proach, that Britaine were Neither forward in warre, nor stable in peace. neither valiant in warre, nor faithfull in peace. Fifthly;Of the second sub∣jection of the Nation. many therefore of the rebellious being
slaine, and some of the in∣thralled for baser workes (least the Land should be wholly brought to desola∣tion) left alive, they sailed from our Country (void of wine and oyle) towards I∣taly, leaving behinde them some of their Governors, as scourges over our Coun∣trymens shoulders, & yokes on their neckes, who should engrave, as it were, on the very ground the name of their subjection to Rome, and chastice not so much with warlike weapons, as with reprochfull punish∣ments the subtill people, and if occasion so required, should fashion them (as they say) to weare their naked swords by their sides, so
that now it was not reputed as Britania but Romania, and what soever Brasse, Silver, and Gold it could possesse, was stamped with the I∣mage of Caesar. Sixthly,Of her Rebellion. in the meane while, Christ the true Son of God, spreading forth not onely from this temporall firmament, but also from the Castell and Court of Heaven, (which exceedeth all times) throughout the whole world, his most glo∣rious light, especially (as we know) in the Raigne of Tiberius Caesar, (whereas in regard that the Emperour) against the will of the Se∣nate threatned death to the disturbers of the professors thereof, Religion was most
largely without any hinde∣rance dispersed of his infi∣nite mercy, did first cast on this Iland, starving with frozen cold, and in a farre remote climate from the vi∣sible Sunne, his gladsome beames, to wit, his most holy Lawes. Of the PersecutionSeaventhly, which al∣though they were received of the inhabitans, but with lukewarme mindes, remai∣ned notwithstanding fully in the soules of some, and in others lesse, untill the nine yeares persecution of the Tyrant Dioclesian, in which the Churches throughout the whole world were o∣verthrowne to the ground, all holy Scriptures (that could be found) burned in
the streetes, the chosen Priests of the flocke of our Lord, together with the in∣nocent Sheepe murthered, to the end that not the least remembrance, truely of Christian Religion (if possi∣bly it might be) should in any place of the Provinces be left. How foule the flights were then, how great the slaughters, what torments of sundry deaths, what ruines of Apostataes, what shining Crownes of glorious Martyrs, what fu∣rious madnesse of the per∣secutors, and on the con∣trary, what singular pati∣ence of the Saints of God, the Ecclesiasticall History declareth: so as the whole Church, in mighty throng∣ing
troopes (leaving behind them all worldly darkenes) hastened with speede to the pleasant Pallaces of Hea∣ven as to their proper seats. Of the holy Mar∣tyrs of Britaine.Eightly, God therefore whose will is, that all men should be saved, and who calleth no lesse sinners then such as repute themselves just, magnified his mercy with us, who as wee con∣jecture of his gracious a∣forenamed goodnesse, that Britaine should not be alto∣gether overwhelmed with the black cloud of this dark some night, lightned unto us in this time of persecuti∣on the most cleare lamps of his Holy Martyrs, the tombes of whose bodies
and places of passion (were wee not for our most mani∣fold offences through the lamentable interruption of the barbarous, deprived of them) would even now in∣kindle in the mindes of the beholders no small fire of the divine charity. I meane S. Alban. St. Alban of Verolamium and Aaron, and Iulius of Carlile up∣on Vske in Monmouth∣shire. Carlile with others of both Sexes persisting in many places with most singular magnanimity in the battle of Christ. Of whom the first, after he had for chari∣ties sake, concealed a Con∣fessor, pursued by the perse∣cutors, and even now ready to be taken, by hiding him in his house, and then by changing garments with
him, and lastly, in the appa∣rell of his fore-recited bro∣ther, had willingly offered himselfe to the ensuing dan∣ger (imitating also in this Christ, who gave his blood for his Sheepe) so pleasing was he found in the sight of God, and betweene his sa∣cred confession and Martyr∣dome so exceedingly glori∣fied with miracles even in the very eies of the wicked, who with fantasticall out∣rage presented the ensignes of the authority of Rome, as entring in the fervour of his Prayers, together with a thousand others dry sooted, the Channell of the noble River of Thames, he made a passage through the wa∣ters that hung in the meane
time as broken mountaines on the one side, & the other. Iosh 3.17 not unlike to that dryed & unworne way of the Israe∣lites when the Arke of the Testament remained long on the sands in the midst of the River of Iordan, and by the sight of so miraculous a matter, he changed his first designed executioner, from a Wolfe to a Lambe. Yea & made him together with himselfe most earnestly to thirst, and constantly to at∣chieve the triumphant victory of Martyrdome. O∣thers also were with such sundry torments tortured, and with such unspeakeable tearing of their limbes rent in peeces, as without delay the glorious conquerours
fixed the tropheys of their Martyrdome, in the famous gates (as it were) of Ierusa∣lem. For they who remai∣ned alive, did hide them∣selves in woods, in desarts and in secretdens, expecting when God the rightfull ru∣ler of all things would pro∣nounce upon their tormen∣tors his severe judgements, and grant themselves the safety of their lives. Tenne yeares therefore of the a∣bove named tempestuous hurlewinde being not yet fully ended, and these wic∣ked decrees by the deaths of their blooddy beginners now withering away, al the Souldiers of Christ with joyfull eyes, doe after this long Winters night, behold
the milde season and faire light as it were of the Hea∣venly sky. They reedifie their Churches battered downe to the ground, they found, builde, and finish the Temples of holy Martyrs, and display farre and neere in a sort their conquering banners, they celebrate holy dayes, and sacrifice with pure hearts and mouthes, yea all the chil∣dren of the Church being now most lovingly embra∣ced and tenderly nourished in the bosome (as you may call it) of their mother doe exceedingly rejoyce.Of the divers he∣resies. Ninthly, for this sweete consort of the members of Christ their head remaind inviolable, untill the Arrian
treason like an horrible ser∣pent, vomitting out upon us his outlandish poysons, brought to mortall discord brethren who dwelt in one, and so all cruell beasts to∣gether, making as it were a passage over the Ocean Sea, and spitting the damnable venome of every heresie from their abhominable mouthes, fastened their deadly wounding teeth on our Country, which is ever desirous to heare novelty, and never truely continueth in any certainety. Of the Tyrants.Tenthly, moreover also at the length, new springs of Tyrants encreasing, and e∣ven now growing up into a very wildernesse of wick∣ednesse, our Iland which
bore as yet the Romane name, but farre degenera∣ted from the manners and lawes of the same, yea ra∣ther which did cast away the first roote of her most bitter planting, furnished out unto the Galles The Ty∣ranny of Maximus. Maxi∣mus (not lawfully inve∣sted, but Tyrannically u∣surping, and advanced by mutinous souldiers) with mighty bands of men to guard him, and ensignes of the Emperiall Majesty, (which never yet did any way become him) who ra∣ther first which crafty subtil∣ty then any valour, tying and combining together all neere adjoyning Shires and Provinces against the estate of Rom, as the nettles of
his perjury and falshood for the atchieving of his wicked government, stret∣ching out one of his wings to Spaine and the other to Italy, and seating at Trire the Throne of his most un∣just Empire, rebelled a∣gainst his Lords with so great outrage, as he expel∣led two most lawfull Em∣perors, the one out of Rome, the other out of his most Religious life; and with∣out delay encouraged with such fatall attempts, lost at the City of Aquilege his ac∣cursed head, who before in a sort had throwne to the dust the Crowned heads of the whole worlds King∣dome.Of two wastfull Nations. XI. After this Britaine
being now dispoyled of all armed Souldiers, of war∣like companies, of (though outragious yet) Rulers, and of her brave and valorous youth, (who marching a∣long with the afore recited Tyrant, never returned to their home againe) and now absolutely ignorant of all practise of warre, was astonished, and lamentably groaned, as trampled many yeares under the feete of especially two very fierce outlandish Nations, the Scots from the South, and the Pyctes from the North. XII. Vpon whose inva∣sions,Of the defence of the Iland. and most terrible op∣pressions, she sent Ambassa∣dors furnished with Letters to Rome, humbly besee∣ching
with pittious prayers an hoast of Souldiers to re∣dresse her wrongs, and vowing with the whole power of her minde her e∣verlasting subjection to the Romane Empyre, so as these her foes might be once chased further away. In whose behalfe (all forepas∣sed injuries being cleane forgotten) a Legion strong∣ly provided for the warre, was forthwith mustered: which being Shipped and so transported over the O∣cean into our Country, and incountring hand to hand, with our grievous foes, and slaying an huge number of them, drave them all out of the British bounds, and with so blooddy a fight delive∣red
their friends and sub∣jects from that imminent thraldome. Whom they commanded to builde a∣crosse over the Iland, from Sea to Sea a wall, which be∣ing manned with garrisons of Souldiers, might be a ter∣ror to suppresse the enemy, and a safe-guard to defend their friends. But this be∣ing without any director made by the people, and unreasonable rout, not so much of stone, as of turfe, prooved to little purpose. XIII.Of the other spoile of the Country. The army was no sooner with great triumph & rejoycing returned home but their accustomed foes not unlike devouring Wolves, that ravening with extreame hunger, and gree∣dy
jawes, leape over the fold, in the Shepheards ab∣sence, being furthered and furnished with the wings of Oares, and the strength of Rowers, and Sailes filled with too prosperous winds, breake downe all bounds, commit all murthers, and as men who reape the now ripe corne, so tread they under foote, and overrunne them all. Of the second re∣venge ta∣ken of the enemy.XIV. And now againe they send supplyant com∣playning Embassadors with rented garments (as they say) and heads overspread with ashes, humbly besee∣ching assistance from the state of Rome, & shrowding themselves like fearefull chickens under the most
trusty wings of their Pa∣rents, that their miserable country might not be alto∣gether made desolate, nor yet the Romane name (which now was onely left with idle sound of words to fill the empty eare) base∣ly vanish away, as consu∣med with the reproachfull despights of forraigne Na∣tions, whereupon the Ro∣manes being mooved (as much as mans nature possi∣bly might be) with the de∣claration of this so lamen∣table a tragedy, advancing forward (as Eagles in their flight) withall speede their troopes of Horse by Land, and Marriners mustred on the Sea, doe sease on the shoulders of their foes, first
with the unexpected, and then the terrible tallons of their swords, and slaughte∣ring, overthrow them as thicke as leaves, that withe∣red Autumn hurleth down. And as the streame that powreth out from the Mountaines, and encreaseth with sundry brookes, that rise of tempestuous raines, which in her roaring fall, surmounteth now all chan∣nels, and outragiously fo∣meth with her furrowed backe and vehement boy∣ling fountaine, and leaping (as they say) to the very clouds with her dashing waters (through whose di∣vers circuling wheeles the appels of our eyes, though often refreshed with our
twinckling eie-lids are not∣withstanding dazled) even with one billow, beareth downe all resisting powers, so our rightworthy assisting friends most speedily cha∣sed the troopes of our foes (if any could so escape their hands) beyond the Seas, because beyond the same Seas, they did yeare by yeare in great abundance greedily transport their praises, no man daring with∣stand them. The Romanes therefore declaring unto our Country, that they could not endure to be so often troubled with such tedious journeyes, nor yet to weary out the Ensignes of Rome, together with such and so great an army, both
by land and Sea, on these wandring wasters; and per∣swading them rather by ex∣ercise of warfare, and cou∣ragious fighting, with their whole powers of them∣selves to defend their lands, goods, wives, children, and (which are dearer then all these) their liberties and lives, and not in any case to yeeld unto Nations no way more valiant then themselves (if by sloath and idle cowardlinesse they were not weakened) their disarmed hands to be ma∣nacled in bands, but rather to shew them the same hands armed with Targets, Swords, and Speares, and manfully prepared to make slaughter of their foes, doe
together with the poore miserable inhabitants by the common charge of all and private helps of many, (because they supposed it would be some advantage to the people, now left to themselves) build a wall as the first, though not weake as the first, by levell, direct∣ly from Sea to Sea, along the Cities, which for dread of their oes, were there by chance situate, give manfull admonitions to the feareful people, leave them the art to make armour, and teach them the order of warfare. And moreover on the Sou∣therne shore of the Ocean, where their Shippes lay in Harbour (because the lan∣ding of the barbarous sa∣vage
sort, was there most to be feared) they doe in divers and distant conveni∣ent places erect watch∣towers, to ken over the Seas, and now as never to returne againe, give them their last farewell. Of the third wast∣full spoile of the Land.XV. They were not∣withstanding no sooner gone home, but as the brownish bands of wormes and eamots, which in the hieghth of Sommer, and encreasing heate, doe swar∣ming breake out of their most straight and darke∣some dens, the dreadfull routes of Scots and Pictes, partly dissenting in man∣ners, but consenting in one and the selfe same greedy thirst of shedding blood,
and shadowing rather their terrible faces, with shag∣ging glibes, then hiding the secrets and shame of their bodies with comely gar∣ments, doe runne in throngs and mustring troopes, a land out of their Ships, wherein they were transported over their Scithian vale,The Sea betweene England and Ireland called Scy∣thca vallis. and be∣ing assuredly informed, as touching the departure of our assisting friends, and their absolute denyall of e∣ver returning againe, even now more boldly then at any time before they in∣vade, and bereave the inha∣bitants of all the Northerne and uttermost bounds of the land, to the very wall it selfe. For the withstan∣ding of whose forces was
placed on the fortresse a sloathfull garrison, backe∣ward to fight, unfit to en∣counter, an unprofitable dismayed company, which day and night in amaze∣ment wasted away; in the meane while ceaseth not the hooked weapons of the naked enemies, with the which our miserable Coun∣trymen were pulled from the wal, and dashed downe to the ground. And yet truely they who lost their lives in this slaughter, rea∣ped through the torment of their untimely death, this commodity, that by their suddaine ends they eschew∣ed the sight of those lamen∣table and imminent plagues and punishments which fell
upon their brethren and deere children. What need many words? They left the Cities, they left the high wall, againe they flye, and are againe dispersed in farre more desperate sort then before; and now the enemy pursueth afresh, and afresh he hastneth, and hea∣peth slaughters on slaugh∣ters, more cruelly then e∣ver, and as Lambs by but∣chers, so our pittifull Coun∣trymen are by their foes hewed in peeces, insomuch as their habitation was like a wildernesse of salvage beasts. XVI. For even theyOf the famine. themselves did not with∣hold their hands from ra∣vening on their owne mise∣rable
Countrymen, yea for a little sustenance of a small deale of food, and so over∣throwes from the enemy were enereased with civill sedition, and the reason was because through these such sundry wastefull spoyles, the whole Country was ut∣terly disfurnished of all manner of provision of vi∣ctuals, that onely excepted which they gat by hun∣ting. Of the Letters to Aeitius.XVII. Wherefore a∣gaine the ruthfull remnants of us direct unto Agitius (a man of power, in the state of Rome) their Letters indited to this purpose. The lamentation of the Britanes unto Agitius thrice Consul, and a little after in
this sort complaining. The Barbarous beate us to the Seas, the Seas drive us back on the Barbarous, between these two dreadfull kindes of death, we are either slain or drowned; but neverthe∣lesse they obtaine no man∣ner of aide. In the meane while a cruell and most no∣torious famine oppressed the strugling and discom∣forted people, which en∣forced many of them with∣out delay, for the gayning but of a little meate to re∣fresh their lives, to yeeld▪ their neckes to the yokes of their terrible spoyling foes, although others would ne∣ver be constrayned there∣unto, but rather from of the mountaines and from out
the dens and defert wood∣dy forests made continuall resistance. Of the victory ob∣tained by the Britaines.XVIII. And then first of all they overthrew their foes, who now for many yeares had wasted their Country, yet not trusting in the strength of man, but in the power of God, according to that of Philo. It is necessary to have divine assistanc, when humane for∣ces faile. A while ceased the attempts of our ene∣mies, but yet not ceased the wickednesse of our Coun∣trymen, our foes left our people, but our people left not their iniquities. Of their offences.XIX. For it hath beene still a custome with our Country (as still als it re∣maineth)
that she hath been weake to represse the pow∣er of their enemies, but strong to raise civil broiles, and beare the burthens of offences; feeble (I say) to execute the lawes of peace and truth, but able enough to sin, falsifie, and deceive. The impudent Irish wasters departed home, as they who not long after deter∣mined to returne againe, and then first the Pictes sea∣ted themselves (where af∣terwards they continued) in the furthest part of the Iland, breaking every while forth in spoyling and defa∣cing our Country. Where∣fore in such truces as these, the cruell sore of famine (which the desolate people
sustained) was now cleare healed, another farre more poysonous secretly arising. For no sooner did the ene∣my desist from spoyling the Country, but the Iland a∣bounded with so great plenty of all things, as no forepassed age could ever remember the like, where∣with all kind of licencious∣nesse in like sort encreased. Yea truely it increased with a mighty off-spring; so that very aptly to the same time might be applyed the say∣ing which is; To be short, such fornication is heard of,1 Cor. 3.1. as among the Gentiles there is not the like. Neither yet this vice alone, but all o∣thers that to humane frail∣ty doe accustomably be∣fall,
and chiefly (that which now also overthroweth in her the whole estate of goodnesse) hatred of truth with her maintainers, and the love of falshood with the framers thereof, the acceptance of sin for sancti∣ty, the worshipping of wickednesse for benignity, the desire of darkenesse for the Sunneshining, the em∣bracing of Sathan for an Angell of light. Kings were annointed, not as God ap∣pointed, but such as in cru∣elty excelled others; and within a while after were they by their Electours without due examination of their deserts murthe∣red, other more blooddy Tyrants being in their pla∣ces
advanced, if any one of them were of a milder dis∣position, or seemed to draw any whit nearer to the truth, on him as the subver∣ter of Britaine were all mens hatred and vengeance with out respect throwne, and at an equall rate was valued all that displeased and plea∣sed God, if that which dis∣pleased bore not the high∣er price. So as rightly to our Country might be spoken those words of the Pro∣phet, which to that people of old were denounced. Esai. 1.5. Children without a law, have ye left God and provoked to anger the holy One of Israel, to what end shall ye be as yet strooken, adding iniquity? every head is languishing, and
every heart is grieving, from the sole of the foote even to the very crowne of the head, there is no soundnesse in him. And so they managed all matters, that were contrary to their salvation, as if the true Physition of all things could Minister no medicine to the enfeebled wound: And thus dealt not only the Lay people, but the very flocke of our Lord, and the Pastors thereof, who ought to give all the Commons good example; very many as it were washed in wine did carelessely waste them∣selves in drunkennesse, and were moreover attainted with the swelling of pride, the contention of anger, the griping talo of envy, and
the indifferent estimation of good and evill; so that apparently (as now also it fareth) there seemed to be powred out Psa. 106 Contempt on the Princes, who caused them to wander astray, and not in the way. Of the suddaine newes of the enemy.XX. God in the meane while being willing to cleanse his family, and with the onely report of tribula∣tion to amend them who were infected with so great a pestilence of mischiefes; the winged flight of no un∣certaine fame, peirced the listning eares of all men, concerning the instant ap∣proach of their inveterate enemies, even now resol∣ved to make a spoile of all, and to possesse after their
accustomed manner, the whole Country from the one end to the other. Yet did our Countrymen never∣thelesse reape small com∣modiy hereby, but like to bransicke beasts, most wil∣fully taking (as they say) in the teeth the bit of reason, they left the safe, though straight way, and ranne mainely to the open passage of sundry vices, that leade headlong to deadly de∣struction. XXI. While therefore (as Salomon saith) The stub∣borne Servant is not with words amended,Of the faminous Plague. the foole is scourged and feeleth it not. For a pestilent sicknesse did mortally infect the unwise people, which (without any
stroake of the sword) did in short time devoure so great a multitude of them, as the living were unneathable to bury; but neither with this were their sinnes correct∣ed, that the same of Esay the Prophet might be also in them fulfilled, saying▪ And God hath called to La∣mentation,Isai. 22.12. to baldnesse, and to the girdle of sackecloth, and behold they rejoyce to kill calves, and to slaughter Rams, to eate and drinke, and to say, Let us eate, and let us drinke, for to morrow wee shall dye. For why the houre drew on a pace, wherein all their iniquities as those sometimes of the Amor∣rheians should be fully ac∣complished.
XXII. For a CounsellOf the Counsell. was called to determine what were the best or safest way to repulse and represse such deadly and often inva∣sions and spoylings made by the aforesaid Nati∣ons. XXIII. When all the Counsell,Of an enemy far more cruell then the first. together with the proud Tyrant, were blin∣ded in finding out this de∣fence, nay, offence, and ut∣ter destruction of our Coun∣try, that those most fierce and detestable people named the Saxons, a Nati∣on odious both to God and man, should be sent for in∣to the Iland (as wolves into a fold of Sheepe) to beate down the Northerne pow∣ers; then which nothing
ever befell to this our Country more pernicious and miserable. O most pal∣pable darkenesse of their sences! O desperate and blockish dulnesse of their mindes! whom they drea∣ded in their absence, more then death it selfe, were now freely and willingly invited to inhabit with them under the roofe (as I may call it) of one selfe same house, by the foolish Princes (as it is said) of Taneos giving undiscreete Counsell to their King Pha∣raoh. And then an huge lit∣ter of whelpes ramping out of the denne of the barb∣rous Saxony. Lionesse, in three Ciuls (according to their tongue, but (after ours) in
three long Shippes or Gal∣lies, with prosperous sailes, fortunes and prophesies, through which by a certain Southsayer among them was foretold, that they should three hundred yeare possesse the Country wher∣unto they directed their course, and spend an hun∣dred and fifty of the same (to wit) the one halfe in of∣ten spoyling of the Realme, and landing first in the Ea∣sterne part of the Iland, fix∣ed there, by the unhappy Tyrants commandement, their cruell clawes, as it were to fight for our Coun∣try, but more truely to o∣verthrow the same. After whom the aforesaid Saxony. Dam, (finding her first begin∣nings
had so good successe) sendeth also forth a new and greater supply of her ravening race, which be∣ing shipped over, joyne themselves with the for∣mer bastardly bands. Here∣upon the bud of iniquity, the roote of bitternesse, and the plant of poyson, answe∣rable truely to our demirits sprung out from this our na∣tive soyle in fierce armes and branches. The Bar∣barous therefore being in∣vited and admitted into our Iland, demaund and obtain allowance of victuals to be granted them as Souldiers and such as would under∣take mighty dangers (as they pretended) for their good hosts, and entertai∣ners
which being a long time largely bestowed. stopped (as they say) the dogges mouth. Yet after∣wards notwithstanding they cavill that they had not suf∣ficient victuals and habita∣tions appointed them, for∣ging thereupon, quarrels of set purpose, and if they found not greater abun∣dance of bounty, they pro∣test they would breake the league, and sacke the whole Iland, and without delay they make good their threats with following ef∣fects. XXIIII. For the fire of just revenge,Of the overthrow of the Ci∣ties. being in regard of our former offen∣ces now inkindled, was in∣creased and continued from
sea to sea, as fed by the hand of the sacrilegious Ea∣sterlings, which spoyling and consuming al neere ad∣joyning Cities and Coun∣tries, when it was once in∣flamed, ceased not till bur∣ning almost the whole We∣sterne face of the Iland, it dipped histerrible red scor∣ching tongue into the Oce∣an Sea. Wherefore in these assaults, not unlike those which the Assyrians some∣times attempted against Iu∣dah, the same was also Hi∣storically performed in us, which the Prophet lamen∣ting said; Psal. 73.7 They have bur∣ned with fire thy Sanctuary, they have pollat d in earth, the Tabernacle of thy name. And againe, Psal. 78.1 O God the
Gentiles have come into thine inheritance, they have defi∣led thy holy Temple. In so much as all the townes with the often beatings of the Rammes, and all the Townes-men, Pastours, Priests, and People, with naked swords that glittred on all sides, and crackling flames were together whir∣led to the ground; lamen∣table and dreadfull to be∣hold, there lay the toppes of lofty Towres now tum∣bled downe, the stones of high wals, the holy Altars, and rented peeces of carca∣ces covered with distilling & congealed purple blood, confusedly in the midst of the streetes heaped in one, as if they were to be crush∣ed
together in a certaine horrible winepresse: and now besides the ruines of houses, there remained no grave at all for the dead, but the bellies of beasts and birds; be it spoken with reverence to the sacred soules (if many yet were to be found) which at that time by the blessed Angels were assumpted to the high Heavens; for that vine which was sometimes so good, had as then so dege∣nerated into bitternes, that (according unto the Pro∣phet) like as when the wine∣makers or harvest men have done, there was hardly a grape or eare of corne to be seene.Of the remnant of the Bri∣taines. XXV. Some therefore
of the miserable remnants being taken in the moun∣taines, were in heapes mur∣thered; others constrained by famine, came and yeel∣ded themselves to be eter∣nall slaves to their foes, if they were not instantly ne∣verthelesse slaine, which truely was the greatest fa∣vour that could be offered them: some others passed over beyond the Seas, sing∣ing or rather sighing with wonderfull lamentation un∣der the shadowes of their sailes, in place of the Marri∣ners sound, this heavy sen∣tence; Psal. 43.12. Thou hast given us as Sheepe to be slaughtered, and among the Gentiles hast thou dispersed us. Others committing the safegard of
their lives, in continuall doubtfull dread, to the mounting hils, to the for∣tresses of deepe downefals, to most thicke wooddy for∣rests, and to the Rockes of the Seas, remained (albeit with trembling hearts) yet still in their Country. But in the meane while, an op∣portunity happening, when as these most cruell rob∣bers were returned home, the poore remnants of our Nation (to whom do flock from divers places round about our most miserable Countrymen as fast as Bees to their hives, for feare of an insueing storme) being strengthened by God, and with all their hearts calling upon him, and lading (as
they say) the Heavens with innumerable vowes, that they might not be now brought to utter distruction take armes under the con∣duction of Ambrose the Au∣relian a modest man (who of all the Romane Nation was then alone in the con∣fusion of so great a tempe∣stuous season by chance left alive, his parents who for their honour were ador∣ned with purple, being slain in the same broyles, al∣though his progeny in these our dayes do foulely dege∣nerate from the worthinesse of their Ancestors) and pro¦voke to battaile their cruell Conquerors, and so by the goodnesse of our Lord ob∣taine the victory.
Of the last victory granted by God to the Britaines.XXVI. After this some∣times our Countrymen, sometimes the Enemy won the field, to the end our Lord might in this Land try after his accustomed man∣ner these his now Israelites, whether they loved him or not, untill the yeare of the siege of the mountaine of Bath, and of the last almost though not the least slaugh∣ter of our villanous foes, which was (as I am sure) forty foure yeares and one moneth after the landing of the Saxons, and also the time of my Nativity. And yet neither to this day true∣ly are the Cities of our Country as before inhabi∣ted, but being forsaken and overthrowne doe hitherto
lye desolate, our forraigne warres ceasing, but civill remaining. For as well the remembrance of so despe∣rate a distruction of the I∣land, as also that of the un∣expected recovery of the same remained in the minds of them, who were eye wit∣nesses of the wonderfull e∣vents of both, and in regard thereof, Kings, publicke Magistrates, and private persons, with Priests and Clergy men, did all and e∣very of them live orderly according to their severall vocations. But when these departed out of this world, and a new off-spring suc∣ceeded, that was ignorant of this troublesome time, and had onely experience
of the present prosperity, all the lawes of truth and justice were so shaken and turned upside downe, that I will not say one step, but not so much truely as one little memory of these ver∣tues hardly rested to be seene in the fore-recited orders of men, a few, yea a very few excepted, who in respect of the losse of so great a multitude, which rusheth daily head-long downe to hell, are accoun∣ted so small a number, that our reverent mother the Church doth in a sort scarce behold them reposing in her bosome, whom shee doth onely accept for her true children; whose wor∣thy lives being admirable
to all men, and of God be∣loved (by the sacred pray∣ers of whom, as by certaine pillars and most profitable supporters, our infirmity is sustained up, that it may not utterly fall downe to the ground) I would have no one suppose I goe once a∣bout to reprove, if any way enforced by the encreasing heapes of offences I shall more liberally, yea more lamentably not so much de∣clare as bewaile the wick∣ednesse of those who are become servants not onely to their bellies, but also to the devill rather then to Christ, who is our bles∣sed God, world without end.
For why shall their Coun∣trymen conceale, what for∣raigne Nations round a∣bout doe as now not onely know, but also cast in their teethes? Britaine hath Kings but Tyrants, shee hath Iudges but wicked, of∣ten spoyling and confoun∣ding, but the Innocent; de∣fending and protecting but the faulty and Felons; ha∣ving very many wives, but queanes and adulteresses, sundry times swearing but forswearing, vowing and almost instantly falsifying the same, making warres, but civill and unjust, migh∣tily pursuing robbers a∣broad truely in the Coun∣try, and yet not only loving but also rewarding such
theeves as are with them at their tables; giving almes bountifully, but on the con∣trary side heaping upmoun∣taines of mischiefes misera∣bly, sitting in the throne of Iustice, but seldome see∣king out the rules of right∣full judgement, disdaining the honest and humble, but extolling (as much as in them lyeth) unto the very starres, the blooddy, the proud, the monstrous mur∣therers, the combined and adulterous enemies if so (as they say) they may pre∣vaile, of God himselfe, who together with their very names are to be razed absolutely out of the earth; having many fettered in their goales, but lading
them with chaines, whom they rather beate downe by deceits, then punish for any due desarts; making solemne oathes on the Al∣tars, and presently after∣wards despising the same Altars, as if they were but durty stones. The re∣prooving of Constantine Of which so horrible a crime, Con∣stantine the Tyrannicall whelpe of the uncleane Ly∣onesse of Dannonier is not guiltlesse. This selfe same yeare after the taking of a dreadfull oath (whereby he bound himselfe first be∣fore God, and by a solemne sworne protestation, then calling all the quires of Saints, and Mother of God to witnesse, that hee would not contrive
any deceipts against his Country-men) he did ne∣verthelesse in the reverent bosomes of two mothers, the Church, and the car∣nall Parent, under the ha∣bit of the Saintly Abbot Amphibalus,Amphibols. amiddest the very holy sacred Altars (as I have sayd) in stead of teeth with his abhomina∣ble sword and lavelin, wound and rent the most tender sides of two royall I thinke this shou'd be rather thus. Youths, and cruelly the entrailes of two nurse∣lings. Fo it appeareth to be two severall slaughter; the first of two young men, the last of two nurse chil∣dren, accor∣ding to our Chroicles; children, or cruelly the entrailes of two such nurse∣lings, whose armes no way defended with armour (which no man almost as then more stoutly, than these poore babes used) but stretched against the day of Iudgement, to God
and the Altar, did hang up (O Christ) at the gates of thy City, the venerable ensignes of their patience and faith: yea so he did it as the purple cloakes (as it were) of congealed blood, did touch the seate of the heavenly sacrifice, neither did he commit this truely after any precedent com∣mendable actions: For many yeeres before was he overcome with the often and interchangeable sten∣ches of adulteries, having thrust away his lawfull wife against the commandement of Christ, and also the Do∣ctor of the Gentiles, saying, Mat. 19 6. Marke 10 9 What God hath joyned, let not man separate; and againe, Eph. 5.28 Colos. 3.19. Husbands love your wives,
For why he had planted in the ground of his heart (an unfruitfull soyle for any good seede) a certaine most bitter set of incredu∣lity and folly, taken at the first from the Vine of So∣dome, which being watred with his vulgar and dome∣sticall impieties, as poysonous kinds of showres, an afterwards to the offence of God more audaciously springing up, hath brought forth into the world the sinne of horrible murder and sacriledge; and not as yet discharged of the en∣tangling netts of his former offences, he encreaseth his new wickednesse with old villanies. Goe too now, I reproove thee as present,
whom I know as yet to be in this life extant; why standest thou astonished, O thou butcher of thine owne soule? why dost thou wilfully inkindle a∣gainst thy selfe the eternall fires of hell: Why dost thou in place of enemies, desperately stabbe thy self with thine owne swords, with thine owne javelins? What cannot those same poysonous cuppes of offen∣ces yet satisfie thy sto∣mack? Looke backe (I be∣seech thee) and come to Christ, (for why thou la∣bourest, and art pressed even downe to the earth with this huge burthen) and he himselfe, as he sayd will give thee rest. Come to
him who wisheth not Esa. 52.2. The death of a sinner, but that hee should be rather converted and live. Vnlose (accor∣ding to the Prophet) the bands of thy necke,Ezech. 33.11. O thou sonne of Sion. Returne (I pray thee) although from the farre remote regions of sinnes,Luc. 15.13. unto the most pyous Father who for his sonne that will despise the filthy foode of swine, and feare the death of cruell famine, and so come backe to him againe, hath with great joy accustomed to kill his fated Calfe, and bring forth for this erronios wanderer, the first stole and royall ring, and then talking as it were a taste of the heavenly hope thou shalt perceive. Psa. 33.9. How sweete
our Lord is. For if thou dost contemn these, be thou assured, thou art almost in∣stantly to be for ever tossed and tormented in the inevi∣table and darke floods of endlesse fires. What dost thou also thou Lions whelp (as the Prophet saith) Au∣relius Conanus?The repro∣ving of Aurelius Conanus. Art not thou as the former (if not farre more foulely) to thy utter destruction, swallow∣ed up in the filthinesse of horrible murders, fornica∣tions and adulteries, as in certaine over-whelming flouds of the sea? Hast not thou by hating, as a deadly serpent, the peace of thy Country, and thirsting un∣justly after civill warres, and often frequent spoyles,
shut up the gates of heaven∣ly peace and repose against thine owne soule? Being now left alone as a withe∣ring tree in the middest of a field, remember (I beseech thee) the vaine and idle phancies of thy Parents, and brethren, together with the untimely death that befell them in the prime of their youth; and shalt thou for thy religious deserts, be reserved to live some hundreds of yeares, or to attaine to the age of Methusalem, being now bereft almost of all succee∣ding posterity? No sure∣ly, but unlesse (as the Psal∣mist saith) thou shalt bee more speedily converted unto our Lord, that King
will shortly Psal. 7.13. Brandish his sword against thee, who by his Prophet saith Deut. 32.39. I will kill, and I will cause to live, I will strike, and I will heale, and he is not who can deliver out of my hand. Bee thou therefore Esa. 52.2. shaken out of thy filthy dust, and withall thy heart converted to him, who hath created thee, that Psal. 2.12. When his wrath shall short∣ly burne out, thou mayest be blessed in hoping on him. But if otherwise, eternall paines will be heaped up for thee, where thou shalt be ever tormented and ne∣ver consumed in the cruell jawes of Hell.The repro∣ving of Vortiper. Thou also who like to the sundry co∣loured Parde art divers in manners and diverse in mis∣cheifes,
whose head now weareth hoare, who art seated in a Throne full of deceipts, and from the bo∣tome even to the very top deflowred with sundry de∣testable murders and adul∣teries, a naughty sonne of a good King, as another Manasses sprung from Eze∣chias, Vortiper thou Tyrant of the Demetians why dost thou astonished stearve a∣way? What! doe not such violent gulfes of sinnes (which thou dost swallow up as most pleasant wine, if thou thy selfe art not rather swallowed up by them) is yet satisfie thee, especi∣ally since the end of thy life dayly now also approa∣cheth? Why dost thou
heavily clogge thy misera∣ble soule with a lustfull sinne of all others the fou∣lest, by putting away thine owne wife, and after her honourable death, with a certaine irrecoverable bur∣den of thine impudent daughter? Wast not (I be∣seech thee) the residew of thy life in offending God, because as yet an 2 Cor. 6.2. accepta∣ble time and day of Salvation shineth on the faces of the repentant, wherein thou mayest worke well, that thy Math. 24.20. Flight may not be made in the Winter, or Sabbath. Psal. 33.15. Turne away (according to the Psalmist) from evill, and doe good, seeke forth blessed peace and follow the same, be∣cause the eyes of our Lord
will bee cast upon thee, when thou dost righteous∣nsse, and his eares will bee then open unto thy prayers, and he will not destroy thy memory out of the land of the living, thou shalt cry and he will heare thee, and out of thy tribulations deliver thee, for Christ doth never despise Psal. 50.19. an heart that is contrite and humbled with his feare. Otherwise Esay 66.24. the worme of thy torture shall not dye, and the fire of thy burning be never extingui∣shed.Marc. 9.44. And why art thou tumbled in the old filth of thy naughtinesse,The re∣prooving of Cuneglasse. yea since the very first spring of thy tender youth, thou Beare, thou rider and ruler of ma∣ny, and guider of the cha∣riot
which is the Beares bearour, thou contemner of God, and depressour of his lot Cuneglasse, and by interpretation in Latine a yellow or golden butcher? why dost thou raise so great a warre as well against men as also against God himselfe, against men yea thy Country-men with thine especiall powers, a∣gainst God with thine infi∣nite offences? Why be∣sides other thine innumera∣ble ruines having throwne out of doores thine owne wife, dost thou with the lustfull love, or rather bloc∣kish dulnesse of thy minde, against the Apostles ex∣presse prohibition,Galat. 1.21. denoun∣cing that no adulterers can
be partakers of the King∣dome of heaven, esteeme (according to the Poet) as the exceeding dainties of the celestiall nimphes, her detestable sister, who had vowed unto God the ever∣lasting continency of her widdowhood? Why dost thou provoke with thine often injuries the lamenta∣tions and sighes of Saints, by thy meanes corporally afflicted, which will in time to come like a terrible Lio∣nesse, breake thy bones in peeces? Psal. 36.8 Desist (I beseech thee (as the Prophet saith) from wrath, and leave of thy deadly, and (that which will be) thy selfe tormen∣ting fury, which thou brea∣thest out against heaven
and earth which is against God and his flocke: make them rather with altered mindes to pray for thee, who possesse a power of binding over this. world, when in this world they binde the guilty, and of loosing when they loose the penitent. Tim. 6.17. Be not (as the Apostle saith) proudly wise, nor hope thou in the un∣certainty of riches, but in God who giveth thee many things abundantly, and by the amendment of thy man∣ners purchase unto thy selfe a good foundation for hereaf∣ter, and obtaine a rue, and truely everlasting life, and not a transitory one Other∣wise thou shalt know and see yea in this very world,
how bad and bitter a thing it is for thee to leave thy Lord God, and not have his feare before thine eyes, and in the next, how thou shalt be burned in the foule incompassing flames of endlesse fire, nor yet by any manner of meanes ever dye. For why the soules of the sinfull are as well eternall in perpetuall fire, as the soules of the just in perpetuall joy and glad∣nesse. And likewise O Dragon of the Island,The re∣proofe of Mglocune. O depriver of many Tyrants, as well from their kingdomes as al∣so from their lives, and a∣mong the fore-recited the last in my writing, but the first in thine owne mis∣chiefe,
exceeding many in power, and also in malice, more liberall in giving, more licentious in sinning, boystrous in armes, but stronger in working thine owne foules destruction, Maglocune, to what end art thou (as one Ier. 23.9. Soken in the wine pressed out of the So∣domiticall grape) foolishly moyled in that so ugly old deformity of thine offen∣ces? Why dost thou wil∣fully heape in bands upon thy kingly shoulders, such huge weights of sinnes, not unlike (as I may say) unto the unsupportable burdens of great mountaines? Why dost thou not shew thy selfe unto the King of all kings (who hath made thee
as well in kingdome as also in stature of body higher than almost all the Dukes of Britaine besides) better likewise in vertues than the rest; but on the contrary side for thy sinnes much worser? The certaine affir∣mation of which sinnes, do thou a while with an in∣different eare, heare and listen unto, wherein I will not touch any whitte thy domesticall and higher offences (if yet any of them are light) but onely report those open ones which are spread farre and broade in the knowledge of all men. Didst not thou in the very first entrance of thy youth, most terribly oppresse through sword,
speare, and fire, the King thine uncle together with his most couragious bands of Souldiers, whose coun∣tenances in battell were not much unlike unto young Li∣ons? Little esteeming those words of the Prophet that say; Psal. 54.24. Men of blood and de∣ceite shall not accomplish the middle part of their daies: and were not the sequell of thy sinnes such as insued) yet what revenge shouldest thou expect at the hands of the just Iudge for this onely offence; He also saying by his Prophet: Esa. 33.1 Woe be to thee who spoylest, and shalt not thou thy selfe be spoiled? and thou who killest, shall not thy selfe be killed? and when thou shalt make an end of thy
spoyling, then shall thy selfe ruinate. But when the conceit of this usurping raigne had succeeded according to thine owne hearts wishes, didst not thou being taken with a desire of returning to the right way, day and night as then (perhaps through the deepe remorse of thy sinnefull conscience) chaw first of all, the cudde of thy many meditations about the service of God, and the observance of the rules of Monkes, and af∣terwards make it knowne to the whole world, and for ever vow thy selfe be∣fore Almighty God, and in the sight of Angels and men (breaking as it was thought
those most large nets, wherein fat buls of thy sort are wont to be headlong in∣tangled, and overcomming all temptations of thirst of Kingdomes, Gold, and Sil∣ver, and which is greatest that of thine owne will) and wert professed a Monk without any thought (as thy selfe didst say) of vio∣lating the same, and didst not thou being now be∣come of a crow a dove, like the same bird, when shee sheareth swiftly with her singing wings the empty aire, and avoideth with her often winding turnes, the fell talons of the ravenous hawke, safely recover thy selfe to the cels, and repo∣ses of Saints, as thy most
trusty refuge? Oh how great a joy should it have beene to our Mother the Church, if the enemy of all mankind had not lamen∣tably pulled thee in a sort out of her bosome! Oh how ample fewell of Hea∣venly hope, would have been inkindled in the hearts of desperate sinners, hadst thou remained in thy bles∣sed estate! Oh what, and how great rewards in the Kingdome of Christ would have beene laid up for thy soule against the day of judgement, if that crasty wolfe had not caught thee, who of a wolfe, was now become a Lambe (not much against thine owne will) out of the fold of our Lord, and
made thee of a Lambe, a wolfe like to himselfe, a∣gaine? Oh how great a joy would the conservation of thy salvation have beene to God the holy Father of all Saints, had not the devill the miserable father of all castawaies, as an Eagle of monstrous wings and claws carryed thee captive away against all right and reason, to the unhappy roote of his children? And to be short, as great gladnes and sweet∣nesse, did thy conversion to righteousnesse minister to heaven and earth, as now thy detestable returne, af∣ter the manner of a sicke mastive unto the horrible vomit againe, breedeth griefe and lamentation:
which being done; Rom. 6.13. The members are now become the armours of iniquity for sinne and the devill, which in right sence should have beene busily imployed, as the armours of justice for God: for now with thy li∣stening eares are not heard the praises of God sweetly sounded forth by the plea∣sant voices of Christs Soul∣diers, nor the Organs of ec∣clesiasticall melody, but thine owne praises (which are nothing) rung out after the fashion of Bacchus gid∣dy rout, by the mouthes of thy villanous followers ful∣filled with lies, and also with foming malice, to the utter overthrow of every one of their neighbours, so
as the vessell sometimes prepared for the service of God, is now turned to a ves∣sell of durt, and what was once reputed worthy of Heavenly honour, is now worthily cast into the bot∣tomelesse pit of hell. Nei∣ther yet is thy sensuall mind (which is overcome by the excesse of folly) any whit abated or debarred of his course with committing so great sinnes, but hot and prone (like a young colt that coveteth every pleasant pa∣sture) runneth▪ headlong forward, with irrecovera∣ble fury, through the large fields of offences, in hea∣ping new wickednesse on the head of the old. For the former marriage of thy
first wife (although after thy violated vow of Reli∣gion, she were not lawful∣ly thine) yet being some∣times thine, was now despi∣sed, another, the wife of a man then living, and hee no stranger, but thine own brothers sonne, being in her place beloved. Vpon which occasion that stiffe necke of thine (being al∣ready laden with many bur∣thens of sinnes) is now moreover with two mon∣strous murthers, the one of thy aforesaid Nevew, the other of her who some∣times was thy marryed wife (as with the outragi∣ous extremity of thy sacri∣ledge) from low to lower, and from bad to worser,
bowed, bended, and de∣pressed downe. Afterwards also didst thou accept her, (by whose deceit and sug∣gestion such mighty matter of offences was undergone) publickely, and (as the flat∣tring tongues of thy para∣sites with faigned, but not faithfull words pronounce) lawfully as a widdow, but (as we) say most wickedly to be thine owne in wed∣locke. And therefore what holy man is there, whose bowels being mooved with the narration of such an hi∣story, would not presently break out into weeping and lamentations? What Priest (whose heart lyeth open unto God) would not in∣stantly upon the hearing of
this, with marveilous mour∣ning cry out that saying of the Prophet: Ier. 9.1. Who shall give water to my head, and to mine eyes a fountaine of teares, and I will day and night bewaile those of my people, who are slaughtered. For why full little (alas) hast thou with thine eares once heard that reprehension of the Pro∣phet speaking in this wise: Eccle. 4 1.11. Woe be unto yee (O wicked men) who have left the Law of the most holy God, and if ye shall be borne, your porti∣on shall be to malediction, and if ye die, into malediction shall be your portion, al things that are from the earth, to the earth shall bee converted a∣gaine, so shall the wicked from malediction passe to per∣dition:
(but ever supposed) if they returne not unto our Lord, receiving especially this admonition: Eccle. 21.1. Sonne thou hast offended, adde no farther offence thereunto, but withall, doe thou pray for the forgivenesse of the former. And againe, Eccle. 5.8 Forslow not to be converted unto our Lord, neither yet doe thou put of the same from day to day, for his wrath doth come sud∣denly. Because as the Scrip¦ture saith: Pro. 29.12 When the King heareth the unjust word,Pro. 29.4 all under his dominion become wicked. And, The just King (according to the Prophet) raiseth up his Region. But warnings truely are not wanting to thee, since thou hast for thine instructor the
most eloquent Master, of almost all Britaine. Take heed therefore, lest that which Solomon noteth, be∣falleth not to thee, which is: Eccle. 22.8. Even as he who stir∣reth up a sleeping man out of his heavy sleepe, so is that person who declareth wisdom unto a foole, for in the end of his speech will he say. What hast thou first spoken? Wash thine heart (as it is written) from malice (Oh Ierusalem) that thou maist be saved. De∣spise not (I beseech thee) the unspeakeable mercy of God, calling by his Pro∣phet, the wicked in this sort from their offences Iere. 18.7 I will on the suddvine speake to the Nation, and to the King∣dome, that I may roote out,
and dispearse, and destroy and overthrow. As for the sinner hee doth in this wise exhort him vehemently to pennance. And if the same people shall do pennance from their offence, I will also doe pennance upon the evil which I have said that I would doe against them. And againe, Ier. 18.8. Who will give them such an heart, as they may heare me, and keepe my Comman∣dements, and that it may be well with them all the daies of their lives, And also in the Deut. 32.28. Canticle of Deuterono∣my, A people without coun∣sell and prudence, I wish they would be wise, and under∣stand, and foresee the last of all, how one pursueth a thou∣sand and two put to flight ten
thousands. And againe, our Lord in the Gospell. Mat. 11.28 Come unto me all yee who doe la∣bour and are burthened, and I will make ye rest. Take up my yoake upon you, and learne of me, because I am meeke and humble of heart, and yee shall finde repose in your soules. For if thou dost hearken to these admoniti∣ons, but with deafe eares, if thou contemnest the Pro∣phets, if thou despisest Christ, and (although most base we are) makest no ac∣count of us, so long as with sincere pietie and puritie of minde, we observe the same of the Prophet, that we may not bee found, Esa. 56.10 Dumbe dogges, not able to barke (howsoever I for
mine own particular am not of that singular fortitude, in the spirit and vertue of our Lord as to declare Esa. 58.1. To the house of Iacob their sins and the house of Israel their offences) and so long as wee shall remember that of Salomon.Pro. 24.24. Who so termeth the wicked to be just, shall be accursed among the people, and odious to nations, for they who reproove shall have bet∣ter hopes.Eccle. 24.27 And againe, Re∣spect not with reverence thy neighbour in his ruine, nor spare thou to speake in time of Salvation. And as long also as wee forget not this,Pr. 24.11. Withdraw them away by force, who are led to death, and forbeare not to redeeme them who are murthered;
because as the same Pro∣phet saith Pro. 11.4 Riches shall not profit in the day of wrath, but justice delivereth from death. And Pro. 11.31. 1 Pet. 4.18. If the just true∣ly be hardly saved, where shall the wicked, and sinner ap∣peare? If thou scornest us and all these, the darke∣some flood of hell shall without all doubt eternally drowne thee in that deadly whirlepoole, and those most terrible fiery streames that shall ever torment and never consume thee, and then shall the palpable knowledge of these paines, and sorrow for sinnes bee altogether to late and un∣profitable unto him, who as now in this acceptable time and day of Salvation
deferreth his conversion unto the righteous way of of life. And here truely if not before was this so dole∣full and lamentable an hi∣story of the miseries of our time, to have received a conclusion, that our mouth might no further discourse of the workes of men; But that we may not be esteemed fearefull or overwearied, whereby we might the lesse carefully avoyde that saying of Esay, which is, Esa. 5.20. Woe be unto them who call good evill, and evill good, placing darkenesse for light, and light for darkenesse, bit∣ter for sweete, and sweete for bitter,Mat. 13.13. who seeing see not and hearing heare not, whose herts are overshadowed
with a certaine thicke and blacke cloud of vices! We will breefely set downe, what and how great threat∣nings are denounced (a∣gainst these five aforesayd lascivious horses, the fran∣ticke followers of Pharaoh, through whom his army is wilfully urged forward to their utter destruction in the red sea, and also against such others) by the sacred Oracles, with whose holy testimonies (as with a faire roofe) the frame of this our little worke, may be most assuredly covered, that it be not subject to the showres of the envious, which o∣therwise would be mainely powred thereupon. Let therefore the holy Pro∣phets
(who have beene un∣to mortall men the mouth in a sort) of God, and the Organ of the holy Ghost, forbidding evils, and favou∣ring goodnesse) answere for us as well now as in that before, against the stub∣borne and proud Princes of this our age, that they may not say we menace them with such threates, and so great terrors, onely of our owne invention, and over∣busie talking rashnesse. For to no wise man is it doubt∣full how farre more grie∣vous the sinnes of this our time are, than those of the first age, the Apostle say∣ing Any one transgressing the law,Heb. 10.28. being convicted by two or three witnesses, shall
dye, how much worser punish∣ments thinke ye then that hee deserveth, who shall trample under his foote the Sonne of God? And he first of all appeareth before us, Samu∣el (by the Commandement of God) the stablisher of a lawfull kingdome, dedica∣ted to God before his birth, undoubtedly knowne by admirable signes, to bee a true Prophet unto all the people, from Dan even to Bersheba, out of whose mouth the Holy Ghost thundreth to all the Poten∣tates of the world, by de∣nouncing unto Saul the first king of the Hebrews, onely because he did not accom∣plish some matters com∣manded him from our
Lord in this sort.1 Sam. 13.13. Thou hast done foolishly, neither yet hast thou kept the Commande∣ments of our Lord thy God, that he hath given thee in charge; which if thou hadst not commited, even now had our Lord prepared thy raigne over Israel for ever, but thy kingdome shall no farther arise. And what did hee commit adultery, or any ab∣hominable murder like to the offences of this time? No truely, but broake in part a Commandement, because as well one of ours noteth; The question is not of the quality of the sinne, but of the violating of the pre∣cept. Also when he endea∣vored to answere (as hee thought) the objections
and after the fashion of men wisely to make defences for his offences on this wise; Yea I have heard the voyce of our Lord,1 Sam. 15.20 and walked in the way through the which hee hath sent me: with this re∣prehension was he corre∣cted by him: What will our Lord have burnt offerings or oblations,1 Sam. 15.22 and not rather that the voyce of our Lord should be obeyed? Obedience is truely better than oblati∣ons, and to hearken unto him, better than to offer the fat of Rammes. Because as the sinne of Southsaying, so is it to re∣sist, and as the offence of Ido∣latry not to obey; in regard therefore thou hast cast away the Word of our Lord, hee hath also cast thee away that
thou be not King. And a lit∣tle after.1. Sam. 15.28. Our Lord hath this day rent the Kingdome of Israel from thee, and delive∣red it up to thy neighbour, a man better than thy selfe. The triumpher of Israel truely will not spare, and will not be bowed with repentance, neither yet is hee a man that he may be penitent doe pennance, (sup∣posed ever) upon the hard stony hearts of the wicked: Wherein it is to bee noted how he saith, that to be dis∣obedient unto God is the sinne of Idolatry. Let not therefore our wicked trans∣gressors (while they doe not openly sacrifice to the gods of the Gentiles) flat∣ter themselves that they are not Idolaters, so long
as they treade like swine the most precious pearles of Christ under their feete. But although this one ex∣ample as an invincible affir∣mation might abundantly suffice to correct the wic∣ked: Yet, that in the mouthes of many witnesses all the offences of Britaine may bee approved, let us passe to the rest. What chanced to David for num∣bring his people, the Pro∣phet Gad speaking unto him in this sort? Thus saith our Lord. The choise of three is offered thee,2 Sam. 24.12. Elect to thee one of these which thou wilt, that I may execute it upon thee. Either shall there befall thee a famine for seaven yeares, or three monethes shalt thou
flye thine enemies and they pursue thee, or certainely there shall be three dayes Pe∣stilence in thy land. For being brought into great streights upon this conditi∣on, and willing rather to fall into the hands of God who is mercifull, than into those of men, he was hum∣bled with the slaughter of LXX thousand of his sub∣jects, and unlesse with the affection of an Apostolike charity, he had desired to dye himselfe for his Coun∣try-men, that the Plague might not further consume them,2 Sam. 24.17. by saying, I am the same person that have offēdd I the sheepheard have dealt unjustly: these who are sheepe what have they sinned? Let
thy hand (I beseech thee) be turned against mee, and a∣gainst the house of my Fa∣ther. He should have pur∣ged the unadvised pride of his heart with his owne death. For what doth the Scripture afterwards de∣clare of his Sonne.1 Reg. 11.6. And Solomon wrought what was not pleasing before our Lord, and he did not supply in his place, that hee might as his Father follow our Lord. And our Lord said unto him; Because thou hast thus beha∣ved thy selfe,1 Reg. 11.11. and not obser∣ved my covenant and pre∣cepts, which I have comman∣ded thee, breaking it asunder; I will divide thy Kingdome, and give the same unto thy Servant. Heare now like∣wise
what fell upon the two sacrilegious Kings of Israel, (even such as ours are) Ie∣roboam, and Baasa, unto whom the sentence and doome of our Lord, is by the Prophet in this sort di∣rected: For what cause have I exalted thee a Prince over Israel, 1 Reg. 14.7. in regard they have provoked me in their vani∣ties. 1 Reg. 16.2, 3, 4. Behold I will stirre up after Baasha and after his house, and I will give over his house as the house of Iero∣boam the Sonne of Nebat. whoso of his blood shall dye in the City, the dogges shall eate him, and the dead carkasse of his in the field, shall the foules of the aire devoure. What doth hee also threa∣ten unto that wicked King
of Israel, a fellow souldier of the former band (by whose collusion and his wives deceit, innocent Na∣both, was for his Fathers Vineyard oppressed) tal∣king by the holy mouth of that Elias, yea the selfe∣same mouth that was in∣structed with the fiery speech of our Lord. Thou hast killed,1 Reg▪ 21.19. moreover like∣wise thou hast possessed, and after these thou wilt adde yet more. Thus saith our Lord, in this very place, wherein the dogges have licked the blood of Naboth, they shall lick up thy blood also. Which that it fell out afterwards in that very sort we have cer∣taine experience. But least perchance (according as it
befell unto the aforesaid A∣chab) The lying spirit which pronounceth vaine things,1 Reg. 22.22. in the mouthes of your Pro∣phets may seduce ye, harken ye to the speeches of the Prophet Michaias.1 Reg. 22.23. Behold God hath suffered the spirit of lying to posssse the mouths of all thy Prophets that doe here remaine, and our Lord hath pronounced evil against thee. For even now it is certaine there are some Doctors replenished with a contrary spirit, preaching and affirming rather naugh∣ty pleasure then truth: whose words are softer then oyle,Psa. 54.22 Iere. 6.14. &. 8.11. and the selfe same are darts, who say, peace, peace and there shall be no peace to them, who persevere in
sinnes, as the Prophet in an∣other place, on this wise speaketh. It is not for the wicked to rejoyce saith our Lord.Esa 48.22 & 57.21. Azarias also the sonne of Obed, did speake unto Asa, who returned from the slaughter of the Army of ten hundred thou∣sand Ethiopians,2 Para. 15.2. saying, Our Lord is with yee, while ye re∣maine with him, and if yee will seeke him out, he will be found by ye, and if ye will leave him, he will forsake ye. For if Iehoshaphat but yeelding assistance unto a wicked King, was thus re∣proved by the Prophet Ie∣hu, the sonne of Anany, saying.2 Paral. 19.2. If thou givest aid to a sinner, or lovest them whom our Lord doth hate,
the wrath of God doth there∣fore hang over thee, what shall become of them, who are fettered in the proper snares of their owne offen∣ces? whose sinnes but not whose soulēs, we must of necessity hate, if wee will fight in the Army of our Lord,Psal. 96.10 the Psalmist saying, Hate ye evill, who love our Lord. What was said to the sonne of the afore rēcited Iosaphat, named Ioram, that most horrible murtherer (who being himselfe a ba∣stard, slew his noble bre∣thren, that hee might pos∣sesse the throne in their place) by the Prophet Eli∣as, the wagon and wagoner of Israel?2 Paral. 21 21. Thus speaketh (quoth he) the Lord God of
thy Father David. Because thou hast not walked in the way of thy Father Iosaphat, and in the waies of Asa the King of Iudah, but hast made thy passage through the wayes of the Kings of Israel, and in unsensiblenesse according to the behaviour of the house of Achab, and hast moreo∣ver killed thy brethren, the sonnes of Iosaphat, men farre better then thy selfe; behold our Lord shall strike thee and thy children with a mighty plague.2 Paral. 21.25. And a little after∣wards. And thou shalt be marveilous sicke, of a disease of thy belly, until the entrailes of thy belly shal together with the malady it selfe from day to day passe forth away from thee? And listen also what
the Prophet Zachary the sonne of Ioiades menaced to Ioas the King of Israel, lea∣ving our Lord even as ye now do, who arising, spoke in this manner to the Peo∣ple; Thus saith our Lord,2 Paral. 24.20. why doe ye transgresse the Commandements of our Lord and doe not prosper? Because ye have left our Lord, he will also leave you. What shall I mention of Esay, the first and chiefe of the Prophets, who beginneth the proeme and enterance of his Pro∣phesie, or rather vision, say∣ing in this sort; Heare O yee Heavens,Esa. 1.2. and O thou earth conceive in thine eares, be∣cause our Lord hath spoken, I have nourished children, and exalted them, but they
themselves have despised me. The Oxe hath knowne his ow∣ner, and the Asse the man∣ger of his Master, but Isra∣el hath not knowne me, and my people hath not under∣stood. From this place for∣ward all the senten∣ces of Esay are omitted in another Booke. Esa. 1.8. And after a few words, framing threatnings answerable to so great a folly, he saith: The Daugh∣ter of Sion shall be uterly left as a shelter in the Vineyard, and as a hovell in the Cow∣cumber Garden, and a City that is sacked. And especial-conventing and accusing the Princes,Esa. 1.10. he saith, Heare the word of our Lord (O yee Princes of Sodome,) perceive ye the Law of our Lord, O yee people of Gomorrah. Where truely it is to be noted, that unjust Kings are tearmed
the Princes of Sodome, for our Lord forbidding sacri∣fices and gifts to be offered unto him by such where we with greedy covetousnesse receive those offerings which in all Nations are displeasing unto God, and to our owne destruction suf∣fer them not to be bestow∣ed on the poore and needy speaketh to them who la∣den with abundance of riches, are likewise given to the filth of offences on this wise.Esa. 1.13. Offer not any more your sacrifice in vaine, your incense is abomination unto me. And againe he denoun∣ceth.Esa. 1.15. And when yee shall stretch out your hands, I will turne away mine eyes from ye, and when ye shall multi∣ply
your prayers, I will not heare. And hee declareth wherfore he doth this, say∣ing; Your hands are full of blood. And likewise show∣ing how he may be appea∣sed, he saith,Esa. 1.16. Be ye washed, be ye cleane, take away the e∣vill of your thoughts from mine eyes, leave of to deale perversly, learne to doe well, seeke for the judgement, suc∣cour the oppressed, doe justice to the pupill or Orphan. And then assuming as it were the part of a reconciling appea∣ser, he adding saith,Esa. 1.18. If your sinnes shall be as scarlet, they shall be made white as Snow: & if they shal be as red as the little worme, they shall be as white as wooll. If ye shall be willing and will heare me, ye
shall feede on the good things of the Land, but if ye wil not, and shall provoke mee unto wrath, the sword shall de∣voure ye. Receive ye, heare the true and publike avou∣cher witnessing without a∣ny falshood or flattery, the reward of your good and e∣vill▪ not like the soothing humble lippes of your Pa∣rasites whispering poysons into your eares. And also directing his sentence a∣gainst ravenous judges, he saith thus.Esa. 1.23. Thy Princes are unfaithfull, companions of theeves, all love gifts, hunt after rewards, they doe no ju∣stice to the Orphan, the wi∣dowes cause entreth not unto them. For this saith our Lord God of hosts, the strong one
of Israel. Alas, I will take consolation upon my foes, and be revenged upon mine ene∣mies, and the hainous sinners shall be broken to powder and offenders together with them and all who have left our Lord, shall be consumed. And afterwards,Esa. 2.11. The eyes of the lofty man shall bee brought low, and the heighth of men hath bowed downe. And a∣gaine,Esa. 3.11. Woe be to the wicked, evill be fall him, for he shall be rewarded according to his handy workes. And a little after, Woe be unto ye who a∣rise earely to follow drunken∣nesse,Esa. 5.11. and to drinke even to the very evening, that ye may vapouring fume with Wine. The Harpe, and the Lyra, and the Taber, and the Pipe,
and Wine are in your ban∣quets, and the worke of our Lord ye respect not, neither yet consider ye the workes of his hands. Therefore is my people led captive away, be∣cause they have not had know∣ledge, and their Nobles have perished with famine, and their multitude hath withe∣red away with thirst. There∣fore hath hell enlarged and dilated his spirit, and without measure opened his mouth, and his strong ones, and his people, and his lofty and glo∣rious ones, shal descend down unto him. And afterwards, Woe be unto ye who are migh∣ty for the drinking of wine,Esa. 5.22. and strong men for the pro∣curing of drunkennesse, who justifie the wicked for re∣wards,
and deprive the just man of his justice. For this cause even as the tongue of the fire devoureth the stub∣bell, and as the heate of the flame burneth up, so shall their roote be as the ashes, and their branch shall rise up us the dust. For they have cast away the law of our Lord of hosts, and despised the speech of the holy one of Israel. In all these the fury of our Lord is not turned away, but as yet his hand is stretched out. And somewhat after debating of the day of judgement and the unspeakeable feare of offendors, he saith. Howle ye out,Esa. 13.6. because the day of our Lord is neere at hand (if then neere, what shall it now be thought to be) in regard
destruction shall proceed from God. For this shall all hands be dissolved, and every mans heart shall wither away, and be bruised, small tortures and dolours shall hold them, as a woman in labour so shall they be grieved, every man shall at his neighbour stand asto∣nished, burned faces shall be their countenances. Behold, the day of our Lord shal come, cruell and full of indignati∣on, and of wrath, and fury, to turne the earth into a de∣sert, and breake her sinners in small peeces from off her, because the starres of Heaven and the brightnesse of them, shall not unfold their light, the Sunne in his ri∣sing shall bee covered over with darknes, and the Moone
shall not shine in her season, and I will visite upon the e∣vils of the world, and against the wicked their owne ini∣quity, and I will make the pride of the unfaithfull to cease, and the arrogancy of the strong, I will bring full low. And againe, Behold, our Lord will disperse the earth,Esa. 24 1. & he will strip her na∣ked, and afflict her face, and scatter her inhabitants, and as the people, so shall be the Priest, and as the slave so shal be his Lord as the hand∣maid so shall be her Lady, as the purchaser so shall be the seller, as the usurer, so shall be he that borroweth, as he who demandeth, so shall be he that oweth. With dispersing shall the earth be scattered,
and with sacking shall she be spoyled. For our Lord hath spoken this word. The earth hath bewailed, and hath flee∣ted away, the world hath run to nothing, she is weakned by her inhabitants, because they have transgressed lawes, changed right, brought to ruine the eternall truce. For this shall malediction devour the earth. And afterwards, They shall lament all of them who doe in heart rejoyce,Esa. 24.7. the delight of the timbrells hath ceased, the sound of the gladsome shall be silent, the sweet∣nesse of the Harpe shall be hu∣shed, they shall not with sing∣ing drinke their wine, bitter shall the potion be to the drinkers thereof. The Cittie of vanitie is wasted, every
house is shut up, no man en∣tring in; an outcry shall be in the streetes upon wine, all gladnesse is forsaken, the joy of the land is transferred, so∣litarinesse is left in the town, and calamitie shall oppresse the gates, because these things shall be in the middest of the land, and in the middest of the people. And somewhat afterwards,Esa. 24.6. Swarving from the truth, have they wandred out of the right way, with the stragling of transgressors have they gone astray. Feare and intrapping falls, and a snare upon thee who art the inhabitant of the earth. And it shall come to passe: Who so shall flye from the voyce of the feare, shall tumble downe into the intrapping pit, and
who so shall deliver himselfe out of the downefall, shall bee caught in the intangling snare: because the flood-gates from aloft shall be ope∣ned, and the foundations of the earth shall be shaken. With bruising shall the earth be broken, with commotion shall she be moved, with tos∣sing shall she be tottred like to a drunken man, and she shall be taken away as if shee were a pavilion of one nights pitching, and her iniquitie shall hang heavie upon her, and she shall fall done, and shall not attempt to rise a∣gaine. And it shall be, that our Lord in the same day shall visit on the warfare of heaven in the high place, and on the Kings of the earth,
who are upon the earth, and they shall be gathered toge∣ther in the bundle of one bur∣then into the Lake, and shall there be shut up in prison, and after many dayes shall they be visited. And the Moone shall blush, and the Sunne be confounded, when our Lord of hosts shall raigne in mount Sion and in Ierusalem, and be glorified in the sight of his Seniors. And after a while, yeelding a reason why hee threatneth in that sort, he saith thus, Behold the hand of our Lord is not shortned that he cannot save,Esay. 59.1. neither yet is his eare made heavy that he may not heare. But your iniquities have divided be∣tweene ye and your God, ad your offences have hid his
face from yee, that he might not heare. For your hands are defiled with blood, and your fingers with iniquitie: Your lippes have spoken ly∣ing, and your tongue uttereth iniquity. There is not who calleth on justice, neither is there he who judgeth truely, but they trust in nothing, and speake vanities, and have conceived greefe, and brought forth iniquity. And a little after;Esa. 59.6. Their workes are un∣profitable, and the worke of iniquity in their hands, their feete runne into evill, and make haste that they may shed the innocent blood; their thoughts are unprofitable thoughts, spoyle and confusion are in their wayes, and the way of peace they have
not knowne, and in their steps there is no judgement, their pathes are made crooked unto them, every one who treadeth in them is ignorant of peace; in this respect is judgment removed farre off from yee, and justice taketh no hold of yee.Esa. 59.14. And after a few words; And judge∣ment hath been turned back, and justice hath stoode a farre off, because truth hath fallen down in the streets, & equitie could not enter in, and truth is turned to oblivion, and who so hath departed from e∣vill, hath layne open to spoyle. And our Lord hath seene, and it was not pleasing in his eyes, because there is not judgement. And thus farre may it suffice among
many, to recite a few sen∣tences out of the Prophet Esay. Now truely doe ye a while with diligent eares hearken unto him (who was foreknowne before he was formed in the belly, sanctified before hee came forth of the wombe, and appointed a Prophet in all Nations) Ieremiah I meane, what he hath pronounced of foolish people and cruell Kings, beginning moderat∣ly his Prophesie in this manner. And the Word of God was spoken unto me say∣ing;Ierem. 2.2. Goe and cry in the eares of Ierusalem, and thou shalt pronounce. Heare the Word of our Lord thou house of Ia∣cob,
and all ye kindreds of the house of Israel; Thus saith our Lord; What iniqui∣ty have your fathers found in me, who have beene farre re∣moved from me, and walked after vanitie, and are become vaine, and have not sayd, Where is he who made us a∣scend out of the Land of Egypt? In ano∣ther booke this first sentence of Ieremy is onely men∣tioned, and the rest all omitted. Ierem. 2.20. And after a few words; From the beginning of thine Age thou hast bro∣ken my yoake, violated my bands, and sayd, I will not serve, I have planted thee my chosen vine, all true seede. How art thou therefore con∣verted into naughtinesse O strange Vine? If thou shalt wash thee with Niter, and multiply unto thee the hearbe Borith, thou art spotted in
my sight with thine iniquity, saith our Lord. And after∣wards; Why will yee contend with me in judgement?Ier. 2.29. Ye have all forsaken me saith our Lord, in vaine have I corrected your children, they have not received discipline. Heare ye the Word of our Lord. Am I made a solita∣rinesse unto Israel, or a late∣ward Land? why therefore hath my people sayd, we have departed, we will come no more unto thee? What doth the Virgin forget her orna∣ment, or the Spouse her gor∣get? my people truely hath forgotten mee innumerable dayes. Ier. 4.22. Because my people are foolish, they have not knowne me, they are unwise and mad children. They are wise to doe
evill, but to doe well they have beene ignorant. Then the Prophet speaketh in his owne person saying; O Lord thine eyes doe respect faith, thou hast stroken them, and they have not sorrowed, thou hast broken them, and they have refused to receive discipline, they have made their faces harder than the rocke, and will not returne. And also our Lord:Ier. 5.20. De∣clare ye this same to the house of Iacob, and make it to bee heard in Iuda, saying: Heare ye foolish people who have no heart, who having eyes see not, and eares heare not. Ye will therefore not dread me saith our Lord, and yee will not conceive griefe from my countenance, who have
placed the sand the bound of the sea, an eternall comman∣dement which she shall not breake, and her waves shall be moved, and they cannot, and her sourges shall swell, and yet not passe the same. But to this people is framed an incredulous and an exas∣perating heart, they have re∣tired and gone their wayes, and not in their heart sayd, Let us feare our Lord God. And againe; Because there are found among my people wicked ones, framing wiles to intangell as if they were foulers,Ier. 5.26. setting snares and ginnes to catch men; As a net that is full of birds, so are their houses fullfilled with deceites. Therefore are they magnified and enriched, they
are become grosse and fat, and have neglected my speeches most vildly, the orphans cause they have not senten∣ced, and the justice of the poore they have not adjudged. What shall I not visit over these saith our Lord? or shall not my soule be reven∣ged upon such a nation? But God forbid, that ever shold befall unto you, which fol∣loweth, Thou shalt speake all these words unto them,Ier. 7.27. and they shall not heare thee, and thou shalt call them, and they shall not answer thee, and thou shalt say unto them; This is the Nation that hath not heard the voice of their Lord God, nor yet received disci∣pline, faith hath perished, and been taken away from out
their mouth. And after some few speeches, Whoso falleth doth he not arise againe,Iere. 8.4. and who so is turned away, shall he not returne againe? why therefore is this people in Ie∣rusalem, with a contentious aversion alienated? they have apprehended lying, and they will not come backe againe. I have beene attentive, and harkened diligently, no man speaketh what is good. There is none who doth pennance for his sinne, saying, What have I done? All are turned unto their owne course, like a horse passing with violence into battle. The Kite in the sky hath knowne her time, the Turtle and Swallow and Storke have kept the season of their comming, but my peo∣ple
hath not known the judge∣ment of God. And the Pro∣phet being strucken into feare, with so wonderfull a blindnesse, and unspeakea∣ble drunkennesse of the Sa∣crilegious, and lamenting them who did not lament themselves (even according to the present behaviour of these our unfortunate Ty∣rants) he beseecheth of our Lord, that an augmentati∣on of teares might be gran∣ted him, speaking in this manner;Iee. 8.21. I am contrite upon the contrition of the daugh∣ter of my people, astonishment hath possessed me: is there no gumme in Galaad, or is there no Physition there? Why therefore is not the wound of the daughter of my people
healed? Who shall give wa∣ter unto my head, and to mine eyes a fountaine of teares, and I will day and night bewaile the slaughtered of my people? who will grant me in the wil∣dernes the Inne of passengers, and I will utterly leave my people, and depart from them, because they are all of them a∣dulterers, a roote of offenders & they have bent their tong as the bow of lying, and not of truth, they are comforted in the earth, because they have passed from evil into evill, & not known me saith our Lord. And againe:Iere. 9.13. And our Lord hath said, Because they have forsaken my law, which I have given them, and not heard my voice, nor walked thereafter, and have wandred away
after the wickednesse of their owne heart, in that respect our Lord of hostes the God of Isra∣el, saith these words, Behold I will feede this people with wormewood, & give them to drinke the water of gall. And a little after (speaking in the person of God) See there∣fore thou doe not pray for this people,Iere. 11.14 nor assume thou for them praise and prayer, be∣cause I will not heare in the time of their outcry unto me, and of their affliction. What then shall now our misera∣ble Governours doe, these few who found out the nar∣row way and left the large, were from God forbiden to powre out their prayers for such as persevered in their evils, & so highly provoked
his wrath, against whom on the contrary side when they returned with all their hearts unto God (his divine Majesty being unwilling that the soule of man should perish, but calling backe the castaway that he should not utterly be destroyed) the same Prophets could not procure the Heavenly revenge, because not Ionas, when hee desired the like most earnestly against the Ninevites, could obtaine it. But in the meane while o∣mitting our owne words, let us rather heare what the propheticall trumpet soun∣deth in our eares speaking thus:Iere. 13.22 If thou shalt say in thy heart, why have these evils befalne? For the multitude
of thine iniquities. If the E∣thiopian can change his skin, or the Parde his sundry spots, ye may doe also well when ye have learned evill (supposed ever) because ye will not. And afterwards:Iere. 14.10 These words doth our Lord say to this people, who have loved to move their feete, and have not rested, and not pleased our Lord; now shall he remem∣ber their iniquities, and visit their offences, and our Lord said unto me, Pray thou not for this people to worke their good, when they shall fast, I will not heare their prayers: nd if they offer burnt sacri∣fices and oblations, I will not eceive them. And againe, And our Lord said unto me;Iere. 15.1. f Moses and Samuel shall
stand before me, my soule is not bent to this people, cast them out away from my face, and let them depart. And af∣ter a few words: Who shall have pitty on thee Ierusalem,Iere. 15.5. or who shall be sorrowfull for thee, or who shall goe to pray for thy peace? Thou hast left me (saith our Lord) and gone away backeward, and I will stretch forth my hand over thee, and kill thee. And somewhat after:Iere. 18.11 Thus saith our Lord, Behold I doe ima∣gine a thought against you, let every man returne from his evill course, and direct ye streight your waies and en∣deavours, Who said, we de∣spaire, we will goe after our owne thoughts, and every one of us doe the naughtinesse of
his evill heart. Thus there∣fore saith our Lord. Aske the Gentiles, who hath heard such horrible matters, which the Virgin Israel hath too often committed? Shall there faile from the rocke of the field, the snow of Libanus? or can the waters be drawne dry that gush out colde and flowing? because my people hath forgotten me. And somewhat also after this, propounding unto them an election, he speaking saith, Thus saith our Lord,Iere. 22.3. Doe ye judgement and justice, and deliver him who by power is oppressed out of the hand of the malicious accuser; and for the stranger, and orphan, and widdow, doe not provoke their sorrow, neither yet
worke ye unjustly the griefe of others, nor shed ye out the innocent blood. For if indeed ye shall accomplish this word, there shall enter in through the gates of this house, Kings of the linage of David, sitting upon his throne. But if ye will not harken unto these words, by my selfe I have sworne (saith our Lord) that this house shall be turned into a desart. And againe,Iere. 22.24 (for he spoke of a wicked King) I live (saith our Lord) if so be that Iechonias shall be a Ring on my right hand, I will plucke him thence away, and give him over into the hands of them who seeke his life. Moreover holy Abraham cryeth out saying:Abac. 2.12 Woe be unto them who build a City in
blood, and prepare a towne in iniquities, saying: Are not these things from our Al∣mighty Lord? and many peo∣ple have failed in fire, and many Nations have beene di∣minished. And thus com∣plaining, hee beginneth his prophesie:Abac. 1.2. How long (O Lord) shall I call, and thou wilt not heare? shall I cry out unto thee, to what end hast thou given mee labours and griefes, to behold misery and impiety? And on the other side;Abac. 1.3. And judgement was sat upon, and the Iudge hath taken in regard hereof, the Law is rent in peeces, and udgement is not brought ful∣ly to his conclusion, because he wicked through power readeth the just underfoote.
In this respect hath passed forth perverse judgement. And marke yee also what blessed Osee the Prophet speaketh of Princes saying:Osee 8.1. For that they have trans∣gressed my covenant, and or∣dained against my Law, and exclaimed out. Wee have knowne thee, because thou art against Israel, they have per∣secuted good, as if it were e∣vill, Osee 8 4. They have raigned to themselves and not by mee, they have held a Principality, neither yet have they ac∣knowledged me. And heare ye likewise the holy Pro∣phet Amos, in this sort threatning:Amos 2 4. In three hainous offences of the sons of Iudah, and in foure I will not con∣vert them, for that they have
cast away the Law of our Lord, and not kept his Com∣mandements, but their vani∣ties have seduced them. And I will send fire upon Iudah, and it shall eate the foundati∣ons of Ierusalem. Amos 2.6. Thus saith our Lord; In three grievous sinnes of Israel, and in foure I will not convert them, for that they have sold the just for money, and the poore man for shooes, which they tread upon the dust of the earth, and with buffets they did beate the heads of the poore, and have eschewed the way of the hum∣ble. And after a few words: Seeke our Lord and ye shall live,Amos 5.6. that the house of Ioseph may not shine as fire, and the flame devoure it, and he shall not be, that can extinguish
it. Amo. 5.10 The house of Israel hath hated him who rebuketh in the gates, and abhorred the upright word. Which A∣mos being forbidden that he should not prophesie in Israel, without any fawning flattery, answering saith: I was not a Prophet, nor yet the sonne of a Prophet,Amos 7.14 but a Goate herd, I was plucking Sicamores, and our Lord tooke me from my herd, and our Lord said unto me, Goe thy way and prophesie against my people of Israel, and now heare thou the Word of our Lord (For hee directed his speech unto the King) Thou sayest, doe not Prophesie a∣gainst Israel, and thou shalt not assemble troopes against the house of Iacob. For which
cause our Lord saith thus, Thy wife in the City shall play the harlot, and thy sonnes and daughters shall dye by the sword, and thy ground be measured by the cord, and thou in a polluted land shalt end thy life, but for Israel, shee shall be led from his owne Country a captive. And af∣terwards:Amos 8.4. Heare therefore these words, ye who doe out∣ragiously afflict the poore, and practise your mighty power against the needy of the earth, who say, When shall the moneth passe over that we may purchase, and the Sab∣baths that wee may open the treasuries. And within a few words after:Amos 8.7. Our Lord doth sweare against the pride of Iacob, if he shall neglecting
forget your actions, and if in these the earth shall not be disturbed, and every inha∣bitant thereof fall to lamen∣tation, and the finall end as a flood ascend, and I will turn your festivall dayes into wai∣ling, and cast on the loynes of every one hairecloth, and on the head of every man baldnesse, and make him as the mourning of one over his beloved, and those who are with him, as the day of sor∣row.Amos 9.10. And againe: In the sword shall die all the sinners of my people, who say, Evils shall not approch, nor yet shall light upon us. And li∣sten ye likewise, what holy Micheas the Prophet hath spoken saying:Mich. 6.10. Hearken ye Tribes. And what shall a∣dorne
the City? shall not fire? and the house of the wicked hoording up unjust treasures, and with injury unrighte∣ousnesse. If the wrongfull dealer shall be justified in the ballance, & deceitful weights in the scales, by which they have heaped up their riches in ungodlinesse. And hearken also what threates the fa∣mous Prophet Sophonias thundereth out together:Sopho. 1.14. Neere draweth on (saith he) the great day of our Lord, neere it is at hand, and very swiftly approcheth. The voice of the day of our Lord is ap∣pointed to be bitter and migh∣ty, that day, a day of wrath, a day of tribulation and ne∣cessity, a day of clouds and mist, a day of the trumpet and
outcry, a day of misery and extermination, a day of dark∣nesse and dimnesse, upon the strong Cities, and high cor∣ners. And I will bring men to tribulation, and they shall goe as if they were blinde, be∣cause they have offended our Lord, and I will powre out their blood as dust, and their flesh as the dung of Oxen, and their silver and gold shall not be able to deliver them in the day of the wrath of our Lord. And in the fire of his zeale shall the whole earth be con∣sumed, when the Lord shall accomplish his absolute end, and bring solitarinesse upon all the inhabitants of the earth. Come together and be joyned in one, thou Nation without Discipline, before ye
be made as the fading flowre, before the wrath of our Lord falleth upon ye. And give eare also unto that which the Prophet Aggeus spea∣keth on this wise:Aggei. 2.22 Thus saith our Lord, I will once moove the Heaven, & Earth, & Sea, and dry land, and I wil drive away the Thrones of Kings, and roote out the powre of the Kings of the Gentiles, and I will chase away the chariots of those who mount upon them. Now also behold ye what Zacharias the sonne of Addo, that chosen Pro∣phet said, beginning his prophesie on this manner: Returne ye to me,Zach. 1.3. and I will returne unto ye, (saith our Lord) and be not like your Fathers, to whom the former
Prophets have imputed say∣ing, Thus saith our Almigh∣ty Lord, Turne away from your waies, and they have not marked whereby they might obediently heare me. And afterwards: And the Angell asked me,Zach. 5.2. what dost thou see? and I said, I see a flying sythe, which contai∣neth in length twenty cubits. The malediction which hath proceeded upon the face of the whole earth: because every one of her theeves shall be pu∣nished even to the very death, and I will throw him away saith our Almighty Lord, & he shall enter into the house of fury, and into the house of swearing falshood in my name.Malac. 4.1. Holy Malachy the Prophet also saith, Behold
the day of our Lord shal come inflamed as a furnace, and all proud men, and all workers of iniquity shall be as stubble, and the approching day of our Lord of hostes shall set them on fire, which shall not leave a roote nor a bud of them. And hearken ye also what holy Iob debateth of the beginning and end of the ungodly,Iob 21.7. saying: For what purpose doe the wicked live, and have dishonestly worne even to old age, and their issue hath beene according to their owne desire, and their sonnes before their faces, and their houses are fruitfull, and no feare nor yet the scourge of our Lord is upon them. Their Cow hath not beene abortive, their great with young, hath
brought forth her young ones and not missed, but remai∣neth as an eternall breede: and their children rejoyce, and taking the Psaltery and Harpe, have finished their dayes in felicity, and fal∣len peaceable a sleepe downe into hell. Doth God there∣fore not behold the workes of the wicked? Not so truely;Iob 21.17. But the can∣dle of the ungodly shall be ex∣tinguished, d destruction shall fall upon them, and do∣lors as of one in childbirth, shall with hold them from wrath; and they shall be as chaffe before the wind, and as the dust which the whirle∣wind hath carryed away. Let all goodnes faile his children, let his eyes behold his owne
slaughter, nor yet by our Lord let him be redeemed. And a little after he saith of the same men;Iob 24.2. Who have rave∣nously taken the flocke with the shepheard, and driven away the beast of the Orphans and engaged the Oxe of the Widdow, and deceiving, have declined from the way of ne∣cessity. They have reaped o∣ther mens fields before the time, the poore have laboured in the Vineards of the mighty without hyre and meate, they have made many to sleepe na∣ked without garments of the covering of their life they have bereaved them. And somewhat afterwards, when hee had throughly understood their workes, he delivered them over to
darkenesse. Let therefore his portion be accursed from the earth,Iob 24.18. let his plantings bring forth witherings; let him for this be rewarded ac∣cording to his dealings: Iob 24.20. Let every wicked man like the unsound wood be broken in peeces. For arising in his wrath hath he overthrown the impotent. Wherefore truely Iob 24.22 shall he have no trust of his life, when he shall beginne to grow diseased, let him not hope for health, but fall into languishing. For his pride hath beene the hurt of many, and he is become decayed and rotten, as the mallowes in the scorching heate, or as the yeare of corne when it falleth off from his stubble. And af∣terwards; If his children
shall be many, they shall be turned to the slaughter,Iob 27.14. and if he gather together silver as if it were earth, and like∣wise purifie his gold as if it were durt, all these same shall the just obtaine. Heare yee moreover what blessed Es∣dras that Library of the Law, threatneth in his dis∣course on this wise.4 Esd. 15.22. Thus saith our Lord God; My right hand shall not be spa∣ring upon sinners, neither shall the sword cease over them who spill the innocent blood on the earth. Fire shall proceede from out my wrath, and devoure the foundations of the earth, and sinners as if they were inflamed straw. Woe be unto them who offend, and observe not my Comman∣dements,
saith our Lord, I will not forbeare them. De∣part away ye Apostatizing children, and doe not pollute my sanctuarie. God doth know who doe offend against him, and he will therefore deliver them over to death and to slaughter. For now have many evils passed over the round compasse of the earth.4 Esd. 16.3. A sword of fire is sent out against yee, and who is he that shall restraine it? shall any man repulse a Lyon that hungereth in the wood? or shall any one quench out the fire when the straw is burning? our Lord God will send out evills, and who is he that shall represse them? and fire will passe forth from out his wrath, and who shall ex∣tinguish
it? it shall brandi∣shing shine, and who will not feare it? it shall thunder, and who will not shake with dread? God will threaten all, and who will not be terrified? before his face shall the earth tremble, and the foundations of the sea fleet from the depth. And marke ye also what Ezechiel the renowned Pro∣phet, and admirable behol∣der of the foure Evangeli∣call creatures, speaketh of wicked offendors, unto whom pittifully lamenting before hand, the scourge that hung over Israel, our Lord doth say,Ezek. 9.9. Too farre hath the iniquity of the house of Israel and Iudah prevai∣led, because the earth is fully filled with iniquity and un∣cleannesse.
Ezeck. 5.8. & 11. Behold I am, mine eyes shall not spare, nor yet will I take pitty. And af∣terwards,Ezeck. 7.23 Because the earth is replenished with people, and the City fraughted with iniquity, I will also turne a∣way the force of their power, and their holy things shall be polluted, prayer shall approach and sue for peace, and it shall not be obtained. And some∣what after; The Word of our Lord (quoth he) was spoken unto me saying;Ezeck. 14.12 Thou sonne of man, the land that shall so farre sinne against me as transgressing it shall com∣mit an offence, I will streatch forth my hand upon her, and breake in peeces her founda∣tion of bread, and send upon her famine, and take away
mankind and cattle from her; and if these three men, Noah, Daniel, and Iob bee in the midst of her, they shall not deliver her, but they in their justice shall be saved, saith our Lord. If so be that also I shall bring  evill beasts upon the land and pu∣nish her, she likewise shall be turned to destruction, and there shall not be one who shall have free passage from the face of the beasts, and ad∣mit these three men are in the midest of her, I live (saith our Lord) if their sonnes and daughters shall be preserved, but they alone shall be saved, and as for the land it shall fall to confusion.Ezeck. 18.20 And againe; The sonne shall not receive the unrighteous∣nesse
of the Father, neither yet the Father the sonnes un∣righteousnesse. The justice of the just shall be upon him∣selfe. And the unjust man, if he turneth him away from all the iniquities which he hath done, and keepeth all my Com∣mandements, and doth justice and abundance of mercy, hee shall live in life and shall not dye. All his sinnes, whatsoever he hath commit∣ted, shall have no further be∣ing; he shall live the life in his owne justice which hee hath performed. Doe I with my will voluntarily wish the death of the unrighteous (saith our Lord) raher than he should returne from his evill way and live? But when the just shall turne
himselfe away from his ju∣stice, and doe iniquity, accor∣ding to all the iniquities which the unrighteous hath committed, all the just acti∣ons (which hee hath done) shall remaine no further in memory. In his offence where∣in he hath fallen, and in his sinnes in which hee hath transgressed, he shall dye. And within some words af∣terwards:Ezech. 29.23. And all nati∣ons shall understand, that the house of Israel are led captive away for their offen∣ces, because they have forsa∣ken me. And I have tur∣ned my face from them, and yeelded them over into the hands of their enemies, and all have perished by the sword; according unto their
uncleane sinnes, and after their iniquities have I dealt with them, and turned my face away from them. This which I have spoken may suffice concerning the threates of the holy Pro∣phets: onely I have thought it necessary to intermingell in this little worke of mine, as well as the former me∣naces, a few words also borrowed out of the wis∣dome of Salomon, which declares unto Kings matter of exhortation or instructiō, that they may not say I am willing to lade the shoul∣ders of men, with heavie and insupportable burthens of words, but not so much as once with mine owne finger (which is with
speech of consolation) to moove the same. Let us therefore heare what the Prophet hath spoken to rule us.Sap. 1.1. Love justice (saith he) yee that judge the earth. This onely testimony (if it were with a full and per∣fect heart observed) would abundantly suffice to re∣forme the governours of our Country. For if they had loved Iustice, they would also love God, who is in a sort the fountaine and originall of all justice. Serve our Lord in goodnesse,Sap. 1.1. and seeke him in simplicity of heart. Alas who shall live (as one before us hath sayd) to see these things performed by our Coun∣trymen, yea if perhaps they
may be any where accom∣plished▪Sap. 1.2. Because he is found of those who doe not tempt him, he appeareth truely to them who have faith in him. For these men without re∣spect doe tempt God, whose Commandements with stubburne despight they contemne, neither yet doe they keepe to him their faith, unto whose Oracles be they pleasing, or some∣what severe, they turne their backes and not their faces.Sap. 1.3. For perverse thoughts doe separate from God, and this in the Tyrants of our time very plainely appea∣reth. But why doth our meannesse intermeddle in this so manifest a determi∣nation? Let therefore him
who is onely true (as wee have sayd) speake for us, the holy Ghost I meane, of whom it is now pro∣nounced;Sap. 1.2. The holy Ghost verily will avoyde the coun∣terfetting of discipline. And againe.Sap. 1.5. Because the spirit of God hath filled the globe of the earth. And after∣wards, (shewing with an evident judgement the end of the evill and righteous) hee saith,Sap. 5.15. How is the hope of the wicked as the doune that is puffed away with the wind, and as the smoake that with the blast is di∣spersed, and as the slender froth that with a storme is scattered, and as the memory of a guest who is a passenger
of one day. But the just shall live for ever, and with God remaineth their reward, and their cogitation is with the highest. Therefore shall they receive the kingdome of glo∣ry, and the crowne of beauty from the hand of our Lord. Because with his right hand he will protect them, and with his holy arme defend them. For very farre unlike in quality are the just and un∣godly, as our Lord verily hath spoken saying,1 Sam. 2 30. Them who honour me I will honour, and who so despise me shall be of no estimation. But let us passe over to the rest, Hear∣ken (saith he) all yee Kings and understand ye,Sap. 6 2. learne ye Iudges of the bounds of the earth, listen with your eares
who conteine multitudes in awe, and please your selves in the troopes of nations. Be∣cause power is given unto yee from God, and puissance from the highest, who will examine your actions, and sift your thoughts. For that when ye were ministers of his king∣dome, ye have not judged up∣rightly, nor kept the law of Iustice, nor yet walked accor∣ding to his will. It shall dreadfully and suddenly ap∣peare unto yee, that a most severe judgement shall be gi∣ven on them who governe. For to the meaner is mercy granted, but the mighty shall mightily sustaine torments. For he shall have no respect of persons, who is the ruler of all, nor yet shall he reverence
the greatnesse of any one, be∣cause he himselfe hath made both small and great, and care alike he hath of all: but for the stronger is at hand a stronger affliction. Vnto yee therefore (O Kings) are these my speeches, that yee may learne wisdome, and not fall away from her. For who so observe what things are just, shall be justified, and who so learne what things are holy, shall be sanctified. Hitherto have we discoursed no lesse by the Oracles of the Pro∣phets, than by our owne speeches with the Kings of our Country, being willing they should know what the Prophet hath spoken say∣ing,Ezeck. 21.2. As from the face of a Serpent, so flye thou sinnes:
If thou shalt aproach unto them, the teeth of a Lyon will catch thee, their teeth are such as kill the soules of men.Eccles. 17.18. And againe, How mighty is the mercy of our Lord. and his forgivenesse to such as convert themselves unto him. And if wee have not in us that Apostolicall zeale,Rom. 9.3. that wee may say, I did verily desire to he ama∣thematised by Christ for my brethren, Notwithstanding we may from the bottome of our hearts speake that Propheticall saying; Alas that a soule perisheth. And againe, Thren. 3.40. Let us search out our wayes, and seeke and re∣turne unto our Lord: Let us lift our hearts together with our bands to God in heaven,
And also that of the Apo∣stle, Phil. 1.8. We covet that every one of yee should bee in the bowels of Christ. And how willingly truely, as one tos∣sed on the waves of the sea, and now arrived in a de∣sired haven; would I in this place make an end (blu∣shing shame forbidding me further to proceede) did I not behold such and so great mountaines of malice advanced against God by Bishops or other Priests, or clearkes, yea some of our owne order, whom as wit∣nesses my selfe must of ne∣cessity first of all stone (ac∣cordig unto the Law) with the hard blowes of words (least I should be otherwise reproved of partiality to∣wards
persons) and then af∣terwards the people (if as yet they keepe their de∣crees) must pursue with their whole powers the same execution upon them, not to their corporall death but to the death of their vices and their eternall life with God. Yet (as before I have sayd) I doe crave pardon of them, whose lives I doe not onely prayse, but also preferre before all earthly treasure, and of the which (if it may be) yet before my death I de∣sire and thirst to be a parta∣ker: and so having both my sides defended with the double shields of Saints, and by those meanes invin∣cibly strengthned to su∣staine
all that arise against me, arming moreover my head in place of an helmet with the helpe of our Lord, and being most assuredly protected with the sundry assistances of the Prophets, I will boldly proceede not∣withstanding the stones of worldly rioters flye never so fast about me. IT is very aptly said, that sinne creepeth on as a Cancker, for no man in a moment becommeth abso∣lutely evill, but even like the Sea that making his en∣try first at a little hole, and afterwards enlarging his passage, in the end breaketh downe the bancke, and o∣verwhelmeth the whole
land; so vice hath her pro∣gresses in depraved mindes; the lamentable example whereof, we may in the hi∣story of Britaine apparant∣ly behold. Our Authour hath already declared the infection of Heresie, the corruption of infidelity, the disorders of warre, and the dissolution of manners, that distempered the body of the Iland, he laid open the sores of the temporall go∣vernors to the end that me∣dicines might have beene the better applyed for their remedies, and here now he beginneth to discover the grievous imperfections of the Clergy, which are true∣ly so much the worse, by how much their lives ought
to be more vertuous and exemplar; and yet would I have you to know, that these were defects not of Religion but of life, such as those offences of the Priests, Scribes, and Phari∣sees, so often in the word of God recited, whose sins (although too foulely they soiled their owne soules) yet could they never staine the immaculate Church of God, committed unto their charge: Neither yet did Gildas as another Elias complaine that there was not one left but himselfe a∣lone who worthily served God, since in sundry places he sheweth how many were yet here in this land whose holy lives deserved most
high commendation, even as our Lord spake to the same Elias saying. There remained seven thousand in Israel, who never bowed their knees to Baal. But suppose Britaine had beene wholly drowned in the deepe Seas of offences, yet did Italy, Greece, and Gall. with many other mighty Provinces of the Christian world, flourish at the selfe same time, both in vertuous Life, and true Religion, not unlike the Kingdome of Iu∣dah, which in that season, when Elias so complained of Israel, did notwithstan∣ding openly maintaine the true worshipping of God; but this insueing Treatise telleth us that in the field of
our Lord, there sprung up Cockell, and in his barne of purest Corne, there was found chaffe, and among his wisest Virgins, foolish ones, all which in this world can∣not be separated, but re∣maine untill the day of judgement, to be severally divided; thus doth he set before our eyes the begin∣ning and proceeding of the wickednesse of Britaine, whose blessed soule posses∣sed with a true zeale to God, departed to receive a Crowne of eternall glory, before the conclusion of this tragedy of sinne, for (as ye shall reade in venerable Bede) presently after the de∣cease of Gildas, they fell to open errors, and then to
disobedience of the Church in withstanding the autho∣rity of Saint Augustine, the first Arch-bishop of Can∣terbury, although within a while afterwards, it pleased God of his singular mercy to recall them backe into his Catholike fold againe: Neither let any man ima∣gine I have Translated this worke to disclose the faults of Pastors, and Superiours; For I had rather with Sem and Iaphet conceale, then with Cham reveale the im∣perfections of spirituall Fa∣thers. But having Englished the former part of Gildas, I did also (because I would not leave the worke maim∣ed, and unperfect) adven∣ture upon this latter, where∣in
I would wish the Readers to consider that if this flame of sinne did scorch the Ce∣dars of Libanus, no doubt but it may burne the lesser silly shrubs, if it infected (I say) the spiritualty, it may assuredly (unlesse wee be ware) consume us of the Laity. BRitaine hath Priests, but some shee hath that are unwise; very many that Minister, but many of them impudent; Clearkes shee hath, but certaine of them deceitfull raveners; Pastors (as they are called) but ra∣ther wolves prepared for the slaughter of Soules, (for why they provide not for the common peoples com∣modity,
but covet rather the gluttony of their owne bellies) possessing the hou∣ses of the Church, but ob∣taining them for filthy lucres sake; instructing the Laity, but shewing withall most vilde examples, vices, and evill manners; seldome sacrificing, and seldome with cleane hearts, standing at the Altars; not correcting the Cominalty for their of∣fences, while they commit the same sins themselves; despising the Commande∣ments of Christ, and being carefull with their whole hearts to fulfill their owne lustful desires, some of them usurping with uncleane feet the seate of the Apostle Pe∣ter; but for the demerit
of their covetousnesse fal∣ling downe into the pesti∣lent chaire of the traitor Iu∣das; detracting often, and seldome speaking truely; hating verity as an open e∣nemy, and favouring false∣hoods, as their most belo∣ved brethren; looking on the just, the poore, the im∣potent, with sterne coun∣tenances, as if they were detested Serpents, and re∣verencing the sinne ull rich men without any respect of shame, as if they were hea∣venly Angels, Preaching with their outward lips that almes are to be disbursed upon the needy, but of them¦selves not bestowing one halfepenny, concealing the horrible sinnes of the peo∣ple,
and amplifying injuries offered unto themselves, as if they were done against our Saviour Christ; expel∣ing out of their houses heir religious mother per∣haps, or sisters, and fami∣iarly entertaining with in∣decency strange women, as f it were for some more se∣ret office, or rather, to peake truely, though fond∣y, (and yet not fondly to ne, but to such as commit hese matters) debasing hemselves unto such bad reatures; and after all these eeking rather ambitiously or ecclesiasticall dignities, hen for the Kingdome of Heaven; and defending af∣er a tyrannicall fashion heir atchieved prefer∣ments,
nor ever labouring with lawfull manners, to a∣dorne the same; negligent and dull to listen to the pre∣cepts of the holy Saints (if ever they did so much as once heare that which full often they ought to heare) but diligent and attentive to the playes and foolish fa∣bles of secular men, as i they were the very waye to life, which indeede are but the passages to death▪ being hoarse, after the fa∣shion of Bulls, with the a∣bundance of fatnesse, and miserably prompt to all un∣lawfull actions; bearin their countenances arrogantly a loft, and having neverthelesse their inwar sences, with tormenting an
gnawing consciences, de∣pressed downe to the bot∣tome, or rather to bottome∣lesse hell, with the gaining of one penny glad, and with the losse of the like valew sad, floathfull and dumbe in the Apostolicall decrees (be it for ignorance or ra∣her the burden of their of∣fences) and stopping also he mouthes of the learned, but singularly experienced n the decitfull shifts of worldly affaires; and ma∣y of this sort and wicked conversation, violently in∣ruding themselves into the referments of the Church, ea rather buying the same  an high rate, then being my way drawne thereunto, nd moreover as unworthy
wretches, wallowing (after the fashion of swine) in their old and unhappy puddell of intollerable wickednesse, after they have attained un∣to the seate of Priesthood or episcopall dignity, (who neither have been installed or resident on the same) for usurping onely the name of Priesthood, they have not received the orders or apo∣stolicall preeminence, bu how can they who are no as yet fully instructed in faith, nor have done pen∣nance for their sinnes, be a∣ny way supposed meet and convenient to ascend unto any ecclesiasticall de∣gree (that I may not speak of the highest) which non but holy and perfect men
and followers of the Apo∣stles, and (to use the words of the Doctor of the Gen∣tiles) persons free from re∣prehension, can lawfully and without the foule of∣fence of sacriledge under∣take. For what is so wicked and so sinnefull as after the example of Simon Magus,Act. 8.18. (yea although with other faults, he were not before hand defiled) for any man with earthly price to pur∣chase the office of a Bi∣shop or Priest, that onely with holinesse and righte∣ous life is lawfully compas∣sed? but herein they doe more wilfully, and despe∣rately erre in that they buy their deceitfull and unpro∣fitable ecclesiasticall de∣grees,
not of the Apostles or their successours, but of tyrannicall Princes, and their father the devill; yea rather they raise this as a certaine roofe and cove∣ring of all offences, over the frame of their former serious life, that being pro∣tected under the shaddow thereof, no man should lightly hereafter lay to their charge their old or new wickednesses, and hereupon they build their desires of covetousnesse and gluttony, because being now the rulers of many they may more freely make havocke at their pleasures. For if truely any such offer of purchasing ecclesiasticall promotion
were made by these impu∣dent sinners, (I will not say with Saint Peter) but to a∣ny holy Priest, or godly King, they would doubt∣lesse receive the same an∣swere which their Father Simon Magus had from the mouth of the Apostle Pe∣ter, saying:Act. 8, 20. Thy money be with thee unto thy perdition. But (alas) perhaps they that order and advance these ambitious aspirers (yea they who rather throw them un∣der foote, and for a blessing give them a cursing, whilst of sinners, they make them not penitents (which were more consonant to reason) but sacrilegious and despe∣rate offendors, and in a sort install Iudas, that traytor to
his Master, in the chaire of Peter, and Nicolas the au∣thor of that foule heresie in the seate of Saint Stephen the Martyr) it may be did by the same meanes at the first obtaine their Priest∣hood themselves, & there∣fore doe not greatly dislike in their children, but rather respect the same race, that they their fathers did be∣fore hand assuredly runne. And also if finding resist∣ance, in obtayning their Diocesses at home, and some, who severely re∣nounce this chaffering of Church-livings, they can∣not there attaine unto such a pretious pearle, then it doth not so much loathe as delight them, (after they
have carefully sent their messengers before hand) to crosse the Seas, and travaile over most large Countries, that so in the end, yea al∣though with the saile of their whole substance, they may winne and compasse such a pompe, and such an incomparable glory, or to speake more truely, such a durty and base deceit, and illusion. And afterwards with great show and mag∣nificall ostentation, or ra∣ther madnesse, returning backe to their owne native soile, they grow from stout∣nesse to statelinesse, and be∣ing wonted to levell their lookes to the toppes of the mountaines, they now lift up their drowsie eyes
streight into the aire, yea to the very highest clouds, and as Novatus that foule hog, and persecutor of our Lords precious jewel, dealt some∣times at Rome, so do these intrude themselves againe into their owne Country, as Creatures of a new mould, yea rather as devillish in∣struments, being even rea∣dy in this state and fashion to stretch out violently their hands (not so worthy of the reverent Altars, as the re∣venging flames of hell) up∣on Christs most holy Sacri∣fices. What doe ye there∣fore (O unhappy people) expect from such belly beasts (as the Apostle calleth them?Tit. 1.12.) Shall your man∣ners be amended by these,
who doe not onely not ap∣ply their mindes to any goodnesse, but (according to the upbraiding of the Prophet) also labour to deale wickedly?Iere. 9.5. Shall ye be illu∣minated with such eyes as are onely with greedinesse cast on those things that leade headlong to vices (which is to say) to the gates of hell? Nay truely, if according to the saying of our Saviour,Mat. 7.16. ye flie not these mostravenous wolves like those of Arabia,Gen. 19.20 or avoide them as Lot, who ranne most speedily from the fiery showre of Sodome up to the mountaines, then being blinde and led by the blinde,Mat. 15.14 ye will both toge∣ther tumble downe into the
infernall ditch. But some man perchance will ob∣jecting say, that all Bishops, or all Priests, (according to our former exception,) are not so wickedly given, be∣cause they are not defiled with the infamy of Scisme, pride, or uncleane life, which neither wee our selves will deny, but albe∣it wee know them to bee chaste, and vertuous, yet will wee briefely an∣swere. What did it profit the High Priest Hely,1 Sam. 2.11. that he alone did not violate the Commandements of our Lord,Examples of the Old Testament. in taking flesh with forkes out of the pots,1 Sam. 4.11. be∣fore the fat was offred unto God, while he was puni∣shed
with the same revenge of death wherewith his sonnes were? what one (I beseech yee) of them whose manners wee have before sufficiently declared hath like Abell upon theAbell. Gen. 4.8. malicious emulation of the more acceptable sacrifice (which with the heavenly fire ascended up into the skies) beene martyred? since they feare the re∣proach even of a seely or∣dinary word, which of them hath hated the councell of the malicious,Psa. 25.59. and not sate with the ungodly, so that of him as a Prophet, this may be verified which was sayd of Enoch;Enoch. Genes. 5.24 Enoch walked with God and was not to be found in the vanity (forsooth) of the
whole world, as then lea∣ving our Lord and begin∣ginning to halte downe right after Idolatry? which of them like Noah in the time of the Deluge,Noah. Genes. 7 7. hath not admitted into the Arke of Salvation (which is the now present Church) any adversary unto God, that it may be most apparent that none but innocents or sin∣gular penitents, ought to remaine in the house of our Lord? Who is he that of∣fering sacrifice like Mel∣chisedeck,Melchise∣deck. hath onely bles∣sed the conquerours, and them who delivering in the number of three hundred (which was in the Sacra∣ment Gen. 14.18.of the Trinitie) the just man have overthrowne
the deadly armies of the five Kings, together with their vanquishing troopes, and not coveted the goods of others?Abraham. Which of them hath like Abraham at the Commandement of God freely offered his owne sonne on the Altar to bee slaine,Genes. 22.1. that hee might ac∣complish a precept of Christ,Math. 5.29. agreeable to this saying, thy right eye if it scandalizeth ought,Ier. 48.10. to bee pulled out, and another of the Prophet, that he is accursed who withholdeth his sword from shedding blood?Ioseph. Who is he that as a Ioseph hath rooted out of his heart the remembrance of an offered injury?Gen. 50.15. Who is he that as a Moses spea∣king
with our Lord in the Mountaine,Moses. Exod. 19.16. and not there∣upon terrified with the sounding trumpets, hath in a figurative sence presen∣ted unto the incredulous the two tables, and his hor∣ned face which they could not endure to see, but trem∣ble to behold? Which of them, praying for the offen∣ces of the people, did from the very botome of his heart cry out, like unto him saying:Exod. 32 3. O Lord this people hath committed a grievous sinne, which if thou wilt for∣give them, forgive it; other∣wise blot me guilty out of thy booke? Who inflamed with the admirable zeale of God hath couragiously risen for the revenge of fornication,Phines. Num. 25.7.
curing without delay by the present medecine of pennance, the affection of filthy lust, left the fire of the wrath of God should otherwise consume the people, as Phinees the Priest did,Ps. 105.31. that by this meane ju∣stice for ever might be re∣puted unto him? Who ve∣rily of them hath in a mo∣rall understanding imita∣ted Iesus Nave either forIesus Nave. the utter rooting forth (e∣ven to the slaughter of the last and least of all)Ios. 24.11. the sea∣ven Nations out of the land of promise, or for the esta∣blishing of spirituall Israel in their places? Which of them hath shewed unto the people of God their finall bounds beyond Iordan
(that it may be knowne what to every tribe is con∣venient) in such sort as the aforenamed Phinees and Ie∣sus have wisely divided the land?Phinees and Iesus. Who is he that to overthrow the innumera∣ble thousands of Gentiles, adversaries to the chosen people of God, hath as an∣other Iephte,Iephte. for a sacrifice of a votive placation or ap∣peasing,Iud. 11.29.34. slaine his onely daughter (which is to be understood his owne pro∣per will) immitating also therein the Apostle, saying, (Not seeking what is profita∣ble to me,1 Cor. 10.33. but to many, that they may be saved) which daughter of his, met the conquerours with drummes and daunces (to wit carnall
desires?) Which of them that he might disorder, put to flight, and overthrow the campes of the proud Gentiles,Gedeon. by the number of three hundred (being as be∣fore we have sayd,Iud. 7.6.16. & 20. the my∣stery of the blessed Trinity) and with his men holding in their hands, those noble sounding trumpets (which are Propheticall and Apo∣stolicall sences, according as our Lord sayd to the Prophet, Exalt thy voyce as a trumpet,Esay 58.1. and the Psal∣mist of the Apostles;Psal. 18.5. Their sound hath passed throughout the whole earth) and bea∣ring also those famous fla∣gons shining in the night season, with that most glit∣tring fiery light (which are
to be interpreted the bodies of Saints adjoyned to good workes, and burning with the flame of the holy Ghost, yea having as the Apostle writeth,2 Cor. 4.7. This treasure in earthen vessels) hath after the hewing downe of the Idolatrous grave (which is morrally meant, duske and darke desire) marched on like Gedeon,Iud. 6.25. with an assured faith in the evident signe of the fleece, which to the Iewes was voyde of the heavenly moysture, but to the Gentiles made wet with the dew of the holy Ghost?Iud. 6 36. Who is hee that (earnestly wishing to dye to this world, and live to Christ) hath as another Sampson.Sampson utterly extinguished
such innumerable lux∣urious banquetters of the Gentiles,Phil. 1.23. while they pray∣sed their gods (which is meant while the sences of men extolled these earthly riches,Iud. 16.30. according to the Apostle speaking thus;Iud. 16.23, 24. And covetousnesse which is the service of Idols) shaking with the power of both his armes the two pillars (which are to bee under∣stood,Coloss. 3.5. the naughty plea∣sures of the soule and bo∣dy) by the which the house of all worldly wickednesse is in a sort compacted,Iud. 16.30. and underpropped?Samuel. Who like Samuel that with prayers and the burnt sacrifice of a sucking lambe,1 Sam. 7.9. drave away the feare of the Philistians,
raised unexpected thunder∣claps,1 Sam. 12.17 and showring clouds, established without flattery a King,1 Sam. 10.1 & 17. deposed him when he displeased God, and an∣nointed another his better in his place and Kingdome,1 Sam. 13.14 & 15.18. & 16.13. when he shall give to the people his last farewell, shall constantly appeare in this sort saying,1 Sam. 12.3. Behold I am ready, speake ye before our Lord and his annointed, whether ever I tooke away the Oxe or Asse of any man. If I have falsely accused any one, if I have oppressed any body, if I have received a bribe from the hands of any? Vn∣to whom it was answered by the people; Thou hast not wrongfully charged us, nei∣ther yet oppressed, nor taken
any thing from the hands of any? Which of them like the famous Prophet Elias,Elias. who consumed with hea∣venly fire the hundred proud men, and conserved the fifty that humbled themselves;2 Reg. 1.9.11. & 13. and afterwards denounced without faw∣ning dissimulation, unto the unjust King (that sought not the Counsell of God by his Prophets, but of the Idoll Accaron) his immi∣nent death, hath utterly overthrowne all the Pro∣phets of Baal (which are interpreted worldly senses ever bent (as we have alrea∣dy sayd)1 Reg. 18.40. to envie and ava∣rice) with the lightning sword (which is the Word of God?) and as the same
Elias moved with the zeale of God,1 Reg. 17.1 after the taking a∣way of the ayrie showres from the Land of the wic∣ked, who were now shut up with famine in a strong pri∣son, as it were of penury for three yeeres and sixe moneths, being himselfe ready to dye for thirst in the desert, hath complaining sayd,1 Reg. 19▪10. They have murthered (O Lord) thy Prophets and undermined thine Altars, and I alone am left, and they seeke my life? Which of them like HaeliseusHaeliseus. hath pu∣nished his deerely beloved disciple if not with an ever∣lasting Leprosie,2 Reg. 5.23 27. yet at least by abandoning him, who was extraordinarily burthe∣ned with the weight of
worldly coveting, those gifts which his Master be∣fore (although very ear∣nestly entreated thereunto) dispised to receive?2 Reg. 6.15 & 17. and which of these among us hath like him revealed unto his servant (who was trou∣bled with despaire of life, and on a suddaine trembled at the warlike army of the enemies that besieged the City wherein hee was) through the fervency of his prayers, powred out unto God those spirituall visions, so as hee might behold a mountaine replenished with an heavenly assisting army, of warlike chariots & horse∣men, who shined with fiery countenances, and also be∣leeve that he was stronger
to save, then foes to offend? And which of them as the afore-recited Helizeus with the touch of his body, be∣ing dead truly to the world, but living unto God,2 Reg. 4.34 shall raise up another course pe∣rishing and carried out with a contrary funerall of death undoubtedly to God, but of life to vices, so as instant∣ly revived, hee may yeeld humble thankes unto Christ for his unexpected recove∣ry from the hellish tor∣ments of all mortall offen∣ces? which of them hath his lips purified and made cleane with the fiery coale carryed by the tongues of the Cherubin,Esaias. Esa. 6.6.7. from off the Altar (that his sinnes may be quite wiped away with
the humility of confession) as it is written of Esay,2 Reg 19.1. by whose effectuall prayers adjoyned with the ayde ofEsa. 37.1. the godly King Ezechias an hundred fourescore and five thousands of the Assi∣rians Army through the stroake of one Angell with∣out the least print of any appearing wound, were overthrowne and slaine? which of them like blessed IeremyIeremy. for accomplishing the Commandements of God, for denouncing the threates thundred out from heaven, and for preaching the truth even to such as would not heare the same,Ier. 1.17. hath suffered loathsome stinking prisons as momen∣tary deaths? And to be breef
what one of them (as the Doctor of the Gentils said) hath endured like the holy Prophets to wander in mountaines,Iere. 20. in dennes, and caves of the earth, to bee stoned,Heb. 11.38. to be sawed in sun∣der, and attempted with all kindes of death, for the name of our Lord? But why doe wee dwell in ex∣amples of the old Testa∣ment as if there were none in the new? Let therefore them (who suppose they doe without any labour at all, under the naked pre∣tence of the onely name of Priesthood, enter this streight and narrow passage of Christian Religion) hear∣ken unto us while we recite and gather in one a few
as the highest and cheefest flowers out of the large and pleasant meddow of the Saintly souldiers of the New Testament;Examples of the New Testament. which of ye (who rather sleepe than lawfully sit in the chaire of Priesthood) being cast out of the councell of the wic∣ked,Act. 11.50. hath after the stripes of sundry rods,Act. 16.23. as the holy Apostles given from the bottome of his heart,Act. 5.41. thanks to the blessed Trinitie that he was found worthy to suf∣fer disgrace for Christs true Deitie? What one for the undoubted testimony of God, having his braines dashed out with the Fullers lubbe;Act. 12.2. hath as Iames the first, a Bishop of the New Testament, suffered corpo∣rall
death? Which of yee like Iames the brother of Iohn was by the unjust Prince beheaded? Who like the first Deacon and Martyr of the Gospell (having but this onely ac∣cusation,Act: 7.57. that he saw God, whom the wicked miscre∣ants could not behold) was by the ungodly hands sto∣ned to death? What one of ye, like the worthy kee∣per of the keyes of the hea∣venly Kingdome, being nayled to the crosse with his feete upward, in regard of the reverence of Christ,S. Peter. whom no lesse in his death than in his life, he endeavo∣red to honour, hath so breathed out his last gaspe? Which of yee for the con∣fession
of the true word of Christ, hath like the vessell of election, and chosen Do∣ctor of the Gentiles, after suffering the chaines of im∣prisonment,S. Paul. sustayning of Shipwracke, after the ter∣rible scourges of whips, the continuall dangers of Seas, of theeves, of Gentiles, of Iewes, and of false apostles, after the labours of famine, of fasting, &c. after his in∣cessant care had over all the Churches, after his excee∣ding trouble, for such as scandalized, after his infir∣mity for the weake, after his admirable peregrination o∣ver almost the whole world in Preaching the Gospel of Christ, through the stroke of the sword lost his head?
which of yee, as the holy Martyr Ignatius,S. Ignatius. Bishop of the City of Antioch, hath after his miraculous actions in Christ, for testi∣mony of him beene broken in peeces by the jawes of Lyons, as hee was some∣times at Rome? whose words (being now led to his passion) when yee shall heare (if ever your counte∣nances were overcome with blushing) ye will not, onely in comparison of him e∣steeme your selves no Priests, but not truely so much as the meanest Chri∣stians; for in the Epistle which hee sent to the Church of Rome, he writeth thus: From Syria even un∣to Rome, I fight with beasts,
at Land and Sea, being bound and chained unto tenne Leo∣pards, the Souldiers (I meane) appointed for my custody, who for our benefits bestowed upon them become more cruell but I by their wickednesse am the better instructed, neither yet am I in this justified; Oh when shall come those beasts the causers of my Salvation (which are for me prepared)? when shall they be let out loose at me? when shall it be law∣full for my carkas to enjoy them? whom I doe most ear∣nestly wish to be eagerly in∣raged against me, and true∣ly  will incite them to de∣voure me, moreover, I will humbly pray, least perchance they should dread to touch my body (as in some others they
have heretofore done) yea al∣so if they doubtfully stagger. I will offer violence, I will enforce my selfe upon them. Pardon mee (I beseech ye) I know what is commodious for me, even now I beginne to be the Disciple of Christ; let all envy, be it either of humane affection or else of spirituall wickednesse surcease, that I may diserne to obtaine Christ Iesus, let fires, let crosses, let cruelty of beasts, let breaking of bones, and renting of limbes, with all the paines of the whole body, and all the torments devised by the art of the devill, be altogether powred out on mee alone, so that I may merit to attaine unto Christ Iesus. Why do ye behold these things with
the sleepy eyes of your soules? why do ye hear∣ken unto them with the deafe eares of your sences? Shake off (I beseech yee) the darkesome and blacke mist of the slothfulnesse of your hearts, that so ye may see the glorious light of truth and humility. A Chri∣stian and he not meane, but a perfect one, a Priest not base, but one of the high∣est, a Martyr not ordinary, but one of the chiefest, saith: Now I begin o be the Disciple of Christ. And ye like the same Lucifer, who was throwne downe out of Heaven, are puffed up with words not with power, and after a sort doe chaw under the tooth, and make pre∣tence
in your actions, even as the Authour of this your wickednesse hath expressed saying,Esa. 14 13. I will mount up into the Heavens, and be like un∣to the highest: And againe, I have digged and drunk wa∣ter,Esa. 37.25. and dryed up with the steppes of my feete all the ri∣vers of the bankes. Where more rightly yee should have imitated him and har∣kened unto his words (who is doubtlesse the most true example of all goodnesse and humility) saying by his Prophet,Psal. 21.7. I am verily a worm and not a man, the reproch of men, and the outcast of the people. Oh unspeakeable matter! that he called him∣selfe the reproach of men, when as he washed quite a∣way
the reproaches of the whole world. And againe in the Gospel, I of my selfe am not able to doe any thing.Ioh. 5.30. When as he being coeter∣nall with the Father, coe∣quall with the Holy Ghost, and consubstantiall unto both, Created not by the helpe of another, but by his owne Almighty power, the Heaven and Earth, with all their inestimable Orna∣ments, and ye neverthelesse have arrogantly lifted aloft your voyces, notwithstan∣ding the Prophet saith,Eccle. 10.9 Why doth earth and ashes swell in prid. But that I may re∣turne unto the purpose. which of yee (I say) like the famous Bishop of the Church of Smerna Policar∣pus,St. Policar∣pus.
that witnesse of Christ, hath courteously entertai∣ned as guests at his table, those who violently drew him out to be burned, and being for the charity which he did beare unto Christ) brought to the stake sayd, He who gave me grace to en∣dure the torment of the fire, will likewise graunt mee without fastning of nayles to suffer constantly the flames. And now overpassing in this my discourse mighty armies of Saints, I will as yet touch but one, for ex∣amples sake,S. Basill. Basil, I meane the Bishop of Caesaria, who when hee was thus by the unrighteous Prince threat∣ned, that (unlesse he would on the next morrow be as
the rest, defiled in the dur∣ty dunghill of the Arrian heresie) he was absolutely to be put to death, answe∣red (as it is reported) I true∣ly will be to morrow the same as to day, and for thee, I wish thou wouldest not change thy determination. And againe, O would I had some worthy reward to bestow on him that would speedily discharge Ba∣sil from the bands of this breathing bellowes. What one of ye to daunt the me∣naces of Tyrants, doth in∣violably keepe the rule of the Apostolicall speech, which in all times and ages when some ever hath beene observed by al holy Priests to suppresse the suggestion of men, when they sought
to draw them headlong to naughtinesse, saying in this manner, It behoveth rather to obey God then men.Act. 5.29. Wher∣fore after our accustomed manner making our refuge unto the mercy of our Lord, and to the sentences of his holy Prophets, that they on our behalfe may now levell the darts of their Oracles at unperfect Pa∣stors (as before at Tyrants) so as thereby receiving compunction they may be cured, let us behold what manner of threates, our Lord doth by his Prophets utter, against slothfull and dishonest Priests, and such as doe not as well by exam∣ples as words, rightly in∣struct the people. For even
Hely the Priest in Silo, for that hee did not severely proceed (with a zeale wor∣thy of God) in punishing his sonnes, when they contem∣ned our Lord, but (as a man overswayed with a fatherly affection) too mildly and remisly admonished them, was sentenced with this judgement by the Prophet speaking unto him:1 Sam. 2.28 Thus saith our Lord, I have mani∣festly shewed my selfe unto the house of thy Father, when they were the servants of Pharaohin Egypt, and have chosen the house of thy Father out of all the Tribes of Israel, for a Priesthood unto me. And a little after,1 Sam. 2.29. Why hast thou looked upon mine incense, and upon my sacrifice, with a dis∣honest
eye? and hast honored thy children more then mee, that thou mightst blesse them from the beginning in all sa∣crifices in my presence? And now so saith our Lord: Be∣cause who so honour me I will honour them againe: and who so make no account of me shall be brought to nothing. Behold the dayes shall come and I will destroy thy Name, and the seed of the house of thy Father. And let this be to thee the signe, which shall fall upon thy two sonnes Ophnee and Phinees, in one day shall they both dye by the sword of men. If thus there∣fore they shall suffer paines, who correct them that are subjected under their charge, with onely words,
and not with condigne pu∣nishment, what shall be∣come of those who by of∣fending exhort ye, and draw others unto wickednesse? It is apparant also what be∣fell unto the true Prophet, who was sent from Iudah to prophesie in Bethel and forbidden not once to taste any meate in that place, af∣ter the signe which he fore∣told, was fulfilled, and af∣ter hee had restored the wicked King, his withered hand againe, being decei∣ved by another Prophet, (as he was tearmed) and so made to take but a little bread and water, his host speaking in this sort unto him,1 Reg. 13.21. Thus saith our Lord God; Because thou hast beene
disobedient to the mouth of our Lord, and not observed the precept which thy Lord God hath commanded, and hast returned, and eaten bread and drunke water in this place, in which I have charged thee that thou shoul∣dest neither eate bread nor drinke water, thy body shall not be buried in the Sepulcher of thy forefathers. And so (saith the Scripture) it came to passe, that after he had ea∣ten bread and drunke water, he made ready his Asse, and departed, and a Lion found him in the way and slew him. Heare yee also the holy Prophet Esay,Esa. 3.11. how he spea∣keth of Priests on this wise. Woe be unto the ungodly, e∣vill befall him; for the re∣ward
of his hands shall light upon him. Her owne exactors have spoyled my people, and women have borne sway over her. O my people who tear me thee blessed, they themselves deceive thee, and destroy the way of thy footesteps. Our Lord standeth to judge, and standeth to judge the people. Our Lord will come unto judgement with the elders of the people and her Princes. Ye have consumed my Vine, the spoile of the poore is in your house. Why doe ye breake in peeces my people, and grinde the faces of the poore, saith our Lord God of Hosts? And also;Esa. 10.1. Woe be unto them who compose ungodly lawes, and writing have written in∣justice, that they may oppresse
the poore in judgement, and worke violence unto the cause of the lowly of my people, that widdowes, may be their prey, and they make sile of the Orphans, what will ye doe in the day of visitation and cala∣mity approching afarre of? And afterwards, But these also in regard of wine have beene ignorant,Esa. 28.7. and in respect of drunkennesse have wande∣red astray, the Priests have not understood, because of drunkennesse, and have beene swallowed up in wine, they have erred in drunkennesse they have not knowne him who seeth, they have beene ig∣norant of judgement. For all tables are filled with the vo∣mit of their uncleannesse, in so much as there is not any
free place to be found. Heare therefore the Word of our Lord (O ye men ye deceivers) who beare authority over my people that  in Ierusalem.Esa. 28.14. For ye have sayd, we have en∣tred into a truce with death, and with hell we have made a covenant. The overflowing scourge when it shall passe forth shall not fall upon us, because we have placed fals∣hood for our hope, and by lying we have beene defended. And somewhat after, And haile shall overthrow the hope of lying,Esay. 28.17. together with the de∣fence. Waters shall overflow, and your truce with death shall be destroyed, and your covenant with hell shall not continue, when the overflow∣ing scourge shall passe forth,
yee shall also be troden under foote, whensoever it shall passe along thorough yee, it shall sweepe ye away withall. And againe, And  Lord hath sayd:Esay 29.13 Because this people a∣proacheth with their mouth, and with their lippes glorifie me, but their heart is farre removed from me, behold therefore I will cause this peo∣ple to admire with a great and amazed wonder. For wisedome shall decay and fall away, from her wisemen, and the understanding of her sages shall be concealed. Woe be unto yee that are profound in heart, to conceale counsell from our Lord, whose workes are in darkenesse, and they say who seeth us? And who hath knowne us? for this thought
of yours is perverse. And somewhat afterwards. Thus saith our Lord: Heaven is my seate, and the earth the foote stoole of my feete.Esay 66.1. What is this house that ye will erect unto me, and what place shall be found of my resting re∣pose? all these things hath my hand made, and these uni∣versally have beene all crea∣ted saith our Lord, on whom truely shall I cast mine eye, but on the humble poore man, and the contrite in spirit, and him that dreadeth my spee∣ches? he that sacrificeth an Oxe, is as he that killeth a man; he that slaughtereth a beast for sacrifice is like him who beateth out the braines of of a dogge; he that offereth an oblation is as he that offe∣reth
up the blood of an hogge; he that is mindfull of fran∣kincense, is as he that honou∣reth an Idoll: Of all these things have thy made choice in their wayes, and in their abominations hath their soule beene delighted. Listen ye also what Ieremy that Virgin and Prophet spea∣keth unto the unwise Pa∣stors in this sort; Thus saith our Lord:Iere. 2.5. What iniquity have your fathers found in me, be∣cause they have removed themselves farre off from me, and walked after vanitie, and are become vaine? And somewhat after;Ier. 2.7. And en∣tring in; ye have defiled my Land, and made mine inhe∣ritance abomination. The Priests have not sayd,
Where is our Lord? and the Rulers of the Law, have not knowne mee, and the Pastours have dealt treache∣rously against me. Wherefore I will as yet contend in judge∣ment with you, saith our Lord, and debate the matter with your children. And a little afterwards,Iere. 5.30. Astonish∣ment and wonders have beene wrought in the land. Pro∣phets did Preach lying, and Priests did applaud with their hands, and my people have loved such matters.Iere. 6.10. What therefore shall be done in her last and finall ends? To whom shall I speake and make prote∣station that he may heare me? behold their cares are uncir∣cumcised, and they cannot heare. Behold the word of our
Lord is uttered unto them for their reproach, and they re∣ceive it not: because I will stretch out my hand upon the inhabitants of the earth, saith our Lord. For why from the lesser even unto the greater, all study avarice, and from the Prophet even unto the Priest, all worke deceit, and they cured the contrition of the daughter of my people, with ignomy, saying, Peace, Peace, and peace there shall not be. Confounded they are, who have wrought abomina∣tion: but rather they are not with a confusion confounded, and have not understood how to be ashamed. Wherefore they shall fall among those who are ruinating, in the time of their visitation shall
they rush headlong downe to∣gether, saith our Lord. And againe, All these Princes of the declining sort, walking fraudulently,Iere. 6.18. being brasse and iron, are universally corrup∣ted, the blowing bellowes hath failed in the fire, the Fi∣er of mettals, in vaine hath melted, their malicious acts assuredly are not consumed, all them refuse and repro∣ate silver, because our Lord ath throwne them away. And after a few words, I m,Iere. 7.11. I am, I have scene saith ur Lord. Goe your wayes to y place in Shilo, where my ame hath inhabited from he beginning, and behold hat I have done thereunto  the malice of my people of srael. And now because ye
have wrought all these works saith our Lord; and I have spoken unto yee, arising in the morning, and talking, and yet ye have not heard me, and have called yee, and yet yee have not answered. I will so deale towards this house, wherein my name is now cal∣led upon, and wherein ye have confidence: and to this place which I have given unto ye, and to your fathers, as I have done to Shilo, and I will cast yee away from my coune∣nance. And againe,Iere. 10.20. My children have departed from me, and have no abiding, and there is not he who any more pitcheth my tent, and advan∣ceth my Pavillion: because the Pastors have dealt fondl and not sought out our Lord.
Wherefore they have not un∣derstood, and their flocke hath beene dispersed. And within some words after,Iere. 11.15 What is the matter that my beloved hath in my houses committed many offences? shall the ho∣ly flesh take away thy maliti∣ousnesse from thee, wherein thou hast gloried? our Lord hath tearmed thy noone a plentifull, faire, fruitfull, goodly olive, at the voyce of the speech a mighty fire hath beene inflamed in her, and her Orchards have beene quite consumed▪ therewith. And againe, Come ye to me,Iere. 12.9. and be ye gathered together all ye beasts of the earth, make ye haste to devoure. Many Pa∣stours have throwne downe my vine, they have trampled
my part under foote, they have given over my portion which was well worthy to be desired into a desart of solita∣rinesse. And againe he spea∣keth: Thus saith our Lord unto this people,Iere. 14.10 which have loved to moove their feete, and not rested, nor yet plea∣sed our Lord; now shall he re∣member their iniquities and visite their offences. Prophets say unto them, ye shall not see the sword, and there shall no famine be among ye, but our Lord shall give true peace unto ye in this place. And our Lord hath said unto me, The Prophets doe falsly foretell in my name, I have not sent them, neither yet laid my Commandement on them, they prophesie unto ye a lying vi∣sion,
and divination together with deceitfulnesse, and the seducement of their owne hearts. And therefore thus saith our Lord: in sword and famine shall those Prophets be consumed: and the people to whom they have prophesied shall by meanes of the famine and sword be cast out in the waies of Ierusalem, and there shall be none to bury them. And moreover;Iere. 23.1. We be to the astours who desroy and rent in peeces the floce of my pasture, saith our Lord. Thus therefore saith our Lord God of Israel unto the Pastours who guide my people, ye have dispersed my flocke, and cast them forth, and not visited them: Behold I will visite upon ye the malice of your en∣deavours,
saith our Lord. For the Prophet and the Priest are both defiled, and in my house have I found their evill, saith our Lord, and therefore shall their way be as a slippery place in the darke, for they shall be thrust forward, and fall downe toge∣ther therein, for I will bring evils upon them, the yeare of their visitation, saith our Lord. And in the Prophets of Samaria, I have seene foo∣lishnesse, and they did pro∣phesie in Baal, and deceived my people of Israel, and in the Prophets of Ierusalem, have I seene the like resemblance, adultery, and the way of ly∣ing, and they have comforted the hands of the vildest of∣fendors, that every man may
not be converted from his malice: they have beene all made to me as Sodome, and the inhabitants thereof as those of Gomorrha. Thus therefore saith our Lord to the Prophets; Behold, I will give them wormewood for their food, and gall for their drinke. For there hath passed from the Prophet of Ierusa∣lem pollution over the whole earth. Thus saith our Lord of hosts; listen not unto the words of Prophets, who pro∣phesie unto ye, and deceive ye, for they speake the vision of their owne heart, and not from the mouth of our Lord. For they say unto these who doe blaspheme me, our Lord hath spoken, peace shall be un∣to ye; and to all that walke
in the wickednesse of their owne hearts, they have said, Evil shal not fall upon them. For who was present in the counsell of our Lord, and hath seene and heard his speech, who hath considered of his word, and hearkened there∣unto? Behold, the whirle∣winde of the indignation of our Lord passeth out, and a tempest breaking forth, shall fall upon the heads of the wicked, the fury of our Lord shall not returne, untill the time that he worketh and un∣till he fulfilleth the cogitati∣on of his heart. In the last daies of all shal ye understand his counsell. And little also do ye conceive and put in execution, that which the holy Prophet Ioel hath like∣wise
spoken in admonish∣ment of sloathfull Priests, and Lamentation of the Peoples dammage for their iniquities,Ioel 1.6. saying: Awake ye who are drunke, from your wine, and weepe and bewaile ye all, who have drunke wine even to drunkennesse, because joy and delight are taken a∣way from your mouthes. Mourne yee Priests, who serve the Altar, because the fields have beene made miserable. Let the earth mourne, because corne hath become miserable, and wine beene dryed up, oyle dimini∣shed, and husbandmen withe∣red away. Lament ye possessi∣ons, in regard of Wheate and Barly, because the vin∣tage hath perished out of the
field, the vine withered up, the figges diminished: the pomegranates, and palme, and apple, and all trees of the field are withered away, in respect that the children of men have confounded their joy. All which things are spiritually to be understood by you, that your soules may not wither away with so pestilent a famine, for want of the word of God. And againe, Weepe out yee Priests,Ioel 2.17. who serve our Lord, saying; Spare O Lord thy People, and give not over thine inheritance unto re∣proch, and let not Natios hold dominion over them, that Gentiles may not say, Where is their God? And yet ye yeeld not your eares
unto these sayings, but ad∣mit of all matters by which the indignation of the fury of God is more vehement∣ly inflamed. With dili∣gence also attend ye what holy O see the Prophet hath spoken unto Priests of your▪ behavior.Osec 5 1. Heare these words (O yee Priests) and let the house of Israel, together with the Kings house marke them; fastn ye them in your eares, for that unto ye appertaineth judgement, because yee are made an intangling snare to the espying watch, and as a piched nt more and worse then the toyle which the fol∣lowers of hunting have fra∣med. To ye also, may this kinde of alienation from our Lord, be meant by the
Prophet Amos saying, I have hated and rejected your festivall daies,Amos 5.21 and I will not receive the savour in your so∣lemne assemblies, because al∣beit ye offer our burnt sacri∣fices and hosts, I will not ac∣cept them, and I will not cast mine eye on the vowes of your declaration. Take away from me the sound of your songs, and the Psalme of your Or∣gans I will not heare. For why the famine of the E∣vangelicall meate consu∣ming, in your abundance of victuals, the very bowels of your soules, rageth vio∣lently within ye, according as the aforesaid Prophet hath foretold,Amos 8.11. saying: Be∣hold the daies shal come▪ saith our Lord, and I will send out
a famine upon the earth, not the famine of bread, nor the thirst of water, but a famine in hearing the word of God, and waters shall be mooved from sea even to sea, and they shal run over from the North even unto the East, seeking out the word of our Lord, and yet shall not find it. Let holy Micheas also pierce your eares, who not unlike a cer∣taine heavenly trumpet soundeth shrilly forth a∣gainst the deceitfull Princes of the People, saying: Hearken now yee Princes of the house of Iacob,Miche. 3.1. is it not for yee to know judgement, who hate goodnesse, and seeke af∣ter mischiefes, who plucke their skinnes from off men, and their flesh from their
bones? Even as they have eaten the flesh of my people, and flyed of their skins from them, broken their bones to peeces, and hewed them small as meate to the pot, they shall cry to God, and he will not heare them, and in that sea∣son turne his face away from them, even as they before have wickedly behaved them¦selves in their inventions. Thus speaketh our Lord of the Prophets who seduce my people, who bite with their teethes, and preach against them peace, and if a man gi∣veth nothing to stoppe their mouthes, they raise and san∣ctifie a war upon him. Night shall therefore be unto yee in place of a vision, and drke∣nesse unto ye in lwe of divi∣nation,
and the sunne shall set upon your Prophets, and the day shall waxe darke upon them, and seeing droames they shall be confounded, and the diviners shall be derided, and they shall speake ill a∣gainst all men, because there shall not be any one that will heare them, but that I myselfe shall doe mine uttermost & strongest endeavour in the spirit of our Lord, in judge∣ment and in power, that I may declare unto the house of Ia∣cob their impieties, and to Israel their offences. Hearken therefore unto these words ye Captaines of the house of Ia∣cob, and ye remnants of the house of Israel, who abhorre judgment, and overthrow all righteousnesse, who build up
Sion in blood and Ierusalem in iniquities: her rulers did judge for rewards, and her Priests answered for hire, ad her Prophets did for money divine, and rested on our Lord, saying: And is not our Lord within us? evils shall not fall upon us. For your cause therefore shall Sion be ploughed up as a field, and Ierusalem as a watch cab∣bin of a garden, and the mountaine of the house as a place of a wooddy wildernesse. And after some words en∣suing,Mich. 7.1. Woe is me for that I am become as e that gathe∣reth stubble in the harvest, and a cluster of grapes in the Vintage, when the principle branch is not left to be eaten. Woe is me, that a soule hath
perished through earthly a∣ctions, the reverence of sin∣ners ariseth even reveren∣cing from the earth, and hee appeareth not that among men correcteth. All contend injudgement for blood, and every one with tribulation afflicteth his neighbour, for mischiefe hee prepareth his hands. Listen ye likewise how the famous Prophet Sophonias debated also in times past, with your fel∣low banqueters (for hee spake of Ierusalem, which is spiritually to be understood the Church or the soule) saying:Sopho. 3.1. O the Citty that was beautifull and set at liberty, the confident Dove hath not obediently hearkened to the voyce, nor yet entertained
discipline, she hath not tru∣sted in our Lord, and to her God she hath not approached. And he sheweth the reason why,Soph. 3.3. Her Princes have beene like unto roaring Lyons, her Iudges as Wolves of Arabia did not leave towards the mor∣ning, her Prophets carrying the spirit of a contemptuous despising man; her Priests did prophane what ws holy, and dealt wickedly in the law, but our Lord is upright in the middest of his people, and no unjust morning will he make, in the morning will he give his judgement. But heare ye also blessed Zachery the Pro∣phet, in the Word of God, admonishing yee: For thus saith our Almighty Lord,Zach. 7 9. Iudge ye righteous judgement
and worke yee every one to∣wards his brother mercy and pitty, and hurt yee not thorough your power the Widdoow, or Orphan, or stranger, or poore man, and let not any man remember in his heart the malice of his bro∣ther; and they have beene stubborne not to observe these, and have yeelded their backes to foolishnesse, and made heavie their eares that they might not hearken, and framed their hearts to be not perswasible that they might not listen to my law and words, which our Almigh∣ty Lord hath sent in his spi∣rit, through the hands of his former Prophets, and mighty wrath hath beene raised by our Almighty Lord. And
againe, Because they who have spoken,Zach. 10.1. have spoken molestations, and diviners have uttered false visions and deceitfull dreames, and given vaine consolations; in respect hereof they are made dry as sheepe, and are afflicted because no health was to bee found; my wrath is heaped upon the Shepheards, and upon the Lambes will I visite. And within a few words af∣ter, The voyce of lamenting Pastors, because their great∣nesse is become miserable.Zach. 11.3. The voyce of roaring Lyons, because the fall of Iordan is become miserable: Thus saith our Almighty Lord; who have possessed have murthe∣red, and yet hath it not re∣pented them, and who have
sold them, have sayd; Our Lord is blessed and we have beene enriched and their Pa∣stors have suffered nothing concerning them. For which I will now beare no sparing hand over the inhabitants of the earth, saith our Lord. Heare ye moreover what the holy Prophet Mala∣chy denounceth unto yee, saying,Mala. 1.6. Yee Priests who de∣spise my name, and have sayd: Wherein doe we despise thy name? in offering on mine Altar polluted bread: and yee have sayd, Wherein have we polluted it? In that ye have sayd: The table of our Lord is as nothing, and have despised such things as have beene placed thereupon; be∣cause if yee bring what is
blind for an offering, is it not evill? If ye set and apply what is lame or languishing, is it not evill? Offer there∣fore the same unto thy gover∣nour, if he will receive it, if he will accept of thy person, saith our Almighty Lord. And now doe ye humbly pray before the countenance of your God, and earnestly be∣seech him (for in your hands have these things beene com∣mitted) if happily he will ac∣cept of your persons. And a∣gaine, And out of your ra∣venous theft ye have brought in the lame and languishing,Mal. 1.13. and brought it in as an offe∣ring. Shall I receive the same at your hands, saith our Lord? Accursed is the de∣ceitfull man who hath in his
flocke one of the male kinde, and yet making his vow offe∣reth the feeble unto our Lord, because I am a mighty King, saith our Lord of hosts, and my name is terrible among the Gentiles. And now unto yee appertaineth this Com∣mandement, O yee Priests, if yee will not heare, and re∣solve in your hearts to yeeld glory unto my name, saith our Lord of hosts, I will send upon ye poverty, and accurse your blessings, because ye have not setled these things on your hearts. Behold I will extend out an arme upon yee, and disperse upon your counte∣nances the dunge of your so∣lemnities. But that ye may in the meane time, with a more thirsting desire pre∣pare
your Organs and in∣struments of mischiefe, to be converted into good∣nesse, hearken yee (if there remaineth as yet any so lit∣tle inward listening in your hearts) what he speaketh of a holy Priest saying; My covenant of life and peace was with him (for histori∣cally he did speake of Levi and Moses) I gave feare unto him,Mala. 2.5. and he was time∣rous of me, he dreaded be∣fore the countenance of my name, the law of truth was in his mouth, and iniquitie was not found in his lippes, he walked with me in peace and equity, and turned many away from unrighteousnesse. For the lippes of the Priest shall keepe knowledge, and
from out his mouth they shall require the law, because hee is the angell of our Lord of hosts. And now againe hee changeth his stile, and de∣sisteth not to rebuke and re∣prove the unrighteous, saying;Mal. 2.8. Ye have departed from the way, and scandali∣zed many in the law, and made voyde my covenant with Levi, saith our Lord of hosts. In regard whereof I have also given ye over as contemptible and abject a∣mong my people, according as ee have not observed my ayes, and accepted counte∣ance of men in the law. What is there not one father of us all? What hath not one god created us? Why therefore doth every one despise his
brother? And againe, Be∣hold our Lord of hosts will come,Mal. 3.2. and who can conceive of the day of his comming, and who shall endure to stand to behold him? For he shall passe forth as a burning fire, and as the fullers hearbe, and shall sit melting and trying silver, and he shall purge the sonnes of Levi, and clense them as gold and as silver. And somewhat afterwards,Mal. 3.13. Your words have growne strong against me, saith our Lord, and ye have spoken thus. He is vaine who ser∣veth God, and what profit be∣cause we have kept his Com∣mandements, and walked sorrowfull before our Lord of hosts. We shall therefore now call the arrogant blessed, for
because they are erected and builded up, while they worke iniquity, they have tempted God, and are made safe. But heare ye also what Ezechiel the Prophet hath spoken, saying:Ezec. 7.26. Woe upon woe shall come, and messenger upon messenger shall be, and the vision shall be sought for of the Prophet, and the law shall perish from the Priests, and counsell from the Elders. And againe: Thus saith our Lord;Ezec. 13.8. In respect that your speeches are lying, and your divinations vaine. For this cause, Behold, I my selfe un∣to ye saith our Lord; I will stretch out my hand on your Prophets, who see lies, and them who speak vaine things, in the discipline of my people
they shall not be, and in the Scripture, of the house of Is∣rael, they shall not be written, and into the land of Israel they shall not enter, and yee shal know that I am the Lord, because they have seduced my people, saying, The peace of our Lord, and there is not the peace of our Lord. Here have they built the wall; and they annointed it, and it shall fall, And within some words af∣terwards;Ezec. 13.18 Woe be unto these who fashion pillowes, apt for every elbow of the hand, and make veiles upon every head of all ages to the subversion of soules, and the soules of my people are subverted, and they possesse their soules, and con∣taminated me unto my people for a handfull of barley, and a
peece of bread to the slaugh∣ter of the soules, whom it be∣hooved not to dye, and to the delivery of the soules, that were not convenient to live, while ye talke unto my people that listeneth after vaine speeches. And afterwards: Say thou sonne of man,Ezec. 22.4. thou art earth which is not wate∣red with raine, neither yet hath raine fallen upon thee in the day of wrath, in which thy Princes were in the mid∣dest of thee as roring Lions, ravening on their preyes, de∣vouring soules in their po∣tent might, and receiving re∣wards, and thy widdwes were multiplyed in the midst of thee, and her Priests have despised my law, and defiled my holy things. Betweene ho∣ly
and polluted, they did not distinguish, and divided not equally betweene the uncleane and cleane, and from my Sab∣baths they veiled their eies, and in the midst of them they defiled.Eze. 22 30. And againe, And I sought among them a man of upright conversation, and one who should altogether stand before my face, to pre∣vent the times that might fal upon the earth, that I should not in the end utterly destroy it, and I found him not. And I powred out upon it, the whole designement of my minde, in the fire of my wrath for the consuming of them: I repaid their waies on their heads, saith our Lord. And somewhat after:Eze 33.1. And the word of our Lord was spoken
unto me saying: O Sonne of man, speake to the children of my people, and thou shalt say unto them: The land whereupon I shall bring my sword, and the people of the land shall take some one man among them, and ordaine him to be a watchman over them, and hee shall espie the sword comming upon the land, and sound with his trumpet, and signifie unto the people, who so truely shall then heare the sound of the trumpet, and yet hearing shall not beware: and the sword shal come and catch him, his blood shall light up∣on his owne head, because when hee heard the sound of the trumpet, hee was not watchfull, his blood shall be upon him, and this man, for
that hee hath preserved his owne soule, hath delivered himselfe. But the watchman if he shall see the sword com∣ming, and not give notice with his trumpet, and the people shall not beware; and the sword comming shall take away a soule from among them, both the soule it selfe is caught a captive for her i∣niquities, and I will also re∣quire her blood at the hand of the watchman. And thou O son of man, I have appoin∣ted thee a watchman over the house of Israel, and if thou shalt heare the word from out my mouth, when I shall say to a sinner, Thou shalt die the death, and yet wilt not speake whereby the wicked may re∣turne from his way: both the
unjust himselfe shall die in his iniquity, and truely I will require his blood also at thy hands. But if thou shalt fore∣warne the wicked of his way, that he may avoide the same, and he neverthelesse will not withdraw himselfe from his course, this man shall die in his impiety, and thou hast pre∣served thine owne soule. And so let these few among a multitude of Propheticall testimonies suffice, by which the pride or sloath of our stubborne Priests may be repelled, to the end they may not suppose that we doe rather of our owne invention, then by the au∣thority of the Lawes, and Saints denounce such threats against them. And
now let us also behold what the trumpet of the Gospell, sounding to the whole world, speaketh like∣wise to disordered Priests; for as wee have often said, this our discourse tendeth not to treate of them, who obtaine lawfully the Apo∣stolicall seate, and such as rightly and skilfully under∣stand how to dispose their spirituall foode (in time convenient) unto their fel∣low servants (if yet at this time there remaine any great number of these in this our Country) but wee onely talke of ignorant and unexpert Shepherds, who leave their flock, & feed on vaine matters, for learned and good Pastours are free
from these vanities. And therefore it is an evident token that hee is not a law∣full Pastour, yea not an or∣dinary Christian, who re∣jecteth and denyeth these sayings, which are not so much ours (who of our selves are very little worth) as the decrees of the old and New Testament; even as one of ours right well doth say, We do exceeding∣ly desire that the enemies of the Church should also, with∣out any manner of truce, be our adversaries: and that the friends and defendours thereof, should not onely be accounted our confederates, but also our fathers and go∣vernours. For let every one with true examination, call
his owne conscience unto account, and so shall he ea∣sily finde, whether accor∣ding unto righteous reason hee possesseth his Priestly chaire or no. Let us see (I say) what the Saviour and Creator of the world hath spoken. Ye are (saith hee the salt of the earth,Math. 5.13 if that the salt vanisheth away, wherein shall it be salted? it prevaileth to no purpose any farther, but that it be cast out of the doores, and tram∣pled under the feete of men. This only testimony might abundantly suffice to con∣fute all such as are impu∣dent, but that it may be yet by the Words of Christ, more evidently prooved, with what huge intollera∣ble
bands of offences, these false priests, intangle and oppresse themselves, some other sayings are also to be adjoyned; For it followeth: Ye are the light of the world.Math. 5.14 A Cty placed on a mountaine cannot be hid, neither yet doe they light a candle, and put it under a bushell, but upon a candlesticke, that it may shine unto all who are in the house. What Preist therefore of this fashion and time, who is so possssed with the blindenesse of ignorance, doth as the light of a most cleere burning candle, shine with the lampe of learning and good workes, in any house, to all that sit in the darkesome night? What one is so accounted a safe
publike and apparant re∣fuge, to all the children u∣niversally of the Church, that he may be to his coun∣trimen a most defensible and strong City, situated on the top of an high moun∣taine? Moreover, which one of them can accomplish one day together, this that followeth:Mat. 5.16. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good workes, and glorifie your Father who is in Heaven: Since rather a certain most obscure cloud of theirs, and the blacke night of offences, do in that sort hang over the whole Iland, that they turne all almost away from the righ∣teous course, and make them to wander astray
through unpassable and cumbersome paths of wic∣kednesse, and so their hea∣venly Father is not onely by their workes not magni∣fied, but also by the same intollerably blasphemed. And truely I gladly would in some historicall or mor∣rall sense how so ever, wil∣lingly interpret (as farre forth as our meanenesse could afford) these testi∣monies of Holy Scripture, which are either already cited, or hereafter to be in∣termixed in this Epistle, but for feare least this our little worke, should be unmea∣surably tedious unto those who despise, loathe, and dis∣daine, not so much our spee∣ches as Gods sayings, I
have already alledged, and meane hereafter to affirme these sentences plainely without any circumstance. And to proceed, within a few words after:Mat. 5.19. For who shall breake one of the least of these Commandements, and so instruct men, shall be called the least in the Kingdome of Heaven.Mat. 7.1. And againe, Iudge ye not that ye may not be ad∣judged: for in what judge∣ment ye shall judge, ye shall be judged. And which one (I pray you) of your Com∣pany will regard this same that followeth;Mat. 7.3. But why dost thou see (saith he) the mote in the eye of thy brother, and considerest not the beame in thine owne eye? or how dost thou say to thy brother, suffer
me, I will cast the mote out of thine eye, and behold the beame remaineth still in thine owne eye? Or this insueing: Doe ye not give what is holy to dogges,Mat. 7.6. neither yet shall yee cast your pearles before swine, least perchance they tread them under their feete, and urning against ye breake ye asunder, which hath most often befallen unto ye. And admonishing the People, that they should not by de∣ceitfull Doctors (such as ye) be seduced hee saith: Keepe your selves carefully from false prophets,Mat. 7.15. who come unto yee in the clothing of sheepe, but inwardly are ra∣venous wolves: by their fruite shall ye know them. Do men gather grapes of thornes,
or figs of thistles? So every good tree beareth good fruite, and the evill, evill. And somewhat afterward: Not every one who saith unto me,Mat. 7.21. Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdome of Heaven, but who so doth the will of my father that is in Heaven, he shall enter into the Kingdome of Heaven. And what shall then become of yee, who (as the Prophet hath said) beleeve God onely with your lippes, and not adhere to him with your hearts. And how doe ye fulfill that which followeth;Mat. 10.16 Behold I send yee forth as sheepe a∣mong the midst of the wolves. Who doe cleane contrari∣wise, proceede as wolves against a flocke of sheepe;
or the other ensueing sen∣tence; Be ye wise as serpents and simple as doves,Mat. 10.16 since ye are onely wise to bite o∣thers, with your deadly mouthes, and not to defend (with the objection and ad∣venture of your whole bo∣dy) your head, which is Christ, whom with all the endeavours of your evill actions, yee treade under foote; neither yet have ye the simplicity of doves, but the resemblance rather of the blacke Crow, which ta∣king her flight out of the Arke, (which is the Church of God) and finding the carren of earthly pleasures, did never with a pure heart returne back thither againe. But let us looke on the rest.
Feare ye not (saith he) them who kill the body,Mat. 10.28 but are not able to slay the soule, but feare ye him, who can overthrow both soule and body into hell fire. Receive in your minds which of these ye have per∣formed? And what one of yee is not wounded in the very deepe secrets of his heart, with this testimony following, which our Sa∣viour uttereth unto his A∣postles, of evill prelats, say∣ing,Mat. 15.14. Doe ye suffer them, the blinde are leaders of the blinde, but if the blinde be a guide to the blinde, both shall fall into the ditch. But the people doubtlesse whom yee have governed, or ra∣ther beguiled, have just oc∣casion to listen hereunto.
Marke ye also the words of our Lord speaking unto his Apostles and to the people, which words likewise (as I heare) yee your selves are not ashamed to pronounce full often in publicke:Mat. 23.2. Vpon the chaire of Moses have Scribes and Pharisees sate, observe ye therefore and ac∣complish, all whatsoever they shall speake unto ye; but doe ye not according unto their workes. For they doe but speake, and they of themselves doe nothing. It is truely un∣to Priests a dangerous and superfluous doctrine, which is overclouded with sinfull actions. Woe be unto ye Hy∣pocrites,Mat. 23 13. who shut up the Kingdome of Heaven before men, your selves truely enter
not in, neither yet doe yee suffer those that are en∣tring to passe in. For yee shall with horrible paines bee tormented, not one∣ly in respect of the great offences of your wicked∣nesse, which ye doe heape up for punishment in the world to come, but also in regard of those who dayly perish through your bad example, whose blood in the day of judgement shall be required at your hands. Yeeld ye in like sort dili∣gent attention unto the mi∣sery, which the Parable setteth before your eyes that is spoken of the ser∣vant, who saith, Mat. 24.48. in his heart, my Lord maketh de∣lay
in his comming, and up∣on this occasion perchance, hath begunne to strike his fel∣low servants, eating and quaffing with drunkards. The Lord of the same ser∣vant therefore (saith hee) will come on a day when hee doth not expect him, and in an houre whereof hee is igno∣rant, and will divide him (from holy Priests undou∣tedly) and will place his portion with hypocrites (with them certainely who under the pretence of Priesthood doe shadow much iniqui∣ty) affirming that there shall bee weeping and gnash∣ing of teeth; Which sor∣row in this present life, neither for the daily ruines of the children of our holy
Mother the Church, nor yet for the desire of the Kingdome of Heaven, they have often sustained. But let us see what Paul, the true Schollar of Christ, and Ma∣ster of the Gentiles (who is a mirrour of every ecclesia∣sticall Doctor,1 Cor. 11.1. Even as I (saith he) am the Disciple of Christ) speaketh about a worke of such importance in his first Epistle on this wise: Because when they have knowne God,Rom. 1.25. they have not magnified him as God, or given thankes unto him; but vanished in their owne cogitations, and their foolsh heart is blinded, affirming themselves to be wise, they are made fooles. Although this seemeth to be spoken
unto the Gentiles; looke in∣to it notwithstanding, be∣cause it may conveniently be applyed unto the Priests and people of this age. And after a few words; Who have changed (saith he) the truth of God into lying,Rom. 1.25. and have reverenced and served the creature rather than the Creator who is blessed for e∣ver: therefore hath God gi∣ven them over unto the passi∣ons of ignominy. And againe,Rom. 1.28. And even as they have not approved themselves to have God in their knowledge, so God hath yeelded them up un∣to a reprobate sence, that they may doe such things as are not convenient, being replenished with all iniquitie, malice, un∣cleannesse of life, fornication,
covetousnesse, naughtinesse, full of envie, murther, (of the soules truely of the peo∣ple) contention, deceipt, wic∣kednesse, backbiters detra∣cters, hatefull to God, spite∣full, proud, puffed up, devi∣sers of mischiefes, disobedient to their Parents, senselesse, disordered, without mercy, without affection, who when they had knowne the justice of God, understood not that they who commit such things, are worthy of death. And now what one of the afore∣cited sort hath indeede beene voyde of all these? And if he were, yet per∣haps hee may be caught in the sense of the ensuing sen∣tence, wherein hee saith; Not onely who doe these
things, but also who consent unto the doers,Rom. 1.31. to wit, that none of them truely are free from this wickednesse. And afterwards; But thou according to thy hardinesse,Rom. 2.5. and impenitent heart, dost lay up for thy selfe wrath, a∣gainst the day of wrath, and revelation of the just judge∣ment of God, who will yeeld unto every one according un∣to his workes. And againe, For there is no acceptation of persons with God.Rom. 2.11. For who∣soever have offended without the Law, shall also without the law perish: whosoever have offended in the Law, shall by the Law be judged. For not the hearers of the Law, shall with God be ac∣counted just, but the dooers
of the law shall be justified. How severe a sentence shall they therfore sustaine, who not onely leave undone, what they ought to accom∣plish, and forbeare not what they are forbidden, but also flie as an hideous snake, the very hearing of the word of God, though lightly sounding in their eares. But let us passe over to that which followeth to this effect:Rom. 6.1. What shall wee therefore say, shall we conti∣nue still in our sinne, that grace may abound? God for∣bid, for we who are dead in sinne, how shall wee againe live in the same? And some∣what afterwards,Rom. 8.35 Who shall separate us (saith hee) from the charity of Christ? tribu∣lation,
or distresse, or perse∣cution, or famine, or naked∣nesse, or danger, or the sword? What one (I pray you) of all you, shall with such an affection be possessed in the inward secret of his heart, since ye doe not only labor for atchieving of piety, but also indure many things for the working of impiety, and offending of Christ? Or who hath respected this that followeth:Rom. 13.2 The night hath passed, and the day ap∣preached. Let us therefore cast of the workes of darke∣nesse, and put on the armour of light, even as in the day, let us honestly walke, not in banqueting, and drunkennes, not in couches, and wanton∣nesse, not in contention, and
emulation, but put ye on our Lord Iesus Christ, and make no care to bestow your flesh in concupiscences. And againe, in the first Epistle to the Co∣rinthians, hee saith: As a wise workemaster have I laid the foundation,1 Cor. 3.10. another buil∣deth thereupon, but let eve∣ry man consider how he buil∣deth thereon. For no man can lay any other foundation be∣sides that which is Christ Ie∣sus. But if any man buildeth upon this, gold, and silver, pretious stones, hay, wood, stubble, every ones worke shall be manifests; for the day of our Lord shall declare the same, because it shall be revea∣led in fire, and the fire shall prove what every mans work is. If any mans worke shall
remaine, all by the fire shall be adjudged. Who so shall build thereupon, shall receive reward. If any mans worke shall burne, he shall suffer de∣triment. Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God inha∣biteth in ye? but if any man violate the Temple of God, God will destroy him. And againe,1 Cor. 3.18. If any man seemeth among yee to be wise in this world, let him be made a foole that he may become wise. For the wisedome of this world, is foolishnesse with God. And within some words after∣wards: Your glorying is not good.1 Cor. 5.6. Know ye not, that a lit∣tle leaven corrupteth the whole masse? Purge ye there∣fore the old leaven, that ye
may be a new sprinkling. How shall the old leaven, (which is sinne) be purged away, that from day to day with your uttermost endea∣vours is encreased. And yet againe.1. Cor. 5.9. I have written unto ye in mine Epistle, that ye be not intermingled with forni∣cators, not truely the forni∣cators of this world, or the avaritious, ravenous, or ido∣latrous, otherwise ye ought to depart out of this world. But now have I written unto ye, that ye be not intermingled, if any one is named a brother, and be a fornicator, or ava∣ritious, or an idolator, or a slaunderer, or a drunkard, or ravenous, with such an one, ye should not so much as eate. But a felon condemneth not
his fellow theefe for stea∣ling, or other open robbe∣ry, whom he rather liketh, defendeth, and loveth, as a companion of his offence. Also in his second Epistle unto the Corinthians; Ha∣ving therefore (saith he) this administration,2 Cor. 4.2. according to that we have obtained mercy, let us not faile, but let us cast away the secrets of shame, not walking in subtilty, nor yet corrupting the word of God, (that is by evil example and flattery.) And in that which followeth, he doth thus dis∣course of wicked Doctors, saying: For such false apo∣stles are deceitful workemen,2 Cor. 11.13 transfiguring themselves in∣to the Apostles of Christ. And no wonder. For Sathan
himselfe transfigureth him into an Angel of light. It is not much therefore if his ministers are transfigured as ministers of justice, whose end will be according unto their workes. Listen yee likewise what hee speaketh unto the Ephesians? and consider if ye find not your consciences attainted as culpable of this that fol∣loweth? where he denoun∣ceth thus;Ephes. 4.17 I say and testifie this in our Lord, that ye doe not as now walke like the Gen∣tiles in the vanity of their owne sence, having their un∣derstanding obscured with darkenesse, alienated from the way of God, through igno∣rance, which remaineth in them in regard of the blind∣nesse
of their heart, who de∣spairing, have yeelded them∣selves over to uncleannesse of life, for the working of all filthinesse and avarice. And which of ye hath willingly fulfilled this that next ensu∣eth;Ephes. 5.17 Therefore be ye not made unwise, but understanding what is the will of God, and be ye not drunke with wine, wherein there is riotousnesse, but bee yee fulfilled with the holy Ghost. Or that which he saith to the Thessaloni∣ans.1 Thess. 2.5 For neither have wee beene with ye at any time in the speech of flattery, as your selves doe know; neither up∣on occasion of avarice, neither seeking to be glorified by men, neither by ye, nor any others, when as wee might be honou∣red
as other Apostles of Christ. But wee have beene made as little ones in the midst of ye, or even as the nurse cherisheth her small tender children, so desiring yee, we would very gladly de∣liver unto yee, not onely the Gospel, but also our very lives. If in all things yee retained this affection of the Apo∣stle, then might ye be like∣wise assured, that ye lawful∣ly possessed his chaire. Or how have ye observed this that followeth: Yee know (saith hee) what precepts I have delivered unto yee.1 Thess. 4.2 This is the will of our Lord, your sanctification, that ye abstaine your selves from fornication, and that every one of ye know to possesse his owne vessell, in
honour and sanctification, not in the passion of desire, like to the Gentiles who are ignorant of God, and that none of you doe encroach upon or circum∣vent his brother in his busi∣nesse, because our Lord is the revenger of all these. For God hath not called us into uncleannesse; but unto sancti∣fication. Therefore who de∣spiseth these, doth not despise man, but God. What one also among you hath advi∣sedly and warily kept this that insueth: Mortifie there∣fore your members which are upon the earth,Colos. 5.3. fornication, uncleannesse of life, lust, and evill concupiscence, for the which the wrath of God hath come upon the children of dis∣fidence. Ye perceive there∣fore
upon what offences the wrath of God doth chiefe∣ly arise, in which respect do ye likewise heare what the same holy Apostle with a Propheticall spirit, fore∣telleth of you, and such as your selves, writing plaine∣ly in this sort to Timothy; For know you this,2 Tim. 3.1 that in the last daies there shall be dan∣gerous times at hand. For men shall be selfelovers, co∣vetous, puffed up, proud, blas∣phemous, disobedient to their parents, ungratefull, wicked, without affection, inconti∣nent, unmeeke, without be∣nignity, betrayers, froward, lofty▪ rather lovers of sensu∣all pleasures, then of God, having truely a show of piety, but renouncing the vertue
thereof, and avoide thou these men. Even as the Prophet saith; I have hated the con∣gregation of the malitious,Psal. 25.5. and with the wicked I will not sit. And a little after, he ut∣tereth that (which in our age we behold to encrease) saying: Ever learning, and never attaining unto the knowledge of truth:2 Tim. 3.7 For e∣ven as Iannes and Mambres resisted Moses, so doe these also withstand the truth: men corrupted in minde, re∣probate against faith, but they shall prosper no further; for their folly shall be manifest unto all, as theirs likewise was. And evidently doth he also declare how Priests in their office ought to behave themselves, writing thus
to Titus, Shew thy selfe an example of good workes,Tit. 2.7. in learning, in integrity, in gra∣vity, having thy word sound without offence, that he who standeth on the adverse part, may be afraid, having o evill to speake of us. And moreo∣ver hee saith unto Timothy; Labour thou as a good Soul∣dier of Christ Iesus,2 Tim. 2.3. no man fighting in Gods quarrell in∣tangleth himselfe in worldly businesses, that he may please him unto whom hee hath ap∣prooved himselfe, for who so striveth in the lists for the mastery, receiveth not the crowne, unlesse he hath law∣fully contnded. This is un∣doubtedly his exhortation given to the good. Other matter also which the same
Epistles contain, is a threat∣ning advertisement unto the wicked (such as your selves, in the judgment of al under∣standing persons, appeare to be.) If any one (saith he) teacheth otherwise,1 Tim. 6.3. and doth not peaceably assent to the sound sayings of our Lord Ie∣sus Christ, and that doctrine which is according unto piety, he is proud, having no know∣ledge, but languishing about questions, and contentions of words, out of the which doe springing arise, envies, de∣bates blasphemies, evill suspi∣cions, conflicts of men cor∣rupted in minde, who are de∣prived of truth, esteeming commodity to be piety. But why in using these testimo∣nies, here and there disper∣sed,
are we any longer (as it were) tossed up and down in the silly boate of our sim∣ple understanding, on the waves of sundry interpreta∣tions? We have now there∣fore at the length thought it necessary, to have re∣course even unto those les∣sons, which are worthily gathered out of almost all Texts of holy Scriptures, to the end they should not onely be rehearsed, but al∣so be assenting and assisting unto the benediction, where with the hands of Priests, and others of inferiour sa∣cred orders, are first conse∣crated, and that therby they may continually be warned never by degenerating from their Priestly dignity,
to digresse from the Com∣mandements, which are faithfully contained in the same; so as it may be plaine and apparant unto all, that everlasting torments are re∣served for them, that they are not Priests, or the ser∣vants of God, who doe not with their uttermost power follow and fulfill these in∣structions and precepts. Wherefore let us hearken what the Prince of the A∣postles, Saint Peter, hath signified about this so weighty a matter saying: Blessed be God,1 Pet. 1.3. and the Father of our Lord Iesus Christ, who through his mercy hath rege∣nerated us into the hope of e∣ternall life, by the resurrecti∣on of our Lord Iesus Christ
from the dead, into an inheri∣tance wch can never corrupt, never wither, neither be defi∣led, conserved in heaven for yee, who are kept in the ver∣tue of God; Why then doe ye fondly violate such an inheritance, which is not as an earthly one, transitory, but immortall and eternall? And somewhat afterwards; For which cause be ye girded in the loynes of your minde,1 Pet. 1.13. sober, perfectly hoping in that grace which is offered ye in the revelation of Iesus Christ: Examine ye now the depths of your hearts, whether yee be sober and doe perfectly conserve the grace of Priesthood, which shall bee duely discussed and decided in the Revela∣tion
of our Lord. And a∣gaine he saith,1 Pet. 1.4. As children of the benediction, not confi∣guring your selves to those former desires of your igno∣rance, but according unto him who hath called yee holy, be ye also holy in all conver∣sation. For which cause it is written; Be ye holy because I am holy. Which one of ye (I pray) hath with the bur∣ning desire of the-whole minde, so pursued sanctitie, that he hath earnestly ha∣stened, as much as in him lay, to fulfill the same? But let us behold what in the second lesson of the same Apostle is conteined,1 Pet. 1.22. My deerest (saith he) san∣ctiie your soules for the obe∣dience of faith through the
spirit in charitie, in brother∣hood, loving one another out of a true heart perpetually, as borne againe not of corrup∣tible seede, but of incorrup∣tible, through the Word of God, living and remaining for ever. These are truely the Commandements of the Apostle; and read in the day of your ordination, to the end ye should invio∣lably observe the same, but they are not fulfilled by ye in discretion and judge∣ment, nay not so much as duely considered or under∣stood. And afterwards, Lay∣ing therefore aside all malice,1 Pet. 2.1. & al deceipt, & dissemblings, and envie, and detractions, as infants now newly borne, reasonable and without guile
covet ye milke, that ye may thereby grow to salvation, because our Lord is sweet. Re∣count yee also in your mindes, if these sayings which have sounded in your deafe eares, have not often likewise bin troden by ye underfoote; And againe, Ye truely are the chosen li∣nage,2 Pet. 2.9. the royall Priesthood, the holy nation, the people for adoption, that ye may declare his vertues, who hath called yee out of darkenesse into that his so mervoilous light. But truely by yee are not onely the vertues of God not de∣clared and made more glo∣rious but also through your wicked examples are they (by such as have not perfect beleefe) despised. Ye have
perchance at the same time likewise heard, what is read in the lesson of the Acts, on this wise; Peter arising in the middest of the Disci∣ples sayd;Act. 1.15. Yee men my bre∣thren, it is expedient the Scripture be fulfilled, which the holy Ghost hath by the mouth of David foretold of Iudas. And a little after, This man hath therefore purchased afield,Act. 1.18. of the reward of iniqui∣tie. This have yee heard with a carelesse or rather blockish heart, as though the reading thereof had nothing at all apperteined unto your selves. What one of yee (I pray yee) doth not seeke the fielde of the reward of iniquitie? For Iudas robbed and pilled the
purse, and yee spoyle and waste the sacred gifts and treasures of the Church, together with the soules of her children. Hee went to the Iewes to make a Mar∣ket of God, ye passe to the Tyrants, and their father the Devill that ye may de∣spise Christ. He did set to sale the Saviour of the world for thirty pence, and yee even for one poore half-penny; what neede many words? The exam∣ple of Matthias is appa∣rently layd before yee for your confusion, who was chosen into his place, not by his owne proper will, but by the election of the holy Apostles, or rather the judgement of Christ, wher∣at
ye being blinded, doe not perceive how farre yee run astray from his merits, while yee fall wilfully and headlong, into the manners and affection of Iudas the traytor. It is therefore ma∣nifest that he who wittingly from his heart, tearmeth ye Priests, is not himselfe true∣ly a worthy Christian. And now I will assuredly speake what I thinke: This repre∣hension might have beene framed after a milder fashi∣on, but what availeth it to touch onely with the hand, or dresse with a gentle oyntment, that wound which with impostumation or stinking corruption, groweth now in it selfe so horrible, as it requireth the
searing iron, or the ordinary helpe of the fire, if happily by any meanes it may bee recured, the diseased in the meane while not seeking a medicine, and the Physiti∣an much erring from a rightfull remedy? O yee enemies of God, and not Priests; O yee traders of wickednesse and not Bi∣shops, O yee betrayers and not successours of the holy Apostles, O ye adversaries and not servants of Christ! Yee have certainely heard at the least, the sound of the words, which are in the se∣cond lesson taken out of the Apostle Saint Paul, although ye have no way observed the admonitions and vertue of them, but even as sta∣tues
(that doe neither see nor heare) stood that day at the Altar, while both then and continualy since he hath thundred in your eares saying; Brethren it is a faith∣full speech,1 Tim. 3.1. and worthy of all acceptance. Hee called it faithfull and worthy, but ye have despised it, as unfaith∣full and unworthy. If any man coveteth a Bishopricke,1 Tim. 3.1. he deireth a goodworke. Ye doe mightily covet a Bi∣shopricke in respect of ava∣rice, but not upon occasion of spirituall commoditie, and for the good worke which is convenient for the place; ye want it. It beho∣veth therefore such an one,1 Tim. .2. to be voyde of all cause of re∣prehension. At this saying
we have more neede to shed teares than utter words; for it is as much as if the Apostle had sayd, He ought to be of all others most free from occasion of rebuke.1 Tim. 3.2. The husband of one wife, which is lkewise so contemned among us, as if that word had never pro∣ceeded from him;1 Tim. 3.2. Sober, Wise, Yea which of ye hath once desired to have these vertues ingrafted in him, Vsing hospitality. For this, if perchance it hath beene found among ye,Ibidem. yet being neverthelesse rather done to purchase the favour of the people, then to accom∣plish the Commandement, it is of none availe, our Lord and Saviour saying
thus; Verely I say unto yee, they have received their reward.Mat. 6.2. Moreover, A man adorned,1 Tim. 3.2. not given to wine; no fighter; but modest; not contentius, not cove∣tous: O lamentable change! O horrible contempt of the heavenly Com∣mandements! And doe ye not continually use the force of your words and actions, for the overthrow∣ing or rather overwhel∣ming of these, for whose defence and confirmation (if neede had required) yee ought to have suffered paines, yea and to have lost your very lives. But let us see what followeth; Well governing (saith he) his house,Ibidem. having his children
subjected with all chastity. Imperfect therefore is the chastity of the Parents, if the children be not also in∣dued with the same. But how shall it be, where nei∣ther the father, nor yet the sonne as depraved by the example of his evill parent, is found to be chaste?1 Tim. 3.5. But if any one knoweth not how to rule over his owne house, how shall hee imploy his care over the Church of God? These are the words, that with apparant effects, shold be made good and approo∣ved.1 Tim. 3.8. Deacons in like man∣ner, that they should be chast, not double tongued, not o∣vergiven much to wine, not followers of filthy gaine, ha∣ving the mystery of faith in
a pure conscience, and let these also be first approoved, and so let them administer, having no offence. And now trem∣bling truely to make any longer stay on these mat∣ters, I can for a conclusion affirme one thing certaine∣ly, which is; that all these are changed into contrary actions, in so much that Clarkes, (which not with∣out griefe of heart, I doe here confesse) are shame∣lesse and deceitfull in their speeches, given to drinking, covetous of filthy commo∣dity, having faith (or to say more truely) unfaithfulnesse in an unpure conscience, mi∣nistring not upon probati∣on of their good workes, but upon foreknowledge of
their evill actions, and be∣ing thus defiled with innu∣merable offences, they are notwithstanding admitted unto the holy function, ye have likewise heard on the same day (wherin ye should with farre more right and reason have beene drawne to prison or punishment, then preferred unto Priest∣hood) when our Lord de∣manded whom his Disci∣ples supposed him to be, how Peter answered; Thou art Christ,Mat. 16.16 the Sonne of the li∣ving God, and our Lord in respect of such his confessi∣on, said unto him: Blessed art thou Simon Bajonas,Mat. 16.17. be∣cause flesh and blood hath not revealed unto thee, but my Father who is in Heaven. Pe∣ter
therefore instructed by God the Father, doth right∣ly confesse Christ; but ye being taught by the devill your father, doe with your lewd actions, wickedly de∣ny our Saviour. It is said to the true Priest, Thou art Peter,Mat. 16.18 and upon this rocke will I build my Church: But ye are resembled unto the foolish man,Mat. 7.26. who hath buil∣ded his house upon the sand. And verily it is to be noted, that God joyneth not in workemanship with the un∣wise, when they build their house upon the deceitfull uncertainty of the sands, ac∣cording unto that saying: They have made Kings unto themselves▪ and not by me. Semblably that (which fol∣loweth)
soundeth in like sort,Mat. 16.17 speaking thus: And the Gates of hell (whereby the infernall sins are to be understood) shall not pre∣vaile. But of your fraile and deadly frame, marke what is pronounced? The floods came,Mat. 7.25. and the winds blew, & have mainely dashed upon that house and it sell, and great was the ruine thereof. To Peter and his successors our Lord doth say: And I will give unto thee the Keyes of the Kingdome of Heaven:Ma▪t 16.18 But unto ye; I know yee not, depart from me ye workers of iniquity, that being separa∣ted with the goates of the left hand, ye may together with them, go into eternall fire. It is also promised un∣to
every good Priest;Mat. 16.18. He speakes not of the power and jurisdiction but of the decency and itnes ince no Priest but may absolve another though in sinne him∣self, neither can he ex∣cummuni∣cate him∣selfe. Prov. 5.22. What soever thou shalt loose upon earth, shall be likewise loosed in heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt binde upon earth, shall be in like sort bound in Heaven. But how shall ye loose any thing, that it may be loosed also in Heaven, since your selves for your sins are severed from Hea∣ven, and hampred in the bands of your owne hai∣nous offences, As Solomon saith: With the cords of his sins, every one is tyed? And with what reason shall ye binde any thing on this earth, that above this world may be likewise bound, un∣lesse it be your only selves, who intangled in your ini∣quities, are so detained on
this earth, as ye cannot as∣cend into Heaven, but with∣out your conversion unto our Lord in this life, will fall downe into the misera∣ble prison of hell? Neither yet let any Priest flatter himselfe upon the know∣ledge of the particular cleannenesse of his owne body, since their soules (o∣ver whom he hath govern∣ment) shall in the day of Iudgement be required at his hands as the murtherer of them, if any through his ignorance, loth, or faw∣ning adulation have perish∣ed, because the stroke of death is not lesse terrible, that is given by a good man then which is inflicted by an evill person: Otherwise
would the Apostle never have said that which he left unto his successors, as a fa∣therly Legacy; I am cleare and cleane from the blood of all:Act. 20.26. for I have not forborne to declare unto ye al the coun∣sell of God. Being therefore mightily drunken with the use and custome of sinnes, and extreamely overwhel∣med with the waves, (as it were) of encreasing offen∣ces, seek ye now forthwith the uttermost endeavours of your mindes, (after this your shipwrake) that one borde of pennance, which is onely left, whereby ye may escape and swimme to the land of the living, that from yee may be turned a∣way the wrath of our Lord,
who saith: I will not the death of a sinner:Ezec. 33.11 but that he may bee converted and live. And the same Almighty God, of all consolation and mercy preserve his few good Pastors from all evill, and (the common enemy being overcome) make them free inhabitants of the heavenly City of Ierusalem, which is the congregation of all Saints, grant this, O Father, Sonne, and Holy Ghost, to whom be honor and glory, world without end, Amen. FINIS.
