12452 99839264 3669
ARMANDVS IOANNES DV PLESIS. Cardinalis de Richelieu Sic oculis, sic Ille manu▪ sic ore decorus: Pallada, in hoc Martem Mercuriumque Vides. P. G. De Vauchelles.
THE LETTERS OF MOVNSIEVR DE BALZAC. Translated into English, according to the last Edition. By W. T. Esq. Lege, & Collige. LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Okes, for Richard Clotterbuck, and are to be sold at his shop, at the Ball in Little-Brittaine. 1634.
TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE WILLIAM Lord CRAVEN, Baron of Hamsted-Marshall, &c. My LORD, NOt to know your Lordship, is an ignorance next Barba∣risine, but to be knowne vn∣to you, is an honour my am∣bition hath alwayes aymed at, but which my want of merit, or euill fortune, neuer yet attained. In making this tender of my truest seruice, I offer you the Votes of all (who not poysoned by that Viper Enuie) iustly extoll courage in youth, not forced to action, but by the only spurre of glory. The vni∣uersall world (among the wonders of our age) numbers you: and our world hauing
the happinesse to boast her selfe your mo∣ther, cherisheth you, as a man shee hath long time laboured to produce. This Pre∣sent is but a Translation; which yet may (happily) as well for the generall benefit, as particular choice, bee equall to an origi∣nall, you can best iudge: I haue therefore in part, vindicated my selfe from those who may accuseme of not knowledge, or negli∣gence. I submit all to your censure; and with this small testimony of my deuotion to true Nobility, doe here sue to haue these first fruits of my labours, placed vnder the protection of so Honourable a Patron; whose vertues, as they are worthy to bee admired by all, so shall they, together with this so noble a fauour, bee euer duely ac∣knowledged by My Lord, Your humblest seruant,William Tirwhyt.
To the Lord CARDINALL of Richelieu. MY LORD, I Here present you Mounsieur Bal∣zac's Letters, which may well bee tearmed new ones, euen after the eighth Edition; for though they haue long since beene in possession of pub∣like fauour, yet may I iustly say, this is the first time their Authour hath auouched them. The aduantagious iudgement you haue deliuered of him, and the ardor wherewith all France hath followed your approbation, well deserueth his best endeauours toward the perfectionating so excellent things: I haue beene solicitous to draw him to this la∣bour, to the end the world might know, that if I bee not worthy the share I haue in his respects, yet that I haue at least beene wise enough to make right vse of my good fortune, and to cause it to become seruiceable to the glory of my Countrey. But truely, were hee master of his body, or did his maladies afford him liberty of spirit, hee would not suffer any but himselfe to speake in this cause; and
his Pen performing no slight acts, would haue consecrated his owne labours, and the wonders they haue produced. But since euills haue no prefixed time of durance, and in that all the good interims which hereafter may befall him, are wholly to be imployed in his Booke, The Prince; I esteemed it to small purpose to attend his health in this businesse, and that it was now no longer any time to deferre the purging of these curious Letters, from such blemishes as ill impressions had left▪ vpon them. They shall therefore now appeare in the parity wherein they were conceiued, and with all their naturall ornaments: Besides, I haue added diuers letters of his, not as yet come to light, which may serue as a subiect of greater sa∣tisfaction to all men, and bee as a recompense of the ho∣nour wherewith he hath collected the former. And truly (my Lord) had it beene possible to place in the Fron∣tispiece of this Booke, a more illustrious name then yours, or should Mounsieur de Balzac's incsination▪ and mine haue beene farre from any such intention, yet would not the order of things, or the law of decency haue permitted any other reflection, then what I now make: I speake not at this present, of that dazeling greatnesse whereunto you are eleuated, nor of that so rare and necessary vertue, which rightly to recognize, the greatest King on earth hath esteemed himselfe not to bee ouer able. I will onely say, I had reason to submit an eloquence produced in the shade, and formed in solitarinesse, to this other eloquence quickned both with voyce and action, causing you to reigne in soueraignety at all assemblies. Certainely (my Lord) you are more powerfull by this incomparable quality, then by the authority wherein the King hath
placed you: The onely accent of your voyce hath a hidden property, to charme all such as hearken vnto you; none can bee possessed with any so willfull passions, who will not be appeased by the reasons you propound; and after you haue spoken, you will at all times remaine master of that part of man, no way subiect to the worlds order, and which hath not any dependency vpon lawfull power, or tyranni∣call vsurpation. This is a trueth (my Lord) as well knowne as your name, and which you so solidly confirmed at the last assembly of the Notables; as that in the great diuersity of humours and iudgements, whereof it was composed, there was peraduenture this onely point well resolued on, That you are the most eloquent man liuing. This being true, I can no way doubt, but the perusall of this Booke I offer vnto you, will extraordina∣rily content you, and that you will bee well pleased to re∣tire thither, sometimes to recreate your spirits after agitation, and to suspend those great thoughts, who haue for their obiect the good of all Europe. It is a Booke (my Lord) wherein you shall find no common thing but the Title; (where entertaining some particular person) Mounsieur de Balzac reades Lessons to all men; and where amidst the beauty of Complements and dexterity of Ieasting, he often teacheth of the most sublime points of Philosophy: I meane not that wrangling part thereof which reiecteth necessary verities, to seeke after vnprofi∣table ones, which cannot exercise the vnder standing with∣out prouoking passions, nor speake of moderation with∣out distemper, and putting the soule into disorder: But of that, whereby Pericles heretofore made himselfe ma∣ster of Athens, and wherewith Epaminondas raised
himselfe to the prime place of Greece: which tempereth the manners of particulars, regulateth the obligation of Princes, and necessarily bringeth with it the felicity of all States where they command. This booke will make it apparent euen to your enemies, that your life hath beene at all times equally admirable, though not alwayes alike glorious: How you haue conserued the opinion of your vertue, euen in the time of your hardest fortunes, and how in the greatest fury of the tempest, and in the most extreame violence of your affaires, the integrity of your actions hath neuer beene reduced to the onely testi∣mony of your conscience. To conclude, It is in this Booke (my Lord) where I suppose you will bee well plea∣sed to reade the presages of your present greatnesse, and what hath beene foretold; not by Astrologicall rules, or the aspect of some Constellation, but by a true discourse founded vpon the maximes of reason, and experience of things past; causing him to presume, that God hath not conferred such extraordinary endowments vpon you, to be for euer encloistered within your selfe: And that he hath loued France better, then to depriue her of the good you ought to procure her. But all these verities shall one day be comprised in that worke the King, by your mouth, (my Lord) hath commanded Mounsieur de Balzac to vndertake, and which one yeere of leisure will effect. There shall it be, where he will cause all men to confesse, that to haue the pourtraict of a perfect Prince, the reigne of so great a Monarch as ours▪ is to bee attended; that the Diuine Prouidence neuer shewed it selfe more ap∣parantly, then in the conduct of his designes, and in the euent of his enterprises; and how Heauen hath so farre
declared it selfe in his fauour, that were his state assaul∣ted on all sides, and all ordinary meanes of defence should faile him; he hath vertue sufficient to saue himselfe, and performe miracles. Now as you are the prime intelli∣gence of his Councill, and your cogitations the first cau∣ses of the good resolutions therein taken, you are not to doubt (my Lord) but you likewise possesse the princi∣pall place therein, after His Maiestie; and that you participate more then any other of His triumphs. There shall you be reuenged of all those wretched writings you haue formerly slighted: There the spirits of all men shall bee satisfied in the iustice of your deportments, and ca∣lumny it selfe will there bee so powerfully conuinced, that to cry downe so legall a gouernement as yours, ill af∣fected French-men, and those strangers enemies to this Crowne, will finde no further pretext in affaires, nor credulity among men. And truely, when I (on the one side) consider how fat all it is to those who gouerne, to be exposed to the enuy of great ones, and complaints of meaner persons, and how Publike affaires haue this fa∣tality, as how pure soeuer the administration thereof be, they still afford sufficient colour to calumny, to disguise them and cause them to appeare iniust. And on the other side, when I consider that to guide this State is no lesse then to manage a body hauing no one sound part; and how there is no sicke person who doeth not sometimes murmure against his Phisitian; I dare bee confident (my Lord) that such a man as Mounsieur de Balzac will not prooue vnusefull vnto you, and that the lustre of your actions, and glory of your life shall receiue no diminution in his hands. I would say more, did I not
feare to disoblige him in commending him, or if I belee∣ued him to be so great a selfe admirer as his enemies figure him vnto vs. But I who haue sufficiently studied him to know him▪ and who am acquainted with his most secret Inclinations, and the most particular conception▪s he hath in his soule, and of a farre different opinion to theirs. I will therefore rest there (my Lord) and not to cause you to loose more time, and to the end you may the sooner inioy the entertainement, this excellent Booke prepareth for you: I will satisfie my selfe in letting you know, that I esteeme not my selfe so vnfortunate as for∣merly I did, since I haue happened vpon so faire an occasion, to let you know that I am, My Lord, Your thrise humble, and most obedient seruant, Silbon.
THE PREFACE Vpon the Letters of Mounsieur de BALZAC: By Mounsieur de la Motte Aigron. I Doubt not, but among those who shall see these Works; some there are who will esteeme them worthy a more aduantagious Title then that of Letters, as well in regard of the greatnesse of those things therein frequent∣ly handled, as in respect of the exactnesse where∣wherewith they seeme to haue beene composed: Butas I willingly excuse those, who with vnapt complements imagine they haue composed a good Letter; nor doe any more blame such as there in neuer digresse from their perticular affaires, o must I likewise acknowledge, that such writings as these, hauidg not beene made with any intention to bee put in Print, the World might well haue passed
without them: And that it is only allowed to the Germans to giue account to the age they liue in, and to posteritie forsooth, concerning the affaires and fortunes of their particular families, and of the silly acts of their Colleagues. Truely it is an errour to beleeue, that graue and solemne subiects are to bee banished out of all Letters, or that euen eloquence ought but slackly therein to appeare; and that the Maiestie of both these is only reserued for Pulpits and Panegyrick Orations; as though valour neuer appeared saue onely in pitcht Battells; and that in single Combats it were lawfull to run away, or that vertue therein were vtterly vnusefull, because it hath fewer witnesses, neither is so fully regarded: But besides that, wee are no longer in those times where∣in the State gouernment was publiquely question∣ed, where the Oratours forced the Lieutenants ge∣nerall of armies to render accompt of their seuerall charges, and that consequently, there is no more any meanes remaining to become eloquent in that kind: Yet are there reasons, whereby w̄ee may vn∣derstand the merit of Letters to bee of no lesse re∣gard then that of Orations. Howbeit, if there bee any necessitie to find some difference betweene these; this at least can neither be in regard of the dignitie of the Subiects, the force of Reasons, the gracefullnesse of Discourses, nor in the sublimitie of Conceits. To speake trueth, when I consider the Orations yet remaining among the ruines of former ages, some where of were publikely pronounced, o∣thers onely penned; I am so farre from admiring
any aduantage they haue ouer those Letters now extant among vs, both of the same Authors and A∣ges, as I doe not so much as wonder at all, how the first hauing beene armed with discourse and voice, together with the gesture and motion of the body, haue produced such prodigious effects as wee all know, and haue so often, as it were by maine force, extorted the consents of all hearers; yet the second, though they had not the like arms and allurements, haue notwithstanding not beene any way icient. Those smooth Exordiums whereby they prepare, and put themselues by easie accesses, as it were into possession of the Readers, those straites and pas∣sages whereby they conduct the spirits of men from pleasant to painefull, and from grieuous, to graci∣ous obiects, to the end, that hauing in a maner sha∣ken and cast them out of their former stations, they may afterwards force them to fall on what side they please. Surely all these aduantages are so peculiar to Orations, as I ingeniously confesse, Letters doe not so much as know what they meane. In these, we enter at the first dash vpon the matter, nor doe wee scarse at any time, quit the same; the reasons goe altogether alone without assistance, and all the or∣nament allowed them, is onely freedome of concep∣tions, the fecunditie of language, and that they passe not promiscuously. But as concerning the Subiects, they are common to both kinds of wri∣tings, and it is an errour to imagine, there are some so particular to the one, that the other cannot touch vpon the same withont iniurie thereunto. Vpon the
matter, Panegyrick discourses, Apologies, Con∣fultations, Iudgements vpon morall actions, whe∣ther good or bad opinions and censures vpon occur∣rents, of those which please, and those wee ought to detest, yea euen indifferent accidents▪ briefely what∣soeuer may fall into discourse, and vnder reason, are the obiects of Letters: So wee see, the greatest and most important misteries of our religion haue been left vnto vs in Letters. All the wisedome of the Pagan contained in those of Seneca, and wee owe to those Cicero wrot to his friends, the knowledge of the secrets, and certaine inducements which caused the greatest reuolutions the world hath euer known, to witt the shaking and subuersion of the Romane Reipublike, wee are therefore to confesse Oratoricall Treatises to haue no other subiect then Letters; and that if there bee any difference, it is none other then what is obserued betweene our ancient Seas, and those not discouered vnto vs till in our fathers times. The latter are no lesse deepe then the other, they are capable of the like shipping; their ebbes, and floods are neither more iust, nor lesse vncertaine; and all the difference discouered betweene them is onely this, that the windes tosse not those in like fort as it doth ours, and in that they are seldome or neuer subiect either to stormes, or tempests. In like manner it being within the power and capacitie of Letters to treate of the same things, how much more emenent and excellent soeuer one may con∣ceiue them to be then any other kind of writings, yet doe they not indeede receiue those extraordina∣ry
motions which appeare in Orations, since neither the like high of excesse, nor the same Enthusias∣mes or Raptures are herein found; In a word, it is a more middle beauty, and a more calme elo∣quence. And surely, if the subiect wee make vse of be as illustrious as the person before whom wee are to handle it, were it not as much as to abuse both the one and the other, to come short in our ex∣pressions: Since the action ought neither to be pub∣lique, nor generall, if you intend to performe it negligently, and not to allow it all the ornaments whereof it is capable. And who can doubt that Ci∣cero being to make an Oration before Caesar, after the change of the Common-wealth, had not a grea∣ter apprehension, and prepared not himselfe with more studious care, then if he had onely spoken to that beast with an hundred heads, hee had so often led after his owne Phantasie, and whereof hee was in so full possession so long before, as to cause them to take the part best pleasing vnto him. In these last occasions, and in the presence of this man alone, he know with whom he had to doe: Now had he beene timerous, or fearefull to faile before his Master, yet impute not this apprehension of his to proceede ei∣ther out of consideration hee had of his greatnesse, nor from the reflection vpon those things hee came to accomplish: But it was in that he considered him as a man no lesse versed in the art of well-speaking then himselfe, and who had heretofore contributed to the study of this science, so many rare gifts of spirit, and so many faire indowments of nature,
that had he not afterward esteemed it more noble to conquer men by armes, then to conuince them by arguments, and if of the two most excellent exercises of this life, his fortune and the famous∣nesse of his courage, had not caused him to make choyce of the former, hee might easily haue dispu∣ted for the glory of the latter with him. Or were it so that this excellent Oratour might at this day returne into the world, and were personally, or by his Penne to discourse with those two great Cardi∣nalls to whom the most part of these Letters are ad∣drest▪ is it not probable, comming to know them as wee doe, that he would imploy, and contribute a a more exact study and solicitude, then when hee was onely to please a multitude of ignorant Plebei∣ans, and to speake to all that rable of ancient Rome. Wee shall yet againe bee amazed at the perfection of these Letters, some whereof are written to the King, and appointed to bee read (as in trueth they were) with admiration in full counsell, and a great part of the rest addressed to the most eminent per∣sons of our age. To speake trueth wee may iustly say, this is the first time any thing of perfection hath appeared in our language; so that if of all our ancient eloquence there bee ought worthy of e∣steeme in any equalitie with this, it may bee that with much labour you shall produce some one Let∣ter: For of all such who haue hitherto written wee may affirme, that the most fortunate among them, when they made choyce of subiects able to subsist of themselues, haue not beene absolutely condem∣nable,
and that amidst their writings, the soliditie of learning, and the sauagenesse of language (to wit) the good and euill did equally appeare. But when at any time they fell vpon subiects where elo∣quence onely swayed the Scepter, there truly it was where fortune forsooke them, and where the feeble∣nesse of their proper forces was manifestly percei∣ued, if they were not some way assisted by strange tongues. Some of them (to say the trueth) haue doubted what way they were to take, and haue stri∣uen to shew it to others, though themselues were not in it. In a word, the greatest glory those gai∣ned who haue written with most perfection and pu∣ritie, is only that which nature hath reserued for wo∣men, to which sex eminent actions being denied, it seemeth they performe sufficient if they abstaine from euill doing. But to say that any hath ioyned Art to aboundance, and mingled mildnesse with Maiestie, or hath raised his stile without either loo∣sing himselfe, or straying from his subiect, that is it which in trueth we could not see till this present. And questionlesse these braue and generous formes of discourse, and those great and strange concepti∣ons wherewith these Letters are so curiously limed, and so plentifully grac'd, haue beene very slenderlie known in proceeding ages: This very order, and this number, whereof euery tongue is not capable, and wherein ours owes nothing to the Latine, and which appeares in all his words, though diuersely, and as their gender requires, do right haply appeare in this place, though the most part of writers before him
haue esteemed these perfections of small impor∣tance; yet notwithstanding, without the helpe of these two great secrets, neither ornaments of Art, nor graces of Nature, can bee but in part pleasing; nor can all the reasons the World can alledge per∣swade a Very woman resoluing to resist: And to speake seriously, they are no lesse necessary among excellent discourses, and conceits, then discipline a∣mongst Souldiers, without which, courage is of no effect, and valour most cōmonly proueth vnprofita∣ble. As for me who haue knowne the Author from both our infancies, and who better then all others, can depose in what fashion he effecteth his labours; besides, knowing the great aduantage hee hath o∣uer all those who write at this day: I haue euer thought, that if any were able to raise our Language to the merit and reputation of such Eloquence, wherewith the Ancients were adorned, it should bee to him alone to whom our age oweth this glo∣rie. Nor doe I doubt, but the comparison comming in question at this present, betweene these his wri∣tings, and those of others; the difference will bee easily discouered, assuring my selfe, that all spirits will dispose themselues to be ranged herein to mine opinion, and voluntarily to giue way thereunto. As for my selfe, who read the Ancients with all respect due vnto them, and the Moderns without any preiu∣dicate opinion, doe notwithstanding confesse, that all I can conceiue in others is so farre short of the merit of these Letters, that abstracting from the passion I am possessed with, both for them, and their
Authour, hardly could I dispose my selfe to frame this Preface for them. And who is there will make any difficultie to giue them their due? Since hee whose very faults haue beene esteemed so faire, that they caused a Sect during his life, which yet con∣tinues after his death; hauing (at Meats) seene certaine discourses this Author composed in those miserable times, and which stood in need of ano∣ther age to be gratefully regarded, was astonished at his beginnings, confessing it was with vnwilling∣nesse, that the onely thing hee supposed to possesse by the generall consent of all, was rauished from him by one who as yet had liued but twenty yeeres. But surely, it was in this straine of writing which in that it is not restrayned within so strict limits as that of Letters, is capable of all the motions, and ornaments of Art; and of the same sort as was the other discourse he addresseth to the Pope who now is, vpon the like subiect, as that of Saint Bernards to Eugenius: And as God neuer chose among men any so accomplished with all perfections, as this person to command all others, so can I not conceiue any thing either more great, or extraordinary, then what appeareth in this worke, nor more sutable to the excellencie of the subiect, and to the Maiestie of him to whom he dedicated his discourse: But if (to returne to the particulars of these Letters) it were necessary for the deliuering an vnpartiall iudg∣ment, to consider those of the Ancients, I should seeme more respectfull then were requisite, if (put∣ting them all together) I should vndertake to make
them so much as enter into comparison with these; excepting onely those of Seneca, yea euen in those (which in trueth come not nere these) there is so in∣finite abundance of matter as can hardly bee imagi∣ned, and since all things therein appeare so confu∣sedly, that it seemes they were therein couched without choice, and to say trueth, as itwere at aduen∣ture, some who will yet further tax his stile will hap∣pily say, they are rather matters then Workes. But for my part, if there bee any defects therein, I hold they ought well to be borne with, in regard of so ma∣ny rarities therein concurring; and when wee haue said all, what appearance is there to vnderualew any thing we receiue from a man who was worth seuen Millions of Gold? And who once in his life had the heart, and ambition to aspire to the Empire of the whole world? Let vs therefore esteeme all wee receiue from him, and from those times, yet suffer vs to commend our owne, wherein this science which medleth with the commanding of spirits, and which was but formerly in it's infancy, is now found to be in his full maturitie, and as it were of ripe yeeres. If therefore you acknowledge any obligati∣on due (as in trueth there is) to these excellent Letters, you shall in short time see so solid, and iust a iudgment proceed from this Author, that the Par∣liament it selfe produceth not any more able; and his solitarines will be so satisfactorie vnto you, that you will make no more difference then I do, to prefer the fame before the magnificence of Princely Courts, and the Pompe of most statelyest Cities.
THE TRANSLATOR To the Reader. ABout fiue yeeres since, I chanced to peruse Mounsieur Balzac's Let∣ters (they being then as I suppose) but lately come forth in French▪ and as it should seeme without the Authours approbation: For of eight Editions in seuerall pla∣ces, since published, this onely being the last, I was by him auowed. Hauing therefore seene this Coppy, was so farre from supposing it vnworthy the reading, as (on the contrary) finding his stile right eloquent, and altoge∣ther vnafected, his conceptions high, and the whole Booke richly adorned with great varietie of learning, appearing almost in euery Page: It raised no small desire in mee to try how his way of writing would sute with our language: I thought therefore good (as my occasions would permit, now and then for my priuate recreation) to translate certaine of his Letters, without any the least intention
to put them all into English, much lesse to publish them: But hauing once begun, I found my selfe so taken with the freeedome of his discourse, together with the facil∣litie of his expressions; and so surunded with the torrent of his witt, that though I had small hopes of wading safe∣ly through, notwithstanding it seemed euen delightfull vnto mee to bee drenched in so rich so pleasing, and so plentifull a flood, yet after diuers attempts, I at last ar∣riued on drie land, resoluing to rest my selfe after these labours, and in priuate to inioy the content I tooke in hearing Mounsieur Balzac speake, though but broken English. But I was not long left in peace with this reso∣lution, before certaine my noble friends vnderstanding I had traualled on this subiect; did importunately so∣licite me to put these Letters into Print, perswading me I should here in performe no vnacceptable seruice to my Countrey, especially to such who are vnacquainted with the French Language. Their power therefore ouer-ruling my bashfullnesse, though otherwise seconding my willing desire to bee vsefull; I held it lesse faultie to incur the hazard of publike censure, then to bee taxed of wilfull inciuillitie. So as (worthy Reader) I haue here expo∣sed them to thy view; If the coursnesse of the English ha∣bit wherein I haue clad them, seeme vnsutable to their French attyre, or vnfashionable in thy sight: Consider I beseech thee, that beautifull creatures are not altoge∣ther blemished, though but plainely attyred. If there∣fore you please so farre to fauour mee, as to excuse these my errours, I will herafter endeauour to become more seruiceable. You will happily not here find all Balzac's Letters Englished; yea and diuers clauses left out; the
onely reason hath beene, their subiect not altogether su∣table to this State, nor very fitting for English eares. The rest are here presented to thy gratious accetpance, not doubting but they will prooue both pleasing and pro∣fitable to diuers who endeauour to make right vse there∣of. My desires haue aimed at that end; and my greatest ambition is to haue them find courteous enter∣tainement, and to afford Publique Vtillitie. Vale. VV. T.
PErlegi hunc librum cui titulus (Balzac his Let∣ters) una cum praefatione duplici ad Domi∣num Cardinall de Richelieu, & ad Lectorum, qui quidem liber continet folio 176. (exceptis quae delentur) in quibus nihil reperio sanae doctrinae, aut bonis moribus contrarium, quo minus cum pub∣lica utilitate Imprimatur: ita tamen ut si non in∣tra annum proxime sequentem typis mandetur haec licentia sit omnino irrita. GVLIELMVS HAYWOOD, Capellan: domest. Archiep. Cantuar.
THE LETTERS OF MOVNSIEVR DE BALZAC. THE FIRST BOOKE. A Letter from the Cardinall of Richelieu, to the Signior of BALZAC▪ LETTER I. SIR: THough I haue formerly deli∣uered my Opinion to a friend of Yours; concerning some of your letters he shewed me; yet can I not satisfie my selfe
before these Lines affoord you a more Au∣thenticall approbation thereof. It is not a∣ny particular affection I beare to your per∣son, which imsiteth me to this allowance, but Truth it selfe, carrying with it such a Prerogatiue, that it compelleth (all who haue their Eyes, and Spirits rightly placed for the deliuering an vnpartiall opinion) to represent them without Disguise: My cen∣sure shall be seconded by many others, and if there be any of a contrary conceite, I dare assure you, time will make them know, that the defects they finde in your Letters, proceede rather from their Spirits, then from your Pen; and how nearely they resemble the Icterickes, who hauing the Iaundesse in their Eyes, see nothing which seemeth not vnto them to carry the same colour: Heretofore meane Wits admi∣red all things aboue the pitch of their capa∣city; but now, their Iudgements second∣ing their Sufficiencies, they approoue no∣thing but what is within the compasse of their Talent, and blame all whatsoeuer ex∣ceedeth
their Studies. I dare (without pre∣sumption) say in what concerneth you herein, that I see things as they are, and declare them to be such as I see them: The conceptions of your Letters are strong, and as transcendent aboue ordinary imaginati∣ons, as they are conformable to the com¦mon sense of such who are of sound iudge∣ment. The Language is pure, and the Words perfectly well chosen, without af∣fectation; the Sense is cleare and neate, and the Periods accomplished with all their nū∣bers. This censure of mine, is by so much the more ingenuous, as that approouing whatsoeuer is your owne in your Letters: I haue not concealed to a certay ne Friend of yours, that I found some rectification to be desired, concerning certaine things you insert of other mens: fearing least the li∣berty of your Pen should cause many to imagine that it is to often dipped in their humours and manners; and draw such as are more acquainted with you by name, then Conuersation, to be otherwise con∣ceited
of you, then you willingly could wish. The manner wherewith you haue receiued this my Aduise, causeth me that continuing my former freedome, I will conclude, in aduertizing you, that you shall be answerable before God, if you suf∣fer your Pen to sleepe, and that you are ob∣liged to imploy it vpon more graue and im∣portant Subiects; being contented that you shall blame me, if in so doing you receiue not the satisfaction, to see that what you performe herein, shall be praysed and estee∣med, euen by those wh would willing∣ly picke occasion to controule them, which is one of the most sure markes of the per∣fection of any Worke. You shall receiue some in this kind out of my Affection, when I may haue the opportunity to assure you, that I am, Your well affectionate to serue you, the Cardinall of Richelieu. From Paris the 4. of February. 1621.
To the Lord Cardinall of Richelieu from BALZAC. LETTER. II. MY LORD: I Am as proud of the Letter you did me the Honour to addresse vnto me, as if there were a thousand Statues e∣rected for me, or if I were assured by in∣fallible authority of my works excellency. Truly, to be commended by that man our Age opposeth to all antiquity, and vpon whose Wisedome God might well intrust the whole earths gouernment, is a fauour I could not wish for with∣out presumption, and which I am yet doubtfull whether I haue really receiued, or onely dreamed somesuch matter. But if it be so that my eyes haue not deceiued me, and that you are hee who hath be∣stowed that voyce vpon me, which hath bin chosen by all France to present her pe∣titions to the King, and by the King him∣selfe
to conuey his Commands into Cit∣ties, and Armies: My Lord, I must hum∣bly then acknowledge you haue already payed me before hand, for all the seruices I can euer possibly performe vnto you: and I should shew my selfe very vngrate∣full, if I should hereafter complayne of my fortunes: since vpon the matter, the goods and honours of this World are most ordinarily none other then the in∣heritance of Sotts, or rewards of Vice, Estimation and Commendation being onely reserued for Vertue. Ought I not then to rest highly satisfied, hauing recei∣ued from your Mouth the same Prize which Conquerors expect for their Vic∣tories? yea, all that your selfe could hope for, in lieu of your great and immortall Actions, if there were another Cardinall of Richelieu to giue them their due Com∣mendations? But truely (my Lord) that is a thing which will alwayes be wanting to your Glory; for when by your onely Presence you haue appeased the spirits of
an incensed Multitude; when by your powerfull Reasons you haue induced Christian Princes to set the Natiue Coun∣trey of Jesus Christ at liberty, and to vn∣dertake the Holy Warre, when you haue gayned whole Nations to the Church, as well by the force of your Example, as by that of your Doctrine, who is of ability to pay you the Reputation which you in all right deserue? and where shall you finde so excellent a Witnesse for all the marueilous Acts of your Life, as I haue of my Watchings and Studies? I cannot chuse but reiterate this, and my ioy is o∣uer iust to be concealed. Is it possible this great Wit and high spirit, which hath bin imployed euen from his first Youth in perswading Princes, in giuing instructi∣ons to Embassadours, and hath beene listned vnto by old men, who haue seene foure Reignes? Is it possible I say, this man should valew me; on whose Appro∣bation all enemies agree? nor is there a∣mong all men a contrary party, or diuer∣sity
of beleefe in this poynt. If I had a purpose to disquiet the repose of this Kingdome, I would seeke for the con∣sent of slacke spirits; and I should stand in need of the fauour of all sorts of men, were I to study for Reputation in a po∣pular State: but truely I neuer affected confusion, or disorder, and my designes haue euer aimed at the pleasing of a few. For since you haue declared your selfe in fauour, as hee likewise hath done, for whom France at this day enuieth Italy: and since you carry after you the most so∣lid part of the Court, I am content to let the rest runne astray with Turkes and Infi∣dels, who make the greater number of Mankinde. Yet (my Lord) I cannot thinke, that any hereafter will be so farre in loue with himselfe, or so obsti∣nate in his owne opinion, as not to be a Convertite by the onely reading the Letter you honour'd me with, and who in conclusion will not subscribe to your great Iudgement? And, if it be certayne
that truth it selfe could not be strong e∣nough against you, there is no question but that side whereon you two shall a∣gree, oughtto be vniuersally followed. For my part (my Lord) let all men say what they will, I fixe my selfe with clo∣sed eyes there; and what enemies soeuer the reputation you haue allowed mee procure me: yet knowing your abilities and what you are, I will be no far∣ther solicitus for mine owne Interest, or future benefit, since it is become your cause; I am My Lord, Your most humble and most obedient seruant, BALZAC. The 10. of March, 1624.
To the Cardinall of Richelieu from BALZAC. LETTER III. My Lord, I Humbly intreate you to be pleased by these presents, to permit me to con∣firme vnto you the assurance of my most humble Seruice, and that you would allow mee to craue some Newes from you: It is the onely thing wherein I am now curious, and which in the very depth of my retirednesse, obligeth me to reflect sometimes vpon worldly Affaires. But happen what can, I am most assured, you will remayne con∣stant euen amidst publique ruines, and that Fortune cannot bereaue you of those aduantages shee neuer gaue you. Yet could I wish, that your life were some∣what more calme, and lesse glorious: And that Artemiza's goodnesse hauing
so great Affinity to what is infinite, and which is of power to procure loue euen amidst the most sauage beasts; doth in right deserue to obtaine truce, and repose among reasonable Creatures. It is not in vs to be Authors of hereafter, nor doe our wishes rule the euent of hu∣mane Affaires. But surely if there be a∣ny Justice in Heauen, (whereof there is no doubt) and if God haue an Eye to worldly matters: wee must beleeue the teares of vpright persons shal not be shed in vaine, or that your Queene shall waxe old in her Misfortunes: yet at the least, since our cogitations be still within our owne compasse, and we being not forbid∣den to hope well, let vs make the best vse we may of this small portion of Liberty yet remayning. The vertue she hath hitherto made vse of, in resisting her afflictions, will happily oneday serue to moderate her felicities. And if God strooke a certayneMadam Gabriella. Woman with suddaine death; for that she should haue beene seated in the place, hee
destinated to this great Princesse; he sure∣ly will not suffer that man to liue long, who hath so highly iniured her. Howsoeuer (my Lord) it is great Honour vnto you, not to haue fayled her in her afflictions, and to haue vnder-valewed all worldly Preroga∣tiues, to be vnfortunate with her. I know that herein you satisfie your selfe with the testimony of a cleare conscience, and that it is not so much for Opinion of men, you vndertake Worthy actions, as for your owne priuate Satisfaction. Nor are you a little to comfort your selfe, in that at this present you are praysed euen by your very enemies; and to see your Resolutions redoubtable to those who haue great Armies on foote, and the chiefe forces of the State vnder their Command. I would say more, did I not feare you might suppose, I had some priuate designe in my Discourse, or seeke hereby to prepare you to receiue some kind of importunity from me: But I most humbly beseech your Lordship to be con∣fident, that I being of free Condition, am
little acquainted with Flattery; and that I am not so giuen ouer to gaine, but that notwithstanding you were still in Auigni∣on, I would euer as really as at this Houre remayne My Lord, Your most humble and most affectionate Seruant, BALZAC. The 15. of May, 1623. To the Cardinall of Richelieu from BALZAC. LETTER IIII. My Lord, VVEre I not well acquainted with my owne insufficiency, I might well be possessed with no small vanity, vpon the Letter you did mee the Honour to addresse vnto me, and might well imagine my selfe to be some other
thing then if I was the day before I receiued it. But knowing it is no other then a meere fauour you pleased to affoord me, I will not flatter my felfe in my good fortune, nor lessen the Obligation due vnto you, in presuming to merit the same. If Vertue re∣quired any Recompence out of her selfe, she would not receiue it from other mouth then yours: and your Reputation is at this day so Iust and Generall, as it is become a Ʋerity wherein the Wise agree with the Vulgar. I doe therefore account my selfe very happy, to be reputed of, by a Person who is able to giue a value to things of themselues worthlesse; and I attribute so much to your Iudgement, that I will no longer hold any meane opinion of my selfe, lest therein I should contradict you. True∣ly (my Lord) very difficultly will my parts any way answere your Expectation. The time my Feauer affoordeth me for rest is so short, I can hardly imploy it to other pur∣pose then to complaine of its cruelty. I haue enough to doe to liue, and to make
that good: I keepe my selfe as careful∣ly as though I were composed of Chri∣stall, or as if I were some necessary matter for the good of all men. Yet (my Lord) you haue so great power ouer me, that I will ftrayne my selfe to shew my O∣bedience, and to giue you an account of my leasure, since you please to thinke I ought not to depriue the World there∣of. It is better to vtter glorious Dreames, then to labour in grosse Designes, and there are certayne Acts of the spirit so excellent, that Princes are too poore, and their pow∣er too slender to affoord them their full me∣rit. But my Lord, you haue often giuen so great testimonies of me, that if I should not haue some presumption, it were fit I lost my memory▪ Wherefore out of the assurance you giue me that my Stile doth not stray from that perfection which men imagine, but neuer saw, nor haue attayned vnto; I will enter vpon a designe which shall amaze our vulgar wits, and cause those who haue hitherto supposed
they surmount others, to see I haue found what they seeke for. Whatsoeuer I doe, I will at least haue you at all times present to my thoughts, thereby to oblige my selfe not to come short before so great an example, nor will I forget the place where at this present I am, to the end not to o∣mit any thing worthy the Ancient Rome. It is impossible at once to haue so glorious obiects, and degenerous thoughts, or not to be transported with all those Tryumphs of times past, and with the glory of our Age. But this is not the place where I intend to speake, it being of too small extent to re∣ceiue so illimitable a Subiect: It shall there∣fore suffice in conclusion of this my Letter to tell you, that since vpon your ad∣uice all posterity dependeth, and the whole Court expecteth from you what they are, or are not to beleeue; I cannot chuse (my Lord) but to esteeme my selfe right happy euen a∣midst my greatest miseries, if you still con∣tinue vnto me your equall Iudgement with the honour of your fauours BALZAC. From Rome this 10. of Aprill, 1623.
To the Lord Cardinall of Richelieu, from Mounsieur Balzac. LETTER V. My LORD; MY purpose was at my arriual in France to haue presented my Seruice vnto you, in the place of your Residence, that I might haue had the honour to see you; but my health hauing not beene such, as to affoord me the free disposition of my selfe: I am forced to deferre my con∣tentment, in that kinde, and to intreate to heare some Newes from You, till I be a∣ble to go to vnderstand them from your Selfe. In the interim, the better to cheare my Spirits, I will beleeue they are as good as I wish them, and will imagine this Collicke of yours, whereof I had so great apprehension, shall be drowned in the foun∣taine of Pougues. This truly is so gene∣rally desired, and sought for at Gods hands,
by so many mouthes, that I am confident he will not (in this poynt) leaue the felicity He hath prepared for our times vnperfect; and that He loueth the World too well, to depriue it of the good you are to Performe. Armies being defeated, new Forces may be set on foot, and a second Fleete may be rigged, after the first perish: But if we should want your Lordship, the World would not last long enough to be able to repayre such a losse: And the King might haue just cause to bewayle the same in the midst of his greatest Tryumphes. He hath indeed an inexhaustable Kingdome of men. The Warres do daily affoord him Captaines. The number of Iudges is not much inferi∣our to that of Criminals. It is only of wise men, and such as are capable to guide the Sterne of States, whereof the scarcity is great; and without flattery to find out your Equall herein, all Nature had need put it selfe into Action, and that God long pro∣mise the same to mankinde before he be pleased to produce him. I say nothing,
(my Lord) I am not ready to sweare in ve∣rification of my beleefe▪ or which I confirme not by the Testimony of your very Enemies. The authority of Kings is not so Soueraigne, as that is, you exercise ouer the Soules of such as hearken vnto you. Your Spirit is right powerfull, and dayly imployed in great affaires, and which refresheth it selfe in agi∣tation of ordinary occurrents: You are desti∣nated to fill the place of that Cardinall, which at this present, maketh one of the beautifull parties of Heauen, & who hath hitherto had no Successour, though he haue had Heires & and Brothers. This being thus, who will doubt that publicke Prayers are to be offred, for so precious and necessary a health as yours; or that your life ought to be deare vnto you, within you are to conserue the glory of our age. As for me (my Lord) who am assaulted on all sides, and to whom nothing is remayning saue hope, being the only benefit of those who are depriued of all others: since my misfortune wil needs make me that pub∣licke sacrifice, which is, to be charged with
the paines of all the people, and pay for all the World. I could be well content you should send me your Collicke, and that it come to accompany the Feauer, the Scyatica, and the Stone. Since of so many Diseases, there can but one Death be composed. Nor is it time any longer, to be a good husband of what is already lost. But I will not enter further into this discourse, wherof I shal find no end; and it were to small purpose to tell you, he is the most wretched man in the World, who so much honoureth you, for feare you should reiect my affection, as somefatall thing, and least it auayle me not at all to protest that I am my Lord Your most hamble and most obedient Seruant; BALZAC. September the 4. 1622. To the Lord Cardinall of Richelieu. LETTER. VI. MY LORD: AFter the sealing of these presents, a mes∣senger passed by this place, by whom I
vnderstand that the Pope hath created you a Cardinall; I make no question but you receiued this Newes as a matter indiffe∣rent vnto you: and that your Spirit be∣ing raised aboue the things of this world, you behold them with one and the same Aspect. Yet since herein the publicke good meeteth with your particular inte∣rest, and that for your sake the Church re∣ioyceth euen in all the most irkesome Prisons of Europe, it is not reasonable you should depriue your selfe of a con∣tentment no lesse chast, then those Hea∣uen it selfe affoordeth vs? and which pro∣ceedeth from the same cause. All good men (my Lord) ought in these times to desire great Dignities, as necessary meanes to vndertake great matters. If they doe otherwise; besides that God will demand a strict account from them of those his graces, whereof they haue made no good vse: the World hath like∣wise iust subiect of Complaint, seeing them abandon it as a prey to the wicked,
and that their desire of ease causeth them to forsake the publicke good. This (my Lord) is to let you know, you are to re∣serue your Humility for those Actions, passing betwene God and Your selfe: But that in other cases you can neither haue too much Wealth, nor ouer great power; since Obedience is due to Wisedome; there being certaine vertues not practiseable by the poore. I doe therefore infinitely re∣ioyce, to see you at this present raised to that eminent Dignity, wherein you fill the Vniuerse with Splendor, and where your sole Example will (I hope) carry so great weight, as to cause the Church to returne to the Purity of its first Jnfancy. Truely, if there be any hope to expect this happinesse, and to see rebellious Spirits perswaded, as we behold their Citties forced; you doubtlesse are the man, from whom wee are to expect this felicity; and who is only able to finish the victories of Kings by the subuersion of Misbeleeuers: To this effect doth all
Christendome exact these atchieuments at your hands, as a last instruction, and the generall peace of Consciences: and my selfe who haue thus long beene in search after the Jdea of Eloquence, without fin∣ding among vs any which is not eyther counterfeit or imperfect; am very confi∣dent you wil bring it to light in the same excellency as it was, when at Rome the Ty∣rants were condemned, and when it de∣fended the oppressed Prouinces. Though Purple be very refulgent, yet will it receiue a farther luster by this your Dig∣nity, carrying command where euer it commeth; and which is particularly so proper for the conduct of Soules, as it is onely to that power whereto they will submit themselues. My Lord, if I haue any hope to be knowne in after Ages, or that my Name may passe to Posterity; they shall finde this consideration to be the first obligation vnto me, of seeking the Honour of your Acquaintance, and that hauing heard you speake, you
did so absolutely purchase both my thoughts and affections, that since then, I haue euer reflected vpon you, as on an extraordinary person, and haue euer passionately remayned My Lord, Your most humble, most obedient, and most faithfull seruant, BALZAC. The 16. of Decem∣ber, 1622. To the Cardinall of Richelieu from BALZAC. LETTER VI. My LORD, HAd the wayes beene safe, or if the good order you haue taken for pub∣licke security, had not beene subiect to the like successe as are wholesome Lawes, which are seldome well obserued, I should not be necessitated to take a lon∣ger time then you allotted me when I
parted from Fountainebleau, nor had I till now beene constrayned to spin out the time of my Dispatch. But though your Commandments are all powerfull in me, yet you know necessity will firstbe obeyed, nor will you (I hope) be displeased that I haue made choyce of a Prison whereto I am accustomed, to auoide another not so commodious for me. This hath not hap∣ned but to my extreame griefe, since I haue not beene able to be a witnesse of the most illustrious life of our Age, and haue thereby lost halfe a Yeare of your Actions which (well nigh) fill vp all our History. For though we are not so remote from the World, that no Newes can come to vs, yet they passe so many places, as it is im∣possible they receiue not diuers Impressi∣ons, or that they should arriue here in their purity, since they are often altered from the very Loouer; yet haue Ivnderstood, and Fame hath published euen in Desarts, the great Conflicts by you vndergone, and at∣chieued for the Honour and Reputation of
France, and how you haue subdued the subtilties of Strangers, being in truth more to be feared then their Forces. I heare how Italy hath spent all her practi∣ses without hurting any, and how those States-men who made accompt to Seigno∣rize in all Assemblies, and to be Maisters in all Reasons of State, were vnable to defend themselues against you, but with passion, and choller: nor to complaine of any other thing, but that you perswaded them to whatsoeuer they were before▪ hand resolued not to yeeld. So as (my Lord) those who tearmed vs Barbartans, and by their treaties commonly tooke reuenge of our Victories, haue in the end found wisedome on this side the Alpes, and haue well perceiued there is a man who hath abilities to hinder them from deceiuing o∣thers. They stood amazed to see a Ser∣uant who would not suffer there should be any Maister greater then his Soueraigne. Who was as sencible of the least Euils of his Countrey, as of his proper sorrowes,
supposing himselfe to be wounded vpon the least apprehension, when any made shew of trenching vpon the Dignity of this Crowne. But when they found you ap∣plyed present remedies to all such inconue∣niences as they obiected; that you preuen∣ted the difficulties they offered to propose, that you diued into their soules, drawing thence their closest Intentions, and how at the first conference you made answer to what they reserued for a second. Then it was indeede, when their Fleame was turned into Choler, and when you put their hu¦mane Wisedomes and politique Maximes to a stand. So as we see it is sufficient one∣ly to let Good appeare, to cause it to be beloued: and truely if Reason had the like power ouer the Will, as it hath ouer the Ʋnderstanding, all those Italians doubt∣lesse, who heard you speake, had retur∣ned good French-men, and the safety of Christendome together with the security of her Princes, had beene but one daies worke. Forraigne warres had beene ended in your
chamber; nor should we now haue any more then one businesse vpon vs, and the Kings Forces had at this present beene imployed onely in suppressing the Rebels of his owne Kingdome. My Lord, I hope you are perswaded (though I could not probably expect any slight occurrents from the place where you are) yet that I receiued these with much emotion and transport, it not being in my power to dissemble my ioy, when I vnderstood how their Maiesties are not wearie of your Seruice, and how after hauing try∣ed diuers Councels, it was in conclusion thought fit to follow yours, and that you precede in the affaires of Europe, by be∣ing conductor of the Fortune of France. Truely, of all exteriour contentments, there is not any whereof I am so sensible as of that. But on the other side, when I vn∣derstand that your Health is dayly assaul∣ted, or threatned by some accident, that the Tranquility your Conscience affords you, hinders you not from hauing ill
Nights: And how amidst the happy suc∣cesses befalling you, life it selfe is notwith∣standing somtimes tedious vnto you; then indeed I must confesse they touch me in the tenderest part of my Soule. And whilst the Court makes thousands of feined Prote∣stations vnto you; there is an Hermite some hundred Leagues from you, who mournes for your maladies with vnfeigned teares. I know not whether or no I may presume to say, I loue you: yet is it not probable you will take offence at a Word wherewith, you know God himselfe is well pleased. My Lord; I do in such manner Loue you, as I am eyther sicke vpon the Relation of your indisposition; or if the newes be current that you are recouered, yet haue I still an apprehension of what alteration each houre may bring vpon you. Ought it then to be in the Fits of your Feauer, and in your inquietude for want of sleepe, that you vn∣derstand these publicke acclamations, and the due prayses you haue purchased: Shall the Senses suffer, and the Spirits reioyce, or
they continue tortured amidst these Try∣umphs, or that you (at once) performe two contrary Actions, and at the same time haue neede, as well of Moderation, as Patience: If Vertue could be miserable, or if that Sect which acknowledgeth no other euill, but paine; nor any greater good then pleasure, had not beene gene∣rally condemned: the Diuine prouidence had receiued complaints from all parts of this Kingdome; nor had there beene an honest man knowne, who for your sake had not found something farther to be de∣sired in the conduct of this World. But (my Lord) you vnderstand much better then I doe, that it is only touching the fe∣licity of beasts, we are to beleeue the bo∣dy, and not concerning ours, residing onely in the supreame part of our selues, and which is as smally sensible of those disorders committed below her, as those in Heauen can bee offended by the tempests of the Ayre, or vapours of the Earth. This being true: God forbid, that
by the estate of your present constitution, I should iudge of that of your Condition; or that I should not esteeme him perfect∣ly happy who is superlatiuely wise. You may please to consider, that howbeit you haue shared with other men the infirmi∣ties of humane Nature, yet the aduantage resteth soly on your side: since (vpon the matter) there is onely some small paine remayning with you, instead of an infi∣nity of errours, passions, and faults falling to our lots. Besides▪ I am confident that the terme of your sufferings is well nigh expired, and that the hereafter prepares right solide and pure contentments for you, and a youth after its season, as you are become old before your time. The King who hath vse of your long liuing, makes no vnprofitable wishes: Heauen beares not the prayers that the Enemies of this State offer. We know no Successor that is able to effect what you haue not yet fi∣nished: and it being true, that our Forces are but the Armes of your Head, and that
your Councels haue beene chosen by God to re-establish the Affaires of this Age: we ought not to bee apprehensiue of a losse which should not happen but to our Successors. It shall then be in your time (my Lord, I hope) that oppressed Nati∣ons will come from the Worlds end to implore the protection of this Crowne: that by your meanes our Allies will re∣paire their losses, and that the Spaniard shall not be the sole Conquerour, but that we shall prooue the Infranchesers of the whole Earth. In your time (I trust) the Holy Sea shall haue her Opinions free, nor shall the inspirations of the Holy Ghost be oppugned by the artifice of our Ene∣mies, resolutions will be raised worthy the ancient Jtaly for defence of the com∣mon cause. To conclude, it will bee through your Prudence (my Lord) that there shall no longer be any Rebellion a∣mong vs, or Tyranny among men: that all the Citties of this Kingdome shall be seates of assurance for honest men; that
nouelties shall be no farther in request; saue onely for colours and fashions of At∣tire▪ that the People will resigne Liber∣ty, Religion, and the Common-wealth, into the hands of Superiours, and that outof lawfull gouernment, and loyall o∣bedience, there will arise that felicity Politisians search after, as being the end of Ciuile life. My hope is (my Lord) that all this will happen vnder your sage con∣duct, and that after you haue setled our repose, and procured the same for our Allies, you shall enioy your good deeds in great tranquility, and see the estate of those things endure, whereof your selfe haue beene a principal Author. All good men are confident these blessed euents will happen in your Age, and by your Aduice. As for me who am the mea∣nest among those who iustly admire your Vertues, I shall not (I hope) prooue the slackest in the expression of your Merits: Since therefore they (of right) exact a ge∣nerall acknowledgment; if I should fayle
in my particular contribution, I were for euer vnworthy the Honour I so ambi∣tiously aspire vnto; the highth whereof is to be esteemed Your Lordships most humble and most obedient seruant, BALZAC. To the Lord Bishop of Aire. LETTER VIII. My Lord, IF at the first sight, you know not my Letter, and that you desire to be infor∣med who writes vnto you: It is one more old▪like then his Father, and as ouer-worne as a Ship, hauing made three Voyages to the Indies; and who is no other thing, then the Relickes of him, whom you saw at Rome. In those dayes I sometimes com∣playned without cause, and happily there was then no great difference betweene the health of others, and my infirmity. How∣soeuer,
be it that my imagination is cra∣zed, or that my present payne doth no longer admit of any comparison. I begin to lament the Feauer and Scyatica as lost goods, and as pleasures of my youth now past: See here to what tearmes I am redu∣ced, and how (as it were) I liue, if it may be called liuing, to be in a continuall con∣testation with Death. True it is, there is not sufficient efficacy in all the words whereof this World makes vse, to expresse the miseries I indure; they leaue no place, eyther for the Physitians skill, or the sicke∣mans▪ Patience; nor hath Nature ordayned any other remedies for the same, saue one∣ly Poyson and precipices. But I much feare least I suffer my selfe to be transported with paine, or endure it lesse Christianly then beseemeth me, being a Witnesse of your Vertus; and hauing had the meanes to pro∣fit my selfe by your Example. My Lord, it is now time (or neuer) I subdue this wic∣ked spirit, which doth forcibly transport my will; and that the old Adam obey the
other. Yet doth it not a little grieue me, to be indebted to my misery for my Soules health, and▪ that I much desire it were some other more noble consideration then necessity, should cause me to become an honest man. But since the meanes to saue vs are bestow∣ed vpon vs▪ and that we chuse them not, it is fitting that reason conuince our sensibli∣ties, causing vs to agree to what is other∣wise distastefull vnto vs. At the worst, we must at all times confesse, that we cannot be sayd to perish, when we are safely cast on shore by some Ship wracke; and it may be, if God did not driue me as he doth out of this Life, I should neuer dreame of a better. I will referre the rest to be related vnto you at your returne from Jtaly, with purpose to lay open my naked Soule vnto you, together with my Thoughts in the same simplicity they spring in me: you are the onely Person from whom I expect Re∣liefe; and I hold my selfe richer in the pos∣session of your good Opinion▪ then if I en∣ioyed the fauours of all earthly Princes,
and all the Wealth of their Territories and Kingdomes. Truely this is the first time (since I writ vnto you from Lyons) I haue made vse of my hands; and I haue receiued a hundred Letters from my Friends without answering one. Here∣by (my Lord) you see, there is no other consideration (your selfe excepted) of force to cause me to breake silence, since for all others I haue lost the vse of speak∣ing. Yet I beseech you to thinke (not∣withstanding all this) my affection to be neyther penurious nor ambitious. The Riches I craue at your noble hands, are purely spiritual, and I am at this present in an estate, wherein I haue more neede to settle some order for the affaires of my Conscience, then to reflect vpon the esta∣blishment of my worldly Fortunes. But (my Lord) to change Discourse, and a little to retire my selfe from my paines, what doe you thus long at Rome? Doth the Pope dally with vs? and will he leaue to his Successor the glory of the best Electi∣on
can be made? Is he not affraide lest it be giuen out he hath some intelligence with his Aduersaries, and that he taketh not the aduice of the Holy Ghost, in what concerneth the Churches Honour: for Gods cause bring vs with speede this Newes, prouided it bee the same the King de∣mands, and all good men desire. I hope it shall not be sayd, you haue spoken Jta∣lian all this while to no purpose, or that you can accuse his predictions, as erroni∣ous, who neuer falsified his word with you, and who is perfectly My Lord Your most humble seruant, BALZAC. The 2. of Iuly, 1622.
To the Lord Bishop of Ayre. For the true vnderstanding of this Letter: it is necessary to be acquainted with the Gibbrige, the French residing at Rome, vse to speake; who frame a new kind of Language to themselues, compo∣sed of Italian words, hauing onely French termi∣nations. LETTER IX. My Lord, I Thinke you will neuer be weary of go∣ing to Cortege, and that you will for e∣uer haue an apprehension of the Cre∣puscule all the dayes of your life; so it is, that you haue long enough caused the curtaynes of your Corroach to be drawne in presence of those of Cardinals; and that you may well be (ere now) acquaynted with the Court of Rome, euen from the Papale subiects, to those who desire to be admitted into the first degrees of sacred Orders. For my part, I should soone be weary in seeing daily one and the same thing, and in beginning the day from
the first houre of night? What can there be so pleasing in the place where you are, that should deserue to stay you there? In faire weather the Sunne is dangerous: halfe the Yeare they breath nothing but smoake, and in the rest, it raineth so frequently, that it seemeth some Sea hangeth ouer the City of Rome. But it may be you take pleasure in seeing the Pope, a body ouer-shaken, and trembling with age and infirmities, who hath no other thing then Ice in his veines, and Earth in his Visage I cannot imagine how this obiect can affoord you any great contentment; or that you are much ta∣ken with the society and Company of the great multitude of my Lords his Assistants, partaking of the one and the other Signature: Nor can it be Car∣riofile whom you so often ouer-rule, who should intreate you to stay there for the furtherance of his Affaires. For being (as he is) a Popeline, and of the Family of the Cardinall Ludouisio, who affoords him his full share▪ it cannot be but well with
him. I conclude therefore (my Lord) that I cannot guesse the cause of your stay, if you take not the paines to tell me. For to imagine Mounsieur de Luzon not to be as yet a Cardinall, were no lesse then to wrong the Kings credit, and to iudge a∣misse of publique acknowledgement. I am here at the Antipodes, where there is not any thing but Ayre, the Earth, and a Riuer; One had here neede make aboue ten dayes iourneyes to finde a man: wherefore hauing in this place no other communication but with the Dead, I can relate no other Newes vnto you, but of the other World. Is it not true, that he who would haue burnt his shirt, had it knowne his secrets, would hardly haue beene drawne to make his generall con∣fession? and that Alexander the Great would with much difficulty haue beene induced to purchase Paradise by Hu∣mility? What say you of poore Brutus? who killed his Father, thinking to con∣found a Tyrant, and no lesse to repent
himselfe at his Death, in hauing loued Vertue, then if he had followed an vn∣faithfull Mistresse. Doe you not yet re∣member the first Consuls, whose words smelt of Garlicke and greene roasted Meate? thinke you not they made vse of their hands insteede of feete, being so rough and durty as they were, and wore Shooes insteed of Gloues? These men were not acquainted eyther with Suger, Muske, or Amber-greeze. They had not (as then any gods of Gold, or Goblets of Siluer. They were ignorant in all sorts of Sciences, saue onely to make Warre, and to haue do∣mination ouer men. I lately read how in Venice (in former times) men of greatest quality, vsually married with cōmon woe∣men, and that either the good Husbandry, or the mutuall correspondency was such a∣mong the Cittizens, that one Wife serued three Brothers. Think you that Francis the first is called Great, for hauing vanqui∣shed the Swisses? or to distinguish him frō his Grand▪child? or by reason of his great
Nose? Giue me a reason why Selim flew his Father, his Brothers, and Nephewes? and after all this dyed but once? Were it not that I feare to be wearisome vnto you, I should neuer make an end of my Newes, yea I should be sufficiently stored to entertayne you my whole life-time. But it is high time that vnprofitable Speeches, giue place to Pious Cogitations; and that I leaue you among your Myrtles and Orange-Trees, where you are neuer better accompanied then when you are alone. I will here con∣clude, rather out of Discretion, then for want of Matter: But this shall not be till after I haue sayd, that of all those who haue any share in your Fauours, there is not any who is therein more proud of his good Fortune, then my selfe, or more real∣ly then I am My Lord, Your most humble and most affectionate Seruant, BALZAC. The 25. of Sep∣tember, 1622.
To the Lord Bishop of Ayre from BALZAC. LETTER X. My LORD, THese times are fatall, for abating those heads appearing aboue others, and for changing the face of things: and questionlesse if this course still continue, the King will eyther be forced to seeke out a new people, or to resolue himselfe for a solitary Reigne: All the Court is blacke with mournings: there is not a French-man who doth not either weepe, or is bewayled▪ and Warre causeth onely slight sorrowes; yet euen among those whose losse we lament, there are alwaies some we willingly leaue, and whose Ca∣tastrophe may serue vs as a consolation for the rest. Without further ambiguity, the man is seased on, who grew leane by the well▪fare of others, and who was one
of those pale and sober persons, borne for the Ruine of States; there is some appea∣rance he dyed as well of the Purples of M. L. C. D. R. as of his owne, and that you sent him his first surfeit from Rome; where he truely considering how there was no longer any fauour to follow, nor Fauorite to flatter, he would leaue to liue any longer, as though he had no further affaires in this World. Howsoeuer it be, we are herein to acknowledge the Finger of God, and to confesse, he doth some∣times punish Malefactors, without ob∣seruing the formes of Justice▪ at least it cannot be denied, but God loueth the Queene extraordinarily, since he reserueth to himselfe the reuenge of all her iniuries, nor will let any thing remay ne in the world which may prooue distastefull vn∣to her. If she desired the Sea should be calme in the most stormy dayes of Winter; or two Autumnes to happen each Yeare: I am confident of Natures change, in confor∣mity to her will: nor is there any thing she
cannot obtaine of Heauen, which granteth the very prayers shee hath not as yet be∣gun. I am here some hundred and fifty Leagues from these fine things, where I study to solace my selfe as much as pos∣sibly I can; and to this end, I make my selfe drunke euery day: But to free you from any sinister opinion of what I say, I assure you it is onely with the water of Pougues, which surely would bee Inke, were it blacke; so that I surfeit without finning against the Rules of Sobriety, and my frolickes are as Austeere as the Mi∣nimes fastings. I haue a great desire to en∣ter couenants with my Phisitians, wherby it might be granted, that all agreeable things should be wholesome, & that one might speedily recouer his Health by the sent of Flowers, instead of their Medicines which are ordinarily second miseries suc∣ceeding the former: yet without spending much time, or trouble▪ I haue made all impossibilities passable with me, and in the case I am, I would swallow Fire, were
it prescribed me for the recouery of my health. It is no small aduantage▪ not to be reduced to these tearmes no more then you are, and not to know what it is to suffer or complayne. So is it for the gene∣rall good of the whole World, that GOD hath giuen you this vigorous Health, to imploy it in the seruice of Kings, and in your Vigilancy ouer the conduct of People. As for me, who should not happily make so good vse thereof as I ought, and who am farre more inclinable to Vice then to Vertue: I hold it conuenient I be alwayes crazy, and that GOD take from me the meanes to offend Him, whereof otherwise I should infallibly make but ouer-much vse: I write not at this present to M. it is all I can do to finish this Letter in hast, and to tell you what you long since knew, that I am my Lord, Your most humble and passionate Seruant; BALZAC. October the 15. 1622.
To the Lord Bishop of Aire, from BALZAC. LETTER XI. My Lord, I Am infinitely glad to vnderstand by your Letters, of your safe returne into France, and that you haue now no fur∣ther vse of Cypbers, for the expression of your minde to my Lord the Cardinall of Richelieu. I shall at your pleasure (I hope) vnderstand the particulars of your Voyage, and what you haue seene at Naples and Ʋenice, worthy your content. This is not out of any great curiosity I haue for these things, or that I admire dumble Marble, or Pictures being no way so beautifull as the Persons: These trifles are to be left for the Vulgar, with whom the same Obiects limit their imagination and sight: and who (of all times) reflect, mearely vpon the pre∣sent, and (of all things▪) onely vppon the
appearance: but for my part I am of a con∣trary opinion. There are not in the whole world any Pallaces so sumptuous, or of so high a structure which are not farre vn∣der my thoughts, and I conceiue in my spirit a poore hermitage, to the foundati∣on whereof many more materials are pro∣iected, then were requisite for establishing a Republicke. You see here my Lord, how in some sort I play the Prince amidst my pouerty, and with what insolency I scorne what the world so much admireth; I am as haughty, as though I were a Minister of State; or as if this last change in the King∣dome had beene made for me alone: yet you know well that I call not my selfe L. M. D. L. V, and how if there had beene none but my selfe to assault my Lord the Comte of Schambergs▪ Vertue, it still had continued in the same place where it hath beene reuerenced of all men. Each man hath his seuerall censure concerning this great newes, but whatsoeuer they can say, I assure my selfe there can nothing
befall that Lord, whereto hee is not at all times prepared, and that he hath liued too long, not to know that Fortune taketh spe∣ciall delight in dallying with the affaires of France, and hath from all Ages made choyce of our Court, as the Theater of her follies. If he had not beene prouided of the gouernment of this Citty, and what time the King commanded him to come thence, his fall had beene more fearefull then it was, but it is Gods will that Augolesme should be the fatall retreate of the afflicted, and truely allthings well considered, it is no great downe▪come to light vpon a Mountaine: Now truely if the e be a∣ny thing amisse in the administration of the Kings Monies, hee cannot be taxed for introducing this errour; for he found it there: and besides, the necessity of the times haue euer resisted his good in∣tentions, and haue hindred the appea∣rance of what he had in his heart, for the reformation of disorders▪ It is now neces∣sary the King vndertake so glorious a De∣signe,
and set his hand to that part of the State, which hath more neede of redresse then all the rest. But he is first to begin by the moderation of his Spirit, and hee shall after gaine their loyalty who serue him. If those Princes our Elders haue seene, had considered, that the Coyne com∣ming into their Exchecquers, was no lesse then the blood, and teares of their poore Subiects, whom they haue often forced to flye into Forrests, and passe the Seas to saue themselues from taxes and impositi∣ons: they would haue beene more scru∣pulous and cautelous how they had tou∣ched vpon so dreadfull vndertakings: at least they would not haue beene at once both indigent and vniust, nor haue a∣mazed all the Princes of Europe, who could neuer conceiue why they borrowed their owne moneyes of their Treasurers, who receiue their revenewes, as they pur∣chase their owne strong places from their Gouernours who command there∣in. Truely, it is very strange the Great
Turke can intrust his Wiues to the vigilan∣cy of others, and assure themselues their Chastity shall therby be conserued; yet that Kings know not to whom they may safe∣ly encharge their Treasures. But the true reason is, for that an honest man is by so much more difficultly found, then an Eu∣nuch, by how much Miracles are more rare then Monsters. Great Fortitude is requisite for the attayning of Honesty, but the will onely sufficeth to become couetous, and the most harmelesse haue hands, and may happen to haue temp∣tations. Were it my part to play the re∣former, and to preach before the Pre∣lates, I would enlarge my selfe vpon this Subiect; but in the condition wherein I stand, it is sufficient I approue not the ill, and haue a good Opinion of the pre∣sent State: prouided, the report be current, that there is now no obstacle betweene the King and the Queene his Mother, likely to hinder them from meeting; and that things are reduced to those tearmes
wherein Nature hath placed them: Then will the face of the State shortly resume the same beauty the late King bestowed thereon, and God will with a full hand powre his Graces vpon so iust a Gouern∣ment. Though my Lord the Cardinall of Richlieu were onely neare Publique affaires, without touching them, there is no que∣stion but he would bring a blessing to all France, and though he intimated nothing to the King, yet that he would at least in∣spire whatsoeuer were necessary for the good of his Subiects, and Dignity of his Crowne▪ I will reserue to speake as I ought of this rare Vertue, till my great Worke come to light▪ Where I will render euery man his right, and condemne e∣uen those as culpable, whom the Parliaments crouch vnto; There shall it be where I will canuasse the Court of Rome▪ (which I alwayes separate from the Church) with as much force, and freedome as he vsed, from whose mouth we haue seene lightning to issue, and Thunder to be
throwne out. There is not any thing of so faire a semblance whose deformities I vn∣maske not. There is nothing of eminency from one end of the World to the other, I ouer-turne not▪ I will discouer the defects of Princes and States. I will expugne Vice wheresoeuer it is hidden, and with what Protection soeuer it is palliated. To con∣clude, I will passe as seuere a Judgement as was that of the Areopagites in times past, or of the Inquisition at this pre∣sent. Yet my Lord, in this my com∣mon censure, I will take a particular care of the Queene Mothers reputation, and will let all the World see, that what hereto∣fore others haue called Vertue, is the natu∣rall habitude of this great Princesse. In the place for others appoynted for Afflictions and Calamities, She shall together with the King, receiue onely Flowers and Crownes; and as her innocency had saued her from the generall deluge, had she then liued; so will it cause her to Tryumph in my Story amidst the tuines of others▪ I haue not the facul∣ty
of Flattering, but the Art only to speake the Truth in good termes; and the Actions you see, had need be more eminent then those you haue read of, if I equall them not by my Words. This being thus (my Lord, as I hope, you doubt not;) imagine in what tearmes▪ I will iustific the R. D. L. R, and in what fort I will intreate her enemies▪ if I haue a minde to it, I will make it one day appeard that  hath beene as cruell a Monster as those who deuourewhole Cities, and denounce Warre agaynst all Humane and Dinine things. One will imagine by the markes I giue him, that R. was a Ma∣gician, which daily▪pricked some Image of Waxe with needles, and who disturbed the repose of all Princes Courts of his time, by the force of his Charmes. The truth is, I will do great matters, prouided my courage quaile not on his part whence I expect it should come, and to whom by a kind of strict Obligation, I am excited to vndertake this Iudgement which will be no lesse famous then that of Michael Angelo.
At our next meeting I will more particular∣ly acquaint you with the whole designe of my Worke, with its order, ornaments, and artifice; you shall there see whether or no I make good vse of those houres I some∣times obtaine from the tyranny of my Phi∣sisians and lingring maladies. In the interim doe me the Honour to loue me still; nor thinke I speake the Court-language, or that I compliment with you, when I assure you I am more then any man liuing My Lord, Your most humble seruant, BALZAC. The 28. of De∣cember, 1622. Another Letter to the Lord Bishop of Ayre. LETTER XII. My Lord, IT must needes be, your Oath of Fealty doth yet continue, and that the Cere∣mony you are imployed in, be longer
then I imagined, since I haue no newes from you: for I must freely confesse vnto you, I am not so slightly perswaded of my selfe, as to haue any thought, as that you neglect me. Besides, I am cer∣taine that publique faith, and what hath euer beene sworne vpon Altars and the Gospolls, are not more inuiolable then your word, and that it will stand good though Heauen and Earth should start; Besides, I can lesse coniecture, that you are hindred by want of Health, whereof I hope you enioy so large a treasure, as it is like to contine as long as the World lasteth. It were a wrong to me, should you alledge Sicknesse, and no lesse then to wrangle with me for a thing in such manner appropriated to my selfe, as I cannot communicate it to any other. I will therefore imagine whatsoeuer you will haue me to thinke; you may loue me if you please, without taking the paines to tell mee so: But for my part, how importunate soeuer I am herein, yet
am I resolute to write vnto you, till you cut off my hands, and to publish so long as I haue a tongue, that I am Sir, Your most humble, and most affectionate seruant, BALZAC▪ The 16. of Decem∣ber, 1622. To the Lord Bishop of Ayre from BALZAC. LETTER XIII. My Lord, YOu cannot loose me, how little care soeuer you take to keepe mee; The Heauens must necessarily infuse new affections in me, and vtterly alter my in∣clinations, if they intend to inhibite mee to be your Seruant. Yet doth it not a lit∣tle grieue me, you doe not testifie what I know you beleeue; and that hauing the power to make me happy by the least of your Letters, I haue more trouble to impe∣trate
this fauour, then I should finde in the obtaining of three Declarations from the King, and as many Briefes from his Holinesse. But all this notwithstanding I cannot be perswaded you place mee a∣mong matters of meere indifferency, or that you no longer remember what you haue promised with so large protestati∣ons, which I hold to be most authenti∣call. I rather for the satisfaction of my thoughts will be confident you haue re∣solued to loue me in secret, thereby to a∣uoide all iealousie; and will beleeue there is more cunning, then coldnesse in your Silence; were it otherwise, or had I really lost your Fauours, certainely I would not suruiue so deepe a discomfort, since there is not any banishment, shipwracke, or sinister fortune, I could not rather require at Gods hands, then such a losse: But these Discourses are as much as to suppose im∣possibilities, or to inuent Dreames: I will therefore leaue them, to let you vnder∣stand some newes from me. I can onely
say, the Ayre of this Countrey is not offen∣siue vnto me: for to assure you that I am in health were too great a boldnesse, I con∣fesse, I haue now and then some pleasing pauses, and I enioy certaine good Houres, which make mee remember my former Health: But there is great difference be∣tweene this imperfect estate of mine and a constitution comparable to that of yours, who haue life sufficient to viuifie thirty such worne bodies as mine, which needes but one blast to blow it downe. Howsoe∣uer, my Phisitians haue promised to make me a new man, and to restore vnto mee what I haue lost. I should be well con∣tented they were men of their words, and that I might at my ease attend all occa∣sions, to testifie how passionately I am The 6. of Ianu∣ary, 1623. Your most humble and most affectionate Seruant, BALZAC.
To the Reuerend Bishop of Ayre, from BALZAC. LETTER XIIII. My LORD, SInce you haue as much care of me as of your Diocesse, and in that I per∣ceiue you would imagine some de∣fect, euen in the felicities you expect in Heauen, should you be saued without me; I will vse my vtmost indeauours to cause that your desire of my Spirituall good prooue not vnprofitable, and to make my selfe capable of the good Counsell you gaue mee by your Letter. True it is, I haue beene so long habituated in vice, I haue almost vtterly forgotten my state of Jnnocency, so as a particular Jubile for my selfe onely, were no more then necessa∣ry: On the otherside, the pious motions I haue, are so poore and imperfect, that of all the flames the Primatiue Christians
haue felt and endured, I should hardly support the meere smoake. Yet my Lord) euen in this bad state wherin I now stand, doe I expect a Miracle from my Maker, who is onely able to raise Children out of the hardest Quarries; nor will I beleeue his Mercy hath finished what hee inten∣deth to effect for the good of Mortals: For since hee hath placed Ports vpon the shoares of most dangerous Seas, and gi∣uen some kinde of dawning, euen to the darkest Nights; it may be there is yet something reserued for me in the secrets of his Prouidence; and that if hitherto I haue ranged out of the right way, he will not any longer suffer me to stray, or tire my selfe in the tracke of vice. And truely, I must here, though much to my shame, acknowledge the truth vnto you, with those few drops of corrupt blood (which is all I haue left) I am plunged in all those passions, wherewith the foundest bodies are pressed: yea, Tyrants, who burne whole Citties vpon the first motion of
rage, and choller, and who allow them∣selues to act what vnlawfull thing soeuer, doe nothing more then my selfe, saue onely to enioy those things I desire, and to execute those designes remayning one∣ly in my will, I wanting their power to perpetrate the like: Nor can the Feauer, the Stone, nor the Scyatica, as yet tame my rebellious spirit, or cause it to become ca∣pable of Discipline; and if time had ad∣ded yeares to the rest of my infirmities, I verily thinke I should desire to behold vncleane sights with spectacles, such I meane as you vtterly auoide, and cause my selfe to be carried to those lewd pla∣ces, whither alone I were vnable to goe: Insomuch that as there are diuers pain∣tings which are necessarily to bee cleane defaced, to take away the defects; so I much feare nothing but Death can stay the current of my crimes, vnlesse by your meanes I enter into a second Life, more fruitfull then the former. I therefore speake in good sadnesse, set your whole
Cleargy to prayer, and commaund a publique Fast in the same strictnesse, as though you were to impetrate at the hands of God, the conversion of the great Turke, or of the Persian Emperour▪ Pro∣pound to your selfe Monsters in my will to be mastred, and an infinity of enemies to ouercome in my passions, and after all this you will beare me witnesse, I haue not made matters greater then they are, and saue onely a certaine imperfect desire I haue to repent, and a kinde of small resistance, I sometimes make a∣gainst the beginnings and buddings of vice, there is not any difference at all be∣tweene my selfe and the greatest sinner li∣uing: But take not (I beseech you) this I write, as a marke of my Humility, for you neuer read a truer relation: and what St. Paul spake in the person of Mankind, ac∣cusing himselfe of other mens offences, is my owne simple deposition, which I deliuer into the hands of the Diuine Ju∣stice. I hate my selfe; yet true it is, I finde
so great coldnesse in the performance of pious actions, that my mind seemeth to be imprisoned when at any time my Du∣ty draweth me to Church, and when I am there, I rather seeke diuertions and temp∣tations, then instruction or edification: Euen mentall prayer being an Oblation for all houres, and which may bee per∣formed without either burnt Jncense, OF bloody Sacrifices, and the finishing where∣of is so neere the first motion; is to me as laborious, as the Pilgrimage of Mount Serrat, or of our Lady of Loretta, would be to another. I am alwayes sad, but ne∣uer penitent; I loue solitarinesse, but hate austerity; I side with honest men, but re∣side with the wicked: if at any time some small rayes of Deuotion reflect vpon my crazy conscience, they are of so short con∣tinuance, and so weake, as they neyther af∣ford me light nor heate, so as all this be∣ing but accident, and meere chance, doth not any way merit the name of good, and it were great wrong to Vertue, to ranke it
in the number of casuall occurrents. You are therefore necessarily to labour for my conversion, which I am vnable to effect of my selfe, and that for my part, I onely affoord matter whereon to make an ho∣nest man. If there bee certayne Saints whom we owe to the teares and interces∣sion of others, and if some Martyrs haue made their very Executioners Compani∣ons of their Glory, I may well hope you will be a powerfull meanes to saue me with your selfe; and that one day (hap∣pily) I may be mentioned among the rest of your Miracles▪ Sir, I know your life to be so spotlesse, as though you were incor∣poreall, or neuer loued any other then that Supreame beauty, from whence all others are deriued▪ Wherefore there is no questi∣on but so rare a Ʋertue may easily impetrate at Gods hands any supplication you shall exhibite, nor is there any doubt hee hath (for you allotted) other limits to his boun∣ty, saue his onely omnipotency. You shall yet at the least finde in me Obedience and
Docility, if I haue not attayned any stronger habitudes. You shall haue to doe with one who amidst the corruption of this Age, wherein well nigh all Spirits re∣uolte from the Faith, cannot be drawne to beleeue any truth to be greater, then what he hath vnderstood from his Nurse or Mother. If in what concerneth not Re∣ligion, I haue sometimes had my priuate Sence and Opinion, I doe with my very heart leaue the same, to the end, to recon∣cile my selfe with the Vulgar; and least I should appeare an Enemy to my Countrey for a slight word, or matter of small impor∣tance. If φφφφ had held himselfe to this Maxime, he might securely haue liued a∣mong men, nor had hee beene prose∣cuted with all extreamity as the most sa∣uage of all beasts: But he rather chose to make a Tragicall end, then to expect a death wherewith the World was vnac∣quainted, or to execute onely ordinary actions. So farre as I can learne, or if the report which passeth be current, he had a
conceite he might one day proue to be that false Prophet, wherewith the decli∣ning age of the Church is threatned: and though hee be but of meane extraction, and poore fortunes, he was notwithstan∣ding so presumptuous, as to imagine him∣selfe to be the man, who is to come with ar∣med forces to disturbe the quiet of Consci∣ences, and for whom the infernall Mini∣sters keepe all the Treasures yet hidden in the Earths intrailes. So long as he conten∣ted himselfe in committing onely humane faults, writing as yet with an vntainted Pen, I often told him, his Verses were not passable; and that hee was in the wrong to esteeme himselfe an vnderstanding man. But he perceiuing that the rules I propoun∣ded to him, for bettering his abilities, to be ouer-sharpe and seuere for him▪ and find∣ing small hope of arriuing whether I desi∣red to conduct him, he perhaps thought best to seeke out some other way to bring him∣selfe into credit at Court, hoping of a meane Poet to become a mighty Prophet: So
that (as it is generally reported) after he had peruerted a number of silly Spirits▪ and long shewed himselfe in the throng of the igno∣rant multitude; he in conclusion did as one who should cast himselfe into a bottomlesse pit, on purpose to gayne the reputation of being an admirable Iumper. My Lord, you remember (I doubt not) what our ioynt o∣pinion hath beene of such like persons, and the weaknesse you shewed there was in the principles of their wicked Doctrine. Now truely how extrauagant soeuer my Spirit hath beene, I haue yet euer submitted the same to the authority of GODS Church, and to the consent of Nations; and as I haue alwayes held, that a single drop of Water, would more easily corrupt, then the whole Ocean: So haue I euer assured my selfe, that particular opinions could neuer be eyther so sound or sollid, as the generall Tenets. A silly man who hath no further knowledge of himselfe, then by the relations of others, who is at his wits end, and wholly confoun∣ded in the consideration or reflection vpon
the meanest workes of Nature; who after the reuolution of so many Ages, is not a∣ble to assigne the cause of a certayne Riuers ouer-flow; nor of the interuals or good dayes of a Tertian Ague: How dare he presume to speake confidently of that Infi∣nite Maiesty, in whose presence the Angels themselues couer their faces with their Wings, and vnder whom the very Heauens crouch, euen to the Earths lowest conca∣uities. There is no other thing remayning for vs, saue the only glory of Humility, and Obedience, within the limits whereof, we ought to contayne our selues: And since it is most certayne, that Humane reason rea∣cheth not to so high a pitch as to attayue the perfection of Knowledge, we ought in∣steed of disputing or questioning poynts of Religion, to rest satisfied in the adora∣tion of their Mysteries: for doubtlesse, if we striue to enter further thereinto, or search for a thing vtterly vnknowne to all Philosophy, and concealed from the Sages of this World, we shall by such prophane
curiosity gaine onely the dazeling of our Eyes, and confusion of our Sences: God by the light of his Gospell hath reuealed vn∣to vs diuers Truths, whereof we were vt∣terly ignorant; but he reserueth for vs far greater Mysteries, which wee shall neuer comprehend, but only in that Kingdome which he hath prepared for his chosen Ser∣uants, and by the onely vision of his Face. In the meane time; to the end, to aug∣ment the merit of our Faith, and the more to perfectionate our Piety, his pleasure is, that Christians should become as blind Louers, and that they haue not any o∣ther desires or hopes, but for those things aboue the reach of their vnderstandings, and which they can no way comprehend by Naturall reason. So soone as the time you haue prefixed me, shall be expired, and the Prime-roses make the Spring appeare, I will not faile to wayte vpon you, and di∣ligently to addresse my selfe to the collecti∣on of your graue and important Discourses, and to become an honest man by hearing,
since that is the Sence appointed for the ap∣prehension of Christian vertues, and where∣by the Sonne of God was conceiued, and his Kingdome established among men. But it is needlesse to vse any artifice, or that you paint the place of your abode in so glorious colours, thereby to inuite mee to come: For though you preached in the Desart, or were you hidden in such a corner of the World, where the Sunne did onely shine vpon the sterile Sands and steepe Rockes: you well know, I should esteeme my selfe happy where you are. Your Company being of power to make either a prison or proscripti∣on pleasing vnto me; and wherein I finde the Loouer and the whole Court, will adde (to the description you haue made of Aire) diuers beauties which Geographers haue not hitherto obserued, as being far grea∣ter then others, though more secret. Those Mountaines which will not allow France and Spaine to be one mans, and vn∣der which the Raine and Thunder are fra∣med, will appeare to me more huge, then
they formerly did, when I first saw them: your waters which heretofore cured di∣uer Diseases, will euen raise the Dead, if you once blesse them; and doubtlesle this people, alwayes bred vp to beare Armes, and who as the Fire and Jron is onely de∣stinated for the vse of Warre, hath (ere now) mollified their fierce humour by the moderation of your mild conduct. For my part (Sir) I make account to become a new man vnder your hands, and to re∣ceiue a second Birth from you. Truely, it would be a thing right happy to me, and in it selfe famous; if the like Spirituall health, proceeding from the garments and sha∣dowes of the Apostles, might happen vnto me by approaching so holy a person; and if being your workmanship, and the Sonne of your Spirit, I should instantly resemble a Father so happily endowed with all those rare qualities and perfections, which are wholy deficient in me. BALZAC.
To Mounsieur de la Motts Aigron. LETTER XV. YEsterday was one of those Sunlesse dayes (as you tearme them) which resemble that beautifull blind Maide, wherewith Philip the second fell in Loue. Truely, I neuer tooke more pleasure in so priuate a solitarinesse; and though I walked in a large and open Plaine, wher∣of man could make no other vse, but for two Armies to fight in: yet the shade the Heauens cast on all sides, caused mee little to regard the shelter of Caues or Forrests. There was a generall and qui∣et calme from the highest Region of the Ayre, euen to the Superficies of the Earth: the waters of Riuers seemed as euen and smooth as those of Lakes; and surely, if at Sea such a calme should for euer sur∣priseships,
they could neuer bee eyther safe, or sunke. This I say, on purpose to make you repent the losle of so pleasant a Day, for not comming abroad out of the Citty, as also to draw you sometimes out of your Angoulesme, where you treade leuill with our Towers and Steeples, to come and take part of those pleasures wherein the ancient Princes of the World tooke delight: who vsually refreshed themselues in Fountaines, and liued on those fruites which Forrests affoord. Your Friends here are in a small circle enuiro∣ned with Mountaines, and where is yet remaining some few graines of that faire Gold whereof the first Age was composed. In truth when the fire of Warre is flaming in the foure corners of France, and that within a hundred paces hence, the whole Earth is couered with aduerse Troupes and Armies; they with mutuall con∣sent doe alwayes spare our Village. The Spring-time in other places producing the besiegings of Forts and Cities, with o∣ther
enterprises of Warre, and which for this dozen yeares hath beene lesse looked for, in respect of the change of Seasons, then for any alteration of Affaires, suffers vs to see no other thing but Violets and Ro∣ses. Our people are not contayned in their primatiue innocency, eyther by feare of Lawes or Study of Sciences▪ They (to liue vprightly) doe simply follow their naturall Bounty, and draw more aduan∣tage from their ignorance of Vice, then most of vs do out of the knowledg of Ver∣tue: so as in this. Territory of two miles, they know not how to cosen any, saue Birds and Beasts, and the pleading Lan∣guage is as vnknowne here, as that of A∣merica, or of other parts of the World, which haue escaped the auarice of Fer∣dinand▪ and the ambition of Isabella. Those things which hurt the health of man, or offend their eyes, are generally banished hence; Snakes nor Lizards are neuer seene here, and of creping creatures wee know no other but Melions and Strawberries. I in∣tend
not here to draw you the portraite of a Palace, the workemanship wherof hath not bin ordred acording to the rules of architecture, nor the matter so precious as Marble and Purphire. I will onely tell you that at the Gates there is a Groue, wherein at full noone there enters no more day then needes must not to make it night, and to cause all colours not to looke blacke▪ so that betweene the Sun and the shade, there is a kinde of third temper composed, which may well be endured by the weakest eyes, and hide the deformities of painted faces. The Trees here, are greene to the very ground, as well with their owne leaues, as with Iuy which inuirones them: and as for the fruites wherein they are deficient, their branches are all beset with Turtle-Doues and Phesants, and this at all times in the yeare. From thence I march into a Meddow, where I treade vpon Tuli∣pans and Anemons, hauing caused them to be mingled among other Flowers, to
confirme my opinion I brought from my Trauailes, that French Flowers are not so faire, as those of Forraine Countries. I (sometimes walke downe into that Vallie, being the secret part of my De∣sart, and which till now) was not knowne to any man: It is a Country to be wished for and painted. I haue made choise thereof for my most precious oc∣cupations, there to passe the most plea∣sing houres of my life: The Trees and Water neuer suffer this place to want coulenesse and verdure. The Swans which couered the whole Riuer, are reti∣red to this place of security: liuing in a Channell, which causeth the greatest talkers to take a nappe, so soone as they come neare; & on whose Bankes I am al∣waies happy; be I merry or melancholly: How short a time soeuer I stay there, I suppose I enter into my first innocency: my desires, my feares and hopes stop in a trice: all the motions of my soule flac∣ken, nor haue I any passions remaining,
or if I haue any, I gouerne them as tame Beasts. The Sunne conuayes its light thither, but neuer its heate. The place is so low, as it can onely receiue the last points of its beames: being therfore the more beautifull, in that they are lesse burning, and the light thereof al∣together pure. But as it is my selfe who haue discouered this new found Land; so do I possesse it without any partner, nor would I share it with my owne bro∣ther. But in all other quarters vnder my commaund, there is not a man who courts not his Mistresse without con∣troule, nor seruant of mine who is not master; each one satisfying himselfe of what he loues, and spending the time at pleasure. And on the other side, when I see the Grasse trodden downe; and on the other, the Corne full of Layers: I am well assured, it is neither Winde nor Haile, hath made this worke, but only a Shepheard and his sweete-heart. At which doore soeuer I goe out of my
house, or on what side soeuer I turne mine eyes, in this pleasant Pathmos, I finde the riuer of Charauton wel meriting as much fame, as that of Tagus, aud wherein, when Beasts go to drinke, they see the Heauens as cleare as we doe, and enioy the same aduantage, which else∣where men haue ouer them. Besides, this pure water is so in loue with this petty Prouince, that it diuides it selfe into a thousand branches, and makes an infinite of windings and turnings, as loath to leaue and depriue it selfe of so pleasing a lodging; and when at any time it ouer-floweth, it is only to make the yeare more firtile, and to affoord vs meanes to catch Trouts and Pykes, lea∣uing them vpon the leuill; and which are so great and excellent, as they equall the Sea Monsters; the Crocadiles of Nile, and all the supposed Gold rowling in those feigned Riuers so much spoken of by Poets. The great Duke of Espernon, comes hether sometimes, for
change of felicity, and to lay aside that austere vertue and splendor, which daze∣leth the eyes of all men, to assume milder qualities, and a more accostable Maiesty. This Cardinall likewise, by whom Heauen intends to act so high de∣signes, and of whom you heare me day∣ly speake, after the losse of his brother who was such a one, as if he might haue chosen him among all men, hee would not haue taken any other: after (as I say) hauing indured that losse, well deser∣uing to draw teares from the Queene, he made choice of this place, here to exer∣cise his patience, and to receiue from Gods hands who loueth silence, and who is found in solitary retirements, what Philosophy affoordeth not, nor is to be practised among the throng of people. I would enlarge my selfe vpon other Ex∣amples, to shew you how my Village hath at all times bin frequented by He∣roical Hermits, and how the steps of Prin∣ces and great Siegniors, are (as yet) new∣ly
trodden in my ordinary pathes. But the more to inuite you to come hither; I suppose it sufficient to say, that Virgil and myselfe do here attend you: if therfore you be accompanied in this Voyage with your Muses; and other Manuscripts, we shall not neede to entertayne the time with Court newes, nor with the Germaine trou∣bles: Let me not liue, if euer I saw any thing comparable to your Spirituall Medi∣tations, and if the least part of the Worke you shewed me, be not of more worth, then all Frankford Mart, and all those great Bookes which come to vs from the North, bringing cold weather and frosts along with them. I assure you the Presi∣dent of THOV, who was as worthy a Iudge of Latine Eloquence, as of the life and fortunes of men; and who had left an ex∣act History behind him, had he pleased to retract some things; made no small e∣steeme of these my Countrey-men: But I cannot as yet conceiue what caused him to affect certaine wits so contrary to his
owne, and who neuer were acquainted, nor did so much as dreame of that Roman purity, you pursue with so great scrupulo∣sity and exact diligence. You will let these men see I assure my selfe; yea, and those wise Transalpines themselues likewise, who thinke all such to be Scythians who are not Jtalians, euen in what fashion they spake in Augustus his age, yea and in a time more cleare from the corruption of good customes. In a word, besides the propriety of termes, and chastity of Stile, which lendeth a luster to your elaborate Writings, your conceits are so sublime, and so full of courage, that it is very pro∣bable the ancient Republicke of Rome was adorned with the like, at what time it was victorious ouer the World, and when the Senate conceiued insemblable tearmes, the Commandments they prescribed to grea∣test Princes, and the answers it addressed to all Nations on earth: I will speake fur∣ther, when you appeare where I expect you; and where instead of Flowers, Fruites, and
Shades, which I prepare for you, I hope to receiue from you all the Riches of Art and Nature. In the interim (to vse my Lord the Cardinall d'Ossats tearme) I bid you good night, and let you know, that if you seeke excuses not to come, I am no longer Your most humble and faithfull Seruant, BALZAC. The 26. of Sep∣tember, 1622. To Mounsieur de bois Robert from BALZAC. LETTER XVI. SIR, I was vpon the point not to haue writ∣ten any more vnto you, and to haue contented my selfe in sending you sin∣gle commendations, since I see my Let∣ters
procure you enemies: and for that you are in dayly contestation for defen∣ding them; if therefore you desire conti∣nuance of our conference in this kinde, liue hence-forward reposedly, and re∣concile your selfe to choice Wits, from whom I should bee sorry you should se∣parate your selfe for my sake; it is farre better to conceale a small truth, then to disturbe a generall peace; and I should hold my Eloquence as pernicious as the perfections of Helena, should it prooue any cause of your quarrels. Since there haue beene found men who haue carped at the Worlds composure, and spied spots in the Sunne, it is very likely in∣feriour things cannot be more perfect; and that there is nothing so absolutely approued, against which there hath not beene some thing disputed, and certayne weake Reasons alledged. I confesse I write as men build Temples and Palla∣ces, and that I sometimes fetch my ma∣terials a farre oft; as wee are to make a
voyage of two thousand Leagues, to transport the Treasures of America into Spaine. But if Pearles be not precious be∣cause they grow not in the sands of Seine; or if in what I doe, some condemne me, it sufficeth that I am not of their minde; if the worst come, I appeale to my Lord the Cardinall of Richelieu, of whose ap∣probation I esteeme more, then of popu∣lar fauour, or applause of Theaters. It is long since I vnderstood from him that I exceeded others; not excepting euen those who striue to aspire to a kind of tyranny, and to vsurpe a more absolute authority ouer wits, then is either law∣full or reasonable. This being so, I should much wrong that Great person, on whose bookes God hath placed the Truth we seeke after, as well as the Elo∣quence all of vs imagine wee haue attay∣ned should I digresse from his opinion, to regard what foure or fiue of those com∣posers of Romands of the Rose say, who haue no other language but Legends: if
I would content my selfe with my infant conceptions, or determined to write as an honest Woman should speake, they would happily finde their owne facility in my Workes: though truely if I take any paines therein, I assure myselfe they will sooner ghèsse at, then gaine my concepti∣ons. But truely, he who purposeth to himselfe the Idea of perfection, and who labours for Eternity, ought not to let any thing escape his Pen, till after long and serious consultation with himselfe. Yet will I tell you, and all the World may easily vnderstand, that my writings smel more of Muske and Amber, then of Oyle or sweate; whereas out of that great labou∣riousnesse they so much frame to them∣selues, there will infallibly arise obscu∣rity, which none but the Blind can taxe me with▪ But as for those fellowes, it is alwayes night with them, and they are rather to accuse their mothers of their defects, and not colours or the light: I indeauour (in what I may) to make all
my conceptions popular, and to be in∣telligable among women and chil∣dren, euen when I speake of things be∣yond their Capacity: but if your friends suppose certayne of my conceits to be o∣uer-farre fetcht, let them throughly ob∣serue, whither they transcend my subiect, or their conceptions; or whither I goea∣stray, or they loose sight of me: There are diuers things aboue reason, which yet are not contrary thereto. An Heroicall vertue making vse of excesses and highth of passions, goeth as farre beyond vulgar Vertue, as it surmounteth Vice: we are not therefore to shut vp all Wits within the same limits, nor presently to censure that as Exorbitant, which is only extraordi∣nary: Otherwise we should resemble that poore Noruegian, who the first time he saw Roses, durst not touch them for feare of burning his fingers, and was much amazed to see (as he supposed) Trees to beare fire: Surely as Nouelty is not of force to make Monsters well featured, so ought it not
to hinder our affections to excellent things, though vnknowne vnto vs. If for the vnderstanding my language, it were necessary to learne two; or that Anxietie, Decrepitude, and the Irritaments of Despaire, were familiar phrases with me; if I made vse of Waues instead of Water, and euill Fates for ill fortune; or the Flower-do-luce for France; to the end to play the Poet in Prose; should I immolate my selfe to publique scorne, and sayle vpon the Ocean in the stormaticall seasons of the yeare, if I should say, the misericordious Justice of God, and his inst Misericord; or plucke comparisons from Pliny; and could I not commend a King without the helpe of Alexander the Great, and Plutarckes Worthies; if instead of well-speaking, I should translate Tacicus ill, and if in spite of him I should force him to deliuer his Opinion concerning all the af∣faires of this Age, you then might rightly blame me frō bringing follies so far off, & for taking so much paines to make my selfe ridiculous. But surely I should be the most
innocent of all others, had I onely offen∣ded therein; and I may safely say without vanity, that euen the follies of my Jnfan∣cy, were more serious then those sweete Rbetoricall flowers: when all is sayd, since there is nothing but Religion can force vs to belecue what shee pleaseth, and that Kings themselues haue no power ouer Soules, I am well satisfied with the affe∣ction of my Friends, and doe willingly leaue their iudgements free to themselues. One Good-night is more worth then all our Eloquence, and not to know the miseries of this life▪ is to be more learned then the Sorbonists and lessits. For my part, (despi∣sing the world as I doe) I cannot much e∣steeme my selfe, who make vp one of the sickliest parts thereof; and I haue so poore an opinion of my owne sufficiency, as I little esteeme the Talents of others: Thinke not then, I adore the workemanship of my hands, though I take as much paines there∣in, as did the ancient Caruers, in counter∣feiting their gods. Butcontrariwise, it is
the reason why I dislike them, and had I beene a man of ten thousand Crownes rent, I would haue giuen the halfe of it to a Se∣cretary, onely to hire him not to indite those Letters you haue so much admired. The 15. February, 1624.
THE LETTERS OF MOVNSIEVR DE BALZAC. To my Lord Cardinall de la Valete; from Moun∣sieur D'BALZAC. THE SECOND BOOKE. LETTER I. My LORD: VVHilst you imploy your houres in gayning hearts and Votes, and happily lay the founda∣tion of some eminent enter∣prize: I here enioy a reposed∣nesse
not vnlike that of the dead, and which is neuer rouzed but by Clorinda's kisses. If the Duke of Ossona be chosen King of Naples, (as you write the report runneth) I finde no strangenesse in it. The world is so old, and hath seene so much, it can hardly spie any new mat∣ter; nor is there at this day any lawfull authority whose Origin (for the most part) hath not beene vniust. And on the other side the ill successe of reuolts are far more frequent then are the change of States: and the same action which hath no lesse then a Diademe for the ayme, hath often an ignominious death for its end. Howsoeuer this happens, it shall not much trouble me since the issue cannot be other then aduantagious to this State. For God herein will either make it appeare, that he is the protector of Kings: or it falling out otherwise, yet at least it will weaken the enemies to this Crowne. But I hope you will not aduise me to beat my braines vpon those
politique considerations; for should I doe so▪ it were no lesse then to retract the resolution I haue taken, to looke vpon things passing among vs and our neighbours, as I doe on the History of Japon, or the affaires of another World. I ought to surrender this humour to vulgar spirits, who interest themselues in all the quarrels of States and Princes, and who will alwayes be parties, on pur∣pose to put themselues into choler, and bee miserable in the misfortunes of o∣thers. Truely we shall neuer haue done if we will needes take all the affaires of the world to heart, and be passionate for the publique; whereof wee make but a very small part. It may be at this very instant wherein I write, the great Indian Fleete suffereth shipwracke within two Leagues of Land: happily the great Turke hath surprised some Prouince from the Christians, and taken thence some twen∣ty thousand soules, to conuey them to their Citty of Constantinople: It may be
the Sea hath exceeded its limits, and drowned some Citty in Zealand. If we send for mischiefes so farre off, there will not an houre passe wherein some disconsolation or other will not come vpon vs. If we hold all the men in the world to be of our affinity, let vs make account to weare Mournings all our life. As mine experience is not great, so are my yeares not many: yet since I came in∣to the world, I haue seene so many strange accidents, and haue vnderstood from my father such store of incredible occur∣rents, as I suppose there can nothing now happen, able to cause admiration in me. The Emperour Charles the fist his Grand-child, borne to the hopes of so many Kingdomes, was condemned to death, for hauing ouer-soone desired them. The naturall subiects of the King of Spaine doe at this day dispute with him for the Empire of the Sea; nor will they rest satisfied with their vsurped li∣berty. Surely wee should hardly bee
drawne to beleeue these things vpon the credit of others, and those in succeeding ages will with much difficulty bee per∣swaded to receiue them for truths; yet are these the ordinary recreations of For∣tune, taking pleasure in deceiuing Man∣kinde, by euents farre opposite to all appea∣rance; yea, and contrary to their iudge∣ments. Hath shee not deliuered ouer to the peoples fury, the man whom she had formerly raysed aboue the rest, to the end, we should not presume in greatest Prospe∣rities? And hath she not at the same time taken out of the Bastile, a Prisoner, to make him Generall of a Royall Army, thereby to oblige vs not at any time to des∣paire? I do here consider all this with a reposed spirit, and as Fables presented on the Stage; or Pictures in a Gallery. Now since the late Comet had like to haue beene as fatall vnto me, as to the Emperour Ro∣dolphus, in that my curiosity to see it, cau∣sed me to rise in my shirt, which gaue me a cold all the Winter after. I am heereafter
resolued not to meddle with any thing a∣boue my reach; but to referre all to GOD and Nature. So as Clorinda suffer me to serue her, and that I vnderstand from her owne mouth that she loues me, I will hearken to no other newes, nor search a second Fortune. I therefore most humbly be∣seech your Lordship to excuse me, if vpon these occasions lately presented, I cannot affoord you my personall attendance, or refuse to follow you whither your resoluti∣on leades you; my Mistresse hauing com∣manded me, to render her an account how I shed my bloud, and enioyning me neuer to goe to the Warres, but when Muskets are charged with Cypres-powder; I am ra∣ther contented you should accuse mee of Cowardize, then she iustly to charge mee with Disobedience. And after all this tell me whether or no, you thinke me to be in my right wits, and that I haue not lost my reason, together with the respect I owe you. I herein doe as a delinquent; who fearing he should not be soone enough pu∣nished,
puts himselfe into the hands of Justice, not staying eyther for the Racke, or examination of Iudges, for the disco∣uery of a crime whereof he was neuer ac∣cused. I am well assured, that of all passi∣ons, you haue onely those of Honour and Glory, and that your Spirits are so reple∣nished therewith, as there is no place left eyther for loue, hate, or feare. Yet doe I withall consider, that it is a part of a wise mans felicity to reflect vpon other mens follies: howsoeuer, if any word hath esca∣ped me which may offend your eyes, take it I beseech you, as a meanes sent you from God for your farther mortification, in cau∣sing you to read things so distastefull vnto you. You are necessarily to endure farre greater crosses amidst the corruption of this Age: if you cannot liue among the wicked, you must seeke for another kinde of world then this, and for more perfect creatures then Mortals. There will euer be poysnings beyond the Alpes, Treasons at Court, and reuolts in this Realme. How∣soeuer
(my Lord) there will be loue e∣uen in spite of you, so long as there are eyes and beauties in the world; yea, the Wise themselues will loue, if they finde Clorindaes, Dianaes, and Cassandraes to be be∣loued. Fire seazeth somtimes on Churches and Pallaces. God hath framed Fooles and Philosophers of one and the same matter: And that cruell Sect which seekes to be∣reaue vs of the one halfe of our selues, in seeking to free vs from our passions and affections, instead of making a wise man, haue onely raised a Statue. I must there∣fore once againe tell you that I loue, since Nature will haue it so; and that I am of the progeny of our first Parent: but I must withall informe you, that all my affecti∣ons spring not from the distempers and diseases of my soule; my inclination to serue you, hauing immortall reason, not momentary pleasure for its foundation, one day happily I shall no more be amo∣rous, but will alwayes remayne My Lord, Your most humble and most affectionate Seruant, BALZAC.
To the Lord Cardinall of Valete, Sonne to the Duke of Espernon. LETTER II. My LORD; AT length they haue done you right, and you now enioy what you de∣serued from the first day of your Natiui∣ty: if there could bee any thing added to a man who reckoneth Kings among his Predecessors, and whose inclinati∣ons happily are ouer-great to liue vnder the power of another; I should aduise you to reioyce at this newes; but being extracted as you are, from one of the most illustrious▪ Origines on earth, and be∣gotten by a Father, whose life is loaden with Miracles; it sufficeth that you par∣don Fortune, since it hath so happned that present necessity hath gained of her what she in right owed to your name. I know well that some will tell you, you
are created Prince of such an Estate, as is bounded neither by Seas nor Moun∣taines, and how the extent of your iu∣risdiction is so illimitable, as were there many worlds, they ought all of them to depend thereon as well as this. But I who suffer not mine eyes to be dazeled by any other luster then that of Vertue, and who doe not so much as bestow the looking on, what most men admire; if I should esteeme you either more great, or happy then you were, I should not haue sufficiently profited vnder you, in the true vnderstanding of you. Doubtlesse in the opinion of the Vulgar, it is an ex∣traordinary Honour to be a prime person in a Ceremony, and to weare a Hat of equal esteeme to Crownes and Diadems. Yet I presume you will pardon mee if I make bold to tell you, it is an honour can neuer oblige a wise man to enuy you. For had you this point onely aboue me, I should still be my owne Master: Nor had I for your sake renounced that liberty,
which was as deare to mee as the Com∣mon-wealth of Venice. Vpon the mat∣ter, to haue none other Iudge on Earth saue onely your reputation and consci∣ence, and to haue a great trayne of fol∣lowers, some whereof are imployed in the procuring your spirituall pleasures, others in the conduct of your temporall affaires, all this shal be still the same with you, and diuers others whom you slight; but to performe good and vertuous acti∣ons, when you are assured they shall ne∣uer come to the worlds eye; to feare no∣thing but dishonest things; to beleeue death to bee neither good nor bad in it selfe; but that if the occasion to imbrace it be honourable, it is alwayes more va∣luable then a long life: to haue the repu∣tation of integrity in your promises, in a time when the most credulous haue e∣nough to doe, to confide on publique faith: This is it which I admire in you my Lord; and not your Red Hat, and your fifty thousand Crownes Rent; yet
I will say, that for the honour of Rome, you ought to esteeme of what she sends you. The time hath bin when she would haue erected Statues for you, and affoor∣ded you sufficient subiect to haue meri∣ted Tryumphs: but those dayes being past, and since that Empire is no longer maintayned by such meanes, yet ought you to rest satisfied with the honours of Peace, and accept (as a high fauour) a Dignity the King of Spaine's Sonne hath made suite for. If there were nothing else in it, but that it causeth you to quit your Mourning-robes, to reuest your selfe with the colour of Roses, you can doe no lesse then reioyce at such a change. Howsoeuer the nearest obiects to your eyes, will not be so dolefull as formerly they were, since there will be nothing vpon you which shall not be re∣splendent and glorious. I would wil∣lingly dilate this discourse, but the spee∣dy departure of the Post will not suf∣fer me; and besides, I being well assu∣red,
that if you esteeme any thing in my Letters, it is not the multitude of words; I ought to be contented to end this, after my humble suite vuto you, to loue me alwayes, since I am passionately My Lord, Your most humble, most obe∣dient, and most faithfull seruant BALZAC.
To the Lord Cardinall de Valette▪ from Balzac. J here send you two Letters which were deliue∣red mee, to bee conueyed vnto you, the one from the Duke of Bauaria, the other from the Cardinall of Lerma. My Lord, you shall thereby perceiue that your propositi∣on hath affoorded ioy, both to the Victorious, and to the Afflicted; and that the World re∣ceiueth a notable interest therein, since it augmenteth the contentment of Triumphes, and sweetneth the harshnes of retyrement. LETTER. III. MY LORD: I Suppose you haue vnderstood of the Election of the Pope, some two dayes iournies from Paris; and that you will make no great hast to adde your approba∣tion to a thing already dispatched: I had sent a Post on purpose to aduertise you thereof; but my Lord Embassador thought
it not fit, but hath encharged his owne Messenger to aduertise you of all things, in your Voyage this way, and to giue you accompt of all occurrents. This makes me thinke that the subiect of your voyage ceasing, and the time of yeare being as yet some what troublesome, for the vn∣dertaking thereof, you will rather reserue it for a fitter season, when you may per∣forme it with lesse disorder, and more aduantagiously for the Kings seruice. My meaning is, that I would haue you set for∣ward about the end of Autumne, that you may spend here with vs, one of these warm and springing Winters, laden with Roses, wholy reserued for our admirable Italy. And my Lord, though herein the consideration of my priuate interest may seeme to make me speake thus, rather then my affection to your seruice; yet would I willingly tell you, that all kinde of con∣tentments attend you here, and if your great Spirit aspire to glorious things for the keeping it in action, it shall infallibly finde
them at Rome. In the interim, how short a while soeuer you stay here, you shall haue the contentment to see France change some fiue or sixe times. At your returne you will hardly find any thing answerable to what you left there; they shall not be the same men you formerly saw, and all things will appeare vnto you, as the af∣faires of another Kingdome. But before the matter be growne to that head, it is fitting you reigne here in Soueraignty, and become the Supreame Iudge of three or foure Conclaues: And truly it might so hap∣pen (my Lord) that I should do you some acceptable seruice in those great occasions, if I had my health; but to my great griefe it is a happinesse, for which I enuy my Grand mother, and howsoeuer I haue heretofore beene little, or much estimable: I confesse, that at this present, I am but the halfe of what I was. It is therefore in vayne to expect workes of any great value from me, or that you importune me to take paynes for the Publicke; for in Consci∣ence
what high defignes can a man haue, be∣tweene the affliction of diseases, and the apprehension of Death? The one where∣of doth neuer forsake me, and the other daily affrights me; or how can you imagine I should conceiue eminent matters, who am ready to dye at euery instant. True it is, that the necessity to obey you, which I haue alwaies before mine Eyes, is an extraordinary strong motiue; but (not to dissemble) the impossibility of my per∣formance is yet more forcible; and so long as I continue in the state I now am, I can not promise you so much as the History of the Kingdome ofA little Principa∣lity in France. Yuetot; nor that of the Papacy of Campora, though it continued onely one halfe quarter of an houre▪ From Rome this 27. of February 1622.
Another Letter vnto Cardinall de la Valete from Balzac. LETTER IIII. My LORD, YOur Cash-keeper hath newly brought mee the summe you com∣manded him to deliuer vnto me. I would willingly shew sufficient thanke∣fulnesse for this high fauour: but besides that your benefits are boundlesse, and that you are so gracious an obliger, that it doth euen augment the value of your Bounty, I should seeme ouer presump∣tuous to thinke any words of mine valu∣able to the least of your actions. It shall therefore suffice me to protest vnto you, that the bounty wherewith the Letter I receiued from you, is so stored; (being of force to infuse Loue and Fidelity in the hearts of very Barbarians,) shall worke no lesse effect in the spirit of a person
who hath learned both by Nature and Philosophy not to be ingratefull. Since I finde my interest within my duty, I must necessarily loue you (if I hate not my selfe) and be an honest man by the ve∣ry Maxime of the wicked. Yet is not this last consideration the cause chiefly obli∣ging me to your seruice: For though I acknowledge diuers defects in my selfe, yet may I without vanity affirme, I was neuer besotted with so base an attraction as that of gaine. I therefore reflect vpon your fauours in their naked purity, and the esteeme you make of me, is to me by so much a more strong obligation then all others, in that it regardeth my merit, and not my instant pouerty, and proceedeth from your iudge∣ment which is farre more excellent, then your fortunes are eminent. Herein (my Lord) it is manifest, that all your incli∣nations are magnificent: for you know∣ing me neither to be fit to make the Fa∣ther of a Family, nor to solicite causes
at the Counsell-table, nor well to ride post: you make it appeare, you are of the right blood of Kings, who are onely rich in superfluous things. Truely it were a hard matter to guesse what in this world is the true vse of Pearles and Dia∣monds; or why a Picture should cost more then a Pallace; but onely plea∣sure: which to satisfie the inuentions of Art, are dayly imployed, and Nature to that end produceth whatsoeuer is rare, being indeede a thing more noble then necessity, shee being contented with small matters, euer preferring profit be∣sore pleasure. And I will here stop, lest I speake too much to my owne aduantage: And if I haue already incurred that crime, I beseech you to beleeue it hath not beene with purpose to praise my selfe, but onely to extoll your liberality: Yet will I make bold to acquaint you, how I imploy your money, and yeelde you a more particular account of the af∣faires I dispatch for you here at Rome:
First, in this hot Moneth I seeke all pos∣sible remedies against the violence of the Sunne. I haue a Fanne which wearieth the hands of foure Groomes, and raiseth a winde in my Chamber which would cause shipwracke in the maine Sea; I ne∣uer die but I dye Snow in the Wine of Naples, and make it melt vnder Mel∣lons. I spend halfe my time vnder wa∣ter, and the rest on Land: I rise twice a day, and when I step out of my bed, it is onely to enter into a Groue of Orange∣trees, where I slumber with the pleasant purling of some twelue Fountaines: but if occasion be offered to goe further once in a Weeke, I crosse not the street but in Carroach, passing still in the shade be∣tweene Heauen and Earth: I leaue the smell of sweetest flowers vnto the Vul∣gar, as hauing found the inuention to eate and drinke them. The Spring▪time neuer parts with me all the yeare either in variety of distilled Waters, or in Con∣serues. I change perfumes according to
the diuersity of Seasons; some I haue sweeter, others stronger: And though the Ayre be a thing Nature bestowes for no∣thing, and whereof the poorest haue plenty, yet that, I breath in my Cham∣ber, is as costly vnto mee as my house∣rent. Besides all this, I in quality of my Lord your Agent, am almost daily fea∣sted: and there whilest others fill them∣selues with substantiall and most ponde∣rous cates; I who haue no great appe∣tite, make choice of such Birds as are crammed with Sugar, and nourish my selfe with the spirit of Fruites, and with a meate called felly. My Lord, these are all the seruices I yeeld you in this place, and all the functions of my resi∣dence neare his holinesse; and I hold my selfe particularly obliged now the second time to thanke you for this fauour: for by your meanes I enioy two things sel∣dome suiting together; a Master and Liberty; and the great rest you al∣low mee, is not the least present you
please out of your Noblenesse to affoord me. Your Graces most humble, most obedient, and most faithfull seruant, BALZAC. From Rome the 15. of Iuly, 1621. To the Lord Cardinall de Valete from BALZAC. LETTER V. My Lord, VVIthin the Deserts of Arabia, nor in the Seas intrailes, was there euer so furious a Monster found, as is the Scyatica: And if Tyrants whose memories are hatefull vnto vs, had beenestored with such instruments for ef∣fecting their cruelties; surely I thinke it had beene the Scyatica the Martyres had in∣dured for Religion, and not the fire, and biting of wild Beasts. At euery sting it
carries a poore sicke person euen to the bor∣ders of the other World, and causeth him sensible to touch the extremities of life. And surely, to support it long, a greater re∣medy then Patience is no lesse then requi∣site, and other forces then those of man▪ In the end GOD hath sent me some case, after the receite of an infinite of remedies, some whereof sharpned my griefe, and the rest asswaged it not. But the violence of my payne being now past, I beginne to enioy such rest, as wearinesse and weake∣nesse affoordeth to ouer-tired bodies. And though I be in a state of health, farre lesse perfect then those who are sound, yet measuring it by the proximity of the misery I haue indured, and the compari∣son of those paines I haue suffered: I am right glad of my present Fortune, nor am I so hardy, to dare as yet complayne of my great weaknesse remaining. To speake truth, J haue no better legges then will serue to make a shew; and should I vnder∣take to walke the length of my Chamber,
my trouble would be no lesse, then if I were to passe the Mountaines, and crosse all Riuers I encounter. But, to the end to change Discourse, and to let you see things in their faire shape; you are to vnderstand that in this plight wherein J stand, (being sufficient to cause you to pitty me foure hundred Leagues off:) J am on the one side become so valiant, as not to flie though I were pursued by a whole Army; and on the other▪ so stately, that if the Pope should come to visite me, I would not conduct him so far as the Gates. This is the aduantage I draw from my bad legges, and the remedies arising in my bed, wherewith I endeauour to comfort my selfe without the helpe of Phisicke. You will (I feare) say I might well haue for∣borne to entertaine you with these imper∣tinencies; nor am I ignorant that perfect felicities, such as yours, desire not to be dis∣quieted either by the complaints of the distressed, or by the consideration of distastefull things: But it is likewise true,
that the first losse we indure in paine, fals vpon our iudgement, and the body hath such a proximity with the soule, that the miseries of the one, doe easily slide into the other. But what reason soeuer I haue to defend my euill humour, yet must it necessarily giue way to your con∣tentment; and of the two passions wherewith I am assaulted, obey the stronger. I will therefore be no longer sad but for others, and will hold it fit I make you laugh vpon the subiect of XXXXX▪ to whom you lately addressed your Letters. You may please to remem∣ber one of their Names to be A. the other B; yet is it not sufficient onely to know so much, but I must likewise informe you somewhat of their shape and stature. The first I speake of, is so grosse, as I ve∣rily thinke he will instantly dye of an Apoplexcy; and the other so little, as I would sweare that since he came into the world▪ hee neuer grew but at the haires end: afore any indifferent Iudges, an Ape
would sooner passe for a man then this Pigmy; nor will I beleeue he was made after the image of God, lest therein I should wrong so excellent a Nature. Be∣sides, it were an easier taske to raise the Dead, then to make this mans Teeth white; he hath a Nose at enmity with all others: and against which there is no possible defence but Spanish Gloues. What can I say more, there is no part of his bo∣dy that is not shamefull, or wherein Nature hath not beene defectiue. Yet notwithstanding one of the fairest Prin∣cesses of Italy, is by a solemne contract condemned to lodge night by night with this Monster. When you chance to see this man together with the other great bellied beast, who stuffes a whole Carroach, you will presently suppose God neuer made them to be Princes; and that it is not onely as much as to abuse the obedience of free persons, but euen to wrong the meanest Groomes, to giue them Masters of this stampe. Now
though the party you wot of, doe in some sort represent the latter person, yet is there still some small difference be∣tweene his actions and the others. The great V V V. is newly parted from this Court, where he hath not receiued from his Holinesse his expected contentment. His designe was to breake the Mariage his Brother hath contracted, vpon some slight appearance of Sorcery, wherewith he deemed to dazle the worlds eye, and ground the nullity of an action, which was by so much the more free, in that the parties who performed it, sought not the consent of any to approue it. In conclusion after the losse of much time, and many words, he is gone without ob∣tayning any thing, saue onely the Popes benediction; and as for me, I remayne much satisfied to see Iustice so exact at Rome, that they will not condemne the Diuell himselfe wrongfully. I haue heard how in some places halfe houre Mariages are made, the conditions whereof are
neither disgested into writing, nor any memory thereof reserued; but of these secret mysteries, there are no other wit∣nesses, saue onely the Night and Silence: And though the Court of Rome appro∣ueth them not, yet doth shee shut her eyes, fearing to see them. I am resolued not to bee long in the description of K K K, whom you know much better then my selfe: Yet thus much I will say, that since Neroes death, there neuer ap∣peared in Jtaly a Comedian of more ho∣nourable extraction: And surely to make the Company at this present in France compleate; this personage were suffici∣ent: He makes Verses, he hath read A∣ristotle, and vnderstands Musicke, and in a word he hath all the excellent quali∣ties vnnecessary in a Prince. I know here a German called S. to whom hee gi∣ueth a annuall pension of a thousand Crownes, assigned vnto him vpon an Abbey during life; this he hath done, not that he intendeth to vse his seruice in his
counsell, or with purpose to imploy him in any important negotiation for the good of his affaires: his onely ambition is to haue him make a booke, whereby it might appeare how those of M M M, are lineally descended from Iulius Caesar. I should be glad he would yet aime at some higher, or more eminent race, and that hee would purchase a second fable at the like rate he payed for the first. I would willingly giue him his choice of the Medes, Persians, Greekes, or Troians, which of these he would haue of his Kindred, and without the rely∣ing vpon the authority of tradition or te∣stimony of Stories: I would draw his de∣scent from Hector, or Achilles, which hee best liked. There are certaine Princes who are necessarily to be deceiued, if you meane to doe them acceptable seruice, being far better pleased to bee entertayned with a plausible lye, then to be aduertised of an important truth. I hold my selfe right happy you are not of this humour: for whatsoeuer I say, I suppose it would bee
very hard for me to be of a fooles minde, though he were a Monarch. Iintend not to steale your fauours, but to purchase them legally: and hauing euer beleeued flattery to bee as mischieuous a meanes to gaine affection as charmes, and sorcery: I cannot speake against my conscience, and were not this true I tell you, I would not assure you that I am Your most humble, most obedient, and most faith∣full seruant, BALZAC. From Rome this 10. of December 1622. To the Lord Cardinall de Valete, from Balzac. LETTER VI. My LORD▪ HOw great soeuer the subiect of my sorrows be, yet doe I finde in your Letters sufficient to make mee happy
in my hard fortune. The last I receiued hath so much obliged mee, that, but for the displeasing newes comming vnto me which tempered my ioy, my reason had not beene of sufficient force to moderate it. But at this time the death of my poore Brother▪being incessantly before mine eyes, taketh from me the taste of all good tidings: and the prosperity euen of the Kings affaires seeme displeasing vnto mee, finding my selfe to beare vpon mee the mournings of his Victory. Yet since in this fatall agitation of Europe, it is not I a∣lone who bewayle some losse, and since your selfe haue not beene able to preserue all that was deare vnto you; I should seeme very vnciuill, if I presumed to preferre my priuate interest before yours, or reflect vpon my particular affliction, hauing one common with yours. It is long since I haue not measured either the felicities or fatalities of this world, but by your con∣tentments, or discomforts; and that I be∣hold you as the whole workmanship God
hath made. Wherefore my Lord, I will lay aside whatsoeuer concernes my selfe, to enter into your resentments, and to tell you, since you cannot make vnwor∣thy elections, it must needes be that in the death of your Friends you can suffer no small losses. Notwithstanding as you transcend sublimary things, and in that all men draw examples out of the mea∣nest actions of your life: I assure my selfe they haue acknowledged vpon this occasion, that there is not any accident to surmount against which you haue vse of all your vertue. Afflictions are the gifts of God, though they be not of those we desire in our prayers; and supposing you should not approue this propositi∣on, yet haue you at all times so little re∣garded death, as I cannot beleeue you will bewayle any; for being in a condi∣tion your selfe esteemes not miserable. My Lord, it sufficeth you conserue the memory of those you haue loued, in con∣sequence of the protestation you pleased
to make vnto me by your Letter: And truly if the Dead be any thing, (as none can doubt) they cannot grieuefor ought in this world, wherein they still enioy your fauours. In the meane time I take this to my selfe, and am most happy in hauing conferred my dutifull affections vpon a man, who setteth so high a value vpon those things he hath lost. For any thing (my Lord) I perceiue, there is small diffe∣rence betweene good workes, and the ser∣uices we offer you; they hauing their re∣wards both in this life, and the other; your goodnesse being illimitable, as is the de∣sire I haue to tell you, I am Your most humble and most faithfull Seruant, BALZAC. From Rome the 29. of December, 1621.
To the Lord Cardinall of Valete, from BALZAC. LETTER. VII. MY LORD: THough I be not in state either to per∣forme any great exploite vpon the person of any man; nor haue any great force to defend my selfe, yet cannot I touch vpon the Count Mansfield without taking it to heart, and ioyning my good affections to the Kings forces. If this were the first time the Germans had exceeded their limits, and sent their Armies to be ouerthr owne in France; the nouelty of these barbarous faces, and of those great lubberly swat∣rutters, might easily haue affrighted vs: But vpon the matter, we haue to doe with knowne enemies, and who will suffer vs to take so sufficient aduantages ouer them, besides those we naturally enioy, as with∣out
being forced to make vse of Armes, we may defeate them onely by their owne e∣uill conduct. I doe not wonder there are men who willingly forsake Frost and Snow, to seeke their liuing vnder a more pleasing and temperate climate then their owne; and who quit bad Countreyes, as being well assured, the place of their ba∣nishment shall bee more blissefull vnto them then that of their birth. Onely here∣in it vexeth me, in the behalfe of the Kings honour, to see him constrayned to finish the remainder of the Emperours victories, vpon a sort of beaten Souldiers, and who rather fly the fury of Marquesse Spinola, then follow vs. These great Bulwarks whose neighbour I am, seeming rather the Fa∣bricks of Gyants, then the fortifications of a Garrison-towne, will not euer be looked vpon with amazement; one day (I hope) there will appeare nothing in their places but Cabbins for poore Fishermen; or if it be requisite the workes of Rebellion should still remaine, and the memory of these trouble∣some
some people indure yet longer, we shall in the vpshot see them remoue Moun∣taines, and diue into the Earths foundati∣ons to prouide themselues a Prison at their owne charge. But withall (my Lord) I beseech you, let there be no further speech made of occasions or expeditions, and let a Peace be concluded which may con∣tinue till the Worlds end; let vs leaue the Warre to the Turke, and King of Persia, and cause (I beseech you) that wee may lose the memory of these miserable times, wherein Fathers succeed their Children, and wherein France is more the Countrey of Lansknights and Swisses then ours. Though Peace did not turne the very Desarts into profitable dwellings as it doth, or caused not the quarries or flints to be come fruit∣full, though it came vnaccompanied, without being seconded with security and plenty, yet were it necessary, onely to refresh ourforces; thereby to enable vs the longer to endure Warre. As I was ending this last word, I heard a voyce which desired my
dispatch oblieging me to end what I sup∣posed I had but begun. It is with much re∣luctation (my Lord) I am depriued of the onely contentment your absence affordeth me. But since you could not receiue this Letter, were it any longer, J am resolued to lose one part of my content, to enioy the other; and to say sooner then I supposed, that I am euer absolutely Your most humble, most obedient, and most faithfull seruant, BALZAC. The 16. of Septem∣ber, 1622. To the Cardinall de Valette from BALZAC. LETTER VIII. My LORD, YOu should oftner receiue Letters from me, could I ouer-master my paine; but to say truth it leaueth me
not one thought free to reflect vpon any thing else; and what desire soeuer I haue to giue you content, yet am I not able to doe any thing but at the Physitians good pleasure, and at the Feauers leasure; whilest the Court affoordeth you all content, and prepareth whatsoeuer is pleasant for you, reseruing distrusts and iealousies for others: I here endure torments, such as wherewith one would make conscience to punish Paricides, and which I would not wish to my worst e∣nemies. If notwithstanding all this (in obedience to the Counsell you giue mee in the Letter you did me the honour to write vnto me) I should make my selfe merry, I were necessarily to take my selfe for some other body, and become a deeper dissembler then an honest man ought to be, My Melancholly is meere∣ly corporeall, yet doth my spirit giue place, though not consent thereto; and of the two parts whereof I am composed, the more worthy is ouer-borne by the
more weighty. Wherefore if the whole world should act Comedies to make me laugh, and though St. Germans Faire were kept in all the streets where I passe, the obiect of Death euer present before my eyes, bereauing me of sight, would likewise barre mee of content, and I should remaine disconsolate amidst the publique Iubilations. Yea, if the stone I▪ so much dread, were a Diamond, or the Philosophers Elixa, I should therein take small comfort, but would rather be∣seech God to leaue me poore, if he please to bestow no better Riches vpon me. But when I haue sayd all, be it vnto me as he shall please to appoint, since I am well assured, my maladiys will either end, or I shall not for euer hold out: yet should I dye with some discontent, if it happen before I testifie my dutifull affection to∣wards you, and the sensibility I haue of your noble fauours. But howsoeuer it fare with me, I would willingly make a iourney to Rome, there to finish the
worke I promised you, and which you commanded me to vndertake for the ho∣nour of this Crowne. Certainely if I be not the cause to make you in loue with our language, and to preferre it in your estimation before our neighbour Tongues; I am affraide you will be much troubled to reuolte from the Roman Empire, and that it will not be for the History of Mathew, or of Hallian, you wil change that of Salust and Liuie. I will not deceiue you, nor delude my selfe; yet may I tell you, that my head is full of inuentions and designes, and if the Spring (for which I much long) would affoord me the least glimpse of health, I would contest with any who should produce the rarest things. I haue an infi∣nite of loose flowers, which onely want binding vp into Nosegayes: and I haue suffered others to speake any time these sixe yeares, on purpose to bethinke my selfe what I haue to say. But I well per∣ceiue the publique shall haue onely de∣sires
and hopes; and truely if I spring not afresh with the trees, in stead of so many bookes you expect from me, you shall not read any thing of minesaue onely the end of this Letter, and the protestation I here make vnto you, to dye Your most humble, most obedient, and most faith∣full seruant, BALZAC. The 7. of Ianu∣ary, 1623. To the Lord Cardinall de Valete from BALZAC. LETTER IX. My Lord, THe hope which any time this three Moneths, I haue had of your determi∣nation to come into this Countrey, hath hitherto hindred me from writing vnto you, or to make vse of the onely meanes remayning for me to be neare your
person. But since you haue supposed the speedy quitting the Court, to be as fatall as to dye a suddaine death, and that no lesse fortitude or time is requisite to resolue to weane our selues from pleasing things, then to surmount painefull ones, I will by your permission resume the commerce the common rumor caused me to surcease, and will not hereafter beleeue you can with any lesse difficulty get out of Paris, then can the Arsenac or Loouer. Were it not a place all stored with inchantments and chaines, and which is of such power to attract and retayne men, as it hath beene necessary to hazard diuers battailes, to driue the Spaniards further off: one might well wonder at the difficulty you finde to conuay your selfe thence. But in truth all the world doth there finde both habitati∣ons and affaires: and for you my Lord, since in that Countrey our Kings both en∣ter into their first infancy, and grow old, as being the seate of their Empire; no man can iustly blame you for making ouer∣long
abode there, without accusing you of ouer much loue to your Master, and for desiring to be neare his person. At Rome you shall tread vpon stones for∣merly the gods of Caesar and Pompey, and shall contemplate the Ruines of those rare workmanships, the antiquity where∣of is yet amiable, and shall dayly walke among Histories and Fables: But these are the pastimes of weake spirits, which are pleased with trifles, and not the imployments of a Prince, who delight∣eth in sayling on rough Seas, and who is not come into the world to let it rest idle: When you haue seene the Tyber, on whose bankes the Romans haue perfor∣med the Apprentiships of their rare Victories, and begun that high designe, which they ended not but at the ex∣treame limits of the Earth. When you shall ascend the Capitol, where they supposed God was as well present as in Heauen; and had there inclosed the fata∣lity of the vniuersall Monarchy: After
you haue crossed that great Circus, dedi∣cated to shew pleasures to the people, and where the blood of Martyrs hath beene often mingled with that of Male∣factors and bruite beasts. I make no doubt but after you haue seene these and diuers other things, you will grow wea∣ry of the repose and tranquility of Rome: and will say they are two things more proper for the Night and Church-yards, then for the Court and the Worlds eye. Yet haue I not any purpose to giue you the least distaste of a Voyage the King hath commanded you to vnder∣take, and whereof I well hoped to haue bin the guide, if my crazy body would haue seconded the motion of my Will. But truely my Lord, I am deepely in∣gaged in this businesse, and when I looke vpon my selfe single, I sometimes haue a desire to make you suspicious of those fe∣licities, I feare, I shal not be able to enioy with you; yet whatsoeuer I say, I am not so farre in loue with my selfe▪, as to
preferre my priuate content before the ge∣nerall desires of all men, and the Churches necessities. It is requisite for infinite con∣siderations of importance, you should be present at the first Conclaue, and that you appeare at a Warre not therefore lesse con∣siderable, in being composed of disar∣med persons, or for that it makes no Widowes nor Orphans. I am certaine you haue elsewhere seene more dangerous en∣counters, and haue often desired more bloudy Victories. But how great soeuer the obiect of your ambition be, yet can it not conceiue any thing of such Eminency, as at once to giue a Successor to Consuls, to Emperours, and Apostles; and to make with your breath the man who ouer-top∣peth Kings, and who commandeth ouer all reasonable Soules: Though my health be so vncertaine, as I cannot promise my selfe three dayes continuance thereof, yet haue I not lost all hope to see you (one day) in this Countrey, the prescriber of Lawes to inferiours, and of examples to
Commanders. My Lord it may be, God reserueth me for your sake, that nothing be wanting to your Glory, and to the end there might be yet one man in the World, able to affoord you the prayses proper to your merits. My Lord, Your most humble and most faithfull Seruant, BALZAC. The 23. of Iune, 1623. To my Lord Cardinall de la Valete. LETTER X. My LORD, IT must necessarily be the greatest Affaire at this present in agitation on Earth, that could oblige you to leaue Paris; nor had you patted thence vpon a∣ny slighter condition, then to make a Head for all Christendome. If you arriue there
opportunely to haue your part in this great Election, and that the Conclaue attend your Presence, on purpose to affoord a more full Reputation and Authority, to what shall there be resolued vpon: I doe no way doubt but you will maintayne the same ad∣uantage ouer the Italian wits, as you haue obtayned ouer ours; or that their policies will not be as impertinent in your Pre∣sence, as the Charmes of Magicians are fri∣uolous, being confronted with Diuine matters. You haue sufficient of their pa∣tience to put off affaires when occasion is offered: but you haue a courage they come short of, to carry matters by strong hand if necessity require. Therefore my Lord, to what part soeuer your Opinion shall in∣cline, you will carry that with you which gaineth victories, and causeth the greater party to side with the sounder; yea, if matters should passe without contestation, yet should you at least take notice that you are intreated to that action, wherein God permits you to supply his place, and
intrusteth to your care the most impor∣tant matter of all his Workes. To speake seriously, his prouidence is neuer in so high imployment, as when hee is to choose the man who hath power to vse well, or abuse all the Riches of Heauen, and who is to exercise a power nearest approaching to Diuinity. Heretofore God made vse of Thunder and tempests, when he purposed to denounce any thing to men, declaring his Will by other then ordinary meanes. But since hee hath caused Oracles to cease, and suf∣fereth the Thunder to worke only natu∣rall effects: It is onely by the voyce of Cardinals hee causeth his desires to bee manifested, and ordayneth concerning the worlds Conduct. When you please (my good Lord) I shall haue some no∣tice of these inspirations hee hath sent you, and of the election you haue made: For to force me (so soone) to informe my selfe thereof in the place where it was performed, this Kingdome had neede
be ouer hot for me, and that I were not so well acquainted as I am with the Sun at Rome. That which blackes the Moores, and burnes Lybia, is not so dangerous at this Season; and were you not stored with treasures of Snow, and prouided of Halls of Marble, to defend you from the scorching Ayre, I should as soone chuse to be condemned to the fire, as to be forced to reside where you are at this present. But your Grace I know can not be affrighted with all these appre∣hensions of heate; you are none of those who will finde fault with the Ayre, which all that ancient Republicke brea∣thed, or with the Sunne, which hath holpen to make so many Conquerours, and giuen light to so many glorious Tryumphs. Yet for my part, I who haue none of these considerations, and who haue wholy put my selfe into the power of Phisicke, it is requisite I a∣uoide the very shadow of danger, and liue with as great apprehension of feare
in this world, as though I were in an E∣nemies Countrey, or in a Forrest of wilde beasts. It is therefore out of pure neces∣sity I attend your commands in this place, and a more seasonable time, to testifie vnto you, without running the hazard of my life, that I am with all my soule My Lord, Your most humble, and most obedient seruant, BALZAC. The 2. of August, 1623. To the Lord Cardinall de Valete, from Balzac. LETTER XI. My LORD; I Verily beleeued I could neuer haue bin so vnfortunate, as to be forced to search in the Gazettes for what you doe, and to heare no other newes from you, then
what common brute bestoweth in all parts of the World, and which the English and Germans may as well know as I. This pu∣nishment is by so much the more wound∣ing, in that I haue heretofore beene en∣riched with those benefits, whereof you now seeme to bereaue me; and in that the time was, when you pleased so farre to dis∣cend from the ranke whence you are deri∣ued, as to lay aside all those lusters, which incompasse you, to conuerse freely with me: But (my Lord) since one word of your mouth hath often cured my decayed spirits, and hath many times made me hap∣py without the helpe of Fortune: I freely confesse vnto you, I cannot resolue to change condition, as knowing the losse of the least of your fauours cannot be liittle; Yet being so innocent that I can no way imagine my offence, and not acknowled∣ging among men, other more assured ve∣rity then your word, I haue a great re∣luctation to be diffident of a thing, vpon the certainty whereof halfe the Court is
ingaged for Warre, and the besieged would make small difficulty to surrender them∣selues. My Lord, you haue pleased to promise you would loue me alwayes; there∣fore I beseech you not to be offended, if I put you in minde, that as the ancient gods of the Country where now you are▪ sub∣mitted themselues to Destinies, after they had once assigned them: So you, though aboue all other Lawes, are yet subiect to your word. I am confident it cannot be reuoked so long as the order of sublunary things change not, and the Decrees of Gods prouidence remaine immoueable: and if you repent any one action in your whole life, you therein doe more then your very Enemies, who neuer as yet cal∣led the least of them in question. For my part, I am far from thinking I haue totally lost your fauours, lest I should wrong your Judgment, which conferred them vpon me, and blame the best eyes in the World, for hauing heretofore beene blind. I will ra∣ther suppose, if you send me no newes, it
is because you thinke I know what will be done some ten yeares hence, and that I am brimfull of the Roman Court, and of the Jtalian affaires. Truely I know the present Pope, and I haue euer belceued, there is not any humane wit more capable to carry so ponderous a felicity, or to let vs againe behold the Primitiue beauty of Re∣ligion, and the golden age of Gods Church▪ I know how at Rome idlenes is day and night in action, and that the comple∣ments and ceremonies there, put you to more trouble then you should find in go∣uerning the whole world, if God had left it to your conduct. Me thinkes I yet see this great Tyrant with so many Heads, (I meane the Signoury of Venice) toge∣ther with all those petty Soueraignes, who would hazard more men in hanging one single person, then the King would ven∣ture in two battailes, or at the taking in of foure Citties. But my Lord all this with the rest doth but slightly touch my spirit, and as you are the sole worldly cause,
which affordeth me either ioy or discom∣fort, so it is from you onely I expect good or ill newes: I haue made your af∣fection in such soft necessary for my lifes contentment, that without it I should finde defects euen in Felicity it selfe, and should haue an imperfect feeling of the most happy successes could befall me. Re∣store therefore, if so you please, or con∣tinue this your ancient fauour towards me, which J cannot possibly forbeare. And since you are part of that body to which God hath giuen infalibility, and since it is forbidden to call the certainty of your wisedome into the least question: con∣demne not I beseech you, what you haue formerly made, as though your Jtalian fa∣uours were some other things then your French ones. Your most humble, most obedient, and most faithfull seruant, BALZAC. The 10. of Decem∣ber, 1623.
Balzac, his Letter to Mounsieur du Planty. LETTER XII. SIR, SInce you cannot be here till after the Feast, and for that I presume you haue no purpose to oppose the Election of the Pope, being cannonically chosen. I will aduise you to stay your iourney till the Spring be past, and the Snowes melted▪ yet truely you are in such esteeme here, as if you come not the sooner, I verily thinke you will be sent for; and that the Court of Rome will commence suite with the Loo∣uer, to haue my Lord the Cardinals pre∣sence. It is therefore fitting (if so hee please) that hee vndertake this Voyage, and put off State-businesse, and the Warre to others, to liue here in the midst of Glo∣ry and Tryumphs. In the meane time, I may (so neare as I can) informe my selfe
both of men and affaires, thereby to giue you the better instructions at your comming. Now to the end to affoord you a taste of what I know, obserue what I say, for I will tell you strange things. There is a certaine Great man here, who entertaineth sixe Astrologers in Pension, to let him vnderstand from time to time who shall be Pope: Ano∣ther takes large fees on both sides, find∣ing it the onely way to bring his Clients to composition: A third hath the most extrauagant vertue you euer heard of, he leades a farre more pleasant life then the Duke of Ossuna; and hauing read in Holy Writ, how the Wisedome of the world is folly in Gods sight, he imagines hee should offend his Conscience, if he were ouer wise. Here are Princes in this place, who in full peace pardon ney∣ther Age nor Sexe. There are others who keepe their beds, though they be well able to ride post; and who vse all Phisicke possible to looke pale, to be
feauerish, and full of Cathars, and who make vse of all the sectets in Phisicke to haue a megar aspect. In conclusi∣on, the highest place in this world, is that, whether the more easily to arriue, it is necessary to be lame, and take short steps; so as a sound Pope is commonly made out of a sickely Cardinall. At our next meeting, I will informe you of the rest, and will in one halfe houre infuse into you all the experience I haue hither to gotten: But if I haue not this con∣tentment so soone as I desire, faile not I pray you, to let me here newes of your health, and the rest of our good friends. But especially I beseech you to assure Mounsieur de Mauroy, that I am passionat∣ly his seruant, and that I finde here much fubtilty and dissimulation, but not ma∣ny so pure and true vertues, as his are BALZAC. From Rome 10. of February, 1621.
A Letter to Mounsieur de la Magdelene from BALZAC. LETTER. XIII. SIR, I Am extreamely glad you are not of the number of those whom the King hath lost before St. Iohn d' Angely. Conserue your selfe therefore so farre forth as your Honour and Courage will suffer or permit, and content your selfe to haue tasted what Warre is; which if you please to be aduised by mee, you should doe well neuer more to behold but with Flanders spectacles. You are bound to execute good actions, but you are to performe many, and permanently; and to be a better husband of a worthy
mans life, then that of an ordinary Souldier of the Guardes. At least∣wise so long as you continue at the as∣sembly of the Clergy, you shall be ser∣uiceable to the Church at your owne ease, and there shall commonly be ten dayes iourney betweene you and danger. Though I were not any more of this world then those who liued before the late King, or who are to come into the world after the decease of this, yet should I not feare to hazard my selfe in this sort; and to keepe all my bloud for the Publique, as readily as the most vali∣ant Iesuite of France. It is in this sort I haue learned to speake in this Court, where honest men are so wedded to their particular interests, and doe so little reflect vpon the generall affaires, as they thinke there is nothing beyond the tips of their vpmost haires, and suppose the world endeth at their feet. The C. L. dreames of no other thing, but how to fortifie himselfe with Men and Money
against the C. B. whom he taketh for the Turke and an Hereticke: And say what you will, the fifty Abbies he hath gotten in one Yeare, is that portion of the Church which pleaseth him better then all the rest. Behold in what tearmes we stand at this present: instead of procu∣ring the conuersion of Nations, and to seeke the meanes to set the Leuant at li∣berty: a P. thinkes he hath worthily ac∣quited himselfe of his charge, so long as he prouides to make his Nephew a grea∣ter man then his Predecessors was. But that I feare lest my zeale should ouer-far transport me, or that you should be∣come as weary of my Discourse as of a tedious Preacher, I would dilate my selfe vpon this Subiect; but I know the affaires in these parts are very indiffe∣rent vnto you, I will therefore referre the further relation wherewith I inten∣ded to acquaint you, to my Lord, the Marquesse of Caeuure. In briefe, there are none but himselfe and the Councell,
who can cause the Pope to incline to our reasonable demands, and I will tell you without flattering him, that so long as he is here, the King may glory that he reigneth at Rome. As for other things, what beautifull obiects soeuer Rome presenteth to my view, & what plea∣sure soeuer each man findes there confor∣mable to his humour and inclination, yet cannot I receiue any, being so remote from persons so deare vnto mee▪ and shall e∣steeme my selfe vnhappy, so long as I am necessitated to write Letters vnto you, and onely say, what is not as yet in my power to cause to appeare, that I am Mounsieur, Your most faithfull seruant BALZAC.
To Mounsieur de Montigny from BALZAC. LETTER XIIII. SIR, THough you vseme ill, and that I haue reason to be sensible of your neglects, yet I am resolued to suffer from you with an obstinate patience, and to acquire your fauours by force▪ since I cannot obtaine them otherwise. But I am assured you are not so vnciuill, as not to suffer your selfe to be beloued, nor so tyed to your owne fancies, as that there re∣mayneth no affection in you for whatsoe∣uer is separate: Otherwise I should thinke your humour were as much changed as are the affaires of France, or that you were snddainly become quite another man. I will therefore rest confident in the Opinion most pleasing vnto me, and imagine you are sufficiently my friend in
your thoughts▪ but that you are ouer loy∣all a French man to haue any intelligence out of the Kingdome: It may be the Ex∣ample of the Duke of Biron affrights you, and that you take all such as are in Jtaly for Don Pedros, or Countes of Fuentes: in this case intruth you haue reason, and it is far better to write no Letters at all, then to be forced to explaine them before the Court of Parliament. But if you were of my hu∣mour, and that you would referre the whole State, and all the affaires therein to Mounsiour Luynes, me thinkes our Amity could not passe for conspiracy, and you might safely let me haue newes from your selfe, and the rest of our friends, without any hazard at all. I desire onely to know what you doe, and wherein you imploy the fairest season of your life. Doe you ne∣uer part from the lips of Opala; whose breath is so sweete, as it seemes shee feedeth onely on Pinkes and Perfumes? are you in as high esteeme in your Mistresses thoughts as your merits and seruice deserues, and
as your loyalty obligeth her vnto? Is Clitophon still in his generous musings? doth he dayly take Townes at table? and doth he yet frame forraigne designes be∣tweene his Bed-curtaines? Is there any good inclination in the Court for our great Cardinall? and are they not perswa∣ded that if he were Pope, the Church would soone be as well Mistresse in Ger∣many as at Rome? After you haue satisfied me in all these points, I am contented to be at truce with you as long as you please; and if neede be, will suffer you to waxe old vpon the bosome of Opala, without e∣uer asking you what you doe there. Yours, BALZAC. BALZAC his Letter to the Duke of Espernon. LETTER XV. My LORD; VVEre I not borne (as I am) your most humble seruant, yet should I
shew my selfe a very degenerate French∣man, if I did not much reioyce in the hap∣pinesse of your Family, since it is a publick Felicity. I haue heard the prosperous successe of the Voyage you made into Bearn, and of the great beginnings you haue giuen, to what the King desireth there to vndertake. And truly, the E∣lection He hath made of you, to serue him in an occasion of such importance, hath beene so generally approued, that, if here∣tofore there hath beene any defects preten∣ded in the conduct of our Affaires. we must necessarily auow, that this last Acti∣on hath sufficiently iustified all the former; it appearing plainly, that it is not only fa∣uour which setteth the difference between men. J no way doubt, but right, and power siding together, that the euent of things will be sutable to our desires: But, howsoeuer it happen, you haue already the glory of hauing facilitated the victory, and made it appeare how the Enemies of the State haue no other force, but what
they draw out of our weaknesse. It is now time (my Lord) you take notice of those aduantages God hath giuen you a∣boue the rest of men: You ought, at least to remember, how being tryed with Worldly affaires, and retired from Court, publicke necessity had not sought you out in your priuate reposednes at home, to put the Kings royall Armies into your hands, if you were not the only man from whom all men expect the re-establishment of these affaires. I will not so farrerelie vp∣on my owne opinion, as to answere for the future: Yet when J consider the acti∣ons of your Life, which are so eminent, that we find difficulty to beleeue them, euen after they haue beene performed; and those in such number, that Strangers may well imagine you haue liued from the very be∣ginning of our Monarchy: I suppose I might boldly affirme, that, if there be yet any great matter remaining to be atchie∣ued in the World, there is none but your Selfe must attempt it. You haue possessed
the fauour of Kings, as Fortunes which might faile you, and haue not feared that their passions could out-last your innocency. This Vertue we so much admire, hath suc∣ceeded the same authority, our Fathers haue adored. You haue made no vse of your power in State, which you haue not euer since coserued by the force of your Courage. You haue at all times preserued the liber∣ty of France amidst the miseries of times, and the vsurpation vpon lawfull power. Who is there can say this of himselfe? where are they that haue stood firme be∣tweene rebellion and seruitude? where was there euer knowne an olde age so necessary for the world, or so much good and bad fortune equally glo∣rious? My Lord, you know your selfe too well, to suspect me of flattery; and my humour is so aliene from any seruile actions, as the Court hath not sufficient hopes to cause me to do any thing against my conscience. I then speake as I doe now; for the onely interest of Vertue;
and if that were not on your side, I would seeke for it among our enemies to doe it right: None will suspect I haue any pretentions at Madrill; or that I intend to make a fortune in Holland; yet to heare mee speake of the Prince of Orenge, and the Marquesse Spinola, one would say that I did at once expect Abbies from the Hollanders, and were a pensioner to Spaine. In summe, I hold my selfe obliged to those, who affoord me matter and meanes to reconcile the two rarest things in this world, to wit; Vertue and Eloquence. And as their re∣putation hath neede of my Pen, to make it immortall; so are their liues and acti∣ons right vsefull vnto me, when I imploy my paines on excellent Subiects. You haue euer done mee the honour to wish me well, and I haue receiued innume∣rable fauours from my Lord the Cardi∣nall your Sonne; but howsoeuer, I hum∣bly beseech you to be confident that my affections are absolutely pure, and that
my particular interests haue not any alli∣ance therewith. I am so happy as to haue serued you in a troublesome time, and to haue bin of the weaker side; as iudg∣ing it to be the more honest. I haue not since beene of another mind; and the rea∣sons drawing me to doe what I did, be∣ing still the same, I am really, as I euer haue beene, My Lord, Your most humble and thrice obedient seruant, BALZAC. To the Duke of Espernon from Balzac. LETTER XVI. My LORD, THe Letter I lately receiued from you, maketh me know I am happier then I supposed, since I haue the honour to
be sometimes in your memory. It is a place so taken vp with high thoughts, and which the publique good doth in such measure make vse of, as I had not the ambition to imagine, there could be any roome left for a man of so small im∣portance as my selfe. But I fee, that as you neuer had any so potent enemies as to exceede your courage, so haue you not any seruants of so slight consi∣deration, whom you esteeme not wor∣thy your care. Herein my Lord, you make it appeare that the meanest matters change their nature into more noble sub∣iects, so soone as they become yours: and how of all men, you haue conquered part, and acquired the rest. I am verily perswaded, it were no lesse then to of∣fend God, to deny obedience to a person so high in his fauour as you are, and that his meaning is, this commanding spirit he hath conferred vpon you, should bee master of all others. The Honour therefore to you appertaining, being
little inferiour to what we owe to sacred things; and that besides the ordinary prouidence which gouerneth the world, there being a particular one in Heauen, designed meerely for the conduct of your life, to make it admired in all after Ages: it is necessary as well in contem∣plation of this common consideration, as for others particularly concerning my selfe, I should perpetually remaine My Lord, Your most humble and most faithfull Seruant, BALZAC. The 5. of Aprill, 1622. To the Duke of Espernon from Balzac. LETTER XVII. My LORD, IN this generall calme of the State, (wherein the affaires of this Kingdome seeme to be asleepe, and the Worlds
occurrents to be at a stand) all France expects your presence at Court, to be the Authour of the desired Newes, and to draw from the Kings breast the good intentions wherewith it is so richly stored. The reduction of Bearn not stayned with any drop of bloud: the truth wherein you haue instructed all men, concerning the possibility of ta∣king Rochell, and the order you haue now lately left in Guiene, where you haue reduced the Factions to such a point, as their only power consisteth in their per∣uerse humours; putteth vs in hope, that if God should deferre the safety of our State till another Age, it could bee no man (your selfe excepted) for whom hee hath reserued so glorious an Enterprise. My Lord, it is certaine he neuer shewed more miracles in those places himselfe hath consecrated to his glory and pub∣lique Piety, and which he hath chosen on purpose there to manifest his power, then he hath done in your person. And
when I consider how often he hath pro∣tected you, contrary to all humane ap∣pearance; and the opposition you haue encountred, in arriuing to this hight by so many rockes and precipices; I can∣not but constantly belecue you haue o∣uerpassed the time of dying; and that for the Worlds generall good, it is fitting you indure as long as the Sunne or Stars. To stop here, were to praise you imper∣fectly, and onely to make it appeare you are able to affoord long seruices. I will therefore say more: on which side soe∣uer I turne mine eyes, be it that I con∣uey them beyond the Seas, or make them passe those Mountaines which separate vs from our neighbours, I finde not that person in any place, who can iustly dis∣pute for glory with you; or whose life is so illustrious as yours. I haue seriously considered all whatsoeuer might giue value or reputation to the Courts of stranger Princes, and there truely I find men who are well seene in Military
affaires, and who haue gained to them∣selues no small experience by meanes of an infinity of rules and maximes: But the difference betweene those men and your selfe, is, that they cannot stirre, nor make themselues awfull without the Jndies, Armies, and Cannons; whereas you are redoubtable all alone, and vnar∣med; yea, your very stilnesse terrifieth the greatest enemies of France. This be∣ing absolutely true (as no man can doubt) it is high time the King doe re∣ally make vse of a man whom the neces∣sity of his state requireth of him, and that he no longer imploy those impros∣perous persons, vnder whose hands op∣portunities waxe old, and his good for∣tune will faile him. It is sufficient that the Rhyne and Alpes haue formerly beene French, and that our Language is spo∣ken in neighbouring Prouinces, with∣out suffering a strange kind of people stil to remaine in the very bowels of our Kingdome, who will not allow of our
ancient Lawes. There is now no longer meanes to couer thisskarre which disho∣noreth the face of State, or to suffer that Rebellion and loyalty liue together. To speake truth, what kind correspondency can be expected betweene the Mistresle of the house, and the Concubine? what a monstrous production would that proue betweene a Monarchy and a popu∣lar gouernment? and what kind of Soue∣raigne should hee be, who were depen∣dent on his subiects, and his Councell subordinate to the Towne-house? Tru∣ly, if Catholickes should demand Cities of the King, proportionable to their number, as others doe, he should be for∣ced hence-forward to remaine all his life time at Fountaine▪bleau and S. Germins: nor would there remaine vnto him any more then the bare title of a King, and the common fields of his Countrey. But it shall not alwaies be so if predictions proue true: And Reason as well as Na∣ture requireth that things should bee
reduced to their ancient forme. It were no lesse then to iniure him who hath promised to France a longer continu∣ance then to all her diseases, to thinke that hee hauing giuen remedies against the Gothes and Moores, hee will suffer it to dye at this day by the hands of a small packe of Rebels: Prouided, that face which I rather call immortall, then anci∣ent, doe still assure vs of the great source of life you retaine in your coura∣gious heart, and that Heauen please to preserue for the worlds benefit, the bles∣sing it conferred vpon vs at your Natiui∣ty; we require not a more certayne pre∣sage of the end of our euils; nor is there any so sicke or far strucken in yeares, who hopeth not to suruiue these intestine troubles: But we are not to imagine that Victory and Peace are two opposite things, though they be different; for it is the one which assureth the other, and setleth it in state not to be any further either troubled or threatned by any.
When all is done, I finde it were much to oblige these malecontents, to giue a sure repose to their distrustfull spirits, and at once to ridde them of all their hopes and feares: when they shall no longer need to trouble themselues with making assem∣blies, and that their liues shalbe free from the feare of punishments. When I say both they and we shall enioy common securi∣ty, it is not to be doubted but their condi∣tion will be much bettered, it being a much fairer fortune to be cast on shore by a storme in a craised Vessell, then to be still in the power of Windes and Sea∣wrackes. The word of Kings ought not to contradict the functions of Regality, nor can they oblige themselues to leaue their Subiects in miserable estate, or to doecontrary to what they ought. And in conscience since the ruine of Rebellion is written in Heauen, in the same sort as is the Day of Judgement, and the Worlds dissolution; were it not as much as to resist Gods will, and to oppugne his prouidence,
should we so soone grow weary of well-do∣ing, or refuse to finish a worke, the euent whereof is infalliable? There is nothing so easie for a great Prince, as either to finde or conceiue faults, nor doth any man doubt that dissimulation is iust, when it rends to the aduantage and auayle of the deceiued. If a mad man were capable of remedies, were it not lawfull to cure him without asking his consent? were it fit a Father should suffer his Son to be drow∣ned, for feare of pulling him out by the haire? Are we to suffer the State to perish, for that we cannot preferue it by ordinary wayes? No (my Lord) we ought not▪ there is no consideration can cause that thing to change its nature, which of it selfe is iust; and the Lawes of necessity doe dis∣pence with vs for those of formality. Now to returne to my first discourse, and to what particularly regardeth your Lord∣ship; seeing your absence from Court hath at all times threatned more miseries vnto vs, then the apparition of Comets and
other irregularities in Nature, and since to be miserable, it is sufficient to be at odds with you. There is not any of your enemies can escape the Diuine iustice, nor is there any doubt, but you will generally finde all those spirits fauourable vnto you, whom you haue formerly conuinced; or that your propositions shall not be receiued as assured Conquests. The best is, there are now no more any vsurpers neare the King, who seeke to ingrosse his fauours to their owne aduantages, & bereaue men of those benefits which ought to be as common to them as the Fire or Ayre. His Maiesties heart is open to all his Subiects, hee re∣ceiues trueth at what hand soeuer it comes vnto him. This being so (my Lord) may wee not rest confident you shall not lose one word, and that your Vertue whereof the World is vncapable, shall at length be found the onely meanes the King hath to redresse and re-establish his affaires. Neither time, trauaile, nor cost, ought diuert him from this designe▪
It is a worke will be nothing so costly as to raise a Fauorite, and it being a thing all Christendome exacteth of him, as an Here∣ditary debt the King his Father hath left to be discharged. And truely, it is most certaine that the face of States hath beene changed, and whole Prouinces conque∣red, with lesse cost then diuers Pagan Prin∣ces haue imployed in erecting of Idols▪ and causing them to be adored by their peo∣ple. But to leaue this Jtalian seuerity you formerly reprooued in me, and lest you should accuse me for warring against the dead, I will for your sake pardon their memory; nor will I farther dilate my selfe vpon so odious a Subiect. Yet is this but halfe of what I intended to speake vnto you at Coignac; if in that short abode you made there, and the continuall presse hin∣dring the freedome of my Speech vnto you, it had beene permitted mee to haue had a longer Audience. But (my Lord) what I could not performe by word of Mouth, I will continue by my Letters, if you please
to doe mee the honour as to command them; or if my words which you haue heretofore made choyce of for the concep∣tion of your High thoughts, in beway∣ling present miseries and publique ingra∣titude, be, as pleasing vnto you, as I am perfectly Your most humble, most obedient, and most faith∣full seruant, BALZAC The 18 of Nouem∣ber, 1623. The Duke of Espernon his Letter to the French King: penned by BALZAC. LETTER XVIII. SIR, I Vnderstand by the Letter it pleased your Maiesty to doe me the honour to write vnto me, that vpon the opini∣on wherewith some haue possessed you
concerning the continuance of the Ger∣man Warres, you iudge it expedient for the good of your seruice, I should not (as yet) leaue this Frontire. Whereunto Sir, I can giue your Maiesty no other answer, but that hauing at all times gathered out of your commands, what my duty obliged me vnto, and hauing neuer proposed o∣ther end to my actions, then the good of your state, I should be carefull of stray∣ing from that designe in an occasion wherein J might imagine your seruice de∣pended on my obedience. But at this pre∣sent (Sir) the tranquility of France grow∣eth to be so generall, your affaires so pow∣erfully established, and the Honour of your Amity so precious among all your neighbouring Princes; that as there is no∣thing in this Kingdome which doth not bend vnder your Authority; so is there not any Prince abroad, who doth not re∣spect your power, or who conserueth not himselfe by your Iustice. And as concer∣ning the troubles of Bohemia; besides, that
time hath euaporated the first heat of spi∣rits, and that they begin to retire from those extreamities wherein formerly they inuolued themselues: the imagined dan∣ger is so farre remoued hence, as we can∣not conceiue the least apprehension, euen for those who are not our next neighbours that way. It is certaine (Sir) that on this side the Rhine all things seeme to bee at rest vnder the shade of your State, and the ancient Allies of this Crowne who are nearest any danger, expect the end of Warre with our fearing it should come any further towards them, or that out of all this noyse, there will arise any more then one Warre. These considerations then doe no way oblige me to stay in these parts, where things are in so good estate, as they may well nigh subsist of them∣selues▪ besides the residence my Sonne of Valette shall make there in my absence, be∣ing sufficient to giue order to all occur∣rents concerning the good of your af∣faires. I assure my selfe your Maiesty will
be so impartiall as to be pleased to reflect vpon the necessity of my particular occasi∣ons, and that suffering me to retire my selfe to my owne house, you will at least permit mee to enioy a fauour, vsually in∣flicted on others as a punishment. I doubt not (Sir) but you will condiscend to the desire I haue to vndertake this Voy∣age, and I presume you will be pleased to consider, that I being ingaged in two hun∣dred thousand Crownes for your seruice; after the sight of your royall bounty in all sorts of hands, it were small reason (I receiuing nothing) should still in this place stand as a meere cypher for the honor of France; or that I ruine my selfe with a rich shew, only to continue strangers in the opinion they haue of the magnificent greatnesse of your Crowne. Yet (Sir) ha∣uing neuer beleeued J could sustayne any great detriment by the losse of a thing J so slightly esteeme, as I do worldly substance, I intend not in this place to complayne of my pouerty: But (to speake truth) since all
my words and actions are by many mis∣interpreted; and that hauing affoorded my dutifull attendance to the seruice of three great Kings, I yet find much difficulty to defend my so long a loyalty agaynst Ca∣lumny: I am with much sorrow constray∣ned to say, that if I stood firme in my duty, euen when disobedience was Crowned with rewards; and haue main∣tayned your Authority, when by some it was abused, by others contemned: It is no small iujury to me, to imagine I wil now begin to fayle in my loyalty at this age wherein I am, or suffer my selfe to be reproached by posterity, whereto I study to annexe the last actions of my life. But I see well (Sir) it is long since the hatred of dishonest French-men hath beene fatall vnto me, and that it hath beene borne with mee inseparably. From the first houre I appeared in the World, there was neuer either peace or truce vnuiolated to my preiudice; and as though I were excepted out of all
treaties, though Warre be ended, yet that made against me endureth. At this pre∣sent (Sir) it sufficeth not I performe my charge without omitting or forgetting a∣ny thing due to your seruice; or that the innocency of my actions be generally ac∣knowledged; but I am driuen to those streights, as to be forced to giue account of my very thoughts, there being not a∣ny (my selfe excepted) from whom sa∣tisfaction is required for the fault hee hath not as yet committed. If wee liued in a Countrey where vertue were auoy∣ded, as not concurrent with the times, or aduerse to the State, and where a great reputation were more dangerous then an inglorious one, I should not neede to make much search for the cause of my misfortunes: but I well know the con∣duct you vse, hath more honourable and honest grounds, and that your Maiesty hath no pretention to reigne with more assurance then the King your Father did before you. It is from him (Sir) you
may learne how you are to distinguish wounded innocency from wicked impu∣dency: and to know it is ordinary to draw honest men into suspicion, there∣by to make them vnseruiceable. In fol∣lowing his example, you shall finde out the truth, though neuer so closely hid∣den, or what shadow soeuer they cast o∣uer the same to disguise it. And truely (Sir) since this great Prince in bestowing your Origin vpon you, hath together therewith conferred his most Royall in∣clinations, I will neuer beleeue, that to follow a stranger passion, you will lose those perfections so proper, and naturall vnto you; or that for me alone your Ma∣iesty hath any other spirit then for the rest of men. Truely, if when you were not yet at your owne liberty, such hath beene the naturall goodnesse of your gra∣cious disposition, as you haue at all times resisted violent counsels, nor haue euer permitted your authority should bee imployed to the ruine of your
subiects: there is small appearance, that hauing now by publique and solemne act obliged your selfe to reigne alone, and your bounty finding not any obstacle to hinder the same, you would disturbe the old age of one of your best seruants, or deny to his gray haires that rest Na∣ture requires at your hands, (I ought to hope (at least) for this recompence for my long and faithfull seruices, since your Maiesty may bestow it without in∣commodating your affaires; and besides I hauing neuer expected other reward of worthy actions, then the onely content∣ment to haue performed them, I shall hold my selfe sufficiently happy, to re∣ceiue from my conscience the testimo∣nies which whilst I liue it will affoord me, that I haue beene, really am, and e∣uer will to the end remayne▪ SIR, Your most humble, most obedi∣ent, and most faithfull subiect and seruant, ESPERNON From Mets 7 of Ianuary, 1619.
Another Letter to the French King from the Duke of Espernon, penned by the same Balzac. LETTER XIX. SIR, HAuing long attended at Mets, the occasions not to be vnusefully there, and not finding any thing either in the conduct of my present life, or in the memory of my fore-passed time, which might iustly cast me into a worse condi∣tion then the rest of your subiects: I haue presumed that the Lawes of this King∣dome, and my Births prerogatiue might permit me to make vse of publique liber∣ty, and to partake of that peace you haue purchased to the rest of your sub∣iects. Neuerthelesse (Sir) your Maie∣sties will doth so regulate mine, that I had not remooued, had not the cause of my stay there ceased, and the difficulties
of the Bohemian Warre beene vtterly re∣moued. But hauing had perfect intelli∣gence by the relations the Duke of Lo∣raine hath receiued from those parts, that the affaires there begin to be well setled, the ouerture thereof beginning with the suspension of Warre on both sides; I could not imagine the good of your ser∣uice did any way oblige me to remaine longer in a place out of all danger in time of peace, and which will make good vse of the Empires weakenes if the War continue: considering likewise that if there bee any part of your State lesse sound then the rest, and where your Authority had need with more then or∣dinary care to be conserued, it is questi∣onlesse in the Prouince whither I am go∣ing, which bordering vpon such neigh∣bours as all honest men may iustly sus∣pect; and being a people composed of diuers parts, haue at all times beene ei∣ther troubled or threatned with chan∣ges▪ yea, at this present (Sir) the most
common opinion is, that the assembly now holden at Rochell, is no way plea∣sing vnto you, and that if you haue bin drawne to giue any asscent thereto, it hath rather beene a conniuency to the necessity of time, then conformable to your will. Whereupon (Sir) if your Maiesty please to reflect vpon the mise∣ries of your State, whereout at least you haue drawne this aduantage, that euen in the very spring of your age, you haue attained great experience: You shall plainely see that all the miseries which befell your Maiesty in your minority, haue beene begun vpon the like occasi∣ons. I therefore vsing my best indeuours, if the intentions of those of Rachell bee good; to hinder that the euents bee not euill; therein I hope I shall no way dis∣obey your Maiesties commands; but doe rather explaine them according to the true sense, allowing them the best in∣terpretation, since it is most profitable for your seruice. Truely (Sir) no man
is ignorant, that as the conseruation of your authority is the principle Law of your State: so likewise that the most ex∣presse and important part of your com∣mands, is the good of your affaires. This being vndoubtedly true, what appea∣rance is there, it being in my power to preserue the affections of a diuided Pro∣uince in due obedience to your Maiesty, and to pacifie by my presence those af∣fections easily drawne to reuolt, if none did confirme them in their loyalty: I should (for the interrupting so necessa∣ry a voyage, propound to my selfe so fri∣uolous considerations, and those so far fetcht as the Warres of Bohemia. I liue not in an age (Sir) wherein I am permit∣ted to feede my selfe with variety; but I doe not withall suppose your Maiesty doth so slightly esteeme of my seruice, as not to make any farther vse of me, saue onely to see the packets from Germany safely conueyed; nor doe I finde my selfe so vnusefull, as to be forced insteade of
better imployments; onely to let you know what newes is stirring, and to giue you an account of ordinary rumours. I must humbly beseech your Maiesty, to suffer me to dye in this opinion I haue of my selfe, and to allow me to make free vse of my leasure; if you please not to im∣pose more honourable imployments vpon me for your seruice. Howsoeuer it hap∣pen, (Sir) or how badly soeuer I be in∣treated, I am determined to continue re∣solute in well-doing. And your Maiesty may be most assured, that neither Time, which affoordeth occasions to the most mi∣serable to raise their fortunes, nor Place often fauouring their resentments, nor Necessity which causeth their actions to seeme iust; shall euer transport mee from remayning with the same affection I euer haue done to be Sir, Your most humble, most o∣bedient, and most faithfull subiect and seruant, Espernon. From Pent de Vichij the 7. of February, 1619.
Another Letter from the Duke of Espernon to the French King, penned by the same Balzac. LETTER XX. SIR, IF your Maiesty haue misconceiued mine intentions before you were charely informed of them; I am perswaded, I haue at this present in such sort iustified the same by my proceedings, as there is no further neede to defend them by my words. Truely, I may iustly say, that the Conduct J haue vsed, hath beene such: the Queene your Mother, hauing done me the honor to make vse of my seruice in a busi∣nes, she deemed much to import the good of your State; as not making vse of the ad∣uantages which might arise by causing mischiefe to continue, or by giuing way to
such designes, the euent whereof would haue sufficiently commended the resoluti∣on, had they not beene disaduantagious vnto you▪ I haue contented my selfe to re∣stifie to all France, that I had respect to your authority euen in the hands of mine enemies: whereby (Sir) I trust I haue cau∣sed my actions to appeare so pure and vn∣spotted before your Maiesty, that you re∣maine fully satisfied; nor will you I hope iudge I haue erred, in following a cause J might probably suppose could not be well separated from yours. Now therefore since it hath pleased your Maiesty to supply what seemed deficient in the felicity of your Reigne, and to settle peace in your State: All your true subiects (Sir) are by so much the more obliged to rely on your Royall word; in that it is the rocke where∣on all Christendome rests confident: And the same hauing beene giuen to the Queene your Mother, besides your obligation thereto by God and Nature, your very re∣putation confirmeth the same vnto her
vpon this sacred and inuiolable assurance, after hauing dedicated my sensibilities and interests to publique peace, and taken your Maiesties memory, as witnesse, that I haue at all times serued you faithfully, though it hath not alwayes beene by ordi∣nary and common waies; I assure my selfe you will bee pleased to permit mee hence forward to passe the rest of my dayes in peace; and now at length to leaue mee in the Hauen whereinto I haue beene cast by so many violent Tempests. Sir, I haue but a short time to stay in this World, and surely I should suppose my life ouer-long, could I find my selfe culpable of one single cogitation repugnant to the Allegeance I owe to your Maiesty, I therefore most humbly beseech you (Sir) to be pleased to consider, that I desiting no other thing of you, but either some small repose after my great paines, or an honourable death in your seruice: I can no way herein allot more moderate limits to my ambition, nor wish a more innocent end to my
old age: Howsoeuer, J shall esteeme it right happy, may I end it in this sort; and if in losing it, I conserue the quality I haue euer hitherto inuiolably kept of Your Maiesties most hum∣ble, most obedient, and most faithfull Subiect and Seruant, ESPERNON. From Angoulosme the 10. of Iune, 1619.
THE LETTERS OF MOVNSIEVR DE BALZAC. To my Lord the Duke de la Valete; from Moun∣sieur D' BALZAC. THE THIRD BOOKE. LETTER I. My LORD: IN acquittance of my promise when I parted from Mets, I am to let your Lordship know, wee are at this instant beyond ten Riuers, and how all things haue bin
propitious to my Lord your Fathers Voy∣age. To be diffident the conclusion will not correspond to these faire beginnings: were either to make doubt of Gods proui∣dence, or to distrust his Grace; but it hath pleased his Diuine Maiesty at all times to take so particular care for the conseruati∣on of your Family, that he will as soone permit his Altars and Images to be irreue∣rently intreated, as persons who are so high in his fauour as all of you are. How∣soeuer it happen (my Lord) if none but the prosperous can lose by altorations; you will, I hope, confesse no such change can a∣ny way happen, whereout wee shall not draw some aduantage; and what inter∣pretations soeuer they giue to my Lord your Fathers intentions, yet will all ho∣nest men iudge fauourably thereof, nor will any man apprehend failing after so e∣minent an example. All France attends his resolution to be rightly informed in the truth of the Kings affaires, and all men know he is of such consideration in this
State, as his least discontentments are to bee reckoned among publicke miseries. I will perswade my selfe they will not pro∣ceede to any extreamity, and that there is not impudency enough in our Enemies to transport them to so dangerous coun∣sels. If the worst come, yet must this voyage necessarily produce the one of two things, equally necessary in a troublesome time, Warre or Liberty. J am not so cleare sighted in future euents, as to answere for what shall happen; yet since the order of seasons are framed to facilitate our passage, and that all things haue chansed more suc∣cesfully vnto vs then we presumed to de∣sire; there is small appearance that Heauen will declare it selfe in fauour of the lesse supportable cause. But that which doth the rather fortifie my confidence, is the vigo∣rous estate wherein I finde my Lord your Father, he hath no shew of old age, saue onely experience and authority. The late Ligue, the Rebels, the Sword, nor Poy∣son haue not beene of power to kill him,
nor was there euer man so awfull in his aduerse fortune. As for you (my Lord) who are the obiect of his hopes and feares; & who are to performe one of the principall parts in his designed action: remember you haue the command of aThe City of Mets. place which hath beene the dishonour of Charles the fift, and which affoordeth France a reuenge for all the affronts he offered thereto. He who defended it a∣gainst him had no more then two armes as you haue, and one single life, nor was hee madé of any other matter then other men are. It is true, he fought by the Kings succours, but it sufficeth you fight for his seruice, and that all men know you are resolued not to sur∣uiue your fortunes. Were you borne to performe ordinary actions, I should hold it fit to speake vnto you in another straine, but since you purpose not to ex∣ercise any idle dignity in this world, nor are at this present in case to make vse of the hands of a great Army, or expect
reputation in your bed; speake as high as you please, prouided you act accor∣dingly; and that out of your particular forces (since those of the State faile you) you make good vnto the King, the last conquest of his Ancestors. One only wor∣thy man hath heretofore beene the whole Republicke of Rome, and hath resisted the fury of a victorious Army. So though there were no more true French∣men, but my Lord your Father, your selfe, and my Lords your Brothers, I could no way dispaire of Publique af∣faires, nor of the fortune of this King∣dome. My Lord, I am so weary, that I am forced to defer the continuation of this discourse till another time, and to rest a∣while to make a more ample relation. I will content my selfe for the present, to passe my promise vnto you of that Hi∣story, the subiect whereof I require at your hands, and to assure you it is im∣possible to be more then I am Your most humble, most obedient, and most affectionate Seruant, BALZAC. The 9. of Febru∣ary, 1619.
To the Signiour of Plessis, Gouer∣nour of Tollemount, from BALZAC. LETTER. II. SIR, SInce it appeares you haue a will to lose euery hour what you can in truth spend but once, and that you so slightly esteeme your life, as though it were another mans; me thinkes the Warre hath dealt very kindly with you, in being contented to leaue you halfe a face, and that you may well account what is left, as gotten goods. The Duke de Mayne, and the rest were not quit at so easie a rate: and it hath pleased God to shew examples in this kinde, to make it appeare that he approoueth not vani∣ty; nor that he needeth the aduise of men for the defence of his owne and his
Churches cause. Truely, if these men had practised with the enemy, they could not haue beene more confident; nor haue gone more naked to Warre, had they fought against women: And in truth I am so farre from praising their despe∣rate courses, as I doe not so much as pardon them their deathes; and if my o∣pinion had passed, I should haue thought it fit to haue accused them as culpable of their owne deathes, and as such who had committed the greatest Parricides. It becomes mee ill in this place to pre∣scribe rules to my Master; for should I attempt to tech your courage how farre it should extend it selfe, I might seeme to doe no lesse then prescribe lawes to what is illimitable. Yet bee pleased (I pray you) to be informed, that valour is so tender and delicate a vertue, that if it be not sometimes well shielded and conserued by some others, it becom∣meth more hurtfull to him who hath it, then healthfull for the State, often
endamaged by it, or to the Prince who maketh vse thereof. And surely without the assistance of Reason, which ought to be its Gouernnesse, and Prudence as a guide vnto it: there is not any passion more blinde, nor which doth lesse differ from the fury of Beasts, and the bruitish ferocity of Barbarians: The latter of these thinke it cowardise to quit the place, though the breach of a Riuer rowle vpon them; or not to stand firme though they see a house falling on their heads. But these wretches, and wee, haue not the same pretentions; for as they propound to themselues, onely to kill, and to die, so should we onely aime at victory, and neglect the rest; otherwise to what end is the knowledge of Vertue vnto vs, and of the limits which boundeth it, or to be borne vnder a more happy Climate, then that of Polonia and Muscouia: if we draw no aduantage either from the excel∣lency of our institutions or extractions; I doe not at all wonder, why there are
men who preferre death before indi∣gence, and who not finding any content∣ment in their owne Countries, are well pleased to passe beyond the Ice of their naturall ayre, as willing to forgoe the infelicity of their fortunes. But a man of worth, who at all houres inioyeth both perfect and pure contents, and who hath a great share of this Ages ver∣tue to lose, is a Traytour to the Publick, and a Tyrant to himselfe, if he forsake all this for a meere fancy, and depriue the world thereof onely for a flash of Fame and vaine Glory. You know this better then I can tell it you, and if you suppose the Philosophy you haue here∣tofore so highly esteemed, be yet wise enough to instruct you, shee will tell you that Life is the ground-worke of all other good that can here befall vs; since by meanes therof one may recouer King∣domes though vtterly lost, and remaine Victor, after hauing beene defeated in foure battailes. There is no question
but a dead Lyon is lesse worth then a li∣uing Dogge, or that the most part of those Princes of whom there hath beene so much speech, and those valiant Cap∣taines with whose Heroicke acts so many Histories are stored, would not wil∣lingly change their Laurels for our liues. Reioyce therefore (good Sir) together with Nature: in that you are as yet in the number of men; and comfort your selfe with Haniball, and the Father of Alexander the great, for the losse you haue receiued: whatsoeuer you can say, you haue yet sight enough to cause you to turne loue∣sicke, and to contemplate the beauties of Heauen and Earth. But suppose you were wholy blinde, yet is it true, that the Night hath its pleasures as well as the Day, yea and such as you best loue. Yours, BALZAC. The 18 of December, 1622.
Another Letter to Hidaspe from BALZAC. LETTER III. MY deare Hidaspe, thou canst not imagine the content I take in thy Letter, and in the good newes it brings me, it is the onely way to cause me to contradict my selfe, when I ac∣count my estate miserable, since I heare thou art in health, and louest me. Were I not confident thereof, I should the next day drinke poyson; or if not valiant e∣nough to attempt so hardy an enterprise, I should dye with sorrow. Thou art (then) as necessary for my liuing as life it selfe; so as if thou desirest my estate, thou needest not for that any other meanes, then to depriue me of thy good opinion: But truely I neuer had the least apprehension of such a losse, and I
assure my selfe if J were dead, thou shoul∣dest be double as rich as thou desirest to be. I haue long since beene assured, thy thoughts are not inthralled to the earth, or that thy passions onely exceede those of the vulgar. Let me intreat thee to cherish them my deare Hydaspe; and though I be continually sad, and at all times ill affected in my health; yet remember that the very rauings of my Feauer are sometimes more prizeable then Philosophicall meditations; and we see beautifull faces often weepe so gracefully, that some haue beene enamou∣red of their teares. I haue fully acquainted thee with our occurrents here, by my last Letters, nor will I let any opportunity passe without giuing my selfe the content of dis∣coursing with thee in that kind; binde me so much vnto thee, as to doe the like on thy part: But if thy Letters be so short, as vsually they are, I will now betimes tell thee, I will read them so often, as they shall become long enough in spite of thee. I know well how in the place where thou
art, thou oughtest not lose any minute of time; since opportunities last no longer; and resolue thy selfe to take a thousand vn∣profitable iournies to thy Lords Chamber, before thou makest one to purpose. Great men vse not to keepe Registers of the ab∣sent, nor remembrancers of them they v∣sually forget: but rather to the contrary; they imagining there is no other thing on earth but themselues, and what concernes them: (prouided, they finde any who looke like men) they neuer trouble them∣selues to enquire for others, since with them assiduity often workes more then seruice; yea, and those whom they would not affect for merit, they will loue by custome: It is therefore necessary you be still in sight, and alwayes at hand for the entertainment of Fortune: It is a tradition the subtle Gascoynes at their deathes leaue to their Children: and truely as choler as∣sumeth Armes out of whatsoeuer it en∣counters; so is it true, that occasion taketh hold of all such as present themselues. We
ought to contract perfect loue with honest men, but yet not to be at oddes with o∣thers. Poysons themselues are necessary in some cases; and since we are forced to liue among sauage creatures, wee had neede haue the industry either to familia∣rise or force them. I aduise thee not to looke before thee, behinde thee, and on euery side when thou speakest; or to be in so great feare to be taken at thy word, as thou darest not tell what a Clocke it is if one askes thee. Thou shalt gaine much by being silent, the dumbe shall at all times therein exceede thee: For my part, I neuer make question of speaking, when I haue any thing in my head better then si∣lence. I doe not hereby meane that wee ought to discouer our intentions by our lookes, or that our interiour concepti∣ons appeare outwardly with all their pas∣sions, namely, of feare, hatred, or distem∣per. This were to betray our selues, and to giue ill example to others. But herein you are to make election of place, and
persons, and not wilfully to depriue thy selfe of the most pleasing fruite of mans life, there being not any, in whose breast we may securely deposite either our griefes or ioyes. Besides, I would not haue thee of that Spaniards humour, who tooke for his deuice Que fi que no; but consider with thy selfe that Reason is a sacred thing▪ whereto thou art to yeeld, where euer it ap∣peares. I confesse that most things are in∣uolued in vncertainties, and that hu∣mane Sciences haue very slender and vn∣certaine foundations; yet are there some truths so perspicuous, and so absolutely receiued into the Worlds approbation, as it were no lesse then to lacke common sense, to call them into question; for hee who should say, my Lord the Constable d'Esdiguieres were not valiant, or my Lord the Cardinall of Richelieu, were not a man of able parts: doubtlesse all men would wonder at him, as at one who sought to introduce some new Sect, or indeauour to ouerthrow the fundamentall Lawes of
the Kingdome. Nay, I tell you yet more; you are piously to beleeue diuers sots to be sufficient men, since the World will haue it so; and that Kings are not the one∣ly men who desire complasency; since if we meane to liue among others, we must sometimes necessarily flatter, and frame our selues to their opinions Let vs then follow the iudgement of the wise, and the customes of the vulgar; let vs keepe our thoughts to our selues, and allow them our actions and out-sides. As J haue adui∣sed thee not to be ouer silent, so would I not haue thee ouer talkatiue, nor to wea∣ry any one with thy discourse of Mountau∣ban, or the exploits thou hast there seene performed. I assure thee to auoyde the company of these boasting companions; I would take poste, goe to Sea, or fly to the Worlds end. They seeme to me to haue gotten a patent for prating, and that it were no lesse then to take their purse, if one should offer to speake a word in their presence: But aboue all, it is very death
to me, when these fellowes come fresh out of Holland, or when they begin to stu∣dy the Mathematicks. From Millan to Sienna I was haunted with one of these Chapmen; whose company I shall so long as I haue life, reckon among my greatest misfortunes. Hee would needes reforme all the fortifications of those strong places wee passed by; bee trode on no earth at which he carped not, nor trauailed ouer any Mountaine, on which hee had not some designe; he set vpon all the Citties in the Dukedome of Florence; he desired one∣ly a certaine short prefixed time, to take in all the States of Medena, Parma, and Vr∣bin: yea, I had much adoe to draw him from casting his designes vpon the lands of the Church, and St. Peters Patrimony. These be diseases the roots whereof are not to be cut vp, without taking away the tongue withall: Nay, J feare when all this is done, there will be yet neede to passe further into the cure, and to vse meanes to bereaue them of voyce, for the
generall good of such as can heare. There is yet another sort of importunate people, whose number doth so multiply in France, it is almost arriued to an infinity: These haue not one halfe houres intertainement for thee, without telling thee the King is raysing puissant forces; how such a one is out of credit with his faction; another is a great searcher into, and medler in State-matters, and how a third diueth into all the intricacies of Court-businesses. If you can haue the patience to heare them yet a while longer, you shall straite vn∣derstand how the President Iannin was the man who had the truest intentions of all the ministers of Justice: That it is expe∣dient to shew a Master-peece of State, to giue reputation to the present current of affaires: That the Kings authority was in∣teressed in this action: and that those who sought to cry downe the present gouern∣ment, rather aimed at their particular ad∣uantages, then redresse of disorders. See here the style wherewith they persecute
me euen to my poore Village, and which is a cause I loath State, and publique af∣faires. Tyre not therefore my eares at thine arriuall, lest you turne mine ad∣uersary with intention to assault mee with these huge words. If you know not that these follies haue not alwayes the same aspect, and that there are as well serious follies, as slight ones, I would admonish thee in this place: Now though a man at twenty can haue no great experience of the World, yet haue you a sufficient cleare iudgement to keepe your selfe from being deluded, by the apparance of good, or by the out∣ward luster of euill. I had neede of more time then the bearer allowes mee, and of more words then a Letter is cape∣able of, sufficiently to instruct thee what thou oughtest to doe, and what to a∣uoide; or to learne thee a Science wher∣in my selfe doe study in teaching thee. I will therefore onely say, since I am hast∣ned to make an end, that before all other
things thou art to offer thy whole will to God, if thou beest not able to giue the rest; and to haue (at least) good de∣signes, if it be not as yet in thy power to doe any good deeds. I well know it is no slender taske, to vndertake to guard our selues from euill, where intice∣ments are extraordinary, and the danger extreame, and where (thou wilt tell me) that if God will hinder thee from lo∣uing beauty, he had neede▪ make thee blind. I hauing no pleasing answer to make thee hereto my deare Hydaspe, I re∣ferre thee to thy Confessor: intreating thee to consider, how if the King in the flower of his age wherein wee see him, and in the midst of an infinity of obiects offering themselues to giue him content, is yet notwithstanding so firme in the re∣solution to vertue, that he as easily sur∣mounteth all voluptuous irregularities▪ as he doth his most violent rebels, and is not any way acquainted with forbid∣den pleasures, nor doth glut himselfe
euen with lawfull ones: If as I say, this truth bee generally auowed, I beseech thee tell me why continency may not be placed among things possible? But I much feare, there is no meanes to gaine this for granted at thy hands; since thou beleeuest as others doe, that to be chaste, were no lesse then to vsurpe vpon the possession of married Wiues. Yet at the least Hydaspe, if this body of thine, being of sufficient ability to send Collo∣nies into each corner of the World, and to people the most desart places, will needes be imployed; I intreate thee to stay there, without being transported with the debauches of the mouth, which haue no other limits then the losse of reason, and ruine of health. I should be in vtter despaire were it told me, that my brother drinkes as much as though hee were in a continuall Feauer, and were as great a purueyer for his panch, as if hee were to enter into a besieged City. I con∣fesse thy inclination doth of it selfe
sufficiently diuert thee from these Ger∣maine vertues, and that thou art not much lesse sober then my selfe, who haue passed ouer three yeares without suppers, and who would willingly feed onely vpon Fennill and picktoothes, if I thought I could thereby recouer health. Yet truely this doth not hinder me from hauing some apprehension, when I con∣sider how the examples of great ones doth often giue authority to vice: and that to keepe our selues vpright in the midst of corruption, is not an effect of the ordinary force of men: Consider then once againe (Hydaspe) that we are powerfully to resist temptations. Haue an eye to the interest thou hast to con∣tayneithy selfe within the limits of an orderly life; and be well aduised, whe∣ther thou couldst be contented to be of the proportion of those good fellowes, whose spirits are choaked in their owne grease, and who become such comely creatures, that if their bodies were
pierced, there would nothing passe forth of their wounds but▪ Wine and Por∣ridge. Besides, making profession as thou dost, to be a man of thy word, be not offended if I summon thee to ob∣serue what thou hast promised mee: or that I freely tell thee, that if thou fal∣lest againe to the old game, I shall haue small subiect to assure my selfe of thy fi∣delity in other thy former promises. Wert thou the King of the Indies, or thy life endlesse, I would not forbid thee this exercise; but since wee haue scarce leasure enough in this world to attayne vertue, nor ouer great possessions to se∣cure vs from pouerty; beleeue me Hydas∣pe, it is very dangerous to suffer ship∣wracke on shoare; and besides, the ex∣pence of money, (which wee esteeme as deare vnto vs as life) to lose our sences likewise, and our time, the last where∣of is irrecouerable, is both shamefull and sinfull; hauing here admonished thee well neere, though confusedly and
scatteredly of those things thou oughtest to flye, it were requisite I should like∣wise aduise thee of what were fit for thee to follow, and to cause if I could, good lawes to arise out of euill manners. But it is fit to take time to deliberate vpon a matter of such importance, and truely to speake herein to purpose, all the wit I haue, ioyned with that of others, were no more then sufficient. Yours, BALZAC. The 1▪ of Ianuary 1624. To Hydaspe from Balzac. LETTER IIII. MY deare Hidaspe, if God had con∣ferred a Kingdome vpon me, with condition not to haue mee sleepe more then I doe: I should prooue the
most vigilant Prince liuing, nor should I neéde either Guards or Sentinels about my person. Surely there is not any (my selfe excepted) for whom Night was not made, since when the windes are calme, and all Nature quiet, I alone watch with the Starres. But I much feare lest God will not be satisfied herewith, since I fore-see so many miseries ready to rowle vpon me, as I haue no small ap∣prehension to become more wretched to∣morrow, then I am at this present. The onely countenance of Hydaspe would re∣fresh mee, and cause my paine to be in some sort pleasing. But fince there are now at least a dozen great Cities, and a hundred Leagues of Snow betweene vs, I haue much adoe to forbeare dying, and to support my selfe vpon my weakest part. Yet my meaning is not to haue thee returne hither; for (were it possible for me) I had much rather come to thee, and continually to gaze on that face whereof I haue drawne so many faire purtraicts.
It is true, there are few men liuing, whose loue we should preferre before li∣berty. But assure thy selfe thy Master is of those; be not therefore more proud then Henry the third, who first obeyed him. For my part, though I be natural∣ly refractory, yet haue I euer had a speci∣all inclination to his seruice, yea, when all things went crosse with him, and that his best Friends forsooke him, I tooke pleasure in perishing, on purpose to affoord him some consolation in his calamities. Many desire a dependency on him out of their particular ends but me thinkes we should haue more noble designes, since his onely vertue deser∣ueth to be followed, and to cause a presse wheresoeuer it passeth. In truth, the seruice we yeeld to so great a person, ought to hold the ranke of the chiefe re∣compences we are to expect; vet after this, there followeth another seldome fayling any of good parts, yea, or those who haue but patience. If thou beest
of the one, or other sort of such men, re∣member this maxime; and doe not as those honest persons, who thinke they doe good seruice to the State, when they betray their Masters. Beasts themselues are capeable of acknowledgement; and that Italian had some small shew of Rea∣son, who called those Diuels, who cured Agues, good Angels. Yet truely it is no lesse then to be ouer mannerly to goe so farre, nor would I thanke Gods ene∣mies for those gracious fauours I indeede receiue from him onely. But as touch∣ing the rest of worldly affaires, there is no question, but wee are to reflect vpon the nearest occasions Fortune affoordeth vs; and those who seeke after more re∣mote meanes, shall in conclusion finde from one degree to another, that it is to Hugh Capete to whom they are obliged. I was affraid lest I should have left my fin∣gers vpon this paper, and haue disena∣bled my selfe for euer writing more Let∣ters after this, had I any longer con∣tinued
my discourse. I tell thee no lye Hydaspe, this is the third Winter wee haue had this yeare, and the greatest irregula∣rity I euer obserued in Nature. For Gods loue inquire the cause of Father Ioseph, and intreate him from me, if your selfe be not acquainted with him, that he would be pleased to imploy the credit he hath in Heauen, to cause the returne of warmer weather. BALZAC The 25. of Ianuary, 1624. To the Seigneur de la Roche from Balzac. LETTER V. SIR, I Cannot conceiue your meaning, when you speake of my friendship, as of a fa∣uour, or predestination, or in being so prodigall of your complements and
commendations. There was sufficient in the Letter you lately sent, to bereaue me of speech, and to make me flye to the Indies, were I forced to frame you a pun∣ctuall answer. But since you are vsually victorious, be pleased, I beseech you, to permit your courtesie to worke the same effects, as doth your courage; and suffer me to yeeld vnto you in this occasion, as I would doe in those of Rochell, or Mountu∣ban. I onely intreate you, henceforward to loue me with lesse ostentation and luster then you haue done hitherto; and since it is not in my power to hinder you from ha∣uing me in estimation, let me at the least intreate you to carry the matter so, as though you had committed some sinne; that is, without calling witnesse, or con∣firming the fact: otherwise, doubtlesse the world will suppose your affection to be in∣iurious to your iudgement▪ and I much feare, lest I should be blamed for blinding you, and for being more wicked then the late Warre, which was contented onely
to make diuers of our friends, blinkards. Truely that so compleate a person, whose acquaintance you commend vnto me; not finding me sutable to the pourtraite you shewed him, may well say, you are not onely satisfied in being singly seduced, but seeke to raise Heresies out of your errours, and a contagion out of your crazy consti∣tution. This being so, I see not how I can better make good, either mine owne repu∣tation, or your report, then by volunta∣rily banishing my selfe from the place where you are, and not by my presence, to ouerthrow all the Honour you haue hither to acquired for me. If therefore you will not appeare a deceiuer, nor declare your selfe my aduersary, leaue me I pray you, to my retirednesse, where I study onely to maintaine health, and take no o∣ther paines then to procure my owne re∣pose, nor haue any conference, but with my selfe. Your most humble seruant, BALZAC. The 10. of Aprill, 1623.
To Mounsieur de Bois Robert from Balzac. LETTER VI. SInce the dead neuer returne but they affright vs: I was perswaded I should doe you no small pleasure, nor a little oblige you, in forbearing to appeare so much as on Paper before you, suffering you purely to enioy your accustomed plea∣sures, without the mixture of any thing that might be distastefull vnto you. But since at this present you come to disturbe the quiet of Church-yards, and to finde out a man, in affecting whose memory you might well be satisfied; I am forced to tell you, that the party you so highly e∣steeme, is wholy remaining beyond the Alpes, and how this is onely his Ghost lately returned into France. I breake all
the Looking▪glasses I meete with, I blun∣der the water of all Riuers I crosse, I auoid the sight of all Paynters in any place where I come, lest they shew me the patterne of my pale visage. Yet if in the crazy case wherein I am, J were any way capeable of consolation, I beseech you to be assured, I should take it as proceeding from the good successe of your affaires, nor would I desire of my disease any long respite, then what were requisite to reioyce with you. But truely, it is an enemy who knowes not how to admit of conditions of peace or truce, and I am so happy as not to be suffered to quit my paines to resume them. The meate I here eate for sustenance, is to me as pleasing as poyson, and I endure life out of pennance, whereas you (in the place where you liue) spend the remainder of the Golden age, refusing nothing to your sences you lawfully may allow them. Though the Queenes Court be so chaste, as it were easier to drinke drunk of a foun∣taine, then to take any dishonest pleasures
thene; and that to gaine admittance, it is requisite to be first purified at the Porters lodge; yet are you allowed euen there to haue pleasing temptations, and going else∣where, to seeke out more solide content∣ments. But as for me in the case I am, I make no difference at all betweene louely creatures, and well limmed pictures: and the misery I endure, hauing bereaued me of action, my wretched vertue is as much constrayned, as the sobriety of the poore is necessary. In all this I adde not one word to the bare truth; and if the Counte of Pountgibaut had his pardon to let you know how it is with me, he would tell you that I am more withered then the last yeares Roses, and how all the Ingeniers in an Army, were no more then sufficient to remoue me. But my discourse will be more pleasing, if I speake of that Head which deserueth to fill a Diadem, then in continuing this wretched complaint. When at the first I saw concurrent in him so much valour, and so great beauty, I
neither tooke him for man nor Woman; but after hauing recollected my selfe, J supposed him to be the Amazonian Queene: and doubtlesle in the worlds infancy, it was to such faces onely, whereto all peo∣ple yeelded willing obedience, none quit∣ting their seruice, euery mans duty being conformable to his inclination; so as the onely meanes then to be rebellious, was to beblinde. When this young Lord came to Rome at his returne from the battaile of Prague, I can well witnesse the iealousie he at once afforded both to men and their wiues, and of the great Prognostickes all such gaue of him, who presumed to haue any experience in future occurrents, either by the aspect of Starres, or some more sublime vnderstanding: besides, to consi∣der how at twenty yeares of age, there is scarce any corner of the knowne world he hath not traced, to encounter honourable actions▪ nor any sort of combate wherein for the most part he hath not beene Con∣querour; that he hath borne Armes against
Turkes and Jnfidels, that he hath appea∣red both in battailes and sieges of Citties; that he hath giuen life to some enemies, and taken it from others. This (to speake truth) is a thing God suffereth as rarely to be seene as deluges, and other great effects of his power or iustice. In a long processe of time the meerest Cowards may become Maisters; were it by no other meanes, but that by seeing all men dye before them, they may inherit the whole world. Diuers likewise haue performed great exploits, who haue begun their actions either with grosse errours, or meane aduentures. But as there are very few Riuers nauigable e∣uen from their first fountaines, nor Coun∣tries where the Sun fendeth forth his full heate from the very day-spring: so are such men (doubtlesse) very rare and sin∣gular, who haue not any neede either of growth or yeares; nor are subiect either to the order of times, or rules of Nature. But I haue no purpose to folde vp a booke in a Letter: for though my griefe doe
sometimes permit mee to spend some small time vpon pleasing subiects, yet will it not allow me to make thereon a∣ny long stay. I must therefore leaue off, during my short good day, lest I fall sicke againe in your presence, and once more clogge you with my complaints, insteade of thanking you for your kinde remembrance, and assuring you of the great desire I haue to remaine so long as I liue, Your most humble seruant, BALZAC. The 4. August, 1615. A Letter from Balzac to Moun∣sieurde Bois Robert. LETTER VII. THough I receiue no newes from you, and howbeit those from Paris are generally naught: yet am I so
confident of your excellent constitution, as I cannot imagine it can be endamaged by that contagious ayre: Surely if it be not in such sort infected, that birds fall downe dead, and that the Springs be not corrupted, you haue small cause to feare; and I haue heretofore seene you of so perfect a composition, and so strong a substance, that an ordinary infection (I suppose) is vnable to seaze vpon you: And rather then I will haue any appre∣hension of your being carryed away with the current of those who dye of this great mortality; I shall sooner be∣leeue that God reserueth you to make the worlds Epitaph, and those last Songs appointed for the Catastrophe of all humane ioyes. Yet ere it come to this point, remember your promise, I pray you, and send me something to rid me of the Megreme I haue taken in reading the sotteries of these times. I cannot counterfeit the matter, but must con∣fesse I taste Verses as I doe Mellons; so
as if these two sorts of Fruites haue not a relish neare approaching to perfection, I know not how to commend them though on the Kings Table, or in Homers workes. Whatsoeuer you doe, yet at the least permit nothing to your spirit which may wound your reputation; and aboue all, let me intreate you not to bee the man who may iustly be taxed of ha∣uing violated the chastity of our Lan∣guage, or for instructing the French in forraigne vices, vtterly vnknowne to their Predecessours. Poetry which God hath sometimes made choice of, for the vttering of Oracles, and to vnfold his secrets to Mankinde, ought at the least to be imployed in honest vses: Nor is it a lesse offence to make vse thereof in vici∣ous matters then to violate a Virgin. This I speake vpon the subiect of our Friend, whose end I feare will hardly be naturall, if hee dye not the sooner of his fourth Poxe. This is the second time hee hath issued out of Paris by a
breach, hauing escaped as furious a flame as that of Troy. For my part, I cannot conceiue what should be his de∣signe. For to warre against Heauen; besides, that he shall be but slackly ac∣companied in such an expedition, nor hath a hundred hands as it is sayd of Gy∣ants; he ought to vnderstand, it was an action they could neuer atchieue: and how in Cicilia there are Mountaines yet smoaking with their Massacre. We come not into this world to prescribe Lawes, but to submit our selues to those we find, and to content ourselues with the wis∣dome of our fore-fathers, as with their Land and Sunne. And truely, since in matters indifferent, nouelties are euer reprehensible, and that our Kings quit not their Lillies to quarter Tulipans in their armes: by how much greater right are we obliged to conserue the ancient, and fundamentall points of Religion, which are by so much the more pure in that by their antiquity they approach
nearer to the Origine of things, and for that betweene them, and the beginning of all good, there is the lesse time sub∣iect to corruption. To speake plainely, there is small appearance that truth hath from the beginning of the world atten∣ded this man, on purpose to discouer it selfe vnto him in a Brothell or Tauerne; and to bee sent forth of a mouth which comes short in sobriety to that of a Suisse. I intend not to intermeddle with the Courts of Parliament, nor to preuent their Decrees by mine opinion: And to thinke to make this man more culpable then he is, were as much as to cast Inke on an Ethiopians face; I owe so much to to the memory of our fore-past acquain∣tance, as I rather pitty him as a diseased person, then pursue him as an enemy. I confesse he hath parts in him not abso∣lutely ill, nor doe I deny I haue much pleased my selfe with his freedome of speech, so long as hee proposed onely men for his obiect, and spared to speake
of holy things. But when I heard say, he exceeded the bounds of inferiour matters, and banded himselfe euen a gainst what is transcendent to Heauen, I instantly quitted all acquaintance with him, and thought the onely pleasure I could doe him, was to pray to God to restore him to his right sences, and to take pitty on him as he did of the Jewes, who crucified our Sauiour. Hereafter I will be better aduised then to weary you with so long a discourse, or to tyre my selfe in troubling you: But truely I thought I could doe no lesse after three yeares silence, esteeming this not to be ouer much for a man who is so slow a pay-master, for so many Letters hee ow∣eth you. Yet cannot I conclude, before I informe you of some particulars touch∣ing the place where I am at this present, and of my imployments here. First there is no day passeth wherein I see not the rising and setting of the Sunne, and how during that time, I withdraw my
selfe from all other distractions, to enioy the purity of that faire light. Be∣hold here in this present state where∣in I am, all the Courtship I vse, and the onely subiection I oblige my selfe vnto. When I desire to take the Ayre▪at other houres of the day, I must indeede con∣fesse my eyes haue no obiects so vast as the Sea, or Appenines, nor doe I behold Rome vnder my feete as formerly I haue done: Yet doe I on all sides discouer so pleasing a prospect, as though it fill not the capacity of my spirit so much as did the other, yet doth it farre more con∣tent me. Painters come forty dayes iourneyes hence, to study in my cham∣ber, and if Nature cause her greatnesse to appeare, euen from the bottome of the deepest Abysses, and darkest downe∣fals, she hath no lesse placed her rarest perfections vnder my windowes. More∣ouer, I am plunged in abundance vp to the eyes, but my Riches are tacked to the twigs and branches of Trees; for as
Summer hath made mee plentifull, so will Winter reduce me to my former pu∣uerty. In the meane time, I make Feasts of Figges and Mellons, yea, out of the very Museadine Grapes I eate, there issu∣eth liquor enough to make halfe a King∣dome drunke; and the thing whereat happily you will wonder, is, that I put all this into a sicke mans stomacke, to whom well-nigh all good things are forbidden: yet haue I found a meanes to reconcile my surfets with my phisicall receits, and in one and the same day I both enioy pleasure, and endure paine; for I nourish my Feauer with excellent fruites, and purge it with Rubarbe: but howsoeuer I cannot hazard my health in more innocent debauches, since I per∣forme them without troubling the tran∣quility either of Earth or Ayre, or with∣out bereauing any thing of life. The first men the world produced, attained to extreame age with such pure cates as mine are; for as of all bloudy meates
they onely vsed Cherries and Mulberries; so was the simplicity of their liues accom∣panied with a perfect reposednesse; Na∣ture as yet being voide of all Monsters: There was as then no mention either of Geryon, or Minotaure, nor of φφφφ. The Inquisition and Parliament were onely in the Jdea of things; and of the two parts of Iustice, there was that onely knowne which gaue merits their due rewards. BALZAC. From BALZAC, 1623. Another Letter from Balzac to Mounsieur de Bois Robert. LETTER. VIII. YOur Letter of the fifteenth of the last Moneth, came to my hands as I was ready to seale these Presents. You might haue iust cause to taxe me, should I
let them goe vnanswered, or if this dead man appearing in your presence, did not giue you thankes for the many excellent words you haue vsed in the adorning his Funerall Oration. I should be but too proud if others were of your opinion, or were infected with the like errour you are; but I much feare you will not for the present herein finde a party equall to that of the League, and doe much doubt if all of a contrary conceite, should be declared Criminals, there would hardly be any ac∣quitted in this Kingdome. Howsoeuer, I hold my selfe much obliged vnto you, in conferring so liberally that vpon me, you so well know I want, and for bestowing all your colours and mercuriall mixtures to make mee seeme beautifull: I will bee well aduised how I fall out with him who flatters me, and in the loue I beare my selfe, I shall at all times suffer a riuall with much satisfaction. Since a certayne Gentleman in Germany pleaseth himselfe in being sti∣led King of Ierusalem, and since those
who haue no reall patrimonies, tickle themselues with meere Titles and Armes: by the like reason may J imagine my selfe to be the man you will needes haue me, and receiue from your courte∣sie the qualities my Natiuity hath not affoorded me. But to disblame both of vs, I beseech you hereafter to haue more care of my modesty, and not to put me in danger either to lose it, or not to beleeue you. It is no lesse then to wrong the Angels, to call other spirits then theirs diuine, yea all the Celestiall Court is sensible of suffering that name to fall to ground. For my part, I am so farre from freeing my selfe of humane defects, as I doe absolutely auow, there is not a∣ny more imperfect then J am, no not so much as blinkards and maymed per∣sons. I espye faults enough, on which side soeuer I see my selfe, and my wit is so disfurnished of forraine perfections, as I hold no man for learned, if he be not adorned with those abilities whereof I
am ignorant, yea euen in that whereof you suppose me to haue a perfect vnder∣standing: I haue in truth no more then meere doubts and coniectures, so as if there were a man of perfect Eloquence to befound at the worlds end, I would goe in pilgrimage on purpose to see one con∣trary to N N. To speake truely, there is great difference betweene filling the care with some pleasing sound, and expres∣sing the fancies of Artizans and Clownes according to Grammaticall Rules; and in reigning ouer the spirits of men by force of Reason; and to share the gouernment of the World with Conquerours and lawfull Kings▪ I haue not the presumption to suppose I am arriued at this point; but I likewise thinke few haue attayned thereto, and the Philosophers Stone were with more ease to be extracted, then the Eloquence I propose to my selfe. It is as yet a kind of Terraincognita, and which hath not beene discouered together with the Indies. The Romans themselues could onely recouer
the bare image, as they did of those Ter∣ritories, ouer which they triumphed by a false title: Yea Greece her selfe how vaine∣ly soeuer shee boasted thereof, yet seazed shee onely vpon the shadow, not seeing the substance: So as vpon the matter di∣uers haue possessed others with that con∣ceite, being first deceiued themselues; and are obliged to the restitution of an ill ac∣quired reputation. Many of our friends haue fallen into the like errours; I will not name them, fearing to astonish at the first sight, all such to whom you shall shew this Letter; or lest I should publish odious truthes. It shall suffice I tell you by the way, that if to attaine perfect Elo∣quence, it sufficed onely to weary our hands with Writing, none could therein any way compare with our Practitioners and Pen-clarkes. Yet is there not any rea∣son why those who performe poore things, should draw their weakenesse to their owne aduantage, or imagine I flatter them. A man is as well damned
for one single deadly sin, as for a thousand without repentance; nor is it the strength of their iudgement, which hinders them from committing many faults, but the onely barrennesse of their wits which en∣ables them not to write▪ many bookes. I might enlarge my selfe vpon this subiect, and discouer diuers secrets vnto you, the world is not yet acquainted with. But I haue neither time nor paper left, saue onely to tell you that J am Sir, Your most humble seruant, BALZAC. Another Letter from Balzac to the same man. LETTER IX. IVnderstand some haue taxed me for say∣ing (in my last Letter vnto you) the spi∣rits of Angels; since Angels being all
Spirits, it seemed vnto them to be two inseperable tearmes: But to let such men see how ill grounded their Obiection is, (and I suppose our iudgements will herein agree) it may please them to remember, that we call Angels Spirits, to distinguish them from bodies, being a farre different signification from what the word Spirit importeth, when we take it for that part of the soule which vnderstandeth, reaso∣neth, and imagineth, and which causeth so different effects in the soule of a foole, and that of a discreete person. Question∣lesse (euen among Angels themselues) there may be a difference found betweene the spirits of some, and other some of them, to wit, in the faculty of Ratiotination and Comprehension: Since those of the last order are not illuminated, but by meanes of them of the precedent rankes, and so of the rest euen to the first; which haue a farre more sublime intelligence then the inferiour Orders, which as no man (how smally soeuer seene in the Metaphisiques)
will doubt of) come as farre short of the vnderstanding the first Order is indued with, as they doe of their degree. We are therefore to admit of this difference, and say, that an Angell is doubtlesse a Spirit, to wit, he is not a Body: but withall that an Angell hath moreouer a spirit, namely, this faculty of knowing, and conceiuing either lesser, or more large, according to the priuiledge of his Order. So as if a Spirit hath no other signification then a simple and incomposed substance, this in∣equality were not to be found among the Angels, being equally simple, and farre from all composition and mixture. When then I say it was a wrong done to Angels to call any other Spirits diuine saue onely theirs: I take the word Spirit in its second signification, and thereby seperate it from the Angell, and distinguish the simple substance, and nature Angellicall from that faculty of the Soule tearmed the vnderstan∣ding. But that one may not say, the spirit of Angels, because they are all spirit, is a
reason very reproueable, and whereto there wanteth nothing but verity to make it no vntruth; for that besides the spirit or vnderstanding affoording to Angels so eminent a knowledge of di∣uine things, they are likewise indued with will, causing them to loue what they know, and with memory day∣ly adding something to their natu∣rall intellect. But admitting I should yeeld to whatsoeuer these my reprehen∣dors would haue, and that I limit the word Spirit within the bounds of its first signification, I should still haue the better of it. For in truth our ordinary manner of conception cannot possibly represent Angels without bodies, yea, and the Church it selfe affoordeth them so faire, beautifull, and perfect ones, that from thence the best Poets ordinari∣ly picke their Comparisons to pourtraite the rarest beauties. Besides, if in holy Writ, mention be often made of the Spi∣rit of God, euen before he assumed our
corporall substance, and in a sence which could not be vnderstood of the third person in Trinity, why may not I as iustly speake of the spirits of Angels, be∣ing in comparison of Gods Spirit, no better then earth, and materiall; and which approacheth not by many degrees vnto the simplicity and purity of this maiesteriall cause, being as the Mother to all the rest. You see here, that (how∣soeuer) it is very dangerous to study by halfe parts, or to vnderstand some small matter more then those who neuer were at Schoole; yet is it out of such men as these, that Nouellists and superstitious persons are raised; yea, and all the rest, who haue reason enough to doubt, but not science sufficiently to determine rightly. BALZAC.
To Mounsieur de Bois Robert from Balzac. LETTER X. SIR, YOu haue anticipated what I inten∣ded to say, and haue not left for me in all Rhetoricke, either comple∣ment or commendations to returne you. This is to force ingratitude by excesse of obligation, and to reduce me to the ne∣cessity of being indebted vnto you after I be dead. In truth it were necessary I had the power to promise you felicity and Paradise, in requitall of the vowes and sacrifices you offer vnto me, and that I were in case to be your aduocate, in∣stead of being thus put to a stand to an∣swer you. It may be you haue a minde in such sort to disguise me to my selfe, as I shall not hereafter know who I am,
but be forced to forget my owne name, by causing me to imagine I am not the same man I was yesterday. Proceede at your pleasure to deceiue me in this sort, for I am resolued not to contest with you in this kind, to the worlds end: nor to arme my selfe against an enemy, who onely throwes Roses at my head. I should be very glad all my life would passe in such pleasing Dreames, and that I might neuer awake, for feare of know∣ing the truth to my preiudice. But for the attayning this happinesse, it is neces∣sary I doe quite contrary to your aduice, and neuer quit my Countrey-house, where none comes to enter into compa∣risons, or contest with me, for the ad∣uantage I haue ouer bruite beasts, or my Lackeyes. I agree with you that it is the Court-voice which either approueth or condemneth all, and that out of its light, things though neuer so perfect, haue no appearance: But I know not whether it were my best, to make that
my owne case; since I feare lest my pre∣sence there, will rather preiudice my re∣putation and your iudgement, then make good your position. Vpon the mat∣ter, if there be any tollerable parts in me, they appeare so little outwardly, as I had neede haue my breast opened to dis∣couer them: And in conclusion you will finde it a sufficient obligation for me, to haue you thinke my soule is more elo∣quent then my discourse, and that the better part of my vertue is concealed: Yet since my promise is past, I must resolue for Paris, though it prooue as strange a place vnto mee, as if I were out of the World, or as though they should chase raw Courtiers thence, as they doe cor∣rupt States-men. To tell you plainely how the case stands, J am none of those who study the slightest actions of their liues, and who vse Art in all they doe, or doe not. I cannot light vpon that ac∣cent, wherewith they authorise their follies, nor make of euery meane matter a
mystery by whispering it in the eare: And lesse doe I know how to palliate my faults; or make shew of an honest man, if really I be not so: Now though I could make my selfe capable of these Arts, yet would it anger mee shrewdly, if after hauing passed nine Ports, and a∣bidden many backe-casts to get thither, to be at last stayed at the Tenth: Nay, should I chance to get admittance; what a hell were it for me to come into a Coū∣trey where Hatts are not made to couer heads, and where all men grow crooked with extreame cringeing. Consider therefore, whether this humour of mine would sute with the place where you are; or if a man whose points and garters seeme ponderous vnto him, and who findes it a difficult matter to obey Gods Commandements, and the Kings Edicts, can be drawne to bee obliged to new lawes, or procure to himselfe a third seruitude. In the state wherein I now am, all the Princes in the World act
Comedies to make me sport. I enioy all the riches of Nature, from the Heauens to riuer-waters, and I easily obtaine of my moderate spirit, what I cannot at∣taine vnto by the liberality of Fortune. This being thus, will you perswade me to change those benefits none enuy, with your feares, hopes, and suspicions; or not thinke it fit I value liberty, for which the Hollanders haue made Warre (now this fifty yeares) against the King of Spaine? But since I haue passed my word, I am not resolued to reuoke it; yet when I must needs bid adieu to my Woods and solitary places, which haue taught mee so many good things, and quit this in∣chanted Palace of mine, where all my thoughts are reall inspirations; I shall haue a great conflict within me, to keepe my word with you. I will beleeue none but your selfe, who best know whether or no I haue reason to loue this prison my Father builded for me, or this little spot of Land, where there is no defect
but a Fountaine of Gold, and other vn∣necessary things; there being else suffici∣ent here to satisfie a sober person; I must confesse the last great raines haue blemi∣shed all the beauty abroad: And Winter which by right should bee condemned neuer to depart from Swedland, is alrea∣dy come to crosse the content I formerly enioyed: But howsoeuer, there are yet pleasing remedies to auoyde these pre∣sent incommodities. The perfumes I burne, and whereof I am as prodigall, as though I exacted tribute from the Coun∣tries from whence they come, maketh me the lesse to misse the sweetnesse of the Spring: And a great fire resembling the brightest beauty, which I tearme the Sunne of the night, and darke dayes, wat∣cheth at all houres in my Chamber, and giueth light to my rest, as well as to my Studies. Before this witnesse (which I neuer loose sight of) all Nature is the subiect of my meditation▪ and I conceiue workes, which happily may merit a
place in your Library, and to bee chosen Citizens of that diuine Republique. I know not what men doe most esteeme in bookes, but I am confident, that in this I compose, Iustice and Maiesty, shall ap∣peare so euenly tempered, as none shall therein find any thing either sauoring of cowardize or cruelty. I take and make vse of the art of Ancients; as they would haue done from me, had I beene the first man liuing. But I haue no seruile depen∣dancy vpon their conceptions, nor am I borne their vassall, to follow no other lawes or examples, saue theirs: To the contrary (if I deceiue not my selfe) my inuention is farre more happy then my i∣mitation; and as there haue beene in our age diuers new Stars discouered, till this present vnperceiued; so I in matter of E∣loquence, seeke out singularities, hitherto vnknowne to any. It is certaine, and you know it as well as my selfe, you who know good things when you see them, and who are the Authour of diuers; that
there are none so seuere Muses as the Frēch, nor any tongue more hating affectation, and bare apparances of things then ours. All kinde of ornaments therefore are not propper for her: and her purity is at such ods with the exorbitant licence of other languages, that a French vice in this kind, is often made a forraine vertue. But (in this case) we are to take aduice of the vn∣derstanding and eare; and for my part, I haue for my patterne herein, the Idea of the great Cardinall of Richelieu, as though he were present and priuy to my concepti∣ons, or as if he at all times receiued or re∣iected them, as they happen to bee either good or otherwise: But to tell you the truth, I know not well which way I passe by this tedious and vntroden path, or what vse I intend to make of these so many im∣pertinent speeches. But I am as often out of my way, in the allies of my hermitage, and I haue many times much vse of a man, to let me know whether it be day or night, and to order my times and actions; yet
would I haue you know, I doe not vsu∣ally fall into such errours, but onely be∣fore such as I loue and honour, as I doe you; at all other times, be it in my visits, or in my Letters; I will bee well aduised, how I suffer the end to come farre short of the Exordium; and from the first word, I make all the haste I may to come to Your most humble seruant, BALZAC. The 11. of Febru∣ary, 1624. To Mounsieur Girard, Secretary to the Duke of Espernon. LETTER XI: LEt me intreate you, that we may deface out of our intended History whatsoe∣uer hath passed these last four Months, let vs imagine that time to haue hapned in some fabulous age, and (for our mutuall content) let vs herein learne the Art of
Obliuion. Had I beene constrayned to quit our ancient acquaintance, being of e∣quall age to either of vs▪ and whereof I make as great account as of my Fathers inheritance; surely J had beene driuen to the like streights, as hee who with one hand should be forced to cut off the other. It is then the necessity of my inclination, which forceth mee to affect Philander, though he were mine enemy: and this pas∣sion doth so please me, that should any man cure me thereof, I would commense suit with him for my former malady. I will not accuse any man for the fault com∣mitted: Let vs both imagine it to be a Child without a Father, and to cleare all men, let vs lay it vp among the present miseries, and impute it to the power of fortune. I will rather suppose it to be the last effect of the Commet, then impute it to any act of your spirit, or that you contriued the dis∣content I haue endured. I sweare vpon whatsoeuer is August or Sacred amongst men, I haue no lesse loued you then my
selfe, and haue equally shared my selfe be∣tweene my brother and Philander. Hence▪ forward I desire to doe the like. But let vs leaue all these faire words, and petty ni∣cities to poore spirits, and hereafter con∣ferre together with such liberty as Philo∣sophy affoordeth vs. But aboue all things J intreate you not to suffer a supposed wis∣dome to restraine you within particular re∣spects and petty considerations, which may hinder you from speaking high in what concernes me. Feare not to shew your selfe my sure friend, for it is neyther theft, nor throat-cutting; and of the two extreamities of defect and excesse, it is better to fall into the fairest and least facul∣ty. Otherwise if Friendship should neuer appeare, but remaine at all times as a re∣cluse, what better vse can we draw thence then of hatred alike hidden? and at the worst what vse is there to be made thereof, but onely for the pleasure of conuersation, and necessity of commerce? But I will leaue this discourse whereof I hope you
haue no vse, to aske you some newes or the little man you sometimes see, and who imagineth the King bereaueth him of all such offices as he bestoweth vpon Moun∣sieur de Luynes. I make no question but he dayly tormenteth both soule and body, for that he is not alwayes at his Masters elbow, nor is so ordinarily seene at the Loouer, as the steps of the great staires, or the Swisses Hall. Threescore and ten yeares of experience haue not sufficed to settle his spirit, and he who should obserue his discourse without knowing him, in∣stead of supposing his beard to be siluer∣haired, would rather thinke hee had cast flowre on his face; yet are wee to confesse, he is one of the rarest Court-peeces, and that it is no small sport to see him in a chafe against the State, and the age wee liue in, which he maliceth more then he doth his creditors. Make quiet vse of so plea∣sing a diuersion, and remember the World could not end, nor Nature bee perfect, if there were not as well such
men as there are Apes and Monkies. The 13. of Nouember, 1623. To the same from Balzac. LETTER XII. SIR, I Beseech you reserue your counsell for those who are not as yet resolued; and goe perswade the Count Maurice to mar∣ry, and beget Captaines for another age. As for me, I loue both solitarinesse and so∣ciety, but will not be continually tyed to either. If my Father had beene of my minde, I had remayned where I was be∣fore he got me. I imagine the party you desire to bestow on me, is faire; but stay awhile, and she will not be so: She is no foole; but happily more witty then is
necessary for an honest woman to be: She is rich, but my liberty is vnprizeable. So as to make mee alter my resolution, there is no other meanes then an expresse commandment from God, with this pro∣position, either of death, or a wife. Those creatures at Paris are ordinarily so cun∣ning, and well practised, they finde no∣thing strange the first night they are mar∣ried: and here, they haue not wit enough to giue their bodies right motion; but in all places they make men alike miserable, as doe Feauers, Warre, or Pouerty. To tell you freely how the matter stands, I will not dayly disturbe my selfe in telling my Mistresses haires, for feare she should be∣stow them as fauours vpon her familiars; or to be iealous lest all the women who come to see her, were young men disgui∣sed. I cannot endure, that in my absence she and her gallant drinke to the health of their Cuckold, and that I be the subiect of all their chatt. And on the other side, it were farre worse, were shee chaste, yet a
scowld, and to be troubled with an e∣nemy to assault me day and night. J ra∣ther affect a tractable vice, then a tyran∣nicall vertue: But if there bee any other remedy, I will not be reduced to such straights, as to chuse the least of euills; since there is not any of this nature, I e∣steeme not vnsufferable. In a word Phi∣lander, my neighbours example doth not alittle terrifie me: hee hath begotten so many dumbe, blinde, and deformed creatures, he is able to furnish a reaso∣nable Hospitall. I will not be bound to loue Monsters, because they are mine, and were I assured not to be defectiue in this kind, I could well forbeare hauing children; who if they be wicked, will desire my death; if wise, expect it; if the honestest liuing, yet will they now and then reflect vpon it. But it may bee (you will say) if my resolution were generally receiued, the Sea should bee no longer charged with ships, and the Land would become desert. To this Philander J answer,
that since the World is not alwayes to endure, it were farre better to haue ver∣tue become its Catastrophe, then any thing else; since it cannot finde a more faire and honest conclusion, then a gene∣rall abstinence in this kind. BALZAC. The 7 of Aprill, 1625. To Philander from Balzac. LETTER XIII. SIR, SInce these be the particular dayes ap∣pointed for Deuotion: we being now in the season of publick Ecclesiastical mourning, and it importing euery man to apply himselfe in the affaires of his conscience; you must excuse me, if I be short in my conuersation with you in this kind, and keepe all my discourse for my Confessor. It were strange wee
should herein doe lesse then the Bells, who are now all dumbe, or trouble the commerce contracted betweene God and man, onely to tell idle Stories. Let vs therefore (I pray you) surcease all sorts of newes, and not mingle any prophane matter with this holy Weeke, which de∣sireth to be as pure as a Virgin. The high Feast wee are falling vpon, will set vs at liberty, after which, instead of three Letters you haue written vnto me, I am contented to returne you sixe answers On Goodfriday, BALZAC. To the same from Balzac. LETTER XIIII. YOur plaints are both right eloquent, and very vniust: I can at least well assure you, my thoughts are not so often here, as where you are, and if my
Letters come not so farre, it is because they can finde none to carry them. But by these presents I purpose rather to re∣ioyce with you for the recouery of your health, then to afflict my selfe vnseason∣ably. Things past are to be reckoned as nothing, and what happened yeaster∣day, is as farre from vs as the life of Char∣lemaine. Wherefore, I who haue a perfect experience of worldly affaires, would as soone comfort you for the losse you re∣ceiued by the death of your great Grand∣father, (so many yeares dead before you were borne) as for the late danger of your Feauer, since it is now gone. The best is, the Phisitians haue not so farre exhau∣sted you, but there yet remaines bloud sufficient, to bestow part thereof in your Mistresses seruice, and to fill the world with your offences; so long as the ruines of your head may be repaired, and your beauty budde againe with the next Ro∣ses, there is nothing lost hitherto; but indeede if instead of your former head,
you carryed the figure of a rusty Murrion or rotten Pumpian, I should much pit∣ty you in such a plight, and would pre∣sently adde you to the number of decay∣ed buildings. Now when all is done Philander, it is but a little water and earth mingled together, wee study to conserue with all the maximes of wise∣dome, and all the rules of Phisicke. Let vs reflect I pray you, vpon our better part, and hereafter labour as well to cure our selues of Vice, as of the Feauer. It is that image of God wee defaced by our owne hands, we ought to repaire; and our first innocency is the thing it behoueth vs to aske at his hands, rather then our former health. For my part, I am absolutely re∣solued to lead a new life, and to take no other care but for my soules health, and to procure the same for others. And true∣ly it were farre better to consecrate this great Eloquence of ours to his glory, who gaue it vs, then to imploy it in commending fooles, and in making our
selues to be praised among children. The P. E. whom happily you know, and who hath one of the best, and most polite wits of all his company, confirmes mee all he can in this my designe, and euery houre of his company is as much to mee, as eight dayes of reformation; yet is hee not a man who professeth that pale ver∣tue which affrighteth all men, and is in∣compatible with humane infirmities: but quite contrary, he flattereth mee in reprehending my errours, and instead of the pennance I deserue, he is contented to enioyne me honest recreations. Your brother will tell you more, about eight dayes hence, and will giue you an ac∣compt both of my actions and intenti∣ons; beleeue him as truth it selfe; and besides, assure your selfe further vpon my word, he is worth some Doctor and an halfe, and hath a good wit, without speaking of his zeale and vertue. BALZAC. The 17 of Ianu∣ary. 1623.
To Olympa from Balzac. LETTER XV. I Am much troubled to finde the cause of your teares; to impute them to the death of your Husband, is happily but the bare pretext. It is not to be ima∣gined that Death which causeth the most beautifull things to become offensiue to the dayes brightnesse, and affrighteth those who formerly admired them; should make that man pleasing vnto you, who was neuer so to any. Yet you seeme with him to haue lost all, and doe so cunningly counterfeit the afflicted, I can hardly beleeue what I see: Can it be possible, you should be thus pestered to support your good fortune with pati∣ence, or be really so sorrowfull for the losse of a poore gouty fellow, whose
ouer-long liuing I should rather haue thought it fit to comfort you? But if this be not thus, what doe you with all this great mourning, wherein you plunge your selfe, and this mid-night neuer remouing from your Chamber? I must confesse I was neuer more astoni∣shed, then to finde such an Equipage of sadnesse about you, accompanied with such elaborate actions, and so constray∣ned countenances; and without iesting Olympia, (after this I haue seene) there re∣maineth nothing for the full expression of a fained passion, but onely to weare blacke smockes, and to be attended by Moores. Yet is it time, or neuer to re∣turne to your right sences, and to con∣clude your Comedy, let me intreat you to leaue off all these sower faces to fooles. Cast off this blacke vaile which hinders me from seeing you, and consider that fiue foote of ground, is worth you two thousand pounds by the yeare. To raise such a rent, the reuenewes of halfe
some Kingdome were hardly sufficient; nor can you taxe mee for not speaking herein the truth, since I haue it from your owne mouth. Is it not almost in∣credible, so small a corner of earth, should yeeld so large a reuenew. I doubt not but diuers will suppose it beares Pearles or Diamonds. But I had almost forgot the most important businesse▪ J am to impart vnto you, and where upon I first intended to write. I must there∣fore say, you are to haue a speciall care, neuer to repaire the losse you haue late∣ly receiued; assuring your selfe there is no one man in the world worthy to en∣ioy you priuatiuely: you shall be answe∣rable for those excellent qualities Nature and Art haue conferred vpon you for the commanding of men, if you say you can∣not liue without submitting your selfe to one. Herein Olympa, you ought not suffer the vaine ambition to be wife to a great Signiour to transport you, or the aduantage of entring into the Loouer in
Carroch, to cause you quit the happi∣nesse you haue to be Queene of your seife▪ How much gold soeuer one bestow in fetters, and how glorious soeuer the scrui∣tude be, yet assure your selfe they are but a couple of bad matters. Of late there was not any part of your body, whereof another was not master, he would examine your very Dreames and thoughts: It was not in your power to dispose of one single haire, nay he robbed you of your very name. See here Olympa, what it is to haue a Husband, and what you torment your selfe for with such prodigall teares. Me∣thinkes it were all you could, or ought to doe were he reuiued; or if the newes of his death were doubtfull. Yours, BALZAC. The 22. of Iuly, 1622.
To Crysolita from Balzac. LETTER XVI. I Must needes disabuse you Crysolita, and informe you better in the History of that old Haxtris, you supposed to bee a very Saint. First, you are to vnderstand, shee is extracted out of her mothers sinnes, nor was euer any Virginity so britle, as that she brought into this world. It is very likely she hath lost all remembrance of any such matter: But people of those dayes, sticke not openly to affirme, that the first time she had liberty to goe abroade, (at her comming home) she mist her gloues and Maiden-head. After this, her beauty aug∣menting with riper yeares, shee drew the eyes of all Italy vpon her; and sold that fif∣ty times at Court, she had formerly lost at Schoole: But since then, she is arriued to an experience, farre surpassing that of the
Lord Chancellor, or the Popes Datary: and when I shall tell you, shee knoweth whether there be more pleasure in a cir∣cumcised Courtizan, then in a Christian; and that she hath experienced the actiuity of Jndians and Musconites, yet shall I relate but halfe the story. So it is, that now af∣ter she hath filled▪ Limbo with her parici∣diall leachery, and bin threescore yeares a Lectoresse in vice, shee would make you confident of her conuersion: Yet am I cre∣dibly informed, that not hauing now any thing worth the losing, she is turned Soli∣citresse, to entice others to vice; nor is there any chastity can escape her, if it take not sanctuary in the Carmolites. Shee can∣not endure there should be one honest wo∣man in the whole City; this angering her as much, as though the robbed her, or had declared her selfe her enemy. Yet is this the Saint you so much talke of Csolita, and the very same old Madame, from whom you promised me so many miracles. Now I, who know her very heart, write vnto
you, what hereafter you ought to belecue: for let her make what shew she will, yet I know she is as far from her conuersion, as from her youth. The Capuchins themselues could not cause her to passe her word to turne honest woman the next grand Iubi∣le; for instead of a better answer, she plain∣ly told them, she had not as yet dispatched her businesse, and could well stay till ano∣ther, which will happen about eight and twenty yeares hence. BALZAC. From Rome the 5. of February, 1622. To Clorinda from Balzac. LETTER XVII. Clorinda, FOr that I am not in your conceite suffi∣ciently punished with my Feauer, you belike thinke it fitting, I should yet be further afflicted with Loue; so as there is nothing wanting to end my good fortune,
but onely a law-suite and a quarrell. In this very place, designed for repose and ioy, I continually burne, I tell each houre, and my dreames are full of distractions. Yet af∣ter all this, you suppose you much oblige me in wishing mee euery night good rest, as though it were not in your power to giue it me. I had once a Master of your humour: he had meanes enough to pro∣cure my aduancement, yet he supposed it sufficient to wish mee well, and that J ought to rest satisfied, so long as he sayd, I deserued a good fortune. I know not whether it be your intention to vsemee in this manner: but howsoeuer I cannot take it ill, though you mocke mee, since you doe it so handsomely. Aduise me if you thinke good, to seeke for a quiet life in Ger∣many; cast mee headlong downe some Cliffe, and then say God guide me; wish me a good night out of your chamber, all this concernes not me Clorinda. If I receiue iniuries from you, I am no longer in state to take notice of them. Yet I should thinke
you might be somewhat more sensible of my sorrowes, and at least to shew your selfe pittifull towards me, though you re∣serue your affections for some other. It is no generous act to kill a sicke person, there is not any so common a Quacke-sal∣uer but can doe as much. And in conclu∣sion Clorinda, all the honour you will at∣tayne vnto herein after my death, is onely to haue had some small force more then my lingering Feauer. BALZAC. In my Bed the 20. fit of my Feauer. Another Letter to Clorinda, from BALZAC. LETTER XVIII. WEE are not seperated either by Seas or Mountaines: your lodg∣ing and mine touch, yet▪ finde I it an impossibility to see you. If you were
at Iapan, or in the Kingdome of China, I would resolue my selfe for those places, and I should finde some Barke or other bound for that voyage: thinke not I dissemble, there is not any shelue in all the Sea, nor ha∣zard to vndergoo in so dangerous a voy∣age, whereof I haue not lesse apprehension, then the meeting this little brother of yours. But it may be it is your selfe, who make these difficulties, I suppose, to arise else-where. You are glad you want no pre∣text, on purpose to vexe mee when you please. If it be so Clorinda, let mee be so much obliged vnto you, as to conceale it. I had farre rather be deceiued, then know the truth to my preiudice: Either my com∣pany is troublesome vnto you, or you re∣serue your fauours for some other friend. Howsoeuer, I am contented to beleeue your Mother is sicke, and that you cannot quit her Chamber: there are no excuses so counterfeit, I accept not for currant, so long as they releiue my spirits: Considering the power you haue ouer me, it is a small
matter to satisfie your selfe in making mee conceiue the best. Yet must I thanke you Clorinda, for violating Iustice so formerly, and faining reasons with purpose to erre punctually. By this meanes you will not suffer me so much as to soeme miserable, and you cozen me so cunningly, I can nei∣ther bemoane my selfe, nor beshrew you▪ Yet is it impossible I can for euer conceale my sensibilities: What violence soeuer I offer to my humour, it can no longer be contained. To be short Clorinda, if you loued me as you say, you would not liue with mee in the fashion you doe; but I should receiue from you reall fauours, not vaine apparances; and say what you will, wee shall meete alone once in our liues: I beseech you, let not this word affright you, for if any should finde vs in this manner, none will imagine we conspire against the King, or suspect I reade Magicke to you. Innocent actions carry their warrant with them, nor is there any necessity that two cannot bee together without making a
third. Beleeue me Clorinda, if we shut our selues for three houres into a priuate cham∣ber, the most slanderous will onely ima∣gine, I eyther let you see the errours you are in, or that you administer some medicine vnto me for my Feauer. BALZAC. The 15. of Aprill, 1620. To Clorinda from Balzac. LETTER XIX. I Know not whether I should tearme it slacknes, or patience, the small resistance I make against the displeasures you doe me; it may be, you are resolued to see how farre my fidelity will extend, and to ex∣tort the vtmost proofesthereof: yet is it bet∣ter Clorinda to endure iniustice, then to act it, and to be rather the Martyr, then the Tyrant. Shew your wit, I beseech you, by
inflicting daily new torments vpon me, and auoyde all occasions of obliging me, with as much care as I seeke those to serue you. J haue prepared my spirits against all the bad occurrents can happen that way. There is nothing I cannot endure, if it comes from you, your slighting me one∣ly excepted: But herein I must tell you, I am so tender, as I am wounded with the least touch. I would not purchase the Kings fauour, if he affoord it mee in rough tearmes; nor would I accept of his Graces, were J forced to gaine them with the forgoing the thing I affect more then his Kingdome. You vnderstand me suficiently what I meane hereby, and the iust occasion I haue to complaine; but still you will haue me in the wrong, nor doe I doubt, but you will accuse mee of your crime: But speake truely, haue you no apprehension, that he whom you haue so often iniured, shall at length grow weary of his sufferings, and lest he should lose all feare, together with his
hopes. You might consider Clorinda, that I am not possessed with slight passi∣ons, and how your selfe hath told mee ere now; that if God should arme mee with thunder when I am angry, within foure and twenty houres there would be neither Towers nor Pauillions standing in any place: Wherefore to second your conceite; know (if that were) one while the fire should fall vpon all iealous per∣sons, and by and by burne all the Mo∣thers and little Brothers in a whole Pro∣uince. And dou btlesse, if I did you no harme, yet would I put you into such a fright, you should be forced to hide your selfe vnder ground, and come to meete me in some Cane. But I gaine much by these glorious brags, or by my seeming feuerity: I assure my selfe, you mocke me and my threats. It is long since I haue shewed you the way how to catch mee, and you know the meanes how to re∣duce mee to my former duty: I must confesse I am not of sufficient force to
contest with Clorinda: her kisses haue power to expell all spleene, euen out of the spirit of an Italian Prince, for the grea∣test iniury can be offered him. Nay, they would force the Duke de Mayne to for∣sake his Armes in the hottest of his Mar∣tiall conflicts: Wherefore I pray you, let vs agree vpon a businesse, which of neces∣sity must be concluded: how disaduan∣tagious soeuer the peace be, I treate of with you, yet shall I at all times gaine that which otherwise I should lose in your absence. I haue therefore presented my complaints, with purpose to receiue satisfactions: I am angry onely to the end you may appease mee. I will tell you to morrow, that I am come to oblige you, to take the paines to receiue me. BALZAC. The 17. of Aprill 1620.
To Clorinda from Balzac. LETTER XX. I See well Clorinda, I doe but lose my la∣bour, and that it were an easier mat∣ter to turne yce into coales, then to kindle loue in you: All I can say, makes no impression in your thoughts, you will not so much as heare reason, because it resteth on my side. Well Clorinda, I must resolue my selfe for the worst of e∣uents, and stay the time till your wrin∣kles affoord mee reuenge for all the wrongs you haue done me. Thinke not this tyrannicall power of your beauty, will last to the worlds end. Time which ouerturneth Empires, and prescribeth limits to all things, will vse you as it doth the rest of faire workemanships. I pray haue patience, if I take vpon mee to tell you this bad newes; for I am not to
day in the humour to flatter any. Though it would raise choler in you, yet must I say, you will grow stale, and be then no more what you now are. I doubt not of your sighes when you reflect vpon this change, or that your very imagina∣tion is not sensible of some sorrow; yet shall this happen Clorinda, there is not an houre passeth, which impaires not some part of your face. But the time will come, when your Looking▪glasse will more scare you, then a Iudge doth a Fel∣lon: your fore▪head will flye to the crowne of your head; your cheekes will fall beneath your chinne, and your eyes of those dayes, shall turne of the same co¦lour your lips are at this houre. I could willingly wish out of my loue vnto you, my relation were not so true as it is. But since I haue quitted all complacency, there is no meanes to make mee silent. Glorinda, the Sunne is still beautifull, though ready to set; and the Autumne agreeable, though sprinkled with some
Snow, but wee enioy no happy yeares, but the first of youth: And be as carefull of your selfe as is possible, yet can you not conserue your complexion, and ac∣quire experience. Will you haue mee say more, and acquaint you with what I vnderstood by a stranger, with whom I haue conuersed all this day? You are to know there is not any part of the world so remote, whither his curiosity hath not carried him, nor rarity in Nature, hee hath not carefully obserued: Hee hath seene Mountaines which burne perpetu∣ally without diminishing▪ hee hath lan∣ded in Ilands, neuer resting in one place; he hath seene naturall Sea-men; but hee swore vnto me, how among all these mi∣racles, he neuer yet saw a beautifull old woman. The Morall hereof is, that you must make vse of your youth, and gather Nose-gayes before the Roses wither. None knowes better then your selfe, that to be faire, is to reigne without hauing neede either of Guards or Forts. You
see you are the worlds ambition, no man desiring further hapinesse then Clorinda: but thinke not to continue this absolute authority, or this generall esteeme, by other meanes then you compassed them; and assure your selfe, that when you haue no further attractions then an eloquent tongue, no man will seeke for them a∣mong the furrowes of your face. A wo∣man had neede be perfectly prouided of vertue, to repaire the ruines of her beau∣ty. All the wit and experience in the world is fruitlesse, when shee falls into this state, nor can any thing hinder her from being hated, but onely to change Sexe. Remember then Clorinda, not to expect to liue, when you are as good as dead; nor doe not spend that time in deliberating, which should be imploy∣ed in doing. You are now of yeares both to giue, and receiue contentment, and we are in the Moneth, wherein each crea∣ture turneth amorous; not excepting Ly∣ons, Tygers, or Philosophers. I intreate
you therefore, not to shew your selfe the sole insensible creature in the world: suf∣fer your selfe to be convinced by reason, since you cannot resist the same but to your owne disaduantage: You haue no subiect to be suspicious of what I say; for I aduise you to nothing Clorinda, where∣in I would not willingly ioyne with you in the accomplishment. BALZAC. The 3. of May, 1620. Another Letter to Clorinda from Balzac. LETTER XXI. CLorinda, your Religion must needes be amisse, otherwise I should see you now and then at Church: But J thinke it were an easier matter to conuert a whole Nation, then to dispose you to giue me content. The cause why you persist in your owne opinion, is, because
it is opposite to mine. Well then, I must depart without speaking with you, and am barred from affoording to my affection, what good manners would haue exacted ofme, though I had not loued you: True∣ly I know not in what manner to suffer so wounding a displeasure, nor am I so well acquainted with my selfe, as to passe my word for him I speake of in this occasion▪ All I can say vnto you Clorinda, is, that the onely way to rid me out of my paine, is to performe the thing I haue so often pro∣posed vnto you, and to make your selfe capable of a strong resolution. Neuer did any Prince enterprise a more glorious voyage, then mine shall bee, if you will make one: and truely, I see not why you should make any difficulty herein, the longer youriourney is, the further shall you be remooued from tyranny▪ It is a Monster you ought to flye from, euen to the worlds end, and with whom to be in peace, is dangerous: Will you feare to come into the Countrey of Comedies,
Painting, and Musicke; or into a place where women are by many as highly estee∣med as Saints? with out flattering you, I must affirme, you shall seeme ouer-much to neglect your owne quiet, if you let slip so fauourable an occasion to procure it. It is time Clorinda, you make it appeare what you are, and that we begin the Hi∣story of our aduentures. If you loue, all things will be easie for you; there is no more difficulty to passe the Alpes, then to goe vp into your Chamber: Nor doubt you that the Sea-waters will become sweet, if you be not satisfied in that they bee smooth. But I am much affraide I shall not receiue from you the satisfaction I expect. You will tell me (as you vse) wee must let Nature worke, and that she will soone reuenge vs of our enemies▪ I suppose Clorinda, all this may happen, but it is no reason we should be obliged to the Tyrants death for our liberty, but to our owne resolutions. BALZAC. The 30. of Iuly, 1620.
To Lydia from Mounsieur Balzac. LETTER XXII. I Am almost madde to vnderstand thou wert seene laugh to day. Is this true loue Lydia to be merry in my absence? and to be the same woman thou art, when I am with thee? Yet should I haue bin satisfied, hadst thou beene contented only to haue made thy selfe merry with thy looking∣glasse, so the man in yron had not been in my place. I neuer saw him but once, and surely he is eyther a Sot, or else all the rules of Phyhognomy are false: yet because he cals himselfe Captaine, thou permits him to persecute thee with his Complements, and art at the point to yeild. If he touch thee Lydia, all the water in the Sea is little e∣nough to purifie thee; and if thou allow∣est him the rest, haue a care, least in his sleep, he take thee for an Enemy, and instead of his imbraces, strangle thee.
To the Baron of Amblouile from BALZAC. LETTER XXIII, My LORD. I Attend you here in the season of Jasmins and Roses, and do send you a taste of the pleasures of Rome, for feare you be poiso∣ned therewith, vppon your first approach. We are here in the Country of curiosities, and to be happy in this place, it sufficeth not to be blind. The Sunne hath yet heat enough to ripen vs Reasins, and to afford vs Flowers: all the Winter fals vppon the neighbouring Mountaines, to the end we may not want Snow in August. But if you desire I should diuert my Discourse vnto more serious matters, & conceale nothing from you: I must tell you, there is no place vnder Heauen, where Vertue is so neare a Neighbour to Vice, or where Good is so mingled with Euill: We here behold miracles on the on side, and mon∣sters on the other; and at the same time
when some Discipline themselues, others run to debauches of all kinds. Besides, there is as profound a peace here, as in that part of the Ayre eleuated aboue the Windes and Stormes. Idlenesse in this place, is an honest mans ordinary Vocation; and to saue halfe the World, no man will rise ha∣stily from Table, for feare of troubling digestion. If you chance to see any with skars in their faces, do not thereupon im∣agine they haue purchased them eyther in Warres, or in defence of their honour, for these are only their Mistresses fauours; but in recompence of such refractory humors, you shall see that here, the sanctity whereof doth illustrate the whole Church. It is their feruent prayers which impetrate all aduantages ouer Enemies: It is their fastings which cause fruitefulnesse to flow vppon the Earth: It is their innocency which con∣serueth the culpable from Eternall ruine. In a word, there are here such excellent exam∣ples of Vertue, and so intising allurements to Vice, that I will not maruaile if you turn
honest man here, and I will likewise wil∣lingly pardon you, if you do not so. Truly, as new Spaine is the Prouince of gold; and as Affricke affords Lyons, and France soul∣diers; so is Italy the mother of those things you best loue. When you shall see these Female Creatures in their owne Country, and compare their beauty with the bad fa∣shion of the masculine Italians, I doubt not, but it will seeme to you, aswel as to my selfe, these diuine Women to haue beene created by themselues, or to be Queenes who haue married their Groomes. The most part of those beyond the Mounts, haue no more beauty then needs must, to excuse them from being esteemed vgly; and if there be some one whose face you could fancy, this shall happily be some de∣solate Palace, or some well fauoured beast. But here (for the most part) they are borne Eloquent; and I will tell you before hand, that in one and the same person, you shal find both your Master and Mistresse. For my part, I ingeniously confesse, I do no
longer liue vnder Clorinda's regency, and all that is permitted mee in this place, is onely sometimes to honour her memory. I expect you should at this passage accuse me of leuity and disloyalty, and that you could willingly reuile mee. But doe you not thinke my sighes must needes be surbated, in going euery day foure hundred leagues? Besides, being so farre from her as I am, what know I, whether I loue a dead body, or an Infidell. I haue not receiued any fa∣uours from her, which are not rather markes of her vertues, then demonstra∣tions of her loue. And had she lost all her liberality in that kinde, shee could hardly misse it. I am therefore onely obliged to my word, not to her affection. And as for that, I should ouer-esteeme her, if I made more reckoning thereof, then some Prin∣ces doe of theirs, and I should shew my selfe ouer superstitious, if I valued what I onely whispered in her care, to be of greater efficacy then Letters Pattents and Edicts. It is a point decided in Onids Theology,
that an hundred false Oathes from an a∣morous person, amount not to halfe a deadly sinne, and that it is onely the God of Poets whom wee offend by our periury in that point. Now I will bee iudged by her selfe, whether J hauing bestowed my seruice vpon her, she should take it ill if another did reward me; or that I loue rather to bee happy, then o∣therwise; or desire rather to possesse Lu∣cretia, then to desire Clorinda. Will she haue her tyranny extend euen to the Churches patrimony, and that the Pope share his temporall authority with her? J doe not beleeue she hath any such preten∣tions. For my part, I would shee knew I can no longer behold any beauty but na∣ked, nor receiue any but warme & moist kisses. I will tell you the rest vpon the bankes of Tyber, and in these precious ruines whither I goe to muse once a day, and to treade in their steps who haue led Kings in triumph. If there were any meanes there to finde a little of Sylla's
good fortune, or of Pompeis greatnesse, in∣stead of the Medals we now & then meet with, I should haue a farther subiect to inuite you hither. Notwithstanding, if you be yet your selfe, and that by so∣lemne vow you haue forsaken the world, and the vanities thereof, assure your selfe, that it is in this Countrey where felicity doth attend you: and that being once in this place, you will e∣steeme all those as banished persons, whom you haue left behinde you in France. BALZAC. The 25. of Decem∣ber, 1621. To the Count of Schomberg from BALZAC. LETTER XXIIII. My Lord, I Send you the papers you haue formerly seene, and whereto you haue attributed
so much, as I should bee ashamed to as∣sent thereto, were it not that I hold it lesse presumption to beleeue I haue me∣rited the same, then to imagine I can haue a flatterer of your fashion. I had neede be eleuated to a more soueraigne fortune then the state of Kings, to ex∣pect complacency from a man, who could neuer be procured to approue euill: and of whose disfauour one can hardly finde other cause, then the onely truth he hath declared. Howsoeuer it be, since you are now in Lymosin, and take not any iour∣ney in those parts, without hauing a thousand old debates to reconcile, and as many new ones to preuent, it is very probable, that after so painefull an im∣ployment, and so great disquiet of mind, my booke will fall into your hands, iust at such time as you cannot find any thing more tedious vnto you, then what you come from treating of: For should I pre∣sume that in your pleasant walkes of Du∣retal, where all your minutes are pleasing,
and all your houres precious, there could be any time spare for me, and my works; it were as much as to be ignorant of the di∣uersions there attending you; or not to be acquainted with the great affluence of no∣ble company, dayly repairing thither, to visite you. But were it so, that you had none with you, saue onely the memory of your fore-passed actions, your solitari∣nesse hath no neede of bookes to make it more pleasing; nay, if all this were not, yet if you desire to seeke contentment out of your selfe, you cannot finde any more pleasing, then in the presence of your Chil∣dren, and particularly of that diuine Daughter of yours, from whom I dayly learne some miracle. It is therefore in her absence, and in solitary walkes, where I haue the ambition to finde entertainement, and to receiue gracious acceptance. In all o∣ther places (without presuming either to passe for Oratour or Poet:) it shall high∣ly suffice me in being honoured with the assurance that I am My Lord, Your most humble Seruant, BALZAC. The 25, of May, 1624.
A Letter from the Count of Schom¦berg, to Mounsieur de Balzac. LETTER XXV. SIR, THe stile you trauaile in, causeth the Pennes of all such who attempt an answere, to fall out of their hands, and Eloquence may so properly be called yours, that it is no maruell though o∣thers haue but a small share therein. I would therefore haue you know, that if I vnderstand any thing in Letters, yours doe obscure whatsoeuer hath hi∣therto bin esteemed of in our Language: and that (without flattering you) there can be no diuersion so pleasing, which ought not to giue place to the perusing of those Lines you sent mee. This occu∣pation is worthy the Cabinets of Kings, and of the richest Eare curtins of France; and not (as you would haue it) of my
solitary retirements in Lymosin, from whence I am ready to be gone, with reso∣lution neuer to retire from the affection I haue promised you, whence you shall at all times draw effectuall proofes, when∣soeuer you please to imploy them for your seruice. Sir, Your most affectionate seruant, SCHOMBERG. The 1. of Iune, 1624.
THE LETTERS OF MOVNSIEVR DE BALZAC. To my Lord Mashall of Schomberg. THE FOVRTH BOOKE. LETTER I. My LORD: I Should be insensible of Pub∣lique good, and an enemy to France, had I not (as I ought) a true taste of the good newes your Foot-man brought me. I will not
mention the obligations I owe you, being no small ones, if that be not a slight mat∣ter to be esteemed by you: But since I make profession to honour vertue euen in the person of one departed, or an enemy; and at all times to side with the right, were there onely my selfe and Iustice for it, you may please to beleeue, I complaine in your behalfe for the miseries of our times, and that I am most ioyfull to see you at this pre∣sent, where all the world mist you: Cer∣tainely your retirement from Court, hath beene one of the fairest peeces of your life, during which, you haue made it apparent you are the same in both fortunes: since I can witnesse, that no one word then passed from you vnsutable to your resolution. Yet this rare vertue being there hidden, in one of the remote corners of the world, hauing but a very small circuite to dilate it selfe, must necessarily be contented with the sa∣tisfaction of your conscience and slender testimonies: In the meane time the autho∣rity of your enemies hath beene obnoxious
to all honest eyes. There was no meanes to conceale from strangers the States infir∣mities, or what reason to affoord them for the disgrace of so irreproachable a Mini∣ster; nor was there any who grieued not, that by your absence the King lost so many houres & seruices. For my part, (my Lord) reflecting vpon you in that estate, it see∣med to me I saw Phidias, or some other of those ancient Artists, their hands bound, and their costly materials, as Marble, Gold, or luory, taken from them. But now that better time succeede, each thing being a∣gaine reduced to its place, it is time to re∣ioyce with all good French-men, that you shall no more want matter, and that the King hath at length found how vnusefull your absence hath beene to his affaires: Truely, be it that he content himselfeto go∣uerne his people wisely, or that the af∣flictions of his poore neighbours set neare his heart, and that his Iustice extend fur∣ther then his Iurisdiction: No man doubts whatsoeuer he doth, but you shall be one
of the principall instruments of his de∣signes, and that as well ▪Peace, as Warre haue equall vse of your Conduct. All men haue wel perceiued, you haue not con∣tributed any thing to the administration of the Kings treasure, saue onely your pure spirit, to wit, that part of the soule separa∣ted from the terrestriall part, being free from passions, which reasoneth without either louing or desiring; and that you haue ma∣naged the Riches of the State with as great fidelity, as one ought to gouerne another mans goods, with as much care as you conserue your owne, and with as great scruple as wee ought to touch sacred things. But in truth it is no great glory for that man to haue beene faithfull to his Master, who knowes not how to deceiue any: And did I beleeue you were onely able to ab∣staine from ill, I would barely commend in you the Commencements of Vertue. I therefore passe further▪ and am assured, that neither the feare of death, which you haue slighted in all shapes, and vnder the most
dreadfull aspects it could possibly appeare, nor complacency which often ouer passeth the best Counsels, to transport it selfe to the most pleasing ones; nor any priuate in∣terest which makes vs rather regard our selues, then the Publique; shall at all hinder you either from purposing, vndertaking, or executing eminent matters, Posterity which will peraduenture iudge of our age vpon the report I shall make, will see more elsewhere then I can here relate, and I shall rest sufficiently satisfied, if you please to doe mee the honour, as to remember that mine affection is no Child of your prospe∣rity, and how in two contrary seasons I haue beene equally My Lord, Your most humble and most faithfull seruant, BALZAC.
To the Bishop of Angoulesme. LETTER II. SIR, I Will no longer complaine of my po∣uerty, since you haue sent me treasures of Roses, Ambergreece, and Suger; it being of such pleasing commodities, I pretend to bee rich, leauing necessary wealth to the Vulgar. Two Elements haue ioyntly contributed the best they haue, to furnish matter for your Liberality; and smally valuing either Cold, or Pearles as I doe, I could wish for nothing either from Sea, or Land, I finde not among your pre∣sents. You haue bestowed with a full hand what is offered vpon Altars, but sparingly, which men reckon by graines, and whereof none (the King of Tunnis ex∣cepted) is so prodigall as your selfe. In a Word, this profusion of forraine odours you haue cast into your Comfitures, obli∣geth me to speake as I doe, and to tell you
if you feed all your flockeat this rate, there will not be any one in all your Diocesse, who will not cost you more by the day, then the Elephant doth his Master. I see therefore Sir, I am the dearest Childe you haue vnder your Conduct, nor should J receiue so delicate and precious nourish∣ment from you, did not your affection force you to beleeue, my life to be more worth then ordinary, and consequently, that it deserueth morecarefully to be pre∣serued then any other. But to returne you Complements for such excellent things, were as much as to vnder-value their worth, should J striue to acquit my selfe that way; our Language is too poore and vnable to lend mee wherewith to pay you: And since in Homers iudgement the words of the most Eloquent among the Grecians, were esteemed little better then Honey, (the foode of Shepheards) there is small probability mine should be compa∣rable to Amber-greece and Suger, the delica∣cies of Princes. I therefore feare J shall
beforced to be all my life time indebted vnto you, for the fauours I haue receiued from you, and that it must bee onely in my heart, where I can bee as liberall as your selfe. But I well know, you are so generous, as to content your selfe with this secret acknowledgement, and that in me you affect my naked good-meaning, which must supply the place of those other more fine, and subtile vertues I cannot learne at Court. Truely, as I expect no commendations, being the second per∣fumes you present mee, in that I hold myselfe vnworthy thereof: so doe I sup∣pose you cannot refuse mee your affection, since it is a kind of deseruing it, to be pas∣sionately as I am Sir, Your most humble and most faithfull seruant, BALZAC. The 25. of Decem∣ber, 1626.
To Father Garrasso. LETTER III. Father, YOu haue found the place whereat I confesse I am the most easily surprised, and to oblige mee to yeelde, your Courtesie hath left nothing for your cou∣rage to performe: since therefore you im∣ploy all your Muses to require my Friend∣ship, and haue already payed of your owne; I can no longer keepe it to myselfe, but as another mans goods. But if this were not so, my resentments are not of such value with mee, as not often to bestow them vpon more slender considerations then those were which produced them; nor doe my passions so transport me, but that I will at all times remaine in the po∣wer of Religion and Philosophy. Hitherto I can defend a iust cause, but in farther re∣sisting what you desire, I should force right it selfe to be in the wrong, were it on
my side: And out of bare enmity which in some Common-wealthes hath beene tollerated, I should euen passe to Tyran∣ny, a thing odious to all men. Since our liues are momentary, it is no reason our passions should be immortall, or that men should glut themselues with re∣uenge, whereof God hath as well for∣bidden the vse, as the excesse. It is a thing he hath soly reserued to himselfe; and since none but hee, truely knoweth how to vse this part of Iustice, he would no more put it into the hands of men, then hee doth Thunder and Tempests. Let vs therefore stop in our first motions, for it is already too much to haue begun. Let vs not tearme the hardnesse of our hearts, Courage: and if you haue preuen∣ted me in the ouerture of the peace wee treate of, repent not your selfe, since you haue thereby bereaued me of all the honour there had beene in acquiring it. Heretofore Magnanimity and Humility might haue beene esteemed two contrary
things, but since the maximes of Mora∣lity haue bin changed by the principles of Diuinity, and that Pagan vices are become Christian vertues, there are euen weake actions a man of courage ought to prac∣tise; nor is true glory any longer due to those who haue triūphed ouer innocents, but to those Martyrs they haue made, and to such persons whom they haue oppres∣sed. But to passe from generall considera∣tions, to what is particular betweene you and me, it is no way likely, a religious man would disturbe the tranquility of his thoughts, or quit his conuersation with God and Angels, to intermeddle with wicked Mortals, and to make him∣selfe a party in our disorders. I should likewise haue lesse reason to seeke for an enemy out of the World, wherein there are so many aduersaries to dislike, and so many Rebels to subdue. Now (Father) whatsoeuer opinion you haue had, and notwithstanding any thing I haue said in the beginning of this Letter. I neuer
intended to commence any reall Warre against you: I haue not at all felt the e∣motion I shewed; all my choller being but artificiall, when at any time certaine of my speeches seemed disaduantagious vnto you; so as I freely consent, that what was written to Hydaspe, shall passe as a flash of my braine, and not as any testi∣mony of my beleefe, onely to let men know, I had a desire to shew how able J was to contest with truth, if I had no minde to side with it. This science ha∣uing beene sufficiently daring to vnder∣take to perswade, that a Quartan Ague was better then Health: Rhetoricke I say, which hath inuented praises for Busiris, made Apologies for Nero, and obliged all the people of Rome to doubt whether Iustice were a good, or bad thing, may yet in these dayes exercise it selfe vpon subiects wholy separated from common opinions, and by gracefull fictions, rather excite admiration in mens spirits, then exact any credence. It rayseth Fantomes
with purpose to deface them. It hath paintings and disguisements, to alter the purity of all worldly things: It chan∣geth sides without leuity, it accuseth innocency without calumny: And to say truth, Painters and Stage▪players are no way culpable of those murthers wee see represented in Pictures, or presented vpon Theaters; since therein the most cruel is the most iust. None can iustly ac∣cuse those of falsity, who make certaine glasses which shew one thing for ano∣ther: Errour in some cases being more gracefull then truth. In a word, the life euen of the greatest Sages, is not altoge∣ther serious, all their sayings are not Sermons, nor is all they write, eyther their last Testament, or the confession of their Faith. What can I say more? Can you imagine me to be so curious, as to condemne the gust of all that great mul∣titude, who flocke to heare you euery morning? Are you perswaded that I and the people can neuer be of one minde?
That I will oppose my selfe to the beleefe of honest men? to the approbation of Doctors? and to their authority who are eminent aboue others? No Father; I al∣low no such liberty to my spirit: assure your selfe, I esteeme you as I ought. I commend your zeale and learning, yea, were it truer then euer it was, that to compose tedious Volumnes, is no lesse then to commit great sinnes: Yet if you oblige me to iudge of yours by that you sent vnto me, I say it is very excellent in its kind, and that I will no way hinder you from obtayning a Ranke among the Fathers of these moderne ages. But my testimony will not (I hope) become the onely fruite of your labours; I wish with all my heart the conuersion of Turkes and Infidels may crowne your indeauours. I am perswaded, all the honour this world can affoord, ought to be esteemed as no∣thing by those who only seeke for the ad∣uancement of Gods glory. I will there∣fore no farther dilate my selfe vpon this
Subiect, nor wrong holy things by profaine praises; my intention is onely to let you know, J assume not so poore a part in the Churches interest, as not to bee extraordinarily well pleased with those who are seruiceable thereto, and that I am right glad besides the propensi∣on I haue to esteeme your amity, so po∣werfull a perswasion as Religion is, doth yet further oblige me. Yours, BALZAC. To the Cardinall of Vallete. LETTER IIII. My LORD: THe Letter you pleased to send mee from Rome, caused me to forget I was sicke, and I presumed to solace my selfe after three yeares of sadnesse, euer since newes was brought mee of Lucidors death, and the successe of that fatall com∣bate, wherein you could not but bee a
loser, on which side soeuer the aduantage happened. My Lord, I doubt not but your spirit though altogether stoute and couragious, to support your proper misfortunes, is yet mollified by the rela∣tion of their miseries who loue you, and where there is question rather of shewing your good nature, or your constancy, you will quit one vertue to acquire another. I know well, that in the number of your goods, you reckon your friends in the first ranke, allowing onely the second place to your dignities, and to fifty thou∣sand Crownes rent which accompanies them; and consequently I assure my selfe, you beleeue you are, as it were, growne poore by the losse of a man who had re∣lation vnto you. But I am likewise most certaine, how after the passing certaine vnpleasant dayes out of the loue you bare him; and hauing affoorded him suffici∣ent testimonies of your true affection, he now expecting no further acknowledge∣ment or seruice, you will at length call
to minde, that it is the Publique to whom you owe your cares and passions, and that you are not permitted farther to afflict a spirit which is no longer yours. Since the misery of this age is so generall, as it leaueth no one house without teares, nor any one part of Europe without trou∣ble; and since Fortune is not of power to conserue euen her owne workemanships, who are many of them fallen to ground: it must needes so happen (my Lord) that being of the world, you are to taste of the fruites it produceth, and that you purchase at some hard rate, the good suc∣cesses dayly attending you. But truely, the place where you are, and the great designes taking you vp, may well furnish you with so strong and solide consolati∣ons, as they neede leaue no worke for o∣thers; and my Eloquence would come too late, should I imploy it after your reason, which hath formerly perswaded you, there being now neither precept nor Counsell in all humane wisedome
vnproposed to your view; and since nei∣ther Seneca, nor Epictetus can say any thing saue onely your thoughts▪ I had much ra∣ther send you diuertisements no way di∣stastefull, then to present you any reme∣dies which doubtlesse will proue importu∣nate. These writings (my Lord) here in∣closed, shall not enter as strangers into your Cabinet, they will not talke vnto you of the fiue Pradicables of Perphirie, nor of Iustinians Neuelles, or the numbers of Al∣gebra▪ But you may there recreate and re∣pose your spirits at your returne from Au∣diences, Congregations, and the Con∣sistory. I could well haue bestowed vp∣pon them a more eminent title, then what they haue. I could out of these com∣posures haue framed Apologies, Accusati∣ons, and politique discourses; yea, had I pleased neuer so little to haue extended some of my Letters, they might haue beene called bookes. But besides, my designe, aiming rather to please, then importune, and that I tend to the highth of concepti∣ons
and not at the abundance of words: When I treate with you, (my Lord) I sup∣pose my selfe to be before a full assembly; and doe propose to my selfe neuer to write any thing vnto you, which Posterity ought not to read. Now if sometimes from your person I passe to others, or if I commend those whom I conceiue are deseruing, I as∣sure my selfe, I therein performing an act of Iustice, and not ofsubiection: you will be no way displeased with what I doe, and well hope, I may conserue your fauours without violating humane Lawes, or sepa∣rating my selfe from ciuill society. Your most humble seruant, BALZAC. The 15. of Iuly, 1629. To the Cardinall of Vallete: LETTER V. My Lord, THough innocency be the Felicity of the afflicted, and that I finde in my selfe
the satisfaction, he can expect who hath not offended, yet can I not so easily com∣fort my selfe: And the remedien my Phylo∣sophy affoord me, are for meaner misfor∣tunes then the losse of your fauours. All I can contribute to my consolation out of the assurance I haue of mine innocency, is the liberty I haue taken to tell you so, and to complaine of the iniustice you haue done me, if you haue so much as suffered any to accuse me I neede not seeke colours to pal∣liate my actions or words: it is sufficient∣ly knowne, their principall obiects haue e∣uer bin the glory of your name, and the de∣sire to please you: I befeech you likewise to call to remembrance, that hard times haue not hindred me from imbarking my selfe where my inclination called me; and that I haue serued my Lord your Father, when most of his followers were in danger to become his Martyrs. It should seeme per∣chance▪ I stand in neede of the memory of what is past, and that I make my precedent good offices appeare, to the end to cause
them to ouer way my present offences. No (my Lord) I intend not to make vse of what now is not, for the iustification of mine actions, nor am I ignorant that neuer any woman was so vicious, who hath not heretofore bin a Virgin, nor criminal, who cannot prescribe some time preceding his bad life. I speake of to day, as well as of here∣tofore, and doe protest vnto you, with all the Oathes able to make truth appeare holy, and inuiolable; that I neuer had one single temptation against my duty, and that my fidelity is spottlesse, as (if you so plea∣sed) it might be without suspicion: I must confesse that you hauing declared your selfe no way desirous to trench vpon my liberty, and that you left it wholy to my selfe, I haue sometimes made vse thereof, imagining that without wronging that first resolution, I vowed to your seruice, it might be lawfull for me to haue second af∣fections. I will not expect the racke to force me to confesse it; I haue loued a man whom the misfortunes of Court, and the
diuers accidents happening in worldly af∣faires, haue separated from some friends of yours, and haue cast him into other in∣terests then theirs. But besides, that he was extracted from a Father, who did not more desire his owne good, then your contentment; and since I am most assured how amidst all the fore-passed broiles, he at all times conserued his inclinations for you. I must needs tell you, I was in such sort obliged vnto him, as had he de∣clared Warre against my King, and against my Country, J could not haue chosen any side which had not bin vniust: J therefore at this day bewaile him with warme teares, and if euer I take comfort in the losse I haue sustained, I shall esteeme my selfe the most vnworthy, and in gratefull person li∣uing. Your selfe (my Lord) knowing (as you do) how much I owe vnto his amity, would sooner adiudge me to die with him, then blame my resentments. I assure my selfe all my actions are disguised vnto you, on purpose to cause you to dislike them▪
Howsoeuer I will not dispaire, but the time to come wil right me for what is past. You will on day see the wrong you ofter to my innocency, in admitting false witnesses in prciudicethereof, and what you now tearme my fault, you will then be pleased to say; it was my vnhappy fate, or my hard fortune: in the interim, I am resolued to continue in well doing, and though there were no other but my conscience to acknowledge my fidelity yet inuiolably to remaine Your most humble and most faithfull seruant. BALZAC. The 30. of Decem∣ber, 1626. To the Lord Bishop of Nantes. LETTER VI. SIR, AS the bearer hereof can testifie the ob∣ligations I owe you, so may he beare witnesse of my perpetuall resent∣ments,
and will tell you, that were I borne your sonne, or subiect, you could haue but the same power ouer mee, you now possesse: nay, I am perswaded, I yet owe somewhat more to your vertue, then to the right of Nations, or Nature. If power hath made Princes, and chance Parents, reason well deserues a further kinde of Obedience: It was that which ouercome me vpon the first conference I had with you, causing me to prostrate all my presumption at your feete, after ha∣uing rightly represented to my thoughts, how impossible it is to esteeme my selfe, and know you: I am sure this Language is no way pleasing to you; and that you will looke awry at my Letter; but doe what you please, I am more a friend to truth, then to your humour, and my spi∣rits are so replenished with what I haue seene, and heard, as I can no longer con∣ceale my thoughts: I must tell you (Sir) you are the greatest Tyrant this day li∣uing; your authority becomes awfull to
all soules, and when you speake, there is no further meanes to retaine priuate o∣pinions, if they be not conformable to yours. I speake this seriously, and with my best sence; you haue often reduced me to such extreamities, that comming from you, without knowing what to answer you, I haue beene ready to ex∣claime and say, (in the rapture wherein I was) Restore me my opinion which you haue violently forced from me, and take not from mee the liberty of Conscience the King hath giuen mee. But truely, it is no small pleasure to be constrained to be happy, and to fall into his hands, who vseth no violence; but to their a∣uaile who suffer. For my part, I haue at all times departed your presence, fully perswaded in what I ought to beleeue: I neuer gaue you a visite which cured me not of some passion: I neuer came into your Chamber so honest a man, as I went foorch: How often with one short speech haue you eleuated me aboue my selfe, and
bereaued me of whatsoeuer was fleshly▪ and prophane in me: How often hearing you discourse of the World to come, and of true felicity, haue I longed after it, and would willingly haue purchased it at the price of my life? How often could I haue followed you, (would you haue conducted me) to a higher pitch of perfection, then all ancient Philosophers euer attained? So it is, that you onely haue bestowed the loue of inuisible things vpon me, causing me to distaste my first and most violent affections: I should still haue beene buried in flesh, had not you drawne me forth, nor had my spirit beene other then a part of my body, had not you taken the paines to vnloose it from sen∣suall obiects, and to seuer the eternall from the perishable part. You caused mee at the first encounter to become suspicious to the wicked, and to fauour the better side, be∣fore I was of it; you haue made those reme∣dies pleasing, which all others affrighted me with, and in the midst of vice, you haue constrained me to confesse Vertue to be the most beautifull thing on Earth. Thinke
not therefore, that either the pompe of the Roman Court, or the glitter of that of France, can dazell those eyes of my soule, where to you haue shewed so many excel∣lent things. It is the beames and lightning of those eminent Vertues you haue discouered vnto me, which cast so forceable reflections vpon the eyes of my soule, and which cause mee, (though I formerly resolued to slight all things,) yet at least now to admire something. But yet (Sir) assure your selfe, it is not the world I admire, for I rather re∣flect vpon it, as on that which hath deceiued me these eight and twenty yeares I haue bin in it, and wherein I fearce euer saw any thing, but how to doe euill, and counterfeit to be good▪ In all places on Earth, whether my curiosity hath transported me, beyond Seas, or on the other side the Alpes, in free States, or in Kingdomes of Conquest, I haue ob∣serued among men onely a fare of flatteries, fooles and Cheaters; of Oldmen corrupted by their Ancestors, and who corrupt their Children: Of slaues who cannot liue out of Seruitude: of pouerty among vertuous
persons, and Ambitious Couetousnesse in the soules of great persons. But now that you haue broken the barres, through which I could onely receiue some light impressi∣on of truth, I distinctly see this generall corruption, and doe humbly acknowledge the iniury I offered to my Creator, when I made Gods of his Creatures; and what glory I fought to bereaue him of, &c. BALZAC. The 12. of Ianu∣ary, 1626. To Mounsieur de la Marque. LETTER VII. I Know not what right vse to make of your praises; if I receiue them, I lose all my humility, and in reiecting them, I giue that as granted which I am taxed for. Vpon the edge of these two extreamities, it is more laudable to suffer my selfe to fall on my friends side, and to ioyne in opini∣on with honest men, then to leane to that
of Lysander, since all men agree, that his censure is euer opposite to the right; and that he is the wisest man in France, who resembles him the least. There would be some errour in the reputation I aime at, were I not condemned by him. Thinke it not therefore strange, that iniuries are blowne vpon mee by the same mouth which vttereth blasphemies against the memory of ρρρ, and remember this old Maxime, that fooles are more vniust then some sinners: The best is, that for one Ene∣nemy my Reputation raiseth against mee, it procures me a thousand protectors; so as without stirring hence, I get victories at Paris; nor finde I any Harmony so plea∣sing, as what is composed of one particular murmure, mingled with generall acclama∣tions. There are sufficient in your Letter to cause me to retract the Maximes of my ancient Philosophy: At the least they ob∣lige me to confesse, that all my felicity is not within my selfe, things without mee entring towards the composition of per∣fect happinesse. I must freely confesse
vnto you mine infirmity: I should grow dumbe, were I neuer so short a time to liue among deafe persons, and were there no glory, I should haue no Eloquence. But it is time I returne to the taske I haue vn∣dertaken; and that instead of so many ex∣cellent words you haue addressed vnto me, I onely answere you, that I am Your most humble seruant, BALZAC. To Mounsieur Tissandier: LETTER VIII. AT my returne from Poiton, I found your packet attending me at my house; but thinking to peruse your Letters, I perceiued I read my Panegyricke; I dare not tell you, with what transport & excesse of ioy I was surprised thereupon, fearing to make it appeare, I were more vaine then v∣sually women are, and affect praises with the like intemperance as I doe persumes. Without dissembling, those you sent mee,
were so exquisite, as be it you deceiue me, or I you, there neuer issued fairer effects, either from iniustice, or errour. I beseech you to continue your fault, or to perse∣uere in your dissimulation: For my part, J am resolute to make you full payment of what J owe you, and to yeeld so publicke a testimony of the esteeme I hold of you, as my reputation hereafter shall be onely seruiceable to yours, oblige me so farre, as to accept this Letter, for assurance of what I will performe; and if you finde mee not so seruiceable as I ought to be, blame those troublesome persons who are alwayes at my throate, forcing me to tell you sooner then I resolued, that I am Your most humble and faith∣full seruant, BALZAC The 5▪ of August, 1625.
To Mounsieur de Faret. LETTER IX. THere is not any acknowledgement an∣swerable to my obligations vnto you: If I owe you any honour, I am farther indebted vnto you then my life comes to. Truely, to be sensible of another mans suf∣ferings sooner then himselfe, or to assume a greater share in his interests, then hee doth? I must confesse, is as much as not to loue in fashion, or not to liue in this Age. It is likewise a long time since I haue bin acquainted, that the corruption enuiro∣ning you, doth not at all infect you; and how among the wicked, you haue conser∣ued an integrity suiting the Reigne of Lewes the twelfth: Nay, happily we must search further, and passe beyond the Au∣thenticke History. It is onely vnder the Poets Charlemaine, where a man of your hu∣mour is to be found, and that the combat of Roger hath beene the victory of Leon.
Without more particularly explaining my selfe, you vnderstand what I would say; and I had much rather be indebted to your support, then to the merit of my cause, or to the fauourable censure I haue receiued from the Publicke. Certainly, truth it selfe cannot subsist, or finde defence without assistance; yea euen that concerning Reli∣gion; and which more particularly apper∣taineth to God then the other, seaseth not on our soules, but by the entermise of words; and hath neede to be perswaded to haue it beleeued. You may hereby iudge whether the good offices you affoorded me, were not vsefull vnto me, or whether or no my iust cause happened successeful∣ly into your hands. But I must deferre the thankes due vnto you vpon this occasion, till our meeting at Paris, to the end, to animate them by my personall expression. Be confident in the interim; though pitty it selfe would stay me in my Cell, yet you are of power to cause mee to infringe my heremeticall vow: besides, you haue set such a luster vpon that great City, and
haue punctuated vnto me so many remarke∣able things, and nouelties thereof, in the Letter you pleased to send me, as I should shew my selfe insensible of rarities, and not possessed with an honest curiosity, had I not a desire to returne thither. I therefore onely attend some small portion of health to strengthen me, to part hence; and to goe to enioy with you our mutuall delights, I meane the conuersation of Mounsieur de Vau∣gelas, who is able to make mee finde the Court in a Cottage, and Paris in the Plaines of Bordeaux: Adieu Mounsienr, loue mee al∣wayes, since I am with all my soule, Your most humble and affectionate seruant, BALZAC. The 12. of Decem∣ber, 1625. To Mounsieur Coeffeteau, Bishop of Marseilles. LETTER X. IT is now fifteene dayes since I receiued any newes from you, yet will I beleeue the
change of ayre hath cured you; and if you (as yet) walke with a staffe, it is rather I hope for some marke of your authority, then for any support of your infirmity: If this be so, I coniure you to make good vse of this happy season yet remaining, and not to lose these faire dayes, hastning away, and which the next Clouds will carry from vs. I giue you this aduice, as finding it good; and be∣cause there is not any thing doth more for∣tifie feeble persons then the Sunne of this Moneth, whose heate is as innocent as its light. Adamantus hath had his share of the vnwholesome influence raigning in these parts. The Feauer hath not borne him the respect due to a person of his quality, ha∣uing so rudely intreated him, as he is scarce to be knowne: Yet hath he some kind of ob∣ligation to his sicknesse, in hauing acquain∣ted him with such pleasures, as were not made for those who are ouer fortunate, and which formerly he knew not. At this pre∣sent he can neuer be weary in praising the benefits of Liberty, nor in admiring the beauty of Day, and the diuersities of
Nature: so as to heare him speake, you would suppose all things to be Nouelties vnto him; and that he is entred into another world, or new borne againe in this. Be∣sides, they passe their time merrily at N. and of two hundred calling themselues Vir∣gins, I verily thinke there is not one who speakes truth, if shee haue not recouered her Maiden-head. It may be their intenti∣on is not ill, and that in suffering themselues to be courted, they haue no other designe, then to raise seruants to God. But since godly intentions doe not alwayes produce good effects, if you suffer things to run on in the same course which they doe, I greatly apprehend in your regard, that An∣tichrist will shortly take his beginning in your Diocesse; and lest you by consequence should be the first obiect of his persecuti∣on. J suppose you haue a greater interest then any man▪ to oppose this accident which now threatneth vs, and that to diuert a mischiefe which is to be followed by the worlds ruine, you ought not to spare the fulminations of Rome; nor make vse onely
of halfe your power. There are not any will be auerse to this good Worke, saue only our young Gallants. But you cannot procure their disaffections vpon a better subiect then this, nor doe greater seruice to the iealious God, then to conserue the honour of those creatures he loueth, I am Your most humble and most affectionate seruant, BALZAC. The 7. of October, 1618. To Mounsieur Pouzet. LETTER XI. IF you will not returne from Court, we are resolued to send Deputies on purpose to require you of the King, and to beseech him to restore vs our good company: I know well, that in the place where you are, there are prisons both for the innocent, and most happy; and that no man can blame you for your ouer-long abode there, with∣out accusing you for being fortunate. But
it were likewise small Justice, your absence should make this City a Village, and that Paris should vsurpe all the affections you owe me. As I perfectly loue you, so doe I expect to be reciprocally respected by you; nor would you I should herein haue any aduantage ouer you, though I yeelde vnto you in all other things: Neither of vs there∣fore can enioy solide contentments, so long as we are separated; and I pretend you doe me wrong, if you take satisfaction where I am not. Take Poste therefore with speed, to be here quickely, grow not old eyther by the way, or at your Inne, for by this meanes I shal get the aduantage of that time, and you shall gaine me foure dayes out of the losse of three Moneths. I haue seene what you willed me concerning λλλ, But I would you knew, I haue no resentments against forcelesse enemies, nor haue I any minde to put my selfe into passion, when these petty Doctors please. Should these fel∣lowes speake well of me, I would instantly examine my conscience, to know whether I were guilty of any fault; and as Hippolitus
suspected his owne innocency, because hee was esteemed spotlesse in his stepdames eye: So should not I haue any good opinion of my owne sufficiency, were I gracious in their sights, who can haue no other then bad affections. Howsoeuer, they cause me once a day to thinke my selfe some greater matter then I am, when I reflect vpon their num∣ber, and the miracle I worke, in inter∣essing in one and the same cause supersti∣cious persons, Atheists, and euill Monkes Adieu. Yours, BALZAC. The 14. Aprill, 1625. An answer to a Letter sent to Balzac, from a learned Old La∣dy, Madamoiselle de Gournay. LETTER XII. Madam, I DOe here at the first tell you, I haue no o∣ther opinion of you, then your selfe giues
me, and I haue at all times had a more strong and sound notion of the inward qua∣lities by the speech, then by the Physiognomy. But if after the Letter you did me the honour to write vnto me, it were necessary to seeke any forraigne proofes; the testimony of those two great personages, who haue admi∣red your vertue euen in the budde, and left the pourtraite thereof vnder their owne hands, may well serue as an Antidote▪ to secure mee from the impressions and the painted shadowes of calumny. I who know that Asia, Affricke, and a great part of the world besides, beleeue Fables as fundamen∣tall points of Religion, doe not at all won∣der (if in what concerneth your particu∣lar) there be some who side not with the truth, which is sure to finde enemies in all places where there are men. This is an ef∣fect of that errour, now growne old in po∣pular opinion; that it is fit an honest woman be ignorant of many things, and that, to maintaine her reputation, it is not requi∣site all the world commend her; but that she be vnknowne to all men. Nay, I say further:
The vulgar doth ordinarily cast an iniuri∣ous eye, and with some taxe of extraua∣gancy, vpon great and Heroicall qualities, if they appeare in that sexe, to which they conceiue it ought not to appertaine. Now though to speake generally, and to reflect rightly vpon the order of earthly things, and the grounds of policy, I must con∣fesse, I should leane to the first of these o∣pinions: Yet will I be well aduised, how I thinke that Nature hath not so much li∣berty left her, as to passe (vpon occasion) the limits shee ordinarily alloweth her selfe; or sometimes to exceede her bounds without blame, to the end, to produce certaine things, farre surpassing the rest in perfection. It is no good Argument to a∣uerre, that because you are adorned with the vertues of our sexe, you therefore haue not reserued those of your owne; or that it is a sinne for a woman to vnderstand the Language which heretofore the Vestals made vse of. I will therefore leaue these calumnious persons, who desire to bereaue Lillies of their beauty; and Christall of
its clearenesse, to returne to the Letter I haue receiued from you; where without flattery I will affirme, thatMeaning himselfe. this man who hath beene discribed vnto you, for so vaine glorious a person; who despiseth times past, who mocketh the moderne, and preiudica∣teth the future; hath found out diuers things in your workes well pleasing vnto him: so as if my approbation be at this pre∣sent of any weight with you, you may for your owne aduantage, adde this Encomion to that of Lipsius and Montagnie, and boldly affirme you haue this aduantage ouer Kings and Emperours, that the tastes of two dif∣ferent ages haue agreed in your fauour. Since you were first commended, the face of Christendome hath changed ten times: Ney∣ther our manners, attire, or Court, are cog∣nisible to what you haue seene them. Men haue made new lawes, yea, and the vertues of our fore-fathers age, are esteemed the vi∣ces of ours: yet shall it appeare, how amidst so many changes and strange reuolutions, you haue brought euen to ourtimes one and the same reputation; and that your beauty (I
speake of what enamoreth the Capucins Fri∣ers, and old Philosophers) hath not left you, with your youth. I shall in mine owne regard bee very glad, the world should take notice how much I honour Vertue, by what name soeuer it passeth, and vnder what shape soeuer it is shrow∣ded: and I esteeme my party stronger by the halfe, then it hath beene, since you haue vouchsafed to enter thereinto. But if without offending against Grammati∣call rules, and those of Decorum: J durst take you for my second, I assure my selfe if wee were to denounce war against these petty Authours, who are ingendered by errour, and disclosed out of the corrupti∣on of this age, you should not haue o∣uer many in taking halfe a dozen of them to taske for your part. At the least, you would put those Pedants to silence, who bragge they haue taught me to speake. Yet will I tell you, before I proceede any fur∣ther, and to the end they may know as much (if you please) that my Mother is not resolued to giue this for granted, and
how if there be any glory to be gotten in so poore an exploite, she is determined to dispute the matter against all these booke∣makers. I haue euer beene hitherto of o∣pinion, that in what concerneth the choice of words, I ought to suffer my selfe to be gouerned by the common acceptati∣on thereof, without adhering to any one mans single example; and that instead of acknowledging the authority of any parti∣cular, I am to follow the publique con∣sent. But howsoeuer, it is not the praise of a great Orator to speake our Language well, but rather the marke of a true French∣man; Nor doe I pretend applause from a∣ny, for not being borne in Holland, or Ger∣many. It is true, I attibute much to E∣locution, and know that high things stand in neede of the helpe of words, and that after those haue bin rightly concei∣ued, they are as happily to bee expressed. It onely angers me, that out of the poo∣rest part of Rhetoricke receiued among the ancients, they will needes extract all ours. And that to please meane spirits, it is
sitting (as they thinke) our workes should resemble those sacrifices, whereout they take the heart, and where, of all the head, nothing is left saue only the tongue. I would make answer to the other aduer∣tisements you did me the honour to giue me, if they had not relation to a matter I re∣serue my selfe fully to treate of in L. be∣ing a worke I am in hand with, and which I hope shortly to present vnto you at Paris. There it shall be, where I will make it ap∣peare vnto you, that reason cannot haue an easier taske, then to perswade a spirit of the like making mine is, and that I e∣qually loue the truth, whether I receiue it from any other, or that I finde it my selfe. BALZAC. The 3. of August, 1624. To Mounsieur Berniere, President in the Par∣liament of Roan. LETTER XIII. THe meane compliment I am to offer you, is the first effect of the fuming
Drinkes I receiued from you. I haue no meanes to finde out my right sences to entertaine you; they are lost in your ex∣cellent liquors, and I had neede be more valiant then I am, to defend my selfe a∣gainst Spaine and Normandy, with their vni∣ted forces: I verily thinke, that what should haue beene drunke at Berniere be∣twixt this and Easter, is ouerflowne in my Chamber: If my Friends come not to my aide, I am in danger to suffer shipwracke, or not to become sober againe till next yeare: yet will you needes haue mee euen in this plight wherein I am, to act a sober mans part; and my soule to execute those functions you haue suspended. It is im∣possible, not being my selfe, I should speake my ordinary Language; I cannot giue you two words of thankes without taking one for another; and my head is so full of your Spanish Wine, and Normandy Cider, that my wits giue place; I will therefore content my selfe, to assure you with this small portion offence yet left mee, that supposing your Friendship
produced nothing, and were as barren, as it is fruitfull, I would sue for it out of a more noble consideration, then that of particular interest, and would testifie vn∣to you, that it is your selfe I loue, and not your fortunes: Beleeue, I beseech you, the truest of all men: you gained my heart the first time I had the honour to see you; I then gaue my selfe wholy as yours, and said within my selfe, what I haue often since reiterated, that you being rich e∣nough to purchase a Soueraignty beyond the Alp es, if that should euer happen, I esteemed you a sufficient worthy person, to deserue to haue me liue vnder your Re∣gency, and that I was Your most humble seruant and subiect, BALZAC. At Paris the 5. of March, 1627. To Mounsieur de Voiture. LETTER XIIII. THough the halfe of France diuide vs, yet are you as presentto my spirit, as
the obiects I see, and you haue part in all my thoughts and dreames. Riuers, Plaines, and Townes may well oppose them selues to my content: they cannot hinder my memory from taking entertainment with you, or from the frequent taste of those excellent Discourses wherewith you haue graced me, till I be so happy as againe to heare you. Though you should grow proud, yet must I confesse▪ I conceiue not any thing either great or sublime, saue onely those Seedes you haue scattered in my Soule; and that your company, which at first, was right pleasing, is now become absolutely necessary for me: You may therefore well thinke it is not willingly I leaue you thus long in your Mistresses hands, or that I suffer her to enioy my goods, without gi∣uing me account: Euery moment she obli∣geth you to allow her, are so many vsurpa∣tions she makes vpon me; all you whisper vnto her, are secrets you conceale from me; and to haue your conuersation in mine ab∣sence, is to inrich her selfe by my losses. But there is no reason J should malice so
faire a Riuall, in that both of you are happy; or that I frame mine afflictions vpon your mutuall contents▪; prouided (at my com∣ming) I find foure moneths absence notto haueblotted me out of your remembrance, and that Loue hath there reserued some place for friendship, I shall still haue for mine aduantage the time passing to attend the houre assigned; and you will come to com∣fort me sometimes, concerning the miseries of this Age, and the iniustice of men. In the interim, in the place where now I am, as I haue but slender ioyes, so haue I not any great discontents: I am in equall distance re∣mooued from dis-fauour and good fortune, and that vnconstant Goddesse, who is euer imploied in depopulating Cities, and subuer∣ting States, hath no leasure to worke mis∣chiefe in meane places. I see Shepheardesses who can only say, yea and nay, and who are too grosse witted to be deceiued by vnder∣standing persons; yet is painting as little knowne among them as Eloquence; and be∣cause I am their Maister, they would suffer me to shew them, if I so pleased, how smal
a distance there is betweene power and ty∣ranny: instead of the fine words and quaint discourses wherein your Ladies abound, there issues from their mouthes a pure and innocent breath, which incorporates it selfe with their kisses▪ and giues them a taste, you ordinarily finde not among those of the Court. Supposing therefore you make not any better choice there, then I happen on hereby chance, I make ouer particular pro∣fession, to relye on your iudgement, and of being▪ Your most humble seruant BALZAC. The 7. October, 1625, To Mounsieur de Vaugelas. LETTER XV. THe good opinion you haue of me, makes vp more then halfe my merit, and you herein resemble the Poets Epicts, who out of small truths frame incredible fixions; how∣soeuer, if you loued me not, but according to the rigour of Law and Reason, I should much feare to be but of indifferent esteeme with you. It is then much better for me, the
affection you beare me, appeare rather a pas∣sion then a vertue. Extremities in all other things are reprooueable, in this laudable; and as certaine Riuers are neuer so vsefull as when they ouerflow: so hath Friendship nothing more excellent in it then excesse; and doth rather offend in her moderation, then in her violence. Continue therefore in obseruing neither rule, nor measure, in the fauours you affoord me▪ and to the end I may be lawfully ingratefull, being infinite∣ly obliged, leaue me not so much as words wherewith to thanke you. Truely your last Letters haue taken from me all the tearmes I should imploy in this occasion▪ and in∣stead of the good offices I incessantly receiue from you, it seemes you will onely haue new importunies in payment▪ Since it is thus, feare not my nicenesse, or that in matters of great consequence, I make not vse of your affection, and in slight ones I abuse it not; henceforward it is requisite, you re∣couer all my Law▪sutes, compose all my quarrels, and correct all my errours: For to vndertake to cure all my diseases, I suppose
you would not, in preiudice of Mounsieur de Lorime. It shall therefore suffice, you will be pleased to let him at this passage read how I requite my life at his hands; and if the onely obeying him, will preserue mee, I will place his precepts immediately after Gods Commandements▪ There is no re∣ceite distastefull, if his Eloquence affoord the preparatiue, nor paine vnasswaged by his words, before it be expelled by his Art: Remotest causes are as visible to him, as the most ordinary effects; and if Nature should discouer herselfe naked vnto him, he could not thereby receiue any further communi∣cation of her secrets, then he hath acquired by former experience. Let him therefore bestow better nights on mee, then those I haue had this sixe yeares, wherein I haue had no sleepe; intreate him to make a peace betweene my Liuer and Stomacke, and to compose this ciuill Warre, which disturbes the whole inside of my body, if he desire I should no longer liue, but for his glory▪ and to perswade the world, he is nothing indeb∣ted to those Arabian Princes, who practised
Phisicke, or to the gods themselues who in∣uented it. Truely if meere Humanists, whom diuers of his profession haue sometimes scorned, seeme of slight consideration with him; or if he be not contented with a ciuill acknowledgement, I am ready to call him my preseruer▪ and to erect Altars, and offer sacrifice vnto him. Yea, to compasse this, I wil quit the better part of what I implore; I desire not, hee should cure mee▪ It is suf∣ficent hee hinder mee from dying, and that hee cause my diseases and plaints to endure some threescore yeares. I would likewise know (if you please) what his good Cozen doth, that Citizen of all Com∣mon wealths, that man who is no more a stranger in Persia, then in France, and whose knowledge hath the same extent, as hath all the Turkish Empire▪ and all the anci∣ent Roman Monarchy. I haue at the least three hundred questions to aske him, and a whole Volumne of doubts to propose vn∣to him; I expect at our first meeting, to resolue with him vpon the affaires of former ages, and concerning the different opini∣ons,
of Baronius and Genebrard on the one side, and of Escales and Casaubon on the o∣ther. I am in the meane time resolued to passe ten or twelue daies with Mounsieur de Racan, to the end to see him in that time worke miracles, and write things which God must necessarily reueale vnto him. Truely Conquerours haue no greater ad∣uantage ouer Masters of Fence, then hee hath ouer Doctors; and hee is at this day one of the great Workemanships of Na∣ture. If all wits were like his, there would bee a great deale of time lost at Schoole▪ Vniuersities would become the most vnprofitable parts of the Common∣wealth, and Latine as well as Millan Parchment, with other forraine Merchan∣dizes, would be rather markes of our va∣nity, then any effects of our necessitie. The 10. of October, 1625. To Mounsieur de Racan. LETTER XVI. VVEre my health better then it is, yet the roughnesse of the season wee are entring into, and which
J hoped to preuent, makes mee ouer ap∣prehensiue, to stirre out of my Chamber, or to hazard my selfe in a long voyage: A Sunlesse day, or one night in a bad Host∣house, were sufficient to finish the worke of my Death; and in the state wherein I am, I should much sooner arriue in the next world, then at Chastellerant. I must therefore intreate you to hold me excused, if J keepe not promise with you, or if I take some longer time to make prouision of strength, to prepare my selfe for so har∣dy an enterprize. At our returne from Court, wee are to come to your delicate House, and to see the places where the Muses haue appeared vnto you, and dicta∣ted the Verses we haue so much admired. Those wherewith you honoured me, doe ouer-much engage me, to leaue my iudge∣ment at liberty; I will onely content my selfe, to protest that you were neuer so ve∣ry a Poet, as when you spake of me; and that you haue Art enough to inuent new Fables, as incredible as ancient fictions: it seemes Diuinity cost you nothing; and
because your Predecessors haue furnished Heauen with all sorts of people, and since Astrologers haue there placed Mon∣sters, you suppose it may bee likewise lawfull for you▪ at least, to get entrance there for some of your Friends. You may doe Sir, what you please; nor haue I any cause to blame the height of you affection, since I hold he loues not sufficiently, who loues not excessiuely. It will onely bee the good Wits of our Age who will not pardon you; and will take it impati∣ently, to see my Name in your Ver∣ses with as great Splendor and Pompe as that of Artemisa and Ydalia. But as you im∣ploy not other mens passions either in mat∣ter of have or loue; so I suppose you make lesse vse of their Eyes in iudging the truth of things. In this case, I am sufficiently con∣fident of my Retoricke to assure my selfe I shall at all times perswade you, that I am more Estimable then mine Enemies: and that they haue no other aduantage ouer me, who am sicke, but only health, it they in∣ioy it. Besides, you need not make any A∣pology,
in excuse of your tediousnesse: I well perceiue by the Excellency of your la∣bours, the time you haue therein imployed, and know that perfection is not presently to be attayned. A Crafts-man may easily in a short time finish diuerse Statues of Clay, or Plaster; but these are but for a dayes vse, or to serue as Ornaments at a Cities tryumph, not to continue many Kings raignes: Those who carue in Brasse or Marble waxe old vp∣on their Workes, and doubtlesse, matters euer to endure are long to be meditated: if my Megreme would permit mee, I could say more vnto you, but all J can obtayne of it, is to signe this Letter, and to assure you that J am perfectly Your most humble and affectionate seruant, BALZAC. The 20. of Nouem∣ber, 1625. To the Abbot of St. Cyran. LETTER XVII. SInce you desire to see in what Stile J be∣gun to Write; and how sufficient a fel∣low
I was at nineteene: I here send you my Errours of that Age, and the first faults I committed: it were much better to con∣demne their memory, then to fall into them a fresh, by renewing them in this place. But you will be absolutely obeyed, and J haue no resistance against your force: See heere then the remainder of many things now lost, and what I haue saued from ship-wracke, being neither valu∣able to the Diamonds, or lumpes of Am∣bergreece, the Sea hath lately cast vpon vpon the Coast of Bayone. I aduise you for your honours sake, not to refresh the memory of what is past, nor to seeke for examples of your fidelity in our Ciuill warres, since you haue not therein conserued it. You may hereupon say what you please, and try (if you can) to make things seeme to vs contrary to what they are; yet am I well assured, you were engaged in a faction, wherein you haue not beene vsefull to the King, no, nor where you could serue him as an ho∣nest man ought; so as if you desire I should
to doe you a fauour) forget things past; or if you will alledge that the tranquility we now enioy, and the good order vsed in mannaging Publique affaires, were the effects of your prudent conduct; besides, that this glory is not absolutely due vnto you, and there remaining others who suppose they haue as large a share therein as your selfe. You must not take it ill, if I freely tell you, there is not any thing therein worthy of admiration. You entred vpon the State▪gouernment in a peaceable time, you therein found all things so wel disposed, as they seemed of themselues to worke the wished effects; and the most of the French so inclined to subiection, as it was no hard matter to bring them to due obedience. And herein you are neces∣sarily to confesse, you owe much to CCC, and that he passed the last yeares of his life for your instructions, as he since then, dy∣ed for the generall good of this King∣dome. If there hath beene any obstacle to remooue, which at this present may be troublesome vnto you, he hath before his
death rid his hands thereof, with as much good fortune as resolution. If it may be esteemed a benefit, to vnderstand the na∣ture of the people, thereby to deale with them according to their humours, he hath made it appeare vnto you, there was not any thing aboue his patience; since with∣out resentment, he was able to suffer the losse of his liberty; and if so it were, that he was forced to make vse of some violent act, which neuerthelesse was necessary; neither hatred, nor enuy, haue euer beene of power to hinder his vndertakings. In a word, he hath tamed the most stubborne spirits, he hath left the parties who most perplexed this poore Kingdome, either absolutely ruined, or so weakned, as they are vtterly vnable to rise againe. He hath accustomed all men to patience, and hath performed so strange things, as wee now finde not any thing extraordinary; and (what I most esteeme) hee hath made the world see, how great things the Kings au∣thority was able to doe, though some∣times he did this for the establishing his
owne. I therefore doe not at all now wonder, if hauing found affaires dispo∣sed to receiue such impressions, as you pleased to put vpon them, you haue hi∣therto caused them to fall out indifferent∣ly well, or if you haue not as yet com∣mitted any confiderable errours in the mannaging of State-affaires, as not ha∣uing any matter of difficulty to ouercome, you haue onely herein suffered your selfe to be guided by common and ordinary presidents. But what is all this? that your indeauours should deserue to be preferred before all those seruices the D. and P. with their Predecessors haue performed. Had you any imagination, when you spake in so high tearmes, you could cause vs to be∣leeue so great improbabilities; or had you so poore an Opinion of all mens iudgements, as to suppose wee more va∣lued your feares and continuall distrusts, then so many generous actions, performed by them in the eye of all Christendome, for the glory and reputation of this Crowne▪ I will not touch vpon the
merits of the liuing, lest you should im∣pute that to a desire of complacency, or some particular obligation, which the onely interest of truth exacteth of me. I onely require iustice for the dead, whom you haue dared to wrong in the Kings presence, against all rules of Piety, obli∣ging you to respect their memory. Doubt not, but that they are yet sensible of things in this world, and that amidst the glory and contentments they possesse, their care to liue in the good odour of men, doth yet continue: You may therefore well ima∣gine, they haue iust cause to thinke, those liues they haue lost in their Princes ser∣uice, and for the defence of their Country, had beene ill imployed, and might iustly complaine of our ingratitude▪ should we suffer before our eyes their reputations to be questioned, without testifying any distaste. In vaine had they triumphed o∣uer the most beautifull parts of the earth, and carryed their victorious Armes where the name of France was not yet arriued. To small purpose had they recluded the
power of strangers, wherein the limits Na∣ture prescribed vnto them. In vaine likewise, euen in our memory had they conserued State and Religion, when those of your fa∣ction did diuersly labour the ruine of both▪ should you now be suffered to enter into comparison with them; or as though the possession of that glory wherein they al∣waies remained, were vniustly controuer∣ted in their case. But the mischiefe herein is, that we haue only right on our side, and that all things are so auerse vnto vs, as it wil be very hard to cause reason to be so much as regarded, because it fauours vs; so as I get nothing by disputing with a man who is a∣boue Lawes, and in whose behalfe, the King hath receiued so aduantagious impressions, as he may securely exercise his passions, vn∣der pretext of his authority, and confound his particular enmities, togetherwith the in∣terests of the Common-wealth. I should be ve∣ry leath to say you are growne to such extre∣mities, or that out of vanity and presumpti∣on, two imperfections purely humane, you should so suddainly stept into Cruelty and ty∣ranny,
two Diabolicall Errors. Neuerthe∣lesse, if hauing great power in the Kings breast, (as indeed you may do much, you cause a generall diffidence therein of all things, and indeauour to bring his best seruants into suspition with him, thereby to make them vnvsefull: if you intend by ima∣ginary iealousies to diuert his inclination from that goodnesse, whereto at all times it hath had an extraordinary propention; or if you hinder him from the free vse of his naturall debonarity toward her, who brought him into this World. Do you not thinke men willbeginne to say, it is not vanity a∣lone hath spoyled you? and that it will not be generally wished, that the Maximes you make vse of, were somewhat more Christian, and lesse contrary to Gods Commandments. I know we haue a Prince of such perfection, as Heauen it selfe cannot without miracle make farther addition, then Experience. So time∣ly a wise man, hath scarce euer bin; all his inclinations do wholy ayme at good, and Vertue is to him so naturall, as I verily be∣leeue he would be much troubled to do ill.
But you are not ignorant that one cannot giue poyson to any man so easily, as to him who in taking it, supposeth he recei∣ueth wholesome Phisicke, and that ill counsells haue neuer so great power ouer our spirits, as when wee embrace them without distrust. Surely the vttermost of euills is that, whereof we haue neither knowledge nor apprehension; nor is there any fault more dangerous, then when we make vse of reason it selfe in our errours. I haue no purpose to offend any with my discourse, and doe intreate you to beleeue, I thinke it very well you make vse of all the meanes, you suppose, may conduce to the causing the Kings authority to become more awfull to all men, and publicke peace further confirmed. These are two so delicate matters, as they cannot be tou∣ched without danger, nor conserued with ouer-much care. Yet must you pardon me, if J say you are to bee very circum∣spect, lest in thinking to strengthen this authority, you abuse it not to the preiu∣dice of your owne Conscience; and you
are withall to consider, that Peace cannot be of any long continuance, if it be not plea∣sing to God, who hath neuer suffered with∣out resentment, that the Lawes of Nature should be violated. These Lawes the Bar∣barians themselues allow of, haue not beene established either by force, or necessity, as o∣thers are: The first thing we can doe, is to follow them, and the obedience wee yeelde them, can neither be milder, nor more ea∣sie: They are not engrauen vpon Marble, but are borne with vs; they are not peculiar to one people or Countrey, but are com∣mon to all men: They haue not ordayned a∣ny punishment for those who will not ob∣serue them, so was it not probable, that a∣ny could be found so much their owne ene∣mies, as to be inclined to such extreami∣ties. To conclude, they were not made for the meane and vulgar people onely, but for all the world: and those are the more strictly thereto obliged, who owe most to their extraction. If this be true (as you can∣not but know) should not Heauen be in∣iured? things both Diuine and Morall, should
they not be openly dispised, would not Nature her selfe cry vengeance against you, should you by your crafts and disguisements animate a young Prince against that per∣son, who of all the world, ought to be most deare vnto him, and deface out of his Roy∣all soule by your seruile feares (ill founded) his first and most innocent affections? I will not beleeue for mine owne content, and the honour of our age, that this mischiefe can happen; but I am much perplexed to know who it is, that causeth all honest men to sigh, who hindreth vs the perfect feeling of that felicity peace affords, and which com∣passionateth euen strangers, who are least interessed in our affaires. Will you haue so sauage a soule, as to dread the fairest thing the world affoordeth? or can you be so pu∣sillanimous, as to haue any timorous reflecti∣on vpon an afflicted person? Can you ima∣gine goodnesse it selfe should doe hurt, or that the Court cannot without danger be∣hold what it hath heretofore seene with so great contentment? For my part, if this be thus, I finde no difference betweene a lost
state, and one concerning it selfe in this sort; and it must needes be, those miseries you apprehend, are very violent, if they ex∣ceede your remedies. Alas, if we haue for∣gotten we are Christians, shall wee not at least remember we are men? if we be almost insensible, euen to brutality, shall wee not yet affoord something to apparance? Be satisfied in being in estimation and fauour with the King: Gouerne alone, (if you can) all his affaires; administer Iustice without a∣ny assistant; take all his authority into your owne hands; yet suffer his Mother to see him, giue way that hee refuse her not a fa∣uour, which he cannot hinder, euen his very enemies, sometimes from enioying. Affoord, since it is in your power, this fauour to all France; appease in time those publicke complaints ready to rise against you, and slackning some part of your rigorous coun∣sels, adde this onely point, deficient in the felicity of this Kings reigne. If you can pro∣cure so pious a thing, and so pleasing to God and Man; this great reputation of Ho∣nesty you haue shrewdly hazarded, will
returne with more glitter, and luster then e∣uer it had; wee will not beleeue our owne eyes, if they shew vs any thing opposite thereunto: Wee will suppose it is some o∣ther who had a desire to outstrip the D. and P. and how there is not any apparance, that a man in whom age ought to finish, what the study of Wisedome had happily left vn∣perfect, should still be subiect to enter in∣to errours. But if on the other side, you goe on in abusing our good Kings facility, and vnprofitably to perplexe his spirits with perpetuall distrusts, if you disguise all things vnto him, on purpose to cause him to perceiue nothing, but what you please, not to take notice of ill, being hidden vnder the apparance of its contrary; perswade not your selfe, that God will long suffer Truth to be unknowne. Doe not thinke, but things will shortly returne to the same tearmes wherein Nature placed them; or that the King hauing once discouered the bad de∣signes of his Fauousites, will not easily be induced once againe to amaze the whole world, by a second example of his Iustice,
and to satisfie his peoples complaints, by a∣bandoning them to Publicke vengeance. Then will you ouer-late reflect vpon this worlds vanity: you will then consider, that when wee esteemed you happy, you are mounted to a place frō whence there is not any, who haue not fallen, and how Fortune enuious of your felicity, drew you from that sweete and peaceable life, wherein you were entred; fearing lest thereby you might con∣serue your Vertue, or therein auoide your ruine. To Mounsieur Malherbe. LETTER XVIII. AFter I haue told you how deare the testi∣monies I receiued from your remem∣brance, are vnto me; I can doe no lesse then thanke you for the good Justice you affoor∣ded me. If the like Jntegrity were to bee found among those, who haue the life and fortunes of men in their hands, I should take pleasure in pleading, and by the same
reason Lawes punish offenders, I might hope to be rewarded. It may be I flatter my selfe, but I suppose my interest is the same with all honest men, and that they can no longer liue in security, since I am fallen vpon, for the vertues I value in them. Surely if the World suffer ill tongues to touch vpon my labours, it is very pro∣bable, they will not spare other mens; and that hereafter there will not be any thing so excellent, which shall not be hated, nor so holy, some Lysander will not violate. These ill examples therefore are not to be suffered, nor is it to be tollerated, that one particular person forsake publicke be∣leefe, to relye vpon his owne peculiar sence: and should this disorder continue, Artificers and Farmers would (at length) prooue reformers of State. I pretend not hereby to lessen the fauour I receiued from you: But on the contrary, I am so easie to oblige, as I suppose my friends giue me all whatsoeuer they take not from me; you will yet auouch thus much, that suppor∣ting my side, you doe in some sort fight
in your owne defence: For if to day they say, my Stile is not good, to morrow they will maintaine your Rimes to be naught. But it is now time, after I haue thanked you, that I wrangle with you, and com∣plaine for hauing beene iniured in the per∣son of Mounsieur de Racan, whom you taxe for a disease, whereof I haue beene dead this ten yeares. I doubt not, but that part of vs whereby wee are men, as well as by Reason, hath heretofore acquired you Honour; and that our History ought to yeeld a glorious testimony of your fore∣passed Vertues in that kind: But since you can no longer be happy therein, but by memory; and that your Courage will now stand in neede of your Sonnes assistance; me thinkes, it is vnseemely for you to scoffe at our weakenesse; for howsoeuer in accusing vs, for not hauing continued young so long as your selfe, you can one∣ly taxe vs for arriuing at the Hauen sooner then you haue done. There is none but M. F. who may boldly laugh at the debi∣lity of others, and make lests at our
charge; but hee hath reason so to doe, since his merit herein is generally acknow∣ledged; as being little lesse valiant in those feates, then that ancient Heroes, who subdued Monsters, and in one Night was fifty times Sonne in law to one of his Hostes. I infinitely esteeme the eminent qualities where with hee is adorned, and find nothing in him which is not perfectly pleasing. But when I consider, that he is capeable to cause vs to bee despised by a whole sexe, and to make vs ridiculous to the most beautifull part of the World, I haue great contestation within my selfe, to forbeare to wish him ill; and what part soeuer I take, touching the glory all men allow him: Yet doth it not a little anger me, that my Eloquence is not so mascu∣line as his. The 15. of August, 1625. To Mounsieur de Vaugelas. LETTER XIX. VVEre it not for the Letter you wrot me, I should haue stood in neede of all my
Philosophy to comfort my selfe for the losse I haue receiued. But since you haue sent mee the counterfeit of that diuine company I left at Paris, hauing thereby something, representing my forepassed good fortune; take it not ill, I begin to haue lesse apprehension then formerly I had, of the discomfort I suffer in being re∣mooued from you; or if J say, you haue caused your absence to become thereby the lesse irkesome vnto mee, which other∣wise would haue prooued insupportable. Lucidor doth ouer-much oblige me in re∣tayning me in his memory, and in desi∣ring my company in his inchanted Pallace. J beseech you to tell him, I shall neuer for∣get the happy day wee there spent, and that I cannot beleeue, there is a more ex∣cellent Structure euen in the Roman King∣dome, though builded by the very hands of Tasso, or Ariosto: in sadnesse my thoughts stayed there, when I parted thence, I still walke in his Allies; I wander in his Woods, and slumber vpon the bankes of the Fairies Fountaine, whereof I need only
drinke a drop to turne Poet: That infi∣nity of different beauties discouering themselues to our eyes, at the opening of the gates, caused mee instantly to hate Rome, Paris, and all Citties; and I tear∣med the Duke of Venice miserable, in that hee is condemned neuer to remoue from the place where he is, and consequently neuer to see what J there beheld. The Foote-post, who is to carry this Letter, doth much presse my dispatch, telling me, hee shall hazard, to remaine still in this place, if I make it an longer. This is e∣qually my misery, and your good fortune; for as I am constrained to depriue my selfe of the contentment to entertaine time with you, so will this free you from di∣uers impertinent speeches, wherewith happily I should otherwise haue importu∣ned you. The 4 of August, 1625. To the same. LETTER XX. I can no longer liue without receiuing newes from you, and vnderstanding from
your selfe, the good successe of your voy∣age. My Brother writ vnto me, they haue done you some kinde of iustice, where∣with you were reasonable well pleased; but if this content be not absolute, I am resolued not to reioyce, and I doe alrea∣dy condemne the State, and all those who gouerne it. It is a shame to see the boun∣ties of Princes in the hands of such persons who can neither be vsefull nor pleasing vn∣to them; and that honest men must still sa∣tisfie themselues with the onely testimo∣ny of a good conscience, and in the con∣tent they receiue in well-doing: For my part, I will not complaine of Fortune, pro∣uided, you haue occasion to commend her. Now if the Ministers of State vnder∣stood my secret, and that for satisfying of two, it were onely necessary to oblige one; by acquitting themselues of what they owe you, they might easily spare what they haue promised me. Wee haue newly receiued tidings of the Defeate gi∣uen to the Enemies nauall Army; but ha∣uing lost one of my neare friends in that
Conflict, I cannot forbeare to bee a bad French-man till to morrow, and to grieue for the Victory, whereatal others reioyce: Besides, I being of a profession onely exer∣cised in priuate, and repose; I assure you the report of Cannons beginnes to trou∣ble me; for of all Warres, those of Germany please me best, in that I am thirty dayes iourneyes off: Our Doctors say no lesse then I doe: the most zealous among them, longingly expect a more quiet season, fea∣ring the ruine of the aduerse part, for the interest of their Arguments and Scholler∣ship: and in very truth, I cannot con∣ceiue what they should doe with their controuersies, were there no longer any against whom they could contend. I write you this from the banke of the most beau∣tifull riuer of the world; but being so farre from you, I taste all pleasures imper∣fectly; and were my Kinsman reuiued, not seeing you, there would still remaine a kinde of affliction vpon me, which no∣thing but your presence is able to ease. VVithout playing the Poet, I can assure
you, I haue taught your name to all the Rocks in my wildernesse: and it is written vpon the Bankes of all our trees: but you are no way obliged vnto me, in that I loue you extraordinarily. It is an action inde∣pendant on my will or free election, it being at this present as necessary for me, as all o∣ther things are, without which I cannot sub∣sist: And it is requisite I suffer my selfe to be transported by the force of my inclinati∣on, which another would call his Destiny. Be therefore when you please, mine enemy; you are assured I shall neuer be but Your most humble and most faithfull seruant, BALZAC. The 21. of Septem∣ber, 1615. To the same. LETTER XXI. A Lame Foote-man would haue made more haste then the Messenger did, who deliuered me your two Letters, fifteene dayes after the latter of them was written: Yet notwithstanding was he very welcome,
and had it beene Lysander himselfe, bring∣ing newes from you, hee had beene inuio∣lable to all my Lackies; and I had receiued him as my Friend. Truely, there is not a¦ny discontent which is not lost, in the ioy I receiue to be beloued by you, and if the small displeasure they haue done mee, were of power to offend me, I should in your fauours finde the remedy others seeke for in reuenge. I haue as vnmouedly read the Satyre made against mee, as I write this Letter; and haue onely accused my bad for∣tune, which hath at all times chosen the most infamous of all men for mine enemies: you cannot imagine how much I am ashamed of this vnlucky accident, and of the wrong I suppose I receiue, when at any time they giue mee the aduantage in a comparison wherein Lysander cannot enter without ha∣uing the better of it. Yet Sir, I am resolued to haue patience, prouided, the Warre you raise against me, be onely feigned, and that you speake not seriously; for surely I would burne all my papers, werethey culpable of one single word displeasing vnto you; and
my thoughts should be farre different from my intention, had I done any thing disgust∣full vnto you; howsoeuer, I craue pardon for the fault whereof you accuse me, though I suppose I haue not done you any so ill offi∣ces to faire Ladies, as it seemes you would perswade me: On the contrary, if my testi∣mony be seconded by their ascents, there will not be hereafter any among them, who will not looke vpon you, as at one of their chiefest felicities; and who will not sell all her Pearles, to purchase one of your Nights. Queenes will come from the remotest parts of the World, to taste the plea∣sure of your conuersation; and you shall be the third▪ after Salomon and Alexander, who shall cause them to come at the report of your Vertue. As for deuoute persons, I doe not thinke they will ranke Health and Strength in the number of Vices; for by that reason they should hold all those for Saints, whom the Courts of Parliament haue decla∣red as impotent, and so fill Heauen with sicke folkes. To say truth, I cannot deny, but I haue giuen the Alarum to Married men,
and I must say, your visits will be suspicious to those who know you not: But when they shall vnderstand what I intend to pub∣lish in all places, that you had rather dye, then violate with so much as one single thought, the lawes of true Friendship, and that your fidelity is irreproueable: Insteade of auoyding you, as an obiect of scan∣dall, they will propound you to their Wiues as an example of Continency. I could alledge diuers other things for my Iustifica∣tion, but if you thinke I haue beene faulty, I will not presume to imagine J am inno∣cent; and rather then contradict you, I will signe the decree of my Death with mine owne hand. The 10. of October, 1625. To the same. LETTER XXII. THere is no other meanes to exceed the hight of what you haue written, nor to answer the ciuilities of your Letter, but only by rendring you all your owne words,
I know not your meaning: but to take the most vnprofitable of your Friends, for your benefactor, and to thanke me for the ill I doe you, is no lesse then strangely to abuse the propriety of words, especially for a man so perfectly acquainted with our language, as your selfe; or questionlesse it must needes be, you suffer my persecuti∣ons with the like patience, as good men receiue those afflictions God layes vpon them. For as losses and diseases are pre∣sents and fauours in tearmes of Deuotion; so doe you bestow pompous names vpon poore matters, and you make your selfe beleeue, you shall draw some aduantage out of my Amity, though in truth you ex∣tract nothing thence but charge; nor doth it produce any better effects, then thornes: And vpon the matter, what else are the paines and affaires, I perpetually put vpon you; or what difference is there betweene the hatred of an Enemy, and so trouble∣some an affection as mine? It is I who disturbe your rest, who vsurpe your liber∣ty, who will not suffer you to haue any
leasure, though that be the true possessi∣on of the Wise. It is no want of good-will in me, that I change not all your kindnesse into choller, and make not a pleader and wrangler of the best tempered spirit Phi∣losophy euer receiued from Nature; I lay Ambushes for you at Paris, at Fontaine∣bleau, and at St. Germaines: Yea, should you thinke to hide your selfe at the worlds end, to auoide importunities, I would vndertake the voyage of Magellan, to seeke you out there: yet are you well pleased with all this, and I receiue thankes instead of expecting ill words. The care you haue to oblige me, exceedes all I can desire: Good offices come thicke vpon me, when they proceede from your side; and they are actions it seemes you are pleased to conuert into habitudes. Without entring into infinities, doe I not of recent memory owe to your testimony, all the good opinion your excellent friend can haue of me; and if hee imagine I am worthy any estimation, is it not you who sets a value vpon my defects, and who
haue assisted me in deceiuing him? But in what sort soeuer you haue procured me these fauours, be it that therein you haue either committed theft, or made an ac∣quisition, I am still right happy to be be∣loued by a man, who hath the reputati∣on not to affect ill things, and to please whom, it is as much as to be reckoned in the number of honest men. The day be∣fore I parted from Court, I had the lea∣sure to obserue him at Mounsieur the Mar∣shall of Schambergs house; but I assure you, I could spie nothing of slender considera∣tion, either in his words, or aspect; and though I haue alwayes vsed to be diffident of my first opinion; nor euer to iudge with∣out long deliberation, I haue notwith∣standing herein, sinned against my owne rules; and was not ashamed to say, that a wit of twenty yeares had amazed mine: But the Sermon bell rings, which calls and forceably drawes me from you: my con∣tentment therefore must giue place to my duty, which commands mee to make an end, after I haue required newes from you,
concerning a woman, to whom I am ex∣traordinarily and particularly obliged; of a woman I say, who is more worth then all our bookes, and in whose conuersation there is sufficient to make one an honest man, without either the helpe of Greekes or Romans: How old a Courtier soeuer you are, you vnderstand not French, if you vn∣derstand not Madame de Desloges. On Christmas day, 1625. To the same. LETTER XXIII. I Hope very shortly to follow these few lines, and to come to court you with as much assiduity and subiection, as though you were to be the founder of my fortunes. I haue no other businesse at Paris, but this; though I frame many pretexts for that voy∣age, but I sweare seriously you are the onely cause. My melancholy is of late become so blacke, and my spirits are so beclouded, as I must of necessity see you, to dissipate
them. It is to small purpose to speake well of me in the place where you are, they doe me no good though; this is as much as to cast incense vpon a dead body, and to strow flowers vpon his graue, but this is no reui∣uing of him. I no longer receiue any com∣fort in the newes you send me, and I am well assured my misfortune is constant, what alteration so euer happen in the World: it re∣mayneth then, that I seeke for my consola∣tion in your presence, and powre forth all my complaynts into your bosome; this I will do at the first sight of the Sun-beames, beseeching you to beleeue, that as in the middest of felicity, I should haue neede of you to make me happy; so also hauing such a friend as your selfe, I shall neuer esteeme my selfe absolutely miserable. The 20. of Nouem∣ber, 1625. BALZAC.
Balzac his Letter to Hidaspe. LETTER XXIIII. I Doe far more esteeme the Carthusians si∣lence, then the Eloquence of such Writers, and am perswaded, (excepting in Church Seruice, and for the necessity of Commerce) the Pope and the King should do well to forbid them Lattin and French; whereof they seeke to make two barbarous languages. I know well, that French spirits are sworne Enemies to all sorts of bondage, and that twelue hundred yeares of Monarchy, hath not beene of power to make them lose their liberty, it being as naturall to them as life it selfe. Whatsoeuer vgly face they frame to the Inquisition, and how full of Tygers and Serpents soeuer they paint the same, yet do I finde it right necessary in this Kingdome: For besides that, it would cause (as in Spaine and Italy) euen the wicked in some sort, to resemble the Vpright, and vice not at all to offend the publicke Eye: it would besides
hinder Fooles from filling the World with their bastardly Bookes, and the faults of Schoole maisters from being as frequent as those are of Magistrates, and Generals of Armies. Truly it is a shame there are Lawes against those who counterfeite Coynes and falsifie Merchandizes; yet that such are freely permitted who corrupt Phylosophy and E∣loquence, and who violate those things, the Vulgar ought no more to meddle with, then with State gouernment, or Religious Mysteries. The late great Plague was of small consideration in comparison of this, which checkes all the World: and surely, if speedy order be not taken, the multiplicity of our Authors, will make a Lybrary as big as Paris, wherein there shall scarcely be found one good word, or reasonable conceit. These be the fruites arising out of inordinate idlenesse, and the third scourge caused by Peace, sent to afflict this poore Realme after Duels, and Law-suites. There are hardly any to be found, who are contented to keep their faults and follies to themselues, or to sin in secret; but are also doting vpon their
owne follies, as they desire to engraue them in Marble and Brasse, thereby to E∣ternize their memory, and to make them past retracting. Now to returne to the par∣ty of whom you particularly required my o∣pinion, and who indeede is the first subiect of this Letter. I must ingeniously confesse vnto you, that next to Beere and Pbysicke, I neuer found any thing so distastefull as his works: he wanteth (almost throughout) euen naturall Logicke, yea that part thereof which prooueth men to be reasonable creatures. In three words hee speakes foure bad ones, and as he alwayes strayeth from the subiect whereof he treateth, so doth he or∣dinarily talke in an vnknowne language; though he intend to speake French: Be∣sides yce it selfe is not more cold then his conceites, and when he desires to be face∣tious (as at euery turne hee faine would) he had neede to be in fee with his Reader, to make him laugh, as at Funerals in Paris, weepers are vsually hired for money. There is no question but truth were of far more force, and disarmed, then it can
be with the assistance this simple Fellow would striue to affoord her: Now suppo∣sing such men were ingaged in the right, without any treacherous designe, yet is it as much as to abandon Gods cause, to suffer it to be supported by so weake and vnworthy Pennes. The Renegadoes haue not so much wronged Christianity▪ as those who haue not valiantly defended themselues against the Turkes, and such who through defect of conduct and skill, though they wanted neither zeale, nor affection, suffer themselues to be surprised by the same aduantages, they otherwise might haue had ouer their enemies. True∣ly the Empire of the wicked doth much more maintaine it selfe by our pusillani∣mity, then by its owne power or forces; nor doth any thing cause▪ Vertue to be so badly followed, as doth the weake and vnskilfull teaching and explanation there∣of. It were therefore requisite, some wise man, who had beene in this Countrey, where there is continuall debate, and where there is neuer eyther peace or truce,
(called the Colledge of Sarbow;) and who besides had the art to make good things gratefull, and could bring matters to at∣tonement by a sweete hand; should come to cleanse the Court from those opinions lately introduced, and cure Soules in∣stead of wounding them with iniuries. It was that great Cardinall who triumphed ouer all humane spirits, and whose me∣mory shall euer be sacred, so long as there remaine any Alltars▪ or that oblarion is of∣fered on Earth. It was I say the Cardinall of Perron, who was able to shew Epiourus himselfe, something more sublime and transcendent then this life, and cause his fleshy soule to be capeable of the greatest secrets of Christian Religion. Though this man had a dignity equall in hight to the greatest Conquerors and Monarchs: Yet had he (in what concerned Religion) an heart as humble as that of decreped men and Infants. How often hath hee (with those two different qualities) imposed silence vpon all Philosophyi, and spoken of Diuine matters, with as great perspi∣cuity
as though he had already beene in Hea∣uen; or had seene the same diuine veri∣ty wholy discouered, whereof here on earth, we haue onely a confused vnderstan∣ding, and imperfect knowledge. To tell you in plaine tearmes, but for the workes of this diuine person, which I as highly e∣steeme as the victories of the late King his Maister, and wherein I desire alwayes to leaue mine eyes, when I am necessitated to giue ouer reading: I had beene much trou∣bled to retire my selfe from the tracing the Booke you sent me, since any mischiefe doth so easily catch hold of mee, when I come neare it, as I can hardly looke vpon a beg∣ger without taking the itch, and my ima∣gination is so tender and delicate, as it is sen∣sible▪ and afflicted at the sight of any base obiect; yet thankes be to God, and the An∣tidote I continually take, I am the better armed against the conspiracy you intended against me: and haue yet life in me, after ha∣uing beene vnder a fooles hands longer then I desired. But by what I can gather, he is notwithstanding in good repute in the
place where you are, and likely enough to finde store of such as will follow him, in that he is head of an euill party. I can here∣vnto answere you nothing, saue onely that betweene this place and the Pyrenean Moun∣taines, good wits doe sometimes stray from common opinion, as from a thing too vulgar; and doe often take counterfeit ver∣tues, yea, euen those who haue not any re∣semblance to the right, for perfect varities: But when I consider, how there is scarce a∣ny kind of beast which hath not heretofore beene adored among Idolaters, nor any dis∣ease incident either to the body, or minde of man, whereunto Antiquity hath not erected Temples. I doe not as all maruell, why di∣uers mon doe sometimes esteeme of those, who are no way deseruing; or why simple people should hold Sots in high reputation, since they haue addressed incense to Apes and Orotadiles. The thing I most vee as herin, is, that both your selfe & I, are in some sort ob∣liged to the Author of the book you sent me, & that I haue receiued the beginnings of my studios, and first tincture of Learning from
the last, and least estimable of all men. For my part, I protest before all the world, I am not for all that guilty, either of the follies he will fall into, or of any such as he hath for∣merly cōmitted: and that hauing had much adoe to purifie my vnderstanding from the orders of the Colledge, and to quit my selfe from peruerse studies, I haue now no other pretention, but to follow such as can no way be reproachable vmo mee. How soe∣uer, I should not reiect Chastity, though my Nurse had died of the Poxe; and it may sometimes happen, that a bungling Mason may lay some few stones in the building of the Loouer, or at the Queene-mothers Pallace. LETTER XXV. THe Letter newly deliuered vnto me from you, is but three Moneths and an halfe old: it is an Age wherein men are yet yong, yet some Popes haue not reigned so long, and in the state wherein the Churches▪ affaires haue often stood. You might haue written vnto me at the beginning of one Papacy, and
I had receiued yours at the end of another; howsoeuer▪ J can no way better imploy my patience, then in attending my good for∣tune; and as it was the vse to be inuited a yeare before hand to the Sybarites Feasts, so is it fitting you make me long attend the most perfect content I enioy in this world. I doubt not but T. T. seeketh all occasions to doe me ill offices, and that my absence af∣foordeth him much aduantage to wrong me; but on the other side, I cannot thinke men will more readily beleeue mine ene∣mies words, then mine owne actions; or that it is sufficient onely to slander an honest man, to make him presently wicked. It is true what he saith, that I am not very vse∣full for Adamantaes seruice, I will at all times readily yeelde that quality to his Coach horses, & to the Mules that carry his Coffers: Yet am I too well acquainted with the Generosity of that Signiour, to thinke he doth more esteeme the body, then the soule, or to suppose that a Farmer should be of higher consideration with him, then a man of worth. What confession of Faith
soeuer R. makes, I will not imagine hee can euer be really altered: I had rather both for mine owne contentment and his ho∣nour beleeue, it is onely a voyage he hath made into the Aduersaries Countrey, to the end to bring vs some newes, and to giue vs account of what passeth at Charen∣ton: Surely, I suppose, I should not wrong him so much in holding him for a Spye a∣mong Enemies, as to call him a forsaker of his side, and a Fugitiue from that Church, whereto he hath at least this obli∣gation, (if he will confesse no other) that it is she who made him a Christian. You may doe me a courtesie, to make mee ac∣quainted with the cause mouing him to forsake vs, and to goe from those Max∣imes hee hath so often preached vnto mee; That a wise man dyes in the Religion of his Mo∣ther: That he neuer alters his opinion: That hee neuer repents himselfe of his forepassed life there∣in: That all Nouelties are to him suspicious. It is long since J knew, that no mans cause can be bad in the hands of Mounsieur 'd Andilly, and that he betters all he affects:
he interessed himselfe in my protection, the first day he saw any workes; so as it is not any more my selfe whom hee com∣mends, but his owne Iudgement, which he is bound to defend: Yet will I not de∣sist from being much obliged vnto him: For I supposing one affoords mee a fauour, when at any time hee doth me Iustice, you may well thiuke, I haue right particu∣lar, and most tender sensibilities for those courtesies I receiue, but they are in speci∣all regard with me, when they come from a person of so high estimation in my thoughts as he is, and of whom I should still haue much to say, after I had related, how amidst the corruption of this age, and in the authority Vice therein hath gained, he hath notwithstanding the fortitude, to continue an vpright man, and blusheth not at Christian vertues, nor vanteth of Morall ones. I hope to see him within few dayes, and to take possession of some small corner in his House at Pompona, which hee hath prouided for me, there to breath at mine ease, and to set my spirits
sometimes at liberty. In the interim you must needes know, about what I busie my selfe, and that I tell you, I entertaine a foole, in whom I finde all the Actors in a Comedy, and all sorts of extrauagancies in∣cident to the spirit of man. After my bookes haue busied me all the morning, and that I am weary of their company, I spend some part of the after-noone with him, partly to diuert my thoughts from serious things, which doe but nourish my Melancholy. E∣uer since I came into this world, I haue bin perpetually troublesome to my selfe, I haue found all the houres of my life tedious vn∣to mee; I haue done nothing all day, but seeke for night. Wherefore if I desire to be merry, I must necessarily deceiue my selfe, and my felicity is so dependant vpon exteri∣or things, that without Painting, Musicke, and diuers other diuertisments, how great a Muser soeuer I am, I haue not suffici∣ent wherewith to entertaine my selfe, or to bee pleased. Thinke not therefore, that either my foole, or my bookes are suffi∣cient to settle my contentment; nay rather
if you haue any care of mee, or if you desire I should haue no leasure to be sad, make me partaker of all the newes happning in the place where you are; let me fee the whole Court by your eyes, cause me to assist at all Sermons by your eares, giue me accompt of the good and bad passages happening this Winter, and that there part not a post, vn∣charged with a Gazetto of your stile, as there shall not any goe hence, who shall not bring▪ you some vision of my retirednesse▪ There runnes a rumour in these parts, that Mounsieur de Boudeuille is slaine, but since there are not many more hard atchieue∣ments to be wrought, then that, it is too great a death to be beleeued vpon the first report. The 1. of November, 162 LETTER XXVI. WEre I not confined to my bed, I should my selfe haue sollicited the businesse I haue recommen∣ded vnto you; nor should I haue suffered
you thus farre to oblige me in my absence. But since I cannot possibly part hence, ▪and am here constrayned to take ill rest, being farre more grieuous vnto me then agitati∣on; I humbly beseech you, to suffer these Lines to salute you in my stead, and to put you in remembrance of the request I made vnto you. Sir, I am resolued not to be be∣holding to any but your selfe, for the hap∣py successe wherof the goodnes of our cause assureth vs, and in case your Integrity should be interessed, I would owe the whole to your fauor: For besides, that you are borne perfectly generous, I doe not at all doubt, but the commerce you haue with good bookes, and particularly with Seneca, hath taught you the Art, To doe good to all men. But to the end the obli∣gation I desire to owe you, may be wholy mine owne, instead of referring it to the study of Morality, to your bountifull in∣clination, or to the Iustice of my request: I will rather imagine, I shall be the sole cause of this effect, and that you will act without any other assistance, out of the
loue you beare mee, who am passio∣nately Your most humble and most faithfull seruant, BALZAC. Paris the 2. of May, 1627. LETTER XXVII. GX. X. is resolued to leaue all worldly affaires in the state he found them, and these great cares which should haue ex∣tended themselues ouer the most remote parts of Christendome, haue not as yet pas∣sed the limits of his house: He preserues his old age, and prolongs his life by all the possible meanes he can imagine: But it is thought he will not long make his succes∣sor attend, and that his Death will be the first newes in the Gazetto. Phisitians and Astrologers haue concluded vpon this point, that he shall not see the end of Au∣tumne. For my part, I neuer made any great difference betweene a dead person, and an vnprofitable one; and if things lesle perfect, ought to be post posed to more excellent ones; it were a mockery to make choyce
of sicke folkes, and cause them to be ado∣red by those who are in health, or to put soueraigne power into their hands, to the end onely to haue them leaue it to others. But it is not my part to reforme all things displeasing me in this World, and I should be very vngratefull, if I blamed that forme of gouernment, wherein I finde my selfe very well: In effect (Sir) speake no more to me of the North, nor its neighbours; I de∣clare my selfe for Rome against Paris, nor can I any longer imagine, how a man can liue happily vnder your Climate, where Winter takes vp nine Moneths of the Yeere, and after that the Sunne appeareth, onely to cause the Plague, and (weake as it is) for∣beares not to kill men: There is not any place (Rome excepted) where life is agree∣able, where the body findes its pleasures, and the spirit his, where men are at the source of singular things. Rome is the cause you are neither Barbarian, nor Pagan, since she hath taught you the ciuility of Religion: She hath giuen you those Laves which arme you against errour, and those Examples
whereto you owe the good actions you performe. It is from hence Inuentions and Arts are come to you, and where you haue receiued the Science of Peace and Warre, Painting, Musicke, and Come dies are strangers in France, but naturall in Italy: that great Vertue it selfe you so much admire in your Court, is shee not Roman? That Martchionesse, of whom so many maruells are related, is shee not Countrey-woman to the Mother of the Graches, and to the Wife of Bratus? and in truth, to possesse all those perfections the World acknowledgeth in her, was it not fitting shee should be borne in a place whereon Heauen defuseth all its Graces? Truely, I neuer ascend Mount Palatin, or the Capitole, but I change spirit, and others then my ordinary cogitations seaze vpon me. This Ayre inspireth me with some great and generous thing I for∣merly had not; and if I muse but two houres vpon the bankes of of Tyber, I am as vnderstanding, as if I had studied eight dayes. It is a thing I wonder at, that
being so farre off, you make so excellent Verses, and so neare the Maiesty of Vir∣gils. I suppose therefore, none will blame me, for hauing chosen Rome for the place of my abode, or for preferring flowers be∣fore snow and yce. If men choose Popes of threescore and ten yeeres old, and not of fiue and twenty, the dayes are therefore neither sadder nor shorter, nor haue wee any subiect to complaine of our Masters debility, since we are thereto obliged for our quiet. From Rome the 25. of March, 1621. LETTER XXVIII. IT is not to answer your excellent Letter, I write you this, but onely to let you know, you haue so absolutely acquired me to your seruice, as you haue left me no liberty to doe what I desire, when there is any question of performing your plea∣sure. Since therefore you and your Prin∣ters haue conspired against my quiet, and that you determine to make my infir∣mities
as publicke, as though you meant to leade me to the Hospitals or Church∣porches; J am co ntented with closed eyes to obey you, and to put my reputation to aduenture, rather then seeme to refuse you a thing you haue demanded of me. Mounsieur the Priour of Chiues, to whom I communicate my most secret thoughts, and in whose person you shall see that I know how to make good electi∣ons, (in deliuering you this Letter) may conclude it, and acquaint you with the power I haue giuen you ouer all my de∣sires; truely, it hath no other bounds then impossibilities. Since as for those which are onely vniust, I beleeue I should make small scruple, to violate the Lawes for your sake, and to testifie vnto you, that vertue it selfe is not more deare vnto mee then your Friendship; this is Your most humble and most affectionate seruant, BALZAC. The 4. of Ianuary 1624.
LETTER XXIX. BEing now ready to alter my course of life, and part hence to come to Court, I held my selfe obliged to aduertise you, that herein I doe, what I haue no minde vn∣to, and that they haue pulled me out from a soyle, where I suppose I had taken roote. It much afflicts me, that I must forsake the company of my Trees, and part from that pleasing solitude my good Fortune had cho∣sen for me, before I was borne: But since all the World driues me out, and because what I call repose, my Friends tearme Pusillanimi∣ty; I must suffer my selfe to be carried away with the presse, and to erre with others, since they will not let me doe well by my selfe. Vpon my Conscience it is not out of mine owne ambition that J am high-min∣ded, but out of my Fathers; and if people of his time had not measured things by the e∣uents, and had not belecued those onely to be wise, who are fortunate, I should not haue busied my selfe in searching at Paris, for
what I ought to haue found in my selfe: But truely I haue so great obligation to so good a Father, and the care he hath taken to hus∣band the good graine he hath cast into mee, and to finish mee after hee had framed me; haue beene so great and passionate, as there is no reason, I should follow my priuate in∣clination, by resisting his intention. I goe therefore since it is his pleasure, to liue a∣mong wilde beasts, and to expose my selfe to hatred and calumny, as though the Feauer and Scyatica were not sufficient to make me miserable. At my first approach the Grammarians will call me into question, because I put not the French word Mensonge into the feminine gender, and doe not beleeue the Iurisdiction they haue ouer words, is powerfull enough, to cause this word to change Sexe. Those who haue not as yet written, will set pen to paper against me, and the new Bridge will eccho nothing but my name and their iniuries I shall be much distasted to heare I am become an Author, and that I performe indifferent good peeces. The meaner sort of spirits will be much
mooued, in that I haue set so high a rate vpon Eloquence, and being vnable to fol∣low me, they will throw stones to stay me. The truth I haue not dissembled, will at once; offend our aduersaries and ill Preists; debaucht persons wil neuer forgiue me the P. P. they haue seene in my bookes; and Hypocrites will wish mee ill, because I set vpon vice euen within the Sanctuarie. See here (my deare friend) the persecution prepared for me, and of what sorts of peo∣ple the Army of mine Enemies is compo∣sed. In all apparance there is not any va∣lour able to surmount so great a Multi∣tude; and I should doe much better to en∣ioy the peace of my Village, and to eate Mellons in security, then to cast my selfe into this incensed troope, and to engage my selfe in an endlesse warre: yet since all Grammarians are not worth one Philoso∣pher, and in that the better part hath of∣ten the aduantage ouer the greater; I am in hope, Authority and Reason siding with me, I shall easily get the vpper hand of Multitudes and Iniustice. To taxe me
in these times wherein we are, is as much as to giue the lye to his Master, and to con∣demne the opinion of the prime men of our Age. Those who gouerne at Rome, and at Paris, make my labours their delights; and when at any time they lay aside the waight of the whole World, they refresh themselues with my Workes. But if some bad Monkes who in religious houses, as Rats, and other imperfect creatures may happily haue beene in the Arke, seeke to gnaw my reputation; Mounsieur de Nantes, and Mounsieur de Berulle will conserue it; and you know them for two men▪ whom the Church in this age be∣holdeth, as two Saints dis-interred out of the memory of her Annals, or two of those Pri∣matiue Fathers, whose Soules were wholy re∣plenished with Iesus Christ, and who haue e∣stablished the Truth as well by their Blood, as Doctrine. I haue besides, as an opposite to my Calumniators, one of the most perfect Religious this day liuing; I meane Father Joseph, whose great Zeale is guided by as e∣minent an vnderstanding, and who hath the same passions for the generall good of
Christendome, as Courtiers haue for their par∣ticular Interests. This irreproachable wit∣nesse knowes, I reuerence in others the Pie∣ty I finde not in my selfe; and if I performe not all the actions of a perfectly vertuous person, yet haue I at least all the sensibilities and desires. Mounsieur the Abbot of St. Cy∣ran, who is not ignorant of any thing falling within the compasse of humane vnderstan∣ding, besides the more sublime gifts and il∣luminations where with he is adorned, and who in a right profound Litterature, hath yet a more resigned humility, will answer for me in the same case; and though all these strange forces should faile me; haue I not suf∣ficient in the protection of the Bishop of Aire, and Mounsieur Bouthilier, who doe both of them loue me, as though I had the honour to be their Brother; and who are so sage, so iudicious, and so vnderstanding in all things, as it is not probable, they would begin to erre by the good opinion they haue of me: I suppose that hereupon I may ven∣ter to goe to Court, and that with so power∣full assistance, there are no enemies I neede
feare. Yet will I once againe tell you, and I beseech you beleeue mee, I would not part hence, were I permitted to stay; and that it doth not a little trouble me, to lose the sight of my pathes and allyes wherein I walke, without being enforced to weare Bootes, or haue any apprehension of Car∣roaches. From Balzac the 18. of October, 1624. LETTER XXX. I Am doubtfull to beleeue you speake in earnest in your Letter, and that he, of all men, who hath most cause to be satis∣fied with himselfe, should neede the as∣sistance of any other to comfort him. This is as much as to be distasted amidst the a∣bundance of all things, and to be vngrate∣full toward your good fortune, since in the height of those fauours you receiue, and expectation of those prepared for you; you notwithstanding seeke for forraine plea∣sures, and are sensible of petty content∣ments among great felicities. My writings are no obiects but for sicke and sad eyes;
yea, of such as will be neither cured, nor comforted: They may indeede flatter me∣lancholy, and affoord a man (in despaire) poyson not vnpleasing vnto him; but to contribute any thing to the satisfaction of a contented spirit, and to mingle thēselues with the pleasures of his life, without cor∣rupting all the sweetnes, is a thing I can hardly be drawn to beleeue: And I herein i∣magine you haue rather a designe to tel me some good newes, then to write a true Hi∣story vnto me. At the age of ooooo. you are seated vpon Flower-de-luces, and can you lye downe vpon Roses? You are wise, and haue not acquired the same with losse of your best yeares; you are borne the same wee desire to be at the best: on what side soeuer you cast your eyes, you find present felicities, and certaine hopes; and were there neither Loouer nor Pallace to pro∣mise you preferments or offices, the house where you are, may alone make you happy. There it is, where vertue hath no cause to complaine of the iniustice of Fortune, and where she is more commodiously lodged,
then among Philosophers; without going thence; you possesse whatsoeuer we desire in our wishes▪ and what we imagine in our dreames. The dayes which to mee are so long, and whose each moment J reckon, pasle ouer swiftly at Villesauin; nor can Riches annoy you in a society capable to make euen pouerty pleasing. What likeli∣hood is it then, this being so, you should be of your Letters opinion, and that you cannot be without me. It sufficeth mee, you sometimes haue me in your thoughts, as those in Heauen behold what they left on Earth: and that you receiue the votes and prayers I shall hereafter addresse vnto you, after the solemne protestation I am a∣bout to make, to remayne whilst I liue, Your most humble and most faithfull seruant, BALZAC. From Paris the 15. of September, 1617. The end of the Fourth and last Booke.
❧ A Table of the Letters contained in this Volumne of Mounsieur de Balzac: wherein the names of all those to whom his Letters haue beene written, are contained. The first Booke. THe Letter of my Lord the Cardinall of Richelieu to Mounsieur de Balzac. p. 1. The answere to my Lord, the Cardinall of Richelieu's Let∣ter. p. 5. The third Letter, to my Lord the Cardinall of Richelieu. p. 10. Fourth, to the same. p. 13. Fifth, to the same. p. 17. Sixth, to the same. p. 20. Seuenth, to the same. p. 24. Eighth, to the Lord Bishop of Ayre. p. 34. Nineth, to the same. p. 39. Tenth, to the same. p. 44. Eleuenth, to the same. p. 48. Twelfth, to the same. p. 58. Thirteenth, to the same. p. 61. Fourteenth, to the same. p. 68. Fifteenth, to Mounsieur de la Motte. p. 74. Sixeteenth, to Mounsieur de Bois-Robert. p. 86. The second Booke. TO my Lord the Cardinall of Vallete. p. 94. Second, to the same. p. 102. Third, to the same. p. 107. Fourth, to the same. p. 111. Fifth, to the same. p. 116. Sixth, to the same. p. 124. Seuenth, to the same. p. 128. Eighth, to the same. p. 131. Nineth, to the same. p. 135. Tenth, to the same. p. 140. Eleuenth, to the same. p. 144. Twelfth, to Mounsieur de Planty. p. 149. Thirteenth, to Mounsieur de la Magdelena. p. 152. Fourteenth, to Mounsieur de Montigny. p. 156. Fifteenth, to my Lord the Duke of Espernon. p. 158.
Sixteenth, from the same Duke to the King. p. 163. Seuenteenth, from the same Duke to the King. p. 165. Eighteenth from the same Duke to the King. p. 175. The third Booke. TO my Lord the Duke of Valete. p. 191. Second, to Mounsieur de Plelles, Gouernour of Talmont, and Marshall of the Field of the Kings armies. p. 197. Third, to Hydaspe. p. 202. Fourth, to the same. p. 217. Fifth, to Mounsieur de la Roche, Captaine of the Guard. p. 219. Sixth, to Mounsieur de Bois-Robert. p. 222. Seuenth, to the same. p. 227. Eighth, to the same. p. 235. Nineth, to the same. p. 240. Tenth, to the same. p. 245. Eleuenth, to Mounsieur Girard, Secretarie to my Lord the Duke of Espernon. p. 253. Twelfth, to the same. p. 257. Thirteenth, to the same. p. 260. Fourteenth, to the same. p. 261. Fifteenth, to Olympa. p. 265. Sixteenth, to Crysolita. p. 269. Seuenteenth to Clorinda. p. 271. Eighteenth, to the same. p. 273. Nineteenth, to the same. p. 276. Twentieth, to the same. p. 280. Twenty one, to the same. p. 284. Twenty two, to Lidia. p. 287. Twenty three, to Mounsieur de Ambleuille. p. 288. Twenty foure, to the Lord Mar∣shall of Schomberg. p. 223. Twenty fiue, the Lord Marshall of Schombergs an∣swere. p. 296. The fourth Booke. THe Letter to my Lord the Marshall of Schom∣berg. p. 298. Second, to the Lord Bishop of Angoulesme. p. 303. Third, to the Reuerend Father Garrasse. 306. Fourth, to the Lord Cardinall of Valete. p. 312. Fifth, to the same. p. 316. Sixth, to the Lord Bishop of Nantes. p. 320.
Seuenth, to Mounsieur de la Marque. p. 325. Eighth, to Mounsieur Tissan∣dier. p. 327. Nineth, to Mounsieur Far∣ret. p. 329. Tenth, to Mounsieur Coeffete∣au, Bishop of Marselle. p. 331. Eleuenth, to Mounsieur Pou∣zet. p. 334. Twelfth, to Madamoselle de Gourny. p. 336. Thirteenth, to Mounsieur Ber∣niere, President in the Court of Parliament of Roan. p. 342. Fourteenth, to Mounsieur de Voiture. p. 344. Fifteenth, to Mounsieur de Vaugelas. p. 347. Sixteenth, to Mounsieur de Ra∣can. p. 351. Seuenteenth, to the Abbot of S. Cyran. p. 354. Eighteenth, to Mounsieur de Malherbe. p. 369. Nineteenth, to Mounsieur de Vaugelas. p. 398. Twentieth, to the same. p. 372. Twenty one, to the same. p. 375. Twenty two, to the same p. 378. Twenty three, to the same. p. 382. Twenty foure, to Hydaspe. p. 384. Twenty fiue, to Mounsieur de la Estang, Aduocate to the Kings priuy Counsell. p. 391. Twenty sixe, to Mounsieur de Auaux, Master of requests of the Kings House, and Ambas∣sador for the French King at Venice. p. 396. Twenty seuen, to Mounsieur Borbonius, the Kings Greeke Professor. p. 398. Twenty eight, to Mounsieur de Bois-Robert. p. 401. Twenty nine, to the Prior of Chiues. p. 403. Thirtieth, to Mounsieur Bou∣thillier, one of the Kings Counsell, and of his Councell likewise in Parlia∣ment. p. 408.
ERRATA. PAge the 5. for, addresse, reade, write. p. ibid. instead of, or if, reade, or as if. p. 8. for, my fauour, reade, in my fauour. p. 10. for, and that Artemizaes goodnes, reade, and I suppose that Artemizaes goodnes. p. 48. for dumble, reade, dumbe. p. 13. for, addresse, reade, write. p. 32. line 11. reade, and that resolutions. p. 188. for, of chardly, reade, clearely. p. 186. for, variety, reade, vanity. p. 265. whose ouer long liuing, reade, for whose ouer long liuing. p. 160. for, tryed, reade, tyred. p. 348. for, importunies, reade, importunities. p. 55. for, at the worst, reade, at the most. p. 365. for, concerning, reade▪ conser∣uing. p. 369. for, you are, reade, you were. p. 291. for, orders, reade, ordures. p. 394. for any workes, reade, my workes. p. 14. for, I neuer die, reade, I neuer dine. p. 133. for Elixa, reade, Elixar. FINIS.
