13470 99848502 13600
A QVARTRON OF REASONS OF CATHO∣LIKE RELIGION, WITH AS MANY BRIEFE REASONS OF REFVSALL: By Tho. Hill. depiction of the Crucifixion Imprinted at Antwerpe, with Priuiledge. 1600.
A COPPY OF A LETTER SENT FROM TVVO CITIZENS of London, to theyr friend remay∣ning beyond the Seas for cause of Religion. WE had great hope (deare friend) that you would haue beene a stay and comforte to vs all, and an ornament to your kinred and Countrie, and therefore no costes nor charges were spared in bringing you vp in learning, but all was thought well be∣stowed, not doubting but if God spared you life, you woulde in time be able, not onlie to prouide well for your owne selfe, but also
to pleasure the best of your friendes. But wee see all to fall out quite contrarie, to our great griefe & endlesse anguish: for the blinde opi∣nions, and selfe-willed conceites which you haue taken, haue ouerthrowne the good for∣tune which otherwise lay before you, they haue discredited you with your kinred, dis∣graced you in your countrey, caused you to haue your natiue soile, and to leade a poore life in a strainge lande. And yet all these might in some sort be borne, were they not accompanied with the endlesse mone of your Parents. If you well remember, you were long since told, that if you perseuered to take, & to holde such opinions as you then began to doe, your burning woulde stande you in small steede, and consequently your kinse∣folkes and friendes should haue little ioy, or comfort of you. And so we see it is come to passe. Your aged Parentes neuer cease to vrge vs to write to you, to mooue you yet at the length to remember your selfe, and either by returning to amende all which is amisse, or else by shewing some Reasons to purge your selfe, and so to yeelde them some satisfaction. We therefore praye you in all kindnesse to write vnto vs, & if by no meanes
you will be drawen backe from this dolefull course, yet vouchsafe to set down some reasons of your Religion, to the ende you may cleare and purge your selfe of the suspition of sot∣tishnesse, and selfe-wilfulnesse. For you are mightily condemned, and of your kinsfolkes heere, thought to bee,Bud. ex Cicer. Opinator vehe∣mens, one very opinatiue, for that you sticke so stifly to the olde, which heere in a man∣ner of all sorts is vtterlye condemned as a grosse and a palpable errour. Yet haue not wee your louing friendes so base conceit of you, but wee rather thinke that you haue great and weightie Reasons (at the least in your owne iudgement) to mooue you to take so harde a course as you doe. Our desire therefore is, that wee may haue them written, and sent vs in as briefe manner as you possibly maye, (for to returne wee will not mooue you, except we thought you would conforme your selfe to the Lawes and Religion of your Countrey) thereby to shew and to declare to them who wishe you well, that you are no such opinions companion, as some woulde haue you to be. Thus hoping you haue a care to accomplishe our request, and not to reiecte our Letters, and neglecte
the aunswering of them, as your woonte and custome hath beene heretofore, with our most hartie commendations, wee commit you to God Almightie. London this 13. of Sep∣tember. 1599. Your very lo∣uing friends, R. & G.H.
A COPPIE OF THE ANSWERE TO THE LET∣ter afore-going. MY DEERE AND louing friendes, the 23. of Octob. Ann. 1599. I receiued your Letter, dated the 13. of Sep∣tember of the same yere. In it you giue me to vnderstand, how that my Parents, with other of my kindred, as also you your selues do greatly grieue for that you are frustrated of the hope, and expectation, you had of my worldly abilitie in time to come, with many other profes, of my blinde opinion, selfe-willed conceites, crossing my good fortune, of disgrace among my kindred, banishement, pouerty, and of other such like. All which wordes I count but as winde, or
as vaine florishes, the more for that I see all your affection towardes me to be meere car∣nall, and that you loue me, Amore con∣cupiscentiae, rather than Amore amici∣tiae, seeking your owne good thereby, as may appeare by your owne writing, yet doe I con∣ster all in the best manner. And whatsoeuer you write or say, I knowe doth proceede from loue and affection, and from true amity, but yet sauoring meerly of fleshe and bloode. I knowe my Parents to be kinde and louing, ac∣cording as nature giueth to them the instinct so to be, and I for my part am ready, & euer haue beene to yeelde to them all duty of an obedient Sonne, as also to you the offices re∣quired in a kinde friende. But this I must entreat both them and you, to giue me leaue to serue and to honour God Almighty, who is Father of all Fathers, and therefore more to be harkened vnto than any kindred, yea or creature whatsoeuer. Which thing I can∣not doe but by cleauing to this Religion, wherein I was Borne, Baptised, and Con∣firmed, and which I am most strongly per∣swaded in my vnderstanding and conscience, to be the onely true Religion. Which setled perswasion and assurance of Faith is not re∣mooueable
by any humane meanes, & there∣fore in vaine doe you write such letters vnto me, and in vaine doe my Parentes grieue at my course, for I more lament your state and theirs, than you doe mine. Assure your selfes that I can neuer be perswaded but that I take the only way to gaine Heauen, and so to saue my soule, and only for that ende doe I take this course of life, as God Almighty best knoweth, and mee thinketh you should not deeme it to be any discredite or disgrace so to doe, considering I cleaue to the Religion of all our Auncestours and Forefathers, which hath beene Vniuersall ouer all Christendome, for aboue these thowsand yeeres, and there∣fore cannot disgrace me, but it must disgrace the whole Christian worlde also. Indeede if I tooke or helde any newe opinions, as of Pu∣ritanisme, Brownisme, Martinisme, or of Family of Loue, or such like newe-sprung conceits, you might both iustly condemne my course, & be vtterly ashamed of such a brain∣sicke fellowe as should crosse his worldly wel∣fare by such sottishnesse, and selfe-wilful∣nesse. To satisfie my Parents and your re∣quest, I haue heere written and sent you a Quartron of Reasons of Religion, not intend∣ing
thereby to perswade you or others there, to this religion which I professe, because I know that to be daungerous, as prohibited by the lawes of the land wherein you liue; but onlie to shewe to them who wishe mee well, what groundes, and reasons I haue for my doinges. I could haue yeelded you so many (if I had thought it fit so to haue done) as would haue made vp a iust volume, and yet haue left be∣hinde me infinite moe: but I thought these to suffice, for that I know you haue not leasure, or at the least are vnwilling to trouble your selues with reading ouermuch of such matter. I tearme them a quartron of reasons, because that number is vsuall here in this Countrie, signifying the fourth part, or quarter of an hundred; for when they will name any num∣ber, as we vsually doe when we say a dozen, a scoare, &c. they say vnquartron, and by that number they commōly buy buttons, lace, &c. as we doe by dozens in England. Take them in good part my deare friendes, and assure your selues that wheresoeuer I liue, I will still carrie a true English hart with mee, by euer bearing a sacred & reuerent respect towards my Soueraigne Princesse, and my deare coun∣trie; as also a dutifull and obedient minde to
my louing Parents, and a friendlie affection towardes you: for I would not haue you to thinke, that liuing out of my Countrie for my conscience, doth any way hinder the duties a∣foresaid: for I call God to witnesse, who is the searcher of all hearts, that (my Religion re∣serued) I be are all loyaltie, affection, & fi∣delitie, which a poore Subiect ought to doe, towards our Soueraigne Queene Elizabeth, (whom I pray God bountifully to blesse, and allaue affection towardes my natiue Coun∣trie, with duty to Parents, and loue to kind∣red as is aforesaid. And thus desiring my fa∣ther & mothers blessing, with many humble commendations to them, and no fewer to you, I leaue you to our Lord, who send vs all of his heauenly grace. From my Chamber at Pha∣lempyne this 16. of Februarie Anno 1600. Your very louing friend. T. H.
THE I. REASON. If the Prophecies of the Holy Bible be true, (as they be most true) then must the Re∣ligion of the Protestants needes be false. BEFORE the comming of the MESSIAS, there was not any people, or nation which did serue the true and liuing God, but only the Iewes, all others whatsoeuer be∣ing ouerwhelmed in a Sea of blind∣nes, & worshipping false Gods, which indeede were Diuels, and therevpon the Maister Diuell LVCIFER vvas tearmed Princeps huius mundi: that is,Ioan. 12. Prince of this world, for that hee was ho∣nored and worshipped in all Lands, & Kingdomes, Iewrie, and that in part,
only excepted: which miserable state & condition God of his infinite mer∣cie greatlie pittying, promised in time to send a Sauiour, vvhich should Re∣deeme all nations & people, free them from that pittiful seruitude and blind∣nesse, and bring them to the know∣ledge of true and right Religion, by suffering death, and consequently by planting a Church, to the which al na∣tions should repaire. This he did fore∣tell by diuerse & sundry Prophets, as by Esay,Cap. 2. who saide the Church should be as a mountaine, to the which, All Nations should flowe. And many people shall goe and say: Come and let vs ascende to the mountaine of our Lorde: and after, Idolles shall vtterly be brused, and to be briefe, all this Chapter, yea all the rest in a manner fore-shewe the same matter, declaring most plainely the conuersi∣on of all Nations to the Church of the Messias,Cap. 49. & 60. Dan. 2. & 7. Isal. 47. Mich. 4. and how Kings and Queenes should come and doe homage vnto it, & that it should euer continue with∣out interruption, and that it should be most ample & large the Prophet Da∣uid
most manifestly foretelleth,Luc. 1. Psal. 71. saying that it should extend, From Sea to Sea, and from the riuer to the endes of the world, and howe the Aethiopians shoulde fall downe Before the Messias, with the kings of Tharsis, Arabia, and Saba, and to be short, all kings, and people should ac∣knowledge this Church, as innume∣rable propesies of the olde Testament doe plainely foreshewe. Heereupon it was that good men thirsted, & longed so greatlye for the comming of the Messias, knowing that by him all peo∣ple which sate in darckenesse, and in the shadowe of death, should be ligh∣tened, deliuered, and set in the right way to Heauen. And so our Sauiour himselfe beeing now in the way to Ie∣rusalem to suffer, saide. Nowe the Prince of this world shall be cast out:Ioh. 12. and If I shall be exalted from the earth, I will drawe all to to my selfe; meaning by his Passion to drawe al people from heathenish Ido∣latry to serue him. Nowe if the Reli∣gion of the Papists (as these new men tearme them) be false and erroneous, then is it against the Messias, and con∣sequently
it is a Religion of the diuels owne inuention, and he the master & inspirer thereof, and so by it he is ser∣ued and worshiped, and then must it needs followe that the Prophets were false, yea Christ himselfe said not true∣lye, in telling his Disciples, That the Prince of this worlde, that is, the diuell should then be cast out, and that hee woulde drawe all to himselfe, for that since his Passion, the diuell hath had a more large and ample dominion than he had before. For before the com∣ming of the Messias, the people of the Iewes, and Gentiles, and almost all Na∣tions, Trybes, and Kingdomes, haue beene euer in Lucifer his thraldome vntil this our age, in which Luther came to expell Lucifer, and to ridde all the worlde out of his captiuity. And so the Passion of our Rēdeemer auailed little or nothing at all for the space of these fifteene hundred yeres, & for a thow∣sand yeeres together he was not so far from drawing all vnto him as he saide he woulde doe,Ioh. 12. that he drewe not so much as one person, that any man can
name. And in our owne Countrey there of England, it is most manifest that all were Papists, without excep∣tion, from the first Christening there∣of vntill this age of King HENRY the eight.Luther. in postil. Ger 1537. part. 2. fol. 141. And so the Protestantes af∣firme of other Countries, and boldly say, that vntil this age, the Gospel lay in the dust, and was hidden vnder the benche, & CHRIST was vnknowen. Which to say (as the protestants must needes say, & blush not so to say in∣deed) is meer madnesse, & flat infide∣lity, and a plaine denying of Christ, & no small establishement of Maho∣mets religion. For the Protestants & Mahometanes agree in this, that the Church which Christ founded, fell some fiue or sixe hundred yeeres, af∣ter his Ascension, into most horrible errours, and then (say the Turkes) the Angell Gabriell was sent from God to Mahomet, to teach him how he should reforme the saide Church, because it woulde not stande with the wise∣dome, and goodnesse of Almightye God, to suffer his Church to vanishe
away through errous, & superstitions, without sending in time to reforme it. And in this out of doubte the Turkes haue far greater reason than the Pro∣testantes haue, which Protestantes by their Doctrine make Christ the most simple, and most improuident Lawe∣giuer that euer was in the world. For neither Plato, Solon, Lyeurgus, nor any other Lawe-maker whosoeuer, was so simple and improuident, as to fashion and plant a common wealth, which before it were well setled, should va∣nishe away, and come to nothing, ha∣uing no sufficient meanes to preuent errours, and such abuses as would o∣uerthrowe their Lawes, and destroie their common wealthes. And there∣fore if Christ be God, and the Holie Bible true, the religion of the Papists, must needes be that religion which he ordayned, and lefte to all genera∣tions, and consequentlye, the onelie true and right religion.
THE II. REASON. The name of Catholikes. NO man can iustlie deny, but that they who euer haue holden the name of Catholikes, and haue beene knowne thereby, were vndoubtedlie of true religion, for that they had e∣uer on their side the Scriptures, Mi∣racles, Fathers, Councells, and Mar∣tyrs, and for that euery one which was against them, was euer accounted, & reputed for an Heretike. And the same Catholikes were euer taken as the trounke, or as the bodye of the tree, and all others bearing the name of Christians, as braunches, or boughs cutte off the same tree. Nowe all the worlde knoweth, that whosoeuer in a∣ny age, was a member of the Romane Church, & vnder the obedience of the high Bishoppe thereof, hee was euer taken for a Catholike, and so ter∣med, although in these our daies it hath pleased the protestāts, to cal such
by the name of Papists, which indeed is all one with the name Catholikes, for that it signifieth such as followe & imbrace the Doctrine of that Church which hath for her head vnder Christ the Pope. And it is not amisse as Saint Chrysostome saith,Hom. 33. in acta. to be named of them who gouerne the Church in Christes steede, so that they take not their name of any particular man, as Here∣tikes doe. But yet the Catholikes are not called Papists, but only of a fewe Lutheranes in Germany, and of some others their adherents in other coun∣tries neere about, for in Greece, Asia, Affrike, & in the Indies, as in Italy, Spain, Sicily, and in other countries of Europe, the name of Papistes is vtterly vn∣knowne. The name therefore of Pa∣pists is no name commonly vsed, but only of a fewe, and neuer heard of be∣fore Luther inuented it, for that hee coulde not call them after the proper name of any one man, because there was neuer anye such in the Church, which either brought vp anye newe Doctrine, or chainged the Religion
of his Predecessours, whereas contra∣riwise, heretikes haue euer taken their names of some one who began that heresie: as the Nestorians, of Nestorius, the Pelagians, of Pelagius, Lutherans, of Luther, Caluinists, of Caluin, &c. And although Luther tearmed them Pa∣pists, yet knewe he so well in his con∣science, that they euer had beene, and ought to be called Catholikes, as that he caused his folowers to chainge their Creede, in saying:Brist. Mo. 1 I beleeue the Christian Church, and not:☜ I beleeue the Catholike Church: for feare least they should bee thought to confesse that they belee∣ued in the Church of Rome, which e∣uer was called Catholike. And it see∣meth that the Protestants knowe in their owne consciences, the name of heretikes to bee so proper to them∣selues, as that in their translations of the Bible, where the name Heretike occurreth, they put in place of it, a mā that is the author of sects: assuring them∣selues that the Reader finding the worde Heretike, or Heresie, woulde pre∣sently iudge it to be meant of them.
As for their own name, whereby they tearme themselues protestants (which name they take from certaine Luthe∣ranes in Germany, who first named them selues so, differing, and disagreeing altogether from these Protestants in Doctrine) it is newe, and neuer heard of before in the world, and of the same quality and condition, that the name Zwinglians is of. And therefore I con∣clude with the saying of Saint Hierome.Aduers. Lucif. Chrysost. in act. hom 33. & Iust. in Tryph. If any where thou heare, them, which are sayed to be of Christ, to be tearmed, not of our Lord Iesus Christ, but of some other, as Marcionites. Valentinians, Hil-bre∣thren, or Fielde-breethren, be thou sure, that they are not the Church of Christ, but the Synagogue of Anti-christ.
THE THIRD REASON. Vnity and Consent. THE Catholike Romane Religi∣on beeing receiued by so manie Nations, in Affrica, Asia, & Europa, & in this last age in both the Indies, hath notwithstanding such varietie of wits, such diuersity of manners, such multi∣tude of tongues and languages, such distance of places, such numbers of matters to be beleeued, yet euer kept Vnity, & Concord in such peaceable and consonant manner, as neuer anie one in England or Ireland, which are the vttermost parts of the west-world, dis∣sented, or disagreed in anye point of Doctrine, concerning Faith, from him which liued in the vtmost parts of the East. But whosoeuer they be, or in what place, or region soeuer they re∣main in al the world, if they be catho∣likes or papists (if you will call thē so) they all haue one Faith, one Beleefe, one Seruice, one number of Sacra∣mentes,
one Obedience, one Iudge∣ment in all, with other like pointes of Vnion, and Vnitie, which maketh a generall vniformitie also in the peace of mens mindes, and to be briefe they haue all one heart, and one soule: But on the other side,Act. 4. if you look into the doinges of Protestantes, you shall see such discentions, such diuisions, such schismes, such contrariety of opinions; as the like was neuer among the Arri∣ans, among the Eutychians, among the Donatists, among the Nestorians, among the Valentinians, no nor yet amongest the most iarring Heretikes that euer were. So as you may plainely beholde in Luther his seed the selfe-same thing that the Poets faine of Cadmus his sow∣ing; you may see the Madianytes & A∣malekites in one tent against the people of God;Ouid. Me∣tam. lib. 3. Iudic. 7. builders of the tower Babell, accusars of chaste Susanna: for they are not only different, and deuided from the generall body of Catholickes in Christendome, with whom they were vnited heretofore: but amongst them selues they haue implacable warres. I
would you did but see, what I haue seene in these Countries, as concer∣ning the deadly hatreds, contentions, and discentions of Luther his ofspring: as of the Muntzerans, Anabaptists, Ada∣mites, Steblerians, Sabbataries, Clanculari∣ans, or Gartenbrijder, Manifestarians, Dae∣monians, Commonholders, Byslipers, How∣ling Anabaptists, Dauidgeorgians, Memno∣nites, Polygamistes, Signifiers, Figurers, Va∣lewers, Pledgers, Presentaries, Metamor∣phists, Iudaists, Neutersacramentaries, Image breakers, Zelous Lutherans, Soft Lutherans, or Interimistes, New-Arrians, Trinitaries, Hell-maisters, Hell-tormentors, Antidaemo∣nians, Amsdorfians, Antadiaphoristes, Antosiandrians, Anti-Swenckefeldians, Anti Caluinists, Hand-impositors, Bisacra∣mentarians, Sacerdotales, Inuisibilists, Scrip∣turians, Adiaphoristes, Trisacramentarians, Quadrisacramentarians, Luthero Caluinists, Semiosiandrians, Maiorists, Penitentiarians, Noui-Pelagians, Politicke-Lutheranes, Swenckefeldians, Osiandrians, Stancarians, Antistancarians, New-Manichees, Stern∣bergers, and of such like: all which haue sucked their errors out of the dregges
of Luthers Doctrine, and yet forsooth, will be sound Protestantes all. And what diuisions you haue there in Eng∣land you may in some sort know, who doe (as I thinke) now and then heare preachers of different doctrine. What combats your Bishops, Councellours, & moderate sort of Protestants haue to defende their Parlimentarie Reli∣gion, and the QVEENES Proceed∣inges as they tearme it, against Puri∣tans, brownists, & other suchlike good fellowes, that by shew of Scriptures impugne it, you can not but know & see vvith your eyes. Neyther can it be aunswered, that the Sectes heere rehearsed differ one from another on∣lie in matters of small moment, for they differ and disagree in vveightie pointes of our Saluation, as might heere easilie be declared, but that it vvould not benifit this mine intended breuitie so to doe. This Vnitie of CATHOLICKES, and discorde of PROTESTANTES, most manifestlie sheweth, that as the Apostles vvere they, for whome our
SAVIOVR prayed to his FA∣THER, and vvas heard of him: Ho∣lie Father, keepe them in thy name, whome thou haste giuen mee, that they may be one, as wee also be one, Iohn seauenteene: so they of the CATHOLIKE ROMAN Religion, be they, for vvhome in the vvordes following hee prayed, and vvas heard: Not for them doe I aske one∣ly, but also for them, which shall beleeue, by theyr preaching in mee, that all may be one, as thou Father in mee, and I in thee, that also they in vs, may be one: and hereof it necessarilie followeth, that they be of the true CHVRCH, for that none but they obserue and keepe the Vni∣tie vvhich hee obtained for them of his Heauenlie FATHER.Aug. l. 18. de ciuit. dei. C. 41. And surelie it can not proceede but from the HOLIE GHOST, that all Sacred vvriters of the CATHO∣LIKE ROMAN CHVRCH, al∣though being men of diuers Nations, Times, and Languages, yet haue so vvonderfullie consented, and agreed amongest themselues, as wee see they haue done.
And lastlie, it is wonderfull to be∣hold, how all decrees of lawfull Coun∣cels, and of Popes doe agree in all points of Doctrine, one with another, although they were made by diuers men, in diuers places, at sundrie times, vpon diuers occasions, & against He∣resies, not only most different, but of∣tentimes contrarie one to another. This, no doubt, is the finger of God. THE IIII. REASON. Conuersion of Countries. IT is most plaine and manifest, that all Countries, which euer beleeued in Christ, were first conuerted to his faith by such, as eyther were precisely sent, or at the least-wise had their au∣thoritie from the Pope, which liued in the time, in which they were conuer∣ted. This thing is so openly set downe in the Historie of the first conuersion of euery Countrie, as no Protestant, were he neuer so impudent, can with∣out
blushing denie it. True it is, that Heretiks haue corrupted such as were Catholikes before, but that they euer conuerted any Heathen Nation to Christianitie can neuer be shewed. I know very well that Iohn Caluin to get glorie, sent certaine of his Ministers into new-found landes, but I neuer could heare that any of them euer cō∣uerted so much as one sillie woman to their Ghospell in those partes. The truth is, their agreement in doctrine was so great, that one destroying an∣others buildings, they became laugh∣ing stocks to the Heathens, & so were glad to depart with shame. But who knoweth not that the Catholikes, as they haue conuerted all to Christiani∣tie that euer were Christians: so in this age they haue brought infinite num∣bers to the Christian faith in the East and West Indies, by the meanes and labours of the most happie & holy Fa∣thers of the holy Order of S. Frauncis, of S. Dominick, & of the blessed Society of IESVS, which blessed Religious men in our owne Countrie there of
England, onlie in regard of theyr Sa∣cred function, are executed as Trai∣tors. And haue not these I pray you theyr authoritie from ROME? I will not here speake of the infinite num∣ber of Miracles vvrought by Catho∣likes in the conuersion of countries, & namely of those which are now done in both the Indies by the Holie Fa∣thers aforesaid, for that I reserue that matter for his proper place, but I vvould aduise you here diligentlie to weigh the sequele of the Assertion of the Protestants; how that if Papistes be not true Christians, & of the right religion, then doth it necessarilie fol∣low, that neither Spaniards, nor Por∣tingales, nor Sardinians, nor Sicilians, nor Italians, nor Germanes, nor Trā∣syluanians, nor Hungarians, nor Po∣lonians, nor Danes, nor Flemminges, nor Scots, nor Irish, nor English, no nor any Nation vnder Heauen had e∣uer true Religion, before Fryar Lu∣ther married Nonne Bore, before Iohn Caluine runne away to Geneua, before Peeter Martyr vvith his Fustelugges
came to teach at Oxford, and before a number of such like good compani∣ons, ledde only by sensualitie, & car∣nall zeale dishodded themselues, and became such spectacles to the worlde as euerie man knoweth. Which thing to affirme, is flatlie to denie Christ, & all Christianity, as I shewed in my first Reason. And surely I am greatly cō∣firmed in the Catholike Religion, be∣holding the Heauenly maner vsed by the professors thereof in gayning sou∣les to Almightie GOD, for that I see them neyther to spare goodes, nor la∣bours, no nor theyr owne liues, so that they may vvinne people to Hea∣uen. GREGORYE the thirteenth Pope of that name in these our dayes, spent all the renennewes of the Popedome in founding SEMINARIES & COL∣LEDGES in diuers Landes and Pro∣uinces, thereby to restore the Catho∣like religion. Manie Holie and Religious Priests doe goe dayly into Germany, into Hun∣gary, into Greece, into Palestina, into
Aegypt, into Syria, into Aethiopia, into Africa, into Moscouia, into Ireland, into Scotland, into England, and into other heretical & heathen countries, yeeld∣ing themselues to all daungers by sea, and land, and to all worldly miseries, hauing mortified all theyr carnall af∣fections, renounced all riches, honors, and kindred, and hauing made them∣selues most ready for their graue, and consequently for another world, mo∣ued only by the zeale of sauing soules. And it mooueth mee not a little to see vvhat patience, mildnesse, and quietnesse these men vse in all theyr dooinges. And I see also on the o∣ther side, that no protestant euer had so great zeale of his Religion, as that he would for spreading abroade the same, forgoe any worldly commodi∣ty, either by founding Seminaries, or Colleges in Countries, or by going, or sending where any difficulty or daun∣ger was, but as one wholly respecting this worlde, he walloweth in wealth, & pleasures at home, or if by any acci∣dent he be compelled to flie into for∣raine
Countries, hee may not trauaile except his preatie parnell goe vvith him; but such a one to goe simplie, & as they say, bona fide, to conuert others was yet neuer seene. And if by anie occasion offered vnto such, they goe about to plant theyr Ghospell anie vvhere, they doe it in such a turbu∣lent, and mutinous maner, and not by Epistles after Saint Paules vse, but by Pistols as Beza did, as euerie one may see what spirit pricketh them forward. Neyther doe they take anie other course in theyr proceedinges, but to destroy States and Kingdomes, & to displace lawfull Monarchies and Ma∣gistrates, as the Low-Countries, Germany, and Scotland can sufficientlie witnesse, and euer theyr beginning is of Pride and Enuie, as Luthers vvas; or by abu∣sing them-selues in theyr former e∣state, as Sir Iohn Caluin did, or by yeel∣ding themselues slaues to ambition, as they did in Scotland, or by following Lust and Leacherie, or of some such like brutish occasion, and neuer in∣deede vpon anie good ground, vsing
their religion only as a serueturne, when other meanes faile to atchieue theyr vnlawfull desires. It is plaine there∣fore in my iudgement, that the Ca∣tholiks are they, who euer fished sim∣plie and syncerely, with Saint Peeters Net, and therein haue enclosed my∣raculous multitudes of fishes, and that the Protestantes, by theyr extraordi∣nary, and late angling haue caught none, but such as were in a better, and more sound maner taken before. And although Freculphus writeth,In Chron. tom. 2. li. 4 cap. 20. that the Arrian heretikes conuerted the whole nation of the Gothes from Paganysme to the Faith, in the time of Valens the Emperour;socrates. lib. 4. cap. 27. sozom. l. 6 cap. 37. Theodo∣ret. lib 4. cap. vlt. yet it appeareth by Socra∣tes, Sozomenus, and Theodoretus, that the greatest part of those Gothes were Ca∣tholike Christians before, and after∣ward seduced by the Arrians: for He∣retikes cannot possiblie conuert anie to such faith as may make the conuer∣ted better then they were before, for that they hauing indeede the Scrip∣ture in some sort, yet haue not the true sense thereof, vvhich properly is the
sword of the spirit, and the wordes are rather the scabard, in which the sword is sheathed. And therefore they fight∣ing only with the scabard, without the sword, cannot wound the harts of In∣fidels. And no meruaile though they peruert Catholikes, for that men are prone to libertie, and to loosenesse of life, which by such doctrine is permit∣ted. So that they are indeed most apt∣ly by S. Augustine likened vnto Par∣tridges,lib. 13. con¦tra faust. cap. 12. which gather together young ones which they begot not; whereas contrariwise the Holy Church is a most fertle Doue, which continuallie bringeth forth new Pigeons. THE FIFT REASON, largenes of Dominion through the multitude of Beleeuers. THE Church vvhich the Messias was to plant, must be (as is afore∣said) dispersed throughout al nations & kingdomes, as the Holy Prophets most plainely foreshewed, and namely the Royall Prophet, speaking of the A∣postles, and Preachers, vvhich should Succeede them, saieth:Psal 18. Theyr sounde
went foorth into all partes of the Earth, and theyr wordes vnto the endes of the circle of the earth. And most manifestlie doth he foretell the largenesse of Christian Religion in the 71. Psalme. And S. Iohn saw the foure beasts,Apoc. c. 5. & the foure and twentie Elders fall downe before the Lambe, singing thus: Thou art wor∣thie Lord to take the Booke, and to open the seales therof, for thou hast bin slaine, & hast redeemed vs to God in thy Blood,Cap. 7. out of euery Tribe, & people, & Language, & Nation: & in another place: After these things, saith hee, I saw a great companie, which no man was able to nūber, of all Nations, & Tribes, and Peoples, and Tongues. These thinges with manie such like in Holy writ are no wise verefied in any Religion vn∣der Heauen, but onely in the Romaine Catholike Church; for that none but it (as euerie man knoweth) hath had any large scope to account vpon in a∣ny age. And it hath beene for these thousand yeares at the least through∣out both the Hemyspheres, in such sort as the sunne stretcheth not his beames further then it doth, and hath
done: yea, there is no tongue nor peo∣ple, nor climate in the vvorlde, which hath not heard of, & in some measure receaued the Catholike Romaine Re∣ligion. Neither can the Protestantes say, that the Church now beginneth to flourish, and to dilate it selfe in the worlde after so many ages; for that now it is growen olde and aged, as is most plaine, & to say that she increa∣sed not in her younge yeares, but now in her olde age is to make her a mon∣ster. She must therefore of necessitie, haue growen, & increased, & occupi∣ed, if not all the world, yet no doubt the greatest part thereof, and so hath the Catholike Romaine Church, and none but she done:Colloss. 1. for in the Apostles time shee began to fructifie in all the world. And in S. Irenaeus his time,Irenaeus. l. 1. cap. 3. Tertul. li. contra Iu∣daeos. ca. 4. Cyprian de vuit. ec¦cles. Atha∣nas. lib. de humanit. shee was spreade all ouer the vvorld then knowen, as she was afterwards in Ter∣tullian his time, and in the dayes of S. Cyprian, Athanasius, Chrisostome, Hierome, Augustine, Theodoretus, Leo the great, and Prosper, vvho in his booke De Ingratis hath these wordes.
verbi Chri¦sost. & Hi∣eron. in Mat. 24. Aug. in E∣pist. 78. & 80. ad He∣sychium. Theod. lib de legibus Leo. Mag. ser. 1. de S S. Petro & Paulo.Sedes Roma Petri, quae pastoralis honoris, Facta caput mundo, quic quid nos possidit armis, Religione tenet. Which thus may be Englished. Rome, Peters seate, whose Bishop is of Prelates Peereles Lord, Religion Lady makes of all, which armes do not afford. But the Protestantes peraduenture, will graunt that the true Church flou∣rished in those dayes, but not after∣wardes vntill this age, in which they haue reformed the same: yet is it most manifest, that it flourished afterwards euen vntill this our time, no lesse then it did before, if not more: for in Saint Gregory his dayes it was spread all ouer the world, as appeareth by his Epistles to the Bishoppes of the East, of A∣frike, Spayne, Fraunce, England, Si∣cilie. And by Saint Bede in cap. 6. can∣tic:In vita S. Bernardi. lib. 2. ca. 7. as also by Saint Bernard, who dis∣puting before Rogerius King of Sicilie, auouched that in those dayes, the East, all the West, Fraunce Germa∣nie, England, Spaniardes, and manie barbarous nations obeyed the Bishop of Rome. And in these dayes, it is all ouer Italie, all ouer Spayne, and in Fraunce, in most parts of Germanie, in Poleland, Boheme, besides Eng∣land,
Hungarie, Greece, Syria, Aethi∣opia, Aegypt, in vvhich Landes are manie Catholikes; and in the nevve world it flourisheth mightily, in al the foure parts of the world; Eastward in the Indies; Westward in America: Northward in Iaponia, Southward in Brasilia, and in the vttermost parts of Afrike. And to name somewhat more in particular some Countries, in which it is happely receaued of many, if not vniuersally of all, but yet in many lāds it is receaued of the greatest parte of the inhabitants, in Goa, in Malabar, in Cochin, in Bazain, in Colā, in Tana, in Da∣man, in Ciaul, in Coran, in Salsetta, in Pes∣caria, in Manar, in Trauancor, in Cogiro, in Bugen, in Cicungo, in Cicugne, in Oian, in Gomotto, in Gensura, in Xichi, in Ormuz, in Ternate, in Momoia, in Ambonio, in Ma∣cazar, in Cerignano, in Siligan, in Butuan, in Pimiliran, in Camigu, in Supa, in Sian, in Bacian, in Solar, in Malacca, in Tidor, in Selebi, and in the Ilandes of S. Tho∣mazo, S. Domingo, Madera, and in all those innumerable Islandes, vvhich the King of Spayne there possesseth:
So that the Catholike Romaine Reli∣gion hath had, and hath yet a far grea∣ter sway in the world, then any other religion euer had, or hath. And wor∣thie it is to be noted, that in no land nor countrie vnder Heauen euer was, or is, any persecution, of any moment against Papists (as you terme them) or against the Priests of that religion, in regard that they be Papists, or Priests made by authoritie from the Sea of Rome, but only in England. And in verie deede, the vvhole world doth wonder, that little England dare, and is not ashamed to doe that, which ne∣uer was seene in the world before: for let a Seminary priest (as they cal him) keepe him out of England, and hee is safe enough in any region vnder hea∣uen. This I say by the way, for that it greeueth me at the very hart, to heare that my deare country doth persecute that religion, which all the world hath ioifully embraced, or at the least, doth willingly tolerate, as though she were wiser then all the world besides is, or euer hath beene, or then al her Elders.
Or, as though Englishe Protestantes knewe, and sawe more, than all the whole Learned men of Christendome haue done for so many ages together. And I pray you, tell me, if an hearbe should be presented to you to eat, that al learned Physitions for a thowsand yeeres together, haue iudged to bee rācke poison, & only some one or two of later yeeres, haue begun to teache the contrary, without actuall experi∣ence whether it be so or no, but onlie by discourse, and newe arguments, of their owne braine, would you abstaine to eate it or no? Or if an action should be offered you there in England, which by all old Lawyers iudgement of for∣mer times hath beene taken for high-treason Ipso facto, & consequently losse of life, and lands, though some newer lawyers were of contrary opinion that nowe it is not, woulde you not looke twise before you would leape, except you were out of your wittes? But in this other case, although all auncient Diuines, and Doctours, for aboue a thowsand yeres together, haue taught
the Catholike Romane Religion, to be true indeede, and only Friar Luther a loose Apostata, and Sir Iohn Caluin, a seare-backt Priest for Sodomy, haue begun in our daies to teache the con∣trary, for feare of beeing punished by the Magistrates of the said Catholike Religion, for wicked, and badde life, yet will they Protestants rushe out, & cast at all, and will hazarde Hell, and all Eternity of tormentes thereon de∣pending. Who will denie this to bee headlong, and hare-braine dealing? Surely this vniuersal consent of Chri∣stendome, against two or three so contemptible authors of nouelties, are more than sufficient to induce anye man of reason to looke about him, and to consider what hee doth, and whe∣ther he may aduenture his soule vpon such inequality of testimonies, as this is betweene two, or three Nouellants, and twenty millions of holy & graue auncientes, and no doubt in West∣minster hall this difference of witnes∣ses woulde preuaile with anye equall, and discreet iudge or iurie. Neither
may the Protestantes nowe at length glory in their great number, as some of them haue donne, for that their Re∣ligion, is there in England, & in Scot∣lande, and some thereof in Irelande,Apol. Ec∣cles. Ang. and in the Lowe-countries, & in some parts of Germany, and a fewe of them in Fraunce, for they neuer yet passed into Asia, nor into Affrica, nor into Greece, nor into many places of Eu∣rope, much lesse into the Indies. But indeed if you rightly scanne their Do∣ctrine, you shall finde that your Reli∣gion Protestantine of Englande, is no where in the worlde else, & that Eng∣lishe seruice contained in your boke of Common praier is vnknowen, & con∣demned of all other Nations, and peo∣ple vnder the cope of Heauen. So that in very deed the doctrine of your Protestantes is taught, or receaued, no where but in Englande, and the Puritane Doctrine of Scotlande (the contrarietie thereof duelye conside∣red) is no where but in Scotlande, the Lutherane Doctrine taught in Den∣marke, is no where but in Denmarke,
and in a fewe places of Germany, the li∣bertine Doctrine taught in the Low-countries, is no where but in the Low-countries, and the like may be said of other sectes. Lastly, I doe heere consider with my selfe, if I should refuse the Catho∣like Romane Religion, so vniuersallie taught, receaued & professed through out all the worlde so many ages toge∣ther, and embrace any of these newe silly sectes, aduenturing my soul ther∣upon, what all my progenitours & an∣cestours, if they were here againe, and sawe me doe so, would say vnto me, I gesse they would vse such speeches as these: what doest thou condemne all our iudgementes, and doings? Doest thou maligne that Religion, which we so highly esteemed and sought to ad∣uaunce? Doest thou sende vs al to hel and damnation? Wilt thou iudge thy selfe wiser and more in Gods fauour than any of vs were? And many such like speeches I thinke they would vse.
THE SIXT REASON. Miracles. True miracles were neuer wrought but by them, who were of true religion, for that they are donne only by the power of God. Now it is so ma∣nifest that there hath beene almost an infinite number of myracles wrought by those who were of the Catholike Romane Religion, and neuer any by them who were not of that Church, since Christes time, as he who shal de∣ny it, may be proued no lesse impu∣dent and shamelesse, than he who shal denie, that euer there was any Masse saide in times past in England, or that euer there were any warres betweene Turkes and Christians, or that ther be any such countries as the East & West Indies. Which things if a man should deny, would he not of all men be dee∣med, not only impudent, but madde, drunken, or a foole? And surely the one is no lesse knowne by al approued
writers, and eie witnesses than the o∣ther. For as in the Gospell, and in the Actes, the holy Scriptures witnesse, that miracles were wrought by Christ and his Apostles, so doe most appro∣ued authors of euery age vntil this day testifie and recorde the continuance of the working thereof in the Catho∣like Romane Church, the which Au∣thors for the most part were eie-wit∣nesses of the saide miracles, as for ex∣āple. In the second age were wrought those wonderful miracles by the Chri∣stian Souldiers in the armie of M. An∣tonius,Tert. in lib ad Scap. & in apol. c. 5 Euseb. lib. 5. hist. c. 5. Oros. lib. 7. hist. c. 15 which Tertullian, Eusebius, Orosius, & the Emperoor himselfe haue recor∣ded. In the third age were the miracles of Gregorius Thaumaturgus, witnesses S. Basil lib. de spiritu sancto Cap. 29. Gregory Nyssen in vita eius. Hierom de viris illustrib. Ruffinus lib. 7. hist. cap. 25. In the fourth of S. Anthony, Hilarion, Martine, Nicolas, and of others. In the fifte, those which S. Augustine setteth downe lib. 22. de ci∣uit. Cap. 8. In the sixt, those which S. Gregory maketh mention of, lib. 3. dial. Cap. 2. & 3. In the seauenth, those
which were done in England, in the cō∣uersiō therof, writtē by the same Greg. li. 9. ep. 58. And by venerable Bede. l. 1. hist. Ca. 31. In the eight, the miracles of S. Cutbert, & S. Iohn in England, also Bede. lib. 4. hist. & 5. In the ninth, the miracles of Tharasius, writtē by Ignat. Nicen. & of others. In the tenth, the miracles of S. Romuald. recorded by S. Pet. Damian: of S. Wenceslaus, & of others which Surius writeth. In the eleuēth, the miracles of S. Edward k. & vir. of S. Ans. & of others In the twelfth, the miracles of S. Mal. S Barn. & of others. In the thirteenth, the miracles of S. Fran. S. Dom. S. Bonauent. S. S. Celest. & of others. In the fourteenth, the miracles of S. Bernardine, S. Kather. of Sieuna, & of others. In the fifteenth, the miracles of S. Vinc. S. Ant. & of others. And last of al in this our sixteenth age are the miracles of the glorious S. Fran. de Paula, of the holy Iesuit Zauer,Aug. de vtil. cred. cap. 17. & lib. cont. ep. fund. cap. 4. in the Indies, & of many moe. And therfore I say vnto you out of S. Ang. I am bound & tied in the Catholike Church by the band or chaine of myracles. And I am bolde considering, and moste steedefastlye
beleuing these infinite glorious myra∣cles of all times and ages in the Catho∣like Romane Church, to crye out to Almighty God, with Richard de S. Vi∣ctore lib. 1. de trin. cap. 2. Lord, if it be not true which we beleeue, thou hast deceaued vs: for these haue beene confirmed in vs by such signes and woonders as could not bee wrought but by thee. But on the contra∣ry part, neuer any Protestant coulde worke any myracle at all, but assay∣ing to make some shewe thereof, to make their Doctrine the more proba∣ble to their followers, felt the iust re∣uengement of God, who turned all to their shame and confusion, as hee did by Simon Magus,Egesippus lib. 3. de excid. hie∣rosol. ca. 2. by Cyrola the patriarke of the Arrians, as witnesseth Grego. Tu∣rones. lib. 2. hist, Franc. cap. 3. by the Dona∣tists. Optatus lib. 2. contr. Parmen. And in our daies by Luther, endeuoring to dis∣possesse a wenche, and by Caluin going about to delude his disciples, as you may reade in Hierom Bolsec. in vit. Caluin cap. 13.Vid. Staph in abs. resp And therefore they are most foolishe and miserably inconsiderate, who beleeue these newe fellowes, not
beeing able to quicken a flea, & leaue the doctrine of the Catholike Church cōfirmed with innumerable miracles. THE VII. REASON. Visions, and the gifte of Prophecie. AS TRVE Miracles neuer were wrought but by them who were of the true Church, so heauenly Visi∣ons, and the gifte of Prophecie, were neuer founde to bee but in the same. And therefore the holye Apostle a∣mongest other thinges which he vseth to commend his Doctrine, & himselfe to the Corinthians against Heretickes,2. Cor. 12. and false Apostles, he bringeth in this as one saying. Now will I come to Visions and Reuelations of our Lord, &c.2. Pet. 1. And S. Peter alleageth for confirmation of his preaching the trāsfiguratiō of our lord in the mount which he sawe,Mat. 17. Act. 10. & 11. & calleth it a Vision, he had a Vision of a sheet with al kind of beasts in it, whē he was to deale with the Gentiles. And for the trueth of Religion, and confirmation
of that which they did, Act. 2. he al∣leageth the prophecie of Ioell,Ioel. cap. 2 who say∣eth amongst other thinges: Your young men shall see Visions, and to bee briefe, of this sort is the whole boke of the Apo∣calyps. So that to see these kind of hea∣uenly Visions, and thereby to foretel things most certainly, is only amongst them who are of the true Church. For although there haue beene prophecies amongest the Heathens, yet were they not vndoubtedly true, as the Oracles of Apollo, & such like illusions, except they were for the confirmatiō of right Religion, as the prophecies of the Sy∣bills,Euseb. lib. 5. hist. cap. 16. & 18. and of Balaam. And the same may be saide of heretikes, as of Montanus, of Luther, of Muncer, and of such like, who loke vpon them to prophecie some to their vtter shame, & some to their own destruction. But the Catho. Romane Church hath had in it in all ages those which had true Visions,Cochlaeus in actis Lutheri. and the gifte of true prophecie, as Agabus. Act. 11. Gregory Thaumaturge, so Basil. li. de spiritu sancto Cap. 29. S. Anthony, the Abbote Iohn, of whom, see S. Aug. lib. 5. de ciuit.
Cap. 26. S. Monica, see Aug. lib. 3. Confes. Cap. 11. S. Benedicte see Gregor. lib. 2. dial. Cap. 15. S. Bernard, see in eius vita. lib. 4. Cap. 3. S. Frauncis, see in eius vita Bona∣uentura, with many others, for seldome was ther any who had the gifte of mi∣racles, but the same had this gifte also. And in these daies, I knowe diuerse and sundry Papists, (as you cal them) who haue seen vndoubtedly wonder∣ful Visions, which perhaps you maye see recorded hereafter, with sufficient and irrefragable testimony. THE VIII. REASON. Scriptures. NEither may here the Protestant reply, and say, that the Papistes builde vpon Miracles, Visions, Pro∣phecies, and vpon such like, but not vpon the WORDE, for al that they alleadge are most agreeable to the worde of God. Neither doe they teach any Doctrine but such as is deriued out of the holy Bible, & for the main∣taining
thereof, they are not compel∣led to denye certaine partes of Gods holy Booke, as the Protestantes, and their predecessours, heretiks, haue bin inforced to do. The Manichees, for that their heresies were so manifestly con∣futed by the Gospel of Saint Mathewe,Aug. l 28. con Faust cap. 2. & de vtil. cred. cap 3. and by the Actes of the Apostles, as they coulde coine no aunswere, nor other shifte, they denyed them to bee Scripture. The Ebinites, because the Epistles of Saint Paul disproued most plainelye Cyrcumcision, which they maintained, denied them to be Scrip∣ture. Luther reiected the Epistle of S. Iames, because it was so plaine against the doctrine, of onely Faith. His of∣spring refused the bookes of Tobias, of Ecclesiasticus, of the Machabees, and of some others, because in them is plain∣ly taught the Doctrine of the custody of Aungells, of Free-will, of Praier for the Faithfull Soules departed, and of Prayer to Saints, al whch they deny, and therefore must they needes denie those parts of the holy Bible. For he∣retikes euer framed the Bible to their
opinions, chainging, wresting, paring, & sometimes flatly reiecting, al which made ouerplainely against such Do∣ctrine as they deuised, and so doe most impudentlye the Protestantes nowe. Whereas the Catholikes euer squared their Doctrine by the line and the le∣uell of the Worde of her Spouse, and therefore neuer had cause to reiecte the least otte of the holy Bible, and at one worde, the Catholikes followe the Bible, but the Protestantes force the Bible to followe them. THE IX. REASON. Councells. THe Church of God hath euer bin accustomed, when any he∣resie did spring vp therein, to gather a Councell of Bishoppes, Prelates, and of other Learned Men, in which the trueth was approued, and the heresie condemned. And whosoeuer were condemned by such Councells, con∣firmed by the See Apostolike, were euer deemed, and in very deede, were
heretiks, & for such at length were ta∣ken of all men, & in the end vanished away. So were the Arrians condemned in the Nyceene Counsel, the Macedoni∣ans in the Councel of Constantinople, the Nestorians in the Ephesyne, the Eu∣tychians in the Chalcedonian, & others in other Councels. Al which heretiks, although they flourished for a time, and drewe manye people, yea Empe∣rours, Kings, States, & Countries after them, yet in time they came to no∣thing, & the councels which condem∣ned thē, were vniuersally embraced. And no doubt the late famouse coun∣cel of Trent, which by the same auto∣rity & order hath cōdemned the Pro∣testants & other sectaries for heretiks, will in time be euery where receiued, and these newe fellowes by it anathe∣matized, will vtterlye vanishe away. For indeed if a man consider the mat∣ter throughly, he shal plainly perceiue that these sects haue no likelihoode of continuance, by reason they haue no meanes to gather a Councel, & much lesse to decide matters therein, if it
were gathered, being without an head as they are, & euery one cleauing on∣ly to his own priuate opinion, & ther∣fore can neuer all meete together, or if by anye power they were compelled therunto, they haue no means to agre in one, for that they wil not yeeld to any iudgement, but what is framed of their own braine, & therefore it must needs be amongst them, as we see it to be, Quot homines, tot sententiae; So many men, so many opinions. Lastly I would haue you here to marke the dealing of heretiks, who play by generall Coun∣cels euē as they play by the scriptures, for they take & leaue as they luste, & as best serueth their turne. There haue bin in all, general Councels 18. Al ga∣thered, allowed, & confirmed by one & the selfesame autority, of which the Greeks receiue only 7. the Lutherans,Concil. Florent. sess. 5. & 6. Magdebur cent. 8. cap 9. & cent. 9. cap. 9. the first 6. the Eutychians which are in Asia onely the first 3. the Nestorians which are yet in the East, onely the first 2. the Trinitaries which are in Hungary, and Poleland, receiue none at all: Beholde the libertie of your Gospell.
THE X. REASON. Fathers. THE Catholike Romane Religi∣on is most plainely taught by all the auncient Fathers of the first, se∣cond, third, fourth, fift, and sixt hun∣dred yeares after Christ, and hath bin euer, (without al controuersie) taught of the Fathers of euerie age since vn∣till this day. That religion did Dyony∣sius, Areopagita, Saint Paule his Scholler, so manifestly teach,Causaeus dialogue. 5 & 11. as Causaeus a french Protestant called him for his labour, a doating old man, much like as his Fa∣ther Luther had said before him, that, Areopagita his vvorkes vvere like to dreames,In Capt. Babilonica and most pernicious. The same faith was taught of saint Ignatius, Clemens, Iustinus, Tertullian, Cyprian, Ire∣naeus, and in one word all the auncient Fathers not one excepted. This is ve∣ry plaine in that the Catholikes are put, & compelled by the Protestants
to defend, maintaine, and vpholde the credit, and authoritie of the saide Fa∣thers; for the Protestants rayle at thē, the Catholiks defend them: the Pro∣testants refuse theyr authoritie, the Catholikes hold it for good: the Pro∣testants will not be tried by them: the Catholikes appeale to theyr iudge∣ment; and to be briefe, the Protestāts make no more account of them, long∣er then they can wrest them to serue their turne, then thy doe of Beuis of Southampton, or of Adam Bell. And in naming the Protestants, I include all the Puritanes: for I am not ignorant how the saide Protestants are driuen by the said Puritanes, to defende the Fathers, and also are called papists for theyr labour. And hereby it is mani∣fest that the Fathers are with the Ca∣tholikes, and neyther with the Pro∣testants, nor Puritanes. And whether all those auncients, being men of ex∣cellent wittes, of continuall studie, of wonderfull learning, feruent in pray∣er, holie in conuersation, greatlie in Gods fauour, mightie in vvorking of
miracles, & adorned with many such like giftes, were more like to vnder∣stand the Scriptures freshly deliuered vnto them from the Apostles them∣selues (who also no doubt, taught their schollers the true sense thereof, and they theirs, from one age to another,) or these late foolish, vnstudied, vn∣learned, prophane, and arrogant fel∣lowes, be iudges your selues But in∣deed it is no maruaile though the pro∣testants doe contemne, yea reuile the Fathers,Luther in Capt. Bab. Causaeus, vbi supra. Centuriat. centur. 2. cap. 10. Caluin in∣stit. cap. 13 num. 29. Centur. 2. cap. 5. Causaeus dialog. 8. & 11. & 6 beza in act Apost. ca. 23. in saying they taught thinges most like to dreames; they were doating oldmen; they had foule blemishes, and tolde trifling tales; they had weedes and dregges, blasphemyes, and monsters: they were child∣ish, dull, and destitute of God, & babled they knew not what: they were bewitched of the Diuell, as damned as the Diuell, blasphemers, naughty, wicked: for they who cannot endure certaine set times to fast in, no meruaile though they reuile S. Basil, S. Gregory, Nazianzene, S. Leo, S. Chrisostome, which wrote such notable Sermons of Lent, and of other fasting dayes, then vsed as they are now in the Catholike
Church. And they, who be giuen to Lust, to Gluttonie, to Ambition, to Couetousnes, and doe teach such do∣ctrine as necessarilie bringeth foorth such fruites, must needes contemne S. Basil, S. Chrisostome, S. Hierome, and S. Augustine, who haue written so excel∣lently of the Order, Rule, & Vertues of Monkes. And generally whereas the Doctrine of the auncient Fathers is cleane contrarie to the Doctrine of Protestants, no meruaile though they be reiected by thē, as they euer haue bin of Heretikes. And although Iwell in his Sermon at Paules Crosse, most impudently challenged the Catholiks to bring any thing for certaine points of theyr Religion out of the Doctours of the first sixe hundred yeares: yet Laurence Humfrey his pue fellowe,Humfridus in vita Iw∣elli. con∣fessed that hee gaue, and graunted to the papists more than was meete, and vvas to himselfe iniurious, &c. and so hee confessed against his companion, that the FATHERS of the Primitiue Church were on the Papists side, and consequently not on theirs. And yet
because they haue founde by experi∣ence, that to teach Doctrine contrary to the auncient Fathers, soundeth but badlie in the peoples eares, in theyr Sermons they gladlie now & then al∣leadge the authoritie of some Doctor or Father, vvhen they can by anie meanes wring, or wrest any peece of a sentence so, as it may seeme to make for them And indeede hee vvho al∣leadgeth the Doctours most, is most praysed of the audience, as you vvell know, which is a pittifull thing in thē, and ridiculous in the Preacher, vvho cannot but know, (if he haue read any of them himselfe) that the Fathers de∣test vtterly that Doctrine which hee wresteth them to confirme, and in the meane time the pore audience think∣eth that they were of this new Religi∣on, vvhose simplicitie therein is most pittifullie abused, by the Preacher.
THE XI. REASON. Triall of Trueth. IT is manifest by the Holye Scrip∣tures that it appertaineth to the Church to try & to discerne spirits, as also to determine & to decide doubts. And agreeably therunto shee hath in all ages mastered, ouer-ruled, & cap∣tiuated the vnderstanding of euerye one, were hee neuer so wise, neuer so learned, or had he neuer so extraordi∣nary giftes, except he obstinatly de∣fended an errour, which if he did, hee was condemned for an heretike, & so came to nothing. The Chatholike Church, I saye, directed by the Holye Ghost, hath euer separated from the trueth, all moales, all singular opini∣ons, al errours and corruptions in eue∣rie mans workes and writings, in such sorte as that easilie and securelye eue∣rie one maie knowe the trueth. And certainelie the Protestantes although they saye that they giue no credite to the CHVRCH, but so farre forth as
they finde in their Scriptures, doe, & can not otherwise but receaue the same Scriptures vppon the Catholike Romane Churches credit, & also the three Creedes of the Apostles, of A∣thanasius, and of Nice, and some Arti∣cles of beleefe, as, the Holy Ghost to proceed from both the Father & the Sonne, & yet as from one beginning, and many tearmes, as, Person, Trini∣tie, Consubstantiall, Sacraments, &c. which none coulde euer haue inuen∣ted, but onely the Catholike Church. Neyther is it possible for any man to know whether this Bible, which is v∣sed amongest Christians, be the true word of God indeede, or some fained thing, but onely vppon the Catholike Romane Churches credit. And Saint Augustine confesseth plainely, that he would not beleeue the Ghospell, but that the authoritie of the Catholike Church moued him thereunto.Con. Epist Manich. c. 5. lib. 2. de doct. Chr. cap. 8. And by the same Churches authoritie hee was mooued to beleeue the bookes of Tobie, Iudith, Canticles, Wisedome, Ecclesi∣asticus, Machabees, &c. as he himself sin∣cerelie
affirmeth. And surely it is wō∣derfull to see, how the Church of God receauing the Olde Testament from the Iewes, and manifesting to the world the Canon of the Holy bookes of the new Testamēt, hath in al times, in so many alterations, and chaunges, kept from the destruction, & corrup∣tion of Heretikes, Iewes, and Panims the whole authenticall corps of Holy Scripture, in such maner, as no Here∣tike in the world can charge her with adding, or diminishing the least iote thereof. Iudge you here whether the madnes of these new fellowes, be wor∣thie to be wondred at, or no, who doe credit and beleeue the Church in this point, and will not doe the same in o∣thers? Why should they rather trust the Church in this, thē in other things. And I would euery man would here consider the wonderfull integritie of the Catholike Romane Church, in keeping the Holy Bible so entire, and vncorrupted these fifteene hundred yeares together at the least, and the a∣theisticall treacherie of these of the
the new Religion, who occupying no Bible, nor hauing to doe with the ho∣ly scriptures for a thousand yeares to∣geather (as they themselues confesse) haue after the vniust vvresting it out of the handes of the iust possessors thereof, robbed the Church of so ma∣ny whole bookes, & besides of so ma∣nie partes, and particles of the same. What these fellowes would bring the Holy Bible vnto in time, if they shuld hold on, they may easily gesse, vvho know their manifold corruption ther∣of in so few yeares. And yet forsooth, they vvill haue all controuersies to be tried by only scriptures; which if they were not by them corrupted, & false∣lie translated, yet could theye neuer finde out any secure truth by them only, for that none of them alloweth anie other mans exposition but his owne, and in so dealing they can but haue a gesse, or an opinion, or fantasie, but no faith at all. Which thing to de∣clare more plainely; I aske the Prote∣stant how he relying vpon only scrip∣ture, can shew mee certainely vvhich
bookes be Scripture, and which not? And if hee be vnlearned, how know∣eth hee that the translation which hee vseth is truely made out of Hebrew, Greeke, & Latine? And then how is hee sure of the sence, & exposition? And if he be neuer so learned, & haue neuer so many helps, all that hee can search and finde out, is but a priuate mans o∣pinion, and consequentlie, his Faith which hee seemeth to haue, is groun∣ded vpon his owne particular iudge∣ment, and so indeed is no faith at all, but an opinion onely, as I said before: for faith must haue Gods expresse au∣thoritie for her foundation. Here you may consider the miserable state, and condition of your newe Ghospellers: in that forsaking the Catholike and v∣niuersall faith of Christendome, deli∣uered to thē by the vniuersal Church, as founded vppon Scripture (vvhich Church Christ and his Apostles gaue thē expresse Commission to beleeue) which was properly Faith, & founded vpon a rocke which could not faile; in that forsaking (I say) that fortres, they
cast themselues into the waues of new opinions, whereby they haue no cer∣taintie at all, but euery one chuseth vvhat hee liketh to himselfe, vvhich choise is properly called Heresie, and so the word signifieth. And let anie Protestant in our Countrie of Eng∣land tell mee, why he doth rather be∣leeue his owne iudgement in points of Religion, then the iudgement of Lu∣ther, Caluin, and Beza, whome he think∣eth were so excellent men? for eue∣ry one that hath any learning know∣eth that they taught otherwise then now is taught in England. This you may plainely see the only touchstone of truth, to be the Catholike Church, which cannot faile, and that they who cleaue to her iudgement, haue most vndoubtedly the truth; whereas on the other side, they, who ground only vpon Scriptures, expounding them according to their owne fantasie, and braine, playing the Maisters, and Pi∣lots, and Boat-swaines themselues, & admitting no iudge, no interpreter, no antiquitie, nor any other manner
of tryall, (which is the greatest mad∣nesse, and malediction that can be) must needes be destitute of all cer∣taintie, and of all Religion, and of all stay, and of all foundation, and of all rule, and of all order, and must needes wrangle and iangle without end, and without meanes to make an end, and must needes cause Nouelties without number, and libertie of life without feare or force of Ecclesiasticall Disci∣pline to restraine them; and to con∣clude, they haue no meanes to rest, vntill the end in Atheisme. THE XII. REASON. The vse and custome of the Church. THE vse, custome, and practise of the Church, hath (as it vvas in the prime thereof.) beene alvvaies an infallible rule to direct and order thinges by.
This the Apostle, after manie argu∣ments, to prooue that women should not be beareheaded in Churches, ap∣plyed as a Fort most stronge, and in∣uincible to beare downe the gain-say∣ers thereof: If any man (saith hee, not∣withstanding mine argumentes) doe seeme to be contentious,1. Cor. 11. we haue no such cu∣stome (as women to pray vncouered) nor the Church of God. And agreeablie vnto this Saint Augustine saith: If the whole Church throughout the world doe vse any thing,Epist. 118. cap. 5. onely to call in question, wheather that thing should be so done, is a point of most proude, or most straunge madnesse. And for this cause against the Pelagians, hee ar∣gueth ordinarilie out of the Churches custome, proouing Children to be borne in sinne,Epist. 105. because the Church doth Baptize them for Remission of sinnes. And because the Church v∣seth to Exorcise them, and to blowe vpon them, therefore the Diuell hath power ouer them, and that by sinne. And to this saith hee, the Pelagians with all theyr crafte coulde not answere: for they durst not say, (as the Protestants
say) wee care not for the Churches custome, wee weigh not thereof.De bono perseu. ca. 23. Manie such like argumentes hath the same Saint Au∣gustne else vvhere: But in few vvordes the custome of the church was a thing so vndoubted, as neuer any Heretike before this our age durst aduenture to stand against the same altogether: But Heresies euer consisted only in some matter of erronious iudgement, and false opinion, but the teachers thereof neuer went about to chaunge the face of Religion, as to take away the Sa∣crifice of the Church, as the Prote∣stants are bold to doe. And surelie in this point the malepeartnesse, and des∣perate boldnesse of the new Ghospel∣lers is wonderfull, who durst not one∣ly attempt to chaunge diuers pointes of the Churches vse, & practise, which in all ages, of all men, was accounted so heinous an offence to doe, but also made no bones to take all quite away, Customes, Ceremonies, Orders, yea and the Holie Masse it selfe, placing in∣steede thereof in some places Chap∣ters and Psalmes ill translated into the
Vulgar tongue, & in some other pla∣ces, Ballades made of Psalmes, com∣monlie called Geneua Psalmes, vvith rayling Sermons, and in other places other stuffe, as best pleased the hu∣mors of the deuisers thereof. And to these new inuentions (forsooth) must the common people be compelled to come, and to forsake & renounce the Seruice and Sacrifice of the Catho∣like Church, left by God Almightie, and continued euer through out all Generations, as it must doe (manger all Protestants heades) euen vnto the worlds end.
THE XIII. REASON. Doctrine. THAT Church vvhose Doctrine tendeth to Mortification, and Holinesse of life must needes be the true Church, and consequentlie di∣rected by Gods holie Spirit; and con∣trariwise, that Sect or Congregation, which teacheth the contrarie, is most vndoubtedly false, and consequent∣lie guided by an euill spirit. This is so manifest, as it needeth no proofe: for euery man knoweth that the Catholike Church is called Holy, because it professeth or teacheth, no∣thing but that which is Holie. Now if a man consider duelie the Doctrine of the Romane Church, he shall finde it to be of the former sort, and easilie he may perceaue the Doctrine of this new religion to be of the latter. But I vvill not heere speake of the fruites of CATHOLIKES, and Protestants,
(although indeede there be no com∣parison in life, for that euery one seeth and easilie confesseth the Catholikes to liue most vprightlie, & Saint-like) but I speake of that which their religi∣on teacheth them to doe: for of that especially our Lord meant vvhen he said:Math. 7. You shall know them by theyr fruites. First, therefore to declare this pointe, if you compare the clergie of the Ro∣mane Religion, vvith these new Cler∣gie men, you may see the Orders, and Institutions of the one sorte to mooue them to mortification, & to the con∣tempt of earthly things, and the insti∣tution of the other to prick them for∣ward to all vanitie, & to carnall liber∣tie: for a Priest of the Catholike Church, receaueth in a most solemne manner seauen Orders, whereof three are cal∣led Holie, because they are about Sa∣cred and holie thinges, as the Body & Blood of our Sauiour, holy vessels, &c And euery thing which the said priest must vse, is holy, and therefore there is required in him the greatest puritie possiblie to be had, so as he must haue
and thoughts free from all carnallitie, and worldly thinges, and for such like causes he is restrained from marriage, although it be in it selfe honorable, & instituted by God himselfe, but yet who so is yoaked therein must needes apply himselfe to worldly affaires, and so is diuided as the Apostle saith.1. Cor. 7. And because he is restrained from marriage & bound to liue Chaste or continent, hee may not vse anye trimming, or tricking vp of himselfe in amorous at∣tyre, nor vse any dalliance, or fondnes with weomen, but euer remembring that he is as a dead man, in regarde of such thinges, he must be far from such lightnesse, but on the other side, the Protestant Minister hauing receiued no Orders, but a certaine kinde of Deaconshippe, and Ministershippe, of their owne inuention, and hauing no Holy or Sacred thinges to deale with∣al, but left to all liberty of winning & rewinning, which he cannot ordinari∣ly doe without woing, woe he cannot handsomely, without hee something tricke & trimme vp himselfe to allure,
& please the eie of his sweet hart, must needes goe trickly with faire starched ruffes, fine mousaches, trimme tusca∣lonians, vse amorous glaunces, yea & that sometimes when they are reading their Chapters in the Church, with a thowsand such-like fonde & foolishe inconueniences, which ensue there∣upon. Furthermore, the Romane Re∣ligion teacheth Restitution of goods wrongfully taken, and of all wronges whatsoeuer, which brideleth and re∣straineth people from bribery, extor∣tion, theft, vsury, symony, & from such like: But the Protestants medling litle with such doctrine, leaueth al at large to his folowers, without restraint of a∣ny such crime. The Catholike religion teacheth obseruatiō of vowes & pro∣mises which must needes cause great trust & fidelity in the professors ther∣of, the Protestant teacheth, that they bind not in cōscience, which openeth the doare to distrust, and maketh the people that one wil not trust another, but must haue him in bandes, with su∣erties & with all fastnes possible to be
deuised. The Catholike religiō teach∣eth abstinēce & fasting, which mortifi¦eth our bodies, & enricheth our coū∣try, the Protestāt teacheth to eat flesh & al kinds of meats euery day, as often as the belly desireth, which causeth plenty of lust in the carcase, & dearth & scarcity in the cōmon-wealth. The Catholike Religion forbiddeth Land-Lords to raise their rents, except vrgēt occasion driue thē so to doe, by which prohibition infinite nūbers of people be benefited & holpe, the Protestant teaching the Land-Lord to doe what he list with his owne, ruyneth, and vt∣terly beggereth thowsandes of poore people. The Catholike religion teach∣eth Marriage, to bee indissoluble, so as they who be once lawefully Mar∣ried, can neuer be so diuorsed, as ei∣ther partye maie euer Marry againe, whilest the other liueth, which cause∣eth Man and Wife to beare much one with the other, knowing there is noe hope of chaunging, but the Protestant teaching that they may Marry again, yeeldeth them occasion, one easilie
to dislike of the other, beeing both in hope to marry againe, and to chainge as ofte as they liste. The Catholike religion teacheth that al Laws of ma∣gistrates, which bee not expreslye a∣gainst the word of God, doe bind the subiects in conscience▪ to obay them, not onely openly, but also in secret, whereupon doe followe peace, quiet∣nesse and obedience to Superiours, but the Protestant teaching the con∣trary, bringeth Magistrates into con∣tempte, and causeth al disorder in the Common-wealth. The Catholike re∣ligion teacheth differences of sinnes, some to be more grieuous than others, some Mortall, some Veniall, and that Concupiscence or naturall inclination to lust of it selfe is no sinne, whereupon Catholikes are taught to striue against this motion, knowing it to be no of∣fence except they yeelde vnto it, and also they manfully fight against grea∣ter sinnes, although they cannot easi∣ly auoide lesser, or Veniall offences: but the Protestant teaching, that eue∣ry sinne, be it neuer so small doth de∣serue
damnation, and Concupiscence to be sinne, which no man can auoid, maketh people, to leaue all to God his mercy, but neuer to resiste sin, nor motion thereunto, for that in his opi∣nion it is but lost labour so to do. The Catholike Religion teaceth, rewarde of good and bad life in the worlde to come, which causeth people to ende∣uour to doe al good workes, and to a∣uoide all euill as farre forth as possibly they can: but the Protestant teach∣ching the contrary, giueth the people occasion to be negligent in dooing of good, and little or nothing fearfull to doe euill. The Catholike Religion teacheth Confession to a Priest of all deadly sins which we can remember, vnder paine of damnation, which re∣straineth people from sinne, & causeth them particularly to be wel instructed and counseled: but the Protestant ta∣king that away, setteth open a doare to all wickednesse, and to losenesse of life, as also to ignorance. The Catho∣like Religion teacheth Satisfaction to be donne either in this life, or in Pur∣gatory
in the next, which causeth people to vndertake willingly penal works, as fasting, praier, almese-deeds, &c. & vpō the consideration of this, & of re∣warde in Heauen, they builded so ma∣ny goodly Churches, Colledges, Mo∣nasteries, Hospitalles, Schooles, &c. they gaue such large Almes, they pu∣nished their bodies with Fasting and wearing of hair-cloath, they watched, they praied, they Married pore & fa∣therlesse children, & did a thowsande kinds of such like good works: but the Protestant denying Satisfaction, and taking away Purgatorye, robbeth the pore of their Almes, children of their education, the sicke of their releefe, & maketh mē vnwilling to doe any good worke at all. The Catholike Religion teacheth Free-wil, which causeth peo∣ple to endeuour to doe good, & to flie frō euil: the Protestant taking it away, discourageth men vtterly from doing good workes, for who will goe about a thing which is not in his power, or for the which, if he did it, he shall haue no recompence. The Catholike Reli∣gion
teacheth the holy Masse, to be a Sacrifice in which the very Body and Bloode of our Sauiour is offered vp, which maketh people so deuout, & re∣uerent at the seruice thereof, as that they kneele altogether, pray continu∣ally, giue attēdance to no other thing for that time, & therupon it commeth that they beare such respecte & reue∣rence to Priestes: but the Protestant, allowing nothing but certaine chap∣ters, psalmes: and collects, to be read in the vulgar toung, giueth the people occasiō to be vndeuout, irreligious, & vnreuerent for that they see nothing worthie of reuerence. Heereupon you may see the people at the Protestants seruice, some staring about them, with out Boke or Bead in their hands, some walking, some talking, some angling, but none kneeling, or praying, or v∣sing any reuerence at al, either to ser∣uice, or to minister, & no maruel when euery one of thē, if he can but read, can play the minister at home as wel as the best curate of thē al. Many such diffe∣rences of doctrine might be set down,
are the publishers, and maintainers, & Heretikes & Protestants the destroy∣ers, and denyers thereof: for the Ca∣tholike affirmeth Baptisme of childrē to be necessarie, the Protestant deny∣eth it. The Catholike affirmeth men to be iustified by inherent iustice, the Protestant denyeth it. The Catholike affirmeth certaine preparations to be necessarie to iustification on the be∣halfe of mā, the protestant denyeth it. The Catholike affirmeth good works to be necessarie, and to haue theyr re∣ward, the Protestant denieth it. The Catholike affirmeth that we haue free vvill, the Protestant denieth it. The Catholike affirmeth that vvee may keepe the Commaundementes, the Protestant denyeth it. The Catho∣like affirmeth humane Lawes agreea∣ble to GODS WORD to bynde in conscience, the Protestant denyeth it. The Catholicke affirmeth seauen SACRAMENTS, the Protestant de∣nyeth fiue, if not all. The Catholike affirmeth Priest-hoode, the Prote∣stant denyeth it. The Catholicke af∣firmeth
single life of the Cleargie, the Protestant denyeth it. The Catho∣licke affirmeth Pennance, the Pro∣testant denyeth it. The Catholicke affirmeth Contrition, the Protestant denyeth it. The Catholicke affirmeth Confession, Satisfaction, Indulgen∣ces, Prayer for the deade, Exequyes, Anniuersaries, the Protestant deny∣eth them all. The Catholicke affir∣meth the Reall Presence, the Sacri∣fice of the holie Masse, Aultars, and all thinges belonging thereunto, the Protestant denyeth them all. The Catholicke affirmeth vvorshipping of Saintes, prayer vnto them, feastes of them, adoration of theyr Riliques, and Images, the Protestant denyeth all. The Catholicke affirmeth trim∣ming vpp of Churches, Ceremonies, Singing, Pilgrimages, Supremacie of Saint Peeter, Monasticall vowes, choyce of meats and fasting, the Pro∣testant denyeth all. The Catholicke affirmeth all the Bible to be Canoni∣call Scripture, the Protestant denyeth diuers partes thereof. The Catholike
affirmeth the perpetuall virginitie of our blessed Lady, the Protestant de∣nyeth it. The Catholike affirmeth the Church to be visible, the Protestant denyeth it. And many moe such like pointes of Christian Doctrine the Ca∣tholik Church deliuereth to her Chil∣dren▪ as she hath receaued them from her Spouse Christ, which the Prote∣stant vtterlie denieth, and indeede af∣firmeth, or putteth downe nothing more then he found before in the said Catholike Church: wherby you may see their Doctrine to be altogeather nothing, but meere negations, & flatt denyals; and so I see plainely that by their Negatiue Doctrine they haue profited the Christian world nothing at all, but haue taken away from it much of that which it had; and in this manner as they are, any horse, or asse, if he could but speake as Balaams Asse did, so it were but one worde, that is, Nego, might be as good a Protestant as the best of them all. Neyther can it be saide, that they doe as the firste Christians did, which denyed and de∣stroyed
the false and superstitious re∣ligion of the Heathens: for that the Christians did that by manifest Com∣mission from God himselfe, by work∣ing of Miracles & by planting Chri∣stian religion in place thereof: but the Protestantes neither doe that which they do, by any authoritie from God, nor euer could work any one miracle, as is afore-saide, and insteede of that which they reiect & pull downe, they place iust nothing. THE XV. REASON. Diuinitie. IF you looke into the Vniuersities of the Catholiks, & of Protestants, you shal see in the one the whole corps of Diuinitie, and of Christian trueth most pythelie and profoundly taught: but in the other nothing but a num∣ber of pelting obiections taken out of Caluins Institutions, or out of the Mag∣deburgenses, or out of some Hereticall Pamphlet, together with wrested in∣terpretations
of the new Testament, which they haue learned of Beza, or of some such like fellow, & in some they trouble themselues with nothing, but onely with the Controuersies of this time, & that is all the Diuinity which they haue, or meddle withall. But the Catholike Diuines studie, and teache in theyr Schooles most exactlie, all thinges vvhich man may in this life know of God ALMIGHTIE, of his Simplicitie, Perfection, Goodnesse, Infinitie, of his being in his creatures, of his immuta∣bilitie, Eternitie, Vnitie, knowledge, and seeing of him, of his names, Science, Idees, Life, Will, Loue, Iustice, and Mercie, Pro∣uidence, Power, Felicitie, of the Blessed Tri∣nitie of the Father, Sonne, and Holy Ghost, of theyr Equalitie, Vnitie, Consubstantia∣litie in one GOD-HEADE, of the Creati∣on of thinges, of Angels, of theyr substance, Incorporcitie, locall motion, Knowledge, Will, Loue, Production, Goodnesse, and Badnesse, of mans Creation, of his Bodie, Soule, of all the powers, and parts thereof, of his Propaga∣tion, of the end whereunto hee is created, of Vertue, and Vice in generall, and in particu∣lar,
of the Incarnation of Gods Sonne, ioyn∣ing two most different natures of God, and Man, both entire, both complete, without cō∣mixtion, or confusion into the vnitie of one person, of the perfections & defects assump∣ted by him, of the Resurrection & Iudgemēt, and of many other profound pointes, vvhich the Protestantes neuer beate their braines about, and indeede they cannot possiblie studie these thinges throughlie, beeing somuch occupied about wooing, vvenching, and wiue∣ing, taking vppon them to be Do∣ctours of Diuinitie, and Husbandes also. And therefore if the learnedst a∣mongst them should appeare in Ca∣tholicke Schooles, or Vniuersities a∣broade, hee would not once dare to open his mouth in matters of Lear∣ning, among the great nūber of most excellent learned men, which there are founde, as wee haue vvell proued by such of your Protestants as nowe and then goe abroade to forraine V∣NIVERSITIES, and are very quick∣lie brought to Confesse theyr ine∣qualitie
in this kinde, for that they scarce vnderstand the verie ordinarie tearmes of the learned sciences, which the others doe fullie possesse. And I pray you, what a learned Clargie was there in Queene Maryes time in our Countrie of England, in respect of these pore creatures, that occupy now theyr Prebends, and sit in the sunne∣shine of theyr new pretended Ghos∣pell with theyr Wiues and Children rounde about them? Were not one Tonstall, one Watson, one Christopherson, for learning, one Fecknā, one Gardener, one White, for wisdome & learning to∣geather, able to set to Schoole all your ruffed Cleargie at this day, for tearme of life, and after, as by their workes & writings yet extant doth wel appeare. This grosse ignorance of these newe Ghospellers is the cause that the peo∣ple doe remaine vtterly voide of the knowledge of mysteries, which they are bound to beleeue vppon paine of damnation, and they cannot other∣wise be, when as their Leaders & Do∣ctours are altogether vnskilfull of the
points afore-named: But if they can speake a litle Greeke, and a few words in Hebrew, and vse some Inke horne Eloquence, with rayling against Pope and Papistes, then are they forsooth deepe Diuines. Take the most lear∣ned Doctour of them all, and set him to reason with an Heathen, or with an Atheist, and you shall see what good∣ly arguments hee will make, nay you shall see him betray the truth for lack of learning, for that he is vtterly igno∣rant (as they are all) of Schoole Diui∣nitie. And hereupon it is that theyr Preachers comming to reason vvith the Turkish Priestes haue beene dri∣uen to yeelde, and haue become Ma∣hometans: for indeed one who taketh vpon him to be Doctor of Diuinitie, ought to be so instructed & furnished with Philosophie, Morall, Physicall, and Metaphysicall, with Logicke, and with all humane helps, with Councels, Fathers, Histories, and such like, and not only with the bare text of the Bi∣ble, as that he may be able to defend the faith of Christ in all points, against
Iewes, Turkes, Heathens, Atheistes, & not only against heretiks. And here I cā∣not but admire the prouidēce & good¦nes of God towards his Church, in fur∣nishing it with all kinds of learning, & sciences, whereby it may defend, and maintaine it self against all sorts of eni∣mies, be they Iewes, Turks, Heathens, A∣theists or Heretikes vvhatsoeuer: for in the Vniuersities thereof, you may see most learnedly, substantially, orderly, and vniuersallie taught all Christian truth, and that in short space: for in 4. or 5. yeares the whole course of Diui∣nity is taught vnder two or three rea∣ders, & in the same time the Contro∣uersies by another reader, by another all the new Testament is learnedlie, & foundly expounded, besides an 100. publike Disputations euerie yeare of some whole matter, as of Baptisme, of the Eucharist, of the Trinitie, of the Incarnation, of Angels, of the Supre∣macie, &c. and withall, the whole Bi∣ble read ouer at Table euery yeare, & alwaies after Dinner and Supper, two Chapters of it, one of the new, and an∣other
of the old testament diligentlie examined, vvith familiar conference betweene the learned, and the youn∣ger sort. And besides all this there are taught Cases of Conscience, in which is set downe, what is sinne, and vvhat not: the differences of sinnes, which great, which lesser, &c. which is a most fruit∣full & a most profitable kind of know∣ledge, and therefore is much studied, and practised by Catholike Priests, & Diuines, who teach the people there∣by to rule, and to order their liues and actions. Neyther doth the Protestant meddle with these matters of Consci∣ence, but fraighteth his ship only with Faith, and neuer beateth his braine a∣bout sinnes, for that he thinketh none to be imputed to such Predestinated, as they all weene them-selues to be, vvhich causeth the people theyr fol∣lowers to be vtterly ignorant of the nature, differences, and quality of sins, and consequently nothing fearefull, or stayed by any conscience to committ the same.
THE XVI. REASON. Holinesse of Life. ALthough vpon externall & out∣warde holinesse vve may not in∣fallibly inferre true Religion, for that among Iewes, Turkes, and other In∣fidelles, some make great shewe of pi∣ety and deuotion, yet we may truelie argue that amongst what company or congregation soeuer, there is not ge∣nerally, any piety, deuotion, mortifi∣cation, or holinesse of life, but contra∣ry-wise, impiety, irreligiosity, carnalli∣ty, and losenesse of life, vniuersally to be seene, and that necessarily issuing out of the bowelles of their doctrine, that there possibly can be no true Re∣ligion: For that the spirit of God, who guideth, directeth, and as it were in∣formeth true Religion, will not suffer it to be vniuersally fruitlesse, and of no efficasie: For otherwise it should be frustrated of it end, which is to make the embracers thereof Holy, & good.
And besides it was foretolde by the Prophet,Esa. cap. 11 that CHRIST his Doctrine should alter mens conditions, and na∣tures, so as such as were most fierce, sauage, and wicked before, should by it become most humble, kind, & gen∣tle, which can no way be applied to the Protestants, as their bloody trage∣dies raised in Fraunce, Flaunders, Scotland Switzerland, and in other partes of Ger∣many sufficiently doe witnesse, where were slaine aboue an hundred thow∣sande people within one yeere, by the rebellion and wars of the countriemē against their Lords for the controuer∣sie of Religion, such humility,Sledan. obedi∣ence, and meekenesse of hart, this new Doctrine imprinted presentlye as it came. And albeit externall holinesse doth not (as is aforesaide) necessarilie inferre true religion, yet doth it giue a great presumption thereof, especially if there be inwarde zeale, and aboue all, Charity. Nowe it cannot be but most plaine to euery one, who know∣eth both, that the liues of Catholikes, in all landes, and that in all ages, and
namely of our auncestours, and prede∣cessours there in Englande were, & are of those who now be, for the most part most Holy, most Innocent, most Re∣ligious, and most Godly: and the liues of the Protestantes ordinarilye most lewde, loose, and voide of piety. And first, if you take a viewe of the Clear∣gie, & of the Religious-men, & weo∣men of the Catholike church, you shal finde infinit numbers to haue lead Ce∣lestiall and Angelicall liues heere on earth, free from all worldly, carnall, & earthly desires, with contempt of all humane & transitory things, as S. Paul the first Eremite, S. Anthony, S. Hilarion, S. Greg. S. Ier. S. Aug. S. Bern. S. Fraun. S. Dom. S, Bened. S. Thom. Aquinas, S. Bona∣uenture, with innumerable others such∣like, whose liues were most heauenly, togeather with millions of professed Virgins, vowed Widdowes, poore by wil and promise, persons of both sexes dedicated to God by renouncing the vvorlde with the delightes thereof, some liuing in Deserts, or Caues of the earth, some in Cloysters in com∣munitie
vnder obedience; with infi∣nite numbers of secular Priestes, most godlie and deuoute. And although I will not denie, but that some there were among the Cleargie, and Religi∣ous people in this latter age, which li∣ued not according to theyr Orders, & Rules, but scandalized the Church of God: yet may I truelie say, that they who did so, vvere not the hundreth part so many, as the Protestantes most falsely make them: But the trueth is, that among a great number (for there were of Priestes and Religious men, at the least fiue times so many, as there be now ministers) a few were bad, and now the ministers being but fewe in respect of them, are all naught. And no meruaile: for the Catholike Clear∣gie, and Religious persons, were by theyr Orders bound to sundrie & di∣uers houres of prayer, as to seauen in the day & night, the religious to rise e∣uery night at midnight, to pray & sing laudes to God, when others sleep two or three houres togeather, besides o∣ther Exercises, Contemplations, and
Meditations in the day time, and ne∣uer to haue so much as one vvhole houre voyde of some godlie employ∣mentes. I would you did but see the manner of the liues of the blessed Ca∣pucynes, which here to recount would be so long, and hardlie could I reckon vp all theyr holy Exercises of mortifi∣cations, or of the happie Fathers of the Societie of Iesus, or of others such like. Oh what Fasting, what Prayer, vvhat Meditation, what Contemplation, what wearing of Haire-cloth, what whiping, of themselues, what watch∣ing, what visiting of the sicke, what teaching of the ignoraunt, vvhat re∣buking of Sinners, vvhat comfort∣ing of the afflicted shoulde you be∣holde? These pray, whilest your mini∣sters playe: These taste, whilest they feaste: These meditate the Contempt of the World, whilest they beat their braines, to compasse worldly commo∣dities: These Watche & sing Praises to God in the Night, whilest they in a warme bedde hugge their Sweete heart in their armes. Who is he amongest you
which seeth not, and is not ashamed of the liues of your ministers? Are not some of them almost in euery circuite hanged for robberies, for rapes, impri∣soned for Zodomie, for hauing diuers wiues at once, for debt, and for other knaueries. The law bindeth them to haue but one Wife at once, and shee must bee vewed by two Iustices of Peace, to see that shee be a maide for sooth. But doe they not now & then take their wiues from Colmans hedge,Frō thence had the vi∣car of wea¦ram his trul by his own con∣fession. and some, other common strumpets? and doe not theyr wiues proue there∣after? An hundred examples I could here alleadge to prooue these thinges, but I will not pollute my paper at this time with such filthie matter. Looke into the Laitie of the Protestants, and tell mee weather there euer was such Pride, especially in apparell? Did not all these new-fashioned attyres, come in with your new religion? Your loose Gownes, your Traines, your Verdin∣gales, your Borders, your Peringles, your Coronets, your Wyres, your Ruffes starched, white, blew, &c. your
Shew me whome this Ghospell hath made of a rauenous glutton, a sober abstainer: of cruell gentle: of couetous, liberall: of a slaunderer, a good reporter: of an vnchaste sinner, a ver∣tuous liuer. I will shew thee many that haue bin made worse then them-selues. Thus far Erasmus. And no meruaile though the followers be such, when as theyr verie first Apostle, Ringleader, and Refor∣mer of all, who first broake the ice, & was indeed the Authour, and founder of theyr Religion, led a most brutishe life: for was he not a leacherous Friar? tooke he not a Nunne to Wife, if so I may tearme it? An act not onlie for∣bidden by holie writ, but by the Ciuil Lawes,L. Si quis non dicā. cap. de E∣pist. Cop. & cleric. and by Iouinian the Emperour aboue a thousand yeres agoe, and that vnder the paine of death. Surpassed he not all other in Pride? Confesseth hee not that hee had conference with the diuell about the Masse? Was not Enuie and Couetousnes the causes of his reuolt? Read his life, and see whe∣ther hee was a man fit to Reforme the Christian Worlde, or rather sent to shame all his followers? Good Lord,
that men can be so blinde, and so be∣witched, as to thinke that the trueth from Heauen should be reuealed to such a one; or that such should haue grace to know the trueth, and to fol∣low it, who neuer fast, seldome, or ne∣uer praie to obtaine the same, neuer punish theyr bodies, neuer mortifie theyr earthlie members, &c. rather then to a number of quiet, modest, & harmeles men, who by prayer, by fa∣sting, by almes deedes, by workes of mercie, by all vertuous meanes labour to attaine the knowledge of the truth. And who is he that can deny, but that in our auncestors dayes when Catho∣like Religion flourished, brauerie in apparrell was vnknowne, and insteede thereof innocent plainenesse vvas to be seene, & that there was no chaūge, no new deuises, litle lawing, for when anie strife fell out, the Priest theyr Ghostlie Father decided the matter, and made them friends; seldome any single woman miscarried in any par∣rish, no Simony, no Vsury, litle fraude or deceit, each one trusted other with∣out
bill or bond, and to be briefe, that euery where raigned simplicity, & in∣nocency? Oh how many thousandes then left the world before it left thē, dedicating themselues whollie to the seruice of God, and that of all Estates: many Kings and Queenes not only of other Countries, but diuers euen of England, gaue ouer their Kingdomes and became Religious men, and wo∣men. And the like did innumerable of inferiour degrees: whereas the Prote∣stants prouide by wast, desolation, de∣struction, and (as it were) by law, that no such orders of holie men and wo∣men be amongst them: they will haue no Maides, but such as can get no matches, no man is poore amongst them but vvith grudge, and much a∣gainst his wil, no vow is made to God, but if it should be, it must not be kept, fasters with them are Pharises, Monks mad men, & those which mortifie thē∣selues, they account Hypocrites, & in in one word they are in theyr liues, as they be in doctrine, Libertines. And in nothing more doth the difference
of the efficacy of their doctrine, & the Catholikes appeare then in this; that if for feare of troubles, or for any other cause, one who was a Cath. is become in outward show a Protestant (for in his conscience such a one seldome or neuer thinketh the Protestants religi∣on to be true) the same is so far from bettering his former life thereby, (ac∣cording to Erasmus his saying before al∣leaged) as that you may see him wal∣lowe in al kind of sins. Set before your eies any one ther in England, who hath left the Catholike Religion, & is be∣come a Protestant, & marke whether he be not as a yoūg calfe let out of his crew, or as a colt leapt out of his inclo∣sure? How manie may you see there amongst you of such good fellowes, which shew plainely that they haue, Conscientiam cauteriatam, a seared Consci∣ence. If you turne any Seminary Priest to your side, doth he liue more vnspot¦tedly with you, then hee liued before in his own professiō, or doth he not ra∣ther then drinke vp any kind of sinne as easilie as a Dogge lapeth water?
But on the other side, if anie doe leaue the Protestants, & become a Catho∣like, doth he not forthwith leaue al his vices? I wish you would but consider a litle the wonderfull chaunge of such a one, whom I may more easilie leaue to your consideration, then describe him: but surely if you did see into it, you would say: Digitus Dei est hic, this is the finger, or power of God. THE XVII. REASON. Constancie in Doctrine. THE Doctrine of the Romaine Church hath euer remained set∣led, and stated without chaunge or in∣nouation, howsoeuer time euer fleet∣ing, altereth many thinges to disad∣uantage, and no man will denie but that it had the truth, when the Apo∣stles said to the Romanes:Rom. ca. 1. I giue thanks to my God through Iesus Christ for you all, because your faith is reported in the vniuer∣sall world. Therefore vntil it be shewed
that it hath swarued from that Faith vvhich the Apostle then spoke of, I cannot but iudge it to haue the true Religion. And I thinke that no man can proue, that euer anie Pope, or Bi∣shoppe in anye See did at anye time chaunge in any point the Religion of his predecessour. For example sake, if you looke but into the See of Canter∣bury in your owne Countrye, & rekon from him who was Arch-bishop ther∣of in King Henry the eight his daies, before he chaunged Religion, you shal find that that Arch-bishop taught the same Religion in all pointes, which his next predecessor had dōe before him, and he the same that his next prede∣cessour, and so from one to another e∣uen vntil the first that sate in that See. The very same may you see in other Bishops Sees, and especially in the A∣postolike See, the See of Rome, for ne∣uer was any mā able to proue that the successor at any time changed the do∣ctrine of his predecessour, & so it must needes be al one & the same that was immediately before this new religion,
and at the first beginning, or in the A∣postles time. For I aske the protestants (for examples sake) whē Italy, Fraunce, or Spaine, chaunged their Religion? I am sure they neuer changed, but kept still the same, which was deliuered to thē by their first Apostles. But cōtrari∣wise the Protestantes beginning but some fiftie or threescore yeares agoe, haue in this small time so chopped & chaunged, so altered, and transformed theyr Religion, as you may well saye Proteus, in regard of them to be con∣stant in shape: wherin they shew thē∣selues like theyr Fathers the old He∣retikes,Greg. lib. 3 mor. expo sit. in Iob. cap. 19. who also in inconstancy of do∣ctrine were very notable: and no mer∣uaile, for when they be once foorth of the right waie, they take euerie pathe which offereth it selfe vnto them, but neuer can happen vpon the right way againe, except they goe backe from whence they came, but runne stil fur∣ther,2. tim. 3. and further out of the vvay, euer learning, but neuer comming to the know∣ledge of the Trueth. This inconstancy & chaunge in Doctrine was so great in
Luther his followers,Riuander in lupo ex∣coriato fol 73. as that they them∣selues complained therof. And heere∣upon it is that the Lutheranes are so ea∣silie chaunged into Zwinglians, or Cal∣uinistes, Caluinistes into Anabaptistes, or Arrians, Anabaptists into Libertines, Frā∣kistes, or into the Family of Loue. And this lenity they haue (as they haue all their other Capricches) frō their grand∣sire Luther, whose inconstancy in Do∣ctrine is most notable. For at his first beginning, hee protested that he only misliked the abuse of Indulgences, and in no wise the Indulgences themselues. A litle after he plainly despised the In∣dulgences themselues.Vlemberg. causa 12. pag. 391. Then he began to call in question the authoritye of the Pope, afterwardes Ceremonies, and by lit∣tle and little going forwarde, at the length, he denied Free-will, & rowling vp and downe as it were a snowe-ball of heresie, made the same bigger and bigger, in such sorte as he came to that audacitye, that he burned openly at Wittenberge, the bookes of the Canon Lawe, affirming the Pope to be Anti∣christ, & the catholike church to be the
Synagogue, and stewes of Sathan: yet stayed he himselfe not so, but stil plai∣ed the Proteus euen vnto his end: for at Wormes before the Emperour, al∣though he professed himself an enimy to the Church, yet he maintained the sacrifice of the Masse, & said it stil him∣selfe, as also prayer to Saintes for the dead, Purgatory, Communion vnder one kind, & many such like Catholike points, all which 9. yeares after, before the same Emperour he vtterly denied. The same inconstancy was in his Dis∣ciples Melanchton, Caluin, Bucer, and in them of Wittenberge, in the Anabap∣tistes, and in such like, as also in your Protestantes there in England. And I pray you vvhat a chaunging, and turning in and out was there of your COMMVNION Booke? For first the deuisers thereof highly commen∣ded it, and affirmed it to be agreeable to Christs institution, & to the seruice of the Primitiue Church; and a while after they vtterly misliked it, and dis∣authorising it, they set foorth another in principall pointes quite contrary to
the former, & yet they affirmed that also to be according to Christs institu∣tion, & iump as the vse was in the Pri∣mitiue Church. And yet how this is approued, & liked of your Preachers, & ministers, you cānot but know, who see & behold such carping, and find∣ing fault thereat, and such contempt therof, as that the Minister who doth obserue duely the order thereof, is ac∣counted a temporizer, or a cold Pro∣testant (I might say an Atheist) for his labour. And he who can most con∣temne it, and can wed, burie, baptize, minister the Communion, and doe such like, after some other new fashion of his owne inuenting, is accounted a iollie fellow, & a man of zeale. What stirre is there (I pray you) in euerie sheire, yea almost in euerie parish, a∣bout the Ministers obseruing the or∣der of this theyr booke of COMMON PRAYER? What holde and tye is there betweene the Parishioners and theyr Curate? What a doe is there, and hath beene from the beginning about the Communion? One vvhile
it must be done in cōmon, & leauened Bread: by and by not so, but in vnlea∣uened Bread, after in loafe Bread, al∣thogh your cup euer had wine in it, till now of late that som do begin to take insteed therof good nappy ale: the like inconstancie you might see in placing the cōmunion table: for first it must be placed in the middle of the quire, then in the bodie of the church, after in the chācel again as the altar was: one while the minister must turne his face tow∣ards the south, another while towards the north, and another while towards the east: wherby al wise men may see, that thē your religion first began, and neuer was in the vvorld before: for if euer it had bin before, you might sure¦ly haue had some president, by which you might haue ordered these things. And to speake plainelie what I ob∣serue, I finde a great cause of your in∣constancie in Doctrine to be aduan∣tage, and disaduantage: for your reli∣gion is framed only to serue turnes, & times: for when they were but few in number, by wresting the Scriptures,
they taught that Christes flocke vvas but little,Iewell in Apol. and therefore they gloried much in theyr small number: but af∣ter that their opinions were spreade through Germanie, Fraunce, Englande, Scotland, and in other Countries they vaunted much, and argued that theyr Doctrine must needs be true, because it was spread so largely. When it ser∣ued their turne they stoutly defended with tooth and nayle,Goodman Knoxe. that a woman might not lawfully gouerne a realme, no not in ciuill, or temporall matters: but within a while after, when it fitted their purpose, they taught as they yet doe, that a woman may rule a realme, not only in temporall thinges, but the Church also in spiritual causes. Whē it serued their turne,Luth. tom. 3. Ger. Iē. fol. 115. they taught that it was a horible thing to put me to death for Religion, and expresly against the word of god: but when they had got∣ten the sword, they cried out in sermōs on the contrary side, & neuer left off, vntil it was decred by publike authori¦ty, that those who wer not of their re∣ligiō, shuld suffer death therfore. Whē
it fitted their purpose,Tom. 5. I. Ger. f. 157. a & f. 444. & 159. & 491. Tom. 1. Germ. fol. 537. Colloq. Mens. f 4. in fine lib. ses. 3. b they taught that none ought to preach, but he who was allowed, and licensed by the Ma∣gistrate, afterwarde vpon other occa∣sion; they wrote that a Christian man may without leaue of any person take vpō him that function. One while they taught that the BIBLE was the plain∣est, and the most easiest booke in the worlde to bee vnderstoode, another∣while they wrote vpō aduantage, that it was vnpossible for any man to vn∣derstande throughly any one worde in the Bible, for that it was so obscure & profound. One while they taught that no Commentaries of SCRIP∣TVRES written by men,Melancth. in Loc. cō. ann. 1524. must be re∣ceiued, yea that they must be shunned as a plague or pestilence, anotherwhile they themselues set forth Commenta∣ries and Postilles, and obtruded them to the people.To. 2. Ger. fol. 255. a & f. 404. a One while they teache that all men ought to be iudges of do∣ctrine & religion, another-while they teache that no man, no not an Angel, must iudge thereof. And a thowsand such like contradictions & proofes of
vnconstancy, and chaunge maye you find in their doctrine, which here fur∣ther to account would be ouer tedi∣ous. I vvill therefore end with the saying of Gregorie Duke of Saxonie: We doe know what these fellowes doe teach this yeare, but what they will teach the next yeare we cannot gesse. THE XVIII. REASON. False Prophets and Teachers. THe Prophets, Apostles, & Christ himselfe fore-tolde that in the latter dayes there should come false Prophets, and to the end wee should take heed of them, they painted them foorth in their colours, whereby they might easilie be knowne. Now it can not be denyed, but that wee be in the latter dayes, and therefore we must be verie vigilant, and watchfull to dis∣cerne, & to know these seducers when they come. And conferring the Prea∣chers afore-saide with the manners of
these Protestants, we doe plainly se that they be the verie same vvhich were foretold, and as it were, pointed at by the finger of God: for first they come vnsent,Ierm. 13. as Ieremie fore-tolde in these wordes. I did not sende them, and they did runne: for certaine it is, that they neyther haue orders, as they ought to haue, nor any Consecration, or right calling: for they were not sent by the Catholike Church as is mani∣fest, but vtterly condemned for He∣retikes, and when any of them is con∣uerted to the Romane Religion, they plainely see that they haue no more to doe with any spirituall function thē o∣ther laymen haue. But on the contra∣rie side, if any Priest of the Catholike Church become an Apostata by for∣saking his religion, if he professe him∣selfe a Protestant they account and e∣steeme such a one, very fitt for theyr Ministry, yea and more worthie then one of theyr owne making: for that they assure themselues, & so confesse, that the Catholiks haue ordinary cal∣ling most lawfull: but they neyther
haue ordinary calling as is most plain: nor extraordinarie, for that they can worke no miracle to proue the same: Ergo no calling at all, but they come of thēselues vnsent for. Then are they, as it was Prophicied of them like their Fathers, smooth tongued fellowes,Rom. 6. which with sweet speeches, & pleasant clawings deceiue the harts of innocēts and haue a show of godlines,2. Tim. but de∣nie the vertue thereof: for they crie out. The word of the Lord, the light of the Gospel, the only Passion of our Sauiour,3. Reg. 22. no sin to the Elect,Ier. 5.14.23. & 27. Isay. cap. 3 al are cleane which beleeue their Doctrine: vvith a thousand such like plausible speeches, as the false Pro∣phets did in times past. But consider them well, & you shall finde them to be lying maisters, and deceauers,2. Pet. 2. & 3. who doe not only them-selues walke after the flesh in concupiscence of vnclean∣nesse, but doe also draw others in the desire of lust, and leacherie, promising libertie, whereas they themselues are slaues of corruption,Math. 7. and in few words they lead the people the broad vvaie to perdition.
This you may plainelie see by that which hath beene said before, & ther∣fore I would haue you to iudge whea∣ther it be like that the Protestants be those false teachers which were fore∣tolde, or no. Surely in mine opinion, there are al things in them which were fore shewed to be in the false prophets, and seducers of the latter dayes.Ier. 29.23. They come vnsent, they teache plausible thinges to flesh and blood, they teach theyr own fansies, and say they be the words of the Lord,Ezech. 13. wresting & wrea∣thing the Scriptures as they list, they colour and set out theyr cause in such braue tearmes, and with such fraunde and deceit, as if it were possible the verie Elect might be drawne into er∣rour,Math. 24. they make a show as they vvere the Apostles of Christ,2. Cor. 11. and thereby they seduce the innocent, they know not that God vseth them as a scourge,Rom. 16. and that hee tempteth his people by them,Deut. 13. they make an outward show of humanitie, of peace and concord, and of such like, putting vpon them the cloathing of sheepe,Mat. 7. but they are in∣deede,
according to the Flemmish Protestants prouerbe Bares in wolues places. THE XIX. REASON. Lyars, slaunderers, & reuylers. IT seemeth that the Protestantes haue eyther no conscience at all, or els that it is seared with an hoate iron, for that they make no boanes to beare so manifestlie false witnes against their neighbours, in charging the Catho∣likes, & all theyr Elders with so plaine vntruthes, and in slaundering and re∣uiling they care not whome in a most iniurious, and opprobrious manner. And a most pittifull thing it is, to see the simple people drawne away from the true Religion of theyr Elders by such shamefull meanes: for euery man of vnderstanding may easily see howe they make lying theyr helpe,Esay. 28. and defende themselues thereby. And yet doe theyr miserable adhaerentes beleeue euerie
thing to be gospel which they say, ne∣uer going about to trie out the trueth therof. To this shameful shift are they driuen (as they be to many others) for that they cānot otherwise excuse their departure frō the ancient Church: for if they had litle or nothing to say a∣gainst it, euery simple mā might mer∣uaile why they left it. They faine ther∣fore, & make vpon their owne fingers many horrible things concerning the doctrine, ceremonies, & condition of the said Church. And this they doe in places where they dominier & raigne, where they know no mā dare shew his face to defend the cause of the christiā world. And no meruaile though they deale thus with the Catholik Church, when as they slaūder & tel lyes of ech other, as the Luherans beare witnes a∣gainst the Sacramentaries, the Maiorists, against the Flacians,Vlenber∣gius causa. 10. and both these a∣gainst the Lutherans, & other Sectaries one against another. And to giue you a litle taste of their dealings I wil put down a few of their sayings, but brief∣lie for that I doubt I be ouer tedious.
1 They say that Christ was vnknown before their cōming,In postilla Germ. An. 1537. part. 2. fol. 141. & that the Gos∣pel lay in the dust, & was hiddē vnder the bēch, & Luther doubteth whether Germany euer heard the word of God before he preached it. Which thing if it were true, then vndoubtedlie in∣finite people, yea al Christēdome was deceiued vnder the name of Christ, for 1500. yeres togeather, and conse∣quentlie were all damned. And how impudent a lie is it, that Christ vvas not knowne before their comming? wheras al churches throughout Chri∣stendōe did by pictures, and externall ceremonies set before the eies of peo∣ple the Death, blood, Crosse & Passiō of our Sauiour? was there not in euery rode loft the picture of Christ crucifi∣ed? And did not the very stones, wals, & sumptuous buildings declare, that the erectors therof were mē, not only beleeuing in Christ, but also most ze∣lous, & forward to set forth his honor, by furthering his religiō, & 10000 ma¦nifest proofes might here be brought forth against this shācles lie of theyrs.
2. They inculcate, and euen dull the eares of the people, with often telling them of the Idolatry of their elders, & affirme it to be more abominable thā the Idolatry of the Iewes, or Heathens: And although they be so deuided a∣mong themselues, as that they accuse one another of that crime, yet in this they all agree, as Pilate & Herod did in putting Christ to death, but other∣wise being mortall enimies, the one to the other. But vntill they proue this Idolatry, which they neuer could, nor neuer wil be able to doe, I cannot but deeme it an intolerable lye and cauill, the which is more thā sufficiently pro∣ued by almost innumerable argumēts, which are to be seene in many learned writers.Aug. conf in artic. de Missa. 3. They say that the Catho∣likes holde, that Christ satisfied onely for Originall sinne, and that he ordai∣ned the Masse for other sinnes; which to be a most manifest lie, all the bokes written of this matter by Catholike Diuines doe plainely testifie.Aug. conf. tit de de∣lectu ci∣borum. 4 They affirme that the Catholikes doe teach, that by choice of meates, and by other
humane constitutions, remissiō of sins, & saluation is obtained, & that there∣by the doers are iustified. Which is a lye so manifest as it needeth no confu∣tation. 5. They say howe the Papistes holde that if a man be Contrite, Con∣fessed, and haue done Satisfaction for his sinnes,In artic. Smalcal. dic. in artic 3. fal pae∣nit. papist. that he is therby iust before God without Christ, or faith, which is a lye no lesse shamefull than the other. For the Catholikes teache, that no Iu∣stice is had, no sinne forgiuen, no good thing obtained, but by the Passion of our Sauiour Christ. 6. They affirme, that the Papists doe worship Saints in steed of Christ, & doe honour them as Gods, which is a grose impudent lye as euery mā knoweth.Hadd cont Osorium. 7. They are not ashamed to write, that Religion was not changed in England but by the cō∣sent of the Bishops, & that the landes, & goods of Abbies & Religious hou∣ses, were distributed to Godly vses, as to Schooles, Vniuersities & Hospitals. And that the Pope for an ordinary tri∣bute to him yeerely paide, giueth free leaue vnder his great seale to Priestes,
to keepe concubines openly without controlement. And the like lies they lay vpon the auncient Fathers, as Me∣lancthon said of S. Austen,In Apol. tit. de pec. orig. that he taught Originall sinne to be taken awaye in Baptisme, not that it was not any more, but that it was not imputed. Whereas S. Austen spoke not there of Originall sin, but of concpiscence. So they say S. Bernard recāted monachisme at his la∣ter ende,Luth. tom. 5. Ien. ger. fol. 457. Teleman. Heshus. l. 1. de ve∣ra ec. p. 60. & that most of auncient wri∣ters, & Fathers retracted, & reuoked before they died the Doctrine which they had written; or else, that they thought otherwise than they wrote, & spoke. By this meanes to defend their newe doctrine, & to shift off the aun∣cient Fathers, which are altogether plainly against it, they are constrained to lay two notable lies vpō the said fa∣thers, the one that they recalled their doctrine before their death, the other that they wrote, & spoke one thing, but thought another. And no maruell though they slaunder, & wrong in this Atheistical manner the Holy Fathers, when as some of them spare not the A∣postles
themselues. If the three Apo∣stles Peter, Paul, & Barnabas,Tom. 3. Ien. Ger. fol. 261. (saith Lu∣ther) had not held their tackle, about Faith without works, al the multitude had failed therin, & Iames stūbled in it. But of this kind of stuffe I wil not here alleadge any more; he who desireth to hear moe of their lies, & slaūders, may find thē aboundantly set down by di∣uerse & sundry authors at this day, but yet take with you this saying of your M. Luther, He who once lieth,Tom. 1. Germ. fol. 423. (saith he) certainly is not of God, & is worthily suspe∣cted in all things. And as for reuiling, & railing, I thinke that Lucifer himselfe coulde little haue exceeded the Pro∣testants therein, & especially their first Apostle, the saide Martine Luther, who with filthy, beastly, scuruy, & oppro∣brious speeches, so be daubeth the Ca∣tholike church, & the magistrats ther∣of, as euery one may see what spirite possessed his heart, the same out of all doubt which delighteth in filthinesse & scurrility. And to the end you may haue some aime what kinde of fellowe this Arche-apostle of your protestan∣tisme
was, I wil here brieflie set downe a few words of his filthie mouth. Hee calleth the Archbiship of Ments, being a Prince Elector, & descended of the Princely Electorall familie of Brande∣burge,Tom 3. Germ. fol. 533. a. b. & f. 326. 360. col. mens. f. 342. 343. a fraudulent, a most shamefull lyar, a shifting Bishop, a filthie shitten Priest, an hel∣lish Cardinall, a great, & a notable Epicure, an impudent and euill worme, a damned and lost man, a craftie scoffer, the greatest knaue that euer was except Nero, & Caligula, &c. Hee reuileth the Princes of the Em∣pire,Tom. 5. Germ. in glossa. su¦per edictū imperat. which did meete at the Diet at Angusta, Anno. 1530. calling them, traitours, wicked men, the diuels seruantes, knaues, madde hogges, great and grosse asses. Hee calleth the Princes of Germanie, fooles,Tom. 3. fol. 195. b. & fol. 200 & 190. Tom. 2. scales, and bubles of the Pope, Gods Is∣beers, and hangemen, Germane beasts, the di∣uels puppies, &c. Hee braggeth that he esteemed the King of England, and o∣ther Catholike Princes as miserable beggers, dizzards and fooles, vvhich make him pastime, and as new nttes, which he would haue to glorie and to sing in this manner. Here wee nits doe sit vpon the head of the noblest beast in the earth
in his haire, wee are of a base lynage, lice are our Parents, those great Giants, which killed euen Scilla the Romane Emperour,Tom. 3. Iē. Ger. f. 331. & f. 334.a. and many others. What haue wee to doe with Luther a begger, it is true you are nits, but yet you are not lice. And in his infamous libell against the said King of England, hee hath great store of oprobrious titles and names, as: Henrie by the inclemencie of God, King of England, King of lyes. &c. So dealt hee vvith that moste famous Prince, George Duke of Saxonie,Tom. 2. Ger. fol. 206. a. & Tom. 6. f. 6. calling him a Tyrant, freneticall, mad, posses∣sed corporally of the diuell, the diuels Apostle, &c. And in his infamous li∣bell entituled: Wider hans, worst, hee calleth Henry Duke of Brunswicke, a grosse asse, a stocke, a tronke, an impudent li∣ar, a mad man, lunatike, damned, the theefe on the left hand, asse of all asses in Wolfen∣butell, a pudding, a sausage, an house-firer, who stuffeth him-selfe not by drinking wine, but by deuouring and drinking Diuelles, a fearefull & fugitiue knaue, a doting eunuch, Prince of cut throats, a broudy dogge, & by a thousand such like names. But a∣gainst the Catholike diuines, yea, and
against his own of-spring the Sacramē∣taries. Iesu, what terms vseth he, where he hath so often that malepert interie∣ction▪ Trotz, Swinglius setting forth the said Luther in his colours, bringeth him in this maner reuiling:In resp. a. v. a. Swemer, a knaue, a diuell, a theefe, an hypocrite, Trotz, Botz, Plotz, Plitz, tonitru, po, pu, pa, plump, &c. And when he had put the word (Sola) of his own braine into the text, Rom. 3. beeing admonished by some of it, he braied out & said,Tom. 5. Germ. fol. 141. & fol. 144. Doctor Martine Luther will so, & affirmeth, that a Papist, and an asse are all one, I wil haue it so, I commaund it so, & againe, Luther will so, & saith, that he is a doctor, aboue all the doctors in the Pa∣pacy. Yea afterward it repented him, that he had not corrupted the text of the Apostle worse in putting in more of his owne head, and that he had not made the Apostle to say: We suppose a man to be iustified by faith only, without all works of al Lawes. And many moe such like outrages I could here set down of his, but I hope these maye suffice to make you to knowe what a milde and modest man this reformer of the chri∣stian
worlde was, and what a notable ring leader you haue in your Religion. THE XX. REASON. Keeping in memory Gods benefits. GOd almighty hauing bestowed infinite benefits vpon man, be∣ginning euen at his creation, demaun∣ded chiefely at his hands, as a signe & token of gratitude and thankefulnesse that he woulde be mindefull of them, and neuer by any meanes suffer them to depart out of his memory. And this was the cause of so many Ceremo∣nies & of the Celebration of so manie Feates amongest the Israelites. The like hath the Catholike ROMANE Church done, by ordaining diuers & sundry feasts for the due worshiping of God, in yelding thankful, & liuely re∣mebrance of special benefits receiued at his hands, & namely of the benefite of Redemption, (which without com∣parison surpasseth all the rest) by call∣ing yeerly to minde, & by setting be∣fore the eies of hir children in a most vniforme maner al that our Sauior did & suffered for vs, as his Conception,
his Aduent, his Natiuity, his Circum∣cision, his Manifestation, his Presen∣tation, his Baptisme, his Fasting, his Preaching, his Miracles, his Passion, his Death, his Burial, his Resurrection, his Ascention, his sending down of the Holy Ghost, his second Aduent, &c. The which are Celebrated, Solemni∣zed, and recalled to memory in a most solmne, and decent manner, with ly∣stories most apte & fitte for euery sa∣son, and with exacte application of all Shadowes, Figures, Promises, Pro∣phecies, and with such like out of the olde Testament, as maye testifie and confirme the Christiā faith, at Chrst-Masse, at Candle-Masse, at Shroe∣tide, at Lent, at Easter, at Whitson∣tide, and at other seasons of the yeere. And I woulde to God that you were but once present here vpon Christ-Masse Eue at night, and vpon Christ-Masse Day, to beholde the liuelye re∣presentation of our Lords Birthe. Oh what Torches, what Tapers, what Lights, what Singing, what Sensing, what Mirth, what Melody, what play∣ing
vpon Organes, and other Instru∣ments, what praying vpon Bookes & Beades, what weeping for ioy and de∣uotion, and what a number of goodlie Ceremonies should you see? And as great solemnitie is at other times of the yeare befitting the season. Wher∣by all that our Redeemer did for vs is most liuelie, and most freshly renewed in the memorie of mankinde. Besides all this, there are also celebrated, and that verie solemnely the birth dayes, (not into this world, but into heauen) of his Apostles, Martyrs, Confessours, Virgins, and the feastes of his blessed Mother. By all which there is a kind of heauen vpon earth, Christ with his Saints and Angels being continuallie seene here after a sort as he is there, in face and fruition. Thus is he honoured in himselfe, thus is he worshiped in his Angels, thus is he praised in his Saints, And to al this may be added the De∣dication of euery particular materiall Church, which Feast in England you vsually call the Wakes, being a moste solemne Feast, to put the Parishioners
in minde of that triumphant Church in heauen, vvhich they daylie trauaile towardes, & to recal, & refresh in me∣mory the day that their parish church was first dedicated to God, or to some one of his Saintes, vvho in particular sort hath the protection thereof, de∣claring thereby their gratitude, and thankefulnes to God for his benefitts of Redemption, and calling. All these Feastes, and solemnities (I say) doe re∣new and retaine in the memorie of man the actes and benefittes of his Redeemer, and doe mooue and stirre vppe his stonie heart to loue him, prayse him, and to serue him; they doe sette before his eyes, the holie liues, and happie deaths of his blessed Saintes, thereby to make vs to imi∣tate them, to honour GOD by them, and to praie to them to be a meanes to him for vs, that we maie hereafter enioy their blessed company for euer. Manie other thinges hath the Ca∣tholicke Church ordayned, thereby to keepe continuallie in the minde of man the matters afore-saide, as Cru∣cifixes,
Pictures, Images, and Cros∣ses, in euerie common place, & high∣waie, vvhich people beholding, may presentlie conuerte theyr minde to some heauenlie misterie represented thereby. And by these meanes the moste vnlearned amongest the peo∣ple, vvere they young Maidens, or olde Wiues, knew more of the My∣steries of Christian religion, then ma∣nie of your Ministers daughters, or their wiues, yea or some of the Mi∣nisters them-selues doe knowe. And no marueile, when as they haue abo∣lished, and abrogated in a manner all Ceremonies, and after a sorte, all feasts, and those who hold themselues the purest, doe altogether lay away all Ceremonies, & Feastes, in such sort as you may see thē doe all kind of work, yea vpon Christmasse day it self, & to make no more account thereof, then of anie worke day in the whole yeare. And they all haue abolished gene∣rallie all Shrines, Pictures, Images, Crucifixes, Monumentes, and eue∣rie thinge vvhich might present to
the minde of the beholder any Miste∣rie or Document of Christian Faith, or any good example to be followed, & they haue leaft their churches as fit to mooue people to pietie and deuotion, as theyr barnes are, when all the corne and hay is out of them, and nothing left to be seene besides the roofes, wal∣les, and silles. Consider here with your selues, whether Iewes, Turks, or Hea∣thens, if they had gotten any Catho∣like countries, could haue made grea∣ter spoile in the churches, or haue left them more bare, then the Protestants haue done? Or wheather Christians, if they had vanquished Heathen coun∣tries, could haue dealt otherwise with the churches of theyr Idols, then the Protestantes haue done with Catho∣like Churches? And besides this, they haue defaced & throwne down Cros∣ses in Market places, & in high waies, as though they would not suffer, nor endure, that people by beholding any such thing should remember and call to minde the Passion of their Sauiour. This out of all doubt, was no smal sub∣tiltie
of the Diuel to mooue them, vn∣der some other pretence, to make & rid all away, that should retaine and keepe in peoples mindes that, which chieflie they ought euer to haue be∣fore the eyes of their minde. And ve∣rie rediculous it is to see them keepe such a stirre about keeping Holie the Sabboth, reiecting al other holy daies: whereas they haue no more vvarrant for the solemnizing of the Sondaie, then they haue for S. Laurence his day, or for any other holy, or festiuall daie in all the yeare: for other reason or warrant they haue not, but the autho∣rity of the Catholike Roman Church, which instituted, and ordained all Fe∣stiual dayes by the same Commission, that it chaunged the Sabboth of the Iewes, which was vpon Saturday, into the Sabboth of the Christians, vvhich it ordained to be vppon Sunday. And in time, I assure my self, if they should proceede on, the Diuell would bring them to lay away Sunday also (as hee hath caused some to doe alreadie) and consequently the Word and all: and
so driue them to plaine Atheisme, to which many of their brethrē are dri∣uen to alreadie. THE XXI. REASON. The Protestantes beginning, and proceeding against then consciences. In colloq. mens. Ger. fol. 458. b. & 369. b.I Know that no man can see into an∣other mans hart or conscience, (al∣though Luther, and his followers brag∣ged that they could so doe) and ther∣fore we cannot iudge thereof by sus∣pition only; but yet wee may be bold to giue our censure of them, by the plaine wordes, and manifest deedes of the parties. Wee dare not be so rash in this matter as the Protestantes are, who by onely coniectures iudge the harts of one another, and sticke not to write,Tom. 1. Iē. Ger. fol. 4. coll. mens. fol. 244. a. Tom. 2. Ger. Ien. fol. 9. b. that they speake and write a∣gainst their cōsciences & knowledge: whereby we may gather that they vse so to do: for otherwise how could they suspect such a detestable fault in o∣thers, for commonlie a man thinketh o∣thers
to be as himselfe is.Col. mens. fol. 10. b. Luther confesseth that hee began this Tragedie against his conscience, & therfore he thought others to doe the like. Zwinglius saith, that he beleeued not the Reall Presence for manie yeares together before hee brake off from the Catholike Church, but yet hee vvarilie dissembled his mind, & outwardly shewing himselfe a Papist,Collo mens. fol. 53. and in his opinion others doe the like. Nenno openly telleth that be∣fore he was an Anabaptist, hee sought after nothing, but his bellie,In adm¦nition ad do & the de∣sires of the flesh, and therefore hee thought that all Catholicke Priestes did the like: but you may aske me, if Luther, who first began the protestants Religion, had at his entry such repug∣nance of conscience, why did hee not leaue off that course, & returne to his Cloyster againe. I answere; for that he had proceeded so farre, as he himselfe thought, that by desperate necessitie hee must goe on, howsoeuer the mat∣ter would fal out. Euen as Iu. Caesar,Suetonius in vita Cae¦saris. who doubted much, and had diuers Cōbats with himself, whether he shuld march
forward with his army against the Ro∣manes or no: but at the length when he had proceeded so farre, as that hee had passed ouer the riuer Rubicon, hee burst out into these words: Now is the chaunce throwne,Col. mens. fol. 241. now must we needs proceed wheather we will or no. In like manner Luther, after he had gone further then his conscience woulde haue suffered him to haue done, hee vtterly dispai∣ring the recouery of his credit (much like as one Thomas Bell who yet liueth, in England, hath done) iustified his a∣ctions,Col. mens. fol. 158. b. 273. b. and so began his hell in this life, hauing his conscience euer after vn∣quiet, and still reproouing him, & cau∣sing him to repent, as Iudas did, for that he had proceeded so farre, and to wish all his Bookes buried in the earth,In praefat. in tom. 1. Germ. Ien. and was so troubled in disputations that as one ready to die, he would goe out in∣to the next chamber, and there throw himselfe vpon a bed. And yet for all this,Melanct. in vita Luth. pag. 13. the Diuell at the last grew so big with him, as that hee made him in all desperation to breake out into all ma∣lice against the Catholicke Church
without any regarde of conscience,Tom. 3. Iē. Ger. f. 274 or honestie; as you may see by that hee flatlie sayeth, that if the Councell of Trent would allow Communion vn∣der both kindes (which he thē taught to be instituted by Christ, and there∣fore of necessitie must so be done) yet he and his followers, would in despite of the Councel, either vse but one on∣ly, or none at all, and would plainelie account them accursed, which should vse both kinds by the authority of the Councell. And in like maner he saith, that if the Catholicke Church, should by any Councell decree that Priestes, and Ecclesiasticall persons might law∣fullie marrie, (which Doctrine he him selfe not only taught,Tom. 2. Ger. f. 214. but euen practi∣sed the same by marrying a Nunne) he would rather dissemble & beleeue, that that man was more in Gods fauor who all his life long, should keepe one or two, yea or three whoores, then he who after the decree of the Councell should marrie, yea he would cōmaund vnder paine of damnation, that no mā by permition of the Councell should
marry, but either liue chaste, or if he cannot so doe, by keeping a who are he should not despaire. So plaied he about the Eucharist, for although he taught that the Eleuation of the Bles∣sed Sacrament was wicked and horri∣ble Idolatry, and therfore would haue it abrogated,Tom. 3. Ien. Germ yet after that he had vn∣derstoode that his aduersary Carolasta∣dius did teach the same, he to contra∣dict & to oppose himselfe against him, retained & kept the Eleuation in Wit∣tenberge, whole twenty yeeres togea∣ther, mauger the head of his said emu∣lator Carolastadius. Yea he openly pro∣tested, that rather than hee woulde yeelde an haires breadth to him, he would goe and be a Friar againe, and obserue all orders in his Monastery, as duely as euer he had done before. The like course he toke about other things, and namely, about Transubstantia∣tion: Because the Papists (saith he) doe vrge Transubstantiation,Tom. 2. Germ. fol. 225. we onely that we may be contrary to them, & insulte against them, will beleeue that true Breade, & true Wine doe there remaine together with the Body &
Bloode of Christ. Yet saide he of Tran∣substantiation against the Sacramen∣taries, that he woulde rather beleeue it with the Papistes, than he would de∣nie the Reall Presence with them. This maye you plainly see, that this your first Apostle and generall Cap∣taine of all you Protestantes, had no conscience, nor Religion at all, but ledde by a spirite of contradiction, he sought to be singular in himselfe, and contrary to all others. Neither did hee onely in this manner against his conscience, but his companions and Schollers were also in the same predicament, and had the same re∣pugnance in themselues. For Melancthon in the diet at Aspurge was so troubled in conscience,Chytraeus in hist. Aug. conf. that he was altogeather sadde, pusillanimous, and doubtfull in minde, and gaue him selfe so to weeping, as that no com∣fortes, nor encouragementes coulde preuaile, or doe him any good. And Carolastadius openly confessed that what hee did was cleane against his conscience.Col. m¦ger. f. 1 & 517. The like repugning
conscience had Zwinglius in expound∣ing the words of our Sauiour of the B. Sacrament,Lib. de cae na. page. 216. a. as witnesseth Kemnitius, and the Lutherans write, that hee openlie shewed, and declared in his manners, gests, and in all things that his consci∣ence accused him of errours:Ioannes Shutz in serp. antiq. fol. 19. but yet he had leifer forsake the truth, then to loose his honour in yeelding to Luther. The like write the same Lutherans of Oecolampadius. And as for Bucer it is wel knowne, that hee had no conscience, nor religion at all: for at Wittenberge he was a Lutheran, at Colone halfe a Ca∣tholike, in England a Zwinglian, & eue∣rie where of euerie Sect. I could easi∣ly shew the like dealing against theyr consciences, and knowledge in diuers other principall Protestants, & name∣lie in your countriman I well, who in ci∣ting and coating Scriptures, Doctors, Councels, and other Authors, doth so rent and teare in peeces the text, in∣uert the sense, chaunge and alter the words, and pull out of the sentence by peece meale some little parcell, which is forced to sound for his purpose, whē
as he cannot but see plainelie, that the Author speaketh cleane contrarie, as any man may wonder to see a man so desperatly and damnably shamelesse, as openly, & in the view of the whole world to shew himselfe without God, or conscience: but mine intended bre∣uitie will not admit any moe allegati∣ons in this place. When I had found out the Premisses to bee moste true, and had duelie weighed with my selfe the dealinges of these new Gospellers, I thought it better to aduenture my soule vvith all the vvhole Christian world of all ages who had their consci∣ences most quiet, caulme, and ioyfull, then with a few desperate fellows, who thus deale against their owne know∣ledge, and consciences, and so shewe themselues most impudent, & shame∣lesse to the whole world. THE XXII. REASON. Vnreuerent dealing. THE Catholike Romane Church hath euer both in doing, & spea∣king, and euery manner of way borne
great repect, and reuerence towardes Gods holy Saints, and towards all ho∣ly things in regard of him, from whom proceedeth all holines, as in reuerent entring into the Church, in reuerent taking of holie-water, in reuerent be∣hauiour towards the holy Aultars, to∣wards pictures, & images of the saints of God, in reuerent and meeke knee∣ling, in reuerent & deuout praying, in all reuerence and attention at the ho∣lie Masse, and in euery action, and iest which Catholikes vse in the Church, you may see great reuerence, & hum∣ble veneration: But contrariwise a∣mongst the Protestants as all thinges are prophane, so are they moste pro∣phanely vsed. They enter into theyr Churches with no greater reuerence thē they enter into tauerns, they bow or make reuerence to nothing therin, for that they haue made all Sacred things away, if any of them kneele, it is but vpon thornes, for full soone are they vp againe, & thē with their hats vpon their heads they eyther iangle, or talke, or walke, or sitte staring a∣bout
them, as if they waited to see when the players would come foorth vppon the stage, or else the good fel∣lowes go to the ale-house (where now & thē they find their minister drink∣ing his morning draught before he go to his seruice) to drink a pot or two of nappy ale, that thereby they may the better hold out the seruice time; du∣ring which space they stand gazing & staring vpō their Minister, as a Coun∣trie clowne which neuer was in Lon∣don before, doth gaze when he goeth downe Cheap-side, at the Gold-smithes stauls, or els they stare one vpon ano∣ther, like as theeues do when they are taken in a robery, or els some of them walke without in the warme sonne, & make theyr bargaines, and generallie you doe see no more deuotion there, then you doe in a Faire or Market; no man nor womā saying one praier, but all waiting for (that which they cā ne∣uer haue in that state) the peace of God. The which being hastely chopped vp, they rush and gush out of the Church as water doth out of a mill pole, when
the flood yeates are sodainely plucked vp, no man moouing lip, or legge, but striuing vvho shall be soonest at his pottage. Neither doe they vse any re∣uerence to their Minister, no nor yet to his wife, but account of thē (as they are indeed) most abiect persons. And no meruaile, when as their superinten∣dents, whom they tearme Bishops, are little esteemed of among their Dio∣cesanes, & especially among Gentle∣men, & are least accounted of among Barrons, and other Noble men, vvho disdaine their companie, & contemne their presence: whereas amongst Ca∣tholikes, Priests haue euer bin great∣lie reuerenced, Bishoppes and Prelats highly honoured, & all Cleargie men much esteemed, and theyr companie & presence, of all sorts desired, & re∣uerently accepted of. The same reue∣rent respect haue Catholikes euer ob∣serued in speaking, & in making men∣tion of Gods Books, Angels, Saints, or of such like holy things: for speaking of such they vsually say: The holie Bible, or the holie Scriptures, the holie Ghospell, the
blessed Sacrament, the holie Sacraments &c. And of Angels & Saints: the holy An∣gels, S. Michael, S Gabriel, &c. And the French more reuerentlie vse to say: Mounsieur S. Michael, Mounsieur S. Pierre, &c. Our blessed Lady, or the holie virgin S. Marie, or the mother of God, S. Peeter, S. Paul, S. Amb. S. August. S. Greg. S Hierome, S. Bernard, &c. and generally in speak∣ing of Holie thinges, they vse Holie tearmes: But the Protestants shew as little reuerence & deuotion in speak∣ing, as they doe in dooing: for they speake no more reuerentlie of such, then they do of the prophanest things they haue. They tearme all, as if they vvere in puris natalibus: The Bible, the Word, the Testament, the Communion book, Baptisme, Bread, the Supper, Angels, Mich∣el, Gabriel, Peter, Paul, Marie, or Marie the virgin, Ambrose, Austen, Gregorie the Pope, Hierome the monke, Bernard the Abot, &c. with as great inciuilitie, irreuerence, and want of good manners, as if rude Countriemen in talking of her Maie∣sties Nobles should say; the Keeper, the Treasurer, the Admirall, Essex, Southampt∣on,
Monioy, &c. or insteede of naming men of worshippe by their Christian names shuld say: Tom, Dick, Wil, Robin, Iacke, Hodge, &c. Which diuersitie of dealing when I considered it with my selfe, I could not but think, & deeme the Protestants profession voide of all impression of pietie and deuotion; & contrariwise in the Catholike Church to be all sincere affection, and celesti∣all humilitie towards almightie God, and towards al things appropriated to his seruice, as also towards those, who are the greatest partakers of his hea∣uenlie fauour. THE XXIII. REASON. Resembling in Doctrine, and deedes, old Heretikes. Irenaeus l. 1. cap. 20. Theo lib. 1. Haeretic. fab. Aug. heres. 54. Hist. trip. l. 8. cap. 9.I HAVE conferred the Doctrine, deedes, & manners of Protestants, with those of the old Heretikes long since condemned by the Catholicke Church, & I find thē little or nothing at all to differ: for as touching Do∣ctrine, the protestants hold with Simon
Magus that good workes are not meri∣torious: they renounce the Pope with Nouatus: they refuse to faste on such dayes as the Church hath prescribed,Hierom in prae. in dia. aduer. Pe∣lag. Aug. de her. cap 45. Epiph. l 3 her 75 Hier. lib. 1. cō. Iouin. idem coa. vigilant. ad Exuperi∣um. and denie free-wil with the Manichees: they denie sacrifice, and praier for the dead with Aeriu: with Iouiniā they put no differences of sins, nor make virgi∣nity any better thē mariage: they per∣mit no tapers, nor lights in their chur∣ches, & they speak against worshiping of Saints, and despise holie reliques of blessed Martyrs with Vigilantiu: they take away the oblatiō of the sacrifice, & the hallowing of Chrisme with Eu∣tyches:Leo Epist. 75. Aug. heres 88. & de pec. merit. lib. 3. cap. 5. loa. Shut lib. 50. cau¦sarum cap. 18. they teach that childrē may be saued without baptisme, & therefore that it is not of necessitie with the Pe∣lagians: they bragge with the Donatistes that all the world hath swarued from the right faith, and they onely are the true Church. And all the rest of theyr doctrine in a maner is borrowed thus of old heretiks, which here particular∣ly to set downe my breuity will not permit. The like cobaerence & agree∣ment they haue with the old heretikes
in deeds & maners: for I haue found by experience that the Protestant preachers expect,Euseb. l. 7. Hist. c. 26. and desire great ap∣plause of their hearers, as Paulus Samo∣satenus did of his followers; they ouer∣throw Aultars,Opt. lib. 6 contr. Do. abuse the blessed Sa∣crament, handle despitefullie Holie Chrisme, as the Donatistes did; they faigne causes, and come excuses why they will not goe to Generall Coun∣cels,Aug. lib. 3. con. Cres∣con. Gram mat. ca. 45. & hist. trip lib. 5. c. 34. as the saide Donatistes, Macedonius, and Dioscorus did. The Donatistes also fained that diuers Bishops vvho were absent, and that one who was dead did take theyr part against Catholickes, therby to make theyr nūber to seeme greater: and there in England, vvhen not somuch as one Catholicke Bishop could be induced by any perswations, promises, gifts, or honours, to consent to their Protestancy, yet were not the Protestantes ashamed to abuse the Queenes Highnesse vvith this fained Supplication:Anno. 1. Reginae E∣lizabethae. Most humblie beseech your most excellent Maiestie, your faithfull and o∣bedient Subiects, the Lordes spirituall and temporall, &c. The same Donatistes, did
torment moste cruellie Catholicke Priests, plucking out the eyes of some,Aug. Pon. com. Epist. 50. and of one Bishoppe they cut out the tongue, and hand, and murdered ma∣nie. And the Protestantes of late in Fraunce did the like to Catholicke Priests, and besides tying haulters a∣bout their neckes, they drewe them dispiteouslie after theyr horses, that done, they cut off theyr eares, noses, & priuie partes, they ware their eares in their hats insteed of brooches, and fi∣nally they either hanged vp their car∣casses,Claud. de Sanctis in lib. du Sa∣cramēt des eglyses. or else shot them through with Pistolles: of others they hackled and mangled their faces: of othersome to trie force & strength, they did cleaue in two at one stroke their heades: and of an old Religious man at Mans, they first cut off his priuie parts, then they fried them, after they forced him to swallow them downe, and last of all they did rip his stomake; being yet a∣liue, and see what was become there∣of. At S. Macharius they buried the Catholikes quicke, they cut Infants in two, they ripped the bellies of Priests,
and drew out their intrals by little & little, winding them about a sticke, or tree. At Patte a village, some 6. leages from Orleaunce, they burned Catholiks & threw infants into the fire there to perish with the rest. And manie other like outrages, and barbarous cruelties they cōmittd, which who so desireth to know,Victor de persec. vā- l. 1. cap. 3. & l 1. cap. de offic. praef. prae∣tor lib. 3, Episc. Egip¦ti Epist. ad Marcum Papaem. may find them set downe by Claudius de Saintes in his booke noted before i the margent. The Arriā he∣retikes troadeth B. Sacrament vnder their feet, they ouerthrew the church¦es in Africa, & made of thē stables for their horses, of Altars clothes, & vest∣ments they made shirts and breeches, they burned the bookes, and carried the ornaments of the Churches away. And how the Protestants haue abu∣sed the B. Sacrament, spoiled church∣es, burned bookes, and haue not onlie made breeches, shirts, & cushions, but euen coats for players, & dizzardes of holy vestments, & Aultar clothes, you cannot but know.Theod. lib 1. cap. 6 Iulian that wicked Aapostata, robbed Churches, spoiled the Cleargy of their priuiledges, bani∣shed
the Priestes, ouerthrew Aultars, caused the sacrifice to cease, reproued the Christians for doing reuerence to the Crosse,Cyrill lib. 6. contra Iulian. & l. 10 coa. e∣undem. and for making the signe thereof in their foreheades, for paint∣ing it vpon the dores of theyr houses, and for worshipping the Reliques of Mattyrs, for visiting their tombes, for praying to them at theyr graues,Zozom. li. 5. cap 12. and Sepulchres, and termed them deadmē: hee ouerthrew & destroyed the ima∣ges, & pictures of Christ, he brake o∣pen the shne, wherein the bones of S. Iohn Baptist vvere religiouslie kept,Theod. lib 5. cap. 6. burned them, & dispersed abroad the ashes. Now whether the Protestants haue iumped iust into the steps of this wicked Apostata in doing the like or no? I leaue to your iudgement, know∣ledge, & consideration.Zozom li. 5. cap 21 Athan. lib. de passion. imag. Chr. The Panims or heathē men brake the image of christ: the Iewes crucified it, as theyr Elders had done Christ himselfe: the Iew in in whose house it was foūd, was troub∣led for it, & brought before the high priest, for that he seemed by keeping that picture, that hee was a Christian.
And doe not the Protestants euen as the Heathens and Iewes did? The Iew was thought to be a fauourer of Christ, because he kept his picture in his house: and why should not Catho∣likes by the like reason, be iudged fa∣uourers, and louers of Christ, for ha∣uing his Image in theyr Churches, houses, and chambers? Or why should not Protestantes be deemed aduersa∣ries and enimies to Christ, as the Iews and Heathens were, seeing they can no more endure his Picture or Crosse then they could? The old Heretikes, as Nestorius,Socrat. lib. 7. hist. cap. 23. Eus. lib 6. cap. 55. & lib. 7. c. 24. Nice∣phor. lib. 6 cap. 30. Theodor. lib. 1. cap. 4 Nouatus, Paulus Samosatenus, the Arrians & others were out of mea∣sure proud, arrogant, and wonderful∣lie conceited of themselues, contem∣ning the Doctours of the Church, which had writttn before them, and preferring them-selues before all o∣thers whatsoeuer: the verie same doe the Protestants in a most proude, and arrogant manner, and the ringleader, and Father of them all is not ashamed to breake out into these speeches:Lutherus col. mens. I haue Excommunicated Origine long agoe,
there is nothing singuler in Athanasius,fol. 474. & 460. & 932. & 476 & 477. & 17. Ter∣tullian is very superstitious: I make no count of Chrisostome, for he is but a pratler: Basil plainely is nothing worth, hee is altogether a Monke: Cyprian the Martyr is a weake Di∣uiner: Hierome ought not to be numbred a∣mongst the Doctours of the Church, for he was an Heretike: amongst all the Doctors scarse∣lie one, except Augustine,Tō. 2. ger. fol. 443. & 449. vnderstood what the spirit & the letter were: in all theyr books there is great darkenesse of Faith: Gregories Sermons are not worth a deafe nut, the diuell deceaued him grosselie in his Dialogues. Thus doe they censure the auncient Fathers, but of themselues they speak farre otherwise: for the same Arch-Protestant saith that hee himselfe is a faithfull Prophet, an Apostle, an Euangelist,Tom 2. Ger fol. 522. & fol 79. Tom. 3. f. 334. Coll. mens. fol. 488. a liuing Saint, &c. And further he said of himselfe, that hee is Esay the Prophet, & Phillip Melancthō, Ieremie. Was there euer any Thraso so impudent, as thus to bragge of him-selfe. And yet his followers were not ashamed to extoll and praise him in such sort, as I cannot without shame and offence to Christi∣an eares declare the same: but yet to
giue you a little taste thereof, I vvill here set downe a distichon, which his Disciples made in praise of him,In parte contra Ste¦phanum Agricolam ca. 4. b. 9. a. and which Cyriacus Spangenbergius one of his principall followers stoutlie maintain∣eth to be true, and allowable the disti∣chon is this. Christ is habet primas, habeas tibi Paule secundus, Ast loca post illos proxima, Luther habet. Which thus maie bee Engli∣shed.The chiefe of all is Christ himselfe, the next is Paul by grace, Backe Saints, Apostles, Angels all for next is Luthers place. Col. mens. fol. 159.And Luther himself in another place coupleth himselfe with the same holie Apostle Saint Paule: But to see vvhat staffe his adhaerentes vse in his com∣mendation and praise, is too redicu-to behold,Col. mens. ger fo. 354 & 159. & Beza in lib Icom r 4. a & in praef. in nouum test. f. 144. a. & Luth. in praefati. in commē. Phill. in Epist. ad Rō. p. 2. & tom 2. Ien. fol. 79. & in li. coa. regē. ang. & tō. 2. Iē. f. 119 & col. mē. f. 144. & f. 474 & tō. 2. Lat. Wit¦ten. f 457. & in l. de∣eruoarbit. & Stigel. l. 2. Poemat. n. 4. Amsd. desc. Luth. & Ab. cō. Carola. an. l. 7. b. Eus. l. 7. cap. 24 Soc. li. 6. c. 8. Zozō. li. 8. c. 8. Ni∣cph. l. c. 16. idem li. 11. cap: 12. Tertul. in lib. de pre∣ser aduers. hers. Epip: her: 49. & 79: Aug: her: 27: Hieron: ad Etesiph: aduers. pelagianos: Euseb which you may see at large in their writings, and thus they do not only write of their master & captaine, but euen one of another and of thēsel∣ues in a most shameful & lying māner. They follow also the fashion of old heretiks in that they disagre so great∣lie
in Doctrine, & are so contentious, & doe affect & seek after eloquence, and smooth speeches, more than after the truth, as they did. And neuer any Arch-heretike among them is cōuer∣ted, as there neuer was in the auncient time: for that their sin was ouer hey∣nous, & against the Holy Ghost; nei∣ther doe they put any difference be∣tweene Ecclesiasticall persons and ci∣uill, as they old heretiks did not. And they season their errours with songes, & ballades in the vulgar tongue, to the end that the common people de∣lighting to heare and singe them, might thereby sucke theyr errours, as you see them doe by the Geneua Psalmes, which women, children, and all sorts confusedlie sing, & so did the old heretiks, as historiographers make mentiō. The women among the here∣tikes in times past were so shameles, & malapert, that they tooke vpon them to dispute, and to reason of matters of religion: & they helped foreward the Heresie, by teaching, preaching, pra∣ting, wrāgling, iangling, prophecying,
and by all meanes possible.5. And doe not,p. 14. Niceph. l. cap. 22. Tom 1. Iē. Ger. f. 336 & f. 17. & 341. I pray you, the women amongest the Protestantes the like, following therin their Father Luthers aduise, who licenseth them to doe such thinges, & namely to preach? The olde Heretikes were verie in∣quisitiue, and desirous to heare of the sinnes, and faults of Priests, and of o∣ther Ecclesiasticall persons,Aug. Epist 137. and when they heard any such, they greatlie re∣ioyced thereat, and blazed it abroad with great exaggerations, and additi∣ons: and doe not the Protestants the same? Yea it were more sufferable if they blazed abroade onelie thinges which were true: but they most impu∣dentlie faine, & make vpon their own fingers the greatest part of such tales as are tolde of Ecclesiasticall persons. Wherein they shewe how farre they are from the spirit and minde of that most Religious Emperour Constantine the great,Zozom▪ li. 1. cap 6. Niceph. li. 8. cap. 16. who would not in any wise heare the faults of Bishops & Priests, but affirmed that if he should chaunce to finde such an one violating wed∣locke,
hee would couer him with his purple cloake, for feare of scandale. I could heere alleadge manie moe things both of doctrine and manners, in which the Heretikes of old, and the Protestants of these dayes, doe agree, and iumpe togeather, and because of breuitie I will surcease, praying you warily to weigh whose steps you tread in, and whose examples you follow. THE XXIIII. REASON. Peace and tranquilitie. THE Catholike Romane religion (according to the prophecies of the old Testament) began with meek∣nes, mildnes, and with all quiet, and peaceable meanes, by which it also encreased, and dilated it selfe: the teachers, and professours thereof, v∣sing all patience and humilitie, but neuer any violence, or force in the planting thereof; whereas the Prote∣stants both haue begun, and holde on theyr course vvith seditious tumults, wars, cruelties, and other outragious Tragedies: as vvith ouerthrowing
noble families, making away honoura∣ble personages, & with destroying all before thē, where they set foot, as Ger∣many, where they begā, can sufficiently witnes, where were slaine within one yeere by rebellion & war for this new religion,Sledn aboue one hundred thousand people, country-men taking armes a∣gainst their Lords, & subiectes against their Princes for the same. And what rule, and reuell they haue kept about their Gospell in Fraunce, in Flaunders, in Poland, in Switzerland, & in Denmarke, is wel known where they haue gathered sundry armies, pitched many campes, fought many battailes, made many in∣surrections, destroyed Countries, Cit∣ties, Townes, Villages, caused such slaughter, and hauocke of Christian blood as euery man abhorreth to hear of. And what tragedies I praye you haue they raised in Scotlande? Haue they not murdered their Princes, and ouerthrowne Noble houses, and Ly∣nages, as the houses and Lynages of Hamiltons, of Duglasses, of Stewardes, and of others? Neither hath Ireland escaped
scot free. But to speake of our owne Countrye, I cannot without teares re∣count sommarily the troubles, calami∣ties, destructiōs, & vtter ruines of no∣ble families, honorable & worshipfull personages, & of the cōmon-wealth it selfe caused by the Protestants, or for the controuersie of religion In k. Henry the 8. his time, two, the chiefest of the whole Realme, for vertue & learning were put to death, with great numbers of others, both spiritual & tēporall, & many noble families were quite ouer∣throwne. King Edward being crowned King: new Lordes, new Earles, new Marquises, and new Dukes tooke the places of the old: new fellowes were called out of Germany, to witte, Peter Martyr, and Martin Bucer two Aposta∣taes Fryars, waited on by two Fuste∣lugge vvenches, vvhich had beene Nunnes, vvho came to teache a new religion: but with expresse condition to be indifferent to teach vvhat sect, or opinions, eyther of LVTHER, ZVVINGLIVS, or CALVINE, or of anye other vvhatsoeuer, vvhich the
Parliament then in gathering shoulde agree vpon. The poore irreligious A∣postataes with their sacrilegious lasses were content so to doe, and vpon that condition they were sent, the one to Oxforde with his wench at his taile, and the other to Cambridge accompanied with his lasse. Then might you haue seene iolly holding & drawing about Religion, placing, and displacing, pri∣soning, and setting at liberty, all men forced to sweare to a forme of seruice drawen out in hast by certaine of the L. Protectours chaplaines, (which ser∣uice was neuer heard of in the worlde before) but the Cleargie refused so to doe, and therefore were depriued, and imprisoned. The Duke of Somerset was head, and ruler of the newe deuised Church, (for the Childe-King, was a playing him, & could not once thinke of any such thing) and attended to his owne aduauncement by purchasing good olde land, whilest the two sillye Apostataes kept the people occupied with newe doctrine, and with not tro∣bling of him. And then began such
reuell, and hold, and tye in the lande, as that the Protector first of all cut off the head of his brother the Admirall: the Earle of Warwicke beheaded the Protector, and diuers others of his friendes, making him-selfe Duke of Northumberland, and complotting with the Duke of Suffolke to cut off all king Henries children, & to bring in Suffolkes daughter, and Northumberlands sonne as they did: for the which both theyr heades were afterwardes cutt off by Queene Marie. And in her Maiesties time, that nowe is, all the Sacred Bi∣shops were depriued in one day, & al, or the most of them imprisoned du∣ring theyr liues. Manie noble houses abused, & disgraced, and diuers ouer∣throwne, manie both of honour and worshipp intollerably afflicted, manie thousands of inferiour sort greiuously persecuted, aboue an hundred Priests tortured, hanged, and quartered, the moste of them beeing Gentlemen of worshipfull discent, of rare witt, lear∣ning, and of other parts incomperable. The Realme is deuided, and shiuered
into a thousand peeces, the old friends and allies thereof, made enimies to it, new friends few and weake, the natu∣rall inhabitants most pittifullie deui∣ded amongst themselues at home, & tossed and turmoiled abroade, euerie man of what state, conditon, or religi∣on soeuer he be of, hath felt the smart of this new Ghospell, eyther in him∣selfe, in his friendes, children, seruants, kinsfolkes, goodes, honoures, & most of all the Realme, and Common-weale in it selfe, vvith ten thousand other troubles, and afflictions, vvhich the Protestantes Religion carrieth vvith it, wheather soeuer it goeth. E∣uer expelling & driuing away Peace, and Tranquilitie, vvhich finde har∣bour, and entertainement only in Ca∣tholike realmes, and common-weales. When I weighed, and considered these things diligently with my selfe, I could not but dislike your new Re∣ligion, euer accompanied vvith Tu∣mults, Insurrections, Ruines, Deso∣lations, and vvith all manner of Tra∣gicall miseries, as is afore-saide, and
cleaue vnto the olde Catholike Reli∣gion, euer bringing with it peace, qui∣etnesse, loue friendshipp, plentie, and all kinde of happinesse, as wee see in Lands & Countries which euer haue kept the same. THE XXV. REASON. All kind of witnesses against one and that onely in show, or in very deed none at all. EVERIE man knoweth that the Protestants can bring foorth no∣thing to witnesse theyr religion, but onely the Scriptures, and how they make for them, I haue partlie shewed before: for in euerie deed they being rightly examined, & truely interpre∣ted beare witnesse moste of all other thinges against them: for out of all doubt, Gods word is not contrarie, but most consonant to all thinges be∣fore aleaged, & practised through the whole christiā world for so many ages together. And wheras they wil admit
no expositors of holie Scriptures, but the Scriptures themselues: for that (as they say) one place expoundeth ano∣ther; I aske thē then, how their chiefe maister M. Luther, when as hee would moste gladlie haue denyed the Reall Presence, thinking thereby to wreake his teene the more on the Pope, con∣fessed that he could not do it, because the words were so manifest for it? And why hath that text beene so tossed & wrested in this age, as that sundry se∣ctaries haue wringed out of it, aboue foure-score different opinions, or ex∣positions; and yet euerie one defend∣eth with tooth and naile his interpre∣tation to be sound, and right? So that in fine they haue no witnesse at all of their new inuented doctrine, but eue∣ry one his priuate fancie, or conceite: whereas the Catholike Religion, be∣sides all the reasons before alleadged, hath all thinges in the world witnesses of it: for if you looke vpp to Heauen, you may there see amongst innume∣rable Martyrs, vvhich all gaue theyr liues for the saide Religion, three and
thirtie which were Popes of Rome. And to speake some what in particu∣lar,In Epist. ad Smyr. the zealous Martyr S. Ignatius, who in Ecclesiasticall affaires would haue no man, no not the King equall to a Bishop, and who wrote Apostolicall traditions, which hee him-selfe had seene, sealed his religiō with his blood.Lib. 3. c. 3. Irenaeus who declared the true Faith by succession in the See of Rome was of this religion. S. Victor,Euseb. 5. hist. 24 Euseb. 4. hist. 14. who by his pō∣tificall power, kept in subiection all Africke, was of this religion. S. Polycarpe who went to Rome about the question of Easter, was of this religion. S. Cyprian, S. Sixtus, S. Laurence, vvith infinite o∣thers, both Doctours and Saintes doe witnesse the Roman Religion. Thou∣sandes of Virgins, which defended their virginitie against diuels, & men,Euseb. 8. hist. 17. Aug l. 9. conf. cap. 7. vs. ad 3. were of this religion. Saint Helen, who went to Ierusalem, to finde out the Crosse of our Sauiour was of this reli∣gion. The mother of S. Austin. S. Mo∣nica, who at her death requested that she might haue Masse said for her, & to be prayed for, was out of all doubt
a Papist: So were S. Paul the Eremite, S. Hilarion, S. Anthonie, S. Nicolas, S. Mar∣tine, S. Benet, with millions of such like, who were fed with fasting, cloathed with sacke-cloath, and enriched vvith all maner of vertues. And to be short, were there, I pray you, any Saintes in heauen, before this our age, vvhich were not Papist? I am sure that either heauen was empty vntil Luth. shooke of his hood, or if there were any there they were Papists. Now if you looke downe into hell, you may behold the Heathen perse∣cutors, Iewes, Turkes, and Heretikes, in perpetuall tormentes for persecu∣ting, and striuing against the Catho∣licke ROMAN CHVRCH To this Constantine the great brought peace, and quietnesse. In this Church there hath beene continuall succession of Bishops without any interruption. All Bishopps and Pastours of particular Churches, in what land or country so∣euer they were in vnder the cope of heauen, were mēbers of this Church. As for example, S. Ignatius, at Antioch,
Peter, Alexander, Athanasius, Theophilus, at Alexandria: Macharius, and Cyrillus at Ierusalem: Proclus at Constantinople: Gre∣gory, and Basil, in Cappadocia: Thauma∣turgus in Pontus: Polycarpas at Smyrna: Iustinus at Athens: Dyonisius at Corinth: Gregory at Nysa, Methodius at Tyrus, E∣phreem in Syria, Cyprian, Optatus, Austin in Africke, Epiphanius in Cyprus, Am∣brose, Paulinus, Gaudentius, Prosper, Fau∣stus, Vigilius in Italy, Irenaeus, Martine, Hylarius, Eucherius, Gregory, Saluianus in Fraunce: Vincentius, Orotius, Hildefonsus, Leander, Isidorus, in Spayne, Fugatius, Da∣mianus, Iustus, Melytus, Beda in England, were Bishoppes and Pastours of this Church. In briefe, whatsoeuer deedes or works, signes or monuments, frag∣ments, or reliques remaine yet in anie land or countrie of them, who planted the Christian Faith there, doe testifie the Catholike Roman Religion. All Princes, Kings, & Emperors, all States and commonweales which euer were christened: the Theodosians in the east, the Charles in the west, the Edwards in Englande, the Lewesses in Fraunce,
the Hermigildes in Spaine, the Henries in Saxony, the Wenceslaes in Boeme-Lande, the Leopoldes, in Austria, the Steeuens in Hungary, the Iosophates in India pro∣fessed, and protected the Roman Re∣ligion, they builded Churches, foun∣ded religious houses, & erected many other Monuments of pietie, not for Protestants Iwis, but for the profes∣sours of the Catholike Roman Religi∣on: which Faith and Religion S. Pat∣tricke brought first into Ireland, Palladi∣us into Scotland, S. Augustine into Eng∣land, and other Apostles into other countries: witnesses of this Religion are al Vniuersities, Colledges, Hospi∣tals, Monasteries, Churches, Chappels and innumerable other monumentes: Witnesses their foundations, their or∣dinances, yea and the very buildings themselues: witnesses all Reuestryes, Chauncels with steppes vp, Aultars, Rood lofts, Cross-buildings, al Cros∣ses in Church and Church-yeardes, Market-places, and High-waies: wit∣nesses all Bishoprickes, Deaneries, Arch-deaconries, Prebendes, Parso∣nages,
Vicariages, & such like, ordai∣ned trow you, for women, & children to make them gentles? Witnesses all tithes, and other liuely-hoods so reli∣giously lotted out, not for ministers wenches, & their brats, but for Sacred anoynted Priests. Good Lord, what would the founders of all these pre∣misses say, if they might come but to see how their lands and goods, which they so religiouslie bestowed to honor God withall, are by Protestants em∣ployed? Witnesses spirituall Courtes, Visitations, Conuocations, Excom∣munications, & Suspensions: witnes∣ses probations of dead mens wils: wit∣nesses bidding and forbidding of ba∣nes: witnesses partitions of Diocese & parishes; all ordeyned, and instituted by Papists. Witnesses auncient lawes and customes: witnesses the vulgar manners of people, the Election, and Inauguration of Emperours, the rites of annoynting & crowning of kings, the dubbing of knights, &c. witnesses coynes, windows, towne-gates, town-houses, all rules, and to conclude, all
things in the world witnes the Catho∣like Roman Religion. Thus haue I briefelie my deare frendes set downe some plaine reasons of the religion which I professe, & for the enioying of which, I am content to forgoe my natiue soyle, my deare Parents, you my dearest friends, with all the rest, and all those commodities and pleasures, which you account in your letter. I wish you not to thinke euill of mee for so doing, for it is the religion wherein I was borne, bapti∣zed, and confirmed: it is the religion which from time to time hath bin v∣niuersallie receaued throughout all Christēdome: it is the religion which there in our own countrie of al others is the first, the auncientest, the moste benificiall of all the rest, the mother, and begetter of the others, & the re∣ligion of all our Christian Predeces∣sours, and therefore beare with me I pray you, in that I will not yeelde vp my title, and interest of that which I haue receaued from myne Elders, by lineall and lawful discent, no man for
these thousand yeares at the least see∣king to put mee, or any of my prede∣cessors out of it. Yet if any Prote∣stant or other whatsoeuer, can shew me any good euidence, why I should not possesse the same, I am readie to giue it vp: but hitherto they promi∣sing and vaunting to shew good eui∣dence, haue brought forth nothing but words, and forgerie. And there∣fore by Gods grace, I purpose to hold the same, euen vntill my dying day, except such euidence come against my title, as is not to be shewed, no not by an Angell, if he should come from heauen. God blesse you in the aboun∣dance of his mercie, who sende vs ioyfull meeting, eyther in this world, or in the next, or in both.
A COPIE OF ANOTHER LETTER WHICH THE TWO Cittizens of London wrote to theyr friende beyond the Seas, shortlie after that the o∣ther was sent. DEARE AND WEL-beloued friend, after that we had sent the last Letter dated the 13. of September Anno. 1599. wee consulting, and weighing the contents thereof, with some what more deepe considerations then before wee had done: it was thought good to write vnto you this se∣cond Letter, to let you vnderstand that wee will not receaue, nor medle with any grounds or reasons of your faith and religion, & ther∣fore you neede not to trouble your selfe with writing any: for wee assure our selues that you can bring forth none, but such as Papistes
vse to alleadge, which are now growne verie stale, & out of request. Onlie this is the desire of vs al, that you would returne without de∣lay: but yet so, as you may shew your selfe o∣bedient to her Ma. lawes in comming to the Church as other good dutiful subiects doe: for surelie what Religion soeuer you professe, we thinke you may with safe conscience come to heare Diuine Seruice, or a Sermon, beeing no further vrged, but that you may thinke, and pray as you list. And what Scripture, autho∣rity or reason can you shew, or pretend for re∣fusing so to doe? For we knowe the cōmon an∣swere, which women, & such sillie soules are accustomed to make in saying: It is against my conscience, I may not with a safe conscience so doe: is too foolish for you, who seeme to haue more knowledge. Wee supposed at the first, that your refusall proceeded of a timerous & ouer scrupulous conscience, but now wee be∣ginne to suspect, that because you haue gone so far in that course, you thinke it would be some discredite, as to be deemed vnconstant, and a turne-coate, if you should in any sort relent, and come to conformitie, and there∣fore you minde still to be obstinate: but wee friendly aduise you to beware of such pee∣uishnes,
proceeding indeede from the roote of pride, & we wish you to submit your selfe to your gracious Princesse, her honourable Coū∣cell, & to the lawes of your natiue Country, and weigh with your selfe, what you are to stand against a whole Realme, and wee see no reason, but that you may as well come to Church, as you did once (if wee be not decea∣ued) eate vpon some occasion, flesh vpon a fri∣day, a thing so opposite to your religion. If you can maister your minde, so as you may come home in this sort, we shall be all most glad of you: for if you do, neyther Parents nor frends will entertaine you, nor speake one worde in your cause, for if they should it were but in vaine, & besides might bring them into some suspitiō & discredit. God giue you grace to be wise in time, for if you holde on in this your wilfull follie, wee feare much, that you who shuld haue bin most cōfort to your friends, wil become their greatest greefe, & giue thē oc∣casion to wish that you neuer had bin borne: whereas being tractable in this our request, you may salue all sores past, benefit your self, pleasure many, do great good in your coūtrie, comfort your kinsfolkes, proue your selfe wise in deed, gaine credit amongst the best, and
liue pleasantly manie an yeare. Which thing your Parents, and wee most earnestlie desire to see. And thus, they with paternall bles∣singes, and wee all ioyntlie with millions of commendations, commit you to the Almigh∣tie. London this 2. of October. an. 1599. Your most kinde and louing friendes. R. and G.H.
AN AVNSWERE TO THE LETTER AFORE GOING. MOST louing frindes, I had writtē the reasons of Religion before I recei∣ued the countermaunde in your last letter, which came to my handes very late, for be∣ing dated the 2. of October Anno 1599. it came not to me vntill the 20. of De∣cember of the same yeere. Perusing the same, & weighing the contents there∣of, I find that you little care what re∣ligion I reteine in my minde and con∣science, so that I be conformable to the Lawes of our Country, in hearing Seruice, as it is nowe set forth, or a peece of a Sermon, as it is nowe there
preached. Manye circumstances and surmises you vse, but all driue to the finall scope by you intended, which is to driue me to your Church. And in∣deede as worldly friends, for an espe∣ciall kinde of such loue towardes me, you labour very much, for the which I hartely thanke you, but alasle your counsell and desire is no other than S. Peters was to our Lord Christ,Mat. 16. or those pittifull frinds was to Eleazarus,1. Mac. 6. for you builde all vpon our present safety, & welfare in this world. And if I thought that I might followe your counsell, & neuerthelesse saue my soule, surelye then I were the most miserable foole that euer was in the worlde, if I would not so doe For to speake of my fellow Catholikes in England, as well as of my selfe, can there I pray you anye man be more madde, than to suffer losse of goods, and liuing, to bee discredited, contemned, and troden vnder euery mans foote that listeth to spoile them, to lie in prison, in dungeons, to be rac∣ked, reracked, hanged, bowelled aliue and boyled, and after all this, to goe
to hell, there to bee tormented eter∣nallye with Fire and Brimstone, and all for Religion, when-as beeing con∣formable to the Lawes of their coun∣try: in going to Church, they may en∣ioy liuings, liberties, & liues, feede at large, and liue gallantly, alofte in all delicacy, mirth, pastime, & pleasure in this world, & after all this, in the ende to be sure of ioy in the next. If you coulde proue this to me, then I saye, you might condemne mee for the wretchedst miscreant that euer liued, if I did not yeelde to your aduice and desire. But vntil you can proue it, I hope you will conster my course in charitable maner, and iudge better of me, thā that I do it of obstinacy, or for feare of discredit, or for anye worldly respecte, for I cal God Almighty (be∣fore whome we are sure to meete one daye, and to receiue according to our thoughts, words, & deeds) to witnesse that I doe refraine & refuse to goe to your seruice, only for conscience sake, that is, because I thinke it not laweful: for in so doing I should offende God
Almightie greatly, which I must not doe for a million of worldes: But be∣cause you write, that you suppose me to haue more knowledge, then to an∣swere with sillie women, it is against my conscience, &c. and aske, vvhat Scripture, authoritie, or reason I haue for my refusing? I thought it good & conuenient to shew you briefly some arguments & reasons, which I know not how to answere if I should follow your counsaile: But I will not ampli∣fie or explane them at large, for so I should be long and ouer tedious for you, who (if I be not deceaued) can hardly endure to reade through anie prolixe discourse: but I wil only point as it were at them with my finger, for I know your wits to be ready enough to conceaue the vvhole by a part, or parcell. To begin therefore, I tell you plainely, that the reasons, why I being a Catholike, and most stedfastly be∣leeuing the Catholike Religion to be most true, and consequently all other Sects and religions false, and damna∣ble, will not goe to heare your seruice,
or a sermon of your religion, are these which follow. 1 In so doing, I should furnish the Campe of the enimies of the Catho∣tholike Church with my visible pre∣sence, which may not be done with∣out offence, for:Prouer. 14 In the multitude of his people is the Kinges dignitie, and in the small number of his folke, the ignominy of the Prince; I lessen ther∣by the number of Catholikes, and en∣crease the number of Protestantes, at the least in open show. 2 I should yeeld to an act of a con∣trary religion, exacted of me as a de∣nyall of mine, which may not be done without great offence: for although you inculcate, and ingeminate obedi∣ence, and dutifulnes to our Prince, & that it is but an act of obedience: sure lie I cannot see but that it is an act of religion: for albeit the Statute beare this title: An act to retaine her Maiesties subiects in theyr due obedience, yet is not meere obedience the marke intended
in the Satute: for the ordinary way to exact obedience is by othes of fideli∣tie, and homage. And why should this law be made for odedience, and none els? or why shuld obedience be rather shewed in the Church then in other places? or why by ioyning with prote∣stants in their seruice, rather thē by o∣ther maner of waies? And I pray you, is not obediēce included in euery law as well as in this? for it is verie plaine, that euery precept or law besides obe∣dience to it selfe, intendeth some acte of some other vertue. And in this law none can be intended but about reli∣gion: and so in going to your seruice I shuld make outward professiō of your religion, which in my conscience I iudge to be false. 3 I should deny my Faith by so do∣ing: for before the law of going to the Church was made, there was no such bond for Catholikes to professe their faith in refusing the Church, as after there was, although I doe not denie, but that it was vnlawfull euen before the Satute, as being a thing euill in it
owne nature, to goe formally to their Seruice: but now euery Catholike is bound to professe his faith in refusing to go to the protestants Seruice, when it is exacted of him according to the Satute, which intendeth to draw him from Catholike Religion And wee see by experience, that what Catho∣like soeuer goeth to theyr Seruice, be hee neuer so zealous in minde in Ca∣tholike Religion, yet is hee of euerie man reckoned in the number of Pro∣testantes, and of all Catholickes vt∣terlie disclaimed. And such a one is in very deed a flatte partaker of Pro∣testantisme, and is incorporated ipso facto with the members of the same, & vtterly excluded from the participa∣tion of the Misticall Body of Christ our Sauiour. 4 You might by the same reason vrge me to receiue your Com∣munion, by which you mooue mee to go to your Seruice: which I hope you will not do, knowing it to be so oppo∣site to my faith, & religion: for I may shewe my obedience to my Princes lawes as wel in the one as in the other.
And I knowe vvell enough that the Communion is but a peece of bread, and a suppe of wine, which are things no lesse indifferent of themselues, thē my presence at your seruice is. And as I know that your minister vvould giue me that bread and wine insteede of a farre better thing: so woulde hee buzze, and sound in mine eares your seruice, I am sure, in liew of a far more holy thing. And as I little esteeme your seruice, so make I small account of your bread and wine: But indeede the true cause why I will doe neither the one, nor the other, is because they be both a like acts of religion, vsed in things which I deeme moste vntrue: yet might obedience excuse thē both in your opinion. 5 I should ipso facto be Excommuni∣cated,Calet. 2.2. . 12. ar. 1. & q. 94. ar. 1. and cut off from the Catholike Church of Christ: for she excommu∣nicating generallie all heretikes, com∣prehendeth me in the number of thē, because in exteriour court or show, I am an heretike by going to any other seruice, then that of the saide Catho∣like
Church, & shee not knowing the mind or affection, iudgeth according to the outward show, and so reputeth me for an absolute heretike, although keeping my Faith inuiolable, I be not so inwardly, and in very deed. By this meanes I should be vsed as an excom∣municat person, altogether cut off frō Gods visible church, barred from ho∣lie seruice, & sacraments: for no Ca∣tholike Priest could lawfullie admitt me to any such, so long as I would cō∣tinue in that miserable state. 6 I should be contrary to my con∣science, a fauourer, and a furtherer of Protestantes Religion; for I by my presence encreasing your number (as I said before) must needes somewhat augment the credit of your congre∣gation, and so make your sect to flou∣rish the more, and encourage others by mine example to help forward the same. 7 I should loose that peace, vvhich coupleth vs to God, and maketh vs of one hart, & soule amongst our selues:Act. 4. and which was so much sought for by
the penitent lapsed Christians of the Primitiue Church. Their admission, or reconciling againe to the Church after theyr fall was tearmed giuing of peace:Cyp. lib. 1. Epist. 2. for GOD knoweth how little peace, rest, or quietnesse of minde a Catholike going to your seruice hath. And no meruail, whē as his body go∣eth one way & his mind another, yea he a member rent off from the whole bodie. 8 I should be adiudged by the Ca∣tholike Church both a Schismatike, and an Heretike in so doing. A Schis∣matike, because I goe to a Congrega∣tion separated frō the church of God: an Heretike, in that I couple my selfe to them who teach heresie: for being by that deed (as I said before) an ex∣terior Heretike, I am consequently a schismatike, because that euery here∣tike is withall a schismatike, but euery schismatike is not an heretike: for a schismatike only is hee, who holding the same opinions,Lib. 20 cō. Faust. c. 3. & con. Crescon. and vsing the same ceremonies of worshipping God with others, yet only is pleased with a seue∣rall congregation.
9 I should in so doing make a great¦lie in professiō of my faith, which must needs be a great sin: for a lie is as well committed in deed by dissimulation,Ambr. ser. de Abra. as in speech. And my presence at pro∣testants seruice telleth that I am a pro¦testant, whereas in my hart & consci∣ence I am a Catholike. This kinde of lying (as saith S. Augustine) ought most chieflie to be auoyded, for that it is made in the most noblest of all morall vertues, I meane Religion. 10 I should giue great scandale, & occasion of fall to others; for that they seeing me doe against my conscience in this, may thinke that I will as easlie doe any thing els which I know to be naught, vpon hope of repentance, and so by mine example may be mooued to doe the like: for hee who knoweth or thinketh in his conscience your Seruice to be vnlawfull, and yet will be present at it, vvhy will hee not as easilie doe anie other thing which hee knoweth to be euill? Besides, others vvoulde by this myne example, bee Confirmed in Schisme, and Heresie,
thinking the seruice either to be good and godly indeed, or at the least-wise that it may begone vnto without any scruple. As those who saw others eate Idolothytes,1. Cor. 8. were confirmed, and en∣couraged to doe the like. 11 I should endaunger my selfe to be infected with that doctrine, which I iudge to be damnable. And I am told that:Eccl. 13. he who loueth daunger shall per∣rish therein. And if I will not be bitten with a Snake, I must not sleep nigh an hedge: neyther ought I to touch pitch, least I be de∣filed by the same. And if Dauid had not aduentured to gaze vpon Bethsabee he had not fallen into so great liking of her, as to commit such horrible sinnes as you know. And if no Catholicke would haue heard Luth. to haue prea∣ched, whē he began this new doctrin, there had beene at this day neyther Lutheran, Zwinglian, Protestant, Puritane, nor any such late sprung vp fellowes, to trouble and molest the Catholicke Church.Rom. 6. 12 I should disobey S. Paule his cō∣maundement, bidding mee auoyde an
Hereticall man.Tit. 3 2. Tim. 4 And farre should I be from the minde of the holy Apostle, and Euangelist, S. Iohn, who durst not so much as stay in the bathe to vvash in the companie of Cerinthus the He∣retike.Euseb. li. 3 cap. 22 What would the same Holie Saint haue said thinke you, if hee had bin requested by his deare vvorldlie friēds, to haue bin present at the prai∣ers, seruice, & sermōs of Cirinth. for the Apostles,Lib. 3. c. 30 and their schollers (as wit∣nesseth Nicephorus) vvere so warie in this case, that they would not so much as once reason the matter with any of them that endeuoured by their lea∣singes to corrupt the truth. And ho∣ly Ignatius boldly affirmeth that,Epist. 6. ad Philadel∣phenses. vvho so flieth not from a false preacher shal be damned into Hell. 13 I should be partaker of all their wickednes, & consequently in daun∣ger of al the punishment & mischiefe which may befal them, especially be∣ing present with them at the deede, wherein principally they offend God: from vvhich thing I am discouraged by the terrible death of all thē which
were in company with the Schisma∣tikes Chore,Num 16. Dathan, and Abiron: which example (as saith Saint Cyprian) ought to mooue vs not to assiste, or further Hereticall oblations,Cyp. Epist 76. praiers, sermons, and errours. 14 I should contrary to the iudge∣ments of the learned of all Religions: for the Gentiles thought it not lawfull to enter into the Iewes Synagogues,Lact lib. 4. & 5. diuin. instit. cur. Senec de hist. ma∣hom. chro∣nic. Wol∣sang Drisl. Eus. lib. 3. & 4. Aug. li. de vnit. Ecl. & lib. 2. coa. Pe∣tilian. Ioh. Gard. in his Cat. art. 86. or into Christiā Churches The Turks at this day refuse to doe the same, the Arrians, Donatists, and such like, would not one goe to anothers conuenticles, nor to the Catholikes seruice, nor the Catholikes to any of theirs. The Ana∣baptistes will not goe to the Lutherans, Churches, nor the Lutheranes to the Trinitaries. The Puritanes vvill hard∣lie be drawen to Protestantes seruice: neither will the Protestantes in Catholike Countreis come to Catholike Seruice. And the Iewes will not go to any Ser∣uice but their own. Those Protestantes which in Queene Maries dayes had a∣nie conscience, refused to go to Masse. And therefore in reason you shoulde
not mooue me, much lesse vrge me, to doe the thing, vvhich the learned on your side in theyr owne case would not doe, because they iudge it vnlaw∣full. 15 I should doe euil to goe to your Seruice because I cannot, but in mine own conscience iudge it to be disho∣nourable to God, and consequentlie naught. For to omit to speake how, it is deuised by your selues, and how your fellovv PVRITANES doe vt∣terlie condemne it. I knowe your Translations of Holie Scriptures to be false & shameles, so as if my schol∣ler should translate one of Tullyes E∣pistles in such corrupt maner, I would soundlie breeche him for his labour. Then your Ministers are no Priestes, but meere Lay-men, & consequently haue no authoritie to deale in such things. Besides you haue in your Ser∣uice diuerse false and blasphemous things, & put them to the people for Scripture; as in a Geneua Psal you pray to be defended frō Pope, Turke, & Papi∣stry, &c. And to speake what I thinke,
you haue left out all good thinges, & haue chosen to your selues iuste no∣thing of Catholike seruice, although the people were made to beleeue that it was the old Seruice put into Eng∣lish. 16 I shoulde goe to that Seruice which neuer was heard of in the world before these dayes: nor yet is in anie place els in all the world, but onelie there in England. 17 I shoulde goe to that Seruice, which you amongst your selues can∣not agree vpō, or decree to continue. And it had by all likelihoode beene chaunged againe before this day, if the grauer sorte had not made some stay, for feare of incurring the note of inconstancy: for how many bils I pray you, haue there bin put vp in Parlia∣ments about the chaunging of your Seruice? Agree therefore amongest your selues first what seruice you will haue to continue, and then I will aun∣swere you reasonablie to your de∣maund. 18 In so doing my soule should goe
one way, and my body another; which ought not to be: for if they should goe two waies in this worlde, they could not be ioyned togeather after the re∣surrection in the next life, but the one should goe to heauen, & the other to hell; which cannot be: for if the bodie serue not God together with the soule in this life, why should it enioy heauē in the next? And if it be with Prote∣stantes at their Seruice in this worlde, why should it not be where the Pro∣testants be in the next? 19 I should loofe all the benefit of Catholike religion, & so either leaue off all conscience, or els liue in conti∣nuall torment of mind; and if I should die in that state, I should be vtterlie cast away for euer. Besides I shoulde loose the merite of all the good works that I euer did in all my life; because I giue ouer working before euening, & so loose my pennie, & wages which otherwise would be truely paide mee.Mat. 20▪ 20 If I should so doe, either to gra∣tifie you, & other of my friends, or by commaūdement of any power vnder
her Maiestie: neyther you, nor they, could take it well, or account of mee, better then of a trayterous caitiue, for that you must needs think that I, who will violate my faith to God almigh∣ty in doing contrarie to my cōscience, & iudgment for any worldly respect, will easily breake my faith & promise with man, according to the iudgment of Constantius the Emperour:Eus. de vit. canstant. l. 1. cap. 11. for how can he be true vnto man, that is con∣uicted of periurie to God? verily such must needs be deemed of the wise, to be flatterers, turne-coates, and great hypocrits. 21 And now to come to the aun∣swere, which you say women, & such sillie soules are accustomed to make; I should do contrary to my conscience: which thing in no case is lawfull to be done. Yea if your seruice were good, & godly indeed, & the very true Ser∣uice of God, yet so long as I thinke o∣therwise of it, I may in no case yeeld to go to it: because an erroneous con∣science bindeth a man to follow it, & neuer to doe any thing against it, ac∣cording
to iudgement of all learned men, of what sect, or religion soeuer they be. And therefore you may not request me, much-lesse vrge me to go to your seruice, before I be perswaded in my conscience that it is lawful so to doe. Greatly therfore doe you offend God there in England, in forcing peo∣ple to goe to the Church, contrary to their consciences, and in imprisoning those, who refuse so to do: for no man is able to maister his own conscience, & knowledge, and to doe against it he ought not, & therefore it is not in his power or will, to goe to your Seruice without offence. 22 I should do contrary to the Cā∣nons & custome of the Catholik church, and against the examples of all Holie Saints, & learned Fathers. Contrarie to the 63. Canon of the Apostles, and against Concil. Carth. 4. cap. 71. & 72. Cō∣cil. Antioch. cap. 2. & 5. Con. Laodicen. c. 9. 32. 33. 37. Con. Mag. Later. cap. 70. and a∣gainst diuers other Councels, as also a∣gainst the late Councell of Trent, where the matter was put (English Catholikes
making suite that it might be couert∣ly discussed, & decided) to 12. lear∣ned Fathers; whose iudgement in this matter is yet extant, and it had bin su∣perfluous to haue in any publike Ca∣nō there condemned the same, which by so many Councels before that was plainly forbidden. Against the exam∣ples of Saints, & learned Fathers, as of S. I. Euang. which I recited before, of S. Polycarpe, of S. Denis Bishop of Alexandria, of S. Anth, of Origen, of Beniolus, S. Amb. S. Athan. S. Chrisost. and of many moe. 23 I should in so doing shew my self a Neuter, that is, such a one as is not af∣fected to either religion, & consequēt¦ly of no religion,Apoc. 3. but an Atheist or nei∣ther hote nor cold, but luke warme, & therfore to be spued out of the mouth of God:3. Reg. 18. for hee who haulteth on both sides, is on neither side, but a traitour to bothe. And from the one, and the same foūtain there runneth not sweet & sower water:Iacob. 3. neyther can any man serue two contrary masters: as he can not plow with an Oxe & an Asse,Mat 6. Deut. 22. nor weare garments of linnin & wollē, nor
sow his field with two maner of seeds. 24 I should in so doing be (as is said before) one of your congregation, and yet I should be but the verie excre∣ments, or chippings of your Church: for receauing no life frō Catholike re∣ligion, in the corps of Protestantisme I should serue for no necessarie vse, be∣cause I could not be ther, but for some worldly respect, & so in body only, & by that meanes but as the haires of a mans body, or nailes, or euill humors: which althogh they be within the bo∣dy, yet are they not animated by the soul, but void of sense, & lost without paine, & by nature not fit to be quick∣ned: for frō the Protestant spirit I hope I should sucke no zeale of that sect, & from the soule of the Catholike Church I could receaue no life, because I cutt my selfe off frō it, by yeelding to your seruice, and so I should remaine void of sense, life, and soule, and should be nothing but Caluins excrements. 25 I should shewe my selfe a colde Catholike, & indeed to haue no zeale at all, for that deeming you to bee
Gods enemies, yet I can finde in my hart not only to be in companye with you in ciuill affaires, but also in your seruice, far from the spirit of the Pro∣phet Dauid,Psal. 16. who hated the congrega∣tion of such, and was euen eaten with the zeale of Gods Church, and great∣ly loued the beutye thereof. Yea, I shoulde doe quite contrary, for when I see a theefe, I should run with him, & take part with the adulterers. And to conclude with answering your de∣maund, why I will not as well goe to your seruice, as eate fleshe vpon a fry∣day, when vrgent occasions driue me thereunto: I say, that Religion being a vertue which giueth honour & re∣uerence to God, doth sometimes cō∣mand other vertues, & directeth their actions to Gods honor.Theod. 22. q. 85. art. 3 As fasting is a vertue that subdueth mans body, and may be commaunded by religion to serue God withall. Other actes there are, which only belong to religion, & not to other vertues, which haue no other praise, but that they are done for the reuerence of God: of vvhich
sort are sacrifies, kneeling, knocking on the brest, & such like. And of this sort is the ceremonie of going to such a place more then to another. Here∣vpon it is that one may eate flesh vp∣on a friday, or other fasting in diuers cases, and yet in no case goe to seruice with those who are of a false religion: for to abstaine vpon certaine dayes, is not a proper, or immediate act of re∣ligion, but commaunded by religion, being indeed an act of temperance, & so intended by holy Church, although it may be vsed to honor God with all. And because none vse to fast on such daies but Catholikes, it doth oftentimes betoken a Catholike, & distinguisheth him from Protestants: yet because the immediate end of the law is tempe∣rance, & the act of eating of flesh or of other forbidden meats, hath other na∣turall ends besides religion, therefore it doth not necessarily containe anie signification of religion: but the act of going to the Church doth of it own nature, & by common acceptation of all betoken deuotion and religion.
Thus haue I brieflie yeelded you some reasons and authorities, why I may not satisfie your request, & con∣discende to your desires in going to your seruice. I coulde haue yeelded many moe, but I thought these might suffice you, and cause you to surcease from your worldly, & carnall perswa∣tions: for hereafter I meane not to aunswere you any more such letters, but only to say vnto you, goe behinde me Satans for you are scandales to me. And so desiring our Parents blessing with humble commendations to thē, and harty to you, and to all the reste of our kinsfolkes and friendes, I leaue you all to our Lord and Sauiour, who send vs his grace in this world, and his glory in the next. From my Chamber at Palempyne this 18. of Februarie. 1600. FINIS.
✚ A bryef & short declaracyon made, wherbye e chrysten man maye knowe, what is a sa∣crament. Of what partes a sacraments consysteth and is made, for what in∣tent sacramentes were institu∣ted, and what is the pryn∣cypall effect of sacra¦mentes, & finally of the abuse of the sa∣crament of chrysten body and bloud. Imprinted At London by Robert Stoughton Dwellynge wythin Ludgate. at the sygne of the Bys∣shoppes My∣ter.
