18467 99841232 5796
THE SECOND Admonition, Sent by the subdued Prouinces to Hol∣land, thereby to entice them by faire-seeming rea∣sons, groundlesse threates, and vnlike ex∣amples to make peace with the Spaniards. With the Hollanders aunswere to the same. Translated out of Dutch into English by H. W. printer's or publisher's device LONDON Imprinted by Iohn Wolfe, and are to bee sold at his shoppe within the Popes head Alley in Lombard street 1598.
To Holland. PEace, O peace, O swéetest estate, neuer was a swéeter word heard. Peace enemy to strife, contention and reuenge, thée I séeke and desire from the bottome of my heart: thou art the most precious iewell that euer was found, the spring of welfare and delight. Thou healest that which con∣trouersie hath wounded. Thou causest the scattered thinges to be relyed. Thou causest and createst ioy and pleasure in euery place. Where peace is, there are our yeares doubled: there life is long, and all our life is swéet: there is riches and plentie at full: there fortune is not séene so vnstedfast. Thou art the treasure where all good is inclo∣sed, and the beautifying of the worlde, to whome all honor is due by common accord. Happie are they that seeke peace sayth the word of the Lord. 2. PEace dwelleth in the kingdome of God. Peace Christ hath re∣commended vnto all beléeuers. With peace are gloriously re∣warded and swéetly crowned Gods people. Peace is the princi∣pall testament which the Lord before his death bequeathed and re∣commended vs. Peace is the bond & perfect image, where through wee deserue the heauens, and without peace all woulde vanish to nought, for through discord each thing decayeth. Peace hindreth destruction, desolation, and griefe. Peace makes kingdomes and countries to flourish. Peace is euery where greatly estéemed: na∣ture forceth all men to loue peace. And what is there more delecta∣ble then peace, to agrée and continue in amitie to the end. Wo to him who is a friend to strife. 3. THou O Peace art pleasing vnto all nations, and full of conso∣lation, yet neuerthelesse in these broyles, we sée thée inhumane∣lie
excluded out of the Hollandish limites. Whence doth this pro∣ceede O Hollandia? insooth it is a strange matter, that thou ha∣test the thing which euery one naturally desireth. Art thou blind? art thou so sencelesse that thou chusest mortail poyson rather then daintie and exquisite food? wilt thou neuer rise out of this thy obscu∣ritie, and lay aside this pernitious discord. Thou art like vnto a sicke person, or the frantike, which madly reiect the good and hole∣some thinges proffered them. Compare the passed time vnto the present, before thou didst reiect thy obeysance, was it not farre bet∣ter then to liue in this sort imothered in strife and contention, and like beastes shedding the blood of thy members? Where peace is hated no mercie can dwell. 4. THou art molested and pilled with taxations, and giuest the sol∣dier the substance, whereon thy people shoulde liue. The com∣mon trafficke doth melt and consume, for it must be vsed with force and might. And as long while as thou doest embrace this pestife∣rous contention, thou shalt find no rest nor quiet in no place: yea finally euery one will forsake thée: for all Europe (for thy sake) endureth great miserie, thou must know that each thing hath but his time, and thy doing cannot continue long. Oh that thou wol∣dest once consider thy owne good, thy hart woulde turne and bee moued. What profit is it alwayes to continue the warres? what pleasure in mischéeuing one another? thy successors shal hereafter feele the smart, vnlesse thou change thy hate One otfen knoweth his fault, but repenteth too late. 5. ACcept peace, beléeue the counsaile of thy friends: bow some∣what thy head, and cease thy obstinacie: reiect passion who bereaueth the fences, and apalleth the spirit, but let his light shine. Peace is at hande if thou canst but affect her. Thy Prince (O Holland) is neither rigorous nor cruell. I fought be passed which any greeue thée, thinke thy selfe hath béene cause thereof, each
thing may easily be amended, if in case thou wilt be ruled by reason, his lappe is open, his goodnesse is readie, séeke peace, and all will be well: Thou shalt be holpe, appeased and disburthened, and fedde as a limme of the patrimony: Turne to thy wonted obedience, acknowledge thy superiors. All shalbe well, and things past forgotten. 6. TIs time, tis time, that thou shouldest perceiue thine owne wel∣fare, and hasten to peace before it waxe too late, for although thou doest abound in wealth and content, whereof thy courage swelleth, yet think how others in like case haue béene serued when they refused the peace, tis wisedome to take occasion when it is proffered, and helpe himselfe with fortune when she smileth. The Athenians because they once subdued and gouerned the Spartans,Athens. thought to gouerne all with their might, and would hearken to no peace, but what happened vnto those which they thought to sup∣presse, they became their subiects. This is the worldes course in all humaine affaires, which to day exalt, and to morrow wil make a slaue. Wise is he who at others harmes doth warning take. 7. WHen the vnwise Romains reiected the swéet peace which Caesar kindly offered them,Rome. and that (as the historie saith) Pompeius with his armies thought to withstand Caesars might, a fire was kindled, which consumed the earth and ruined Rome ye mightie people lost his former libertie: Pompey was murthered, and all the nobilitie subdued: and in that sort that monarchy which whilome ruled and swayed ouer the world was subdued & brought to nought, where (if they had accepted peace) they might haue continued in their former estate. Consider this, the time is the manifester of all hidden things, marke then what profit occasion well taken doth bring. Vnwise is he who the vncertaine before the sure doth prefer.
8 Carthage.ALso if Carthage had helde, and not violated the true peace which was granted them by Fabius, they might very well haue shunned the destruction which after befell them, when the Romaines the second time raised their standardes against them. Had Mithridates accepted the alliance which was kindly proffe∣red him,Mithridates. he had neuer fallen into those daungers, nor in the wars which dured fortie yeares, but because he could not fancie peace, he spoiled his kingdome & lost his life.Iugurtha Also had not Iugurtha through euill counsaile reiected the peace offered him, hee had neuer béene caryed captiue to Rome, where hee ended his life in miserie and thrail. He neuer fared well, that on the warre him founded. 9. WHen Israel departed out of the deserts, trauelling with great paine towardes the land of promise, they reque∣sted king Sehon to let them passe peaceably,Sehon. they not desiring to hurt his realme, but he proud and vnwise rather chose warre, then peace with loue, wherefore obstinacie had her reward, being cause that he lost both kingdome and life. Also when the Beniamites e∣uill minded,Beniamites. had sinned and disturbed all Israel, might at the be∣ginning of the broyles with small amends haue ceased the warres, but no, they came into the field against their brethren, by which they were pittifully discomfited, and 25000. of them were slayne, and their Cittie burnt all within thrée daies. Hee that neglecteth occasion proffered, needes not com∣plaine. 10. NEuer had béene séene the heapes of murthered Troianes and flouds of their blood, nor yet that flourishing kingdome spoy∣led by the valiant Gréekes, who at the first proffered them condi∣tions of peace, but alas they were bereaued of their former wittes,
not being able to loue peace. Had eke the victorious Persian Ci∣rus accepted the peace in Scithia, which Tomyris sonne proffered him, he had not béen discomfited and slain in that vnluckie battaile, where all his hoste (though great) was put to the sworde, and his seuered head was (by Tomiris) bathed in his owne blood, O mis∣chieuous and vnluckie chance. But yet more, O the mischieuous and wicked workes of men which do cause them. He that is prouident, may beware in time. 11. THe Citie of Siracusa so highly renowned, that she was com∣pared to Carthage, is not she likewise come to the like mishap,Siracuse. and by the warre pittifully spoyled? for they also reiected the peace which Marcelles was willing to giue them, they stood very stout∣ly vpon their instruments, which Archimedes made them, wher∣withall in the Romain Campe they did many wonderfull exploits to their aduantage, yet notwithstanding their triple wall, all their couragious soldiers, nor yet their strange deuises did any whit pro∣fite them against the Romaine wrath, but were ouerthrowne and made pillage, where they lost both their honour, and fréedome. He that lets a good opotunitie escape, may after want it. 12. HAd Iudea (when she was kindled with anger and desire to deliuer her selfe from the Romaine subiection) with proui∣dence shunned the perill which hung ouer her heade,Iudea. and learned to breake her high minded and rebellious courage, before Vespatian came, who (as is known) brought them all into desolation, she had neuer felt that gréeuous smart, whereof whole histories are scarce able to tell the miserie: she might haue had mercie & béen conserued, where to the contrarie she hath aboade more miserie then any peo∣ple on earth. O how wise is he, who séeketh rest and tranquillitie. why chuse you the badde rather then the good? is not vnitie farre better then dissention? What reason will not do, experience teacheth.
13. Cosroe.THe king Cosroe that mightie potentate, who continually rai∣sed the Persian estate, had he kindly accepted the peace, which vnfaynedly was by the Emperour proffered, hee had had fortune so his wish, & her whéele wold not so soone haue turned. Heraclius sought peace, as the thing most beneficiall vnto both: but Cos∣roe was therewithall not appaid, he thirsted after warre, and hee was suffised, with thrée sundry battailes, which all went against him, had not he scorned the Emperors kindnesse, & refused peace, he had not had that reprochfull discomfiture, nor brought himselfe and his people in that distresse. Marke then what negligence doth cause, when in time one cannot foresee his owne good. What strife doth spoyle, doth bind the peace. 14. 1519. 1521.HOw fared in old time the Spanish band, which also knew not their superiors counsaile, they were offered peace to ende the broyles, but they rather chose the warre, and the miseries of the same which was the cause that they were persecuted, banisht and slaine, he who refuseth peace proffered, doth not deserue to haue it afterwardes.Nples. Fsa. And how often haue the Neapolitaines béene di∣stressed? Moreouer reade what of Friesland is written for they being in strife with the Saxons, refused peace: yea more came in the field with the Emperour. Wherefore O Holland take care to deale wisely, accept peace, strife hath endured enough. The whole bodie greeues at the discord of the limmes. 15. BOth Cleueland and Gelderland can record what profite the warre bringes, when peace is refused, had they somewhat a∣based their high mindes as they were counsayled, they had not fal∣len into the destruction which hath ruined all the land. Moreouer call to remembrance O Holland what issue the broiles in North
Holland tooke,North Hol∣land. when thy communaltie rebelliously were risen vp against their Magistrates, and as enraged people ran about, all their mindes being bent to murther and bloodshed, they also were proffered peace, but they desirous to liue at libertie and rule all thinges to their owne fancie refused the same, where through at last they were well punished for their foolish pretence. It seldome goes well where the people doth rule. 16. O Friend, let this bee a looking glasse vnto thée, these exam∣ples are manifest and knowne. Shunne strife, and desire peace: let none spare himselfe to that swéet and delectable e∣state, visit thy prince, send thy ambassadors, not to nourish the warre, nor to exile peace, but endeuour thy selfe to vnity, for concordia is the swéetest treasure on earth, thy neighbors and allies desire the same, giue eare vnto thē: thy superiors expect thée and will heare thée, and their hearts are bent to thée, depart from this wicked resistance, whereunto some counsaile thée, but the craf∣tie and subtill séeke more their owne profite thereby, then thy pre∣ferment, or thy countries good. It is alwaies good fishing in trou∣bled water, and cutting broade girdles out of other mens leather. A fayned friend ought to be shunned as an enemie. 17. THou art fedde with lies and dissimulations, thou art perswa∣ded to exclude the truth, and that thy vertues and praise shall be extolled in the places where the earth is full of veynes of gold, thou art euery where greatly estéemd, because thou canst so migh∣tily rule Mars himselfe. In the East and North thy fame is spread, by reason whereof thou thinkest all the world will adore thée, thou persuadest thy selfe to be inuincible, but surely it will faile thée, for God doth alwaies abate such high minds: thou wilt neither stoop nor obay, but séekest to become a common wealth of some newe manner: consider I pray what a man doth in his wantonnesse when ease and pride hath possessed his heart: are all thy deedes al∣lowed?
wilt thou no more harber after subiection. Where force is a counsailour, wisdome is forgotten. 18. BVt finally (Holland) thou shalt find thyne error: there were neuer yet found rebels, which in their faults were not confuted & ouerthrowen, with plagues as is euery where seen and known: take examples in Gods house it selfe, where an Angell raysed him∣selfe against the Almightie God, yea an Angell who in glory and beautie farre surpassed all the rest, as scriptures do vnfolde, fell hee not and the rest with an incurable wound? because against their soueraigne they rebelled: from the most highest he was made the basest, from the fayrest to the ouglyest, from great glorie to eter∣nall confusion: a short pleasure bringeth great griefe, an exam∣ple to all subiectes. What rebellion winnes is no victorie. 19. Israelites.HOw often hath Israel beene plagued of God, brought in néed and chastised, when the commandement of Moyses did not like them, and did still transgresse the same: also how wonderful∣ly God punished the 10. tribes which were rebelled from the roy∣all seat & subiection of Iuda.Absolon. Also Absolon wt his complices very shamefully rose vp in armes against Dauid, and a thousand others (too long to rehearse) the which God hath punished. Rebellion is an infection, a stinke, a thing hated, an ouerruled mallice, and iniu∣stice, the picture and image of hellish discord. A poyson of a deadly composition, a tree bearing deadly fruit. A common wealth is spoyled where strife is begunne. 20. THe heathen histories do also record how seuerely the Citie of Thebes in Grecia was punished for her rebellion, being re∣uolted from the Macedonians, but they had losse in stead of profit,
and in stead of libertie were brought in more seruitude.Capua. Numatia. Capua al∣so lost her glorie, when she began to rebell: how deare did Numa∣tia buy her foolish rebellion, and the Italian vassalles which rose vp against the Romaine estate?Bellum sociale Bataui. How fared the Batauians (thy first seede) in their rebellion during Vespasians raygne, the beginning was luckie, but the ende desolate, as Tacitus shewes in his Ro∣maine Chronicle. He that seekes to raise himselfe falles often in the dirt. 21. HOw much blood hath Italie shed when the enraged people set their mutinies abroach, and (as we finde written) the Germaine Emperor appeased them. What Germany en∣dured in that time, when Carolus Quintus raigned,Germany. is ma∣nifest, the Magistrates were exiled for their libertie, the beginning had a faire glose, but the end proued bad: In summe all people and nations haue beene destroyed by their rebellion, the bookes are ful of their doings, and the memorie thereof will neuer perish: where∣fore O Holland take example by them then, accept concord which is offered thee, behold the truth, put off that ougly maske, behold anothers woundes and heale thy selfe. A peace seeking heart doth find peace euery where. 22. WHereupon doest thou put thy trust, and whet thy clawes to shew thy strength? doest thou thinke no bodie shall hinder thee, & yt thou shalt vse thy superiors power, he will at some time escape, although thou passest not therefore) and as a Lion shew thee his grinning teeth. Of thy great trafficke thou art very proude as though thou onely couldest rule the same, and make it continue, but no, not so, for that stands not in humaine power, on∣lie in God, who doth it giue and take: that floode would soone bee runne dry, those incommes which now doth fill thy Casse will soon melt, the maine foundation whereon thy common wealth doeth liue is of people diuers of minds and humors, and a variable thréed who so thereon doth weaue, shalbe subiect to many mutations. Where the communaltie is mad can be no stable estate.
23. THy common wealth is vnstedfast, it cannot endure, whom to day they raise, to morrow they pull downe: the fauors of the people are neither rockes nor walles, but continually wauering as the leafe by the wind, they will be grieued and become wanton, as then looke for a mutation. They which now raigne and rule, and by their computation sit fast, shal fall in indig∣nation, and what then shal follow is knowne to God. But this is alwaies the end where such tumultuous people beare any sway. Is it not better to haue peace, while as yet thy case seemes sure and stable, then to stay vntill occasion doth turne from thée, and for∣tune change, according to her variable and euer chaunging vse. When one stayes too long the sore waxeth incurable. 24. O Hollandia that féedest thy selfe with strife and contention, and blindly louest warre and trouble, wee admonish thée, and God shews thee tokens to the end thou shouldst rise out of this entangled net to thine owne good, why dost thou hate peace? why dost thou shed the blood of thy brethrē? what are we Barbarians, man-eating Caniballes or heathens forsaken of God? Oh no, but thinke that thou doest it for christians, thy owne country men and neerest friends: driue Mars from hence, and let vs with a christian like mind, knit our forces, strength and treasures together, let vs oppose our selues against Gods enemies in Hungaria, where now Christendome prospereth, and driue out the Turke, who intendes to deuour vs: there is a rightfull warre and well founded. He fightes well who Gods prayse doth exalt. 25. LEt concordia descend, let the fire bee quenched which euery where flameth. Discordia doth sell her baite deare: we can find no liking in her, a louely vnion would please vs far better then
thus to drinke Mars his bittter reuenge. Come Holland, cease thy ire, the swéet Doue presents vnto thy hands an Oliue branch. In peace is ioy, rest and ease: in peace we shall become amiable. The warre makes all thinges féeble and weake: Peace féeds and heales: discord and contention doth banish all good: Peace bréedes good successe, vnion and loue. Come O Holland, let peace shine, for in sure peace consistes thine and my safety. Where peace dwels good lucke is manifold. All is well that ends well. The Hollanders Answere to the se∣duced Prouinces vpon the rehearsed Admonition. 1. THat the bloody warre doth destroy and spoile all things, and that the swéet peace is a great treasure and highly estéemed, that know I better then thy selfe, although thou admonish me. But sithence that peace is so much by thee desired, why then doest thou not preach the same vnto thy Idoll Phillip of Spaine, who what with hanging, strangling, murthering, and bur∣ning, destroyeth (in a manner) all the worlde, as to all is mani∣fest, for he continually doth not only plague me, but also Barbary, the East and west Indies, him you do not correct, but allow it all, whereby we manifestly see that among the meat which thou pro∣ferest, vs, is mixed mortall poyson, which with reason wee hate: warie consideration shewes and explaines me thy meaning, and that thou seekest nothing els but to hang a nette ouer our heades, thou hast at more times deceyued my subiects: thou shalt not as now effect any thing, for we know thy old trickes. Know ye that it is bad taking one Foxe with an other.
2. Yet all peace is not good, for a fained peace which should be hurtfull, or which might cause losse of lawfull liberty or priuiledges a rightfull war is to be prefer¦red before such a peace.THe laudes of a true peace I cannot enough pronounce: my pen is too quicke, my tongue too vnskilfull: one that were far more enriched, yea with heauenly skill were not able enough to expresse the same. All places in the world are seene (through peace) to farewell and the countries to flourish. A right peace defendeth both the land and people from trouble: an vnfained honorable peace is the best thing that one can desire, but thinke not there∣fore that I will with thee consent to accept any peace, as if they were all in one degree: No, I assure my selfe, that any war to withstand an enemie is both laudable and honorable, and to the contrarie some peace hurtfull and nought: warres vndertaken for honorable causes tending for himselfe and his, their goodes or life, for freedome or in defence of Gods lawes are honorable, but peace which threatens the losse of all these may (with right) be refused: against such one may make a rightfull warre. Tis an accursed peace which destroyes Gods word. 3 Which peace is good and to be desired.WHen peace doth free from care and trouble, when she diminisheth the daungers and perilles, when by her meanes great costs and charges are forborne: when she yeeldeth quiet and tranquillitie of life and minde: as then it is a holy worke to make peace with our enemie. But when as one standeth in doubt and feare,Which peace is nought and to be shunned least vnder the peace her faire vaile lie not hidden some secrete mischiefe, then she is mortall venome mixed in a wholesome potion. One ought alwaies to be bent to peace, (so farre forth she be cleare from deceit and daunger) we are naturally giuen to seeke peace, but not in such sort that she should be worse then the warre: for without securitie of life goodes and conscience what is it? That the name of peace should onely bee vnto vs a deceitfull pleasure: a peace whereby one doth leese freedome and libertie is a detestable plague in the eares of the wise.
A rightfull warre is better then a faigned peace. 4 WHerefore we haue here wisely to consider if it bee not da∣mageable to make peace with euery one, if that with procuring a peace we subuert not our selues into an eternall slaue∣rie, in such sort that wee had better to endure the warre, then to liue in a peace which bréedes seruitude.Many haue by warres wonne their libertie, & maintained the same: o∣thers by bad peace haue made slaues, A true libertie is to be prefer∣red aboue life. Thou shewest vs the di∣sasters of the peace with many examples, as if with (trusting ther∣in) did seeke after it, but yet many haue in choosing peace won their welfare and exiled tiranny: others haue through peace lost their libertie, and through their light beliefe béene made slaues. Liber∣tie is the chiefest thing during ones life, her we ought with our life to maintaine: in the defence of life and goods one will endaunger himselfe, but yet aboue all, libertie is to be preferred. It is honor to expose his life in defence of his libertie and patrimony. 5 IN the defence of our libertie and securitie,Which to at∣taine the war were enterpri∣sed, & to keep them they must be contin∣nued, expect∣ing by the grace of God a good issue. Saguntines. Athens. Our desire of peace hath al∣waies appeared but hath been but badly recompensed. which wee will not misse: we are altogether zealously bent, which our burning zeale shall not be quenched, nor is there any one in that respect, which shall turne our minds, we hate them with our hartes which here∣in contrarie vs: we fight couragiously and willingly, the armes shall not easily be pulled out of our handes, neyther yet doe we re∣ioyce in bloodie battailes, we hope the best, being alwaies readie rather to abide the hardest brunt, then to bee made slaues. The noble Saguntines, haue in spite of their foes rather chosen to die by famine and miserie, then by a slauish peace to saue their liues. The Athenians too weak for the might of the Barbarians, haue rather suffred their cittie to bee ouerthrowne and spoyled, then to be brought vnder their subiection. An honourable death is to bee preferred before a slauish life.
6. The treatise of peace at Bre∣da was dearly bought by those of Buerē Leerdam. Ou∣water, Shoon∣houen, and Zieriezee. The pacificati∣on of Gaunt was of the Spanish side most treche∣rously viola¦ted, as it was concluded be∣fore the trea∣tise was made as apeared by diuers letters. By meanes of the treatise of peace of Cul∣len, was Ma∣stricht, Artoys, Haynalt, and Flaunders, se∣uered and rent from the other vnited prouin∣ces, & broght again vnder the Spanish yoke. Anno 88 whē with the Spa∣nish Armado all seemd to be conquered, as then the peace was also spoken of. Anno 94. whē Ernestus so flatteringly, profferd peace by Ieronimus Coemas, and Otto Hartius.THat I haue sought to bring all things to an vnfained peace, hath appeared by my peaceable dealing: but yu hast alwaies, sought (vnder thy peace) to couer deceit. In the treatise of peace at Breda, appeared thy deceitfull trickes. Bueren Leerdam, Ouwater, Shoonhouen, beare yet the markes of thy peace: Immediatly after Ziericzee was beset. The pacification of Gaunt thou didst violate: thy pretence appeared by the letters of Escouedo. Also by the letters of ye Barō of Selles which he brought with him at Mechelen, from the Spanish counsaile. The violati∣on of Don Ian against honor, oath and law manifestly appeared: it may be said without feare, that nothing but treasons and surmi∣ses were intended in all thy faire shewes of peace, stretching to the annulling and exiling of the vertuous. Tis in vaine, thy faultes are no more to be fauoured. But vntruth hath yet hitherto paid his mayster. 7. HOw deceitfull, shamefull, & pernicious was the treatise of peace of Cullen vnto me, the time hath taught. The siege of the good Citie of Mastricht with many other subtill de∣uices haue also bewrayed the same, Artoys and Henalt with others were thereby seduced. The dealing with Flaunders (to my losse) and to what peace thou and thine were inclined, when the Prince of Parma proffered peace to her Maiestie, was mani∣festly shewed by the Spanish Fleete. More what peace Ernestus brought who sought to murther his excellencie, as if there by all matters might be pacified. More, the heade of the Inquisition, Lieuetenant vnto thy holy father, (yea when it was least suspec∣ted) sheweth his cruell nature, which (not a yeare agoe) buried a silly maiden aliue. A foole is he that will be a slaue if he may chuse.
8. IF so it were that we desired peace, yet there is no meanes to re∣couer the same of the Spaniard, the ground and foundation of truth to bind peace, dependeth on the faith, this may not be forsa∣ken: without faith or trust no accorde is to bee made which one may trust on, or that will dure, or ought to forbeare any alliance with those which kept not their word, faith, nor oath: feare of vn∣thankfulnesse causeth an vnquiet minde. The faith is the onely thing whereon peace must be built, and where she is absent (wher∣on we ought to build) we must like an Oxe stande in feare of the axe: this is euen the true exposition thereof. Let the peace defend vs from the euils present and to come, for by a broken peace, to run againe to the warres it falles crueller then before, and brings farre more griefe and trouble. Alliance without truth, breeds feare of life and goods. 9. NO Wolues Beares, Lyons, nor Tygers neuer so ouer cru∣ell are not so pernicious as vnfaithfulnesse, for if so bee that they intend to assaile any one they will roare and bray: before the wracke the sea and tempest will tosse the shippe to and fro,Perfidie is the highest mis∣chiefe in mens dealing. and be∣fore it raynes the cloudes will frowne: but vnfaithfulnesse séekes by all subtill and deceitfull meanes and faire shewes to couer the intended mischiefe, thereby to draw his allyes into danger. There is nothing more perillous then an enemie supposed a friend, for we are carefull of our known foes, with armes, regard & watch to pre∣uent them. Also courage, vnitie, & inuincible strength asist vs, but the enemie who is a supposed friend,Embden. hath meanes to mischieue vs both night and day. Embden is our glasse by which we haue séen what lurketh vnder false friendship. Wise is he who by his countries harme is taught foresight. 10. THe Spaniards peace are méere lies and deceit,It is impossi∣ble to make a firme & true peace with the Spaniard. a very Iudas kisse wherewith they seeke to betray vs, yea euen the peace which Ioab gaue Amasa, euen so they intend wt faire words to ruine vs. Thou that seekest peace giuest vs occasiō to re∣fuse thy peace, It appeareth by thy reasons, though they are cun∣ningly couered: for thou praisest thy prince to be full of mercie, that
his lappe is open, his goodnesse readie. But thou sayest presently after: If he were cruell and seuere, it were no maruell, for he hath reason, being that we are cause of our owne hurt. This is enough, we are content: but sooner shall heauen and earth be ioyned, sooner shall water and fire (through arte) be mixed together, then I will enter into such peace with thee, which would in no way be benefi∣ciall vnto vs. He that sees another burne, let him beware of indging. 11. The first proofe. The vse of princes.THis I proue by the nature and vse of many Princes: the olde aduentures and experiences doe also teach the same, that they should neuer enter into alliance or make peace, vnlesse wee know it to be to their furtherance and profit, that also they shoulde not keepe the same no longer (without brabling) then it shoulde be to their good and profite. Machiauell their maister doeth also giue this precept,Machiauels doctrine. Iulius Cesar. that any promise which a prince might haue made, he neede not to hold, if hee find any damage thereby. Iulius Caesar also vsed to say, if one may breake a promise or a right against any liuing,Lysander. one may do it to gouerne or rule. This is also Lysanders o∣pinion: with bables (saith he) one deceiues children, but those of ryper yeares and iudgement with oathes, eyther to reuenge an iniurie, or to hinder and repulse the intent & might of ones enemy. Great trust giues the faithlesse meanes to work mischiefe. 12. Iulius Pope.IVlius the second of that name Pope of Rome said that neither with Spaniards, Dutch, or Wallons (whom hee named Bar∣baros) he neuer did enter into peace, but onely to withdrawe them backe out of Italie. Maximillian Phillips grandfather was also wont to say,Maximilian. that hee neuer made peace with the French but to reuenge his former wrongs, which hee supposed to haue re∣ceiued.Antiochus Il∣lustris decey∣ued Ierusalem by false peace. We find how Antiochus Illustris with a deceiptful intent made peace with the Iewes, and immediately after sent his Gene∣rall Apollonius, who vtterly destroyed and burned Ierusalem: the people he made captiues, and constrained them to forsake their God. Those which circumcised themselues, hee crossed & murdred, the women he strangled, and killed the children about their necks. Mistrust is the best weapon against tyrants.
13. ANtiochus Empator through the counsaile of Lysias besieg∣ed Ierusalem, and begirt the same with his troupes:Antiochus Empator de∣ceyued the Iewes by false peace. but per∣ceyuing he should not take the same by force, he sought to deceiue them with a false peace, makes an agréement with them, permits them to vse their lawes and religion with their libertie, but ha∣uing entred the citie, he neither respected oath nor honor, but cau∣sed all the walles and fortresses of the Cittie to bee pulled downe. Through his command was many a man drowned, captiued,Alcimus to his owne kin∣dred. and murthered. Alcimus did great mischiefe in murthering & strang∣ling, when he desired peace with his owne linage, hee being of the Tribe of Aron, no harme was suspected in him, in somuch that this great trusting hath béene deere vnto the Iewes.Tryphon. Ionathan. Ionathan had neuer béene betrayed by Tryphon, had hee not giuen credit to his words, but should rather haue prepared himselfe to the combat with him. Vnwise is he who by peace expeecteth any good of the wicked. 14. THat we haue reason to feare can we farther explain,A more parti∣cular vse of Princes to∣wardes their subiectes. in that a mighty prince or potentate being displeased with his subiects; and must fauour them for some occasion, cannot wholly depose his wrath, but wel dissemble the same for a while: insomuch that when he finds oportunitie there is no punishment, no reuenge, so vnmer∣cifull or cruell, which is badde inough (in his opinion) for the for∣mer committed offence: and although he sweare to keepe inuiola∣bly the peace, yet ought one neuerthelesse to feare, because who now keep their word so little as princes to their subiectes, for they estéeme it a small matter, being we sée they seldome make peace with them (being in contention) vnlesse they be thereto (by ex∣treame neede) compelled. Then followes (as they estéeme) that a∣ny oath taken through compulsion may be broken when they wil. And to verifie this, we cannot find any example that a prince, who though he haue neuer so solemnely sworne truce. But finding oportunitie hath not reueng'd his wrong. 15. LOdouicus the seconde King of France,Lewes the se∣cond. was forced to conclude and make a peace with his subiects which had deposed him, the which he solemnely swore, but yet afterwards hee made them all
subtilly away. The Duke of Nemours, Burgundie, and Ar∣miniac lost their liues, yea hee was so much bent to reuenge, that he poisoned his owne brother Charles: A kings crueltie cuts all through,The king of Feza. and nothing can resist the same. The King of Feza being lately besieged by his younger brother was compelled to craue a peace, the communaltie obtayned reasonable conditions betweene both, whereunto they were sworne. The king being escaped this danger, his brother comming to embrace him, he strangled him & caused him to be cast out of the window. Many one thinks him∣selfe secure when he is in most daunger. Vnder the greenest grasse lurks the most venomous snake. 16. Henry the 6.HEnry the sixt of that name King of England, was forced to make an agréement with Rychard Duke of Yorke, where∣unto he firmely swore & promised the said Richard and his heires the succession of the crowne after his death, but notwithstanding all that, hee was afterwardes slaine in the fielde by the kinges procurement.Anthonius Caracalla. Anthonius Caracalla in reuenge of some flout or mockerie done to him, by subtill practices put to death all the youth of Alexandria in a place where they were assembled, not doubting of any such mischiefe. Ferdinandus of Arragon also broke his oath,Ferdinandus. and promise done vnto his nobles who had conspi∣red against him, for hee caused them all secretly to bee made away, although notwithstanding diuers Princes were as sureties vnto the said promise. It is bad going as a guest vnder sureties into a Lions denne. 17. THe mercy which we are to expect, should 100. yeares after the day be bemoaned by our successors,An especiall cause why of the Spani∣ardes we expect neither pardon, nor obliuion of our factes. for they esteeme vs worse then Iewes, heathens, or Turkes, yea we are all condem∣ned to lose both our liues and goods, for we haue rent the yoke of the tyrant from our neckes, and haue openly taken armes against him, his false idolatry we haue exiled, and wholly changed the same according to the scriptures: renounced the king, & proclaimed him an enemie, as the cruell Spanish broode which hath sworne our spoile: against the Inquisition no meanes haue beene spared, and all done what was possible to smother their crueltie. Wee haue
chosen other Potentates, this is treason to his Maiestie in the highest degrée: wherefore we assure our selues that all hope of mer∣cy is lost, & that thou séekest to deceaue vs with thy swéet words. He that belieues easily, is cause of his owne harme. 18. WHat beliefe or faith ought to be held vnto them who haue sinned so grosly,An example of his deedes and nature, Granada. what pardon we shold haue (God be prai∣sed) we know it is a mockerie yt thou tellest vs our offences shall be pardoned, by them who are more inclined to reuenge then pardon: we remember how pittifully Granada was vsed, the inhabitants exiled, and the countrie planted with Castilians, their goods con∣fiscated and themselues made slaues, going with a marke burnt in their foreheades.Arragon. Also how he handled Aragon against the lawes and priuiledges of the same wherunto he was sworne, he condem∣neth the right, slayeth it as a foe, as soone as hee had got the lande in his possession: marke but the couenantes whereunto the countrie had sworne him, and how they were performed to many a ones griefe: he that will not learne by all these examples, let him pre∣pare himselfe to die or to be made a slaue. A reuengefull harte respecteth not honor nor oth to haue his will. 19. HE that most will seeke to know the kings kinde, let him sée what seruants he vseth, and let him call their valiant déeds to mind, and what commissioners of his haue beene in this country, Granuelle, Vergas, Roda, and the Duke D'Alba their maister in crueltie: Don Ian with Escouedo, and others which were not to be glutted with blood, and were (without faith, truth, or honor) prompt to spoile, robbe, burne and destroy. Don Ian said that a king were fitter to inherit woods, trées mountains, beasts, water or other sencelesse things, then to be Lord of a mightie countrie, wherein he should suffer so much as one rebell, or any one of con∣trary religion, which at his pleasure hee might not put to death. The Marquisse of Kisbrooke had rather flowen (with his) to the Diuel then to leaue persecuting the Heretikes: that they had such intents they were not ashamed to shew not onely in this country, but through all the world. The man doth purpose, but God doth dispose.
20. THe West Indians much commend the Spaniard, in  it appeares by the countrie, which was wont like an Ant  to abound in people, which now by the Spaniards bloody handes are all murthered, falling on them without reason or occasion: with∣in these few yeares they strangled & murthered aboue 180. times hundreth thousand liuing soules. In Castile are not by the thou∣sand part so many bloodthirstie roagues, as in the lande guiltlesse haue béene smothered: who euer heard of more horrible crueltie, no tongue so learned that can fully set forth the same. He that desireth to know further hereof, let him reade Bartolomeus de las Casas, who writes that they haue rent ye infants from the breasts of their mothers, taking them by the legs dashed out their braines against the stones, cut in péeces and throwne to the dogges: many hun∣drethes haue béene by the dogges deuoured, many rosted, sodde, & inhumanely deuoured. The commemoration hereof would wound a stony heart. 21. IF yet thy king estéeme his honor aboue reuenge, yet in his reli∣gion he will neuer budge,His religion. which concludes (as by the counsayle of Constance was decréede, whereon wee ought to consider) that one néedes not kéepe any oath vnto Heretickes: this giues vs oc∣casion enough to mistrust, for though the king had sworne vnto vs a thousand oaths,An. 1080. when it pleaseth the Pope (on whom more then on God they trust) he may be discharged of his oath. Pope Gre∣gorie the 7. was the first that made this law against the Em∣perour Henry the fourth, who displeasing him, hee put him in the banne,The Bishops of Mnts and Cullin. and egged and incited Rodolphus of Swaben against him, after he had giuen him a dispensation of the oath, which the saide Rodolph had done to the Emperour. But so it happened yt in the conflict Rodolphus lost his right hand, wherefore he said vnto the Bishops his counsaylors: Lo there Gods iust punishment wee not respected. There lies now the hand which swore homage vnto Henry my true Lord. It is lost labour to seek to deceyue God. 22. Tom. 3. Con∣sil. fol. 860.THe counsaile of Constance not onely concluded, to keepe no faith vnto Heretickes, but moreouer constrained and comman∣ded,
to breake, rent and annullate the sworne oath. It appeareth by the Emperour Sygismundus who was very loath so shameful∣ly to breake his oath, done to the king Laodislaus,Iohannes Hus Ieronimus de Praga. Eccius in Lutherum, counsailes the Emperour to breake his oth in putting thē to death. Hus & Prage contrary to and against his safeconduct were throwne in the fire. Eccius practised also to vse those tricks against Luther in Worms as aboue is said, maintaining these decrées very stoutly to the Em∣perours preiudice, that hee shoulde retire his giuen conducte, yea more that he was bound to do it by the councles decrée, if he would be reputed a true sonne vnto the holy Church. The Spanyard is named thus, as in pardons are séene, hee being very obedient to worke after that order. One refraines often from euill through diligent consideratiō. 23. BY this Constantish and holy fathers decrée,Iulianus, was the Cardinal Iulianus sent into Hungarie to giue knowledge vnto Iohan∣nes Huniades that he might break the truce betwéen the Turks: from which thing he woulde fayne haue refrained as vnlawfull, for hee resisted the same a great while, but was by the Councell forced, wherefore he refused the Turkish peace. The Hungarians began the warres very stoutly: but the Turkes greatly displea∣sed with that faithlesse déede, assembled a mighty hoast, with which they fell in Hungarie like hungry Wolues, beating al the Christi∣ans wholly out of the field. There died the Cardinall and Laodis∣lao: here it appeared that vnto them, & not vnto God their faith∣lesse behauiour is a pleasure, for hee that brake the sworne truce, trusting on his strength in stead of hoped victory they had a shame∣full discomfiture. Vntruth and pride neuer remaine vnpunished. 24. SEcondly this is a Maxime of the Papall doctrine that one may do euill if good procéed thereof,The second part of his re∣ligion. Iesuites. especially if it be to ye furtherance of the holy Church, and enterprised to that end, the Iesuites those murtherers of Princes, say and affirme, that one may bereaue kings, princes, and Lords of their liues, dissemble any manner of way to deceaue the Heretickes, & that any euil is good, so it procéed
of a good intent.Thirdly the Popes autho∣ritie. Thirdly such might is giuen to the Pope, that he can binde and vnbinde any thing which is in the compasse of the worlde, that is, hee may cast downe or raise Empires and king∣domes, and discharge or keepe oathes: the Pope is all aboue all, hee may alwaies aboue and against right doe what hee will: hee hath the right of the king of kinges, for no man how great soeuer may say,The Canon. why doest thou so. The Pope (with you) is no man, but a God on earth. 25. The faithlesse neuer wants occasion.FInally the perfidious (when hee espies oportunitie to reuenge his wronges) whereunto they are generally addicted, wantes no excuses and occasions to breake his oath. They will kéepe their oathes in small matters, to the ende, that when time serues, they may through their dissimulations worke their will the better: this was shewed vnto Scipio Africanus by Fabius, saying didst thou not once trust to Syphacius,The counsell of Fabius. and Numidis, let it be a warning vn∣to thée not to be deceaued againe: for the trothlesse keeps his word and oath in small thinges, thereby the better to attaine the good o∣pinions of euery one, by the which he may with lesse perill & more profite worke his treason. Hee then that refuseth Gods manifest aide against the sword, must be seene to bee deceyued with the O∣liue branch and faire shew of peace. Once deceyued one hath the more cause alwaies to mistrust his foe. 26. OVt of these aboue written examples and reasons, is to bee perceyued, that Holland and her allies are well informed and resolued not to enter into peace so vnaduisedly with the proud Spaniard, but continually mistrust his wonted treacherie; the more hauing considered that many nations haue been through their easie belieuing and too much trusting deceiued, and almost spoyled: others to the contrarie, mistrusting, and by their diligent foresight haue eschued their approching perilles, pre∣serued their libertie, and defended their common wealth: it is bad to stand at anothers mercie, & especially of his enemies whō one hath
iniured Magdenburge, and Rochel,Magdenburge Rochell. chose rather to dye in the de∣sence of their libertie, then to trust to those which are wicked by nature, whereby they haue preserued themselues, who else were now ouerthrowne. Through stedfastnes the Crown of victorie is wonne. 27. THe Admirall of France had he not reiected the many aduer∣tisementes and counsels giuen him,The Admirall of France tru∣sting to the many oathes of the king was with ma∣ny thousands pittifully mur¦thered. Parthes Arta∣banus. he had not beene so pitti∣fully murdred: the dissimulations of Charles the 9. had not beene so hurtfull vnto him: at Paris had not happened such a massacre where the streets were strawed with murthered bodies of 10000. Protestantes, besides many thousandes in other Cities: Who would not abhorre such crueltie, and rather choose an honorable war, before such treacherous agreements. Had Artabanus not put too much confidence in his enemie, the Parthians had not béene by Bascianus Caracalla so cruelly murthered, had hee not geuen consent to the match of his daughter, hee had protected the people from that destruction for when Caracalla more like an ene∣mie then a frende, with his men came for his bryde, the Parthians comming in amiable sort, weaponlesse to receiue him, hee in a mo∣ment fell with his men vpon them, Artabanus hardly escaped, he saw his people massacred. The vnexperienced must often times learne to their damage. 28. THe plagues which thou preposest vnto vs, which thou sayest fel vpon these which scorn peace, we neyther expect nor feare thē, because that the estates nor causes of such as thou namest are not to be compared to ours, the example which thou shewest vs of Iulius Caesar, is without sence, and not any way to the purpose;Iulius Cesar. Example shewing also that the grea∣test potentates ought to keep themselues within their owne lim∣mits, and to know God. for Caesar sought (through ambition) to be chiefe of Rome, there∣by to bercaue them of their former libertie, he sought thereby to transport (at his pleasure) the armies into Italie, to bring his pa∣ternitie to slauerie, yet in the end he bought it with his life, where∣fore the example is in our behalfe, and shewes vs in that as Iulius Caesar bought his paternity in slauery: euen so hath done the king of Spaine, seeking to suppresse these countries, yet God punisheth his pride, by that little Prouince which he little doubted, insomuch
that his punishment is no lesse then Caesars. As the deede is so deserues it like punishment. 29. Carthage.CArthage did often make peace with Rome: but they broke it againe, setting aside al honor and oathes, whereat the Ro∣maines being iustly moued, because they esteemed their oath so much, and yet were vsed contrarily, they made towards Carthage with all their powers, and recompenced them for their treache∣ry: the deede deserued no lesse, for falsenesse and periury are com∣monly requited with losse, and that thou comparest vs vnto Mi∣thridates, that hath no resemblance, neither any way Mith∣ridates intendes to subuert Asia and Europe vnder his subiecti∣on:Mithridates. murthers many Romains, yea wil ouerow Rome it selfe, for which cause the Romaines with a great host resisted him, van∣quished and punished him accordingly, Phillip (like Mithrida∣tes) meant to ouerrunne al the earth, and become a Monarche, shall if it please God finde like fare, For they that couet all, commonly loose all. 30. Iugurtha.EVen as Iugurth wrongfully ruled ouer the Numedians, so haue Phillips Predicessors against all right tyranized ouer many kingdomes, as Cicilia, Naples, the Indies and such like, but they shall yet with right, withdrawe themselues from him, yea through Gods iust iudgement rise vp all against him, as we with reason haue abandoned him, for as it is wonne so it will thriue. Sehon.As the Israelites desired Sehon to let them passe peaceably, and quietly through his land, which he refusing, the Israelites had good occasion to fal on him & destroy him euen so haue we onely sought as obedient subiectes according to our paternall right to enioy our libertie, this not onely is refused, but also those which sued for the same, and many others were slaine: This vnmeasurable crueltie moues and compels vs to resist and hate the Spanish broode. It is lawfull to resist force, when necessitie constraines. 31 Paris.PAris most trecherously bereaued Menelaus of Helena his dear wife, who first in frendship was by the Grecians asked again,
but the denyall incited them to anger in such sort, that they assem∣bled a mighty host, and finally the Troians as they deserued were ruined: so also the king of Spaine shall not easily cleare himselfe frō these countries, because he hath rauished our Helen, which is our libertie, the which to recouer, we will not feare to aduenture our liues and liuing, vntill the last droppe of our bloode, for who would liue content being bereaued of so sweete a blessing, and to liue in bondage of life and conscience? that is no wayes our intent nor desire, God through his mercy will strengthen vs all in our pretences. It is honorable to loue libertie aboue life. 32 IT is not in our power; nor we may not make any couenant nor peace with our Prince, since you name our warre a cause∣lesse rebellion, we ought therefore thē belike (as obedient subiects) to cease the war, to render al our aduantage, forsake al our right, acknowledge our Superiors againe, set our selues in the first e∣state, if so be we will not tast the punishment due to rebels, wee must couch to his command, returne to our old customes, deliuer vp all the land, giue our Prince power to do and leaue at his plea∣sure, he is our superior, our war is meare wantonnesse and pride, which we to our power maintaine stoutelie and without licence, what all this would be we haue beene taught by the Gallowes, sword, water and fire, for in the time of obedience those cruelties were vsed, aboue 80000. haue in the Netherlandes beene put to death byforme of iustice, onely accused of Heresie. This thou namest peace, but it is a miserable slauery. 33. ANd that our warre is no rebellion, nor madnes, wee manifest clearely with cittizenlike and godly lawes, we acknowledge a Lorde, but none that shall rule ouer vs in such sort, that at his pleasure he shall make vs slaues, except hee can shew and proue that our libertie may be hindred and subuerted to slauerie at the command of thy king: but this is manifest, the people choose a Prince: but he sweares first at his crowning, to be vnto them, their lawes and liberties an eternall defendor, and to maintaine them and augment them with all his might, then sweares the
people in recompence of his promise to be true to him (so far forth he kéepe his oath and worde) hee then that preferres one to an e∣state is more to bée esteemed, then he that is preferred, although this will seeme ridiculous to the flatterers, also one which is exal∣ted to some estate beleeues for sure that hee that hath raised him hath the power in his misdemeanor to pull him downe againe. He that on condition is raysed, may with condition be abased 34. THat the king of Spaine hath not conquered vs with the sworde (but that he was made Earle vpon condition, wée can easily proue, the order of electing or crowning doth shew the same: for he swore first to vs, and afterwarde wee to him, wee also see the manner of the swearing in Arragon whē they elect any one to the kingly estate, wee haue also chosen thee for our Lord and king on condition,Tralas. that thou shouldest keepe in∣uiolably our rightes and priuiledges otherwise not. Traianus is also of this mind, when he putteth the sword in the hands of his cheefest ruler, saying, holde and iustly vse this thy geuensworde, if in case I am valiant and true against my enemies in the fielde, but if otherwise, vse it against me with al force, hereby follow that when a Prince sweares, and then goes from his worde, that as then the oath of the subiectes is also of no worth, but may iust∣ly compell and force the Prince to doe iustice. He that will be truely delt with, must first be true himselfe. 35. THe Prince that is sworne to the countries priuiledges to keepe and defend them, not to diminish but to augment thē, and that afterwardes by all subtill and deceitfull meanes, will spoile the countrie of the same: may hee not iustly bee declared a Periure of all his subiectes, and deposed from his rule, without that the same be accounted rebellion, and especially since that our Predicessors in their priuiledges concluded (necessitie ex∣cepted) neuer to resist their Princes actions, all the while they were iust true and good, kéeping their oath, and defended vs as they ought, all that while wée haue obeyed them with life & goodes. as much as any people on earth. The hystorie of Carolus Audax sufficiently shewes the same,aros Au∣dax. how true and willing his subiectes
were, sending him in diuers warres great assistances of their frée will, and how hée was estéemed and loued of little and great. It is more security for a Prince to be loued then feared. 36: WHen Kinges will rule ouer consciences and mindes, and will be obayed, against Gods lawes in such respect, one may with all godly and worldly right, withstand them, without therefore vsing any rebellion, whether it be right in Gods sight to obay you rather then God iudge you,Act. 4. v. 19. this ap∣peared also in the Hebrew midwiues, which in the killing of the babes did not effect the kinges command,Exod. 1. v. 17. Gods mighty hande preserued Sydrach, Misach, and Abednago,Daniel 3. v. 28. Dan. 6. v. 16. from the scorching flames of fire, because they spurned at the kinges command, and trusted in him. And Daniell refusing to offer vnto Bell was cast into the Lyons denne, from the which by Gods miraculous power he was saued. Mathias with his 5. Brethren reiected the kinges command, nay more raised an armie against him, God blessed their war, praysed and furthered their pretence, & through his helpe they recouered their freedome. Against tyranny all God-fearing people may fight. 37. SInce this our Prince hath sought to vse vs not as good subiects but as vanquished slaues, nor yet would not cease his persecu∣tions, by no good perswasions, nor grant libertie of conscience, but moreouer such as sued for it, hath he condemned as Traitors, and put them to death, the countrie being moued, vrged, and forced, through extreame necessitie, which according to her priuiledges was lawfull, to procure meanes to disturbe, and hinder such like tyranny, to liue in her wonted libertie, hath not of any desire of gaine, nor treacherie, but of meere neede and necessity exposed her selfe to the warre, therein following the example of many nations, the which had receiued nothing so much iniurie as wee, yet haue they exiled and driuen their Princes away, neither were they re∣puted rebels, nor yet receiued any damage thereby. He doth no bodie wrong who defendes his owne right. 38. EDwarde the secondEdward e second Englandes king through bad counsaile
putteth certaine of his Barons to death, without eyther reason or lawful cause: but the other Peares of the land moued by that cruel∣ty assembled together an hoast of men, tooke him prisoner, and de∣clared him vnworthy,Christern. Tarquinius Superbus. Caius Caligula Nero. Domitianus Cmmodus Maximus. Christern of Denmark was imprisoned af∣ter that he was eled, and Tarquinius Superbus for his cruelty was deposed by the Romaines the which hee had plagued, and al∣tred their gouernement, insomuch that they displeased them. Ca∣ius Caligula a monstrous tyrant, was also therefore murthered by the Romaines: Nero for his filthy and horrible factes was de∣clared a foe, and his life persecuted, and Domitianus, Commodus, Maximus, and more, others of like crueltie were vsed according∣ly, for they that seeke the spoile of the common welth, are alwaies seene to buy it deare. No Tyrant that euer could escape Gods punishment. 39. BEing then that our warre is no rebellion, as manifestly ap∣peares, and sufficiently proued by true examples, and infallible argumentes, thou doest vs great wrong to compare vs to rebel∣lious Absolon, or to the wicked Israelites: for no comparison can be made of it, we are in no wise to stand in feare of ye punishment, which rebels haue endured, but since wee put our trust in the al∣mighty God, wee will continually expect a good issue of our iust quarrell although thou seekest through thy threates to quench our courages, vanting of thy maisters Lyonly téeth, with all his for∣ces, stedfastly trusting on our God, thy threates wee let flie, re∣mayning coniunctly in our intent, esteeming far better to haue iust warre, then a dissembled peace. Who so trusts on Gods aide, is neuer put to shame. 40. IT séemes that thou hast learned the bragging of thy maister Rapsace, who also cryed, wherein dost thou relie, wherein dost thou trust? but what God did, and commanded in the next chap∣ter, thou hast not read or perhaps but badly remembred: hee shall not enter the citty, nor endamage the same, for I wil defend and kéepe it, for my seruant Dauids sake who trusted in mee, I will protect her against the tyrantes pretences, Baldeus also boa∣sted before Leidiz, that one should sooner touch the starres then
the cittie be rescued, but God displeased at this blasphemie sent them vnnaturall floodes, whereby his pretence was disturbed. Thou that through false peace seekest to bring vs in thy net consider the matter: for if thou art not blinded through thy wilfulnes, thou must of force confesse that our resistance which thou seest is no hu∣mane worke. God fauoreth our case, for the defence of his Christ. 41 Assure thy selfe that I trust not so much on the helpe of my neighbores and allies, as on the iust and vpright dealing which we dayly vse: for when with diligent care I consider the forepassed, and ballance the issue thereof, it giues mee a great cause of hope, that this will ende wel, and that I shal want no meanes, while I feele Gods hand, his bounty, aide, and bles∣sing which are the infallablest tokens of a good issue of the vnsted∣fastnes thereby, thou makest a great discourse, that it hanges in no mens handes, and that it is dayly seene, but I know they are sted∣fast, and neuer deceiued any, except he displeased God through our great sinne: I trust and beléeue assuredlie that they are bound to me, as long as I shall with zeale prosecute this iust cause, and wil through Gods mercy, and in spight of the Spaniarde as a yong bud florish, which thou with all thy force shalt not hinder. Gods blessing will dwell alwaies fast with the God-fearing. 42. ANd finally when thou comest forth with thy Princes power, name him with a common name, because thou knowest not thy right: yet for reasons to your aduantage, doe not name him: neuerthelesse we perceiue thy deceipt cunningly cloaked there vn∣der, as the Asse of Cuma couered with the Lyons skinne: but through his long cares he was knowne: so thou also with thy peace, masked with a Foxes skinne: we perceiue thy intent: for thou shewest thy maister in forme of a Lyon, of whome wee feare to bée deceiued in the end: because wee see many footesteppes in∣ward: but none outwarde, whereby is seene his malice is not one∣ly to vs: but also to them that neuer iniured him, out of thy own wordes we construe his meaning, and what a happy peace wee should haue: we are Lambes, thy Lord a Lyon, those two kindes
neuer agree, besides we are nations of diuers humors. Contrary humors doe quicklie breake vnitie. 43 IF then you, our neighbores, of the seduced Prouinces, so much and so seruentlie desire peace, the way is open, a good s peace is at hand, which thou now maist attaine, in follow∣ing our good counsaile, it being impossible for you to continue in Peace when you shoulde be contracted vnto God with vs: and the proude Spaniarde, open thy eyes, know thy enemie, when thou maist driue him away, which through Gods helpe and thy neighbores, may easily and in short space bee effected, then peace wil yeelde vs traffick, welfare, and plenty, the peace shalbe sure without false shew, the more since wee are a nation of one kinde and condition, who also though to their damage keepe their oath and respect their honors, endeauour thou to doe this ridde thy selfe from the Spanish venime, trust on Gods mercy, and not on thy kinges great Forces. He that puts his trust in God, neuer comes to shame. 44. IF not, then you Batauians, which haue vndertaken the defence of your priuiledges, let not the feare of death daunt your inuin∣cible courages you shal not onely thereby recouer infinite praise, but also hereafter an eternal life: but if you faint, and will seeke to shunne the perils, you bring your selues & your successors in great disquietnesse: wherefore then take courage, and for the defence of thy patrimony (in recompence that shee hath nourished thee) and for your liberty spare neither life nor goods, let not any wayes the desire of this fickle life expel the wonted courages from your hartes, let not the praise and renowne of the Battauians) which hetherto hath continued, any way be blemished nor dimi∣nished, although dangers are at hand, shew that this meaning is deepely imprinted in your hartes. Farre better to endure a warre that shoulde neuer cease, then to be deceiued by a false peace. FINIS.
