19.6 99851003 16255
Valentine: Why how do you know that I am in love? Speed: Marry, by these special marks:—you have learned... to sign like a school-boy that had lost his A B C. UNIQUE XVITH CENTURY ENGLISH CHILD'S BOOK A. B. C. WITH THE PATER NOSTER, AVE, CREDE AND X COMAUNDEMENTES. Folio, single sheet; folded to make a booklet of 4 leaves, 12mo. 3⅞ by 2¾ inches. Preserved in full morocco box. Printed at London in the Old bayly by Richard Lant. No date, but about 1536. A unique child's book which had disappeared from sight for over a century. Variously considered by authorities as having been intended as a Horn Book or as an education book for the very young scholar. Last seen by bibliographers at the beginning of the Nineteenth Century, the volume is described as follows by Ames-Herbert-Dibden's Typographical Antiquities, 1816, Vol. III, page 581, item 1779:— "The ABC &c. Without date. Octavo. It begins with five differ∣ent Alphabets, and Gloria Patri▪ then the Pater-noster, &c., grace before meat, and after. Printed only on one side, to be folded as blank pages to be pasted together, and make one leaf of two; or four small leaves of the whole sheet. Licensed by the Company." From 1816 on, the volume seems to have disappeared. Pollard, apparently from the above entry, records the fact that the work was printed by Lant (Handlist of Books Printed by English Printers Bibliographical Society) but indicates no copy known. Duff, Century of the English Book Trade also had not seen a copy. He records that the Old Bailey address was the first of several addresses at which Lant printed,—hence books without date printed at that address must of necessity ante-date those of established dates printed at other location. Though Pollard, in a haphazard fashion, gives Lant's dates as 1542-1563 (op. Cit.), Duff records that "Richard Lant, Printer, in London, was made a freeman of the Stationers on the 6th September, 1537, and paid 44 shillings for the privilege.... When he started printing, he was living in the Old Bailey." Thus proving Pollard in error, and establishing the fact that in 1537, Lant was already a recognized printer of sufficient standing to be admitted to the Stationers Company. The volume under consideration bears a manuscript date of 1536, written in an old hand. While this is not conclusive evidence of its actual date, the writer may have had access to evidence now no longer available. Certainly the sheet was printed before 1542 when Lant was sent to the Fleet prison for printing Tolwyn's The Manne of Synne (of which no copy now survives.)
The date of 1536, if it is the correct date, would establish this as the earliest known English A. B. C., the earliest known English Horn Book (for it can be considered as such) and the earliest known book printed in England strictly for children! Lant, moreover, is the rarest of all English printers; far more rare, for instance, than is Caxton. Of the many books that he printed from 1536 or 1537 until 1563, most have disappeared entirely. Only two of his works are recorded in the British Museum for instance, and there are none at Cambridge. Of English A. B. C.s, the following are now known. 1. The present example, printed by Richard Lant. Unique. Not in the Short Title Catalogue. 2. A.B.C. for children. J. King. No date. Entered at the Stationers 1561/2. S.T.C. No. 18. Unique copy at Queen's College, Oxford. 3. The B. A. C. (sic) booke in Latyn and in Englysshe. T. Petyt. No date but said to be 158. S.T.C. No. 19. Unique copy at Emmanuel College, Cambridge. 4. The A. B. C. set forth by the Kynges Majestie. W. Powell. No date, but said to be 1545. S.T.C. No. 20. Unique copy in the British Museum. 5. The A. B. C.; with the catechisme. for the Company of Stationers, 1633. S.T.C. No. 21. Unique copy was in the Guild Hall Library, London. The rarity of these little books requires no summing up after the above evidence.
The a b c with the Pater noster Aue / Credo / and .x. cōmaundemen¦tes in En∣glysshe newly translated and set forth at the kyng most gracyouse com∣maunde∣ment. 1536 ¶ Printed at Londō in the Old bayly vp Richard Lant
✚ A a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r r s s t v u w x y z & {us}. Est Amen. A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P Q R S T V W X Y Z. A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P Q R S T V X. ✚ A a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s s t v u w x y z &. est Amen. A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P Q R S T V X. In the name of the father & son / & the holy ghost. Amē.
¶ The seuen peticyons of the Pater noster. OVr father whiche arte in heuyn / ha∣lowed be thy na∣me. Thy kynge∣dome come. Thy wyll be done in erth / as it is in heuen. Gyue vs this daye our dayly bred. And forgyue vs our trespasses as we forgyue thē that trespasse agaynst vs. And let vs not be led into tem¦tacyon. But delyuer us from euyll. Amen.
The salutacyon of the An∣l / called Aue Maria. HAyle MARI full of grace / the lorde is wt the. Blessed arte thou onge women. And blessed  the fruyte of thy wombe. Amen. The Crede / or the .xii. arty¦les of the christen fayth. I Beleue in GOD the father almighty make  heuen and erth. d in Iesu Christ / his only
sonne our lorde. Which was conceyued by the holy goost / borne of the vyr∣gyne Mary. Suffred vnder Pons Pyla∣te was crucifyed / deed / bury∣ed / and descended into hell. And the thyrde daye he rose a¦gayne frome deth. He ascended in to heuen / and sytteh on the ryght hand of god the father almyghty. From thence he shall come to iudge the quicke and the deed I beleue in the holy goost. The holy Catholyke church. The communion of sayntes /
the forgyuenesse of synnes. The resurreccyon of the body And the lyfe euerlastyng Amen The .x. cōmaundementes of allmyghty God. THOV shalte haue non other Goddes but me Thou shalt not make to thy selfe any grauē ymage nor any lykenesse of any thīge that is in heauen aboue / or in erth beneth / nor in the water vnder the erth / thou shalt not bow downe to them / nor wor¦shyp them.
Thou shalt not take the na¦me of thy lorde god in vayne. Remembre that thou keepe holy thy Saboth day. Honor thy father & thy moder Thou shalt do no murther. Thou shalt not commytte adultry. Thou shalt not steale. Thou shalte beare no false wytnes agaynst thy neybour Thou shalte not desyre thy neybours house / thou shalte not desyre thy neybours wyfe nor his seruaūt / nor his mayd nor his oxe nor his asse / nor a∣ny thing that is thy neybors.
¶ Grace afore meate. The lorde aboue / graūt vs to take. His gracyouse gyftes / with thankes geuyng And his gospell not to forsake which is our helth & life lastīg Our father. &c. ¶ Grace after meate. Thankes to that lords that all hath sent For this our fode conuenient And for his worde / which is our helth And lyfe of soule as scripture telth. Our father which act in heuen. &c. Finis.
