18920 99856160 21686
The Iust Down Ambition, Adultery, and Murder. Where-vnto are added 3. notorious sin∣ners. ,Weston. M. Turner and Fra With his Arraignement, Confession and E Who all suffered Death for the der of Sir Tho: Ouerbury, poysone the Tower: of whom to these discourses ioyned an Elegy, vpon the death of Sir Thomas Ouerbury.
The iust Downfall of three notorious Sinners, v. Weston, Mistris Turner, and Fraklin. Who all suffered death for the Murder of Sir THOMAS OVERBVRY, who was poysoned in the Tower. LOoking lately into the customes of this Age, and coniecturing the in∣ward affections of men, I gather that the world is the house of confusion, and the inhabitants thereof set vpon mischiefe: for the seauen Capital Sinnes are growne to such a custome, that our eyes want no allurements to bewitch, our eares no per∣swasions to seduce, nor our senses no subtlety to af∣fect: Which seizing on the hearts of men, haue brought forth many pernicious children, to the hurt of Nature; some like Centaures, begotten of clouds, as Ambition; some like Serpents nourished in dung∣hils, as Sensuality; some like Vapors, raysed vp to bee consumed, as Flattery, and such like: generally all dan∣gerous and full of trouble: therefore (is it in the sense of man) most fitting to haue the painting taken off from these foule faces, the couers pulled off from these cups of Poyson, and the couert of this bed of Serpents ripped vp, that wee may discerne what hath long time beene hidden cunningly.
The first that presents himselfe vpon our Stage, If we call Ambition, catching at nothing but Stars,  onely for Greatnesse: this is hee, that cun∣ningly can inuent stratagems to his own ouerthrow, giuing Pens occasion to write Tragedies: if hee rise from obscurity, (as many haue done) hee laboureth to be skilfull in those things, which are most pleasing to the greater sort, and tollerable among the Com∣mons: His study is for prayse, and not for Vertue: His lookes like Mausolus Tombe, faire and comely without, but within nothing but rotten bones, and orrupt practises: his apparrell increaseth with his ortune, and as worldly affaires direct him, so su∣eth he both fashions and affections: in his study he ffecteth singularity, and is proud in beeing Author of a new Stratagem: if hee chance to come into the ye of the World, he then creepes into the fauour of some great Personage, in feeding whose humors (to relieue his wants) he makes intrusion into som he∣ritage, and matcheth not according to his birth, but to the increase of his fortune; and by that meanes, by hooke or crooke, hee attaineth to some place in the Court. Then begins he with guifts to win hearts; by fained humility to auoyd hatred; by offices of friendship, to bind his equals; by cunning insinua∣tions to worke his Superiors; by which meanes he is held to be worthily a Statesman. Being growne to this step higher, the authority likes him not without the stile, wherein if any crosse him, looke for poy∣son in his cup, or conspiracy in his walkes: yea so
pestilent is his nature, that (like fire raked vp in em∣bers) he neuer sheweth but to consume both him∣selfe and others: if he perceiue any that by ripe iudge∣ment conceiteth his courses, with him he ioyneth, as if he sought his onely protection vnder the wing of his Glory, but the very truth is, he hath no other in∣tent but this, to clip the wings of his renowne for feare he flye beyond him: if the nature of the No∣bleman whom he enuieth be gentle, hee bringeth him in feare, either of his own seruants in his house∣hold, or his familiars that loue his honour, or else some mislike betwixt his Prince and him, sworne and confirmed by flatteries and intelligences, till the no∣ble-man looseth either his land, authority, or place; and hee attaine both his stile and promotion: yet play he neuer so cunningly, such vncertaine ho∣nors beget daily dangers, & make him careles of his soules prosperity: for then there entreth intohis mind a delightfull sin called curiosity, by which, to make him more able in other mischiefs, he giues entertain∣ment to witches and charmers, and consorts him∣selfe with nouell-mongers, and strange inuenters of banquets, to set lust on fire, and that can deuise con∣fections to besot youth with luxury, that for an ireful man can worke strange reuenges, for a fearefull, a strong tower to keepe him in: to be excellent at poy∣sons, to kill lingringly, like the Italian. But again to our purpose. To the Ambitious man ther is cōmonly belonging a rusticke troupe of Flatterers, Bauds, Adulterers Soothers, and such like, that hating  vertue makes sin seeme pleasing, which  in the
flexible heart such a sweet desire of forbidden plea∣sures, that it euen surfets and growes sicke with ex∣cesse; Lust and Adultery I meane; which I describe in this maner. It is the most insolent of all things, it troubles the mind, and taketh away the Empire of liberty, it confounds Memory, kils Prouidence, and treads downe good Counsell. Offends not hee the Law that takes possession of another mans free-hold, and makes a Common of his Neighbours Inclo∣sure? Adulterers, I say, haue no Spirit to good∣nesse, nor will they bee by any Councell moued to godlinesse: for their felicity is in the surfets of the flesh, and the pleasures thereof bring nothing but too deare repentance: the Adulterer spights him most that examines his proceedings; and plots his ouerthrow that doth but touch his infirmities. Oh! what an enemy is it to vertue, the onely wrack of wealth, and plaine high way to pouerty? The Adul∣terer is so blinded in heart, and so hardened withall, that he can hardly look vp toward Heauen to behold Gods iust Iudgements: yet so iust and sure they are that in all ages this vile sin hath been seuerely puni∣shed, as by the example of Iudas, iustice on Thamar, Dauids adultery with Vrias wife punished in his son Absolon, thousands of men dyed in the fields of Moab for this fault, threescore thousand of the children of Israell were put to the sword for the rauishing onely of a Leuites Wife: of all sins it is in nature the most odious, and brings with it the greatest shame vnto : it is a sin that hath made the earth drunke
with blood, to the confusion of many Townes and Cities. Sodome and Gomorah were consumed with fire for Incest and Adultery: Troy a proud City made a plow-land for the same sin. It was the onely adulte∣ries of the French, that caused a Massaker of foure-score thousand, by the ringing of one bell. Let not the Strumpets eye, saies one of the Sages of Greece, shine vpon the countenance of young men, least with the Basaliske it pearce vnto the death: for her malice is as lightening, and more raging then the shee Beare: vpon her attends malicious hatred, whose fe∣licity is onely to reioyce at the harmes of others, gi∣uing more affliction to them that are most troubled with affliction, where if any offend her, she admits no reconciliation, but liues as a partiall iudge in her own cause: if she heares the aduancement of ver∣tue then growes she pensiue, and if she want credit a∣mongst the mighty, then falls shee working with the meaner sort: she smiles not vpon any man but to be∣tray him, nor giues him countenance but to vndoe him, nor contriues any Stratagems without Murder, nor dwels by any neighbour but to hutt him; and if she be but crossed in her will, she euer frets her selfe away in anger, and after in hate and malice becomes infamous: for her loue is a minute, but her spight o∣uerlasting. Her hand beeing once dipt in mischiefe, she neuer walkes abroad but in suspition, fearing to be accused by vertue, and still liues in dread of her good Fortune: yet by nature is she such, that shee hath courage enough to aduenture on any sinne. An
ambitious woman shewes her selfe to be a trouble∣some disturber of the world, powerfull to make small things great, and great, monstrous: Enuy by na∣ture is greeued at the Prosperity of others: hee enuieth the Great in that he cannot Equall them, he enuieth the weake, dreading they should compare themselues with him: he enuieth his Equalls because they should not become his Companions: in King∣domes, Common-Wealths, Princes Courts and Ambitious mens Houses, he is still working: no Man hunteth after Honor but he affronts him, onely the miserable man hee enuies not, because (being kept in Prison) hee feares not his risings, yet hath hee a scorne ouer him. Machiuell knowing the venome of this vice, gaue his sonne this last and not least in∣struction: that he should not be enuious, but to doe (saith hee) such deeds that others may enuy thee: for to be enuied is the token of good desert, but to be enuious the signe of a foolish nature, which verifies the saying of Marcus Tullius the Orator, that the most florishing fortune is most enuied at. But now to be more familiar in my discourse: wher Ambition, Adul∣tery, Pride, Enuy, Malice, and such like Capitall Sins haue set in foote, there cannot chuse but follow Murder and confusion, and where the foundation is layd with bloud, there can be a building but of small continuance, but where Honors haue a true begin∣ning, a ground of vertue springing vp by noble de∣serts, continued by Wisedome and maintayned with Care, there cannot choose but follow a fruitfull
haruest, and a plentifull Winter: contrariwise to ob∣taine sodaine Honors begets Pride and Vaineglory: Pride and Vainglory are the cherishers of Enuy and Mallice: Enuy and Mallice the Nurses of Bloudshed & Murder, in which whosoeuer dippeth but the tip of his finger, giues to his Soule a scarlet staine, which neuer can be cleare vntill the dissolution of the body, and then well are they that can wash it away with the true teares of repentance. Brittle is that greatnesse that fadeth in a moment, and vaine the ioy that is vnwisely lost. He that hath a sodaine rise and can wisely stand, is a most happy worldling, but he that forgets himselfe on the Pina∣cle of prosperity, is besotted with arrogancy: there∣fore let him that hunts for honors in Princes Courts, wander in an euen passage, for dangerous are the pro∣ceedings and busines of a Statesman. Take this for an example: suppose that a young man from the lowest ebbe of worldly chance haue the aduancement of Greatnesse laid vpon his shoulders, will it not for a time seeme a heauy burthen, and a great trouble to his new transformed fortunes? Will not the pride of his heart swell to a full Sea; euen ready to burst ouer the bankes of his Honour-giuer? Then rightly may the Picture of ingratitude be imprinted in his fore-front, playing the Viper to his high forunes first beginner. Being thus intituled with State-Offices, hath hee not many soothers in sin, personages of base conditi∣on attending him, hemming him round with perswa∣sions of selfe conceit, which for a need will venture
their liues to gaine him the commands of his will: what becomes of such follies but a sorrowfull repen∣tance, and no recouery? All you that haue your harts pierced with sad considerations, take this for a re∣membrance of greefe, that is, that when a Woman of noble Parentage, placed on the mountaine of smi∣ling chance, hauing the dignity of Greatnesse shi∣ning on her fore-head, should humble her selfe to base conditions, giuing her whole mind to malici∣ous hatred, secret consents of iniquity, selfewill and wicked proceedings, neuer pacified till the end of damned performances. Oh! was not this woman cre∣ated for a deep sorrow to her Alliance, a great greefe vnto her Country, and a foule staine vnto her owne reputation? Is it not also a lamentable example for a Gentleman of good birth and calling, placed in dignity in high office and charge for his Country, to giue way by consent to a bloudy stratagem, and for feare of the displeasures of Groatnes intangle himselfe in the snares of reproch? Will not this also be a continuall remembrance to his posterity, and a barre of disgrace branding the coat-Armes of his house, to haue the common course of Iustice passe vpon him in the eye of the multitude? Is it not also great pitty that for want of grace some of a seruile (yet an obseruing condition) should from the golden meane of low estate wait at the elbow of Greatnes, and bring fuel to their fire of iniquity, wherein at the length they themselues are likewise consumed? Oh! wherefore should simplicity thus blind vp their eyes
of vnderstanding, to be thus the instruments of such dangerous drifts, that ayme at nothing but grudge and mallice? If with Solons saying they had sealed vp their hearts, Remember the end, this had neuer been: then how are they led away with amisse, that hauing the guifts of art and experience, the secrets of the simples of Physick, ordained by God for mans good vse, should by the Diuell & them be conuerted thus to malignant purposes? if the feare of God had shi∣ned in their hearts, it would haue beene a light to haue led them fro all those darke practises, which haue now spotted the foreheads of their reputations with the markes of blacke infamy. Shame cannot choose but be the reward of such enterprisers, that for the fauor of Greatnes will dip their hands in the blood of Innocents, and euen as it were worke a∣gainst nature: Oh more then sauage minded Crea∣tures! in the very deepnesse of your blacke and bloody imaginations (imboldened by whomso∣euer) this might haue beene your Memento, in which I conclude, that strange and wonderfull are Gods iudgements, that in these fore-passed stratagems haue shined in great glory: say you then that bloud inno∣cently shed is layd vp in Heauens Treasury, not one drop of it can be lost, but lent out to Vsury: water pou∣red forth, sincks downe quietly into the earth, but bloud spilt on the ground, sprinkles vp to the Firma∣ment. Murder is wide-mouthed, and will not let God rest till he grant reuenge, not onely the bloud of the slaughtered, but the soule of the innocent ascending
to his throne, crying out and exclaiming for Iustice, which (the Lord be praised) hath beene, and will be carefully followed by the learned and worthy Magi∣strates of this Kingdome, whom the Lord God pros∣per and protect in all their proceedings, to which let all true hearts say Amen. Mistrís Turners Teares, for the Murder of Sir Thomas Ouerbury, who was poysoned in the Tower of London. IF euer teares fell from a Wretches eies, I am that Creature: waues on waues doe rise So fast, and swell so high, they drowne my soule In her owne crimes, as numberlesse as foule. Oh had my cradle bin my sodaine Graue, In peace my Soule had slept, which is a slaue Now both to sinne and shame: I had not then Been of God hated, and so scorn'd of Men. Vnhappy was the Wombe that lent me breath, Would it had bin the Charnell-house of Death, Had I bin stisled there, thē had my flight To heauen bin like a Doues, with winges more white. O would to God the Day when I was borne, Had from the Calender of time beene torne, Where now it stands accursed, and does beare The marke of a most fatall Character.
Many a Widdow reading there my name, Will curse it, & the leafe that holds the same: Children as yet vnborne, comming to spell, Will take it for a Furies name in Hell; And casting by the Booke no more will read, But onely learne to heape vppon my head VVishes of mischeefe though in Graue I lye, For to confound mee euerlastingly. But leauing this, let my sad Story tell▪ Both from what height I fall, & how I fell: That though time present does not mone my state Yet times to come may pitty my hard fate. My birth was faire, my bringing vp was good, My dayes were golden in my widdow-hood, And might haue been so still, but climbers hye Beyond their reach must downe, and so doe I. Plenty and I at board together sate, I fed with Diues, dranke in richest plate: VVore ritch attires, tasted all worldly pleasure, But nere had care to hoord vp heau'nly treasure. VVith Eue I might haue liu'd in Paradise, But that a Serpent did my Soule intice To touch forbidden fruit, which relish'd well In chewing, but being downe it smelt of Hell. Twas not one onely Apple to deuoure, For which I long'd; my hunger gap'd at more, At a whole tree I look'd: it was a Tree, Me thought the goodliest mortall eyes could see, This Tree I climb'd, and as I pluckt it grew Still fresh and fresh, the boughs were euer new;
The branches euer greene, bushy and faire, It seem'd the Darling both of sunne and ayre. But when my Soule lookt vp with open eyes, I saw the top-bough brauing euen the skies, VVhen the root stuck in Hell, where looking in I knew it then to be the tree of sinne. And though my Conscience told me I should fall, If that I leand to: nothing could appall My setled resolution, I would on, Though still before me stood damnation. From this I pluckt the guilded fruit of pride, Like Queen-apples they shew'd, for euery side VVas ruddy and alluring, but (what trust Is in vaine earth?) being toucht they turne to dust. Frō this I suckt Enchantmēts which drunk well, And luscious sweet, yet prou'd the milke of hell: Hence did I gather poysonous drugges to kill Such as withstood my friends, or crost my wil. Lust often lay within my widdowed sheetes, And taught me how to tast forbidden sweetes, And that toward hell I might go one step furder The last and worst I went into was murder. O crying sinne! which smothered nere so deep, In caues, which silent night her selfe does keep, Bound vp in darknes, like the steeme of Hell which none can peirce; yet the black deed to tell Euen graues of dead men (rotten long agoe,) VVill open wide: Vengeance walks often slow To our weak sight, but when to Strike it stands, On Heau'ns high Tower, it hath a 1000. hands.
Th' Almighties Arrowes fly both sure & strong, And where they hit great Oakes fall all along. No hidden mark but stands within his eie, And that he cleaues, when forth his wrath does flie. Witnesse my selfe and others, who defying The busiest searching Sun-beam from descrying Where Villany lay lurking, wrapd in clouds, so safe we thought as dead men in their shrouds When to Mans Sense twas as impossible Mountaines to moue, as find a tongue durst tel Our buried plots; See! they are rent and torne By Gods least finger; and we left in Scorne. Our maskes pluckd off, our faces now appeare writ Such as they are indeed, not as they were, Plain on our browes are our close mischiefes Who most did hide, now most discouer it. The Wolues are caught in snares; the shepherd now Knows that a Lamb was slain, by whom & how, The blood of whom by cruell friend so spilt, Flowes like a Sea, yet washes off no guilt. If any aske mee, why I was so led, And why so neere to hell I ventured, I was bewitch'd, for what I did behold, Was a most bitter Pil, but wrap'd in gold. That liquorish baite intic'd me take it downe, As wholesom Physick, but (with shāe) tis known No poison can so soone destroy the Soule, The out-side glorious, but the inside foule. O Gold! thou glittering diuel that confoundest The Richest, Fairest, Strongest, wisest, Soundest,
Would God, as He to Indians is vnknown, That so their Drossy God were theirs Alone. Soules would not tumble then so fast to Hell, Nor of my Fall should I this Story tell, Terror to Soule and Body, had not Heauen, To sinnes more high and horrid, pardon giuen. Pardon of thee (sweet Iesus) then I craue, What thou hast Bought and Payd for deerely Saue. Men, let me beg forgiuenes from you too Because I did more then my Sex should doe. And you of Modest dames that beare the note, And my blacke Name quite from your tables blot, As I am lost, so let my fault I craue, And write Obliuion on my wretched Graue. You Fathers whome of Children I bereaue, You Children whom of Parents I deceaue, You Wiues whom Husbandles my Guilt does make, Forgiue me All: of All this Leaue I take. Heauen frownes to looke vpon me and my Sin, Earth trembles that by her I fed haue bin. My very breath poysons the Aire about me, Hell onely is within me and without me. Yet in despite of Hell, from Heauen comes down Mercy, I see holding a glorious Crown O immortality ouer my faint head, Iesus in that and thee I'me Comforted. Strengthen my weake heart, Death is fearefull grim, One finger of thy Hand can vanquish him: Giue to my fleeting Soule a prosperous gaile; That I to Blest Ierusalem may Saile. FINIS.
Master VVestons Teares, for the Murder of Sir Thomas Ouerbury who was poysoned in the Tower of London. GOD of my Soule and Body, haue mercy vpon mee: the one I haue cast away by my folly, & the other is likely to perish in thy Fury, vnlesse in thy great mercy thou Saue it. My Sinnes are deepe Seas to drowne mee▪ I am swallowed vp in the bottomles Gulph of my owne transgressions. With Caine I haue beene a Murderer, and with Iudas a Betrayer of the Innocent. My body is a Slaue to Sathan, and my wretched Soule is deuoured vp by Hell. Black haue bin my thoughts, and blacker are my deeds. I haue beene the Diuells instrument, and am now become the Scorne of Men, a Serpent vpon earth, and an Out-cast from Heauen. What therefore can be∣come of me (miserable Caytiffe?) if I looke vp to my Re∣deemer, to him I am an Arch Traitor, if vpon Earth, it is drowned with Blood of my shedding, if into Hell, there I see my Conscience, burning in the Brimstone lake. God of my Soule and Body haue mercy therefore vpon mee, Saue me, O saue me, or else I perish for euer, I die for euer in the world to come, vnlesse (sweet Lord) thou catch∣est my repentant Soule in thine Armes; O saue mee, saue me, saue me. FINIS.
Iames Franklin A Kentishman of Maidstone, his owne Arraignment, Confession, Con∣demnation, and Iudgement of Himselfe, whilst hee lay Prisoner n the Kings Bench for the Poysoning of Sir Thomas Ouerbury. I Am Arraign'd at the black dreadfull Barre, Where Sinnes (so red as Scarlet) Iudges are; All my Inditements are my horrid Crimes, Whose Story will affright succeeding Times, As (now) they driue the present into wonder, Making Men tremble, as trees struck with Thunder. If any askes what Euidence comes in, O 'tis my Conscience, which hath euer bin A thousand witnesses: and now it tells A Tale, to cast me to ten thousand Hells. The Iury are my Thoughts (vpright in this,) They sentence me to death for doing amisse▪ Examinations more there need not then, han what's confest heere both to God and Men. The Crier of the Court is my black Shame, Which when it cals my Iury, doth proclaime (as they are summon'd) they appeare, To giue true Verdict of the Prisoner, They shall haue heauy Fines vppon them set, Such as may make them dye deep in Heauens debt. About mee round sit Innocence and Truth, As Clerkes to this high Court; and little Ruth
Because my facts are barbarous, damn'd, and base. The Serieants that about mee (thick) are plac't, To guard me to my death▪ (when I am cast) Are the black stings my speckled soule now feeles, Wich like to Furies dog me close at heeles. The Hangman, that attends me is Despaire, And gnawing wormes my fellow-Prisoners are. His first Inditement for Murder. THe first who (at this Sessions) loud doth call me, Is Murder, whose grim visage doth appall me, His eyes are fires, his voyce rough windes out-rores, And on my head the Diuine Vengeance scores: So fast and fearfully I sinke to grownd, And wish I were in twenty Oceans drownd. He sayes I haue a bloudy villaine bin, And (to proue this) ripe Euidence steps in, Brow'd like my selfe: Iustice so brings about, That black sinnes still hunt one another out: 'Tis like a rotten frame ready to fall, For one maine Post being shaken, puls downe all. To this Indictment, (holding vp my hand,) Fettered with Terrors more then Irons I stand, And being ask'd what to the bill I say, Guilty I cry. O dreadfull Sessions-day! His second Indictment for poysoning. ANother, forthwith bids me come to'th Barre, (Poyson) that Hel-borne cunning Sorcerr, That windes himselfe into a thousand formes, And when the day is brightest flings downe stormes. This hath an Angels face, a Mermaids tongue,
This is the Coward Sinne, which (like a Pill,) When 'tis most guilded, is most sure to kill. Whether this Hel-hownd strike at Morne or Night, So trecherous, close, and speedy is his fight, That Armors all-of-proofe, nor Towers of Stone, Can barre his bloody Execution. This Snake with the smooth skin hiss'd out my name Mongst others more, and venom'd me with shame That rancles to the soule. It sayes that I (For a poore golden handfull) did defie Heauen and Saluation, when I gaue consent To teare the bowels of an Innocent With lingring poysons of themselues too strong, But that their working God put off so long; That darker deeds (by this) the light may try, Which now perhaps in worser bosomes lye. To this Inditement holding vp my hand, (Fettered with Terrors more then Irons I stand) And being askd what to the Bill I say, Guilty I cry. O dreadfull Sessions-Day! His third for raising of Spirits &c. IN rushes then a heape of Accusations, For all those Godlesse damn'd Abhominations, Rais'd by the black Art, and a Coniurers spelles: As to call Spirits euen from the deepest Hells, To fetch back theeues that with stoln goods are gone, And calculate natiuities: such a one Credulity of fooles and women made me, And to that glorious infamy betraide me. A Cunning man, a Wise man were my stile,
Art knew I none, nor did I euer reach A bough of learnings tree; what I did teach To others, or did practise, it was all Cheating, false, apish, diabollicall. To this being likewise ask'd, what I can say, I guilty cry. O dreadfull Sessions day! This Diuells coate to my body made I fit, Braue was the outside, thrid-bare was the wit. His Iudgment. FOr these thick Stygian streams in which th'ast swō Thy guilt hath on the laid this bitter doome; Thy loath'd life on a tree of shame must take A leaue compeld by Law, er'e old age make Her signed pass-port ready. Thy offence, No longer can for daies on earth dispense. Time blot thy name out of this bloody roule, And so the Lord haue mercy on thy soule. His speech what he could say for himselfe. O wreched Caitiffe! what perswasiue breath Can call back this iust sentence of quick death? I beg no boone, but mercy at Gods hands, (The King of Kinges, the Soueraigne that commands Both soule and body) O let him forgiue My treason to his Throne, and whilst I liue, Iebbits and Racks shall torture limbe by limbe, Through worlds of Deaths Ile breake to fly to him. My birth day gaue not to my mothers wombe, More ease, then this shall ioyes, when e're it come. My body mould to earth, sinnes sinke to Hell, My penitent soule win Heauen, vaine world farewell▪
A Funerall Elegie, vppon the vntimely Death of the honorable Knight Sir Thmas Ouerburie, who was poysoned in the Tower. WHy in this world to liue should men desire, Since death so many waies our liues expire? What happines hath man vpon the earth, But mountaine misery for Mole-hill mirth? A moments Ioy, mixt with an age of woes, Each drop of comfort flouds of cares o're flowes. For 'tis decreed by ineuitable Fate, The greatest men are not most fortunate. The head that weares a Crowne, weares many cares, The which (before old age) makes hoary haires. And humaine honors like a fading flower, Which florisheth, and fadeth in an hower. The meane estate doth onely longest last, Not being subiect to each wandring blast Of ticklish Fortunes euer-turning wheele, Whose fickle turnings, oft makes Greatnes reele. If all the windes, East, West, and North and South, Should raging burst from blustring Eol's mouth, The lowly shrub stands euer rooted fast, When lofty Pines and Cedars downe are cast. And though the mighty oft the weake opprest, Of all estates, the meane sleepes most in rest. Thou worthy OVERBVRY, to thy Hearse I consecrate this sad lamenting Verse.
Hadst thou beene some vnlearned rusticke hind, Hadst thou beene basely borne, and base inclind: Hadst thou had nothing in thee that was good So sooe foule murther had not suck't thy blood. But being in all parts a man compleate, Great in regard, in goodnes farre more greate, Who like a Starre in Brittaines Court did shine Learn'd in the Lawes, both Humaine and Diuine, A Scholler, full of Gentleman-like parts, Whose noble carriage won a world of hearts. That Arts like painefull Bees did daily striue, To fill with sacred loue his learned hiue. Which thou (as did befit thy worthy worth) With admiration often wouldst powre forth: So courteous, valiant, sober, and so wise, And one that (fawning) could not temporise, So well proportion'd, of such comely feature, So fully fraught with a true honest nature, So hopefull, and so louing, and belou'd, Whose life and actions euery tongue approu'd, That expectation mark'd him out to be A man of absolute Integrity. Of Zeale, Capacity, and Eminence, To serue his God, his Country, and his Prince. But Sathan that old enemie of man, As he with Abels murther first began, He still hath spew'd from out his damned den, Inhumaine thoughts in bloody Caine-like men. And as the blood of that first slaughtered Saint, For vengeance to Iehouah made complaint: So did the blood of OVERBVRY cry For Justice to the Throne of Maiesty. Oh Physick, great preseruer of mans breath. Heau'ns Habeas Corpus against dismall death.
Most honorable treasury of health, Renowned Piller of each Common-wealth: Lifes louing Champion, how art thou abus'd, When poyson's with thy Antidots infus'd? But this vnusuall damnable abuse, No bleamish is to lawfull Physicks vse, No more then Phoebus glorious beames are soyld, With shining on a stinking dung-hill moyld. Thus to thy praise, whose praise doh passe my skill▪ (My poore vnlearned, most obsequious quill) Doe offer these poore slender lines of mine, Vnworthy for that worthy worth of thine. Which though thy soule be in eternall rest, Thy friends may thanke me, for I did my best. FINIS. I. T. REaders, you that are desirous to see the reward of the Adulterer and the Adultresse, paid by Gods owne hand: there is a little Table called the Spectacles, where you may see it more at large.
