19204 99849226 14364
COP OF A LATE DECREE OF the Sorbone , for the condemning of that impious and haericall opinion touching the murthering ; Generally maintained by the Iesuites, And amongst the rest, of late by IOANNES MARIANA, a Spaniard▪ Together, with the Arrest of the Parlia∣ment, for  that Decree, And the condem  Marianas Book  burnt by the Executioner. ¶ Taken out of the Register of the Parliament, and translated into English. ¶ IMPRINTED AT LONDON by R.B. ANNO 1610.
THE PREAMBLE. IT hath bene long since obserued, that England whilest it was in captiui∣tie and bondage vnder the Bishop of Rome, was of all other Countreys most oppressed with his intolerable exactions, and most heauy impositions. In so much as this our most noble Countrey was termed by the Frenchmen the Popes Asse; and one of the Popes owne Cardinals, in the dayes of In∣nocentius 4. vnderstanding of the polling and pillage which the Romane Collectors and ministers did vse in this Countrey, to the great griefe of the inhabitants there∣of,
of, did in compassion vse these wordes to the said Pope, Anglia nostrís iniurijs mul∣toties laesa, quasi Asina Balaam, calcaribus & fustibus caesa, tandem loquitur & oblo∣quitur, & se nimis & intolerabiliter conque∣ritur fatigatam, & instaurabiliter damnifica∣tam; England many times wounded with our iniuries, and beaten as it had bene Ba∣laams asse, with spurres and clubs, at the last doeth speake and repine at it, and doeth complaine, that she was too much and intolerably wearied, and irrecoue∣rably damnified. Into which blockish thraldome this kingdome was brought, through the lewdnesse, false practises, and impostures of the Priests, who by their counterfait miracles, and Reuelations, touching the seuerall paines and punish∣ment of soules in Purgatorie, so terrified the mindes of men and women (brought vp in ignorance and more then Aegyptia∣call darkenes) as they led them hither and thither like brute beasts, for the compas∣sing of their owne designes, that they, and the Pope their master might tyrannize as
they list. And although the iuggling and fraud of the Bishop of Rome, and his traiterous brood, is now more publiquely knowen to all the world, and especially to vs here in England, then it was in former times: Yet as if we meant to be Asses stil, it is incredible, how many are dayly seduced with toyes and bables by such lewd Priests and Iesuites, as hauing bene traiterously brought vp in the Seminaries beyond the Seas, and learned all the false sleights and iuggling trickes that those places can af∣ford, doe lurke, vpon their stealth into England, in many corners within this Realme, studying with all their skill, not onely to imitate their Predecessors in all their wicked and lewd practises, but to goe therein farre beyond them; as being Vipers of a more detestable generation, then we euer heard of in this Countrey, or in any other Christian Kingdome or Na∣tion in the dayes and times of our forefa∣thers. And as it is obserued by Philo the Iew, of the old Scribes and Pharises before the comming of our Sauiour CHRIST,
how mightily they preuailed and were followed by women; so now it hapneth and falleth out in this Kingdome with that sexe, that these new Scribes and Pha∣rises, the Iesuites and Priests that adhere vnto them, doe strangely bewitch them, hauing more secret conuersation with them, vnder pretence of Confession, then in some politicke considerations perhaps is conuenient. It is too well knowen to this false brood of Romish Priests and hy∣pocrites, how easily, and by what light sleights women may be seduced: neither are they ignorant, when they haue so done, what mischiefe doeth thereby (for the most part) happen, in those families, where such seduced women doe liue and beare rule, they being commonly very passionate and violent in their affections and opinions. But it were lesse hurt, if these new Scribes and Pharises did limit their false practises to the inueygling and seducing of women, and that they did not in like sort seeke with al their Engines and deuilish stratagems to infect with their
poyson young Gentlemen, and such others of the Laitie, as they can by any meanes induce to giue eare vnto them; most men (not well grounded) being soone weary of the present estate wherein they liue, and euer desirous of Nouelties, (especially we in England,) if they tend to superstition and Idolatry: Whereby it falleth out, ac∣cording to the nature of pestilent corrup∣tion and poison, which worketh very vio∣lently when it is taken, that the late sort of Recusants in England, men and women of all sorts (which haue bene peruerted and poysoned by the said new Iesuiticall brood, and other Impostors of their straine) are growen into great fury, indu∣ring with no patience at all, to be in any wise impugned. For the more violent the poysoned opinions are, wherewith they are peruerted, the more desperate and au∣dacious they are become, to vphold and defend them. The Powder-Treason in England had many abetters; and that lewd Iesuite Garnet, drawen and hanged for his Treason, is now become a Martyr,
and wanteth not the confirmation of his Martyrdome by a strange miracle in a straw, deuised and published by two lewd Recusants in London, one Griffin a tailor, and Wilkinson a yong silke man▪ And it is not to be doubted, a Iesuite very lately hauing written an Apologie in the behalfe of the said lewd Traitor, (the same being approued by the Generall of the Iesuites in Rome, after it was allowed by three other Iesuites) but that our Recusants in Eng∣land of the furious stampe, will hereafter, as they dare, iustifie the said villainous Traitour. When the Oath of Allegi∣ance Anno 3. Regis Iacobi was made and confirmed by Act of Parliament, it is pro∣bably supposed, that all the Recusants in England would willingly haue taken it, as sundry of them began, had not the Iesuits opposed themselues, and procured the Pope to commaund the contrary. Since which time it is euident, how many haue refused, (as being bewitched and cast into a reprobate sense) to receiue the said Oath, diuers euen of the more moderate
sort, as well Priests as other persons, pre∣tending that they cannot in conscience receiue it, because the trayterous positions concerning the deposing or murthering of Princes by their Subiects (there being little difference betwixt them, in that it hath bene seldome seene, that such tray∣terous Subiects as were able to depose their Soueraignes, did euer thinke it poli∣cie to suffer them to liue) are there termed to be Haereticall. False and diabolicall assuredly they are, and directly contrary to the two first Commandements of the second Table, Honour thy father and mo∣ther; and Thou shalt doe no murther; And then, if they haue bene wilfully and pub∣liquely defended by any, why they should not be acknowledged for damnable Hae∣resies, I for my part cannot discerne. For I agree in iudgement herein with Grost∣head Bishop of Lincolne (in the dayes of Henry the 3. King of this Realme) where he defineth Haeresie in these words; Hae∣resis est sententia humano sensu electa, Scrip∣turae sacrae contraria, palam edocta, pertina∣citer
defensa: Haeresie is an opinion cho∣sen by humane sense, contrary to the Scripture, publiquely taught, and wilfully defended. How these false lewd and traiterous opinions haue bene published to the world, and shamefully mainteined, it doeth appeare by diuers bookes and Treatises, printed and diuulged, to the perpetuall shame of the Authors and ap∣prouers of them: As by the booke intitu∣led De iustâ abdicatione Hen. 3. and by an∣other not long since, Viz. Decemb. 13. An. 1598. allowed to be Printed In Coenobio Madriti, at Madrill in Spaine, by Friar Peter de Onna the Principall of that Order, and compiled by Iohn Mariana, a Spanish Ie∣suite, at that time Scholemaster to the now King. This second booke is thus intituled, Iohannis Marianae Hispani è societate Iesu, De Rege & Regis institutione libri tres ad Philippum 3. Hispaniae Regem Catholicum; Three books of Iohn Mariana, a Spaniard, of the societie of Iesu, Of a King, & Of the instruction, or bringing vp of a King, to Philip the 3. the Catholick king of Spaine.
And the Author of it hath the now Kings License, that none within his dominions vnder a certaine penaltie, shall print it, nisi de Authoris voluntate, without the Authors consent. In this booke the murthering of Princes by priuate persons, is in direct termes fully approued, and particularly the butcherous and traiterous slaughter of the French King Henry the 3. by Iames Clement a Dominicane. Against which traiterous, deuilish and hęretical doctrine, diuers learned men haue opposed them∣selues, and lately the Vniuersitie of Paris, vpon the barbarous murther of their late renowmed King Henry the 4. who besides their detestation of that fact, do fully con∣clude the said new conceit of murthering of Kings and Soueraigne Princes, to be a very lewd and haereticall opinion. The Act of whose proceedings comming to my friends hands, together with the Ar∣rest of the Parliament of Paris, for the con∣demning, drawing through the streets, and burning of the said booke of Iohn Ma∣riana, he hath thought it fit to offer to
the Presse to be published in Print, if so it might seeme good to some in Authority: to the end that thereby, if it were possible, not onely the malignant humours of the more furious sort of our Popish Recu∣sants, might be abated, when they shall finde their treacherous and traiterous schoolemasters, the Iesuites, with their adherents, to bee condemned for Haere∣ticks; but that also the milder and more moderate sort of Priests, and other Recu∣sants, might be induced not to refuse the said Oath of Allegiance, because the said conceits of murthering of Princes (a con∣sequent in effect of deposing them) is therein termed an Haereticall opinion. And so I referre you to the Actes them∣selues, as they were copied out of the Register of the Parliament of Paris. J. B.
ANNO DOM.M.DC.X. CVM SACRA THEOLOGIÆ facul∣tas, ob festa Pentecostes, & Comitia priuata, inter viros selectos Ordinis Theo∣logiae, in presenti negotio agitata, suos statos & ordinarios Conuentus prima aut secunda die Iu∣nij habere non potuisset, illos in diem quartum Iunij transtulit, atque omnes Magistros Theologiae, in vim obedientiae, quam emisso sacramento Facultati spo∣sponderunt, in Collegium SORBONICVM conuo∣cauit, vbi post Missam de Sancto Spiritu more solito celebratam, deliberârunt super executione Senatus∣consulti, cuius haec summa est. CVria Parlamenti, Decu∣rijs, maiore rerum Capita∣lium, at{que} Edictivnd con∣gregatis, procedendo ad iu∣dicium & litem capitalem, ac extraordinariam, Cogni∣toris generalis Regis postulatione instructam, aduersus nefandissimum, crudelisimum, & execratissimum parricidium, in sacratam per∣sonam
HENRICI 4. Regis patratum, au∣dito Cognitore generali Regio, decreuit, at{que} decernit, vt diligentia & procuratione De∣cani & Syndici Facultatis Theologiae, eadem facultas quàm primùm conuocetur, ad delibe∣randum super confirmatione Decreti praedictae Facultatis, quod die xiij. Decembris Anno M. CCCC. XIII. à centum quadraginta & vno Theologis eiusdem facultatis constitu∣tum, dehinc Concilij Constantiensis authori∣tate roboratum fuit. Quo Decreto definitur; Nemini licitum esse, quacun{que} occasione, causa vel praetextu quaesito, Sacrosanctis Regum & aliorum Principum supremo∣rum personis vim inferre; Deinde, vt De∣cretum quod in eiusdem facultatis Comitijs statuetur, omnium Doctorum, qui Comitijs & deliberationi interfuerint, nec non etiam omnium Baccalaureorum, qui cursum Theo∣logicum decurrunt, syngraphis muniatur; Quò tùm demum, auditô super eare Cognitore generali Regio, Curia decernat quod iustum & rationi conforme erit. Datum in Parla∣mento xxvij. Maij, Anno Domini 1610. Signatum. Voisin.
ITaque eadem sacra facultas, vt mandato amplissimi Ordinis, tàm iusta & necessaria praecipientis obtemperaret, primùm priuata, deinde publica habuit Comitia. Conside∣rans autem sibi ex officio incumbere, vt suam Censuram & Iudicium doctrinale cunctis il∣lud poscentibus declaret, atque Parisiensem Academiam à primis suis incunabilis paren∣tem & alumnam optimae ac saluberrimae Do∣ctrinae perpetuo extitisse, & tranquillitatem Reip. ab ordine, ordinem porrò & pacem (se∣cundum Deum opt. Max.) à Regum & Prin∣cipum salute pendere; ac solius esse principis aut potestatis politicae, gladio vti; atque insu∣per paucis ab hinc annis nonnulla peregrina, seditiosa at{que} impia dogmata inualuisse, quib. plerique priuati homines dementati, Sacro∣sanctos Reges & Principes excrranda appel∣latione Tyranni contaminare, hôc{que} nefario praetextu, necnon Religionis, pietatis, aut bo∣ni publici iuuandi, vel promouendi specie, in Sacrosancta Regum & Principum capita conspirare, suasque manus parricidas sacro Illorum sanguine cruentare, & continuò pa∣tentissimam fenestram aperire non horrent
ad perfidiam, ad fraudes, insidias, proditiones, populorum interneciones, vrbium, Prouincia∣rum, ac Regnorum florentissimorum excidia, & alia innumerabilia nequitiae genera, quae ci∣uilia aut interna bella concomitari solent, haec demùm pestifera & diabolica dogmata hodie in causa esse, vt qui discessionem ab Ecclesiâ Catholicâ Romanâ fecerint, in suo errore ob∣durescant, virosque religiosos, Doctores & Praelatos Catholicos, quanquam insontes, quasi talia docerent vel authorarent, fugiant & detestentur: Eadem (inquam) Facultas haec & similia consideratè perpendens, magna animorum consensione & alacritate, ista peregrina & seditiosa dogmata, velut impia, haeretica, societati ciuili, paci & tranquillitati publicae, ac Religioni Catholicae penitus contraria exe∣cratur, at{que} condemnat. In cuius rei fidem, ac testimonium, Decretum antiquum sibi de in∣tegro renouandum esse duxit, quod ducentis ab hinc annis à 141 Theologis sancitum fuit, in condemnationem huius execrabilis propo∣sitionis.
Quilibet Tyrannus potest & debet licitè & meritoriè occidi, à quocunque suo vassallo aut subdito, & per quemcun{que} modum, per insidias & per adulatio∣nes, non obstante quocunque iura∣mento, aut confoederatione facta apud eum, non expectando sententiam aut mandatum Iudicis cuiuscunque. Haec assertio sic generaliter posita, & se∣cundum acceptionem huius vocabuli (Ty∣rannus) est error in nostrâ fide, & doctrinâ bonorum morum, & est contra praeceptum Dei, Non occides: & contra hoc, quod di∣cit Dominus noster, Omnes qui gladium acceperint, gladio peribunt. Item haec As∣sertio vergit in subuersionem totius Reipub. & vniuscuiusque Regis aut Principis. Item dat viam & licentiam ad plura alia mala, & ad fraudes & violationes fidei, & iura∣menti, & ad proditiones, & generaliter ad omnem inobedientiam subiecti ad Dominum suum, & ad omnem infidelitatem & diffiden∣tian vnius ad alterum, & consequenter ad
aeternam damnationem. Item ille qui affir∣mat obstinatè talem errorem, & alios qui inde sequuntur, est haereticus, & tanquam haere∣ticus debet puniri, etiā post suam mortem. No∣tetur in Decretis xxiij. ix. V. & Act. Anno M. CCCC. XIII. die Mercurij xiij. Decembris. Quae Censura Facultatis Parisiensis in Sy∣nodo Constantiensi, Sessione xv. Anno M. CCCC. XV. pridie Nonas Iulij, his conceptis verbis comprobata füit. PRaecipuâ sollicitudine volens haec sacro∣sancta Synodus, ad extirpationem errorū & haeresium in diuersis mundi partibus inua∣lescentium prouidere, sicut tenetur, & ad hoc collecta est, nuper accepit, quod nonnullae as∣sertiones in fide, & bonis moribus, ac multi∣pliciter scandalosae, totiusque Reip. statum, & ordinem subuertere molientes, dogmatisatae sunt; inter quas haec Assertio delata est; Quilibet Tyrannus potest & debet licitè & meritoriè occidi per quemcunque vassallū suum, vel subditum, etiam per clanculares insidias, & subtiles blandi∣tias
vel adulationes, non obstante quo∣cunque pręstito Iuramento, vel confoe∣deratione facta, nec expectatâ senten∣tiâ, vel Mandato Iudicis cuiuscunque. Aduersus hunc errorem satagens haec san∣cta Synodus insurgere, & ipsum funditùs tollere, praehabitâ deliberatione maturâ decla∣rat, decernit, & definit, huiusmodi doctrinam erroneam esse in fide & moribus, ipsamque tanquam haereticam, scandalosam, & ad frandes, deceptiones, mendacia, proditiones, periuria, vias dantem, reprobat, & con∣demnat. Declarat insuper, decernit, & defi∣finit, quod pertinaciter doctrinam hanc perni∣ciosissimam asserentes, sunt haeretici, & tanquam tales, iuxta Canonicas sanctiones puniendi. Sacra igitur Facultas strictè, accurate{que}, exploratis omnium & singulorum Doctorum suffragijs, Primò statuit antiquissimam illam Censuram Facultatis, Synodi Constantiensis sanctione firmatam, non modò iterari, verùm etiam omnium hominum animis inculcari de∣bere. Secundò censet seditiosum, impium,
& haereticum esse, quocunque quaesito colore, à subdito, vassallo, aut extraneo, sacris Re∣gum & Principum personis vim inferri. Tertiò statuit, vt omnes Doctores & Bac∣calaurei Theologiae, quo die in instituta & Articulos Facultatis iurare consueuerunt, in hoc similiter Decretum iurent, ac syngraphae suae appositione obtestentur, se illius verita∣tem, docendo & concionando, diligenter ex∣plicaturos. Quartò, vt haec Acta cùm La∣tinè tùm Gallicè typis mandentur, & pro∣mulgentur. De mandato Domini Decani & sa∣crae Facultatis Theologiae Pari∣siensis, Signé DE LA COVR. Collatione factâ. Signé. VOYSIN. VEu, par la COVR, les Grand Chambre, Tournelles, & l'Edict assemblees, le Decret de la Facultè de Theologie Assemblée le qua∣triesme du present mois de Iuin, suiuant l'Ar∣rest du 27. May precedent sur le renouuelle∣ment
de la Censure doctrinale de la dicte Fa∣culté faicte en l'an 1413; confirmee par le S. Concile de Constance; Que c'est heresie pleine d'impiete, de maintenir qu'il soit loi∣sible aux subiects, ou estrangers soubsquelque pretexte & occasion, qui puisse estre, d'atten∣ter au personnes sacrées des Roys, & Princes Souuerains; Le liure de IEAN MARIANA, intitulé De Rege & Regis institutione, imprimé tant á Mayence qu'autres lieux, contenant plusieurs blasphemes execrables contre le feu Roy HENRY 3. de tresheureuse memoire; les personnes & estats des Roys, & Princes sou∣uerains; & aultres Propositions contraires au dict Decret; Conclusions du Procureur gene∣ral du Roy; Lamatiere mise en deliberation; La dicte Cour à ordonné, & ordonne, que le dict Decret du 4. du present Mois de Iuin, sera registré es Registres d'Icelle; ouy & ce requerant le Procureur general du Roy; & leu par chacun an â pareil iour, 4. de Iuin, in l'assembleé de la dicte Faculté, & publié au premier iour de Dimanche es Prosnes des Paroisses de ceste Ville, & Faulxbourgs de Pa∣ris: Ordonne, que le liure de MARIANA sera bruslé par l'Executeur de la haute Iustice deuant l'Eglise de Paris. Et à fait & fait inhi∣bitions & defenses a toutes personnes de quelque estat, qualité & condition qu'elles soyent, sur peine de crime de lese Maiesté,
d'escrire ou faire imprimer aucuns liures, ou Traité contreuenants au dict Decret, & Ar∣rest d'Icelle. Ordonne, que copies collati∣onneés aux Originaux du dict Decret, & pre∣sent Arrest seront enuoyeés aux Bailliages & seneschausseés de ce Ressort, pour yestre leues & publieés en la forme & maniere acco∣stumee; & outre es Prosnes des Parroisses des Villes, Faulxbourgs & autres Bourgs, le pre∣mier Dimanche du Mois de Iuin. Enioint aux Baillifs & Seneschaux proceder a la dicte publication, & aux substituts dú Procureur general du Roy, tenir la main a l'execution; & certifier la Cour de leur diligence au mois. Fait en Parlement le 8. de Iuin. Mil▪ six cent dix.
¶ COPIED OVT OF THE Acts of the Court of Parliament. ANNO DOMINI 1610. THE SACRED FA∣CVLTIE OF DIVINES, not being able, by reason of the feast of Pentecost, and of some priuate meetings held touching this present businesse by certaine selected persons of that Order, to keepe their an∣nuall, and ordinary Assemblies on the first and se∣cond of Iune, assigned them ouer vnto the fourth of the same, and summoned by vertue of their obedience sworne vnto that Facultie, all the Gra∣duats in Diuinity, vnto the Colledge of the SOR∣BONE. Where after celebration of the Masse de sancto Spiritu, (as the vsuall maner is) they entred into consultation touching the performance and execution of the Arrest of Parliament: the te∣nour whereof ensueth. THE COVRT, the Great Chamber, the Tournell, and the Chamber of the Edict beeing assembled, and proceeding to iudgement in the processe criminall and ex∣traordinary,
commenced and prosecuted at the suit of the Kings Attourney Generall, a∣gainst the most barbarous, bloody, and exe∣crable murther committed vpon the sacred person of King HENRY the fourth, the mat∣ter being set foorth by the Kings said Attour∣ney, hath ordered, and doeth hereby order, that by the diligence and procurement of the Deane and Syndicke of the Facultie of Di∣uines, the said Facultie bee forthwith assem∣bled, to consult together touching the confir∣mation of a certaine Decree made the 13. of December 1413. by 141. Diuines of that Facultie, and afterwards ratified by the au∣thoritie of the Counsell of Constance. In which Decree it is defined: That it is not lawfull for any man vpon what occasion, cause, or deuised colour soeuer, to at∣tempt any violence against the sacred per∣sons of Kings and Soueraigne Princes. Next, that order betaken, that what shall be decreed in the assembly of the said Facultie, be confirmed by the subscription of all the Do∣ctors, and Bachelers now passing their course in Diuinitie, which shalbe present at the said
meeting and consultation. That thereupon the Court, calling the Kings Atturney there∣unto, may take such course as shalbe agreeable to iustice and equitie. Giuen in Parlia∣ment on the 27. of May, AN NO DOM. 1610. Signed. Voisin. WHerefore, the said sacred Facultie, for the performance of the dire∣ction and commaundement of the said Court in a matter so iust and requisite, did first assemble themselues priuately, and then in publique. And weighing with thēselues; That they were in duty bound to yeeld their opinion and iudgement in points of doctrine to whosoeuer should demand it: That the Vniuersitie of París hath euer from her first original, bene the mother and nourse of the most Catho∣lique, and wholesome doctrine: That the peace of a State dependeth chiefly vpon Order, and both order and peace (next and immediatly vnder God,) vpon the safetie and preseruation of Kings and Princes: That it only appertaineth vnto the Prince and Ciuill power to vse the
sword: That notwithstāding within these later yeeres, certaine strange, seditious, and impious Positions haue taken footing, whereby many priuate persons beeing transported, feare not to staine anoynted Kings and Princes with the detestable terme and style of Tyrants, and vnder this accursed pretence, or by colour of furthe∣ring or aduancing Religion, pietie, or the publique good, doe conspire against the annoynted persons of Kings and Princes, imbrewing their murtherous hands with their sacred blood, and thereby opening a large window to all infidelitie, practises, treacheries, treasons, slaughters of peo∣ple, ruines of Cities, Countries, and most flourishing kingdomes, and a thousand sorts of mischiefes besides, (the ordinarie attendants of Ciuil, and intestine warres:) and that lastly these pestilent and diabo∣licall points of doctrine, are the cause that such as haue departed from the Catho∣lique Romane Church, are obdurate in their errours, shunning, and detesting (al∣though without cause) other Religious
persons, and Catholique Doctours and Prelats, as if they were the Authors or pa∣trones of those opinions: These and such like reasons the Facul∣tie maturely pondering, doeth with great vnanimitie of consent and alacritie, ac∣curse and condemne the said strange and seditious opinions, as impious, haereticall, and most repugnant to Ciuill societie, to the peace and good of the State, and to Catholique religion. In confirmation and witnesse whereof, they thought it fit to re∣nue the ancient Decree established two hundred yeeres agoe by 141. Diuines, in condemnation of this damnable Position: That euery Tyrant may and ought lawfully and meritoriously to be murthered by any his vassall or subiect whatsoeuer, and by what meane soeuer, whether by treachery, or subtile insinuation, notwithstanding any Oath or promised Allegeance made vnto him, nay, not so much as expecting the sen∣tence or warrant of any Iudge whatsoeuer.
This Assertion being thus generally layed, and as this word Tyrannus, is or may be taken, is an errour in faith, and in the doctrine of good manners, being flat∣ly repugnant to that Commandement of God: Thou shalt not kill: and to that say∣ing of our Sauiour: That whosoeuer shall strike with the sword, shall perish with the sword. The same also tendeth to the sub∣uersion of the whole Common wealth, and of all Kings and Princes: giuing way, and free libertie to a world of mischiefes, fraude, breach of faith and oath, treason, and in a word to all disobedience of the Subiect towards his Lord, and to all dis∣loyaltie and distrust of the one to the o∣ther, and consequently to eternall damna∣tion. Whosoeuer therfore shal obstinately maintaine the said error & others therout ensuing, is an haereticke, and to bee puni∣shed as an haereticke, euen after death. Let it bee recorded in the decrees 23.9. V. and dated 1413. on Wednesday the thir∣teenth of December. This Censure of the Facultie of Paris was
after ratified in the Councell of Constance sess. 15. on the 6. of Iuly, 1415: in these words: THis sacred Synode hauing an especial care (as in truth it ought, being to that purpose assembled) to prouide for the extirpation of all errours and haeresies, which haue set foote into diuers parts of the world, hath bene lately ad∣uertised, that certaine Assertions haue beene published very scandalous aswell in faith and maners, as sundrywise else, and tending to the ouerthrow of the whole State and gouernment of the Common wealth, amongst which this is deliuered to be one: That euery Tyrant may and ought law∣fully and meritoriously to be murthe∣red by any his Vassall or Subiect what∣soeuer, either by close treacherie, or by smooth practises, and insinuations, notwithstanding any Oath taken or promise of Allegiance made vnto him: nay not so much as expecting the sen∣tence or warrant of any Iudge what∣soeuer.
Against which errour this holy Synode ad∣dressing it selfe to make head, and vtterly to extinguish the same, after mature deliberation doth pronounce, decree, and define, that this doctrine is erroneous in faith and manners, and doth reiect and condemne it, as haereticall and scandalous, opening a gap to fraud, deceit, dissimulation, treason, and periurie. It doeth moreouer declare, decree, and define, that they who shall obstinately maintaine this pernicious doctrine, are haereticks, and as such to be puni∣shed, according to the Canonicall decrees. Wherefore, the sacred Facultie, hauing strictly and carefully demanded the suffra∣ges of all and euery of the Doctours, doth determine; first, that the said most ancient Censure of the Facultie confirmed by the Decree of the Counsell of Constance, ought not onely to be renewed, but by fre∣quent iteration to bee imprinted in the mindes of all men. Secondly, that it is trai∣terous, wicked, and haereticall, that any subiect, vassall, or stranger should vpon a∣ny pretext whatsoeuer, offer violence vnto the sacred persons of Kings and Princes.
Thirdly it decreeth, that all Doctors, and Bachelours of Diuinitie, vpon that day when they are accustomed to sweare vnto the Orders, and Articles of the Facultie, they doe likewise sweare vnto this decree, and by their subscription promise, that they will in their Lectures and Sermons diligently set foorth the trueth thereof. Fourthly, that these Acts be published in Print, aswell in Latine, as in French. By the direction of the Deane, and Sacred Facultie of Diuines at Paris. Signed DE LA COVR. Compared with the originall, Signed. VOISIN. THERE being viewed by the Court, the great Chamber, the Tournell and the Chamber of the Edict assembled, the De∣cree of the Facultie of Diuines meeting together on the 24. of this present mo∣neth of Iune, according to an Arrest of
the 27. of May last past, for the renewing of the censure and doctrinall resolution of the said Facultie, deliuered in the yeere 1413. and confirmed by the holy Coun∣cell of Constance, that it is a very impi∣ous haeresie, to mainteine it to be lawfull for Subiects or strangers, vpon what pre∣tence and occasion soeuer, to attempt vp∣on the sacred persons of Kings and Soue∣raigne Princes: there being also viewed a certaine booke written by IOHN MA∣RIANA, intituled: De Rege & Regis in∣stitutione: printed aswell at Mayence as elsewhere, contayning many detestable blasphemies against the late King of hap∣pie memory HENRY the third; and a∣against the persons and States of Kings and Soueraigne Princes, and diuers other Positions contrary to the said Decree: the Kings Attourney Generall hauing concluded, and the matter put to con∣sultation: THE said Court hath ordered and doeth order, that the said Decree of the fourth of this present Moneth of Iune,
shalbe registred in the Recordes of the same, at the motion and request of the Kings Attourney generall, and read yere∣ly on the same day of the 4. of Iune in the assembly of the said Facultie, and that it shalbe published on the next Sunday in seruice time in the Churches of the Citie and Suburbes of Paris: It decreeth more∣ouer, that Marianas said booke shall be burnt by the common Executioner be∣fore our Ladies Church in Paris: and doeth inhibite and forbid all persons of what estate, qualitie, or condition soeuer, on paine of high Treason, to write, or cause to bee printed the said bookes or Tractats, being repugnant to the Decree aforesaide, and to the Sentence of this Court. It decreeth, that copies examined by the originals of the said Decree, and of this present Arrest, shalbe sent abroad in∣to the Balliages, and Shriualties, of this precinct, there to be read and published in the forme and maner accustomed; and moreouer in time of Seruice in the Chur∣ches of all Cities, Suburbes, and other
townes on the first Sunday in Iune. It enioyneth the Bailiffes and Shiriffes to proceede to the sayd publication, and to the Deputies of the Kings Atturney gene∣rall to see to the execution, and to certifie the Court of their diligence in this behalfe. Giuen in Parliament the 8. of Iune 1610.
THat you be not igno∣rant of one particular occasion of these pro∣ceedings against Mari∣anas booke (which my friend in his Preface hath not touched) concurring with the generall detestation of that impious do∣ctrine of murther, the practise whereof wee haue seene vpon the persons of two late Kings of France, HENRY the third and fourth: you shall vnderstand that Rauillac, the villaine, who gaue that accursed stroke, which hath made all France to bleed, being (as in his Examina∣tions he deliuered) a long time in delibe∣ration ere he could resolue, that it was law∣full to kill the King: falling vpon that booke of Mariana, he found his conscience (as he said) cleared of all scruple in that point, and himselfe fully resolued to vn∣dertake
it. And certainely the cordiall doctrine, which he from thence receiued, so setled his resolution before hand, so steeled his heart in the execution, and after the deed seared and mortified his consci∣ence in such sort, as that hee was so farre from any remorse of the fact, as the con∣science and comfort therof seemed to har∣den him against all sense of his punish∣ment. For being vrged by torture to con∣fesse the trueth by whome he was set on worke, I will giue you a taste of one or two of his confessions, as I receiued them from thence. At one time being examined vp∣on the racke, who were his perswaders to that accursed deed: he desired to be loo∣sed, and hee would confesse the trueth: which being done, and he set on his feet, he stretching out himselfe, tolde them: The trueth was, that now he found himselfe at much more ease, then before, when he was on the torture. And this was all the trueth, he would at that time confesse. At ano∣ther time President Iannin being appoin∣ted to examine him, and pressing him ve∣ry
straightly to confesse, who had incited him to this fact: hee bad the Clerke set downe that President Iannin had incited him therunto: who detesting the villaines desperate audaciousnesse therein: he re∣plied againe; Well Sir, if I should say so much at my death, I beleeue it would trouble you. These things being aduertised from thence, I thought fit to impart vnto you, as arguments of the Caitises impenitency, and finall obduration, touching that exe∣crable fact, grounded vpon the doctrine so condemned: the first sparkes whereof being (as appeareth) kindled in France a∣bout two hundred yeeres since, were then trode vnder foote by the Sorbone and the Councell of Constance: but since haue bene reuiued by the Iesuites (the most in∣dustrious purueyours for the Popes Court) and by their Lectures and bookes nourished and brought to those flames that now wee see: as it hath beene not seldome obiected vnto them, but neuer yet by them wel denied; I am sure the do∣ctrine neuer publikely condemned by a∣ny
resolution of their schooles, as hereto∣fore, and of late by the Colledge of Sor∣bone. So as whosoeuer put the knife into the villaines hand, it is euident, that the mettall wherof it was made, (I meane the aforesaid doctrine) was tempered in their forge, and their bookes (as it is confessed) gaue edge vnto it. Neither to say trueth, can it euer be imagined, that these wret∣ched soules (such as this Rauillac and be∣fore him Iohn Chastel) being perplexed in conscience, and almost brought to the pit of despaire, with remorse of some sinnes of frailtie, durst euer haue aduentured vpon a malicious and deliberate purpose of murther, especially of their Soueraigne; had they not bene resolued in conscience by their ghostly fathers, (which office the Iesuits haue almost ingrossed to them∣selues) that howsoeuer it were a very dan∣gerous sinne to murther a priuate person: yet was it a merite, able to redeeme a world of former sinnes, to kill a king, such a one, as they should point out vnto them. But whatsoeuer the ground may be, cer∣taine
it is, there is a very hard opinion con∣ceiued of them in France touching the late murther of the King, as may appeare by a briefe Pasquill set vp in Paris to that pur∣pose, the occasion whereof was this. After the Iesuites had stood a while bani∣shed by the Arrest of Parliament, it is too well knowen how the late King (though against the generall wish of the whole State, and the aduise of many his loyall seruants) repealed that Arrest, defaced the Marble Pillar, wherein their banish∣ment and the causes thereof were re∣corded, recalled them home into his Realme (all men wondering to what pur∣pose it might be, vnlesse it were to that, which since hath happened) tooke some of them too neere his bosome, and that he might assure (if it were possible) their loyaltie vnto him, erected for their societie a stately Colledge in la Flesche, the place where he himselfe was borne. These re∣ligious persons, in exchange of such his gracious fauours towards them, bare him likewise so zealous an affection, as they
were neuer satisfied, vntill they had got∣ten his heart into their hands (the richest treasure hee could haue endowed them withall) to initiate therewith the Chappel of their new erected Colledge. Which be∣ing obtained, and deliuered vnto them in a boxe of Siluer, layed on a pillow of red Veluet, they receiued with solemne coun∣tenance, to carry in triumph to their said Colledge. At whose departure it is by the way reported, that a chiefe President of París, let fall a question vnto them, comming to take their leaue: Whether the Kings tooth which Chastel stroke out, were likewise enclosed in the boxe with the heart. This fauour of obtaining the Kings heart to burie in their Colledge, gaue occasion (amongst many other) of this Pasquill: Ce n'est, qu'a vous (trouppe sacrée) Quo'n doibt bailler le Coeur des Roys: Quand les grands Cerfs sont aux abboys, On en doibt aux chiens la Cureé.
T'is you alone (you sacred crue) To whom the hearts of Kings are due. When the great Harts are hunted hard, The entrailes are the Hounds reward. The riddle may perhaps seeme at the first somewhat obscure, but I know you wil reade it without a Light. And there∣fore I spare my paines to expound it, ha∣uing already done more then I could well doe, to turne it in rime. And so hauing ac∣quainted you with those aduertisements which came to my handes touching this businesse, being certified hither by a very credible Author, which I haue to shew; I cease to trouble you. J. W.
