19289.5 99845891 10822
AN ADMONITION TO ALL SUCH AS SHALL INTEND HERE AFTER TO ENTER THE STATE OF MA∣TRIMONY, GODLILY AND AGREEABLY TO LAWES. FIrst, that they contract not with such persons as be hereafter expressed, nor with any of like degree, against the law of God, & the laws of the Realm. Secondly, that they make no secret contracts, without consent and counsell of their Parents or Elders, under whose authority they be: contrary to Gods lawes and mans ordinances. Thirdly, that they contract not anew with any other upon divorce and seperation made by the Iudge for a time, the lawes yet standing to the contrary. MArriage is honourable among all men, and the bed undefiled. But whoremongers and adulterers God will judg, Heb. 13. To avoid fornication, let every man have his wife, and let every woman have her husband. He that cannot containe, let him marry: For better it is to marry, then to burn. 1 Cor. 7. Vnto the married I commaund, not I, but the Lord: Let not the Wife depart from her Husband. But if she depart let them remaine unmarried, or be reconciled unto her husband. And let not the Husband put away his Wife. LEVITICUS. XVIII. & XX. None shall come neer to any of the kinred of his flesh to uncover her shame: I am the Lord. ¶A man may not marry his   Secundus gradus in linea recta ascen∣dente.     Con. Avia 1 Grandmother af. Avi relicta 2 Grandfathers wife af Prosocrus, vel socrus magna. 3 Wives Grandmother.   Secundus grad: in aequalis, in linea trans∣versa ascendente.     Con. Amita 4 Fathers sister Con. Matertera 5 Mothers sister af. Patrui relicta 6 Fathers brothers wife af. Avunculi relicta 7 Mothers brothers wife af. Amita uxoris 8 Wives fathers sister af. Matertera uxoris. 9 Wives mothers sister.   Primus gradus in linea recta ascendente.     Con. Mater 10 Mother af. Noverca 11 Stepmother af. Socrus 12 Wives mother.   Primus gradus in linea recta descendente.     Con. Filia 13 Daughter af. Privigna 14 Wives daughter af. Nurus 15 Sonnes wife.   Primus gradus aequalis in linea transver∣sali.     Con. Soror. 16 Sister af. Soror uxoris 17 Wives sister af. Fratris relicta 18 Brothers wife.   Secundus gradus in linea recta descen∣dente.     Con. Neptis ex filio 19 Sonnes daughter Con. Neptis ex filia 20 Daughters daughter af. Pronurus. i. relicta nepotis ex filio 21 Sonnes sonnes wife af. Pronurus. i. relicta nepotis ex filia 22 Daughters sonnes wife af. Privigni filia 23 Wives sonnes daughter af. Privignae filia 24 Wives daughters daughter.   Secundus gradus inaequalis, in linea trans∣versali descendente.     Con. Neptis ex fratre 25 Brothers daughter Con. Nepis ex sorore 26 Sisters daughter af. Nepotis ex fratre relicta 27 Brothers sonnes wife af. Nepotis ex sorore relicta 28 Sisters sonnes wife af. Neptis uxoris ex fratre 29 Wives brothers daughter af. Neptis uxoris ex sorore. 30 Wives sisters daughter. A woman may not marry with her       Secundus gradus in recta linea ascen∣dente. 1 Grandfather Con. Avus 2 Grandmothers husband af. Aviae relictus 3 Husbands grandfather. af. Prosocer, vel socer magnus.       Secundus gradus inaequalis in linea transversali ascendente. 4 Fathers brother. Con. Patruus 5 Mothers brother Con Avunculus 6 Fathers sisters husband af. Amitae relictus 7 Mothers sisters husband af. Materterae relictus 8 Husbands fathers brother af. Patruus mariti 9 Husbands mothers brother. af. Avunculus mariti.       Primus gradus in linea recta descen∣dente. 10 Father Con Pater 11 Stepfather af. Vitricus 12 Husbands father. af. Socer       Primus gradus in linea recta descendente. 13 Sonne Con. Filius 14 Husbands sonne af. Privignus 15 Daughters husband. af. Gener.       Primus gradus aequalis in linea trans∣versali. 16 Brother Con. Frater 17 Husbands brother af. Levir 18 Sisters husband. af. Sororis relictus.     Con. Secundus gradus in linea recta descen∣dente. 19 Sonnes sonne Con. Nepos ex filio 20 Daughters sonne. af. Nepos ex filia 21 Sonnes daughters husband af. Progener. i. relictus neptis ex filio. 22 Daughters daughters husband af. Progener. i. relictus neptis ex filia. 23 Husbands sonnes sonne af. Privigni filius. 24 Husbands daughters sonne. af. Privignae filius.       Secund. gradus inaequalis, in linea trans∣versali descendente 25 Brothers sonne Con. Nepos ex fratre 26 Sisters sonne Con. Nepos ex sorore 27 Brothers daughters husband af. Neptis ex fratre relictus 28 Sisters daughters husband af. Neptis ex sorore relictus 29 Husbands brothers sonne af. Leviris filius. i. nepos mariti ex fratre 30 Husbands sisters sonne. af. Gloris filius. i. nepos mariti ex sorore 1 IT is to be noted, that those persons which be in the di∣rect line, ascendent & descendent, cannot marry toge∣ther, although they be never so far asunder in degree. 2 It is also to be noted, that consanguinity & affinity (letting and dissolving Matrimony) is contracted as well in them & by them, which is of kinred by the one side, as in & by them, which be of kinred by both sides. 3 Item, that by the Laws, consanguinity and af∣finity (letting and dissolving Matrimony) is contracted as well by unlaw∣full company of man and woman as by unlawful marriage. 4 Item, in contracting betwixt persons doubtfull, which be not expressed in this Table, it is most sure, first to consult with men learned in the lawes, to understand what is lawfull, what is honest and expedient, before the fini∣shing of their contracts. 5 Item, that no Parson, Vicar or Curate, shall solemnize Matrimony out of his or their Cure or parish Church or Chappel, and shall not solemnize the same in private houses, nor lawlesse or exempt Churches, under the pains of the law, forbidding the same. And that the Curate have the Certificates, when the parties dwell in divers places. 6 Item, the bands of matrimony ought to be openly denounced in the Church by the Minister, three severall Sundaies or Festivall daies, to the end that who will and can alledge any impediment, may be heard, and that stay may be made till further triall, if any exception be made there against it upon sufficient caution. 7 Item, who shall maliciously object a frivolous impediment against a law∣full matrimony, to disturb the same, is subject to the paines of the Law. 8 Item, who shall presume to contract in the degrees prohibited (though he do it ignorantly) besides that the fruit of such copulation may be judged unlawfull, is also punishable at the ordinaries discretion. 9 Item, if any minister shall conjoyne any such, or shall be present at such contracts making, he ought to be suspended from his ministerie for three years: and otherwise to be punished according to lawes. 10 Item, it is further ordained, that noe Parson, Vicar, or Curate, do Preach, treat, or expound of his own voluntary invention, any matter of controversie in the Scriptures, if he be under the degree of master of Art, except he be licensed by his Ordinary thereunto, but onely for the instruction of the people: read the Homilies, allready set forth, and such other form of do∣ctrine as shall be hereafter by authority published: and shall not innovate, or alter any thing in the Church, or use any old Rite, or Cerimony, which be not set forth by publick authority. Set forth by the most Reverend Father in God, Mathew Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of England, and Metropolitane.
